John Richard Kasich Jr. (/ˈkeɪsɪk/ KAY-sik; born May 13, 1952) is an American politician and author who was the 69th governor of Ohio from 2011 to 2019, a member of the U.S. House of Representatives from 1983 to 2001, and a Republican candidate for the presidential nomination in 2000 and 2016. Kasich was born and grew up in McKees Rocks, Pennsylvania, and moved to Ohio in 1970 to attend college. After a single term in the Ohio Senate, he served nine terms as a member of the United States House of Representatives from Ohio's 12th congressional district. His tenure in the House included 18 years on the House Armed Services Committee and six years as chairman of the House Budget Committee. Kasich was a key figure in the passage of both 1996 welfare reform legislation and the Balanced Budget Act of 1997. Kasich decided not to run for re-election in 2000 and ran for president instead. He withdrew from the race before the Republican primaries. After leaving Congress, Kasich hosted Heartland with John Kasich on Fox News from 2001 to 2007 and served as managing director of the Lehman Brothers office in Columbus, Ohio. He ran for governor of Ohio in 2010, defeating Democratic incumbent Ted Strickland. He was re-elected in 2014, defeating Democratic challenger Ed FitzGerald by 30 percentage points. Kasich was term-limited and could not seek a third gubernatorial term in 2018; he was succeeded by fellow Republican Mike DeWine. Kasich ran for president again in 2016, finishing in fourth place in the Republican primaries behind Donald Trump, Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio. He won the primary in his home state of Ohio and finished second in New Hampshire. Kasich declined to support Trump as the Republican presidential nominee and did not attend the 2016 Republican National Convention, which was held in Ohio. From 2019 to 2023, Kasich was a CNN contributor. Since March 2023, he has been an analyst on NBC News. Kasich is known as one of Trump's most prominent critics within the Republican Party, and he endorsed Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden for president in a speech at the 2020 Democratic National Convention. John Richard Kasich Jr. was born and raised in the Pittsburgh suburb of McKees Rocks, Pennsylvania. He is the son of Anne (née Vukovich; 1918–1987) and John Richard Kasich (1919-1987), who worked as a mail carrier. Kasich's father was of Czech descent, while his mother was of Croatian descent. Both his father and mother were children of immigrants and were practicing Roman Catholics. He has described himself as "a Croatian and a Czech". After attending public schools in his hometown of McKees Rocks, Kasich later left his native Pennsylvania, settling in Columbus, Ohio in 1970 to attend Ohio State University, where he joined the Alpha Sigma Phi fraternity. As a freshman, he wrote a letter to President Richard Nixon describing concerns he had about the nation and requesting a meeting with the President. The letter was delivered to Nixon by the university's president Novice Fawcett and Kasich was granted a 20-minute meeting with Nixon in December 1970. Earning a Bachelor of Arts degree in political science from Ohio State in 1974, he went on to work as a researcher for the Ohio Legislative Service Commission. From 1975 to 1978, he served as an administrative assistant to then-state Senator Buz Lukens. In 1978, Kasich ran against Democratic incumbent Robert O'Shaughnessy for State Senate. A political ally of Kasich remembers him during that time as a persistent campaigner: "People said, 'If you just quit calling me, I'll support you.'" At age 26, Kasich won with 56% of the vote, beginning his four-year term representing the 15th district. Kasich was the second youngest person ever elected to the Ohio Senate. One of his first acts as a State Senator was to refuse a pay raise. Republicans gained control of the State Senate in 1980, but Kasich went his own way, for example, by opposing a budget proposal he believed would raise taxes and writing his own proposal instead. In 1982, Kasich ran for Congress in Ohio's 12th congressional district, which included portions of Columbus as well as the cities of Westerville, Reynoldsburg, Worthington, and Dublin. He won the Republican primary with 83% of the vote and defeated incumbent Democratic U.S. Congressman Bob Shamansky in the general election by a margin of 50%–47%. He would never face another contest nearly that close, and was re-elected eight more times with at least 64 percent of the vote. During his congressional career, Kasich was considered a fiscal conservative, taking aim at programs supported by Republicans and Democrats. He worked with Ralph Nader in seeking to reduce corporate tax loopholes. Kasich was a member of the House Armed Services Committee for 18 years. He developed a "fairly hawkish" reputation on that committee, although he "also zealously challenged" defense spending he considered wasteful. Among the Pentagon projects that he targeted were the B-2 bomber program (teaming up with Democratic representative Ron Dellums to cut the program, their efforts were partly successful) and the A-12 bomber program (ultimately canceled by defense secretary Dick Cheney in 1991). He participated extensively in the passage of the Goldwater–Nichols Act of 1986, which reorganized the U.S. Department of Defense. He also pushed through the bill creating the 1988 Base Realignment and Closure Commission, which closed obsolete U.S. military bases, and successfully opposed a proposed $110 million expansion of the Pentagon building after the end of the Cold War. He also "proposed a national commission on arms control" and "urged tighter controls over substances that could be used for biological warfare." Kasich said he was "100 percent for" the first Persian Gulf War as well as the 2001 invasion of Afghanistan, but said that he did not favor U.S. military participation in the Lebanese Civil War or in Bosnia. In 1997, with fellow Republican representative Floyd Spence, he introduced legislation (supported by some congressional Democrats) for the U.S. to pull out of a multilateral peacekeeping force in Bosnia. In the House, he supported the Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act, a U.S. Representative Ron Dellums (D- CA)-led initiative to impose economic sanctions against apartheid-era South Africa. In 1993, Kasich became the ranking Republican member of the House Budget Committee. Kasich and other House Budget Committee Republicans proposed an alternative to President Bill Clinton's deficit reduction bill, the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993. That proposal included funds to implement Republican proposals for health care, welfare, and crime control legislation and for a child tax credit. The Penny-Kasich Plan, named after Kasich and fellow lead sponsor Tim Penny, was supported by Republicans and conservative Democrats. It proposed $90 billion in spending cuts over five years, almost three times as much in cuts as the $37 billion in cuts backed by the Clinton administration and Democratic congressional leaders. About one-third ($27 billion) of the proposed Penny-Kasich cuts would come from means-testing Medicare, specifically by reducing Medicare payments to seniors who earned $75,000 or more in adjusted gross income. This angered the AARP, which lobbied against the legislation. Another $26 billion of the Penny-Kasich plan's cuts would have come from the U.S. Department of Defense and foreign aid, which led Secretary of Defense Les Aspin to say that the plan would destroy military morale. Another $27 billion in savings would have come from federal layoffs. The proposal was narrowly defeated in the House by a 219–213 vote. As ranking member of the Budget Committee, Kasich proposed his own health care reform plan as a rival to the Clinton health care plan of 1993 championed by First Lady Hillary Clinton, but more market-based. As journalist Zeke Miller wrote in Time magazine, "The Kasich plan would have covered all Americans by 2005, using a form of an individual mandate that would have required employees to purchase insurance through their employers. (The mandate was an idea initially supported by conservative groups like The Heritage Foundation.)" On November 17, 1993, Kasich voted to approve the North American Free Trade Agreement, casting a "yea" vote for the North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act. In 1994, Kasich was one of the Republican leaders to support a last-minute deal with President Bill Clinton to pass the Federal Assault Weapons Ban. After a series of meetings with Clinton's Chief of Staff, Leon Panetta, a longtime friend of Kasich, the assault weapons ban was passed when 42 Republicans crossed party lines and voted to ban assault weapons with the Democrats. His support of the assault-weapons ban angered the National Rifle Association, which gave Kasich an "F" rating in 1994 as a result. In 1995, when Republicans gained the majority in the United States Congress following the 1994 election, Kasich became chair of the House Budget Committee. In 1996, he introduced the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act in the House, an important welfare reform bill signed into law by President Clinton. During the 1996 presidential campaign, Republican nominee Bob Dole was reported to have considered Kasich as a vice presidential running mate but instead selected Jack Kemp, a former congressman and Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. In 1997, Kasich rose to national prominence after becoming "the chief architect of a deal that balanced the federal budget for the first time since 1969"—the Balanced Budget Act of 1997. In 1998, Kasich voted to impeach President Clinton on all four charges made against him. In 1999, while the Senate prepared to vote on the charges, he said: "I believe these are impeachable and removable offenses." Kasich did not seek re-election in 2000. In February 1999, he formed an exploratory committee to run for president. In March 1999 he announced his campaign for the Republican nomination. After very poor fundraising, he dropped out in July 1999, before the Iowa Straw Poll, and endorsed governor George W. Bush of Texas. After leaving Congress, Kasich went to work for Fox News, hosting Heartland with John Kasich on the Fox News Channel and guest-hosting The O'Reilly Factor, filling in for Bill O'Reilly as needed. He also occasionally appeared as a guest on Hannity & Colmes. Kasich served on the board of directors for several corporations, including Invacare Corp. and the Chicago-based Norvax Inc. In 2001, Kasich joined Lehman Brothers' investment banking division as a managing director, in Columbus, Ohio. He remained at Lehman Brothers until it declared bankruptcy in 2008. That year, Lehman Brothers paid him a $182,692 salary and a $432,200 bonus. He stated that the bonus was for work performed in 2007. Kasich's employment by Lehman Brothers was criticized during his subsequent campaigns in light of the firm's collapse during the financial crisis. Kasich responded to critics by saying: "I wasn't involved in the inner workings of Lehman, I was a banker. I didn't go to board meetings or go and talk investment strategy with the top people. I was nowhere near that. That's like, it's sort of like being a car dealer in Zanesville and being blamed for the collapse of GM." Republicans made efforts to recruit Kasich to run for Ohio governor in 2006, but he declined to enter the race. In 2008, Kasich formed Recharge Ohio, a political action committee (PAC) with the goal of raising money to help Republican candidates for the Ohio House of Representatives and Ohio Senate, in an effort to retain Republican majorities in the Ohio General Assembly. Kasich served as honorary chairman of the PAC. On May 1, 2009, Kasich filed papers to run for governor of Ohio against incumbent Democratic governor Ted Strickland. He formally announced his candidacy on June 1, 2009. On January 15, 2010, Kasich announced Ohio State Auditor Mary Taylor as his running mate. During a speech before Ashtabula County Republicans in March 2009, Kasich talked about the need to "break the back of organized labor in the schools," according to the Ashtabula Star Beacon. Ohio teachers' unions supported Strickland, and after Kasich's gubernatorial victory, he said, "I am waiting for the teachers' unions to take out full-page ads in all the major newspapers, apologizing for what they had to say about me during this campaign." Elsewhere, he said he was willing to work with "unions that make things." On May 4, 2010, Kasich won the Republican nomination for governor, having run unopposed. On November 2, 2010, Kasich defeated Strickland in a closely contested race to win the governorship. He was sworn in at midnight on January 10, 2011, in a private ceremony at the Ohio Statehouse in Columbus. It was then followed by a ceremonial inauguration at the Ohio Theatre at noon on the same day. In November 2014, Kasich won re-election, defeating Democrat Ed FitzGerald, the county executive of Cuyahoga County, 64% to 33%. He won 86 of 88 counties. Kasich, who was elected with Tea Party support in 2010, faced some backlash from some Tea Party activists. His decision to accept the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act's expansion of Medicaid caused some Tea Party activists to refuse to support his campaign. Kasich supported longtime ally and campaign veteran Matt Borges over Portage County Tea Party chairman Tom Zawistowski for the position of chairman of the Ohio Republican Party. Zawistowski secured just three votes in his run for the chairmanship. Tea Party groups announced they would support a primary challenger, or, if none emerged, the Libertarian nominee. Ultimately, Zawistowski failed to field anyone on the ballot and the Libertarian nominee (former Republican State Representative Charlie Earl) was removed from the ballot after failing to gain the required number of valid signatures necessary for ballot access. Kasich is considered by some to be a moderate Republican due to his strong condemnation of far-right conservatives and his endorsement of Joe Biden in the 2020 presidential election. However, his record in the House and as governor of Ohio has led others to point out that his views place him to the right of most moderate politicians. Larry Sabato, the director of the University of Virginia Center for Politics, who has known Kasich for years, says that "If you had asked me in the 90s about Kasich I would have said he was a Gingrich conservative." Kasich's friend Curt Steiner, former chief of staff to former Republican Ohio governor and U.S. senator George Voinovich, described Kasich as a "solid Republican" with "an independent streak." Kasich's tenure as governor was notable for his expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, his work combating the opioid addiction crisis, his attempt (later reversed by Ohio voters in a 2011 referendum) to curtail collective bargaining for public sector employees, his local government funding cuts, his passage of several anti-abortion laws, his veto of a six-week abortion ban, his tax cuts, and his evolving position on gun control. Kasich opposes abortion except in cases of rape, incest, and danger to the mother's life. As governor, he signed 18 abortion-restrictive measures into law. In June 2013, Kasich signed into law a state budget, HB 59, which stripped some $1.4 million in federal dollars from Planned Parenthood by placing the organization last on the priority list for family-planning funds; provided funding to crisis pregnancy centers; and required women seeking abortions to undergo ultrasounds. The budget also barred abortion providers from entering into emergency transfer agreements with public hospitals, requiring abortion providers to find private hospitals willing to enter into transfer agreements. Another provision of the bill requires abortion providers to offer information on family planning and adoption services in certain situations. Under the budget, rape crisis centers could lose public funding if they counseled sexual assault victims about abortion. In 2015, Kasich said in an interview that Planned Parenthood "ought to be de-funded", but added that Republicans in Congress should not force a government shutdown over the issue. In December 2016, Kasich approved a ban on abortions after 20 weeks, except when a pregnancy endangers a woman's life, but vetoed HB 493, a six-week abortion ban. Kasich cited the cost to taxpayers of defending the legislation in court, and the likelihood that the six-week bill would be struck down in federal court as reasons for vetoing the more restrictive bill. In December 2018, Kasich again vetoed a proposed six-week abortion ban, citing the cost to taxpayers and previous rulings by the federal courts. He did sign a bill into law that bans the dilation and evacuation procedure commonly used for abortion. In a speech in April 2012, Kasich acknowledged that climate change is real and is a problem. In the same speech, however, Kasich said that the Environmental Protection Agency should not regulate carbon emissions and that instead states and private companies should be in charge of regulating coal-fired power plant emissions. In 2015, Kasich stated that he did not know all the causes of climate change, and that he did not know the extent to which humans contribute to climate change. In 2014, Kasich signed into law a bill freezing Ohio's renewable portfolio standard (RPS) program for two years. Ohio's RPS program was created by 2008 legislation and required the state to acquire 12.5 percent of its energy portfolio from renewable sources and to reduce energy consumption by 22 percent by 2025. The legislation signed by Kasich to stop the program was supported by Republican legislative leaders, utility companies, and some industry groups, and opposed by environmentalists, some manufacturers, and the American Lung Association. In 2016, Kasich broke with fellow Republicans in the state legislature by vetoing their attempt to continue blocking the RPS standards; as a result, the freeze ended on December 31, 2016, and the clean-energy mandate resumed. This veto won Kasich praise from environmentalist groups, and angered Republicans in the state legislature. In his 2015 budget plan, Kasich proposed raising the tax rate on hydraulic fracturing (fracking) activities. Specifically, Kasich's plan called for imposing a 6.5 percent severance tax on crude oil and natural gas extracted via horizontal drilling and sold at the source (about $3.25 per $50 barrel of oil), and for an additional 4.5 percent tax per thousand cubic feet on natural gas and liquefied natural gas (about $0.16 per thousand cubic feet). The proposal would not affect conventional drilling taxes. Kasich formerly supported fracking in Ohio state parks and forests, signing legislation in mid-2011 authorizing him to appoint a five-member commission to oversee the leasing of mineral rights on state land to the highest bidders. In 2012, Kasich aides planned a campaign with a stated goal to "marginalize the effectiveness of communications by adversaries about the initiative" to bring fracking to state parks and forests, naming in an email the Ohio Sierra Club and state Representatives Robert F. Hagan and Nickie Antonio as adversaries of the plan. Kasich never appointed the commission, and the promotional plan was never put into effect. A memo and email relating to the 2012 promotional campaign were publicly released for the first time in February 2015, which according to the Columbus Dispatch attracted criticism from state environmental and liberal groups, as well as Democratic state legislators, who called for an investigation. On the same day the governor reversed himself, with a spokesman saying, "At this point, the governor doesn't support fracking in state parks. We reserve the right to revisit that, but it's not what he wants to do right now, and that's been his position for the past year and a half." In April 2015, Kasich signed a bill aimed at protecting Lake Erie's water quality. The bill places restrictions on the spread of manure and other fertilizers that contribute to toxic algal blooms and requires large public water treatment plants to monitor phosphorus levels. The bill had been unanimously approved by both chambers of the Ohio Legislature the previous month. Kasich supported the Keystone XL oil pipeline project and, along with other Republican governors, signed an open letter in February 2015 urging federal approval for the project. In 2016, in response to a request from South Dakota under the terms of an interstate compact, Kasich dispatched 37 Ohio state troopers to South Dakota, where they were stationed around Dakota Access Pipeline protests near the Standing Rock Sioux Reservation. This controversial deployment prompted unsuccessful petitions to Kasich (from members of the public, Cincinnati City Council members, environmentalists, and some state legislators), who asked Kasich to recall the troopers. To offset a state budget deficit, Kasich proposed selling five state prisons to the for-profit prison industry. The Lake Erie prison was sold for $72.7 million to the Corrections Corporation of America (CCA), generating savings of $3 million. Kasich's Director of Corrections, Gary Mohr, whom he had hired in January 2011, had previously worked for CCA, but he said that he removed himself from the sales process. In an audit in October 2012, CCA was cited for 47 contractual violations, and failed a second audit later that year. In July 2015, the Kasich administration announced its intent to sell the North Central Correctional Institution at Marion, in order to recoup the state's original investment in the facility and invest the proceeds in community-based alternatives to prison. Following the separate fatal police shootings of John Crawford III and Tamir Rice, a 12-year-old boy in Ohio, while each were holding BB guns, grand juries decided not to indict any of the officers involved. Following this, Kasich created the Ohio Collaborative Community-Police Advisory Board "to address what he described as frustration and distrust among some Ohioans toward their police departments, particularly among the black community." The 23-member task force (with 18 members appointed by Kasich) was appointed in January 2015 and issued its 629-page final report and recommendations in April 2015. The report recommended greater accountability and oversight for police agencies and officers, further community education and involvement in policing, and new use-of-force and recruitment, hiring, and training standards for police agencies. In April 2015, Kasich created the Ohio Collaborative Community-Police Advisory Board, a twelve-member board tasked (in conjunction with the Ohio Office of Criminal Justice Services and the Ohio Department of Public Safety) with developing statewide standards for the recruiting, hiring and screening of police officers, and for the use of force (including deadly force) by police. The advisory board, the first of its kind in Ohio, was also tasked by Kasich with developing "model policies and best practice recommendations to promote better interaction and communication between law enforcement departments and their home communities." In August 2015, the board issued its recommendations, which placed "an emphasis on the preservation of human life and restrict officers to defending themselves or others from death or serious injury." In August 2015, Kasich said that he was open to the idea of requiring police officers to wear body cameras. As governor, Kasich presided over the executions of fifteen inmates and commuted the death sentences of seven inmates. The last execution in Ohio took place in July 2018. In January 2015, Kasich announced that, due to pending litigation and other issues, he was delaying all seven executions scheduled through January 2016. The delay was largely attributed to European pharmaceutical companies, which have refused to supply the state with deadly drugs necessary for executions. In February 2017, Kasich again delayed Ohio executions for an additional three months, after a federal judge ruled that Ohio's three-drug lethal injection protocol is unconstitutional. Kasich used his power of executive clemency sparingly. He has the lowest clemency rate of any Ohio governor since at least the 1980s, when records began to be kept. In six years in office, Kasich granted 86 of the 2,291 requests that he acted upon. In 2016, Kasich granted executive clemency to 13 people; in all of the cases, the Ohio Adult Parole Authority had recommended clemency. Kasich supports various criminal justice reform efforts; according to conservative Washington Post columnist George Will, Kasich "favors fewer mandatory minimum sentences and has instituted prison policies that prepare inmates for re-integration into communities." In 2011, Kasich signed sentencing reform legislation which allowed judges to sentence defendants convicted of non-violent fourth- and fifth-degree felonies to "community-based halfway house facilities" instead of prison; expanded the earned credit system to allow inmates to reduce their sentences; and allowed felons who have already served 80 percent or more of their sentences to be immediately released. In 2012, Kasich signed into law a bill, sponsored by Cleveland Democratic Senator Shirley Smith and Cincinnati Republican Senator Bill Seitz, easing the collateral consequences of criminal conviction. In September 2014, Kasich touted the Ohio's prison system's recidivism rate, which is one of the lowest in the nation. U.S. Senator Rob Portman, a Republican, attributed a drop in Ohio's recidivism rate "to the bipartisan work of the state legislature, Governor Kasich, Ohio's reentry leaders and the success of programs made possible at the federal level by the Second Chance Act," which Portman sponsored. In 2015, Kasich proposed a state budget including $61.7 million for addiction treatment services for prisoners. Kasich initially expressed opposition to medical marijuana in 2012, saying "There's better ways to help people who are in pain." However, in late 2015 and early 2016, Kasich said he was open to the legalization of medical marijuana. In March 2014, in an effort to address the opioid epidemic, Kasich signed legislation (passed unanimously in both chambers of the state legislature) expanding the availability of naloxone, a lifesaving antidote to opioid overdoses. The measure allowed friends and family members of addicts to obtain access to naloxone and for first responders to carry naloxone. In July 2015, Kasich signed legislation further expanding the availability of naloxone, making it available without a prescription. In a 2015 interview with radio talk show host Hugh Hewitt, Kasich said he was opposed to the legalization of recreational marijuana and equated the drug to heroin, stating: "In my state and across this country, if I happened to be president, I would lead a significant campaign down at the grassroots level to stomp these drugs out of our country." When Kasich was asked by Hewitt whether, if elected president, he would federally enforce marijuana laws in states which have legalized marijuana, Kasich characterized it as a states' rights issue and said that "I'd have to think about it." When asked the same question later in 2015, Kasich said: "I would try to discourage the states from doing it ... but I would be tempted to say I don't think we can go and start disrupting what they've decided." Kasich opposed Issue 3, an Ohio ballot measure in 2015 that proposed the legalization of recreational marijuana, saying it was a "terrible idea". During Kasich's tenure, the state has eliminated a budget shortfall that his administration has estimated at $8 billion, but which the Cleveland Plain Dealer estimated at closer to $6 billion. (The New York Times put the number at $7.7 billion). Ohio also increased its "rainy day fund" from effectively zero to more than $2 billion. Kasich "closed the budget shortfall in part by cutting aid to local governments, forcing some of them to raise their own taxes or cut services. And increasing sales taxes helped make the income tax cuts possible." An analysis by the Plain Dealer in March 2016 found that more than 70 cities and villages had lost at least $1 million a year due to Kasich's budget and taxation policy. In March 2008, Kasich called for "phasing out" Ohio's state income tax. During Kasich's time as governor, Ohio ranked 22nd out of the 50 states for private-sector job growth, at 9.3%. Kasich signed a state budget in 2011 which eliminated the state's estate tax effective January 1, 2013. In 2013, Kasich signed into law a $62 billion two-year state budget. The budget provided for a 10-percent state income tax cut phased in over three years, and an increase in the state sales tax from 5.5 percent to 5.75 percent. It also included a 50% tax cut for small business owners on the first $250,000 of annual net income. Kasich used his line-item veto power to reject a measure that would stop the Medicaid expansion (which Kasich had accepted from the federal government) to cover nearly 275,000 working poor Ohioans. In 2015, Kasich signed into law a $71 billion two-year state budget after using his line-item veto power to veto 44 items. The overall 2015 budget provides a 6.3 percent state income-tax cut as a part one component of a $1.9 billion net tax reduction and lowers the top income-tax rate to slightly below 5 percent. The budget also "spends $955 million more in basic state aid for K-12 schools than the last two-year period"; "boosts state funding for higher education to help offset a two-year tuition freeze at public universities"; expands the Medicaid health program; increases cigarette taxes by 35 cents a pack; and "prohibits independent health care and child care workers under contract with the state from unionizing." On March 31, 2011, in his first year as governor, Kasich signed into law Senate Bill 5, a controversial labor law which restricted collective bargaining rights of public employees, such as police officers, firefighters, and teachers. The legislation, championed by Kasich, prohibited all public employees from striking and restricted their ability to negotiate health care and pension benefits. The final version of the legislation signed by Kasich had passed the state Senate in a 17–16 vote (with six Senate Republicans joining all of the Senate Democrats in voting no) and the state House in a 53–44 vote, with two members abstaining. Democrats and labor unions opposed the legislation and placed a referendum on the November 2011 ballot to repeal SB 5. SB 5 also "sparked numerous protests with thousands of union workers and other opponents descending on the Statehouse, mirroring similar demonstrations in Wisconsin and injecting Ohio into the national debate over Republican governors' attempts to curb public workers' collective bargaining rights." Kasich and other supporters of SB 5 characterized the legislation as a necessary measure "to help public employers control labor costs" and reduce tax burdens to make Ohio more competitive with other states, while labor unions and other opponents characterized the bill as "a union-busting attack on the middle class." Ohio voters rejected Senate Bill 5 in a 61 percent to 39 percent vote, which was viewed as a rebuke to Kasich. On election night, Kasich said in a speech at the Ohio Statehouse that "It's clear the people have spoken. I heard their voices. I understand their decision. And frankly, I respect what the people have to say in an effort like this." Following this defeat, Kasich dropped efforts to pass broad-based collective bargaining restrictions, although in 2012 he supported a bill including "provisions reminiscent of Senate Bill 5" but applying only to the Cleveland Metropolitan School District. In May 2015, Kasich rescinded executive orders issued by his predecessor Ted Strickland in 2007 and 2008 that provided the right to home health care contractors and in-home child care contractors to collectively bargain with the state. Kasich has campaigned for a balanced budget amendment to the U.S. Constitution. Kasich created a 501(c)(4) group, Balanced Budget Forever, to promote the cause. Kasich said in 2016 that "I have never been an ideological supporter of free trade," but has long supported free trade agreements. He is a strong supporter of the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and participated with others in a meeting with President Obama in support of the agreement. In speaking in the 2016 campaign on domestic surveillance, Kasich has "straddled the line," praising Rand Paul for saying that "we need to get warrants," but also saying "if there's information they need, the government needs to get it." Kasich has said there needs to be "a balance between good intelligence and the need to protect Americans from what can become an aggressive government somewhere down the road." On one occasion, Kasich spoke out against proposals to mandate that technology companies provide a "backdoor" for the government to access encrypted devices, saying that this could end up aiding hackers. On a subsequent occasion, Kasich said that encryption was dangerous because it could stymie government antiterrorism investigations. Kasich has condemned whistleblower Edward Snowden as a traitor. Kasich proposed new legislation which would increase funding to charter schools and poor school districts. He canceled the school-funding formula put into place by his Democratic predecessor, Governor Ted Strickland. During Kasich's tenure as governor, he pushed to expand charter schools, increase the number of school vouchers that use public money to pay for tuition at private schools, implement a "merit pay" scheme for teachers, and evaluate teachers by student standardized test scores in math and reading. Kasich supports the Common Core State Standards and has criticized Republicans who turned against it. During Kasich's tenure, funding for traditional public schools declined by about $500 million, while funding for charter schools has increased at least 27 percent. As calculated by the Howard Fleeter/Education Tax Policy Institute, total school funding under Kasich (including both charter and district schools) has ranged from a low of $7.1 billion in fiscal year 2013 to $7.8 billion in fiscal year 2015, which was higher than its previous peak under Kasich's predecessor, Ted Strickland. As calculated by the Howard Fleeter/Education Tax Policy Institute, Kasich has proposed total school funding of $8.0 billion in fiscal year 2016 and fiscal year 2017. The Ohio Department of Education—which includes more spending areas than Fleeter's does and so reports higher numbers—projects total school funding for Ohio schools to rise to slightly under $10.5 billion by the end of fiscal year 2017. Analysts disagree "on whether Kasich's education budgets give increases beyond inflation." In the 2015 state budget, Kasich used his line-item veto power "to cut more than $84 million of funding from public schools." According to a September 2014 story in the Columbus Dispatch, Kasich favored allowing public school districts "to teach alternatives to evolution—such as intelligent design—if local school officials want to, under the philosophy of 'local control.'" In 2011, Kasich had the idea of establishing a Holocaust memorial on the grounds of the Ohio Statehouse. Kasich successfully secured approval of the proposal from the Capital Square Review and Advisory Board. The $2 million Ohio Holocaust and Liberators Memorial, designed by Daniel Libeskind, is located across from the Ohio Theatre; the memorial was dedicated in 2014. In November 2002, Kasich urged the invasion of Iraq, telling a crowd of students at Ohio State University: "We should go to war with Iraq. It's not likely that (Saddam) Hussein will give up his weapons. If he did he would be disgraced in the Arab world." In an interview in August 2015, Kasich said: "I would never have committed ourselves to Iraq." A Kasich spokesman subsequently said that "Kasich was not revising history" but was instead saying that the Iraq War was a mistake given the facts available now. Kasich has said that the U.S. "should've left a base in Iraq" instead of withdrawing troops in 2011. In 2015, Kasich said that airstrikes were insufficient to combat the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, and he would send U.S. ground troops to fight ISIL. Kasich opposed the landmark 2015 international nuclear agreement with Iran, and in September 2015 was one of fourteen Republican governors who sent a letter to President Obama stating "that we intend to ensure that the various state-level sanctions [against Iran] that are now in effect remain in effect," despite the agreement. Kasich has expressed support for the U.S.'s drone program. He has said, however, that the program should be overseen by the Department of Defense, and not by the CIA. Kasich has said that he wants to lift budget sequestration for military spending, and "spend more if necessary." In November 2015, Kasich said that if elected president, he "would send a carrier battle group through the South China Sea" to send a message to China regarding their claims of sovereignty there. Kasich supports continued U.S. support of Saudi Arabia, but he criticized Saudi Arabia's "funding and teaching of radical clerics who are the very people who try to destroy us". Kasich favors strong relations between the U.S. and its NATO allies. He supported Senator John McCain's call for maintaining existing U.S. sanctions on Russia, and condemned the Trump administration's consideration of lifting sanctions. Like McCain, Kasich supports imposing "tougher sanctions against Russia and Putin's inner circle." He supports a bipartisan investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections. By the mid-2010s, Kasich had shown much more support for LGBT rights than many of his Republican counterparts. However, during his time in Congress, Kasich was much less accepting, and voted for the Defense of Marriage Act, which barred federal recognition of same-sex marriage. During this period, Kasich supported a ban on same-sex marriage in Ohio and stated that he did not approve of the "gay lifestyle." As governor of Ohio, Kasich signed an executive order banning discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation for state employees; this was more narrow than the previous executive order signed by his predecessor because it omitted protections for gender identity. During the 2016 presidential campaign, Kasich struck a more moderate tone compared to his Republican opponents. In June 2015, following the U.S. Supreme Court's decision in Obergefell v. Hodges, which held that there is a fundamental right to same-sex marriage under the Fourteenth Amendment, Kasich said that he was "obviously disappointed" and that he believes in "traditional marriage," but that the ruling was "the law of the land and we'll abide by it" and that it was "time to move on" to other issues. During his time as Ohio governor, Kasich appointed Richard Hodges as Ohio Director of Health, who was the lead-respondent in the case. Kasich indicated that he did not support an amendment to the U.S. Constitution to overturn the decision. In response to a debate question about how he would explain his position on same-sex marriage to one of his daughters if she were gay, Kasich responded, "The court has ruled, and I said we'll accept it. And guess what, I just went to a wedding of a friend of mine who happens to be gay. Because somebody doesn't think the way I do doesn't mean that I can't care about them or can't love them. So if one of my daughters happened to be that, of course I would love them and I would accept them. Because you know what? That's what we're taught when we have strong faith." In September 2015, Kasich commented on the highly publicized case of Kim Davis (the Rowan County, Kentucky clerk who refused to comply with a federal court order directing her to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples), saying: "Now, I respect the fact that this lady doesn't agree but she's also a government employee, she's not running a church, I wouldn't force this on a church. But in terms of her responsibility I think she has to comply. I don't think — I don't like the fact that she's sitting in a jail, that's absurd as well. But I think she should follow the law." In a March 2018 interview on The Rubin Report, Kasich passively came out in support of same-sex marriage saying "I'm fine with it," but stated that he now preferred to show himself as someone in the "Billy Graham tradition" that "avoided social issues". In December 2018, Kasich signed an executive order extending non-discrimination protections for gender identity, including trans and non-binary identities, to state employees in Ohio. While in the U.S. House of Representatives, Kasich had a mixed record on gun policy. He was one of 215 Representatives to vote for the Federal Assault Weapons Ban, which became law in 1994, but voted against the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act ("Brady Bill"), which established current background check laws. As governor, Kasich shifted to more pro-gun positions. In 2011, he signed one bill permitting concealed handguns in bars and another making it easier for people with misdemeanor drug convictions to purchase guns. In 2012, Kasich signed a bill allowing gun owners to transport weapons with loaded magazines in their vehicles and expanding concealed carry permit reciprocity. In December 2014, Kasich signed legislation that reduced the numbers of hours of training required to obtain a concealed carry permit and eliminated the training requirement for permit renewals. After the Stoneman Douglas High School shooting in February 2018, Kasich called for restrictions on the sales of AR-15 style rifles. Kasich opted to accept Medicaid-expansion funding provided by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA or "Obamacare") in Ohio. This decision angered many Statehouse Republicans, who wanted Kasich to reject the expansion. Total spending on Medicaid by the state was almost $2 billion (or 7.6 percent) below estimates for the fiscal year ending in June 2015, according to a report by Kasich's administration. The lower-than-expected costs were attributed to expanded managed care, shorter nursing home stays and increased in-home care for seniors, capitated reimbursement policies, increased automation to determine eligibility for the program and pay care providers, and an improving economy in the state which allowed some participants to move out of the program. In an October 2014 interview, Kasich said that repeal of the ACA was "not gonna happen" and stated that "The opposition to it was really either political or ideological. I don't think that holds water against real flesh and blood, and real improvements in people's lives." Kasich later said that he was referring solely to the law's Medicaid expansion, and that "my position is that we need to repeal and replace" the rest of the law. In 2015, Kasich expressed support for many provisions of the ACA (ensuring coverage for people with preexisting conditions, the use of insurance exchanges, and Medicaid expansion), but opposed mandates. In 2017, after Donald Trump took office and congressional Republicans maneuvered to repeal the ACA, Kasich criticized Republican hard-liners in Congress who demanded a full ACA repeal, saying that full repeal was "not acceptable" when 20 million people gained insurance under the ACA and that doing so would be a "political impossibility." Kasich urged that the Medicaid expansion be preserved in some form, criticizing the House Republican legislation that would cut the Medicaid expansion and phase out health insurance subsidies for low-income Americans. Kasich said that the nation's "soul" was at stake if Republicans passed legislation that left millions without health insurance. After the failure of the House Republican health-care legislation, Kasich met in Washington with members of the Republican Tuesday Group and urged fellow Republicans to work with Democrats to make more modest changes to the Affordable Care Act. In May 2017, Kasich said that the version of the Republican health care bill that passed the House was "inadequate" and would harm patients; Kasich said that Republicans "should've worked with the Democrats" on the bill rather than passing legislation merely to fulfill a campaign pledge. In June 2017, Kasich said that he didn't "have a problem" with gradually phasing out the ACA's expansion of Medicaid over a seven-year period, but only if Congress provided states with significantly more, more than the House Republican bill provided for, and only if Congress granted states more authority to manage the program. Along with three other Republican governors (Asa Hutchinson of Arkansas, Brian Sandoval of Nevada, and Rick Snyder of Michigan), Kasich signed a letter to Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell with an outline of their wishes for a health care bill. Kasich and the others specifically called upon Congress to "end the requirement that state Medicaid programs cover nearly every prescription drug approved by the Food and Drug Administration." Kasich and the other governors' views were seen as influential, because their states have Republican senators and the Republicans have only a narrow majority in the Senate. In 2010, while running for governor, Kasich expressed support for amending the U.S. Constitution to abolish the Fourteenth Amendment's guarantee of jus soli (birthright) citizenship for people born in the United States. Kasich also told the Columbus Dispatch at the time that "One thing that I don't want to reward is illegal immigration." In 2014, Kasich acknowledged that his stance on immigration has "evolved" because "maybe [I'm] a little smarter now," stating: "I don't want to see anybody in pain. So I guess when I look at this now, I look at it differently than I did in '10. ... When I look at a group of people who might be hiding, who may be afraid, who may be scared, who have children, I don't want to be in a position of where I make it worse for them." That year, Kasich expressed openness to a path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants, saying at a Republican Governors Association (RGA) meeting in Florida, "I don't like the idea of citizenship when people jump the line, [but] we may have to do it." Kasich was the only governor at the RGA conference "to express openly a willingness to create a pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants." In August 2015, while running for president, Kasich called for a path to legal status (but not necessarily citizenship) for undocumented immigrants and for a guest worker program. Kasich also appeared to disavow his earlier stance against birthright citizenship, stating "I don't think we need to go there"; called for completion of a fence along the U.S.-Mexico border; and noted that undocumented immigrants who were brought to the U.S. as young children may obtain driver's licenses in Ohio. In October 2015, Kasich criticized Donald Trump's "plan to build a wall along the Mexican border and remove immigrants who entered the United States illegally," calling these notions "just crazy." In September 2015, Kasich said that the U.S. had a moral responsibility to accept refugees fleeing war and violence in Syria. Subsequently, however, Kasich moved to the right, and in November 2015 wrote a letter to President Obama asking that no additional Syrian refugees be resettled in Ohio. Kasich opposed Trump's executive order on travel and immigration, which Trump signed one week after taking office in January 2017. Kasich said that the order was "ham-handed" because it "sowed so much confusion" and "sent a message that somehow the United States was looking sideways at Muslims." Kasich has a "long-standing political partnership" with his lieutenant governor, Mary Taylor. In 2014, Kasich defended Taylor after her chief of staff, and that chief of staff's administrative assistant, resigned following a timesheet probe. Kasich said of Taylor's handling of the matter: "Mary did the right thing and I support her." In 2017, the Kasich-Taylor relationship frayed after Taylor abandoned Kasich ally Matt Borges in his bid for chairman of the Ohio Republican Party, and instead chose to support Jane Timken, who was actively supported by Donald Trump, who sought revenge against Kasich for his choice not to endorse Trump. Nevertheless, Kasich indicated that Taylor had "been a good partner" over his term and indicated that he would support her if she chose to run for governor in 2018. Upon taking office in 2011, Kasich received criticism for appointing an initial all-white cabinet of 22 members. Responding to criticism for not appointing any black, Hispanic, or Asian Cabinet members, Kasich said: "I don't look at things from the standpoint of any of these sort of metrics that people tend to focus on, race or age, or any of those things. It's not the way I look at things... I want the best possible team I can get." Shortly afterward, on February 2, 2011, Kasich made his first minority appointment to the Cabinet, naming Michael Colbert, a black man, to lead the Ohio Department of Job and Family Services. As of 2018[update], four members of Kasich's Cabinet were members of racial minorities. Throughout his first gubernatorial campaign, Kasich opposed the Ohio Hub higher-speed passenger rail project (a proposed 258-mile Cleveland-to-Cincinnati train) and promised to cancel it, claiming that it would average speeds of merely 36 mph. In his first press conference following his election victory, Kasich declared "That train is dead...I said it during the campaign: It is dead." As governor-elect, Kasich lobbied the federal government to use $400 million in federal dollars allocated for high-speed rail for freight rail projects instead. In a November 2010 letter to Kasich, Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood wrote that the federal funding was specifically allocated by the 2009 economic stimulus act for high-speed rail, and could not be used for other purposes. In a December 2010 meeting with President Barack Obama, Kasich again unsuccessfully lobbied to use the grant money for freight rail rather than high-speed rail. In December 2010, the U.S. Department of Transportation announced that Ohio would lose the $385 million in grant funds allocated for high-speed passenger rail, since Kasich had informed them that he had no intention of ever building high-speed rail projects. (Almost $15 million had already been spent for preliminary engineering.) The $385 million was instead diverted to other states, such as California, New York, and Florida, which planned high-speed rail using the grant money for its congressionally intended purpose. Outgoing governor Ted Strickland, who championed the project, expressed disappointment, saying that the loss of funding for the project was "one of the saddest days during my four years as governor" and that "I can't understand the logic of giving up these vital, job-creating resources to California and Florida at a time when so many Ohioans need jobs." Kasich is an opponent of the Cincinnati Streetcar project. In April 2015, Kasich signed a two-year transportation budget bill which allocated $7.06 billion for highway construction and maintenance, $600 million to local governments for road and bridge projects, and an additional million over the last budget for public transportation. In February 2014, Kasich signed into law a bill which cut six days from Ohio's early voting period, including the "golden week" (a period at the beginning of early voting when voters could both register to vote and cast an in-person absentee ballot). The measures were hotly contested in the state legislature, passing on a party-line vote, with Republicans in favor and Democrats opposed. This measure prompted two federal lawsuits. The first lawsuit, brought by the American Civil Liberties Union of Ohio on behalf of the NAACP and League of Women Voters of Ohio, resulted in a settlement in April 2015, in which the state agreed to provide evening and Sunday hours for early voting in elections in Ohio through 2018. The second lawsuit, Ohio Democratic Party v. Husted, was brought in May 2015 by Democratic election lawyer Marc Elias; plaintiffs argued that the Ohio bill eliminating "golden week" violated the Constitution and the Voting Rights Act because it disproportionately burdened black, Latino and young voters. The federal district court agreed and struck down the legislation, but the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit reversed that decision in a 2–1 vote, and the U.S. Supreme Court declined to hear an appeal. In July 2015, Kasich said that it was "pure demagoguery" for Hillary Clinton to "say that there are Republicans who are deliberately trying to keep people from voting." In April 2015, Kasich used his line-item veto power to veto a provision added to a highway-budget bill by Republicans in the state legislature that would have required college students who register to vote in Ohio to obtain a state driver's license and vehicle registration, imposing an estimated $75 in motor vehicle costs on out-of-state college students who wanted to vote in the state. The veto was celebrated by voting rights advocates, Ohio Democrats, and the Cleveland Plain Dealer editorial board, which viewed the proposal as effectively a "poll tax" motivated by a partisan desire to limit college-town voting. In Ohio, justices of the Ohio Supreme Court are elected, but the governor can fill unexpired terms. In May 2012, Ohio Supreme Court Associate Justice Evelyn Lundberg Stratton announced she would retire at the end of 2012. In December 2012, Kasich appointed Judge Judith L. French to Stratton's unexpired term, which ran from January 1, 2013, through January 1, 2015. On October 18, 2019, Kasich publicly stated that Donald Trump should be impeached. He had previously said there was not enough evidence to impeach the President. In April 2015, Kasich announced the formation of his "New Day For America" group. Formerly a 527 group, it filed as a super PAC in July 2015. Between April 20 and June 30, 2015, the super PAC raised over $11.1 million from 165 "reportable contributions," including 34 contributions of $100,000 or more. Major contributors to the PAC include Floyd Kvamme, who donated $100,000, and Jim Dicke, chairman emeritus of Crown Equipment Corporation, who donated $250,000. According to FEC filings, Kasich's campaign had $2.5 million on hand at the beginning of 2016. In May 2015, sources close to him had said he was "virtually certain" to run for the Republican nomination for president. On July 21, 2015, Kasich announced his candidacy for the Republican presidential nomination during a speech at the Ohio Union, the student union of his alma mater, the Ohio State University. On January 30, 2016, the New York Times endorsed Kasich for the Republican nomination. The Times editorial board strongly rebuked leading candidates Donald Trump and Senator Ted Cruz and wrote that Kasich, "though a distinct underdog, is the only plausible choice for Republicans tired of the extremism and inexperience on display in this race." On the campaign trail, Kasich sought to project a sunny, optimistic message, describing himself as "the prince of light and hope." This marked a change in tone for Kasich, who had developed a reputation as an abrasive governor. Viewed as a long-shot contender, Kasich took an "above-the-fray approach to his rivals" and "ran unapologetically as a candidate with experience" even as others ran as "outsider" contenders. Kasich came in second place in the New Hampshire primary on February 9, 2016, behind winner Trump. The Cincinnati Enquirer reported that this was "the best possible result" for Kasich and lent "credence to the notion that he can emerge" as a Republican alternative to Trump and Cruz. Ultimately, however, Kasich's message "never caught on in a campaign that ... exposed the anger and frustration coursing through the electorate" and he "found himself stuck in fourth place in a three-man race, trailing Senator Marco Rubio of Florida in the delegate count" although Rubio had dropped out of the race in March. The only state won by Kasich was his home state of Ohio, which gave him 66 delegates in its March 2016 winner-take-all primary but still left him with "a steep delegate deficit against his rivals." Kasich's unsuccessful campaign strategy hinged on the possibility of a contested (or brokered) Republican National Convention, in which no single candidate has enough delegates to win the nomination on the first ballot, something that has not happened in either of the two major parties' presidential nominating conventions since 1952. Kasich suspended his campaign for the Republican presidential nomination on May 4, 2016, one day after Trump won the Republican primary in Indiana. The third remaining contender, Cruz, quit the race shortly before Kasich did, leaving Trump as the only candidate remaining in the Republican field and hence the party's presumptive nominee. A 2018 study on media coverage of the 2016 election noted "the paradox of the Kasich campaign's longevity while it lacked public interest provides some evidence for the idea that Kasich's biggest supporters were the media". Following his withdrawal from the race, Kasich did not extend his support to Trump. In May and June 2016, Kasich said that Trump was a divisive figure rather than a "unifier," said he had no plans to endorse Trump in the near future, and ruled out the possibility of seeking the Vice Presidency as Trump's running mate. Kasich said it was "hard to say" whether he would ever endorse Trump; he added, "I can't go for dividing, name calling, or somebody that doesn't really represent conservative principles." Kasich said he had ruled out voting for Clinton but lacked the enthusiasm to fully back Trump. In August 2016, Kasich repeated an earlier claim that the Trump campaign had offered him a powerful vice presidency, "putting him in charge of all domestic and foreign policy". The Trump campaign denied that such an offer had been made. Kasich also doubted whether Trump could win Ohio, a critical state in the election. It was speculated that Kasich was looking towards a 2020 campaign. This speculation was strengthened by a report that Kasich had planned to give a speech to the American Enterprise Institute less than 48 hours after the election but cancelled it the morning after the election when it was clear that Trump had won. Kasich received an electoral vote for the presidency from one faithless elector, Christopher Suprun of Texas, who had been pledged to vote for Trump. An elector in Colorado also attempted to vote for him, but that vote was discarded; the elector was replaced by an alternate elector who voted, as pledged, for Clinton. In February 2017, Kasich met with Trump at the White House in a private meeting that followed a bitter feud. Kasich indicated that he hoped for Trump's success, but would continue to be critical when he thought it was necessary. The same month, Kasich's chief political advisors launched a political group, Two Paths America, in an effort to promote Kasich and his views and draw a contrast with Trump. In April 2017, Kasich also released a book, Two Paths: America Divided or United, written with Daniel Paisner. The creation of the group prompted speculation he could possibly run for president again, but Kasich said that he had no plans to seek elected office in the future. In April 2017, during a CNN town hall, Kasich, while stating that he was "very unlikely" to do so, reopened the possibility that he might run for president in 2020. On August 20, however, he reiterated his previous statement that he had no plans to run; rather, he stated that he was "rooting for [Trump] to get it together." In October 2017, during an interview with CNN's Jake Tapper, Kasich said he had not "given up" on the Republican Party, but added that "if the party can't be fixed ... I'm not going to be able to support the party. Period. That's the end of it." In March 2018, he told The Weekly Standard that he was "increasingly open" to running for president in the 2020 presidential election; however, in May 2019, he again declared that he would not seek the presidency in 2020. In October 2019, Kasich expressed support for the impeachment inquiry against Trump, saying that the "final straw" for him was when Trump's acting chief of staff Mick Mulvaney admitted that Trump had withheld U.S. aid from Ukraine in part to pressure the country to investigate Trump's domestic political rivals, a statement that Mulvaney later said was misconstrued. Kasich confirmed on August 10, 2020, that he would be speaking at the 2020 Democratic National Convention in support of presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden. Kasich said that his conscience compelled him to speak out against Trump and in support of Biden, even if it resulted in blowback against him, adding, "I've been a reformer almost all of my life. I've been very independent and I'm a Republican but the Republican Party has always been my vehicle but never my master. You have to do what you think is right in your heart and I'm comfortable here." Kasich has been married twice. His first marriage was to Mary Lee Griffith from 1975 to 1980, and they had no children. Griffith has campaigned for Kasich since their divorce. Kasich and his current wife, Karen Waldbillig, a former public relations executive, were married in March 1997 and have twin daughters, Emma and Reese. Kasich was raised a Catholic, but considers denominations irrelevant, while stating that "there's always going to be a part of me that considers myself a Catholic." He drifted away from his religion as an adult, but came to embrace an Anglican faith after his parents were killed in a car crash by a drunk driver on August 20, 1987. He joined the Episcopal Church as an adult. Kasich has said he "doesn't find God in church" but does belong to St. Augustine's in Westerville, Ohio, which is part of the Anglican Church in North America, a conservative church with which he remained when it broke off from the Episcopal Church. Kasich has authored five books: Courage is Contagious, published in 1998, made the New York Times bestseller list Stand for Something: The Battle for America's Soul, published in 2006 Every Other Monday, published in 2010. This book is a New York Times bestseller. Two Paths: America Divided or United, published in 2017 It's Up to Us: Ten Little Ways We Can Bring About Big Change, published in 2019 Ohio's 12th congressional district List of United States representatives from Ohio Ohio gubernatorial election, 2010 Ohio gubernatorial election, 2014 Republican Party presidential candidates, 2016 List of John Kasich presidential campaign endorsements, 2016 Citations Phillips, Amber (February 9, 2016). "Who is John Kasich? Five things you should know — including how to pronounce 'Kasich.'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 4, 2018. Retrieved November 26, 2018. "Biography | John R. Kasich Congressional Collection". Westervillelibrary.org. 1952-05-15. Archived from the original on 2013-10-17. Retrieved 2013-07-19. "Governor John R. Kasich Biography". Governor of Ohio. Archived from the original on 2017-07-29. Retrieved 2013-07-02. "KASICH, John Richard, Biographical Information". Biographical Directory of the United States Congress. Archived from the original on 2012-07-07. Retrieved 2011-01-29. Davis, Teddy (May 12, 2010). "Lehman Brothers Collapse Haunts John Kasich in Ohio Governor's Race". ABC News. Archived from the original on 2012-11-03. Retrieved 2012-09-05. Hershey, William (April 2, 2010). "Kasich made $1.1 M in 2008; no "golden parachute" from Lehman Bros, records show". Dayton Daily News. Archived from the original on 2012-01-25. Retrieved 2012-09-05. "Governor and Lieutenant Governor: November 2, 2010". Ohio Secretary of State. Archived from the original on February 10, 2016. Retrieved November 3, 2014. Tilove, Jonathan (September 23, 2016). "John Kasich not following Ted Cruz's lead; no plans to endorse Trump". Austin American-Statesman. Archived from the original on October 9, 2016. Retrieved December 13, 2016. Henry J. Gomez (November 2016). "John Kasich follows through on vow not to vote for Donald Trump, writes in John McCain instead". Cleveland.com. Archived from the original on 2016-11-01. Retrieved 2016-12-23. "Former Ohio Gov. John Kasich joins MSNBC as analyst". Gray, Sarah (January 9, 2019). "John Kasich issued a fiery response to Trump's Oval Office address that mostly criticized the president's leadership". Business Insider. Archived from the original on February 2, 2019. Retrieved August 12, 2020. Dorman, Sam (August 11, 2020). "John Kasich says 'conscience' compelled him to speak at DNC, GOP is 'my vehicle but never my master'". Fox News. Archived from the original on August 11, 2020. Retrieved August 11, 2020. Kaplan, Rebecca (July 21, 2015). "He's late to the 2016 race – but not to politics - Five things to know about John Kasich". CBS News. Archived from the original on February 17, 2017. Retrieved December 23, 2016. Weisskopf & Maraniss 2008, p. 46. Kasich 1999, p. 242. croatiaweek (June 2015). "The American-Croat Running for President of the United States of America". Croatia Week. Archived from the original on 2015-07-22. Retrieved 2015-07-22. Rechcigl 2013, p. 373. Gossett, Dave (February 7, 2012). "Kasich relaxes at Wells Academy". Herald-Star. Steubenville, Ohio: Ogden Newspapers. Archived from the original on May 4, 2015. Retrieved December 12, 2014. "Brother Kasich Elected Ohio Governor". Alpha Sigma Phi Fraternity, Inc. Archived from the original on October 16, 2013. Sellers, Patricia (March 12, 2012). "Ohio governor's career-making moment". Fortune. Archived from the original on February 28, 2016. Kasich, John (December 2, 1970). "Letter to Richard Nixon". Dayton Daily News. Archived from the original on January 27, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2016. "Governor John R. Kasich (OH)". Project Vote Smart. Archived from the original on 2010-10-30. Retrieved 2011-01-29. Bischoff, Laura (July 31, 2010). "Minister, former psychologist Strickland faces millionaire Kasich". Dayton Daily News. Archived from the original on June 28, 2011. Retrieved January 29, 2011. "John Kasich's biodata". Fox News Channel. December 1, 2011. Archived from the original on November 2, 2012. Retrieved January 29, 2011. Gomez, Henry (March 13, 2014). "After some lean and mean years, a maverick goes mainstream in Congress: John Kasich 5.0". The Plain Dealer. Cleveland, Ohio: Gannett. Archived from the original on January 22, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2016. "Statehouse oath a step back in time for Kasich". News Net 5. January 9, 2011. Archived from the original on June 28, 2011. Wilkinson, Howard (February 26, 1999). ""Little guy" starts White House run". Cincinnati Enquirer. Archived from the original on July 15, 2012. Retrieved June 12, 2015. Shutt, Dave (December 21, 1978). "Most Ohio Legislators To Take $5,000 Raise". Toledo Blade. "19 Won't Take Full Pay Hike". Youngstown Vindicator. December 22, 1978. "OH District 12 – R Primary Race – Jun 08, 1982". Our Campaigns. Archived from the original on February 7, 2015. Retrieved July 19, 2013. "OH District 12 Race – Nov 02, 1982". Our Campaigns. Archived from the original on 2015-02-07. Retrieved 2013-07-19. Straub, Bill (1998-07-04). "Kasich is a maverick with youth on his side". The Cincinnati Post. E. W. Scripps Company. Archived from the original on 2004-09-18. "OH District 12 Race – Nov 05, 1996". Our Campaigns. Archived from the original on 2015-02-07. Retrieved 2013-07-19. Apple, R. W. Jr. (1998-04-26). "A Republican With Rough Edges". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2017-01-15. Retrieved 2017-02-17. Pianin, Erich (May 25, 2006). "Kasich looks at nation, GOP and finds both in trouble". Evansville Courier & Press. Archived from the original on October 25, 2013. Smith, Adam (August 19, 2015). "Meet John Kasich, the straight-talking GOP candidate threatening Jeb Bush". Miami Herald. Archived from the original on September 5, 2015. Retrieved September 1, 2015. Kaplan, Rebecca (August 17, 2015). "John Kasich: What does he stand for?". CBS News. Archived from the original on September 19, 2015. Retrieved September 13, 2015. Eaton, Sabrina (August 14, 2015). "Kasich to tout foreign policy experience on presidential campaign trail". Cleveland Plain Dealer. Archived from the original on September 7, 2015. Retrieved September 13, 2015. Weisskopf, Michael; Maraniss, David (1996). Tell Newt to Shut Up: Prize-Winning Washington Post Journalists Reveal How Reality Gagged the Gingrich Revolution. New York City: Simon & Schuster. pp. 102–03. ISBN 978-0-684-83293-7. Locher, James R. III; Nunn, Sam (2004). Victory on the Potomac: The Goldwater-Nichols Act Unifies the Pentagon. College Station, Texas: Texas A&M University Press. pp. 375, 423, 425. ISBN 978-1-58544-398-7. Rowland, Darrel (April 27, 2015). "What we've found out about the foreign policy of a President Kasich". Columbus Dispatch. Columbus, Ohio: Gannett. Archived from the original on September 23, 2015. Retrieved September 13, 2015. "A GOP Move To Bring Bosnia Troops Home: Reps. Kasich, Spence want to stop funds by Sept. 30". CNN. March 21, 1997. Archived from the original on February 8, 2016. Retrieved September 13, 2015. Pianin, Eric (March 3, 1994). "Republican Alternative to Clinton Budget Includes Tax Relief for Parents". The Washington Post. Washington, D.C. Archived from the original on August 25, 2017. Retrieved September 1, 2017. "House Approves Spending Cuts: Clinton Fends Off Call For Bigger Savings". Washington Post. Washington, D.C. November 23, 1993. Archived from the original on 2015-11-17. Retrieved 2015-08-05. Crawford, J. Craig (November 24, 1993). Budget-cutting "Zeal Sends a Clear Message to Clinton". Orlando Sentinel. Orlando, Florida: Tribune Publishing. Archived from the original on 2015-10-30. Retrieved 2015-08-05. {{cite news}}: Check |url= value (help) LaCayo, Richard (November 8, 1993). "Remember the Deficit?". Time. New York City: Time Warner. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved July 15, 2007. Miller, Zeke J. (July 23, 2015). "Hillary Clinton Dined With John Kasich Over Healthcare Reform—In 1993". Time. New York City: Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved August 5, 2015. "H.R. 3450 (103rd): North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act". GovTrack.us. November 17, 1993. Archived from the original on October 29, 2019. Retrieved December 23, 2016. Broder, David (August 24, 1994). "Bipartisanship Was The Key In Getting Crime Bill Passed". Chicago Tribune. Chicago, Illinois: Tribune Publishing. Archived from the original on 2015-06-14. Retrieved 2015-06-12. Rowland, Darrel; Siegel, Jim (October 28, 2010). "Strickland told truth in anti-Kasich ad, elections panel finds". Columbus Dispatch. Columbus, Ohio: GateHouse Media. Archived from the original on June 19, 2012. Retrieved September 5, 2012. Eaton, Sabrina (January 27, 2015). "Gov. John Kasich continues reform quest he started two decades ago: welfare to work". The Plain Dealer. Cleveland, Ohio: Gannett. Archived from the original on July 7, 2015. Retrieved August 10, 2015. Schneider, Bill (April 16, 1996). "The Last Cookie on the Plate". CNN. Archived from the original on February 21, 2008. Retrieved July 15, 2007. Symth, Julie Carr (July 21, 2015). "White House Brief: Things to know about 2016 Republican candidate and Ohio Gov. John Kasich". U.S. News & World Report. Washington, D.C.: U.S. News & World Report, L.P. Associated Press. Archived from the original on August 13, 2015. Payne, Dan (August 19, 2015). 20 Revelations "About GOP Candidate John Kasich". WBUR. Archived from the original on September 22, 2015. Retrieved September 13, 2015. {{cite web}}: Check |url= value (help) Berke, Richard L. (February 7, 1999). "The President's Trial: Presidential Candidates Are Saying Little About Impeachment Trial, for Now". The New York Times. New York City. Archived from the original on September 19, 2017. Retrieved February 17, 2017. "Veteran Ohio lawmaker plans to seek GOP presidential nod". Deseret News. 1999-02-15. Archived from the original on 2015-03-27. Retrieved 2013-07-19. Kasich forms exploratory committee to run for president Archived 2006-12-19 at the Wayback Machine, CNN (February 15, 1999). "Pittsburgh Post-Gazette – Google News Archive Search". Archived from the original on 2020-11-09. Retrieved 2013-07-19. Wilkinson, Howard (July 14, 1999). "Kasich will bow to Bush". Cincinnati Enquirer. Archived from the original on July 25, 2012. Retrieved July 6, 2017. Calderone, Michael (March 2, 2010). "Fox platform gives Kasich a boost". Politico. Archived from the original on January 7, 2016. Retrieved September 12, 2015. Daley, David (May 23, 2000). "Pursuit Of No. 2: Vp Candidates Parade Before Chatfests". Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on September 23, 2015. Retrieved September 12, 2015. "Lehman Hires Kasich". New York Times. January 11, 2001. Archived from the original on 2012-11-11. Retrieved 2012-09-05. "Kasich discloses Lehman pay". Politico. Archived from the original on 2015-07-18. Retrieved 2015-07-01. Pelzer, Jeremy (October 29, 2015). "Here Are the Facts behind 3 GOP Debate Claims Involving John Kasich". Cleveland.com. Archived from the original on February 10, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Hallett, Joe; Riskind, Jonathan (July 15, 2005). "GOP voices urge Kasich to enter race for governor". Columbus Dispatch. Archived from the original on December 2, 2005. Joe Hallett, Kasich creates PAC to help Ohio GOP retain power Archived 2016-02-14 at the Wayback Machine, Columbus Dispatch (July 15, 2008). Kevin Risner, Kasich announces leadership team for Ohio PAC Archived 2016-02-14 at the Wayback Machine, Advertiser-Tribune (February 17, 2009). Kraushaar, Josh (2009-05-01). "Kasich to run for Ohio governorship". Politico.com. Archived from the original on 2013-05-14. Retrieved 2013-07-19. Points of division: Jobs dominate, but 'hot button' issues remain important in governor's race, Columbus Dispatch Archived March 21, 2011, at the Wayback Machine "Kasich touts reform, but few details makes districts anxious in Columbus". Springfieldnewssun.com. Archived from the original on 2011-09-28. Retrieved 2013-07-19. Unions that 'make things' will get chance to help | Columbus Dispatch Politics[dead link] "Governor's Mansion goes red as John Kasich wins". Findarticles.com. Archived from the original on 2016-01-07. Retrieved 2013-07-19. "Kasich To Be Sworn In As Ohio's Next Governor | WBNS-10TV Columbus, Ohio". 10tv.com. Archived from the original on 2011-01-11. Retrieved 2013-07-19. Terkel, Amanda (March 11, 2013). John Kasich Faces Tea Party Protest Over Medicaid Decision Archived 2018-02-06 at the Wayback Machine, The Huffington Post. Retrieved 2014-12-24. Green, Justin (May 6, 2013). Why Does the Tea Party Want to Let Democrats Run Ohio? Archived 2014-11-05 at the Wayback Machine, The Daily Beast. Retrieved 2014-12-24. Freedlander, David (September 4, 2013). Ohio Republican Party Goes to War With Itself, Leaving 2016 in Doubt Archived 2014-11-05 at the Wayback Machine, The Daily Beast. Retrieved 2014-12-24. Joe Vardon, Libertarians angry at GOP while acknowledging faults Archived 2014-10-06 at the Wayback Machine, The Columbus Dispatch ( March 9, 2014). Joanna Walters, John Kasich has been billed as moderate candidate, but his record is anything but Archived 2016-12-14 at the Wayback Machine, The Guardian (February 11, 2016). "Looking for another boomer president". Cincinnati Enquirer. 1998-10-11. Retrieved 2013-07-19. Bischoff, Laura (January 13, 2019). "John Kasich ends 2 terms as governor, prepares for what's next". Retrieved January 26, 2021.[permanent dead link] Pilkington, Ed (September 8, 2015). "Ohio Planned Parenthood fights back at frontline of new conservative assault". The Guardian. London, England. Archived from the original on January 7, 2017. Retrieved December 14, 2016. Candisky, Catherine (May 3, 2017). "Abortion-rights advocates say support has swelled since Trump election". Columbus Dispatch. Columbus, Ohio: Gannett. Archived from the original on May 21, 2017. Retrieved May 21, 2017. Brandon Blackwell, Kasich signs budget, keeps abortion restrictions, leaves door open for Medicaid expansion Archived 2015-09-06 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (July 1, 2013). "Ohio Abortion Restrictions: Gov. John Kasich Signs New State Budget Containing Anti-Abortion Measures". The Huffington Post. New York City: Huffington Post Media Group. July 1, 2015. Archived from the original on April 6, 2018. Retrieved February 18, 2020. Eilperin, Juliet (July 1, 2013). "Ohio Gov. John Kasich signs new abortion restrictions into law". The Washington Post. Washington, D.C.: Nash Holdings. Archived from the original on May 5, 2016. Retrieved April 17, 2016. Torry, Jack (September 13, 2015). "John Kasich warns against government shutdown over Planned Parenthood funding". Columbus Dispatch. Columbus, Ohio: Gannett. Archived from the original on September 16, 2015. Retrieved September 13, 2015. Grinberg, Emanuella (2016-12-14). "Ohio bans abortions after 20 weeks, vetoes 'heartbeat' bill". CNN. Archived from the original on 2016-12-21. Retrieved 2016-12-23. "House Bill 493 - Votes | The Ohio Legislature". Legislature.ohio.gov. Archived from the original on 2016-12-20. Retrieved 2016-12-23. Anderson, Chris (21 December 2018). "Ohio Gov. Kasich vetoes anti-abortion 'heartbeat bill'". cleveland19.com. Archived from the original on 2018-12-21. Retrieved 2018-12-22. Smyth, Julie Carr (2018-12-21). "Kasich veto sets up Ohio showdown over abortion limit". AP NEWS. Archived from the original on 2018-12-21. Retrieved 2018-12-22. Laura A. Bischoff, Columbus Bureau. "Kasich vetoes heartbeat abortion ban, signs other abortion bill". daytondailynews. Archived from the original on 2018-12-22. Retrieved 2018-12-22. Sarah McHaney, What does John Kasich believe? Where the candidate stands on 10 issues Archived 2017-09-13 at the Wayback Machine, PBS (July 21, 2015). Joe Vardon, Kasich breaks ranks, speaks of climate change Archived 2015-08-18 at the Wayback Machine, Columbus Dispatch (April 10, 2012). Nuccitelli, Dana (2016-03-14). "Sanders, Clinton, Rubio, and Kasich answer climate debate questions | Dana Nuccitelli". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 2019-02-27. Retrieved 2019-02-26. Rachel Leven & Anthony Adragna, Candidate Kasich Says Climate Change Cause Unclear Archived 2015-08-02 at the Wayback Machine, Bloomberg BNA (July 21, 2015). Steven Mufson & Tom Hamburger, Ohio governor signs bill freezing renewable-energy standards Archived 2017-07-16 at the Wayback Machine, Washington Post (June 13, 2014). John Funk, Ohio renewable energy and efficiency rules frozen for two years as Gov. John Kasich signs legislation Archived 2015-08-03 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (June 13, 2014). * Carrie Blackmore Smith, Kasich breaks with GOP, keeps renewable energy standards Archived 2016-12-31 at the Wayback Machine, Cincinnati Enquirer (December 27, 2016). John Funk, Kasich wins strong support from environmentalists for green mandates Archived 2017-01-08 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (December 27, 2016). Jeremy Pelzer, Ohio's fracking tax would jump significantly under Gov. John Kasich's budget plan Archived 2015-07-21 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (February 2, 2015). Eric Albrecht, Kasich reverses on fracking in state parks: Legislators call for investigation into ODNR plan Archived 2015-09-23 at the Wayback Machine, Columbus Dispatch (February 18, 2014). Gov. Kasich signs bill aimed at protecting Lake Erie, Ohio water quality Archived 2015-05-06 at the Wayback Machine, Toledo Blade. John Seewer, Gov. John Kasich signs new rules to help reduce Lake Erie Algae, Associated Press (April 2, 2015). Archived August 12, 2015, at the Wayback Machine Jack Torry, Kasich backs Keystone Pipeline Archived 2015-07-15 at the Wayback Machine, Columbus Dispatch (February 12, 2015). * Randy Ludlow, Ohio troopers return from North Dakota pipeline protest Archived 2016-11-20 at the Wayback Machine, Columbus Dispatch (November 16, 2016). Carrie Blackmore Smith, Kasich: I sent Ohio troopers to assist with security at Dakota Access Pipeline Archived 2017-04-17 at the Wayback Machine, Cincinnati Enquirer (April 17, 2017). Joe Guillen, Private corrections company with ties to government officials will not get special treatment while Ohio sells five prisons, director says Archived 2016-01-07 at the Wayback Machine, The Plain Dealer (March 21, 2013). Collier Meyerson, Private prisons and the profit motive Archived 2020-01-14 at the Wayback Machine, MSNBC (September 13, 2013). German Lopez, From the Inside Archived 2013-06-09 at the Wayback Machine, City Beat (May 29, 2013). Jona Ison, Ohio puts Marion prison up for sale Archived 2016-03-17 at the Wayback Machine, Marion Star (July 1, 2015). Izadi, Elahe; Holley, Peter (November 26, 2014). "Video shows Cleveland officer shooting 12-year-old Tamir Rice within seconds". Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 1, 2016. Retrieved December 29, 2015. Tamir Rice decision: What the experts are saying Archived 2015-12-28 at the Wayback Machine, cleveland.com, Eric Heisig, December 28, 2015. Retrieved December 29, 2015. Berman, Mark (September 24, 2014). "No indictments after police shoot and kill man at an Ohio Wal-Mart; Justice Dept. launches investigation". Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 30, 2017. Retrieved September 1, 2017. Robert Higgs, John Kasich orders minimum standards for police departments to improve community relations Archived 2015-07-28 at the Wayback Machine, Northeast Ohio Media Group Columbus (April 30, 2015). Robert Higgs, New task force a step toward easing tensions between citizens, police, John Kasich says Archived 2015-09-23 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (December 5, 2014). Kasich appoints members of Community-Police Relations task force, WKYC (January 14, 2015). Ohio Task Force on Community-Police Relations Final Report Archived 2020-02-19 at the Wayback Machine (April 29, 2015). Eric Sandy, State Task Force Publishes Report on Community-Police Relations Archived 2015-09-10 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Scene (May 4, 2015). Chrissie Thompson, Kasich orders rules for use of deadly force Archived 2016-01-07 at the Wayback Machine, Cincinnati Enquirer (April 29, 2015). Tammy Mutasa, Gov. Kasich announces police standards board in wake of shootings: Board is first for state Archived 2015-10-12 at the Wayback Machine, WLWT (April 29, 2015). Mark Gokavi, Ohio adopts first-ever police standards on deadly force Archived 2015-11-22 at the Wayback Machine, Dayton Daily News (August 28, 2015). Bradner, Eric (August 10, 2015). "John Kasich 'open' to police body cameras". CNN. Archived from the original on September 17, 2015. Retrieved September 13, 2015. Julie Carr Smyth, John Kasich on issues of 2016 campaign, Associated Press (July 22, 2015). Associated Press, Records show Ohio governor John Kasich uses clemency power infrequently Archived 2015-08-13 at the Wayback Machine (March 23, 2015). Jim, Provance (January 31, 2015). "Kasich delays all executions for '15 amid drug issues". Toledo Blade. Archived from the original on 2015-07-01. Retrieved 2015-06-30. "Can Europe End the Death Penalty in America?" Archived 2017-04-05 at the Wayback Machine, Matt Ford. The Atlantic. February 18, 2014. Retrieved 23 jan 2017 Rebecca Hersher, [Ohio Postpones 8 Executions Amidst Legal Challenge To Lethal Injection Procedure], NPR (February 10, 2017). Jackie Borchardt, Gov. John Kasich pushes back execution dates for 8 Ohio inmates Archived 2017-09-14 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland.com (February 10, 2017). Alan Johnson, Kasich stays conservative with pardons Archived 2017-05-21 at the Wayback Machine, Columbus Dispatch (February 11, 2017). George F. Will, Kasich waits in the wings Archived 2015-07-14 at the Wayback Machine, Washington Post (March 18, 2015). Reginald Fields, Ohio Gov. John Kasich signs sentencing reform bill that favors rehab over prison for non-violent felons Archived 2015-08-21 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (June 30, 2011). Reginald Fields, Bill easing collateral sanctions for felons in Ohio will soon be law Archived 2015-09-24 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (June 26, 2012). Rowland, Darrel (September 10, 2014). "Kasich already looking beyond November election". Archived 2014-09-10 at the Wayback Machine The Columbus Dispatch. Gary C. Mohr, Reforming A System: An Inside Perspective on How Ohio Achieved a Record-Low Recidivism Rate Archived 2015-05-03 at the Wayback Machine, Justice Center: Council of State Governments (March 12, 2012). Ohio Gov John Kasich advocating significant resources devoted to addiction services for prisoners Archived 2015-07-18 at the Wayback Machine, Sentencing Law & Policy Blog (February 7, 2015). Chrissie Thompson, Will Ohio legalize marijuana this year? Archived 2016-01-07 at the Wayback Machine, Cincinnati Enquirer (May 23, 2015). Stephen Grills John Kasich On Pot Legalization Archived 2021-11-10 at the Wayback Machine, The Late Show with Stephen Colbert, CBS (November 7, 2015). Rowland, Darrel (February 6, 2016). "Capitol Insider: John Kasich would consider legalizing medical marijuana". The Columbus Dispatch. Archived from the original on April 17, 2016. Cory Shaffer, First responders in Ohio can now carry life-saving heroin overdose antidote Archived 2015-07-05 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (March 12, 2014). Jason Cherkis, Gov. Kasich Makes Heroin Overdose Drug Available Without Prescription Archived 2016-01-07 at the Wayback Machine, Huffington Post (July 17, 2015). Matt Wilstein, John Kasich Equates Marijuana with Heroin: 'A Scourge in This Country' Archived 2015-08-13 at the Wayback Machine, Mediaite (April 21, 2015). Matt Ferner, Here's Where The GOP's 2016 Presidential Contenders Stand On Marijuana Legalization Archived 2015-05-28 at the Wayback Machine, Huffington Post (May 6, 2015). Jonathan Oosting, Marijuana legalization a 'terrible idea,' says GOP presidential hopeful John Kasich Archived 2016-04-26 at the Wayback Machine, MLive (September 2, 2015). Kovac, Marc (October 27, 2015). "Gov. Kasich votes against Issue 3". The Alliance Review. Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. John Sharp, Ohio Gov. John Kasich on legalization of marijuana: 'I hope it loses' (video) Archived 2016-04-16 at the Wayback Machine, AL.com (November 3, 2015). Marshall, Aaron, Ohio's $8 billion budget hole: Was it really that big? Archived 2015-04-15 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (May 29, 2011). Thomas Kaplan, John Kasich Boasts of Ohio Recovery, but Reality Is More Nuanced Archived 2017-08-25 at the Wayback Machine, New York Times (March 13, 2016). Jacobson, Louis, John Kasich: 'I took the state of Ohio from an $8 billion hole ... to a $2 billion surplus' Archived 2015-08-09 at the Wayback Machine, PolitiFact (August 6, 2015). "Joe Hallett, Kasich gets set to run in 2010, 3/27/08". Columbus Dispatch. 2008-03-27. Archived from the original on September 4, 2012. Retrieved 2013-07-19. Higgs, Robert, So-called 'death tax' to perish at year's end Archived 2015-07-28 at the Wayback Machine, PolitiFact (July 24, 2011). Julie Carr Smyth, Kasich signs $71B budget after vetoing 44 items Archived 2016-01-07 at the Wayback Machine, Associated Press (July 1, 2015). Robert Higgs, Kasich-O-Meter: Revamp the state's collective bargaining law for public employees Archived 2015-09-14 at the Wayback Machine, PolitiFact (March 5, 2013). Ohio's SB 5, Explained, StateImpact/NPR (retrieved September 13, 2015). Archived July 25, 2015, at the Wayback Machine Jim Provance, Kasich accepts defeat of Issue 2 Archived 2015-11-17 at the Wayback Machine, Toledo Blade (November 8, 2015). CNN, Bill restricting public-sector unions passes in Ohio Archived 2015-11-17 at the Wayback Machine (March 30, 2011). Joe Guillen, What's really in Senate Bill 5? Clearing up the rumors, misinformation surrounding collective bargaining overhaul Archived 2015-10-03 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (March 20, 2011). Reginald Field, Ohio voters overwhelmingly reject Issue 2, dealing a blow to Gov. John Kasich Archived 2012-01-23 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (November 10, 2011). Michelle Everhart, Gov. John Kasich rescinds orders allowing collective bargaining for care workers Archived 2015-08-20 at the Wayback Machine, Columbus Dispatch (May 22, 2015). Janet Hook, Will Kasich's Balanced Budget Tour Lead Him to White House? Archived 2017-03-11 at the Wayback Machine, Wall Street Journal (January 23, 2015). James Hohmann, John Kasich's crusade: Behind the potential 2016 candidate's long-shot bid for a balanced budget amendment Archived 2015-06-28 at the Wayback Machine, Politico (December 14, 2014). Eric Bradner & Eugene Scott, Kasich meets with Obama to discuss TPP Archived 2017-02-03 at the Wayback Machine, CNN (September 16, 2016). Alex Jaffe, Kasich outlines iron fist, velvet glove foreign policy doctrine in South Carolina Archived 2020-02-12 at the Wayback Machine, MSNBC (August 18, 2015). John Kasich on the N.S.A. Archived 2016-04-05 at the Wayback Machine, New York Times (June 4, 2015). Ross Barkan, Kasich Warns Giving Government a Backdoor to Encrypted Phones Could Help Hackers Archived 2016-02-14 at the Wayback Machine, New York Observer (December 9, 2015). Andrea Peterson, Kasich doesn't understand how the tech that keeps you safe online works Archived 2016-02-14 at the Wayback Machine, Washington Post (December 16, 2015). Aaron Marshall, Kasich-O-Meter: Scrap Gov. Ted Strickland's evidence-based school funding model Archived 2015-09-14 at the Wayback Machine, Politifact (June 28, 2012). Valerie Strauss, What Ohio Gov. John Kasich is doing to public education in his state Archived 2015-10-19 at the Wayback Machine, Washington Post (July 20, 2015). What has Gov. John Kasich really done to school funding in Ohio? Archived 2015-08-05 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (March 24, 2015). Overview of School Funding Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine, Ohio Department of Education (March 1, 2016). Darrel Rowland, Kasich, FitzGerald at odds on hot-button issues Archived 2015-09-23 at the Wayback Machine, Columbus Dispatch (September 28, 2014). Alan Johnson, Holocaust memorial at Statehouse speaks for victims, survivors, liberators Archived 2017-02-07 at the Wayback Machine, Columbus Dispatch (June 1, 2014). Carlo Wolff, 1,500 attend dedication of Ohio Holocaust Memorial Archived 2020-02-25 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Jewish News (June 2, 2014). Eric Bradner, Kasich revises history on Iraq war Archived 2015-08-20 at the Wayback Machine, CNN (August 16, 2015). Alexandra Jaffe, Kasich: Boots on the ground necessary to defeat ISIS Archived 2015-09-04 at the Wayback Machine, CNN (February 20, 2015). Shahien Nasiripour, Kasich Wouldn't Cancel Iran Deal, Would Send Troops to Fight ISIS Archived 2016-01-07 at the Wayback Machine, Huffington Post (July 26, 2015). Deirdre Shesgreen & Ledyard King, Kasich: Ohio to keep sanctions against Iran Archived 2016-03-17 at the Wayback Machine, Bucyrus Telegraph-Forum (September 9, 2015). Alexandra Jaffe, Kasich: Boost Defense Spending With Reforms, Lose Sequestration Archived 2015-09-05 at the Wayback Machine, NBC News (August 31, 2015). "John Kasich, in Rare Break From GOP Liturgy, Offers Mild Criticism of Saudi Arabia". The Intercept. January 15, 2016. Archived from the original on July 1, 2018. Retrieved July 1, 2018. John R. Kasich, Reject False Prophets. Protect Our Allies Archived 2017-02-02 at the Wayback Machine, Time (January 12, 2017). Jack Torry, Portman, McCain, Kasich slam talk of lifting Russian sanctions Archived 2017-02-03 at the Wayback Machine, Columbus Dispatch (January 27, 2017). Kasich Weighs in on Trump's First Month Archived 2017-06-30 at the Wayback Machine, Columbus Underground (February 20, 2017). Jessica Schulberg, The Reaction John Kasich Got for Accepting Gay Marriage Shows How Far the GOP Has Come Archived 2016-01-18 at the Wayback Machine, Huffington Post (August 7, 2015). Alan Johnson, Kasich alters order on work rights Archived 2015-07-26 at the Wayback Machine, The Columbus Dispatch (January 22, 2011). John Kasich: An 'Obviously Disappointed' Record On Equality Archived 2015-09-11 at the Wayback Machine, Human Rights Campaign (July 21, 2015). Gov. John Kasich responds to gay marriage ruling Archived 2015-09-25 at the Wayback Machine (video), Dayton Daily News (June 26, 2015). Jack Torry, Gov. John Kasich says 'it's time to move on' from same-sex marriage ruling Archived 2015-09-07 at the Wayback Machine, Columbus Dispatch (June 28, 2015). "Director Hodge Bio". 2017-03-05. Archived from the original on 2017-03-05. Retrieved 2019-06-30. Gov. John Kasich scores political points on gay marriage without embracing it Archived 2016-02-10 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (August 13, 2015). Kate Davidson & Andrew Ackerman, John Kasich Says Kentucky Clerk Should Follow Law on Gay Marriage Archived 2017-10-01 at the Wayback Machine, Wall Street Journal (September 6, 2015). Reaction to Sears Catalog philosopher John Kasich on The Rubin Report from an Ohioan. Archived 2018-08-08 at the Wayback Machine Hard News By Razor Ray McCoy - March 30, 2018 The Rubin Report (30 March 2018). "Governor John Kasich: 2016 Craziness to 2020 Prospects (Full Interview)". Archived from the original on 2021-12-21. Retrieved 21 October 2018 – via YouTube. Henderson, Emma (21 December 2018). "Governor Kasich adds additional protections for transgender, non-binary state employees". wtol.com. Archived from the original on 2018-12-23. Retrieved 2018-12-23. "Ohio Gov. John Kasich Signs Order Protecting Trans State Workers". advocate.com. 2018-12-21. Archived from the original on 2018-12-22. Retrieved 2018-12-23. Dan Friedman, How John Kasich Flipped a Mixed Gun Voting Record into an 'A' Grade from the NRA Archived 2016-02-14 at the Wayback Machine, The Trace (February 5, 2016). Koenig, Kailani (February 18, 2018). "GOP Sen. Lankford has 'no issue' with stronger gun background checks". Meet the Press. NBC News. Archived from the original on August 4, 2018. Retrieved July 18, 2018. Benen, Steve. Ohio's Kasich expands healthcare access through Obamacare Archived 2020-01-13 at the Wayback Machine, MSNBC (October 22, 2013). Eric Bradner, Kasich in interview: Obamacare here to stay Archived 2015-09-24 at the Wayback Machine, CNN (October 21, 2014). Daniel Skinner, Medicaid in Ohio: The Politics of Expansion, Reauthorization, and Reform Archived 2015-10-11 at the Wayback Machine, Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law (October 7, 2015), doi:10.1215/03616878-3424647. Domenico Montanaro, Ohio Republican Gov. Kasich On Expanding Medicaid: 'It's My Money' Archived 2018-03-29 at the Wayback Machine, NPR (May 1, 2015). Catherine Candisky, Ohio's Medicaid costs $2 billion less than estimates Archived 2015-08-16 at the Wayback Machine, Columbus Dispatch (August 13, 2015). Tom LoBianco, Kasich says he's not an Obamacare hypocrite Archived 2015-08-02 at the Wayback Machine, CNN (May 27, 2015). Chrissie Thompson, Kasich-care: Priorities like Obamacare, without mandates, Cincinnati Enquirer (August 16, 2015). *Emily Schultheis, Ohio Gov. Kasich says House conservatives may cause "problem" passing Obamacare replacement Archived 2017-03-07 at the Wayback Machine, CBS News (February 26, 2017). Deirdre Shesgreen, Ohio Gov. John Kasich: House Republicans could foil Obamacare replacement Archived 2017-03-07 at the Wayback Machine, USA Today (February 26, 2017). Jeremy Pelzer, John Kasich lobbies in D.C. to save Medicaid expansion: Ohio Politics Roundup Archived 2017-02-27 at the Wayback Machine, cleveland.com (February 27, 2017). Carl Weiser, John Kasich: Nation's 'soul' at stake in Obamacare repeal Archived 2017-03-19 at the Wayback Machine, Cincinnati Enquirer (March 13, 2017). Jessica Wehrman, Talk to Democrats about health care, Kasich urges GOP Archived 2017-03-28 at the Wayback Machine, Columbus Dispatch (March 28, 2017). Jennifer Calfas, John Kasich Says GOP Health Care Bill Is 'Inadequate' Archived 2017-05-21 at the Wayback Machine, Time (May 7, 2017). Robert Pear, John Kasich Backs Slow Medicaid Rollback, but With More Money Archived 2017-06-15 at the Wayback Machine, New York Times (June 12, 2017). Darrel Rowland, Kasich's immigration views 'evolved' Archived 2015-09-24 at the Wayback Machine, Columbus Dispatch (November 21, 2014). Anna Louie Sussman, Kasich Backs Path to Legal Status for Undocumented Immigrants Archived 2017-02-22 at the Wayback Machine, Wall Street Journal (August 9, 2015). Kasich supports a path to legal status for those in country illegally; Trump says they 'have to go' Archived 2020-02-26 at the Wayback Machine, Los Angeles Times (August 16, 2015). Alan Rappeport (October 27, 2015). "John Kasich Says He's "Had It" With Rivals Peddling "Crazy" Ideas". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 25, 2017. Retrieved February 17, 2017. Alan Rappeport, John Kasich Shifts His Stand on Accepting Refugees Archived 2017-02-18 at the Wayback Machine, New York Times (November 17, 2015). Robert Costa (January 29, 2017). "Kasich calls Trump's immigration order — and White House staff — 'ham-handed'". Washington Post. Archived from the original on April 7, 2017. Retrieved March 18, 2017. Henry J. Gomez, Ohio Gov. John Kasich's allies ponder whether to punish Lt. Gov. Mary Taylor for political snub Archived 2017-07-13 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland.com (January 26, 2017). Karen Kasler, Kasich Defends Lt. Gov. Mary Taylor after Resignation of Two Staffers Archived 2015-09-24 at the Wayback Machine, Ideastream (WVIZ/WCRN) (June 16, 2014). Jim Letizia, Kasich Defends Taylor in Timesheet Probe Archived 2015-12-10 at the Wayback Machine, Ohio Public Radio (June 17, 2014). Paul Orlousky, Leak suggests Lt. Gov. Mary Taylor 'double-crossed' Ohio Gov. John Kasich, WOIO (January 26, 2017). Trump gets revenge, helps oust Kasich loyalist from Ohio GOP post Archived 2017-04-12 at the Wayback Machine, Fox News (January 10, 2017). Laura A. Bischoff, Kasich says he backs Taylor for governor in '18 Archived 2017-02-25 at the Wayback Machine, Dayton Daily News (February 10, 2017). John Kuntz, The race of Gov. John Kasich's all-white Cabinet only matters if he fails to create jobs: Phillip Morris Archived 2011-01-22 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (January 21, 2011). Aaron Marshall, Gov. John Kasich makes first minority appointment to his Cabinet Archived 2015-09-08 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (February 2, 2011). "Governor of Ohio, John R. Kasich > Administration > Cabinet". governor.ohio.gov. Archived from the original on 9 October 2018. Retrieved 21 October 2018. Robert Higgs, Kasich successful in halting $400-million, high-speed rail project Archived 2015-07-31 at the Wayback Machine, Politifact (January 10, 2011). "Not So Fast: Future For High-Speed Rail Uncertain" Archived 2018-05-24 at the Wayback Machine, David Schaper. NPR. November 12, 2010. Retrieved 23 jan 2017 Lisa Lambert, Tensions with states grow over high speed rail Archived 2015-09-24 at the Wayback Machine, Reuters (November 10, 2010). Jack Torry & Mark Niquette, Kasich pitches his $400M rail plan to Obama Archived 2010-12-04 at the Wayback Machine, Dayton Daily News (December 3, 2010). Stephen Koff, Feds to Ohio: Your high-speed rail project is officially dead (and New York thanks you) Archived 2013-10-17 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (December 10, 2010). Joe Wessels, Cincinnati streetcar state funding nixed by Ohio agency Archived 2015-09-24 at the Wayback Machine, Reuters (April 12, 2011). Kasich: Can't 'justify' streetcar money Archived 2016-01-07 at the Wayback Machine, Cincinnati Enquirer (March 11, 2011). Robert Higgs, John Kasich signs transportation budget that targets billions for roadwork, bolsters driver safety (video) Archived 2015-07-10 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (April 1, 2015). Robert Higgs, Kasich signs voting bills that end Golden Week and limit distribution of absentee ballots Archived 2015-08-12 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (February 21, 2014). Zachary Roth, Kasich to sign restrictive Ohio voting bills Archived 2020-01-24 at the Wayback Machine, MSNBC (February 21, 2015). Reid Wilson, Ohio Republicans move to curb early, absentee voting Archived 2016-04-05 at the Wayback Machine, Washington Post (February 20, 2014). Robert Higgs, New federal lawsuit targets changes in Ohio voting laws Archived 2015-08-11 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (May 11, 2015). Robert Higgs, ACLU, Secretary of State Jon Husted settle federal lawsuit over access to early voting in Ohio Archived 2015-07-12 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (April 20, 2015). *Darrel Rowland, Federal lawsuit filed against Ohio's voting system Archived 2015-08-19 at the Wayback Machine, Columbus Dispatch (May 11, 2015). Robert Barnes, The crusade of a Democratic superlawyer with multimillion-dollar backing Archived 2017-05-21 at the Wayback Machine, Washington Post (August 7, 2016). David A. Graham, Ohio's 'Golden Week' of Early Voting Is Dead, Again Archived 2016-11-11 at the Wayback Machine, The Atlantic (August 23, 2016). Adam Liptak, Supreme Court Won't Restore 'Golden Week' Voting in Ohio Archived 2017-06-19 at the Wayback Machine, New York Times (September 14, 2016). Darrel Rowland, Hillary Clinton draws ire of John Kasich on voting Archived 2015-08-22 at the Wayback Machine, Columbus Dispatch (June 6, 2015). Zachary Roth, John Kasich blocks GOP scheme to target student voting Archived 2020-01-13 at the Wayback Machine, MSNBC (April 2, 2015). Chrissie Thompson, Kasich vetoes GOP's college-voting provision Archived 2016-01-07 at the Wayback Machine, Cincinnati Enquirer (May 13, 2015). Editorial: Gov. John Kasich's veto of college-voting restriction does the right thing for Ohio Archived 2015-07-12 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland Plain Dealer (April 3, 2015). Fields, Reginald (2012-05-22). "Ohio Supreme Court Justice Evelyn Lundberg Stratton to retire midway through term". Cleveland.com. Archived from the original on 2017-06-29. Retrieved 2012-05-25. Vardon, Joe (2012-12-20). "Kasich Names French to Supreme Court". The Columbus Dispatch. Archived from the original on 2012-12-23. Retrieved 2012-12-22. Iyer, Kaanita (October 18, 2019). "Former Republican Ohio Gov. John Kasich says he's now for impeaching Trump". CNN. Archived from the original on October 18, 2019. Retrieved October 18, 2019. Klar, Rebecca (October 18, 2019). "Kasich says he'd back impeachment". The Hill. Archived from the original on October 18, 2019. Retrieved October 18, 2019. Daniel Strauss, John Kasich super PAC raises more than $11 million Archived 2015-08-02 at the Wayback Machine, Politico (July 31, 2015). Jeremy Fugleberg, Kasich campaign warchest: $2.5 million Archived 2016-02-14 at the Wayback Machine, Cincinnati Enquirer (February 1, 2016). Karl, Jonathan (May 17, 2015). "Ohio Gov. John Kasich Virtually Certain to Run for President, Sources Say". ABC News. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved May 17, 2015. Stolberg, Sheryl Gay (July 21, 2015). "John Kasich Enters Crowded 2016 Race Facing Job of Catch-Up". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 25, 2020. Retrieved July 21, 2015. Henry J. Gomez (December 11, 2014). "In Arizona, the first hints of what a John Kasich presidential campaign might look and sound like". Cleveland Plain Dealer. Archived from the original on 2014-12-15. Retrieved 2014-12-12. Ingles, Jo (21 July 2015). "U.S. latecomer Kasich touts experience as he joins Republican field". Reuters.com. Reuters. Archived from the original on July 21, 2015. Retrieved July 21, 2015. The Editorial Board (January 30, 2016). "A Chance to Reset the Republican Race". New York Times. Archived from the original on 2016-02-01. Retrieved 2016-02-02. Thomas Kaplan, With Calm and Experience, John Kasich Connects in New Hampshire Archived 2016-07-25 at the Wayback Machine, New York Times (January 22, 2016). Robert Costa, Ohio Gov. John Kasich heads to early primary state of South Carolina Archived 2016-02-14 at the Wayback Machine, Washington Post (February 11, 2015). Erick Trickey, How Mean Old John Kasich Became Mr. Nice: Ohio's famously abrasive governor ditches the tough talk to convince New Hampshire voters he's the anti-Trump Archived 2016-02-14 at the Wayback Machine, Politico Magazine (February 3, 2016). Kaplan, Thomas (May 4, 2016). "John Kasich Drops Out of Presidential Race". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved February 17, 2017. Chrissie Thompson (February 9, 2016). "John Kasich finishes 2nd in New Hampshire primary, vaulting to prominence in GOP race". Cincinnati Enquirer. Archived from the original on 2016-02-11. Retrieved 2016-02-09. Alan Rappeport, John Kasich Wins Ohio, His Home State Archived 2017-02-18 at the Wayback Machine, New York Times (March 15, 2016). Tim Reid, Kasich Banks on Contested Convention to Win GOP Nomination Archived 2020-11-08 at the Wayback Machine, Reuters (March 14, 2016). Reuning, Kevin; Dietrich, Nick (2018). "Media Coverage, Public Interest, and Support in the 2016 Republican Invisible Primary". Perspectives on Politics. 17 (2): 326–339. doi:10.1017/S1537592718003274. ISSN 1537-5927. Chrissie Thompson, John Kasich 'undecided' on backing Donald Trump, won't serve as VP Archived 2016-11-08 at the Wayback Machine, Cincinnati Enquirer (May 17, 2016). Eliza Collins, Kasich still not endorsing Trump, won't be his VP Archived 2018-02-15 at the Wayback Machine, USA Today (June 9, 2016). Kailani Koenig, John Kasich: 'Hard to Say' If I Will Ever Endorse Donald Trump Archived 2016-06-13 at the Wayback Machine, NBC News (June 9, 2016). Healy, Patrick (August 8, 2016). "Tim Kaine Says Hillary Clinton Has Learned From Email 'Mistake'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 10, 2016. Retrieved August 8, 2016. Cadigan, Will (August 7, 2016). "Kasich: Trump Jr. called aide to float VP offer". CNN. Archived from the original on August 28, 2016. Retrieved August 30, 2016. Libit, Daniel (August 9, 2016). "Yes, John Kasich is still running for president — in 2020". CNBC. Archived from the original on February 16, 2018. Retrieved September 9, 2017. Thompson, Chrissie (November 9, 2016). "NeverTrumper John Kasich Cancels Thursday Speech". Cincinnati Enquirer. Archived from the original on November 9, 2016. Retrieved December 26, 2016. Detrow, Scott (19 December 2016). "Donald Trump Secures Electoral College Win, With Few Surprises". NPR. Archived from the original on January 23, 2017. Retrieved December 19, 2016. Henry J. Gomez, President Donald Trump will meet with Ohio Gov. John Kasich on Friday. But whose idea was it? Archived 2017-02-22 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland.com (February 21, 2017). Deirdre Shesgreen, After bitter feud, Kasich and Trump try to mend fences Archived 2017-03-05 at the Wayback Machine, USA Today (February 24, 2017). Henry J. Gomez, John Kasich's allies launch political organization to promote his vision (and to counter Trump's) Archived 2017-08-27 at the Wayback Machine, Cleveland.com (February 10, 2017). Philip Rucker, Kasich to publish 'Two Paths,' a book offering a contrast to Trump's America Archived 2017-08-27 at the Wayback Machine, Washington Post (January 31, 2017). Martha Wexler, Ohio Gov. John Kasich on America's Division and Rising Above 'Self-Absorption' Archived 2018-04-07 at the Wayback Machine, NPR, Morning Edition (April 26, 2017). Eli Watkins, John Kasich says he's not running for office again Archived 2017-03-28 at the Wayback Machine, CNN (March 26, 2017). Kasich: Unlikely I'll run for president in 2020 (Video). United States: YouTube. April 24, 2017. Event occurs at 0:15. Very unlikely. Kasich: Unlikely I'll run for president in 2020 (Video). United States: YouTube. April 24, 2017. Event occurs at 0:36. If I see something I need to do to help my country that I really believe I have to do, you know, then I would think I would probably do it. Cheney, Kyle (August 20, 2017). "Kasich: No plans to challenge Trump in 2020". Politico. Archived from the original on August 20, 2017. Retrieved August 20, 2017. Eli Watkins, Kasich hints at leaving GOP if it's not 'fixed' Archived 2017-10-02 at the Wayback Machine, CNN (October 1, 2017). Erica Pandey, Kasich: If GOP "can't be fixed," I can't support it Archived 2017-10-02 at the Wayback Machine, Axios (October 2, 2017). McCormack, John (March 23, 2018). "Party of One". The Weekly Standard. Archived from the original on April 1, 2018. Retrieved April 3, 2018. Galioto, Katie (31 May 2019). "Kasich says there's 'no path' to the White House for him in 2020". POLITICO. Archived from the original on 2021-11-10. Retrieved 2021-01-26. Kasich calls for Trump's impeachment Archived 2019-10-18 at the Wayback Machine, CNN Newsroom (October 18, 2019). 'Final straw': GOP ex-Ohio Gov. Kasich supports impeachment Archived 2019-10-18 at the Wayback Machine, Associated Press (October 18, 2019). @JohnKasich (August 11, 2020). "I will be speaking at the #DNC Convention because I believe that America needs to go in a different direction. I've searched my conscience and I believe the best way forward is for change - to bring unity where there has been division. And to bring about a healing in America" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Stephanie Schorow (September 30, 2010). "Is John Kasich Married?". politicsdaily.com. AOL News/HuffPost Politics. Archived from the original on October 19, 2010. Retrieved 2012-02-12. Kasich 2010, p. 96. Gomez, Henry J. (May 12, 2014). "A mailman's son in McKees Rocks dreams of priesthood and politics: John Kasich 5.0". The Plain Dealer. Cleveland.com. Archived from the original on February 19, 2016. Retrieved February 19, 2016. "Religion in Review May 2010". publishersweekly.com. Archived from the original on 2015-02-07. Retrieved 2015-02-07. Cathy Lynn Grossman, 5 faith facts about Gov. John Kasich: 'God is with me wherever I happen to be' Archived 2018-04-03 at the Wayback Machine, Religion News Service (July 21, 2015). "How Kasich's Religion Is Hurting Him With Conservatives". POLITICO Magazine. Archived from the original on 2018-11-20. Retrieved 2018-11-20. "5 Things You Should Know About John Kasich". NPR.org. Archived from the original on 2018-11-20. Retrieved 2018-11-20. "Election Results". Ohio Secretary of State. Archived from the original on 2012-08-15. Retrieved 2014-03-01. "Election Statistics". United States House of Representatives: History, Art & Archives. Archived from the original on 2013-01-03. Retrieved 2014-03-01. "New York Times Best Sellers July 11, 2010". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2014-11-29. Retrieved 2014-11-26. Bibliography Kasich, John (1999). Courage Is Contagious: Ordinary People Doing Extraordinary Things to Change the Face of America. New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0-385-49148-8. Kasich, John (2010). Every Other Monday: Twenty Years of Life, Lunch, Faith, and Friendship. New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4391-7218-6. Rechcigl, Miloslav Jr. (2013). Czech American Timeline: Chronology of Milestones in the History of Czechs in America. Bloomington, Indiana: Author House. ISBN 978-1-4817-5706-5. Weisskopf, Michael; Maraniss, David (2008). Tell Newt to Shut Up: Prize-Winning Washington Post Journalists Reveal H. New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4391-2888-6. Wikimedia Commons has media related to John Kasich. Wikiquote has quotations related to John Kasich. Governor John Kasich official Ohio government website Jan. 2019 archive John Kasich for Governor John Kasich for President John Kasich at Curlie Appearances on C-SPAN U.S. Representative (1983–2001) Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission