Cominotto (Maltese: Kemmunett), sometimes referred to as Cominetto, is an uninhabited Mediterranean island off the northern coast of Malta. It is located near the larger island of Comino and is part of the Maltese archipelago. Measuring at only 0.25 square kilometres (0.10 sq mi) in area, it is the largest uninhabited island of Malta. Cominotto lies 100 metres (328 feet) to the north-west of Comino. Cominotto is known for its picturesque coastline, clear waters, and rich marine life. Cominotto covers an area of approximately 2.5 hectares (6.2 acres), and is characterized by its rugged coastline and rocky terrain. Between Comino and Cominotto, lie the transparent, cyan waters of the Blue Lagoon (Maltese: Bejn il-Kmiemen, literally "Between the Cominos"). Frequented by large numbers of tourists and tour boats daily, the Blue Lagoon makes Cominotto popular with divers and snorkelers. The island also has a small cave which people can swim through. Despite its small size, Cominotto boasts a diverse range of flora and fauna, including several species of seabirds that inhabit the island's cliffs. Cominotto has a long history, dating back to ancient times when it was used by the Romans, as a hunting ground. In more recent centuries, the island has been primarily uninhabited, serving as a natural haven for wildlife and a retreat for visitors. Cominotto's natural beauty, and tranquil atmosphere make it a popular destination for day trips, and boat tours from nearby Comino and Malta. Snorkeling, and diving are also popular activities, allowing visitors to discover the rich marine life that inhabits the waters surrounding the island. Cominotto is accessible by boat from the main island of Malta, or from the neighboring island of Comino. Several tour operators offer boat trips to Cominotto. Due to its ecological importance and natural beauty, Cominotto is part of a protected area, ensuring that its delicate ecosystem, and wildlife are preserved for future generations to enjoy. Conservation efforts aim to maintain the island's environment and protect its diverse flora and fauna from human impact. Comino Malta Maltese Islands The Blue Lagoon at sea level with Cominotto in the background Cominotto and the Blue Lagoon "Comino & Cominotto in Gozo". www.responsibletravel.com. Retrieved 2022-09-05. "Attraction". Visit Malta. Retrieved 2022-09-05. "ซีรี่ย์จีนพากย์ไทย". Casual Monday. Retrieved 16 November 2023. "Sailing directions for the Mediterranean: France, west coast of Italy, Corsica, Sardinia and Sicily, including adjacent islands". 1958. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cominotto (island).