The inauguration of Joe Biden as the 46th president of the United States took place on Wednesday, January 20, 2021, marking the start of the four-year term of Joe Biden as president and Kamala Harris as vice president. The 59th presidential inauguration took place on the West Front of the United States Capitol in Washington, D.C. Biden took the presidential oath of office, before which Harris took the vice presidential oath of office. The inauguration took place amidst extraordinary political, public health, economic, and national security crises, including the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic; outgoing President Donald Trump's attempts to overturn the 2020 United States presidential election, which provoked an attack on the United States Capitol on January 6; Trump's second impeachment; and a threat of widespread civil unrest, which stimulated a nationwide law enforcement response. Festivities were sharply curtailed by efforts to prevent the spread of COVID-19 and mitigate the potential for violence near the Capitol. The live audience was limited; members of the Congress attended with one guest of their choosing, resembling a State of the Union address. Public health measures such as mandatory face coverings, testing, temperature checks, and social distancing were used to protect participants in the ceremony. "America United" and "Our Determined Democracy: Forging a More Perfect Union"—a reference to the Preamble to the United States Constitution—served as the inaugural themes. The inauguration marked the formal culmination of the presidential transition of Joe Biden, who had become president-elect after defeating Donald Trump on November 3, 2020. The victory of Biden and his running mate, Harris, was formalized by the Electoral College vote, which took place on December 14, 2020. In accordance with Article I, Section 6 of the United States Constitution, Harris resigned her seat in the U.S. Senate effective noon on January 18, 2021. Trump repeatedly falsely disputed the legitimacy of the election, but committed to an orderly transition of power exactly two months after losing. Upon his inauguration, Biden became the oldest president at 78 years and 61 days, older upon taking office than Ronald Reagan, who left office at 77 years and 349 days. He also became the first president from Delaware, the second Catholic after John F. Kennedy, the second non-incumbent vice president to be elected president after Richard Nixon in 1968, and the fifteenth vice president to serve as president. He became the first man since George H. W. Bush to have held the office of both President and Vice President, as well as the first Democrat to do so since Lyndon B. Johnson. Harris became the first woman to hold a nationally elected office, and the first African American and first Asian American vice president. The swearing-in ceremony for President-elect Biden and Vice President-elect Harris was planned by the Joint Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies, a bipartisan committee composed of United States Senators Roy Blunt (chairman), Mitch McConnell, and Amy Klobuchar, and United States Representatives Nancy Pelosi, Steny Hoyer, and Kevin McCarthy. The committee is overseen by the Senate Committee on Rules and Administration. On December 8, 2020, Republican members of the committee voted against a resolution that would have publicly recognized Biden as the president-elect and Harris as the vice president-elect. After Biden and Harris's win was certified by the Electoral College, Blunt and several other Republican senators finally acknowledged him and her as the president-elect and vice president-elect, stating that he will facilitate communications with Biden's presidential inaugural committee to prepare for the inauguration. The 2021 Presidential Inaugural Committee organized several other inauguration‑related events at the direction of the president‑elect and vice president‑elect of the United States. The committee was led by Jim Clyburn, Eric Garcetti, Cedric Richmond, Lisa Blunt Rochester, and Gretchen Whitmer (co-chairs), Tony Allen (chief executive officer), Maju Varghese (executive director), Yvanna Cancela and Erin Wilson (deputy executive directors), David A. Kessler (chief medical adviser), and Adrienne Elrod (director of talent and external affairs). The committee hired Stephanie Cutter and Ricky Kirshner, who produced the largely virtual 2020 Democratic National Convention, along with Glenn Weiss to organize the inaugural programming. The Joint Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies chose the inaugural theme "Our Determined Democracy: Forging a More Perfect Union" to highlight the inaugural ceremony as a "hallmark of American governance and democracy" and stress the peaceful transition of power. Allen, Biden Inaugural Committee CEO, said the events would "look different amid the pandemic" but maintain inaugural traditions while engaging Americans in a safe manner. This included several virtual concerts and events hosted by celebrities, featuring live musical performances and speeches that spanned five days—Saturday, January 16, 2021, through the evening of Inauguration Day. The committee's inaugural theme was "America United" and its official YouTube channel and other social media featured exclusive content related to the ceremonies. On September 3, 2020, the Capitol Police Board announced that public access to the West Front of the United States Capitol would be restricted from September 7, 2020, to February 28, 2021, to "allow for the safe and secure construction of the Inaugural platform, stands, and other infrastructure necessary to support the event". Construction began on September 29, 2020. The traditional "first nail ceremony" commemorating the start of construction of the inaugural platform was not held because it coincided with the death and state funeral of Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the Supreme Court justice. The platform can support 1,600 spectators. However, far fewer were permitted for this event, due to attendance restrictions designed to prevent the spread of COVID-19. Another 1,000 people, often choirs and musical guests, are traditionally situated on risers above the platform, but these were not used at full capacity for this event. Compared to past inaugurations, the drastic reduction in crowd size at Biden's inauguration was expected to reduce costs. Typically, presidential inaugurations cost about US$100 million. In September 2020, prior to implementing attendance restrictions, costs were estimated to exceed US$44.9 million, with the District of Columbia's costs incurred in connection with the event being reimbursed by the federal government. However, the storming of the Capitol two weeks prior to the inauguration on January 6, along with threats of nationwide unrest, significantly increased the need for security. John Sandweg, a former Homeland Security Department official, remarked that the United States Secret Service likely has a surplus of funds because of lower-than-usual expenses during the 2020 campaign season, when presidential nominating conventions were mostly virtual and the travel of presidential candidates was curtailed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The storming of the United States Capitol on January 6 raised concerns about the security of the inauguration. However, Biden chose not to move the ceremony indoors, indicating that he believed a public, outdoor ceremony was necessary to demonstrate strength. In response, organizers and officials made an unprecedented effort to secure the Capitol during the ceremony and deter people from visiting Washington, D.C., during the week of the inauguration over concerns of political violence. While several individuals were arrested near the Capitol in the days preceding the event for carrying illegal weapons, disobeying police, and trespassing, and a fire near a homeless encampment prompted an evacuation of the grounds, the ceremony proceeded without incident. A heightened security presence remained in the city through the end of the month. The inauguration, like all ceremonies since the first inauguration of George W. Bush in 2001, was designated a National Special Security Event (NSSE). However, following the attack and reports of subsequent threats to disrupt Biden's inauguration and incite nationwide unrest, the Secret Service launched a security operation that surpassed any in modern U.S. history. The Secret Service established a Multi-Agency Command Center (MACC) to coordinate security—formed six days earlier than planned—composed of agents and representatives from many government agencies (such as the FBI, U.S. Marshals Service, Defense Department, Park Police, and D.C. Metro Police) and private companies (including a gas company, CSX railroad, and Amtrak). Combined efforts included: Activating more than 25,000 National Guard forces into the city—which may have been the highest since the American Civil War—as a part of Operation Capitol Response, with members arriving from all U.S. states, three territories, and the District of Columbia itself. Installing "non-scalable" seven foot-high crowd control barriers and jersey barriers with razor wire atop around the perimeter of the Capitol grounds. Deputizing up to 4,000 local law enforcement officers from across the nation via the Marshals Service. Strengthening aviation security at the three D.C.-area airports, increasing the use of random gate screenings, explosive detection dogs, and federal air marshals, and tightening D.C. airspace restrictions. Many major airlines also banned incoming travelers from checking firearms on board flights. Assigning 750 active-duty military personnel to specialized units (including CBRN defenses, bomb squads, logistics and communications personnel, and medical personnel), and aircraft and watercraft, including U.S. Coast Guard cutters and U.S. Air Force fighter jets. The House Oversight Committee asked 27 transportation and hotel companies, including Avis, Hertz, Marriott, and Hyatt, to implement screening procedures to prevent the use of their services by domestic terrorists targeting the inauguration. D.C. Mayor Muriel Bowser urged tourists not to visit the city, and the Office of Personnel Management asked federal agencies to allow federal employees to work remotely. The National Mall, which served as a non-ticketed viewing area in past ceremonies, and Washington Monument at its geographic center, were closed to the public. Much of the surrounding downtown area near Capitol Hill, Union Station, the Lincoln Memorial, and White House came under significant parking restrictions and road closures. Many Metrorail stations, Metrobus routes, Amtrak, MARC, and Virginia Railway Express commuter rail service lines were modified or suspended. Airbnb canceled all reservations in the city, and a local hotel workers' union called on hotels to restrict guests to those providing inauguration security. The U.S. Postal Service temporarily removed or locked public post boxes and suspended mail collection in Washington and several major U.S. cities to "protect postal property, employees, and the public". The Commonwealth of Virginia closed four bridges connecting to D.C.—Theodore Roosevelt, Arlington Memorial, Interstate 395, and 14th Street. A stretch of 10 miles (16 km) of the Potomac River between the Francis Scott Key Bridge and the Woodrow Wilson Memorial Bridge was closed to marine traffic. On the Saturday before the inauguration, America United: An Inauguration Welcome Event Celebrating America's Changemakers, opened the inaugural program through a series of musical performances and political speeches. The live-streamed event opened with an original performance of "Everybody Deserves To Be Free" by the Resistance Revival Choir, a group of female and non-binary protest singers, featuring a lead vocal by soul artist Deva Mahal. The Pledge of Allegiance was then led by members of the Girl Scouts. Mexican American producer Cristela Alonzo hosted the program, remarking that Biden's inauguration will be "the beginning of the next chapter" in American history. New Mexico Congresswoman Deb Haaland then recounted the history of America's indigenous peoples, and introduced Quechan Indian tribal nation leader Claudette White, who joined in the performance of a traditional song. After the performance, several female political organizers appeared and discussed the significance of Harris's election as the first female vice president. Alonzo then introduced actor Nik Dodani, who emphasized the importance of Biden's inauguration, and civil rights activist Janet Murguía, who spoke of the political successes of women of color in the 2020 presidential election. International, national, and local union leaders, including American Federation of Teachers president Randi Weingarten and National Education Association president Rebecca S. Pringle, along with leaders representing firefighters, government and service sector employees, steel, auto, postal, food, and communications workers then hailed Biden's win as a success for workers in their respective industries, citing his support of their causes, such as the Fight for $15. Actress Whoopi Goldberg then appeared and said she felt "optimistic" for the nation under Biden's and Harris's leadership, and actor and musician Darren Criss then performed a cover of "(Your Love Keeps Lifting Me) Higher and Higher". Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms of Atlanta, Georgia, an early endorser of Biden's 2020 campaign, then joined, saying Biden "will ensure that all Americans ... have their voices heard". Musical group the Black Pumas then performed their song "Colors" and said they were "looking forward to a new sense of optimism, unity and peace" for all Americans. Concluding the event, New York Congresswoman Grace Meng introduced Harris, who said that she "stands on the shoulders" of those who created opportunities for women, particularly African-American women, to participate and lead in politics. The Biden Inaugural Committee released an official musical playlist of 46 songs (symbolizing Biden as the 46th president) that was curated by disc jockey D-Nice and music label Raedio, created by actress Issa Rae. The playlist was part of the committee's efforts to have Americans participate from home for the inauguration. The playlist, released on all major streaming platforms, included Biden, Harris, and their spouses' "walk-on songs", which were played when they appeared on stage at campaign rallies. According to Rolling Stone, Biden's "walk-on song" was "We Take Care of Our Own" by Bruce Springsteen; Jill Biden's was "You Make My Dreams (Come True)" by Hall & Oates; Harris's was "Work That" by Mary J. Blige; and Emhoff's was "You Get What You Give" by New Radicals. Committee CEO Allen remarked that the musical selections "reflect the relentless spirit and rich diversity of America" and served as the "score to a new chapter" in American history as Biden and Harris begin their "important work to unite [the] country". On the Sunday before the inauguration, Biden's inaugural committee organized the virtual "We the People" concert fundraiser co-hosted by actor Keegan-Michael Key and actress Debra Messing. Attendees of the live-streamed event had to donate to the Biden Inaugural Committee to be allowed entry. The concert opened with Biden and his wife, Jill, thanking supporters of his campaign and acknowledging the lives lost in the COVID-19 pandemic; Biden remarked that it is the "honor of [his] lifetime" to serve as president. Musician Ben Harper was the first musical performance of the night, playing his song "With My Own Two Hands". Singer Michael Bivins made a video appearance and thanked viewers for their donations. Band AJR then performed their song "Bummerland". Singer Barbra Streisand then joined to congratulate Biden and Harris, calling for them to "restore the health" of the United States and world; she also performed her rendition of "Happy Days Are Here Again", an American standard. Messing introduced actor and former Barack Obama administration member Kal Penn, who reflected on the importance of the inauguration and hope of a "brighter future". Harris and her husband, Doug Emhoff, then joined via video link to thank supporters and list the issues they will face in leading the nation. Rapper will.i.am then performed "American Dream", a charity single supporting his fundraising initiative for the i.am Angel Foundation to expand STEM education for underprivileged students. Actress and activist Sophia Bush later appeared to thank donors to the inaugural committee, and musician Carole King performed her Grammy Award-winning song "You've Got a Friend". Mexican actor Jaime Camil then delivered a short address on immigration, and James Taylor performed "America the Beautiful", which he previously had played at the 2013 inauguration. Actress Connie Britton reflected on political unity and the time she met then-Vice President Biden at the 2016 United State of Women Summit. Musical act Fall Out Boy performed their song "Centuries" in a pre-recorded video. Cher then addressed Biden's and Harris's win, saying that she was "thrilled" and "optimistic" for them to lead the nation; she then performed a cover of Miley Cyrus's song "I Hope You Find It". In concluding the event, DJ Cassidy addressed viewers and sampled music. Two days before Inauguration Day, January 18, 2021, was Martin Luther King Jr. Day, the federal holiday that recognizes Dr. King's birthday. Biden and his inaugural committee encouraged Americans to engage in acts of community service and organized more than 2,500 virtual or socially distant volunteer events in 56 U.S. states and territories in partnership with AmeriCorps. The committee recommended several volunteer activities aimed at improving people's economic, health, and social well-being, including writing cards for those recovering from COVID-19, knitting sentimental items for the homeless, serving at "contactless" food and clothing donation drives, and participating in community cleanups. Biden and his wife volunteered at Philabundance, a non-profit food bank in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, by helping box canned goods. Harris and her husband volunteered in Washington, D.C. On the evening of Martin Luther King Jr. Day, the Biden inaugural committee celebrated Dr. King's commitment to community service through virtual speeches and music in United We Serve: A Celebration of the National MLK Day of Service. Co-hosts Sean Patrick Thomas and Lynn Whitfield introduced the event and commended the acts of volunteerism Americans participated in during the day of service; both Harris and her husband, Emhoff, appeared and discussed the importance of the inauguration and community service. Dr. King's son, Martin Luther King III, daughter-in-law, Andrea, and granddaughter, Yolanda, discussed community service; his youngest daughter, Bernice King, then spoke at a pulpit and remarked on her late father's practice of nonviolence. Musician Aloe Blacc performed his song "My Way"; cellist Yo-Yo Ma performed Air and Simple Gifts, a composition he also performed at the 2009 inauguration in the presence of then-Vice President-elect Biden; Andra Day performed her song "Rise Up"; BeBe Winans sang Dr. King's "I Have a Dream" speech; Alejandro Fernández and band Maná performed "Decepciones"; and Chesca and Diane Warren performed "El Cambio", which was frequently played during Biden's campaign. Additional speakers included Al Sharpton, NAACP president Derrick Johnson, National Urban League president Marc Morial, Senators Cory Booker and Tammy Duckworth, Kansas Congresswoman Sharice Davids, actress Rosario Dawson, and several other academics and civil rights activists who spoke on the legacy of Dr. King. Across the National Mall to 13th Street, a public art display composed of 191,500 U.S. flags and 56 pillars of light (representing the 50 U.S. states, D.C., and the five permanently inhabited U.S. territories), were installed, representing those who could not attend the inauguration in person due to the attendance restrictions to prevent the spread of COVID-19. The field was lit the evening of January 18. On Tuesday, January 19, Biden departed his home state of Delaware in a send-off ceremony at his late son Beau Biden's namesake Major Joseph R. "Beau" Biden III National Guard/Reserve Center in New Castle; the event included remarks from Delaware Governor John Carney, Biden, his wife Jill, and a benediction by Rabbi Michael S. Beals of Congregation Beth Shalom in Wilmington. Later that day, Biden, Harris, and their spouses participated in a nationwide lighting ceremony at the Lincoln Memorial Reflecting Pool. Inaugural organizers invited communities around the United States to light buildings and ring church bells at 5:30 p.m. ET on the eve of the inauguration in a moment of "unity and remembrance" for those lost to the pandemic. The Lincoln Memorial lighting was held simultaneously, providing a moment of national reflection to help Americans find the spirit to rebuild after the pandemic. Cardinal Wilton Daniel Gregory, the archbishop of Washington, delivered the ceremony's invocation; gospel singer Yolanda Adams sang "Hallelujah" and Michigan nurse Lori Marie Key performed "Amazing Grace". Both Biden and Harris, in their addresses, emphasized the importance of national grieving, with Biden saying it's "how [Americans] heal". Several national landmarks participated in the lighting ceremony, including the Empire State Building, Space Needle, and other buildings in major U.S. cities, as well as on tribal lands. Washington National Cathedral tolled its bells four hundred times, each one in memory of a thousand Americans who had died, thus far, in the COVID-19 pandemic. Asian American and Pacific Islanders (AAPI) were celebrated in AAPI Inaugural Ball: Breaking Barriers, a partnership between the inaugural committee, and advocacy organizations IMPACT and RUN AAPI. The event featured remarks and musical performances from Neera Tanden, Congresspeople Ami Bera, Pramila Jayapal, Andy Kim, and Raja Krishnamoorthi; former Olympian Michelle Kwan; actors Kal Penn, John Cho, Kumail Nanjiani, and Chloe Bennet; and musical performances by Japanese Breakfast, Ari Afsar, Raja Kumari, and others. African Americans were celebrated in We Are One, hosted by Terrence J, through "inspiring stories and entertaining performances". Politicians Stacey Abrams, congresspeople Jim Clyburn, Cedric Richmond, Joyce Beatty, Senator Cory Booker, and Senator-elect Raphael Warnock appeared. Actors and actresses, including Leslie Jones and Kim Fields, were also featured; musical acts Tobe Nwigwe, DJ D-Nice, Frankie Beverly, The O'Jays, Rapsody, and Step Afrika!, among others, performed. The event also included a Battle of the Bands, featuring several historically black college marching bands from around the nation. Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority president Glenda Glover and Howard University president Wayne A. I. Frederick delivered remarks. Hispanic and Latino Americans were celebrated in Latino Inaugural 2021: Inheritance, Resilience, and Promise, hosted by Eva Longoria, in partnership with many Hispanic advocacy groups, including the Hispanic Federation. Entertainment figures John Leguizamo, Rita Moreno, Edward James Olmos, Ivy Queen, and Becky G appeared along with many civil and voting rights advocates and U.S. senators Ben Ray Luján, Bob Menendez, Catherine Cortez Masto, and Alex Padilla (Harris's senatorial designate). Musical performers included Gilberto Santa Rosa, Gaby Moreno (featuring David Garza), who performed "Fronteras", Lin-Manuel Miranda and Luis Miranda paid tribute to Puerto Rico through the song "En Mi Viejo San Juan", Mariachi Nuevo Santander, who performed American folk song "This Land is Your Land"; and All-Star Tejanos United, an act from Roma, Texas, performed "America the Beautiful: A Salute to the Latino Imprint". The Wailers performed the Emilio Estefan production "One World, One Prayer", featuring relatives of Jamaican musician Bob Marley. Biden originally planned to travel to Washington, D.C., from Wilmington, Delaware, on an Amtrak passenger train, which he routinely took during his time as a U.S. Senator. However, on January 14, this plan was canceled due to security concerns. On January 20, 2017, after completing his tenure as vice president, Biden departed the city on an Amtrak Acela train bound for his namesake station in Wilmington. Biden and his wife spent the night of January 19 at Blair House, the President's Guest House—a custom for incoming presidents. Traditionally, the president-elect meets with the outgoing president at the White House on the morning of their inauguration after a church service. Since Trump did not attend the inaugural ceremony—becoming the first outgoing president to not attend since Andrew Johnson in 1869—and did not communicate with Biden directly since the second presidential debate of the 2020 campaign, this tradition was not upheld. Before each of his inaugurations as vice president, Biden attended a Catholic Mass celebrated by Kevin O'Brien. In 2013, this service was at the vice president's residence. Biden and his wife, along with the second family attended a Mass of Thanksgiving celebrated by O'Brien at the Cathedral of St. Matthew in Washington. Biden extended invitations to the four congressional leaders from both parties—Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.), Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.), House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.), and House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.)—and all four accepted. Trump departed for his Mar-a-Lago resort in Palm Beach, Florida, the morning of the inauguration out of Joint Base Andrews aboard Air Force One. Trump and his wife, First Lady Melania Trump, landed on the tarmac in helicopter Marine One. Cannons fired in salute, after a military band played "Hail to the Chief", in front of a modest crowd of a few hundred aides and other loyalists. Trump's White House had issued invitations for the event to many present and former administration officials. Several invitees who have been critical of Trump, such as Don McGahn, John F. Kelly, and Anthony Scaramucci, declined to attend. Trump was only the fifth outgoing United States president not to attend their elected successor's inauguration, after John Adams in 1801, John Quincy Adams in 1829, Martin Van Buren in 1841, and Andrew Johnson in 1869. Before departing, Trump delivered short remarks at a podium bearing the presidential seal, telling his supporters "we will be back in some form." A number of songs played as he boarded the airplane, many of which featured prominently at Trump rallies; this included "Macho Man" and "Y.M.C.A.", as well as "Fortunate Son", "Funeral for a Friend", and "Billie Jean". As Air Force One lifted off, Frank Sinatra's "My Way" played—the song Trump and his wife danced to during his inaugural ball four years prior. Trump delivered his official farewell address, a recorded online video, the day before the inauguration. Without naming Biden, he referred to the "inauguration of a new administration", saying that "we pray for its success at keeping America safe and prosperous." In keeping with tradition, Trump left Biden a letter of support in the Resolute desk. When asked about the letter, Biden said it was "generous", but refused to provide details. Outgoing Vice President Mike Pence attended Biden's inauguration, then departed for his home state of Indiana, where a group of supporters, including his brother, Indiana Congressman Greg Pence, welcomed him. Beginning two hours before the outset of the inaugural ceremony, actress Keke Palmer hosted Our White House: An Inaugural Celebration for Young Americans, a livestream aimed at engaging youth in the day's events. Jill Biden addressed viewers in a pre-recorded message, and historians Doris Kearns Goodwin and Erica Armstrong Dunbar discussed the ceremony's significance; a Nickelodeon special on White House pets and PBS NewsHour student interviews aired, along with other curated educational content. The transfer of power included the transition of official administration Twitter accounts, @POTUS and @VP. Members of the Biden administration also assumed ownership of a number of institutional accounts, including @WhiteHouse, @FLOTUS for First Lady Jill Biden, @SecondGentleman for Second Gentleman Doug Emhoff, and @PressSec for White House Press Secretary Jen Psaki. New executive branch websites were initialized; previous administrations' websites reside in the National Archives. Most traditional inaugural festivities were conducted virtually, primarily modeled after the 2020 Democratic National Convention. The ceremony took place outdoors on the West Front of the United States Capitol, the site of every inauguration since Ronald Reagan's in 1981. While members of Congress, in previous years, would receive 200,000 tickets to distribute among constituents, on this occasion, each member was allotted one guest ticket, with many taking their spouses. Only about three thousand people were to be permitted into the secure perimeter areas, and the total live attendance for the scaled-down event was to be just over a thousand, with guests seated both on the inaugural platform and in front of the platform. The decision to limit attendance was made by the Joint Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies based on consultation with public health experts. According to historian Jim Bendat, COVID-19 prevention and security measures instituted for Biden's inauguration would make it the smallest ceremony since Franklin D. Roosevelt's fourth inauguration in 1945, when the inaugural was held at the White House before an audience of just a thousand people due to Roosevelt's poor health and the ongoing world war. Outgoing President Donald Trump and First Lady Melania Trump refused to attend the ceremony, the first time an incumbent skipped their successor's inauguration since Andrew Johnson refused to attend Grant's first inauguration in 1869. Former presidents Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, and Barack Obama (under whom Biden served as vice president), along with respective former first ladies Hillary Clinton, Laura Bush, and Michelle Obama, attended. Former president Jimmy Carter and former first lady Rosalynn Carter did not due to their advanced age and inability to travel. Outgoing vice president Mike Pence (who succeeded Biden as vice president in 2017) and second lady Karen Pence also attended. Apart from Pence and Biden himself, Dan Quayle was the only other living former vice president who attended the ceremony, as Walter Mondale (who died 3 months after Biden's inauguration), Al Gore and Dick Cheney were absent. For the first time in more than two decades, not every U.S. Supreme Court justice attended: Justices Clarence Thomas, Stephen Breyer, and Samuel Alito, the oldest members of the Court, opted not to attend in light of the COVID-19 health risks, while the other six justices attended. Other attendees included the family members of Biden and Harris, Biden's Cabinet nominees, various ambassadors to the United States, and other dignitaries. For the first time, the representative of Taiwan in the United States (the country's de facto ambassador) was invited to attend a presidential inauguration, with Hsiao Bi-khim attending the ceremony. The U.S. Army Herald Trumpets played ruffles and flourishes. The U.S. Marine Band (nicknamed "The President's Own") played a medley of patriotic music by Sousa, Bagley, and others; heralded the entry of dignitaries to the inaugural platform with works including a newly commissioned Fanfare for Tomorrow written by Peter Boyer, "Hail, America" to introduce then-President-elect Biden; "Hail, Columbia" (the official anthem of the vice president) to introduce then-Vice President Pence and after Harris was sworn in, and "Hail to the Chief" (the official anthem of the president) after Biden was sworn in. The band had appeared at every presidential inauguration since Thomas Jefferson's in 1801. Courtney Williams, Senior Chief Musician and concert moderator for the U.S. Navy Concert Band, returned as the platform announcer for his fourth consecutive inauguration. Senator Amy Klobuchar opened the ceremony with a short speech, saying the storming of the Capitol two weeks prior "awakened us to our responsibilities as Americans"; she declared the inaugural day "the day when our democracy picks itself up, brushes off the dust, and does what America always does: goes forward as a nation". Senator Roy Blunt, chair of the Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies and the master of ceremonies, delivered a short speech expounding the Constitution's Preamble, noting that unlike the Articles of Confederation or the Magna Carta, it roots and establishes law and authority in "We the People". Blunt remarked that the endeavor to create a "more perfect Union" is a continuing project and "we are more than we have been and we are less than we hope to be." Leo J. O'Donovan, a Catholic priest and former president of Georgetown University, invoked the "gracious and merciful God" in praying for Biden and Harris to "care for the common good with malice toward none and with charity for all", and quoted Archbishop John Carroll, Pope Francis, and the Epistle of James. Lady Gaga then sang the national anthem, wearing a custom design gown and brooch by Schiaparelli. The Georgia firefighters' union leader Andrea Hall led the Pledge of Allegiance, using American Sign Language in addition to speaking. Jennifer Lopez performed her renditions of "This Land Is Your Land" and "America the Beautiful", and during the bridge she translated the last stanza of the Pledge of Allegiance in Spanish: "¡una nación, bajo Dios, indivisible, con libertad y justicia para todos!" After the inaugural address (see below), Garth Brooks performed "Amazing Grace" (including the verse "When we've been there ten thousand years"), and asked the public to join him in singing the final verse; and National Youth Poet Laureate Amanda Gorman recited her poem "The Hill We Climb". At 22, Gorman is the youngest inaugural poet. Silvester Beaman, a Methodist pastor of Bethel AME Church in Wilmington, Delaware, and a friend of Biden, delivered the benediction paraphrasing Isaiah 11 by replacing both in the messianic role of the "shoot from the stump of Jesse", and in the yet-to-be-reconciled role of the "wolf" and "lamb", with references to "We the People"—saying, for example, "We will not kill or destroy on all your Holy Mountain," and "We will not learn hate anymore." Biden was sworn in on a Bible that has been in his family since 1893—the same one he used during his senatorial and vice presidential swearing-in ceremonies—held by his wife. It is a late 19th-century edition of the Douay–Rheims Bible, with commentary by George Leo Haydock. The Bible is large—five inches (12.7 cm) thick—and has a Celtic cross on the front. Biden's inauguration marked the first time a Catholic Chief Justice administered the oath to an incoming Catholic president. Harris was sworn in on two Bibles held by her husband, one belonging to Regina Shelton, a person important to her and her sister Maya Harris, and another belonging to former Supreme Court Associate Justice Thurgood Marshall. Associate Justice Sonia Sotomayor administered the oath of office to Harris at 11:40 a.m., with 20 minutes remaining in Pence's term. Sotomayor became the first woman to administer an inaugural oath twice after she administered Biden's at his 2013 swearing-in. Harris recited the following: I, Kamala Devi Harris, do solemnly swear that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties of the office on which I am about to enter. [So help me God.] Chief Justice John Roberts then administered Biden's oath of office at 11:47 a.m., with 13 minutes remaining in Trump's term. Biden recited the following, as prescribed by the Constitution: I, Joseph Robinette Biden, Jr., do solemnly swear that I will faithfully execute the Office of President of the United States, and will to the best of my ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States. [So help me God.] Upon completing the oath, the U.S. Army Band ("Pershing's Own") played four ruffles and flourishes, but a 21-gun cannon salute was not rendered, which caused a brief delay in the proceedings before Biden was able to deliver his inaugural address. The 21-gun cannon salute for President Biden was later rendered at the wreath-laying ceremony at Arlington National Cemetery. The flag of the vice president of the United States was present at the beginning of the inauguration ceremony, indicating the presence of the then-incumbent vice president Mike Pence. At noon the flag continued to fly for the new incumbent Kamala Harris. When the noon hour arrived, the flag of the president of the United States was raised by the military sentry, indicating the presence of the newly sworn incumbent president. The presidential nuclear football, which can authorize a nuclear attack while away from a command center, was discreetly given to military aides of the new administration during the ceremony; however, Trump's absence did not change the automatic deactivation of his and Pence's nuclear access and activation of Biden and Harris'. Inaugural Address Inaugural address of Joe Biden (31:44) Joe Biden delivers his inaugural address on January 20, 2021. Wikisource has a transcript of Biden's inaugural address: Joe Biden's Inaugural Address The inaugural address was 2,514 words long and took 21 minutes to deliver, between 11:52 a.m. and 12:13 p.m., with 7 minutes remaining in President Trump's term and in the first 13 minutes of President Biden's term. Biden's inaugural speech was regarded as laying out his vision to unite the nation prefaced by the various impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, economic strife, climate change, political polarization, and racial injustice. Biden composed the speech with the assistance of speechwriter Vinay Reddy, senior advisor Mike Donilon, then-incoming Secretary of State Antony Blinken, and chief of staff Ron Klain. His speech was described by the New York Times as a "direct rebuttal" in tone to Trump's inaugural address (in which Trump spoke of "American carnage"), as Biden called for an end to the "uncivil war" of political, demographic, and ideological American cultures through a greater embrace of diversity. In the speech, Biden repeated his campaign pledge to "fight as hard for those who did not support me as for those who did". Focusing on the struggles of American citizens, Biden expressed sympathy, but stressed that distrust and fighting amongst one another would not better their conditions. He cited the Civil War, Great Depression, world wars, and September 11 attacks as moments in American history where citizens' "better angels" prevailed, saying that the solution—unity—must again be invoked to rise from the "cascading" crises of the present; this unity, he proclaimed, exists in the "common objects" that define America: "opportunity, liberty, dignity, respect, honor, and ... truth". Biden vocalized his opposition to disinformation and politicians who seek to gain from its weaponization—a passive reference to Trump, who frequently made false or misleading statements while in office. He explicitly decried white supremacy and nativism, calling them an "ugly reality" of American life he vows to defeat that clouds the "American ideal" set out in the U.S. Declaration of Independence—that all Americans are equal. Biden pledged that the United States would "engage with the world once again"; "repair our alliances"; and act as a "trusted partner for peace and security". His decision, for example, to reinstate American participation in the Paris Agreement via executive order, which Trump withdrew from, signaled his commitment to a global policy on climate change. Biden also discussed the historical significance of Harris's ascension to the vice presidency, recounting the movements for civil rights and women's suffrage that permitted African Americans and women to participate in politics; he celebrated their inauguration as a "triumph" for democracy, affirming a peaceful transfer of power exactly two weeks after the violent storming of the Capitol. Near the conclusion of his speech, Biden held a moment of silence for those who died in the COVID-19 pandemic. Quoting the Gene Scheer composition "American Anthem", he implored Americans to consider their legacy in answering the "call of history" to protect "democracy, hope, truth, and justice", "secure liberty", and make America a "beacon to the world", insisting that generations of their descendants will judge them on their actions. In closing his speech, Biden promised to "always level" with the American people and govern exclusively in their interest. After the swearing-in ceremony, Biden, Harris, and their spouses participated in a Pass in Review on the East Front of the United States Capitol featuring members of the United States Armed Forces. Traditionally, before the Pass in Review, the new president would escort the outgoing president to a helicopter, Marine One, where they would officially depart Washington, D.C. However, Trump's decision to not attend Biden's inauguration and rather depart prior to the event's outset broke this custom. The congressional luncheon, a tradition witnessed since the 1897 inauguration of William McKinley, was canceled due to public health concerns, the first time since the 1977 inauguration of Jimmy Carter. However, Biden and Harris were presented several gifts in the Capitol rotunda, including Landscape with Rainbow by Robert S. Duncanson, two lead Lenox crystal vases cut by Peter O'Rourke, two flags that had been flown over the Capitol during the inaugural ceremony, and portraits of them taking their oaths of office. Later in the afternoon, Biden participated in a signing ceremony, proclaiming the day a National Day of Unity and declaring his nominations for Cabinet and sub-Cabinet positions to Congress. In the evening, Harris performed her first vice presidential duty by swearing in Senators-elect Jon Ossoff and Raphael Warnock who, respectively, won the January 5 regular and special Georgia Senate runoff elections that yielded a Democratic majority in the U.S. Senate, along with Alex Padilla, who was appointed by California Governor Gavin Newsom to fill Harris's vacated seat. Following the Pass in Review, Biden and Harris, along with former presidents Clinton, Bush, and Obama, and all their spouses, participated in a wreath laying ceremony at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier at Arlington National Cemetery. The television package included footage of former presidents Clinton, Bush, and Obama at Arlington Memorial Amphitheater discussing the peaceful transition of power. Presidential historian Timothy Naftali noted that the ceremony was significant because Congress had decided on Inauguration Day in 1921, almost a hundred years prior to Biden's, to bury an unidentified soldier who died in World War I at the spot. Naftali additionally remarked that the gathering of Biden and former presidents to honor the unknown soldiers who died in war served as a "visual message of unity, at a time of anxiety, pain and suffering in [the] country". Following the wreath laying ceremony, a parade down Pennsylvania Avenue, NW escorted Biden and Harris to the White House which included every branch of the U.S. military, along with drumline bands from Biden and Harris's alma maters, the University of Delaware and Howard University, respectively. The Virtual Parade Across America, organized by the Biden Inaugural Committee, was hosted by actor Tony Goldwyn, reflecting the "diversity, heritage, and resilience of the country" in the event's musical acts, poets, dance troupes, and more. Viewing stands outside the White House that were originally constructed for members of the public were dismantled because they were ultimately deemed unnecessary for the revised plans. The live parade was announced by Charlie Brotman, who has served as the inaugural parade announcer during almost every ceremony since former President Dwight D. Eisenhower's second inauguration. Comedian Jon Stewart, musicians Andra Day, Nile Rodgers, and Kathy Sledge, along with several choirs and athletes (including former Olympians Nathan Chen, Allyson Felix, and Katie Ledecky) appeared in a "virtual roll call". The parade included 1,391 virtual participants, 95 horses, and nine dogs. Frontline healthcare workers and several distinguished students and educators who helped their communities during the COVID-19 pandemic were honored as "heroes" during the ceremony. Choreographer Kenny Ortega led a dance featuring 275 recorded segments from participants around the country; the Ryan Martin Foundation, a "wheelchair basketball program", joined the parade virtually. Musical act New Radicals reunited for the first time in two decades to conclude the parade with their hit song "You Get What You Give". The song was used by Harris's husband, Emhoff, during 2020 campaign rallies, and was referred to by Biden in his autobiography, Promise Me, Dad, as his family's "rallying "theme song"" during his late son Beau's terminal battle with glioblastoma. The band's leader, Gregg Alexander, said he hoped the group's performance of the song was a "tiniest beacon of light in such a dark time". Celebrating America was a television special hosted by Tom Hanks that aired the evening of the inauguration across most major television networks and other cable and streaming outlets. The event featured many musical guests and celebrities, including Bruce Springsteen, Jon Bon Jovi, Justin Timberlake, Dave Grohl, Tim McGraw, Lin-Manuel Miranda, John Legend, Demi Lovato, and Katy Perry. The Biden Inaugural Committee raised over $61.8 million for the event from various companies, unions, and individuals. At 10:00 a.m. on the morning of January 21, the National Prayer Service took place at Washington National Cathedral. A virtual service, Biden and his family participated from the White House. More than thirty religious leaders of various faiths participated; William Barber II preached, calling for a "third reconstruction" of America in his homily. A series of protests and counter-protests related to the results of the 2020 presidential election began in December 2020. After the storming of the Capitol, D.C. Mayor Muriel Bowser requested the Interior Department to cancel city demonstration permits and reject demonstration applications during the inauguration, but the agency declined to do so. The National Park Service designated two adjacent areas—portions of the John Marshall Park and Navy Memorial—exclusively for "First Amendment activities" (protests). The U.S. Park Police limited demonstration attendance to a maximum of one hundred individuals in each location and required participants be screened via magnetometers. The left-wing groups ANSWER Coalition and D.C. Action Lab were granted permits and staged demonstrations within attendance limits. The scale of protests and armed militia marches that intelligence reports indicated would occur near the U.S. Capitol and at state capitols on Inauguration Day was vastly overestimated, both in size and in scope. Nationally, few people demonstrated at state capitols. At the New York State Capitol, a lone Trump supporter reportedly visited with the intention of protesting—the demonstrator had expected a "massive protest". On January 17, three days before the inauguration, some members of the Michigan Boogaloo Bois openly carried weapons outside the state's capitol, but never became violent. NPR attributed the lack of violent protests to several factors: the Justice Department's targeting of rioters from the storming of the Capitol; protest organizers warning of "false flag" events staged by law enforcement to "gather people for potential arrest"; and the banning or removal of social media profiles, groups, pages, and applications, such as Parler, associated with political extremism and fringe movements. Nearly forty million people watched Biden's address on the combined major cable news and broadcast network television stations. More than 21 million people watched the prime time Celebrating America special. In 2017, a combined 38.3 million viewers watched Trump's inaugural address across the same networks, according to Nielsen data, representing a 4% increase in raw television viewership. CNN was the ratings leader throughout the day. Compared to the previous inaugural ceremony in 2017, Fox News's viewership fell 77%, while CNN's tripled and MSNBC's quadrupled. The figures below, Nielsen data sourced from Adweek, do not include streaming figures. Biden and Harris's assumption of their respective offices was met with congratulations from many world leaders, including prime ministers Muhyiddin Yassin, Scott Morrison, Alexander De Croo, Boris Johnson, Justin Trudeau, Mette Frederiksen, Sanna Marin, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, Katrín Jakobsdóttir, Narendra Modi, Micheál Martin, Benjamin Netanyahu, Giuseppe Conte, Yoshihide Suga, Jacinda Ardern, Erna Solberg, Imran Khan, António Costa, Pedro Sánchez, and Stefan Löfven; presidents Xi Jinping, Vladimir Putin, Sahle-Work Zewde, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, Emmanuel Macron, Jair Bolsonaro, Rodrigo Duterte, Andrés Manuel López Obrador and Moon Jae-in; European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen, NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg, and Pope Francis. Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying said the Chinese government hopes Biden will restore bilateralism. Iranian President Hassan Rouhani called Trump a "tyrant" and urged Biden to return to the Iran nuclear agreement, which Trump withdrew the United States from, saying Iran will then "fully respect" their "commitments under the pact". Hamas called Trump "the biggest source and sponsor of injustice, violence and extremism in the world", calling for Biden to "reverse the course of misguided and unjust policies against [their] people". Following the inauguration, a picture of Bernie Sanders attending went viral as an internet meme. Sanders' website subsequently sold merchandise with the picture and donated the profits to charity. Politics portal United States portal 2020 United States presidential election Bernie Sanders mittens meme Joe Biden 2020 presidential campaign Presidency of Joe Biden Presidential transition of Joe Biden Timeline of the Joe Biden presidency (2021 Q1) Lisa Mascaro; Mary Clare Jalonick (January 14, 2021). "Trump impeachment trial to focus on his attacks on election". AP News. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2021. Felicia Sonmez; Colby Itkowitz; John Wagner; Paulina Firozi; Nick Miroff (January 11, 2021). "Acting homeland security secretary Wolf to step down, nine days ahead of Biden inauguration". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2021. "JCCIC Announces Attendance Guidelines for 59th Inaugural Ceremonies". Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies. December 16, 2020. Archived from the original on December 19, 2020. Retrieved December 16, 2020. Shear, Michael D.; Fandos, Nicholas (November 30, 2020). "Biden's Inauguration: Expect Smaller Crowds and More Social Distancing". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 13, 2021. Blunt, Roy (November 2, 2020). "59th inaugural ceremonies: 'Our Determined Democracy: Forging a More Perfect Union'". The Hill. Archived from the original on December 28, 2020. Retrieved January 15, 2021. Lemire, Jonathan; Miller, Zeke (November 7, 2020). "Biden wins White House, vowing new direction for divided US". Associated Press. Archived from the original on November 7, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Parks, Miles (December 14, 2020). "Electoral College Affirms Biden Victory As Trump Continues Baseless Challenges". NPR. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved December 14, 2020. Wright, Jasmine; Duster, Chandelis (January 18, 2021). "Harris resigns from the Senate ahead of inauguration". CNN. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Malloy, Ally (January 7, 2021). "Trump pledges orderly transition after Congress affirms Biden's win and Capitol riot". CNN. Archived from the original on January 7, 2021. Retrieved January 7, 2021. Cormier, Ryan; Talorico, Patricia (November 7, 2020). "Delaware history is made: The First State gets its first president in Joe Biden". Delaware Online. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. Peter, Josh (November 7, 2020). "Joe Biden will become the oldest president in American history, a title previously held by Ronald Reagan". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 7, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. "Membership of the Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies". United States Senate. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved November 8, 2020. Lillis, Mike (December 8, 2020). "Inauguration committee Republicans sink Democrats' resolution acknowledging Biden victory". The Hill. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved December 8, 2020. Carney, Jordain (December 14, 2020). "Top GOP senators acknowledge Biden as president-elect after Electoral College vote". The Hill. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved December 15, 2020. Forgey, Quint (November 30, 2020). "Biden, Harris form inaugural committee". Politico. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2021. "Presidential Inaugural Committee Outlines Initial Plans to Honor American Traditions and Protect Public Health | inauguration". inauguration.dc.gov. January 15, 2021. Archived from the original on January 9, 2021. Retrieved January 15, 2021. Tapp, Tom (January 15, 2021). "Star-Studded Biden/Harris Inaugural Events To Stretch Over 5 Days, Celebrate "America United"". Deadline. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved January 15, 2021. Mucha, Sarah (January 11, 2021). "'America United' announced as inaugural theme". CNN. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 11, 2021. "Access to West Front of U.S. Capitol Restricted for Inauguration Platform Construction" (Press release). United States Capitol Police. September 3, 2020. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. "Inauguration Day 2021: What it will look like and what you need to know". WUSA. November 9, 2020. Archived from the original on November 10, 2020. Retrieved November 12, 2020. Lesniewski, Niels; Tully-McManus, Katherine (November 5, 2020). "Biden or Trump, inaugural planning and construction well underway on Capitol Hill". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Archived from the original on November 7, 2020. Retrieved November 7, 2020. Fields, Samantha (January 11, 2021). "Will Capitol attack hike security costs for Biden inauguration?". Marketplace. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 12, 2021. Segraves, Mark (September 18, 2020). "Why DC Officials Are Expecting Next Presidential Inauguration to Be the Most Expensive Yet". WRC-TV. Archived from the original on November 7, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2021. Chalfont, Morgan (January 11, 2021). "DHS secretary says security measures tied to inauguration will begin Wednesday". The Hill. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 11, 2021. Leonnig, Carol D.; Demirjian, Karoun; Jouvenal, Justin; Miroff, Nick (January 12, 2021). "Secret Service launches massive security operation to protect Biden inauguration". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2021. Carney, Jordain; Chalfant, Morgan (January 13, 2021). "Security concerns mount ahead of Biden inauguration". The Hill. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 13, 2021. John Wagner, Holding swearing-in outside sends important message, Biden officials say Archived January 20, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, The Washington Post (January 20, 2021). Contrera, Jessica; Leonnig, Carol D.; Mettler, Katie (January 16, 2021). "Va. man arrested at inauguration checkpoint says he was lost and didn't mean to bring gun, ammunition to D.C." The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved January 16, 2021. Meckler, Laura (January 17, 2021). "Avowed Trump supporter arrested near Capitol for carrying gun; women charged with impersonating police". Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Zilbermints, Regina (February 1, 2021). "Judge orders 'Cowboys for Trump' leader held without bail over Capitol riot charge". The Hill. Archived from the original on February 1, 2021. Retrieved February 5, 2021. Gstalter, Morgan (January 18, 2021). "Capitol put on lockdown after fire reported several blocks away". The Hill. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Athey, Philip (January 20, 2021). "The National Guard had a quiet day in DC standing post against threats they helped prevent". Army Times. Retrieved January 21, 2021. Davies, Emily; Brice-Saddler, Michael; Hermann, Peter (January 21, 2021). "The fortress around downtown D.C. is being dismantled. But heightened security may remain". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved January 26, 2021. Ryan, Missy; Horton, Alex; Zapotosky, Matt; Lamothe, Dan (January 13, 2021). "Security footprint grows in nation's capital ahead of inauguration". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2021. Schwartz, Matthew (January 16, 2021). "Up To 25,000 Troops Descend On Washington For Biden's Inauguration". NPR. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2021. Baldor, Lolita (January 16, 2021). "Guard troops pour into Washington as states answer the call". AP News. Archived from the original on January 17, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Katkov, Mark (January 7, 2021). "Army Secretary Says A 'Non-Scalable' 7-Foot Fence Is Going Up Around U.S. Capitol". NPR. Archived from the original on January 8, 2021. Retrieved January 7, 2021. Kanno-Youngs, Zolan; Sullivan, Eileen; Schmitt, Eric (January 15, 2021). "New Warnings of Violence as Security Tightens for Inauguration". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 17, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2021. Eric Schmitt & Helene Cooper,12 National Guard Members Removed From Inauguration Duties Amid Extremist Threats Archived January 20, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, New York Times (January 19, 2021). FLIGHT ADVISORY NATIONAL SPECIAL SECURITY EVENT 2021: Presidential Inauguration Events Archived January 16, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, Federal Aviation Administration. Josephs, Leslie (January 14, 2021). "Airlines ban DC-bound travelers from checking firearms ahead of inauguration". CNBC. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved January 15, 2021. Pager, Tyler; Beavers, Olivia (January 14, 2021). "Biden team postpones inauguration rehearsal due to security threats". Politico. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved January 15, 2021. Edelman, Adam (January 11, 2021). "Biden plans 'America United' inauguration theme". NBC News. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 11, 2021. Edelman, Adam (January 11, 2021). "Biden plans 'America United' inauguration theme". NBC News. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 11, 2021. Tierney, Lauren; Meko, Tim; Dormido, Hannah; Karklis, Laris; Fox, Joe (January 15, 2021). "Ahead of the inauguration, much of D.C. closed off like never before". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2021. Davies, Emily; Jouvenal, Justin. "Entire National Mall to close on Inauguration Day". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 14, 2021. Boykin, Nick (January 13, 2021). "Metro closing 13 stations ahead of Inauguration Day in DC". wusa9.com. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2021. George, Justin (January 13, 2021). "Metro to close 13 stations for a week amid threats of inauguration violence". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2021. Myers, Leah (January 16, 2021). "Amtrak issuing travel advisory in D.C. area for Biden's inauguration". New Haven, CT: WTNH. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved January 16, 2021. Moses, Lauren (January 15, 2021). "MARC Train suspends all services leading up to Inauguration, beginning Sunday". WBFF. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved January 16, 2021. Davies, Emily; Brice-Saddler, Michael; Lang, Marissa; Jouvenal, Justin (January 13, 2021). "Airbnb to cancel all D.C. reservations during inauguration week as security in the city is tightened". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 13, 2021. Cartagena, Rosa (January 13, 2021). "Hotel Workers' Union Calls for DC Hotels to Close During Inauguration, but That Seems Unlikely". Washingtonian. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 13, 2021. Moshtaghian, Artemis (January 11, 2021). "US Postal Service removing mailboxes for security reasons ahead of inauguration". CNN. Archived from the original on January 17, 2021. Retrieved January 16, 2021. "Virginia-DC bridges to close to enhance Biden inauguration security". Reuters. January 15, 2021. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2021. Goncalves, Delia (January 19, 2021). "Secret Service reopens bridges connecting communities east of Anacostia River". wusa9.com. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2021. Beresford, Trilby (January 16, 2021). "'Victory' of Kamala Harris Celebrated in 'America United: An Inauguration Welcome'". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 17, 2021. Retrieved January 16, 2021. Gold, Elizabeth Isadora (February 6, 2020). "Meet the Resistance Revival Chorus, Where You Can Sing Out Your Political Frustrations". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on November 23, 2020. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Kreps, Daniel (January 17, 2021). "See Black Pumas Perform 'Colors' for Biden-Harris Inauguration Welcome Event". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 17, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Whack, Errin Haines (June 28, 2019). "Biden lands 2020 endorsement from Atlanta Mayor Bottoms". AP News. Archived from the original on November 6, 2020. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Blistein, Jon (January 15, 2021). "Joe Biden, Kamala Harris Share Inauguration Playlist With Springsteen, Mary J. Blige, and More". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 17, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Mims, Taylor (February 13, 2020). "From TV to Music Mogul: How Issa Rae Is Giving Artists A Leg Up". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 22, 2020. Retrieved January 18, 2021. McClearly, Kelly (January 16, 2021). "Joe Biden and Kamala Harris drop a playlist for your inauguration watch party". CNN. Archived from the original on January 17, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Lejeune, Tristan (January 14, 2021). "Biden inauguration announces virtual concert 'We the People' on Sunday". The Hill. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 14, 2021. Michallon, Clémence (January 18, 2021). "Cher tells Joe Biden 'this is your time' as virtual show kicks off Inauguration Week". The Independent. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Johnson, Ted (January 18, 2021). "Performers Fete Joe Biden And Kamala Harris At Inauguration Week Kickoff Concert: "This Is Your Time," Says Cher". Deadline. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. "will.i.am Launches $5 Million "American Dream Fund" for i.am Angel Foundation to Expand Access to STEAM-Focused Education". www.businesswire.com. January 12, 2021. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Daw, Stephen (January 14, 2021). "Carole King, James Taylor & More to Perform at Joe Biden's 'We the People Concert'". www.billboard.com. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Brodsky, Rachel (January 18, 2021). "'We The People' concert: Connie Britton reveals moving moment with Joe Biden". The Independent. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. "Barack Obama Presidential Inauguration: full schedule". Daily Telegraph. London: Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies. January 21, 2013. Archived from the original on April 28, 2016. Retrieved January 30, 2013. Tamari, Jonathan (January 18, 2021). "Biden volunteered in Philly to mark Martin Luther King Jr. Day". The Inquirer. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Saenz, Arlette (January 4, 2021). "Biden inaugural festivities to feature national day of service on MLK Day". CNN. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 11, 2021. VanHoose, Benjamin (January 18, 2021). "Biden Inauguration Committee Encourages Day of Service on Martin Luther King Jr. Day". People. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. "President-Elect Biden Volunteers at Philabundance for MLK Day of Service—NBC10 Philadelphia". January 18, 2021. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Cohn, Alicia (January 18, 2021). "Biden calls Americans to volunteer on MLK Jr. Day". The Hill. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Silva, Cynthia (January 15, 2021). "'United We Serve': Biden-Harris team to celebrate and honor MLK Day". NBC News. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Iasimone, Ashley (January 18, 2021). "How to Watch 'United We Serve: A Celebration of the National MLK Day of Service' With Aloe Blacc, Chesca & More". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2021. Johnson, Ted (January 18, 2021). "Joe Biden's Inauguration United We Serve Concert Lineup Includes Diane Warren, Chesca, Andra Day And Yo-Yo Ma". Deadline. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2021. Akers, Mary Beth (December 18, 2008). "I Barack Hussein Obama Do Solemnly Swear ..." The Washington Post. Archived from the original on March 23, 2012. Retrieved February 9, 2009. Stephanie, Guerilus (January 15, 2021). "Biden-Harris team hosts star-studded 'United We Serve' celebration for MLK Day". TheGrio. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved January 15, 2021. Cobo, Leila (January 18, 2021). "Spanish Acts Get a Moment at Inaugural Events". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2021. Chalfant, Morgan (January 11, 2021). "Biden inauguration theme will be 'America United'". The Hill. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 12, 2021. Brown, Matthew (December 30, 2020). "Parade viewing stands dismantled near White House as Biden team seeks to discourage inauguration crowds". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. "'Field of Flags' at National Mall Represents Americans Unable to Attend Inauguration". NBC4 Washington. January 18, 2021. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Lolita Baldor; James LaPorta; Lisa Mascaro; Jill Colvin (January 19, 2021). "The Latest:The Latest: Pence headed to Indiana after Biden inauguration". AP News. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2021. "Watch Live: Biden leaves Delaware for final time before inauguration". CBS News. January 19, 2021. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2021. Allen, Mike (December 31, 2020). "Biden's plan for Inauguration Eve: Lights, church bells for COVID lives lost". Axios. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved December 31, 2020. Falconer, Rebecca (January 18, 2021). "Empire State Building among hundreds to light up in Biden inauguration coronavirus tribute". Axios. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Castronuovo, Celine (January 19, 2021). "Washington National Cathedral to toll its bell 400 times to honor those lost to coronavirus". The Hill. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2021. Bloom, Madison (January 20, 2021). "Watch Japanese Breakfast Play "Everybody Wants to Love You!" for Biden Inauguration Event". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Noveck, Jocelyn (January 19, 2021). "From Gaga to Garth, Miranda to Moreno: Celebs join inaugural". AP News. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. "Schedule". bideninaugural.org. January 18, 2021. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2021. "'We Are One': Biden-Harris inaugural event will celebrate Black resiliency in America". Associated Press. January 18, 2021. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. "Here Are All the Music Moments Planned for Joe Biden & Kamala Harris's Inauguration". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Jaffe, Alexandra; Miller, Zeke (January 13, 2021). "Biden forgoing Amtrak trip to Washington over security fears". AP News. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 14, 2021. Cherry, Amy (January 20, 2017). "VIDEO: Crowd cheers, chants 'Welcome Home Joe' for the homecoming of Delaware's own". Wilmington, DE: WDEL. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved March 10, 2018. Phillips, Morgan (January 13, 2021). "White House offers and Biden accepts the use of Blair House for the night before inauguration". Fox News. Archived from the original on January 13, 2021. Retrieved January 15, 2021. Waxman, Olivia B. (January 19, 2021). "As Trump Plans to Skip Biden's Swearing In, Here Are 3 Other U.S. Presidents Who Dodged Their Successors' Inauguration". Time. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Miller, Zeke (January 14, 2021). "Lingering questions about how Trump will finish out his term". AP News. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved January 15, 2021. Weissert, Will; Schor, Elena (December 19, 2020). "President in the pews: DC churches offer Biden options". AP News. Archived from the original on January 10, 2021. Retrieved January 16, 2021. Wagner, John; Min Kim, Seung (January 19, 2021). "Biden invites congressional leadership to church on Wednesday". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2021. Budryk, Zack (January 19, 2021). "McConnnell, McCarthy accept Biden invitation to pre-inauguration church service". The Hill. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2021. Walters, Joanna; Belam, Martin (January 18, 2021). "Trump to hold early morning sendoff ceremony on Biden inauguration day". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2021. "Air Force One Lifts Off With Trump Aboard After White House Departure, Ceremony". NBC4 Washington. January 20, 2021. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Colvin, Jill (January 20, 2021). "Trump leaves White House, says 'It's been a great honor'". AP News. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Gearan, Anne; Rucker, Philip; Rucker, Philip (January 20, 2021). "As Trump exits Washington, he tells modest crowd, 'We will be back in some form'". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 6, 2021. Collins, Kaitlan; Acosta, Jim; Liptak, Kevin; Bennett, Kate (January 19, 2021). "Current and former officials who've been critical of Trump have been invited to his send-off". CNN. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2021. Belser, Dave Evensen and Kimberly (January 12, 2021). "A tense time for transition". College of Liberal Arts & Sciences at Illinois. Retrieved May 31, 2021. Crisp, Elizabeth (January 20, 2021). "Donald Trump, in final farewell speech, says "we will be back in some form"". Newsweek. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Allefson, Lindsey (January 20, 2021). "Trump's Sendoff Playlist Includes 'Macho Man,' 'My Way'—and 'Billie Jean'". TheWrap. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. "Trump White House Archives—Briefings and Statements—Farewell Address". whitehouse.gov – via National Archives. "Biden inauguration: Trump leaves White House vowing 'we will be back'". BBC News. January 20, 2021. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Jackson, David; Fritze, John (January 20, 2021). "Donald Trump leaves letter for Joe Biden ahead of inauguration". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Epstein, Jennifer (January 20, 2021). "Biden Says Trump Wrote 'Very Generous' Letter Before Leaving". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2021. Ali, Rasha (January 16, 2021). "Inauguration to include programming aimed at kids along with a message from Jill Biden". USA Today. USA Today. Archived from the original on January 17, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Treisman, Rachel (January 20, 2021). "On Inauguration Day, Transfer Of Power Includes Handover Of Twitter Accounts". NPR. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. "National Archives—Presidential Libraries". January 9, 2017. Shabad, Rebecca (December 8, 2020). "Clyburn says Biden's inauguration events will be '80 percent virtual'". NBC News. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved December 9, 2020. "JCCIC Announces Attendance Guidelines for 59th Inaugural Ceremonies". U.S. Senate. Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies. December 16, 2020. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 13, 2021. "A Closer Look at Who Attended President Biden's Inauguration". The New York Times. January 22, 2021. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2021. "Fears over Biden inauguration security mount after US Capitol attack". The Guardian. January 9, 2021. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 9, 2021. Williams, Eliot; Cheslow, Daniella (January 12, 2021). "Here's What We Know About The Plans For Inauguration". NPR. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Davies, Emily; Jouvenal, Justin; Lamothe, Dan; Flynn, Meagan (January 15, 2021). "With Mall, bridges and streets closed in D.C., the nation prepares for a celebration of democracy mostly devoid of its citizens". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Zeleny, Jeff; Janfaza, Rachel (January 8, 2021). "Obama and Clinton will join Bush at Biden's inauguration". CNN. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 8, 2021. Fortin, Jacey (January 19, 2021). "Trump Is Not the First President to Snub an Inauguration". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Doubek, James (January 9, 2021). "Pence Will Attend Biden Inauguration". NPR. Archived from the original on January 10, 2021. Retrieved January 15, 2021. Behrmann, Savannah (January 21, 2021). "The Trumps, Jimmy Carter: Who did not attend Biden's inauguration". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved January 26, 2021. Creitz, Charles (January 19, 2021). "Former VP Quayle calls Trump absence from Biden inauguration 'unfortunate'". Fox News. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Barnes, Robert (January 20, 2021). "An incomplete Supreme Court witnessed Biden's oath. There's history there". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2021. "India's Ambassador to US attends Biden's inauguration ceremony". The Times of India. Press Trust of India. January 21, 2021. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 21, 2021. Ghazanchyan, Siranush (January 18, 2021). "Armenia's Ambassador to the US to attend Joe Biden's inauguration". Public Radio of Armenia. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 21, 2021. Cooper, Charlie (January 19, 2021). "UK's pitch to Biden: We'll work with you on China". Politico. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 21, 2021. Blanchard, Ben (January 20, 2021). "Taiwan-Biden ties off to strong start with invite for top diplomat". Reuters. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 21, 2021.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Boyer, Peter (July 2022). Boyer: Balance of Power - Orchestral Works (CD liner notes). Naxos American Classics. Naxos. Naxos Catalogue No. 8.559915. "Presidential Inauguration 2021". United States Marine Band. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. "Inaugural Ceremony: 59th Presidential Inaugural (subject to change)" (PDF). United States Marine Band. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Smith, Nickelle (January 20, 2021). "Middle Tennessee native serves as announcer for fourth presidential inauguration". WATE 6 On Your Side. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2021. "Sen. Klobuchar Delivers Remarks At Inauguration" (Press release). January 20, 2021. "Sen. Klobuchar Delivers Remarks At Inauguration: 'This Is The Day Our Democracy Picks Itself Up'". January 20, 2021. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2021. Huguelet, Austin (January 20, 2021). "Missouri's Roy Blunt: Trump's decision not to attend inauguration a 'personal mistake'". Springfield News-Leader. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2021. "Jesuit Fr. Leo O'Donovan to deliver invocation at Biden inauguration". National Catholic Reporter. January 6, 2021. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 8, 2021. Wilkinson, Alissa (January 18, 2021). "What the clergy praying at Biden's inauguration signal about his priorities". Vox. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Ciliberto, Gina (January 20, 2021). "TRANSCRIPT: The Prayer Offered at Biden's Inauguration By Rev. O'Donovan". Sojourners. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2021. Nolfi, Joey (January 20, 2021). "Watch Lady Gaga power through national anthem at Joe Biden's inauguration". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Allaire, Christian (July 4, 2021). "You Can Now Buy Lady Gaga's Inauguration Brooch". Vogue. Retrieved August 8, 2021. "Lady Gaga, Jennifer Lopez to perform at Biden's inauguration". ABC News. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 14, 2021. Castronuovo, Celine (January 15, 2021). "Biden chooses Amanda Gorman as youngest known inaugural poet". The Hill. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved January 15, 2021. Leimkuehler, Matthew (January 18, 2021). "Garth Brooks to perform at Joe Biden's inauguration: 'This is a statement of unity'". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2021. Collman, Ashley (December 19, 2020). "Biden plans to be sworn in as president with a massive family heirloom Bible dating back to 1893". Business Insider. Archived from the original on December 20, 2020. Retrieved January 19, 2021. Walther, Matthew (January 20, 2021). "Why Biden's bible is so big". The Week. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2021. Jackson, David. "Obama to be sworn in with Lincoln, King Bibles". USA Today. Archived from the original on March 24, 2015. Retrieved January 14, 2021. White, Christopher (January 20, 2021). "Biden's inauguration will feature Catholic signs, symbolism". National Catholic Reporter. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2021. Harper, Averi; Pearson, Beatrice (January 16, 2020). "Harris to be sworn in by Justice Sonia Sotomayor at inauguration". ABC News. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved January 16, 2020. Baker, Peter (January 20, 2021). "Biden Inaugurated as the 46th President Amid a Cascade of Crises". The New York Times. Retrieved January 20, 2021. "Biden became president at noon despite taking oath early, constitutional experts say". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Stephanie Sigafoos, Inauguration Day: How to watch, what to expect as Joe Biden is sworn in as president Archived January 19, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, Morning Call (January 19, 2021). Cohen, Zachary (January 19, 2021). "How Trump will hand off the 'nuclear football' to Biden". CNN. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2021. Ashraf, Khalil (December 15, 2020). "Biden to take oath outside Capitol amid virus restrictions". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved December 16, 2020. Korecki, Natascha (January 19, 2021). "Writing a speech for Biden can be hell. And that was before the inaugural". Politico. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Baker, Peter; Astor, Maggie; Kaplan, Thomas (January 20, 2021). "Inauguration Live Updates: President Biden Arrives at the White House". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. NPR Staff (January 20, 2021). "'This Is America's Day': Biden's Inaugural Address, Annotated". NPR. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Wise, Alana (January 20, 2021). "Biden Celebrates 'Triumph' Of Democracy In Inaugural Address". NPR. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Thrush, Glenn (January 20, 2021). "President Biden's Full Inauguration Speech, Annotated". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2021. Lemire, Jonathan; Miller, Zeke; Jaffe, Alexandria (January 20, 2021). "Biden takes the helm as president: 'Democracy has prevailed'". AP News. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Korecki, Natasha (January 20, 2021). "Biden pledges, once more, to lead America away from dystopia". Politico. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 21, 2021. Davenport, Coral; Friedman, Lisa (January 20, 2021). "Biden, in a Burst of Climate Orders, Rejoins the Paris Agreement". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 21, 2021. Yoo, Noah (January 20, 2021). "President Biden Quotes From "American Anthem," His "Favorite Song," in Inaugural Address". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2021. Subramanian, Courtney; Fritze, John; Jackson, David (January 15, 2021). "Trump to hold departure ceremony at Joint Base Andrews on morning of Biden inauguration". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved January 16, 2021. Korte, Gregory (December 29, 2020). "Biden's Inaugural Lunch Called Off Due to Concern Over Virus". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on January 6, 2021. Retrieved December 31, 2020. Schiller, Meghan (January 19, 2021). "Pittsburgh-Area Glass Cutter Handcrafts Special Inauguration Gifts For Joe Biden And Kamala Harris". Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2021. Meg Wagner; Melissa Mahtani; Melissa Macaya; Mike Hayes; Veronica Rocha; Fernando Alfonso III (January 20, 2021). "Biden Inauguration Day: Live coverage of Joe Biden, Kamala Harris and the US Capitol ceremony". CNN. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Cornwell, Susan (January 19, 2021). "Democrats to take working control of U.S. Senate Wednesday when three sworn in". Reuters. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Tim Elfrink (January 21, 2021). "Obama, Bush and Clinton release video praising peaceful transfers of power, as Trump skips inauguration". Washington Post. Retrieved November 9, 2023. Ryan, Josiah (January 20, 2021). "Biden Inauguration Day: Live coverage of Joe Biden, Kamala Harris and the US Capitol ceremony". CNN. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Collins, Michael (January 18, 2021). "Joe Biden's virtual 'Parade Across America' to feature 'heroes' and Jon Stewart, Andra Day, Kenny Ortega". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Mitchell, Samantha (January 18, 2021). "Howard University Drumline to perform during the Inaugural 'Parade Across America'". WJLA. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Collins, Michael (January 3, 2021). "Joe Biden to get 'presidential escort' to White House, virtual parade instead of traditional inaugural festivities". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved January 4, 2021. Brown, Matthew (December 30, 2020). "Parade viewing stands dismantled near White House as Biden team seeks to discourage inauguration crowds". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved December 31, 2020. Kunkle, Fredrick (January 20, 2013). "Inaugural parade's announcer knows how to call 'em as voice of former Washington Senators ballclub". The Washington Post. Washington DC. Archived from the original on August 2, 2018. Retrieved January 19, 2021. Allen, Mike (January 19, 2021). "Biden's virtual "Parade Across America" to feature 1,391 people, 90 horses, 9 dogs". Axios. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2021. Kreps, Daniel (January 18, 2021). "New Radicals to Reunite for First Time in 22 Years for Biden Inauguration Parade". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Lejeune, Tristan (January 20, 2021). "Bruce Springsteen kicks off 'Celebrating America' special with 'Land of Hope and Dreams'". The Hill. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Day, Chad (April 21, 2021). "Unions, Pfizer and a Record Label Helped Biden Inaugural Committee Raise $61.8 Million". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on April 21, 2021. Retrieved April 21, 2021. Barber II, William J. (January 21, 2021). "Read the Rev. William Barber's Sermon From the Inaugural Prayer Service". Time. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved January 25, 2021. Khalil, Ashraf (December 12, 2020). "Trump loyalists converging again on Washington over election". Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 14, 2021. Retrieved December 12, 2020. Knickmeyer, Ellen; Khalil, Ashraf (January 15, 2021). "Trump supporters among those seeking Jan. 20 protest permits". AP News. Archived from the original on January 17, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. "Record of Determination for the Partial Temporary Closure of Areas within and around the National Mall in Response to Threats to Visitors and Park Resources—National Mall and Memorial Parks (U.S. National Park Service)". www.nps.gov. January 19, 2021. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2021. Chappell, Bill; Allam, Hannah (January 20, 2021). "No Large Protests In D.C. As President Biden Is Inaugurated". NPR. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved January 21, 2021. "At NY Capitol, a Lone Trump Supporter Protests". NBC New York. January 20, 2021. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Wisely, John (January 17, 2021). "Lansing protest over the presidential election proves to be a dud". Detroit Free Press. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved January 21, 2021. Koblin, John (January 21, 2020). "Biden's Inauguration Scores Bigger TV Ratings Than Trump's". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2020. Lahut, Jake (January 21, 2021). "Over 1 million more people watched Biden's inauguration than Trump's". Business Insider. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2021. Katz, A.J. (January 21, 2021). "Inauguration Day 2021 Ratings: CNN Is the No. 1 Network During the Inauguration of Joe Biden". adweek.com. Retrieved January 22, 2021. Axelrod, Tal (January 20, 2021). "World leaders congratulate Biden on becoming president". The Hill. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. "How world leaders are reacting to Joe Biden's inauguration". Reuters. January 20, 2021. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 21, 2021. "Bernie Sanders' inauguration memes help raise $1.8 million for charity". NBC News. January 27, 2021. Retrieved October 18, 2022. McCleary, Kelly (January 23, 2021). "Bernie Sanders turns inauguration meme into sweatshirt for charity | CNN Politics". CNN. Retrieved October 18, 2022. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Joe Biden 2021 presidential inauguration. Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies Biden Inaugural Committee 59th Presidential Inauguration website of the District of Columbia government 59th Presidential Inauguration website of the United States Army Military District of Washington Official video of inauguration from Biden Inaugural Committee Presidential Proclamation—"A National Day of Unity"—inaugural proclamation at the White House website, January 20, 2021 Trump White House Archives—Briefings and Statements Trump White House Archives—Remarks 38°53′23″N 77°00′36″W﻿ / ﻿38.8898°N 77.0101°W﻿ / 38.8898; -77.0101