The 27th Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards, honoring the best achievements in film and television performances for the year 2020, were presented on April 4, 2021. The ceremony was broadcast on both TNT and TBS at 9:00 P.M. EST / 6:00 P.M. PST, airing for one hour rather than the usual two. The nominees were announced by Lily Collins and Daveed Diggs on February 4, 2021 via Instagram Live. Additionally, the shortened one-hour show was pre-recorded. The winners were informed of their wins a few days before the telecast and the acceptance speeches were also pre-taped. These changes were a COVID-era decision in order to protect the guild's nominees and presenters. Michael Keaton made history by becoming the first person in SAG history to win three awards for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture, winning this year for The Trial of the Chicago 7. In 2015 and 2016, he was part of the winning ensembles for Birdman (2014) and Spotlight (2015), respectively. Chadwick Boseman tied Jamie Foxx and Maggie Smith in the record for most nominations in a single ceremony with four: Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role for Ma Rainey's Black Bottom, Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Supporting Role for Da 5 Bloods, and as part of the ensembles of both films for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture. Boseman ultimately won for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role, making history as the first actor to win the category posthumously; his widow, Taylor Simone Ledward, accepted the award. The ceremony also marked the first time that all four individual film acting categories were won by people of color. Note: Winners are listed first and highlighted in boldface. The segment honored the following who died in 2020 and early 2021: Cloris Leachman Thomas Jefferson Byrd Carl Reiner Dawn Wells Ja'Net DuBois Shirley Knight Max von Sydow Joyce Gordon Ian Holm Conchata Ferrell Irrfan Khan Naya Rivera Hal Holbrook Yaphet Kotto John Karlen Henry Darrow Warren Berlinger Fred Willard Jerry Stiller Natalie Desselle-Reid Kelly Preston Lyle Waggoner Zoe Caldwell Kellye Nakahara Ann Reinking Richard Herd Tommy Lister Jr. John Saxon Diana Rigg Ben Cross Olivia de Havilland Brian Dennehy Sean Connery George Segal Robert Conrad Honor Blackman Gregory Sierra Tanya Roberts David L. Lander Christopher Plummer Mark Blum Deezer D Mac Davis Bruce Kirby Lynn Cohen Orson Bean Kevin Dobson Dustin Diamond Jessica Walter Nick Cordero Peter Mark Richman Wilford Brimley Cicely Tyson Kirk Douglas Chadwick Boseman The following individuals presented awards at the ceremony: Mindy Kaling with Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Television Movie or Limited Series Riz Ahmed with Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Television Movie or Limited Series Daveed Diggs with Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Comedy Series Rita Moreno with Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Comedy Series Jimmy Fallon with Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series Gabrielle Carteris presented SAG-AFTRA Cynthia Erivo with Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Supporting Role Henry Golding with Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role Viola Davis presented "In Memoriam" segment Common with Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Drama Series Lily Collins with Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series Dan Levy with Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series Ethan Hawke with Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role Daisy Ridley with Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role Helen Mirren with Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture Petski, Denise; Hammond, Pete (April 4, 2021). "SAG Awards: 'The Trial Of The Chicago 7' Wins For Motion Picture Cast; 'The Crown', 'Schitt's Creek' Lead TV — The Complete Winners List". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved April 5, 2021. "Nominations Announced for the 27th Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards". Screen Actors Guild. February 4, 2021. Retrieved February 4, 2021. Hipes, Patrick (February 4, 2021). "SAG Awards Nominations: 'Ma Rainey', 'Minari' Lead Film List; 'The Crown', 'Schitt's Creek' Top TV And 'Bridgerton' Arrives – Full List". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved February 4, 2021. "Lily Collins and Daveed Diggs to Announce the 27th Annual SAG Awards® Nominations". Screen Actors Guild. January 28, 2021. Retrieved January 28, 2021. Strause, Jackie (April 4, 2021). "'Minari' Star Youn Yuh-jung Makes History at SAG Awards". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved April 5, 2021. Blyth, Antonia (April 4, 2021). "SAG Awards: 'The Trial Of The Chicago 7' Wins Best Picture; Michael Keaton Sets SAG Record". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved April 5, 2021. Hammond, Pete (February 4, 2021). "SAG Nominations Movie Analysis: Chadwick Boseman's Record Showing, 'Minari's Strength And Strong Diversity Make Up For Globes Oversights". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved April 5, 2021. Stewart, Matthew (March 9, 2021). "SAG nominee profile: Chadwick Boseman ('Ma Rainey's Black Bottom') has set one record already this year". Gold Derby. Retrieved April 5, 2021. TooFab Staff (April 5, 2021). "Chadwick Boseman Helps Make History at SAG Awards with Posthumous Win, Honored By Wife and Co-Stars". TooFab. Retrieved April 6, 2021. Ramos, Dino-Ray (April 4, 2021). "Taylor Simone Ledward Accepts SAG Award For Chadwick Boseman With Words Of Hope: "Be A Crusader"". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved April 6, 2021. Hammond, Pete (April 4, 2021). "SAG Awards Analysis: A Big Night For Netflix, Diversity, And Possible Game Changer For 'The Trial Of The Chicago 7'". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved April 5, 2021. "Chadwick Boseman, Kelly Preston, Naya Rivera and More Honored During Moving SAG Awards In Memoriam". People. April 4, 2021. Retrieved April 5, 2021. Fernández, Alexia (March 25, 2021). "Henry Golding, Cynthia Erivo, Hellen Mirren and More Stars to Present at 2021 SAG Awards". People. Retrieved April 6, 2021. Official website