Nerlerit Inaat Airport (Greenlandic: Mittarfik Nerlerit Inaat, Danish: Constable Pynt Lufthavn) (IATA: CNP, ICAO: BGCO) is an airport in the Sermersooq municipality in eastern Greenland. It is located on Jameson Land and serves the town of Ittoqqortoormiit, approximately 40 km (25 mi) to the south-east. The airport can serve STOL aircraft. An AS 350 helicopter of Air Greenland is permanently housed at the airport, linking it with Ittoqqortoormiit Heliport. The helicopter also provides search and rescue capabilities within the surrounding area, and can be chartered for transport. On July 28, 2021, in Nerlerit Inaat Airport, a temperature of 23.2 °C (73.8 °F) was recorded. The airport was built in 1985 by the US oil company ARCO in connection with oil exploration in Jameson Land. It was sold to Greenland in 1990. In summer 2004 the airport was the destination of an arctic trip by two German microlight pilots flying a Flight Design CT2K light aircraft. The airport may be relocated to a new site on Liverpool Land closer to Ittoqqortoormiit, between the settlement and Uunarteq cape (Danish: Kap Tobin) to the south, thus eliminating the need for helicopter transfers. The airport has around 15 employees, who have their home within the airport area. No other settlement is reachable by road, making the airport possibly the one with smallest population reachable by road in the world. There is a road to a seaport around 2 km south of the terminal building, and some other roads in the area. Transportation to the main settlement in the area (Ittoqqortoormiit) is by helicopter or (in the summer) by boat. The airport acts as stopping off point for a number of expeditions into Jameson Land and Northeast Greenland National Park. Areas such as Renland have only just been visited, or have had no known visitors. Greenland AIP for BGCO – Nerlerit Inaat Airport from Naviair "04341: Constable Pynt (Greenland)". ogimet.com. OGIMET. 28 July 2021. Retrieved 29 July 2021. "Nerlerit Inaat". www.airgreenland.com. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 11 April 2016. "Im Ultraleichtflugzeug nach Grönland". www.lornav.de. Retrieved 11 April 2016. "Øget trafik i Nationalparken". Sermitsiaq (in Danish). 9 March 2010. Archived from the original on 3 July 2012. Retrieved 17 May 2010. Nerlerit Inaat Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine (airgreenland.com) "TripAdvisor discussion on the fact there are no domestic fixed wing flights from Nerlerit Inaat". "Visit Greenland website says that there are 'No direct internal flights' to Ittoqqortoormiit, meaning Nerlerit Inaat has no Air Greenland fixed wing flights". "Norlandair Flight Schedule".