Gavin Christopher Newsom (born October 10, 1967) is an American politician and businessman serving since 2019 as the 40th governor of California. A member of the Democratic Party, he was the 49th lieutenant governor of California from 2011 to 2019 and the 42nd mayor of San Francisco from 2004 to 2011. Newsom graduated from Santa Clara University in 1989. Afterward, he founded the boutique winery PlumpJack Group with billionaire heir and family friend Gordon Getty as an investor. The company grew to manage 23 businesses, including wineries, restaurants, and hotels. Newsom began his political career in 1996, when San Francisco mayor Willie Brown appointed him to the city's Parking and Traffic Commission. Brown then appointed Newsom to fill a vacancy on the Board of Supervisors the next year and Newsom was first elected to the board in 1998. Newsom was elected mayor of San Francisco in 2003 and reelected in 2007. He was elected lieutenant governor of California in 2010. As lieutenant governor, Newsom hosted The Gavin Newsom Show from 2012 to 2013. He also wrote the 2013 book Citizenville, which focused on using digital tools for democratic change. He was reelected in 2014. Newsom was elected governor of California in 2018. During his governorship, Newsom faced criticism for his personal behavior and leadership during the COVID-19 pandemic. He faced an unsuccessful attempt to recall him from office in 2021; he was reelected the next year. Newsom was born on October 10, 1967, the son of Tessa Thomas (née Menzies) and William Alfred Newsom III, a state appeals court judge and attorney for Getty Oil. He is a fourth-generation San Franciscan. One of Newsom's maternal great-grandfathers, Scotsman Thomas Addis, was a pioneer scientist in the field of nephrology and a professor of medicine at Stanford University. Newsom is the second cousin, twice removed, of musician Joanna Newsom. Newsom's aunt was married to Ron Pelosi, the brother-in-law of then Speaker of the United States House of Representatives Nancy Pelosi. Newsom's parents divorced in 1971 when he was three years old. Newsom has said he did not have an easy childhood, partly due to dyslexia. He attended kindergarten and first grade at École Notre Dame Des Victoires, a French-American bilingual Catholic school in San Francisco, but eventually transferred out, due to the severe dyslexia that still affects him. It has challenged his abilities to write, spell, read, and work with numbers. Throughout his schooling, Newsom had to rely on a combination of audiobooks, digests, and informal verbal instruction. To this day, he prefers to interpret documents and reports through audio. Newsom attended third through fifth grades at Notre Dame des Victoires, where he was placed in remedial reading classes. In high school, he played basketball and baseball and graduated from Redwood High School in 1985. Newsom was a shooting guard in basketball and an outfielder in baseball. His skills placed him on the cover of the Marin Independent Journal. Tessa Newsom worked three jobs to support Gavin and his sister Hilary Newsom Callan. In an interview with The San Francisco Chronicle, his sister recalled Christmases when their mother told them they would not receive any gifts. Tessa opened their home to foster children, instilling in Newsom the importance of public service. His father's finances were strapped in part because of his tendency to give away his earnings. Newsom worked several jobs in high school to help support his family. Newsom attended Santa Clara University on a partial baseball scholarship, graduating in 1989 with a Bachelor of Science with a major in political science. He was a left-handed pitcher for Santa Clara, but he threw his arm out after two years and has not thrown a baseball since. He has reflected on his education fondly, crediting Santa Clara's Jesuit approach with helping him become an independent thinker who questions orthodoxy. While in school, Newsom spent a semester studying abroad in Rome, Italy. Newsom and his investors created the company PlumpJack Associates L.P. on May 14, 1991. The group started the PlumpJack Winery in 1992 with the financial help of his family friend Gordon Getty. PlumpJack was the name of an opera written by Getty, who invested in 10 of Newsom's 11 businesses. Getty told the San Francisco Chronicle that he treated Newsom like a son and invested in his first business venture because of that relationship. According to Getty, later business investments were because of "the success of the first". One of Newsom's early interactions with government occurred when Newsom resisted the San Francisco Department of Public Health's requirement to install a sink at his PlumpJack wine store. The Health Department argued that wine was a food and required the store to install a $27,000 sink in the carpeted wine shop on the grounds that the shop needed the sink for a mop. When Newsom was later appointed supervisor, he told the San Francisco Examiner: "That's the kind of bureaucratic malaise I'm going to be working through." The business grew to an enterprise with more than 700 employees. The PlumpJack Cafe Partners L.P. opened the PlumpJack Café, also on Fillmore Street, in 1993. Between 1993 and 2000, Newsom and his investors opened several other businesses that included the PlumpJack Squaw Valley Inn with a PlumpJack Café (1994), a winery in Napa Valley (1995), the Balboa Café Bar and Grill (1995), the PlumpJack Development Fund L.P. (1996), the MatrixFillmore Bar (1998), PlumpJack Wines shop Noe Valley branch (1999), PlumpJackSport retail clothing (2000), and a second Balboa Café at Squaw Valley (2000). Newsom's investments included five restaurants and two retail clothing stores. Newsom's annual income was greater than $429,000 from 1996 to 2001. In 2002, his business holdings were valued at more than $6.9 million. Newsom gave a monthly $50 gift certificate to PlumpJack employees whose business ideas failed, because in his view, "There can be no success without failure." Newsom sold his share of his San Francisco businesses when he became mayor in 2004. He maintained his ownership in the PlumpJack companies outside San Francisco, including the PlumpJack Winery in Oakville, California, new PlumpJack-owned Cade Winery in Angwin, California, and the PlumpJack Squaw Valley Inn. He is the president in absentia of Airelle Wines Inc., which is connected to the PlumpJack Winery in Napa County. Newsom earned between $141,000 and $251,000 in 2007 from his business interests. In February 2006, he paid $2,350,000 for his residence in the Russian Hill neighborhood, which he put on the market in April 2009 for $3,000,000. At the time of the Silicon Valley Bank collapse in March 2023, it was acknowledged that at least three of Newsom's wine companies, PlumpJack, Cade and Odette, were Silicon Valley Bank clients. Newsom's first political experience came when he volunteered for Willie Brown's successful campaign for mayor in 1995. Newsom hosted a private fundraiser at his PlumpJack Café. Brown appointed Newsom to a vacant seat on the Parking and Traffic Commission in 1996, and he was later elected president of the commission. Brown appointed him to the San Francisco Board of Supervisors seat vacated by Kevin Shelley in 1997. At the time, he was the youngest member of San Francisco's board of supervisors. Newsom was sworn in by his father and pledged to bring his business experience to the board. Brown called Newsom "part of the future generation of leaders of this great city". Newsom described himself as a "social liberal and a fiscal watchdog". He was elected to a full four-year term to the board in 1998. San Francisco voters chose to abandon at-large elections to the board for the previous district system in 1999. Newsom was reelected in 2000 and 2002 to represent the second district, which includes Pacific Heights, the Marina, Cow Hollow, Sea Cliff and Laurel Heights, which had San Francisco's highest income level and highest Republican registration. Newsom paid $500 to the San Francisco Republican Party to appear on the party's endorsement slate in 2000 while running for Supervisor. He faced no opposition in his 2002 reelection bid.[citation needed] As a San Francisco Supervisor, Newsom gained public attention for his role in advocating reform of the city's municipal railway (Muni). He was one of two supervisors endorsed by Rescue Muni, a transit riders group, in his 1998 reelection. He sponsored Proposition B to require Muni and other city departments to develop detailed customer service plans. The measure passed with 56.6 percent of the vote. Newsom sponsored a ballot measure from Rescue Muni; a version of the measure was approved by voters in November 1999. Newsom also supported allowing restaurants to serve alcohol at their outdoor tables, banning tobacco advertisements visible from the streets, stiffer penalties for landlords who run afoul of rent-control laws, and a resolution, which was defeated, to commend Colin Powell for raising money for youth programs. Newsom's support for business interests at times strained his relationship with labor leaders. During Newsom's time as supervisor, he supported housing projects through public-private partnerships to increase homeownership and affordable housing in San Francisco. He supported HOPE, a failed local ballot measure that would have allowed an increased condo-conversion rate if a certain percentage of tenants within a building were buying their units. As a candidate for mayor, he supported building 10,000 new housing units to create 15,000 new construction jobs. Newsom's signature achievement as a supervisor was a voter initiative called Care Not Cash (Measure N), which offered care, supportive housing, drug treatment, and help from behavioral health specialists for the homeless in lieu of direct cash aid from the state's general assistance program. Many homeless rights advocates protested against the initiative. "Progressives and Democrats, nuns and priests, homeless advocates and homeless people were furious", Newsom said. The successfully passed ballot measure raised his political profile and provided the volunteers, donors, and campaign staff that helped make him a leading contender for the mayorship in 2003. In a city audit conducted four years after the inception of program and released in 2008, the program was evaluated as largely successful. Newsom placed first in the November 4, 2003, general election in a nine-person field. He received 41.9 percent of the vote to Green Party candidate Matt Gonzalez's 19.6 percent in the first round of balloting, but he faced a closer race in the December 9 runoff, when many of the city's progressive groups supported Gonzalez. The race was partisan, with attacks against Gonzalez for his support of Ralph Nader in the 2000 presidential election, and attacks against Newsom for contributing $500 to a Republican slate mailer in 2000 that endorsed issues Newsom supported. Democratic leadership felt they needed to reinforce San Francisco as a Democratic stronghold after losing the 2000 presidential election and the 2003 gubernatorial recall election to Arnold Schwarzenegger. National Democratic Party figures, including Bill Clinton, Al Gore, and Jesse Jackson, campaigned for Newsom. Five supervisors endorsed Gonzalez, while Willie Brown endorsed Newsom. Newsom won the runoff with 53 percent of the vote to Gonzalez's 47 percent, a margin of 11,000 votes. He ran as a business-friendly centrist Democrat and a moderate in San Francisco politics; some of his opponents called him conservative. Newsom claimed he was a centrist in the Dianne Feinstein mold. He ran on the slogan "great cities, great ideas", and presented over 21 policy papers. He pledged to continue working on San Francisco's homelessness issue. Newsom was sworn in as mayor on January 3, 2004. He called for unity among the city's political factions, and promised to address the issues of public schools, potholes and affordable housing. Newsom said he was "a different kind of leader" who "isn't afraid to solve even the toughest problems". San Francisco's progressive community tried to field a candidate to run a strong campaign against Newsom. Supervisors Ross Mirkarimi and Chris Daly considered running, but both declined. Gonzalez also decided not to challenge Newsom again. When the August 10, 2007, filing deadline passed, San Francisco's discussion shifted to talk about Newsom's second term. He was challenged in the election by 13 candidates, including George Davis, a nudist activist, and Michael Powers, owner of the Power Exchange sex club. Conservative former supervisor Tony Hall withdrew by early September due to lack of support. The San Francisco Chronicle declared in August 2007 that Newsom faced no "serious threat to his re-election bid", having raised $1.6 million for his reelection campaign by early August. He was reelected on November 6 with over 72 percent of the vote. Upon taking office for a second term, Newsom promised to focus on the environment, homelessness, health care, education, housing, and rebuilding San Francisco General Hospital. As mayor, Newsom focused on development projects in Hunters Point and Treasure Island. He gained national attention in 2004 when he directed the San Francisco city–county clerk to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples, violating the state law passed in 2000. Implementation of Care Not Cash, the initiative he had sponsored as a supervisor, began on July 1, 2004. As part of the initiative, 5,000 more homeless people were given permanent shelter in the city. About 2,000 people had been placed into permanent housing with support by 2007. Other programs Newsom initiated to end chronic homelessness included the San Francisco Homeless Outreach Team (SF HOT) and Project Homeless Connect (PHC), which placed 2,000 homeless people into permanent housing and provided 5,000 additional affordable rental units in the city. During a strike by hotel workers against a dozen San Francisco hotels, Newsom joined UNITE HERE union members on a picket line in front of the Westin St. Francis Hotel on October 27, 2004. He vowed that the city would boycott the hotels by not sponsoring city events at them until they agreed to a contract with workers. The contract dispute was settled in September 2006. In 2005, Newsom pushed for a state law to allow California communities to create policy restricting certain breeds of dogs. In 2007, he signed the law establishing Healthy San Francisco to provide city residents with universal health care, the first city in the nation to do so. Newsom came under attack from the San Francisco Democratic Party in 2009 for his failure to implement the City of San Francisco's sanctuary city rule, under which the city was to not assist U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement. The same year, Newsom received the Leadership for Healthy Communities Award, along with Mayor Michael Bloomberg of New York City and three other public officials, for his commitment to making healthful food and physical activity options more accessible to children and families. He hosted the Urban-Rural Roundtable in 2008 to explore ways to promote regional food development and increased access to healthy, affordable food. Newsom secured $8 million in federal and local funds for the Better Streets program, which ensures that public health perspectives are fully integrated into urban planning processes. He signed a menu-labeling bill into law, requiring that chain restaurants print nutrition information on their menus. Newsom was named "America's Most Social Mayor" in 2010 by Same Point, based on analysis of the social media profiles of mayors of the 100 largest U.S. cities. Newsom gained national attention in 2004 when he directed the San Francisco city–county clerk to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples, violating state law. In August 2004, the Supreme Court of California annulled the marriages Newsom had authorized, as they conflicted with state law. Still, Newsom's unexpected move brought national attention to the issue of same-sex marriage, solidifying political support for him in San Francisco and in the LGBTQ+ community. During the 2008 election, Newsom opposed Proposition 8, the ballot initiative to reverse the Supreme Court of California ruling that there was a constitutional right to same-sex marriage. Proposition 8 supporters released a commercial featuring footage of Newsom saying the following in a speech regarding same-sex marriage: "This door's wide open now. It's going to happen, whether you like it or not." Some observers noted that polls shifted in favor of Proposition 8 after the commercial's release; this, in turn, led to speculation that Newsom had inadvertently played a role in the amendment's passage. Newsom filed initial paperwork to run for lieutenant governor in February 2010, and officially announced his candidacy in March. He received the Democratic nomination in June and won the election on November 2. Newsom was sworn in as lieutenant governor on January 10, 2011, and served under Governor Jerry Brown. The one-week delay was to ensure that a successor as mayor of San Francisco was chosen before he left office. Edwin M. Lee, the city administrator, took office the day after Newsom was sworn in as lieutenant governor.[citation needed] While lieutenant governor, in May 2012, Newsom began hosting The Gavin Newsom Show on Current TV. The same month, he drew criticism for calling Sacramento "dull" and saying he was only there once a week, adding, "there's no reason" to be there otherwise. Newsom was reelected as lieutenant governor on November 4, 2014, defeating Republican Ron Nehring with 57.2 percent of the vote. His second term began on January 5, 2015. Newsom supported a failed measure in 2012 that sought to end capital punishment in California. He claimed the initiative would save California millions of dollars, citing statistics that California had spent $5 billion since 1978 to execute just 13 people. In 2016, Newsom supported Proposition 62, which also would have repealed the death penalty in California. He argued that Prop. 62 would get rid of a system "that is administered with troubling racial disparities" and said that the death penalty was fundamentally immoral and did not deter crime. Proposition 62 failed. In 2014, Newsom was the only statewide politician to endorse California Proposition 47, legislation that recategorized certain nonviolent offenses like drug and property crimes as misdemeanors as opposed to felonies. Voters passed the measure on November 4, 2014. In July 2015, Newsom released the Blue Ribbon Commission on Marijuana Policy's final report, which he had convened with the American Civil Liberties Union of California in 2013. The report's recommendations to regulate marijuana were intended to inform a legalization measure on the November 2016 ballot. Newsom supported the resulting measure, Proposition 64, which legalized cannabis use and cultivation for California state residents who are 21 or older. On February 24, 2017, in response to pro-enforcement statements by White House Press Secretary Sean Spicer, Newsom sent Attorney General Jeff Sessions and President Donald Trump a letter urging them not to increase federal enforcement against recreational cannabis firms opening in California. He wrote: "The government must not strip the legal and publicly supported industry of its business and hand it back to drug cartels and criminals ... Dealers don't card kids. I urge you and your administration to work in partnership with California and the other eight states that have legalized recreational marijuana for adult use in a way that will let us enforce our state laws that protect the public and our children while targeting the bad actors." Newsom responded to comments by Spicer that compared cannabis to opioids: "Unlike marijuana, opioids represent an addictive and harmful substance, and I would welcome your administration's focused efforts on tackling this particular public health crisis." Newsom joined Long Beach City College Superintendent Eloy Oakley in a November 2015 op-ed calling for the creation of the California College Promise, which would create partnerships between public schools, public universities, and employers and offer a free community college education. Throughout 2016, he joined Oakland mayor Libby Schaaf at the launch of the Oakland Promise and Second Lady Jill Biden and Los Angeles mayor Eric Garcetti at the launch of the LA Promise. In June 2016, Newsom helped secure $15 million in the state budget to support the creation of promise programs throughout the state. In December 2015, Newsom called on the University of California to reclassify computer science courses as a core academic class to incentivize more high schools to offer computer science curricula. He sponsored successful legislation signed by Governor Brown in September 2016, that began the planning process for expanding computer science education to all state students, beginning as early as kindergarten. In 2016, Newsom passed a series of reforms at the University of California to give student-athletes additional academic and injury-related support, and to ensure that contracts for athletic directors and coaches emphasized academic progress. This came in response to several athletics programs, including the University of California–Berkeley's football team, which had the lowest graduation rates in the country. Newsom released his first book, Citizenville: How to Take the Town Square Digital and Reinvent Government, on February 7, 2013. The book discusses the Gov 2.0 movement taking place across the nation. After its release, Newsom began to work with the Center for Information Technology Research in the Interest of Society at the University of California, Berkeley, on the California Report Card (CRC). The CRC is a mobile-optimized platform that allows state residents to "grade" their state on six timely issues. The CRC exemplifies ideas presented in Citizenville, encouraging direct public involvement in government affairs via technology. In 2015, Newsom partnered with the Institute for Advanced Technology and Public Policy at California Polytechnic State University to launch Digital Democracy, an online tool that uses facial and voice recognition to enable users to navigate California legislative proceedings. On April 21, 2009, Newsom announced his candidacy for governor of California in the 2010 election. He named state senator (and future U.S. Senator) Alex Padilla to chair his campaign. He received former President Bill Clinton's endorsement in September 2009. Throughout the campaign, he had low poll numbers, trailing Democratic frontrunner Jerry Brown by more than 20 points in most polls. Newsom dropped out of the race in October 2009. On February 11, 2015, Newsom announced that he was opening a campaign account for governor in the 2018 elections, allowing him to raise funds for a campaign to succeed Brown as governor of California. On June 5, 2018, he finished in the top two in the nonpartisan blanket primary, and he defeated Republican John H. Cox by a landslide in the November 6 general election. Newsom was sworn in on January 7, 2019. Several recall attempts were launched against Newsom early in his tenure, but they failed to gain much traction. On February 21, 2020, a recall petition was introduced by Orrin Heatlie, a deputy sheriff in Yolo County. The petition mentioned Newsom's sanctuary state policy and said laws he endorsed favored "foreign nationals, in our country illegally"; said that California had high homelessness, high taxes, and low quality of life; and described other grievances. The California secretary of state approved it for circulation on June 10, 2020. Forcing the gubernatorial recall election required a total of 1,495,709 verified signatures. By August 2020, 55,000 signatures were submitted and verified by the secretary of state, and 890 new valid signatures were submitted by October 2020. The petition was initially given a signature deadline of November 17, 2020, but it was extended to March 17, 2021, after Judge James P. Arguelles ruled that petitioners could have more time because of the pandemic. Newsom's attendance at a party at The French Laundry in November 2020, despite his public health measures; voter anger over lockdowns, job losses, school and business closures; and a $31 billion fraud scandal at the state unemployment agency were credited for the recall's growing support. The French Laundry event took place on November 6, and between November 5 and December 7 over 442,000 new signatures were submitted and verified; 1,664,010 verified signatures, representing roughly 98 percent of the final verified total of 1,719,900, were submitted between November 2020 and March 17, 2021. During the campaign, Newsom compared the recall effort to the attempts to overturn the 2020 United States presidential election. On September 14, 2021, the recall election was held, with only 38 percent voting to recall Newsom, failing to remove him from office. In 2022, Newsom was elected to a second term, defeating Republican state senator Brian Dahle with 59 percent of the vote. A CalMatters analysis published in 2019 found Newsom's political positions to be more moderate than those of almost every Democratic state legislator in California. After U.S. Senator Kamala Harris was elected vice president of the United States in the 2020 presidential election, Newsom appointed Secretary of State of California Alex Padilla to succeed her as California's junior U.S. senator. To replace Padilla as secretary of state, Newsom appointed Assemblywoman Shirley Weber. After the U.S. Senate confirmed Xavier Becerra as U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services, Newsom appointed Rob Bonta Attorney General of California. In an interview with Joy Reid, Newsom was asked whether he would appoint a Black woman to replace Dianne Feinstein if she were to retire from the Senate or die before her term ended in 2024; Newsom replied that he would. Feinstein died in September 2023, and Newsom faced pressure to quickly appoint a successor. He fulfilled his promise and appointed Laphonza Butler to the seat. On March 13, 2019, three years after voters narrowly rejected its repeal, Newsom declared a moratorium on the state's death penalty, preventing any execution in the state as long as he remained governor. The move also led to the withdrawal of the state's current lethal injection protocol and the execution chamber's closure at San Quentin State Prison. In a CBS This Morning interview, Newsom said that the death penalty is "a racist system ... that is perpetuating inequality. It's a system that I cannot in good conscience support." The moratorium granted a temporary reprieve for all 737 inmates on California's death row, then the largest death row in the Western Hemisphere. In January 2022, Newsom directed the state to begin dismantling its death row in San Quentin, to be transformed into a "space for rehabilitation programs", as all the condemned inmates are moving to other prisons that have maximum security facilities. The state's voters upheld capital punishment in 2012 and 2016, with the latter measure agreeing to move the condemned to other prisons. Though a 2021 poll by the UC Berkeley Institute of Governmental Studies and co-sponsored by the Los Angeles Times suggested declining support for the death penalty among California's voters, Republican opponents criticized Newsom's moves to halt capital punishment in California as defiance of the will of voters, and capital punishment advocates said they denied closure to murder victims' families. In response to the Trump administration's crackdown on immigrants with criminal records, Newsom gave heightened consideration to people in this situation. A pardon can eliminate the grounds for deportation of immigrants who would otherwise be legal permanent residents. Pardon requests from people facing deportation are given expedited review by the state Board of Parole Hearings, per a 2018 California law. In his first acts of clemency as governor, Newsom pardoned seven formerly incarcerated people in May 2019, including two Cambodian refugees facing deportation. He pardoned three men who were attempting to avoid being deported to Cambodia or Vietnam in November 2019. They had separately committed crimes when they were each 19 years old. In December 2019, Newsom granted parole to a Cambodian refugee who had been held in a California prison due to a murder case. Although immigrant rights groups wanted Newsom to end policies allowing the transfer to federal agents, the refugee was turned over for possible deportation upon release. On January 13, 2022, Newsom denied parole to Sirhan Sirhan, Robert F. Kennedy's assassin, who had been recommended for parole by a parole board after serving 53 years in prison. Newsom wrote an op-ed for the Los Angeles Times saying Sirhan "still lacks the insight that would prevent him from making the kind of dangerous and destructive decisions he made in the past. The most glaring proof of Sirhan's deficient insight is his shifting narrative about his assassination of Kennedy, and his current refusal to accept responsibility for it." Newsom has spoken in favor of Assembly Bill 1196, which would ban carotid artery restraints and choke holds in California. He has claimed that there is no longer a place for a policing tactic "that literally is designed to stop people's blood from flowing into their brain, that has no place any longer in 21st-century practices." In September 2021, Newsom signed legislation raising the minimum age to become a police officer from 18 to 21. Also in the bills were restrictions on the use of tear gas and a ban on police departments employing officers after misconduct or crimes. Among the bills was the George Floyd Bill, requiring officers to intervene when witnessing excessive force on the part of another officer. In September 2020, Newsom signed into law a bill allowing California transgender inmates to be placed in prisons that correspond with their gender identity. Newsom declared a state of emergency on March 4, 2020, after the first death in California attributable to the novel SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus disease (COVID-19). His stated intention was to help California prepare for and contain COVID-19's spread. The emergency declaration allowed state agencies to more easily procure equipment and services, share information on patients and alleviated restrictions on the use of state-owned properties and facilities. Newsom also announced that mitigation policies for the state's estimated 108,000 unsheltered homeless people would be prioritized, with a significant push to move them indoors. Newsom issued an executive order that allowed the state to commandeer hotels and medical facilities to treat COVID-19 patients and permitted government officials to hold teleconferences in private without violating open meeting laws. He also directed local school districts to make their own decisions on school closures, but used an executive order to ensure students' needs would be met whether or not their school was physically open. The U.S. Department of Agriculture approved the Newsom administration's request to offer meal service during school closures, which included families being able to pick up those meals at libraries, parks, or other off-campus locations. Roughly 80 percent of students at California's public schools receive free or reduced-price meals. This executive order included continued funding for remote learning opportunities and child care options during workday hours. As the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in the state continued to rise, on March 15, Newsom urged people 65 and older and those with chronic health conditions to isolate themselves from others. He also called on bars and brewery and winery tasting rooms to close their doors to patrons. Some local jurisdictions had mandatory closures. The closures were extended to movie theaters and health clubs. He asked restaurants to stop serving meals inside their establishments and offer take-out meals only. His statewide order to stay at home became mandatory on March 19. It allowed movement outside the home for necessities or recreation, but people were required to maintain a safe distance apart. Activity "needed to maintain continuity of operation of the federal critical infrastructure sectors, critical government services, schools, childcare, and construction" was excluded from the order. Essential services such as grocery stores and pharmacies remained open. Newsom provided state funds to pay for protective measures such as hotel room lodging for hospital and other essential workers fearing returning home and infecting family members. By April 26, he had issued 30 executive orders under the state of emergency while the legislature had not been in session. On April 28, Newsom, along with the governors of Oregon and Washington, announced a "shared approach" for reopening their economies. His administration outlined key indicators for altering his stay-at-home mandate, including the ability to closely monitor and track potential cases, prevent infection of high-risk people, increase surge capacity at hospitals, develop therapeutics, ensure physical distancing at schools, businesses, and child-care facilities, and develop guidelines for restoring isolation orders if the virus surges. The plan to end the shutdown had four phases. Newsom emphasized that easing restrictions would be based on data, not dates, saying, "We will base reopening plans on facts and data, not on ideology. Not what we want. Not what we hope." Of a return of Major League Baseball and the NFL, he said, "I would move very cautiously in that expectation." In early May, Newsom announced that certain retailers could reopen for pickup. Most Californians approved of Newsom's handling of the crisis and were more concerned about reopening too early than too late, but there were demonstrations and protests against these policies. Under pressure, Newsom delegated more decision-making on reopening to the local level. That same month, he announced a plan for registered voters to have the option to vote by mail in the November election. California was the first state in the country to commit to sending mail-in ballots to all registered voters for the November general election. As the state opened up, the Los Angeles Times found that new coronavirus hospitalizations in California began accelerating around June 15 at a rate not seen since early April, immediately after the virus began rapidly spreading in the state. On June 18, Newsom made face coverings mandatory for all Californians in an effort to reduce COVID-19's spread. Enforcement would be up to business owners, as local law enforcement agencies view non-compliance as a minor infraction. By the end of June, he had ordered seven counties to close bars and nightspots, and recommended eight other counties take action on their own to close those businesses due to a surge of coronavirus cases in some parts of the state. In a regular press conference on July 13 as he was ordering the reinstatement of the shutdown of bars and indoor dining in restaurants, he said, "We're seeing an increase in the spread of the virus, so that's why it's incumbent upon all of us to recognize soberly that COVID-19 is not going away any time soon until there is a vaccine or an effective therapy". Newsom oversaw a sluggish initial rollout of vaccines; California had one of the lowest vaccination rates in the country by January 2021, and had only used about 30 percent of the vaccines it had at its disposal, a far lower rate than other states, by January 20. After reaching high approval ratings, specifically 64 percent in September 2020, a UC Berkeley Institute of Governmental Studies poll from February 2021 showed that Newsom's approval rate was down to 46 percent, with 48 percent disapproval, the highest of his tenure. The Los Angeles Times attributed this decline to public opinion of his management of the pandemic. The vaccination rate began increasing in January, with over half the population fully vaccinated as of September 2021, the percentage ranking #16 out of the 50 states. Despite Newsom's administration enacting some of the country's toughest pandemic restrictions, California had the 29th-highest death rate out of all 50 states by May 2021. Monica Gandhi, a leading COVID-19 expert from UCSF, said that California's restrictive approach "did not lead to better health outcomes", and criticized California's delay in implementing new CDC recommendations absolving the fully vaccinated from most indoor mask requirements, while saying the decision lacked scientific rationale and could cause "collateral damage". In January 2021, the Los Angeles Times reported that Newsom's administration had mismanaged $11.4 billion by disbursing unemployment benefits to ineligible claimants, especially those paid through the federally funded Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program. Another $19 billion in claims remained under investigation for fraud. At the same time, legitimate claimants faced lengthy delays in receiving benefits. The state's unemployment system had been overseen by California Labor Secretary Julie Su, a Newsom appointee, whom President Joe Biden later appointed as deputy secretary of labor in February 2021. Political opponents attributed the crisis to the Newsom administration's failure to heed multiple warnings by federal officials of the potential for fraud, while Newsom's administration said the Trump administration's failure to provide appropriate guidance for the new federally funded program contributed to the fraud. Experts said much of the fraud appeared to originate from international criminal gangs in 20 countries. A report by California State Auditor Elaine Howle said $810 million was disbursed to claimants who had fraudulently filed on behalf of inmates in the state's prison system. According to The Sacramento Bee, by the summer of 2021, California owed $23 billion to the federal government for unemployment benefits paid out during the pandemic, which was 43 percent of all unemployment debt, owed by 13 states at the time, to the federal government. Most of this debt was unrelated to the federally funded pandemic unemployment programs that had experienced most of the fraud, and instead was due to longstanding underfunding and California's high rate of unemployment during the pandemic. Due to a mass die-off of trees throughout California that could increase the risk of wildfires, Newsom declared a state of emergency on March 22, 2020, in preparation for the 2020 wildfire season. After declaring a state of emergency on August 18, he reported that the state was battling 367 known fires, many sparked by intense thunderstorms on August 16–17. His request for assistance via issuance of a federal disaster declaration in the wake of six major wildfires was first rejected by the Trump administration, but accepted after Trump spoke to Newsom. On June 23, 2021, the NPR station CapRadio reported that Newsom and Cal Fire had falsely claimed in January 2020 that 90,000 acres (36,000 ha) of land at risk for wildfires had been treated with fuel breaks and prescribed burns; the actual treated area was 11,399 acres (4,613 ha), an overstatement of 690 percent. According to CapRadio, the fuel breaks of the 35 "priority projects" Newsom had touted, which were meant to ensure the quick evacuation of residents while preventing traffic jams and a repeat of events in the 2018 fire that destroyed the town of Paradise, where at least eight evacuees burned to death in their vehicles, were struggling to mitigate fire spread in almost every instance while failing to prevent evacuation traffic jams. The same day CapRadio revealed the oversight, leaked emails showed that Newsom's handpicked Cal Fire chief had ordered the removal of the original statement. In another report in April 2022, CapRadio found a program, hailed in 2020 by the Newsom administration to fast-track environmental reviews on high-priority fire prevention projects, had failed to make progress. KXTV released a series of reports chronicling PG&E's liabilities after committing 91 felonies in the Santa Rosa and Paradise fires. Newsom was accused of accepting campaign donations from PG&E in order to change the CPUC's ruling on PG&E's safety license. The rating change allowed PG&E to avoid billions of dollars in extra fees. Newsom was also accused of setting up the Wildfire Insurance Fund via AB 1054, using ratepayer fees, so PG&E could avoid financial losses and pass the liability costs to ratepayers and taxpayers. Upon taking office in 2019, Newsom succeeded Brown as co-chair of the United States Climate Alliance. In September 2019, Newsom vetoed SB 1, which would have preserved environmental protections at the state level that were set to roll back nationally under the Trump administration's environmental policy. In February 2020, the Newsom administration sued federal agencies over the rollbacks to protect imperiled fish in the Sacramento–San Joaquin River Delta in 2019. Newsom attended the 2019 UN Climate Action Summit, where he spoke of California as a climate leader due to the actions of governors before him. In August 2020, he addressed the 2020 Democratic National Convention. His speech mentioned climate change and the wildfires prevalent in California at the time. On September 23, 2020, Newsom signed an executive order to phase out sales of gasoline-powered vehicles and require all new passenger vehicles sold in the state to be zero-emission by 2035. Bills he signed in September with an environmental focus included a commission to study lithium extraction around the Salton Sea. During his 2018 campaign, Newsom pledged to tighten state oversight of fracking and oil extraction. Early in his governorship, his administration approved new oil and gas leases on public lands at about twice the rate of the prior year. When asked about this development, Newsom said he was unaware of the rate of approvals, and he later fired the head of the Division of Oil, Gas and Geothermal Resources. In November 2019, he imposed a moratorium on approval of new hydraulic fracturing and steam-injected oil drilling in the state until the permits for those projects could be reviewed by an independent panel of scientists. State agencies resumed issuing new hydraulic fracturing permits in April 2020. In 2021, the Center for Biological Diversity sued the Newsom administration over the continued sale of oil and gas leases, and Consumer Watchdog called for the end of their sale. In April 2021, Newsom committed to ending the sale of gas leases by 2024 and ending oil extraction by 2045. In October 2021, he proposed a 3,200-foot (980 m) buffer between new fossil fuel extraction sites and densely populated areas. In 2022, gas prices in California exceeded $6 per gallon. Newsom attributed this to corporate greed and price gouging by oil companies. He proposed a windfall profits tax and penalty for oil companies in September 2022. On March 28, 2023, Newsom signed a law that authorizes the California Energy Commission to set "a profit threshold above which companies would be assessed a financial penalty", requires petroleum companies to report additional profit data to state regulators, and creates a new oversight division of the California Energy Commission to investigate price gouging in the gasoline industry. The Sacramento Bee reported that Jennifer Siebel Newsom's nonprofit organization The Representation Project had received more than $800,000 in donations from corporations that had lobbied the state government in recent years, including PG&E, AT&T, Comcast, and Kaiser Permanente. Siebel Newsom received $2.3 million in salary from the nonprofit since launching it in 2011. In 2021, Governor Newsom said that he saw no conflict in his wife's nonprofit accepting donations from companies that lobby his administration. Overall, Newsom has vetoed legislation at a rate comparable to that of his predecessors. From 2019 to 2021, he vetoed 12.7 percent of the bills passed by the legislature on average. The rate declined over the course of the three legislative sessions. Newsom's vetoes have included bills to allow ranked-choice voting, require an ethnic studies class as a high school graduation requirement, and reduce penalties for jaywalking. Newsom used a larger than normal number of executive orders during the 2020 legislative session. As lieutenant governor in 2016, Newsom was the official proponent of Proposition 63. The ballot measure required a background check and California Department of Justice authorization to purchase ammunition, among other gun control regulations. In response to the 2019 mass shooting in Virginia Beach, Newsom called for nationwide background checks on people purchasing ammunition. Later that year, he responded to the Gilroy Garlic Festival shooting by stating his support for the 2nd Amendment and saying he would like national cooperation controlling "weapons of goddamned mass destruction". He also said, "These shootings overwhelmingly, almost exclusively, are males, boys, 'men'—I put in loose quotes. I do think that is missing in the national conversation." On June 10, 2021, Newsom called federal Judge Roger Benitez "a stone cold ideologue" and "a wholly owned subsidiary of the gun lobby of the National Rifle Association" after Benitez struck down California's statewide ban on assault weapons. While the ban remained in place as the state appealed the ruling, Newsom proposed legislation that would empower private citizens to enforce the ban after the United States Supreme Court declined to strike down the Texas Heartbeat Act, which empowers private citizens to report unauthorized abortions. In 2022, Newsom signed gun control bills passed by the California Legislature. On July 1, he signed Assembly Bill 1621, which restricts privately manufactured ghost guns, which were found to be linked to over 100 violent crimes in Los Angeles, and Assembly Bill 2571, which prohibited the marketing of firearms such as the JR-15 to children. On July 22, Newsom signed Senate Bill 1327, a law enabling private citizens to sue anyone who imports, distributes, manufactures or sells illegal firearms in California. The law requires courts to award statutory damages of at least $10,000 and attorney's fees. On June 8, 2023, Newsom proposed a 28th amendment to the U.S. Constitution to raise the age to buy firearms to 21, institute universal background checks for gun purchases, mandate waiting periods and ban assault weapons for civilians. Law professor Erwin Chemerinsky called this a "terrible idea", since the advocated method (which has never been used) would be a constitutional convention (which is not understood to be limited to single amendments), potentially allowing a complete rewrite of the Constitution, or addition of other amendments on separate subjects, like abortion, or the often proposed balanced budget amendment (which liberals feel would decimate welfare programs). In December 2021, Newsom announced his intention to make California a "sanctuary" for abortion, which included possibly paying for procedures, travel, and lodging for out-of-state abortion seekers, if the procedure is banned in Republican-led states. In March 2022, he signed a bill requiring private health insurance plans in the state to fully cover abortion procedures by eliminating associated co-pays and deductibles and increasing insurance premiums. In February 2023, Newsom organized the Reproductive Freedom Alliance of state governors supportive of abortion and reproductive rights. After Walgreens announced in March 2023 that it would refuse to dispense abortion pills in the 21 states where it is illegal, Newsom tweeted, "California won't be doing business with @walgreens – or any company that cowers to the extremists and puts women's lives at risk, we're done." He also said that Walgreens was giving into "right-wing bullies" and that he would determine how California can cut ties with Walgreens. He indicated that he wanted to cancel Walgreens' $54 million contract with the California state prison system. Walgreens also receives $1.5 billion for filling prescriptions for the 15 million people enrolled in the state's Medi-Cal program (California's version of Medicaid). Legal experts said that federal Medicaid laws do not allow health plans to disqualify providers for reasons other than fraud or contract violations, provisions that have prevented conservative states from blocking Medicaid spending to Planned Parenthood clinics. Newsom campaigned on reducing the cost of health care and increasing access. He also indicated his support for creating a universal state health-care system. The budget passed in June 2019 expanded eligibility for Medi-Cal from solely undocumented minor children to undocumented young adults from ages 19 to 25. In 2021, Newsom signed legislation expanding Medi-Cal eligibility to undocumented residents over age 50. On June 30, 2022, he signed a $307.9 billion state budget that "pledges to make all low-income adults eligible for the state's Medicaid program by 2024 regardless of their immigration status." This budget would make California the first U.S. state to guarantee healthcare to all low-income illegal immigrants, at a cost of $2.7 billion per year. Newsom was criticized in early 2022 for walking back from his support for universal health care and not supporting Assembly Bill 1400, which would have instituted single-payer health care in California; critics suggested that opposition from business interests, which had donated large sums to Newsom and his party, had swayed his opinion. On July 6, 2022, Newsom signed Senate Bill 184, which established the Office of Health Care Affordability, with the stated goal to "develop data-informed policies and enforceable cost targets, with the ultimate goal of containing health care costs." In October 2023, Newsom vetoed a bill to cap co-pays for diabetic insulin at $35. In his February 2019 State of the State address, Newsom announced that, while work would continue on the 171-mile (275 km) Central Valley segment from Bakersfield to Merced, the rest of the system would be indefinitely postponed, citing cost overruns and delays. This and other actions created tension with the State Building and Construction Trades Council of California, a labor union representing 450,000 members. A poll found that California voters thought the most important issue for Newsom and the state legislature to work on in 2020 was homelessness. In his first week of office, Newsom threatened to withhold state funding for infrastructure to communities that failed to take actions to alleviate California's housing shortage. In late January 2019, he announced that he would sue Huntington Beach for preventing the construction of affordable housing. A year later, the city acted to settle the lawsuit by the state. Newsom opposes NIMBY (not-in-my-back-yard) sentiment, declaring in 2022 that "NIMBYism is destroying the state". In 2021, he signed a pair of bills into law that made zoning regulations for housing less restrictive, allowing construction of duplexes and fourplexes in lots that were previously zoned exclusively for single-family homes. Newsom also signed a bill which expedites the environmental review process for new multifamily developments worth at least $15,000,000. To participate, developers must apply directly through the governor's office. In 2022, Newsom signed 39 bills into law intended to address California's housing crisis, three of which entailed major land use reform. One bill eliminated minimum parking requirements for housing near mass transit stations throughout the state. Michael Manville, an urban planning professor at UCLA's Luskin School of Public Affairs, called it "one of the biggest land-use reforms in the country." Another bill allowed developers to build housing on some lots previously exclusively zoned for commercial use without getting local governments' permission if a certain percentage of the housing was affordable. A third bill allowed for the construction of market-rate housing on some lots previously exclusively zoned for commercial use. In a signing ceremony for the latter two bills, Newsom warned local governments, which have a history of blocking and delaying housing developments, that they would be held accountable for future housing obstructionism. Other bills Newsom signed required localities "to approve or deny various building permits within a strict timeline" and streamlined student and faculty housing projects by allowing California colleges to skip onerous review processes for new projects. Measures and actions to reduce homelessness in California have not yet solved the problem. The number of homeless hit a record number of over 181,000 in January 2023. According to some, to cope with this problem, California must build more than 2.5 million housing units. In October 2023, Newsom vetoed several bills aimed at expanding access to housing assistance. One was a bill to repurpose unused state-owned land for affordable housing, which Newsom said infringed on state sovereignty. Another would have expanded the number of people who qualify for state housing assistance. A third would have mandated that Medi-Cal cover the cost of housing assistance.[non-primary source needed] Newsom supports a series of tentative water-sharing agreements that would bring an end to the dispute between farmers, cities, fishers, and environmentalists over how much water should be left in the state's two most important rivers, the Sacramento and San Joaquin, which flow into the Delta. In a speech before representatives of Native Americans in June 2019, Newsom apologized for the genocide of Native Americans approved and abetted by the California state government upon statehood in the 19th century. By one estimate, at least 4,500 Native Californians were killed between 1849 and 1870. Newsom said, "That's what it was, a genocide. No other way to describe it. And that's the way it needs to be described in the history books." In September 2022, Newsom made California the first sanctuary state for transgender youth, proclaimed June 2023 LGBTQ+ Pride Month in California, and issued a fine of $1.5 million to a school district whose board rejected a curriculum including a biography of Harvey Milk, a Californian gay rights leader. But he also vetoed several bills, passed by the Assembly by a wide margin, one of which would have instructed judges who preside over custody battles to take a parent's affirmation of a child's gender identity into account, and another of which would have mandated that insurance plans serving California residents cover the cost of gender-affirming care. In October 2023, Newsom vetoed a bill to ban discrimination based on caste, calling it "unnecessary". Many Hindu rights organizations applauded the veto, saying the bill "would have put a target on hundreds of thousands of Californians simply because of their ethnicity or their religious identity". Advocates for the rights of Dalits and other violently oppressed castes sharply criticized the veto. In October 2023, Newsom vetoed a bill to provide unemployment insurance to striking workers, citing excess burden on the state's unemployment system. He also vetoed a bill to expand the mandatory warning given to soon to be laid off employees from 60 days to 75, extend the same protections to long-term contract workers, and prohibit employers from making laid-off employees sign nondisclosure agreements in order to receive severance. Newsom's first international trip as governor was to El Salvador. With nearly 680,000 Salvadoran immigrants living in California, he said that the "state's relationship with Central America is key to California's future". He was also concerned about the tens of thousands of Salvadorans who were fleeing the smallest country in Central America for the U.S. each year. As governor of a state impacted by the debate of illegal immigration, he went to see the factors driving it firsthand, and to build business and tourism partnerships between California and Central America. He said he wanted to "ignite a more enlightened engagement and dialogue". On October 20, 2023, Newsom visited Israel to express solidarity with the country during the Israel–Hamas war. He met with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, Israeli President Isaac Herzog, other top Israeli officials, and survivors of the 2023 Hamas-led attack on Israel. In October 2023, Newsom embarked on a week-long visit to China. It began in Hong Kong, where he attended a discussion at the University of Hong Kong about climate change. He then traveled to Beijing, where he met with Chinese President Xi Jinping, discussing issues including climate change, trade relations, and the response to fentanyl production. The visit also included stops in Guangdong, Jiangsu and Shanghai. He called for better relations between the U.S. and China during the trip, saying that "divorce is not an option" for the two countries. Many journalists and political analysts have mentioned Newsom as a presidential hopeful. According to a poll by NewsNation, 22% of California voters wanted Newsom to enter the 2024 presidential election. In May 2023, former California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger believed a future presidential campaign by Newsom to be a "no-brainer". An article published in The Hill by journalist Sharon Udasin also discussed the inevitability of a Newsom presidential run. On September 25, 2022, Newsom said that he would not run for president in 2024, citing his "vulnerable" 2021 recall. After his 2022 reelection, he informed White House staff that he would not challenge incumbent president Joe Biden in the Democratic primaries; he endorsed Biden's reelection campaign on April 25, 2023. Newsom has become an outspoken critic of the policies of Florida governor Ron DeSantis, denouncing DeSantis's orchestration of the Martha's Vineyard migrant airlift. DeSantis responded by saying California has "huge problems" and dared Newsom to run against Biden. On November 30, 2023, the two debated, with Fox News Network's Sean Hannity as moderator. Newsom was baptized and raised in his father's Catholic faith. In 2008 he described himself as an "Irish Catholic rebel...in some respects, but one that still has tremendous admiration for the Church and very strong faith"; when asked about the state of the Catholic Church, he said it was in crisis. He said he stays with the Church because of his "strong connection to a greater purpose, and to sort of a higher being". Newsom identifies as a practicing Catholic, saying in 2008 that he has a "strong sense of faith that is perennial, day in and day out". In December 2001, Newsom married Kimberly Guilfoyle, a former San Francisco prosecutor and legal commentator for Court TV, CNN, and MSNBC. They married at Saint Ignatius Catholic Church on the campus of the University of San Francisco, where Guilfoyle had attended law school. The couple appeared in the September 2004 issue of Harper's Bazaar; the spread had them posed at the Getty Villa with the caption "the New Kennedys". They jointly filed for divorce in January 2005, citing "difficulties due to their careers on opposite coasts". Their divorce was finalized on February 28, 2006. Guilfoyle gained prominence in 2011 via a Fox News chat show. She was later named senior advisor to Republican President Donald Trump, whom Newsom has extensively criticized. In September 2006, Newsom, then 38, briefly dated 19-year-old Brittanie Mountz, a model and restaurant hostess. On January 31, 2007, Newsom's close friend, campaign manager, and former chief of staff Alex Tourk confronted Newsom after learning from his wife, Ruby Rippey-Tourk, that she and Newsom had an affair in 2005, when she was Newsom's appointments secretary. Tourk immediately resigned. Newsom admitted the affair the next day and apologized to the public, saying he was "deeply sorry" for his "personal lapse of judgment". In 2018, Rippey-Tourk said that she thought it wrong to associate Newsom's behavior with the #MeToo movement: "I was a subordinate, but I was also a free-thinking, 33-yr old adult married woman & mother... I do want to make sure that the #metoo movement is reserved for cases and situations that deserve it." Newsom began dating film director Jennifer Siebel in October 2006. He announced he would seek treatment for alcohol use disorder in February 2007. The couple announced their engagement in December 2007, and they were married in Stevensville, Montana, in July 2008. They have four children. Newsom and his family moved from San Francisco to a house they bought in Kentfield in Marin County in 2012. After his election as governor, Newsom and his family moved into the California Governor's Mansion in Downtown Sacramento and thereafter settled in Fair Oaks. In May 2019, The Sacramento Bee reported that Newsom's $3.7 million purchase of a 12,000 square foot home in Fair Oaks was the most expensive private residence sold in the Sacramento region since the year began. In August 2021, Newsom sold a Marin County home for $5.9 million in an off-market transaction. He had originally put the property up for sale in early 2019 for $5.895 million, but removed the property from the market after a price reduction to $5.695 million. Newsom is the godfather of designer and model Nats Getty. In 2023, Newsom launched Campaign for Democracy, a PAC to take on "authoritarian leaders" in the U.S. It is thought to be a starting point for a possible 2028 presidential bid. Gavin Newsom (2013; co-authored with Lisa Dickey). Citizenville: How to Take the Town Square Digital and Reinvent Government. London: Penguin Group. ISBN 978-0-1431-2447-4. OCLC 995575939. Electoral history of Gavin Newsom "Gavin Newsom". The Governors' Gallery. California State Library. Retrieved September 29, 2023. Rosen, Jody (March 3, 2010). "Joanna Newsom, the Changeling". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 9, 2018. Retrieved February 24, 2018. Chuck Finnie; Rachel Gordon; Lance Williams (March 23, 2003). "Newsom's Portfolio: Mayoral hopeful has parlayed Getty money, family ties and political connections into local prominence". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on February 20, 2008. Retrieved March 11, 2008. "William Newsom, 84, California Judge and Governor-Elect's Father, Dies". The New York Times. December 13, 2018. Retrieved December 14, 2018. Newsom, Gavin (March 8, 2020). Citizenville. Santa Clara, California: Penguin. p. 49. ISBN 978-0-14-312447-4. Julian Guthrie (December 7, 2003). "Gonzalez, Newsom: What makes them run From modest beginnings, Newsom finds connections for business, political success". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on August 24, 2011. Retrieved March 8, 2008. Mike Weiss (January 23, 2005). "Newsom in Four Acts What shaped the man who took on homelessness, gay marriage, Bayview-Hunters Point and the hotel strike in one year". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on February 6, 2008. Retrieved March 10, 2008. Vega, Cecilia (October 27, 2007). "Newsom reflects on 4 years of ups and downs as election approaches". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on December 6, 2007. Retrieved March 7, 2008. George Raine (March 11, 1997). "Newsom's Way: He hopes business success can translate to public service". The San Francisco Examiner. Archived from the original on September 15, 2011. Retrieved March 16, 2008. Boffi, Kristen (April 12, 2008). "San Francisco's Gavin Newsom sits down with The Santa Clara Newsom discusses how Santa Clara guides his career". The Santa Clara. Archived from the original on April 26, 2009. Retrieved April 13, 2008. Byrne, Peter (April 2, 2003). "Bringing Up Baby Gavin". SF Weekly. Archived from the original on July 22, 2010. Retrieved June 10, 2014. Cecilia M. Vega (April 1, 2008). "Mayor has financial holdings at Napa, Tahoe". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on October 17, 2011. Retrieved April 12, 2008. "Newsom Penthouse For Sale". San Francisco Luxury, SFLuxe.com. April 24, 2009. Archived from the original on May 17, 2009. Retrieved April 24, 2009. Klippenstein, Ken (March 14, 2023). "Cheering Silicon Valley Bank Bailout, Gavin Newsom Doesn't Mention He's A Client". The Intercept. Retrieved March 16, 2023. "Silicon Valley Bank Wine Division Premium Wine Client Promotions" (PDF). svb.com. April 1, 2020. Retrieved March 16, 2023. John King (February 4, 1997). "S.F.'s New Supervisor – Bold, Young Entrepreneur". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved April 16, 2008. Gordon, Rachel (February 14, 1997). "Newsom gets his political feet wet Newest, youngest supervisor changes his tune after a chat with the mayor". The San Francisco Examiner. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved March 8, 2008. Ray Delgado (February 3, 1997). "Board gets a straight white male Mayor's new supervisor is businessman Gavin Newsom, 29". The San Francisco Examiner. Archived from the original on August 24, 2011. Retrieved March 9, 2008. "Lone Candidate is Going All Out in District 2 Race: Newsom has his eye on". Archived from the original on August 24, 2011. Retrieved February 11, 2022. Lauterborn, Peter (October 1, 2007). "Newsom's Expensive Silence". Beyond Chron. Retrieved January 23, 2023. Gordon, Rachel (October 16, 1998). "Fights idea that he's a Brown "appendage'". San Francisco Guardian. Archived from the original on August 24, 2011. Retrieved March 7, 2021. Edward Epstein (October 2, 1998). "Muni Riders Back Newsom And Ammiano". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved April 18, 2008. "How San Francisco Voted". The San Francisco Chronicle. November 5, 1998. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved April 18, 2008. Carol Lloyd (October 29, 2003). "From Pacific Heights, Newsom Is Pro-Development and Anti-Handout". SF Gate. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved March 10, 2008. Smith, Dakota (October 23, 2018). "Gavin Newsom's approach to fixing homelessness in San Francisco outraged activists. And he's proud of it". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 6, 2020. Retrieved October 14, 2020. Gordon, Rachel; Simon, Mark (December 10, 2003). "Newsom: 'The Time for Change is Here'". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on November 12, 2007. Retrieved March 10, 2008. Carol Lloyd (December 21, 2003). "See how they ran". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on March 4, 2008. Retrieved March 10, 2008. Buchanan, Wyatt (May 1, 2008). "S.F.'s Care Not Cash a success, audit shows". SFGate. Archived from the original on October 14, 2020. Retrieved October 14, 2020. Wildermuth, John; Gordon, Rachel (November 12, 2003). "Mayoral hopefuls come out swinging in debate". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved March 10, 2008. John Wildermuth; Katia Hetter; Demian Bulwa (December 3, 2003). "SF Campaign Notebook". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved March 10, 2008. Joan Walsh (December 9, 2003). "San Francisco's Greens versus Democrats grudge-match". Salon.com. Archived from the original on July 24, 2008. Retrieved March 10, 2008. Gordon, Rachel; Guthrie, Julian; Joe Garofoli (November 5, 2003). "It's Newsom vs. Gonzalez Headed for run-off: S.F.'s 2 top vote-getters face off Dec. 9". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved March 10, 2008. Gordon, Rachel (January 9, 2004). "Mayor Newsom's goal: a 'common purpose' Challenges Ahead: From potholes to the homeless". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on November 12, 2007. Retrieved March 19, 2008. Gordon, Rachel; Simon, Mark (January 8, 2006). "Mayor's challenge: finishing what he started". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on November 12, 2007. Retrieved April 19, 2008. Cecilia M. Vega; Wyatt Buchanan (June 3, 2007). "San Francisco Newsom faces few hurdles to re-election Position available: Progressives rally but fail to find a candidate". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on November 6, 2007. Retrieved March 15, 2008. Cecilia M. Vega (August 11, 2007). "Newsom lacks serious challengers, but lineup is full of characters". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved March 15, 2008. C.W. Nevius (September 6, 2007). "When Newsom gets a free pass for 4 more years, nobody wins". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved March 15, 2008. Cecilia M. Vega (August 3, 2007). "Far-out in front – Newsom is raising war-size war chest". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on February 20, 2008. Retrieved March 15, 2008. ""Election Summary: November 6, 2007". San Francisco City and County Department of Elections. November 6, 2007. Archived from the original on May 25, 2012. Cecilia M. Vega (January 18, 2008). "Newsom's $139,700 office spending spree". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on February 21, 2008. Retrieved March 10, 2008. Cecilia M. Vega; John Wildermuth; Heather Knight (November 7, 2007). "Newsom's 2nd Act His Priorities: Environment, homelessness, education, housing, rebuilding S.F. General". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on December 9, 2008. Retrieved March 10, 2008. Lisa Leff (August 10, 2007). "Newsom set to endorse Clinton for president". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on December 9, 2008. Retrieved March 7, 2008. Gavin Newsom wasn't always such a liberal crusader Archived May 8, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, Sacramento Bee, Christopher Cadelago, July 19, 2018. Retrieved March 28, 2021. Unite Here Local 2, "History" Archived October 26, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, October 25, 2018. "Cities, counties may be allowed to restrict specific dog breeds". The San Diego Union-Tribune. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved November 27, 2014. Knight, Heather (March 27, 2009). "S.F. Dems blast mayor in sanctuary city case". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on May 20, 2013. Retrieved January 15, 2013. "Top Policy Groups Take Action to Create Healthy Communities, Prevent Childhood Obesity". Leadership for Healthy Communities. Archived from the original on June 30, 2009. Retrieved November 18, 2010. Allday, Erin (November 30, 2008). "S.F. food policy heading in a healthy direction". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on August 24, 2011. Retrieved February 11, 2022. "PressRoom_NewsReleases_2008_82219 « Office of the Mayor". San Francisco Government. Archived from the original on June 10, 2008. Retrieved November 18, 2010. Knight, Heather (August 4, 2008). "S.F. pushes legislation to promote good health". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on August 19, 2008. Retrieved February 11, 2022. Shih, Gerry (February 19, 2010). "Gavin Newsom, the Twitter Prince". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 10, 2011. Retrieved November 18, 2010. Dolan, Maura (May 16, 2008). "California Supreme Court overturns gay marriage ban". The Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 19, 2008. Retrieved July 4, 2008. "San Francisco Mayor Gavin Newsom fights for same-sex marriage". ABC Local. October 29, 2008. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved November 18, 2010. Allday, Erin (November 6, 2008). "Newsom was central to same-sex marriage saga". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on August 24, 2011. Retrieved February 11, 2022. "Newsom seeks to get beyond Prop. 8 fiasco in quest to become governor - Sacramento Politics - California Politics | Sacramento Bee". February 11, 2009. Archived from the original on February 11, 2009. Retrieved February 11, 2022. Jonathan Darman (January 17, 2009). "SF Mayor Gavin Newsom Risks Career on Gay Marriage". Newsweek. Archived from the original on April 17, 2009. Retrieved November 18, 2010. "An interview with Gavin Newsom - Washington Blade". December 1, 2008. Archived from the original on December 1, 2008. Retrieved February 11, 2022. "Gavin Newsom, San Francisco mayor, files papers in lieutenant governor race". News10. February 17, 2010. Archived from the original on June 7, 2011. Retrieved November 18, 2010. Coté, John (March 12, 2010). "City Insider: It's official: Newsom's running for lieutenant governor". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on March 14, 2010. Retrieved March 12, 2010. "PolitiCal". Los Angeles Times. June 8, 2010. Archived from the original on June 12, 2010. Retrieved June 9, 2010. "Brown, Newsom, Boxer elected". The Stanford Daily. Archived from the original on November 6, 2010. Retrieved March 11, 2010. Aaron Sankin (May 29, 2012). "Gavin Newsom on Sacramento". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on June 4, 2012. Retrieved August 9, 2012. "Former San Francisco Mayor Gavin Newsom Re-Elected California Lieutenant Governor". CBS News. November 4, 2014. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved March 6, 2015. Ulloa, Jazmine. "Essential Politics July archives". Los Angeles Times. ISSN 0458-3035. Archived from the original on April 15, 2017. Retrieved April 14, 2017. "California gubernatorial candidates share views on criminal justice changes". sacbee.com. Archived from the original on April 14, 2017. Retrieved April 14, 2017. Cadelago, Christopher (July 21, 2015). "Gavin Newsom's panel: Marijuana shouldn't be California's next Gold Rush". Sacbee.com. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved December 6, 2016. McGreevey, Patrick (February 24, 2017). "Essential Politics: State Atty. Gen. Xavier Becerra to open Washington office, cap-and-trade auction revenue results are revealed". Los Angeles Times. ISSN 0458-3035. Archived from the original on April 13, 2017. Retrieved April 13, 2017. "Gavin Newsom and Eloy Ortiz Oakley: Free community college tuition will drive California economy". San Jose Mercury News. November 12, 2015. Archived from the original on April 24, 2017. Retrieved April 23, 2017. "Oakland Launches Promise Initiative to Triple Number of College Graduates". City of Oakland. January 28, 2016. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved April 24, 2017. "L.A. puts higher education within reach for all students". City of Los Angeles. September 14, 2016. Archived from the original on April 24, 2017. Retrieved April 23, 2017. "California's College Promise Celebrated by Local Elected Officials, Education Leaders". California State Assembly. June 17, 2016. Archived from the original on April 24, 2017. Retrieved April 23, 2017. "Coalition calls for greater focus on computer science in UC, Cal State admissions". Los Angeles Times. December 2, 2015. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved December 6, 2016. Johnson, Eric (December 2, 2015). "Silicon Valley Urges Cal, CSU to Give Computer Science Full Credit in Admissions (Updated)". Recode.net. Archived from the original on October 29, 2016. Retrieved December 6, 2016. "Gov. Brown signs law to plan expansion of computer science education". EdSource. September 27, 2016. Archived from the original on April 24, 2017. Retrieved April 23, 2017. "Gavin Newsom places his stamp on UC sports policy; it's a start". Sacbee.com. May 11, 2016. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved December 6, 2016. Leff, Lisa (May 11, 2016). "University panel adopts expanded student-athlete protections". Bigstory.ap.org. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved December 6, 2016. Newsom, Gavin (2013). Citizenville: How to Take the Town Square Digital and Reinvent Government. Penguin Press. ISBN 978-1-59420-472-2. "Citizenville". Penguin Books. Archived from the original on September 20, 2020. Retrieved August 8, 2019. Lucas, Scott. "Gavin Newsom and a Berkeley Professor Are Trying to Disrupt Public Opinion Polls". San Francisco Magazine. Modern Luxury. Archived from the original on July 21, 2014. Retrieved July 16, 2014. Noveck, Beth (March 2013). "'Citizenville', by Gavin Newsom". SFGate. Archived from the original on July 20, 2014. Retrieved July 16, 2014. "Lt. Gov. Gavin Newsom, Former Sen. Sam Blakeslee Launch 'Digital Democracy'". Govtech.com. May 7, 2015. Archived from the original on February 12, 2017. Retrieved December 6, 2016. Leff, Lisa (April 22, 2009). Newsom in governor's race. Ventura County Star. CAMPAIGN WATCH. The Sacramento Bee. July 16, 2009. Matier, Phillip; Ross, Andrew (August 24, 2009). "Campaign 2010/Mayor Newsom wants to move on up to the governor's place/Campaign expected to be very crowded and very expensive". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on October 19, 2010. Retrieved January 19, 2010. "Governor 2010: New Field Poll – Things Look Bad For Newsom, Not So Bad for Feinstein and Villaraigosa". Johnny California. November 12, 2008. Archived from the original on May 7, 2010. Retrieved November 18, 2010. Barabak, Mark Z.; Halper, Evan (October 31, 2009). "Gavin Newsom drops out of California governor's race". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 27, 2010. Retrieved May 3, 2010. Selway, William (April 21, 2009). "San Francisco Mayor Joins Race for California Governor in 2010". Bloomberg. Retrieved November 18, 2010. Harrell, Ashley (September 9, 2009). "The Wrong Stuff". SF Weekly. Archived from the original on November 25, 2009. Retrieved November 19, 2009. "Statement by Mayor Gavin Newsom" (Press release). Gavin Newsom for a Better California. October 30, 2009. Archived from the original on November 2, 2009. Retrieved January 6, 2010. Siders, David (February 11, 2015). "Gavin Newsom to open campaign account for governor in 2018". Sacramento Bee. Archived from the original on August 25, 2017. Retrieved March 6, 2015. Hart, Angela (June 5, 2018). "Gavin Newsom, John Cox advance to general election in California governor's race". The Sacramento Bee. Archived from the original on June 7, 2018. Retrieved June 6, 2018. Martichoux, Alix (February 3, 2021). "Why do people want to recall Gov. Gavin Newsom? We explain". ABC7 Los Angeles. Archived from the original on February 15, 2021. Retrieved February 11, 2021. "Gavin Newsom recall, Governor of California (2019–2021)". ballotpedia.org. Archived from the original on May 10, 2021. Retrieved January 26, 2021. Korte, Lara (March 29, 2021). "The origin of the Newsom recall had nothing to do with COVID-19. Here's why it began". The Sacramento Bee. Archived from the original on July 16, 2021. Retrieved September 16, 2021. Stone, Ken (November 6, 2020). "Newsom Recall Drive Gets New Life: Signature Deadline Delayed to March 17". Times of San Diego. Archived from the original on February 3, 2021. Retrieved December 16, 2020. Sources that reference Newsom's attendance at The French Laundry as a contributor to the recall petition: Marinucci, Carla (November 25, 2020). "French Laundry snafu reignites longshot Newsom recall drive". Politico. Archived from the original on December 6, 2020. Retrieved February 5, 2021. Victoria Lozano, Alicia (December 20, 2020). "Recall effort against California governor an attempt to 'destabilize the political system,' analysts say". NBC News. Archived from the original on January 10, 2021. Retrieved February 5, 2021. Roos, Meghan (December 31, 2020). "Gavin Newsom Under Renewed Fire Over French Laundry Lobbyist as Recall Bid Gains Steam". Newsweek. Archived from the original on January 1, 2021. Retrieved February 5, 2021. Siders, David; Marinucci, Carla (January 11, 2021). "'It's all fallen apart': Newsom scrambles to save California – and his career". Politico. Archived from the original on January 11, 2021. Retrieved February 5, 2021. Pogue, James (February 3, 2021). "Gavin Newsom Is Blowing It". The New Republic. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved February 5, 2021. Blood, Michael R. (March 17, 2021). "EXPLAINER: Why is California Gov. Newsom facing a recall?". ABC News. Archived from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved September 16, 2021. Hoeven, Emily (August 4, 2021). "How much will California's EDD scandal cost Newsom in the recall election?". CalMatters. Archived from the original on September 10, 2021. Retrieved September 16, 2021. Harris, Mary (May 3, 2021). "Are Californians Still Mad at Gavin Newsom?". Slate Magazine. Archived from the original on May 31, 2021. Retrieved September 16, 2021. Nuttle, Matthew (June 23, 2021). "Newsom Recall is a Go After Only 43 People Remove Their Signatures from Effort". ABC. Archived from the original on October 1, 2021. Retrieved September 22, 2021. Ronayne, Kathleen; Blood, Michael R. (September 15, 2021). "California Gov. Gavin Newsom beats back GOP-led recall". Associated Press. Sacramento. Archived from the original on September 19, 2021. Retrieved September 19, 2021. "California Gov. Gavin Newsom stays in power as recall fails". AP NEWS. September 14, 2021. Archived from the original on September 15, 2021. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Bernstein, Sharon (September 15, 2021). "TV networks". Reuters. Archived from the original on September 14, 2021. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Korte, Lara (November 8, 2022). "Gavin Newsom easily wins reelection in California a year after recall". Politico. Retrieved November 12, 2022. Christopher, Ben (October 22, 2019). "Gov. Newsom the moderate? On this spectrum, almost every Democratic legislator is further left". Calmatters. Archived from the original on December 3, 2021. Retrieved December 3, 2021. Based on an analysis of the 1,042 bills that the governor signed or vetoed this year, Gavin Newsom is more moderate than any other Democratic state senator and sits to the left of only two Democrats in the Assembly. Myers, John; Luna, Taryn (December 22, 2020). "Newsom names Assemblywoman Shirley Weber to succeed Padilla as California secretary of state". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 19, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2021. "Harris bursts through another barrier, becoming the first female, first Black and first South Asian vice president-elect". CNN. Cable News Network. November 7, 2020. Archived from the original on December 24, 2020. Retrieved December 20, 2020. Hubler, Shawn (December 22, 2020). "Alex Padilla Will Replace Kamala Harris in the Senate". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 22, 2020. Retrieved December 22, 2020. White, Jeremy B. (February 3, 2021). "Newsom will wait to announce California AG until Becerra confirmed". Politico PRO. Archived from the original on July 13, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2021. Cillizza, Chris (March 16, 2021). "Analysis: Gavin Newsom just tried to shove Dianne Feinstein out the door". CNN. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2021. Quinn, Melissa (March 16, 2021). "Gavin Newsom vows to name Black woman to Senate if Dianne Feinstein steps down". CBS News. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2021. Karni, Annie; Hubler, Shawn (September 29, 2023). "The senator was hailed as a pioneer in politics. Here's what to know". The New York Times – via NYTimes.com. Edelman, Adam; Terkel, Amanda (October 1, 2023). "Gov. Gavin Newsom chooses Laphonza Butler to fill Dianne Feinstein's Senate seat". NBC News. Shafer, Scott; Lagos, Marisa (March 12, 2019). "Gov. Gavin Newsom Suspends Death Penalty in California". NPR News. Archived from the original on September 2, 2021. Retrieved September 19, 2021. Bollag, Sophia. "'Ineffective, irreversible and immoral:' Gavin Newsom halts death penalty for 737 inmates". Sacramento Bee. Archived from the original on December 10, 2020. Retrieved March 13, 2019. "California governor on halting executions: "It's a racist system. You cannot deny that."". CBS News. Archived from the original on March 16, 2019. Retrieved March 15, 2019. Arango, Tim (March 12, 2019). "California Death Penalty Suspended; 737 Inmates Get Stay of Execution". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved April 4, 2019. Koseff, Alexei (February 9, 2022). "Is this another way to end California's death penalty?". Calmatters. Thompson, Don (January 31, 2022). "California moves to dismantle nation's largest death row". Associated Press. Archived from the original on February 8, 2022. Retrieved February 8, 2022. "Support for the death penalty is declining in California, poll shows". Los Angeles Times. May 20, 2021. Willon, Phil (August 23, 2019). "She faces deportation after shooting her husband. Now, Gov. Newsom could pardon her". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 23, 2019. Retrieved August 23, 2019. Willon, Phil; Chabria, Anita (May 13, 2019). "In a rebuke to President Trump, Gov. Newsom pardons refugees facing deportation". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 14, 2019. Retrieved May 14, 2019. "California Gov. Gavin Newsom pardons 3 in bid to block deportations". Associated Press. November 16, 2019. Archived from the original on November 16, 2019. Retrieved November 16, 2019 – via Los Angeles Times. "Newsom paroles immigrant, who is immediately detained by ICE". Los Angeles Times. Associated Press. December 23, 2019. Archived from the original on December 24, 2019. Retrieved December 24, 2019. Tapper, Jake; Mossburg, Cheri (January 13, 2022). "California Gov. Gavin Newsom denies parole for RFK assassin Sirhan Sirhan". CNN. Archived from the original on January 14, 2022. Retrieved January 14, 2022. Jackman, Tom (January 13, 2022). "Calif. Gov. Newsom denies parole for Sirhan Sirhan, convicted of Robert F. Kennedy assassination". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 14, 2022. Retrieved January 15, 2022. Wiley, Hannah (September 3, 2020). "Will Gavin Newsom Sign New Police Laws After George Floyd Protests? Here are His Options". The Sacramento Bee. Archived from the original on September 15, 2020. Retrieved September 22, 2021. Martichoux, Alix (June 5, 2020). "Gavin Newsom directs California police officers to stop training use of carotid hold". ABC 7. Archived from the original on September 1, 2021. Retrieved September 18, 2021. Lethang, Marlene (October 1, 2021). "California Gov. Newsom signs sweeping police reform bills, will strip badges from officers for misconduct". ABC News. Retrieved July 12, 2022. Colton, Emma (September 27, 2020). "Newsom signs law allowing transgender inmates to be placed in prisons according to gender identity". Washington Examiner. Archived from the original on September 29, 2020. Retrieved September 27, 2020. Beam, Adam (September 26, 2020). "Gov. Newsom signs law requiring California prisons to house transgender inmates by gender identity". ABC7 San Francisco. Archived from the original on October 1, 2020. Retrieved September 27, 2020. "Gov. Newsom declares state of emergency due to coronavirus". KCRA. March 4, 2020. Archived from the original on March 5, 2020. Retrieved March 4, 2020. "Governor Newsom Declares State of Emergency to Help State Prepare for Broader Spread of COVID-19" (Press release). California Office of the Governor. March 4, 2020. Archived from the original on March 9, 2020. Retrieved March 9, 2020. "Grand Princess cruise ship at center of coronavirus fight amid concerns about spread". Los Angeles Times. March 4, 2020. Archived from the original on March 9, 2020. Retrieved March 12, 2020. Curwen, Thomas; Oreskes, Benjamin; Chabria, Anita Chabria (March 15, 2020). "An unexpected side effect of the coronavirus? A new urgency about helping homeless people". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 16, 2020. Retrieved March 17, 2020. Luna, Taryn (March 12, 2020). "Newsom issues order allowing California to take over hotels for coronavirus patients". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 16, 2020. Retrieved March 14, 2020. Willon, Phil; Myers, John (March 14, 2020). "Newsom orders more aid to California campuses shuttered by coronavirus, opting not to close schools statewide". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 14, 2020. Retrieved March 15, 2020. Phil Willon; Alex Wigglesworth; Taryn Luna; Laura Newberry; Colleen Shalby (March 16, 2020). "Coronavirus cases spike to 94 in L.A. County as officials issue more emergency restrictions". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 17, 2020. Retrieved March 17, 2020. Chance, Amy; Kasler, Dale (March 16, 2020). "No gatherings, restaurant meals in California now, Gavin Newsom directs". The Sacramento Bee. Archived from the original on March 17, 2020. Retrieved March 17, 2020. Willon, Phil; Luna, Taryn; Fry, Hannah (March 21, 2020). "'Time to wake up,' Newsom says, again urging Californians to stay home in coronavirus fight". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 21, 2020. Retrieved March 22, 2020. Willon, Phil. "Newsom assures Californians that the state has enough ventilators in coronavirus fight". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 12, 2020. Retrieved April 12, 2020. Skelton, George (April 27, 2020). "Column: In the coronavirus crisis, California isn't under one-party rule, it's under one-man rule". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 27, 2020. Retrieved April 27, 2020. "Washington, Oregon and California announce Western states pact". Seattle Weekly. April 13, 2020. Archived from the original on June 4, 2020. Retrieved April 29, 2020. "Washington, Oregon, California announce coronavirus pact". Q13 FOX News. April 13, 2020. Archived from the original on April 14, 2020. Retrieved April 13, 2020. McGreevy, Patrick; Wigglesworth, Alex (April 19, 2020). "California will 'do the right thing' when lifting stay-at-home orders, Newsom says". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 19, 2020. Retrieved April 19, 2020. Myers, John (April 28, 2020). "Some California businesses could reopen within weeks as state fights coronavirus, Newsom says". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 28, 2020. Retrieved April 28, 2020. Mossburg, Cheri; Cole, Devan (April 28, 2020). "California governor outlines state's phased reopening plan". CNN. Archived from the original on April 29, 2020. Retrieved April 29, 2020. Savidge, Nico (April 4, 2020). "Coronavirus: Will fans pack NFL stadiums for week 1? Don't count on it, Gov. Newsom says". The Mercury News. Archived from the original on July 13, 2021. Retrieved April 4, 2020. Luna, Tarlyn (May 4, 2020). "Gov. Gavin Newsom says reopening California will begin this week". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 4, 2020. Retrieved May 4, 2020. Lopez, German (July 6, 2020). "How California went from a coronavirus success story to a worrying new hot spot". Vox. Archived from the original on July 6, 2020. Retrieved July 7, 2020. Mossburg, Cheri; Kelly, Caroline (May 8, 2020). "All California voters to receive mail-in ballot for November election, but in-person voting will remain". CNN. Archived from the original on May 9, 2020. Retrieved May 9, 2020. "Three Republican groups sue California governor over mail-in-vote order". Reuters. May 26, 2020. Archived from the original on May 26, 2020. Retrieved May 27, 2020. Lin, Rong-Gong II; Blume, Howard; Gutierrez, Melody; Fry, Hannah; Dolan, Maura (July 14, 2020). "How California went from a rapid reopening to a second closing in one month". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 14, 2020. Retrieved July 15, 2020. Bollag, Sophia (June 18, 2020). "Gavin Newsom issues statewide mask order: Californians must wear face coverings in public". Sacramento Bee. Archived from the original on June 21, 2020. Retrieved June 28, 2020. "Face coverings required in public spaces" (PDF). Official California State Government Website. June 18, 2020. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 18, 2020. Retrieved June 19, 2020. "California county sheriff says he won't enforce Newsom's coronavirus mask order". FoxNews. June 19, 2020. Archived from the original on June 19, 2020. Retrieved June 19, 2020. Myers, John; Wigglesworth, Alex; Newberry, Laura; Holland, Gale (June 28, 2020). "Newsom orders bars closed in 7 California counties including L.A. due to coronavirus spread". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 29, 2020. Retrieved June 29, 2020. "COVID vaccine rollout: Latest numbers, updates for California and the Sacramento area". The Sacramento Bee. 2021. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. "Vaccine Chaos: Californians Scramble For Shots Amid Mixed Messaging". KPBS Public Media. January 20, 2021. Archived from the original on February 4, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. "Newsom approval plummeting with a third of voters support recall amid COVID-19 criticism, poll finds". Los Angeles Times. February 2, 2021. Archived from the original on February 2, 2021. Retrieved February 3, 2021. "States ranked by percentage of population fully vaccinated: Sept. 10". September 11, 2021. Archived from the original on September 11, 2021. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Ting, Eric (May 14, 2021). "UCSF expert: California, San Francisco should 'immediately' lift mask mandates for vaccinated". Sfgate. Archived from the original on May 17, 2021. Retrieved May 17, 2021. "California Focus: Florida or California: Which handles covid better?". May 7, 2021. Archived from the original on May 17, 2021. Retrieved May 17, 2021. Hepler, Lauren; Council, Stephen (December 22, 2020). "Who will pay for all of California's unemployment fraud?". CalMatters. Archived from the original on September 16, 2021. Retrieved September 18, 2021. McGreevy, Patrick (January 25, 2021). "California officials say unemployment fraud now totals more than $11 billion". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 18, 2021. Retrieved September 18, 2021. "Editorial: California's unemployment system collapsed on Julie Su's watch". Los Angeles Times. February 11, 2021. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021. Retrieved February 12, 2021. "House Republicans from California demand Gov. Newsom answer for unemployment failings". Los Angeles Times. February 5, 2021. Archived from the original on February 12, 2021. Retrieved February 12, 2021. McGreevy, Patrick; Chabria, Anita; Winton, Richard (December 4, 2020). "California may have sent $1 billion in jobless benefits to people outside the state, D.A.s warn". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 5, 2020. Retrieved December 4, 2020. McGreevy, Patrick (December 7, 2020). "California unemployment fraud amid COVID-19 pandemic may total $2 billion, Bank of America says". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 16, 2020. Retrieved December 16, 2020. McGreevy, Patrick (January 15, 2021). "California unemployment fraud could top $9 billion, double previous estimate, expert warns". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved January 16, 2021. Ronayne, Kathleen (January 29, 2021). "Unemployment Fraud Audit Creates Fresh Questions for Newsom". NBC 7 San Diego. Archived from the original on December 3, 2021. Retrieved December 3, 2021. Park, Jeong (August 13, 2021). "California ran up a $23 billion tab for unemployment benefits. Who will pay off the debt?". The Sacramento Bee. Archived from the original on December 6, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2022. Gedye, Grace (March 4, 2022). "California unemployment debt: How to dig out of a $20 billion hole?". Calmatters. Archived from the original on September 6, 2023. Daniels, Jeff (March 22, 2019). "California Gov. Gavin Newsom declares state of emergency due to increased wildfire risk". CNBC. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved March 22, 2020. Singh, Maanvi (August 19, 2020). "California wildfires: thousands evacuate as 'siege' of flames overwhelms state". The Guardian. Archived from the original on August 19, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Fuller, Thomas; Taylor, Derrick Bryson (October 16, 2020). "In Rare Move, Trump Administration Rejects California's Request for Wildfire Relief". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 16, 2020. Retrieved October 16, 2020. "Newsom Misled the Public About Wildfire Prevention Efforts Ahead of Worst Fire Season on Record". Archived from the original on July 12, 2021. Retrieved July 12, 2021. "Gov. Newsom's Wildfire 'Priority Project' Didn't Contain the Lava Fire, Leaving Evacuees Stuck in Traffic". Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Rodd, Scott. "As Lawmakers Indefinitely Postpone Wildfire Oversight Hearing, Internal Emails Reveal Cal Fire Chief Ordered Key Document Pulled from the Internet". www.capradio.org. Archived from the original on August 28, 2021. Retrieved August 28, 2021. Rodd, Scott (April 12, 2022). "Newsom hailed this 'critical' wildfire-prevention program. Two years on, it hasn't completed a single project". CAP Radio. Retrieved April 13, 2022. Rittiman, Brandon (August 10, 2021). "Newsom's office crafted law protecting PG&E after company's crimes killed 84 people | FIRE – POWER – MONEY Investigation". abc10.com. Archived from the original on February 3, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2022. "AB-1054 Public utilities: wildfires and employee protection". Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved February 11, 2022. Rittiman, Brandon (August 10, 2021). "Fire-Power-Money". Archived from the original on February 9, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2022. Rittiman, Brandon (August 12, 2021). "California government defends PG&E bailout law in court". Archived from the original on August 19, 2021. Retrieved February 11, 2022. Willon, Phil (September 28, 2019). "Defying environmentalists, Newsom vetoes bill to block Trump's Endangered Species Act rollback". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 2, 2019. Retrieved October 2, 2019. Boxall, Bettina (November 22, 2019). "Newsom administration sends mixed signals on delta endangered species protections". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 22, 2019. Retrieved November 23, 2019. "Attorney General Becerra Files Lawsuit Against Trump Administration for Failing to Protect Endangered Species in the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers". State of California - Department of Justice - Office of the Attorney General. February 20, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Luna, Taryn (September 25, 2019). "Newsom will announce new plans for a satellite to track climate change". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 6, 2019. Retrieved October 7, 2019. "Newsom's address to the Democratic National Convention, emphasizing climate change and praising Joe Biden and Kamala Harris". ABC News. August 21, 2020. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2020. Grandoni, Dino (September 23, 2020). "California to phase out sales of new gas-powered cars by 2035". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved November 12, 2020. Olalde, Mark (September 30, 2020). "Gov. Gavin Newsom signs off on new commission to study Salton Sea lithium extraction". The Desert Sun. Archived from the original on October 1, 2020. Retrieved September 30, 2020. Willon, Phil (July 12, 2019). "Gov. Gavin Newsom fires top official over fracking permits — but won't ban the oil wells". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 13, 2019. Retrieved July 14, 2019. Nguyen, Daisy (September 3, 2020). "Approvals for new oil and gas wells up in California". AP NEWS. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Cantu, Aaron (February 1, 2021). "California Governor Gavin Newsom, despite pledge, signed 1,709 oil and gas production permits". Newsweek. Retrieved May 30, 2022. "Why Is California Approving So Many New Oil Wells?". Bloomberg.com. November 18, 2019. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Willon, Phil (November 19, 2019). "Newsom blocks new California fracking pending scientific review". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 20, 2019. Retrieved November 21, 2019. "California Issues First New Fracking Permits Since July". KPBS Public Media. April 4, 2020. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Willon, Phil (September 21, 2020). "Environmentalists plan lawsuit challenging Newsom over oil and gas drilling permits". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved May 30, 2022. "Gavin Newsom Sued for 'Completely Unacceptable' Approval of Oil and Gas Projects in California". EcoWatch. February 25, 2021. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Sheeler, Andrew (October 5, 2021). "End oil drilling permits? + Equality California union breakthrough + Group seeks Newsom vetoes". The Sacramento Bee. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Hubler, Shawn (April 23, 2021). "California's governor seeks to ban new fracking and halt oil production, but not immediately". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Newburger, Emma (October 21, 2021). "California moves to ban oil wells within 3,200 feet of homes and schools". CNBC. Retrieved May 12, 2022. Koseff, Alexei (March 29, 2023). "Newsom signs watered-down oil profit penalty into law". CalMatters. Retrieved March 29, 2023. Ronayne, Kathleen (June 4, 2021). "Newsom: No conflict in corporate giving to wife's non-profit". AP NEWS. Archived from the original on August 2, 2021. Retrieved August 2, 2021. Rosenhall, Laurel (October 12, 2021). "Newsom's vetoes: Why did the governor block California bills?". CalMatters. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Rosenhall, Laurel (October 17, 2021). "Budget, Repeats and Caution: Why Gov. Gavin Newsom Vetoed 66 Bills". Times of San Diego. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Wildermuth, John (October 15, 2019). "Gavin Newsom vetoes bill to allow ranked-choice voting throughout California". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Fensterwald, John. "Gov. Newsom vetoes requirement for ethnic studies course in high school". EdSource. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Gutierrez, Melody (October 9, 2021). "Newsom vetoes jaywalking bill aimed at easing fines, targeted enforcement". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Christopher, Ben (October 5, 2020). "How the pandemic reshaped California politics in 2020". CalMatters. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Kahn, Debra. "Newsom executive orders test constitutional bounds — and legislative goodwill". POLITICO. Retrieved May 30, 2022.[permanent dead link] Willon, Phil (June 1, 2019). "California Gov. Gavin Newsom calls for nationwide background checks on ammo purchases". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 1, 2019. Retrieved June 2, 2019. Winton, Richard; Luna, Taryn; McGreevy, Patrick; Nelson, Laura (July 30, 2019). "Gilroy festival shooter obtained 'weapons of goddamned mass destruction,' Newsom says". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 25, 2019. Retrieved July 30, 2019. REESE, PHILLIP (October 7, 2019). "When masculinity turns 'toxic': A gender profile of mass shootings". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 14, 2019. Retrieved October 15, 2019. "California Appeals Court Ruling Upending Assault Weapons Ban". June 10, 2021. Archived from the original on June 10, 2021. Retrieved June 10, 2021. "California's governor pledges to model an assault weapons ban on Texas abortion law". NPR. The Associated Press. December 12, 2021. Archived from the original on December 12, 2021. Retrieved December 12, 2021. "Governor Newsom Takes Action to Further Restrict Ghost Guns and Protect California Kids from Gun Violence". California Governor. July 1, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Ahumada, Rosalio (July 1, 2022). "Gavin Newsom signs new gun safety laws targeting illegal weapons, marketing to kids". The Sacramento Bee. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Veronica Stracqualursi (July 22, 2022). "Newsom signs California gun bill modeled after Texas abortion law". CNN. Retrieved July 23, 2022. "Newsom signs gun law modeled after Texas abortion ban, setting up Supreme Court fight". Los Angeles Times. July 22, 2022. Retrieved July 23, 2022. Ellison, Stephen (June 8, 2023). "California governor launches campaign for gun control amendment to US Constitution". NBC Bay Area. Retrieved June 8, 2023. "Governor Newsom proposing a 28th Amendment to the Constitution to end the gun violence crisis". www.cbsnews.com. June 8, 2023. Retrieved June 8, 2023. Willon, Phil; Luna, Taryn (June 8, 2023). "Newsom launches long-shot push for U.S. constitutional amendment on gun control". Los Angeles Times. Under Article V of the U.S. Constitution, an amendment may be proposed by a two-thirds majority vote in both chambers of Congress or by a constitutional convention called for by two-thirds of the state legislatures. None of the 27 amendments to the Constitution have been proposed in a constitutional convention under that process. "To me, what's really frightening about it is we've never had a constitutional convention under that procedure of Article V," Chemerinsky said. "No one knows would it be limited to just the 2nd Amendment, or could it do anything? Could they do abortion or rewrite the Constitution? How is it going to be constituted? What are its rules?" "California plans to be abortion sanctuary if Roe overturned". Associated Press. December 8, 2021. "California governor signs law that makes abortions cheaper". ABC News. "Twenty-One States Announce Historic Governor-Led Reproductive Freedom Alliance". California Governor. February 21, 2023. Retrieved March 4, 2023. Gregory Krieg; Nathaniel Meyersohn (March 7, 2023). "Newsom to shut Walgreens out of California state business following abortion pill decision | CNN Politics". CNN. Retrieved March 10, 2023. Young, Samantha (April 6, 2023). "Gov. Newsom wanted California to cut ties with Walgreens. Then federal law got in the way". San Francisco Chronicle. The federal regulations that protect Walgreens are the same that have allowed Planned Parenthood to offer health care services to Medicaid enrollees in conservative states, where leaders have sought unsuccessfully to exclude the network of clinics from receiving taxpayer funding. An approved pharmacy company can be excluded from state networks only if it has committed fraud or other contract violations, added Edwin Park, a research professor at Georgetown University with expertise in Medicaid law. "Certainly, that wouldn't be the case for Walgreens," Park said. Koseff, Alexei (June 14, 2019). "Where Gov. Gavin Newsom wins and loses in newly passed California budget". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on June 14, 2019. Retrieved June 14, 2019. Gutierrez, Melody (July 27, 2021). "California expands Medi-Cal to older undocumented immigrants". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 3, 2021. Retrieved December 3, 2021. "California budget deal would boost health care for undocumented immigrants over 50". June 26, 2021. Beam, Adam; Thompson, Don (July 1, 2022). "California becomes first state to guarantee free health care for all low-income immigrants". ABC7 Los Angeles. Archived from the original on July 5, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Abdul El-Sayed (February 22, 2022). "Why California's Cowardly Democrats Scurried Away From Single-Payer". The New Republic. Retrieved March 22, 2022. Walker Bragman (January 28, 2022). "Newsom's Big Choice: Single Payer Or His Insurance Donors?". Retrieved March 22, 2022. Marashi, Soraya (July 6, 2022). "Newsom signs bill establishing Office of Health Care Affordability after negotiations". State of Reform. Retrieved March 16, 2023. [1] [2] "No, Gov. Gavin Newsom didn't kill high-speed rail. But what's his Plan B?". Sacramento Bee. February 18, 2019. Archived from the original on February 21, 2019. Retrieved February 21, 2019. Heller, Nathan (February 15, 2019). "Is Gavin Newsom Right to Slow Down California's High-Speed Train?". New Yorker. Archived from the original on February 15, 2019. Retrieved February 16, 2019. Luna, Taryn (December 2, 2019). "One of California's most powerful labor unions is feuding with Gov. Gavin Newsom". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 2, 2019. Retrieved December 2, 2019. Skelton, George (January 16, 2020). "Newsom can't afford to ignore homelessness. It's the top issue with voters". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 16, 2020. Retrieved January 16, 2020. della Cava, Marco (April 14, 2019). "As Trump battles California, Gov. Newsom makes big changes in first 100 days". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 14, 2019. Retrieved April 15, 2019. Dillon, Liam (January 10, 2019). "Gov. Gavin Newsom threatens to cut state funding from cities that don't approve enough housing". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 29, 2019. Retrieved January 29, 2019. Dillon, Liam (January 25, 2019). "At Gov. Newsom's urging, California will sue Huntington Beach over blocked homebuilding". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 29, 2019. Retrieved January 29, 2019. Sclafani, Julia (January 15, 2020). "Planning Commission vote moves Huntington Beach a step closer to resolving state housing lawsuit". Daily Pilot. Archived from the original on January 16, 2020. Retrieved January 16, 2020. Cavanaugh, Kerry (January 25, 2019). "Gavin Newsom just declared war on NIMBYs". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 28, 2019. Retrieved January 29, 2019. Dillon, Liam (June 18, 2019). "Southern California cities cite 'chaos' in rejecting state push for more housing". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 18, 2019. Retrieved June 18, 2019. Luna, Taryn (January 17, 2020). "Gov. Gavin Newsom promotes using state-owned trailers to house homeless people". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 17, 2020. Retrieved January 17, 2020. Bollag, Sophia (May 22, 2022). Written at Sacramento. "'NIMBYism is destroying the state.' Gavin Newsom ups pressure on cities to build more housing". San Francisco Chronicle. San Francisco. Retrieved June 6, 2022. NIMBYism is destroying the state," [Newsome] told the editorial board in an interview seeking the paper's endorsement in his upcoming re-election bid. "We're gonna demand more from our cities and counties. Koseff, Alexei (September 16, 2021). "Newsom signs long-awaited bills to increase housing density in California". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on September 17, 2021. Retrieved September 17, 2021. "Bill Text – SB-7 Environmental quality: Jobs and Economic Improvement Through Environmental Leadership Act of 2021". leginfo.legislature.ca.gov. Archived from the original on September 2, 2021. Retrieved September 2, 2021. Gardiner, Dustin (September 28, 2022). "Newsom signs major bills to increase housing density in urban centers". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved September 29, 2022. Khouri, Andrew (September 23, 2022). "California bans mandated parking near transit to fight high housing prices, climate change". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved September 29, 2022. Beam, Adam (September 28, 2022). "California Gov. Newsom signs laws to boost housing production". PBS NewsHour. Associated Press. Retrieved September 29, 2022. Watt, Nick (July 11, 2023). "California has spent billions to fight homelessness. The problem has gotten worse". CNN. Retrieved January 1, 2024. Levin, Sam (December 19, 2023). "California's homelessness crisis is the worst in the US. But who is struggling the most?". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved January 1, 2024. [3] [4] Sabalow, Ryan; Kasler, Dale (December 19, 2019). "Gov. Newsom's threat to sue Trump upends peace talks on California water wars". Sacramento Bee. Archived from the original on January 6, 2020. Retrieved December 20, 2019. "Minorities During the Gold Rush". California Secretary of State. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Cowan, Jill (June 19, 2019). "'It's Called Genocide': Newsom Apologizes to the State's Native Americans". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 6, 2021. Retrieved June 20, 2019. Riedel, Samantha (September 30, 2022). "California Is Officially the First Sanctuary State for Trans Youth". Retrieved September 23, 2023. "Governor Newsom Proclaims LGBTQ+ Pride Month 2023". June 1, 2023. Retrieved September 23, 2023. Lozano, Alicia (July 23, 2023). "California to fine school district $1.5 million for rejecting materials mentioning Harvey Milk". NBC News. Retrieved September 23, 2023. [5] Childs, Jeremy (July 23, 2023). "Newsom vetoes bill requiring custody hearings consider affirmation of child's gender identity". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved September 23, 2023. [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] Luna, Taryn (March 28, 2019). "Newsom will travel to El Salvador next month in first international trip as California governor". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved March 28, 2019. Bollag, Sophia (April 8, 2019). "Is Gavin Newsom campaigning in El Salvador? Trip prompts praise, speculation". The Sacramento Bee. ISSN 0890-5738. Archived from the original on April 8, 2019. Retrieved April 8, 2019. Luna, Taryn (April 8, 2019). "Newsom seeks to counter Trump as he makes world stage debut in El Salvador". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 8, 2019. Retrieved April 8, 2019. Aguilera, Elizabeth; Christopher, Ben (April 13, 2019). "Mission Accomplished? Scoring Newsom's Trip To El Salvador". Capital Public Radio. Archived from the original on April 14, 2019. Retrieved April 14, 2019. "California Gov. Newsom's Israel visit draws support and criticism, supporters of Palestinians gather at Capitol". CBS News. October 20, 2023. "Newsom: Israel-Hamas war 'not intellectual any longer'". Politico. October 23, 2023. Gardiner, Dustin; Korte, Lara (October 31, 2023). "Newsom's only stumble in China". POLITICO. Retrieved December 31, 2023. "California's Newsom Wraps Up China Trip With Tesla Factory Visit". Bloomberg News. October 30, 2023. Retrieved November 9, 2023. Toh, Michelle; Lilieholm, Lucas (October 26, 2023). "'Divorce is not an option' for US and China, Newsom says after Xi meeting". CNN. Retrieved November 9, 2023. "Newsom making headlines, but analysts skeptical of 2024 run". NewsNation. June 9, 2023. Retrieved July 13, 2023. Pengelly, Martin (May 16, 2023). "Gavin Newsom presidential run is 'no-brainer', Arnold Schwarzenegger says". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved July 13, 2023. Udasin, Sharon (April 10, 2023). "Will Gavin Newsom run for president? Experts say it's not if, but when". The Hill. Retrieved July 13, 2023. Balevic, Katie. "Gavin Newsom says he is definitely not running for president in 2024 after his 'vulnerable' 2021 recall". Business Insider. Retrieved July 13, 2023. "Newsom Told the White House He Won't Challenge Biden". POLITICO. November 26, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2023. Daunt, Tina (April 25, 2023). "Gavin Newsom Shelves Own Presidential Ambitions, Endorses Joe Biden Reelection Run | Exclusive". Retrieved July 13, 2023. Mueller, Julia (June 5, 2023). "Newsom calls DeSantis a 'small, pathetic man' amid questions over migrant flight". The Hill. Retrieved July 13, 2023. Galt, Claire (June 20, 2023). "Political scientist speculates on DeSantis-Newsom feud". WINK News. Retrieved July 13, 2023. "Governors Ron DeSantis, Gavin Newsom to face off in unusual debate today - CBS News". www.cbsnews.com. November 30, 2023. Retrieved November 30, 2023. Gordon, Rachel (March 3, 2006). "Down by the Bay/A blues story with all the requisite elements: love, booze and death". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on November 18, 2010. Retrieved February 25, 2010. Garchik, Leah (August 5, 2004). "Leah Garchik column". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on August 24, 2011. Retrieved March 10, 2008. Phillip Matier; Andrew Ross (January 6, 2005). "Newsom, wife decide to end 3-year marriage Careers on opposite coasts take toll on mayor, TV star". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved March 11, 2008. Gordon, Rachel (June 24, 2011). "Gavin and Kimberly are officially divorced". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on July 15, 2011. Retrieved February 11, 2022. "Kimberly Guilfoyle, rumored Spicer replacement, signs long-term Fox News deal". The Hill. June 29, 2017. Retrieved July 5, 2022. "Mayor McHottie's New Girlfriend -- Half His Age". ABC News. October 18, 2006. Retrieved November 26, 2023. Matier, Phillip; Ross, Andrew (October 15, 2006). "Has the mayor's new girlfriend, who is only 20, been drinking?". SFGATE. Retrieved November 26, 2023. Phil Matier; Andrew Ross; Cecilia M. Vega (January 31, 2007). "Aide Quits As Newsom's Affair With His Wife Is Revealed/Campaign manager confronts mayor, who is 'in shock'". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on June 10, 2010. Retrieved November 6, 2010. Laura Locke (February 2, 2007). "The Scandal of San Francisco". Time. Archived from the original on October 9, 2017. Retrieved October 30, 2017. Alex Tourk, Newsom's buddy and campaign manager, abruptly quit after confronting the mayor about having an illicit affair with his wife, who once worked as an appointment secretary to Newsom. Mehta, Seema; Willon, Phil (February 8, 2018). "Former aide to Gavin Newsom speaks out about their affair while he was San Francisco mayor". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 17, 2021. Knight, Heather (February 5, 2007). "Newsom seeks treatment for alcohol abuse". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on October 24, 2012. Retrieved November 26, 2012.Heather Maddan (March 11, 2007). "Girlfriend, uninterrupted/Actress Jennifer Siebel is standing by her man, who happens to be Mayor Gavin Newsom, and says there's no trouble in their romance". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on March 4, 2008. Retrieved March 10, 2008. Carolyne Zinko (January 1, 2008). "S.F. Mayor Newsom engaged to be married". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved March 10, 2008. Matier and Ross (May 25, 2008). "Newsom, Siebel plan Montana wedding in July". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved June 22, 2008. Park, Michael Y. (July 26, 2008). "San Francisco Mayor Gavin Newsom Weds". Weddings. People. Archived from the original on January 8, 2011. Retrieved November 18, 2010. The City Insider (February 18, 2009). "And baby makes three for the Newsoms". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on February 22, 2009. Retrieved February 19, 2009. Andrew Dalton (July 5, 2013). "Newsom Clan Adds Third Offspring". SFist.com. Archived from the original on July 10, 2013. Retrieved July 15, 2013. "Gavin Newsom's New Baby Named After Town of Dutch Flat". The Mercury News. February 28, 2016. Archived from the original on September 21, 2016. Retrieved September 12, 2016. Wilkey, Robin (November 29, 2011). "Gavin Newsom Buys House In Marin County". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on February 28, 2012. Retrieved March 6, 2012. Sheeler, Andrew (May 31, 2019). "More Bay Area transplants: Gavin Newsom bought Sacramento's most expensive home in 2019". The Sacramento Bee. Archived from the original on May 5, 2020. Retrieved April 5, 2020. "More Bay Area transplants: Gavin Newsom bought Sacramento's most expensive home in 2019". The Sacramento Bee. May 31, 2019. Archived from the original on July 20, 2021. Retrieved July 30, 2021. "Photos: Amid recall madness, Gavin Newsom sells Marin County home in lucrative $5.9 million off-market deal". The Mercury News. August 23, 2021. Archived from the original on September 3, 2021. Retrieved September 2, 2021. Varian, Ethan (July 20, 2019). "At the Wedding of Gigi Gorgeous and Nats Getty". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on July 13, 2021. Retrieved September 24, 2020. "California's Newsom starts tour to boost red-state Democrats". AP News. March 30, 2023. Retrieved October 19, 2023. Friend, Tad (October 29, 2018). "Gavin Newsom, the Next Head of the California Resistance". The Political Scene. The New Yorker (published November 5, 2018). pp. 18–26.. Gavin Newsom at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Governor Gavin Newsom official government website Gavin Newsom on Twitter official personal Twitter account Office of the Governor of California official governor Twitter account Gavin Newsom for Governor campaign website CityMayors profile about Gavin Newsom Profile at Vote Smart Appearances on C-SPAN Gavin Newsom at On the Issues