The United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC; French: Conseil économique et social des Nations unies, CESNU) is one of the six principal organs of the United Nations, responsible for coordinating the economic and social fields of the organization, specifically in regards to the fifteen specialised agencies, the eight functional commissions, and the five regional commissions under its jurisdiction. ECOSOC serves as the central forum for discussing international economic and social issues, and formulating policy recommendations addressed to member states and the United Nations System. It has 54 members. In addition to a rotating membership of 54 UN member states, over 1,600 nongovernmental organizations have consultative status with the Council to participate in the work of the United Nations. ECOSOC holds one four-week session each year in July, and since 1998 has also held an annual meeting in April with finance ministers of heading key committees of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF). Additionally, the High-Level Political Forum (HLPF), which reviews the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, is convened under the auspices of the Council every July. The president of the Council is elected for a one-year term and chosen from the small or medium sized states represented on the Council at the beginning of each new session. The presidency rotates among the United Nations Regional Groups to ensure equal representation. Paula Narváez, Representative of Chile, was elected as the seventy-ninth president of the Council on 27 July 2023. She succeeded Lachezara Stoeva, who was elected as the seventy-eighth president of the Council on 25 July 2022, succeeding Collen Vixen Kelapile of Botswana. The Council consists of 54 Member States, which are elected yearly by the General Assembly for overlapping three-year terms. Seats on the Council are allocated ensuring equitable geographic rotation among the United Nations regional groups. Outgoing members are eligible for immediate re-election, and some seats are held by de facto permanent members. In 1945 when the United Nations Charter was originally signed, the Economic and Social Council consisted of 18 seats. The formal concept of the United Nations Regional Groups did not yet exist, and unlike the Security Council, there was no "gentlemen's agreement" between the superpowers to assign ECOSOC seats. Regardless, with 4 exceptions out of 102 elections (see list), a relatively stable pattern emerged and held until 1960: 5 seats to the Permanent Five of the UNSC 4 seats to Latin America 2 seats to Eastern Europe 1 seat to the British Commonwealth 3 seats to the Middle East / "Near and Far East" 3 seats to Western Europe As the number of United Nations members grew with decolonization, the pattern began to break down starting in 1961, with UNSC permanent member the Republic of China (Taiwan) and one of the Western European seats losing elections to nations in Africa. In 1965, the Charter was amended to increase the size of ECOSOC to 27 seats, and the Regional Groups were formally introduced. The seat distribution became: 7 seats to the African Group 5 seats to the Asian Group 3 seats to the Eastern European Group 5 seats to the Latin American and Caribbean Group 7 seats to the Western European and Others Group In 1973, the Charter was amended again to increase the size of ECOSOC to 54 seats. The seat distribution became: 14 seats to the African Group 11 seats to the Asia-Pacific Group (renamed from the Asia Group in 2011) 6 seats to the Eastern European Group 10 seats to the Latin American and Caribbean Group 13 seats to the Western European and Others Group Election pending between North Macedonia and Russia. The United Nations currently recognizes the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan as the government of Afghanistan instead of the de facto ruling government, the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan Participation on a continuing basis: African Regional Centre of Technology Asian and Pacific Development Centre Asian Productivity Organisation Council of Arab Economic Unity Global Water Partnership Helsinki Commission Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture Intergovernmental Forum on Mining, Minerals, Metals and Sustainable Development Intergovernmental Institution For the Use of Micro-Algae Spirulina Against Malnutrition International Association of Economic and Social Councils and Similar Institutions International Center for Public Enterprises in Developing Countries International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology Islamic Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization Latin American Energy Organization Organisation of Ibero-American States Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries Regional Organisation for the Protection of the Marine Environment Union des Conseils Économiques et Sociaux Africains West African Economic and Monetary Union World Deserts Foundation Participation on an ad hoc basis: African Accounting Council African Cultural Institute Arab Security Studies and Training Center Council of Arab Ministers of the Interior International Bauxite Association International Civil Defence Organisation Latin American Social Sciences Institute The following are the active functional commission of the Council: Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND) Commission on Population and Development (CPD) Commission on Science and Technology for Development (CSTD) Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) Statistical Commission Commission for Social Development (CSocD) Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice (CCPCJ) Forum on Forests (UNFF) The following commissions were disbanded by the Council and replaced by other bodies: Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) Disbanded in 2006 and replaced by the United Nations Human Rights Council (UNHRC), a subsidiary organ of the General Assembly. Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD) Disbanded in 2013 and replaced by the High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development (HLPF), a joint subsidiary body of the General Assembly and ECOSOC. The following are the active regional commissions of the Council: United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA) The following are some of the other bodies that the Council oversees in some capacity: Committee for Programme and Coordination (CPC) Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations Committee on Negotiations with Intergovernmental Agencies Committee for Development Policy (CDP) Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR) Committee of Experts on Global Geospatial Information Management (UN-GGIM) Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters Committee of Experts on Public Administration (CEPA) Committee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods and the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals Group of Experts on Geographical Names (UNGEGN) Intergovernmental Working Group of Experts on International Standards of Accounting and Reporting Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues (UNPFII) System Chief Executives Board for Coordination (CEB) High-Level Committee on Management (HLCM) High-Level Committee on Programmes (HLCP) The specialized agencies of the United Nations are autonomous organizations working within the United Nations System, meaning that while they report their activities to the Economic and Social Council, they are mostly free to their own devices. Each agency must negotiate with the Council as to what their relationship will look and work like. This leads to a system where different organizations maintain different types of relationships with the Council. Some were created before the United Nations existed and were integrated into the system, others were created by the League of Nations and were integrated by its successor, while others were created by the United Nations itself to meet emerging needs. The following is a list of the specialized agencies reporting to the Council: Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) International Labour Organization (ILO) International Monetary Fund (IMF) International Maritime Organization (IMO) International Telecommunication Union (ITU) United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) United Nations World Tourism Organization (UNWTO) Universal Postal Union (UPU) World Bank Group (WBG) International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) International Development Association (IDA) International Finance Corporation (IFC) Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) World Health Organization (WHO) World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) World Meteorological Organization (WMO) In a report issued in early July 2011, the UN called for spending nearly US$2  trillion on green technologies to prevent what it termed "a major planetary catastrophe", warning that "It is rapidly expanding energy use, mainly driven by fossil fuels, that explains why humanity is on the verge of breaching planetary sustainability boundaries through global warming, biodiversity loss, and disturbance of the nitrogen-cycle balance and other measures of the sustainability of the earth's ecosystem". UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon added: "Rather than viewing growth and sustainability as competing goals on a collision course, we must see them as complementary and mutually supportive imperatives". The report concluded that "Business as usual is not an option". The governance of the multilateral system has historically been complex and fragmented. This has limited the capacity of ECOSOC to influence international policies in trade, finance, and investment. Reform proposals aim to enhance the relevance and contribution of the council. A major reform was approved by the 2005 World Summit based on proposals submitted by secretary-general Kofi Annan. The Summit aimed to establish ECOSOC as a quality platform for high-level engagement among member states and with international financial institutions, the private sector, and civil society on global trends, policies, and action. It resolved to hold biennial high-level Development Cooperation Forums at the national-leadership level, transforming the high-level segment of the Council to review trends in international development cooperation and promote greater coherence in development activities. At the Summit it was also decided to hold annual ministerial-level substantive reviews to assess progress in achieving internationally agreed on development goals (particularly the Millennium Development Goals). These "Annual Ministerial Reviews" will be replaced by the High-Level Political Forum from 2016 onwards after the new post-MDG/post-2015 Sustainable Development Goals are agreed upon. Subsequent proposals by the High-Level Panel Report on System-Wide Coherence in November 2006 aimed to establish a forum within the ECOSOC as a counter-model to the exclusive clubs of the G8 and G20. The Forum was to comprise 27 heads of state (L27, corresponding to half of ECOSOC's membership) to meet annually and provide international leadership in the development area. This proposal however, was not approved by the General Assembly. The Economic and Social Council Chamber in the United Nations Conference Building was a gift from Sweden. It was conceived by Swedish architect Sven Markelius, one of the 11 architects in the international team that designed the UN headquarters. Wood from Swedish pine trees was used in the delegates' area for the railings and doors. The pipes and ducts in the ceiling above the public gallery were deliberately left exposed; the architect believed that anything useful could be left uncovered. The "unfinished" ceiling is a symbolic reminder that the economic and social work of the United Nations is never finished; there will always be something more that can be done to improve living conditions for the world's people. List of organizations with consultative status to the United Nations Economic and Social Council Copenhagen Consensus French Economic and Social Council European Economic and Social Committee (EU) Hard Choices: Moral Dilemmas in Humanitarian Intervention International Court of Justice International Hydrological Programme UN Secretariat UN Security Council UN Trusteeship Council UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs Union of International Associations Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics Chapter X of the United Nations Charter G20 Various inconsistent names were used before the proper introduction of Africa and Asia as Regional Groups, including also "Near and Middle East". Sources that were published after the introduction of the Regional Groups retroactively name this group "Asia-Africa" or similar, but this name was not used at the creation of ECOSOC. "About ECOSOC". ECOSOC. Archived from the original on Nov 2, 2019. "High-Level Political Forum 2020 (HLPF 2020)". Sustainable Development Knowledge Platform. Retrieved 2020-01-27. Basu, Rumki (2019). The United Nations. Sterling. p. 83. ISBN 978-81-207-2775-5. "Welcome to csonet.org | Website of the UN DESA NGO Branch. At your service". csonet.org. Archived from the original on 2023-01-11. Retrieved 2023-01-11. Mu Xuequan (27 July 2018). "UN ECOSOC Elects New President". Xinhuanet. Xinhua News Agency. Archived from the original on February 26, 2019. Retrieved 25 February 2019. "United Nations Official Document, Rule 20.2". un.org. Archived from the original on 2020-09-10. Retrieved 2020-09-15. "2022: H.E. Lachezara Stoeva (Bulgaria)". Economic and Social Council United Nations. Archived from the original on Sep 6, 2023. "President of ECOSOC". ECOSOC. Archived from the original on 26 July 2018. Retrieved 26 July 2018. "Members". UNITED NATIONS ECONOMIC and SOCIAL COUNCIL. Retrieved 18 September 2019. "General Assembly Elects 19 Economic and Social Council Members to Terms Beginning 1 January 2020, Adopts Resolution Commemorating Signing of United Nations Charter". United Nations Meetings Coverage & Press Releases. United Nations. 14 June 2019. Retrieved 1 January 2020. Gregg, Robert W. “The Economic and Social Council: Politics of Membership.” The Western Political Quarterly, vol. 16, no. 1, 1963, pp. 109–32. JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/445962. Accessed 5 Mar. 2024. Agam, Hasmy; Sam Daws; Terence O'Brien; Ramesh Takur (26 March 1999). What is Equitable Geographic Representation in the Twenty-First Century (PDF) (Report). United Nations University. Retrieved 5 March 2019. Padelford, Norman J. “Politics and the Future of ECOSOC.” International Organization, vol. 15, no. 4, 1961, pp. 564–80. JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/2705552. Accessed 24 Mar. 2024. "Economic and Social Council Membership". Economic and Social Council. "ECOSOC Membership by Year". Dag Hammarskjöld Library. Retrieved 1 January 2024. "Türkiye elected to UN Economic and Social Council". Anadolu Agency. 8 June 2023. Retrieved 1 January 2024. "Announcement of 22 new members for 2022 term". UN ECOSOC President - Official Twitter Account of UN ECOSOC. Gladstone, Rick (2021-12-01). "U.N. Seats Denied, for Now, to Afghanistan's Taliban and Myanmar's Junta". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2021-12-28. Retrieved 2022-04-07. ECOSOC observers, Part V Archived 22 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine "Subsidiary Bodies of ECOSOC". United Nations Economic and Social Council. United Nations. n.d. Retrieved 25 February 2019. Manhire, Vanessa, ed. (2019). "United Nations Handbook 2019–20". United Nations Handbook: An Annual Guide for Those Working with and within the United Nations (57th ed.). Wellington: Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade of New Zealand: 144–198. ISSN 0110-1951. "UN Creates New Human Rights Body". BBC. London. 15 March 2006. Retrieved 25 February 2019. "United Nations Human Rights Council (HRC)". UIA Open Yearbook. Union of International Associations. n.d. Retrieved 25 August 2020. "United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development (CSD)". UIA Open Yearbook. Union of International Associations. n.d. Retrieved 25 February 2019. United Nations General Assembly Session 67 Resolution 290. Format and Organizational Aspects of the High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development A/RES/67/290 9 July 2013. Retrieved 25 August 2020. Cohn, Theodore H. (2016-05-05). Global Political Economy: Theory and Practice. Routledge. ISBN 9781317334828. "UN Specialized Agencies". Globalization 101. The Levin Institute. Retrieved 25 February 2019. Kurtas, Susan. "Research Guides: UN System Documentation: Specialized Agencies". Research Guides at United Nations Dag Hammarskjöld Library. Retrieved 2020-12-13. "Funds, Programmes, Specialized Agencies and Others". United Nations. United Nations. n.d. Retrieved 25 February 2019. "World Economic and Social Survey 2011 | Department of Economic and Social Affairs". United Nations. Retrieved 2022-02-27. "The World Economic and Social Survey 2011: The Great Green Technological Transformation'". Thaindian News. Archived from the original on 25 October 2017. Retrieved 23 February 2011. Ian Williams, "Annan has paid his dues". The Guardian, 19 September 2005 UNDESA (8 July 2015). "Session 18: Reviewing and monitoring progress: What have we learned and how can it advance implementation?". Sustainable Development Knowledge Platform. Retrieved 2020-03-18. "Turkmenistan Elected to ECOSOC for 2019-2021". The Gazette of Central Asia. 15 June 2018. Retrieved 2020-03-18. Anand, Ankit. "Project Work of Political Science". scribd. Chanakya National Law University. Retrieved 9 February 2021. UN website. Mathews-Schultz, A. (2020). "The Untold History of the United Nations, the US State Department, and Organized Interests in the Postwar Era." Social Science History, 44(2), 197–222. Wikimedia Commons has media related to United Nations Economic and Social Council. Official website – United Nations Economic and Social Council UN Economic and Social Council – Background United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs Congo – Conference of UN NGO's Global Policy Forum – Social and Economic Policy at the UN (archived 5 September 2006) United Nations The Group of Eight, ECOSOC and the Constitutional Paradox (in French) Portal:  Politics