Nizhnekolymsk (Russian: Нижнеколы́мск) is a rural locality (a selo) in Pokhodsky Rural Okrug of Nizhnekolymsky District in the Sakha Republic, Russia, located within the Arctic Circle near the East Siberian Sea on the left bank of the Kolyma River near its confluence with the Anyuy, 80 kilometers (50 mi) from Chersky, the administrative center of the district, and 35 kilometers (22 mi) from Pokhodsk, the administrative center of the rural okrug. Its population as of the 2010 Census was 6, of whom 4 were male and 2 female, up from 0 recorded during the 2002 Census. It was founded as a fort on the Kolyma River in 1644. On May 20, 1931, Nizhnekolymsk became the administrative center of Nizhnekolymsky District, but in 1942, due to constant flooding, the administrative center was transferred to Nizhniye Kresty. Nizhekolymsk had mostly been abandoned by 1968, although a small number of people continued to reside there. Alexander Penn (1906–1972), Israeli poet, born in Nizhnekolymsk Red Pawn, a 1932 screen play by Ayn Rand, takes place in the vicinity of Nizhnekolymsk, during the early years of the Soviet Union. Srednekolymsk Verkhnekolymsk Registry of the Administrative-Territorial Divisions of the Sakha Republic Е. П. Сашенков (Ye. P. Sashenkov). На почтовых трактах Севера. (К истории почты Якутии). (On the Postal Roads of the North. (About the History of Yakutia's Postal Service).) (in Russian) Sakha Republic Territorial Branch of the Federal State Statistics Service. Results of the 2010 All-Russian Census. Численность населения по районам, городским и сельским населённым пунктам Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine (Population Counts by Districts, Urban and Rural Inhabited Localities) (in Russian) Law #173-Z 353-III "Об исчислении времени". Официальный интернет-портал правовой информации (in Russian). June 3, 2011. Retrieved January 19, 2019. Почта России. Информационно-вычислительный центр ОАСУ РПО. (Russian Post). Поиск объектов почтовой связи (Postal Objects Search) (in Russian) Official website of the Sakha Republic. Registry of the Administrative-Territorial Divisions of the Sakha Republic. Nizhnekolymsky District. (in Russian) Анадырская и Чукотская епархия Русской Православной Церкви