Lloyd James Austin III (born August 8, 1953) is a retired United States Army four-star general who has served as the 28th and current United States secretary of defense since January 22, 2021. Before retiring from the military in 2016, Austin served as the 12th commander of United States Central Command (CENTCOM), beginning in March 2013. Prior to that he served as the 33rd vice chief of staff of the Army from January 2012 to March 2013, and as commander of United States Forces – Iraq from September 2010 to December 2011. He is the first African American to hold each of these positions. After retiring from the armed services Austin joined the boards of Raytheon Technologies, Nucor, Tenet Healthcare, and Auburn University. On December 7, 2020, he was nominated for defense secretary by then-President-elect Joe Biden and was confirmed by the United States Senate on January 22, 2021, by a vote of 93–2. Austin holds the unique distinction of having commanded in combat in Iraq and Afghanistan at the one-, two-, three- and four-star levels, and was the first African American to command a division, corps, and field army in combat. He is a recipient of the Silver Star, the nation's third highest award for valor, for his actions during the Iraq invasion, as well as five Defense Distinguished Service Medals. Austin was born on August 8, 1953, in Mobile, Alabama; he was raised in Thomasville, Georgia. He graduated from the United States Military Academy at West Point with a Bachelor of Science degree in 1975. While at the Academy, Austin played rugby and ran track. He later earned a Master of Arts degree in counselor education from Auburn University's College of Education in 1986, and a Master of Business Administration in business management from Webster University in 1989. He is a graduate of the Infantry Officer Basic and Advanced courses, the Army Command and General Staff College, and the Army War College. In June 1975, Austin graduated from West Point and was commissioned in the Infantry as a second lieutenant. He completed Airborne and Ranger schools prior to receiving his initial assignment in Germany with the 3rd Infantry Division (Mechanized) as a rifle platoon leader and later as a scout platoon leader and company executive officer in 1st Battalion, 7th Infantry. Following this assignment and attendance at the Infantry Officer Advanced Course, he was assigned to the 82nd Airborne Division at Fort Bragg, North Carolina, where he commanded the Combat Support Company, 2nd Battalion (Airborne), 508th Infantry and served as the Assistant S-3 (Operations) for 1st Brigade. In 1981, Austin was assigned to Indianapolis, Indiana, where he was the operations officer for the Army Indianapolis District Recruiting Command, and where he later commanded a company in the Army Recruiting Battalion. Upon conclusion of this assignment, he attended Auburn University, where he completed studies for a Master's in education. He then returned to the West Point as a company tactical officer. After completion of the Army Command and General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, he was assigned to the 10th Mountain Division (Light Infantry), Fort Drum, New York, where he served as the S-3 (Operations) and later executive officer for the 2nd Battalion, 22nd Infantry. He subsequently served as Executive Officer for 1st Brigade, 10th Mountain, and later Director of Plans, Training, Mobilization, and Security for Fort Drum. In 1993, Austin returned to the 82nd Airborne Division where he commanded the 2d Battalion (Airborne), 505th Infantry. He later served as G-3 for the 82nd. Following graduation from Army War College, Carlisle, Pennsylvania, he returned to the 82nd Airborne Division for a third tour of duty there to command 3rd Brigade. Shortly after brigade command, he served as Chief, Joint Operations Division, J-3, on the Joint Staff at The Pentagon in Arlington, Virginia. His next assignment, in 2001, was as Assistant Division Commander for Maneuver (ADC-M), 3rd Infantry Division (Mechanized), Fort Stewart, Georgia. As the ADC-M, he helped lead the division's invasion of Iraq in March 2003. Leading the fight from the front, Austin traveled the 500 miles from Kuwait to Baghdad in his command and control vehicle. The division reached Baghdad and secured the city. Austin was awarded a Silver Star, the nation's third highest award for valor, for his actions as commander during the invasion. Commanding General of 10th Mtn Division (Light) and CJTF-180 – Afghanistan Austin served from September 2003 until August 2005 as Commanding General of 10th Mountain Division, with duty as Commander, Combined Joint Task Force 180, during the War in Afghanistan. He was the first African American to serve as a U.S. Army division commander in combat. He subsequently served as Chief of Staff of US Central Command at MacDill AFB in Tampa, Florida, from September 2005 until October 2006. Commanding General of Multi-National Corps – Iraq On December 8, 2006, Austin was promoted to Lieutenant General and assumed command of XVIII Airborne Corps, Fort Bragg, North Carolina. In February 2008, Austin became the second highest ranking commander in Iraq, taking command of the Multi-National Corps – Iraq (MNC-I). As commander of MNC-I, he directed the operations of approximately 152,000 joint and coalition forces across all sectors of Iraq. He was the first African American general officer to lead a corps-sized element in combat. Austin assumed the mission during the period when the Surge forces were drawing down. He expertly oversaw the responsible transition of forces out of the country while ensuring that progress continued on the ground. Austin handed over command of XVIII Corps to become Director of the Joint Staff in August 2009. This promotion came at the direction of Admiral Michael Mullen, then Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Austin credited the appointment as having jumpstarted his later career, saying: "People who might not have known Lloyd Austin began to know him." On September 1, 2010 at a ceremony at Al-Faw Palace in Baghdad, Austin was promoted to the rank of General, becoming the Army's 200th four-star general officer and the sixth African American in the U.S. Army to achieve the top rank. He subsequently assumed the role of Commanding General (CG) of United States Forces – Iraq (USF-I), becoming the first African American in history to command an entire theater of war. He was preceded in the role by General Ray Odierno. As CG, USF-I, Austin was the senior military commander in charge of all US and remaining coalition forces in Iraq. Their mission was to advise, train, assist, and equip the Iraqi Armed Forces and the security agencies part of the Ministry of the Interior. As commander, Austin requested an additional troop presence in Iraq from 14,000 to 18,000. Austin oversaw the transition from Operation Iraqi Freedom and combat operations to Operation New Dawn and stability operations focused on advising, assisting, and training the ISF. He was extensively involved in the internal U.S. discussions and then negotiations with the Iraqi Government leading up to the signing of the Strategic Partnership Agreement. Opposing total U.S. withdrawal, Austin preferred that the U.S. maintain about 10,000 troops in Iraq after 2011 and he approved staff planning for up to 20,000 remaining troops. In the absence of a new Status of Forces Agreement, President Barack Obama made the decision to retrograde all U.S. forces out of Iraq by the end of 2011. Austin oversaw the entire operation, concurrently planning and executing the orderly drawdown and redeployment of approximately 50,000 service members. The U.S. command in Iraq formally cased its colors on December 15, 2011, at a reduced-sized BIAP complex, and Austin's speech there cited his division's seizure of the airport over eight years beforehand. Austin, along with other members of the USF-I staff, departed Iraq on December 18, 2011. In December 2011, Austin was nominated to become Vice Chief of Staff of the United States Army (VCSA). He took office on January 31, 2012. As VCSA, he managed the day-to-day administration of the Army's budget and headquarters staff. Under his direction, the Army took steps to reduce the incidence of suicide in the ranks. He spearheaded the Army's efforts to increase awareness and improve treatment options for the "invisible wounds" of war, namely traumatic brain injuries and post-traumatic stress. Austin became the commander of CENTCOM on March 22, 2013, after being nominated by President Obama in late 2012. Austin was preceded as CENTCOM Commander by General James Mattis, whom Austin would later succeed as Secretary of Defense. In this capacity, General Austin oversaw all United States troops deployed and major United States Military operations around the area of Middle-East and Central Asia and some parts of South Asia. The area of command consisted of 20 countries including Iraq, Syria, Yemen, Afghanistan, Egypt and Lebanon. He directed the activities of four service component commands, one subordinate unified command (U.S. Forces-Afghanistan/Resolute Support Mission), two major subordinate multi-service commands, and several temporary task forces actively engaged in military operations. Austin oversaw more than 150,000 American and coalition forces involved in operations throughout the region. During his tenure, Austin routinely advised the President, the Secretary of Defense, and other national-level leadership on challenges afflicting the CENTCOM region, and directed U.S. and allied military response to multiple crises and operations. These included the explosive crisis and transition of power in Egypt (2013–14); the resurgence of Al Qaeda's affiliate in the Arabian Peninsula; the Huthi-led insurgency against the Hadi government and the civil war in Yemen; continued support for the operations in Afghanistan against Al Qaeda and other extremist groups; malign activity by Iran's Revolutionary Guard Corps-Qods Forces; and the rise of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in Iraq and Syria. As commander, after ISIL seized control of Mosul in June 2014, Austin oversaw the development and execution of the military campaign plan to counter ISIL in Iraq and Syria. As of October 2014, Austin argued that the U.S. military's primary focus in operations against ISIL should be Iraq, as opposed to Syria. In 2015, Austin conceded in a Senate Committee on Armed Services hearing that a CENTCOM-developed U.S. program intended to train Syrians to combat ISIL had resulted in only a handful of fighters. At the hearing, he faced particularly pointed questioning from Senator John McCain over the direction of military engagement in Syria. Austin's retirement ceremony took place at Joint Base Myer–Henderson Hall on April 5, 2016. During his departure and retirement ceremony, General Austin said that he was extremely proud of the achievements of the troops under his command. He said "I'm very proud to have had the opportunity to lead troops in combat, I have seen our young leaders do amazing things in really tough and dangerous situations." Immediately after retiring as CENTCOM Commander, Austin joined the board of Raytheon Technologies, a military contractor, in April 2016. As of October 2020[update], his Raytheon stock holdings were worth roughly $500,000 and his compensation, including stock, totaled $2.7 million. On September 18, 2017, he was appointed to Nucor's board of directors. On May 29, 2018, Austin was appointed as an independent director on the board of Tenet Healthcare. He also operates a consulting firm and has been a partner at Pine Island Capital, an investment company with which Secretary of State Antony Blinken and Michèle Flournoy are affiliated. On December 7, 2020, it was reported that President-elect Joe Biden would nominate Austin as Secretary of Defense. Austin had a close relationship with Beau, Biden's late son, when he served on Austin's staff in Iraq in 2008 and 2009 and both kept in touch with each other after Beau returned from his deployment. Biden became acquainted with Austin while Austin was CENTCOM commander in the Obama administration, and reportedly grew to trust Austin after receiving Austin's briefings. Like former defense secretary James Mattis, Austin required a congressional waiver of the National Security Act of 1947 to bypass the seven-year waiting period after leaving active-duty military, as prescribed by 10 U.S.C. § 113(a), in order to be appointed as Secretary of Defense. Austin's nomination, and the attendant requirement for a waiver, met with some concern in Congress regarding its implications for civil–military relations. Former Secretary of Defense Robert Gates and former Secretary of State Colin Powell, among others, issued statements supporting Austin's nomination. The Senate Armed Services Committee held a confirmation hearing for Austin on January 19, 2021. On January 21, Congress granted Austin a waiver of the seven-year requirement by a 326–78 vote in the House and a 69–27 vote in the Senate. He was confirmed by the Senate in a 93–2 vote on January 22, 2021. Republican senators Josh Hawley and Mike Lee were the only "no" votes. Upon his confirmation and swearing-in later that day, Austin became the first black secretary of defense. Austin took office on January 22, 2021, after being sworn in by a Defense Department official, and was sworn in ceremonially by Vice President Kamala Harris on January 25, 2021. Upon assuming the office, Austin announced his top three priorities for the Defense Department in a memorandum issued to all DoD employees. It stated in part, "As the Secretary of Defense, I am committed to ensuring that the Department develops the right people, priorities, and purpose of mission to continue to defend our Nation from enemies foreign and domestic. This will require aligning our priorities and capabilities to a changing and dynamic threat landscape. We will do so in a way that is based on a sober assessment of our strategic needs and recognize the importance of building and sustaining a strong workforce and unity within our Department, across the Nation and with our allies and partners around the world. Three priorities - defending the Nation, taking care of our people, and succeeding through teamwork - will guide our efforts." On March 28, 2023, Austin testified before the Senate Armed Services Committee on DoD's Budget Request for Fiscal Year 2024 and the Future Years Defense Program. In his opening statement he reiterated the objectives of the 2022 National Defense Strategy (NDS): "The NDS directs the Department to act urgently to sustain and strengthen U.S. deterrence, with the [People's Republic of China] as our pacing challenge. The NDS also directs the Department to tackle the acute threat of Russia, as well as the persistent threats from Iran, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK), and global terrorist groups. The NDS clearly articulates our priorities: defend the homeland from the growing, multi-domain challenge posed by the PRC; deter strategic attacks against the United States, our Allies, and our Partners; deter aggression, while preparing to prevail in conflict if necessary, by prioritizing the PRC challenge in the Indo-Pacific, followed by the Russian challenge in Europe; and build a resilient Joint Force and defense ecosystem." Several days after assuming office as Secretary of Defense, Austin visited the National Guard deployed to Washington D.C. Austin praised the Guard for protecting the Capitol in the days after the January 6, 2021 attack on the United States Capitol. During a press conference, he confirmed that the National Guard was expected to leave the U.S. Capitol within weeks and that there would be no further requests from federal authorities or lawmakers to keep the National Guard's troops in the Capitol complex following their March departure. Austin would subsequently order the troops stay through May. Part of Austin's primary agenda as Secretary of Defense was the Department of Defense's plan—in coordination with Anthony Fauci, the chief medical advisor to the president—to confront the COVID-19 pandemic within the department. Austin's first step was to urge service members to get vaccinated, especially after the revelation that almost one-third of active-duty service members had turned down the opportunity to get administered the vaccine. In order to tout the safety of the coronavirus vaccine, Austin took the vaccine himself and also emphasized that taking the coronavirus vaccine will prevent disease among the troops, particularly those who were deployed overseas. Among his early acts as Secretary of Defense, Austin removed former president Trump's appointees from the Pentagon advisory boards. As part of a review, he ordered their resignations, most notably former House Speaker Newt Gingrich and former Trump campaign manager Corey Lewandowski. Many of those removed were last minute political appointees after the 2020 election. On January 1, 2024, Austin was hospitalized at Walter Reed National Military Medical Center due to complications following a minimally invasive surgical procedure conducted on December 22, 2023 to address his prostate cancer (prostatectomy). On January 2, Austin began experiencing fever and chills and shallow breathing. The medical staff decided to transfer him to the critical-care unit for several days for closer monitoring and better team care by his doctors. Austin spent several days in Walter Reed's intensive care unit (ICU) and during that time delegated authority to the deputy secretary of defense Kathleen Hicks. On January 5, he resumed his functions and duties as secretary of defense from the hospital. The cancer was treated early, and Austin's doctors have stated that his prognosis is "excellent". The Department of Defense did not disclose the hospitalization to the President, senior Defense Department officials, senior White House national security staff, members of the U.S. Congress, media outlets, or the public for several days. This failure to disclose, which came at a time when Iranian-backed militias were frequently attacking U.S. military bases and the U.S. Navy was fighting to protect maritime safety of commercial shipping vessels in the Persian Gulf area, contravened established practices of disclosing the medical issues of Cabinet members and senior U.S. officials. President Biden and high-ranking White House officials only learned of Austin's hospitalization three days after it happened, when National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan was informed just before he attended an event at Joint Base Myer–Henderson Hall where Austin was also scheduled to appear. Sullivan subsequently relayed the information to his colleagues and to Biden. During Austin's hospitalization, Hicks performed the duties of Secretary of Defense. She was not informed of the specifics behind Austin's hospitalization for three days. Other top civilian and military Defense Department officials were notified only two hours before public disclosure, and Congress was notified only fifteen minutes beforehand. The Pentagon Press Association, which represents members of the media covering the Defense Department, criticized Austin's multiday disappearance and the ensuing lack of transparency. Some Democratic and Republican members of Congress have called on Austin to resign due to the failure to disclose his absence. While stopped at a coffee shop in Allentown, Pennsylvania, a journalist asked Biden, "Do you have confidence in Secretary Austin?" the president responded, "I do." When the journalist asked, "Was it a lapse in judgment for him not to tell you earlier?" Biden said, "Yes." During a press conference at the Pentagon on February 1, Austin addressed his hospitalization, stating: "I want to be crystal clear. We did not handle this right, and I did not handle this right. I should have told the President about my cancer diagnosis. I should have also told my team and the American public. And I take full responsibility. I apologize to my teammates and to the American people. Now, I want to make it very clear that there were no gaps in authorities and no risks to the Department's command and control. At every moment, either I or the Deputy Secretary was in full charge. And we've already put in place some new procedures to make sure that any lapses in notification don't happen. In the future, if the Deputy Secretary needs to temporarily assume the office -- the duties of my office, she and several White House offices will be immediately notified, including the White House Situation Room, and so will key officials across the Department. And the reason for that assumption of duties will be included in writing." In response to the incident, the White House and the Department of Defense ordered reviews of all notification procedures. An internal 30-day review of the transfer of authority during Austin's hospitalization conducted by the Defense Department's administration and management director in January found that while processes could be improved, "nothing examined during this review demonstrated any indication of ill intent or an attempt to obfuscate." On February 29, 2024, Austin testified before the House Armed Services Committee regarding his hospitalization. He took full responsibility, stating: "I did not handle it right. But let me be clear: I never intended to keep my hospitalization from the White House… or from anybody else." Austin also confirmed that at no time was the Department absent leadership nor was the U.S. or its interests around the world at risk at any point. He told the Members: "There was never a break in command and control. We transferred authority in a timely fashion. What we didn't do well was the notification of senior leaders." Concerns of possible right-wing extremism among the troops caused Austin to implement new training requirements. On February 5, 2021, Austin announced that all members of the United States military would be required to stand down within the next 60 days in order to conduct training. The training includes the importance of the oath of office, a review of impermissible behaviors, and procedures for reporting suspected or actual extremist behavior. Throughout his tenure, Austin has engaged with civil and military leaders in the Middle East, reinforcing the United States' commitment to partnerships and security in the region. Areas for collaboration between the U.S. and allies include integrated air and missile defense, maritime security, intelligence sharing and early warning systems. There are more than 30,000 U.S. troops in the Middle East, despite the United States' withdrawal from Afghanistan and significant drawdown in Iraq. At the AIPAC Political Leadership Forum in January 2023, Austin stated: "Our network of alliances and partnerships is one of America's core strategic strengths. And no other country on Earth has anything like it. And that's especially important in today's Middle East." During a speech delivered at the Manama Dialogue in Bahrain in November 2021, Austin said: "We do crucial work together with our friends in this [Middle East] region—to deter aggression from any quarter, to disrupt terrorist networks, and to maintain freedom of navigation in some of the world's most important waterways. And over the decades, we have worked side-by-side as you invested in the capabilities to defend yourselves. We've supported you along the way, and we're going to keep doing so. Our forces train together, plan together, and work together—and that makes us stronger together." He went on to say: "So we're going to build on our longstanding investments in this crucial region—in security cooperation, and training, and professional military education, capacity building, and intelligence sharing, and joint exercises. It is a core part of my mission as Secretary of Defense to deepen and widen our partnerships." On July 16, 2022, President Biden met in Jeddah with the leaders of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) – Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates – the Republic of Egypt, the Republic of Iraq, and the Kingdom of Jordan (together known as the GCC+3) for the first of its kind "Jeddah Security and Development Summit". At the Summit, Biden reiterated the importance the United States places on its decades-long strategic partnerships in the Middle East region, affirmed the U.S.' enduring commitment to the security and territorial defense of U.S. partners, and recognized the region's increasingly important role as a trade and technology crossroads between hemispheres. He also strongly affirmed the centrality of the Middle East region to the long-term security and prosperity of the United States and the American people. During a visit to Israel in March 2023, in a joint press conference with Israeli Defense Minister Yoav Gallant, Austin said: "Iran remains the primary driver of instability in the region and we remain deeply concerned by Iran's support for terrorism, its dangerous proxies, its nuclear advances, its aggression at sea, its cyber threats, and its proliferation of attack drones and advanced conventional weapons." At the AIPAC Political Leadership Forum on January 10, 2023, Austin stated: "Going back to my days at CENTCOM, I have consistently said that the greatest threat to Israeli security, and to the region, is the prospect of a nuclear-armed Iran. We fully understand the dangers of the Iranian government's destabilizing actions—including its support for terrorism, its dangerous proxies, and its threats to wipe Israel off the map. But Iran is also stoking instability across the region—including its support for terrorists and militias, its proliferation of drones, its menacing cyber activities, its maritime aggression, and its continued threats against foreign officials. So Iran's reckless actions don't just threaten Israel. They endanger the entire Middle East and beyond, including by supporting Russia's cruel targeting of civilians in Ukraine. And increasingly, U.S. partners understand the importance of a regional approach to this kind of shared danger. So we're working closely with Israel, our partners in the Middle East, and our allies and partners to impose coordinated pressure on the Iranian regime." On February 19, 2021, Austin spoke to Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, saying that "We discussed the continued commitment to the 70-year US-Saudi security partnership, and I'm looking forward to working together to achieve regional security and stability." Austin expressed support for Saudi Arabia in the Iran–Saudi Arabia proxy conflict. On February 25, 2021, under Biden's direction, Austin coordinated military defensive airstrikes against an Iranian-backed militia in Syria. Austin had previously recommended such airstrikes as a response to Iranian attacks on Americans in Iraq earlier in the month. It was also believed that the militia is responsible for killing a civilian contractor and injuring one American soldier as well as other troops in a missile attack on February 15, 2021. During his testimony before the Senate Armed Services Committee on March 28, 2023, Austin stated that, "ISIS, al-Qa'ida, and other terrorist groups continue to threaten the security of the United States, our citizens, and our Partners in the Middle East, Africa, and South Asia. We are investing in a modernized, over-the-horizon counterterrorism architecture to prevent future attacks on our citizens and the U.S. homeland, and we have proven our continued ability to remove the most threatening al-Qa'ida and ISIS operatives from the battlefield." On December 18, 2023, Austin announced the establishment of a multinational maritime task force, Operation Prosperity Guardian, to address attacks from Houthis in Yemen on commercial ships and other targets. According to the Pentagon's December 19 report, Houthis conducted over 100 drone and ballistic missile attacks, targeting 10 merchant vessels involving more than 35 different nations. In a statement issued on October 18, while he was on a trip to the Middle East, Austin said: “The recent escalation in reckless Houthi attacks originating from Yemen threatens the free flow of commerce, endangers innocent mariners, and violates international law. Operation Prosperity Guardian is bringing together multiple countries to include the United Kingdom, Bahrain, Canada, France, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Seychelles, and Spain, to jointly address security challenges in the southern Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden, with the goal of ensuring freedom of navigation for all countries and bolstering regional security and prosperity.” In January 2023, Austin declared that "America's commitment to Israel's security is ironclad. It is not negotiable. And it never will be." In January 2023, the U.S. and Israel conducted the largest U.S.-Israel partnered exercise in history: Juniper Oak 23.2. The exercise integrated unmanned aerial vehicles, strategic bombers, jet fighters and precision fires. U.S. and Israeli forces conducted long-range strikes, suppression of enemy air defense, electronic attacks, offensive counter and air interdiction, and air operations in the maritime domain. More than 7,000 personnel participated in the all-domain exercise. On October 8, 2023, the day after the Hamas attack on Israel, Austin directed Gerald R. Ford carrier strike group to the Eastern Mediterranean in response. Along with the carrier, the group also included the cruiser Normandy and the destroyers Ramage, Carney, Roosevelt, and Thomas Hudner. On October 13, 2023, he arrived in Israel and met with Israeli Defense Minister Yoav Gallant. Austin said: "I am here in person to make something crystal-clear: America's support for Israel is ironclad." Since the initial Hamas attack, Pentagon Spokesman Brig. Gen. Pat Ryder said the Department has focused its efforts on protecting American forces and citizens in the region, flowing security assistance to Israel, coordinating with Israelis to secure the release of hostages held by Hamas and strengthening the force posture across the region in order to deter any escalation of the conflict beyond Gaza. In November 2023, the House approved $14.5 billion in military aid for Israel. The Biden administration announced that it would seek "an unprecedented support package for Israel’s defense” of $14.3 billion." On November 13, 2023, Defence for Children International, Al-Haq, and Palestinians living in Gaza and the United States, represented by the Center for Constitutional Rights, filed a lawsuit against Lloyd Austin, President Joe Biden and Secretary of State Antony Blinken for failure to prevent genocide, citing Israel's "mass killings," targeting of schools and hospitals, collective punishment, use of chemical weapons, forced expulsion, and blockage of food, water, electricity and other basic needs. The lawsuit reads: "Despite escalating evidence of Israeli policies directed at inflicting mass harm to the Palestinian population in Gaza," the Biden administration opposed "a life-saving cease-fire and lifting of the siege, even vetoing United Nations measures calling for a ceasefire. Instead, their actions to fund, arm, and endorse Israel’s mass and devastating bombing campaign and total siege of the Palestinians in Gaza constitutes a failure to prevent an unfolding genocide and complicity in its development." On November 28, 2023, the U.S. airlifted 24.5 metric tons, or more than 54,000 pounds, of U.N. humanitarian supplies to the people of Gaza. At the request of USAID, these supplies were transported via a U.S. Air Force C-17 Globemaster aircraft to Egypt where they were then transported via ground into Gaza and then distributed by U.N. agencies. On December 2, 2023, Austin stated that "the United States will remain Israel’s closest friend in the world. Our support for Israel’s security is non-negotiable. And it never will be." In December 2023, the Biden administration bypassed Congress to approve the sale of military equipment to Israel. On December 18, 2023, Austin declared that American support for Israel is "unshakeable". On March 5, 2024, Austin met with Israeli War Cabinet Member Benny Gantz. In their meeting, Austin condemned Hamas' attack against Israel on October 7 and called for the release of all hostages held by Hamas. He also conveyed strong concerns over the humanitarian situation in Gaza and requested Minister Gantz's support in enabling more humanitarian assistance and distribution into Gaza. Austin emphasized the critical need for a credible and implementable plan for protecting civilians and addressing the humanitarian situation prior to any ground operations in Rafah. On March 8, 2024, the Defense Department announced plans to undertake an emergency mission to establish a temporary pier on the coast of Gaza to deliver up to 2,000,000 humanitarian aid meals per-day. During a Pentagon press briefing, Pentagon press secretary Maj. Gen. Pat Ryder said, "This is part of a full-court press by the United States to not only focus on working on opening up and expanding routes via land, which are the optimal way to get aid into Gaza, but also by conducting air drops," in reference to the more than 100,000 meals that have been dropped into Gaza by the U.S. and Jordan during the previous week.   In his testimony before the House Armed Services Committee on March 29, 2023, Austin said: "The PRC is our pacing challenge. And we're driving hard to meet it. Our budget builds on our previous investments to deter aggression. We're investing in a more resilient force posture in the Indo-Pacific and increasing the scale and the scope of our exercises with our partners. And in recent months, our friends in the Indo-Pacific have taken major steps forward. The Philippines has agreed to nearly double the number of sites where we cooperate together. Japan has committed to double its defense spending. And through the historic AUKUS partnership, we'll work with our Australian and British allies to build game-changing defense advantages that will deter aggression and boost our defense industrial capacity." In March 2021, as part of their first overseas trip as members of the Biden administration, Austin and Secretary of State Antony Blinken visited Japan and South Korea. The trip reflected the Biden administration's concerns about China's growing influence within the Indo-Pacific region, especially their military buildup during the pandemic, as well as North Korea's nuclear threat and the February 2021 coup d'état in Myanmar. The trip was also part of the Biden administration's "America is back" diplomatic theme, and Austin pledged the U.S.'s commitment to reaffirm ties with its allies and to maintain a robust military presence in the Indo-Pacific region. Austin added that denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula remains a top priority for the Biden Administration, and that the alliances with South Korea and Japan are among the most important tools the United States has in that regard. On March 16, 2021, the Japan-U.S. Security Consultative Committee (SCC) (Japan-U.S. "2+2") was convened in Tokyo. The meeting was attended by Austin and Blinken from the U.S. side, and Foreign Minister Motegi Toshimitsu and Defense Minister Kishi Nobuo from the Japanese side. The four ministers reaffirmed that the Japan-U.S. Alliance remains the "cornerstone" of peace, security, and prosperity in the Indo-Pacific region, and renewed the unwavering commitment of both countries to the Japan-U.S. Alliance. In June 2023, as part of his seventh official visit to the Indo-Pacific region, Austin traveled to Tokyo to meet with his Japanese counterpart, Defense Minister Yasukazu Hamada and other senior leaders, including Prime Minister Kishida Fumio and Foreign Minister Yoshimasa Hayashi. Austin's visit came as the United States and Japan took important strides to modernize Alliance capabilities, optimize U.S. force posture, and build links with like-minded partners following the historic U.S.-Japan "2+2" Ministerial meeting earlier that year. In July 2023, Austin traveled to Australia where he participated in the 33rd Australia/U.S. ministerial consultations, also called AUSMIN. Following the meeting, DoD officials stated, "the unbreakable alliance between the United States and Australia has never been stronger" and "it is doing more than ever for peace and stability in the Indo-Pacific." In March 2021, Austin also made a three-day visit to India, where he met with his Indian counterpart Rajnath Singh, and other senior government officials. India drew closer to the United States following its tensions with China on their disputed Sino-Indian border. Austin urged India to cancel the planned purchase of Russia's S-400 air defence system. Austin made a second visit to India in June 2023, where he again met with Defense Minister Rajnath Singh as well as other senior leaders to discuss the ongoing joint efforts to modernize the U.S.-India Major Defense Partnership. The India-U.S. defense partnership has strengthened considerably in the last few years with the countries signing key defense and security pacts, including the Logistics Exchange Memorandum of Agreement in 2016 that allows their militaries to use each other's bases for repair and replenishment of supplies. During a press conference following Austin's visit to New Delhi, a senior Defense Department official described the progress between the U.S. and India: "India's growing commitment to playing a more engaged international role, including in the Indo-Pacific Quad, demonstrates a new and growing willingness to join the United States to protect and advance a shared vision of a free, open and rules-based global order. On June 11, 2022, Austin condemned China's "provocative, destabilising" military activity near Taiwan, a day after China's Defence Minister Wei Fenghe warned Austin that "if anyone dares to split Taiwan from China, the Chinese army will definitely not hesitate to start a war no matter the cost." Austin said the United States "will continue to fulfill our commitments under the Taiwan Relations Act. That includes assisting Taiwan in maintaining a sufficient self-defense capability." By February 2023, he had secured the U.S. military access to nine military bases in the Philippines, which is orthogonally situated between Taiwan and the South China Sea, expediting the full implementation of the Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement signed during the Obama administration. At the June 2023 Shangri-La Dialogue in Singapore, Austin warned that conflict in the Taiwan Strait would be devastating. In November 2023, Austin traveled to Jakarta, Indonesia for the ASEAN Defense Ministers' Meeting-Plus where he emphasized the U.S. commitment to ASEAN centrality as a key pillar of the United States’ efforts to uphold a free and open Indo-Pacific and detailed how U.S. security cooperation with ASEAN partners is contributing to a more stable and prosperous region. On the margins of the ADMM-Plus, Austin also met with each of his ASEAN counterparts from the Philippines, Indonesia, Thailand, and Vietnam. On February 19, 2021, Austin told reporters at the Pentagon that the Biden Administration had not yet determined whether the U.S. would withdraw all troops from Afghanistan by the May 1 deadline set by the Trump administration in February 2020 as part of the Doha Agreement, a deal reached between the United States and the Taliban. The Biden administration was considering a six-month extension. Austin promised that the United States "will not undertake a hasty or disorderly withdrawal from Afghanistan." On March 21, 2021, Austin met with Afghanistan President Ashraf Ghani in Kabul. In March 2021, Biden directed his national security team, including Austin, to begin withdrawal planning that accounted for a range of possible contingencies, including a non-combatant evacuation operation (NEO). On April 14, 2021, in an address to the nation, President Biden announced that a new deadline for full withdrawal of all U.S. troops had been set for September 11, 2021. "After consulting closely with our allies and partners, with our military leaders and intelligence personnel, with our diplomats and our development experts, with the Congress and the Vice President, as well as with [Afghan President Ashraf Ghani] and many others around the world, I concluded that it's time to end America's longest war. It's time for American troops to come home," he said. Soon after the withdrawal of U.S. troops started, the Taliban launched an offensive against the Afghan government, quickly advancing in front of a collapsing Afghan Armed Forces. On July 24, 2021, Austin said: "In terms of whether or not [Afghanistan's military] will stop the Taliban, I think the first thing to do is to make sure that they can slow the momentum." On August 12, 2021, following continued Taliban victories across Afghanistan, the Biden Administration announced that 3,000 U.S. troops would be deployed to Kabul Airport to evacuate embassy personnel, US nationals and Special Immigrant Visa applicants. Over the next few weeks, the Defense Department oversaw one of the largest airlifts in history, evacuating more than 120,000 Americans, Afghans and people of other nationalities. On August 26, 2021, an ISIS-K terrorist detonated a suicide bomb at Hamid Karzai International Airport, killing more than 170 civilians and 13 US service members. In a statement issued on the one-year anniversary of that devastating attack at Abbey Gate, Austin said: "The heroes we lost that day gave their lives to defend their teammates and to help save the lives of tens of thousands of innocent Afghan people who sought freedom and the opportunity for a better life." On August 30, 2021, the last American service member left Afghanistan. In December 2021, Austin directed an independent After Action Review (AAR) be conducted to provide a detailed assessment of the Defense Department's implementation of US Afghanistan policy from January 2020 through August 2021. "The purpose of the AAR was to examine decision points, constraints, and assumptions in order to contribute toward a whole-of-government effort to learn, improve and incorporate lessons learned into the Department's response to future crises." On February 24, 2022, Russian President Vladimir Putin launched an invasion of Ukraine, stating the "special military operation" is aimed at "demilitarization" and "denazification" of the country to protect ethnic Russians, prevent Kyiv's NATO membership and to keep it in Russia's "sphere of influence". During the invasion, the U.S. sent tens of billions of dollars in missiles, ammunition and other items to Ukraine. Austin said that he wanted to see "Russia weakened to the degree that it can't do the kinds of things that it has done in invading Ukraine". Austin said he "does not" believe that Russia's invasion of Ukraine will result in a nuclear war. Austin immediately ordered deployment of 7,000 U.S. military personnel and key enablers to locations across Europe in support of Ukraine. The next day, the NATO Response Force was activated, and the Biden administration authorized $350 million in military assistance from Defense Department inventories, including anti-armor, small arms and various munitions, body armor, and related equipment. In March 2022, the Biden administration announced $1 billion in security assistance to Ukraine, including direct transfers of Defense Department equipment to the Ukrainian military. In total, the United States has committed more than $44.9 billion in security assistance to Ukraine since the beginning of the Biden Administration, including $44.2 billion since the beginning of Russia’s invasion on February 24, 2022. On April 24, 2022, Secretary Austin and Secretary of State Antony Blinken visited Kyiv, Ukraine, and met with President Volodymyr Zelenskyy and other Ukrainian leaders. They discussed America's stalwart support for the Ukrainian government and Ukrainian people, including through the U.S.'s significant assistance to Ukraine's security, governance, economic and humanitarian needs. On April 26, 2022, Austin hosted a forum at Ramstein Air Base, Germany, where nearly 40 nations met to discuss current and future efforts to provide support for Ukraine. In his opening comments he articulated the purpose of the gathering, "to help Ukraine win the fight against Russia's unjust invasion—and to build up Ukraine's defenses for tomorrow's challenges". Austin also made clear that the invasion of Ukraine was a "war of choice". "Nobody is fooled by Putin's pretexts or by his phony claims on the Donbas [region]", Austin said. "Let's be clear — Russia's invasion is indefensible, and so are Russian atrocities. We all start today from a position of moral clarity: Russia is waging a war of choice to indulge the ambitions of one man." "Russia's invasion is baseless, reckless and lawless," Austin said. "It is an affront to the rules-based international order. It is a challenge to free people everywhere. And, as we see this morning, nations of goodwill from around the world stand united in our resolve to support Ukraine in its fight against Russia's imperial aggression. And that's the way it should be." "The contact group will be a vehicle for nations of goodwill to intensify our efforts, coordinate our assistance, and focus on winning today's fight and the struggles to come. The monthly meetings may be in-person, virtual or mixed. And they'll extend the transparency, the integration, and the dialogue that we saw today." On January 20, 2023, Austin traveled to Ramstein Air Base, Germany to conduct the eighth such meeting of the Ukraine Defense Contact Group (UDCG). He was joined by ministers of defense and chiefs of defense from nearly 50 nations, including Ukrainian Defense Minister Oleksiy Reznikov. The meeting produced an unprecedented level of donations from allies and partners, including the procurement of 31 M1 Abrams tanks for Ukraine by the U.S. as part of a $400 million Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative package. On May 15, 2023, the Defense Department announced the arrival of the Abrams tanks to Grafenwoehr, Germany in preparation for U.S.-led training of Ukrainian tank crews and maintainers before the tanks are sent to the front lines to arm Ukrainian forces. Austin refused to cooperate with the International Criminal Court (ICC) investigating Russian war crimes in Ukraine, consistent with long-standing policy that it might legitimize the ICC's investigation of United States war crimes. During a May 2023 Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Defense hearing about the Department of Defense's (DoD) fiscal year 2024 budget request, Senator Dick Durbin asked Austin: "Why are you reluctant to share [with the International Criminal Court] the evidence that we have gathered in the United States through the Department of Defense for those who are holding [Russian President] Vladimir Putin accountable for his war crimes?" Austin responded, "The Department firmly supports the goal of holding Russia accountable for its violations in Ukraine." But he added, "I will always prioritize the protection of US military personnel in anything that we do." When Durbin pushed him for further clarification, Austin said, "Again, I do have concerns about reciprocity [against U.S. military personnel] going forward." On May 25, 2023, Austin hosted the 12th meeting of the UDCG, held virtually and attended by leaders from 50 countries. Austin told those gathered, "Today, we committed to doing even more to support Ukraine's fight for freedom. I came away from today's meeting as confident as ever in the contact group's resolve and sustained unity." On June 15, 2023, Austin delivered remarks at the 13th meeting of the UDCG, marking the United States' new package of more than $2 billion under the Ukraine Security Assistance Initiative. On July 17, 2023, he spoke at the 14th meeting of the UDCG, noting that "Russia's war of choice has now lasted more than 500 days. On September 19, 2023, at the 15th meeting of the UDCG, Austin said: "Back in June, President Biden joined the leaders of the G7 in a joint declaration condemning, and I quote, "Russia's illegal, unjustifiable and unprovoked war of aggression against Ukraine. Those leaders committed to working together with Ukraine on long-term bilateral security commitments and arrangements to help secure its future. Since June, more than 22 countries have signed on to this statement and they've started working to further deepen their support for Ukraine now and in the years to come." The U.S.-led coalition has grown to include more than 54 countries – from North America to Europe to the Indo-Pacific – providing military assistance to help Ukraine. Collectively, as of February 2023, they have committed more than $80 billion in security assistance to Ukraine since Russia launched its invasion. They have also committed over: 1,000 tanks and other armored vehicles, 800 artillery systems, two million rounds of artillery ammunition and 50 advanced multiple rocket launching systems. The group of nations has also trained thousands of Ukrainian service members in these new capabilities. At an October 31, 2023 Senate Appropriations Committee hearing, Austin told lawmakers that supplemental aid is needed to help Ukraine continue to defend itself against Russia's ongoing aggression. He said, “Today's battles against aggression and terrorism will define global security for years to come. And only firm American leadership can ensure that tyrants, thugs and terrorists worldwide are not emboldened to commit more aggression and more atrocities.” On November 20, 2023, Austin met with President Zelensky and Defense Minister Rustem Umerov during an unannounced visit to Ukraine. It was his third visit as defense secretary and second since Russia’s invasion. While in Kyiv, Austin announced a new security assistance package for Ukraine valued at up to $100 million. The package includes additional air defense capabilities, artillery ammunition, antitank weapons and other materials to help Ukrainian forces defend their territory amid Russia's ongoing assault. On November 22, Austin hosted the 17th meeting of the Ukraine Defense Contact Group virtually from the Pentagon. On December 2, 2023, in his keynote address at the Reagan National Defense Forum held at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library & Museum, Austin said, in part: "We must continue to be clear to the American people about the stakes in Ukraine. Ukraine matters profoundly to America and to the entire world. And it matters for four key reasons. First, Putin’s war poses a stark and direct threat to security in Europe and beyond. Second, Putin’s aggression is a clear challenge to our NATO allies. Third, the Kremlin’s deliberate cruelty is an attack on our shared values of democracy and decency. And finally, Putin’s war is a frontal assault on the international rules-based order. So the outcome of this struggle will define global security for decades to come. And we don’t have the option of sitting it out." He went on to say: "If we do not stand up to the Kremlin’s naked aggression today, if we do not deter other would-be aggressors, we will only embolden them—and we will invite even more bloodshed and chaos. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine offers a grim preview of a world of tyranny and turmoil that should make us all shudder." On December 27, 2023, the U.S. announced an additional $250 million package to help meet Ukraine's urgent security needs. The package includes lifesaving air-defense munitions, air-defense system components, ammunition for HIMARS, anti-armor munitions, 155-millimeter and 105-millimeter artillery ammunition, and medical equipment. On February 23, 2024, Austin issued a statement marking two years since Russia's invasion of Ukraine. In it he acknowledged the work and continued commitment of the 50 countries that comprise the Ukraine Defense Contact Group. Since Putin started this war, this historic coalition has committed more than $87 billion in security assistance to Ukraine—including 15 U.S. allies that, as a percentage of GDP, contribute more to Ukraine's capability needs than the United States. In September 2023, Austin made his first trip to Africa as Secretary of Defense. He started his tour in Djibouti, home to the primary U.S. military base on the African continent, Camp Lemonnier, where he met with Djibouti's President Ismaïl Omar Guelleh and Somali President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. He then traveled to Kenya, where he and Kenyan Defense Minister Aden Duale signed a five-year security agreement to support working together against their common terror threat. Austin also pledged $100 million in support of Kenyan security deployments, as Kenya prepares to lead a multinational peacekeeping mission to Haiti to combat gang violence. He concluded his trip on Africa’s western coast, becoming the first U.S. defense secretary to ever visit Angola. In a speech delivered at the National Archives Auditorium in Luanda, Angola on September 27, Austin said: "I'm here in Angola to strengthen that robust and equal partnership. But I'm also here to underscore an important point, and that is that Africa matters. It matters profoundly to the shape of the 21st Century world. And it matters for our common prosperity and our shared security." He went on to say: "We know that the walk to freedom can be long, and no one gets it right all of the time. You know, I love my country so much that I fought for it, but America isn't trying to cover up for our imperfections. When a democracy falls short, when it falls short of its best traditions, as we all sometimes do, the whole world gets to see it. But that's not the point. The genius of a democracy is not that it's perfect. The genius of a democracy is that it can always open up space to let its citizen strive to live the universal values of freedom and self-government and human rights. And the genius of a democracy is that it is always a work in progress, and that's personal for me. I am a child of America's segregated South. I grew up in a time of legalized and racist segregation in America, and I stand here today in Africa as America's first black secretary of defense." Austin was raised by a devoutly Catholic mother and remains practicing himself. Austin and his wife, Charlene Denise Banner Austin, have been married for over forty years. Charlene worked as a non-profit administrator and served on the board of the Military Family Research Institute at Purdue University. Austin has two stepsons. 2007 inductee into the Thomasville County Sports Hall of Fame. Austin, Lloyd J.; Pollack, Kenneth M.; Wittes, Tamara Cofman (August 14, 2015). The Middle East in Transition (Report). Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. Austin, Lloyd J. (September 16, 2015). Statement of General Lloyd J. Austin III, Commander, U.S. Central Command, Before the Senate Armed Services Committee on Operation Inherent Resolve (PDF) (Speech). List of African-American United States Cabinet members "Lloyd J. Austin III". www.defense.gov. Archived from the original on October 28, 2022. Retrieved January 22, 2023. MacAskill, Ewen (March 22, 2013). "General Lloyd Austin picked for top job at US Central Command". The Guardian. Archived from the original on February 9, 2017. Retrieved December 2, 2020. Nominations before the Senate Armed Services Committee, 2nd Session, 111th Congress (PDF) (Report). 2010. p. 327. S Hrg 111-896. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 26, 2020. Retrieved December 2, 2020. Nobles, Miranda (October 2, 2017). "Retired Army general, Auburn trustee to speak at This is Auburn Speaker Series event". Auburn University. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved January 23, 2021. "On the Nomination (Confirmation: Lloyd James Austin, of Georgia, to be Secretary of Defense)". U.S. Senate. January 22, 2021. Archived from the original on January 29, 2021. Retrieved March 4, 2021. Hassler, Becky (May 23, 2017). "2017 Distinguished Graduate Award Recipients". West Point Association of Graduates. Archived from the original on June 24, 2023. Retrieved June 23, 2023. Cooper, Helene (December 9, 2020). "'Is Austin on Your List?': Biden's Pentagon Pick Rose Despite Barriers to Diversity". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 10, 2020. Retrieved December 10, 2020. "'Perfect People': Living the West Point Ideal". West Point Center for Oral History. Archived from the original on October 27, 2020. Retrieved December 8, 2020. "General Lloyd J. Austin III". United States Department of Defense. Archived from the original on September 5, 2015. Retrieved December 1, 2020.  This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the United States Department of Defense. "MISSION FIRST: The Warrior Leader". Army West Point. September 8, 2015. Archived from the original on June 24, 2023. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III". www.linkedin.com. Archived from the original on June 24, 2023. Retrieved June 23, 2023. Ibberson, Stuart (December 7, 2020). "Biden nominates retired general Lloyd Austin as defense secretary". Aerotech News and Review. Archived from the original on June 9, 2023. Retrieved February 21, 2021. Brooks, Drew (April 10, 2016). "Gen. Lloyd Austin Ends 41-year Army Career". The Fayetteville Observer. Archived from the original on December 9, 2020. Retrieved December 11, 2020 – via Military.com. Schogol, Jeff (January 27, 2022). "We finally know the backstory of how Defense Secretary Austin got the Silver Star". Task & Purpose. Archived from the original on June 24, 2023. Retrieved June 23, 2023. "Lloyd Austin". The American Academy of Diplomacy. Archived from the original on June 24, 2023. Retrieved June 23, 2023. Dickstein, Corey (December 8, 2020). "Biden officially announces he's picked retired CENTCOM Gen. Lloyd Austin for defense secretary". Stars and Stripes. Archived from the original on December 9, 2020. Retrieved December 10, 2020. "Maj. Gen. Lloyd J. Austin III to Command Fort Bragg 18th Airborne Corps". Jet. Johnson Publishing Company. August 28, 2006. pp. 36–37. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved December 10, 2020. "DoD News Briefing with Lt. Gen. Austin III from Iraq". United States Department of Defense. June 23, 2008. Archived from the original (News Transcript) on January 21, 2009. Retrieved December 2, 2020.  This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the United States Department of Defense. "U.S. general brings Baghdad standard home". CNN. December 20, 2011. Archived from the original on June 24, 2023. Retrieved June 23, 2023. Biden, Joe (December 8, 2020). "Why I Chose Lloyd Austin as Secretary of Defense". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on June 8, 2023. Retrieved June 23, 2023. Dey, Roger M. (September 4, 2010). "Austin leads USF-I into New Dawn". United States Army. Archived from the original on January 26, 2019. Retrieved May 18, 2016. Gordon & Trainor 2013, p. 637. "USF-Iraq Commanding General". United States Forces – Iraq. December 5, 2010. Archived from the original on October 20, 2020. Retrieved December 2, 2020.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Singh, Robert (2012). Barack Obama's Post-American Foreign Policy: The Limits of Engagement. Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 106. ISBN 978-1-78093-113-5. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved December 8, 2020. "Advance questions for General Lloyd J. Austin III" (PDF). United States Senate Committee on Armed Services. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 27, 2016. Retrieved December 2, 2020. Gordon & Trainor 2013, pp. 653–657. "Joe Biden picks Lloyd Austin as defense secretary". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on December 9, 2020. Retrieved December 9, 2020. [Austin] subsequently oversaw the withdrawal of US troops in 2011, a decision which he disagreed with. Gordon & Trainor 2013, pp. 659–660, 662. "MISSION FIRST: The Warrior Leader". Army West Point. September 8, 2015. Archived from the original on June 24, 2023. Retrieved June 23, 2023. Gordon & Trainor 2013, p. 671. Logan, Joseph (December 18, 2011). "Last U.S. troops leave Iraq, ending war". Reuters. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved May 19, 2016. "General Officer Announcements". United States Department of Defense. September 30, 2011. Release No 841-11. Archived from the original on October 26, 2012. Retrieved December 18, 2011.  This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the United States Department of Defense. Dock-Abuhl, Courtney (March 12, 2013). "Austin sworn in as vice chief of staff". United States Army. Archived from the original on August 8, 2020. Retrieved December 1, 2020. "General Foresees Turnaround in Army Suicide Rate". CBS News. Associated Press. March 7, 2013. Archived from the original on October 28, 2018. "NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell, Army Vice Chief of Staff General Lloyd Austin, Reps. Mike Thompson, Gus Bilirakis Join Forces to Tackle Traumatic Brain Injury". Mike Thompson. September 12, 2012. Archived from the original on June 11, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016. Ibberson, Stuart (December 7, 2020). "Biden nominates retired general Lloyd Austin as defense secretary". Aerotech News & Review. Archived from the original on June 9, 2023. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "General Lloyd J. Austin III Retires". Black Engineer.com. April 11, 2016. Archived from the original on June 4, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016. "Secretary Panetta Statement on Intent to Nominate CENTCOM Commander". United States Department of Defense. No 951-12. Archived from the original on April 15, 2013. Retrieved February 13, 2013.  This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the United States Department of Defense. "Looking back for the way ahead: An interview with Retired Gen. Lloyd Austin". Office of the Deputy Chief of Staff. January 2, 2018. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved December 9, 2020. "Austin leaves legacy of leading from the front". U.S. Central Command. Archived from the original on March 5, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2021. "United States Central Command, United States Africa Command and United States Special Operations Command". www.govinfo.gov. Archived from the original on August 1, 2023. Retrieved June 24, 2023. Austin, Lloyd J. (September 16, 2015). "Statement of General Lloyd J. Austin III" (PDF). United States Senate Committee on Armed Services. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 25, 2016. Retrieved December 2, 2020. "Combined Forces Air Component Commander Airpower Statistics (as of 31 March 2016)" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on August 19, 2016. Retrieved December 2, 2020. Ackerman, Spencer (October 17, 2014). "US stresses Iraq emphasis even as air strikes escalate against Isis in Syria". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved December 8, 2020. Cooper, Helene (September 16, 2015). "Few U.S.-Trained Syrians Still Fight ISIS, Senators Are Told". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on November 28, 2020. Retrieved December 8, 2020. Ackerman, Spencer (September 16, 2015). "US has trained only 'four or five' Syrian fighters against Isis, top general testifies". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on November 23, 2020. Retrieved December 8, 2020. Bender, Bryan; Seligman, Lara (December 8, 2020). "Questions swirl over Austin's limited experience". Politico. Archived from the original on December 9, 2020. Retrieved December 9, 2020. Callahan, Guv (April 8, 2016). "A Soldier's Soldier". United States Army. Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016. Lipton, Eric; Vogel, Kenneth P.; LaForgia, Michael (December 9, 2020). "Biden's Choice for Pentagon Faces Questions on Ties to Contractors". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 10, 2020. Retrieved December 11, 2020. "Lloyd J Austin III". Raytheon Technologies. Archived from the original on November 29, 2020. Retrieved November 28, 2020. "Nucor Announces the Addition of General Lloyd J. Austin III to the Nucor Board of Directors" (Press release). PR Newswire. Archived from the original on September 14, 2017. Retrieved December 2, 2020. "Tenet Board Appoints Two Independent Directors" (Press release). May 29, 2018. Archived from the original on May 30, 2018. Retrieved May 29, 2018. Seligman, Lara; Pager, Tyler; O'Brien, Connor; Bertrand, Natasha (December 7, 2020). "Biden picks retired general Lloyd Austin to run Pentagon". Politico. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved December 8, 2020. Cooper, Helene; Martin, Jonathan; Schmitt, Eric (December 8, 2020). "Biden Plans to Tap Lloyd Austin, Former Iraq Commander, as Defense Secretary". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved December 8, 2020. Bender, Bryan; Seligman, Lara. "Questions swirl over Austin's limited experience (8 December, 2020)". POLITICO. Archived from the original on December 9, 2020. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "Revolving Door: Lloyd Austin Employment Summary | OpenSecrets". OpenSecrets.org. Archived from the original on April 3, 2023. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Ordoñez, Franco; Johnson, Carrie; Wise, Alana (December 7, 2020). "Biden Expected To Nominate Gen. Lloyd Austin As Defense Secretary". NPR. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved December 8, 2020. Lamothe, Dan (December 1, 2016). "Trump picks retired Marine Gen. James Mattis for secretary of defense". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on December 1, 2016. Retrieved December 8, 2020. Steinhauer, Jennifer; Schmitt, Eric; Broadwater, Luke (December 8, 2020). "Biden's Pentagon Pick Reignites Debate Over Civilian Control of Military". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 9, 2020. Retrieved December 9, 2020. Desiderio, Andrew; O'Brien, Connor (December 8, 2020). "Democrats signal early opposition to Biden's Defense pick". Politico. Archived from the original on December 9, 2020. Retrieved December 9, 2020. Crowley, Michael; Schmitt, Eric (December 10, 2020). "Biden Asks Congress to Grant Waiver for 'Cool Under Fire' Defense Pick". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 10, 2020. Retrieved December 10, 2020. O'Brien, Connor (January 21, 2021). "Senate clears Austin waiver, setting up confirmation vote to be Biden's Pentagon chief". Politico. Archived from the original on January 23, 2021. Retrieved January 21, 2021. Youssef, Nancy A. (January 21, 2021). "Lloyd Austin Receives Waiver Allowing Him to Become Defense Chief". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved January 21, 2021. "H.R.335 – 117th Congress (2021-2022): To provide for an exception to a limitation against appointment of persons as Secretary of Defense within seven years of relief from active duty as a regular commissioned officer of the Armed Forces". www.congress.gov. January 22, 2021. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved January 23, 2021. Booker, Brakkton (January 22, 2021). "Lloyd Austin Confirmed As Secretary of Defense, Becomes First Black Pentagon Chief". NPR. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2021. Edmondson, Catie (January 22, 2021). "Lloyd Austin is confirmed, becoming the first Black defense secretary in U.S. history". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2021. Everstine, Brian W. (January 25, 2021). "Austin Ceremonially Sworn in at the White House". Air Force Magazine. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved January 26, 2021. "Memorandum for All Department of Defense Employees" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on August 10, 2023. Retrieved August 10, 2023. "Introduction". March 28, 2023. Archived from the original on August 10, 2023. Retrieved August 10, 2023. Military.com (February 1, 2021). "Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin Visits National Guard Troops Deployed to DC". Military.com. Archived from the original on February 10, 2021. Retrieved March 1, 2021. Valerio, Mike (February 20, 2021). "Defense Secretary Austin: National Guard troops expected to leave Capitol March 12". WUSA. Archived from the original on March 5, 2021. Retrieved March 1, 2021. Watson, Eleanor (March 10, 2021). "Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin approves request to extend nearly 2,300 troops at Capitol until May 23". CBS News. Archived from the original on September 23, 2022. Retrieved February 9, 2023. Liebermann, Oren (February 25, 2021). "Pentagon chief urges service members to get vaccinated after it was revealed one-third are opting out". CTV News. Archived from the original on January 10, 2024. Retrieved March 16, 2021. Olson, Wyatt (February 25, 2021). "Austin touts safety of coronavirus vaccine: 'I've taken it myself'". Stars and Stripes. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2021. Baldor, Lolita C. (February 2, 2021). "Pentagon chief purges defense boards; Trump loyalists out". The Associated Press. Archived from the original on March 22, 2023. Retrieved March 22, 2023. Nirappil, Fenit; Sun, Lena H. (January 10, 2024). "How Lloyd Austin's prostate cancer surgery led to hospitalization". Washington Post. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III Press Conference". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved March 9, 2024. Epstein, Kayla; Debusmann, Bernd Jr. (January 9, 2024). "Lloyd Austin: Pentagon reveals US defence secretary had prostate cancer surgery". BBC. Archived from the original on January 9, 2024. Retrieved January 9, 2024. Garrison, Joey; Vanden Brook, Tom; Collins, Michael (January 10, 2024). "Lloyd Austin kept his diagnosis from the commander-in-chief. Biden has to answer this question". USA Today. ISSN 0734-7456. Ward, Alexander; Seligman, Lara; Lemire, Jonathan (January 6, 2024). "Pentagon didn't inform Biden, White House for days about Austin's hospitalization". Politico. Archived from the original on January 8, 2024. Retrieved January 10, 2024. Stewart, Phil; Mohammed, Arshad (January 6, 2024). "Pentagon keeps Austin's hospitalization under wraps for days". Reuters. Retrieved January 10, 2024. Daniels, Eugene; Ward, Alexander; Cancryn, Adam; Stein, Sam (January 10, 2024). "'This can't happen again': How the White House reacted to Austin's stunning news". Politico. Retrieved January 10, 2024. Ward, Alexander; Berg, Matt (January 8, 2024). "The 3 biggest questions of the Austin saga". Politico. Retrieved January 8, 2024. Ward, Alexander; Seligman, Lara; Lemire, Jonathan (January 7, 2024). "The Lloyd Austin fallout is growing: 'Someone's head has to roll'". Politico. Retrieved January 8, 2024. Baldor, Lolita C. (January 6, 2024). "Senior Biden leaders and Pentagon officials unaware for days that defense secretary was hospitalized". The Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 7, 2024. Retrieved January 10, 2024. Richards, Zoë (January 10, 2024). "Rep. Chris Deluzio becomes first Democrat to call for Defense Secretary Austin to resign". NBC News. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Biden says he has confidence in Austin amid scrutiny over defense secretary's hospitalization". NBC News. January 12, 2024. Retrieved March 10, 2024. Baker, Peter (January 9, 2024). "Surprised by New Details About Austin's Health, White House Orders Review". The New York Times. ISSN 1553-8095. OCLC 1645522. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Watson, Eleanor (February 26, 2024). "Pentagon review of Lloyd Austin's hospitalization finds no "ill intent" in not disclosing but says processes could be improved - CBS News". www.cbsnews.com. Retrieved March 10, 2024. Watson, Eleanor (February 29, 2024). "Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin testifies before Congress about his hospitalization: "I did not handle it right" - CBS News". www.cbsnews.com. Retrieved March 10, 2024. "Stand-Down to Address Extremism in the Ranks" (PDF). media.defense.gov. February 5, 2021. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 15, 2021. Retrieved April 14, 2021. Lopez, Todd C. (March 30, 2021). "Extremism Stand Downs Focus on Oath, Not Data Collection". U.S Department of Defense. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021. Retrieved November 12, 2021. Barbara Starr, Zachary Cohen, Ellie Kaufman and Oren Liebermann (February 3, 2021). "Secretary of Defense orders all military to pause and review handling of extremism in ranks". CNN. Archived from the original on September 8, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2021.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Defense Official Says U.S. Remains Committed to Middle East". U.S. Department of Defense. Archived from the original on August 10, 2023. Retrieved August 10, 2023. "Remarks by Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III at the AIPAC Political Leadership Foru". U.S. Department of Defense. Archived from the original on August 10, 2023. Retrieved August 10, 2023. "Remarks by Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III on Middle East Security at the Manama". U.S. Department of Defense. Archived from the original on August 10, 2023. Retrieved August 10, 2023. McGinn, George (November 20, 2021). "Remarks by Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III on Middle East Security at the Manama Dialogue (As Delivered)". The Daily Defense News. Archived from the original on August 10, 2023. Retrieved August 10, 2023. House, The White (July 16, 2022). "FACT SHEET: The United States Strengthens Cooperation with Middle East Partners to Address 21st Century Challenges". The White House. Archived from the original on August 10, 2023. Retrieved August 10, 2023. "Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III Holds a Joint Press Conference With Israeli Defen". U.S. Department of Defense. Archived from the original on July 18, 2023. Retrieved August 10, 2023. "U.S. defense secretary calls Saudi crown prince, reaffirms strategic ties". Reuters. February 19, 2021. Archived from the original on February 19, 2021. "U.S. Conducts Defensive Airstrikes Against Iranian-backed Militia in Syria". U.S. Department of Defense. Archived from the original on November 12, 2023. Retrieved March 1, 2021. "Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin Says He Recommended Syria Airstrike: 'We Know What We Hit'". NewsOne. February 26, 2021. Archived from the original on February 27, 2021. Retrieved March 1, 2021. "Statement for the Record, Senate Armed Services Committee Budget Posture Hearing, March 28, 2023" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on September 22, 2023. Retrieved August 10, 2023. "Pentagon announces new international mission to counter attacks on commercial vessels in Red Sea". AP News. December 18, 2023. Retrieved March 10, 2024. Gordon, Chris (December 18, 2023). "Pentagon Announces 'Operation Prosperity Guardian' to Stop Attacks by Houthis". Air & Space Forces Magazine. Retrieved March 10, 2024. "Largest U.S.-Israeli Exercise in History Concludes". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved August 10, 2023. "Statement From Secretary Lloyd J. Austin III on U.S. Force Posture Changes in the Middle E". U.S. Department of Defense. Archived from the original on October 8, 2023. Retrieved October 8, 2023. Fischler, Jacob (October 13, 2023). "U.S. stresses support for Israel as 1 million residents of North Gaza ordered to evacuate". Colorado Newsline. Archived from the original on October 14, 2023. Retrieved October 15, 2023. "Defense Department Continues to Stress Law of War With Israel". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved December 14, 2023. US House passes $14.5bn military aid package for Israel Archived January 8, 2024, at the Wayback Machine aljazeera.com Retrieved 4 November 2023 "Most of Israel's weapons imports come from the US. Now Biden is rushing even more arms". Vox. November 18, 2023. Archived from the original on January 8, 2024. Retrieved January 7, 2024. McGreal, Chris (November 13, 2023). "US rights group sues Biden for alleged 'failure to prevent genocide' in Gaza". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on November 21, 2023. "US President Biden sued for 'complicity' in Israel's 'genocide' in Gaza". Al Jazeera. November 14, 2023. Archived from the original on December 22, 2023. Retrieved January 8, 2024. Thakker, Prem (November 13, 2023). "Palestinians Sue Biden for Failing to Prevent Genocide in Gaza". The Intercept. Archived from the original on November 19, 2023. "Pentagon Press Secretary Air Force Brig. Gen. Pat Ryder Holds a Press Briefing". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved December 14, 2023. "US Defense Secretary: The US will remain Israel's closest friend in the world". Israel National News. December 3, 2023. Archived from the original on December 12, 2023. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "Biden administration bypasses Congress on weapons sales to Israel". Al Jazeera. December 30, 2023. Archived from the original on January 7, 2024. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Austin says US support for Israel unshakeable as Gaza ceasefire calls grow". Al Jazeera. December 18, 2023. Archived from the original on January 6, 2024. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "DOD to Construct Pier to Deliver Humanitarian Aid to Gaza". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved March 10, 2024. "Opening Testimony by Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III Before the House Armed Servi". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved August 10, 2023. "Austin arrives in Tokyo for talks expected to include cooperation on China, North Korea". Stars and Stripes. Archived from the original on March 15, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2021. "2 key US Cabinet members visit Japan for China-focused talks". AP NEWS. March 15, 2021. Archived from the original on March 15, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2021. Jessie Yeung (March 16, 2021). "US and Japan express concern over China's 'aggressive actions'". CNN. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2021. "Japan-U.S. Security Consultative Committee (Japan-U.S." Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan. Archived from the original on December 5, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2023. "Secretary of Defense Travel to Japan, Singapore, India, France". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved August 10, 2023. "Australian, U.S. Leaders Say Alliance Is More Relevant Than Ever". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved August 10, 2023. Roy, Shubhajit (March 21, 2021). "US Defence Secretary holds talks to deepen Indo-US ties, says discussed rights too". The Indian Express. The Indian Express. Archived from the original on November 20, 2021. Retrieved November 20, 2021. "U.S. defense secretary urges India to avoid buying Russian equipment". Reuters. March 20, 2021. Archived from the original on April 13, 2021. Retrieved April 9, 2021. "U.S., India sign military logistics agreement". Reuters. August 29, 2016. Archived from the original on October 2, 2019. Retrieved August 10, 2023. "U.S., India Rapidly Expand Their Military Cooperation". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved August 10, 2023. "US blasts China's 'destabilising' military activity near Taiwan". France 24. June 11, 2022. Archived from the original on August 13, 2022. Retrieved August 13, 2022. "'Smash to smithereens': China threatens all-out war over Taiwan". Al-Jazeera. June 10, 2022. Archived from the original on August 13, 2022. Retrieved August 13, 2022. "Chinese Defense Minister Warns of Confrontation if US Tries to Corner China". VOA News. June 12, 2022. Archived from the original on July 17, 2022. Retrieved August 13, 2022. Wingfield-Hayes, Rupert (February 2, 2023). "US secures deal on Philippines bases to complete arc around China". BBC News. Archived from the original on February 3, 2023. Retrieved February 3, 2023. Britzky, Haley; Brad Lendon (June 3, 2023). "Taiwan war would be 'devastating,' warns US Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin as he criticizes China at Shangri-La security summit". CNN. Archived from the original on June 3, 2023. "Readout of Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III Meetings in Jakarta, Indonesia for the". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved December 14, 2023. Macias, Amanda (February 19, 2021). "Defense secretary calls for an immediate reduction in violence in Afghanistan as troop withdrawal deadline looms". CNBC. Archived from the original on March 18, 2021. Retrieved June 24, 2023. Crawford, Jamie (March 21, 2021). "Defense secretary visits Afghanistan as US considers troop extension | CNN Politics". CNN. Archived from the original on March 21, 2021. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "U.S. defense secretary calls for immediate reduction in violence in Afghanistan". Reuters. February 19, 2021. Archived from the original on August 22, 2023. Retrieved August 22, 2023. Jamie Crawford (March 21, 2021). "Defense secretary visits Afghanistan as US considers troop extension". CNN. Archived from the original on March 21, 2021. Retrieved March 22, 2021. "U.S. Withdrawal from Afghanistan" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on June 14, 2023. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "Biden Announces Full U.S. Troop Withdrawal From Afghanistan by Sept. 11". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved June 24, 2023. Robertson, Nic (June 24, 2021). "Afghanistan is disintegrating fast as Biden's troop withdrawal continues". CNN. Archived from the original on July 9, 2021. Retrieved August 4, 2021. Graham-Harrison, Emma (July 13, 2021). "Afghanistan stunned by scale and speed of security forces' collapse". The Guardian. Archived from the original on August 15, 2021. Retrieved August 4, 2021. Ali, Idrees (July 25, 2021). "First task for Afghan forces is to slow Taliban's momentum -Pentagon chief". Reuters. Archived from the original on December 6, 2022. Retrieved February 9, 2023. Martin, David; Watson, Eleanor (August 12, 2021). "Pentagon sending troops to Kabul to help evacuation of U.S. Embassy". CBS News. Archived from the original on August 15, 2021. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "U.S. Central to One of Largest, Most Difficult Airlifts in History, Biden Tells Nation". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "Single suicide bomber killed US troops and Afghans in ISIS-K attack at Kabul airport, Pentagon finds". ABC News. Archived from the original on June 24, 2023. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "Statement by Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved June 24, 2023. Fieldstadt, Elisha (September 1, 2021). "The last soldier to leave Afghanistan was uniquely prepared for that moment". NBC News. Archived from the original on June 24, 2023. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "Statement by Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III on the Defense Department's Afghanis". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "US senators accuse Pentagon of hindering war crimes prosecution of Russia". Reuters. May 11, 2023. Archived from the original on August 19, 2023. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "1 year after the invasion began, a timeline of Russia's war in Ukraine". PBS NewsHour. February 19, 2023. Archived from the original on June 24, 2023. Retrieved June 24, 2023. Fram, Alan (May 11, 2022). "House approves $40B in Ukraine aid, beefing up Biden request". Associated Press. Archived from the original on May 11, 2022. Retrieved May 20, 2022. "Ukraine war: US wants to see a weakened Russia". BBC News. April 25, 2022. Archived from the original on April 25, 2022. Retrieved April 25, 2022. "Austin says he 'does not' believe Russian invasion will end in nuclear war". The Hill. April 26, 2022. Archived from the original on May 20, 2022. Retrieved May 20, 2022. Herb, Barbara Starr,Jeremy (February 25, 2022). "NATO Response Force activated for first time | CNN Politics". CNN. Archived from the original on February 26, 2022. Retrieved June 24, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Department of Defense Statement on Additional Military Assistance for Ukraine". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "Fact Sheet on U.S. Security Assistance to Ukraine" (PDF). U.S. Department of Defense. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 10, 2023. Retrieved September 21, 2023. "Austin Kicks Off Meeting on Ukraine Defense". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved December 14, 2023. "DoD website" (PDF). "Secretary Blinken and Secretary Austin's Travel to Ukraine". Archived from the original on May 28, 2023. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "Secretary Austin's Opening Remarks at the Ukraine Defense Consultative Group, Ramstein Air". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "Austin Meets With Nations to Intensify Support for Ukraine". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "US and allies gather at Ramstein to discuss how to help Ukraine defeat Russia's 'unjust invasion'". Stars and Stripes. Archived from the original on May 4, 2022. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "Readout of Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III's Call With Ukrainian Minister of Defe". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "Biden Announces Abrams Tanks to be Delivered to Ukraine". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "Russian War in Ukraine: Timeline". U.S. Department of Defense. Archived from the original on July 10, 2023. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "Ukrainian Tank Crews, Maintainers to Begin Training on U.S. M1 Abrams in Germany Soon". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "U.S.: 'Hague Invasion Act' Becomes Law". Human Rights Watch. August 3, 2002. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Pentagon accused of blocking effort to hand Russia war crimes evidence to ICC". The Guardian. March 8, 2023. Archived from the original on December 2, 2023. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Pentagon's cold shoulder in probe of Russia war crimes spurs pushback at Senate". Courthouse News Service. April 19, 2023. Archived from the original on September 23, 2023. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Pentagon withholding evidence in Russia war crimes case: Senators". Al Jazeera. May 11, 2023. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved July 12, 2023. "Durbin Urges Secretary Of Defense To Support ICC's Investigation Into The Atrocities Committed In Ukraine In Senate Appropriations Hearing | U.S. Senator Dick Durbin of Illinois". www.durbin.senate.gov. Archived from the original on August 10, 2023. Retrieved August 10, 2023. "Austin Speaks at Ukraine Defense Meeting". U.S. Department of Defense. Archived from the original on June 24, 2023. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "Defense Contact Group Remains Steadfast on Ukraine Support". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "Opening Remarks by Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III at the 13th Ukraine Defense Co". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved August 10, 2023. "Opening Remarks by Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III at the 14th Ukraine Defense Conference". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved August 10, 2023. "Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved October 3, 2023. "Department of Defense U.S. Security Assistance to Ukraine" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on May 25, 2023. Retrieved June 24, 2023. "Ukraine Defense Package Includes Missiles, Air Defense". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved December 14, 2023. "Opening Remarks by Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III at the 17th Ukraine Defense Co". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved December 14, 2023. "'A Time for American Leadership': Remarks by Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved December 14, 2023. "Opening Remarks by Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III at the 18th Ukraine Defense Co". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved March 10, 2024. "Statement by Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III Marking Two Years Since Russia's Inv". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved March 10, 2024. "US Defense Secretary Completes First Tour Across Africa". VOA. September 27, 2023. Archived from the original on October 2, 2023. Retrieved October 3, 2023. "Secretary of Defense Lloyd J. Austin III Remarks at the National Archives Auditorium in Lu". U.S. Department of Defense. Retrieved October 3, 2023. Black, Rick (March 30, 2017). ""Perfect People": Living The West Point Ideal". West Point Center for Oral History. Archived from the original on October 27, 2020. Retrieved December 8, 2020. Fikes, Robert (December 24, 2017). "Lloyd James Austin III (1953– )". BlackPast.org. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved December 8, 2020. Cooper, Helene; Martin, Jonathan; Schmitt, Eric (December 8, 2020). "Biden Plans to Tap Lloyd Austin, Former Iraq Commander, as Defense Secretary". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved December 14, 2020. "Austin, Charlene – USA > CAPSTONE > Spouse Course Mentors". capstone.ndu.edu. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved December 14, 2020. Austin, Lloyd James. "Lloyd James Austin Awards by Date of Action". Hall of Valor Project. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved January 23, 2021. Gordon, Michael R.; Trainor, Bernard E. (2013). The Endgame: The Inside Story of the Struggle for Iraq, from George W. Bush to Barack Obama. New York: Vintage Books. ISBN 978-0-307-38894-0. OCLC 819383400. Biden, Joe (December 8, 2020). "Why I Chose Lloyd Austin as Secretary of Defense". The Atlantic. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lloyd Austin. Wikiquote has quotations related to Lloyd Austin. Lloyd Austin on Twitter Biography at the United States Department of Defense Appearances on C-SPAN