Andrew Mark Cuomo (/ˈkwoʊmoʊ/ KWOH-moh, Italian: [ˈkwɔːmo]; born December 6, 1957) is an American politician, lawyer, and former government official who served as the 56th governor of New York from 2011 to 2021. A member of the Democratic Party, Cuomo was elected to three terms to the same position that his father, Mario Cuomo, held for three terms as the 52nd governor. Born in Queens, New York City, Cuomo is a graduate of Fordham University and Albany Law School. He began his career working as the campaign manager for his father in the 1982 New York gubernatorial election. Later, Cuomo entered the private practice of law and chaired the New York City Homeless Commission from 1990 to 1993. Cuomo then served in the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development as assistant secretary from 1993 to 1997 and as secretary from 1997 to 2001 under President Bill Clinton. After failing to win the Democratic primary in the 2002 New York gubernatorial election, Cuomo was elected New York attorney general in 2006. Cuomo won the 2010 Democratic primary for governor of New York and won the general election with over 60 percent of the vote. He was re-elected in 2014 and 2018. During his governorship, Cuomo signed legislation to legalize same-sex marriage, medical use of cannabis, and recreational use of cannabis. Cuomo's administration oversaw the construction of the Governor Mario M. Cuomo Bridge, the Second Avenue Subway, the Moynihan Train Hall, and a reconstruction of LaGuardia Airport. He also decommissioned the Indian Point nuclear plant, which led to an uptick in greenhouse gas emissions. In response to the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting and the 2012 Webster shooting, Cuomo signed the NY SAFE Act of 2013, the strictest gun control law in the United States. He also delivered Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act; a 2011 tax code that raised taxes for the wealthy and lowered taxes for the middle class; 12-week paid family leave; and a gradual increase of the state's minimum wage to $15 per hour. Cuomo received national attention for his handling of the COVID-19 pandemic in New York. Although he was initially lauded for his response, he faced renewed criticism and federal investigation after it was discovered that his administration covered up information pertaining to COVID-19 deaths among nursing home residents. Beginning in late 2020, Cuomo faced numerous allegations of sexual misconduct. An investigation commissioned by New York attorney general Letitia James reported in August 2021 that Cuomo sexually harassed at least eleven women during his time in office, for which Cuomo faces criminal investigations. Following the release of the attorney general's report, Cuomo was called to resign by President Joe Biden. On August 23, Cuomo resigned from office and was succeeded by his lieutenant governor, Kathy Hochul. At the time of his resignation, he was the longest-serving governor in the United States. On December 28, 2021, the Westchester County district attorney declined to issue criminal charges from the credible allegations, citing "statutory requirements" of New York. On January 7, 2022, a judge dismissed a criminal complaint which had been filed against Cuomo. Andrew Mark Cuomo was born on December 6, 1957, in the New York City borough of Queens to lawyer and later governor of New York Mario Cuomo and Matilda (née Raffa). His parents were both of Italian descent; his paternal grandparents were from Nocera Inferiore and Tramonti in the Campania region of southern Italy, while his maternal grandparents were from Sicily (his grandfather from Messina). He has four siblings; his younger brother, Chris Cuomo, is a current NewsNation anchor and a former CNN journalist, and his elder sister is noted radiologist Margaret Cuomo. Cuomo graduated from Archbishop Molloy High School in 1975. He earned a Bachelor of Arts from Fordham University in 1979 and a Juris Doctor from Albany Law School in 1982. During his father's successful 1982 campaign for governor, Cuomo served as campaign manager. He then joined the governor's staff as a policy advisor and sometime Albany roommate, earning $1 a year. As a member of his father's administration, Cuomo was known as the "enforcer" where his father was known as the "nice guy" in a good cop/bad cop dynamic to further advance his father's legislative agenda. From 1984 to 1985, Cuomo was a New York assistant district attorney and briefly worked at the law firm of Blutrich, Falcone & Miller. He founded Housing Enterprise for the Less Privileged (HELP) in 1986 and left his law firm to run HELP full time in 1988. From 1990 to 1993, during the administration of New York City mayor David Dinkins, Cuomo was chair of the New York City Homeless Commission, which was responsible for developing policies to address homelessness in the city and providing more housing options. Cuomo was appointed Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development in the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) in 1993, a member of President Bill Clinton's administration. After the departure of Secretary Henry Cisneros at the end of Clinton's first term under the cloud of an FBI investigation, Cuomo was unanimously confirmed by the United States Senate to succeed him as Secretary of HUD. Cuomo served as Secretary from January 1997 until the Clinton administration ended in 2001. In 2000, Cuomo led HUD efforts to negotiate an agreement with United States handgun manufacturer Smith & Wesson. This agreement required Smith & Wesson to change the design, distribution, and marketing of guns to make them safer and to help keep them out of the hands of children and criminals. Budgets enacted during Cuomo's term contained initiatives to increase the supply of affordable housing and home ownership and to create jobs and economic development. These included new rental assistance subsidies, reforms to integrate public housing, higher limits on mortgages insured by the Federal Housing Administration, a crackdown on housing discrimination, expanded programs to help homeless people get housing and jobs, and creation of new empowerment zones. During Cuomo's tenure as HUD Secretary, he called for an increase in home ownership. He also pushed government-sponsored lenders Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to buy more home loans issued to poor homeowners in an attempt to end discrimination against minorities. Some believe that this helped lead to the 2007–2010 subprime mortgage crisis. Edward J. Pinto, former chief credit officer at Fannie Mae, said: "They should have known the risks were large." Pinto said, "Cuomo was pushing mortgage bankers to make loans and basically saying you have to offer a loan to everybody." But others disagree with the assessment that Cuomo caused the crisis. Dean Baker, co-director of the Center for Economic and Policy Research, said Cuomo "was a contributor in terms of him being a cheerleader, but I don't think we can pin too much blame on him". According to libertarian author and critic James Bovard, Cuomo was obsessed with changing HUD's image, as Cuomo declared, "The PR is the important thing I do... Eighty percent of the battle is communications." He championed a new program called Community Builders, created without appropriation by Congress, for 800 new HUD employees with computers to be paid as much as $100,000. In a June 16, 1999, speech, Cuomo declared that one purpose of the program was to fight against HUD's abolition. In August 1999, Community Builders distributed a letter to community groups to fight against proposed tax cuts. One HUD official declared that Community Builders was seen as "Democratic ward heelers who act as a pipeline between Democratic city officials, party leaders, and the administration and the Democratic National Committee." In 1998, Clinton-appointed HUD inspector general Susan Gaffney testified to a Senate committee that she was the victim of "'escalating' attacks on her office by Cuomo and 'his key aides,' including cooked-up charges of racism, insubordination, malfeasance, and general dirty-dealing". In 1999, Gaffney's office concluded that "most (15 out of 19) Community Builders' goals were activities rather than actual accomplishments" and that Cuomo's initiatives "had a crippling effect on many of HUD's ongoing operations". Gaffney retired in May 2001, shortly after the department reached a $490,000 settlement with a black employee who had accused her of racial discrimination in passing him over for a promotion. Prior to Cuomo's tenure, HUD was routinely included on the General Accounting Office's biannual watch list of government programs whose poor management made them prone to fraud. During his time in office, two of HUD's four main departments were removed from the GAO list. In addition, the department cut 15 percent of its staff as part of a Cuomo initiative to streamline its operations. From 2001 to 2006, Cuomo was not in government. He worked at the Fried Frank law firm from 2001 to 2004 and later the Island Capital real estate firm. Cuomo first ran for the Democratic nomination for the New York governor seat in 2002. He was initially the favorite for the nomination and led in fundraising and polls, but his campaign took serious damage after a gaffe. Speaking about the aftermath of the September 11 attacks, Cuomo said, "Pataki stood behind the leader. He held the leader's coat. He was a great assistant to the leader. But he was not a leader. Cream rises to the top, and Rudy Giuliani rose to the top." His remarks were widely derided; even his father, former governor Mario Cuomo, later admitted it was a blunder. On the eve of the state convention, Cuomo withdrew from consideration after concluding that he had little chance of support against the favored party candidate, State Comptroller Carl McCall. McCall went on to lose the general election to incumbent George Pataki. Cuomo declared his candidacy for the Democratic nomination for New York State Attorney General in 2006 and on May 30, 2006, captured the Democratic Party's endorsement, receiving 65% of the delegates. Though Cuomo won the endorsement, former New York City Public Advocate Mark Green and two-time candidate for Lieutenant Governor Charlie King also earned places on the Democratic ballot. King dropped out of the race before the primary and endorsed Cuomo. Cuomo won the primary with a majority of the vote, defeating his nearest opponent by over 20%. Clinching the Democratic party nomination was considered a significant rebound following his unsuccessful and unpopular 2002 gubernatorial campaign, and at the nominating convention June O'Neill, the Democratic chairwoman of St. Lawrence County, called him "New York's own Comeback Kid". In the general election on November 7, 2006, he defeated the Republican nominee, former Westchester district attorney Jeanine Pirro, winning 58% of the vote. On July 23, 2007, Cuomo's office admonished the Spitzer administration for ordering the New York State Police to keep special records of then Senate majority leader Joseph Bruno's whereabouts when he traveled with police escorts in New York City. At the discretion of top officials of the Spitzer administration, the created documents meant to cause political damage to Bruno. Spitzer responded by accepting responsibility and issuing an apology to Bruno. In 2007, Cuomo was active in a high-profile investigation into lending practices and anti-competitive relationships between student lenders and universities. Specifically, many universities steered student borrowers to a "preferred lender", which resulted in the borrowers' incurring higher interest rates. This led to changes in lending policy at many major American universities. Many universities also rebated millions of dollars in fees to affected borrowers. On June 10, 2008, Cuomo announced that three major Internet service providers (Verizon Communications, Time Warner Cable, and Sprint) would "shut down major sources of online child pornography" by no longer hosting many Usenet groups. Time Warner Cable ceased offering Usenet altogether, Sprint ended access to the 18,408 newsgroups in the alt.* hierarchy, and Verizon limited its Usenet offerings to the approximately 3,000 Big 8 newsgroups. The move came after Cuomo's office located 88 different newsgroups to which child pornography had been posted. In 2008, Cuomo said of the Democratic Party candidate Barack Obama, who was running against Hillary Clinton, the candidate Cuomo supported: "You can't shuck and jive at a press conference." Cuomo received criticism from some for his use of the phrase. Roland Martin of CNN said that "'Shucking and jiving' have long been words used as a negative assessment of African Americans, along the lines of a 'foot shufflin' Negro'. In fact, I don't recall ever hearing the phrase used in reference to anyone white." Cuomo investigated a corruption scandal, a "fraudulent scheme to extract kickbacks", which involved New York investigators, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and attorneys general in dozens of states. After Hillary Clinton became President Obama's choice for U.S. Secretary of State in December 2008, then–New York governor David Paterson was charged with appointing a temporary replacement until a special election. Cuomo was seen as a leading contender for this appointment.[failed verification] Caroline Kennedy (who is a first cousin of Cuomo's ex-wife) was another leading contender, but withdrew for personal reasons two days before Paterson was set to announce his choice, leaving Cuomo and U.S. representative Kirsten Gillibrand as the most likely appointees. On January 23, Paterson announced he would appoint Gillibrand to the U.S. Senate. On September 18, 2009, advisors to President Barack Obama informed Governor David Paterson that the president believed he should withdraw his 2010 gubernatorial candidacy, stepping aside for "popular Attorney General Andrew Cuomo". On January 23, 2010, the New York Daily News reported that Cuomo would announce plans for a gubernatorial campaign at the end of March. Later reports indicated Cuomo would announce his gubernatorial campaign coinciding with the state Democratic Convention in late May. On May 22, 2010, Cuomo announced his run for governor in a video posted to his campaign website. Cuomo announced his choice for lieutenant governor on May 26, 2010: Robert Duffy, Mayor of Rochester. In the November 2, 2010, general election, Cuomo faced Republican Carl Paladino, a Buffalo-based businessman who had been heavily supported by the Tea Party movement. Cuomo won the election for governor by a landslide, winning 62.6% of the vote. Paladino performed strongly in his native Buffalo area, while Cuomo performed well in the eastern part of the state as well as downstate. In addition to the parties fielding candidates, New York's electoral fusion laws allow parties to cross-endorse candidates. The Independence Party and Working Families Party cross-endorsed Andrew Cuomo, while the Conservative Party and Taxpayers Party cross-endorsed Carl Paladino. The Independence Party line received 146,648 votes (5.0% of Cuomo's total, and 3.2% of the statewide total) and the Working Families line received 154,853 votes (5.3% and 3.4%), with the Democratic line receiving the remaining 2,610,220 votes (89.6% and 56.5%). The Conservative line received 232,281 votes (15.0% of Paladino's total, and 5.0% of the statewide total) and the Taxpayers line received 25,821 votes (1.5% and 0.6%), with the Republican line receiving the remaining 1,290,082 votes (83.3% and 27.1%). Cuomo sought reelection in 2014, with former U.S. Representative Kathy Hochul as his new running mate. On March 5, 2014, Westchester County executive Rob Astorino announced that he would run on the Republican ticket against Cuomo for governor. Law professors Zephyr Teachout and Tim Wu challenged the Cuomo–Hochul ticket in the Democratic primary election – capturing 34% of the vote on the gubernatorial line (Wu drew 40.1% as lieutenant governor). On November 4, 2014, Cuomo was reelected for a second term with 54% of the vote, while Astorino received 40.6% of the vote. Despite low voter turnout, Cuomo won the general election by a comfortable margin; however, his margin of victory was smaller than it had been in his 2010 victory. Astorino won most of upstate New York but was overwhelmed in New York City. Cuomo was sworn in for his second term as governor. Cuomo was challenged in the primary from the left by actress and activist Cynthia Nixon. She criticized him for having failed to fix the New York City Subway following his declaration of the 2017 New York City transit crisis as well as for not protecting undocumented immigrants, not legalizing recreational marijuana, and not creating a single-payer healthcare system. When debating Nixon, Cuomo countered her argument on the subways by pointing out that the system is owned by New York City, though past administrations agree it is the governor's role. An analysis conducted by New York City comptroller Scott Stringer revealed that New York City pays for 70 percent of subway repair costs. Cuomo defeated Nixon, 65.5–34.5%. On November 6, 2018, the Cuomo-Hochul ticket defeated the Molinaro-Killian ticket by a margin of 59.6% to 36.2%. On March 19, 2021, The New York Times, in an episode of their podcast The Daily, leaked audio of Cuomo threatening Bill Lipton, head of the Working Families Party, which had endorsed primary opponent Nixon, that "[i]f you ever say, 'Well he's better than a Republican' again, then I'm gonna say, 'You're better than a child rapist.'" In May 2019, Governor Cuomo announced he would run for a fourth term. In August 2021, after a report released by the Attorney General of New York, Letitia James, detailed accusations of sexual assault by Governor Cuomo and his attempts to silence victims, the New York State Legislature's leaders indicated that they would seek to remove Cuomo from office. In the face of almost certain removal from office, he announced his resignation as Governor, effective August 24, 2021. Although there was no formal withdrawal, individuals close to Cuomo indicated he would likely not seek his party's nomination following his resignation. Cuomo took the gubernatorial oath of office at 12:01 a.m. on January 1, 2011, succeeding David Paterson. During his first year as governor, Cuomo worked to pass an on-time budget that cut spending without raising taxes, made a new deal with a large state-employee union, signed ethics reform legislation, passed a property tax cap, worked to enact a same-sex marriage bill with bipartisan support, and restructured New York's tax code. In 2014, Politico reported that Cuomo had been actively involved in the formation of the Independent Democratic Conference (IDC) three years earlier, which gave control of the state senate to Republicans. He has been accused of failing to bridge the rift between the IDC and the Democratic caucus in the Senate. There was media speculation about a possible presidential run, either in 2016 or 2020. Several reports indicated that Cuomo supported the Independent Democratic Conference until its dissolution and defeat in 2018 in part to appear more moderate for an eventual presidential bid. For his 2018 re-election bid, Cuomo accepted being on top of the ballot line for the Independence Party, a list that featured numerous Republicans, including ardent Trump supporters. In an August 15, 2018, anti-sex trafficking bill-signing event, Cuomo said: "We're not gonna make America great again. It was never that great. We have not reached greatness. We will reach greatness when every American is fully engaged." The assembled audience of Cuomo's supporters booed. In a February 2019 opinion poll, Cuomo's approval rating dropped to 43 percent, the lowest of his tenure as governor, and a full 50% said they disapproved. The poll showed an eight-percent drop from January 2019; it was taken after Cuomo signed several pieces of progressive legislation, including an expansion of abortion rights and access and stricter gun laws, suggesting that the legislation may have upset certain voters and contributed to the drop; however, the majority of voters agreed with his position on both issues. By early 2020, Cuomo's favorability rating was up to 77 percent, a record high. On his first day in office, Cuomo renewed an executive order signed by Eliot Spitzer which prohibited Governors of New York from receiving donations from gubernatorial appointees. A February 2018 investigation by The New York Times, however, revealed that the Cuomo administration had quietly reinterpreted the order, and that Cuomo had collected $890,000 from 24 of his appointees, as well as $1.3 million from the spouses, children and businesses of appointees. Some donations were made to Cuomo just days after the donor was appointed. In March 2018, The New York Times reported that Cuomo had rewritten the disclaimer language on his campaign website for the executive order barring donations from appointees. The website added two caveats whereby some gubernatorial appointees are allowed to donate to the governor, which The Times said could potentially lead to more donations from appointees to the governor. The Cuomo campaign returned a $2,500 donation from one appointee who was in violation of the new disclaimer, but retained approximately $890,000 raised from other appointees. From the time of Utah governor Gary Herbert's retirement on January 4, 2021, until his resignation on August 23, 2021, Cuomo was the longest-serving governor in the United States still in position, with 3,887 days in office. Cuomo has supported providing tax and other incentives to attract business to locate in New York State. He even joked in 2018 that he would be willing to change his name to "Amazon Cuomo" if Amazon located their "Amazon HQ2" in the state. His strong support for New York City's bid to become the home of Amazon's HQ2 faced criticism based on arguments that the costs to the state outweighed the possible benefits. Amazon decided on two "major corporate outposts", in New York City and Arlington, Virginia, instead of a single second headquarters, before bowing out of the former under local pressure. On March 1, 2020, Cuomo issued a statement regarding novel coronavirus in New York wherein he mentioned the first positive case of novel coronavirus in New York State. On March 2, 2020, Cuomo said that community transmission of the new coronavirus is "inevitable". He also mentioned New York City's plans to aggressively ramp up diagnostic testing for the new virus and said that he would like to see New York City conducting "1,000 tests per day". He announced the "world-renowned" Wadsworth Center was partnering with hospitals to expand surge testing capacity to "1,000 tests per day statewide" for the novel coronavirus. On March 3, 2020, Cuomo signed a $40 million emergency management authorization for coronavirus response and claimed that "New York's overall risk remained low". He also announced the institution of a new cleaning protocol at schools and in the public transportation system "to help stop any potential spread of the virus". On March 4, 2020, Cuomo confirmed nine new cases in the state and said that it was "literally like trying to stop air" and that it was inevitable that it would continue to spread. On March 6, 2020, Cuomo criticized the federal government's response to the COVID-19 outbreak, calling it "absurd and nonsensical". Early in the coronavirus response efforts, Cuomo received widespread praise from epidemiologists for his handling of the evolving COVID-19 pandemic in New York State, including a statewide lockdown and a shutdown of nonessential businesses in an effort to help flatten the curve of the virus. At the same time, however, Cuomo also received criticism for failing to grasp the gravity of the pandemic before its risks were fully visible to the American public. On March 28, 2020, Cuomo threatened Rhode Island with a lawsuit over a state quarantine policy enforcing quarantine on arriving New Yorkers. In the spring of 2020, social media posters and television hosts such as Stephen Colbert, Trevor Noah, and Ellen DeGeneres came up with the term "Cuomosexuals" to express admiration and love for the governor and his brother, CNN anchor Chris Cuomo, related to their leadership roles during the COVID-19 pandemic. In June 2021, Cuomo lifted COVID-19 restrictions, following the news that 70% of adults had one shot of the COVID-19 vaccine. Between July and August 2020, Cuomo utilized state resources and property, including assigning work by Executive Chamber government staffers to compile materials and perform frequent work on the drafting of his book on a non-voluntary basis. In October 2020, Cuomo published his book, American Crisis, proclaiming victory against the pandemic due to his leadership. He wrote that New York "confronted and defeated" the virus, although the state had the highest per capita hospitalization rate in the country by February 2021. Cuomo was paid more than $5 million to write the book. In November 2020, Cuomo received the International Emmy Founders Award from the International Academy of Television Arts and Sciences for his coronavirus briefings. On August 24, 2021, the morning after his departure, the academy rescinded the Emmy award due to the New York Attorney General's report on sexual harassment allegations against him. On December 14, 2021, Cuomo was ordered by the Joint Commission on Public Ethics to pay New York state $5.1 million in book profits he made during the height of the COVID-19 pandemic. The commission rejected the prior approval after complaints that Cuomo used state resources, including personnel used to edit, write, prepare, and gather data to write "American Crisis". Cuomo is ordered to return proceeds from the book by January 13, 2022. Over the course of the COVID-19 pandemic in his state, nine state health officials resigned, reportedly in response to Cuomo's policies. In a press conference on January 29, 2021, Cuomo stated that he did not trust the expertise of health officials. In August 2017, the Cuomo administration awarded more than $7 million, financed with money from large bank settlements, in grants to New York colleges to offer courses to New York prisoners. In January 2018, Cuomo proposed reforms that would "reduce delays during trials, ban asset seizures in cases where there has been no conviction and make it easier for former convicts to get a job after leaving prison". He also called for an end to cash bail for minor crimes. Under Cuomo's tenure, he granted commutations to fewer prisoners than many previous Republican and Democratic New York governors. Cuomo commuted a total of nine sentences. Cuomo pardoned 140 adults who were convicted of nonviolent felonies as 16- and 17-year-olds, but had served their sentences. He pardoned 18 others who had served their sentences for nonviolent felonies but were exposed to deportation due to their criminal record. In 2017, Cuomo announced that the Indian Point nuclear plant, which produced one quarter of New York City's power, would be phased out. As a result of the phaseout, the carbon-free power generated by the plant was replaced by power generated by carbon-generating fossil fuels. As a consequence, New York was estimated to struggle to meet its climate goals. On January 15, 2013, Cuomo signed into law the first state gun control bill to pass after the December 14, 2012, Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting in neighboring Connecticut. The NY SAFE Act was described as the toughest gun control law in the United States. The act came under criticism, and the National Rifle Association called it draconian. The New York State Sheriffs' Association issued a statement supporting tougher penalties for illegal use of firearms but criticizing several aspects of the legislation, including a magazine limit of seven rounds and a "too broad" definition of assault weapons. On July 5, 2013, Cuomo signed an amendment to the NY SAFE Act that exempts retired police officers from some of the act's ownership restrictions. On July 7, 2021, Cuomo declared the first 'disaster emergency' in the United States on gun crime for New York. After Hurricane Sandy in October 2012, Cuomo allowed New York voters, via a specific provision aimed at accommodating those displaced, to cast provisional ballots for the 2012 election anywhere in the state. He also appointed a commission to examine the responses of New York utilities to damage caused by the storm. Controversy ensued when the Cuomo administration used $140 million, including $40 million of federal disaster relief funds, to pay for the broadcast of national TV ads promoting "New New York" slogans outside New York in an attempt to attract new business investment to the state. Many have been critical of the effort, including former New York governor Eliot Spitzer, who called the ads "fluff" and "a waste of taxpayer money". In June 2012, the Cuomo administration said it was considering lifting a state ban on the practice of hydraulic fracturing (also known as "fracking") to stimulate the economy in upstate New York. But critics said that fracking upstate could contaminate the water supply of New York City, New Jersey and parts of Pennsylvania. Following a long-awaited study started years earlier, New York State health officials cited "significant public health risks" associated with fracking, and on December 17, 2014, the Cuomo administration announced a ban on hydraulic fracturing in New York State. In solidarity with Israel, Cuomo announced an executive order against the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions movement. Cuomo tweeted: "If you boycott Israel, New York State will boycott you." In January 2014, Cuomo announced an executive order to allow the limited use of medical marijuana in New York. Later that year, a comprehensive bill to legalize medical cannabis was passed by the state legislature, containing some restrictions at Cuomo's insistence such as a ban on consumption by smoking. On July 5, 2014, the Compassionate Care Act was signed into law by Governor Cuomo. In December 2018, Cuomo announced his support for legalizing the recreational use of cannabis, after previously stating his opposition and calling it a "gateway drug" as recently as February 2017. On March 31, 2021, recreational use of cannabis was officially legalized with the signing into law of the Marijuana Regulation and Taxation Act by Governor Cuomo. In June 2017, after a series of subway disasters, Cuomo declared a "state of emergency" for the New York City Subway system. According to The New York Times, a series of New York City mayors and New York governors, including Cuomo, were partly at fault for the worsening quality of the subway system and inflated construction costs. Under the Cuomo administration, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority repeatedly diverted tax revenues earmarked for the subways, paid for services that there was no need for and spent on subway projects that did not boost service or reliability. As a result, the MTA was saddled with debt and could not undertake investments into overhauling outdated and inefficient subway infrastructure. Cuomo also directed the MTA to spend on projects that the heads of the MTA did not consider to be priorities. One reason why the New York City subway system is so expensive is due to exorbitant labor costs; according to several M.T.A. officials who were involved in negotiating labor contracts, Cuomo pressured the MTA to accept labor union contracts that were extremely favorable to workers. The New York Times noted that Cuomo was closely aligned with the union in question and had received $165,000 in campaign contributions from it. The New York Times reported, "Cuomo had steered clear of the M.T.A. during his first years in office, but in his second term he took an intense interest. He placed aides within the organization and, in an unusual move, made some report directly to him. He badgered transit leaders about the construction of the Second Avenue subway on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. And over the objections of some board members, he canceled several M.T.A. capital projects to make room for his own priorities. According to high-ranking current and former M.T.A. officials, the moves interfered with the authority's plans to address the rising delays." On April 18, 2017, Cuomo signed the New York State 2018 fiscal year budget. It included the Excelsior Scholarship, a provision that families making less than $125,000 in 2019 could have free tuition at all SUNY and CUNY universities, though some education experts including Sara Goldrick-Rab say it won't help the poorest students and that the requirement that recipients live and work in New York after graduating is counter-productive. On July 16, 2011, Cuomo finalized a five-year deal with the Public Employees Federation to end pay raises, implement furlough days, and require additional contributions to health insurance accounts. In an interview with The New York Times, he stated his top goal in 2012 is the reduction of public employee pensions. In the winter of 2018, Cuomo responded to a class-action lawsuit brought against the New York City Housing Authority by attorney Jim Walden on behalf of a group of public housing tenants. The suit was the first of its kind and called upon NYCHA to immediately address decrepit and unhealthy conditions in public housing units across New York City. By early April, Cuomo appointed an independent monitor to oversee NYCHA on an emergency basis. In a January 17, 2014, interview with Susan Arbetter on WCNY's The Capital Pressroom, Cuomo stated: [New York Republicans] are searching to define their soul, that's what's going on. Is the Republican party in this state a moderate party or is it an extreme conservative party? ... The Republican Party candidates are running against the SAFE Act – it was voted for by moderate Republicans who run the Senate! Their problem is not me and the Democrats; their problem is themselves. Who are they? Are they these extreme conservatives who are right-to-life, pro-assault-weapon, anti-gay? Is that who they are? Because if that's who they are and they're the extreme conservatives, they have no place in the state of New York, because that's not who New Yorkers are. If they're moderate Republicans like in the Senate right now, who control the Senate – moderate Republicans have a place in their state. George Pataki was governor of this state as a moderate Republican, but not what you're hearing from them on the far right. This remark received a major reaction in the conservative media. Radio host Glenn Beck wrote a letter to the governor regarding the remarks from the interview. Fox News contributor and radio/TV show host Sean Hannity threatened to move out of the state with all of his assets if Cuomo did not apologize for his remarks. Cardinal Timothy M. Dolan, the archbishop of New York, said during a radio broadcast that Cuomo's remarks were "most unfortunate at best. Are there pro-lifers who are extremist? Yes, there are. But I think they are a distinct minority." The New York State Democratic Committee, which is headed by Cuomo, supported his remarks and reiterated them in a May 2014 statement responding to a speech by Rob Astorino, who was running against him in the 2014 gubernatorial election: "Tea Party Republicans have done enough damage in Washington, today's speech made it abundantly clear that we don't need them here in New York." In keeping with a campaign promise, Cuomo signed the Marriage Equality Act, introducing same-sex marriage, on June 24, 2011, following an "intense public and private lobbying campaign", and later called for all states to do the same. Cuomo was lauded for his efforts to pass same-sex marriage legislation. One prominent advocate stated that for gay Americans, Cuomo was "the only national politician with hero status". Following the passage of the Act, Cuomo was criticized for describing the viewpoints of opponents as "anti-American". On July 25, 2011, a lawsuit was filed in the New York Supreme Court seeking an injunction against the Act, alleging corruption and violations of the law in the process of passing the bill. The trial court initially held that the plaintiffs' case could proceed, but the decision was reversed on appeal. Cuomo ordered a boycott of Indiana and North Carolina to protest their legislation on LGBT issues. In July 2016, the Empire State Development Corporation, a state agency, released a report indicating that the state's flagship business tax incentive program, called Start-Up NY, had generated 408 jobs since its inception in 2014. Ads promoting the program had cost at least $53 million. The Start-Up NY annual report was delayed three months in 2016, leading some lawmakers, such as Assemblyman Schimminger, to call the delays "curious". Cuomo was praised for his 2011 restructuring of the New York State tax code. He was also criticized for allegedly requesting a unanimous Assembly vote in favor of the proposal and threatening to campaign against Assembly members who voted "no" – a charge he denied. Cuomo also received criticism from voices on the left who felt that the tax reform was insufficient. Hoping that the Federal cap on state and local tax deductions will be repealed, Cuomo signed a tax increase on high income workers and corporations and the wealthy worth over one million dollars in 2021. The increase extends until the year 2027. In April 2018, Cuomo announced that he would restore the voting rights of parolees through an executive order. He said that he would consider restoring the voting rights of all parolees (more than 35,000), and would also enfranchise new parolees throughout his term. In 2013, Cuomo called for the passage of a Women's Equality Act. The Women's Equality Act included 10 component bills affecting issues such as domestic violence, human trafficking, and pregnancy discrimination. The tenth bill of the Women's Equality Act was the Reproductive Health Act, which would have "enshrine[d] in state law existing federal protections for abortion rights", "shift[ed] the state's abortion law from the criminal code to the health care laws", and "[made] it clearer that licensed health care practitioners as well as physicians could perform abortions". During his 2013 State of the State address, Cuomo said, "Enact a Reproductive Health Act because it is her body, it is her choice. Because it's her body, it's her choice. Because it's her body, it's her choice." The New York State Assembly passed the Women's Equality Act on June 20, 2013. The Republican leadership of the New York State Senate expressed support for the nine non-abortion-related planks of the Women's Equality Act, but objected to the Reproductive Health Act and expressed unwillingness to allow a vote on it. On the final day of the 2013 legislative session, following the Senate Republican Conference's continued refusal to vote on the full Women's Equality Act, Senator Jeff Klein, leader of the Independent Democratic Conference (IDC), offered the abortion plank of the Act as a hostile amendment to another bill. The amendment was defeated by a narrow margin of 32–31; all 30 Senate Republicans voted against the abortion amendment, as did Democratic Sens. Ruben Diaz and Simcha Felder. The Senate proceeded to pass the nine non-abortion-related planks of the Women's Equality Act as separate bills, and the 2013 legislative session came to an end without any portion of the WEA becoming law. "[After] the 2014 election season was over, with Cuomo victorious, the governor and his lieutenant governor Kathy Hochul both declared the abortion plank of the act officially dormant, if not dead." In 2015, the non-abortion-related Women's Equality Act bills passed both houses of the State Legislature. In October 2015, Cuomo signed eight of the 10 Women's Equality Act bills into law; the abortion rights bill was not among them. On January 22, 2019, Cuomo signed the 2019 version of the Reproductive Health Act, which passed days after Democrats took control of the state Senate. Cuomo ordered One World Trade Center and other landmarks to be lit in pink to celebrate the bill's passage. Cuomo's signing and the lighting of the World Trade Center building sparked intense criticism from conservatives. The Catholic cardinal Timothy Dolan criticized Cuomo over the Reproductive Health Act. In July 2014, it was reported that the Moreland Commission, a committee established by Cuomo to root out corruption in politics, was directed away from investigations that could be politically damaging. Cuomo later disbanded the commission. Federal prosecutors in Manhattan launched an inquiry into Cuomo's dealings with the anti-corruption panel and concluded that "after a thorough investigation", there was "insufficient evidence to prove a federal crime". In September 2016, Joseph Percoco, a close friend and former top aide to Cuomo, was indicted as part of a bribery investigation into the Buffalo Billion. He had worked for Cuomo in both Washington and Albany and had managed his 2010 and 2014 gubernatorial campaigns and has been described as "the governor's enforcer and a member of his inner circle". Cuomo had previously referred to him as a brother, and as Mario Cuomo's "third son". Todd Howe, a lobbyist and former Cuomo aide, was also indicted, along with several developers who were major donors to Cuomo and other state politicians. Cuomo was not accused of wrongdoing. In March 2018, a federal jury in Manhattan convicted Percoco on felony charges of solicitation of bribes and honest services fraud for over $315,000 in bribes he took from two people seeking official favors on behalf of an energy company, Competitive Power Ventures Inc. Prosecutors described him as Cuomo's "right-hand man". Following Percoco's conviction, Cuomo released a statement declaring that he would respect the jury's verdict and that "there is no tolerance for any violation of the public trust". In September 2018, Judge Valerie Caproni sentenced Percoco to 6 years in prison saying "I hope that this sentence will be heard in Albany. I hope it will serve as a warning to others in public service." In March 2021, allegations came out that Cuomo prioritized COVID-19 tests for his family and other associates during the early stages of the pandemic when tests were limited. Particular scrutiny went to the positive test of his brother Chris in March 2020 amid other conflicts of interest that commentators saw in their relationship. These reports were investigated during his impeachment probe. On March 25, 2020, Cuomo and the New York State Department of Health issued an advisory requiring the admission of patients to nursing homes who test positive for the coronavirus and barred testing prospective nursing home patients. This order was revoked on May 10 after widespread criticism from medical experts. By then, as many as 4,500 COVID-19 infected patients had been sent to nursing homes in NY state. Over 6,000 New York state nursing home residents had died of COVID-19 as of June 2020. In July 2020, the New York State Department of Health released a report that found: "Peak nursing home admissions occurred a week after peak nursing home mortality, therefore illustrating that nursing home admissions from hospitals were not a driver of nursing home infections or fatalities"; instead the department concluded that asymptomatic nursing home staff drove the infections. Cuomo reacted to this report by stating that attribution of nursing home deaths to his March 2020 policy had "no basis in fact". On January 28, 2021, an investigation conducted by state attorney general Letitia James concluded that the Cuomo administration undercounted COVID-19-related deaths at nursing homes by as much as 50%. On February 12, 2021, Melissa DeRosa, a top aide to Cuomo, said in a call with state Democratic leaders that the Cuomo administration intentionally delayed the release of data pertaining to deaths from COVID-19 within nursing homes in fear it would've triggered a potential federal investigation by the Department of Justice and given an advantage to political opponents. Calls to rescind Cuomo's emergency powers granted amidst the pandemic were launched within the New York State Senate immediately following this report, with 14 Democrats joining the Republican minority in the effort. On February 17, 2021, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the U.S. attorney in Brooklyn announced they were investigating the incident. On March 19, 2021, the FBI reported that an investigation was underway on Governor Andrew Cuomo for improperly using the power of his office to shield nursing home executive political donors from COVID-19 lawsuits. On November 22, 2021, the New York State Assembly released an Impeachment Investigation Report disclosing Cuomo directed his staff to inappropriately withhold or misrepresent information regarding the effects of COVID-19 on nursing home dealths including the exclusion of out-of-facility COVID-19 deaths in his report to the Department of Health. On December 13, 2020, Lindsey Boylan, a former aide for Cuomo who was a Democratic candidate for Manhattan Borough president in 2021, alleged "[Cuomo] sexually harassed me for years. Many saw it, and watched." Boylan further alleged that Cuomo "exists without ethics", "takes advantage of people, including me" and ran a "toxic team environment". A spokesperson for the Cuomo administration denied the accusation. Boylan further elaborated on her accusations in February 2021, claiming Cuomo goaded her to play strip poker with him while on a flight in 2017 and forcibly kissed her on the mouth in his Manhattan office. The governor's office said Boylan's claims were false. On February 27, 2021, Charlotte Bennett, an executive assistant and health policy advisor of Cuomo, also accused him of sexual harassment, saying that he asked her about her sex life on several occasions in late Spring 2020 and if she had been in sexual relationships with older men. She also suggested that Cuomo was open to relationships with women "above the age of 22". In a statement on February 27, Cuomo denied making advances to Bennett and acting inappropriately towards her. In a February 28 statement, Cuomo said: "I now understand that my interactions may have been insensitive or too personal and that some of my comments, given my position, made others feel in ways I never intended." He apologized and acknowledged "some of the things I have said have been misinterpreted as an unwanted flirtation." He also said, "At work sometimes I think I am being playful and make jokes that I think are funny. I mean no offense and only attempt to add some levity and banter to what is a very serious business." The two U.S. senators for New York, Chuck Schumer and Kirsten Gillibrand, both Democrats, called for an independent investigation. White House press secretary Jen Psaki said in a CNN interview that President Joe Biden supported an independent investigation into Governor Cuomo's conduct. On March 1, a third woman came forward alleging Cuomo had sexually harassed her and touched her without consent on her bare lower back. Anna Ruch was not on the governor's staff, but encountered him socially at a wedding reception in September 2019. The attorney general of New York state, Letitia James, was reported to be investigating options for an independent investigation. When reporting the allegation, The New York Times also published a photograph from the event which showed Cuomo putting his hands on Ruch's face. She said the incident made her feel "uncomfortable and embarrassed". A fourth woman, Ana Liss, came forward on March 6 and alleged Cuomo touched her inappropriately on her lower back and kissed her hand. That same day, Karen Hinton, a former consultant of Cuomo when he was leading the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, alleged that in 2000 he had asked personal questions and inappropriately hugged her in his hotel room. On March 1, 2021, Cuomo's senior counsel and special adviser Beth Garvey instructed New York attorney general Letitia James to proceed with an independent investigation of Cuomo. On March 8, James hired attorneys from two law firms (firstly Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton, and secondly Vladeck, Raskin & Clark) to conduct an independent investigation of Cuomo. On March 9, a sixth woman alleged that Cuomo inappropriately touched her at the governor's mansion. On April 7, the unnamed aide said that after she had been summoned to governor's mansion in November 2020, Cuomo allegedly rose from his desk and began groping her. After the aide told him it would get him in trouble, Cuomo then shut the door and said "I don't care." He then returned and groped one of her breasts under her bra by reaching under her blouse. A month later she claimed that Cuomo told her to cover-up what had occurred. On August 8, she revealed her identity: Brittany Commisso. On March 11, 2021, the New York Assembly approved a separate impeachment investigation into the sexual misconduct allegations made against Cuomo. On March 12, Kaitlin (last name unreported), who formerly worked for the governor's office, alleged that Cuomo had made her feel uncomfortable in various situations, with his comments, questions, requests, and invasions of her personal space. She did not allege inappropriate touching or explicit sexual propositions. Also on March 12, journalist Jessica Bakeman alleged that Cuomo had sexually harassed her by touching her and making inappropriate comments. She wrote: "I never thought the governor wanted to have sex with me. It wasn't about sex. It was about power. He wanted me to know that I was powerless". On March 18, another journalist, Valerie Bauman, came forward. She said that Cuomo had made her feel uncomfortable, describing him staring at her, entering her personal space, offering her a job, and asking personal questions. Bauman also stated that Cuomo "never touched [her] inappropriately or said anything that [she] felt [she] could report to [her] boss". On March 19, Alyssa McGrath, who was still working for Cuomo's office at the time, accused Cuomo of sexually harassing her by ogling her and making inappropriate comments. McGrath did not accuse Cuomo of inappropriate sexual contact. On March 29, Sherry Vill, a New York constituent whose flood-damaged house Cuomo had visited in May 2017, alleged that Cuomo had inappropriately kissed her twice during that visit. Attorney General James's five-month investigation concluded with the release of a report on August 3, 2021. This report concluded that during Cuomo's time in office, he sexually harassed 11 women: Boylan, Bennett, Ruch, Liss, Brittany Commisso, Kaitlin, McGrath, event attendee Virginia Limmiatis, an unnamed New York State trooper and two unnamed state entity employees. The investigation concluded that Cuomo's behaviour included unwanted groping, kissing and sexual comments, and also found that Cuomo's office had engaged in illegal retaliation against Boylan for her allegation against him. Cuomo responded to the report with a denial: "I never touched anyone inappropriately." The report generated public condemnation against the governor and heightened calls for him to resign. On August 3, President Joe Biden called upon Cuomo to resign. The release also prompted district attorneys for Manhattan, Nassau County, Westchester County, Albany County and Oswego County to pursue criminal investigations regarding his behavior. On August 10, 2021, Cuomo announced he would step down as Governor of New York, effective August 24. On August 21, Cuomo said that Hurricane Henri would not affect his resignation. On October 28, 2021, a spokesman for the state court system announced that Cuomo would be charged with a misdemeanor sex crime in the Albany City Court. The office of Albany County Sheriff Craig Apple would file a criminal complaint against Cuomo related to Brittany Commisso's groping allegation. However, on January 4, 2022, Albany County District Attorney David Soares declined to prosecute Cuomo and asked a judge to dismiss the complaint, stating that "While we found the complainant in this case cooperative and credible, after review of all the available evidence, we have concluded that we cannot meet our burden at trial." Soares also stated that his office considered other potential criminal charges, but none fit the allegations. On January 4, 2022, Albany County District Attorney David Soares dropped a criminal complaint against Cuomo and also announced that Cuomo would not face any other charges related to other groping allegations, citing lack of evidence.[9][clarification needed] Three days later, a judge dropped the criminal charge against Cuomo. On January 31, 2022, a district attorney in upstate New York declined to continue the investigation of the criminal side of other allegations against Cuomo. On January 31, the fifth and final Sexual Misconduct case against Cuomo, made by Virginia Limmiatis, was dropped by New York district attorney Gregory Oakes, effectively clearing him of all charges. On November 24, 2023, Commisso filed a lawsuit against Cuomo alleging sexual harassment under the New York Adult Survivors Act which extended the time period a victim could sue for sexual assault or harassment that had previously been beyond the statute of limitations. Commisso filed the lawsuit on the last day of the time limit to sue, with the window expiring at midnight on the 24th. The lawsuit alleges a number of inappropriate interactions and actions by Cuomo, and that Commisso hadn't come forward in fear of retaliation; which the suit claims did happen and that then-Lieutenant Governor Kathy Hochul demoted her to menial tasks in lower offices. Cuomo's attorney responded claiming that Commisso's claims were false and an attempt at a "cash grab". Cuomo filed for a state retirement pension, to be effective September 1, 2021 based on 14.56 years of state service as attorney general and governor. According to Politico, Cuomo used the weeks after his resignation to mount a revenge campaign against his successor Kathy Hochul and other perceived enemies, financing it with $18 million of leftover campaign donations. On March 3, 2022, during Cuomo's first public appearance since his resignation, he gave a speech at the God's Battalion of Prayer church in Brooklyn and came out against cancel culture and hinted at a political comeback. Cuomo said, "The press roasted me, my colleagues were ridiculed, my brother was fired. It was ugly. It was probably the toughest time of my life." In the speech before an ally's church, he said, "Contrary to what my political opponents would have you believe, nothing I did violated the law or the regulation." On March 14, 2022, at an event to commemorate the 80th anniversary of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising, Cuomo came out stating his plans to create an organization that will be called "Progressives for Israel". As part of his justification for this organization, he stated "You cannot denounce antisemitism but waver on Israel's right to exist and defend itself but it should be non-Jewish officials who speak first and loudest". Cuomo later declared "I am going to call the question for Democrats 'Do you stand with Israel or do you stand against Israel?'" This came amidst speculation that Cuomo intended to run in the 2024 United States Senate election in New York. In February 2023, Andrew Cuomo criticized President Biden over the problems stemming from the Mexican border and migrants being displaced within the United States. Cuomo married Kerry Kennedy, the seventh child of Robert F. Kennedy and Ethel Skakel Kennedy, on June 9, 1990. They have three daughters: twins, Cara Ethel Kennedy-Cuomo and Mariah Matilda Kennedy-Cuomo (born 1995), and Michaela Andrea Kennedy-Cuomo (born 1997). They separated in 2003, and divorced in 2005. Cuomo began dating Food Network host Sandra Lee in 2005, and the couple moved in together in 2011. The two resided in Westchester County, New York. On September 25, 2019, the couple announced that they had ended their relationship. From the fall of 2019 until August 21, 2021, Cuomo lived in the New York State Executive Mansion on a full-time basis with his three daughters. On July 4, 2015, Cuomo presided over the wedding ceremony of his longtime friend Billy Joel to his fourth wife, Alexis Roderick. Cuomo is a Roman Catholic. According to The New York Times, Cuomo's positions in favor of abortion rights and same-sex marriage (and his cohabitation with Lee without marrying her) contrary to church teachings have "become a lightning rod in a decades-old culture war between conservative Catholics and those, like Mr. Cuomo, who disagree with the church's positions on various issues, including abortion and divorce". During the COVID-19 pandemic, Cuomo became known by the nickname of the "Love Gov" after answering a question by his brother, CNN anchor Chris Cuomo, about showing his softer tone while leading coronavirus response efforts. The governor responded with, "I've always been a soft guy. I am the love gov. I'm a cool dude in a loose mood, you know that. I just say, 'Let it go, just go with the flow, baby.' You know. You can't control anything, so don't even try." Cuomo drives a 1968 Pontiac GTO with the New York license plate of number "1". Cuomo, Andrew (2003). Crossroads: The Future of American Politics. New York: Random House. ISBN 978-1400061457. Cuomo, Andrew (2014). All Things Possible: Setbacks and Success in Politics and Life. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-230008-9. Cuomo, Andrew (2020). American Crisis: Leadership Lessons from the COVID-19 Pandemic. New York: Crown. ISBN 978-0-593-23926-1. Chaffin, Joshua (August 12, 2021). "After Andrew Cuomo's downfall, New York reconsiders its political bullies". Financial Times. Archived from the original on October 10, 2021. Retrieved September 20, 2021. Milman, Oliver (March 20, 2024). "A nuclear plant's closure was hailed as a green win. Then emissions went up". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. "Governor Cuomo Signs $15 Minimum Wage Plan and 12 Week Paid Family Leave Policy into Law". Governor.ny.gov. April 4, 2016. Archived from the original on November 4, 2020. Retrieved November 1, 2020. "The lighter days of CNN's Cuomo Brothers show are long gone". AP News. February 19, 2021. Archived from the original on February 23, 2021. Retrieved February 22, 2021. McKinley, Jesse; Ferré-Sadurní, Luis (February 12, 2021). "New Allegations of Cover-Up by Cuomo Over Nursing Home Virus Toll". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved February 22, 2021. Ferré-Sadurní, Luis; McKinley, Jesse (March 11, 2021). "Aide Says Cuomo Groped Her, as New Details of Account Emerge". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved March 11, 2021. Sommerfeldt, Chris (March 12, 2021). "Seventh Cuomo accuser alleges he 'verbally and mentally abused' her after getting hired for her looks". nydailynews.com. Archived from the original on March 13, 2021. Retrieved March 12, 2021. Thomas, David (August 4, 2021). "Former top U.S. prosecutor in New York took lead on Cuomo probe". Reuters. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. Niedzwiadek, Nick (August 3, 2021). "What we know about the 11 women in the Cuomo harassment report". Politico. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Allen, Jonathan (August 4, 2021). "Six takeaways on the investigation of NY Governor Andrew Cuomo". Reuters. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved August 4, 2021. McEvoy, Jemima. "Cuomo Now Under Criminal Investigation For Sexual Misconduct In Manhattan, Albany And Westchester". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 4, 2021. Retrieved August 4, 2021. Bolger, Timothy (August 4, 2021). "Nassau Acting DA Investigating Cuomo's Alleged Misconduct at Belmont Racetrack". Li Press. Long Island Press. Archived from the original on August 5, 2021. Retrieved August 6, 2021. Pellis, Randy (August 13, 2021). "Oswego County district attorney investigating local sexual misconduct allegations against Cuomo". Watertown Daily Times. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2021. Reyes, Yacob (August 24, 2021). "Kathy Hochul sworn in as New York's first female governor". Axios. Archived from the original on August 25, 2021. Retrieved August 24, 2021. Watson, Kathryn (August 10, 2021). "Who is Kathy Hochul, New York's soon-to-be first female governor?". CBS News. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. Johnson, Ted; Goldsmith, Jill (August 10, 2021). "Embattled New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo Resigns Amid Sexual Harassment Allegations". Deadline. Archived from the original on August 26, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2021. Gregorian, Dareh; Finn, Teaganne (August 10, 2021). "New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo resigns after sexual harassment allegations". NBC News. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. "Westchester DA declines to pursue charges against former New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo". ABC News. Archived from the original on December 29, 2021. Retrieved December 29, 2021. Scott, Eugene (December 29, 2021). "Westchester DA won't charge Andrew Cuomo despite 'credible' allegations". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved December 29, 2021. Villeneuve, Marina; Hill, Michael (January 7, 2022). "Judge dismisses sole criminal charge against Andrew Cuomo". Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 16, 2022. Retrieved January 16, 2022. Herbert, Geoff (March 23, 2020). "Who is Andrew Cuomo? About the NY governor leading coronavirus response in state". syracuse.com. Advance Local. Archived from the original on June 26, 2020. Retrieved May 7, 2020. Blauner, Peter (February 13, 1989). "All Star Family Feud: The Governor's In-Laws Battle Over a Father's Legacy". New York. Archived from the original on December 23, 2019. Retrieved December 6, 2010. Arena, Michael; Marianne Arneberg (October 20, 1988). "Cuomo's Father-in-Law Dies". Newsday. Archived from the original on February 3, 2013. Retrieved November 24, 2012. O'Kane, Caitlin (March 24, 2020). "New York Governor Andrew Cuomo takes national spotlight during coronavirus pandemic". CBS News. Archived from the original on November 22, 2020. Retrieved November 1, 2020. Barbaro, Michael (November 23, 2010). "All That Time Serving the Public? Very Sexy". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 25, 2010. Retrieved December 6, 2010. "Andrew Cuomo Biography: Government Official, Lawyer (1957–)". Biography.com (FYI / A&E Networks). Archived from the original on March 20, 2019. Retrieved May 25, 2015. Smith, Chris (April 14, 2013). "The Albany Machiavelli". New York. Archived from the original on October 8, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2021. O'Shaughnessy, Patrice (September 27, 2009). "Andrew Cuomo: From Horror on the Hudson to Democrats' chosen son". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on July 7, 2011. Retrieved December 6, 2010. Goldmacher, Shane (March 13, 2021). "The Imperious Rise and Accelerating Fall of Andrew Cuomo". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved March 14, 2021. Dugger, Celia W. (January 31, 1992). "Report to Dinkins Urges Overhaul In Shelter System for the Homeless". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on June 25, 2020. Retrieved May 7, 2020. "Andrew M. Cuomo". Archives, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Archived from the original on May 27, 2010. Retrieved May 20, 2010. Evans, Judith (November 30, 1996). "HUD's Cisneros to Leave a Legacy of Public Housing Reform". The Washington Post. p. E01. Archived from the original on November 11, 2012. Retrieved January 12, 2011. "Cuomo's HUD career under scrutiny Questions persist over department's possible role in subprime mortgage meltdown". The Buffalo News. May 30, 2010. Archived from the original on February 15, 2022. Retrieved May 7, 2020. David M. Halbfinger; Michael Powell (August 23, 2010). "As HUD Chief, Cuomo Earns a Mixed Score". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 27, 2014. Retrieved September 17, 2010. Barrett, Wayne (August 5, 2008). "Andrew Cuomo and Fannie and Freddie". The Village Voice. Archived from the original on July 22, 2010. Retrieved September 17, 2010. Fairbanks, Phil (May 30, 2010). "Cuomo's HUD career under scrutiny Questions persist over department's possible role in subprime mortgage meltdown". The Buffalo News. Archived from the original on March 23, 2021. Retrieved March 2, 2021. Bovard, James (2000). Feeling Your Pain: The Explosion and Abuse Of Government Power in the Clinton-Gore Years. New York: St. Martin's Press. pp. 182–184. ISBN 9780312230821. 0-312-23082-6. Nakashima, Ellen (May 6, 2001). "HUD's Inspector General Retiring After Racial-Bias Suit Settlement". Sun-Sentinel. Deerfield Beach, FL. The Washington Post. Archived from the original on March 21, 2020. Retrieved March 21, 2020. Mahler, Jonathan (August 11, 2010). "The Making of Andrew Cuomo". The New York Times Magazine. p. 30. Archived from the original on March 21, 2020. Retrieved March 21, 2020. Dolmetsch, Chris; Baxter, Brian (August 11, 2021). "'Toxic' Andrew Cuomo will struggle to find law firms who want him post-Albany". Bloomberg. Retrieved March 30, 2022 – via National Post. Dreher, Rod (September 4, 2002). "Where the Son Doesn't Follow". National Review. Archived from the original on September 10, 2002. Schneider, Bill (September 6, 2002). "Let a political connection be your umbrella?". Inside Politics. CNN. Archived from the original on March 19, 2005. Hicks, Jonathan P. (May 31, 2006). "Cuomo Wins Democrats' Backing in Primary Race for Attorney General". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 6, 2020. Retrieved July 23, 2007. Benjamin, Elizabeth (February 26, 2010). "Sharpton Praises Paterson, Won't Endorse Cuomo Today". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on March 3, 2010. Hakim, Danny (July 23, 2007). "Spitzer's Staff Misused Police, Report Finds". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 19, 2013. Retrieved July 24, 2007. Matthews, Cara (July 23, 2007). "Cuomo: Spitzer aides used state police to try to damage Bruno". The Ithaca Journal. Retrieved July 24, 2007.[dead link] Alt URL Archived March 24, 2008, at the Wayback Machine Goldenberg, Sally (July 23, 2007). "Report: Governor's office compiled, leaked data on Bruno". Staten Island Advance. Retrieved July 24, 2007.[dead link] "Cuomo: School loan corruption widespread". USA Today. April 10, 2007. Archived from the original on May 23, 2008. Retrieved April 8, 2008. Lederman, Doug (May 15, 2007). "The First Casualty". Inside Higher Education. Archived from the original on October 10, 2007. Retrieved April 8, 2008. Rosencrance, Lisa (June 10, 2008). "3 top ISPs to block access to sources of child porn". Computer World. Archived from the original on July 22, 2012. Retrieved September 23, 2010. DeJean, David (October 7, 2008). "Usenet: Not Dead Yet". PC World. Archived from the original on September 21, 2012. Retrieved September 23, 2010.[dead link] McCullagh, Declan (June 10, 2008). "N.Y. attorney general forces ISPs to curb Usenet access". CNET News. Archived from the original on October 11, 2008. Retrieved April 28, 2009. "Martin: 'Shucking and jiving' and the campaign trail" Archived December 10, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, CNN Political Ticker – CNN.com Blogs, January 11, 2008. Go-Between Tied Funds to Carlyle Archived January 27, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. May 14, 2009. Chan, Sewell; Pérez-Peña, Richard (January 22, 2007). "If Clinton Should Win, Who Would Take Her Place?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 5, 2015. Retrieved November 23, 2008. Hakim, Danny (October 4, 2007). "Wishing and Hoping for Clinton's Seat". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 25, 2009. Retrieved November 23, 2008. Hakim, Danny (November 21, 2008). "New York Weighs Options to Fill the Seat of Senator Clinton". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 10, 2008. Retrieved November 23, 2008. Silverleib, Alan (January 23, 2009). "N.Y. governor names Clinton successor". CNN. Archived from the original on May 5, 2009. Retrieved January 12, 2011. "Obama cordial but cool to Gov. David Paterson". Newsday. September 21, 2009. Archived from the original on September 24, 2009. Retrieved May 16, 2010. Molloy, Joanna (January 23, 2010). "Source says Andrew Cuomo will announce plans to run for New York Governor in March". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on January 27, 2010. Retrieved January 24, 2010. Goldman, Henry (May 30, 2005). "Cuomo Said to Wait for N.Y. Convention to Declare Governor Run". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on December 18, 2014. Retrieved May 16, 2010. "Cuomo Names Mayor Duffy as Running Mate". Your News Now (YNN) Rochester. May 26, 2010. Archived from the original on March 9, 2012. Retrieved February 18, 2012. ""Long Islanders put Paladino to test as their cup of tea", Buffalo News, September 12, 2010". Archived from the original on February 8, 2012. McKinley, Jesse (March 5, 2014). "Westchester Leader Opens Bid to Deny Cuomo a Second Term". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 11, 2014. Retrieved March 26, 2014. "Cuomo Spent Nearly 40 Times More Than Teachout To Win Primary". Shadowproof. Archived from the original on September 11, 2014. Retrieved September 11, 2014. "Cuomo Wins Democratic Primary". WNYC. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved February 15, 2022. "Election Results – 2014 NY State Primary". WNYC. Archived from the original on March 12, 2018. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Karni, Annie (September 10, 2014). "Zephyr Teachout's primary election loss has air of a victory party". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on September 11, 2014. Retrieved September 11, 2014. Kaplan, Thomas (November 4, 2014). "Andrew Cuomo Is Re-elected New York Governor, but Loses Clout". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved January 15, 2014. "Andrew Cuomo Wins Re-election in NY Governor's Race". NBC New York. November 4, 2014. Archived from the original on November 5, 2014. Retrieved November 5, 2014. "Election 2014". WNYC. Archived from the original on October 19, 2021. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Littleton, Cynthia (August 30, 2018). "Cynthia Nixon and Andrew Cuomo Spar Over Subway Woes, Legalizing Pot in Gubernatorial Debate". Archived from the original on September 2, 2018. Retrieved September 10, 2018. Shittu, Kenneth Lovett, Esther (July 24, 2018). "Cynthia Nixon calls for single-payer health care in New York". nydailynews.com. Archived from the original on August 27, 2019. Retrieved August 17, 2019.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Andrew Cuomo, Cynthia Nixon gubernatorial debate gets heated: 'Can you stop lying?'". The Week. August 29, 2018. Archived from the original on September 9, 2018. Retrieved September 10, 2018. "Cuomo continues his ping-pong approach to subway ownership". Politico. August 31, 2018. Archived from the original on September 10, 2018. Retrieved September 10, 2018. "Some Questions For Cuomo After Wednesday's Debate". Archived from the original on August 31, 2018. Retrieved September 10, 2018. "Certified Results from the November 6, 2018 General Election for Governor and Lt. Governor" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on January 17, 2021. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Barbaro, Michael (March 19, 2021). "The Ruthless Rise and Lonely Decline of Andrew Cuomo". The Daily. The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved March 20, 2021. Schultz, Marisa (March 20, 2021). "Cuomo threatened to compare critic to 'child rapist' in leaked audio". Fox News. Archived from the original on March 20, 2021. Retrieved March 20, 2021. "Andrew Cuomo says he'll run for fourth term as New York governor". www.cbsnews.com. May 28, 2019. Archived from the original on August 6, 2021. Retrieved August 4, 2021. Ferré-Sadurní, Luis; Goodman, J. David (August 10, 2021). "Cuomo Resigns Amid Scandals, Ending Decade-Long Run in Disgrace". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Gartland, Michael (August 10, 2021). "Cuomo's resignation opens the potentially wide-open governor's race next year". nydailynews.com. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Hakim, Danny (December 31, 2010). "Cuomo Is Sworn In as New York's Governor". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 1, 2011. Retrieved January 1, 2011. Gershman, Jacob (January 2, 2011). "Cuomo Takes Office, Calls New York State's Reputation a 'National Joke'". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on January 26, 2011. Retrieved January 11, 2011. Kaplan, Thomas (March 31, 2011). "Albany Approves Budget, With Time to Spare". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 19, 2017. Retrieved February 5, 2017. Lovett, Kenneth; Blain, Glenn (March 27, 2011). "Cuomo, lawmakers reach New York State budget deal, agreeing on 2% cut in spending and no new taxes". New York Daily News. New York. "Cuomo Praises Lawmakers In Video Victory Lap". Capitaltonight.com. March 31, 2011. Archived from the original on April 12, 2011. Retrieved April 5, 2012. Kaplan, Thomas (November 3, 2011). "Public Employees Union Accepts Cuomo's Contract Deal to Avert Layoffs". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 19, 2017. Retrieved February 5, 2017. Hamilton, Colby. "Cuomo signs ethics reform into law". WNYC. Archived from the original on February 15, 2022. Retrieved April 5, 2012. "Governor Cuomo Signs Historic Property Tax Cap Legislation In Nassau County | Governor Andrew M. Cuomo". Governor.ny.gov. June 30, 2011. Archived from the original on April 14, 2012. Retrieved April 5, 2012. Baum, Geraldine (June 25, 2011). "Gay marriage fight shows N.Y. Gov. Andrew Cuomo is no rookie". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 17, 2017. Retrieved February 20, 2020. Smith, Chris (June 25, 2011). "Gay Marriage All Goes According to Andrew Cuomo's Plan – Daily Intel". New York Intelligencer. Archived from the original on September 2, 2011. Retrieved April 5, 2012. "Assembly (Finally) Passes Tax Package". New York Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on July 20, 2013. Retrieved January 15, 2012. Lovett, Kenneth (December 6, 2011). "Cuomo announces sweeping tax deal". New York Daily News. New York. Zeff, Blake (September 2, 2014). "Another Cuomo noninterference story falls apart". Politico. Archived from the original on August 22, 2017. Retrieved August 22, 2017. Goldmacher, Shane (August 9, 2017). "Tensions Flare as Cuomo Confronts Democratic Rift". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 14, 2017. Retrieved August 22, 2017. Dovere, Edward-Isaac; Haberman, Maggie (June 25, 2011). "Andrew Cuomo 2016 speculation heating up". Politico. Archived from the original on March 30, 2012. Retrieved April 5, 2012. "Cuomo jumpstarts 2016 speculation". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. June 25, 2011. Archived from the original on March 18, 2013. Retrieved January 15, 2012. Zeff, Blake (September 2, 2016). "Another Cuomo noninterference story falls apart". Politico. Archived from the original on December 30, 2017. Retrieved January 18, 2018. Yglesias, Matthew (September 14, 2018). "Andrew Cuomo has won himself another term, but his presidential aspirations are dead". Vox. Archived from the original on January 19, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2019. Higgins, Eoin (September 13, 2018). "A group of Democrats joined Republicans to give them power in New York. On Election Day, New Yorkers wiped them out". Archived from the original on January 20, 2019. Retrieved January 20, 2019. Shephard, Alex; Chang, Clio (May 12, 2017). "How Andrew Cuomo Profits From a Republican Senate". The New Republic. Archived from the original on January 20, 2019. Retrieved January 20, 2019. McKinley, Jesse (August 2018). "Third-Party Line Will Feature Governor Cuomo, and a Slew of Republicans". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 2, 2018. Retrieved August 1, 2018. "Cuomo: America 'was never that great'". Msn.com. Archived from the original on August 16, 2018. Retrieved August 31, 2018. Riley, Jason L. (August 21, 2018). "Opinion - The Media Keep Falling Into the Trump Trap". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on August 31, 2018. Retrieved August 31, 2018. Gov. Andrew Cuomo's popularity hits new low, poll says Archived March 31, 2019, at the Wayback Machine February 11, 2019. Democrat and Chronicle. Cuomo's Approval Rating Drops to Lowest Level in 8 Years as Governor Archived February 12, 2019, at the Wayback Machine February 11, 2019. The New York Times. "Coronavirus Pandemic Pushes Cuomo to Record High Ratings; Voters Trust Cuomo over Trump on NY Reopening 78-16". Siena College Research Institute. Archived from the original on October 29, 2020. Retrieved November 1, 2020. Goldmacher, Shane; Rosenthal, Brian M.; Armendariz, Agustin (February 24, 2018). "In Spite of Executive Order, Cuomo Takes Campaign Money From State Appointees". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on February 24, 2018. Retrieved February 24, 2018. Goldmacher, Shane; Rosenthal, Brian M. (March 29, 2018). "Cuomo, in Writing, Reinterprets Fund-Raising Ban on Appointees". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on March 29, 2018. Retrieved March 30, 2018. "Governor Cuomo Launches "New York Open for Business" Marketing Initiative". Governor.ny.gov. August 24, 2011. Archived from the original on October 29, 2020. Retrieved November 1, 2020. French, Marie J. (August 5, 2015). "Cuomo says New York tax incentives are a necessity for attracting businesses". Albany Business Review. Archived from the original on March 4, 2021. Retrieved November 1, 2020. "New York's governor jokes he'll change his name to 'Amazon Cuomo' to win the HQ2 bid hours before a report that New York City will be home to one of the company's new headquarters". Business Insider. Archived from the original on November 13, 2018. Retrieved November 13, 2018. "Tax Incentives' Bipartisan Folly". Governing.com. September 20, 2018. Archived from the original on November 13, 2018. Retrieved November 13, 2018. Weise, Karen; Goodman, J. David (November 13, 2018). "Amazon Announces New York and Virginia as HQ2 Picks". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 13, 2018. Retrieved November 13, 2018. "Governor Cuomo Issues Statement Regarding Novel Coronavirus in New York". Governor Andrew M. Cuomo. March 1, 2020. Archived from the original on November 18, 2020. Retrieved November 19, 2020. Feuer, Will (March 2, 2020). "New York Gov. Cuomo says community transmission of coronavirus is 'inevitable' after confirming state's first case". CNBC. Archived from the original on November 27, 2020. Retrieved November 19, 2020. "During Coronavirus Briefing, Governor Cuomo Signs $40 Million Emergency Management Authorization for Coronavirus Response". Governor Andrew M. Cuomo. March 3, 2020. Archived from the original on November 19, 2020. Retrieved November 19, 2020. Feuer, Berkeley Lovelace Jr, Noah Higgins-Dunn, Will (March 4, 2020). "NY Gov. Cuomo confirms 5 new cases of coronavirus: 'This is literally like trying to stop air'". CNBC. Archived from the original on March 4, 2020. Retrieved November 19, 2020.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Feuer, Will (March 6, 2020). "New York Gov. Cuomo slams CDC coronavirus response: 'Absurd and nonsensical'". CNBC. Archived from the original on November 25, 2020. Retrieved November 19, 2020. "In coronavirus crisis, Cuomo and Trump show contrast in leadership". NBC News. March 22, 2020. Archived from the original on March 23, 2020. Retrieved March 23, 2020. Sexton, Joe; Sapien, Joaquin (May 16, 2020). "Two Coasts. One Virus. How New York Suffered Nearly 10 Times the Number of Deaths as California". ProPublica. Archived from the original on May 16, 2020. Retrieved May 17, 2020. "Cuomo threatens to sue RI over new policy to find New Yorkers in the state". The Hill. March 28, 2020. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved March 29, 2020. "Cuomo threatens to sue Rhode Island if it doesn't ease up on New Yorkers during coronavirus pandemic". The Week. March 28, 2020. Archived from the original on March 29, 2020. Retrieved March 29, 2020. Carras, Christi (April 28, 2020). "Gov. Andrew Cuomo approves of people who identify as 'Cuomosexuals". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 5, 2021. Retrieved March 5, 2021. Mendez, Rich (June 15, 2021). "New York lifts most Covid restrictions 'effective immediately' now that 70% of adults have at least one vaccine shot". CNBC. Archived from the original on June 15, 2021. Retrieved June 15, 2021. & Wardwell LLP, Davis Polk. "Impeachment Investigation Report to Judiciary Committee Chair Charles Lavine and the New York State Assembly Judiciary Committee" (PDF). nyassembly.gov. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 23, 2021. Retrieved November 29, 2021. Legum, Judd. "The truth about Cuomo". popular.info. Archived from the original on February 16, 2021. Retrieved February 16, 2021. Goodman, J. David; Alter, Alexandra; Abrams, Rachel; Ferré-Sadurní, Luis (May 17, 2021). "Cuomo Set to Receive $5.1 Million From Pandemic Book Deal". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. "Andrew Cuomo To Receive International Emmy For 'Masterful' COVID-19 Briefings". NPR.org. November 21, 2020. Archived from the original on February 12, 2021. Retrieved February 13, 2021. "2020 INTERNATIONAL EMMY® WINNERS ANNOUNCED LIVE AT CEREMONY HELD FROM NEW YORK CITY". International Academy. Archived from the original on April 11, 2021. Retrieved August 25, 2021. Bruce Paisner presented Governor Andrew Cuomo of New York with the 2020 International Emmy Founders Award for his exceptional use of television for Public service during the Covid-19 pandemic. Joining him were fellow New Yorkers Billy Joel, Billy Crystal, Robert De Niro, Rosie Perez and Ben Stiller, who recorded special congratulatory messages. Schneider, Michael (August 24, 2021). "International Emmys Takes Back Former New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo's Honorary Emmy Award". Variety. Archived from the original on August 24, 2021. Retrieved August 24, 2021. Herbert, Geoff (December 14, 2021). "Andrew Cuomo ordered to pay back $5.1 million in book profits to state". Syracuse.com. Advance Local. Archived from the original on December 14, 2021. Retrieved December 14, 2021. "Ethics Commission Orders Former New York Governor Andrew Cuomo to Return Earnings From Pandemic Book Deal - December 15, 2021". The Daily News Brief. December 15, 2021. Archived from the original on December 15, 2021. Retrieved December 15, 2021. Goodman, J. David; Goldstein, Joseph; McKinley, Jesse (February 1, 2020). "9 Top N.Y. Health Officials Have Quit as Cuomo Scorns Expertise". New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. McKinley, Jesse (August 6, 2017). "Cuomo to Give Colleges $7 Million for Courses in Prisons". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 9, 2018. Retrieved January 9, 2018. McKinley, James C. Jr. (2018). "Cuomo, in Bid to Help Poor, Proposes Ending Cash Bail for Minor Crimes". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 7, 2018. Retrieved January 8, 2018. "Cuomo the Merciless". The Appeal. Archived from the original on July 10, 2018. Retrieved July 9, 2018. McGeehan, Patrick (April 12, 2021). "Indian Point Is Shutting Down. That Means More Fossil Fuel". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on April 12, 2021. Retrieved April 14, 2021. Glaser, Howard (January 15, 2013). "Cuomo Gun Safety Legislation Passes NY State Senate With Bipartisan Support, Assembly Action Today". HuffPost. Archived from the original on January 18, 2013. Retrieved January 25, 2013. Walshe, Shushannah (January 15, 2013). "New York Passes Nation's Toughest Gun-Control Law". ABC News. Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved January 16, 2013. "Sheriff's response to NY SAFE Act". New York State Sheriff's Association. Archived from the original on January 29, 2013. Weaver, Teri (July 15, 2013). "Gov. Andrew Cuomo signs amendment to NY Safe Act allowing exceptions for retired police". The Post-Standard. Syracuse, New York. Archived from the original on July 10, 2013. Retrieved July 8, 2013. "New York declares US's first 'disaster emergency' on gun crime as shooting deaths overtake COVID". Sky News. Archived from the original on July 7, 2021. Retrieved July 7, 2021. "New York declares gun violence emergency after 51 shot over weekend". July 7, 2021. Archived from the original on July 9, 2021. Retrieved July 7, 2021. David Halbfinger; Thomas Kaplan; Wendy Ruderman (November 5, 2012). "Officials Rush to Find Ways for the Storm-Tossed to Vote". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 9, 2012. Retrieved January 22, 2013. "Suffering on Long Island as Power Agency Shows Its Flaws". The New York Times. November 13, 2012. Archived from the original on June 23, 2013. Retrieved June 23, 2013. Hakim, Danny (May 3, 2013). "Ad Effort Selling State as a Business Haven Is Criticized". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 7, 2013. Retrieved June 4, 2013. Johnson, Eliana (May 6, 2013). "Andrew Cuomo Launches Ad Campaign to Lure Businesses to N.Y." The National Review. Archived from the original on May 27, 2013. Retrieved June 4, 2013. Schwartz, Jen (September 10, 2012). "Fracklash". New York Intelligencer. Archived from the original on April 14, 2014. Retrieved February 20, 2020. "Stop fracking, and save our water, land, and air!". nofracking.com. September 16, 2014. Archived from the original on May 7, 2014. Retrieved June 23, 2014. Campbell, J. (February 18, 2014). "Hearing on NY energy plan attracts fracking critics". Democrat & Chronicle. Archived from the original on August 9, 2014. Retrieved June 23, 2014. Kaplan, Thomas. (December 17, 2014). "Citing Health Risks, Cuomo Bans Fracking in New York State". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 6, 2017. Retrieved February 5, 2017. Greenwald, Glenn (April 16, 2019). "In Case Brought by School Speech Pathologist, Texas Federal Court Becomes the Third to Strike Down Pro-Israel Oath as Unconstitutional". The Intercept. Archived from the original on June 10, 2021. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Craig, Susanne; McKinley, Jesse (January 4, 2014). "New York State Is Set to Loosen Marijuana Laws". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 29, 2015. Retrieved September 14, 2015. Campbell, Jon (May 25, 2018). "Andrew Cuomo's changing position on marijuana: A timeline". Democrat and Chronicle. Archived from the original on March 28, 2021. Retrieved June 8, 2021. Campbell, Jon (July 7, 2014). "Cuomo signs New York's medical marijuana bill". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 9, 2021. Retrieved June 8, 2021. Ferrigno, Lorenzo; Assefa, Haimy (July 7, 2014). "New York legalizes medical marijuana". CNN. Archived from the original on June 9, 2021. Retrieved June 8, 2021. Young, Shannon (April 1, 2021). "Cuomo signs bill legalizing adult-use, recreational marijuana in New York". Politico. Archived from the original on June 9, 2021. Retrieved June 8, 2021. Rosenthal, Brian M.; Fitzsimmons, Emma G.; LaForgia, Michael (November 18, 2017). "How Politics and Bad Decisions Starved New York's Subways". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on March 5, 2021. Retrieved December 29, 2017. Chen, David W. (April 11, 2017). "New York's Free-Tuition Program Will Help Traditional, but Not Typical, Students". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on April 13, 2017. Retrieved April 13, 2017. "Tuition-Free Degree Program: The Excelsior Scholarship". Welcome to the State of New York. December 27, 2016. Archived from the original on April 13, 2017. Retrieved April 13, 2017. "Free College? What's the Catch with the Excelsior Scholarship? - ShakingNews". ShakingNews. April 13, 2017. Archived from the original on April 26, 2017. Retrieved April 25, 2017. Kaplan, Thomas (July 17, 2011). "Union Yields on Benefits in Deal With Cuomo". The New York Times. pp. A16. Archived from the original on March 19, 2017. Retrieved February 5, 2017. Kaplan, Thomas; Barbaro, Michael (July 14, 2011). "Cuomo Says Curbing Public Pension Benefits Will Be His Top Goal in '12". The New York Times. pp. A20. Archived from the original on March 19, 2017. Retrieved February 5, 2017. Mays, Jeffery C. (February 27, 2018). "Tenants Sue New York City Housing Authority: 'We Have Let Other People Speak for Us for Too Long'". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on April 8, 2018. Retrieved April 10, 2018. Ferré-Sadurní, Luis; Goodman, J. David (April 2, 2018). "Cuomo Creates Monitor to Oversee Repairs to City's Public Housing". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on April 4, 2018. Retrieved April 10, 2018. "Cuomo: 'Extreme conservatives ... have no place in the state of New York'". Capitol Confidential. January 17, 2014. Archived from the original on January 21, 2014. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Freedlander, David (April 14, 2017). "Governor Cuomo: 'Extreme Conservatives Have No Place In New York'". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved April 19, 2020. "Is Sean Hannity really leaving New York after Gov. Cuomo's anti-conservative comments? – OTR Interviews – On the Record". Fox News Channel. Archived from the original on July 1, 2016. Retrieved November 29, 2018. McKinley, Jesse (January 22, 2014). "Comment by Cuomo outrages Republicans". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 1, 2016. Retrieved February 5, 2017. Reisman, Nick (May 15, 2014). Democrats blast Astorino speech Archived May 17, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. Time Warner Cable News. Retrieved May 15, 2014. Epstein, Reid (June 24, 2011). "Cuomo signs New York gay marriage bill". Politico. Archived from the original on December 29, 2013. Retrieved July 6, 2011. "Gossip". New York Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on December 28, 2011. Retrieved January 15, 2012. Kaplan, Thomas (December 1, 2011). "Cuomo Fund Fills With Money From Thankful Gay Donors". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 26, 2016. Retrieved February 5, 2017. Kaplan, Thomas (October 27, 2011). "Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo Calls for Same-Sex Marriage in All States". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 19, 2017. Retrieved February 5, 2017. Bolcer, Julie (October 25, 2011). "Gay Marriage Opponents Want Apology from Cuomo". The Advocate. Archived from the original on December 29, 2011. Retrieved February 22, 2012. "Burling: Cuomo "Doesn't Scare Me" | Politics on the Hudson". Polhudson.lohudblogs.com. December 9, 2011. Archived from the original on February 3, 2013. Retrieved April 5, 2012. "Lawsuit filed over New York same-sex marriage law". CNN. July 25, 2011. Archived from the original on November 10, 2012. Retrieved December 5, 2011. New Yorkers for Constitutional Freedoms v. New York State Senate Archived March 22, 2020, at the Wayback Machine, 98 A.D.3d 285, 297, 948 N.Y.S.2d 787, 797 leave to appeal denied, 19 N.Y.3d 814, 979 N.E.2d 813 (2012) "Watchdog: Start-Up NY ads cost taxpayers $53M". Archived from the original on January 3, 2018. Retrieved September 11, 2016. "Cuomo economic development chief responds defiantly to Start-Up NY questions". Politico. August 3, 2016. Archived from the original on September 8, 2016. Retrieved September 11, 2016. "Capitol Confidential » Tax code agreement React-O-Mat". Blog.timesunion.com. December 6, 2011. Archived from the original on September 18, 2012. Retrieved April 5, 2012. "Bronx Pols Get Behind Cuomo's Tax Plan". Norwood News. December 7, 2011. Archived from the original on May 22, 2012. Retrieved April 5, 2012. "Governor Andrew Cuomo hears hosannas for New York deal on tax reform". SILive.com. Associated Press. December 8, 2011. Archived from the original on February 1, 2012. Retrieved April 5, 2012. Vielkind, Jimmy (December 8, 2011). "Governor to Assembly GOP: Vote for tax code unanimously or risk seats". Times Union. Archived from the original on January 15, 2012. Retrieved April 5, 2012. Kaplan, Thomas (December 6, 2011). "Albany Tax Deal to Raise Rate for Highest Earners". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 24, 2012. Retrieved February 22, 2012. "New York is raising taxes for millionaires. Will other states follow?". CNBC. April 8, 2021. Wang, Vivian (April 18, 2018). "Cuomo Plans to Restore Voting Rights to Paroled Felons". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on April 18, 2018. Retrieved April 18, 2018. "Transcript of Governor Andrew M. Cuomo's 2013 State of the State Address". Archived from the original on January 7, 2018. Retrieved January 6, 2018. "Reproductive Health Act". NY State Senate. October 3, 2015. Archived from the original on January 7, 2018. Retrieved January 6, 2018. "Reproductive Rights in New York". The New York Times. February 19, 2013. Archived from the original on January 7, 2018. Retrieved January 6, 2018. "Refusing to Shatter Women's Equality into Parts, Assembly Approves All 10 Points of Women's Equality Act". June 20, 2013. Archived from the original on January 16, 2020. Retrieved December 5, 2018. Katz, Celeste (June 19, 2013). "Officially, Gov. Cuomo, NY Senate GOP Dig In Their Heels On Women's Equality Act". Archived from the original on January 7, 2018. Retrieved January 6, 2018. "Klein Offers Hostile Abortion Amendment, Fails (Updatedx2)". State of Politics. June 21, 2013. Archived from the original on January 7, 2018. Retrieved January 6, 2018. "Senate Approves Women Equality Agenda". June 21, 2013. Archived from the original on January 16, 2020. Retrieved December 5, 2018. Nahmias, Laura (June 30, 2015). "Quietly, most of Women's Equality Act becomes law". Archived from the original on January 7, 2018. Retrieved January 6, 2018. Hamilton, Matthew (October 21, 2015). "Cuomo signs women's equality bills". Times Union. Archived from the original on January 7, 2018. Retrieved January 6, 2018. "Long-stalled abortion bill passes New York Legislature". The Buffalo News. January 22, 2019. Archived from the original on February 3, 2019. Retrieved January 31, 2019. "Governor Cuomo Directs One World Trade Center and Other Landmarks to be Lit in Pink to Celebrate Signing of the Reproductive Health Act". Governor Andrew M. Cuomo. January 22, 2019. Archived from the original on May 31, 2019. Retrieved June 1, 2019. Parke, Caleb (January 23, 2019). "New York 'celebrates' legalizing abortion until birth as Catholic bishops question Cuomo's faith". Fox News. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved November 1, 2020. Parke, Caleb (January 30, 2019). "Cuomo brushes off criticism of New York abortion law: 'I'm not here to legislate religion'". Fox News. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved November 1, 2020. Joseph Spector | Democrat & Chronicle, Excommunicating Cuomo? Some Catholic leaders angered over new abortion law in New York Archived September 19, 2020, at the Wayback Machine, January 29, 2019. Chozick, Amy; Cuomo, Andrew (October 12, 2014). "It Could Not Have Been Worse". The New York Times Magazine. p. 16. ISSN 0028-7822. Gale A385503700. Craig, Susanne (July 24, 2014). "Cuomo's Office Hobbled Ethics Inquiries by Moreland Commission". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 15, 2014. Retrieved September 16, 2014. Weiser, Benjamin (2016). "Cuomo Won't Face Federal Charges Over Moreland Ethics Panel". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on February 23, 2018. Retrieved February 23, 2018. Yee, William K. Rashbaum, Vivian; Weiser, Benjamin (September 23, 2016). "Ex-Cuomo Aides Charged in Federal Corruption Inquiry". The New York Times. p. A1. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on September 22, 2016. Retrieved September 22, 2016.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "All the Governor's Men – Federal Charges Against Top Cuomo Aide, Donor and SUNY Head". The New York Observer. September 22, 2016. Archived from the original on September 23, 2016. Retrieved September 22, 2016. "Who is Joe Percoco, former Cuomo aide charged by Bharara Thursday?". September 22, 2016. Archived from the original on September 23, 2016. Retrieved September 22, 2016. Campbell, Jon; Bandler, Jonathan. "Joe Percoco, Andrew Cuomo's former right-hand man, gets 6 years in prison". lohud.com. Archived from the original on October 22, 2021. Retrieved February 15, 2022. September 22, Matthew Hamilton on; AM, 2016 at 8:53 (September 22, 2016). "Who is Joe Percoco, former Cuomo aide charged by Bharara Thursday?". Capitol Confidential. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved February 15, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Campbell, Jon; Spector, Joseph. "Joe Percoco, ex-aide to Cuomo, guilty of 3 felonies in bribery case". lohud.com. Archived from the original on January 20, 2022. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Rahim, Saqib (March 14, 2018). "Jury finds former Cuomo aide guilty of gas deal corruption". Energy Wire. Archived from the original on April 11, 2018. Retrieved April 10, 2018. Wang, Vivian; Weiser, Benjamin (March 14, 2018). "Joseph Percoco, Ex-Cuomo Aide, Found Guilty in Corruption Trial". The New York Times. p. A1. Archived from the original on March 14, 2018. Retrieved March 15, 2018. "Joseph Percoco, Former Executive Aide And Campaign Manager To N.Y. Governor, Convicted Of Accepting More Than $300,000 In Bribes". March 13, 2018 (Press release). United States Department of Justice. Archived from the original on March 16, 2018. Retrieved March 15, 2018. Wang, Vivian; Weiser, Benjamin (March 13, 2018). "Joseph Percoco, Ex-Cuomo Aide, Found Guilty in Corruption Trial". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 30, 2018. Retrieved August 31, 2018. "Cuomo Reacts To Percoco Verdict". Nystateofpolitics.com. Archived from the original on August 20, 2018. Retrieved August 31, 2018. "Percoco conviction hurts Cuomo, observers say". March 14, 2018. Archived from the original on August 20, 2018. Retrieved August 31, 2018. "Percoco sentenced to 6 years in prison for corruption". politico.com. September 20, 2018. Archived from the original on March 9, 2021. Retrieved March 14, 2021. Coleman, Justine (March 24, 2021). "Cuomo family members received special priority for COVID-19 testing: report". The Hill. Archived from the original on March 26, 2021. Retrieved April 3, 2021. Bolger, Timothy (April 2, 2021). "How Chris Cuomo's Southampton Covid-19 Test Became Subject of Gov. Cuomo's Impeachment Probe". Archived from the original on April 2, 2021. Retrieved April 3, 2021. Vlamis, Kelsey. "CNN anchor Chris Cuomo got special priority COVID-19 tests at his home in the Hamptons at the height of the pandemic, report says". Business Insider. Archived from the original on March 29, 2021. Retrieved April 3, 2021. "Cuomo impeachment probe to examine Covid tests for relatives". NBC News. March 26, 2021. Archived from the original on March 31, 2021. Retrieved April 3, 2021. Sapien, Joaquin; Sexton, Joe. ""Fire Through Dry Grass": Andrew Cuomo Saw COVID-19's Threat to Nursing Homes. Then He Risked Adding to It". ProPublica. Archived from the original on June 18, 2020. Retrieved June 18, 2020. Bruno, Giuliana (August 19, 2020). "NY lawmakers call for passage of bill to investigate state's handling of COVID-19 in nursing homes". WTEN. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Bragg, Chris (July 6, 2020). "New York DOH report says state blameless for nursing home deaths". Times Union. Archived from the original on July 6, 2020. Retrieved August 11, 2021. McKinley, Jesse; Ferré-Sadurní, Luis (January 28, 2021). "N.Y. Severely Undercounted Virus Deaths in Nursing Homes, Report Says". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved February 13, 2021. del Valle, Lauren (February 12, 2021). "New York governor's top aide admits administration delayed the release of Covid-19 deaths in long-term care facilities over federal investigation concerns". CNN. Archived from the original on February 13, 2021. Retrieved February 13, 2021. Luscombe, Richard (February 12, 2021). "Cuomo faces calls to resign amid allegations of hiding nursing home Covid deaths". The Guardian. Archived from the original on February 13, 2021. Retrieved February 13, 2021. Fung, Katherine (February 12, 2021). "Some New York Democrats Break With Cuomo as 14 State Senators Call to Strip Him of Emergency Powers". Newsweek. Archived from the original on February 12, 2021. Retrieved February 13, 2021. Dienst, Jonathan; Valiquette, Joe (February 17, 2021). "U.S. attorney, FBI investigating Cuomo's handling of nursing home deaths". NBC News. Archived from the original on February 18, 2021. Retrieved February 17, 2021. "FBI reportedly investigating Cuomo role in shielding donors from Covid liability". The Guardian. March 19, 2021. Archived from the original on July 27, 2021. Retrieved August 5, 2021. Macias, Amanda (December 13, 2020). "Former Cuomo staffer accuses NY governor of sexually harassing her for years – he denies it". CNBC. Archived from the original on December 14, 2020. Retrieved December 14, 2020. Rubinstein, Dana; McKinley, Jesse (December 13, 2020). "Former Aide Accuses Cuomo of Sexual Harassment". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 1, 2021. Retrieved March 1, 2021. "Former aide accuses New York governor Andrew Cuomo of sexually harassing her". The Independent. December 13, 2020. Archived from the original on December 14, 2020. Retrieved December 14, 2020. McKinley, Jesse; Ferré-Sadurní, Luis (February 24, 2021). "Ex-Aide Details Sexual Harassment Claims Against Gov. Cuomo". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved February 24, 2021. Ferré-Sadurní, Luis (March 1, 2021). "Sexual Harassment Claims Against Cuomo: What We Know So Far". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 1, 2021. Retrieved March 1, 2021. McKinley, Jesse (March 1, 2021). "Cuomo Is Accused of Sexual Harassment by a 2nd Former Aide". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved March 1, 2021. "2nd Former Aide to Cuomo Accuses NY Governor of Sexual Harassment". WNBC. February 27, 2021. Archived from the original on February 28, 2021. Retrieved February 27, 2021. Clark, Dan (February 28, 2021). "White House, Members Of Congress Call For Probe Into Sexual Harassment Claims Against Cuomo". WSKG. Archived from the original on April 10, 2021. Retrieved February 28, 2021. "New York Governor Cuomo faces fresh claims of sexual harassment". BBC News. February 28, 2021. Archived from the original on March 1, 2021. Retrieved March 1, 2021. "Statement From Governor Andrew M. Cuomo". Governor Andrew M. Cuomo. February 27, 2021. Archived from the original on March 1, 2021. Retrieved March 1, 2021. Smith, Allan (February 28, 2021). "Cuomo apologizes for 'insensitive' comments, turns over sexual harassment investigation to AG's office". NBC News. Archived from the original on March 1, 2021. Retrieved March 1, 2021. McKinley, Jesse; Rubinstein, Dana (March 1, 2021). "Under Siege Over Sex Harassment Claims, Cuomo Offers Apology". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 28, 2021. Retrieved March 1, 2021. Flegenheimer, Matt; McKinley, Jesse (March 1, 2021). "Cuomo Accused of Unwanted Advance at a Wedding: 'Can I Kiss You?'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved March 2, 2021. Vielkind, Jimmy; Paul, Deanna; Safdar, Khadeeja (March 6, 2021). "Cuomo Faces New Accusations of Inappropriate Behavior From Third Former Aide". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on March 13, 2021. Retrieved March 14, 2021. Brittain, Amy; Dawsey, Josh; Knowles, Hannah; Jan, Tracy (March 6, 2021). "Cuomo's behavior created 'hostile, toxic' workplace culture for decades, former aides say". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 14, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. Moghe, Sonia; LeBlanc, Paul (March 1, 2021). "NY AG says she can start investigation into Cuomo as second accuser says he 'wields his power to avoid justice'". CNN. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. McKinley, Jesse; Ferré-Sadurní, Luis (March 8, 2021). "Cuomo Inquiry to Be Led by 2 Lawyers, Including Ex-U.S. Attorney". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. Lyons, Brendan J. (March 9, 2021). "Cuomo faces new sexual harassment allegation, this time at Executive Mansion". Times Union. Archived from the original on March 9, 2021. Retrieved March 9, 2021. "Cuomo aide says he slammed door shut before groping her". AP News. April 7, 2021. Archived from the original on April 7, 2021. Retrieved April 8, 2021. Niedzwiadek, Nick (April 7, 2021). "Report: Accuser says Cuomo groomed her, urged her to stay silent". Politico PRO. Retrieved April 8, 2021. Lyons, Brendan J. (April 7, 2021). "In her own words: Woman describes Cuomo's alleged groping at mansion". Times Union. Archived from the original on April 8, 2021. Retrieved April 8, 2021. "Executive assistant who accused Cuomo of groping speaks publicly for the first time: "The governor needs to be held accountable"". CBS News. August 8, 2021. Archived from the original on August 8, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Milman, Oliver (March 12, 2021). "New York assembly approves 'impeachment investigation' into Andrew Cuomo". The Guardian. Archived from the original on March 12, 2021. Retrieved March 12, 2021. Ferré-Sadurní, Luis; Goodman, J. David; McKinley, Jesse (March 11, 2021). "Cuomo Faces New Threat: Impeachment Inquiry Led by Democrats". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved March 12, 2021. Traister, Rebecca (March 12, 2021). "Andrew Cuomo's governorship has been defined by cruelty that disguised chronic mismanagement. Why was that celebrated for so long?". New York. Archived from the original on March 13, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Bakeman, Jessica (March 12, 2021). "Cuomo Never Let Me Forget I Was a Woman". Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. Herbert, Geoff (March 12, 2021). "Cuomo accused of more inappropriate behavior: 'It wasn't about sex. It was about power.'". syracuse.com. Advance Local. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. Lenthang, Marlene (August 4, 2021). "Timeline: Investigation alleges New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo sexually harassed women". ABC News. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. Shugerman, Emily (March 18, 2021). "Women Reporters Faced Cuomo's Creepy Behavior, Too". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. "The Claims Against Cuomo: A Look at the Women's Allegations". WNBC. Associated Press. August 3, 2021. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. McKinley, Jesse (March 19, 2021). "Cuomo Faces New Claims of Sexual Harassment From Current Aide". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 19, 2021. Retrieved March 21, 2021. "Upstate woman said Gov. Cuomo forced kisses on her cheek". WNYT NewsChannel 13. March 29, 2021. Archived from the original on March 29, 2021. Retrieved March 29, 2021. Lyons, Brendan J. (March 29, 2021). "Rochester-area woman alleges Cuomo kissed her in front of her family". Times Union. Archived from the original on March 29, 2021. Retrieved March 29, 2021. Vielking, Jimmy (August 3, 2021). "New York Gov. Cuomo Sexually Harassed Multiple Women, Investigation Finds". The Wall Street Journal. The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved August 3, 2021.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Scherer, Michael; Dawsey, Josh (August 4, 2021). "How Cuomo's office sought help from prominent liberal advocates as it pushed to discredit an accuser". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. "Cuomo investigation: What we know and what's next". Times Union. Associated Press. August 4, 2021. Archived from the original on August 4, 2021. Retrieved August 4, 2021. Wilkie, Christina (August 3, 2021). "Biden calls on Cuomo to resign after bombshell sexual harassment report". CNBC. Archived from the original on September 21, 2021. Retrieved September 20, 2021. "Andrew Cuomo To Resign After Investigation Finds He Sexually Harassed Multiple Women". NPR. August 10, 2021. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. Glueck, Katie (August 10, 2021). "Live Updates: Governor Cuomo Says He Will Resign". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. "Gov. Andrew Cuomo resigns over sexual harassment allegations". Associated Press. August 10, 2021. Archived from the original on August 26, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. "Gov. Cuomo says storm won't stop his planned resignation". Associated Press. August 21, 2021. Archived from the original on August 22, 2021. Retrieved August 23, 2021. Dienst, Jonathan (October 28, 2021). "Andrew Cuomo Charged With Misdemeanor 'Sex Crime', Court Spokesman Says". WNBC. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved October 28, 2021. Hill, Michael (October 28, 2021). "Cuomo accused of groping woman, a misdemeanor sex crime". Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 4, 2022. Retrieved January 4, 2022. Hill, Michael; Villeneuve, Marina (January 4, 2021). "Prosecutor drops groping charge against former NY Gov. Cuomo". Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 4, 2022. Retrieved January 4, 2022. "Upstate New York district attorney declines to pursue sexual harassment case against Cuomo". The Hill. January 31, 2022. Archived from the original on February 1, 2022. Retrieved February 15, 2022. "Last Criminal Case Against Former Gov. Andrew Cuomo Dropped by DA – NBC New York". Nbcnewyork.com. January 31, 2022. Archived from the original on February 1, 2022. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Linton, Caroline (November 24, 2023). "Andrew Cuomo accused of sexual harassment in new lawsuit filed by former executive assistant Brittany Commisso". CBS News. Retrieved November 25, 2023. Reisman, Nick (August 17, 2021). "Cuomo, leaving office, files for retirement". New York State of Politics. Archived from the original on August 25, 2021. Retrieved August 25, 2021. Palmeri, Tara; Bade, Rachael; Lizza, Ryan; Daniels, Eugene (August 27, 2021). "POLITICO Playbook: 'The worst day of your presidency'". Politico. Archived from the original on February 15, 2022. Retrieved August 28, 2021. Gronewold, Anna (March 7, 2022). "'God isn't finished with me yet': Cuomo speaks at Brooklyn church for first live appearance since resigning". Politico. Retrieved March 7, 2022. King, Ryan (March 14, 2022). "Andrew Cuomo announces progressive pro-Israel advocacy group". Washington Examiner. Retrieved March 18, 2022. Severi, Misty (February 9, 2023). "Andrew Cuomo slams Biden immigrant policies: 'Federal government was not prepared'". Washington Examiner. Retrieved February 1, 2024. "Sandra Lee and Gov. Andrew Cuomo Have Family Dinners at Home". People. May 17, 2013. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Gibson, David (January 7, 2011). "Andrew Cuomo Takes Communion and Revives the 'Good Catholic' Debate". Politics Daily. Archived from the original on January 21, 2012. Retrieved April 15, 2016. Blain, Glenn (January 2, 2011). "On second day in office, Cuomo attends church with daughters and Sandra Lee". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on November 24, 2011. Retrieved February 22, 2012. McKinley, Jesse (September 25, 2019). "Governor Cuomo and Sandra Lee Have Split Up". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 12, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2021. "Cuomo presides over surprise Billy Joel wedding". Times Union. July 5, 2015. Archived from the original on March 22, 2020. Retrieved March 22, 2020. Vitello, Paul (March 18, 2011). "A Cuomo Who Is Catholic but Hardly Theological". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2021. Spector, Joseph (May 8, 2020). "In coronavirus response, Gov. Andrew Cuomo shows a different side: A softer one". Democrat and Chronicle. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved March 5, 2021. Chon, Monica (April 9, 2020). "The Cuomo Brothers' Latest Comedic Exchange Involved a New Nickname: "Love Gov"". O, The Oprah Magazine. Archived from the original on March 5, 2021. Retrieved March 5, 2021. Flegenheimer, Matt (April 13, 2021). "Andrew Cuomo's White-Knuckle Ride". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved April 14, 2021. "American Crisis by Andrew Cuomo: 9780593239261". Penguin Random House. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved October 28, 2020. Paterson, David (2020). Black, Blind, & in Charge: A Story of Visionary Leadership and Overcoming Adversity. New York. Andrew Cuomo at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Governor Andrew M. Cuomo official government website Andrew Cuomo for Governor campaign website Andrew Cuomo at Curlie Appearances on C-SPAN Profile at Vote Smart