Baarle-Nassau (Dutch pronunciation: [ˌbaːrlə ˈnɑsʌu] ) is a municipality and town in the southern Netherlands, located in the province of North Brabant. It had a population of 6,899 in 2019[update]. The town is the site of a complicated borderline between Belgium and the Netherlands: it encloses 22 small exclaves of the Belgian town Baarle-Hertog, of which the two largest contain seven counter-enclaves of Baarle-Nassau, and the main body of Belgium contains another. Baarle-Nassau is closely linked, with complicated borders, to the Belgian exclaves of Baarle-Hertog. Baarle-Hertog consists of 26 separate parcels of land. Apart from the main parcel, known as Zondereigen and located north of the Belgian town of Merksplas, there are 22 Belgian exclaves in the Netherlands and three other parcels on the Dutch-Belgian border. There are also six Dutch exclaves located within the largest Belgian exclave, one within the second-largest, and an eighth within Zondereigen. The smallest Belgian parcel, H7, locally named De Loversche Akkers, measures 2,469 square metres (26,580 sq ft). The border's complexity results from numerous medieval treaties, agreements, land-swaps and sales between the Lords of Breda and the Dukes of Brabant. Generally speaking, predominantly agricultural or built environments became constituents of Brabant, while other parts devolved to Breda. These distributions were ratified and clarified as a part of the borderline settlements arrived at during the Treaty of Maastricht in 1843. For clarification and the interest of tourists, the border is made visible on all streets with iron pins. This way it is always clear whether one is in Belgium (Baarle-Hertog) or in the Netherlands (Baarle-Nassau). This is also visible on the house numbers: the style of house numbers is different in both countries, and often one will find the Dutch or Belgian flag next to the number. Baarle-Nassau (population: 5,330) Ulicoten (1,110) Castelré (140) These are all part of Baarle-Nassau municipality. These are all part of Baarle-Hertog municipality, and are surrounded by Baarle-Nassau municipality (Netherlands). Baarle-Nassau has two primary schools: Basisschool De Uilenpoortand and Bernardusschool, the latter in the Ulicoten section. There is a single secondary school in Baarle-Nassau, De La Salle, which has Voorbereidend middelbaar beroepsonderwijs, lower Hoger algemeen voortgezet onderwijs, and Voorbereidend wetenschappelijk onderwijs levels. It shares, with Baarle-Hertog, a joint library with Belgian and Dutch staff. Petrus Christus (c. 1410/1420 in Baarle – 1475/1476) an Early Netherlandish painter; was a leading painter after the death of Jan van Eyck Jan Hendrikx (born 1944) a former Dutch politician, mayor of Baarle-Nassau 1990–2012 Baarle-Nassau, church Baarle-Nassau, town hall Grensovergang Poppel-Baarle Baarle-Nassau, bij Singel, water pump "Braam V.T.M." (in Dutch). Gemeente Baarle-Nassau. Archived from the original on 29 April 2014. Retrieved 28 April 2014. "Kerncijfers wijken en buurten 2020" [Key figures for neighbourhoods 2020]. StatLine (in Dutch). CBS. 24 July 2020. Retrieved 19 September 2020. "Postcodetool for 5111CC". Actueel Hoogtebestand Nederland (in Dutch). Het Waterschapshuis. Retrieved 28 April 2014. "Bevolkingsontwikkeling; regio per maand" [Population growth; regions per month]. CBS Statline (in Dutch). CBS. 1 January 2021. Retrieved 2 January 2022. Whyte, Brendan (2004). "En Territoire Belge et à Quarante Centimètres de la Frontière" An historical and documentary study of the Belgian and Dutch enclaves of Baarle-Hertog and Baarle-Nassau. The University of Melbourne, School of Anthropology, Geography and Environmental Studies. ISBN 0-7340-3032-0. "Jeugd en Onderwijs". Baarle-Nassau. Retrieved 2022-01-18. - Under the tab "Onderwijs en kinderopvang" "bibliotheek." Baarle-Hertog. Retrieved on January 6, 2017. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Baarle-Nassau. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Baarle. Official website Baarle-Nassau (in Dutch) Official website Baarle-Hertog (in Dutch) The Baarle Enclaves outlined with Maps Photograph of H-22, the smallest enclave of B.-Hertog Baarle-Nassau / Baarle-Hertog (with maps) Photos from Baarle-Nassau/Hertog English Website about the Baarle Enclaves / with maps [Dead link] Dutch pages about Baarle-Hertog and Baarle-Nassau / with maps