Bacău County (Romanian pronunciation: [baˈkəw] ) is a county (județ) of Romania, in Western Moldavia, with its capital city at Bacău. It has one commune, Ghimeș-Făget, in Transylvania. This county has a total area of 6,621 km2 (2,556 sq mi). In the western part of the county there are mountains from the Eastern Carpathian group. Here, along the valleys of the Oituz River and Trotuș River, there are two important links between Moldavia and Transylvania. On the East side, the heights decrease and the lowest point can be found on the Siret River valley which crosses the county from North to South down the middle. On the East side there is the Moldavian Plateau crossed by many small rivers. Bears, wolves, foxes, wild boars, and squirrels inhabit Bacău County's mountains, particularly in its rural Slănic-Moldova region; the remnants of the local deer are preserved in Mănăstirea Cașin. AB AR AG BC BH BN BT BV BR BZ CS CL CJ CT CV DB DJ GL GR GJ HR HD IL IS IF MM MH MS NT OT PH SM SJ SB SV TR TM TL VS VL VN B Vaslui County in the East. Harghita County and Covasna County in the West. Neamț County in the North. Vrancea County in the South. The county of Bacău was one of the most industrialized regions in the communist period and it remained Moldavia's most important industrial center ever since. There are two large oil refineries at Onești and Dărmănești. Following the collapse of the communist regime, Bacău continued to be the region's most important GDP supplier, but the county became more famous for the controversial figures involved in the local economy than for its performance. The predominant industries in the county are: The chemical and oil industry. Food industry. Construction materials industry. Wood and paper industry. Textile industry. Mechanical components industry. Aeronautics industry. In Bacău County there are important reserves of oil and salt. Also coal is exploited. The main tourist destinations in the county are: The cities of Bacău and Onești. The resorts: Poiana Sărată Poiana Uzului Slănic-Moldova Târgu Ocna The Nemira Mountains [ro]. Some estimates put the total number of Csángós at around 70,000 in 1987. The Bacău County Council, renewed at the 2020 local elections, consists of 36 councillors, with the following party composition: Gabriela Adameșteanu Vasile Alecsandri George Bacovia Radu Beligan Nadia Comăneci Loredana Groza Vasile Pârvan Lucrețiu Pătrășcanu Radu R. Rosetti Tristan Tzara Bacău County has 3 municipalities, 5 towns, and 85 communes Municipalities Bacău – capital city; population: 136,087 (as of 2021) Moinești Onești Towns Buhuși Comănești Dărmănești Slănic-Moldova Târgu Ocna Communes Agăș Ardeoani Asău Balcani Berești-Bistrița Berești-Tazlău Berzunţi Bârsănești Blăgești Bogdănești Brusturoasa Buciumi Buhoci Cașin Căiuți Cleja Colonești Corbasca Coțofănești Dămienești Dealu Morii Dofteana Faraoani Filipeni Filipești Găiceana Ghimeș-Făget Gârleni Glăvănești Gioseni Gura Văii Helegiu Hemeiuș Huruiești Horgești Izvoru Berheciului Itești Letea Veche Lipova Livezi Luizi-Călugăra Măgirești Măgura Mănăstirea Cașin Mărgineni Motoșeni Negri Nicolae Bălcescu Odobești Oituz Oncești Orbeni Palanca Parava Pâncești Parincea Pârgărești Pârjol Plopana Podu Turcului Poduri Prăjești Racova Răcăciuni Răchitoasa Roșiori Sascut Sănduleni Sărata Săucești Scorțeni Secuieni Solonț Stănișești Strugari Ștefan cel Mare Tamași Tătărăști Târgu Trotuș Traian Ungureni Urechești Valea Seacă Vultureni Zemeș Bacău became famous after electing Ilie Ilașcu of the Greater Romania Party as their Senator, while he was held in prison in Transnistria. Between the world wars, Bacău County had a different territorial extent. The county was located in the east central part of Greater Romania, in the center of Moldavia. Its territory included the central part of the current Bacău County. It bordered on the west with the counties of Trei Scaune and Ciuc, in the north with Neamț and Roman counties, in the east with the counties of Tutova and Tecuci, and in the south with Putna County. The county was originally divided into five districts (plăși): Plasa Bistrița Plasa Muntele, headquartered in Muntele Plasa Oituz, headquartered in Oituz Plasa Siret, headquartered in Siret Plasa Tazlău, headquartered in Tazlău Subsequently, two more districts were established: Plasa Răcăciuni, headquartered in Răcăciuni Plasa Traian, headquartered in Traian According to the 1930 census data, the county population was 260,781, comprising 88.6% Romanians, 5.3% Jews, 3.3% Hungarians, as well as other minorities. From the religious point of view, 75.8% were Eastern Orthodox, 18.1% Roman Catholics, 5.5% Jewish, as well as other minorities. In 1930, the county's urban population was 50,342, of which 70.1% were Romanians, 23.9% were Jews, 2.2% were Hungarians, as well as other minorities. From a religious point of view, the urban population consisted of 64.9% Eastern Orthodox, 24.4% Jewish, 9.3% Roman Catholic, as well as other minorities. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bacău County. "Populaţia rezidentă după grupa de vârstă, pe județe și municipii, orașe, comune, la 1 decembrie 2021" (XLS). National Institute of Statistics. Network of small rural communities of energetic neutrality (RURENER) (Archived from the original), Slănic-Moldova - RURENER Case Study, European Commission, retrieved 24 July 2019. Archived at the Wayback Machine National Institute of Statistics, "Populația la recensămintele din anii 1948, 1956, 1966, 1977, 1992, 2002 și 2011" Archived 22 September 2006 at the Wayback Machine "Comunicat de presă: 2 februarie 2012 privind rezultatele provizorii ale Recensământului Populației și Locuințelor – 2011" (PDF). Recensamantromania.ro. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 August 2019. Retrieved 11 April 2018. 1987 estimate published in: Tennant, Chris (transl.) (1994) The Hungarian minority’s situation in Ceaușescu's Romania. Boulder: Social Science Monographs. p. 33. "Rezultatele finale ale alegerilor locale din 2020" (Json) (in Romanian). Autoritatea Electorală Permanentă. Retrieved 2 November 2020. Bacău County Council - Heraldică Portretul României Interbelice - Județul Bacău Recensământul general al populației României din 29 decemvrie 1930, Vol. II, pag. 30 Recensământul general al populației României din 29 decemvrie 1930, Vol. II, pag. 536-541