Estonian Aviation Academy (Estonian: Eesti Lennuakadeemia) is a state-owned institution educating and training personnel for Estonian aviation enterprises and organizations. The academy is situated near the Tartu Airport. Instruction at the Estonian Aviation Academy meets the curricular requirements of the country's Ministry of Education and Research, as well as international agencies (ICAO, JAA, EASA and EUROCONTROL). The mission of the Estonian Aviation Academy is to educate, train aviation personnel (at international standards), develop national aviation culture, and support the development of activities in the field of aviation. The main building, that was completed in 2011, is situated beside of the Tartu Airport. Air traffic services Management of aviation communication and navigation surveillance Aircraft piloting Airplane piloting Helicopter piloting Aviation management Aircraft engineering Illari Lään (-2020) Koit Kaskel (2020-) Estonian Aviation Academy has developed links with aviation enterprises and higher educational institutions in Estonia and abroad, including: Estonian Air Estonian Air Force Estonian Air Navigation Services Estonian Aviation Museum Estonian Border Guard Aviation Group Estonian Civil Aviation Administration Estonian National Defence College Estonian University of Life Sciences Magnetic MRO (ex. Air Maintenance Estonia) Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communications Ministry of Education and Research Pakker Avio Tallinn Airport, Ltd. Tallinn University Tallinn University of Applied Sciences Tallinn University of Technology University of Tartu Ülenurme High School Anadolu University School of Aviation Avia College EUROCONTROL Institute of ANS Helsinki-Vantaa Airport Hochschule Bremen Hogeschool van Amsterdam Finnair Katholieke Hogeschool Kempen Lufthansa Technical Training Lund University School of Aviation Lycon Engineering AB Mayflower College National Defence University of Warsaw Patria Pilot Training OY Riga Technical University SAS Flight Academy Transport and Telecommunication Institute University of Maryland Eastern Shore Vilnius Gediminas Technical University Technical University of Košice "Eesti Lennuakadeemia rektori ülesandeid täidab 1. oktoobrist Illari Lään" (in Estonian). 26 September 2019. Official website