Moulins (French pronunciation: [mulɛ̃] ; Occitan: Molins) is a commune in central France, capital of the Allier department. It is located on the river Allier. Among its many tourist attractions are the Maison Mantin, the Anne de Beaujeu Museum and The National Center of Costume and Scenography. Moulins is located on the banks of the river Allier. Moulins-sur-Allier station, in the centre of the town, has direct trains to Paris (Gare de Bercy), which take about 2 hours 25 minutes. The A79 motorway passes south of the town. Montbeugny Airport is a small airport located near Moulins. Before the French Revolution, Moulins was the capital of the province of Bourbonnais and the seat of the Dukes of Bourbon. It appears in documented records at least as far back as the year 990. In 1232, Archambaud VIII, Sire de Bourbon granted a franchise to the village's inhabitants. The town achieved greater prominence in 1327, when Charles IV elevated Louis I de Clermont to Duke of Bourbon. Either Louis or the later Peter II, Duke of Bourbon and of Auvergne moved the capital of the province from Bourbon-l'Archambault to Moulins. Note: This article in French suggests Pierre II moved the capital, while the local tourism website (also in French) suggests it was Louis I. In February 1566 it became eponymous to the Edict of Moulins, an important royal ordinance dealing with many aspects of the administration of justice and feudal and ecclesiastical privilege, including limitations on the appanages held by French princes, abrogation of the levy of rights of tallage claimed by seigneurs over their dependants, and provisions for a system of concessions on rivers. This was the birthplace of the great 19th-century operatic baritone and art collector Jean-Baptiste Faure. In the 20th century, Coco Chanel went to school in Moulins as an orphan, before moving to Paris, where she became a fashion designer and major innovator in women's clothing. Moulins is the prefecture of Allier, even though it is not the most populated commune of the department. The position of mayor has existed in Moulins since 1518. The current mayor is Pierre-André Périssol, in office since 1995 and last re-elected at the 2020 elections. Moulins is twinned with: Bad Vilbel, Germany since 26 October 1990 Montepulciano, Italy Centre National du Costume de Scene (museum) Antoine Gilbert Griffet de Labaume (1756–1805), translator and man of letters Théodore de Banville (1823–1891), poet and playwright Jean Pastelot (1820–1870), painter and caricaturist Coco Chanel, fashion designer, started as a cabaret singer Philippe N'Dioro, footballer Jean-Luc Perrot (born 1959), pipe organ player and composer Stéphane Risacher, basketball player for the French national team Jean-Baptiste Faure, opera singer Samuel Paty, slain teacher Claude Louis Hector de Villars (1653–1734), Marshal General of France Gilbert Mercier (1957), author of "The Orwellian Empire" and journalist[citation needed] Louis Jacques Brunet (1811), ancient professor of natural history[citation needed] James FitzJames, 1st Duke of Berwick (1670–1734) Rahel Shtainshnaider, footballer Decauville factory Manitowoc Company Moulins Cathedral Diocese of Moulins AS Moulins Communes of the Allier department Moulins Ball "Répertoire national des élus: les maires" (in French). data.gouv.fr, Plateforme ouverte des données publiques françaises. 6 June 2023. "Populations légales 2021". The National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies. 28 December 2023. Faure, Henri. Histoire de Moulins (in French). Thierry, Augustin (1853). Essais sur la formation et les progrès du Tiers-État. p. 258. Retrieved 20 December 2022. Des villages de Cassini aux communes d'aujourd'hui: Commune data sheet Moulins, EHESS (in French). Population en historique depuis 1968, INSEE Wikimedia Commons has media related to Moulins, Allier. Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article "Moulins". City council website (in French) Local tourism website (in French) Picture of Moulins Cathedral