The following is a list of countries where Spanish is an official language, plus several countries where Spanish or any language closely related to it, is an important or significant language. Spanish is the official language (either by law or de facto) in 20 sovereign states (including Equatorial Guinea, where it is official but not a native language), one dependent territory, and one partially recognized state, totaling around 442 million people. In the these countries and territories, Spanish is the main or mostly used language of communication of the vast majority of the population; official documents are written chiefly or solely in that language; and it is taught in schools and utilized as the primary medium of instruction as part of the official curriculum. Spanish is a secondary language, co-official with Arabic as the primary language. Notes: In Spain, Spanish is the sole official language at the national level, while Basque, Catalan/Valencian, Aranese, and Galician are co-official alongside Spanish in certain regions. In Ecuador, Spanish is the sole official language at the national level while the Kichwa (Northern Quechua) and Shuar languages hold co-official status in selected regions. In Bolivia, the national constitution recognizes Spanish and various indigenous languages of Bolivia as official at the national level, though Spanish is predominant nationwide. In Paraguay, Spanish and the indigenous Guaraní are recognized as co-official at the national level and both are widely used in society. In Equatorial Guinea, the Spanish, French, and Portuguese languages all hold official status at the national level, though Spanish is the primary language in the public sphere while Fang, Bube, Kombe, and other Bantu languages, as well as an English-based creole, are used at home and family settings. Puerto Rico is an unincorporated territory of the U.S. where Spanish and English are the official languages and Spanish is the primary language. The Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic is a partially recognized state, recognized by 46 UN member states, which claims the non-self-governing territory of Western Sahara. Though not an official language at the national level, Spanish is regularly spoken by significant populations throughout these countries. Public services, education, and information are widely available in Spanish, as are various forms of printed and broadcast media. Spanish is not the official language of Andorra but holds a special status in some fields, namely in education and business. Public education in Spanish (following the Spanish public education system) is offered in the country. It is the second-most spoken language in the country, with nearly half of the population conversant in Spanish, rivaling the official Catalan in both native and total speaker numbers. Spanish has also emerged as the lingua franca between various linguistic groups and in the commercial sector, which has triggered government efforts to promote the more general and universal use of Catalan. In 2008, 30.8% of students were enrolled in the Spanish education system. Spanish has no official recognition in the Central American nation of Belize, a Commonwealth of Nations member state where English is the official national language. However, the country shares land borders with Spanish-speaking Mexico and Guatemala and, per the 2010 Belizean census, Spanish is spoken by a sizable portion of the population; 30% claim Spanish as a mother tongue and about 50% of the population has a working knowledge of the language. The Census Report 2010 reported that 56.6% of Belizeans spoke Spanish. Spanish is not official in the British Overseas Territory of Gibraltar, which shares its only land border with Spain. Nevertheless, Spanish is compulsory for secondary school students and a mixture of Spanish and English called Llanito is colloquially spoken among most inhabitants. Recent trends since the 2000s have found, however, that Spanish proficiency and usage among younger generations is declining as members of these groups tend to use English exclusively. Spanish has been spoken in the United States for several centuries in the Southwest and Florida, which were all once part of New Spain. However, today only a minority of Spanish speakers in the U.S. trace their language back to those times; the overwhelming majority of speakers come from recent immigration. Only in northern New Mexico and southern Colorado there have been Spanish-speaking communities uninterruptedly since colonial times. Spanish is the most studied foreign language in United States schools and is spoken as a native tongue by 41 million people, plus an additional 11 million fluent second-language speakers. Though not official, Spanish has a special status in the American state of New Mexico. With almost 60 million native speakers and second language speakers, the United States now has the second-largest Spanish-speaking population in the world after Mexico. Spanish is increasingly used alongside English nationwide in business and politics. Media in Spanish has also become influential outside of native Hispanophone circles. In the United States, the language is regulated by the North American Academy of the Spanish Language. Spanish was the official language of the Philippines from the beginning of the Hispanic period in 1565 and through independence until a constitutional change in 1973. However, President Ferdinand Marcos had Spanish redesignated as an official language under Presidential Decree No. 156, dated 15 March 1973 and Spanish remained official until 1987, when it was re-designated as a voluntary and optional auxiliary language. Additionally, the present Philippine Constitution, in its Article XIV, stipulates that the Government shall provide the people of the Philippines with a Spanish-language translation of the Constitution. The article was invoked and applied when, in 2015, Senator Loren Legarda introduced a Senate Bill requesting an act intended to provide translations of the Philippine Constitution into several specific languages, including Spanish. The bill was accepted and approved. Beyond the Constitution, the Philippine Department of Education issued DECS Order No. 33 in 1987, requiring schools to include Spanish and Arabic when offering foreign language courses, pointing out the relevance of both languages "in the development of Philippine history and culture". On 8 August 2007, President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo announced that the Philippine government asked for help from the Spanish Government in her plan to reintroduce Spanish as a required subject in the Philippine school system. By 2012, the language was a compulsory subject at only a very select number of secondary schools. Despite government promotion of Spanish, only about 400,000 people, which accounts for under 0.5% of the population, can speak Spanish at least proficiently. While Spanish is designated as an optional government language in the Philippines, its usage is very limited and not present in everyday life. Despite this, Tagalog and other native Philippine languages incorporate a large number of Spanish loanwords, as a result of 300 years of Spanish influence. In the country, Spanish is regulated by the Philippine Academy of the Spanish Language. Spanish is an official language, alongside Arabic, of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, a partially recognized state that claims Western Sahara. The territory, a former Spanish colony now mostly occupied by Morocco, is regarded as a non-self-governing territory by the United Nations. Although Spanish is not commonly spoken as a native language in Western Sahara, it is widely used as a secondary language in the region's SADR-controlled area, while the Moroccan government uses Arabic and French in administrating the Moroccan-occupied area. There are several Spanish-based creole languages. Chavacano is spoken in Zamboanga City in the Philippines and is a regional language. Papiamento is the official language in Aruba, Bonaire, and Curaçao; it has been classified as either a Spanish-based or a Portuguese-based creole. Chamorro is an Austronesian language with many Spanish loanwords; some scholars have considered it a creole, but the most authoritative sources deny this. Judeo-Spanish (sometimes known as Ladino or other names) is a language derived from medieval Spanish; it is still spoken by some Sephardi Jews, mainly in Israel. United Nations (UN) European Union (EU) Union of South American Nations (UNASUR) African Union (AU) Central American Integration System (SICA) Latin American Parliament (Parlatino) United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) Organization of American States (OAS) Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) Organization of Ibero-American States (OEI) World Trade Organization (WTO) North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) Mercosur Andean Community of Nations (CAN) Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Latin American Integration Association (ALADI) Antarctic Treaty Secretariat (ATS) International Labour Organization (ILO) Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) International Telecommunication Union (ITU) Latin Union Pacific Alliance Interpol Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) Inter-American Development Bank World Tourism Organization (UNWTO) Hispanophone "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 31 August 2014.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) "Spanish-Speaking Countries — Berges Institute". www.bergesinstitutespanish.com. Retrieved 12 January 2023. "The World Factbook". Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 17 April 2021. Mexico does not have an official language at the federal level [1]; however, Spanish is spoken by the majority. Constitution of Colombia, Art. 10 Spanish Constitution Archived 2 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine, Art. 3-1 The Argentine Constitution does not establish Spanish as an official language. Constitution of Peru, Art. 48 Constitution of Venezuela, Art. 9 The Constitution of Chile does not establish Spanish as an official language. However, Chilean legislation establishes that schools must teach students to communicate in the "Castilian language" (General Law on Education (Articles 29 and 30), Chile Library of Congress.) Constitution of Guatemala, Art. 143 Constitution of Ecuador, Art. 2 Constitution of Bolivia, Art. 5 Constitution of Cuba Archived 2 September 2006 at the Wayback Machine, Art. 2 Constitution of the Dominican Republic, Art. 29 Constitution of Honduras, Art. 6 Constitution of Paraguay, Art. 140 Constitution of El Salvador, Art. 62 Constitution of Nicaragua, Art. 11 Constitution of Costa Rica, Art. 76 Constitution of Panama, Art. 7 The Constitution of Uruguay does not establish Spanish as an official language. Constitution of Equatorial Guinea Archived 1 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Art. 4 "The World Factbook". Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 25 January 2021. Constitution of Puerto Rico Archived 19 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Art. 3, Section 5: It is mandatory to be able to read and write in either English or Spanish in order to be a member of the Legislative Assembly. The Constitution of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic does not establish Spanish as an official language. However, Spanish is the country's secondary language, used on official emblems, currency, government agencies, embassies and educational institutions. Additionally, several political figures, including the President of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Brahim Ghali, have described Spanish as one of the official languages of the country. "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 24 July 2020.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) "Observatori de l'Institut d'Estudis Andorrans" (in Catalan). Archived from the original on 17 July 2007. Retrieved 5 June 2013. Presentació dels resultats de l'enquesta de coneixements i usos lingüístics del 2022, Government of Andorra, 2022. (in Catalan). Molla, Guillem (2003). "El català a Andorra: tota una lluita" (PDF). Ianua: Revista philologica romanica (in Italian). 4: 73–90. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 October 2013. "Departament d'Estadística". www.estadistica.ad. Archived from the original on 13 November 2010. Retrieved 11 January 2022. Statistical Institute of Belize: Belize Population and Housing Census 2010. Country Report. Belmopan 2013. Buck, Tobias. Gibraltar fears loss of identity over Yanito decline, Financial Times, 6 April 2017. Barahona, Pepe. Why the Spanish language is losing ground in Gibraltar, El País, 14 August 2019. Canfield, Delos Lincoln (1981). Spanish Pronunciation in the Americas. The University of Chicago Press. p. 80. The main nuclei of Spanish speech in the United States are northern New Mexico / southern Colorado, the border territories from California through Texas, the Florida peninsula, New York City, and other large cities of the Northeast and Midwest. Only one of these, the New Mexico / Colorado dialect area, has maintained linguistic continuity since colonial days, and its speech goes back to about 1600. "US now has more Spanish speakers than Spain". The Guardian. 29 June 2015. Retrieved 9 May 2016. "Language Rights and New Mexico Statehood By the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 February 2017. Retrieved 11 September 2011. "Más 'speak spanish' que en España". Retrieved 6 October 2007. (Spanish) de Varona, Paola (24 June 2019). "We're living in an American renaissance for Spanish-language television". The Outline. Retrieved 19 January 2024. Garay, Ryan. Música bilingüe: How America shaped its own Spanish-language hits, The Daily Californian, 1 December 2022. Article XIV, Sec 7: For purposes of communication and instruction, the official languages of the Philippines are Filipino and, until otherwise provided by law, English. The regional languages are the auxiliary official languages in the regions and shall serve as auxiliary media of instruction therein. Spanish and Arabic shall be promoted on a voluntary and optional basis. Article XIV, Sec 8: This Constitution shall be promulgated in Filipino and English and shall be translated into major regional languages, Arabic, and Spanish. Constitution of the Philippines, Art. 14 Ager, Maila (5 August 2015). "Legarda wants Filipino, Spanish, Arabic versions of Constitution". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Retrieved 14 December 2023. "Senate Bill No. 2862: Providing for an official Filipino version of the Philippine Constitution and its translation into major regional languages, Arabic, and Spanish, appropriating funds therefor and for other purposes" (PDF). Senate of the Philippines. "DO 46, s. 1987 – Amendment to DECS Order No. 33, s. 1987 (Spanish as Optional Subject)". Philippine Department of Education. 14 August 2013. Archived from the original on 24 September 2023. Retrieved 19 January 2024. "La presidenta filipina pedirá ayuda a España para oficializar el español" (in Spanish). MSN Noticias. Archived from the original on 26 October 2007. Retrieved 30 August 2007. Legaspi, Amita O. (3 July 2012). "PNoy (President Benigno Aquino III) and Spain's Queen Sofia welcome return of Spanish language in Philippine schools". GMA News. Mojarro, Jorge (6 October 2020). "Spanish is an endangered Filipino language". The Manila Times. Archived from the original on 15 October 2020. Retrieved 14 December 2023. Medium projection, Philippine Statistics Authority, 2010, archived from the original on 11 August 2011 "الوفد الصحراوي سيحضر لقاء جنيف بإرادة صادقة للتقدم نحو الحل الذي يضمن حق الشعب الصحراوي في تقرير المصير والاستقلال". Sahara Press Service (in Arabic). 29 November 2018. "Como saharauis queremos conservar el español". Lavozdegalicia.es. 13 March 2008. Retrieved 28 January 2015. "EL ESPAñOL EN LOS CAMPAMENTOS DE REFUGIADOS SAHARAUIS (TINDUF, ARGELIA)" (PDF). Cvc.cervantes.es. Retrieved 20 May 2015. DepEd adds 7 languages to mother tongue-based education for Kinder to Grade 3. GMA News. 13 July 2013. Attila Narin (June 1998). "Papiamentu Facts". Retrieved 13 June 2008. Dalby, Andrew (1998). Dictionary of Languages. Bloomsbury Publishing plc. p. 489. ISBN 0-7475-3117-X. Topping, Donald (1973). Chamorro Reference Grammar. University Press of Hawaii. pp. 6 and 7. ISBN 978-0-8248-0269-1. "Ethnologue". Retrieved 13 June 2008. ""Language" – Government of Aruba (official site) – 2010". Archived from the original on 17 March 2013. Retrieved 28 September 2017. Migge, Bettina; Léglise, Isabelle; Bartens, Angela (2010). Creoles in Education: An Appraisal of Current Programs and Projects. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company. p. 268. ISBN 978-90-272-5258-6. "Tijdelijke wet officiële talen BES" (in Dutch). wetten.nl. Retrieved 24 October 2010. Artikel 2: De officiële talen zijn het Engels, het Nederlands en het Papiamento. (English: Article 2: The official languages are English, Dutch and Papiamento) Número de hispanohablantes en países y territorios donde el español no es lengua oficial Archived 29 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Instituto Cervantes. "Nieuwsbrief 070313 – Papiaments officieel erkend". Nieuws.leidenuniv.nl. Archived from the original on 12 May 2013. Retrieved 21 November 2011. EJP | News | Western Europe | Judeo-Spanish language revived Archived 29 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine. Ejpress.org (19 September 2005). Retrieved on 19 October 2011.