Justin Randall Timberlake (born January 31, 1981) is an American singer, songwriter, record producer, and actor. Often referred to as the "Prince of Pop", he is regarded as one of the most influential entertainers of his generation. Timberlake is known for his diverse artistry in songwriting, showmanship, tenor vocal range, and music production. He is the recipient of numerous awards and accolades, including ten Grammy Awards, four Primetime Emmy Awards, three Brit Awards, nine Billboard Music Awards, the Contemporary Icon Award by the Songwriters Hall of Fame, and MTV's Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award. According to Billboard, Timberlake is the best performing male solo artist in the history of the Mainstream Top 40. Born and raised in Memphis, Tennessee, Timberlake appeared on musical television shows as a child, competing on Star Search; in the early to mid-1990s, he was a main cast member of Disney's Mickey Mouse Club, performing cover songs and choreography. While on the show, Timberlake worked with future bandmate JC Chasez, as well as future pop cultural figures including Britney Spears, Christina Aguilera, Keri Russell and Ryan Gosling. Timberlake and Chasez soon rose to prominence in late 1997 as the lead vocalists for the boyband *NSYNC. The group released four commercially successful studio albums, becoming one of the best-selling boy bands of all time with sales of over 70 million units worldwide. As a solo act, Timberlake has sold over 88 million records, making him one of the best-selling music artists in the world. Timberlake's debut solo album, Justified (2002) yielded his first solo hit singles, "Cry Me a River" and "Rock Your Body". His second album, FutureSex/LoveSounds (2006) reached further success as it debuted atop the US Billboard 200 and spawned three consecutive Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles: "SexyBack" (featuring Timbaland), "My Love" (featuring T.I.) and "What Goes Around... Comes Around". Established as a solo artist worldwide, his first two albums both exceeded sales of 10 million copies and received triple platinum certification by the RIAA. Meanwhile, Timberlake collaborated with other artists on a string of successful singles, including The Lonely Island's viral hit "Dick in a Box" in 2006, his fourth US number-one single with Timbaland's "Give It to Me" in 2007, as well as Madonna's "4 Minutes", 50 Cent's "Ayo Technology" and T.I.'s "Dead and Gone" in the following years. From 2008 through 2012, Timberlake paused his musical career to focus on acting, starring in the films The Love Guru (2008), The Social Network (2010), Bad Teacher (2011), Friends with Benefits (2011), and In Time (2011). He returned to recording in 2013 with his third and fourth albums, The 20/20 Experience and The 20/20 Experience – 2 of 2; both of which peaked at number one on the Billboard 200 and spawned the Hot 100 top-ten singles "Suit & Tie" (featuring Jay-Z), "Mirrors", and "Not a Bad Thing". The 20/20 Experience became the best-selling album of that year. Timberlake voiced the character Branch in DreamWorks’ Trolls franchise; the soundtrack for the first film included his fifth US number-one single, "Can't Stop the Feeling!", which earned him an Academy Award nomination. He had also previously voiced Artie in Shrek the Third. His fifth studio album, Man of the Woods (2018) became his fourth US number-one album and was supported by two top-ten singles, "Filthy" and "Say Something" (featuring Chris Stapleton); it was named the sixth best-selling album of that year. His sixth studio album, Everything I Thought It Was (2024) became his sixth consecutive top five album in the US, and was preceded by the top-twenty single "Selfish," as well as the singles "Drown" and "No Angels". Justin Randall Timberlake was born on January 31, 1981, in Memphis, Tennessee, the son of Janet Lynn (Bomar) Harless and Charles Randall Timberlake, a Baptist church choir director. Timberlake has two half-brothers, Jonathan and Stephen, from Charles' second marriage to Lisa Perry. His half-sister Laura Katherine died shortly after birth in 1997, and is mentioned in his acknowledgments in the album NSYNC as "My Angel in Heaven". His family circle includes several musicians; his grandfather introduced him to music from country music artists like Johnny Cash and Willie Nelson. Performing as a child, Timberlake sang country and gospel music: at the age of 11, he appeared on the television show Star Search, performing country songs as "Justin Randall". By that time, he began listening to rhythm and blues musicians from the 1960s and 70s, such as Al Green, Stevie Wonder and Marvin Gaye, and he had listening sessions with his father of studio albums by the Eagles and Bob Seger. In 1993 and 1994, he was a Mouseketeer on The All-New Mickey Mouse Club, where his castmates included future girlfriend and singer Britney Spears, future tourmate Christina Aguilera, future bandmate JC Chasez, and future movie actors Ryan Gosling and Keri Russell. Timberlake then recruited Chasez to be in an all-male singing group, put together by Chris Kirkpatrick and financed by boy band manager Lou Pearlman, that eventually became NSYNC. The boy band NSYNC formed in 1995, and began their career in 1996 in Europe; Timberlake and Chasez served as its two lead singers. In 1998, the group rose to prominence in the United States with the release of their self-titled debut studio album, which sold 11 million copies and included the single "Tearin' Up My Heart". Their second album No Strings Attached (2000) sold 2.4 million copies in the first week, and included a number one single, "It's Gonna Be Me". NSYNC's third album Celebrity (2001) was also financially successful. The group's second and third studio albums spawned top-five singles such as "Bye Bye Bye", "Girlfriend" and "This I Promise You". Upon the completion of the Celebrity Tour, the group went into hiatus in 2002. NSYNC performed at the Academy Awards in 2000, the 2002 Winter Olympics, and the Super Bowl XXXV halftime show. The band sold more than 70 million records worldwide, becoming the fifth-best selling boy band in history. In 2000, Timberlake appeared in The Wonderful World of Disney movie Model Behavior. He played Jason Sharpe, a model who falls in love with a waitress after mistaking her for another model. The rise of his own stardom and the general decline in the popularity of boy bands led to the dissolution of NSYNC. Band member Lance Bass was openly critical of Timberlake's actions in his memoir Out of Sync. By 2002, when the group went on a hiatus and members were following individual projects, he partnered with Pharrell Williams of the producing team The Neptunes–and Timbaland to start working on new music. The idea of going solo was strengthened a year earlier. Timberlake originally wrote the single "Gone" around 2001 for Michael Jackson, but he turned the song down, and it was instead recorded by NSYNC. Before its release, however, Jackson contacted him. Timberlake declared in a later interview that the first time he felt confident to go solo happened after that conversation. In a retrospective article in 2020, Billboard considered Celebrity "the group's swan song, setting the stage for Timberlake's equally massive solo career". [Michael] called me on the phone and said that he wanted to cut the record ("Gone"), but he wanted it to be a duet between himself and I. And I said, 'Well ... we've already cut the song as an 'N Sync record. Could we do, like, 'N Sync featuring Michael Jackson', or 'Michael Jackson featuring 'N Sync'? And he was very absolute about the fact that he wanted it to be a duet between himself and I.. [That was] the first time I ever really felt the confidence to do it – Timberlake on Master Class, 2014 In August 2002, Timberlake performed at the 2002 MTV Video Music Awards, where he premiered his debut solo single "Like I Love You"; it peaked at number 11 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number two on the UK Singles Chart. His debut solo studio album Justified was released in November and debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 439,000 copies, fewer than previous 'N Sync releases. It sold over three million copies in the U.S. and more than ten million copies worldwide. Its R&B influence, provided by hip-hop producers The Neptunes and Timbaland, was complimented by music critics. About the musical direction of the record, he commented, "I just want to do R&B. It's what I grew up listening to". The album spawned the top-five singles "Cry Me a River" and "Rock Your Body". In summer 2003, Timberlake and Christina Aguilera headlined the Justified/Stripped Tour. Later that year he recorded a song "I'm Lovin' It", used by McDonald's as the theme to its "I'm Lovin' It" campaign. The deal with McDonald's earned Timberlake an estimated $6 million. A tour titled Justified and Lovin' It Live was included with the deal, following his initial Justified World Tour. Timberlake was featured on Nelly's song, "Work It", which was remixed and included on Nelly's 2003 remix album. Near the end of 2002, Timberlake was the first celebrity to appear on Punk'd, a "candid camera" type show created by Ashton Kutcher to trick celebrities. Timberlake, who cried during the episode, later admitted to being under the influence of cannabis when he was pranked. Three episodes later, he set up Kelly Osbourne to be "punk'd", thus making him the first celebrity to appear on the show more than once. Timberlake later spoofed Ashton Kutcher and Punk'd in a 2003 episode of NBC's Saturday Night Live. Timberlake co-starred in a skit titled The Barry Gibb Talk Show alongside comedian Jimmy Fallon, where the duo portrayed Bee Gees brothers Barry and Robin Gibb. It marked the beginning of a long-running friendship and collaboration with Fallon. In February 2004, during the Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show, broadcast on the CBS television network from Houston, Timberlake performed with Janet Jackson before a television audience of more than 140 million viewers. At the end of the performance, as the song drew to a close, Timberlake tore off a part of Jackson's black leather costume in a "costume reveal" meant to accompany a portion of the song lyrics. Jackson's representative explained Timberlake intended "to pull away the rubber bustier to reveal a red lace bra. Part of the costume detached, and Jackson's breast was briefly exposed. Timberlake apologized for the incident, stating he was "sorry that anyone was offended by the wardrobe malfunction during the halftime performance of the Super Bowl..." The phrase "wardrobe malfunction" has since been used by the media to refer to the incident and has entered pop culture. Timberlake and Jackson were threatened with exclusion from the 2004 Grammy Awards unless they agreed to apologize on screen at the event. Timberlake attended and issued a scripted apology when accepting the first of two Grammy Awards he received that night (Best Pop Vocal Album for Justified and Best Male Pop Vocal Performance for "Cry Me a River"). He had also been nominated for Album of the Year for Justified, and Record of the Year along with Best Rap/Sung Collaboration for "Where Is the Love?" with The Black Eyed Peas. After the Super Bowl incident, Timberlake put his recording career on hold to act in several films, having starred in a few feature films earlier in his career. The first role he took during this time was as a journalist in Edison Force, filmed in 2004 and received a direct-to-video release on July 18, 2006. He also appeared in the films Alpha Dog, Black Snake Moan, Richard Kelly's Southland Tales, and voiced Prince Artie Pendragon in the animated film Shrek the Third, released on May 18, 2007. He also appeared as a young Elton John, in the video for John's song "This Train Don't Stop There Anymore". Timberlake was considered to play the role of Roger Davis in the film version of the rock musical Rent, but director Chris Columbus had insisted that only the original Broadway members could convey the true meaning of Rent, so the role was reprised by Adam Pascal. He continued to record with other artists. After "Where Is the Love?", he again collaborated with the Black Eyed Peas on the 2005 track "My Style" from their album Monkey Business. When recording the 2005 single "Signs" with Snoop Dogg, Timberlake discovered a throat condition. Nodules were subsequently removed from his throat in an operation that took place on May 5, 2005. He was advised not to sing or speak loudly for at least a few months. In 2005, he began his own record company, JayTee records. FutureSex/LoveSounds, a full-length LP of coherence and uniform song-to-song quality virtually unheard of in pop music since the '80s golden age of Michael, Madonna, Janet and Prince... Like one of his suit-and-vest combos, Timberlake himself continued to wear pop stardom exceptionally well. He glided through his music videos and live performances with the confidence of a man who'd already spent a large percentage of his life in the spotlight, and who never doubted he'd be able to return to music on top. —Billboard's "The Greatest Pop Star By Year (1981–2019)" Timberlake released his second studio album, FutureSex/LoveSounds, on September 12, 2006. The album, which Timberlake created from 2005 to 2006, debuted at number-one on the Billboard 200 album chart, selling 684,000 copies its first week. It became the biggest album for pre-orders on iTunes, and beat Coldplay's record for the biggest one-week sales of a digital album. The album was produced by Timbaland and Danja (who produced a bulk of the album), will.i.am, Rick Rubin and Timberlake himself, and features guest vocals by Snoop Dogg, Three 6 Mafia, T.I. and will.i.am. A studio representative described it as being "all about sexiness" and aiming for "an adult feel". The album's lead single, "SexyBack", was performed by Timberlake at the opening of the 2006 MTV Video Music Awards and reached number-one on the Billboard Hot 100, where it remained for seven consecutive weeks.[better source needed] "My Love", the album's second single, also produced by Timbaland and featuring rapper T.I., reached number-one on the Hot 100, as did third single "What Goes Around... Comes Around". The song is reported to have been inspired by the break-up of his childhood friend and business partner, Trace Ayala, with actress Elisha Cuthbert. In October 2006, Timberlake said that he would focus on his music career rather than his film roles, specifying that leaving the music industry would be a "dumb thing to do at this point".[better source needed] He was the special guest performer at the 2006 Victoria's Secret Fashion Show where he sang "SexyBack", "My Love" and "LoveStoned". Timberlake hosted many music events, including the European MTV Music Awards in 2006. On December 16, 2006, Timberlake hosted Saturday Night Live, doing double duty as both host and musical guest for the second time. During this appearance, he and Andy Samberg performed an R&B song for a skit titled "Dick in a Box", which some radio stations aired as an unofficial single from Timberlake. Called "one of the most iconic musical moments in the show's history" by Billboard, it became a viral hit and one of the most viewed videos on YouTube at the time. Rolling Stone listed the skit at number three on their "50 Greatest 'Saturday Night Live' Sketches of All Time". The song earned him an Emmy Award and was later featured on The Lonely Island's debut album Incredibad. In January 2007, Timberlake embarked on the FutureSex/LoveShow tour. Following singles off the album, "LoveStoned/I Think She Knows (Interlude)" and "Until the End of Time", peaked within the top 20 on the Hot 100, while the fourth single "Summer Love" reached the top 10. The song "Give It to Me", a Timbaland single on which Timberlake guests with Nelly Furtado, reached the Hot 100 number-one spot. Eventually, FutureSex/LoveSounds was added to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame's musical library and archive. The song "4 Minutes" was first played by Timbaland at Philadelphia's Jingle Ball on December 17, 2007. When released on March 17, 2008, "4 Minutes" was revealed to be a duet between Timberlake and Madonna, with backing vocals by Timbaland. It was lead single from Madonna's eleventh studio album Hard Candy, which featured four other song-writing collaborations with Timberlake, being also one of the executive producers. The single was an international hit, topping the charts in over 21 countries worldwide. Timberlake also appears in the music video, which was directed by Jonas & François. On March 30, 2008, Timberlake performed the song at Madonna's Hard Candy Promo Show at Roseland Ballroom in New York City. On November 6, 2008, Timberlake performed the song with Madonna on the Los Angeles stop of her Sticky & Sweet Tour. In June 2007, Timberlake co-wrote, produced and provided vocals for the songs "Nite Runner" and "Falling Down" for Duran Duran's album Red Carpet Massacre, released on November 13, 2007. "Falling Down" was released as a single in the UK on the previous day. Also in 2007, Timberlake made an appearance on 50 Cent's third album Curtis. Timberlake, along with Timbaland, is featured on a track called "Ayo Technology", which was the album's fourth single. Also, another possible collaboration was to occur with Lil Wayne for his album Tha Carter III with Nelly Furtado and Timbaland. With the wrapping up of the FutureSex/LoveSounds tour of Australasia and the Middle East in November 2007, Timberlake resumed his film career. Projects underway early in 2008 were starring roles in Mike Myers' comedy The Love Guru (released June 20, 2008) and Mike Meredith's drama The Open Road (released August 28, 2009). In March 2008, it was announced that he would be an executive producer in an American adaptation of the hit Peruvian comedy My Problem with Women for NBC. On November 20, 2008, TV Guide reported that Timberlake's next single, "Follow My Lead", which also featured vocals by Timberlake's protégée, former YouTube star Esmée Denters, would be available for exclusive download through Myspace. All proceeds would go to Shriners Hospitals for Children, a charity dedicated to improving pediatric care for sick children. In February 2008, Timberlake was awarded two Grammy Awards. At the 50th Grammy Awards ceremony, he won the Award for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance for "What Goes Around...Comes Around", and the Award for Best Dance Recording for "LoveStoned/I Think She Knows". In 2008, a collaboration between Timberlake and T.I., "Dead and Gone", was featured on T.I.'s sixth studio album, Paper Trail, and was released as its fourth single late in 2009. In November 2008, it was confirmed that Timberlake would make a guest appearance and produce some tracks on R&B/pop singer Ciara's upcoming album Fantasy Ride due out May 5, 2009. Timberlake featured on Ciara's second single "Love Sex Magic", the video being shot on February 20, 2009. The single became a worldwide hit, reaching the top ten in numerous countries and peaking at number-one in several countries including Taiwan, India, and Turkey. The song was nominated for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals at the 52nd Grammy Awards. Timberlake hosted the 16th ESPY Awards, and the musical number "I Love Sports" was later nominated for an Emmy award. Timberlake and his production team The Y's, along with Mike Elizondo, produced and co-wrote the song "Don't Let Me Down" for Leona Lewis's second studio album, Echo, released on November 17, 2009. Timberlake also co-wrote and performed on "Carry Out", the third single from Timbaland's album Shock Value II, released on December 1, 2009. Timberlake appeared on Jimmy Fallon's debut as host of Late Night with Jimmy Fallon on March 2, 2009. Timberlake was the executive producer on the MTV reality series The Phone, which premiered on April 21, 2009. In late 2009, Barbadian singer Rihanna released the album Rated R, with Timberlake being one of the writers and producers. They both worked together previously for her third studio album Good Girl Gone Bad. From 2010, Timberlake increased his acting work. He played Sean Parker, the founder of Napster, in the acclaimed film The Social Network (2010). He also appeared at the 2010 MTV VMAs on September 12, 2010. In 2011, he starred alongside Cameron Diaz in Bad Teacher and alongside Mila Kunis in Friends with Benefits, and played Will Salas, the protagonist of In Time, a science fiction film by Andrew Niccol. He provided a feature and appeared in the music video for the song "Motherlover" from The Lonely Island's second album Turtleneck & Chain, and directed and made a cameo in the FreeSol music video "Hoodies On, Hats Low", which was released in August 2011. The Late Night with Jimmy Fallon sketch "History of Rap" was performed for the first time by both Fallon and Timberlake in 2010. In July 2011, United States Marine Kelsey De Santis uploaded a YouTube video asking Timberlake to be her date to the United States Marine Corps birthday ball; they attended the event on November 13, 2011, in Richmond, Virginia. His fifth Saturday Night Live episode, as host and musical guest, was the most-watched episode since January 7, 2012, with Charles Barkley as host and Kelly Clarkson as musical guest. Timberlake began working on his third studio album The 20/20 Experience in June 2012 with "no rules and/or end goal in mind". He publicly announced his return to the music industry in January 2013, releasing the album's lead single "Suit & Tie" featuring Jay-Z later that month, which would eventually peak at number three on the Billboard Hot 100. After four years not performing in concert, Timberlake appeared the night before the 2013 Super Bowl and performed during the "DirecTV Super Saturday Night" on February 2, 2013, in New Orleans. On February 10, 2013, he performed "Suit & Tie" with sepia-toned lighting at the 55th Annual Grammy Awards, with Jay-Z joining him from the audience. On February 11, 2013, "Mirrors" was released as the second single from The 20/20 Experience. The song would eventually peak at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 and number-one on the UK Singles Chart. The 20/20 Experience was released on March 19, 2013 through RCA Records due to the disbandment of Jive Records. The album set a digital sales record for being the fastest-selling album on the iTunes Store and debuted at number-one on the charts by moving just over 968,000 copies in the U.S., the biggest sales week of 2013. It eventually became the best-selling album of the year in the country. Timberlake performed at the "In Performance at the White House: Memphis Soul" concert, held in the East Room of the White House and hosted by President Barack Obama, celebrating Memphis soul music from the 1960s. Afterward, Timberlake officially announced The 20/20 Experience World Tour, following his and Jay-Z's co-headlining concert tour Legends of the Summer Stadium Tour. Timberlake also appeared on Jay-Z's twelfth studio album Magna Carta... Holy Grail on three songs: "Holy Grail", "BBC" (along with Nas, Swizz Beatz, Timbaland, Pharrell Williams, Niigo & Beyoncé), and "Heaven". On August 25, 2013, Timberlake received the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards. He also took home three competitive awards, including Video of the Year for "Mirrors". During his performance, Timberlake briefly reunited with his former NSYNC bandmates for a medley of their hit songs "Girlfriend" and "Bye Bye Bye". Timberlake's fourth studio album The 20/20 Experience – 2 of 2 was released on September 30, 2013 and debuted at number-one on the Billboard 200. Its lead single "Take Back the Night" was released on July 12, 2013, following by the second single "TKO". Timberlake was given a production and writing credit on track six on Beyoncé's self-titled fifth studio album, which was released in December 2013. At the 57th Annual Grammy Awards, Timberlake was nominated for seven awards, eventually winning three: Best R&B Song for "Pusher Love Girl", Best Rap/Sung Collaboration for "Holy Grail", and Best Music Video for "Suit & Tie", which was directed by The Social Network director David Fincher. On February 25, 2014, "Not a Bad Thing" was released as the third single from The 20/20 Experience - 2 of 2. The song reached the top 10 on the Hot 100 and topped the Mainstream Top 40 chart. In 2014, Timberlake appeared on Michael Jackson's second posthumous record Xscape on the song "Love Never Felt So Good", which was produced by Timbaland, Jerome "J-Roc" Harmon and Timberlake. On May 14, 2014, a music video was also released featuring clips of Jackson, with Timberlake accompanied by several of Jackson's fans performing some of Jackson's signature moves. The video was directed by Timberlake and Rich Lee. During 2015, Timberlake performed along with Jimmy Fallon the Saturday Night Live 40th Anniversary's cold open, returned to The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon as a guest to perform a sixth edition of the sketch "History of Rap", and performed along with Chris Stapleton at the 49th Annual Country Music Association Awards. Showcasing the final date of The 20/20 Experience World Tour at Las Vegas' MGM Grand Garden Arena, the space-age themed concert film titled Justin Timberlake + The Tennessee Kids and directed by Jonathan Demme premiered at the 2016 Toronto International Film Festival on September 13. Timberlake dedicated the film to Prince for influencing his music. Ahead of its debut at the film festival, the streaming service Netflix released it on October 12. Timberlake composed the soundtrack and served as music supervisor for the 2017 film The Book of Love, which his wife Jessica Biel produced and starred in. Timberlake voiced the lead character in DreamWorks Animation's musical comedy Trolls opposite Anna Kendrick. The film was released in November 2016, and returned for its next two entries Trolls: World Tour and Trolls: Band Together in 2020 and 2023 respectably. He also served as the executive music producer, performing original music for the film. The lead single, "Can't Stop the Feeling!", was released on May 6, 2016. Timberlake was invited by Swedish broadcaster Sveriges Television (SVT) to perform "Can't Stop the Feeling" live during the interval act at the grand finale of the Eurovision Song Contest 2016 on May 14, 2016. The single debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100, and reached the top spot in other 16 countries. It became his eighth U.S. Mainstream Top 40 number-one song. It became the best-selling song of the year in the U.S. with 2.4 million downloads sold. On February 26, 2017, Timberlake opened the 89th Academy Awards with a performance of "Can't Stop the Feeling!", since the song earned him a nomination. Also that year, Timberlake starred with Kate Winslet and Juno Temple in Woody Allen's drama film Wonder Wheel, and headlined several festivals and live sets, including Rock in Rio, the United States Grand Prix, and the Pilgrimage Music & Cultural Festival, which he co-produced. For the biggest pop stars in the world, the place where they have the most trouble is honesty... Because there's a formulaic sort of vulnerability... But if you're able to really screenshot your own vulnerability, frame it properly, and color-correct it, then it becomes something that every human can relate to. And I think Justin is in the place where he's mastering that right now. – Pharrell Williams on the recording sessions for Man of the Woods, Timberlake's fifth studio album Speaking of his fifth studio album in 2016, Timberlake stated, "I think where I grew up in America has a lot of influence. Growing up in Tennessee—very central of the country—Memphis is known as the birthplace of rock & roll, but also the home of the blues, but Nashville's right down the street so there's a lot of country music." In following interviews, Timberlake confirmed working with producers Timbaland and Pharrell Williams, while stating, "It sounds more like where I've come from than any other music I've ever made... It's Southern American music. But I want to make it sound modern – at least that's the idea right now." His fifth studio album Man of the Woods was released on February 2, 2018, two days before he headlined the Super Bowl LII halftime show in Minneapolis, Minnesota on February 4, where Timberlake performed a medley of his songs featuring both the Tennessee Kids and the Minnesota Marching Band alongside him, as well as a duet of "I Would Die 4 U" with a video projection of late singer Prince on screen. The show contained multiple selections from Man of the Woods, which is named after his son Silas, whose name means "from the forest". The album's first single, "Filthy", was released on January 5, along with its accompanying video directed by Mark Romanek. The electro-funk song has reached number nine in the US and number 5 in Canada. The songs "Supplies", "Say Something" featuring Chris Stapleton and "Man of the Woods" were also released along with music videos ahead of the album. His collaboration with Stapleton also reached the top 10 in the US and Canada. Man of the Woods topped the Billboard 200 with the biggest first week sales of the year at the time, selling 293,000 total units. Man of the Woods also marks Timberlake's fourth consecutive No. 1 album and has since been certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Man of the Woods concluded 2018 as the sixth best-selling album of the year. An accompanying tour of the same name began on March 13, 2018, in Toronto, Canada and concluded on April 13, 2019, in Uncasville. The Man of the Woods Tour was the sixth-highest-grossing tour of 2018. In May 2019, Timberlake received an honorary doctorate from Berklee College of Music. Missy Elliott and Alex Lacamoire also received doctorates at the ceremony. Following the announcement of Trolls World Tour, Timberlake teased potential collaborations with a number of artists, through a series of Instagram posts, which included frequent collaborators Pharrell Williams, Nathaniel Hills and Rob Knox, as well as new collaborators such as Anderson. Paak, Brandy Norwood, Lizzo, and Meek Mill. On February 26, 2020, SZA and Timberlake released the single "The Other Side", a song part of the Trolls World Tour soundtrack, alongside its music video. On March 9, 2020, Timberlake released a teaser for his upcoming song "Don't Slack", which features Anderson. Paak, and is also part of the Trolls World Tour soundtrack. The song was released on March 10, 2020. In September 2020, Timberlake and producer Timbaland teased a potential upcoming collaboration with Canadian musician Justin Bieber, as well as collaborations with Justine Skye, Hit-Boy and Ty Dolla $ign. In December 2020, Timberlake and Ant Clemons released the single "Better Days", which received its premier on the Rock The Runoff virtual concert, held by Stacey Abrams' organization Fair Fight. In January 2021, Timberlake performed as part of the Inauguration of Joe Biden. Performing from his hometown of Memphis, Timberlake performed his collaboration with Ant Clemons during the Celebrating America special. Timberlake performed at Pharrell Williams' Something in the Water festival in Washington D.C., where he was joined on stage by T.I. and Clipse for his five-song set. In May 2023, Timbaland revealed that Timberlake's sixth studio album was completed, adding that their pair had revived the sound from the FutureSex/LoveSounds era. On September 1, 2023, Timbaland released the single "Keep Going Up", in collaboration with Furtado and Timberlake. Timberlake also reunited with his former band members of NSYNC later that month and released the single "Better Place" in support of the Trolls Band Together soundtrack. In addition to "Keep Going Up" and "Better Place", Timberlake had also collaborated with Meek Mill on the song Believe, Romeo Santos on the song "Sin Fin",, DJ Khaled on his album Khaled Khaled, on the song "Just Be", Justine Skye on her album, Space & Time, on the song "Innocent", Jack Harlow on his album Come Home the Kids Miss You, on the song "Parent Trap"; a remix of Coco Jones' "ICU" and a further remix of the song "3D" by Jungkook. Timberlake had also worked with Calvin Harris, producer of "Fuckin' Up the Disco" and "No Angels", on his song "Stay with Me", alongside Pharrell Williams and Halsey. On January 19, 2024, Timberlake performed a free one-night-only concert at the Orpheum in Memphis where he live-debuted his new single "Selfish" after teasing a new project on social media in previous days. In promotion of the record, on January 25, 2024, Timberlake appeared on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon; he announced the release of "Selfish" and revealed that the album had taken four years to produce. Selfish debuted at number 19 on the Billboard Hot 100, marking Timberlake's highest debut in six years on the chart. It became his 39th career solo entry on the Hot 100, and his 29th to reach the top 40. On the release day of Selfish, he also announced that his sixth studio album, Everything I Thought It Was, would be released in March 2024. Timberlake appeared as a musical guest on the January 27, 2024, episode of Saturday Night Live, singing "Selfish" and "Sanctified". On January 30, he appeared on The Kelly Clarkson Show and held an "intimate" concert at Irving Plaza in New York City on January 31, his 43rd birthday. He appeared as the musical guest, where he performed "Selfish" on The Graham Norton Show recorded in London on February 22, 2024, the night before he cancelled A One Night Only concert, to be held at the Roundhouse, London, on February 23, 2024. Timberlake was recovering from an illness. The promotional single "Drown" was released on February 23, 2024. On March 13, 2024, in anticipation of the album release, Timberlake performed a one-off concert at The Wiltern in Los Angeles. The show featured a surprise reunion with his NSYNC bandmates, with the group playing a medley of hits and the new album track “Paradise.” Timberlake then performed on NPR’s Tiny Desk series on March 15 for a half-hour-long concert. Timberlake also announced the release of a documentary showing the album's creation process. The second single off the record, "No Angels", was released on March 15, 2024, the same day as the album's release. Everything I Thought It Was debuted at number four on the US Billboard 200, giving Timberlake his sixth consecutive top five album in the country. Timberlake will promote the album on The Forget Tomorrow World Tour, which will begin on April 29, 2024, in Vancouver, Canada. On February 23, 2024, Timberlake announced summer 2024 Europe tour dates. In early 1999, Timberlake began dating fellow former The All-New Mickey Mouse Club cast member and singer Britney Spears. Their relationship ended abruptly in March 2002. In her 2023 memoir, Spears wrote that she became pregnant during their relationship and had an abortion in late 2000 after Timberlake said they were not prepared for parenthood and he did not want to be a father. In 2003, he briefly dated British singer Emma Bunton. In April 2003, he began a relationship with actress Cameron Diaz soon after they met at the Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards. After much speculation of breakups throughout their relationship, the couple split in December 2006 shortly after she introduced him as a musical guest on Saturday Night Live. In January 2007, Timberlake began dating actress Jessica Biel. They became engaged in December 2011 and married on October 19, 2012, at the Borgo Egnazia resort in Fasano, Italy. Their first child, a son, was born in April 2015. In July 2020, they had a second son. In July 2002, Timberlake purchased a 13,250-square-foot (1,231 m2) mansion in Hollywood Hills for $8.3 million from Helen Hunt. In 2010, Timberlake purchased a unit at 311 West Broadway in SoHo, formerly owned by Oscar de la Renta, for $6.56 million. He sold the unit in 2018 for $6.35 million, incurring a loss. In 2015, Timberlake bought a house in the Yellowstone Club near Big Sky, Montana. In May 2017, Timberlake and his wife, Jessica Biel, paid $20.2 million for a 5,375-square-foot (499.4 m2) penthouse unit at 443 Greenwich Street in Tribeca, Manhattan. Forbes began reporting on Timberlake's earnings in 2008, calculating that he earned $44 million between June 2007 and June 2008 for his music, tour, commercials, and hospitality, making him the world's 4th best-paid music personality at the time, above Madonna and Celine Dion. That year, he was ranked twelfth on the Forbes Celebrity 100 list and second on the "Best-Paid Celebrities Under 30" list. According to Billboard, Timberlake was the third highest-paid musician of 2013, with earnings of $31 million. He was ranked 26th with earnings of $57 million on the Celebrity 100 list for 2014, and 19th on the 2015 list with $63 million. Timberlake was listed at number three on the Billboard Money-Makers List of 2014. He was ranked 41st on the 2019 Celebrity 100 list by Forbes, with earnings of $57.5 million in 2019. Timberlake possesses a lyric tenor vocal range. He began including beatboxing in his records near the end of his boyband era and into his emergence as a solo act with Justified and FutureSex/LoveSounds. Many of his songs draw from his personal life and relationships, notably "Cry Me a River" (about his breakup with Britney Spears). Described by critics as a "consummate showman", Timberlake usually plays guitar, piano and keyboard in his shows. The New York Times' editor Katie Rogers highlighted Timberlake's crossover appeal after his performance with Chris Stapleton at the 2015 Country Music Association Awards. Primarily an R&B album, his 2002 debut Justified also includes influence from dance-pop, funk and soul music. Timberlake has described it as influenced by Michael Jackson and Stevie Wonder. For the album's supporting tour Justified and Stripped, he co-headlined with Christina Aguilera, drawing praise from Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times for his comfort in performing as part of a package. His 2006 followup album FutureSex/LoveSounds departed from his earlier work to explore a broader sound, with elements of rap, rock, funk, soul, gospel, new wave, opera, and world music. During production, Timberlake was interested in musical techniques associated with rock music, which inspired his approach to recording. He described the album as drawing from David Bowie and Prince. Other influences include late INXS-frontman Michael Hutchence, Arcade Fire, David Byrne, The Killers, The Strokes, and Radiohead. Timberlake's next album, The 20/20 Experience (2013) is a neo soul album partly inspired by the expansive song structures of 1960s and 1970s rock. Mikael Wood of the Los Angeles Times found its elaborate structures ambitious in the vein of Stevie Wonder, Prince, and Michael Jackson. He supported the album with a pair of tours: Legends of the Summer, which he co-headlined with Jay-Z, and The 20/20 Experience World Tour. These tours introduced his backing ensemble, the Tennessee Kids, a 15-piece multi-instrumentalist throwback to big band music. Timberlake's fashion and style evolution, from "boy-band synchronized wardrobe days" to "a notable source of fashion inspiration to men all over", has been noticed by the media. As noted by a Billboard editor, "Since his solo career began with the 2002 release of debut album Justified, Timberlake has honed his unique sense of style", while citing Elvis Presley, Johnny Cash, Jerry Lee Lewis and Frank Sinatra as style influences: "guys who were just really never trying to be that [stylish], they just were that". According to American fashion designer Tom Ford, who has dressed Timberlake since 2011 and created more than 600 exclusive pieces for The 20/20 Experience World Tour, Timberlake "has a kind of effortless cool that makes classic menswear tailoring modern". The New York Times' editor Sia Michel wrote in 2007, "Since his last tour, for 2002's multiplatinum Justified, he has learned how to project sex-symbol edge" adding "he's a rock star who can commit." Napster's founder Sean Parker, portrayed by Timberlake in The Social Network, stated "I don't think I look anything like Timberlake, but it's not so bad being played by a sex symbol." In Nielsen Music's U.S. report for 2015, Timberlake led the "Top 10 Musicians Among Millennials" list. His high-profile relationships earned him the nickname "Trousersnake", a reference to his allegedly big penis. Wax statues of Timberlake are on display at the Madame Tussauds wax museums in New York, Las Vegas, Hollywood, Nashville, Berlin, Amsterdam, and London. His costume used in the Saturday Night Live skit "Dick in a Box" is displayed at "Saturday Night Live: The Exhibition" in New York. After New York legalized same-sex marriage in 2011, he voiced his support for LGBT equality in the U.S., stating, "We're people and we're different, all of us. And we should be using our differences to bring ourselves closer together." Timberlake and his wife Jessica Biel received the Inspiration Award at the GLSEN Respect Awards in 2015, with the executive director saying, "They are two vocal and committed allies to the LGBT community who are also devoted to charitable works that improve the lives of youth." Timberlake's pronunciation of the word "me" on "It's Gonna Be Me" was popularized as an internet meme titled "It's Gonna Be May", after a Tumblr image of Timberlake was posted in 2012 with the respective caption. The meme eventually became an annually recurring joke throughout the month of April, which gained the attention of Barack Obama and Timberlake himself. Influenced by the national attention received by Timberlake's selfie inside a voting booth shared on Instagram during the 2016 presidential election, which was at the moment an illegal act, Senator Brian Kelsey of Germantown, Tennessee brought up a bill that would allow taking photos in voting poll stations, with some exceptions against bad procedures. It was later approved by the Tennessee Senate. In June 2021, Timberlake spoke out in support of Britney Spears during her court battle over her conservatorship. Timberlake wrote on his Twitter that "No woman should ever be restricted from making decisions about her own body [...] [Jessica Biel] and I send our love, and our absolute support to Britney during this time. We hope the courts, and her family make this right and let her live however she wants to live". Following the release of Framing Britney Spears, public attention was brought to old comments Timberlake made in 2002 to describe his relationship with Britney Spears following their breakup, with some considering them to contain misogynistic rhetoric. It also led to renewed interest in his participation in the Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show controversy, where he exposed Janet Jackson's breast on live television. Following much public pressure, Timberlake issued a public apology on his Instagram page, writing he "benefited from a system that condones misogyny and racism" and "I do not want to ever benefit from others being pulled down again." He finished by saying "I care deeply about the wellbeing of the people I love and have loved. I can do better and I will do better". Public scrutiny surrounding the Super Bowl XXXVIII incident was raised when a stylist alleged that the plan was originally for Timberlake to step on the back of Jackson's dress to reveal her butt in a g-string but that he changed the plan to exposing her breast because he wanted a "reveal" to "one-up" Britney Spears' and Madonna's kiss at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards. The claim that Timberlake wanted the breast reveal, however, is contradictory to a statement from Salli Frattini, the producer of the Halftime show, who stated in 2018 that the production team experimented with removing elements of clothing in rehearsal to reveal Jackson's skirt without nudity but that the idea was ultimately nixed. According to Frattini, it was Jackson's team who pitched the idea to Timberlake prior to the show that lead to Jackson's breast being exposed. Timberlake has been referred to as the "President of Pop" and "Prince of Pop" by contemporary journalists. In a 2016 article of The Hollywood Reporter, editor Scott Feinberg stated Timberlake is "widely regarded as one of the greatest all-around entertainers in the history of show business". In 2003, Rolling Stone named him the biggest pop star of the year and featured him on the magazine's cover, commenting that he "attained the one thing most pop stars don't, and the one thing he wanted more than anything else: credibility". For Entertainment Weekly his second studio album, FutureSex/LoveSounds, "redefined pop's cutting edge"; for Vibe it "pushed boundaries more forcefully" than works by his male contemporaries. Fuse TV's editor Jason Lipshutz stated it "changed the game. [The album] was steely and sweaty, a universal dance opus that made room for intimacy. It had the best first half of any pop album in 25 years. You have to go back to 1979 for Off the Wall, to find a pop album with a first half that matches up." He was ranked 66th on the VH1 100 Greatest Artists of All-Time. Timberlake appeared for the first time on the Time 100 list of most influential people by Time in 2007. In 2013, he made his second appearance on the 100 list, with Stevie Wonder writing "Justin has accomplished a lot at a young age, taking advantage of all the possibilities, and yet he's found time to give of himself too—he gets and gives back. He has a spirit. He does God's work through using the most of his talent." Justified's single "Cry Me a River" was ranked at number 20 on Rolling Stone's 100 Best Songs of the 2000s, and one of their 500 greatest songs of all time. Marilyn Manson further cited it as one of the main songs that influenced him. Billboard editor Jason Lipshutz named the song's music video "one of the more brilliant musical moments in pop music since the dawn of the century". His second album FutureSex/LoveSounds was placed at 46 on Rolling Stone's 100 Best Albums of the 2000s, the ninth best album of the decade for Entertainment Weekly, and the greatest of the decade for Vibe. The lead single, "SexyBack", helped introduce EDM sounds to top 40 radio, as it brought together variations of electronic dance music with Timberlake's R&B tone. Aside from earning critical acclaim for its parent album, Sia Michel of The New York Times noted that he was responsible for popularizing in 2006 the catchphrase "I'm bringing sexy back". Considered a pop icon by media outlets, his work has influenced numerous artists, including Justin Bieber, Shawn Mendes, Olly Murs, Maroon 5, Britney Spears, Lorde, Joe Jonas, Thomas Rhett, Ed Sheeran, Jason Derulo, Tori Kelly, Liam Payne, Bridgit Mendler, Hunter Hayes, BoA, Seungri, Taeyang, Rain, Lloyd Banks, Maluma, Rosalía, and Jungkook. Bieber and Nick Jonas have cited him as one of their role models, with the latter stating is for "not only transitioning from where he started, but also balancing acting and singing". Christian hip hop artist tobyMac has stated Timberlake's work inspires him, commenting "he's setting himself up to be a classic, making decisions and moving on them. That's a great place to be." In the context of male artists that achieved commercial success after leaving their boy bands, Brittany Spanos from Rolling Stone wrote "Timberlake and Michael Jackson set a high bar for what could be attained by solo success in that they not only scored numerous number-one hits but they also crafted the mold for what it meant to be a male pop star", while for Variety's Jeremy Blacklow the singer is "the modern case study". Multiple music publications have deemed Justified as the standard for post boy-band solo albums and teen pop stars seeking credibility. Billboard critics discussed in 2018 whether Timberlake is "the Best Male Pop Star of the 21st century;" those in favor named his crossover appeal, career longevity, showmanship and credibility within the industry among the reasons. Throughout his solo career, Timberlake has sold over 32 million albums and 56 million singles globally, and a further 70 million records with NSYNC, making him one of the world's best-selling music artists. Timberlake has won ten Grammy Awards, four Emmy Awards, seven American Music Awards, three Brit Awards, nine Billboard Music Awards, and eleven MTV Video Music Awards. His Grammy wins include categories on the pop, dance and R&B genres; while his Emmy wins consist of two Outstanding Original Music and Lyrics and two Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series. Timberlake received the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards and the Innovator Award at the 2015 iHeartRadio Music Awards. Among other awards, he won the MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year for "Mirrors" in 2013 and the Billboard Music Awards for Top Artist with the Top Billboard 200 Album for The 20/20 Experience in 2014. Timberlake received the inaugural Decade Award at the 2016 Teen Choice Awards for his continuous achievements since the release of FutureSex/LoveSounds (2006). In October 2015, he was inducted into the Memphis Music Hall of Fame, becoming its youngest member. On April 30, 2018, Timberlake reunited with his NSYNC bandmates to receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. In 2019, Timberlake received a Contemporary Icon Award by the Songwriters Hall of Fame, and an honorary Doctor of Music degree from Berklee College of Music. All five of Timberlake's studio albums have been certified platinum or better by the RIAA and have received numerous awards. Worldwide sales figures for Justified stand at 10 million copies, FutureSex/LoveSounds at 10 million, and joint sales of The 20/20 Experience and 2 of 2 at 6 million copies. As of 2014[update], Timberlake has had seven songs exceed 3 million digital downloads in the United States, with "SexyBack" (4.5), "4 Minutes", "Dead and Gone", "Suit & Tie", "Mirrors", "Holy Grail", and "Can't Stop the Feeling!". According to Billboard, FutureSex/LoveShow was the third highest-grossing concert tour of 2007 and highest solo. The 20/20 Experience World Tour was an international success and became Timberlake's most successful tour to date. The tour was the highest-grossing led by a solo artist in 2014, and one of the highest grossing tours of the decade. For its associated album, The 20/20 Experience, Timberlake was named 2013 Artist of the Year with the top-selling album by iTunes' annual list of best-sellers. In the United States, five of Timberlake's singles have topped the Billboard Hot 100: "SexyBack", "My Love" and "What Goes Around... Comes Around", "Give It to Me" and "Can't Stop the Feeling!". The latter became the 41st Hot 100 number one song to be nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Song. He topped nine Billboard Year-End charts for 2013, including Billboard 200 Artists and Billboard 200 Albums. For 2014, Timberlake was named Billboard Top Male Artist. Billboard published a list of "Greatest of All Time Pop Songs Artists" in 2017, where Timberlake ranked at number 5, being the top male soloist. The magazine also ranked him 25 on their "The Top 60 Male Artists of All-Time" list in 2018, and 64th on "The Hot 100's Top Artists of All Time". In 2019, Billboard ranked him 20th on their decade-end chart for "Top Artists" of the 2010s, and 74th on "Top 125 Greatest of All Time Artists Chart". Timberlake has co-owned or provided celebrity endorsement for three restaurants in the United States: "Chi" opened in West Hollywood, California in 2003, and "Destino" and "Southern Hospitality" in New York opened in 2006 and 2007, respectively. In 2005, Timberlake launched the William Rast clothing line with childhood friend Juan ("Trace") Ayala. The 2007 line contained cord jackets, cashmere sweaters, jeans, and polo shirts. The pair reports inspiration from fellow Memphis resident Elvis Presley: "Elvis is the perfect mixture of Justin and I", Ayala says. "You can go back and see pictures of him in cowboy boots and a cowboy hat and a nice button-down shirt, but then again you can see him in a tux and a collared shirt with rhinestones on it and slacks. We like to think 'If he was alive today, what would he be wearing?'" Target has announced that a William Rast collection, including denim, outerwear and sportswear for men and women, would launch in December and be available for a month. In 2015, the clothing line earned him a Lord & Taylor's Fashion Oracle Award at the Fashion Group International's Night of The Stars Gala. An avid amateur golfer, in 2007 Timberlake purchased the run-down Big Creek Golf Course in his hometown of Millington, Tennessee, which he redeveloped as the eco-friendly Mirimichi Golf Course at the cost of around $US16 million. It was reopened on July 25, 2009, but closed again on January 15, 2010, for further improvements expected to take six months. In October 2011, Timberlake received the Futures Award at the Environmental Media Awards for his green-conscious golf course. It was reported on November 7, 2014, that Timberlake had sold Mirimichi to Three Star Leasing LLC for $500,000. In October 2018, Timberlake and Levi's debuted their collaborative clothing line collection "Fresh Leaves". In 2022, Justin Timberlake invested in Greenville, South Carolina par-3 golf course Greenville 3's. Timberlake provides celebrity endorsement for many commercial products, this aspect of his business being managed by IMG since April 2008. Major endorsements in 2009 included Sony electronic products, Givenchy's men's fragrance "Play", the Audi A1, Callaway Golf Company products, and in 2011, Myspace. In 2011, he teamed up with Capital One to announce the winners of the inaugural Capital One Cup, in a six-minute advert, where he is repeatedly getting hit in the groin. In 2012, he hosted Walmart's annual shareholders meeting, saying, "I buy a lot at Walmart." In 2014, Timberlake partnered with Sauza Liquors to re-launch his own version of the beverage as part of the Sauza franchise: Sauza 901. In 2016, he became an investor in the beverage company Bai Brands. In 2017, Tiger Woods and Timberlake acquired an ownership stake in the Hurricane Junior Golf Tour. Timberlake and his wife Jessica Biel are minority owners of the Memphis Grizzlies. Timberlake is an Air Jordan brand ambassador. His first collection with the brand, the Legend of the Summer collection, debuted on the co-headlining tour of the same name with Jay-Z. These sneakers have gone on to resell for upwards of $10,000. In the lead up to his 2018 Super Bowl Halftime Show, Timberlake worked with famed Nike, Inc. designer Tinker Hatfield to design his own version of the Air Jordan 3. Timberlake debuted the shoe at the halftime show. Timberlake's performance was estimated to be worth $2.86 million in marketing for Nike, and is credited for reigniting interested in the Nike and Air Jordan brand. Nike went on to release several colorways as part of the collaboration with Timberlake. In May 2022, Timberlake sold the rights to his entire musical catalog, around 200 songs he wrote or co-wrote, to Hipgnosis Song Management for $100 million. The deal covers only pre-existing work, and not work he produces after the deal. Timberlake had an estimated net-worth of $250 million prior to the Hipgnosis deal, and is now estimated to be worth in excess of $350 million - making him one of the music industry's wealthiest solo performers. Timberlake has been active in several charitable pursuits, initially through NSYNC's "Challenge for the Children" aimed at a range of charities, and since 2001 through his "Justin Timberlake Foundation", which initially funded music education programs in schools, but now has a much broader agenda. In October 2005, the Grammy Association presented Timberlake with an award for his humanitarian efforts in Tennessee, alongside writer/director Craig Brewer, also a Memphis native. In November 2007, he donated $100,000 from takings from his Australian tour to Wildlife Warriors founded by Steve Irwin. On March 23, 2008, he donated $100,000 to the Memphis Rock N' Soul Museum and another $100,000 to the Memphis Music Foundation. On November 12, 2007, the PGA Tour announced that Timberlake, an avid golfer who plays to a six handicap, would become the host of the tour's Las Vegas tournament starting in 2008. With Timberlake's agreement to host the tournament, its name was changed to the Justin Timberlake Shriners Hospitals for Children Open. He played in the celebrity pro-am on the day before the competitive tournament and hosted a charity concert during the week of the tournament. The activity was a success and was repeated in 2009. A review of the value of celebrities to fundraising concluded that Timberlake's contribution to Shriners Hospitals for Children was the single most valuable celebrity endorsement in the U.S. during 2009, and worth over $US9 million. However, in 2012, the event's chair Raoul Frevel told reporters Timberlake would no longer be involved in the event: "We tried everything we could to get him more involved with our kids and the hospitals. But it seemed that when the TV cameras weren't on, he disappeared." Timberlake often participates in the American Century Championship and the AT&T Pebble Beach Pro-Am. Both annual tournaments raise money for a range of national and local non-profits. In late 2012, Timberlake and his wife Jessica Biel volunteered in Far Rockaway, Queens over the weekend after Hurricane Sandy. Joined by their friend Timbaland, the couple helped distribute backpacks of supplies to members of the community who were still struggling after the hurricane. Timberlake has donated items for auction for several charities, including by Ten O'Clock Classics and MusiCares. In 2010, Timberlake participated in the Hope for Haiti Now telethon performing "Hallelujah". The cover was made available for digital download with all proceeds donated to organizations doing relief work in Haiti. In 2016, Timberlake was featured in a new version of "Where Is the Love?". The proceeds of the charity single will go to educational programs. In 2017, Timberlake and Eminem helped raise over $2 million for Manchester Arena bombing victims. Timberlake's autobiography, Hindsight & All the Things I Can't See In Front of Me, was released on October 30, 2018. The book covers some on and off camera candid images, the singer's early life and inspiration for songs. According to publisher HarperCollins, Hindsight includes a "collection of anecdotes, reflections, and observations on his life and work". Studio albums Justified (2002) FutureSex/LoveSounds (2006) The 20/20 Experience (2013) The 20/20 Experience – 2 of 2 (2013) Man of the Woods (2018) Everything I Thought It Was (2024) Films starred Model Behavior (2000) Edison (2005) Alpha Dog (2006) Black Snake Moan (2006) Southland Tales (2007) Shrek the Third (2007) The Love Guru (2008) The Open Road (2009) The Social Network (2010) Yogi Bear (2010) Bad Teacher (2011) Friends with Benefits (2011) In Time (2011) Trouble with the Curve (2012) Runner Runner (2013) Inside Llewyn Davis (2013) Justin Timberlake + The Tennessee Kids (2016) Trolls (2016) Wonder Wheel (2017) Trolls World Tour (2020) Palmer (2021) Trolls Band Together (2023) Reptile (2023) List of best-selling music artists – Artists with sales of over 88 million records worldwide Honorific nicknames in popular music List of Billboard Social 50 number-one artists "JUSTIN TIMBERLAKE". Grammy Awards. November 23, 2020. Min, Janice (November 17, 2016). "Songwriter Roundtable: Justin Timberlake, Sting, Alicia Keys and More Hitmakers on Gender Bias, Trump's 'Hitler-Level' Rhetoric and Fears of a 'Divided States of America'". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 30, 2017. "Justin Timberlake to perform at Kaseya Center in Downtown Miami in June". CBS. January 26, 2024. Retrieved January 30, 2024. Miller, James Andrew; Shales, Tom (September 5, 2014). "The Secrets Behind 'Dick in a Box' & More: Andy Samberg, Justin Timberlake on the Viral Hits of 'SNL'". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 5, 2015. Retrieved July 2, 2015. Caulfield, Keith (January 8, 2019). "Drake's 'Scorpion' Is Nielsen Music's Top Album Of 2018 in U.S., 'God's Plan' Most-Streamed Song". Billboard. "Ariana Grande's 'Eternal Sunshine' Spends Second Week at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Chart". Billboard. March 24, 2024. Retrieved March 24, 2024. Rigotti, Alex (January 20, 2024). "Justin Timberlake teases new album 'Everything I Thought It Was', previews lead single 'Selfish'". NME. Retrieved January 26, 2024. Dailey, Hannah (January 25, 2024). "Justin Timberlake Reveals He Wrote '100 Songs' for New Album 'Everything I Thought It Was'". Billboard. Retrieved January 26, 2024. Dailey, Hannah (February 20, 2024). "Justin Timberlake Announces Emotional New Single 'Drown': Here's When It Arrives". Billboard. Retrieved February 20, 2024. @jtimberlake (May 11, 2014). "#HappyMothersDay to Janet Lynn... You're the greatest leader and I'm so proud to be your son. I love you so much, Momma!! J" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "Justin Randall Timberlake". Geneanet. Summers, Kimberly Dillon (June 16, 2010). Justin Timberlake: A Biography. ABC-Clio. ISBN 9780313383212. Moss, Corey (August 15, 2006). Justin Timberlake. MTV. Archived from the original on September 1, 2006. Retrieved May 5, 2015. Amidon Lüsted, Marcia (January 2012). Justin Timberlake: Musician, Actor, and Dancer. ABDO. ISBN 9781614784432. Archived from the original on February 7, 2018. "Justin Timberlake: The New King of Pop". Rolling Stone. December 23, 2003. Archived from the original on November 8, 2015. Retrieved November 29, 2014. Neal, Rome (January 14, 2003). "Where Are They Now?". CBS News. Archived from the original on September 23, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Justin Timberlake – Biography". AllMusic. Archived from the original on March 16, 2013. Abbott, Jim (December 12, 2013). "Justin Timberlake's road to longevity". Orlando Sentinel. "Ex-Mouseketeers: Where Are They Now?". ABC News. January 18, 2008. Archived from the original on May 24, 2008. Weatherby, Taylor (March 24, 2020). "'It's *NSYNC's World, We Just Live in It': An Oral History of 'No Strings Attached' Selling a Historic 2.4 Million First-Week Copies in 2000". Billboard. MEYERS, LAURA MARIE (February 26, 2017). "This Actually Isn't Justin Timberlake's First Time Performing at the Oscars". PopSugar. Moss, Corey (December 18, 2001). "Creed, 'NSYNC, Dave Matthews Band, More Set For Olympic Concert Series". MTV News. Archived from the original on April 5, 2008. Franich, Darren (February 5, 2021). "Watching the 2001 Super Bowl halftime show, 20 years later". Entertainment Weekly. Newman, Melinda (November 14, 2017). "*NSYNC And Epic Rights Join Together For Merchandise Line to Celebrate Band's 20th Anniversary: Exclusive". Billboard. Honeycutt, Shanté (April 25, 2018). "Boy Band Flashback: When *NSYNC-Era Justin Timberlake Played a Teen Heartthrob in TV Movie 'Model Behavior'". Billboard. Abbott, Jim. "Lance Bass book comes out". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on September 15, 2008. Grigoriadis, Vanessa (July 1, 2011). "A Free Man in L.A." Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on January 16, 2017. Michaels, Sean (May 7, 2014). "Justin Timberlake says his solo career is owed to Michael Jackson". The Guardian. Archived from the original on June 21, 2017. "The Greatest Pop Star By Year (1981–2019)". Billboard. April 2, 2020. "MTV Video Music Awards to mix irreverence, 9/11 remembrance". USA Today. August 29, 2002. Archived from the original on May 23, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "Justin Timberlake". Billboard. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "Justin Timberlake". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on August 26, 2011. Retrieved April 11, 2015. "Review: Timberlake's 'Justified' strangely anonymous". CNN. October 30, 2002. Archived from the original on December 3, 2002. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "The Comiebackkid [sic]". Daily Record. Scotland. Archived from the original on February 16, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "Justified (2002)". Entertainment Weekly. October 28, 2002. Archived from the original on September 14, 2012. "All Eyes On: Justin Timberlake". MTV. Archived from the original on October 26, 2006. Retrieved October 18, 2015. "Justified And Stripped Preview: Timberlake Talks Tour". MTV. Archived from the original on May 1, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "Timberlake Ties Up Tasty McDonald's Deal". Billboard. September 3, 2003. Archived from the original on January 1, 2015. Retrieved December 17, 2014. "Singles and Albums Reviews; Nelly feat Justin Timberlake Work It ****.(192)". Daily Record. Retrieved April 22, 2008.[permanent dead link] "Kutcher: Done with 'Punk'd' – really". CNN. Archived from the original on September 10, 2007. Retrieved April 22, 2008. Collis, Clark (February 5, 2007). "Sexy Beast". Entertainment Weekly. p. 2. Archived from the original on February 10, 2007. Retrieved January 9, 2024. "QUICK TAKES; MTV plans to air more 'Punk'd'". Los Angeles Times. June 24, 2003. Archived from the original on June 18, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "Timberlake Punks Ashton on SNL". Teen Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 18, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2008. Merrigan, Tara Wanda (December 20, 2013). "History of a Bromance: Jimmy Fallon and Justin Timberlake". GQ. Archived from the original on February 10, 2015. "Apologetic Jackson says 'costume reveal' went awry". CNN. February 2, 2004. Archived from the original on April 24, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "Apologetic Jackson says costume reveal went awry". CNN. February 2, 2004. Archived from the original on April 24, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2008. Puente, Maria (February 4, 2004). "Will 'wardrobe malfunction' live on?". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 17, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2008. Ayres, Chris (February 9, 2004). "Clinton outdoes wife to win Grammy with Gorbachev". The Times. London. Retrieved April 22, 2008. Susman, Gary (February 10, 2004). "Consolidated 'Edison'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 29, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "Voice cast announced for SHREK THE THIRD". Mania. July 13, 2006. Archived from the original on April 14, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "Timberlake does justice to Elton John". USA Today. January 11, 2002. Archived from the original on May 23, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "Rent Film Success Bodes Well for Future Movie Musicals". Broadway World. November 28, 2007. Archived from the original on February 28, 2008. Retrieved February 6, 2008. "Black Eyed Peas turn to Timberlake". Radio Telefís Éireann. Archived from the original on April 13, 2005. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "Justin Timberlake Undergoes Throat Surgery". People. May 12, 2005. Archived from the original on December 18, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2014. "Justin Timberlake Undergoes Throat Surgery". People. Archived from the original on February 14, 2017. Retrieved June 21, 2006. "THE COMIEBACKKID; Exclusive the BIG razz interview A boyband, solo hits, awards, Hollywood ... now Justin Timberlake is back for more.(Features)". Daily Record. Retrieved April 22, 2008.[permanent dead link] Walters, Joanna (October 2, 2005). "Justin bids for Elvis's kingdom". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on August 29, 2013. Retrieved April 22, 2008. Freydkin, Donna (October 13, 2006). "Timberlake, roommate Trace talk shop". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 8, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "Justin Timberlake Album Hits Number One". The Washington Post. Associated Press. September 21, 2006. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "Timberlake To Release His Lovesounds". ShowBuzz. June 20, 2006. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved June 21, 2006. "Timberlake to release 'sexy' new album". Digital Spy. June 21, 2006. Archived from the original on November 14, 2017. "Timberlake: "I Will Never Take a Break from Music"". China Daily. October 13, 2006. "'Alpha Dog' Director Explains The Story Behind Justin's New Single". Popdirt. December 29, 2006. Archived from the original on December 4, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "5 Best Musicians That Have Performed at Victoria's Secret Fashion Show". New York: CBS. December 1, 2013. Archived from the original on September 25, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015. "50 Greatest 'Saturday Night Live' Sketches of All Time". Rolling Stone. February 3, 2014. Archived from the original on October 11, 2015. Retrieved September 17, 2015. Cohen, Jonathan (April 12, 2007). "Timbaland Soars To No. 1 After Sales Explosion". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "FutureSex/LoveSounds [sound recording] / Justin Timberlake". Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on May 15, 2016. Retrieved March 2, 2016. "Madonna, Justin Timberlake, Timbaland collaboration leaked". NME. December 17, 2007. Archived from the original on May 1, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2008. Hard Candy (liner notes). Madonna. Warner Bros. Records. 2008. 9362-49884-9.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) Bull, Sarah (May 12, 2008). "Madonna's sweet success continues". News Limited. Archived from the original on May 5, 2013. Retrieved August 10, 2010. Harris, Chris (May 1, 2008). "MTV review of the Roseland Ballroom Promo Concert". MTV. Archived from the original on July 15, 2010. Retrieved May 11, 2010. "Britney and Justin Back Up Madonna – Separately". TV Guide. November 7, 2008. Archived from the original on July 5, 2009. Retrieved November 7, 2008. "Jams Packed". Entertainment Weekly. April 9, 2007. Archived from the original on August 19, 2007. Retrieved April 22, 2008. Shaheem Reid, Jayson Rodriguez (June 11, 2007). "Lil Wayne Plans His Own Leak". MTV. Archived from the original on April 12, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "Justin Timberlake working on 'Problem with Women'". CNN. Archived from the original on April 10, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "Justin Timberlake's New Single Lends a Hand to Charity". TV Guide. November 20, 2008. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved November 21, 2008. "Grammy-Honored Fashion Designers". InStyle. Archived from the original on April 23, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "Ciara and Justin Timberlake Make 'Magic'". Rap-Up.com. February 19, 2009. Archived from the original on June 10, 2009. Retrieved January 2, 2010. W. Mills, Clifford (2012). Justin Timberlake. Info base Learning, 2012. ISBN 9781438141213. Retrieved March 20, 2015. "Justin Timberlake is featured on a track called 'Carry Out' on Timbaland's new LP, Timbaland Presents Shock Value II". MTV. December 12, 2009. Archived from the original on December 15, 2009. Retrieved December 20, 2009. "Jimmy Fallon Debuts As 'Late Night' Host". today.com. March 3, 2009. Archived from the original on January 9, 2014. Retrieved March 3, 2009. Vena, Jocelyn (October 21, 2009). "Justin Timberlake Says Rihanna's New Songs Are 'Awesome'". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on October 22, 2009. Retrieved October 21, 2009. Watson, Margeaux (June 22, 2007). "Caribbean Queen". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 22, 2015. Retrieved September 4, 2013. "Justin Timberlake". TV Guide. September 9, 2010. Archived from the original on October 17, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2014. Schillaci, S. (July 22, 2011). "Justin Timberlake's 'In Time' Trailer: 5 Things We Learned". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 19, 2011. Retrieved September 16, 2011. Kaufman, Gil (May 11, 2009). "Justin Timberlake, Andy Samberg Reunite For 'Motherlover' On 'SNL'". MTV. Archived from the original on October 8, 2014. Retrieved November 5, 2009. Kaufman, Gil (August 11, 2011). "Justin Timberlake Makes New Music Video ... For FreeSol". MTV. Archived from the original on September 9, 2011. Retrieved August 29, 2011. Sternbergh, Adam (November 7, 2010). "Mr. Sunshine". New York. Archived from the original on May 21, 2015. Retrieved May 5, 2015. "Justin Timberlake Attends Marine Corps Ball". B96 Chicago. November 14, 2011. Archived from the original on July 8, 2012. Retrieved December 18, 2014. O'Connell, Michael (March 10, 2013). "TV Ratings: Justin Timberlake Drives 'Saturday Night Live' to 14-Month High". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 14, 2015. Retrieved May 6, 2015. "Justin Timberlake unveils Suit and Tie single". BBC News. January 14, 2013. Archived from the original on January 16, 2015. Retrieved December 18, 2014. O'Donnell, Kevin (January 10, 2013). "Justin Timberlake: 'I'm Ready' to Release New Music". People. Archived from the original on January 12, 2013. Retrieved January 10, 2013. Lauren, Craig (February 3, 2013). "Justin Timberlake Makes Super Return at Pre-Super Bowl Gig". MTV News. Archived from the original on November 30, 2015. Retrieved September 15, 2015. Atkinson, Katie (February 11, 2013). "Justin Timberlake Drops Self-Reflective Song 'Mirrors' After Grammys". MTV News. Archived from the original on December 17, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2014. "Justin Timberlake sets release date for new album 'The 20/20 Experience'". Digital Spy. January 25, 2013. Archived from the original on January 27, 2013. Retrieved January 25, 2013. "RCA's New Executive Team Named Under CEO Peter Edge Amid Layoffs (Update)". Billboard. August 23, 2011. Archived from the original on March 26, 2012. Retrieved April 4, 2012. "Radio Industry News, Music Industry Updates, Arbitron Ratings, Music News and more!". FMQB. August 23, 2011. Archived from the original on November 8, 2011. Retrieved April 4, 2012. Corner, Lewis (March 28, 2013). "Justin Timberlake breaks worldwide iTunes record with new album". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on June 1, 2013. Retrieved June 25, 2013. "Official: Justin Timberlake's '20/20 Experience' Sells 968,000, Debuts at No. 1". Billboard. March 26, 2013. Archived from the original on March 29, 2013. Retrieved March 26, 2013. "Justin Timberlake's '20/20' 2013's Best Selling Album, 'Blurred Lines' Top Song". Billboard. January 2, 2014. Archived from the original on January 5, 2014. Retrieved May 5, 2015. "White House Hosts Night of Memphis Soul -- Watch Justin Timberlake Sing for Obamas". Billboard. April 10, 2013. Archived from the original on February 23, 2016. Retrieved October 17, 2015. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) "Justin Timberlake Announces '20/20' World Tour". Billboard. May 6, 2013. Archived from the original on January 10, 2015. Retrieved December 23, 2014. Lee, Christina (June 29, 2013). "Jay-Z's "BBC" Features Nas, Beyonce, Justin Timberlake & More: See The Lyrics". Idolator. Archived from the original on December 18, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2014. Coulehan, Erin (August 25, 2013). "'NSync Reunites for Justin Timberlake's 2013 VMAs Video Vanguard Honor". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 18, 2015. Retrieved December 18, 2014. "'NSYNC Reunion: The Gang Returns for the 2013 VMAs". MTV. James, Nicolas (May 5, 2013). "Justin Timberlake Announces "The 20/20 Experience" Sequel Release Date". HotNewHipHop.com. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved May 5, 2013. Caulfield, Keith (October 9, 2013). "Justin Timberlake's 'The 20/20 Experience, 2 of 2' Debuts at No. 1". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 15, 2014. Retrieved February 5, 2014. Wood, Mikael (July 12, 2013). "Listen to Justin Timberlake's new single 'Take Back the Night'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 14, 2013. Retrieved July 13, 2013. "Listen To Justin Timberlake's New Single 'TKO' From 'The 20/20 Experience Pt 2' - Music News, Reviews, Interviews and Culture". Music Feeds. September 20, 2013. Archived from the original on September 23, 2013. Retrieved February 5, 2014. X, Dharmic (December 13, 2013). "Here Are the Production, Songwriting, and Directing Credits For Beyoncé's New Album". Complex. Archived from the original on December 16, 2013. Retrieved December 13, 2013. Josephs, Brian (January 26, 2014). "Justin Timberlake Takes Home 2014 Grammy Award for Best Music Video". The Boom Box. Archived from the original on July 28, 2014. Retrieved July 28, 2014. "All Access". All Access. February 23, 2014. Archived from the original on February 2, 2014. Retrieved February 23, 2014. Trust, Gary (May 26, 2014). "Chart Highlights: Justin Timberlake Passes Bruno Mars For Most Pop Songs No. 1s Among Solo Males". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 30, 2014. Retrieved May 31, 2014. "New Song! Michael Jackson + JT's "Love Never Felt So Good"". justintimberlake.com. May 1, 2014. Archived from the original on December 18, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2014. Lee, Ashley (May 17, 2014). "17 Iconic Michael Jackson Shots in 'Love Never Felt So Good' with Justin Timberlake (Video)". The Hollywood Reporter. DERSCHOWITZ, JESSICA (February 16, 2015). ""Saturday Night Live": 10 top moments from the 40th anniversary special". CBS News. Archived from the original on September 30, 2015. Goldstein, Ian (September 10, 2015). "Jimmy Fallon & Justin Timberlake reunite for 'History of Rap 6' on The Tonight Show". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 12, 2015. "19 Best Music Performances of 2015". Entertainment Weekly. December 16, 2015. Archived from the original on December 19, 2015. Kohn, Eric (July 26, 2016). "TIFF Lineup: 5 Reasons to Get Excited About the 2016 Program". Indie Wire. Archived from the original on July 28, 2016. SEITZ, DAN (July 26, 2016). "The 2016 Toronto Film Festival Schedule Has Justin Timberlake, Oscar Contenders, And A Lot of Amy Adams". Uproxx. Archived from the original on July 27, 2016. Havens, Lyndsey (October 11, 2016). "Justin Timberlake Says 'Tennessee Kids' Concert Film Debut Made Him As Nervous As He's Ever Been". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 16, 2017. Retrieved January 19, 2018. Romano, Nick (September 9, 2016). "Justin Timberlake 20/20 concert movie dropping on Netflix". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 10, 2016. Retrieved September 9, 2016. Drysdale, Jennifer; Murphy, Desiree (November 21, 2016). "Maisie Williams Gives Off Badass Arya Stark Vibes in 'The Book of Love' Trailer". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on November 22, 2016. McClintock, Pamela (May 21, 2012). "Cannes 2012: Chloë Moretz, Jessica Biel to Star in 'Deep Blue Sea'; Justin Timberlake to Compose". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 18, 2015. Siegel, Tatiana (September 16, 2015). "Justin Timberlake and Jonathan Demme are making a concert film together". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 18, 2015. Kroll, Justin (February 28, 2017). "Universal DreamWorks Animation Announces 'Trolls 2'; Sets for April 10, 2020". Variety. Archived from the original on February 28, 2017. Ford, Rebecca (January 5, 2016). "Justin Timberlake to Executive Produce Music for 'Trolls' Movie". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 7, 2016. Blistein, Jon (May 6, 2016). "Hear Justin Timberlake's Sunny New Song 'Can't Stop the Feeling'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. Iasimone, Ashley (May 14, 2016). "Justin Timberlake Performs 'Can't Stop the Feeling,' 'Rock Your Body' at Eurovision 2016". Billboard. MCKENZIE, JOI-MARIE (May 15, 2016). "Justin Timberlake Performs 'Can't Stop The Feeling' At Eurovision 2016". ABC News. Trust, Gary (May 16, 2016). "Justin Timberlake Debuts at No. 1 on Hot 100 With 'Can't Stop the Feeling!'". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 17, 2016. Retrieved May 16, 2016. Trust, Gary (June 6, 2016). "Justin Timberlake's 'Can't Stop the Feeling!' Hits No. 1 on Pop Songs & Adult Pop Songs Charts". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 8, 2016. Grein, Paul (December 19, 2016). "The Best-Selling Singles of 2016". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on July 3, 2017. "Watch Justin Timberlake's Dazzling 2017 Oscars Performance". Rolling Stone. February 26, 2017. Archived from the original on October 23, 2017. Siegel, Tatiana (July 7, 2016). "Justin Timberlake Joins Woody Allen's New Movie". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 8, 2016. Retrieved July 7, 2016. "Justin Timberlake cantará no Rock in Rio 2017" [Justin Timberlake will sing at Rock in Rio 2017]. Globo (in Portuguese). February 16, 2017. Archived from the original on February 17, 2017. "Justin Timberlake to perform at US Grand Prix in Austin". Associated Press. March 29, 2017. Archived from the original on March 29, 2017. "Pilgrimage 2017: Go Behind the Scenes at Justin Timberlake Festival". Rolling Stone. September 25, 2017. Archived from the original on November 11, 2017. Berker, Andrew (November 1, 2016). "Justin Timberlake Talks 'Trolls,' Family Life and His New Album with Pharrell Williams". Variety. Archived from the original on November 2, 2016. Spanos, Brittany (May 6, 2016). "Justin Timberlake: 'I'm Definitely Working on a New Album'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. Sonis, Rachel (October 17, 2016). "Justin Timberlake Says He's Been in the Studio With Pharrell, Timbaland and Max Martin". Idolator. "Justin Timberlake on Fatherhood, His Uncertain Future and Being Best Friends With Jimmy Fallon". The Hollywood Reporter. February 8, 2017. Archived from the original on February 8, 2017. Retrieved December 6, 2019. Weatherby, Taylor (January 2, 2018). "Justin Timberlake Announces New Album 'Man of the Woods,' Reveals Release Date". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 2, 2018. Kim, Michelle (February 4, 2018). "Justin Timberlake Duets With Prince Video During Super Bowl Halftime". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on February 5, 2018. Retrieved February 5, 2018. "Still sexy but now fatherly, Justin Timberlake returns". The Straits Times. February 1, 2018. Archived from the original on February 2, 2018. Yoo, Noah (January 2, 2018). "Justin Timberlake Announces New Album Man of the Woods". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on January 2, 2018. Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (January 5, 2017). "Justin Timberlake: Filthy review – comeback single channels Prince into grownup funk masterpiece". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 5, 2018. Retrieved January 5, 2017. Trust, Gary (January 16, 2018). "Ed Sheeran's 'Perfect' Rules Hot 100, Bruno Mars & Cardi B's 'Finesse' Flies to No. 3 & Justin Timberlake's 'Filthy' Debuts at No. 9". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 17, 2018. Retrieved January 16, 2018. "Billboard Canadian Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 7, 2018. Retrieved January 27, 2017. Vallejo-Lopez, Abdiel (January 25, 2018). "Watch Justin Timberlake's "Say Something" Video, Featuring Chris Stapleton". Paste. Archived from the original on January 26, 2018. Retrieved January 25, 2018. Trust, Gary (February 5, 2018). "Drake's 'God's Plan' Still No. 1 on Hot 100, Justin Timberlake & Chris Stapleton's 'Say Something' Debuts in Top 10". Billboard. McIntyre, Hugh (February 11, 2018). "Justin Timberlake's 'Man Of The Woods' Opens At No. 1 With 2018's Biggest Week". Forbes. "Gold & Platinum". RIAA. Kaufman, Gil (January 8, 2018). "Justin Timberlake Announces Man of the Woods North American Tour Dates". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 8, 2018. Retrieved January 8, 2018. Eric, Frankenberg (December 5, 2018). "The Year in Touring Charts: Ed Sheeran Claims 2018's Top Tour; Taylor Swift, Beyoncé & Jay-Z Do Big Business". Billboard. Retrieved December 6, 2018. DeSantis, Rachel (May 13, 2019). "Justin Timberlake Receives Honorary Doctorate from Berklee College of Music". People. Ahmed, Trisha (May 13, 2019). "Missy Elliott, Alex Lacamoire and Justin Timberlake can now call themselves doctors". CNN. Retrieved August 24, 2020. Corcoran, Nina (August 18, 2019). "Justin Timberlake teases Lizzo collaboration". Consequence of Sound. Jones, Jiggy (August 17, 2019). "Is a Lizzo, Justin Timberlake and Meek Mill Collaboration Coming?". The Source. Saponara, Michael (May 7, 2019). "Justin Timberlake Hits the Studio With Anderson .Paak". billboard. Samuels, Keithan (August 7, 2019). "Brandy Hits the Studio With Pharrell and Justin Timberlake". Rated R&B. Shaffer, Claire (February 26, 2020). "Justin Timberlake, SZA Get Funky on 'The Other Side'". Rolling Stone. Kinane, Ruth (February 26, 2020). "Justin Timberlake and SZA Team Up for Uplifting Bop 'The Other Side' from Upcoming Trolls World Tour Movie". People. Lavin, Will (February 26, 2020). "Watch SZA and Justin Timberlake shine in video for new single 'The Other Side'". NME. Aniftos, Rania (March 6, 2020). "Justin Timberlake Announces Anderson .Paak Collaboration Release Date". Billboard. Roth, Madeline (March 10, 2020). "Justin Timberlake And Anderson .Paak Refuse To Hold Back On 'Don't Slack'". MTV News. Kaufman, Gil (September 29, 2020). "Whoa, What Are Justin Timberlake, Justin Bieber and Timbaland Cooking Up?". Billboard. Long, Danielle (September 30, 2020). "Justin Timberlake teases new music with producer Timbaland". Good Morning America. "Justin Timberlake spreads positivity with 'Better Days' release alongside Ant Clemons". The News International. December 6, 2020. "Justin Timberlake says it will be 'an honor' to perform at Biden inaugural special". Today. January 13, 2021. Retrieved June 11, 2022. Aderoju, Darlene. "Justin Timberlake Was 'Deeply Honored' to Sing 'Better Days' with Ant Clemons for Biden Inauguration". People. Retrieved June 11, 2022. Kaufman, Gil (January 21, 2021). "Justin Timberlake 'Deeply Honored' to Perform 'Better Days' During 'Celebrating America' Special". Billboard. Retrieved June 11, 2022. Ruggieri, Melissa; KRuggieri, Melissa (June 19, 2022). "Justin Timberlake, T.I. join Pharrell's Something in the Water festival, but serious crowd issues persist". USA Today. Retrieved June 20, 2022. Williams, Kyann-Sian (May 4, 2023). "Timbaland was inspired by an "Oompa Loompa" beat for Aaliyah's 'Are You That Somebody'". NME. Retrieved May 8, 2023. Schillaci, Sophie (January 22, 2024). "Justin Timberlake Debuts New Songs, Drops Everything I Thought It Was Trailer". Entertainment Tonight. Retrieved January 25, 2024. "Keep Going Up". Spotify. September 1, 2023. Retrieved September 18, 2023. Krol, Charlotte (September 1, 2023). "Listen to Timbaland, Justin Timberlake and Nelly Furtado reunite on 'Keep Going Up'". NME. Retrieved September 18, 2023. Conway, Jeff (September 1, 2023). "Timbaland On His New 'Keep Going Up' Single With Nelly Furtado And Justin Timberlake: 'We Created Magic'". Forbes. Retrieved September 18, 2023. "Romeo Santos & Justin Timberlake - Sin Fin". Qobuz. Denis, Kyle (July 14, 2023). "Coco Jones & Justin Timberlake Unite for 'ICU' Remix: Stream It Now". Billboard. Retrieved July 15, 2023. McIntyre, Hugh (November 24, 2023). "Jungkook Returns With New Justin Timberlake Collaboration. But…Why?". Forbes. Retrieved November 24, 2023. Bain, Katie (July 6, 2022). "Calvin Harris Reveals Release Date for New Collab With Halsey, Justin Timberlake & Pharrell". Billboard. Retrieved July 15, 2022. Cite error: The named reference memphis was invoked but never defined (see the help page). Zemler, Emily (January 26, 2024). "Justin Timberlake Announces World Tour, Performs With Classroom Instruments on 'Fallon'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved January 26, 2024. "Justin Timberlake Scores His Highest Hot 100 Debut in Six Years with 'Selfish'". Billboard. Strauss, Matthew (January 25, 2024). "Justin Timberlake Announces First Album Since 2018, Shares Video for New Song "Selfish": Watch". Pitchfork. Retrieved January 25, 2024. Zemler, Emily (January 26, 2024). "Justin Timberlake Announces World Tour, Performs With Classroom Instruments on 'Fallon'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved January 26, 2024. Wilson, Matthew (January 30, 2024). "Justin Timberlake Teases Major *NSYNC News With Kelly Clarkson, Autographs Teacher's Outrageous Life-Size Cutout". American Songwriter. Retrieved January 30, 2024. "Hanging out with the one and only Justin Timberlake today on Kelly, PLUS a big surprise for some young New Orleans musicians!". Twitter. January 30, 2024. Retrieved January 30, 2024. Sacher, Andrew (January 25, 2024). "Justin Timberlake details new album Everything I Thought It Was, shares "Selfish"". BrooklynVegan. Retrieved January 25, 2024. "2 minute clip The Graham Norton Show". February 23, 2024. Pilley, Max (February 23, 2024). "Justin Timberlake announces summer 2024 UK and European tour". NME. Retrieved February 23, 2024. Muir, Ellie (February 23, 2024). "Justin Timberlake abruptly cancels one-off London show". The Independent. Retrieved February 23, 2024. Madarang, Charisma (February 23, 2024). "Justin Timberlake Dives Into Heartbreak With New 'Drown' Track". Rolling Stone. Retrieved February 23, 2024. Denis, Kyle (February 23, 2024). "Justin Timberlake 'Drown'" Stream It Now". Billboard. Retrieved February 23, 2024. "Justin Timberlake - Drown". Spotify. February 23, 2024. Retrieved February 23, 2024. "Ariana Grande's 'Eternal Sunshine' Spends Second Week at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Chart". Billboard. March 26, 2024. Retrieved March 24, 2024. Leroy, Chris (February 11, 2024). "Justin Timberlake announces documentary on creation of 'Everything I Thought I Was'". The News International. Retrieved February 11, 2024. Sisti, Sara (March 15, 2024). "Justin Timberlake - No Angels (Radio Date: 15-03-2024)". EarOne (in Italian). Retrieved March 15, 2024. "Ariana Grande's 'Eternal Sunshine' Spends Second Week at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Chart". Billboard. March 24, 2024. Retrieved March 24, 2024. Kaufman, Gil (January 26, 2024). "Justin Timberlake Announces North American Dates for 2024 Forget Tomorrow World Tour". Billboard. Retrieved January 26, 2024. Pilley, Max (February 23, 2024). "Justin Timberlake announces summer 2024 UK and European tour". NME. Retrieved February 23, 2024. Smith, Sean (October 4, 2005). Justin: The Unauthorized Biography. Pocket Books. ISBN 1-4165-0773-6. "Britney Spears says she had abortion when dating Justin Timberlake". BBC News. October 17, 2023. Retrieved October 20, 2023. "Britney Spears and Justin Timberlake: Everytime video revisited following abortion news". BBC News. October 18, 2023. Retrieved October 21, 2023. "Justin Timberlake Beds Baby Spice". Contact Music. May 18, 2003. Archived from the original on January 31, 2017. Retrieved January 6, 2017. Dingwall, John. "WHEN TWO BECAME ONE AGAIN; When Emma Bunton started dating pop hunk Justin Timberlake it looked like the real thing.. now after dumping him for spilling the beans she reveals why she is happy to be on her own". The Free Library. Retrieved April 4, 2019. Nissim, Mayer (July 5, 2016). "Spice Girl Emma Bunton took time to forgive Geri - and still won't comment on that Justin Timberlake fling". Digital Spy. Retrieved April 4, 2019. "Timberlake, Diaz announce that they've split". The Hollywood Reporter. Associated Press. January 12, 2007. Fowler, Bella (December 1, 2019). "Inside Justin Timberlake and Jessica Biel's 2011 split". News.com.au. VINEYARD, JENNIFER (January 11, 2007). "JUSTIN TIMBERLAKE, CAMERON DIAZ OFFICIALLY ANNOUNCE BREAKUP". MTV News. "Justin Timberlake, Jessica Biel Engaged: Singer, Actress To Marry (Report)". HuffPost. January 4, 2012. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Donnelly, Matt (October 19, 2012). "Justin Timberlake-Jessica Biel wedding: 'It's great to be married'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 20, 2012. Deerwester, Jayme (April 11, 2015). "Timberlake, Biel welcome son Silas". USA Today. "Justin Timberlake and Jessica Biel Welcome Baby Son". Time. April 11, 2015. Leon, Anya (April 11, 2015). "Justin Timberlake and Jessica Biel Welcome Son Silas Randall". People. Archived from the original on April 11, 2015. Gifford, Storm (September 25, 2020). "Justin Timberlake and Jessica Biel welcome secret 2nd child, says Lance Bass". New York Daily News. Wong, Curtis M. (January 18, 2021). "Justin Timberlake Reveals He And Jessica Biel Welcomed A New Son, Phineas". HuffPost. Caamano, Andrea (January 18, 2021). "Justin Timberlake confirms second son's unique name – six months after his birth". Hello!. Ryon, Ruth (August 18, 2002). "TIMBERLAKE BUYS HOLLYWOOD HILLS HOME". Orlando Sentinel. Gould, Jennifer (November 14, 2018). "Justin Timberlake, Jessica Biel take a hit selling Soho penthouse". New York Post. David, Mark (January 3, 2019). "Justin Timberlake and Jessica Biel Lose Out on Sale of Lower Manhattan Penthouse". Variety. ALLEN, JOSEPH (April 8, 2020). "Where Is Justin Timberlake's House in Montana? Inside the Club He Calls Home". Distractify. WILKINS, BRIDIE (April 19, 2021). "Inside Jessica Biel and Justin Timberlake's family home at private ski resort". Hello!. Hall, Miriam (May 31, 2017). "Justin Timberlake pays $20M for PH at 443 Greenwich". The Real Deal. Rose, Lacey (September 22, 2008). "World's Best-Paid Music Stars". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 7, 2009. "The Celebrity 100 No. 12 Justin Timberlake". Forbes. June 11, 2008. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Amina, Khan (September 22, 2008). "World's Best-Paid Music Stars". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 13, 2014. "Music's Top 40 Money Makers 2014: The Rich List". Billboard. March 10, 2014. Archived from the original on March 15, 2014. "#26 Justin Timberlake". Forbes. June 2014. Archived from the original on October 16, 2014. "The World's Highest-Paid Celebrities 2015". Forbes. June 29, 2015. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015. "Billboard Money-Makers List: Music's Top Earners of 2014". Billboard. May 1, 2015. Archived from the original on May 3, 2015. "The World's Highest-Paid Entertainers 2019". Forbes. Kierans, Katie; Hughes, Catriona (July 10, 2013). "Justin's bringing sexy back". Daily Mirror. Archived from the original on March 2, 2014. "10 Awesome Things About Justin Timberlake". Paste. January 31, 2013. Archived from the original on May 11, 2016. Cinquemani, Sal (November 8, 2002). "Justin Timberlake: Justified". Slant Magazine. Archived from the original on April 8, 2012. Stewart, Allison (September 12, 2006). "Justin Timberlake, More Purr Than Growl". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 8, 2012. "The 25 Best Justin Timberlake Songs". Complex. March 15, 2013. Archived from the original on October 27, 2017. Retrieved June 18, 2017. "Justin Timberlake: Suffering helped me write". The Times of India. January 27, 2017. Retrieved June 25, 2017. Strecker, Erin (January 31, 2015). "Happy Birthday, Justin Timberlake: 5 Great Performances". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 16, 2015. Retrieved May 24, 2015. Kaufman, Gil (August 25, 2013). "Justin Timberlake Caps VMA Medley With 'NSYNC Reunion". MTV. Archived from the original on June 30, 2015. Retrieved May 24, 2015. Newman, Jason (July 11, 2014). "Justin Timberlake's Intimate NYC Show: 5 Things We Learned". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 7, 2015. Retrieved May 24, 2015. Rogiers, Katie (November 5, 2015). "Justin Timberlake Shows Crossover Appeal at C.M.A. Awards". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. "Timberlake in Sync With '60s Sounds on His Solo Debut". Billboard. Vol. 114. 2003. p. 73. ISSN 0006-2510. Archived from the original on February 7, 2018. Retrieved May 18, 2012. Long, Camilla (July 16, 2006). "'I'm bringing back sexy'". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on March 4, 2014. M. Silverman, Stephen (June 19, 2003). "Critics Dump on Justin and Christina". People. Archived from the original on September 22, 2013. Retrieved September 21, 2013. Vineyard 2006. Moss, Corey (January 5, 2006). "Don't Expect Justified 2: Timberlake Enlists Rick Rubin For New LP". MTV News. Archived from the original on October 28, 2009. Collis 2007, p. 1. Scaggs, Austin (September 21, 2006). "Justin Timberlake Revs Up His Sex Machine". Rolling Stone. Retrieved June 18, 2023. Vineyard, Jennifer (July 6, 2006). "'Back' In Style: Justin Timberlake Mixes Funk, Rock On New Single". MTV News. Archived from the original on November 8, 2012. Moss, Corey. "Justin's Future Shock". MTV News. Viacom. p. 1. Archived from the original on July 3, 2007. Retrieved January 8, 2013. Scaggs 2006, p. 4. Tucker, Ken (March 19, 2013). "Justin Timberlake Returns To Music With Enthusiasm and 'Experience'". NPR. Archived from the original on March 20, 2013. Retrieved March 19, 2013. Wood, Mikael (March 14, 2013). "Album review: Justin Timberlake's 'The 20/20 Experience'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 14, 2013. "Jay-Z and Justin Timberlake Announce 'Legends of the Summer' Tour Dates". Rap-Up. Devine Lazerine. Retrieved February 22, 2013. Wray, Daniel (March 31, 2014). "Justin Timberlake, The 20/20 Experience Tour, review". The Independent. Archived from the original on December 21, 2014. Retrieved December 16, 2014. "Justin Timberlake Goes Country, Brings Down the House With Chris Stapleton Duet | Entertainment Tonight". www.etonline.com. November 4, 2015. Retrieved June 18, 2023. Sinclair, Kyle; Saeed, Saeed (May 23, 2014). "Justin Timberlake wows 20,000-strong crowd at Abu Dhabi's du Arena". The National. Retrieved June 18, 2023. "Justin Timberlake Fashion Evolution". Billboard. March 18, 2013. Archived from the original on September 8, 2015. Retrieved May 6, 2015. Phili, Stelios (March 18, 2013). "Celebrity Style Evolution: Justin Timberlake". GQ Magazine. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved May 6, 2015. Saunders, Nicole (September 8, 2016). "Justin Timberlake Discusses Tennessee Roots in New William Rast Promo Video". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 10, 2016. Retrieved September 9, 2016. Glein, Kelsey (November 8, 2013). "Tom Ford Designed 600 Pieces For Justin Timberlake's 20/20 Experience World Tour". inStyle. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved May 6, 2015. Michel, Sia (February 9, 2007). "He's Bringing Commitment Back (and Not in a Box)". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 22, 2018. Michel, Sia (February 9, 2007). "He's Bringing Commitment Back (and Not in a Box)". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 5, 2015. "Sean Parker is a fan of Justin Timberlake's body - of work - but only in film, not song". Daily News. New York. October 26, 2010. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved May 6, 2015. "2015 Nielsen Music U.S. Report" (PDF). Nielsen. January 6, 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 30, 2019. Retrieved January 6, 2016. "Justin Timberlake's co-star confirms the Trousersnake is very well-endowed". Metro. June 30, 2018. Heaf, Jonathan (September 3, 2012). "2006: Justin Timberlake". British GQ. Archived from the original on July 9, 2021. "'I'm bringing back sexy'". The Guardian. July 16, 2006. "Music Stars' Wax Figures: Beyonce, Ariana Grande, Britney Spears & More". Billboard. May 7, 2015. "Stock Photo - LAS VEGAS - OCT 23 : A waxwork of Justin Timberlake at The Madame Tussauds museum in Las Vegas on October 23 2015, The two-floor 30,000-square-foot museum has 100-plus wax replicas". 123RF. "Madame Tussauds Hollywood". Frommer's. Paulson, Dave (April 14, 2017). "Here's your first look at Madame Tussauds Nashville". The Tennessean. "Justin Timberlake's wax figure at Madame Tussauds Berlin". Madame Tussauds. Retrieved September 19, 2015.[permanent dead link] "Justin Timberlake's wax figure at Madame Tussauds Amsterdam". Madame Tussauds. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved May 6, 2015. "Justin Timberlake's wax figure at Madame Tussauds London". Madame Tussauds. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved May 6, 2015. Levere, Jane (May 30, 2015). "Live From New York, It's 'Saturday Night Live: The Exhibition'!". Forbes. Archived from the original on September 18, 2015. Retrieved September 17, 2015. Roth, Madeline (August 25, 2015). "5 Times Justin Timberlake And Jessica Biel Were Inspiring LGBT Allies". MTV. Archived from the original on August 26, 2015. Retrieved August 25, 2015. Kinser, Jeremy (July 25, 2015). "Justin and Mila: More Than Just Friends". Advocate. Archived from the original on August 30, 2015. Retrieved August 25, 2015. Romano, Aja (May 1, 2017). "'It's Gonna Be May': how a silly internet meme co-opted May Day". Vox. Archived from the original on May 14, 2020. Retrieved April 30, 2020. Grossman, Samantha (April 30, 2015). "Let Justin Timberlake Remind You That 'It's Gonna Be May'". Time. Archived from the original on February 15, 2017. Retrieved November 29, 2019. Holmes, Sally (May 1, 2014). "Great Thing of the Day: Barack Obama Has Out-Memed Us All". Elle. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved November 29, 2019. Lowary, Jake (April 13, 2017). "Justin Timberlake selfie bill gets OK from Tennessee Senate". The Tennessean. Retrieved April 17, 2017. Tom, Lauren (April 18, 2017). "Voting Selfies Are Now Legal in Tennessee, Thanks to Justin Timberlake". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 19, 2017. Retrieved April 18, 2017. "We should all be supporting Britney". CBS News. Retrieved July 26, 2021. "What we learned from 'Framing Britney Spears'". NME. February 17, 2021. Retrieved April 14, 2021. "'I am deeply sorry': Justin Timberlake apologises to Britney Spears and Janet Jackson". The Guardian. February 12, 2021. Retrieved April 14, 2021. "Stylist Claims Justin Timberlake 'Wanted a Reveal' During Janet Jackson Super Bowl Performance". Complex. Retrieved April 14, 2021. Bonner, Mehera (April 12, 2021). "Stylist Says Justin Timberlake Set Up Janet Jackson's "Wardrobe Malfunction" to One-Up Britney Spears at VMAs". Cosmopolitan. Retrieved April 14, 2021. "New Claims From Stylist Detail How Justin Timberlake Was Allegedly Responsible For Janet Jackson Wardrobe Malfunction". CINEMABLEND. April 12, 2021. Retrieved April 14, 2021. "Nipplegate Revisited". USA Today. Retrieved July 26, 2021. "BWW Asks: Was Justin Timberlake's Marathon Medley Best VMA Performance Ever?". Broadway World. August 26, 2013. Archived from the original on December 6, 2014. Retrieved November 29, 2014. "Justin Timberlake Performing at VMAs, Getting Vanguard Award". Rolling Stone. August 15, 2013. Archived from the original on September 25, 2015. Retrieved September 24, 2015. Long, Camilla (July 6, 2006). "'I'm bringing back sexy'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved March 1, 2016. Feinberg, Scott (December 22, 2016). "'Awards Chatter' Podcast – Justin Timberlake ('Trolls')". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 25, 2016. Retrieved December 6, 2019. "10 Best Albums of the Decade". Entertainment Weekly. December 17, 2009. Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved March 2, 2016. "The Greatest 50 Albums Since '93". Vibe. April 18, 2013. Archived from the original on April 27, 2016. Retrieved April 6, 2016. Lipshutz, Jason (January 26, 2016). "The Greatest Achievement of Justin Timberlake's 'FutureSex/LoveSounds'". Fuse. Archived from the original on February 15, 2016. Retrieved February 11, 2016. "Michael Jackson, the Beatles, Bob Dylan, Led Zeppelin and the Rolling Stones Top VH1's '100 Greatest Music Artists of All Time' List" (Press release). New York. PR Newswire. August 25, 2010. Archived from the original on August 28, 2010. Retrieved October 26, 2010. Timbaland (May 3, 2007). "Justin Timberlake – The 2007 TIME 100". Time. Archived from the original on April 11, 2015. Wonder, Stevie (April 18, 2013). "Justin Timberlake – The 2013 TIME 100". Time. Archived from the original on December 25, 2014. Retrieved December 13, 2014. "500 Greatest Songs of All the Time: Justin Timberlake, 'Cry Me a River'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 11, 2012. Retrieved May 16, 2012. "100 Best Songs of the 2000s: Justin Timberlake, 'Cry Me a River'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 24, 2012. Retrieved May 16, 2012. "Marilyn Manson: The Music That Made Me". Rolling Stone. May 8, 2015. Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. Retrieved May 15, 2015. "Marilyn Manson: Timberlake is dark". The Belfast Telegraph. May 8, 2015. Retrieved May 15, 2015. Lipshutz, Jason (September 19, 2013). "Why 'Wrecking Ball' Is Miley Cyrus' 'Cry Me A River' (Opinion)". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 17, 2016. Retrieved April 22, 2016. "Justin Timberlake, 'FutureSex/LoveSounds'". Rolling Stone. July 18, 2011. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved September 1, 2011. Goodman, Jessica (July 8, 2016). "Justin Timberlake explains how David Bowie influenced 'SexyBack'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 9, 2016. Retrieved July 9, 2016. Craddock, Lauren (July 8, 2016). "How David Bowie Inspired Justin Timberlake's 'SexyBack'". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 8, 2016. Retrieved July 9, 2016. Moss, Corey (October 24, 2006). "Sick Of 'SexyBack'? YouTube Has The Guy Who's Bringing Sweaty Back". MTV News. Archived from the original on November 8, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2011. Heaf, Jonathan (April 21, 2011). "2006: Justin Timberlake". GQ. Archived from the original on November 22, 2015. Retrieved October 28, 2015. "Justin Bieber's Next Album Inspired By Justin Timberlake". MTV. October 19, 2011. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. "mtv meets: shawn mendes". MTV. September 2, 2014. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. "Olly Murs: The music that made me - Kings of Leon, Justin Timberlake". Digital Spy. November 28, 2014. Archived from the original on September 14, 2017. Retrieved May 23, 2017. "Artist Influences for Maroon 5". MTV. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2015. Cava, Marco (December 29, 2013). "Who inspires Britney? Beyonce, Bruno and her ex JT". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 5, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. "Lorde Rocks Straight Hair During Grammys 2014 "Royals" Performance: Picture". Yahoo!. January 26, 2014. Archived from the original on April 4, 2016. Retrieved March 23, 2016. "Joe Jonas Covers 'Paper' And Discusses Bono, Justin Timberlake Inspirations". Idolator. June 22, 2011. Retrieved May 24, 2017. Herrera, Dave (October 3, 2015). "Country singer Rhett draws inspiration from pop stars". Las Vegas Review-Journal. Archived from the original on September 14, 2017. Retrieved June 20, 2017. Lipshutz, Jason (April 9, 2014). "Ed Sheeran Shares 'x' Track List". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 2, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. "Jason Derulo: 'I want to be legendary. I want to go down in history.'". virgin.com. May 4, 2014. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. "Tori Kelly keeping it real with her fans". nsnews.com. September 28, 2012. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. "One Direction's Liam Payne on Bumping into Justin Timberlake at the BRITs 2013". Capital FM. Global Radio. February 20, 2013. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. "One Direction... a duffer's guide to pop sensations". The Journal. May 27, 2014. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. "Exclusive! We chat to the Disney star about 1D, JT and Britney". MTV. June 20, 2009. Archived from the original on October 17, 2013. Retrieved May 4, 2015. "Hunter Hayes Previews Wheels Up Tour, Cites Justin Timberlake & Punch Brothers as Influences". radio.com. May 1, 2015. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved November 17, 2004. "BoA's profile" (in Japanese). Avex Marketing Inc. Archived from the original on February 11, 2010. Retrieved August 30, 2008. 빅뱅 화보. Vogue Korea (in Korean). July 1, 2009. Archived from the original on May 11, 2017. Retrieved May 23, 2017. 빅뱅家의 남자들- 승리와의 인터뷰. GQ Korea (in Korean). March 25, 2011. Archived from the original on September 14, 2017. Retrieved May 23, 2017. "29 fun facts about BIGBANG birthday boy Taeyang". SBS. May 18, 2017. Archived from the original on May 24, 2017. Retrieved May 23, 2017. Jung, Sun (November 1, 2010). Korean Masculinities and Transcultural Consumption. Hong Kong University Press. ISBN 9789888028665. Retrieved May 23, 2017. "Rain to keep Staples date". Los Angeles Times. June 15, 2007. Archived from the original on September 27, 2015. Retrieved May 23, 2017. "Lloyd Banks Influenced By Lady Gaga, Justin Timberlake on Next Album". MTV. March 25, 2010. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. Herrera Mulligan, Michelle (April 20, 2017). "Reggaeton's Sexiest Star Maluma on Crossover Dreams (Hola Justin Timberlake!) and Struggling With Fame". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 19, 2017. Retrieved May 23, 2017. Stern, Bradley (November 2, 2018). "Rosalía, the Voice of the Past and the Future". Paper. Retrieved November 19, 2018. "BTS Is Back: Music's Billion-Dollar Boy Band Takes the Next Step (Featured video)". The Hollywood Reporter. October 2, 2019. Retrieved January 25, 2020. Roth, Madeline (October 27, 2015). "Justin Bieber compares his musical transformation to Justin Timberlake". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 17, 2016. Retrieved June 7, 2016. "Nick Jonas". Rolling Stone. January 26, 2015. Archived from the original on May 19, 2015. Retrieved May 6, 2015. Evans Price, Deborah (August 24, 2015). "Christian Rapper TobyMac Dishes on Staying Relevant at 50 and Why He's Inspired By Justin Timberlake". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 28, 2015. Retrieved August 24, 2015. Spanos, Brittany (March 30, 2016). "How Do Ex-Boy Band Stars Stack Up?". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 30, 2016. Retrieved March 30, 2016. Blacklow, Jeremy (May 12, 2017). "The Top 15 Former Boy-Bander Solo Debuts". Variety. Archived from the original on July 31, 2017. Retrieved May 23, 2017. Sackllah, David (March 25, 2016). "Zayn – Mind of Mine". Consequence of Sound. Retrieved January 19, 2018. "Latest Album Reviews: Zayn, The Last Shadow Puppets, Charles Bradley, Club Cheval & Pet Shop Boys". news.com.au. March 30, 2016. Retrieved January 19, 2018. Smith, Troy L. (May 12, 2017). "Justin Timberlake to Harry Styles: 18 boy-band solo debuts ranked". Cleveland.com. Retrieved July 12, 2017. "Is Justin Timberlake the Best Male Pop Star of the 21st Century? (Staff Debate)". Billboard. February 1, 2018. Archived from the original on February 7, 2018. Retrieved February 1, 2018. Murgue, Hermance (February 4, 2018). "Super Bowl 2018: depuis le "nipplegate", les mille et unes vies de Justin Timberlake". L'Express. Archived from the original on February 4, 2018. Retrieved February 6, 2018. "Justin Timberlake". National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. "Justin Timberlake". Television Academy - Emmy. Archived from the original on February 26, 2014. Retrieved July 26, 2014. Johnson, Zach (March 16, 2015). "Justin Timberlake To Be Honored With Innovator Award at 2015 iHeartRadio Music Awards". iHeartRadio. Archived from the original on March 18, 2015. Retrieved March 17, 2015. "Justin Timberlake to Accept Decade Award at Teen Choice 2016". FOX. July 6, 2016. Archived from the original on October 14, 2016. Retrieved July 6, 2016. "Justin Timberlake Sings Otis Redding, Gives Speech at Memphis Music Hall of Fame: Watch". Billboard. October 18, 2015. Archived from the original on October 19, 2015. Retrieved October 18, 2015. Mehr, Bob (August 21, 2015). "Justin Timberlake, Sam & Dave among Memphis Music Hall of Fame's class of 2015". Commercial Appeal. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved August 26, 2015. Angermiller, Michele (April 30, 2018). "*NSYNC Reunites to Receive Hollywood Walk of Fame Star (Watch)". Variety. Retrieved April 30, 2018. "Justin Timberlake Tapped by Songwriters Hall of Fame for Icon Award". Variety. May 8, 2019. Kaplan, Ilana (May 12, 2019). "Justin Timberlake, Missy Elliott Receive Honorary Doctorate Degrees". Rolling Stone. Kaufman, Gil (June 21, 2012). "Justin Vs. Justin: Can Bieber Take Timberlake's Crown?". MTV. Archived from the original on January 7, 2015. Retrieved December 26, 2014. "The Evolution Of: Justin Timberlake". MTV. Archived from the original on November 8, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2011. "JT 6m plaque". HITS Digital Ventures. July 14, 2014. Archived from the original on April 19, 2016. Retrieved April 7, 2016. Grein, Paul (June 18, 2014). "Chart Watch: PSY & Snoop Attack Your Brain Cells". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on July 15, 2014. Retrieved June 19, 2014. Grein, Paul (July 18, 2012). "Week Ending July 15, 2012. Songs: Blow Me (One More Hit)". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on October 20, 2013. Retrieved July 18, 2012. Grein, Paul (March 26, 2014). "Chart Watch: Two Movie Songs In Top 5". Yahoo Music. Archived from the original on March 30, 2014. Retrieved March 30, 2014. Grein, Paul (October 23, 2013). "Week Ending Oct. 20, 2013. Songs: Women In Charge". Chart Watch. Archived from the original on October 25, 2013. Retrieved October 26, 2013. "Chart Watch: 'Despacito' Ties One Record, Eyes Another". Yahoo! Music. June 13, 2017. Archived from the original on June 13, 2017. Retrieved June 13, 2017. Waddell, Ray (December 13, 2007). "The Police Score Top-Grossing Tour Of '07". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 3, 2013. Retrieved December 14, 2008. "Live Music's $20 Billion Year: Rolling Stones, One Direction, Live Nation Top Boxscore's Year-End". Billboard. December 12, 2014. Archived from the original on February 5, 2016. Retrieved December 12, 2014. "iTunes Lists Best-Sellers, Names Justin Timberlake Artist of the Year, Lorde Best Song". Billboard. December 17, 2013. Archived from the original on February 9, 2015. Retrieved November 29, 2014. "Here Are All 41 Hot 100 No. 1 Hits Nominated for Best Original Song at the Oscars". Billboard. January 31, 2017. Retrieved May 15, 2018. "Billboard 200 Artists". Billboard. December 17, 2013. Archived from the original on December 28, 2014. Retrieved December 9, 2014. "Billboard 200 Albums". Billboard. December 17, 2013. Archived from the original on December 12, 2014. Retrieved December 9, 2014. "Top Artists - Male". Billboard. December 9, 2014. Archived from the original on December 27, 2014. Retrieved December 9, 2014. "Greatest of All Time Pop Songs Artists". Billboard. October 19, 2017. Retrieved October 19, 2017. "Hot 100 Turns 60! The Top 60 Male Artists of All-Time, From Elton John to Elvis Presley & More". Billboard. August 2, 2018. Retrieved October 4, 2018. "The Hot 100's Top Artists of All Time". Billboard. August 2, 2018. Retrieved October 4, 2018. "Top Artists - Decade-End". Billboard. "Greatest of All Time Artists Chart". Billboard. Corcoran, Monica (December 28, 2003). "Boîte; Where's Timberlake?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 19, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2014. "Pecan Pie Recipe From Justin Timberlake's Granny Sadie". ABC News. Archived from the original on June 17, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2008. Freydkin, Donna (October 13, 2006). "Timberlake's gear on racks, runway". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 9, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2008. "Not Just a Pretty Face". entrepreneur.com. November 17, 2008. Archived from the original on December 18, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2014. "Justin Timberlake's Fashion Line Coming to Target". Billboard. September 14, 2009. Archived from the original on February 18, 2013. Retrieved September 6, 2010. "Justin Timberlake, Meryl Streep Stole the Show at FGI's Night of Stars". The Observer. October 23, 2015. Archived from the original on October 24, 2015. Retrieved October 24, 2015. "Justin Timberlake reopens eco-friendly course in Memphis". Golf Magazine. September 10, 2010. Archived from the original on December 18, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2014. Miller, Gerri (October 19, 2011). "Environmental Media Awards honor Justin Timberlake". MNM. Archived from the original on October 22, 2011. Retrieved October 23, 2011. "Justin Timberlake sells Memphis course for $500K". Golfweek. November 7, 2014. Archived from the original on November 10, 2014. Retrieved May 5, 2015. Yotka, Steff (September 27, 2018). "Justin Timberlake Debuts a Levi's Collaboration That Is Really "Just Justin"". Vogue. Retrieved October 4, 2018. Riddle, Lyn (November 23, 2022). "Justin Timberlake invests in old SC golf course". The State. Retrieved November 24, 2022. "Justin Timberlake signs with IMG for endorsement representation". Retrieved December 19, 2009. "Peyton Manning, Justin Timberlake And Others in New Sony Commercial/". Sonyinsider.com. Archived from the original on December 7, 2009. Retrieved December 21, 2009. Bullock, Maggie (August 27, 2009). "Justin Timberlake for Givenchy Fragrance". Elle. Archived from the original on August 30, 2009. "Audi Picks Justin Timberlake As New Brand Ambassador". December 16, 2009. Archived from the original on January 3, 2013. Retrieved December 19, 2009. Szalai, Georg (January 24, 2012). "Justin Timberlake, Golf Equipment Maker Callaway to Launch New Ad Campaign". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 6, 2015. Retrieved December 18, 2014. "Justin Timberlake's Fashion Line Coming to Target". Billboard. September 14, 2009. Archived from the original on February 18, 2013. Retrieved September 30, 2010. Nakashima, Ryan (June 29, 2011). "Justin Timberlake part of group buying MySpace". Yahoo Finance. Archived from the original on July 5, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2011. Blackden, Richard (June 30, 2011). "MySpace sold to Justin Timberlake-backed ad agency by News Corp". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on July 1, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2011. "Video: Justin Timberlake in Capital One Cup ESPYs commercial". July 8, 2011. "Justin Timberlake Dons Hawaiian Skirt, Lei at Walmart Shareholders' Meeting". June 1, 2012. Archived from the original on December 18, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2014. Intelligencer/Posts, New York magazine, June 11–18, 2012, p. 20 Buli, Liv (January 11, 2014). "That's The Spirit: Justin Timberlake Takes On Tequila". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved May 4, 2015. "Justin Timberlake Invests in Beverage Startup Bai Brands". Fortune. October 20, 2016. Archived from the original on November 4, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016. "Justin Timberlake, Tiger Woods invest together in future of junior golf". CBS. February 19, 2017. Archived from the original on March 20, 2017. Stukenborg, Phil (November 24, 2012). "LA Lakers at Memphie Grizzlies recap". National Basketball Association. Archived from the original on December 23, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2014. "Justin Timberlake doesn't like being called a bandwagon Griz fan". November 18, 2014. Ciment, Shoshy. "Here are the most expensive Air Jordans to sell on StockX and Stadium Goods, where rare pairs have gone for as much as $20,000". Business Insider. Retrieved September 5, 2021. "Nike Air Jordan 3 Justin Timberlake Tinker Hatfield Collaboration". Nike, Inc. Retrieved September 5, 2021. Bain, Marc (February 5, 2018). "Justin Timberlake scored a Super Bowl win for Nike". Quartz. Retrieved September 5, 2021. "Justin Timberlake Is Bringing Jordan Brand Back". Complex. Retrieved September 5, 2021. "Justin Timberlake Air Jordan 3 JTH Superbowl LII 52 Halftime Performance". Sneaker News. February 5, 2018. Retrieved September 5, 2021. "Justin Timberlake Has Another Air Jordan". GQ. August 24, 2018. Retrieved September 5, 2021. Korn, Jennifer (May 26, 2022). "Justin Timberlake sells his entire music catalog". CNN. Retrieved June 11, 2022. Millman, Ethan (May 26, 2022). "Justin Timberlake Says Bye Bye Bye, Sells Entire Song Catalog". Rolling Stone. Retrieved June 11, 2022. Ahmed, Yasmin (May 27, 2022). "Justin Timberlake net worth: Singer's fortune explored as he sells music catalogue for $100 million". www.sportskeeda.com. Retrieved June 11, 2022. "Justin Timberlake's Charity Work, Events and Causes". Looktothestars.org. Archived from the original on February 1, 2010. Retrieved January 2, 2010. "Justin Timberlake". Askmen.com. April 22, 2008. Archived from the original on May 12, 2007. "Justin Timberlake donates $100k to Australia Zoo". October 28, 2007. Archived from the original on December 18, 2014. Retrieved December 17, 2014. Mock, Janet (April 24, 2008). "Justin Timberlake Donates $200,000 to His Hometown". People. Archived from the original on December 18, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2014. "Timberlake to host PGA Tour's Las Vegas event in '08". ESPN. November 12, 2007. Archived from the original on November 14, 2007. Retrieved November 13, 2007. "Justin Timberlake to host Las Vegas PGA TOUR event in 2008" (Press release). PGA Tour. November 12, 2007. Archived from the original on December 18, 2014. Retrieved November 13, 2007. "The Celebrity Impact Rankings". The Daily Beast. December 16, 2009. Archived from the original on December 18, 2014. Retrieved December 18, 2014. "Justin Timberlake won't return for 2013 Las Vegas golf tournament" (Press release). sbnation.com. October 3, 2012. Archived from the original on December 20, 2014. Retrieved December 17, 2014. "Justin Timberlake to compete in 2017 Lake Tahoe ACC celebrity golf tournament". Tahoe Daily Tribune. Archived from the original on June 9, 2017. Retrieved June 8, 2017. "Justin Timberlake saves the day at AT&T Pebble Beach". PGA Tour. September 2, 2016. Archived from the original on March 13, 2017. Retrieved June 8, 2017. "The Charity". America Century Championship. Archived from the original on June 24, 2017. Retrieved June 8, 2017. "Charities We Support". AT&T Pebble Beach Pro-Am. Archived from the original on July 4, 2017. Retrieved June 8, 2017. "Musicians Step Up for Hurricane Sandy Relief". Rolling Stone. November 15, 2012. Archived from the original on July 15, 2015. Retrieved October 18, 2015. "Justin Timberlake in Sync with Kids' Charity". People. September 28, 2009. Archived from the original on March 15, 2016. "Musicares Announce 5th Annual GRAMMY Charity Black Friday Online Auction". Broadway World. November 29, 2013. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 18, 2017. "Justin Timberlake's "Hallelujah" Is The Most Downloaded From 'Hope For Haiti'". Idolator. January 25, 2010. Retrieved November 18, 2017. "Black Eyed Peas Reunite for Anti-Gun Violence Song". Billboard. August 31, 2016. Archived from the original on September 2, 2016. Retrieved September 1, 2016. "Eminem and Justin Timberlake Help Raise Over $2 Million for Manchester Attack Victims". Complex. May 27, 2017. Archived from the original on June 2, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2017. "Justin Timberlake has written his first book". Digital Spy. August 12, 2018. Retrieved August 14, 2018. "Justin Timberlake wrote his first book, 'Hindsight,' and it's coming out this year". Entertainment Weekly. August 11, 2018. Retrieved August 14, 2018. Media related to Justin Timberlake at Wikimedia Commons Official website Justin Timberlake at AllMusic Justin Timberlake at IMDb Portals:  Biography  Pop music  R&B and Soul Music  Television  Film  United States Justin Timberlake at Wikipedia's sister projects: Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata