|date=July 2014}} The Nerodimka (Serbian Cyrillic: Неродимка, Albanian: Nerodimja or Nerodime) is a river in the Nerodime region of Kosovo, a 41 km-long left tributary to the Lepenc river. It represents Europe's only instance of a river bifurcation flowing into two seas, dividing into two irreversible branches. The left branch flows into the Black Sea, and the right branch flows into the Aegean Sea. For other cases see List of unusual drainage systems. The Nerodimka river rises as Golema Reka in the Nerodimka mountain and is formed by the two main tributaries, Golema (Velika) Reka and Mala Reka. They join near the village of Nerodime e Epërme (Gornje Nerodimlje). From there it flows west-east direction, and the basin bifurcation occurs at the outskirts of Ferizaj. The northern branch drains into the Sitnica river and via the Iber, Morava and Danube ultimately into the Black Sea, while the main, southern branch, joins with another branch of the Nerodimka river and together continue the journey to the Aegean Sea via the Lepenc and Vardar rivers. After the major settlement of southern Kosovo, the town of Ferizaj, the Nerodimka turns south and flows next to the villages of Varosh, Komoglava, Kacanik, Stagovo and Runjevo, before it reaches the town of Kacanik and empties into the Lepenec river. The bifurcation is actually an artificial phenomenon, as the connection was achieved by digging an artificial canal, but the downstream water flow is still natural.[failed verification] In the 14th century, during the reign of king Milutin, a canal connecting the Sazlia pond and the river Nerodimka was dug, creating an artificial bifurcation,[citation needed] since the Nerodimka flows to the south into the Lepenec river and thus belongs to the Aegean Sea drainage basin, while the Sitnica (which is an outflow of the Sazlia) flows to the north, into the Iber river and belongs to the Black Sea drainage basin. After World War II, the canal was covered with earth again as it was previously mudded as a result of the lack of maintenance.[citation needed] These water flows have separate impact in annual temperatures of this region. The average annual temperature is 9.9 °C. Warmest months are July and August, with average temperature 18.9 °C. The coldest month is January, with an average temperature -2.6 °C. Maximum air temperature is 32.5 °C in July, while the minimum -14.0 °C in January. Atmospheric precipitation also plays a role of abundance water in Nerodimka river. The average of rainfalls for every month is 73.3 mm. Months with the most rainfalls are April–May, 105.6 mm, while at least August with 42.2 mm.[citation needed] The bifurcation of Nerodimka has been under state protection since 1979, and it is declared as a strict wildlife sanctuary, first category according to (IUCN) The official emblem of the municipality of Ferizaj contains the visual representation of the Nerodimka river bifurcation. This phenomenon is attractive for researchers and visitors and has great importance to education, science and tourism.[citation needed] The western part of the city offers ideal conditions for the formation of public green spaces (parks), for the development of tourism and recreation. Branch of Nerodimka River enters within the city, extensive recreational area that is also available to residents of Ferizaj bifurcation area, waterfall and the merger of the two rivers. The NNerodimka rodime drains an area of 229 km2 (88 sq mi) itself, and it is not navigable. Strategy for Local Economic Development 2005-2007 (PDF). Ferizaj Municipality. 2005. p. 8. Vlašković, Zoran (27 May 2013). ""Осавремењена" бифуркација Неродимке" ["Modernized" Bifurcation of Nerodimka] (in Serbian). Fond Slobodan Jovanović. Archived from the original on 6 January 2015. Retrieved 5 January 2015. Report on the State of Nature (PDF). Kosova Environmental Protection Agency. 2010. p. 17. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 January 2022. Retrieved 22 December 2022. Gashi, Gani. Hydrological heritage in the system of natural values and its protection in Kosova. Municipality of Ferizaj (December 2008). Urban Development Plan of Ferizaj (PDF). Instituti I Kosoves per mrbojiten e natyres (2005). Values of Nature Legacy of Kosovo (PDF). Pristina.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nerodimka (river). The video showing the phenomena Protected and Proposed Hydro Monuments in Kosovo[permanent dead link] One river flowing into two seas, GBTimes Serbia / Nacionalna revija Srbija