Tuzla is a municipality and district of Istanbul Province, Turkey. It has a population of 288,878 (2022) and a land area of 138 km2 . It is on the Asian side of the city next to the municipality of Pendik. Tuzla is on a headland on the coast of Marmara Sea, at the eastern limit of the city. The mayor is Şadi Yazıcı (AKP). The Greek name for the headland was Akritas (Ακρίτας). During the reign of the Ottoman Empire, a majority of inhabitants of Tuzla were Greek farmers and fishermen. The local Greek population of Tuzla was exchanged with the Turkish population of Salonica, Kavala and Drama during the population exchange between Greece and Turkey following the Treaty of Lausanne and the foundation of the Turkish Republic in 1923. There are 17 neighbourhoods in Tuzla District: Akfırat Anadolu Aydınlı Aydıntepe Cami Evliya Çelebi Fatih İçmeler İstasyon Mescit Mimar Sinan Orhanlı Orta Postane Şifa Tepeören Yayla While fishing boats are still present in Tuzla today, by the end of the 1980s, fishing had been largely overtaken by industrial services, particularly shipbuilding; the shipyards of Tuzla remain active. Farming continues to be prevalent around the inland parts of Tuzla. Tuzla is most well known for its seafront and its abundance of fish restaurants. It is also a popular location for wealthy or retired residents of Istanbul to move into houses that are further away from the cityside. Travelling to Kadıköy from Tuzla by public transport takes around 40 minutes to an hour, while the European side transit hubs of Eminönü and Beşiktaş are another 30 minutes away by ferry. The local birdlife is primarily sustained by the wetland from the coast, which has since largely deteriorated due to the accelerating growth of the city as well as environmental product dumping by factories. To this day, environmental pollution remains a prevalent issue in Tuzla. Frequent deaths of shipyard workers have become a common occurrence in Tuzla as of recent. This has led to criticism of the government for their lack of control of illegal employment and inaction in regards to companies and improving their working conditions. In February and March 2008, thousands of workers went on strike for better wages and conditions. The police intervened in the demonstrations, and 86 workers were taken into police custody, 15 of them injured. Tuzla Tuzla Aluminum Factory Residential building in Tuzla Residential buildings in Tuzla Residential buildings in Tuzla Residential buildings in Tuzla Tuzla coastline Atakan Demirseren Hall at Koç School Koç School Pool Complex Sabancı University Campus Tuzla experiences a warm-summer Mediterranean climate (Csb/Cs) according to both Köppen and Trewartha climate classifications, with cool winters and warm summers. Located far away from the city's urban heat island, its nights are colder than districts inside the city; Tuzla's climate is often thought to be southern Istanbul's pre-urbanized climate. It is in USDA hardiness zone 8b with pockets of 8a, and in AHS heat zone 4. ITU School of Maritime Koç School Okan University Piri Reis University Sabancı University School of Infantry (Piyade Okulu) Turkish Naval Academy Istanbul Park Racing Circuit The mayor of Tuzla during the 1990s was İdris Güllüce, a leading figure in the conservative Justice and Development Party (AK Party). "Address-based population registration system (ADNKS) results dated 31 December 2022, Favorite Reports" (XLS). TÜİK. Retrieved 12 July 2023. Büyükşehir İlçe Belediyesi, Turkey Civil Administration Departments Inventory. Retrieved 12 July 2023. Mahalle, Turkey Civil Administration Departments Inventory. Retrieved 12 July 2023. "Bitki Soğuğa ve Sıcağa Dayanıklılık". www.mgm.gov.tr. Retrieved 2021-04-28. "Balçık - Weather History & Climate Data - Meteostat". meteostat.net. Retrieved 2021-06-23. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tuzla, Istanbul. Sabancı University Local Newspaper: Tuzla Gazetesi (Tuzla Haberleri) www.tuzlagazetesi.com.tr "Shipbuilding 'Success' Based on Human Sacrifice" by Bianet "Yet More Deaths at Tuzla Shipyards!" by Bianet Local real estate agent: Tuzla Emlakçı (Tuzla gayrimenkul danışmanlık ofisi) www.www.tuzlasatilikdaire.com