Suceava County (Romanian pronunciation: [suˈtʃe̯ava]) is a county (Romanian: județ) of Romania. Most of its territory lies in the southern part of the historical region of Bukovina (Romanian: Bucovina), while the remainder forms part of Western Moldavia proper. The county seat is the historical town of Suceava (German: Suczawa, also Sotschen or Sutschawa; historically known in Old High German as Sedschopff as well) which was the capital of the Principality of Moldavia during the late Middle Ages and then a pivotal, predominantly German-speaking commercial town of the Habsburgs, Austrian Empire, and Austria-Hungary at the border with the Romanian Old Kingdom (Romanian: Vechiul Regat, German: Altreich) throughout the late modern period up until 1918, when, after the end of World War I, the town became part of the enlarged Kingdom of Romania. Suceava County, as part of the historical and geographical region of Bukovina, had been sometimes described as 'Switzerland of the East'. It has also been known as 'Switzerland of Eastern Europe' in the minds of the educated public. In 2011, as per the official census conducted that year, Suceava County had a population of 634,810, with a population density of 74/km2. The proportion of each constituent ethnic group is displayed below as follows, according to how they were officially recorded: Romanians – 96.14% Romani – 1.92% Ukrainians (including Hutsuls and Rusyns) – 0.92% Lipovans – 0.27% Germans (namely Bukovina Germans, Zipser Germans/Saxons, and Regat Germans) – 0.11% West Slavs (i.e. Poles, Slovaks, and Czechs) as well as minor other ethnic groups (including Hungarians or Szekelers, more specifically the Székelys of Bukovina) – 0.5% In the recent past, during the early 20th century, Suceava County used to be more ethnically heterogenous or mixed (due to the ethnic legacy and heritage of the former Austro-Hungarian times when most of the territory of the county was part of the Duchy of Bukovina), with sizeable minority populations of Germans (more specifically Bukovina Germans, including Zipsers), Jews, Ukrainians, Poles, or Hungarians (more specifically Székelys of Bukovina). These minority communities gradually dwindled throughout much of the 20th century. In addition, small German minority groups/communities existed (and still exist) on the territory of Suceava County which forms part of Western Moldavia as well, more specifically Regat Germans (German: Regatsdeutsche) inhabiting the small town of Fălticeni (German: Folitscheni) for example. Nowadays, during the early 21st century, the county is inhabited mostly by Romanians with very few minority ethnic groups, therefore making it very ethnically homogenous. Additionally, the primary language of the majority of the population is Romanian and the main religion is Eastern Orthodoxy represented by the Romanian Orthodox Church. AB AR AG BC BH BN BT BV BR BZ CS CL CJ CT CV DB DJ GL GR GJ HR HD IL IS IF MM MH MS NT OT PH SM SJ SB SV TR TM TL VS VL VN B Two-thirds of the county lies within the southern part of the historical region of Bukovina, while the rest of it incorporates territories from Western Moldavia proper. In terms of total area, it covers a surface of 8,553 square kilometres (3,302 sq mi), making it thus the second in Romania in this particular regard, just after Timiș County in Banat. The western side of the county consists of mountains from the Eastern Carpathians group: the Rodna Mountains, the Rarău Mountains, the Giumalău Mountains, and the Ridges of Bukovina, the latter with lower heights. The county's elevation decreases towards the east, with the lowest height in the Siret River valley. The rivers crossing the county are the Siret River with its tributaries: the Moldova, Suceava, and Bistrița rivers. The county of Suceava is bordered by the following other territorial units: Ukraine to the north – Chernivtsi Oblast. Mureș County, Harghita County, and Neamț County to the south. Botoșani County and Iași County to the east. Maramureș County and Bistrița-Năsăud County to the west. The predominant industries/economic sectors in the county are as follows: Lumber – producing the greatest land mass of forests in Romania; Food and Cooking; Mechanical components; Construction materials; Mining; Textile and leather; Tourism. Suceava occupies the first place among the Romanian cities with the most commercial spaces per inhabitant. Notable supermarket chains correlated with the aforementioned economic areas: Metro, Carrefour, Auchan, Selgros, Kaufland, and Lidl (some of the biggest supermarket chains in Romania). In June 2022, it was reported that there are projects worth 1 billion EUR for the Suceava County from the PNRR/Next Generation EU plan by County Council president Gheorghe Flutur, former acting/ad interim president of the National Liberal Party (PNL). In 2017, Suceava was ranked 3rd in Romania regarding the total tourist accommodation capacity, after Brașov and Constanța counties. Furthermore, one year later in 2018, Suceava County was designated "European destination of excellence" by the European Commission (EC). The main tourist attractions of the county are: The town of Suceava with its medieval fortifications; The Painted churches of northern Moldavia and their monasteries: The Voroneț Monastery; The Putna Monastery; The Moldovița Monastery; The Sucevița Monastery; The Bogdana Monastery from Rădăuți; The Humor Monastery; The Arbore Monastery; The Probota Monastery; The Dragomirna Monastery; The medieval salt mine of Cacica (Polish: Kaczyka); Mocăniță narrow-gauge steam train network, built during Austrian times, in the Moldovița commune and other rural parts of the county; The Vatra Dornei resort; The cities and towns of Rădăuți, Fălticeni, Câmpulung Moldovenesc, Gura Humorului, and Siret; The Via Transilvanica long-distance hiking and biking trail, which crosses the county. Mocănița-Huțulca-Moldovița narrow-gauge steam train in Moldovița commune (July 2013), a popular touristic attraction of Suceava County. Example of picturesque rural landscape of the countryside of Suceava County in Fundu Moldovei (German: Luisenthal or Louisenthal) Câmpulung Moldovenesc (German: Kimpolung) Slătioara secular forest, a UNESCO World Heritage Site, with a waldhufendorf (i.e. forest village) in the background. The elected President of the County Council was Constantin Sofroni (FSN). The Suceava County Council, elected at the 1992 local elections, consisted of 45 councillors, with the following party composition: The elected President of the County Council was Gavril Mârza (PDSR). The Suceava County Council, elected at the 1996 local elections, consisted of 45 councillors, with the following party composition: The elected President of the County Council was Gavril Mârza (PDSR). The Suceava County Council, elected at the 2000 local elections, consisted of 45 councillors, with the following party composition: The elected President of the County Council was Gavril Mârza (PSD). The Suceava County Council, elected at the 2004 local elections, consisted of 37 councillors, with the following party composition: The elected President of the County Council was Gheorghe Flutur (PDL). The Suceava County Council, elected at the 2008 local elections, consisted of 36 councillors, with the following party composition: The elected President of the County Council was Cătălin Nechifor (PSD/USL). The Suceava County Council, elected at the 2012 local elections, consisted of 36 councillors, with the following party composition: The elected President of the County Council was Gheorghe Flutur (PNL). The Suceava County Council, elected at the 2016 local elections, consisted of 37 councillors, with the following party composition: The elected President of the County Council is Gheorghe Flutur (PNL). The Suceava County Council, renewed at the 2020 local elections, consists of 36 county councillors, with the following party composition: Suceava County has 5 municipalities, 11 towns, and 98 communes. Municipalities Câmpulung Moldovenesc Fălticeni Rădăuți Suceava – county seat (Romanian: Oraș reședință de județ); population within town limits: 124,161 (as of 2018) Vatra Dornei Towns Broșteni Cajvana Dolhasca Frasin Gura Humorului Liteni Milișăuți Salcea Siret Solca Vicovu de Sus Communes Adâncata Arbore Baia Bălăceana Bălcăuți Berchișești Bilca Bogdănești Boroaia Bosanci Botoșana Breaza Brodina Bunești Burla Cacica Calafindești Capu Câmpului Cârlibaba Ciocănești Ciprian Porumbescu Comănești Cornu Luncii Coșna Crucea Dărmănești Dolhești Dorna-Arini Dorna Candrenilor Dornești Drăgoiești Drăgușeni Dumbrăveni Fântâna Mare Fântânele Forăști Frătăuții Noi Frătăuții Vechi Frumosu Fundu Moldovei Gălănești Grămești Grănicești Hănțești Hârtop Horodnic de Jos Horodnic de Sus Horodniceni Iacobeni Iaslovăț Ilișești Ipotești Izvoarele Sucevei Mălini Mănăstirea Humorului Marginea Mitocu Dragomirnei Moara Moldova-Sulița Moldovița Mușenița Ostra Păltinoasa Panaci Pârteștii de Jos Pătrăuți Poiana Stampei Poieni-Solca Pojorâta Preutești Putna Rădășeni Râșca Sadova Șaru Dornei Satu Mare Șcheia Șerbăuți Siminicea Slatina Straja Stroiești Stulpicani Sucevița Todirești Udești Ulma Vadu Moldovei Valea Moldovei Vama Vatra Moldoviței Verești Vicovu de Jos Voitinel Volovăț Vulturești Zamostea Zvoriștea Villages Probota Solonețu Nou During June 2010, Gheorghe Flutur, at that time (as now) the president of Suceava County Council, stated in a Mediafax interview that his county was one of the worst hit in the country. In the morning of June 29, relief work was coordinated to deal with the flooding that killed 21 people and caused hundreds to be evacuated from their homes. Tihuța Pass – connecting Bukovina to neighbouring westward Transylvania Prislop Pass Ciumârna (Palma) Pass Pietrosul Bistriței peak, Bistrița Mountains (1791 m) Traditional Romanian inn by a countryside road Hills covered in fog in the countryside Part of the forested Carpathian Mountains near Ciocănești Crucea Commune Romanian Orthodox white church in Baia (German: Baja, Stadt Molde, or Moldenmarkt) 15th century Roman Catholic cathedral ruins built by the Transylvanian Saxons in Baia (German: Baja, Stadt Molde, or Moldenmarkt) Cacica (Polish: Kaczyka) Solonețu Nou (Polish: Nowy Sołoniec) village Poiana Micului (Polish: Pojana Mikuli) The town hall of Iacobeni (German: Jakobeny) Prisaca Dornei (German: Eisenau) Valea Putnei (German: Waleputna) Straja (German: Strasza) Roman Catholic church in Gura Putnei (German: Karlsberg) Mountainous landscape near Câmpulung Moldovenesc Mocăniță narrow-gauge railway steam train Dumrăveni Mitocu Dragomirnei (German: Mitoka Dragomirna) Mănăstirea Humorului (German: Humora Kloster) Putna Monastery Moldovița (German: Russ Moldawitza) Slătioara secular forest, UNESCO World Heritage Site Meadows in Panaci Downtown Fălticeni (German: Foltischeni) Verești Sturdza manor in Salcea Anca Parghel – Romanian-Romani musician and jazz singer Matei Vișniec – Romanian-French playwright Nichita Danilov – Lipovan poet Iulian Vesper – Romanian poet and writer Nicolae Labiș – Romanian poet Grigore Vasiliu Birlic – Romanian actor Ion G. Sbiera – Romanian folklorist Ion Costist – Romanian 16th century Roman Catholic monk Liviu Giosan – Romanian-American marine geologist Elisabeta Lipă – Romanian Olympic rower Dorin Goian – Romanian football player Constantin Schumacher – Romanian-German footballer Józef Weber – German Roman Catholic archbishop Elisabeth Axmann – German writer Otto Babiasch – German Olympic boxer Lothar Würzel – German linguist, journalist, and politician George Ostafi – German abstract painter Hugo Weczerka – German historian and academician Anton Keschmann – German politician in the Imperial Austrian Parliament Olha Kobylianska – Ukrainian-German writer Ludwig Adolf Staufe-Simiginowicz – Ukrainian-German writer and educator George Löwendal – Russian-Danish painter In the Kingdom of Romania, between the early 20th century up to the end of the 1940s, the county had a smaller size and population. The contemporary Suceava county is the result of the merger of other smaller former Romanian counties from the historical regions of Bukovina and Western Moldavia that were functional mostly throughout the interwar period (e.g. Rădăuți County, Câmpulung County) and part of Baia County). As per the administrative reform of 1938 under King Carol II, the whole counties which divided Bukovina in the Kingdom of Romania were united into a bigger land called Ținutul Suceava. Later, during World War II, Suceava County was part of the Bukovina Governorate of Romania. As for the historical interwar Suceava County, this administrative unit was located in the northern part of Greater Romania and the southern part of the historical region of Bukovina respectively. Its territory was situated entirely within the borders of the current Suceava County, constituting thus the central-eastern part of the contemporary namesake county. During the interwar period, it was the smallest county of Greater Romania by area, covering 1,309 square kilometres (505 sq mi). It was bordered on the east by the counties of Dorohoi and Botoșani, to the north by Rădăuți County, to the west by Câmpulung County, and to the south by Baia County. During the communism period, Suceava County was at some point dissolved (as were all other counties in Romania as per the law no. 5 from 6 September 1950), then changed into the Suceava Region and then re-organized once again as county starting from 1968. The coat of arms of Ținutul Suceava (1938–1940) The communist coat of arms of Suceava County Alternative contemporary coat of arms of Suceava County As of 1930, the county was administratively subdivided into three districts (plăși): Plasa Arbore, headquartered at Arbore Plasa Dragomirna, headquartered at Dragomirna Plasa Ilișești, headquartered at Ilișești In 1938, the county was administratively reorganized into the following districts: Plasa Arbore, headquartered at Solca (containing 15 villages) Plasa Bosancea, headquartered at Bosancea (including 36 villages) Plasa Ilișești, headquartered at Ilișești (including 17 villages) According to the 1930 census data, the county population was 121,327, ethnically divided among Romanians (79.5%), Germans (primarily Bukovina Germans but also Zipsers) (8.2%), Jews (5.5%), Poles (2.7%), Ukrainians (1.7%), as well as other ethnic minorities. By language the county was divided among Romanian (76.5%), German (9.4%), Ukrainian (5.5%), Yiddish (4.3%), Polish (2.5%), as well as other languages. From the religious point of view, the population consisted of Eastern Orthodox (80.1%), Roman Catholic (8.4%), Jewish (5.5%), Evangelical Lutheran (3.3%), Greek Catholic (1.4%), as well as other minor religions. The county's urban population consisted of 19,850 inhabitants (17,028 in Suceava and 2,822 in Solca), ethnically divided among Romanians (61.5%), Jews (18.7%), Germans (13.9%), Poles (2.6%), as well as other ethnic minorities. As a mother tongue in the urban population, Romanian (60.4%) predominated, followed by German (18.7%), Yiddish (13.8%), Ukrainian (3.2%), Polish (2.2%), as well as other minor spoken languages. From the religious point of view, the urban population consisted of 60.6% Eastern Orthodox, 18.8% Jewish, 15.3% Roman Catholic, 2.0% Greek Catholic, 1.7% Evangelical Lutheran, 0.7% Baptist as well as other confessional minorities. The rest of the territory encompassed by the county is part of Western Moldavia (i.e. the area coloured in yellow). Due also to its geographic location and historical legacy, Suceava County used to be (and still is to some extent) a county where more ethnicities and cultures live together. Romanian: Mișcarea Ecologistă din România Romanian: Partidul Național Ecologist Electoral alliance consisting of the Democratic Party (PD) and the Romanian Social Democratic Party (PSDR). Romanian: Partidul Național al Producătorilor Liberi din România Romanian: Partidul Național al Automobiliștilor din România Romanian: Partidul Pensionarilor Romanian: Partidul Socialist Romanian: Partidul Național Democrat Creștin Romanian: Partidul Român pentru Noua Societate Romanian: Mișcarea pentru Integrare Europeană Subsequently PSD starting from 2001, when it merged with the Romanian Social Democratic Party (PSDR). Romanian: Alianța Națională Creștin Democrată Romanian: Partidul Pensionarilor din România Electoral alliance consisting of the National Liberal Party (PNL) and the Democratic Party (PD). The PNL won 10 mandates whereas the PD won only 4. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Suceava County. "Populaţia rezidentă după grupa de vârstă, pe județe și municipii, orașe, comune, la 1 decembrie 2021" (XLS). National Institute of Statistics. The number used depends on the numbering system employed by the phone companies on the market. Johann Schiltberger. Hans Schiltbergers Reisebuch Tübingen, Litterarischer Verein in Stuttgart, 1885, p. 111 Sophie A. Welsch (March 1986). "The Bukovina-Germans During the Habsburg Period: Settlement, Ethnic Interaction, Contributions" (PDF). Retrieved 6 October 2021. Gaëlle Fisher (20 November 2018). "Looking Forwards through the Past: Bukovina's "Return to Europe" after 1989–1991". Lean Library. 33: 196–217. doi:10.1177/0888325418780479. S2CID 149895103. Retrieved 6 October 2021. David Rechter (16 October 2008). "Geography is destiny: Region, nation and empire in Habsburg Jewish Bukovina". Journal of Modern Jewish Studies. 7 (3): 325–337. doi:10.1080/14725880802405027. S2CID 142797383. Retrieved 6 October 2021. "Ștefan cel Mare" University of Suceava (USV). "Bucovina. Past, present and perspectives". "Ștefan cel Mare" University of Suceava (USV). Retrieved 26 September 2022. National Institute of Statistics, "Populația la recensămintele din anii 1948, 1956, 1966, 1977, 1992 și 2002" "Rezultate definitive: Caracteristici demografice" (in Romanian). INSSE. 2022. Retrieved 12 July 2023. National Institute of Statistics, "Populația după etnie" Archived 2009-08-16 at the Wayback Machine Sandrinio Neagu (4 May 2018). "Suceava pe primul loc la nivel național în privința spațiilor comerciale". Monitorul de Suceava (in Romanian). Retrieved 23 October 2020. Monica Bonea (10 June 2022). "Gheorghe Flutur: Proiecte de un miliard de euro din PNRR pentru Suceava". Digi24.ro (in Romanian). Retrieved 11 June 2022. "Județul Suceava pe locul trei ca număr de structuri de primire turistică după Brașov și Constanța (in Romanian)". News Bucovina. Retrieved 22 March 2020. Dan Coman. "Flutur a primit, la Bruxelles, premiul "Suceava, destinație europeană de excelență" (in Romanian)". Radio România Internațional. Retrieved 22 March 2020. Dan Coman (26 April 2017). "Consiliul Judeţean Suceava a împlinit 25 de ani de la înfiinţare". Monitorul de Suceava (in Romanian). Retrieved 12 October 2022. Biroul Electoral Central (BEC) (10 August 1992). "Comunicat din 9 februarie 1992 cu privire la rezultatul alegerilor locale din România, care au avut loc la data de 9 februarie 1992". Monitorul Oficial nr. 191 din 10 august 1992 (in Romanian). Retrieved 12 October 2022. "Alegeri locale 1996, Voturi pe județul Suceava". Autoritatea Electorală Permanentă (in Romanian). Retrieved 9 October 2022. "Voturi pe județul SUCEAVA". Alegeri locale 2012 (in Romanian). Autoritatea Electorală Permanentă. Retrieved 6 October 2022. "Mandate de CJ pe județe și competitori" (in Romanian). Biroul Electoral Central. 10 June 2016. Retrieved 16 June 2016. "Rezultatele finale ale alegerilor locale din 2020" (Json) (in Romanian). Autoritatea Electorală Permanentă. Retrieved 2020-11-02. "HARTĂ INTERACTIVĂ – Câți mai suntem în România? Populația în fiecare județ și în fiecare municipiu din țară" (in Romanian). INSSE. 6 May 2019. Retrieved 6 May 2019. "Romania floods kill 21- Hindustan Times". Archived from the original on 2010-07-03. Retrieved 2010-07-11. "Fundația Löwendal" (in Romanian). Portretul României Interbelice – Județul Suceava Recensământul general al populației României din 29 decemvrie 1930, Vol. II, pag. 434–437 Recensământul general al populației României din 29 decemvrie 1930, Vol. II, pag. 738–739 suceava.online