Ümraniye (pronounced [ymˈɾaːnije]) is a municipality and district of Istanbul Province, Turkey. Its area is 46 km2, and its population is 732,379 (2022). It was separated from Üsküdar in 1987. It is bordered by Çekmeköy to the northeast, Sancaktepe to the east, Ataşehir to the south, Üsküdar to the west and Beykoz to the northwest. Ümraniye is located on high ground just inland from Üsküdar. It was originally a small village of less than 900 inhabitants, mainly coming from the Black Sea Region in the 1950s. Its population grew far beyond its capacity during the 1970s and 1980s due to migration to the cities from rural areas of Anatolia. On 17 March 1978, 5 workers were massacred by Communist militants in the district. The growth of Ümraniye was relatively better controlled than other districts that also attracted workers on the European side (such as Esenler or Gaziosmanpaşa); there are wider roads through the district, more space between the blocks and relatively more green space. A large commercial district grew up to support this large population. The main road through the centre has public buildings, shops, shopping centres and branches of many banks. There are 37 neighbourhoods in Ümraniye District: Adem Yavuz Altınşehir Armağanevler Aşağı Dudullu Atakent Atatürk Çakmak Çamlık Cemil Meriç Dumlupınar Elmalıkent Esenevler Esenkent Esenşehir Fatih Sultan Mehmet Finanskent Hekimbaşı Huzur Ihlamurkuyu İnkılap İstiklal Kazım Karabekir Madenler Mehmet Akif Namık Kemal Necip Fazıl Parseller Saray Şerifali Site Tantavi Tatlısu Tepeüstü Topağacı Yamanevler Yenişehir Yukarı Dudullu In the last few decades, Ümraniye has built a lively shopping and business district. Recent building projects include the construction of large shopping malls (including Istanbul's first branch of IKEA), and modern apartment complexes have made parts of Ümraniye attractive places buying real estate, as Ümraniye is on a main highway that leads to one of the two bridges linking the Asian and European sides of Istanbul. The women's football club Dudullu Spor was promoted to the Women's First League for the 2020-21 League season. The Süper Lig club Ümraniyespor is located in Ümraniye. The club plays their matches in the Ümraniye Belediyesi Şehir Stadium. Ümraniye has seen its fair share of political violence between left and right-wingers over the years, and during the 70s and 80s law enforcement was problematic in parts of the area. In this way it was considered the Asian side's equivalent of Gaziosmanpaşa on the European side. This violence was concentrated in a small quarter of Ümraniye, a vast district. In recent times however, Ümraniye has been relatively calm. The people of Ümraniye usually vote in large numbers for conservative parties. The AK Party does well in this district. Ümraniye experiences a relatively cool Mediterranean climate (Csa/Cs) according to both Köppen and Trewartha climate classifications, barely missing the criteria for a humid subtropical climate (Cfa/Cf), with cool winters and warm to hot summers. Because of its altitude, it is one of the colder districts of Istanbul, with plentiful snowfall and a reputation as a cold, brisk location. It falls into USDA hardiness zone 8b, and AHS heat zone 3. In between Üsküdar and Ümraniye there is a 'çilehane' of the Sufi saint Aziz Mahmud Hudayi. A çilehane (lit. 'house of despair') was where Sufis would go to pray in seclusion. The Haldun Alagaş Sports Hall is located here, which is named after the karateka Haldun Alagaş. The venue hosts both national and international basketball, volleyball, handball games and martial art competitions. Due to its elevated altitude, the full scene of Istanbul, including Bosphorus and European Side, can be seen from Ümraniye. Ümraniye is twinned with: Şahinbey - Gaziantep, Turkey Altıeylül - Balıkesir, Turkey Susurluk - Balıkesir, Turkey Belen - Hatay, Turkey Mihalgazi - Eskişehir, Turkey Geyve - Sakarya, Turkey Of - Trabzon, Turkey Kelkit - Gümüşhane, Turkey Demirözü - Bayburt, Turkey Çayeli - Rize, Turkey Sarıcakaya - Eskişehir, Turkey Gümüşhane - Turkey Jabalia, Palestine Fojnica, Bosnia and Herzegovina Stari Grad, Bosnia and Herzegovina Dire Dawa - Ethiopia "Address-based population registration system (ADNKS) results dated 31 December 2022, Favorite Reports" (XLS). TÜİK. Retrieved 12 July 2023. Büyükşehir İlçe Belediyesi, Turkey Civil Administration Departments Inventory. Retrieved 12 July 2023. "İl ve İlçe Yüz ölçümleri". General Directorate of Mapping. Retrieved 12 July 2023. Mahalle, Turkey Civil Administration Departments Inventory. Retrieved 12 July 2023. "2019-2020 Sezonu Kadın Ligleri Yönetim Kurulu Kararı - 2- Kadınlar 2. Ligi" (in Turkish). Türkiye Futbol Federasyonu. 13 July 2020. Retrieved 10 October 2020. "Bitki Soğuğa ve Sıcağa Dayanıklılık". www.mgm.gov.tr. Retrieved 2021-04-28. "National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) formerly known as National Climatic Data Center (NCDC) | NCEI offers access to the most significant archives of oceanic, atmospheric, geophysical and coastal data". www.ncdc.noaa.gov. Retrieved 2021-06-03. "Ümraniye - Weather History & Climate Data - Meteostat". meteostat.net. Retrieved 2021-06-03. "Haldun Alagaş Spor Kompleksi" (in Turkish). Spor AŞ. Retrieved 2012-11-27. "Ümraniye Municipality and Palestine Jabalia Al Nazlah Municipality Has Become 'Sister Municipalities' With a Ceremony". umraniye.bel.tr. Ümraniye. Retrieved 2020-06-01. "Kardeş Şehirler". umraniye.bel.tr. Retrieved 2023-10-19. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ümraniye. Ümraniye municipality web site