A catechism ( /ˈkætəˌkɪzəm/; from Ancient Greek: κατηχέω, "to teach orally") is a summary or exposition of doctrine and serves as a learning introduction to the Sacraments traditionally used in catechesis, or Christian religious teaching of children and adult converts. Catechisms are doctrinal manuals – often in the form of questions followed by answers to be memorised – a format that has been used in non-religious or secular contexts as well. According to Norman DeWitt, the early Christians appropriated this practice from the Epicureans, a school whose founder Epicurus had instructed to keep summaries of the teachings for easy learning. The term catechumen refers to the designated recipient of the catechetical work or instruction. In the Catholic Church, catechumens are those who are preparing to receive the Sacrament of Baptism. Traditionally, they would be placed separately during Holy Mass from those who had been baptized, and would be dismissed from the liturgical assembly before the Profession of Faith (Nicene Creed) and General Intercessions (Prayers of the Faithful).[citation needed] Catechisms are characteristic of Western Christianity but are also present in Eastern Christianity. In 1973, The Common Catechism, the first joint catechism of Catholics and Protestants, was published by theologians of the major Western Christian traditions, as a result of extensive ecumenical dialogue. Before the Protestant Reformation, Christian catechesis took the form of instruction in and memorization of the Apostles' Creed, Lord's Prayer, and basic knowledge of the sacraments. However, there were also more comprehensive documents that outlined of the Christian faith, such as the Catechetical Lectures of St. Cyril of Jerusalem, "The Morals" of St. Basil of Caesarea, and the Enchiridion on Faith, Hope and Love by St. Augustine of Hippo. The earliest known catechism is the Didache, which was written between 60 and 85 AD. The word "catechism" for a manual for this instruction appeared in the Late Middle Ages. The use of a question and answer format was popularized[clarification needed] by Martin Luther in his 1529 Small Catechism. He wanted the catechumen to understand what he was learning, so the Decalogue, Lord's Prayer, and Apostles' Creed were broken up into small sections, with the question "What does this mean" following each portion. The format calls upon two parties to participate, a master and a student (traditionally termed a "scholar"), or a parent and a child. The Westminster Shorter Catechism (1647) is an example: Q. What is the chief end of man? A. To glorify God and enjoy Him forever! Q. What rule hath God given to direct us how we may glorify and enjoy Him? A. The word of God which is contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments is the only rule to direct us how we may glorify and enjoy him. The Catechism of the Catholic Church (see below) is the catechism that is in most widespread use among Catholics today. It is the official catechism of the Church. For Catholics, all the canonical books of the Bible (including the Deuterocanonical books), the tradition of the Church and the interpretation of these by the Magisterium (which may be outlined in a catechism, a compendium or a declaration) constitute the complete and best resource for fully attaining to God's revelation to mankind. Catholics believe that sacred scripture and sacred tradition preserved and interpreted by the Magisterium are both necessary for attaining to the fullest understanding of all of God's revelation. The term catechist is most frequently used in Catholicism, often to describe a lay catechist or layperson with catechetical training who engages in such teaching and evangelization. This can be in both parish church and mission contexts. Ignorantia Sacerdotum are the first words and the better-known title of De Informatione Simplicium, a catechetical manual drafted by Archbishop Pecham's provincial Council of Lambeth in 1281. It called for the memorisation of the Apostles' Creed, the Ten Commandments, and the two-fold injunction to "love the Lord thy God with all thy heart... and thy neighbour as thyself.". It also emphasised the Seven Virtues, the Seven Deadly Sins, the Seven Sacraments, and the Seven Works of Mercy. A 1357 translation into English is often called the Lay-Folk's Catechism. The catechetical instructions of Saint Thomas Aquinas were used generally throughout the 13th and 14th centuries as manuals and textbooks for priests and teachers of religion. "The Explanations of St. Thomas," wrote Spirago, "are remarkable for their conciseness and their simplicity of language; they are especially noteworthy because the main parts of the catechetical course of instruction are brought into connection with one another so that they appear as one harmonious whole." The influence of these works is especially prominent in the "Roman Catechism" which the Council of Trent ordered written for parish priests and for all teachers of religion. Many of the explanatory passages in both works are almost identical. A question-and-answer format catechism that was the standard catechetical text in Great Britain in the earlier part of the 20th century. Popularly called the Penny Catechism, as the original version only cost one penny. Various editions of the Penny Catechism were issued through the century and changes were made to the text. The Catechism for Filipino Catholics (CFC) is a contextualised and inculturated Filipino Catholic catechism prepared by the Catholic Bishops' Conference of the Philippines and approved by the Holy See. The draft was produced by the Conference's "Episcopal Commission on Catechesis and Catholic Education," and is an update of the late 16th century Doctrina Christiana en Lengua Espanola Y Tagala, which was a Hispano-Tagalog version of the earlier Hispano-Chinese Doctrina that was the First book of the Spanish Philippines|first book printed in the Philippines using moveable type. The Doctrina Cristiana was written in Tagalog (both in a hispanised Latin script and the then-common indigenous Baybayin script), as well as Spanish. Amongst the contents of the Doctrina are the Spanish alphabet and phonics, basic prayers shown in both languages – in the case of the Tagalog, using archaic words and both scripts – and a brief catechism in question-and-answer format. The Enchiridion symbolorum, definitionum et declarationum de rebus fidei et morum also known as Enchiridion or Denzinger, is a compendium of all basic texts of Catholic dogma and morality since the apostles. Commissioned by Pope Pius IX, it has been in use since 1854, and has been updated periodically. It is a compendium of faith, like a catechism. By including all relevant teachings throughout history, it is at the same, more than a catechism. It is a search instrument for theologians, historians and anybody interested in Christian religion. The latest updates of the Enchiridion extend to the teachings of Pope John Paul II. The Archbishop of Baltimore Cardinal James Gibbons is quoted in earlier versions of the Enchiridion, that every theologian should have always two books at hand, the Holy Bible and this Enchiridion. Tradivox (or the Catholic Catechism Index) is a multi-volume book series by Sophia Institute Press, which restores and reprints Catholic catechisms. Ongoing, it will consist of twenty cross-indexed hardcover volumes upon the series' completion. The project received several endorsements from prominent members of the Catholic clergy & public, including Cardinal Burke, Cardinal Müller, Cardinal Pell, Bishop Strickland, Bishop Schneider, & theologian Peter Kwasniewski. Schneider also provided a foreword in the hardcover edition of Vol. 1. Unlike the Catholic Church, there is no teaching Magisterium in the Orthodox world. Most catechumens are instructed orally by a deacon or priest at the church. There is emphasis on being taught by simply being in church, and listening to the services. Most Orthodox would refer back to the original writings of the Church Fathers, including the Catechetical Lectures of St. Cyril of Jerusalem and The Ladder of Divine Ascent. New catechumens would generally be encouraged to read "The Orthodox Church" by Kallistos Ware to get an overview of the Christian faith from an Orthodox perspective before being given more advanced readings. In recent times, perhaps under influence from the West, a number of catechisms have emerged in the Eastern Orthodox Church such as the Philaret Catechism, which is entitled, "The Longer Catechism of The Orthodox, Catholic, Eastern Church," "A new-style catechism on the Eastern Orthodox faith for adults" by Rev. George Mastrantonis, and the more modern "The Orthodox Faith" by Protopresbyter Thomas Hopko. However, presently such catechisms are not widely used. The Oriental Orthodox Churches rely heavily on the Didascalia Apostolorum. The Ethiopic version is known as the "Ethiopic Didascalia." It is included in the Orthodox Tewahedo biblical canon, and is read from on Sundays. The faith of the Coptic Orthodox Church has historically been evidenced in the lives and sayings of the early desert monks, which was recorded in "The paradise of the holy fathers," Volume 1 and Volume 2. Recently the Coptic church has used Fr. Tadros Malaty's books, along with Pope Shenouda III of Alexandria's many books, to help lay people better understand their Coptic faith. However, like the Eastern Orthodox church, the faith is mostly expounded in the lives of the saints and the material recited during the services. The catechism's question-and-answer format, with a view toward the instruction of children, was a form adopted by the various Protestant confessions almost from the beginning of the Reformation. Among the first projects of the Reformation was the production of catechisms self-consciously modelled after the older traditions of Cyril of Jerusalem and Augustine. These catechisms showed special admiration for Chrysostom's view of the family as a "little church", and placed strong responsibility on every father to teach his children, to prevent them from coming to baptism or the Lord's table ignorant of the doctrine under which they are expected to live as Christians. The Anglican Book of Common Prayer includes a catechism. In older editions it is a brief manual for the instruction of those preparing to be brought before the bishop for confirmation: the baptised first professes his baptism, and then rehearses the principal elements of the faith into which he has been baptised: the Apostles' Creed, Ten Commandments, the Lord's Prayer, and the sacraments. Catechist: What is your Name? Answer: N. or M. Catechist: Who gave you this Name? Answer: My Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism; wherein I was made a member of Christ, the child of God, and an inheritor of the kingdom of heaven. The "N. or M." stands for the Latin, "nomen vel nomina", meaning "name or names". It is an accident of typography that "nomina" came to be represented by "m". The catechism was published in 1604 as a stand-alone document. It was later bound up with the 1662 Book of Common Prayer. This edition holds authority across the Anglican Communion. William Nicholson's "An exposition of the catechism of the Church of England" was published in 1655. Zacheus Isham's "The Catechism of the Church: with Proofs from the New Testament: and Some Additional Questions and Answers" was published in 1694 Samuel Clarke's "An exposition of the church-catechism" was published in 1719 Thomas Secker's "Lectures on the Catechism of the Church of England" were published in 1769 (vol. I and vol. II) Thomas Howell's "A familiar and practical improvement of the church catechism" was published in 1775 Thomas Howell's "Discourses on the commandments" was published in 1824 Stephen Wilkinson Dowell's "A catechism on the services of the Church of England" was published in 1852 Vernon Staley's "The Catholic religion : a manual of instruction for members of the Anglican Church" was published in 1908. "The Catechism An Outline of the Faith' was published in 1998 by Church of Wales. The Episcopal Church's 1928 prayer book included a catechism with offices of instruction, based upon the catechism of the Church of England's 1662 prayer book. The Episcopal Church's 1979 prayer book includes a catechism newly written for the prayer book, intended as "an outline of instruction" and "a brief summary of the Church's teaching". "To Be A Christian: An Anglican Catechism" was published in 2020 by Anglican House Media Ministries, the publishing house of the Anglican Church in North America (ACNA). Keach's Catechism is utilized in many Particular Baptist congregations. Nondenominational Reformed Baptist preacher John Piper wrote a commentary on this catechism, publishing it in 1986. Luther's Large Catechism (1529) typifies the emphasis which the churches of the Augsburg Confession placed on the importance of knowledge and understanding of the articles of the Christian faith. Primarily intended as instruction to teachers, especially to parents, the catechism consists of a series of exhortations on the importance of each topic of the catechism. It is meant for those who have the capacity to understand, and is meant to be memorized and then repeatedly reviewed so that the Small Catechism could be taught with understanding. For example, the author stipulates in the preface: Therefore it is the duty of every father of a family to question and examine his children and servants at least once a week and to ascertain what they know of it, or are learning and, if they do not know it, to keep them faithfully at it. The catechism, Luther wrote, should consist of instruction in the rule of conduct, which always accuses us because we fail to keep it (Ten Commandments), the rule of faith (Apostles' Creed), the rule of prayer (Lord's Prayer), and the sacraments (baptism, confession, and communion). Luther adds: However, it is not enough for them to comprehend and recite these parts according to the words only, but the young people should also be made to attend the preaching, especially during the time which is devoted to the catechism, that they may hear it explained and may learn to understand what every part contains, so as to be able to recite it as they have heard it, and, when asked, may give a correct answer, so that the preaching may not be without profit and fruit. Luther's Small Catechism, in contrast, is written to accommodate the understanding of a child or an uneducated person. It begins: The First Commandment You shall have no other gods. Q. What does this mean? A. We should fear, love, and trust in God above all things. The Probationer's Catechism was authored by Methodist divine S. Olin Garrison for probationary members of the Methodist Episcopal Church seeking full membership in the connexion; it has been one of the most widely used catechisms in Methodist history. A Catechism on the Christian Religion: The Doctrines of Christianity with Special Emphasis on Wesleyan Concepts by Mel-Thomas and Helen Rothwell is another popular catechism used to explicate Wesleyan-Arminian theology. More recent publications are A Catechism Prepared Especially for the Members of the Evangelical Wesleyan Church (printed in the United States), A Larger Catechism: For Members of the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church (printed in the United States), and A Catechism for the Use of the People Called Methodists (printed in Great Britain). While the Pentecostal movement has no one official catechism or confession, nevertheless Pentecostal authors have produced catechetical works. William Seymour, founder of the Azusa Street revival, included a catechism in the Doctrines and Disciplines of the Azusa Street Apostolic Faith Mission. Assemblies of God minister Warren D. Combs produced a catechism in the 1960s. In 2016 Henry Volk the host of the Theology in Perspective podcast authored a resource entitled, A Pentecostal Catechism. Calvin's 1545 preface to the Genevan Catechism begins with an acknowledgement that the several traditions and cultures which were joined in the Reformed movement would produce their own form of instruction in each place. While Calvin argues that no effort should be expended on preventing this, he adds: We are all directed to one Christ, in whose truth being united together, we may grow up into one body and one spirit, and with the same mouth also proclaim whatever belongs to the sum of faith. Catechists not intent on this end, besides fatally injuring the Church, by sowing the materials of dissension in religion, also introduce an impious profanation of baptism. For where can any longer be the utility of baptism unless this remain as its foundation – that we all agree in one faith? Wherefore, those who publish Catechisms ought to be the more carefully on their guard, by producing anything rashly, they may not for the present only, but in regard to posterity also, do grievous harm to piety, and inflict a deadly wound on the Church. The scandal of diverse instruction is that it produces diverse baptisms and diverse communions, and diverse faith. However, forms may vary without introducing substantial differences, according to the Reformed view of doctrine. John Calvin produced a catechism while at Geneva (1541), which underwent two major revisions (1545 and 1560). Calvin's aim in writing the catechism of 1545 was to set a basic pattern of doctrine, meant to be imitated by other catechists, which would not affirm local distinctions or dwell on controversial issues, but would serve as a pattern for what was expected to be taught by Christian fathers and other teachers of children in the church. The catechism is organized on the topics of faith, law, prayer and sacraments. Master. What is the chief end of human life? Scholar. To know God by whom men were created. M. What reason have you for saying so? S. Because he created us and placed us in this world to be glorified in us. And it is indeed right that our life, of which himself is the beginning, should be devoted to his glory. M. What is the highest good of man? S. The very same thing. After Protestantism entered into the Palatinate, in 1546 the controversy between Lutherans and Calvinists broke out, and especially while the region was under the elector Otto Heinrich (1556–1559), this conflict in Saxony, particularly in Heidelberg, became increasingly bitter and turned violent. When Frederick III, Elector Palatine, came into power in 1559 he put his authority behind the Calvinistic view on the Lord's Supper, which denied the local presence of the body of Jesus Christ in the elements of the sacrament. He turned Sapienz College into a school of divinity, and in 1562 he placed over it a pupil and friend of Luther's colleague, Philipp Melanchthon, named Zacharias Ursinus. In an attempt to resolve the religious disputes in his domain, Frederick called upon Ursinus and his colleague Caspar Olevianus (preacher to Frederick's court) to produce a catechism. The two collaborators referred to existing catechetical literature, and especially relied on the catechisms of Calvin and of John Lasco. To prepare the catechism, they adopted the method of sketching drafts independently, and then bringing together the work to combine their efforts. "The final preparation was the work of both theologians, with the constant co-operation of Frederick III. Ursinus has always been regarded as the principal author, as he was afterwards the chief defender and interpreter of the Catechism; still, it would appear that the nervous German style, the division into three parts (as distinguished from the five parts in the Catechism of Calvin and the previous draft of Ursinus), and the genial warmth and unction of the whole work, are chiefly due to Olevianus." (Schaff, in. Am. Presb. Rev. July 1863, p. 379). The structure of the Heidelberg Catechism is spelled out in the second question; and the three-part structure seen there is based on the belief that the single work of salvation brings forward the three persons of the Trinity in turn, to make God fully and intimately known by his work of salvation, referring to the Apostles' Creed as an epitome of Christian faith. Assurance of salvation is the unifying theme throughout this catechism: assurance obtained by the work of Christ, applied through the sacraments, and resulting in grateful obedience to the commandments and persistence in prayer. Lord's Day 1. Q. What is thy only comfort in life and death? A. That I with body and soul, both in life and death, am not my own, but belong unto my faithful Saviour Jesus Christ; who, with his precious blood, has fully satisfied for all my sins, and delivered me from all the power of the devil; and so preserves me that without the will of my heavenly Father, not a hair can fall from my head; yea, that all things must be subservient to my salvation, and therefore, by his Holy Spirit, He also assures me of eternal life, and makes me sincerely willing and ready, henceforth, to live unto him. Q. How many things are necessary for thee to know, that thou, enjoying this comfort, mayest live and die happily? A. Three; the first, how great my sins and miseries are; the second, how I may be delivered from all my sins and miseries; the third, how I shall express my gratitude to God for such deliverance. The Heidelberg Catechism is the most widely used of the Catechisms of the Reformed churches. Together with the Westminster Confession of Faith (1647), the Westminster Assembly also produced two catechisms, a Larger and a Shorter, which were intended for use in Christian families and in churches. These documents have served as the doctrinal standards, subordinate to the Bible, for Presbyterians and other Reformed churches around the world. The Shorter Catechism shows the Assembly's reliance upon the previous work of Calvin, Lasco, and the theologians of Heidelberg. It comprises two main sections summarizing what the Scriptures principally teach: the doctrine of God, and the duty required of men. Questions and answers cover the usual elements: faith, the Ten Commandments, the sacraments, and prayer. Q. What is the chief end of man? A. Man's chief end is to glorify God, and to enjoy him forever. Q. What rule hath God given to direct us how we may glorify and enjoy him? A. The Word of God, which is contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, is the only rule to direct us how we may glorify and enjoy him. Q. What do the scriptures principally teach? A. The scriptures principally teach, what man is to believe concerning God, and what duty God requires of man. Oecolampadius composed the Basel Catechism in 1526, Leo Juda (1534) followed by Bullinger (1555) published catechisms in Zurich. The French Reformed used Calvin's Genevan catechism, as well as works published by Louis Cappel (1619), and Charles Drelincourt (1642). Spiritual Milk for Boston Babes, written by the Puritan minister John Cotton and published in 1656, was the first known children's book published in the United States. Judaism does not have a formal catechism. While there have been several attempts to formulate Jewish principles of faith, and some of these have achieved wide acceptance, none can be described as being in the form of a catechism. The most widely recited formulation, Yigdal, is in the form of a hymn based on Maimonides' 13 Articles of Faith. Besides the manuals of instruction that were published by the Christians for use in their families and churches, there were other works produced by heretical sectarian groups intended as a compact refutation of Christian orthodoxy. For example, Socinians in Poland published the Racovian Catechism in 1605, using the question and answer format of a catechism for the orderly presentation of their arguments against the Trinity and the doctrine of Hell, as these were understood by the Reformed churches from which they were forced to separate. Islam teaches children and new Muslims the matters of faith, worship, and ethics in the form of a concise manual. They are popular in Turkish as Ilmihal [tr] (from the Arabic Ilm ul-Hal, Situation Science). It is also advised for every Muslim to have a basic knowledge of such matters of religion. The first chapter is the book of cleanliness and first to be taught are subjects such as: which are clean, what is clean and what is not clean, what people need to be cleansed from, how they should clean, and which water should they use to clean. There is a well-known book of catechism that is studied in Islamic boarding schools in Indonesia called Safinatun Najah, which talks about of matters of faith, worship and jurisprudence. Bhaktivinoda Thakur's book Jaiva Dharma is an example of Gaudiya Vaishnava catechism. It follows the usual question-answer format. In the Pali Canon of Theravada Buddhism a small bit of catechism appears as the fourth section of the Khuddakapatha, as well as the forty-third and forty-fourth suttas of the Majjhima Nikaya. Henry Steel Olcott introduced his own form of Buddhist Catechism, appropriated from Christianity, to Ceylon when setting up his Buddhist education system during the late 19th century Buddhist revival on the island. In Zoroastrianism there is the "ČĪDAG ANDARZ Ī PŌRYŌTKĒŠĀN" also known as "Pand-nāmag ī Zardušt" (Book of the counsels of Zoroaster), which is a post-Sasanian compendium of apothegms intended to instruct every Zoroastrian male, upon his attaining the age of fifteen years, in fundamental religious and ethical principles, as well as in the daily duties incumbent upon him. In Robert Charles Zaehner's words, it "sums up succinctly the whole of Zoroastrian doctrine: it is what every boy and girl of fifteen must know before he or she is invested with the sacred girdle {kusti}." Epicurean catechesis may have originated from the practice of writing outlines of Epicurean doctrines for easy memorization. Epicurus' Letter to Herodotus is known as the "Little Epitome" which young students are instructed to memorize, and in antiquity they would move on to more advanced teachings with the "Large Epitome". The 40 Principal Doctrines also serve the role of a catechism. The philosopher Philodemus of Gadara instructed his students to keep an outline of the doctrines on wealth and economics, so that there are additional doctrines that advanced students may focus on. Schools of esoteric learning have used a catechetical style of instruction, as this Zodiac catechism shows: Q. "Where is the animal, O Lanoo? and where the Man? A. Fused into one, O Master of my Life. The two are one. But both have disappeared and naught remains but the deep fire of my desire. In the past, catechisms were written to rehearse the basic knowledge of a non-religious subject. Examples include numerous political catechisms published from the 18th to the 20th century in Europe as well as in North and South America. See also the Catechism of the History of Newfoundland (c1856), the Coal Catechism (1898), and A Catechism of the Steam Engine (1856). "Elementary catechism on the Constitution of the United States" Arthur J. Stansbury (1828), "Catechism of the Constitution of the United States" Lewis Cruger (1863) and "A Catechism of the Constitution of the United States of America" John V. Overall. Friedrich Engels' 1847 work Principles of Communism was written as a catechism: Engels subsequently decided that the format was not suited to the addition of historical material which he felt was necessary, and he and Karl Marx restructured the material and used it as the nucleus of The Communist Manifesto. Some literary works have also taken the form of a catechism. The 17th episode of James Joyce's novel Ulysses, known as "Ithaca", is written in the form of a catechism, as is Ted Hughes' poem Examination at the Womb Door, from the collection Crow. In Henry IV, Part 1: Act V, Scene I, Line 141 Falstaff refers to his monologue as a catechism, explaining his view of the virtue of honor. Christianity portal Religion portal Catechesis Katecheo Archived 25 August 2011 at Wikiwix[full citation needed] – Strong's Concordance St Paul and Epicurus. Minnesota Archive Editions. January 1954. ISBN 0816657467. "The Longer Catechism of The Orthodox, Catholic, Eastern Church". www.pravoslavieto.com. Retrieved 14 April 2022. Commonweal, Volume 102. Commonweal Publishing Corporation. 1975. p. 31. The book offers the first comprehensive statement of religious faith produced jointly by Catholic and Protestant theologians since the separation of the churches over four centuries ago. "Catechetical Lectures (Cyril of Jerusalem)". www.newadvent.org. Retrieved 28 March 2022. "The Morals in "The Fathers Of The Church A New Translation Saint Basil Ascetical Works Volume 9"". archive.org. 17 September 1962. Retrieved 20 April 2022. "The oldest catechism in Christian history dates from the 1st century". aleteia.org. 14 August 2019. Retrieved 18 April 2022. Green, Ian (1996). The Christian's ABC: Catechisms and Catechizing in England c.1530–1740. Oxford: Clarendon Press. pp. 14–15. Archived from the original on 8 January 2018. Green, Ian (1996). The Christian's ABC: Catechisms and Catechizing in England c.1530–1740. Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 17. Archived from the original on 8 January 2018. "Westminster Shorter Catechism". Archived from the original on 7 April 2012. Retrieved 9 April 2012. Joseph, William (1912). "Roman Catechism". Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 13. Vaux, Laurence; Law, Thomas Graves (1885). A Catechisme, Or Christian Doctrine. Chetham society. "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Christian Doctrine". www.newadvent.org. Retrieved 26 October 2019. The Douay Catechism Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1908). "Joseph Deharbe" . Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 4. New York: Robert Appleton Company. "Baltimore Catechism Number 2". "Catechism of St. Pius X". "Declaration of the Commission of Cardinals on the". www.ewtn.com. Archived from the original on 30 October 2017. Retrieved 8 May 2018. "About". Christ Our Pascha. 17 November 2017. Retrieved 7 May 2019. Councils & Synods, with Other Documents Relating to the English Church, vol. 2: 1205–1313, ed. F. M. Powicke and C. R. Cheney (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1964), part 2, p. 900–905.Excerpts appear in William Lyndwood's Provinciale. The Lay Folks' Catechism or the English and Latin Versions of Archbishop Thoresby's Instructions for the People (London: Published for the Early English Text Society, by Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner & Co., 1901). Archived version of Penny Catechism "Lessing J. Rosenwald Collection" Library of Congress. World Digital Library. Retrieved 10 November 2010. Seng, Aaron (2 October 2020). "How Tradivox is Restoring the Lost Riches of Catechesis". Catholic Exchange. Catholic Exchange (18 November 2020). "The Lost Riches of Catholic Catechisms with Aaron Seng of Tradivox". Catholic Exchange. Schneider, Athanasius (27 November 2019). Letter of endorsement for the project "Catholic Catechism Index" of "Tradivox" Tradivox Vol. 1. Sophia Institute Press. 2020. pp. xi–xii. "The Longer Catechism of The Orthodox, Catholic, Eastern Church". www.pravoslavieto.com. Retrieved 28 March 2022. "The Orthodox Faith". www.oca.org. Retrieved 28 March 2022. "Coptic Reading Shelf". sites.google.com. Archived from the original on 28 March 2022. Retrieved 28 March 2022. "Coptic Synaxarium". www.copticchurch.net. Retrieved 28 March 2022. "OCA Lives of the Saints". www.oca.org. Retrieved 28 March 2022. "An Exposition of the Catechism of the Church of England". www.forgottenbooks.com. Retrieved 25 May 2021. Engl, Catechism ch of; Isham, Zachary (1694). The catechism of the Church: with proofs from the New Testament: and some additional questions and answers. R. Clavel, at the Peacock, at the west end of St. Paul's Church-Yard. Clarke, Samuel; Clarke, John (1729). An exposition of the church-catechism. University of California Libraries. London : Printed by W. Botham, for James and John Knapton. Secker, Thomas (1790). Lectures on the catechism of the Church of England: with a discourse on confirmation 7th ed. University of California Libraries. London : Rivington. Secker, Thomas (1790). Lectures on the catechism of the Church of England: with a discourse on confirmation 7th ed. University of California Libraries. London : Rivington. Secker, Thomas (1835). Lectures on the catechism of the Protestant Episcopal Church : with a discourse on confirmation. Princeton Theological Seminary Library. Columbus : Isaac N. Whiting. Haweis, Thomas (1775). A familiar and practical improvement of the church catechism: designed to render the work of catechising more easy and profitable . University of California Libraries. London : Dilly. Secker, Thomas (1824). Discourses on the commandments, and the sacraments of baptism and the Lord's Supper : from the lectures on the Catechism by Archbishop Secker, with a memoir of his life, and his sermon on confirmation. Princeton Theological Seminary Library. Philadelphia : S. Potter & Co. [etc.] Stephen Wilkinson Dowell, Church of England services (1852). A catechism on the services of the Church of England. Oxford University. "Vernon Staley". anglicanhistory.org. Retrieved 6 June 2021. Staley, Vernon (1917). The Catholic religion : a manual of instruction for members of the Anglican Church. Trinity College – University of Toronto. London : A. R. Mowbray. "The Catechism". Church in Wales. Retrieved 22 June 2021. "An Outline of the Faith". www.bcponline.org. Retrieved 22 June 2021. "Concerning the Catechism". The Book of Common Prayer. Church Publishing. 1979. p. 844. "TO BE A CHRISTIAN" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 October 2020. Kirby, James E.; Rivera, Feliciano; Rowe, Kenneth E.; Richey, Russell E. (1996). The Methodists. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 223–224. ISBN 978-0-313-22048-7. Marsh, Clive (10 May 2006). Methodist Theology Today. A&C Black. p. 235. ISBN 9780826481047. Combs, Warren D. (1964). Pentecostal Catechism. Thorne Printing. Volk, Henry (22 October 2016). A Pentecostal Catechism (1 ed.). CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform. ISBN 9781539696629. Paul Royster (2013). "Milk for Babes. Drawn Out of the Breasts of Both Testaments. Chiefly, for the Spiritual Nourishment of Boston Babes in Either England: But May Be of Like Use for Any Children – Abstract". Electronic Texts in American Studies. Libraries of the University of Nebraska – Lincoln. Retrieved 11 October 2013. Davidson & McTigue 1988, p. 140 "This was the first children's book printed in North America." Hunt 2013, p. 860 "first book especially prepared for North American youth". Kane, Joseph (1997). Famous First Facts, A Record of First Happenings, Discoveries, and Inventions in American History (5th ed.). H.W. Wilson Company. p. 65, item 1729. ISBN 0-8242-0930-3. The first children's book was John Cotton's catechism Milk for Babes, Drawn out of the Breasts of Both Testaments, Chiefly for the Spiritual Nourishment of Boston Babes in either England: But may be of like use for any children Silvey 1995, p. 19 "the first book printed for children in the New World was Spiritual Milk for Boston Babes.". Hawes & Hiner 1985, p. 190 "Spiritual Milk for Boston Babes, the first children's book written and published in America". Library of Congress 1982, p. 26 "A book that the Library lacks, John Cotton's Spiritual Milk for Boston Babes (1656), is the classic example of the moral children's book. In this small question-and-answer manual, the first children's book printed in America". Spurgeon 2012, p. 148 "first children's book written by an American". Barbara Kiefer, Ohio State University-Columbus (2010). "Charlotte Huck's Children's Literature". Online Learning center. McGraw-Hill Higher Education. Retrieved 11 October 2013. John Cotton's catechism, Spiritual Milk for Boston Babes in Either England, Drawn from the Breasts of Both Testaments for Their Souls' Nourishment, was originally published in England in 1646, and revised for American children in 1656, the first book written and printed for children in the American colonies. electricpulp.com. "ČĪDAG ANDARZ Ī PŌRYŌTKĒŠĀN – Encyclopaedia Iranica". www.iranicaonline.org. Archived from the original on 10 December 2017. Retrieved 8 May 2018. Peterson, Joseph H. "Chidag Andarz i Poryotkeshan: A Zoroastrian Catechism". www.avesta.org. Archived from the original on 15 September 2017. Retrieved 8 May 2018. Jean-Charles Buttier, Émilie Delivré (ed.),"Les catéchismes républicains Archived 2009-11-20 at the Wayback Machine", La Révolution française, Institut d'Histoire de la Révolution Française, Paris, sept. 2009. "Catechism of the history of Newfoundland". 8 August 2004. Archived from the original on 8 August 2004. Retrieved 8 May 2018. William Jasper Nicolls, Coal Catechism, 1898, published by George W. Jacobs & Co, 1906. John Bourne, A Catechism of the Steam Engine, London, 1856 Bedacht, Max (1925). "Introduction" (PDF). Principles of Communism. Little Red Library. Chicago: Daily Worker Pub. Co. p. 4. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 27 April 2016. Hughes, Ted (3 January 2003). "Examination at the Womb Door". Crow. Archived from the original on 26 June 2007. Retrieved 23 June 2007. Davidson, Marshall B.; McTigue, Bernard (1988). Treasures of the New York Public Library. H.N. Abrams. ISBN 978-0-8109-1354-7. Haemig, Mary Jane (2014), Catechisms, EGO – European History Online, Mainz: Institute of European History, retrieved: 17 March 2021 (pdf). Hawes, Joseph M.; Hiner, N. Ray (14 November 1985). American Childhood: A Research Guide and Historical Handbook. Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-23337-1. Hunt, Peter (15 April 2013). International Companion Encyclopedia of Children's Literature. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-87994-6. Retrieved 11 October 2013. Library of Congress (1982). Library of Congress Acquisitions: Rare Book and Special Collections Division. The Library of Congress. Retrieved 11 October 2013. Luther, Martin; Lenker, John Nicholas. Luther's two catechisms explained by himself, in six classic writings, Minneapolis, Minn., The Luther Press, 1908 – Google Books Palmer, Roland F.; McCausland, John G. The Catechist's Handbook; and, The Church's Guide: Teaching the Canadian [Anglican] Church Catechism to Children and to Older Persons (Bracebridge, Ont.: Society of Saint John the Evangelist, 1962). Silvey, Anita (1995). Children's Books and Their Creators. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 978-0-395-65380-7. Spurgeon, Charles (2012). From the Library of Charles Spurgeon: Selections From Writers Who Influenced His Spiritual Journey. Baker Books. ISBN 978-1-4412-7011-5. Various authors include Leonardo Marini, Muzio Calini, Egidio Foscarari, Francisco Foreiro, Charles Borromeo, & William Sirletus. Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article "Catechism". Catechism of the Catholic Church from the official website of the Vatican Catechisme – Laurence Vaux's Catechism Archived 31 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine reprint of the 1583 edition, published by The Chetham Society in 1885 Search the Catechism of the Catholic Church Westminster Shorter Catechism From Christian Classics Ethereal Library Westminster Larger Catechism From Christian Classics Ethereal Library Heidelberg Catechism From Christian Classics Ethereal Library A Catechism of the Steam Engine at Project Gutenberg by John Bourne CatechismClass an interactive tool developed to provide the Catechism of the Catholic Church, Baltimore Catechism, and other Catholic catechisms in an integrated format Series of essays explaining Catechism of the Catholic Church