Akkawi cheese (Arabic: جبنة عكاوي, romanized: jubna ʿakkāwī, also Akawi, Akawieh and Ackawi) is a white brine cheese named after the city of Akka (Acre, present-day Israel). Akkawi cheese is named after the port city of Akka (Arabic: عكّا). Akkawi in Arabic means "from Akka". Akkawi is commonly made with pasteurized cow's milk, but can also be made with goat or sheepmilk. This cheese is largely produced in the Middle East, notably in Israel, Palestine, Lebanon, Jordan, Syria, Egypt, and Cyprus. In these regions, people usually eat it with a soft flatbread during lunch and dinner. Akkawi is hand-packed into square draining hoops and then cured in a salted whey brine for two days. The color is white and it has a smooth texture and a mild salty taste. It is commonly used as a table cheese eaten by itself or paired with fruit. The texture can be compared to mozzarella, feta or a mizithra, since it does not melt easily. Akkawi can be stored up to a year. The texture and flavor is a result of its specific culturing from its curds that are kept together for a prolonged period longer than simpler tasting curd cheese such as Syrian cheese when akkai is transformed into cheese. The supply of akkawi has often been a problem in the Middle East.[citation needed] During the Lebanese Civil War, dairy animals were slaughtered and the country had to import akkawi from Eastern Europe. In Los Angeles, people used to make a substitute for akkawi by soaking feta cheese in several changes of water to desalinate it. Food portal Brined cheese – Cheese that is matured in brine List of cheeses – List of cheeses by place of origin List of stretch-curd cheeses – Cheeses prepared using the pasta filata technique "Ackawi - Cheese.com". www.cheese.com. Retrieved 2016-04-18. Tamime, A. Y. (1991). R. K. Robinson and A. Y. Tamime (ed.). Feta and Related Cheeses. Woodhead Publishing. pp. 209–216. ISBN 978-1-85573-278-0. "Ackawi". Retrieved 24 March 2015. Burm, Linda (28 January 1993). "MARKETS : Pulling Strings: Cheese From the East". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 24 March 2015.