A cruiseferry is a ship that combines the features of a cruise ship and a Ro-Pax ferry. Many passengers travel with the ships for the cruise experience, staying only a few hours at the destination port or not leaving the ship at all, while others use the ships as means of transportation. Cruiseferry traffic is mainly concentrated in the seas of Northern Europe, especially the Baltic Sea and the North Sea. However, similar ships traffic across the English Channel as well as the Irish Sea, Mediterranean and even on the North Atlantic. Cruiseferries also operate from India, China and Australia. In the northern Baltic Sea, two major rival companies, Viking Line and Silja Line, have for decades competed on the routes between Turku and Helsinki in Finland and Sweden's capital Stockholm. Since the 1990s Tallink has also risen as a major company in the area, culminating with acquisition of Silja Line in 2006. The term "cruiseferry" did not come into use until the 1980s, although it has been retroactively applied to earlier ferries that have large cabin capabilities and public spaces in addition to their car- and passenger-carrying capacity.[citation needed] Eckerö Linjen () Viking Line Spirit of Tasmania BC Ferries Marine Atlantic Jadrolinija DFDS Seaways Tallink Smyril Line Eckerö Line Silja Line (operated by Tallink) () Viking Line Finnlines Wasa Line Brittany Ferries Corsica Ferries - Sardinia Ferries Corsica Linea ANEK Lines Blue Star Ferries Hellenic Seaways LANE Lines Levante Ferries Minoan Lines NEL Lines Superfast Ferries Ventouris Ferries Brittany Ferries DFDS Seaways Irish Ferries P&O Ferries Stena Line Grandi Navi Veloci Grimaldi Lines Corsica Ferries Moby Lines Tirrenia di Navigazione Baja Ferries Color Line Fjord Line Polferries Trasmediterranea Baleària Stena Line  UK P&O Ferries  UK NorthLink Ferries  UK Condor Ferries  UK Irish Ferries  UK Stena Line  UK Caledonian MacBrayne Taiheiyō Ferry Pont-Aven, Brittany Ferries' flagship. M/S Silja Europa, the largest cruiseferry in the world 1993–2001. M/S Cinderella departing Helsinki. M/S Mega Regina at Ile Rousse M/S Color Fantasy, the largest cruiseferry in the world 2004–2007. MS Cruise Roma in Civitavecchia, Italy. M/S Danielle Casanova in Bastia, Corsica, France. M/S Pride of Rotterdam MS Galaxy in Helsinki West Harbour. MS Scandinavia in Gdańsk, Poland. M/S Pearl of Scandinavia in Oslo, Norway MV Cap Finistère of Brittany Ferries sailing from Portsmouth International Port, UK for Bilbao, Spain. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cruiseferries. River cruise