Tom and Jerry: Spy Quest is a 2015 American animated direct-to-video action comedy film produced by Warner Bros. Animation. Despite the film being purposed for the Tom and Jerry franchise, it is a crossover between Tom and Jerry and Hanna-Barbera's Jonny Quest and served as a direct sequel to the original 1964 series. It is also the first Jonny Quest entry produced without the assistance of William Hanna and Joseph Barbera, who died in 2001 and 2006 respectively. It was originally released digitally on June 9, 2015, followed by a DVD release on June 23, 2015. In this film, Jonny Quest's original voice actor, Tim Matheson, is involved. The film begins with a trip to the beach for Tom and Jerry who soon get into a chase. On the same day, The duo later encounter Jonny Quest and Hadji, along with their canine companion Bandit. Tom fights off an evil cat army and sends them to retreat. Later, they meet Race Bannon who takes them to Quest Labs where they meet Johnny's father, Dr. Benton Quest, who happens to have the Q sphere, a device that will solve the world's energy problems. Meanwhile, Dr. Quest's nemesis, Dr. Zin soon finds out about the device and he sends his bumbling henchcats Tin, Pan and Alley to steal the device and kidnap Dr. Quest. That evening, Tom, Jerry, Bandit, Hadji, Dr. Quest, Johnny and Race are having dinner. Tom is dissatisfied upon only having a bowl of milk, which leaves him still hungry when he and everyone else go to bed for the night. Before heading for bed, he learns and memorizes the security code, which is 1-2-3-4. The security system is unlocked as Tom helps himself to the food and as a result, the cats easily break into the Quest Labs and abduct Dr. Quest along with Race and steal the device. Johnny Quest and Hadji wake up to see what has happened, rushing to the scene. They pinpoint to the location where the cat army has taken Dr. Quest and Race and rush off to rescue them. They head to Zin's island where Johnny and Hadji are captured by Zin's robots due to Tom's antics, However, Tom and Jerry escape. Jerry decides to help them and Tom, who resist to help them, joins the fight where they help Dr. Quest, Johnny and Hadji escape and successfully destroy the volcano which was to attack the White House. Zin tries to escape on his escape pod, but it is stolen by his henchcats, who get tired of his abuse, forcing Zin to hold on to the pod. Tom, Jerry, Johnny, Hadji, Dr. Quest and Race escape from the island and are awarded by the President and the film ends with Tom chasing Jerry after he made fun of Jerry's small medal. Reese Hartwig as Jonny Quest Eric Bauza as Dr. Benton Quest Michael Hanks as Race Bannon Tia Carrere as Jezebel Jade James Hong as Dr. Zin Joe Alaskey as Droopy Greg Ellis as Tin Jess Harnell as Pan Richard McGonagle as Alley Arnie Pantoja as Hadji Grey DeLisle as Carol Tim Matheson as The President Spike Brandt as Tom, Jerry, Spike, Tyke, and Bandit (Uncredited) The film received positive reviews with praise for its humour and many critics calling it an improvement from previous crossover films. Tom and Jerry: Back to Oz was released on June 21, 2016. Beck, Jerry (March 24, 2015). "DVD TRAILER: Tom & Jerry Meet Jonny Quest in "Spy Quest"". Animation Scoop. Archived from the original on December 22, 2015. Retrieved October 18, 2021. "TOM AND JERRY Team Up With JONNY QUEST in 'TOM AND JERRY: SPY QUEST'". Forces of Geek. March 17, 2015. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved October 18, 2021. "Tom and Jerry: Spy Quest" – via Amazon. Animation outsourced to Yearim Productions. Tom and Jerry: Spy Quest at IMDb