Tom and Jerry's Giant Adventure is a 2013 animated fantasy comedy direct-to-video film starring Tom and Jerry, produced by Warner Bros. Animation. Tom and Jerry are the faithful servants of Jack, son of the founder of a struggling storybook amusement park that gets a much-needed boost thanks to some mysterious magical beans. This marks the latest Tom and Jerry cartoon to feature Red Hot Riding Hood, whom has not appeared in anymore cartoons since. Tom and Jerry live with Jack and his mother in Storybook Town, a fairy tale-inspired theme park. The park has been ailing since the death of its founder, Jack's father. Young Jack is desperate to save the park from the hands of greedy billionaire Mr. Bigley who bought the park's mortgage, setting out with his loyal cat and mouse friends to sell his performing cow to make the next mortgage payment. Too late to sell it to a nearby circus, they trade the cow to a mysterious farmer named Farmer O'Dell for a handful of magic beans. What follows is a journey up a beanstalk to Fairyland, a magical land ruled by a greedy giant named Mr. Ginormous and home to all manner of fabled characters, some portrayed by classic MGM cartoon characters such as Droopy as Old King Cole and Screwy Squirrel as Simple Simon's pieman. Now, Tom and Jerry must put an end to their furry feud long enough to save both Fairyland and Storybook Town. Spike Brandt as Tom Cat (uncredited) William Hanna as Tyke (archive sound, uncredited) Jacob Bertrand as Jack Bradley Garrison Keillor as Narrator and Farmer O'Dell Tom Wilson as Mr. Bigley and Mr. Ginormous Kath Soucie as Tuffy Joe Alaskey as Droopy as Old King Cole Paul Reubens as Screwy Squirrel as the Pieman Richard McGonagle as Barney Bear Phil LaMarr as Spike as Old Mother Hubbard's Dog John DiMaggio as Meathead Dog as Simple Simon Grey DeLisle as Mrs. Bradley, Red as the Red Fairy Chaz Lipp states the film is "a harmless hour of fun that should ably hold the attention of its target audiences," but confused about the lack of "fighting, chasing and general struggle between the title characters." Tom and Jerry: The Lost Dragon was released on September 2, 2014. Lipp, Chaz (August 4, 2013). "Blu-ray Review: Tom and Jerry's Giant Adventure". The Morton Report. Archived from the original on May 10, 2021. Retrieved March 20, 2020. Tom and Jerry's Giant Adventure at IMDb v t e