Islamism (also often called political Islam) is a religio-political ideology. The advocates of Islamism, also known as "al-Islamiyyun", are dedicated to realizing their ideological interpretation of Islam within the context of the state or society. The majority of them are affiliated with Islamic institutions or social mobilization movements, often designated as "al-harakat al-Islamiyyah." Islamists emphasize the implementation of sharia, pan-Islamic political unity, the creation of Islamic states, (eventually unified), and rejection of non-Muslim influences—particularly Western or universal economic, military, political, social, or cultural. In its original formulation, Islamism described an ideology seeking to revive Islam to its past assertiveness and glory, purifying it of foreign elements, reasserting its role into "social and political as well as personal life"; and in particular "reordering government and society in accordance with laws prescribed by Islam" (i.e. Sharia). According to at least one observer (author Robin Wright), Islamist movements have "arguably altered the Middle East more than any trend since the modern states gained independence", redefining "politics and even borders". Central and prominent figures in 20th-century Islamism include Sayyid Rashid Riḍā, Hassan al-Banna (founder of the Muslim Brotherhood), Sayyid Qutb, Abul A'la Maududi, Ruhollah Khomeini (founder of the Islamic Republic of Iran), Hassan Al-Turabi. Syrian Sunni cleric Muhammad Rashid Riḍā, a fervent opponent of Westernization, Zionism and nationalism, advocated Sunni internationalism through revolutionary restoration of a pan-Islamic Caliphate to politically unite the Muslim World. Riḍā was a strong exponent of Islamic vanguardism, the belief that Muslim community should be guided by clerical elites (ulema) who steered the efforts for religious education and Islamic revival. Riḍā's Salafi-Arabist synthesis and Islamist ideals greatly influenced his disciples like Hasan al-Banna, an Egyptian schoolteacher who founded the Muslim Brotherhood movement, and Hajji Amin al-Husayni, the anti-Zionist Grand Mufti of Jerusalem. Al-Banna and Maududi called for a "reformist" strategy to re-Islamizing society through grassroots social and political activism. Other Islamists (Al-Turabi) are proponents of a "revolutionary" strategy of Islamizing society through exercise of state power, or (Sayyid Qutb) for combining grassroots Islamization with armed revolution. The term has been applied to non-state reform movements, political parties, militias and revolutionary groups. At least one author (Graham E. Fuller) has argued for a broader notion of Islamism as a form of identity politics, involving "support for [Muslim] identity, authenticity, broader regionalism, revivalism, [and] revitalization of the community." Islamists themselves prefer terms such as "Islamic movement", or "Islamic activism" to "Islamism", objecting to the insinuation that Islamism is anything other than Islam renewed and revived. In public and academic contexts, the term "Islamism" has been criticized as having been given connotations of violence, extremism, and violations of human rights, by the Western mass media, leading to Islamophobia and stereotyping. Following the Arab Spring, many post-Islamist currents became heavily involved in democratic politics, while others spawned "the most aggressive and ambitious Islamist militia" to date, such as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Originally the term Islamism was simply used to mean the religion of Islam, not an ideology or movement. It first appeared in the English language as Islamismus in 1696, and as Islamism in 1712. The term appears in the U.S. Supreme Court decision in In Re Ross (1891). By the turn of the twentieth century the shorter and purely Arabic term "Islam" had begun to displace it, and by 1938, when Orientalist scholars completed The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Islamism seems to have virtually disappeared from English usage.[citation needed] The term remained "practically absent from the vocabulary" of scholars, writers or journalists until the Iranian Islamic Revolution of 1978–79, which brought Ayatollah Khomeini's concept of "Islamic government" to Iran. This new usage appeared without taking into consideration how the term Islamist (m. sing.: Islami, pl. nom/acc: Islamiyyun, gen. Islamiyyin; f. sing/pl: Islamiyyah) was already being used in traditional Arabic scholarship in a theological sense as in relating to the religion of Islam, not a political ideology. In heresiographical, theological and historical works, such as al-Ash'ari's well-known encyclopaedia Maqālāt al-Islāmiyyīn (The Opinions of The Islamists), an Islamist refers to any person who attributes himself to Islam without affirming nor negating that attribution. If used consistently, it is for impartiality, but if used in reference to a certain person or group in particular without others, it implies that the author is either unsure whether to affirm or negate their attribution to Islam, or trying to insinuate his disapproval of the attribution without controversy. In contrast, referring to a person as a Muslim or a Kafir implies an explicit affirmation or a negation of that person's attribution to Islam. In order to evade the problem resulting from the confusion between the Western and Arabic usage of the term Islamist, Arab journalists invented the term Islamawi (Islamian) instead of Islami (Islamist) in reference to the politicists, which is nonetheless sometimes criticized as being ungrammatical. Islamism has been defined as: "the belief that Islam should guide social and political as well as personal life" (Sheri Berman); the belief that Islam should influence political systems (Cambridge English Dictionary); "the [Islamic] ideology that guides society as a whole and that [teaches] law must be in conformity with the Islamic sharia", (W. E. Shepard); a combination of two pre-existing trends movements to revive the faith, weakened by "foreign influence, political opportunism, moral laxity, and the forgetting of sacred texts"; the more recent movement against imperialism/colonialism, morphed into a more simple anti-Westernism; formerly embraced by leftists and nationalists but whose supporters have turned to Islam. a form of "religionized politics" and an instance of religious fundamentalism that imagines an Islamic community claiming global hegemony for its values (Bassam Tibi); "political movement that favors reordering government and society in accordance with laws prescribed by Islam" (Associated Press stylebook); a political ideology which seeks to enforce Islamic precepts and norms as generally applicable rules for people's conduct; and whose adherents seek a state based on Islamic values and laws (sharia) and rejecting Western guiding principles, such as freedom of opinion, freedom of the press, artistic freedom and freedom of religion (Thomas Volk); a broad set of political ideologies that utilize and draw inspiration from Islamic symbols and traditions in pursuit of a sociopolitical objective—also called "political Islam" (Britannica); "[... has become shorthand for] 'Muslims we don't like.'" (Council on American–Islamic Relations—in complaint about AP's earlier definition of Islamist); In "Western popular discourse generally uses 'Islamism' when discussing the negative or 'that-which-is-bad' in Muslim communities. The signifier, 'Islam,' on the other hand, is reserved for the positive or neutral." (David Belt). a movement so broad and flexible it reaches out to "everything to everyone" in Islam, making it "unsustainable" (Tarek Osman); an alternative social provider to the poor masses; an angry platform for the disillusioned young; a loud trumpet-call announcing "a return to the pure religion" to those seeking an identity; a "progressive, moderate religious platform" for the affluent and liberal; ... and at the extremes, a violent vehicle for rejectionists and radicals. an Islamic "movement that seeks cultural differentiation from the West and reconnection with the pre-colonial symbolic universe", (François Burgat); "the active assertion and promotion of beliefs, prescriptions, laws or policies that are held to be Islamic in character," (International Crisis Group); a movement of "Muslims who draw upon the belief, symbols, and language of Islam to inspire, shape, and animate political activity;" which may contain moderate, tolerant, peaceful activists or those who "preach intolerance and espouse violence", (Robert H. Pelletreau); "All who seek to Islamize their environment, whether in relation to their lives in society, their family circumstances, or the workplace ...", (Roy Olivier). Islamists simply believe that their movement is either a corrected version or a revival of Islam, but others believe that Islamism is a modern deviation from Islam which should either be denounced or dismissed. A writer for the International Crisis Group maintains that "the conception of 'political Islam'" is a creation of Americans to explain the Iranian Islamic Revolution, ignoring the fact that (according to the writer) Islam is by definition political. In fact it is quietist/non-political Islam, not Islamism, that requires explanation, which the author gives—calling it an historical fluke of the "short-lived era of the heyday of secular Arab nationalism between 1945 and 1970". Hayri Abaza argues that the failure to distinguish Islam from Islamism leads many in the West to equate the two; they think that by supporting illiberal Islamic (Islamist) regimes, they are being respectful of Islam, to the detriment of those who seek to separate religion from politics. Another source distinguishes Islamist from Islamic by emphasizing the fact that Islam "refers to a religion and culture in existence over a millennium", whereas Islamism "is a political/religious phenomenon linked to the great events of the 20th century". Islamists have, at least at times, defined themselves as "Islamiyyoun/Islamists" to differentiate themselves from "Muslimun/Muslims". Daniel Pipes describes Islamism as a modern ideology that owes more to European utopian political ideologies and "isms" than to the traditional Islamic religion. According to Salman Sayyid, "Islamism is not a replacement of Islam akin to the way it could be argued that communism and fascism are secularized substitutes for Christianity." Rather, it is "a constellation of political projects that seek to position Islam in the centre of any social order". The modern revival of Islamic devotion and the attraction to things Islamic can be traced to several events. By the end of World War I, most Muslim states were seen to be dominated by the Christian-leaning Western states. Explanations offered were: that the claims of Islam were false and the Christian or post-Christian West had finally come up with another system that was superior; or Islam had failed through not being true to itself. The second explanation being preferred by Muslims, a redoubling of faith and devotion by the faithful was called for to reverse this tide. The connection between the lack of an Islamic spirit and the lack of victory was underscored by the disastrous defeat of Arab nationalist-led armies fighting Israel under the slogan "Land, Sea and Air" in the 1967 Six-Day War, compared to the (perceived) near-victory of the Yom Kippur War six years later. In that war the military's slogan was "God is Great". Along with the Yom Kippur War came the Arab oil embargo where the (Muslim) Persian Gulf oil-producing states' dramatic decision to cut back on production and quadruple the price of oil, made the terms oil, Arabs and Islam synonymous with power throughout the world, and especially in the Muslim world's public imagination. Many Muslims believe as Saudi Prince Saud al Faisal did that the hundreds of billions of dollars in wealth obtained from the Persian Gulf's huge oil deposits were nothing less than a gift from God to the Islamic faithful. As the Islamic revival gained momentum, governments such as Egypt's, which had previously repressed (and was still continuing to repress) Islamists, joined the bandwagon. They banned alcohol and flooded the airwaves with religious programming, giving the movement even more exposure. The abolition of the Ottoman Sultanate by the Grand National Assembly of Turkey on 1 November 1922 ended the Ottoman Empire, which had lasted since 1299. On 11 November 1922, at the Conference of Lausanne, the sovereignty of the Grand National Assembly exercised by the Government in Angora (now Ankara) over Turkey was recognized. The last sultan, Mehmed VI, departed the Ottoman capital, Constantinople (now Istanbul), on 17 November 1922. The legal position was solidified with the signing of the Treaty of Lausanne on 24 July 1923. In March 1924, the Caliphate was abolished legally by the Turkish National Assembly, marking the end of Ottoman influence. This shocked the Sunni clerical world, and many felt the need to present Islam not as a traditional religion but as an innovative socio-political ideology of a modern nation-state. The reaction to new realities of the modern world gave birth to Islamist ideologues like Rashid Rida and Abul A'la Maududi and organizations such as Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt and Majlis-e-Ahrar-ul-Islam in India. Rashid Rida, a prominent Syrian-born Salafi theologian based in Egypt, was known as a revivalist of Hadith studies in Sunni seminaries and a pioneering theoretician of Islamism in the modern age. During 1922–1923, Rida published a series of articles in seminal Al-Manar magazine titled "The Caliphate or the Supreme Imamate". In this highly influential treatise, Rida advocates for the restoration of Caliphate guided by Islamic jurists and proposes gradualist measures of education, reformation and purification through the efforts of Salafiyya reform movements across the globe. Sayyid Rashid Rida had visited India in 1912 and was impressed by the Deoband and Nadwatul Ulama seminaries. These seminaries carried the legacy of Sayyid Ahmad Shahid and his pre-modern Islamic emirate. In British India, the Khilafat movement (1919–24) following World War I led by Shaukat Ali, Maulana Mohammad Ali Jauhar, Hakim Ajmal Khan and Abul Kalam Azad came to exemplify South Asian Muslims' aspirations for Caliphate. Muslim alienation from Western ways, including its political ways. The memory in Muslim societies of the many centuries of "cultural and institutional success" of Islamic civilization that have created an "intense resistance to an alternative 'civilizational order'", such as Western civilization. The proximity of the core of the Muslim world to Europe and Christendom where it first conquered and then was conquered. Iberia in the eighth century, the Crusades which began in the eleventh century, then for centuries the Ottoman Empire, were all fields of war between Europe and Islam. In the words of Bernard Lewis: For almost a thousand years, from the first Moorish landing in Spain to the second Turkish siege of Vienna, Europe was under constant threat from Islam. In the early centuries it was a double threat—not only of invasion and conquest, but also of conversion and assimilation. All but the easternmost provinces of the Islamic realm had been taken from Christian rulers, and the vast majority of the first Muslims west of Iran and Arabia were converts from Christianity ... Their loss was sorely felt and it heightened the fear that a similar fate was in store for Europe. The Islamic world felt its own anger and resentment at the much more recent technological superiority of westerners who, are the perpetual teachers; we, the perpetual students. Generation after generation, this asymmetry has generated an inferiority complex, forever exacerbated by the fact that their innovations progress at a faster pace than we can absorb them. ... The best tool to reverse the inferiority complex to a superiority complex ... Islam would give the whole culture a sense of dignity. For Islamists, the primary threat of the West is cultural rather than political or economic. Cultural dependency robs one of faith and identity and thus destroys Islam and the Islamic community (ummah) far more effectively than political rule. Whatever unity religious Muslims and the capitalist west felt in the face of a common atheist Communist enemy disappeared with the end of the Cold War and the end of the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan. Islamism is described by Graham E. Fuller as part of identity politics, specifically the religiously oriented nationalism that emerged in the Third World in the 1970s: "resurgent Hinduism in India, Religious Zionism in Israel, militant Buddhism in Sri Lanka, resurgent Sikh nationalism in the Punjab, 'Liberation Theology' of Catholicism in Latin America, and Islamism in the Muslim world." By the late 1960s, non-Soviet Muslim-majority countries had won their independence and they tended to fall into one of the two cold-war blocs - with "Nasser's Egypt, Baathist Syria and Iraq, Muammar el-Qaddafi's Libya, Algeria under Ahmed Ben Bella and Houari Boumedienne, Southern Yemen, and Sukarno's Indonesia" aligned with Moscow. Aware of the close attachment of the population with Islam, "school books of the 1960s in these countries "went out of their way to impress upon children that socialism was simply Islam properly understood."Olivier Roy writes that the "failure of the 'Arab socialist' model ... left room for new protest ideologies to emerge in deconstructed societies ..." Gilles Kepel notes that when a collapse in oil prices led to widespread violent and destructive rioting by the urban poor in Algeria in 1988, what might have appeared to be a natural opening for the left, was instead the beginning of major victories for the Islamist Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) party. The reason being the corruption and economic malfunction of the policies of the Third World socialist ruling party (FNL) had "largely discredited" the "vocabulary of socialism". In the post-colonial era, many Muslim-majority states such as Indonesia, Egypt, Syria, and Iraq, were ruled by authoritarian regimes which were often continuously dominated by the same individuals or their cadres for decades. Simultaneously, the military played a significant part in the government decisions in many of these states (the outsized role played by the military could be seen also in democratic Turkey). The authoritarian regimes, backed by military support, took extra measures to silence leftist opposition forces, often with the help of foreign powers. Silencing of leftist opposition deprived the masses a channel to express their economic grievances and frustration toward the lack of democratic processes. As a result, in the post-Cold War era, civil society-based Islamist movements such as the Muslim Brotherhood were the only organizations capable to provide avenues of protest. The dynamic was repeated after the states had gone through a democratic transition. In Indonesia, some secular political parties have contributed to the enactment of religious bylaws in order to counter the popularity of Islamist oppositions. In Egypt, during the short period of the democratic experiment, Muslim Brotherhood seized the momentum by being the most cohesive political movement among the opposition. Few observers contest the immense influence of Islamism within the Muslim world. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, political movements based on the liberal ideology of free expression and democratic rule have led the opposition in other parts of the world such as Latin America, Eastern Europe and many parts of Asia; however "the simple fact is that political Islam currently reigns [circa 2002-3] as the most powerful ideological force across the Muslim world today". The strength of Islamism also draws from the strength of religiosity in general in the Muslim world. Compared to other societies around the globe, "[w]hat is striking about the Islamic world is that ... it seems to have been the least penetrated by irreligion". Where other peoples may look to the physical or social sciences for answers in areas which their ancestors regarded as best left to scripture, in the Muslim world, religion has become more encompassing, not less, as "in the last few decades, it has been the fundamentalists who have increasingly represented the cutting edge" of Muslim culture. Writing in 2009, German journalist Sonja Zekri described Islamists in Egypt and other Muslim countries as "extremely influential. ... They determine how one dresses, what one eats. In these areas, they are incredibly successful. ... Even if the Islamists never come to power, they have transformed their countries." Political Islamists were described as "competing in the democratic public square in places like Turkey, Tunisia, Malaysia and Indonesia". Islamism is not a united movement and takes different forms and spans a wide range of strategies and tactics towards the powers in place—"destruction, opposition, collaboration, indifference"—not because (or not just because) of differences of opinions, but because it varies as circumstances change.p. 54 Moderate and reformist Islamists who accept and work within the democratic process include parties like the Tunisian Ennahda Movement. Jamaat-e-Islami of Pakistan is basically a socio-political and "vanguard party" working with in Pakistan's Democratic political process, but has also gained political influence through military coup d'états in the past. Other Islamist groups like Hezbollah in Lebanon and Hamas in Palestine participate in the democratic and political process as well as armed attacks by their powerful paramilitary wings. Jihadist organizations like al-Qaeda and the Egyptian Islamic Jihad, and groups such as the Taliban, entirely reject democracy, seeing it as a form of kufr (disbelief) calling for offensive jihad on a religious basis. Another major division within Islamism is between what Graham E. Fuller has described as the conservative "guardians of the tradition" (Salafis, such as those in the Wahhabi movement) and the revolutionary "vanguard of change and Islamic reform" centered around the Muslim Brotherhood. Olivier Roy argues that "Sunni pan-Islamism underwent a remarkable shift in the second half of the 20th century" when the Muslim Brotherhood movement and its focus on Islamisation of pan-Arabism was eclipsed by the Salafi movement with its emphasis on "sharia rather than the building of Islamic institutions". Following the Arab Spring (starting in 2011), Roy has described Islamism as "increasingly interdependent" with democracy in much of the Arab Muslim world, such that "neither can now survive without the other." While Islamist political culture itself may not be democratic, Islamists need democratic elections to maintain their legitimacy. At the same time, their popularity is such that no government can call itself democratic that excludes mainstream Islamist groups. Arguing distinctions between "radical/moderate" or "violent/peaceful" Islamism were "simplistic", circa 2017, scholar Morten Valbjørn put forth these "much more sophisticated typologies" of Islamism: resistance/revolutionary/reformist Islamism, Islahi-Ikhwani/Jihadi-Ikhwani/Islah-salafi/Jihadi-salafi Islamism, reformist/revolutionary/societal/spiritual Islamism, Third Worldist/Neo-Third Worldist Islamism, Statist/Non-Statist Islamism, Salafist Jihadi/Ikhwani Islamism, or mainstream/irredentist jihadi/doctrinaire jihadi Islamism. Throughout the 80s and 90s, major moderate Islamist movements such as the Muslim Brotherhood and the Ennahda were excluded from democratic political participation. At least in part for that reason, Islamists attempted to overthrow the government in the Algerian Civil War (1991–2002) and waged a terror campaign in Egypt in the 90s. These attempts were crushed and in the 21st century, Islamists turned increasingly to non-violent methods, and "moderate Islamists" now make up the majority of the contemporary Islamist movements. Among some Islamists, Democracy has been harmonized with Islam by means of Shura (consultation). The tradition of consultation by the ruler being considered Sunnah of the prophet Muhammad, (Majlis-ash-Shura being a common name for legislative bodies in Islamic countries). Among the varying goals, strategies, and outcomes of "moderate Islamist movements" are a formal abandonment of their original vision of implementing sharia (also termed Post-Islamism) -- done by the Ennahda Movement of Tunisia, and Prosperous Justice Party (PKS) of Indonesia. Others, such as the National Congress of Sudan, have implemented the sharia with support from wealthy, conservative states (primarily Saudi Arabia). According to one theory -- "inclusion-moderation"—the interdependence of political outcome with strategy means that the more moderate the Islamists become, the more likely they are to be politically included (or unsuppressed); and the more accommodating the government is, the less "extreme" Islamists become. A prototype of harmonizing Islamist principles within the modern state framework was the "Turkish model", based on the apparent success of the rule of the Turkish Justice and Development Party (AKP) led by Recep Tayyip Erdoğan. Turkish model, however, came "unstuck" after a purge and violations of democratic principles by the Erdoğan regime. Critics of the concept — which include both Islamists who reject democracy and anti-Islamists — hold that Islamist aspirations are fundamentally incompatible with the democratic principles. The contemporary Salafi movement is sometimes described as a variety of Islamism and sometimes as a different school of Islam, such as a "phase between fundamentalism and Islamism". Originally a reformist movement of Jamal al-Din al-Afghani, Muhammad Abdul, and Rashid Rida, that rejected maraboutism (Sufism), the established schools of fiqh, and demanded individual interpretation (ijtihad) of the Quran and Sunnah; it evolved into a movement embracing the conservative doctrines of the medieval Hanbali theologian Ibn Taymiyyah. While all salafi believe Islam covers every aspect of life, that sharia law must be implemented completely and that the Caliphate must be recreated to rule the Muslim world, they differ in strategies and priorities, which generally fall into three groups: The "quietist" school advocates Islamization through preaching, educating the masses on sharia and "purification" of religious practices and ignoring government. Activist (or haraki) Salafi activism encourages political participation—opposing government loans with interest or normalization of relations with Israel, etc. As of 2013, this school makes up the majority of Salafism. Salafist political parties in the Muslim world include Hizb al-Nour in Egypt, the Al Islah Party of Yemen and Al Asalah of Bahrain. Salafi jihadism, (see below) is inspired by the ideology of Sayyid Qutb (Qutbism, see below), and sees secular institutions as an enemy of Islam, advocating revolution in order to pave the way for the establishment of a new Caliphate. One of the antecedents of the contemporary Salafi movement is Wahhabism, an 18th-century reform movement from the Arabia founded by Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab. Ibn Abd al-Wahhab, gave his bay'ah (pledge of allegiance to a ruler/commander), to the House of Saud, the rulers of Saudi Arabia, and so have almost all Wahhabi since, (small numbers have become Salafi Jihadist or other dissidents). Obedience to a ruler precluding any political activism (short of an advisor whispering advice to the ruler), there are few Wahhabi Islamists, at least in Saudi Arabia. Wahhabism and Salafism more or less merged by the 1960s in Saudi Arabia, and together they benefited from $100s of billions in state-sponsored worldwide propagation of conservative Islam financed by Saudi petroleum exports, (a phenomenon often dubbed as Petro-Islam). (This financing has contributed indirectly to the upsurge of Salafi Jihadism.) Qutbism refers to the Jihadist ideology formulated by Sayyid Qutb, (an influential figure of the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt during the 50s and 60s). Qutbism argued that not only was sharia essential for Islam, but that since it was not in force, Islam did not really exist in the Muslim world, which was in Jahiliyya (the state of pre-Islamic ignorance). To remedy this situation he urged a two-pronged attack of 1) preaching to convert, and 2) jihad to forcibly eliminate the "structures" of Jahiliyya. Defensive jihad against Jahiliyya Muslim governments would not be enough. "Truth and falsehood cannot coexist on this earth", so offensive Jihad was needed to eliminate Jahiliyya not only from the Islamic homeland but from the face of the Earth. In addition, vigilance against Western and Jewish conspiracies against Islam would-be needed. Although Qutb was executed before he could fully spell out his ideology, his ideas were disseminated and expanded on by the later generations, among them Abdullah Yusuf Azzam and Ayman Al-Zawahiri, who was a student of Qutb's brother Muhammad Qutb and later became a mentor of Osama bin Laden. Al-Zawahiri helped to pass on stories of "the purity of Qutb's character" and persecution he suffered, and played an extensive role in the normalization of offensive Jihad among followers of Qutb. Salafi Jihadism or revolutionary Salafism emerged prominent during the 80s when Osama bin Laden and thousands of other militant Muslims came from around the Muslim world to help fight the Soviet Union after it invaded Afghanistan. Local Afghan Muslims had declared jihad against the Soviets (mujahideen) and were aided with financial, logistical and military support by Saudi Arabia and the United States, but after Soviet forces left Afghanistan, this funding and interest by America and Saudi ceased. The international volunteers, (originally organized by Abdullah Azzam), were triumphant in victory, away from the moderating influence of home and family, among the radicalized influence of other militants. Wanting to capitalize on financial, logistical and military network that had been developed they sought to continue waging jihad elsewhere. Their new targets, however, included the United States—funder of the mujahideen but "perceived as the greatest enemy of the faith"; and governments of majority-Muslims countries—perceived of as apostates from Islam. Salafist-jihadist ideology combined the literal and traditional interpretations of scripture of Salafists, with the promotion and fighting of jihad against military and civilian targets in the pursuit of the establishment of an Islamic state and eventually a new Caliphate. Other characteristics of the movement include the formal process of taking bay'ah (oath of allegiance) to the leader (amir), which is inspired by Hadiths and early Muslim practice and included in Wahhabi teaching; and the concepts of "near enemy" (governments of majority-Muslims countries) and "far enemy" (United States and other Western countries). (The term "near enemy" was coined by Mohammed Abdul-Salam Farag who led the assassination of Anwar al-Sadat with Egyptian Islamic Jihad (EIJ) in 1981.) The "far enemy" was introduced and formally declared under attack by al-Qaeda in 1996. The ideology saw its rise during the 90s when the Muslim world experienced numerous geopolitical crisis, notably the Algerian Civil War (1991–2002), Bosnian War (1992–1995), and the First Chechen War (1994–1996). Within these conflicts, political Islam often acted as a mobilizing factor for the local belligerents, who demanded financial, logistical and military support from al-Qaeda, in the exchange for active proliferation of the ideology. After the 1998 bombings of US embassies, September 11 attacks (2001), the US-led invasion of Afghanistan (2001) and Iraq (2003), Salafi Jihadism lost its momentum, being devastated by the US counterterrorism operations, culminating in bin Laden's death in 2011. After the Arab Spring (2011) and subsequent Syrian Civil War (2011–present), the remnants of al-Qaeda franchise in Iraq restored their capacity, rapidly developing into the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, spreading its influence throughout the conflict zones of MENA region and the globe. Salafi Jihadism makes up a minority of the contemporary Islamist movements. Although most of the research and reporting about Islamism or political Islam has been focused on Sunni Islamist movements, Islamism exists in Twelver Shia Islam (the second largest branch of Islam that makes up approximately 10% of all Muslims.). Islamist Shi'ism, also known as Shi'i Islamism, is primarily but not exclusively associated with the thought of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, with the Islamist Revolution he led, Islamic Republic of Iran that he founded, and the religious-political activities and resources of the republic. Compared to the "Types" of Islamism mentioned above, Khomeinism differs from Wahhabism (which does not consider Shi'ism truly Islamic), Salafism (both orthodox or Jihadi—Shi'a do not consider some of the most prominent salaf worthy of emulation), reformist Islamism (the Islamic Republic executed more than 3,400 political dissidents between June 1981 and March 1982 in the process of consolidating power). Khomeini and his followers helped translate the works of Maududi and Qutb into Persian and were influenced by them, but their views differed from them and other Sunni Islamists in being "more leftist and more clerical": more leftist in the propaganda campaign leading up to the revolution, emphasizing exploitation of the poor by the rich and of Muslims by imperialism; more clerical in the new post-revolutionary state, where clerics were in control of the levers of power (the Supreme Leader, Guardian Council, etc., under the concept of Velayat-e Faqih.). Khomeini was a "radical" Islamist, like Qutb and unlike Maudidi. He believed that foreigners, Jews and their agents were conspiring "to keep us backward, to keep us in our present miserable state". Those who call themselves Muslims but were secular and Westernizing, were not just corrupt or misguided, but "agents" of the Western governments, helping to "plunder" Muslim lands as part of a long-term conspiracy against Islam. Only the rule of an Islamic jurist, administering Sharia law, stood between this abomination and justice, and could not wait for peaceful, gradual transition. It is the duty of Muslims to "destroy" "all traces" of any other sort of government other than true Islamic governance because these are "systems of unbelief". "Troublesome" groups that cause "corruption in Muslim society," and damage "Islam and the Islamic state" are to be eliminated just as the Prophet Muhammad eliminated the Jews of Bani Qurayza. Islamic revolution to install "the form of government willed by Islam" will not end with one Islamic state in Iran. Once this government comes "into being, none of the governments now existing in the world" will "be able to resist it;" they will "all capitulate". Khomeini's form of Islamism was particularly unique in the world because it completely swept the old regime away, created a new regime with a new constitution, new institutions and a new concept of governance (the Velayat-e Faqih). A historical event, it changed militant Islam from a topic of limited impact and interest to a topic that few either inside or outside the Muslim world were unaware of. As he originally described it in lectures to his students, the system of "Islamic Government" was one where the leading Islamic jurist would enforce sharia law—law which "has absolute authority over all individuals and the Islamic government". The jurist would not be elected, and no legislature would be needed since divine law called for rule by jurist and "there is not a single topic in human life for which Islam has not provided instruction and established a norm". Without this system, injustice, corruption, waste, exploitation and sin would reign, and Islam would decay. This plan was disclosed to his students and the religious community but not widely publicized. The constitution of the Islamic Republic written after the revolution did include a legislature and president, but supervising the entire government was a "Supreme Leader"/guardian jurist. Islamist Shi'ism has been crucial to the development of worldwide Islamism, because the Iranian regime attempted to export its revolution. Although, the Islamist ideology was originally imported from Muslim Brotherhood, Iranian relations between the Muslim Brotherhood and Islamic Republic of Iran deteriorated due to its involvement in the Syrian civil war. However, the majority Usuli Shi'ism rejects the idea of an Islamist State in the period of Occultation of the Hidden Imam. Twelver Shia Muslim live mainly in a half dozen or so countries scattered around the Middle East and South Asia. The Islamic Republic of Iran has become "the de facto leader" of the Shi'i world by virtue of being the largest Shia-majority state, having a long history of national cohesion and Shia-rule, being the site of the first and "only true" Islamist revolution (see History section below), and having the financial resources of a major petroleum exporter. Iran's influence has spread into a cultural-geographic area of "Irano-Arab Shiism", establishing Iranian regional power, supporting "Shia militias and parties beyond its borders", intertwining assistance to fellow Shi'a with "Iranization" of them. Shi'i Islamism in Iran has been influenced by the Sunni Islamists and their organizations, particularly Sayyid Rashid Rida, Hassan al-Banna (founder of the Muslim Brotherhood organization), Sayyid Qutb,Abul A'la Maududi, but has also been described as "distinct" from Sunni Muslim Brotherhood Islamism, "more leftist and more clerical", with its own historical influencers: Sheikh Fazlullah Nouri, a cleric of the Qajar dynasty court and the leader of the anti-constitutionalists during the Persian Constitutional Revolution of 1905-1911, who declared the new constitution contrary to sharia law. Navvab Safavi, a religious student who founded the Fada'iyan-e Islam, seeking to purify Islam in Iran by killing off 'corrupting individuals', i.e. certain leading intellectual and political figures (including both a former and current prime minister). After the group was crushed by the government, surviving members reportedly chose Ayatollah Khomeini as a new spiritual leader. Ali Shariati, a non-cleric "socialist Shi'i" who absorbed Marxist ideas in France and had considerable influence on young Iranians through his preaching that Imam Hussein was not just a holy figure but the original oppressed one (muzloun), and his killer, the Sunni Umayyad Caliphate, the "analog" of the modern Iranian people's "oppression by the shah". Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr, a Shi'i Islamic scholar in Iraq who critiqued Marxism, socialism and capitalism and helped lead Shi'i opposition to Saddam Hussein's Baath regime before being executed by them. Mahmoud Taleghani, an ayatollah and contemporary of Khomeini, was more leftist, more tolerant and more sympathetic to democracy, but less influential, though he still had a substantial following. Was deposed from revolutionary leadership after warning of a "return to despotism" by the revolutionary leadership. Some Western political scientists see the unchanging socio-economic condition in the Muslim world as a major factor. Olivier Roy believes "the socioeconomic realities that sustained the Islamist wave are still here and are not going to change: poverty, uprootedness, crises in values and identities, the decay of the educational systems, the North-South opposition, and the problem of immigrant integration into the host societies". Islamist movements such as the Muslim Brotherhood, "are well known for providing shelters, educational assistance, free or low cost medical clinics, housing assistance to students from out of town, student advisory groups, facilitation of inexpensive mass marriage ceremonies to avoid prohibitively costly dowry demands, legal assistance, sports facilities, and women's groups." All this compares very favourably against incompetent, inefficient, or neglectful governments whose commitment to social justice is limited to rhetoric. The Arab world—the original heart of the Muslim world—has been afflicted with economic stagnation. For example, it has been estimated that in the mid-1990s the exports of Finland, a country of five million, exceeded those of the entire Arab world of 260 million, excluding oil revenue. Demographic transition (caused by the gap in time between the lowering of death rates from medical advances and the lowering of fertility rates), leads to population growth beyond the ability of housing, employment, public transit, sewer and water to provide. Combined with economic stagnation, urban agglomerations have been created in Cairo, Istanbul, Tehran, Karachi, Dhaka, and Jakarta, each with well over 12 million citizens, millions of them young and unemployed or underemployed. Such a demographic, alienated from the westernized ways of the urban elite, but uprooted from the comforts and more passive traditions of the villages they came from, is understandably favourably disposed to an Islamic system promising a better world—an ideology providing an "emotionally familiar basis for group identity, solidarity, and exclusion; an acceptable basis for legitimacy and authority; an immediately intelligible formulation of principles for both a critique of the present and a program for the future." One American anthropologist in Iran in the early 1970s (before the revolution), when comparing a "stable village with a new urban slum", discovered that where "the villagers took religion with a grain of salt and even ridiculed visiting preachers", the slum dwellers—all recently dispossessed peasants -- "used religion as a substitute for their lost communities, oriented social life around the mosque, and accepted with zeal the teachings of the local mullah". Gilles Kepel also notes that Islamist uprisings in Iran and Algeria, though a decade apart, coincided with the large numbers of youth who were "the first generation taught en masse to read and write and had been separated from their own rural, illiterate progenitors by a cultural gulf that radical Islamist ideology could exploit". Their "rural, illiterate" parents were too settled in tradition to be interested in Islamism and their children "more likely to call into question the utopian dreams of the 1970s generation", but they embraced revolutionary political Islam. Olivier Roy also asserts "it is not by chance that the Iranian Revolution took place the very year the proportion of city-dweller in Iran passed the 50% mark". and offers statistics in support for other countries (in 1990 Algeria, housing was so crowded that there was an average of eight inhabitants to a room, and 80% of youth aged 16 to 29 still lived with their parents). "The old clan or ethnic solidarities, the clout of the elders, and family control are fading little by little in the face of changes in the social structure ..." This theory implies that a decline in illiteracy and rural emigration will mean a decline in Islamism. Starting in the mid-1970s the Islamic resurgence was funded by an abundance of money from Saudi Arabian oil exports. The tens of billions of dollars in "petro-Islam" largesse obtained from the recently heightened price of oil funded an estimated "90% of the expenses of the entire faith." Throughout the Muslim world, religious institutions for people both young and old, from children's madrassas to high-level scholarships received Saudi funding, "books, scholarships, fellowships, and mosques" (for example, "more than 1500 mosques were built and paid for with money obtained from public Saudi funds over the last 50 years"), along with training in the Kingdom for the preachers and teachers who went on to teach and work at these universities, schools, mosques, etc. The funding was also used to reward journalists and academics who followed the Saudis' strict interpretation of Islam; and satellite campuses were built around Egypt for Al-Azhar University, the world's oldest and most influential Islamic university. The interpretation of Islam promoted by this funding was the strict, conservative Saudi-based Wahhabism or Salafism. In its harshest form it preached that Muslims should not only "always oppose" infidels "in every way," but "hate them for their religion ... for Allah's sake," that democracy "is responsible for all the horrible wars of the 20th century," that Shia and other non-Wahhabi Muslims were infidels, etc. While this effort has by no means converted all, or even most Muslims to the Wahhabist interpretation of Islam, it has done much to overwhelm more moderate local interpretations, and has set the Saudi-interpretation of Islam as the "gold standard" of religion in minds of some or many Muslims. Though the much smaller Qatar could not provide the same level of funding as Saudi Arabia, it was also a petroleum exporter and also sponsored Islamist groups. Qatar backed the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt even after the 2013 overthrow of the MB regime of Mohamed Morsi, with Qatar ruler Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani denouncing the coup. In June 2016, Mohamed Morsi was sentenced to life for passing state secrets to Qatar. Qatar has also backed Islamist factions in Libya, Syria and Yemen. In Libya, Qatar supported Islamists with tens of millions of dollars in aid, military training and "more than 20,000 tons of weapons", both before and after the 2011 fall of Muammar Gaddafi. Hamas, in Palestine, has received considerable financial support as well as diplomatic help. During the Cold War, particularly during the 1950s, during the 1960s, and during most of the 1970s, the U.S. and other countries in the Western Bloc occasionally attempted to take advantage of the rise of Islamic religiousity by directing it against secular leftist/communist/nationalist insurgents/adversaries, particularly against the Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc states, whose ideology was not just secular but anti-religious. In 1957, U.S. President Eisenhower and senior U.S. foreign policy officials, agreed on a policy of using the communists' lack of religion against them: "We should do everything possible to stress the 'holy war' aspect" that has currency in the Middle East. During the 1970s and sometimes later, this aid sometimes went to fledgling Islamists and Islamist groups that later came to be seen as dangerous enemies. The US spent billions of dollars to aid the mujahideen Muslim Afghanistan enemies of the Soviet Union, and non-Afghan veterans of the war (such as Osama bin Laden) returned home with their prestige, "experience, ideology, and weapons", and had considerable impact. Although it is a strong opponent of Israel's existence, Hamas, officially founded in 1987, traces its origins back to institutions and clerics which were supported by Israel in the 1970s and 1980s. Israel tolerated and supported Islamist movements in Gaza, with figures like Ahmed Yassin, as Israel perceived them preferable to the secular and then more powerful al-Fatah with the PLO. Egyptian President Anwar Sadat – whose policies included opening Egypt to Western investment (infitah); transferring Egypt's allegiance from the Soviet Union to the United States; and making peace with Israel—released Islamists from prison and welcomed home exiles in tacit exchange for political support in his struggle against leftists. His "encouraging of the emergence of the Islamist movement" was said to have been "imitated by many other Muslim leaders in the years that followed." This "gentlemen's agreement" between Sadat and Islamists broke down in 1975 but not before Islamists came to completely dominate university student unions. Sadat was later assassinated and a formidable insurgency was formed in Egypt in the 1990s. The French government has also been reported to have promoted Islamist preachers "in the hope of channeling Muslim energies into zones of piety and charity." Olivier Roy dates the beginning of the Islamism movement "more or less in 1940", and its development proceeding "over half a century". Some Islamic revivalist movements and leaders which pre-date Islamism but share some characteristics with it include: Ahmad Sirhindi (~1564–1624) was largely responsible for the purification, reassertion and revival  of conservative orthodox Sunni Islam in India during Islam's second millennium. Ibn Taymiyyah, a Syrian Islamic jurist during the 13th and 14th centuries argued against the practices such as the celebration of Muhammad's birthday, and seeking assistance at the grave of the Prophet. Muhammad ibn Abd-al-Wahhab, the founder of Wahhabism, advocated doing away with the later religious accretions like worship at graves. Shah Waliullah of India was a forerunner of reformist Islamists like Muhammad Abduh, Muhammad Iqbal and Muhammad Asad in his belief that there was "a constant need for new ijtihad as the Muslim community progressed. Sayyid Ahmad Barelvi was a disciple and successor of Shah Waliullah's son who led a jihadist movement and attempted to create an Islamic state based on the enforcement of Islamic law. the Deobandi movement, founded after the defeat of the Indian Rebellion, around 1867, led to the establishment of thousands of conservative Islamic schools or madrasahs throughout modern-day India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. The end of the 19th century saw the dismemberment of most of the Muslim Ottoman Empire by non-Muslim European colonial powers, despite the empire's spending massive sums on Western civilian and military technology to try to modernize and compete with the encroaching European powers. In the process the Ottomans went deep into debt to these powers. Preaching Islamic alternatives to this humiliating decline were Jamal ad-din al-Afghani (1837–97), Muhammad Abduh (1849–1905) and Rashid Rida (1865–1935). Abduh's student Rida is widely regarded as one of the "ideological forefathers" of contemporary Islamist movement, and along with early Salafiyya Hassan al-Banna,and Mustafa al-Siba’i, preached that a truly Islamic society would follow sharia law, reject taqlid, (the blind imitation of earlier authorities), restore the Caliphate. Syrian-Egyptian Islamic cleric Muhammad Rashid Rida was one of the earliest 20th-century Sunni scholars to articulate the modern concept of an Islamic state, influencing the Muslim Brotherhood and other Sunni Islamist movements. In his influential book al-Khilafa aw al-Imama al-'Uzma ("The Caliphate or the Grand Imamate"); Rida explained that that societies that properly obeyed Sharia would be successful alternatives to the disorder and injustice of both capitalism and socialism. This society would be ruled by a Caliphate; the ruling Caliph (Khalifa) governing through shura (consultation), and applying Sharia (Islamic laws) in partnership with Islamic juristic clergy, who would use Ijtihad to update fiqh by evaluating scripture. With the Khilafa providing true Islamic governance, Islamic civilization would be revitalised, the political and legal independence of the Muslim umma (community of Muslim believers) would be restored, and the heretical influences of Sufism would be cleansed from Islam. This doctrine would become the blueprint of future Islamist movements. Muhammad Iqbal was a philosopher, poet and politician in British India, widely regarded as having inspired the Islamic Nationalism and Pakistan Movement in British India. Iqbal expressed fears of secularism and secular nationalism weakening the spiritual foundations of Islam and Muslim society, and of India's Hindu-majority population crowding out Muslim heritage, culture and political influence. In 1930, Iqbal outlined a vision of an independent state for Muslim-majority provinces in northwestern India which inspired the Pakistan movement. He also promoted pan-Islamic unity in his travels to Egypt, Afghanistan, Palestine and Syria. His ideas later influenced many reformist Islamists, e.g., Muhammad Asad, Sayyid Abul Ala Maududi and Ali Shariati. Sayyid Abul Ala Maududi was an important early twentieth-century figure in the Islamic revival in India, and then after independence from Britain, in Pakistan. Maududi was an Islamist ideologue and Hanafi Sunni scholar active in Hyderabad Deccan and later in Pakistan. Maududi was born to a clerical family and got his early education at home. At the age of eleven, he was admitted to a public school in Aurangabad. In 1919, he joined the Khilafat Movement and got closer to the scholars of Deoband. He commenced the dars-i nizami education under supervision of Deobandi seminary at the Fatihpuri mosque in Delhi. Trained as a lawyer he worked as a journalist, and gained a wide audience with his books (translated into many languages) which placed Islam in a modern context. His writings had a profound impact on Sayyid Qutb. Maududi also founded the Jamaat-e-Islami party in 1941 and remained its leader until 1972. In 1925, he wrote a book on Jihad, al-Jihad fil-Islam (Arabic: الجهاد في الاسلام), that can be regarded as his first contribution to Islamism. Maududi believed that Muslim society could not be Islamic without Sharia (influencing Qutb and Khomeini), and the establishment of an Islamic state to enforce it. The state would be based on the principles of: tawhid (unity of God), risala (prophethood) and khilafa (caliphate). Maududi was uninterested in violent revolution or populist policies such as those of the Iranian Revolution, but sought gradual change in the hearts and minds of individuals from the top of society downward through an educational process or da'wah. Maududi believed that Islam was all-encompassing: "Everything in the universe is 'Muslim' for it obeys God by submission to His laws." "The man who denies God is called Kafir (concealer) because he conceals by his disbelief what is inherent in his nature and embalmed in his own soul." Roughly contemporaneous with Maududi was the founding of the Muslim Brotherhood in Ismailiyah, Egypt in 1928 by Hassan al Banna. His was arguably the first, largest and most influential modern Islamic political/religious organization. Under the motto "the Qur'an is our constitution", it sought Islamic revival through preaching and also by providing basic community services including schools, mosques, and workshops. Like Maududi, Al Banna believed in the necessity of government rule based on Shariah law implemented gradually and by persuasion, and of eliminating all Western imperialist influence in the Muslim world. Some elements of the Brotherhood, did engage in violence, assassinating Egypt's premier Mahmud Fami Naqrashi, in 1948. MB founder Al-Banna was assassinated in retaliation three months later. The Brotherhood has suffered periodic repression in Egypt and has been banned several times, in 1948 and several years later following confrontations with Egyptian president Gamal Abdul Nasser, who jailed thousands of members for several years. The Brotherhood expanded to many other countries, particularly in the Arab world. In Egypt, despite periodic repression—for many years it was described as "semi-legal"—it was the only opposition group in Egypt able to field candidates during elections. In the 2011–12 Egyptian parliamentary election, the political parties identified as "Islamist" (the Brotherhood's Freedom and Justice Party, Salafi Al-Nour Party and liberal Islamist Al-Wasat Party) won 75% of the total seats. Mohamed Morsi, the candidate of the Muslim Brotherhood's party, was the first democratically elected president of Egypt. However, he was deposed during the 2013 Egyptian coup d'état, after mass protests against what were perceived as undemocratic moves by him. Today, the Muslim Brotherhood is designated as a terrorist organization by Bahrain, Russia, Syria, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. Qutb, a leading member of the Muslim Brotherhood movement, is considered by some (Fawaz A. Gerges) to be "the founding father and leading theoretician" of modern jihadists, such as Osama bin Laden. He was executed for allegedly participating in a presidential assassination plot in 1966. Maududi's political ideas influenced Sayyid Qutb. Like Maududi, he believed Sharia was crucial to Islam, so the restoration of its full enforcement was vital to the world. Since Sharia had not been fully enforced for centuries, Islam had "been extinct for a few centuries". Qutb preached that Muslims must engage in a two-pronged attack of converting individuals through preaching Islam peacefully but also using "physical power and jihad". Force was necessary because "those who have usurped the authority of God" would not give up their power through friendly persuasion. Like Khomeini, whom he influenced he believed the West was engaged in a vicious centuries long war against Islam. The quick and decisive defeat of the armies of several Arab states by one small non-Muslim country during the Six-Day War constituted a pivotal event in the Arab Muslim world. The defeat along with economic stagnation in the defeated countries, was blamed on the secular Arab nationalism of the ruling regimes. A steep and steady decline in the popularity and credibility of secular, socialist and nationalist politics ensued. Ba'athism, Arab socialism, and Arab nationalism suffered, and different democratic and anti-democratic Islamist movements inspired by Maududi and Sayyid Qutb gained ground. The first modern "Islamist state" (with the possible exception of Zia's Pakistan) was established among the Shia of Iran. In a major shock to the rest of the world, Muslim and non-Muslim, a revolution led by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini overthrew the secular, oil-rich, well-armed, pro-American monarchy of Shah Muhammad Reza Pahlavi. The revolution was an "indisputable sea change"; Islamism had been a topic of limited impact and interest before 1979, but after the revolution, "nobody within the Muslim world or outside it" remained unaware of militant Islam. Enthusiasm for the Iranian revolution in the Muslim world could be intense; and there were many reasons for optimism among Islamists outside Iran. Khomeini was implementing Islamic law. He was interested in Pan-Islamic (and pan-Islamist) unity and made efforts to "bridge the gap" between Shiites and Sunnis, declaring "it permissible for Shiites to pray behind Sunni imams", and forbidding Shiites from "criticizing the Caliphs who preceded Ali" (revered by Sunnis but not Shia). The Islamic Republic also downplayed Shia rituals (such as the Day of Ashura), and shrines Before the Revolution, Khomeini acolytes (such as today's Supreme Leader of Iran, Ali Khamenei), translated and championed the works of the Muslim Brotherhood jihadist theorist, Sayyid Qutb, and other Sunni Islamists/revivalists. This campaign did not survive his death however. As previously submissive Shia (usually minorities) became more assertive, Sunnis saw mostly "Shia mischief" and a challenge to Sunni dominance. "What followed was a Sunni-versus-Shia contest for dominance, and it grew intense." Animosity between the two sects in Iran and its neighbors is systemic as of 2014, with thousands killed from sectarian fighting in Iraq and Pakistan. Also tarnishing the revolution's image have been "purges, executions, and atrocities", and periodic and increasingly widespread domestic unrest and protest by young Iranians. Among the "most important by-products of the Iranian revolution” (according to Mehrzad Boroujerdi as of 2014) include “the emergence of Hezbollah in Lebanon, the moral boost provided to Shia forces in Iraq, the regional cold war against Saudi Arabia and Israel, lending an Islamic flavour to the anti-imperialist, anti-American sentiment in the Middle East, and inadvertently widening the Sunni-Shia cleavage". The Islamic Republic has also maintained its hold on power in Iran in spite of US economic sanctions, and has created or assisted like-minded Shia terrorist groups in Iraq (SCIRI) and Lebanon (Hezbollah) (two Muslim countries that also have a large percentage of Shiites). The campaign to overthrow the shah led by Khomeini had had a strong class flavor (Khomeini preached that the shah was widening the gap between rich and poor; condemning the working class to a life of poverty, misery, and drudgery, etc.); and the "pro-rural and pro-poor" approach has led to almost universal access to electricity and clean water, but critics of the regime complain of promises made and not kept: the “sons of the revolution’s leaders and the business class that decides to work within the rules of the regime ... flaunt their wealth, driving luxury sportscars around Tehran, posting Instagram pictures of their ski trips and beach trips around the world, all while the poor and the middle class are struggling to survive or maintain the appearance of a dignified life” (according to Shadi Mokhtari). One commitment made (to his followers if not the Iranian public) that has been kept is Guardianship by the Islamic jurist. But Rather than strengthening Islam and eliminating secular values and practices, the "regime has ruined the Iranian people’s belief in religion" ("anonymous expert"). The strength of the Islamist movement was manifest in an event which might have seemed sure to turn Muslim public opinion against fundamentalism, but did just the opposite. In 1979 the Grand Mosque in Mecca Saudi Arabia was seized by an armed fundamentalist group and held for over a week. Scores were killed, including many pilgrim bystanders in a gross violation of one of the most holy sites in Islam (and one where arms and violence are strictly forbidden). Instead of prompting a backlash against the movement that inspired the attackers, however, Saudi Arabia, already very conservative, responded by shoring up its fundamentalist credentials with even more Islamic restrictions. Crackdowns followed on everything from shopkeepers who did not close for prayer and newspapers that published pictures of women, to the selling of dolls, teddy bears (images of animate objects are considered haraam), and dog food (dogs are considered unclean). In other Muslim countries, blame for and wrath against the seizure was directed not against fundamentalists, but against Islamic fundamentalism's foremost geopolitical enemy—the United States. Ayatollah Khomeini sparked attacks on American embassies when he announced: "It is not beyond guessing that this is the work of criminal American imperialism and international Zionism", despite the fact that the object of the fundamentalists' revolt was the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, America's major ally in the region. Anti-American demonstrations followed in the Philippines, Turkey, Bangladesh, India, the UAE, Pakistan, and Kuwait. The US Embassy in Libya was burned by protesters chanting pro-Khomeini slogans and the embassy in Islamabad, Pakistan was burned to the ground. In 1979, the Soviet Union deployed its 40th Army into Afghanistan, attempting to suppress an Islamic rebellion against an allied Marxist regime in the Afghan Civil War. The conflict, pitting indigenous impoverished Muslims (mujahideen) against an anti-religious superpower, galvanized thousands of Muslims around the world to send aid and sometimes to go themselves to fight for their faith. Leading this pan-Islamic effort was Palestinian 'alim Abdullah Yusuf Azzam. While the military effectiveness of these "Afghan Arabs" was marginal, an estimated 16,000 to 35,000 Muslim volunteers came from around the world to fight in Afghanistan. When the Soviet Union abandoned the Marxist Najibullah regime and withdrew from Afghanistan in 1989 (the regime finally fell in 1992), the victory was seen by many Muslims as the triumph of Islamic faith over superior military power and technology that could be duplicated elsewhere. The jihadists gained legitimacy and prestige from their triumph both within the militant community and among ordinary Muslims, as well as the confidence to carry their jihad to other countries where they believed Muslims required assistance. The collapse of the Soviet Union itself, in 1991, was seen by many Islamists, including Bin Laden, as the defeat of a superpower at the hands of Islam. Concerning the $6 billion in aid given by the US and Pakistan's military training and intelligence support to the mujahideen, bin Laden wrote: "[T]he US has no mentionable role" in "the collapse of the Soviet Union... rather the credit goes to God and the mujahidin" of Afghanistan. Another factor in the early 1990s that worked to radicalize the Islamist movement was the Gulf War, which brought several hundred thousand US and allied non-Muslim military personnel to Saudi Arabian soil to put an end to Saddam Hussein's occupation of Kuwait. Prior to 1990 Saudi Arabia played an important role in restraining the many Islamist groups that received its aid. But when Saddam, secularist and Ba'athist dictator of neighboring Iraq, attacked Kuwait (his enemy in the war), western troops came to protect the Saudi monarchy. Islamists accused the Saudi regime of being a puppet of the west. These attacks resonated with conservative Muslims and the problem did not go away with Saddam's defeat either, since American troops remained stationed in the kingdom, and a de facto cooperation with the Palestinian-Israeli peace process developed. Saudi Arabia attempted to compensate for its loss of prestige among these groups by repressing those domestic Islamists who attacked it (bin Laden being a prime example), and increasing aid to Islamic groups (Islamist madrassas around the world and even aiding some violent Islamist groups) that did not, but its pre-war influence on behalf of moderation was greatly reduced. One result of this was a campaign of attacks on government officials and tourists in Egypt, a bloody civil war in Algeria and Osama bin Laden's terror attacks climaxing in the 9/11 attack. By the beginning of the twenty first century, "the word secular, a label proudly worn" in the 1960s and 70s was "shunned" and "used to besmirch" political foes in Egypt and the rest of the Muslim world. Islamists surpassed the small secular opposition parties in terms of "doggedness, courage," "risk-taking" or "organizational skills". As of 2002, In the Middle East and Pakistan, religious discourse dominates societies, the airwaves, and thinking about the world. Radical mosques have proliferated throughout Egypt. Book stores are dominated by works with religious themes ... The demand for sharia, the belief that their governments are unfaithful to Islam and that Islam is the answer to all problems, and the certainty that the West has declared war on Islam; these are the themes that dominate public discussion. Islamists may not control parliaments or government palaces, but they have occupied the popular imagination. Opinion polls in a variety of Islamic countries showed that significant majorities opposed groups like ISIS, but also wanted religion to play a greater role in public life. By 2020, approximately 40 years after the Islamic overthrow of the Shah of Iran and the seizure of the Grand Mosque by extremists, a number of observers (Olivier Roy, Mustafa Akyol, Nader Hashemi) detected a decline in the vigor and popularity of Islamism. Islamism had been an idealized/utopian concept to compare with the grim reality of the status quo, but in more than four decades it had failed to establish a "concrete and viable blueprint for society" despite repeated efforts (Olivier Roy); and instead had left a less than inspiring track record of its impact on the world (Nader Hashemi). Consequently, in addition to the trend towards moderation by Islamist or formerly Islamist parties (such as PKS of Indonesia, AKP of Turkey, and PAS of Malaysia) mentioned above, there has been a social/religious and sometimes political backlash against Islamist rule in countries like Turkey, Iran, and Sudan (Mustafa Akyol). Writing in 2020, Mustafa Akyol argues there has been a strong reaction by many Muslims against political Islam, including a weakening of religious faith—the very thing Islamism was intended to strengthen. He suggests this backlash against Islamism among Muslim youth has come from all the "terrible things" that have happened in the Arab world in the twenty first century "in the name of Islam"—such as the "sectarian civil wars in Syria, Iraq and Yemen". Polls taken by Arab Barometer in six Arab countries — Algeria, Egypt, Tunisia, Jordan, Iraq and Libya — found "Arabs are losing faith in religious parties and leaders." In 2018–19, in all six countries, fewer than 20% of those asked whether they trusted Islamist parties answered in the affirmative. That percentage had fallen (in all six countries) from when the same question was asked in 2012–14. Mosque attendance also declined more than 10 points on average, and the share of those Arabs describing themselves as "not religious" went from 8% in 2013 to 13% in 2018–19. In Syria, Sham al-Ali reports "Rising apostasy among Syrian youths". Writing in 2021, Nader Hashemi notes that in Iraq, Sudan, Tunisia, Egypt, Gaza, Jordan and other places were Islamist parties have come to power or campaigned to, "one general theme stands. The popular prestige of political Islam has been tarnished by its experience with state power." In Iran, hardline Ayatollah Mohammad-Taqi Mesbah Yazdi has complained, "Iranians are evading religious teachings and turning to secularism." Even Islamist terrorism was in decline and tended "to be local" rather than pan-Islamic. As of 2021, Al-Qaeda consisted of "a bunch of militias" with no effective central command (Fareed Zakaria). Islamism, or elements of Islamism, have been criticized on numerous grounds, including repression of free expression and individual rights, rigidity, hypocrisy, anti-semitism, misinterpreting the Quran and Sunnah, lack of true understanding of and innovations to Islam (bid'ah) -- notwithstanding proclaimed opposition to any such innovation by Islamists. The U.S. government has engaged in efforts to counter militant Islamism (Jihadism), since 2001. These efforts were centred in the U.S. around public diplomacy programmes conducted by the State Department. There have been calls to create an independent agency in the U.S. with a specific mission of undermining Jihadism. Christian Whiton, an official in the George W. Bush administration, called for a new agency focused on the nonviolent practice of "political warfare" aimed at undermining the ideology. U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates called for establishing something similar to the defunct U.S. Information Agency, which was charged with undermining the communist ideology during the Cold War. Anti-Western sentiment Anti-Zionism Islamist Shi'ism Clash of Civilizations Clerical fascism Dominionism Islamicism (disambiguation) Islamofascism As such, Salafi Jihadism envisions the Islamist goals akin to that of Salafism instead of the traditional Islamism exemplified by the mid-20th century Muslim Brotherhood, which is considered by Salafi Jihadis as excessively moderate and lacking in literal interpretations of the scriptures. "The study of Islamist movements has often implicitly meant the study of Sunni Islamist movements. ... the majority of studies [of Islamism] concern various forms of Sunni Islamism, whereas the “Other Islamists” – different kinds of Shia Islamist groups – have received far less attention ... ." 85% of Shi'a Muslims, who make up 10-15% of Muslims Shia Islamist groups exist outside of the ideology of the Islamic Republic -- the Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr and the Islamic Dawa Party in Iraqi, for example). The radicalism had come from attempts to integrate socialism/Marxism into Islamism—by Ali Shariati and the People's Mojahedin guerilla; or by pro-Khomeini clerical radical (such as Ali Akbar Mohtashami-Pur); or from attempts by Khomeini to counter the attraction of socialism/Marxism to the young with an Islamic version of radical populist, class struggle rhetoric and imagery. Early radical government policies were later abandoned by the Islamic Republic. Official histories and propaganda celebrated clerics (and never secular figures like Mohammad Mosaddegh) as the protectors of Islam and Iran against Imperialism and royal despotism. forming majorities in the countries of Iran, Iraq, Bahrain, Azerbaijan, and substantial minorities in Afghanistan, India, Kuwait, Lebanon, Pakistan, Qatar, Syria, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. " ... the revolutionary Shiite movement, it is the only one to have taken power by way of a true Islamic revolution; it has therefore become identified with the Iranian state, which used it as an instrument in its strategy for gaining regional power, even though the multiplicity of Shiite groups reflects local particularities (in Lebanon, Afghanistan, or Iraq) as much as it does the factional struggles of Tehran." In the words of pro-Islamic Republic book by Jon Armajani: "Iran's government has attempted to align itself with Shia Muslims in various countries, such as Iraq and Lebanon, [it] ... has attempted to religiously nourish and politically mobilize those Shias as a matter of principle, not only because of the Iranian government's desires to protect Iran from external threats." Even after Sunni-Shia hostility escalated, Iranian leaders often "went directly for the kind of things that make them very unpopular in the West and very popular on the Arab streets. So Iranian President [Mahmoud] Ahmadinejad started to attack Israel and question the Holocaust." Khomeini never presided over or visited Shi'i shrines, (it is thought because he believed that Islam should be about Islamic law, and his revolution (which he believed) was of "equal significance" to Battle of Karbala where the Imam Husayn was martyred). "Islamism". Oxford Reference. Retrieved 25 August 2023. Eikmeier, Dale (2007). "Qutbism: An Ideology of Islamic-Fascism". The US Army War College Quarterly: Parameters. 37 (1): 85–97. doi:10.55540/0031-1723.2340. Soage, Ana Belén. "Introduction to Political Islam." Religion Compass 3.5 (2009): 887–96. Burgat, François, "The Islamic Movement in North Africa", U of Texas Press, 1997, pp. 39–41, 67–71, 309 Berman, Sheri (2003). "Islamism, Revolution, and Civil Society". Perspectives on Politics. 1 (2): 258. doi:10.1017/S1537592703000197. S2CID 145201910. Byers, Dylan (5 April 2013). "AP Stylebook revises 'Islamist' use". Politico. Retrieved 6 February 2023. Shepard, W. E. Sayyid Qutb and Islamic Activism: A Translation and Critical Analysis of Social Justice in Islam. Leiden, New York: E.J. Brill. (1996). p. 40 Tibi, Bassam (1 March 2007). "The Totalitarianism of Jihadist Islamism and its Challenge to Europe and to Islam". Totalitarian Movements and Political Religions. 8 (1): 35–54. doi:10.1080/14690760601121630. ISSN 1469-0764. Bale, Jeffrey M. (1 June 2009). "Islamism and Totalitarianism". Totalitarian Movements and Political Religions. 10 (2): 73–96. doi:10.1080/14690760903371313. ISSN 1469-0764. S2CID 14540501. Wright, Robin (10 January 2015). "A Short History of Islamism". Newsweek. Retrieved 23 December 2015. Zhongmin, Liu (2013). "Commentary on "Islamic State": Thoughts of Islamism". Journal of Middle Eastern and Islamic Studies (In Asia). 7 (3). Routledge: Taylor & Francis group: 23–28. doi:10.1080/19370679.2013.12023226. Fuller, Graham E., The Future of Political Islam, Palgrave MacMillan, (2003), p. 120 Zhongmin, Liu (2013). "Commentary on "Islamic State": Thoughts of Islamism". Journal of Middle Eastern and Islamic Studies (In Asia). 7 (3). Routledge: Taylor & Francis group: 38–40. doi:10.1080/19370679.2013.12023226. Matthiesen, Toby (2023). The Caliph and the Imam. 198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America: Oxford University Press. pp. 270–271, 276–278, 280, 283–285, 295, 310–311. doi:10.1093/oso/9780190689469.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-068946-9.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location (link) Milton-Edwards, Beverley (2005). Islamic Fundamentalism since 1945. New York: Routledge: Taylor and Francis Group. p. 141. ISBN 0-415-30173-4. B. Hass, Ernst (2000). Nationalism, Liberalism, and Progress: Volume 2 The Dismal Fate of New Nations. Ithaca, New York 14850, USA: Cornell University Press. p. 91. ISBN 0-8014-3108-5.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location (link) B. Hass, Ernst (2000). "2: Iran and Egypt". Nationalism, Liberalism, and Progress: Volume 2 The Dismal Fate of New Nations. Ithaca, New York 14850, USA: Cornell University Press. p. 91. ISBN 0-8014-3108-5.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location (link) Matthiesen, Toby (2023). "10: The Muslim Response". The Caliph and the Imam. 198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America: Oxford University Press. pp. 280, 284–285, 295. doi:10.1093/oso/9780190689469.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-068946-9.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location (link) Pappe, Ilan (2010). The Rise and Fall of a Palestinian Dynasty: The Husaynis 1700–1948. Translated by Lotan, Yaer. Berkeley and Los Angeles, California, United States: University of California Press. pp. 147–148. ISBN 978-0-520-26839-5. Roy, Failure of Political Islam, 1994: p. 24 Hamid, Shadi (1 October 2015). "What most people get wrong about political Islam". Nugent, Elizabeth (23 June 2014). "What do we mean by Islamist?". Washington Post. Retrieved 17 January 2023. Fuller, Graham E., The Future of Political Islam, Palgrave MacMillan, (2003), p. 21 Rashid Ghannouchi (31 October 2013). "How credible is the claim of the failure of political Islam?". MEMO. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. "Understanding Islamism" (PDF). International Crisis Group. p. 5. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 March 2013. Emin Poljarevic (2015). "Islamism". In Emad El-Din Shahin (ed.). The Oxford Encyclopedia of Islam and Politics. Oxford University Press. Retrieved 1 February 2017. Islamism is one of many sociopolitical concepts continuously contested in scholarly literature. It is a neologism debated in both Muslim and non-Muslim public and academic contexts. The term "Islamism" at the very least represents a form of social and political activism, grounded in an idea that public and political life should be guided by a set of Islamic principles. In other words, Islamists are those who believe that Islam has an important role to play in organizing a Muslim-majority society and who seek to implement this belief. William E. Shepard; FranÇois Burgat; James Piscatori; Armando Salvatore (2009). "Islamism". In John L. Esposito (ed.). The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Islamic World. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780195305135. The term "Islamism/Islamist" has come into increasing use in recent years to denote the views of those Muslims who claim that Islam, or more specifically, the Islamic sharīʿah, provides guidance for all areas of human life, individual and social, and who therefore call for an "Islamic State" or an "Islamic Order." [...] Today it is one of the recognized alternatives to "fundamentalist", along with "political Islam" in particular. [...] Current terminology usually distinguishes between "Islam," [...] and "Islamism", referring to the ideology of those who tend to signal openly, in politics, their Muslim religion. [...] the term has often acquired a quasi-criminal connotation close to that of political extremism, religious sectarianism, or bigotry. In Western mainstream media, "Islamists" are those who want to establish, preferably through violent means, an "Islamic state" or impose sharīʿah (Islamic religious law)—goals that are often perceived merely as a series of violations of human rights or the rights of women. In the Muslim world, insiders use the term as a positive reference. In the academic sphere, although it is still debated, the term designates a more complex phenomenon. Roy, Olivier (16 April 2012). "The New Islamists". foreignpolicy.com. Archived from the original on 9 October 2014. Retrieved 7 March 2017. "Islamism, n." Oxford English Dictionary. Oxford University Press. Retrieved 27 December 2012. Mehdi Mozaffari (March 2007). "What is Islamism? The History and Definition of a Concept" (PDF). Totalitarian Movements and Political Religions. 8 (1). Retrieved 17 January 2023. "تأملات في معنى مصطلح إسلامي". AYARI, Badreddine (19 July 2012). "بين المسلم والاسلامى:مصطلح ( اسلامى) بين الاجتهاد والبدعة". الموقع الرسمي للدكتور صبري محمد خليل خيري (in Arabic). Retrieved 4 May 2023. admin (31 March 2021). "الفرق بين "المسلمين" و"الإسلاميين"". صحيفة الحراك السياسي (in Arabic). Retrieved 4 May 2023. Nawal.Alali. "إسلامي أو إسلاموي: نقلات فوق رقعة من المصطلحات". www.alaraby.co.uk/ (in Arabic). Retrieved 4 May 2023. "" مسلم " أم " إسلامي " أم "إسلاموي " .. أين الصواب ..؟". الشروق. Ali al-Juzu, Mustafa. "زيادة الألف والواو في النسبة". "Islamism". Cambridge English Dictionary. Roy, Failure of Political Islam, 1994: p. 4 Bassam Tibi (2012). Islamism and Islam. Yale University Press. p. 22. ISBN 978-0300160147. "You are here: Home Press Center Press Releases CAIR Condemns Series of Terror Attacks in France, Tunisia and Kuwait CAIR Welcomes AP Stylebook Revision of 'Islamist'". Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR). 5 April 2013. Archived from the original on 7 September 2015. Retrieved 29 June 2015. Volk, Thomas (February 2015). "Islam – Islamism Clarification for turbulent times". Konrad Adenauer Stiftung FACTS & FINDINGS (164): 1. Retrieved 6 February 2023. Zeidan, Adam. "Islamism". Britannica. Retrieved 15 January 2023. Belt, David (July–December 2009). "Islamism in Popular Western Discourse". Policy Perspectives. 6 (2): 1–20. JSTOR 42909235. Retrieved 6 February 2023. Osman, Tarek, Egypt on the brink, 2010, p. 111 Robert H. Pelletreau, Jr. (8 May 1996). "Dealing with the Muslim Politics of the Middle East:Algeria, Hamas, Iran". Council on Foreign Relations. Archived from the original on 10 October 2017. Roy, Olivier; Sfeir, Antoine (2007). The Columbia World Dictionary of Islamism. Columbia University Press. p. viii. ISBN 978-0231146401. Retrieved 15 December 2015. "Understanding Islamism". International Crisis Group. 2 March 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 August 2010. Hayri Abaza (22 October 2010). "Is It Islamic or Islamist?". Newsweek. Final Report of the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States, The 9/11 Commission Report, W.W. Norton & Company, New York, (2004), p. 562 Daniel Pipes (1 March 2000). "Islam and Islamism: Faith and Ideology". The National Interest (Spring 2000). Retrieved 12 March 2014. Sayyid, Salman (2014). Recalling the Caliphate: Decolonisation and World Order. London: Hurst. p. 9. Edward Mortimer in Faith and Power: The Politics of Islam, in Wright, Sacred Rage, Simon & Schuster, (1985), pp. 64–66 Wright, Sacred Rage, pp. 64–66 Wright, Sacred Rage, p. 66 from Pipes, Daniel, In the Path of God, Basic Books, (1983), p. 285 from interview by Robin Wright of UK Foreign Secretary (at the time) Lord Carrington in November 1981, Sacred Rage: The Wrath of Militant Islam, by Robin Wright, Simon & Schuster, (1985), p. 67 Murphy, Passion for Islam, (2002), p. 36 Rahnema 2005, p. 101. Olidort, Jacob (2015). "A New Curriculum: Rashīd Riḍā and Traditionalist Salafism". In Defense of Tradition: Muḥammad Nāșir AL-Dīn Al-Albānī and the Salafī Method. Princeton, NJ, U.S.A: Princeton University. pp. 52–62. Rashīd Riḍā presented these core ideas of Traditionalist Salafism, especially the purported interest in ḥadīth of the early generations of Muslims, as a remedy for correcting Islamic practice and belief during his time. Willis, John (2010). "Debating the Caliphate: Islam and Nation in the Work of Rashid Rida and Abul Kalam Azad". The International History Review. 32 (4): 711–732. doi:10.1080/07075332.2010.534609. ISSN 0707-5332. JSTOR 25762122. S2CID 153982399. Allāh, ‘Abd (29 February 2012). "Shaykh Rashid Rida on Dar al-'Ulum Deoband". Friends of Deoband. Retrieved 7 May 2022. B. Metcalf, "Islamic Revival in British India: Deoband, 1860–1900", p. 50-60, Princeton University Press (1982). "From the article on westernization in Oxford Islamic Studies Online". Oxfordislamicstudies.com. Archived from the original on 28 May 2012. Retrieved 21 April 2012. Fuller, E., The Future of Political Islam, (2003), p. 15 Islam and the Myth of Confrontation, Fred Halliday; (2003) p. 108 Lewis, Bernard, Islam and the West Oxford University Press, p. 13, (1993) Hassan Hanafi, Islamist philosophy professor at Cairo University quoted in Passion for Islam by Caryle Murphy, p. 172 Haddad/Esposito p. xvi Kepel, Gilles, Jihad, Harvard University Press, (2002), p. 218 Fuller, Graham E., The Future of Political Islam, Palgrave MacMillan, (2003), pp. 70–71 Kepel, Jihad, 2002, p.46 Kepel, Jihad, 2002, p.47 Roy, Failure of Political Islam, 1994: p.52 Kepel, Jihad, 2002, p.160-1 The History of the Modern Middle East by William L. Cleveland and Martin Bunton, 2008, p. 371. "Political parties clash over sharia-based bylaws". The Jakarta Post. The Unbreakable Muslim Brotherhood: Grim Prospects for a Liberal Egypt. by Eric Trager, Foreign Affairs, 2011. Murphy, Caryle, Passion for Islam, (c. 2002), p. 160 Cook, Michael, The Koran: A Very Short Introduction, Oxford University Press, (2000) Murphy, Caryle, Passion for Islam: Shaping the Modern Middle East: the Egyptian Experience, Scribner, (c. 2002), p. 161 Fuller, The Future of Political Islam, (2003), p. 67 Referring to the success of radical transnational Islamism and specifically the party Hizb ut-Tahrir, Zeyno Baran writes that "all religions have radicals, but in contemporary Islam the radicals have become the mainstream, and the moderates are pushed to the sides of the debate." (source: Baran, Zeyno (December 2004). "Hizb ut-Tahrir: Islam's Political Insurgency" (PDF). Nixon Center. p. 13. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 December 2015. Retrieved 30 March 2016.) Cook, Michael, The Koran: A Very Short Introduction, Oxford University Press, (2000), p.42-3 Sonja Zekri (2008). "The Islamism Debate: God's Counterculture". Süddeutsche Zeitung. Translated by Phyllis Anderson. Archived from the original on 3 April 2008. Farr, Thomas F. "Islam's Way to Freedom", First Things, November 2008, pp. 24–28 [26] Roy, Failure of Political Islam, 1994: p. 109 Valbjørn, Morten (c. 2017). "Bringing the 'Other Islamists' back in: Sunni and Shia Islamism(s) in a sectarianized new Middle East". POMEPS, Project on Middle East Political Science. Elliott School of International Affairs. Retrieved 27 January 2023. Fuller, The Future of Political Islam, (2003), pp. 194–95 Roy, Olivier, The Politics of Chaos in the Middle East, Columbia University Press, (2008), pp. 92–93 Robinson, Glenn E. (2007). "The battle for Iraq: Islamic insurgencies in comparative perspective". Third World Quarterly, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 261-273. Utvik, Bjørn Olav (2011). Islamismen, Oslo: Unipub. Yavuz, M. Hakan (2003). Islamic Political Identity in Turkey, Oxford: Oxford University Press. Strindberg, Anders & Mats Wärn (2005). "Realities of Resistance: Hizballah, the Palestinian rejectionists, and al-Qa’ida compared". Journal of Palestine Studies, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 23-41. Volpi, Frédéric & Ewan Stein (2015). "Islamism and the state after the Arab uprisings: Between people power and state power". Democratization, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 276-293. Lynch, Marc (2010). "Islam Divided Between ‘Salafi-jihad’ and the ‘Ikhwan'". Studies in Conflict & Terrorism, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 467-487. Gerges, Fawaz (2005). The Far Enemy : why jihad went global, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. "The Key to Arab Reform: Moderate Islamists" (PDF). Carnegie Endowment for Peace: 2. Moussalli, Ahmad S. Islamic democracy and pluralism. from Safi, Omid. Progressive Muslims: On Justice, Gender, and Pluralism. Oneworld Publications, Apr 1, 2003. "The Shura Principle in Islam – by Sadek Sulaiman". www.alhewar.com. Esposito, J. & Voll, J.,2001, Islam and Democracy, Humanities, Volume 22, Issue 6 "Ennahda is "Leaving" Political Islam". Wilson Center. 20 May 2016. Retrieved 23 August 2017. Al-Hamdi, Ridho. (2017). Moving towards a Normalised Path: Political Islam in Contemporary Indonesia. JURNAL STUDI PEMERINTAHAN (JOURNAL OF GOVERNMENT & POLITICS). Vol. 8 No. 1, February 2017. p. 53, 56–57, 62. "SUDAN: "IN THE NAME OF GOD", Repression Continues in Northern Sudan". Human Rights Watch Report. November 1994. Fuller, Graham E., The Future of Political Islam, Palgrave MacMillan, (2003), p. 108 Pahwa, Sumita (2016). Pathways of Islamist adaptation: the Egyptian Muslim Brothers' lessons for inclusion moderation theory. Democratization, Volume 24, 2017 – Issue 6. pp. 1066–1084. Sinan Ülgen; Marwan Muasher; Thomas de Waal; Thomas Carothers (19 December 2011). "Can the Turkish Model Gain Traction in the New Middle East?". carnegieendowment.org. de Bellaigue, Christopher (19 December 2013). "Turkey: 'Surreal, Menacing…Pompous'". New York Review of Books. Retrieved 12 December 2013. Akyol, Mustafa (22 July 2016). "Who Was Behind the Coup Attempt in Turkey?". The New York Times. New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 23 July 2016. Roy, Failure of Political Islam, 1994: p. 35 Roy, Failure of Political Islam, 1994: p. 31 Roy, Failure of Political Islam, 1994: p. 32-33 George Joffé, Islamist Radicalisation in Europe and the Middle East: Reassessing the Causes of Terrorism, p. 317. London: I.B. Tauris, 2013. Mohie-Eldin, Fatima. The Evolution of Salafism A History of Salafi Doctrine. Al-Noor, Fall 2015. pp. 44–47. "Saudi Arabia. Wahhabi Theology". December 1992. Library of Congress Country Studies. Retrieved 17 March 2014. Husain, Ed (2007). The Islamist: Why I joined Radical Islam in Britain, what I saw inside and why I left. Penguin Books. p. 246. ISBN 9780141030432. "Wahhabism: Understanding the Roots and Role Models of Islamic Fanaticism and Terror". AGAINST "ISLAMIC" TERRORISM & ISLAMOPHOBIA. 18 February 2014. Archived from the original on 24 July 2018. Retrieved 4 December 2017. Lacey, Robert (2009). Inside the Kingdom: Kings, Clerics, Modernists, Terrorists, and the Struggle for Saudi Arabia. Viking. p. 56. ISBN 9780670021185. Dillon, Michael R. (September 2009). "Wahabism: Is it a Factor in the Spread of Global Terrorism?" (PDF). Naval Post-Graduate School. pp. 3–4. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 April 2014. Retrieved 2 April 2014. Stephane Lacroix (Spring 2008). "Al-Albani's Revolutionary Approach to Hadith" (PDF). ISIM Review. 21. Leiden University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 October 2017. Salafism has been termed a hybridation between the teachings of Ibn Abdul-Wahhab and others which have taken place since the 1960s Murphy, Caryle (5 September 2006). "For Conservative Muslims, Goal of Isolation a Challenge". Washington Post. Lewis, Bernard (27 April 2006). "Islam and the West: A Conversation with Bernard Lewis (transcript)". pewforum.org. Pew. Retrieved 5 August 2014. Kepel, Gilles (2002). Jihad: The Trail of Political Islam. I.B.Tauris. p. 61. ISBN 978-1845112578. "Analysis Wahhabism". PBS Frontline. Retrieved 13 May 2014. Muslim extremism in Egypt: the prophet and pharaoh by Gilles Kepel, pp. 55–6 SOAGE, ANA BELÉN (June 2009). "Islamism and Modernity: The Political Thought of Sayyid Qutb". Totalitarian Movements and Political Religions. 10 (2): 192. doi:10.1080/14690760903119092. S2CID 144071957. Retrieved 9 March 2021. Dale C. Eikmeier (Spring 2007). "Qutbism: An Ideology of Islamic-Fascism" (PDF). Parameters: 85–98. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 February 2017. Hassan, Hassan (13 June 2016). "The Sectarianism of the Islamic State: Ideological Roots and Political Context". Carnegie Endowment for Peace. Kepel, Jihad, 2002, p. 31 Sageman, Marc, Understanding Terror Networks, University of Pennsylvania Press, 2004, p. 63 "How Did Sayyid Qutb Influence Osama bin Laden?". Archived from the original on 17 October 2010. Retrieved 26 February 2015. Wright, Looming Tower, 2006, p. 32-59 Amghar, Cavatorta, Samir, Francesco (17 March 2023). "Salafism in the contemporary age: Wiktorowicz revisited". Contemporary Islam. 17 (2): 3. doi:10.1007/s11562-023-00524-x. S2CID 257933043 – via Springer.{{cite journal}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Byman, Daniel L and Williams, Jennifer R. (24 February 2015). "ISIS vs. Al Qaeda: Jihadism's global civil war". Brookings.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Deneoux, Guilain (June 2002). "The Forgotten Swamp: Navigating Political Islam". Middle East Policy. pp. 69–71." "The Salafist movement by Bruce Livesey". PBS Frontline. 2005. Archived from the original on 28 June 2011. Retrieved 24 October 2014. Kramer, Martin (Spring 2003). "Coming to Terms: Fundamentalists or Islamists?". Middle East Quarterly. X (2): 65–77. French academics have put the term into academic circulation as 'jihadist-Salafism.' The qualifier of Salafism—an historical reference to the precursor of these movements—will inevitably be stripped away in popular usage. "Jihadist-Salafism" is introduced by Gilles Kepel, Jihad: The Trail of Political Islam (Harvard: Harvard University Press, 2002) pp.219-222 Kepel, Jihad, 2002, p.219-220 Kepel, Jihad, 2002, p.220 "القطبية الإخوانية والسرورية قاعدة مناهج السلفية التكفيرية". al-Arab Online. Archived from the original on 5 December 2017. Kepel, Gilles; Roberts, Anthony F. (2006). Jihad. Bloomsbury Publishing PLC. ISBN 978-1845112578. Retrieved 24 October 2014. Wright, Robin (12 December 2016). "AFTER THE ISLAMIC STATE". The New Yorker. Retrieved 9 December 2016. Noah, Timothy (26 February 2009). "The Near-Enemy Theory". Slate. "Al Qaeda grows as its leaders focus on the 'near enemy'". The National. 30 August 2013. "Salafism: Politics and the puritanical". The Economist. 27 June 2015. Retrieved 29 June 2015. Rastyad Collective. "Rastyad: online database concerning the 1981 Massacre in Iran". Rastyad.com. Archived from the original on 12 August 2022. Retrieved 25 August 2022. Amsterdam, Universiteit van (21 June 2022). "Onderzoekers lanceren online database over de grootste massamoord uit de Iraanse geschiedenis". Universiteit van Amsterdam (in Dutch). Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 25 August 2022. Roy, Failure of Political Islam, 1994: p. 2 Abrahamian, Khomeinism, 1993: p.30 Ranstorp, Hizb'allah in Lebanon, (1997) pp. 103, 126 Abrahamian, Khomeinism, 1993: p.31 Abrahamian, Khomeinism, 1993: p.47 Abrahamian, Khomeinism, 1993: p.25-26 Roy, Failure of Political Islam, 1994: p.36 Khomeini, Islamic Government, 1981: p.34 Khomeini (1981), p. 54 Khomeini, Islamic Government, 1981: p.48 Khomeini, Islamic Government, 1981: p.89 Khomeini, Islamic Government, 1981: p.122 Kepel, Jihad, 2002, p.106 Khomeini, Islamic Government, 1981: p.56 Khomeini, Islamic Government, 1981: p.29-30, also p.44 Abrahamian, Iran between two revolutions, 1982: p.478-9 Fred Halliday (1999). "Revolution and World Politics". Internationalism in Practice: Export of Revolution. Duke University Press. pp. 94–132. ISBN 0-8223-2464-4. Persia, Track (15 June 2019). "The historical relationship between the Iranian theocracy and Muslim Brothers in Egypt". Track Persia. Archived from the original on 30 May 2021. Retrieved 17 June 2021. Syrian war has been a turning point in the relations between the Iranian regime and the Muslim Brotherhood organisation, excluding its branches in Turkey and Hamas. Some of the Muslim Brothers have shown support to Syrian opposition groups against the dictatorship of the Syrian President Bashar al-Asad, Iran's close ally. Ghobadzadeh, Naser (December 2013). "Religious secularity: A vision for revisionist political Islam". Philosophy & Social Criticism. 39 (10): 1005–1027. doi:10.1177/0191453713507014. ISSN 0191-4537. S2CID 145583418. Samadov, Bahruz (18 July 2022). "Will new Azerbaijani Islamist movement share the fate of its predecessors?". Eurasia Net. Retrieved 27 January 2023. "Sunnis and Shia: Islam's ancient schism". BBC News. 4 January 2016. Retrieved 27 January 2023. Bokhari, Kamran; Senzai, Farid (2013). Political Islam in the Age of Democratization. Palgrave Macmillan. p. abstract. doi:10.1057/9781137313492_9. ISBN 9781137313492. Retrieved 27 January 2023. Roy, Failure of Political Islam, 1994: p. 168 ARMAJANI, Jon (2020). Shia Islam and Politics Iran, Iraq, and Lebanon. Lexington Books. p. abstract. Retrieved 27 January 2023. Farhosh-van Loon, Diede (2016). "The Fusion of Mysticism and Politics in Khomeini's Quatrains". International Journal of Persian Literature. 1 (1): 59–88. doi:10.5325/intejperslite.1.1.0059. ISSN 2376-5739. JSTOR 10.5325/intejperslite.1.1.0059. Khalaji 2009. Shaykh al Fawzān Warns Against The Books of Sayyid Quṭb | Shaykh Ṣāliḥ al Fawzān, retrieved 22 April 2021 Mackey, Sandra, The Iranians : Persia, Islam and the Soul of a Nation by Sandra Mackey, New York : Dutton, c1996, p.150-55 HERMANN, DENIS (May 2013). "Akhund Khurasani and the Iranian Constitutional Movement". Middle Eastern Studies. 49 (3): 430–453. doi:10.1080/00263206.2013.783828. JSTOR 23471080. S2CID 143672216. Retrieved 20 April 2023. Donzel, Emeri "van" (1994). Islamic Desk Reference. ISBN 90-04-09738-4. p. 285-286 Taheri, The Spirit of Allah, (1985), p. 98 Moin, Khomeini (2000), p.224 Taheri, Amir, Spirit of Allah : Khomeini and the Islamic Revolution , Adler and Adler c1985, p.187 Kepel, Jihad, 2002, p.107-8 Mackay, Iranians, (1998), p. 291 Keddie, Modern Iran, (2006), p. 245 Roy, Failure of Political Islam, 1994: p. 27 Fuller, Graham E., The Future of Political Islam, Palgrave MacMillan, (2003), p. 28 Commentary, "Defeating the Oil Weapon", September 2002 Fuller, Graham E., The Future of Political Islam, Palgrave MacMillan, (2003), p. 68 Kepel, Gilles, Muslim extremism in Egypt: the prophet and Pharaoh, Berkeley: University of California Press, (c2003), p. 218 Lewis, Bernard, The Crisis of Islam: Holy War and Unholy Terror, (2003), p. 22 Goodell, `The Elementary Structures of Political Life` (PhD dissertation, Columbia University, 1977); quoted in Iran Between Two Revolutions by Ervand Abrahamian, Princeton University Press, 1982 (p.426-84) Kepel, Jihad, p.365 Roy, Failure of Political Islam, 1994: p. 53 Roy, Failure of Political Islam, 1994: p.54-5 Kepel, Gilles, Jihad: on the Trail of Political Islam, Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, (2002), pp. 69–75 Dawood al-Shirian, 'What Is Saudi Arabia Going to Do?' Al-Hayat, May 19, 2003 Abou al Fadl, Khaled, The Great Theft: Wrestling Islam from the Extremists, HarperSanFrancisco, 2005, pp. 48–64 Kepel, Gilles, Jihad: on the Trail of Political Islam, Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, (2002), p. 72 Nasr, Vali, The Shia Revival, Norton, (2006), p. 155 Murphy, Caryle, Passion for Islam, (2002) p. 32 "Saudi Publications on Hate Ideology". January 2006. Archived from the original on 5 May 2019. "An interview with Minister Mentor of Singapore, Lee Kuan Yew". Accessmylibrary.com. 24 September 2004. Archived from the original on 13 July 2009. Retrieved 21 April 2012. Islam Hassan (31 March 2015). "GCC's 2014 Crisis: Causes, Issues and Solutions". Gulf Cooperation Council's Challenges and Prospects. Al Jazeera Research Center. Retrieved 4 June 2015. "Mohammed Morsi: Egypt's former president given life in spying case". BBC News. 18 June 2016. Retrieved 19 June 2016. Hendawi, Hamza (18 June 2016). "Egyptian court sentences 2 Al-Jazeera employees to death". Associated Press News. Retrieved 30 September 2017. "The UAE and Qatar Wage a Proxy War in Libya". International Policy Digest. 13 December 2015. Archived from the original on 1 July 2016. Retrieved 9 June 2016. Dagher, Sam; Tripoli, Charles Levinson in; Doha, Margaret Coker in (17 October 2011). "Tiny Kingdom's Huge Role in Libya Draws Concern". Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 9 June 2016. Spencer, David Blair and Richard (20 September 2014). "How Qatar is funding the rise of Islamist extremists". Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 9 June 2016. Boghardt, Lori Plotkin (6 October 2014). "Qatar Is a U.S. Ally. They Also Knowingly Abet Terrorism. What's Going On?". New Republic. Retrieved 9 June 2016. Lazareva, Inna (15 May 2016). "Israel lied about Isil soldiers entering Gaza to justify its siege, Hamas claims". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 9 June 2016. "Dar Al Hayat". 10 December 2005. Archived from the original on 10 December 2005. Annie Jacobsen, "Surprise, Kill, Vanish: The Secret History of CIA Paramilitary Armies, Operators, and Assassins", (New York: Little, Brown and Company, 2019), p. 88 Terror and Liberalism by Paul Berman, W.W. Norton and Company, 2003, p. 101. Peter Bergen, Alec Reynolds (November–December 2005). "Blowback Revisited". Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 29 November 2007. Retrieved 9 November 2007. Higgins, Andrew (24 January 2009). "How Israel Helped to Spawn Hamas". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 15 January 2013. Retrieved 15 January 2017. "How Israel and the United States Helped to Bolster Hamas". Democracynow.org. 26 January 2006. Kepel, Gilles. Jihad: the trail of political Islam. p. 83. Kepel, Gilles, Muslim Extremism in Egypt, chapter 5, "Vanguard of the Umma" Roy, Failure of Political Islam, 1994: p.3 Massington, L., Radtke, B. Chittick, W.C., Jong, F. de., Lewisohn, L., Zarcone, Th., Ernst, C, Aubin, Françoise and J.O. Hunwick, "Taṣawwuf", in: Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition, Edited by: P. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C.E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel, W.P. Heinrichs Qamar-ul Huda (2003), Striving for Divine Union: Spiritual Exercises for Suhraward Sufis, RoutledgeCurzon, pp. 1–4. Mortimer, Faith and Power, (1982) p. 58. Quoting Aziz Ahmad, Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian Environment, Oxford University Press, (1964), p. 189 Haque 1982, pp. 78–81. Mortimer, Faith and Power, (1982) pp. 67–68. Mortimer, Faith and Power, (1982), p. 69 Metcalf, Barbara Daly (2002). Islamic revival in British India : Deoband, 1860–1900 (3rd impression. ed.). New Delhi: Oxford Univ. Press. ISBN 0195660498. Islam and the Muslim World, (2004) p. 374 Mortimer, Edward, Faith and Power, (1982), p. 85 Mortimer, Edward, Faith and Power, (1982), pp. 93, 237–40, 249 Encyclopedia of Islam and the Muslim World, Macmillan Reference, 2004, v.2, p. 609 The New Encyclopedia of Islam by Cyril Glasse, Rowman and Littlefield, 2001, p. 19 The Oxford Dictionary of Islam by John L. Esposito, OUP, 2003, p. 275 Historical Dictionary of Islam by Ludwig W. Wadamed, Scarecrow Press, 2001, p. 233 Meleagrou-Hitchens, Alexander (2018). Salafism in America. The George Washington University. p. 65.[permanent dead link] Passion for Islam: Shaping the Modern Middle East: the Egyptian Experience by Caryle Murphy, p. 46 Roy, Failure of Political Islam, 1994: p.33 McHugo, John (2013). A Concise History of the Arabs. New York, N.Y.: The New Press. p. 287. ISBN 978-1-59558-950-7. Enayat, Hamid (1982). Modern Islamic Political Thought: The Response of the Shi'i and SunnI Muslims to the Twentieth Century. London: The Macmillan Press Ltd. pp. 69, 77. ISBN 978-0-333-27969-4. C. Martin, Richard (2016). "State and Government". Encyclopedia of Islam and the Muslim World, Second Edition. Farmington Hills, Michigan: Gale Publishers. p. 1088. ISBN 978-0-02-866269-5. Li, Ruiheng (2016). "A Preliminary Study on the "Islamic State" Thought in Modern Islamism". Journal of Middle Eastern and Islamic Studies (In Asia). 10 (4). Routledge: Taylor & Francis group: 27. doi:10.1080/19370679.2016.12023291. "Allama Muhammad Iqbal Philosopher, Poet, and Political leader". Aml.Org.pk. Archived from the original on 5 March 2012. Retrieved 2 March 2012. "Iqbal Academy Pakistan". Archived from the original on 21 February 2014. Retrieved 25 October 2014. Anil Bhatti. "Iqbal and Goethe" (PDF). Yearbook of the Goethe Society of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 October 2008. Retrieved 7 January 2011. Rahnemaa, Saeed (2008). "Radical Islamism and Failed Developmentalism". Third World Quarterly. 29 (3): 483–96. doi:10.1080/01436590801931462. S2CID 144880260. "Maulana Maududi's Two-Nation Theory". Witness-pioneer.org. 27 January 2012. Retrieved 21 April 2012. Bonney, R (2004). Jihad: From Qur'an to Bin Laden. Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 201. Mawdudi trained with two Deobandi ulama at the Fatihpuri mosque's seminary in Delhi and received his certificates to teach religious sciences (ijazahs) in 1926. Rahnema 2005, p. 100. Rahnema 2005, pp. 104–110. Rahnema 2005, p. 102. Abu al-A'la al-Mawdudi, "Political Theory of Islam", in Khurshid Ahmad, ed., Islam: Its Meaning and Message (London: Islamic Council of Europe, 1976), pp. 159–61. Abu al-A'la al-Mawdudi, Islamic Way of Life (Delhi: Markazi Maktaba Islami, 1967), p. 40 Esposito and Piscatori, "Democratization and Islam", pp. 436–37, 440 Esposito, The Islamic Threat, pp. 125–26; Voll and Esposito, Islam and Democracy, pp. 23–26. Abul A'la Maududi (1980). "The Process of Islamic Revolution". Archived from the original on 8 September 2015. Nasr, Seyyed Vali Reza (1996). Mawdudi and the Making of Islamic Revivalism. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. p. 77. ISBN 978-0195357110. Maududi on social justice: "a man who owns a car can drive it; and those who do not own one should walk; and those who are crippled cannot walk but can hop along." (Nizam al-Hayat fi al-Islam, 1st ed., n.d. (Bayrut: Musassast al-Risalah, 1983), p. 54) See also Radical Islamic Fundamentalism: the Ideological and Political Discourse of Sayyid Qutb by Ahmad S. Moussalli American University of Beirut, (1992) "The Meaning of Islam". A. Maududi's 'Towards Understanding Islam' (PDF). June 2008. p. 7. Retrieved 23 January 2023. "The Meaning of Islam". A. Maududi's 'Towards Understanding Islam' (PDF). June 2008. p. 8. Retrieved 23 January 2023. Abul ʻAla Maudoodi, Syed (1986). Towards Understanding Islam. Islamic Circle of North America. Retrieved 23 January 2023. "The Meaning of Islam". The Message of the Teachings – Hasan al-Banna (PDF). p. 7. Retrieved 23 January 2023. *Mura, Andrea (2012). "A genealogical inquiry into early Islamism: the discourse of Hasan al-Banna". Journal of Political Ideologies. 17 (1): 61–85. doi:10.1080/13569317.2012.644986. S2CID 144873457. "Egypt, A Timeline of Recent Events". Gemsofislamism.tripod.com. Retrieved 21 April 2012. "Free Republic. The day before, and after – It's been 25 years since the Islamist genie first went on the rampage". Fr.jpost.com. Archived from the original on 23 December 2011. Retrieved 21 April 2012. Sonja Zekri (2008). "The Islamism Debate: God's Counterculture". Süddeutsche Zeitung. Translated by Phyllis Anderson. Archived from the original on 3 April 2008. Kirkpatrick, David D. (21 January 2012). "Islamists Win 70% of Seats in the Egyptian Parliament". The New York Times. Fawaz A. Gerges, The Far Enemy: Why Jihad Went Global (Bronxville, N.Y.: Sarah Lawrence College) ISBN 978-0521791403 prologue "How Did Sayyid Qutb Influence Osama bin Laden?". Gemsofislamism.tripod.com. Archived from the original on 17 October 2010. Retrieved 21 April 2012. *Mura, Andrea (2014). "The Inclusive Dynamics of Islamic Universalism: From the Vantage Point of Sayyid Qutb's Critical Philosophy". Comparative Philosophy. 5 (1): 29–54. Qutb, Sayyid, Milestones, The Mother Mosque Foundation, (1981), p. 11, 19 Qutb, Sayyid, Milestones, p.55 Qutb, Sayyid, Milestones, p.59 Qutb, Sayyid, Milestones, pp.124, 116, 160 Mayer, p. 110 "The Islamic Resurgence: Prospects and Implications" by Kemal A. Faruki, from Voices of Resurgent Islam, ed. by John L. Esposito, OUP, (1983), p. 283 Parvaz, D. (11 February 2014). "Iran 1979: the Islamic revolution that shook the world". Aljazeera. Retrieved 22 May 2023. 'Removing Saddam strengthened Iran' Archived 2011-06-05 at the Wayback Machine Ataie, Mohammad; Lefèvre, Raphaël; Matthiesen, Toby (26 April 2021). "How Iran's 1979 Revolution Affected Sunni Islamists in the Middle East". London School of Economics Blog. Retrieved 22 May 2023. "Frequently Asked Questions on Iran". IslamOnline. Archived from the original on 7 November 2009. Ansari, Hamid, The Narrative of Awakening, The Institute for the Compilation and Publication of the works of the Imam Khomeini, (no date), p.253 Nasr, Vali, The Shia Revival, Norton, (2006), p.135 Nasr, Vali, The Shia Revival, Norton, (2006), p.136 Nasr, Vali, The Shia Revival (Norton), 2006), p.143-4 Nasr, Vali, The Shia Revival (Norton), 2006), p.148-9 Paul Vallely (19 February 2014). "The vicious schism between Sunni and Shia has been poisoning Islam for 1,400 years – and it's getting worse". The Independent. London. Retrieved 2 March 2014. "1979 – 2021 Modern Sunni-Shia Tensions". Council on Foreign Relations. Retrieved 22 May 2023. Kepel, Gilles, Jihad, Harvard University Press, (2002), p. 118 Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq#History Bakhash, Shaul, The Reign of the Ayatollahs, Basic Books, (1984), p. 233 "Hezbollah Shia group is coy about revealing the sums it has received from Iran. ... Reports have spoken of figures ranging from 10 to 15 million dollars per month, but it is possible that Hezbollah has received larger sums. It is only in recent years (after 1989) that Iran has decreased its aid." from: Jaber, Hala, Hezbollah: Born with a vengeance, New York: Columbia University Press, (1997), p. 150 Isfahani, Djavad Salehi (14 March 2019). "Iran's economy 40 years after the Islamic Revolution". Brookings. Retrieved 22 May 2023. Isfahani, Djavad Salehi (12 February 2019). "The Islamic Revolution at 40". Brookings. Retrieved 22 May 2023. Priborkin, Emily (8 April 2019). "40 Years Later: Iran after the Islamic Revolution". American University. Retrieved 22 May 2023. Wright, Sacred Rage, (2001), p. 148 "Masjid-ul-Haram: Sacred and forbidden". Ourdialogue.com. Archived from the original on 20 April 2012. Retrieved 21 April 2012. Wright, Lawrence, The Looming Tower: Al Qaeda and the Road to 9/11. New York: Knopf, (2006), pp. 103–04 Wright, Robin, Sacred Rage: The Wrath of Militant Islam, p. 155 Wright, Robin, Sacred Rage: The Wrath of Militant Islam, p. 149 Atkins, Stephen E. (2004). Encyclopedia of Modern Worldwide Extremists and Extremist Groups. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 35. ISBN 978-0-313-32485-7. Retrieved 5 October 2014. abdullah azzam afghanistan. Commins, David (2006). The Wahhabi Mission and Saudi Arabia. London: I.B.Tauris & Co Ltd. p. 174. In all, perhaps 35,000 Muslim fighters went to Afghanistan between 1982 and 1992, while untold thousands more attended frontier schools teeming with former and future fighters. Rashid, Ahmed, Taliban: Militant Islam, Oil and Fundamentalism in Central Asia (New Haven, 2000), p. 129. Peter Bergen (2005). "blowback revisited". Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 29 November 2007. "How the CIA created Osama bin Laden". Green Left Weekly. 19 September 2001. Retrieved 9 January 2007. "bin Laden interview with Peter Arnett, March 1997". Anusha.com. Retrieved 8 June 2012. Jihad: The Trail of Political Islam Gilles Kepel pp. 205–17 Jihad: The Trail of Political Islam Gilles Kepel p. 207 The Age of Sacred Terror by Daniel Benjamin and Steven Simon, Random House, 2002, pp. 172–73 "Muslims and Islam: Key findings in the U.S. and around the world". Pew Research Center. 22 July 2016. Retrieved 11 November 2016. Sinanovic, Ermin (2005). "[Book review] Post-Islamism: The Failure of Islamic Activism?". International Studies Review. 7: 433–436. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2486.2005.00508.x. JSTOR 3699758. Retrieved 30 December 2020. Hashemi, Nader (2021). "Political Islam: A 40 Year Retrospective". Religions. 12 (2): 130. doi:10.3390/rel12020130. Akyol, Mustafa (12 June 2020). "How Islamists are Ruining Islam". Hudson Institute. Retrieved 30 December 2020. "Arabs are Losing Faith in Religious Parties and Leaders". The Economist. 5 December 2019. Sham al-Ali (22 August 2017). "On Rising Apostasy Among Syrian Youths". Al-Jumhuriya. Zakaria, Fareed (29 April 2021). "Opinion: Ten years later, Islamist terrorism isn't the threat it used to be". Washington Post. Retrieved 4 May 2021. David Brooks, "This Is How Theocracy Shrivels", New York Times, 27 August 2021 Wistrich, Robert S. (20 May 2015). "Anti-Semitism and Jewish destiny". Jpost.com. "Information Warfare Matters". Online.wsj.com. 1 December 2008. Retrieved 8 June 2012. "Creating a New Public Diplomacy Cabinet Post. Spring 2008". Brookings.edu. Archived from the original on 25 May 2013. Retrieved 8 June 2012. Esposito, John (1998). Islam and Politics (Fourth ed.). Syracuse NY: Syracuse University Press. Grinin, Leonid; Korotayev, Andrey; Tausch, Arno (2019). Islamism, Arab Spring, and the Future of Democracy. Perspectives on Development in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) Region. London: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-91077-2. ISBN 978-3-319-91076-5. S2CID 158388148. Mura, Andrea (2015). The Symbolic Scenarios of Islamism: A Study in Islamic Political Thought. London: Routledge. Yazbeck Haddad, Yvonne; Esposito, John, eds. (1998). Islam, Gender, and Social Change. New York: Oxford University Press. Halliday, Fred (2003). Islam and the Myth of Confrontation (2nd ed.). London, New York: I.B. Tauris. ISBN 9781850439592. Hassan, Riaz (2002). Faithlines: Muslim Conceptions of Islam and Society. Oxford University Press.[dead link] Hassan, Riaz (2008). Inside Muslim Minds. Melbourne University Press. Kepel, Gilles (2002). Jihad: The Trail of Political Islam. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0674010901. Jihad: The Trail of Political Islam. Mandaville, Peter (2007). Transnational Muslim Politics. Abingdon (Oxon), New York: Routledge. Martin, Richard C.; Barzegar, Abbas, eds. (2010). Islamism: Contested Perspectives on Political Islam. Stanford University Press. Ayubi, Nazih (1991). Political Islam. London: Routledge. Rashwan, Diaa, ed. (2007). The spectrum of Islamist movements. Schiler. Roy, Olivier (1994). The Failure of Political Islam. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0674291416. Retrieved 2 April 2015. Sayyid, S. (2003). A Fundamental Fear: Eurocentrism and Emergence of Islamism (2nd ed.). London, New York: Zed Press. Strindberg, Anders; Wärn, Mats (2011). Islamism. Cambridge, Malden MA: Polity Press. Valentine, Simon Ross, Force and Fanaticism: Wahhabism in Saudi Arabia and Beyond, (2015), London/New York, Hurst & Co. Tausch, Arno (2015). The political algebra of global value change. General models and implications for the Muslim world. With Almas Heshmati and Hichem Karoui (1st ed.). Nova Science Publishers, New York. ISBN 978-1629488998. Teti, Andrea; Mura, Andrea (2009). "Sunni Islam and politics". In Jeff Haynes (ed.). Routledge Handbook of Religion and Politics. Abingdon (Oxon), New York: Routledge. Volpi, Frédéric (2010). Political Islam Observed. Hurst. Volpi, Frédéric, ed. (2011). Political Islam: A Critical Reader. Routledge. Sayej, Caroleen Marji (2018). Patriotic Ayatollahs: Nationalism in Post-Saddam Iraq. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. p. 67. doi:10.7591/cornell/9781501715211.001.0001. ISBN 9781501714856. Farzaneh, Mateo Mohammad (March 2015). Iranian Constitutional Revolution and the Clerical Leadership of Khurasani. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press. ISBN 9780815633884. OCLC 931494838. Hermann, Denis (1 May 2013). "Akhund Khurasani and the Iranian Constitutional Movement". Middle Eastern Studies. 49 (3): 430–453. doi:10.1080/00263206.2013.783828. ISSN 0026-3206. JSTOR 23471080. S2CID 143672216. Bayat, Mangol (1991). Iran's First Revolution. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-506822-1. Nouraie, Fereshte M. (1975). "The Constitutional Ideas of a Shi'ite Mujtahid: Muhammad Husayn Na'ini". Iranian Studies. 8 (4): 234–247. doi:10.1080/00210867508701501. ISSN 0021-0862. JSTOR 4310208. Martin, V. A. (April 1986). "The Anti-Constitutionalist Arguments of Shaikh Fazlallah Nuri". Middle Eastern Studies. 22 (2): 181–196. doi:10.1080/00263208608700658. JSTOR 4283111. Khalaji, Mehdi (27 November 2009). "The Dilemmas of Pan-Islamic Unity". Current Trends in Islamist Ideology. 9: 64–79. Fuchs, Simon Wolfgang (24 May 2021). "A Direct Flight to Revolution: Maududi, Divine Sovereignty, and the 1979-Moment in Iran". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. 32 (2): 333–354. doi:10.1017/S135618632100033X. S2CID 236344952. Aziz, T. M. (May 1993). "The Role of Muhammad Baqir al-Sadr in Shi'i Political Activism in Iraq from 1958 to 1980". International Journal of Middle East Studies. 25 (2): 207–222. doi:10.1017/S0020743800058499. JSTOR 164663. S2CID 162623601. Fuchs, Simon Wolfgang (July 2014). "Third Wave Shi'ism: Sayyid Arif Husain al-Husaini and the Islamic Revolution in Pakistan". Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society. 24 (3): 493–510. doi:10.1017/S1356186314000200. JSTOR 43307315. S2CID 161577379. Rahnema, Ali (1 November 2005). Pioneers of Islamic Revival. London, UK: Zed Books. ISBN 9781842776155. Rahnema, Ali (2000). An Islamic Utopian – A Political Biography of Ali Shari'ati. London, NY: I.B. Tauris. ISBN 1860645526. Bohdan, Siarhei (Summer 2020). ""They Were Going Together with the Ikhwan": The Influence of Muslim Brotherhood Thinkers on Shi'i Islamists during the Cold War". The Middle East Journal. 74 (2): 243–262. doi:10.3751/74.2.14. ISSN 1940-3461. S2CID 225510058. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Islamism and Victims of Islamism. The dictionary definition of Islamism at Wiktionary Quotations related to Islamism at Wikiquote Portals:  Islam  Politics