This article lists the confirmed national football squads for the 2006 FIFA World Cup tournament held in Germany, between 9 June and 9 July 2006. Before announcing their final squad, several teams named a provisional squad of 23 to 33 players, but each country's final squad of 23 players had to be submitted by 15 May 2006. Replacement of injured players was permitted until 24 hours before the team's first World Cup game. Players marked (c) were named as captain for their national squad. Number of caps counts until the start of the World Cup, including all pre-tournament friendlies. Club information is that used by FIFA. Players for whom this information changed during or prior to the tournament are indicated by footnotes. Head coach: Alexandre Guimarães Head coach: Luis Fernando Suárez Head coach: Jürgen Klinsmann Head coach: Paweł Janas Head coach: Sven-Göran Eriksson Head coach: Aníbal Ruiz Head coach: Lars Lagerbäck Head coach: Leo Beenhakker Head coach: José Pekerman Head coach: Henri Michel Head coach: Marco van Basten Head coach: Ilija Petković Head coach: Oliveira Gonçalves Head coach: Branko Ivanković Head coach: Ricardo La Volpe Head coach: Luiz Felipe Scolari Head coach: Karel Brückner Head coach: Ratomir Dujković Head coach: Marcello Lippi Head coach: Bruce Arena Head coach: Guus Hiddink Head coach: Carlos Alberto Parreira Head coach: Zlatko Kranjčar Head coach: Zico Head coach: Raymond Domenech Head coach: Dick Advocaat Head coach: Köbi Kuhn Head coach: Otto Pfister Head coach: Marcos Paquetá Head coach: Luis Aragonés Head coach: Roger Lemerre Head coach: Oleg Blokhin Serhiy Fedorov was injured prior to the start of the tournament. His replacement, Vyacheslav Shevchuk, was also injured shortly after filling in. Oleksandr Yatsenko was then called up, and sat on the bench for the last two matches.[citation needed] The squads for Italy and Saudi Arabia were made up entirely of players from their respective domestic leagues. Saudi Arabia were the only team with no players from European clubs. The Ivory Coast squad was made up entirely of players employed by foreign clubs, and 22 out of the 23 players were registered in Europe. Although Turkey, Scotland, and Russia failed to qualify for the finals, their domestic leagues were represented by 12, 11, and 10 players respectively. In total, domestic leagues from 48 countries had players at the 2006 World Cup. Finalised clubs' listing as per FIFA, excluding players on standby and loans. "2006 FIFA World Cup Germany – Teams". FIFA.com. Fédération Internationale de Football Association. Archived from the original on 3 June 2007. Retrieved 24 May 2006. Borja joined Olympiacos following the tournament. "Olympiacos sign Ecuador striker". UEFA. Union of European Football Associations. 1 May 2006. Retrieved 18 June 2006. Castillo joined Red Star Belgrade following the tournament. "Ecuadorian World Cup winger Castillo joins Serbian club Red Star". People's Daily. Xinhua News Agency. 29 August 2006. Retrieved 29 October 2014. Valencia was on loan to Recreativo prior to the tournament."Luis Valencia". FIFA. Archived from the original on 18 June 2006. Retrieved 18 June 2006. Reasco joined São Paulo following the tournament."Neicer Reasco". FIFA. Archived from the original on 18 June 2006. Retrieved 18 June 2006. Ballack joined Chelsea after his contract with Bayern Munich expired on 1 July."Ballack cheered by Chelsea challenge". UEFA. Union of European Football Associations. 15 May 2006. Archived from the original on 26 May 2006. Retrieved 18 June 2006. 1. FC Köln chairman Wolfgang Overath had confirmed that Podolski would play for Bayern Munich in the following season."Podolski ready to join Bayern". UEFA. Union of European Football Associations. 1 June 2006. Archived from the original on 26 June 2006. Retrieved 18 June 2006. Kosowski was on loan to Southampton prior to the tournament, and became a free agent following its conclusion."Kosowski wants last farewell". football.co.uk. 25 April 2006. Archived from the original on 12 May 2006. Retrieved 18 June 2006. Bak became a free agent following the tournament. Krzynówek joined VfL Wolfsburg following the tournament."Leverkusen capture Swiss starlet". UEFA. Union of European Football Associations. 16 May 2006. Retrieved 21 June 2006. Rasiak was on loan to Southampton prior to the tournament, and joined the club permanently following its conclusion."Poland looking to add extra polish". UEFA. Union of European Football Associations. 2 May 2006. Archived from the original on 26 May 2006. Retrieved 21 June 2006. Żewłakow joined Olympiacos following the tournament."Iuliano returns to Italy". UEFA. Union of European Football Associations. 30 January 2006. Retrieved 21 June 2006. Bosacki was called up after Damian Gorawski sustained an injury and had to withdraw from the squad."Injuries spell late squad changes". FIFA. 8 June 2006. Archived from the original on 28 June 2006. Retrieved 21 June 2006. Bridge was on loan to Fulham prior to the tournament. "Nélson fit for Mersey mission". UEFA. Union of European Football Associations. 2 March 2006. Archived from the original on 25 May 2006. Retrieved 21 June 2006. Carson was on loan to Sheffield Wednesday prior to the tournament. "Scott Carson, Liverpool". The Football Association. Archived from the original on 9 July 2008. Retrieved 21 June 2006. Salvador Cabañas joined América following the tournament. "América returns to Houston". Houston Chronicle. 8 June 2006. Retrieved 21 June 2006. Paredes joined Sporting CP following the tournament. Valdez joined Borussia Dortmund following the tournament. "Valdez delighted with Dortmund move". UEFA. Union of European Football Associations. 30 May 2006. Archived from the original on 3 July 2006. Retrieved 21 June 2006. Caniza joined Atlas following the tournament. Larsson had a pre-contract agreement with Helsingborg prior to the tournament, and joined the club following its conclusion. "Larsson looks to bow out in style". UEFA. Union of European Football Associations. 16 May 2006. Archived from the original on 10 July 2006. Retrieved 21 June 2006. Svensson joined Rangers following the tournament. "Rangers move delights Svensson". UEFA. Union of European Football Associations. 26 May 2006. Retrieved 21 June 2006. Källström joined Lyon following the tournament. "Lyon land Swede Källström". UEFA. Union of European Football Associations. 27 May 2006. Retrieved 21 June 2006. Elmander had a pre-contract agreement with Toulouse prior to the tournament, and joined the club following its conclusion. Hislop joined FC Dallas following the tournament. Wrexham were a team from Wales and under the jurisdiction of the Football Association of Wales, but played in the English football league system. Abbondanzieri joined Getafe following the tournament. Saviola was on loan to Sevilla prior to the tournament. Scaloni was on loan to West Ham United prior to the tournament. "Petković quits in World Cup row". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 6 June 2006. Archived from the original on 10 July 2012. Retrieved 28 April 2011. Petković withdrew from the squad following accusations he was only called up due to nepotism. He had initially been selected as a replacement for injured striker Mirko Vučinić. Thus, the side entered the tournament with only 22 players in the squad. Vukić was on loan to Partizan prior to the tournament. Ljuboja was on loan to VfB Stuttgart prior to the tournament, and joined the club permanently following its conclusion. Stojković joined Nantes following the tournament. Ricardo became a free agent following the tournament. Akwá became a free agent following the tournament. Marques was on loan to Hull City prior to the tournament. Nekounam joined Osasuna following the tournament. Salcido joined PSV Eindhoven following the tournament. Osorio joined VfB Stuttgart following the tournament. Pardo joined VfB Stuttgart following the tournament. Borgetti joined Al Ittihad following the tournament. Fonseca joined Benfica following the tournament. Caneira was on loan to Sporting CP prior to the tournament. Costinha joined Atlético Madrid following the tournament. Maniche was on loan to Chelsea prior to the tournament. Postiga was on loan to Saint-Étienne prior to the tournament. Galásek joined 1. FC Nürnberg following the tournament. Sionko joined Rangers on a Bosman ruling following the tournament. Koller joined Monaco following the tournament. Rosický joined Arsenal following the tournament. Gyan was on loan to Modena prior to the tournament. Dramani joined Gençlerbirliği following the tournament. Grosso joined Inter Milan following the tournament. Howard was loaned to Everton following the tournament. Albright was called up after an injury to Frankie Hejduk. Berhalter, who joined 1860 Munich following the tournament, was called up after an injury to Cory Gibbs. Popovic's Crystal Palace contract expired following the tournament. Skoko was on loan to Stoke City prior to the tournament. Lazaridis joined Perth Glory following the tournament. Beauchamp joined 1. FC Nürnberg following the tournament. Thompson was on loan to PSV Eindhoven prior to the tournament. Kennedy joined 1. FC Nürnberg following the tournament. Zé Roberto became a free agent following the tournament. Mineiro was called up following an injury to Edmílson. Pletikosa was on loan to Hajduk Split prior to the tournament. Tudor was on loan to Siena prior to the tournament. Kovač joined Red Bull Salzburg following the tournament. Jerko Leko joined Monaco following the tournament. Ivan Bošnjak joined Genk following the tournament. Nakata was on loan to Bolton Wanderers before the tournament. Takahara joined Eintracht Frankfurt following the tournament. Landreau joined Paris Saint-Germain following the tournament. Govou was called up as a replacement for the injured Djibril Cissé. Zidane retired from football following the tournament. Barthez became a free agent following the tournament. Frei joined Borussia Dortmund following the tournament. David Degen joined Borussia Mönchengladbach following the tournament. Yakin was called up after an injury to Johan Vonlanthen. "Confusion over Pfister comeback". BBC Sport. British Broadcasting Corporation. 12 June 2006. Archived from the original on 1 January 2007. Retrieved 28 April 2011. Disputes over the Togo players' pay bonuses caused Pfister to walk out after Togo's first match, but he returned before their second match. Akoto had not played for Admira Wacker since the end of 2005 due to a contract dispute, and had been training with Austrian club Schwechat before the tournament. Atsou was called up as a replacement for the injured Karim Guede. Pernía was called up as a replacement for the injured Asier del Horno, and joined Atlético Madrid following the tournament. Guemamdia was called up as a replacement for the injured Mehdi Meriah. Ben Saada was called up as a replacement for the injured Issam Jomaa. Saidi was on loan to Lecce prior to the tournament. Yatsenko was called up as a replacement for the injured Serhiy Fedorov and Vyacheslav Shevchuk. Shevchenko joined Chelsea following the tournament. Sviderskyi was on loan to Arsenal Kyiv prior to the tournament. Wikimedia Commons has media related to 2006 FIFA World Cup players.