The 71st annual Berlin International Film Festival took place from 1 to 5 March 2021 as a virtual festival due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Romanian film Bad Luck Banging or Loony Porn directed by Radu Jude won the Golden Bear. It was the third victory of Romania in the last nine years. The following were on the jury for the Berlinale Competition section: Ildikó Enyedi, Hungarian filmmaker Nadav Lapid, Israeli filmmaker Adina Pintilie, Romanian filmmaker Mohammad Rasoulof, Iranian filmmaker Gianfranco Rosi, Italian filmmaker Jasmila Žbanić, Bosnian filmmaker The following people were on the jury for the Encounters Awards: Florence Almozini, French programmer Cecilia Barrionuevo, Argentinian artistic director Diedrich Diederichsen, German editor and publisher The following people were on the jury for the Berlinale Shorts section: Basim Magdy, Egyptian artist Christine A. Maier, Austrian cinematographer Sebastian Urzendowsky, German actor The following films were selected for the main competition for the Golden Bear and Silver Bear awards: The following films were selected for the Encounters section: The following films were selected for the Panorama section: The following films were selected for the Perspektive Deutsches Kino section: Golden Bear: Bad Luck Banging or Loony Porn by Radu Jude Silver Bear Grand Jury Prize: Wheel of Fortune and Fantasy by Ryusuke Hamaguchi Silver Bear Jury Prize: Mr. Bachmann and His Class by Maria Speth Silver Bear for Best Director: Dénes Nagy for Natural Light Silver Bear for Best Leading Performance: Maren Eggert for I'm Your Man Silver Bear for Best Supporting Performance: Lilla Kizlinger for Forest - I See You Everywhere Silver Bear for Best Screenplay: Hong Sang-soo for Introduction Silver Bear for Outstanding Artistic Contribution: Yibrán Asuad for A Cop Movie (editing) Best Film: We by Alice Diop Special Jury Award: Taste by Lê Bảo Best Director: (ex-aequo) Ramon Zürcher and Silvan Zürcher for The Girl and the Spider Denis Côté for Social Hygiene Special Mention: Rock Bottom Riser by Fern Silva Golden Bear for Best Short Film: My Uncle Tudor by Olga Lucovnicova Silver Bear Jury Prize: Day Is Gone by Zhang Dalei Berlin Short Film Candidate for the European Film Awards: Easter Eggs by Nicolas Keppens Grand Prix: Summer Blur by Han Shuai Special Mention: A School in Cerro Hueso by Betania Cappato Grand Prix: The Fam by Fred Baillif Special Mention: Cryptozoo by Dash Shaw "71st International Film Festival Berlin - Berlinale". visitberlin.de. Retrieved 2 January 2021. Keslassy, Elsa (16 December 2020). "Berlin Film Festival Set to Go Virtual for 71st Edition (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Retrieved 2 January 2021. Scott Roxborough, "Berlin Film Festival Unveils Panorama, Encounters Titles". The Hollywood Reporter, 10 February 2021. "Golden Bear Winners Form the International Jury of the 71st Berlinale". Berlinale. Retrieved 5 March 2021. "Encounters Jury". Berlinale. Retrieved 5 March 2021. "The 2021 International Short Film Jury". Berlinale. Retrieved 5 March 2021. "Competition - Reshaping Cinematic Forms". Berlinale. Archived from the original on 12 February 2021. Retrieved 12 February 2021. "The Prizes of the International Jury". Berlinale. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "Encounters Jury". Berlinale. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "International Short Film Jury". Berlinale. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "Awards and Juries in the Generation section". Berlinale. Retrieved 20 March 2021. Berlin International Film Festival