At the 2002 FIFA World Cup, each national association was required to name a squad of 23 players, expanded from 22 in previous tournaments. The players' ages, caps and clubs are as of 31 May 2002, the opening day of the tournament. Head coach: Morten Olsen Head coach: Roger Lemerre Head coach: Bruno Metsu Head coach: Víctor Púa Head coach: Cesare Maldini Head coach: Srečko Katanec *Was expelled from the squad after the first game. Note: caps for Yugoslavia are not counted. Head coach: Jomo Sono Head coach: José Antonio Camacho Head coach: Luiz Felipe Scolari Head coach: Bora Milutinović Head coach: Alexandre Guimarães Head coach: Şenol Güneş Head coach: Jerzy Engel Head coach: António Oliveira Head coach: Guus Hiddink Head coach: Bruce Arena Head coach: Winfried Schäfer Head coach: Rudi Völler Head coach: Mick McCarthy Roy Keane left the squad before the tournament and was not replaced. See Saipan incident. Keane was technically still part of the named squad and appeared in FIFA's official squad lists. Head coach: Nasser Al-Johar Head coach: Marcelo Bielsa Originally, the squad was named with Ariel Ortega given shirt number 23 and Roberto Bonano number 24, as the Argentine Football Association had decided to retire the number 10 shirt in honour of Diego Maradona. FIFA, however, insisted that all squads were assigned with numbers ranging only from 1–23, prompting Argentina to amend their squad list. Head coach: Sven-Göran Eriksson Head coach: Festus Onigbinde Head coaches: Lars Lagerbäck and Tommy Söderberg Head coach: Mirko Jozić Note: caps for Yugoslavia are not counted. Head coach: Hernán Darío Gómez Head coach: Giovanni Trapattoni Head coach: Javier Aguirre Head coach: Robert Waseige Head coach: Philippe Troussier Head coach: Oleg Romantsev Note: caps include those for USSR, CIS, and Russia, while those for other countries, such as Ukraine, are not counted. Head coach: Ammar Souayah The Saudi Arabian squad was the only one made up entirely of players from their country's domestic league and the only one with no players from European clubs. The Cameroon squad were made up entirely of players employed by overseas clubs, the Irish squad was made up entirely by players in the English league. Although the Netherlands and Greece failed to qualify for the finals, their domestic leagues were represented by 18 and 10 players, respectively. Altogether, there were 43 national leagues who had players in the tournament. (in English) Planet World Cup website (in English) Sortable list of players at ScoreShelf.com website