Kazakhstan is divided into 17 regions (Kazakh: облыстар, romanized: oblystar; sg. облыс, oblys; Russian: области, romanized: oblasti; sg. область, oblast). The regions are further subdivided into districts (Kazakh: аудандар, romanized: audandar; sg. аудан, audan; Russian: районы, romanized: rayony; sg. район, rayon). Three cities, Almaty, Shymkent, and the capital city Astana, do not belong to their surrounding regions. On 16 March 2022, Kazakh President Kassym-Jomart Tokayev announced that three new regions would be created. Abai Region was created from East Kazakhstan Region with its capital in Semey. Ulytau Region was created from Karaganda Region with its capital in Jezkazgan. Jetisu Region was created from Almaty Region with its capital in Taldykorgan; Almaty Region's capital was moved from Taldykorgan to Qonayev. In 2022, three new regions were created - Abai (from part of East Kazakhstan), Jetisu (from part of Almaty Region) and Ulytau (from part of Karaganda Region). In the following table, the 2009 population totals have been amended to reflect the population in the new or altered regions. Over the last 60 years, both the distribution and names of regions of Kazakhstan have changed considerably. Major changes were several fusions and splits between Guryev and Mangystau, Karaganda and Dzhezkazgan, Almaty and Taldy-Kurgan, East Kazakhstan and Semipalatinsk and Kostanay, Turgay and Tselinograd, respectively. Changes in region names were often in line with the renaming of cities, such as in the case of Alma-Ata/Almaty. After the administrative reform in 1997, the last change happened since then took place in 1999, when parts of North Kazakhstan that originally belonged to Kokshetau region became part of Akmola. The 1990s merges were in order to dilute the Russian population in the resulting region and to avoid having regions where Russians form a majority. Notes ^1 Almaty, Astana and Shymkent have the status of City of State Significance, and as such do not relate to any region. ^2 The West Kazakhstan and Atyrau regions are both partly located in Eastern Europe as the Ural River runs through Atyrau and Oral, their respective capital cities. ^3 Baikonur city has a special status because it is currently being leased to Russia along with Baikonur Cosmodrome until the year 2050. "V Kazakhstane poyavitsya chetyre novykh regiona" В Казахстане появится четыре новых региона [Four new regions will appear in Kazakhstan]. Interfax.ru (in Russian). Retrieved 20 April 2022. INFORM.KZ (4 May 2022). "3 new regions established in Kazakhstan". Казинформ. qazinform. Retrieved 22 May 2022.. On the time change in the city of Baikonur and Kyzylorda region, Administration of the city of Baikonur, 13 December 2018 (in Russian). "Analytical report" (PDF). www.liportal.de. 2009. Retrieved 7 March 2021. The Agency of Statistics of the Republic of Kazakhstan (web) - as at 1 October 2022 Bologov, Pyotr (25 August 2016). "Tri ugrozy dlya Nazarbayeva: naskol'ko stabilen Kazakhstan" Три угрозы для Назарбаева: насколько стабилен Казахстан [Three threats to Nazarbayev: how stable is Kazakhstan] (in Russian). carnegie.ru. Retrieved 29 August 2016. GeoHive