The 2021 Toronto International Film Festival, the 46th event in the Toronto International Film Festival series, was held from September 9 to 18, 2021. Due to the continued COVID-19 pandemic in Toronto, the festival was staged as a "hybrid" of in-person and digital screenings. Most films were screened both in-person and on the digital platform, although a few titles were withheld by their distributors from the digital platform and instead were screened exclusively in-person. Artistic director Cameron Bailey indicated that while the 2021 festival would not fully return to the size of program that it offered at the 2019 Toronto International Film Festival, it would be significantly bigger than the reduced lineup that was offered at the 2020 Toronto International Film Festival. Overall, the festival featured over 100 films, including a special retrospective program devoted to the work of Canadian documentary filmmaker Alanis Obomsawin. In-person screenings were held at the festival's traditional venues, including the TIFF Bell Lightbox, the Princess of Wales Theatre and Roy Thomson Hall, the latter two of which hosted the world premiere of Stephen Chbosky's film adaptation of Broadway musical Dear Evan Hansen, the festival's Opening Night Gala Presentation. Denis Villeneuve's film Dune received an IMAX world premiere screening at the Cinesphere. As in 2020, digital screenings took place on the Digital TIFF Bell Lightbox platform. In addition to Toronto, the festival also staged a number of satellite screenings in other Canadian cities for the first time. The festival presented the TIFF Tribute Awards, which were introduced in 2019 to honour actors and filmmakers for distinguished achievements over the course of their careers. The ceremony took place on September 18; as in 2020, it was broadcast by CTV. The first two honorees announced were Alanis Obomsawin as the recipient of the Jeff Skoll Award in Impact Media and Denis Villeneuve as the winner of the Ebert Director Award. Jessica Chastain and Benedict Cumberbatch were subsequently announced as the recipient of the Actor Awards. Dionne Warwick received the special tribute award, filmmaker Danis Goulet was named the recipient of the Emerging Talent Award, and cinematographer Ari Wegner received the Variety Artisan Award. The festival's main awards were announced on September 18, some live during the Tribute Awards broadcast and others on social media following the ceremony's conclusion. A few high-profile titles in the festival program, namely Dune, Last Night in Soho and Spencer, were not eligible for the People's Choice Award, as their distributors had not permitted them to be screened online on the digital platform. The first 13 films selected for the festival were announced in June 2021. The gala and special presentation programs were announced on July 20, while Contemporary World Cinema and Discovery titles were announced on July 28, TIFF Docs, Midnight Madness and Wavelengths were announced on August 4, Shortcuts and Platform were announced on August 11, and Primetime was announced on August 13. Walt Becker's Clifford the Big Red Dog was initially selected to be one of the Gala Presentations, but was withdrawn from the festival, after US distributor Paramount Pictures pulled it from its release schedule due to the rise of the Delta variant of COVID-19. The festival also announced a special event screening of an unspecified new film by Steven Soderbergh. Details of the film were not announced in advance, except that it was not expected to be his known upcoming film KIMI. Soderbergh ultimately premiered a reedited version of his 1991 film Kafka titled Mr. Kneff. A new program which saw classic films that screened at TIFF in past years made available for streaming on Crave, paired with talks by actors or filmmakers involved in the production. Special screenings of selected Gala or Special Presentations films in other communities across Canada. As in 2020 the Industry Selects program screened films for industry professionals, acting as a film market due to the continued COVID-19 pandemic having impacted the ability of filmmakers and critics to travel to international film festivals, but was not made available for the general public. The festival's annual year-end Canada's Top Ten list, collecting the films named as the top Canadian films of the year by critics and film festival programmers from across Canada, was released on December 6, 2021. All My Puny Sorrows — Michael McGowan Charlotte — Eric Warin, Tahir Rana Drunken Birds (Les oiseaux ivres) — Ivan Grbovic Learn to Swim — Thyrone Tommy Night Raiders — Danis Goulet Maria Chapdelaine — Sébastien Pilote Scarborough — Shasha Nakhai, Rich Williamson Ste. Anne — Rhayne Vermette Subjects of Desire — Jennifer Holness The White Fortress — Igor Drljača Ain't No Time for Women — Sarra El Abed Angakusajaujuq: The Shaman's Apprentice — Zacharias Kunuk Boobs (Lolos) — Marie Valade Defund — Khadijah Roberts-Abdullah, Araya Mengesha Fanmi — Sandrine Brodeur-Desrosiers, Carmine Pierre-Dufour Honour to Senator Murray Sinclair — Alanis Obomsawin Like the Ones I Used to Know (Les grandes claques) — Annie St-Pierre Meneath: The Hidden Island of Ethics — Terril Calder The Syed Family Xmas Eve Game Night — Fawzia Mirza Together — Albert Shin Barry Hertz, "TIFF planning ‘substantially bigger’ 2021 film festival compared to last year’s hybrid event". The Globe and Mail, May 3, 2021. "Toronto film festival plans return to in-person, digital hybrid model for 2021". Toronto Star, May 6, 2021. Peter Howell, "TIFF cautiously rebounds from pandemic with 100-plus features planned, but no popcorn". Toronto Star, June 23, 2021. Victoria Ahearn, "Alanis Obomsawin, Denis Villeneuve to get TIFF Tribute Awards at Toronto film fest". Toronto Star, July 22, 2021. Etan Vlessing, "Toronto: Jessica Chastain to Receive TIFF Tribute Actor Award". The Hollywood Reporter, August 5, 2021. Etan Vlessing, "Toronto: Benedict Cumberbatch to Receive TIFF Tribute Actor Award". The Hollywood Reporter, August 12, 2021. Selome Hailu, "Dionne Warwick and Danis Goulet to Receive TIFF Tribute Awards". Variety, August 26, 2021. Pat Saperstein, "‘Power of the Dog’ Cinematographer Ari Wegner to Be Honored With TIFF Variety Artisan Award". Variety, September 2, 2021. Steve Pond, "‘Belfast’ Wins Toronto Film Festival’s People’s Choice Award". TheWrap, September 18, 2021. Anthony D'Alessandro, "‘Dune’, ‘Last Night In Soho’ & ‘Spencer’ Among Those Movies Not Eligible To Compete For TIFF’s Top Prize, The People’s Choice Award". Deadline Hollywood, September 14, 2021. Fleming, Mike Jr. (July 20, 2021). "2021 Toronto Festival Unveils 'Dear Evan Hansen' As Opening Night Premiere; Check Out First Slated Films". Deadline. Archived from the original on July 20, 2021. Retrieved July 20, 2021. Rubin, Rebecca (July 20, 2021). "Toronto Film Festival Lineup Adds 'Dear Evan Hansen,' 'The Eyes of Tammy Faye' and 'Clifford the Big Red Dog'". Variety. Archived from the original on July 20, 2021. Retrieved July 20, 2021. Rebecca Rubin, "Toronto Film Festival Unveils Contemporary World Cinema and Discovery Lineup". Variety, July 28, 2021. Anthony D'Alessandro, "TIFF Unveils Docs, Midnight Madness & Wavelengths Lineup With Palme d’Or Winner ‘Titane’, Liz Garbus’ ‘Becoming Cousteau’ & More". Deadline Hollywood, August 4, 2021. Brian Welk, "‘Spencer,’ Princess Diana Film Starring Kristen Stewart, Added to Toronto Lineup". TheWrap, August 11, 2021. "Julia Child doc, Colin Kaepernick drama, CBC genderfluid dramedy join TIFF lineup" Archived August 14, 2021, at the Wayback Machine. Victoria Times-Colonist, August 13, 2021. Erik Pedersen and Anthony D'Alessandro, "‘Clifford The Big Red Dog’ Pulled From Paramount Release Schedule Over Delta Concerns; Pic Looking For New Date". Deadline Hollywood, July 30, 2021. Anthony D'Allessandro, "Steven Soderbergh Surprise Movie To Premiere At TIFF". Deadline Hollywood, September 2, 2021. Hassannia, Tina (September 18, 2021). "Steven Soderbergh Reintroduces His Cult Classic 'Kafka' After Decades of Tinkering". IndieWire. Archived from the original on September 18, 2021. Retrieved September 18, 2021. "'Wildhood,' 'Scarborough' added to TIFF lineup". Guelph Mercury Tribune, July 28, 2021. K. J. Millar, "Prince Rupert one of six cities chosen by Toronto International Film Festival for screening". The Interior News, September 9, 2021. "Toronto Film Festival Unveils Conversations, Industry Selects, Special Event Lineups". Shoot Online, August 24, 2021. Norman Wilner, "TIFF announces Canada’s Top Ten films of 2021". Now, December 6, 2021. Official website