The 78th annual Venice International Film Festival was held from 1 to 11 September 2021. South Korean director Bong Joon-ho was the Jury President of the main competition, marking the first time a South Korean director has been picked as the festival's top juror. Serena Rossi hosted the opening and closing nights. The Golden Lion was awarded to Happening directed by Audrey Diwan. Bong Joon-ho, South Korean filmmaker - Jury President Saverio Costanzo, Italian filmmaker Virginie Efira, Belgian actress Cynthia Erivo, British actress and singer Sarah Gadon, Canadian actress Alexander Nanau, Romanian-German director Chloé Zhao, Chinese-American filmmaker Jasmila Žbanić, Bosnian filmmaker and producer - Jury President Mona Fastvold, Norwegian filmmaker and actress Shahram Mokri, Iranian filmmaker Josh Siegel, director of the cinema department of MoMA Nadia Terranova, Italian novelist Uberto Pasolini, Italian director and producer - Jury President Martin Schweighofer, Austrian film critic Amalia Ulman, Argentine visual artist The following films were selected for the main international competition: Highlighted title indicates Golden Lion winner. The following films were selected to be screened out of competition: The following films were selected for the Horizons (Italian: Orizzonti) section: Highlighted title indicates Orizzonti award winner. The lineup of films selected for the 36th Venice International Critics' Week is as follows: The following films were selected for the Giornate degli Autori (aka Venice Days) section: The following official awards were presented at the 78th Edition: Golden Lion: Happening by Audrey Diwan Grand Jury Prize: The Hand of God by Paolo Sorrentino Silver Lion: The Power of the Dog by Jane Campion Volpi Cup for Best Actress: Penélope Cruz for Parallel Mothers Volpi Cup for Best Actor: John Arcilla for On the Job: The Missing 8 Golden Osella for Best Screenplay: The Lost Daughter by Maggie Gyllenhaal Special Jury Prize: Il buco by Michelangelo Frammartino Marcello Mastroianni Award: Filippo Scotti for The Hand of God Roberto Benigni Jamie Lee Curtis Best Film: Pilgrims by Laurynas Bareisa Best Director: Full Time by Éric Gravel Special Jury Prize: El Gran Movimiento by Kiro Russo Best Actress: Laure Calamy for Full Time Best Actor: Piseth Chhun for White Building Best Screenplay: 107 Mothers by Peter Kerekes Best Short Film: The Bones by Cristóbal León and Joaquín Cociña Armani Beauty Audience Award: The Blind Man Who Did Not Want to See Titanic by Teemu Nikki Immaculate by George Chiper-Lillemark and Monica Stan The following awards were presented by independent juries: Grand Prize: Zalava by Arsalan Amiri Mario Serandrei: They Carry Death by Samuel M. Delgado and Helena Girón Best Short Film: Inchei by Federico Demattè Best Director: Inchei by Federico Demattè Best Technical Contribution: L'Incanto by Chiara Caterina GdA Director's Award: Immaculate by George Chiper-Lillemark and Monica Stan Europa Cinemas Label Award: Californie by Alessandro Cassigoli and Casey Kauffman The Last Chapter by Gianluca Matarrese Best Italian Film: The Hand of God by Paolo Sorrentino Venezia 78 Best Film: Happening by Audrey Diwan Best Director: Vera Dreams of the Sea by Kaltrina Krasniqi Best Screenplay: Immaculate by George Chiper-Lillemark and Monica Stan Privat Desert by Aly Muritiba Happening by Audrey Diwan Immaculate by George Chiper-Lillemark and Monica Stan Amira by Mohamed Diab Al Garib by Amer Fakher Eldin Vera Dreams of the Sea by Kaltrina Krasniqi Graffetta d'Oro for Best Film: Freaks Out by Gabriele Mainetti Nave d’Argento for Best OTP: Mona Lisa and the Blood Moon by Ana Lily Amirpour VR Fan Experience: Knot: A Trilogy by Glen Neath and David Rosenberg Special Mention: Old Henry by Potsy Ponciroli Il buco by Michelangelo Frammartino Special mention: La Ragazza Ha Volato by Wilma Labate Best Film (main competition): Happening by Audrey Diwan Best Film (other sections): Zalava by Arsalan Amiri Mario Martone and Toni Servillo for The King of Laughter Best Film: The Hand of God by Paolo Sorrentino Best Actor: Leonardo Di Costanzo for The Inner Cage Toni Servillo for The Hand of God and The King of Laughter Best Actress: Teresa Saponangelo for The Hand of God Il buco by Michelangelo Frammartino Freaks Out by Gabriele Mainetti Freaks Out by Gabriele Mainetti El Gran Movimiento by Kiro Russo Special mention: Costa Brava, Lebanon by Mounia Akl Special mention: 7 Prisoners by Alexandre Moratto Special mention: Full Time by Éric Gravel Best New Young Actor: Filippo Scotti for The Hand of God Best New Young Actress: Aurora Giovinazzo for Freaks Out Best Visual Effects: Maurizio Corridori for Freaks Out Best Gaffer: Loris Felici for Freaks Out Best Camera Operator: Luca Massa for Il buco Best Costume Tailoring: Tirelli for The King of Laughter Best Soundtrack: Freaks Out by Gabriele Mainetti Special Mention: Mona Lisa and the Blood Moon by Ana Lily Amirpour Lifetime Achievement Award: Ornella Vanoni The Hand of God by Paolo Sorrentino Il buco by Michelangelo Frammartino Special mention: The Card Counter by Paul Schrader Aurora Giovinazzo for Freaks Out The Box by Lorenzo Vigas Another World by Stéphane Brizé Special mention: The Hand of God by Paolo Sorrentino Life of Crime 1984-2020 by Jon Alpert Best Italian Film: Freaks Out by Gabriele Mainetti Best Foreign Film: 7 Prisoners by Alexandre Moratto Amira by Mohamed Diab Erasing Frank by Gàbor Fabricius "Director Bong Joon Ho President of the Venezia 78 International Jury". 15 January 2021. Retrieved 15 January 2021. Vivarelli, Nick (15 January 2021). "'Parasite' Director Bong Joon Ho to Head Jury at Venice Film Festival". Variety. Retrieved 15 January 2021. Wiseman, Andreas (15 January 2021). "Venice Film Festival: 'Parasite' Director Bong Joon Ho Set As 2021 Jury President". Deadline. Retrieved 15 January 2021. "Biennale Cinema 2021 | Serena Rossi to host the opening and closing nights of Venezia 78". La Biennale di Venezia. 29 April 2021. "French abortion drama 'Happening' wins Golden Lion at Venice Film Festival". France 24. 11 September 2021. Retrieved 17 September 2021. "Venice Competition Jury: Chloé Zhao & Cynthia Erivo Join President Bong Joon Ho". 21 July 2021. Retrieved 21 July 2021. Roxborough, Scott (26 July 2021). "Venice Film Festival 2021 Full Lineup". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 26 July 2021. Hollywood Cheers AT&T Retreat, Viewing Discovery As More Talent-Friendly Warner Steward; HBO Max Day-And-Date Strategy For ‘Dune’ Gets A Rewrite Vivarelli, Nick (14 May 2021). "Venice Fest Prepares to Roll Out Red Carpet for Full-Fledged Physical Edition (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Retrieved 10 June 2021. Venice: Jamie Lee Curtis to Receive Lifetime Achievement Golden Lion; ‘Halloween Kills’ Screening Out of Competition Roxborough, Scott (26 July 2021). "Venice Film Festival 2021 Full Lineup". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 26 July 2021. Roxborough, Scott (3 August 2021). "2021 Venice Festival Adds Music Documentary 'Becoming Led Zeppelin'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 7 September 2021. "Orizzonti". labiennale.org. La Biennale di Venezia. 29 June 2021. Retrieved 26 July 2021. De Marco, Camillo (22 July 2021). "Venice's International Film Critics' Week line-up sees Europe playing a leading role in the increasingly global nature of films". Cineuropa. Retrieved 30 November 2023. Lavallée, Eric (28 July 2021). "2021 Giornate degli Autori: Plenty of First Features Plus Antoine Barraud, Iván Fund & Aly Muritiba". IONCINEMA.com. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "French Abortion Drama 'Happening' Wins Venice Film Festival". The Hollywood Reporter. 11 September 2021. Retrieved 12 September 2021. "Mostra del Cinema di Venezia, a Roberto Benigni il Leone d'oro alla carriera". Agenzia Nazionale Stampa Associata (in Italian). 15 April 2021. Retrieved 16 April 2021. "Festival di Venezia, a Jamie Lee Curtis il Leone d'Oro alla carriera". Sky TG 24 (in Italian). 30 June 2021. Retrieved 30 June 2021. "COLLATERAL AWARDS OF THE 78TH VENICE FILM FESTIVAL". labiennale.org. 10 September 2021. Retrieved 12 September 2021. Official website