Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings is a 2021 American superhero film based on Marvel Comics featuring the character Shang-Chi. Produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the 25th film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). The film was directed by Destin Daniel Cretton from a screenplay he wrote with Dave Callaham and Andrew Lanham, and stars Simu Liu as Shang-Chi alongside Awkwafina, Meng'er Zhang, Fala Chen, Florian Munteanu, Benedict Wong, Yuen Wah, Michelle Yeoh, Ben Kingsley, and Tony Leung. In the film, Shang-Chi is forced to confront his past when his father Wenwu (Leung), the leader of the Ten Rings terrorist organization, draws Shang-Chi and his sister Xialing (Zhang) into a search for a mythical village. A film based on Shang-Chi entered development in 2001, but work did not begin in earnest until December 2018 when Callaham was hired. Cretton joined in March 2019 and the film's title and primary cast were announced that July. This revealed the film's connection to the Ten Rings organization, which previously appeared throughout the MCU, and its leader Wenwu who was adapted from the problematic comic book characters Fu Manchu and the Mandarin. Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings is the first Marvel Studios film with an Asian director and a predominantly Asian cast. Filming began in Sydney in February 2020 but was put on hold in March due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Production resumed in August and ended in October, with additional filming in San Francisco. Brad Allan and other members of the Jackie Chan Stunt Team coordinated the fight sequences. Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings premiered in Hollywood, Los Angeles, on August 16, 2021, and was released in the United States on September 3 as part of Phase Four of the MCU. It grossed over $432 million worldwide, making it the tenth-highest-grossing film of 2021. It set several box office records and received positive reviews from critics, many of whom praised the exploration and representation of Asian culture which differentiated the film from the rest of the MCU, as well as the action sequences and Leung's performance. The film received various accolades, including a nomination for Best Visual Effects at the 94th Academy Awards. A sequel is in development. A thousand years ago, Xu Wenwu discovers the mystical ten rings which grant godly powers including immortality. He establishes the Ten Rings organization, conquering kingdoms and toppling governments throughout history. In 1996, Wenwu searches for Ta Lo, a village said to harbor mythical beasts. He travels through a magical forest to the village entrance but is stopped by a guardian, Ying Li. The two soon fall in love, but the Ta Lo villagers reject Wenwu so Li chooses to leave with him. They marry and have two children, Shang-Chi and Xialing. Wenwu abandons his organization and locks away the ten rings. When Shang-Chi is seven years old, Li is murdered by Wenwu's enemies, the Iron Gang. Wenwu dons the rings once again, massacres the Iron Gang, and resumes leadership of his organization. He makes Shang-Chi undergo brutal training in martial arts but does not allow Xialing to train, prompting her to secretly teach herself. When Shang-Chi is 14, Wenwu sends him to assassinate the Iron Gang's leader. After completing his mission, a traumatized Shang-Chi runs away to San Francisco and adopts the name "Shaun". In the present day, Shang-Chi works as a parking valet with his best friend Katy. They are attacked on a bus by the Ten Rings organization who steal a pendant that Li gave to Shang-Chi. Shang-Chi travels to Macau to find Xialing, fearing that the Ten Rings will go after her matching pendant. He reveals his past to Katy who insists on helping him. They find Xialing at a secret fight club which she founded after escaping from Wenwu at 16. The Ten Rings attack the fight club and Wenwu arrives to capture Shang-Chi, Katy, Xialing, and her pendant. At the Ten Rings' compound, Wenwu uses the pendants to reveal a mystical map leading to Ta Lo. Wenwu explains that he has heard Li calling and believes she has been held captive in Ta Lo behind a sealed gate. He plans to destroy the village unless they release her. When his children and Katy object, he imprisons them. They meet former actor Trevor Slattery, whom the Ten Rings imprisoned for impersonating Wenwu, and his hundun companion Morris. They escape and Morris guides them to Ta Lo, which exists in a separate dimension with various Chinese mythological creatures. The group meet Li's sister Ying Nan who explains the history of Ta Lo: thousands of years ago, the village's universe was attacked by the soul-consuming Dweller-in-Darkness and its soul eaters, but was saved by a Chinese dragon called the Great Protector who helped seal the Dark Gate to the Dweller's world. According to Nan, the Dweller-in-Darkness has been impersonating Li so Wenwu will use the ten rings to open the Gate. Shang-Chi, Xialing, Katy, Slattery, and Morris join the villagers in training and preparing for Wenwu's arrival, using outfits and weapons crafted from dragon scales that are effective against the soul eaters. Wenwu and the Ten Rings arrive and attack. Wenwu overpowers Shang-Chi, pushes him into the nearby lake, and attacks the Gate with the rings. This allows some of the Dweller's soul eaters to escape, with the Ten Rings allying with the villagers to effectively fight them. The Great Protector revives Shang-Chi and bears him from the lake to battle the soul eaters. Wenwu and Shang-Chi fight once more, and Shang-Chi gains the upper hand but chooses to spare Wenwu. The Dweller-in-Darkness escapes from the weakened Gate and attacks Shang-Chi. Wenwu saves Shang-Chi but is killed by the Dweller-in-Darkness; he bequeaths the rings to Shang-Chi before he dies. Shang-Chi, the Great Protector, Xialing, and Katy slay the Dweller-in-Darkness. Afterward, Shang-Chi and Katy return to San Francisco where the sorcerer Wong summons them to Kamar-Taj. In a mid-credits scene, Wong introduces Shang-Chi and Katy to Bruce Banner and Carol Danvers and the group discusses the origins of the rings. They discover that the rings are acting as a beacon to something. In a post-credits scene, Xialing becomes the new leader of the Ten Rings, despite telling Shang-Chi that she would disband the organization, and begins training women alongside men. Simu Liu as Xu Shang-Chi / Shaun: A skilled martial artist who was trained at a young age to be an assassin by his father Wenwu. Shang-Chi left the Ten Rings organization for a normal life in San Francisco, and changed his name to "Shaun". Director Destin Daniel Cretton characterized Shang-Chi as a fish out of water in the U.S. who attempts to hide that with his charisma, and does not know "who he really is". Cretton also compared Shang-Chi to Matt Damon's character Will Hunting from Good Will Hunting (1997), with both characters combining masculinity and vulnerability, and having secrets and superpowers that they do not understand. Cretton said the film was a journey for Shang-Chi to discover his place in the world, and Liu added that Shang-Chi's identity struggles are the core of the character rather than his martial arts skills. Liu performed many of his own stunts since the character does not wear a mask, and put on 10 pounds (4.5 kg) of muscle for the role while working on his flexibility. Liu was knowledgeable in taekwondo, gymnastics, and Wing Chun. Additionally, he trained in other various martial arts, including tai chi, wushu, Muay Thai, silat, Krav Maga, jiu-jitsu, boxing, and street fighting for the film. Jayden Zhang and Arnold Sun portray Shang-Chi as a child and teenager, respectively. Awkwafina as Katy: A hotel valet and Shang-Chi's best friend in San Francisco who is unaware of his past. Awkwafina described Katy as relatable, with a "real heart" and dedication to Shang-Chi, who is "thrust into a world where she doesn't really know what to do [... and is] discovering things about herself". Katy has difficulty committing to a direction in her life, something Awkwafina felt was a relatable struggle for a lot of Asian Americans due to their own expectations as well as those of their parents and society. Meng'er Zhang as Xu Xialing: Shang-Chi's estranged younger sister and Wenwu's daughter, who was excluded from the Ten Rings organization by her father due to his traditional gender bias. Xialing is an amalgamation of several comic book characters, particularly inspired by Zheng Bao Yu. This was Zhang's first film role, and she said the character was vulnerable behind her tough exterior. She originally had a red streak in her hair but Zhang asked for this to be removed during filming after discovering the style's association with the "rebellious Asian girl" stereotype; the streak was removed from existing footage in post-production with visual effects. For the role, Zhang trained in MMA, tai chi, and rope dart. Elodie Fong and Harmonie He portray Xialing as a child and teenager, respectively. Fala Chen as Ying Li: Wenwu's wife and the mother of Shang-Chi and Xialing who was a guardian of Ta Lo. Chen studied tai chi for the role. Florian Munteanu as Razor Fist: A member of the Ten Rings who has a machete blade for his right hand. Benedict Wong as Wong: A Master of the Mystic Arts participating in a cage fighting tournament with Emil Blonsky. Yuen Wah as Guang Bo: One of the leaders of Ta Lo. Michelle Yeoh as Ying Nan: A guardian of Ta Lo who is Shang-Chi and Xialing's aunt. Ben Kingsley as Trevor Slattery: An actor who previously took on the guise of the Mandarin and was abducted by the Ten Rings, becoming a "court jester" or Shakespearean fool for Wenwu. He has a close relationship with the mythical hundun Morris, and journeys to Ta Lo with Shang-Chi. Cretton felt it was "essential to hear [Slattery] admit how ridiculous that whole [Mandarin impersonation] situation was", as seen in Iron Man 3 (2013) and the Marvel One-Shot short film All Hail the King (2014), feeling that having Slattery apologize for impersonating Wenwu was the perfect way to apologize for the racial stereotypes surrounding the Mandarin. Kingsley enjoyed revisiting and developing the character, with Cretton saying Kingsley was able to portray "a Trevor who has actually benefited from being in prison and has come out a clean and sober version of himself". Tony Leung as Xu Wenwu: Shang-Chi and Xialing's father and the leader of the Ten Rings. Wenwu is an original character created for the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) who replaces Shang-Chi's original comic book father Fu Manchu, a "problematic character" associated with racist stereotypes to whom Marvel Studios does not hold the film rights. In the film, Wenwu has taken on many different names, including "The Mandarin", which is a name that producer Jonathan Schwartz noted comes with audience expectations due to its comic book history. He said Wenwu was a more complex and layered character than the comic book version, with Cretton adding that there were problematic aspects of the Mandarin's comic book portrayal that he wanted to change. He felt Leung avoided Asian stereotypes and a one-dimensional portrayal by bringing humanity and love to the role, describing Wenwu as a "fully realized human" with relatable reasons for his bad decisions. Leung did not want to approach the character as a villain, instead hoping to explore the reasons behind why he is "a man with history, who craves to be loved", describing him as "a sociopath, a narcissist, [and] a bigot". This was Leung's first Hollywood film after a long career primarily in Hong Kong action cinema. Also appearing in the film are Ronny Chieng as Jon Jon, Xialing's right-hand man and announcer at her underground fighting club; Jodi Long as Mrs. Chen, Katy's mother; Dallas Liu as Ruihua, Katy's brother; Paul He as Chancellor Hui; Tsai Chin as Katy's grandmother; Andy Le as Death Dealer, one of Wenwu's assassins who trained Shang-Chi in his youth; Stephanie Hsu and Kunal Dudheker as Soo and John, married friends of Shang-Chi and Katy; Zach Cherry as Klev, a bus rider who livestreams one of Shang-Chi's fights (after portraying a street vendor in 2017's Spider-Man: Homecoming); and Dee Baker as the voice of Morris, a hundun who befriends Slattery. Jade Xu reprises her role as a Black Widow named Helen from Black Widow (2021), while Tim Roth provides uncredited vocals for his The Incredible Hulk (2008) character Emil Blonsky / Abomination. Mark Ruffalo and Brie Larson appear, uncredited, in the mid-credits scene, reprising their respective MCU roles of Bruce Banner and Carol Danvers / Captain Marvel. According to Margaret Loesch, former president and CEO of Marvel Productions, Stan Lee discussed a potential film or television series based on the Marvel Comics character Shang-Chi with actor Brandon Lee and his mother Linda Lee during the 1980s, with the intention of having Brandon Lee star as the character. Brandon's father, martial arts legend Bruce Lee, was the visual inspiration for artist Paul Gulacy when drawing Shang-Chi during his tenure on the Master of Kung Fu comic book in the 1970s. In 2001, Stephen Norrington signed on to direct a Shang-Chi film entitled The Hands of Shang-Chi. By 2003, it was in development at DreamWorks Pictures with Yuen Woo-Ping replacing Norrington as director and Bruce C. McKenna writing the screenplay. Ang Lee joined the project as a producer in 2004, but it did not materialize and the rights to the character reverted to Marvel. In September 2005, Marvel chairman and CEO Avi Arad announced Shang-Chi as one of ten properties being developed as films by the newly formed Marvel Studios, after the company received financing to produce the slate with Paramount Pictures as distributor. Marvel thought the character could make a great film, despite being relatively unknown, because he has a "very Disney story" in the comic books. The Ten Rings organization was introduced in Marvel Studios' first Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) film, Iron Man (2008), without its leader the Mandarin. Marvel Studios President Kevin Feige felt they could not do the character justice in the Iron Man films because they focused on Tony Stark / Iron Man, and planned to introduce him in a later film instead. According to Chris Fenton, former president of the Chinese-based film production company DMG Entertainment that was in talks with Marvel Studios to co-produce their films, Marvel offered to create a teaser featuring either Shang-Chi or the Mandarin for the Chinese market that would be featured at the end of The Avengers (2012). DMG balked at the offer since the Mandarin's negative stereotypical portrayal in the comics could potentially prevent the film from being released in China and risk DMG being shut down. The Mandarin would eventually appear in the DMG co-produced film Iron Man 3 (2013) portrayed by Ben Kingsley, but he is revealed to be an actor named Trevor Slattery who was hired to pose as the Mandarin. Feige felt this did not necessarily mean a more faithful version of the character did not exist in the MCU, and this was confirmed in the Marvel One-Shot short film All Hail the King (2014) in which Kingsley reprised his role as Slattery. By December 2018, Marvel had fast-tracked development of a Shang-Chi film with the intent of making it their first film with an Asian lead. Marvel hired Chinese-American writer Dave Callaham to write the screenplay, and began looking at Asian and Asian-American filmmakers to potentially direct the film. The studios' goal was to have Asian and Asian-American filmmakers explore themes related to their culture, as they had done for African and African-American culture with Black Panther earlier in 2018. Development of the film also came following the success of the film Crazy Rich Asians that was likewise released earlier in 2018 and led to several other Asian-led properties being developed by Hollywood studios. Callaham's script was expected to modernize elements of the comic book story, which was first written in the 1970s, to avoid what modern audiences would consider to be negative stereotypes. When Callaham began work on the script, he became emotional realizing it was the first project where he was asked to write "from my own experience, from my own perspective". Jessica Gao, who would later become the head writer of the Marvel Studios television series She-Hulk: Attorney at Law (2022), also presented a pitch for the film. Richard Newby of The Hollywood Reporter said the film could "break out in a way similar to Black Panther" by bringing a new perspective to the character. Newby felt Shang-Chi could have worked well as a television series, and said it "speaks volumes" that Marvel would decide to make a feature film about the character instead. Newby concluded that the film was an opportunity to avoid stereotypes about Asian martial artists and be "more than Marvel's Bruce Lee". Marvel Studios hired Japanese-American filmmaker Destin Daniel Cretton to direct the film in March 2019. Deborah Chow—who previously directed episodes of Marvel Television's Iron Fist and Jessica Jones series—Justin Tipping, and Alan Yang were also considered. Cretton had previously not been interested in directing a superhero film, but was drawn to the project to help create a world and character that Asian children could look up to and see themselves in. His pitch included visual inspiration from Chinese, South Korean, Japanese, and other Asian cinema, including anime, to highlight a tone that showed "the drama and the pain of life, but also show[ed] the humor of life". In April, Marvel Studios and Australian Arts Minister Mitch Fifield announced that an upcoming Marvel film, believed to be Shang-Chi, would be filmed at Fox Studios Australia in Sydney and on location throughout the state of New South Wales. The production received AU$24 million (US$18 million) in one-off funding from the Australian government, as well as backing from the AU$10 million (US$8 million) "Made in NSW" state fund. The production was expected to generate AU$150 million (US$113 million) for the Australian economy as well as 4,700 new jobs, while taking advantage of around 1,200 local businesses. Don Harwin, the New South Wales Arts Minister, confirmed in July that this film was Shang-Chi and it would be produced back-to-back with Marvel Studios' Thor: Love and Thunder (2022). Production on Shang-Chi was set to begin in early 2020 and be completed later that year. Marvel Studios began testing actors in their 20s for the role of Shang-Chi in mid-July 2019, including Lewis Tan and Simu Liu; Tan previously portrayed Zhou Cheng in Iron Fist. The studio was adamant that actors be of Chinese descent to audition for the character. Liu was considered earlier in the audition process and was brought back in for a second audition when the creatives were finding it difficult to cast the role. He tested again on July 14 and was officially cast on July 16. Awkwafina, who was the first actor cast for the film, had chemistry tests with the potential actors and said "it was apparent that [Liu] was Shang-Chi from the jump". Liu and Awkwafina's castings were announced by Cretton and producer Feige at Marvel Studios' San Diego Comic-Con panel on July 20, where the film's full title was announced to be Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings. Feige noted the connection between this title and the Ten Rings organization that had appeared throughout the MCU. He said the group's leader, the Mandarin, would be introduced in this film and Tony Leung had been cast in the role. Cretton had wanted to cast Leung but was doubtful he would accept the part. Despite this hesitation, producer Jonathan Schwartz decided to contact Leung and he accepted the role after a meeting with Cretton. In December, Feige said the film would feature a predominantly Asian cast. A month later, Michelle Yeoh entered talks for a role in the film. This was for a different character than Aleta Ogord, who Yeoh had briefly portrayed in Marvel's Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2 (2017). Jessica Henwick, who previously portrayed Colleen Wing in Iron Fist, was asked to audition for the role of Xialing in the film, but was concurrently offered the role of Bugs in The Matrix Resurrections (2021). After being given an ultimatum to select one of the roles by the respective studios, Henwick chose the Resurrections part. This was partially because she hoped to reprise the role of Wing in a future MCU production. Newcomer Meng'er Zhang was eventually cast in the role. Kingsley reprises his role as Slattery in the film. The character's inclusion was planned early on to help fully explore the "context of who the Mandarin is in the MCU". Schwartz called Slattery a "secret weapon" whose introduction part-way through the film moves it in a different direction and provides comic relief. In addition to Callaham, Cretton and Andrew Lanham also contributed to the screenplay for Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings from a story by Callaham and Cretton. The film was described as a "sweeping superhero epic that combines emotional family drama with gravity-defying martial arts action". Schwartz said much of Shang-Chi's arc within Marvel Comics is a family drama, and Cretton wanted to focus on that element for the film, exploring Shang-Chi's broken and abusive family background. Liu noted that the comic book backstory for Shang-Chi is not widely known like those for comic book characters such as Batman or Spider-Man, and that gave the film's writers freedom to take more creative liberties with the story. Cretton and Callaham were cognizant of some of the racial stereotypes surrounding the character in the comics, with Liu saying everyone involved was "very sensitive to not have it go into stereotypical territory". Cretton believed the resulting script was a "really beautiful update" to the character from what began in the comics. Cretton felt the film told an authentic story about Asian identity. Callaham said there is "no single Asian American voice", and he and Cretton contemplated how the film could speak to "the wider Asian diaspora" and would be generally entertaining but also "personal to all these people". Cast members Liu, Leung, and Zhang contributed their own experiences coming from Canada, Hong Kong, and mainland China, respectively, to add to the authenticity of the film. Some aspects that were discussed regarding each scene were whether characters should be speaking in Chinese Mandarin or English and the type of food served in the different households to ensure it felt authentic to whose house it was. The film's opening begins with narration entirely in Mandarin, which Nancy Wang Yuen, writing for io9, said was a striking decision for an MCU film to "begin in a language other than English and continue to do so for an extended period". Regarding the use of Mandarin in the film, Cretton said the choice of which language to use when was "always rooted in just the logic of the characters and who would naturally be speaking what language". Zhang, whose first language is Mandarin, served as a dialect coach for the other actors. Shang-Chi further deals with some of the negative characterization around Asian-Americans and languages by portraying its characters as having varied knowledge of Asian languages, as demonstrated by an exchange with Katy and the character Jon Jon when Jon Jon says he speaks "ABC" (American-born Chinese). Another such moment is when Shang-Chi teaches Katy how to pronounce his name, which serves as a meta moment to also aid the audience on learning the proper pronunciation of "Shang-Chi". Cretton felt it was important to have "many strong women" around Shang-Chi that were "kicking his butt into gear" in contrast to the relationship between Shang-Chi and his father Wenwu (the film's version of the Mandarin). These supporting characters also have their own narrative arcs. Cretton's three sisters and his wife helped inspire the characters Katy, Xialing, Ying Nan, and Ying Li. Speaking to the relationship between Shang-Chi and Katy, Cretton enjoyed being able to show a strong, "deeply caring" friendship that is rarely seen in superhero films, adding that it would have felt forced to have the two characters end up in a romantic relationship together. Yeoh requested a scene be added between her character Ying Nan and Zhang's Xialing that would empower Xialing to "step out of the shadows for the first time"; this scene became an important part of Xialing's journey in the film and was one of the many scenes that also addressed the sexism presented in the story. Cretton felt seeing Xialing become the new head of the Ten Rings organization in the film's post-credits scene was reflective of her beginning to take control of her life. Various versions of the scene existed throughout the production before it was moved to be after the credits since they thought it was "a juicy idea for where the story might go in the future". Sue Chan served as production designer for the film. The first location that she and the crew scouted was San Francisco, where Chan previously lived. She suggested Clement Street, "the old Chinatown of San Francisco", as the characters' home because it does not have the expected Chinatown cliches. The film's San Francisco apartment set was one of Chan's favorites due to its accuracy to real Asian-American houses. Another favorite was a restaurant set where Wenwu kills his enemies, for which Chan took inspiration from Hong Kong gangster films. Cretton wanted Xialing's fight club to be fun and show her character rather than be scary and dangerous. Chan noted that Xialing's office combines imagery of skulls with flowers and bold colors, and the sets incorporate the character's feminist views. The fighting arena is an octagon because the number eight is significant in Asian cultures. For Ta Lo, Chan researched ancient Chinese culture and designs and took elements from many eras since the village is not from a specific time in Chinese history. These elements includes symbolism, styles, and colors from the Tang and Song dynasties. Key symbols for the village were the five Chinese elements of wood, water, fire, metal, and earth, with metal being replaced with dragon scales for the film. These elements were used as the basis of the village set, along with traditional construction elements such as bamboo (both real and artificial bamboo was used). The village itself was built in an open area by a reservoir outside of Sydney and all of the buildings in the village were planned, built, and dressed as they would be used by the inhabitants. These include a pottery shed, a cooking shed, and a schoolroom, all built around the central temple which is open on all sides and contains the history of Ta Lo. Ta Lo's universe is inhabited by various Chinese mythological creatures, including dragons, fenghuang, shishi, hundun, jiuwei hu, and qilin. Andy Park led Marvel Studios' visual development team for the film, and specifically designed Shang-Chi's hero costume. The costume combines elements of his own style with those from both his parents: the jacket is made from the Ta Lo dragon scales and is a gift from his mother, he receives the ten rings from his father at the end of the film, and he wears his own American shoes. Costume designer Kym Barrett also researched ancient Chinese designs and then adapted these to suit the film's stunt needs. The Ten Rings logo that was originally designed for the MCU featured a circle of ten interlocked rings with characters from the Mongolian language. The logo's appearance in Iron Man 3 drew ire from the Mongolian government who felt the Mongolian scripts "offensively tied the country's intangible cultural heritage to a terrorist group". The logo was updated for Shang-Chi to use "inoffensive" Chinese characters instead, including synonyms for strength or power written in ancient seal script. Oyungerel Tsedevdamba, Mongolia's former minister of culture, sports and tourism, believed the change was more to appease the Chinese market than the Mongolian government. The actual ten rings are portrayed as bangles worn on the wrist rather than as finger rings like they are in the comics. Schwartz said multiple approaches to the rings were discussed, and the comic-accurate design looked "a little goofy in practice" and was too similar to the Infinity Stones that appear throughout the MCU. The Ten Rings compound goes through four stages in the film that reflect Wenwu's character: it begins as a "cold" fortress that prominently features the Ten Rings logo; the compound then becomes a family home with bright colors, gardens, design elements from the Ta Lo village, and a mosaic of a phoenix replacing the Ten Rings logo; the color was then stripped from the sets to make it a "desolate shell" as Wenwu mourns the death of his wife; and finally elements of Xialing's fight club are introduced in the post-credits scene as she takes over the compound and makes it her own. Principal photography began in February 2020, shooting at Fox Studios Australia in Sydney and on location throughout the state of New South Wales, under the working title Steamboat. William Pope served as cinematographer for the film, shooting on the Arri Alexa LF. Cretton chose Pope because he felt the cinematographer's style could be both naturalistic and heightened, and because of Pope's work on The Matrix (1999) which Cretton believed had the right tone for an MCU film focused on Asian and Asian-American characters. Pope already wanted to work with Cretton after being impressed by his film Short Term 12 (2013). Cretton was inspired for his direction by Jackie Chan's filmography, the Ip Man series, Tai Chi Master (1993), and Kung Fu Hustle (2004) among others in the martial arts and kung-fu genres, as well as anime and video games. On March 12, after studios had started halting production on films due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Cretton decided to have himself tested for coronavirus after working closely with people who had potentially been exposed to it. This was a precaution due to Cretton having a newborn baby, and he self-isolated while awaiting these results; the test later came back negative. While Cretton was self-isolating, Marvel suspended first unit production for the film but intended for other aspects such as second unit to continue as normal. On March 13, the rest of the film's production was paused as Disney halted filming on most of its projects. Before the shut down, Ronny Chieng joined the cast in an undisclosed role. In early April, Disney shifted much of the MCU's Phase Four slate of films due to the pandemic, moving Shang-Chi's release date to May 7, 2021. Work building sets for the film resumed at the end of July 2020, and by August 2 all cast and crew members had arrived to begin shooting "in the coming days". Any cast and crew returning to Australia had to be quarantined for two weeks upon arrival before returning to work, according to Australia's COVID-19 guidelines. Later in August, Yeoh was confirmed to be appearing in the film. The next month, the film's release date was pushed back to July 9, 2021, after Black Widow was shifted to the May 2021 date. In October, filming took place in San Francisco, also under the working title Steamboat. Due to the pandemic, crew in Australia could not travel to San Francisco for this filming. Shooting locations included the Russian Hill, Noe Valley, and Nob Hill neighborhoods, as well as Fisherman's Wharf and Ghirardelli Square. Filming wrapped on October 24, 2020. Cretton wanted to use a range of different fighting styles in the film due to Shang-Chi being trained in different types of martial arts. These include the "elegant, almost ethereal wushu style" from Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (2000) and the "kinetic" fights of Jackie Chan's films. Supervising stunt coordinator Brad Allan along with other members of the Jackie Chan Stunt Team became responsible for making the different styles feel consistent, as well as containing elements of Hong Kong action cinema. Schwartz said there was a meaning for each fighting style in the film, and they helped to tell the story visually. Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings is dedicated to Allan, who died in August 2021. The bus fight sequence was part of Cretton's initial pitch for the film. He called it a "what-if scenario" that helped explain the kind of fight sequences he enjoyed, "ones where the stakes just keep rising as the fight continues". Once it was decided to include the sequence in the film and planning for it began, Cretton credited Allan for bringing the "Buster Keaton-like physical comedy [to the fight], mixed with setups and payoffs, and stakes rising ... to almost ridiculous levels". The stunt team added a specific reference to Jackie Chan, who is known for this style of fighting, in which Shang-Chi takes off his jacket, spins it around while fighting, and puts it back on. Fight coordinator Andy Cheng said the whole sequence took over a year to plan, going through as many as 20 different iterations, with most of the differences pertaining to the fighting within the bus. He said figuring out how the bus would be sliced in half and choreographing a fight around that was the most difficult part. The stunt team put together 10 to 15 different "stuntviz" edits planning out the sequence. Two buses were shipped to Sydney for filming the sequence's interior shots. These buses were taken apart and re-assembled on a 15 feet (4.6 m) high gimbal and a 3.3 feet (1.0 m) high gimbal, with the windows and seats removed most of the time for safety. The sequence was partially completed when the production shut down for COVID, requiring those involved to "retune" once production resumed. Filming for the interior shots took around six weeks. The exterior shots were filmed in San Francisco, with a different crew due to the pandemic. The visual effects team planned out the shoot remotely so the unit could get the footage that was needed. Four more buses were used for this portion of the sequence, including one that was filmed crashing down a hill into several cars. The entire sequence was shot in 48 fps to help with tracking and making adjustments, and was then converted back to 24 fps. The shots in slow-motion were shot at 250 fps using a Phantom Camera. The sequence ends at a real intersection in San Francisco that was partially filmed in Sydney and combined with footage from San Francisco by the visual effects team. Cretton said there were some "fudges" in how accurate the sequence was to San Francisco—"you can't go downhill for six minutes straight"—but was mostly based on a real route, suggested by Chan. The bus is meant to be a Muni bus but different branding was used due to that company not wanting to be associated with a crashing bus. Cretton initially told Leung that he would not need to fight due to Wenwu's use of the ten rings, but the actor did ultimately have several fight sequences and only had two weeks to prepare for them. He said this was not difficult due to his experience acting in action films. The character's first action scene, where he falls in love with Ying Li, took specific inspiration from the wuxia-style of films such as Hero (2002) which Leung starred in, and he said filming the scene reminded him of his early career. The fight in Macau on scaffolding outside Xialing's fightclub was filmed against bluescreen on several sets of scaffolding, including one that was built on a 45-degree gimbal to achieve a specific shot with Xialing. The Kamehameha attack from the anime series Dragon Ball Z was an inspiration for the final fight between Shang-Chi and Wenwu, which Cretton also included in his pitch. Nat Sanders and Elísabet Ronaldsdóttir served as co-editors on the film, alongside Harry Yoon. In December 2020, Marvel revealed roles for several cast members, including Awkwafina as Shang-Chi's friend Katy, Yeoh as Jiang Nan, and Chieng as Jon Jon. They also announced the casting of Zhang as Xialing, Fala Chen as Jiang Li, and Florian Munteanu as Razor Fist; Munteanu was cast after Marvel Studios was impressed with his role in Creed II (2018). In March 2021, the film's release date was pushed back once again to September 3, 2021, when Black Widow was shifted to the July 2021 date, and Dallas Liu was revealed to be appearing. The film's official trailer in June 2021 revealed that Benedict Wong would reprise his MCU role of Wong, and the character Abomination would be appearing alongside him; the Abomination first appeared in The Incredible Hulk (2008) portrayed by Tim Roth, and Roth returned to provide uncredited vocals for the character in Shang-Chi. Feige enjoyed returning to the Abomination after over a decade since his last MCU appearance, especially with the fans recognizing and embracing the reference in the trailer. The characters were added to the film after Gao created a storyline for them in She-Hulk: Attorney at Law, so the audience could be reminded of Abomination and get excited for their upcoming appearances in the series. Wong was thrilled to be part of the film and its Asian cast, expressing excitement to be "sat at a table of Asian excellence". The film's mid-credits scene, which features Mark Ruffalo as Bruce Banner and Brie Larson as Carol Danvers, was conceived late in production by Cretton to tease the origins of the ten rings. Several origins were written for the rings, but Callaham said none of these made a difference to the film's story so they decided to leave the origin ambiguous which meant it could be addressed in a later MCU project. Cretton hoped they could feature Wong in the scene and have him go to karaoke with Shang-Chi and Katy to sing "Hotel California", but was unsure which additional Avengers characters would appear until late in post-production. Banner and Danvers were chosen since they each represent the science and space aspects of the MCU, respectively, and because their appearances align with other events in the MCU happening around the time of the scene. Cretton also jokingly acknowledged that Larson's appearance continued her streak of appearing in his films after the pair worked together on Short Term 12, The Glass Castle (2017), and Just Mercy (2019). Ruffalo and Larson filmed their roles in early 2021 during the film's additional photography. Feige said the scene indicated how important Shang-Chi is to the MCU, likening it to Nick Fury's appearance in the post-credits scene of Iron Man. Christopher Townsend was hired to be the visual effects supervisor for the film. He worked with eleven different vendors, and also hired the Australia-based Joe Farrell to serve as an additional supervisor working with another five vendors. They created more than 1,700 visual effects shots for the film. Farrell supervised the bus sequence in Sydney (and remotely for the San Francisco portion of shooting) and said it was one of the most complicated sequences he and Townsend had worked on. The scene featured 168 shots, with 40 to 50 of them being mostly digital. The environment required digital pieces for the bus, buildings, and people. Farrell said the sequence's motion made editing difficult, especially in regards to the nine passengers. They were mapped out to know where they were at all times and sometimes were digitally moved around. Because the Macau fight takes place on scaffolding outside a glass building, Rodeo FX had to rotoscope around the actors and replace the entire background. A digital version of downtown Macau was created based on reference filming that Farrell again supervised remotely. The map to Ta Lo went through many iterations to determine how that information should be conveyed. Cretton felt the completed scene, which uses water effects, connected well to the story and was "visually beautiful". The film's main-on-end title sequence, designed by Perception, also focuses on the movement of water. Rising Sun Pictures contributed more than 300 visual effects shots to the film and was primarily responsible for creating Ta Lo. They based the geography of the forest on different locations in Southeast Asia, and integrated this digital environment with some practical elements from material shot in Sydney. The team also worked with the Australian Institute for Machine Learning to develop an advanced technique for facial replacement, powered by artificial intelligence, which was used to replace the stunt double's faces with those of the principal actors for the action scenes. The hundun Morris was inspired by Cretton's family dog, a 15-year-old dachshund. Images of hunduns, which do not have faces, were included during early development as potential inspiration for the film and Cretton wanted to feature one in the film in some way after seeing them. Morris was a green screen "blob" during filming, with Cretton crediting Kingsley for helping to "breathe life into him", making it feel as if Morris was a real character. Multiple different designs were tested for the character, including one that had him looking "like a plucked chicken", but the creatives wanted to ensure Morris remained cute, which was challenging since a character's eyes and face help convey their emotion. As such, they relied on the look of his fur and feathers. Wētā FX contributed more than 305 visual effects shots to the film, including creating the ten rings. Wētā visual effects supervisor Sean Walker said creating realistic-looking rings digitally was not complicated, but getting the correct movements for each character was; Shang-Chi uses the rings defensively while Wenwu uses them in an aggressive manner. Feige initially wanted the energy of each ring to have its own color as a reference to the comic book rings, which each have a different ability, but they found this to be too distracting. Instead, the energy of the rings is based on who is using them, with warmer orange energy for Shang-Chi and a cooler blue color for Wenwu. Wētā also created the Great Protector and the Dweller-in-Darkness for the final action sequence. The Great Protector's scales were initially based on quartz, porcelain, and shells before the team found images of albino lizards, alligators, and snakes that they thought were the perfect reference for the creature. The dragon's hair was then simulated on top. In contrast, the Dweller-in-Darkness was based on rhino and elephant hides and armored lizards. The souls that the Dweller-in-Darkness and its soul eaters consume were intended to be colorful visualizations of chakras but this was ultimately toned down to a more subtle effect. Joel P. West, who scored Cretton's four previous films, returned to compose the score for Shang-Chi; he acknowledged that this was the biggest film he had ever worked on. West began working on the film when Cretton was hired and developed his ideas throughout the filmmaking process. He wrote "ominous" and "dominating" music for Wenwu and more "ethereal" music for Ying Li, and then combined these to create Shang-Chi's music since the story is about him accepting both sides of his family. West spent months researching Chinese music so he could incorporate traditional Chinese elements into the score, primarily for Ying Li and Ta Lo. Recording took place with a 70-piece London orchestra at Abbey Road Studios in London by June 2021, with the UK Chinese Ensemble also providing traditional Chinese instruments and performances for the score. An album featuring the film's score was released digitally by Marvel Music and Hollywood Records on September 1, 2021. Marvel Music, Hollywood Records, and Interscope Records also released four separate singles inspired by the film ahead of its release: "Lazy Susan" by 21 Savage and Rich Brian, "Every Summertime" by Niki, "Run It" by DJ Snake, Rick Ross, and Rich Brian, and "In the Dark" by Swae Lee & Jhené Aiko. A soundtrack album was released on September 3 containing these in addition to songs by JJ Lin, Saweetie, Anderson .Paak, and other members of the "next generation of Asian artists". This was produced by Sean Miyashiro and 88rising, who worked with Cretton to tell a story in the album about the Asian-American experience with particular inspiration from San Francisco because that city is featured in the film. On April 19, 2021, which was Liu's birthday, he shared the first teaser poster for the film. This was shortly followed by Marvel releasing the first teaser trailer. Adam B. Vary of Variety felt it was "gratifying to finally see Liu in action as Shang-Chi" and highlighted how the teaser provided further insight into details such as how the film would depict the Mandarin wearing the ten rings. Cole Delbyck at HuffPost said the "eye-popping" action was unlike anything seen in past MCU films. Writing for io9, Rob Bricken felt the teaser did not disappoint with its action, but the family drama was what made the film look compelling to him. Collider's Adam Chitwood called the teaser "pretty fantastic", comparing its story and tone to Black Panther and saying Shang-Chi looked to be "an exciting, fresh, and new Marvel Cinematic Universe experience" based on the teaser. Reactions to the poster and trailer in Chinese speaking regions in East Asia were more critical, with commentators believing both presented a stereotypical view of Chinese people and culture. The film's first full trailer was released on June 24, 2021, during ESPN's NBA Countdown. Sean Keane at CNET enjoyed seeing more of Leung in the trailer and called the fight sequences "super-impressive". He was surprised by the inclusion of Abomination at the end of the trailer and noted that the character looked more like his design from the comics than when he appeared in The Incredible Hulk. Digital Spy's Gabriella Geisinger felt the Abomination's role in the film would just be a cameo appearance to set up the character's story in She-Hulk: Attorney at Law but also felt it could have "wide-reaching implications" for the MCU. Germain Lussier of io9, Susana Polo of Polygon, and Jennifer Ouellette of Ars Technica all felt the trailer was a better showcase for Shang-Chi than the teaser was, with Ouellette highlighting the different narration for the trailer that expanded on Shang-Chi's family background. Lussier also noted a lot of new visual effects in the trailer that were not in the teaser, and felt Shang-Chi would soon become a big star despite not being a well-known character. On August 15, 2021, Ron Han created a GoFundMe drive to raise money for Asian American Pacific Islander (API) children at the Boys & Girls Club in San Gabriel Valley to see Shang-Chi, as well as a larger "Shang-Chi challenge" for other people to create similar drives for their communities; the challenge was inspired by a similar one created for Black Panther. By the end of the month, API nonprofit organization Gold House partnered with GoFundMe to create the Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings Gold Open Community Fund to raise money for private screenings of the film for the API community and non-profit groups. An episode of the series Marvel Studios: Legends was released on September 1, exploring the Ten Rings organization using footage from its previous MCU appearances. Beginning September 3, Shang-Chi and Death Dealer began appearing in Disneyland's Avengers Campus. Promotional partners for the film included Sanzo beverages, which released a limited edition version of lychee flavor; Microsoft; BMW, which acted as the film's global car sponsor and had the BMW iX3 and BMW M8 appear in the film; Old Spice; and international sponsors including Visa, Virgin Plus, Gruppo TIM, Mikron Group, and BGF. Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings had its world premiere at the El Capitan Theatre and TCL Chinese Theatre in Hollywood, Los Angeles, on August 16, 2021, and was screened at CinemaCon on August 25. The film was released in international markets beginning on September 1, and had been released in 66% of its markets by the end of its first weekend. The film was released in the United States on September 3, in over 4,200 theaters, of which 400 were IMAX, over 850 were premium large format, 1,500 were 3D, and an additional 275 were the D-Box, 4DX, and ScreenX formats. Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings is part of Phase Four of the MCU. Shang-Chi was previously scheduled to be released on February 12, 2021, the first day of the Chinese New Year, before it was shifted to May 7, and then to July 9, delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The film shifted once again in March 2021 to the September 2021 date after Black Widow was moved to the July 9 release date. In Australia, Shang-Chi was released on September 2, with a planned release in New South Wales, Victoria, and Australian Capital Territory on September 16 because of COVID-19-related state lockdowns; it was ultimately released in New South Wales on October 11 when theaters in the state reopened. The film had a 45-day exclusive theatrical release, rather than being released simultaneously in theaters and on Disney+ with Premier Access like Black Widow was. In August 2021, with the increase of COVID-19 Delta variant cases, Disney CEO Bob Chapek explained that the film would stay theatrical-only for its 45-day window due to logisitical reasons and said this window was an interesting experiment for the company to learn more on how consumers wished to view their films; Liu took issue with Chapek calling the film an experiment, but Feige later stated that Liu's response appeared to be based on a misunderstanding of Chapek's intention. In May 2021, a Chinese state media report excluded Shang-Chi, as well as Marvel's Eternals, from its list of upcoming MCU films being released. Variety noted that this added to rumors that the films would not be released in China. In September 2021, Deadline Hollywood reported that a theatrical release in China was unlikely due to comments Liu made in an interview with the CBC in 2017 which referenced his parents' negative experiences living in China. Disney still listed the film's release in China as "to be determined" in October, but it ultimately did not receive a theatrical release in the country. The film was released on digital download on November 12, 2021, as well as on Disney+ as part of the service's "Disney+ Day" celebration. Disney+ also received the IMAX Enhanced version of the film. It was released on Ultra HD Blu-ray, Blu-ray, and DVD on November 30. The home media of the film includes audio commentary, deleted scenes, a gag reel, and various behind-the-scenes featurettes. Following the release of Shang-Chi on Disney+, viewer tracking application Samba TV reported that over 1.7 million U.S. households watched the film within its first weekend of availability. Samba TV also reported viewership numbers for the United Kingdom (250,000), Germany (85,000), and Australia (17,000), while TV Time reported that it was the most-streamed film in the United States during that same time frame. Nielsen stated that it was the second-most-streamed film, behind Netflix's Red Notice, with a viewership of 1.072 billion minutes in its first week. Asian Americans made up 10% of the audience, the highest percentage for any title on the chart. The film remained in the top five on Nielsen and TV Time's charts in the following weeks, and TV Time stated that it was the sixth most-streamed-film globally in 2021. The film was number one on the NPD Videoscan First Alert chart, which tracks combined sales of DVDs and Blu-rays, and the dedicated Blu-ray sales chart for two weeks. It was the third most-selling title on disc for December 2021 according to the NPD Group. Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings grossed $224.5 million in the United States and Canada, and $207.7 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $432.2 million. It became the highest-grossing film ever released on Labor Day weekend, and earned $13.2 million worldwide from IMAX, another Labor Day weekend record. Shang-Chi earned $29.6 million on its opening day (which included $8.8 million from its Thursday night previews), the third-best opening day since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic in March 2020. The Thursday night previews gross was the second-highest of the pandemic, behind Black Widow ($13.2 million). It grossed $75.5 million over its three-day opening weekend, the second-largest of the pandemic behind Black Widow ($80.3 million). IMAX contributed $8 million, which was a record for a Labor Day weekend release. The film earned $94.67 million over the four-day Labor Day weekend, surpassing Halloween's (2007) $30.6 million to become the largest Labor Day weekend opening ever. The film surpassed $100 million in five days, the fastest film to reach that milestone since Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker (2019) did it in its opening weekend. Shang-Chi remained the number one film in its second weekend, earning $35.8 million which was the largest second weekend gross of the pandemic, and in its third weekend when it earned $21.7 million, the second-largest third weekend gross for a September release behind It (2017). It was the third MCU film following Guardians of the Galaxy (2014) and Black Panther to remain the top film for four consecutive weeks, and was the first film of the pandemic era to surpassed $200 million in the United States and Canada when it did so on September 30. It was the third-highest-grossing film in its fifth weekend, the fourth-highest in its sixth weekend, and remained in the top ten at the box office for two additional weekends. The film ended its run at the United States and Canada box office as the second highest-grossing film of 2021 behind Spider-Man: No Way Home. The film earned $56.2 million from 41 markets in its opening weekend, opening number one in many. The United Kingdom release had the largest opening day of the pandemic, and the largest three-day opening weekend of the pandemic with $7.7 million. In Hong Kong, the film produced the largest September opening weekend, as well as the second-best opening during the pandemic. Nancy Tartaglione of Deadline Hollywood noted South Korea's $6.5 million opening was an underperformance for the market and an MCU film, though it was the first Hollywood film to open at number one there in several weeks. In its second weekend, the film earned $35.2 million from 42 markets, remaining number one in several. In its third weekend, the film earned an additional $20.3 million from 43 markets and was still the top film in territories such as Australia, Brazil, Mexico, and the UK. The film remained at number one in all of the territories in its fourth weekend, when it opened in Indonesia. It was number one there as well with $1.2 million. Shang-Chi was the top film in Australia for nine weekends, with its highest-grossing day coming on October 31, 2021. As of October 2021, the film's largest markets are the United Kingdom ($27.1 million), South Korea ($14.9 million), and France ($11.5 million). The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an approval rating of 92%, with an average score of 7.5/10, based on 344 reviews. The website's critical consensus reads, "Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings isn't entirely free of Marvel's familiar formula, but this exciting origin story expands the MCU in more ways than one." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 71 out of 100, based on 52 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Critics commonly praised the film's representation of Asian culture which differentiated it from other MCU films, as well as the performances and action sequences. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, while PostTrak reported 91% of audience members gave it a positive score and 78% said they would definitely recommend it. Peter Debruge at Variety said the decision to give the "second-tier" Shang-Chi the same "over-the-top treatment" as major Marvel heroes had broadened Marvel Studios' cultural representation and would empower audiences of Asian descent in a similar way to what Black Panther did for audiences of African descent. Angie Han of The Hollywood Reporter felt the film did not combine its martial-arts, fantasy elements, and exploration of Chinese and Asian-American culture "as smoothly as [it] should", but did find it to be a fresh and fun superhero film. Giving the film 3.5 out of 4 stars, RogerEbert.com's Nick Allen said the film fit within Marvel's formula but had a soulfulness that other MCU films, as well as superhero and action films in general, did not have. He concluded that Shang-Chi was not an experiment for Marvel and Disney but rather "a promising template for how they can get it right again". Writing for Empire, Laura Sirikul said the film was "a winning blend" of Chinese culture and the Marvel formula that avoided Asian stereotypes and called out some of Marvel's past "racial errors". Francesca Rivera at IGN felt the film had successfully balanced the "real-life complicated conflict between first-gen Asian American children and the wishes of their immigrant parents" with the needs of an MCU film. Alexis Nedd said Liu was "flawless" as Shang-Chi and compared his casting to that of Robert Downey Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man and Chris Evans as Steve Rogers / Captain America in the MCU. Jake Cole of Slant Magazine was more critical, giving the film 1.5 out of 4 stars and criticizing Liu's performance as being "curiously affectless". Cole also criticized the film's flashbacks which he felt slowed the overall story down, but praised Leung as "effortlessly convey[ing] the calm malice with which Wenwu asserts his absolute power as well as the anguish that the man feels over the loss of his wife". Allen said Leung was the film's most brilliant casting, and Han praised his performance for bringing sincerity to Wenwu which made him a "supervillain with a soul". Katie Rife at The A.V. Club said Leung "exudes the type of movie-star charisma critics sometimes complain is on the decline". Rife felt Leung was not being challenged by the material in the film but was still able to bring emotional depth to Wenwu. Sirikul praised the performances of Liu, Awkwafina, and Leung, but felt some of the character arcs were undermined by the film's convoluted story and rushed ending. Entertainment Weekly's Leah Greenblatt highlighted Zhang, who she felt deserved her own spin-off, and Awkwafina. Rivera praised the film's action sequences as the best of the MCU so far, focusing on the choreography and cinematography and particularly highlighting the wuxia-style fight between Wenwu and Li at the start of the film, but criticized the digital backgrounds in Ta Lo. Wenlei Ma at News.com.au also said the film's action had some of the best choreography of the MCU. Greenblatt praised the bus fight, fight club, and skyscraper fight sequences as "astonishing set pieces", while Matt Goldberg at Collider also praised the action set pieces for combining classic kung-fu movie influences with MCU visual effects. Peter Hartlaub of the San Francisco Chronicle said the bus fight was "one of the best car chases in San Francisco movie history". Allen enjoyed the various fight sequences, saying Cretton changed the height, light, reflections, and staging for each. He described the film's final act as "such an over-the-top, giddy, rollercoaster ride that you can't help but root for it". In contrast, Cole took issue with the amount of visual effects in the action sequences and said the final act "devolves into loud and chaotic visual nonsense". At /Film, Hoai-Tran Bui also criticized the visual effects-heavy third act but said the film had "one of the more forgivable ones, if only because it verges on full fantasia", and praised the wuxia moments. In December 2021, Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings received the Vanguard Award at Unforgettable Gala's 19th Annual Asian American Awards, an honor previously held by The Farewell (2019). In February 2021, the documentary series Marvel Studios: Assembled was announced. The specials go behind the scenes of the MCU films and television series with cast members and additional creatives. A special for this film, "The Making of Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings", goes behind the scenes of the making of the film and was released on Disney+ on November 12, 2021. By December 2021, development on a sequel had begun with Cretton returning to write and direct. Liu was also expected to return as Shang-Chi by the following month. He wanted the sequel to explore what his character would do with the "newfound power" of the ten rings, as well as how he fits into the larger MCU. Liu said in July 2023 that he was unsure when the film would be made. He had been told that it would be released after Avengers: The Kang Dynasty (2026), which was originally scheduled for 2025 but had since been delayed. He hoped more details on the sequel would be able to be shared soon. As depicted in Iron Man 3 (2013) and the Marvel One-Shot short film All Hail the King (2014) "Shang-chi And The Legend Of The Ten Rings (12A)". British Board of Film Classification. Archived from the original on September 2, 2021. Retrieved September 1, 2021. Knight, Chris (September 3, 2021). "How Canada's Simu Liu went from low-budget Crimson Defender to Marvel's Shang-Chi". National Post. Archived from the original on September 5, 2021. Retrieved September 4, 2021. Rubin, Rebecca (September 6, 2021). "Marvel's Shang Chi Crushed Box Office Expectations. Will That Convince Disney to Keep Eternals in Theaters?". Variety. Archived from the original on September 8, 2021. Retrieved September 8, 2021. "Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved December 14, 2021. "Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings". The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Retrieved December 2, 2021. Kit, Borys; Galuppo, Mia (July 20, 2019). "Marvel Finds Its Shang-Chi with Chinese-Canadian Actor Simu Liu". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Coggan, Devan (April 19, 2021). "Simu Liu suits up in first look at Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 19, 2021. Retrieved April 19, 2021. Allen, Nick (August 23, 2021). "Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on August 23, 2021. Retrieved August 23, 2021. Davids, Brian (August 24, 2021). "Shang-Chi Star Awkwafina on Her Key Role During Casting of Simu Liu's Superhero". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 27, 2021. Retrieved August 29, 2021. Tapp, Tom; D'Alessandro, Anthony (June 24, 2021). "Shang-Chi And The Legend Of The Ten Rings: 2nd Trailer For Marvel Movie May Reveal Abomination". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 25, 2021. Retrieved June 26, 2021. Yu, Phil (July 6, 2021). "Simu Liu is hitting new heights with Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 6, 2021. Retrieved July 6, 2021. Davis, Erik (August 16, 2021). "Shang Chi Director Destin Daniel Cretton Reveals New Details About Marvel's Next Big Historic Action Movie". Fandango Media. Archived from the original on August 16, 2021. Retrieved August 16, 2021. Samuel, Ebenezer (May 19, 2021). "Simu Liu Wants You to See Yourself as a Superhero". Men's Health. Archived from the original on May 19, 2021. Retrieved May 20, 2021. Northrup, Ryan (August 16, 2021). "Shang-Chi Star Simu Liu Got Paid $120 For Stock Photo Modeling Gig". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 4, 2021. Retrieved September 4, 2021. Welk, Brian (August 23, 2021). "Simu Liu Explains the 'Mosaic' of Martial Arts Styles Used in Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings (Video)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on September 4, 2021. Retrieved September 4, 2021. Samaniego, Maite (August 13, 2021). "Shang-Chi y la leyenda de los diez anillos: te contamos cómo se preparó Simu Liu, el protagonista para la película" [Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings: we tell you how protagonist Simu Liu prepared for the film]. Cultura Geek (in Spanish). Archived from the original on August 19, 2021. Retrieved September 4, 2021. Brook, Mitch (September 3, 2021). "Shang-Chi Cast & Character Guide: All New & Returning MCU Actors". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 3, 2021. Retrieved September 3, 2021. Vary, Adam B. (April 19, 2021). "What the Shang-Chi Teaser Reveals About Marvel Studios' Groundbreaking Movie". Variety. Archived from the original on April 19, 2021. Retrieved April 19, 2021. Pham, Jason (December 7, 2020). "Awkwafina in Her Mystery Character in Shang-Chi & the Marvel Character She Wants to Meet IRL". StyleCaster. Archived from the original on December 7, 2020. Retrieved December 10, 2020. Bloom, Mike (April 19, 2021). "Who's Who in Marvel's Shang-Chi Teaser Trailer". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on April 19, 2021. Retrieved April 19, 2021. Moon, Kat (September 9, 2021). "Tony Leung's Favorite Film Is the One He Hasn't Done Yet". TIME. Archived from the original on September 9, 2021. Retrieved July 2, 2023. Sandwell, Ian (September 5, 2021). "Shang-Chi's best Easter eggs and MCU references". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on September 5, 2021. Retrieved September 5, 2021. Bui, Hoai-Tran (August 25, 2021). "Shang-Chi Star Meng'er Zhang On Kicking Simu Liu's Ass And Being More Than The Sidekick [Interview]". /Film. Archived from the original on August 25, 2021. Retrieved August 30, 2021. Yuen, Nancy Wang (September 7, 2021). "Surrounding Shang-Chi With Powerful Women Was Vital to the Story". io9. Archived from the original on September 11, 2021. Retrieved September 13, 2021. Lebovitz, David L. (September 1, 2021). "Meng'er Zhang Discusses Her Xialing Role In Shang-Chi, Punching Simu Liu, And More – Exclusive Interview". Looper. Archived from the original on September 2, 2021. Retrieved September 4, 2021. Talusan, Roslyn (September 14, 2021). "Shang-Chi Depicts A World Where Asian Women Can Be Human & Heroes". Refinery29. Archived from the original on September 14, 2021. Retrieved September 19, 2021. Bui, Hoai-Tran (August 31, 2021). "Shang-Chi Star Fala Chen On What It's Like To Be Gazed Upon By Tony Leung [Interview]". /Film. Archived from the original on August 31, 2021. Retrieved September 3, 2021. Debruge, Peter (August 23, 2021). "Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings Review: Marvel Gives Lesser-Known Asian Hero the A-List Treatment". Variety. Archived from the original on August 23, 2021. Retrieved August 23, 2021. Meares, Joel (June 29, 2021). "Exclusive: Kevin Feige Confirms That Is The Abomination Fighting Wong in the Shang-Chi Trailer". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on June 29, 2021. Retrieved June 29, 2021. Chitwood, Adam (July 15, 2021). "Shang-Chi Actress Michelle Yeoh Says She Plays a 'Guardian of a Mythical City' in the Marvel Movie". Collider. Archived from the original on July 16, 2021. Retrieved July 15, 2021. Welch, Alex (September 2, 2021). "Shang-Chi Spoilers: How That Surprise Cameo Fixes Marvel's Biggest Faux Pas". Inverse. Archived from the original on September 3, 2021. Retrieved September 3, 2021. Paige, Rachel (September 9, 2021). "Shang-Chi and The Legend of The Ten Rings: Sir Ben Kingsley Triumphant Return as Trevor Slattery". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on September 9, 2021. Retrieved September 13, 2021. Ryan, Mike (August 30, 2021). "Shang-Chi Director Destin Daniel Cretton Deserves His Victory Lap After What It Took To Make This Marvel Movie". Uproxx. Archived from the original on August 31, 2021. Retrieved September 2, 2021. B. Vary, Adam (September 3, 2021). "The Funny Story of How Shang-Chi Landed That Big Cameo". Variety. Archived from the original on September 4, 2021. Retrieved September 4, 2021. Katz, Brandon (September 10, 2019). "Exclusive: Destin Daniel Cretton on Breaking Stereotypes in Marvel's Shang-Chi". Observer. Archived from the original on September 14, 2019. Retrieved September 14, 2019. Tang, Chelsea (August 20, 2021). "Tony Leung on the Pursuit of Perfection". Elle Singapore. Archived from the original on August 24, 2021. Retrieved August 26, 2021. Perry, Spencer (August 17, 2021). "Marvel's Shang-Chi Features Specific Martial Arts Move's First Time Captured on Film". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 17, 2021. Retrieved August 17, 2021. Outlaw, Kofi (August 20, 2021). "Spider-Man Character Has Cameo in Marvel's Shang-Chi Bus Battle Clip". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 20, 2021. Retrieved August 20, 2021. Sarkisian, Jacob (September 4, 2021). "19 details you may have missed in Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings". Insider. Archived from the original on September 4, 2021. Retrieved September 4, 2021. Bonomolo, Cameron (September 4, 2021). "Marvel's Shang-Chi Clip Reveals a Black Widow Cameo". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on September 4, 2021. Retrieved September 4, 2021. Fink, Richard (September 1, 2021). "Incredible Hulk Actor Returned As Abomination Voice In Shang-Chi". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 1, 2021. Retrieved September 3, 2021. Davids, Brian (September 3, 2021). "Destin Daniel Cretton on Shang-Chi and That Post-Credit Scene Cameo". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 4, 2021. Retrieved September 3, 2021. Francisco, Eric (September 2, 2021). "Shang-Chi post-credits scene: Director explains that game-changing cameo". Inverse. Archived from the original on September 3, 2021. Retrieved September 3, 2021. Francisco, Eric (November 23, 2018). "Stan Lee Tried to Make a Shang-Chi Movie Starring Bruce Lee's Son". Inverse. Archived from the original on July 26, 2019. Retrieved September 6, 2019. Cooke, Jon B. (February 2000). "A Master of Comics Art – Artist Paul Gulacy and His Early Days at Marvel". Comic Book Artist. No. 7. TwoMorrows Publishing. Archived from the original on March 6, 2001. Retrieved October 15, 2019. Brehmer, Nat (January 16, 2020). "Breaking Down the Deleted Blade Ending Featuring Morbius and Why We Never Got That Sequel". Bloody Disgusting. Archived from the original on March 7, 2020. Retrieved March 7, 2020. Craig, Andrew (March 30, 2018). "15 Abandoned Marvel Movie/TV Projects That We Never Got To See". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 7, 2020. Retrieved March 7, 2020. Balsley, Sarah (April 15, 2003). "Marvel Puts Shang Chi In DreamWorks' Hands". Animation World Network. Archived from the original on March 7, 2020. Retrieved March 7, 2020. "Marvel Making Movies". IGN. September 6, 2005. Archived from the original on October 24, 2012. Retrieved December 4, 2018. Vincent, Rodger (September 6, 2005). "Marvel to Make Movies Based on Comic Books". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 28, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Meares, Joel (July 12, 2021). "Kevin Feige Previews the MCU's Upcoming Phase 4: Shang-Chi, Eternals, No Way Home, Wakanda Forever, and More". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on July 12, 2021. Retrieved July 12, 2021. Johnston, Rich (August 6, 2020). "Marvel Studios Offered Shang-Chi Or Mandarin For First Avengers Movie". Bleeding Cool. Archived from the original on August 7, 2020. Retrieved August 7, 2020. Breznican, Anthony (January 9, 2014). "Marvel One-Shot: First Look at Ben Kingsley's Mandarin encore in 'All Hail the King' short film – Exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 10, 2014. Retrieved January 9, 2014. Ryan, Mike (May 16, 2016). "Shane Black On 'The Nice Guys,' Mel Gibson, And Why A Female 'Iron Man 3' Villain's Gender Changed". Uproxx. Archived from the original on September 28, 2018. Retrieved September 28, 2018. Fleming, Mike Jr. (December 3, 2018). "Shang-Chi Marvel's First Asian Film Superhero Franchise; Dave Callaham Scripting, Search On For Director Of Asian Descent". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 15, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Galuppo, Mia; McMillan, Graeme (December 3, 2018). "Marvel Developing Shang-Chi Movie with Wonder Woman 1984 Writer". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 3, 2018. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Ettenhofer, Valerie (August 15, 2022). "She-Hulk Head Writer Jessica Gao On Rejected Marvel Pitches And The Wong Cinematic Universe [Interview]". /Film. Archived from the original on August 15, 2022. Retrieved August 16, 2022. Newby, Richard (December 4, 2018). "How Shang-Chi Could Be Marvel's Next Black Panther". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 27, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Couch, Aaron; Kit, Borys (March 13, 2019). "Marvel's Shang-Chi Sets Director Destin Daniel Cretton". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 16, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Zaid, A'bidah (August 31, 2021). "Geek Interview: Director Destin Daniel Cretton On How DBZ's Kamehameha Influenced Shang-Chi's Epic Final Battle". Geek Culture. Archived from the original on September 10, 2021. Retrieved September 10, 2021. Maddox, Garry (April 5, 2019). "Marvel's first Asian superhero movie tipped to shoot in Sydney". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved April 7, 2019. Frater, Patrick (July 25, 2019). "Marvel's Thor: Love and Thunder and Shang-Chi to Shoot in Sydney, Australia". Variety. Archived from the original on July 27, 2019. Retrieved July 27, 2019. Goldberg, Matt (October 14, 2019). "Shang-Chi Director Destin Daniel Cretton on His Vision for the New Marvel Film". Collider. Archived from the original on October 14, 2019. Retrieved October 27, 2019. Kroll, Justin [@krolljvar] (July 13, 2019). "With comic-con closing in, hearing Marvel is putting out test offers for a group of men in their 20s for its Shang-Chi movie. Marvel have also been adamant to reps offering up their clients for the role that they have to be of Chinese ancestry no other Asian ancestry excepted" (Tweet). Archived from the original on July 15, 2019. Retrieved July 15, 2019 – via Twitter. Boone, John (April 6, 2021). "Lewis Tan Talks Losing Shang-Chi and Booking Mortal Kombat (Exclusive)". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on April 7, 2021. Retrieved April 7, 2021. Chee, Alexander (August 31, 2021). "Hong Kong Legend Tony Leung Tries His Hand at Hollywood". GQ. Archived from the original on August 31, 2021. Retrieved August 14, 2023. Chapman, Tom (December 30, 2019). "Marvel's Shang-Chi Film's Cast Is Nearly Completely Asian". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on December 31, 2019. Retrieved January 7, 2020. Davis, Brandon (January 21, 2020). "Michelle Yeoh In Talks For Marvel's Shang-Chi". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 21, 2020. Retrieved January 21, 2020. Davids, Brian (December 22, 2021). "Jessica Henwick on The Matrix Resurrections and Her Knives Out 2 Full-Circle Moment". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 23, 2021. Retrieved December 22, 2021. Romano, Nick (November 30, 2021). "Keanu Reeves and Carrie-Anne Moss resurrect a 20-year love story with The Matrix 4.0". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 22, 2021. Retrieved December 1, 2021. Boone, John (August 17, 2021). "Sir Ben Kingsley Confirms His MCU Return in Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved August 18, 2021. Coggan, Devan (September 7, 2021). "Shang-Chi director Destin Daniel Cretton explains the goofy story behind that surprise return". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 10, 2021. Retrieved September 10, 2021. Chitwood, Adam (April 19, 2021). "Marvel's First Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings Trailer Reveals a New Hero and a Familiar Villain". Collider. Archived from the original on April 19, 2021. Retrieved April 19, 2021. Yuen, Nancy Wang (September 6, 2021). "Shang-Chi's Director on Making a Marvel Movie With Asian Americans in Mind". io9. Archived from the original on September 10, 2021. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Paige, Rachel (September 8, 2021). "The Women of Shang-Chi and The Legend of The Ten Rings on Owning Their Power". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on September 13, 2021. Retrieved September 13, 2021. Baumgartner, Drew (September 9, 2021). "Shang-Chi Director Explains Why Shang-Chi and Katy's Relationship Was Kept Platonic". Collider. Archived from the original on September 10, 2021. Retrieved September 10, 2021. Larki, Shadan (January 18, 2022). "Sue Chan Breaks Down the Symbolism in 'Shang-Chi's Production Design". Awards Daily. Archived from the original on January 18, 2022. Retrieved July 2, 2023. Tangcay, Jazz (September 6, 2021). "How 'Shang Chi's' Production Designer Built a World Around Chinese Culture and Kung Fu Movies". Variety. Archived from the original on September 6, 2021. Retrieved July 2, 2023. Mondor, Brooke (September 6, 2021). "All of the Incredible Creatures In Shang-Chi Explained". Looper. Archived from the original on September 12, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Liu, Narayan (September 4, 2021). "September 4, 2021". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on September 4, 2021. Retrieved October 10, 2021. Treese, Tyler (November 30, 2021). "Interview: Marvel Studios' Andy Park on Designing Shang-Chi's Costume". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on November 30, 2021. Retrieved July 2, 2023. Foss, Gary (August 17, 2021). "Kym Barrett: Myth Over Matter – Costume Designers Guild, I.A.T.S.E. Local 892". Costume Designers Guild. Archived from the original on September 7, 2021. Retrieved July 2, 2023. Davis, Rebecca (August 19, 2021). "Shang-Chis' Ten Rings Logo Controversy Comes Full Circle". Variety. Archived from the original on August 19, 2021. Retrieved August 19, 2021. Perine, Aaron (September 1, 2021). "Shang-Chi Producer Confirms Infinity Stone Influence on the Ten Rings". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on September 1, 2021. Retrieved September 1, 2021. Martens, Todd (March 6, 2020). "The Walt Disney Archives are shaping the culture of tomorrow. Ask Marvel's Kevin Feige". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 7, 2020. Retrieved March 8, 2020. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 16, 2020). "Shang-Chi Director Destin Daniel Cretton Tests Negative For Coronavirus, Says 'Social Distancing Is An Act Of Love...For Every Person'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 17, 2020. Retrieved March 18, 2020. "Production Weekly – Issue 1190 – Thursday April 16, 2020 / 174 Listings – 36 Pages". Production Weekly. April 15, 2020. Archived from the original on August 12, 2020. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Seymour, Mike (September 28, 2021). "Shang-Chi: Behind the Scenes in Sydney". FX Guide. Archived from the original on September 29, 2021. Retrieved September 30, 2021. Eagan, Daniel (December 23, 2021). "Shang-Chi DP Bill Pope on Plunging into the MCU with Destin Daniel Cretton". Below the Line. Archived from the original on December 23, 2021. Retrieved July 2, 2023. Kit, Borys (March 12, 2020). "Marvel's Shang-Chi Temporarily Suspends Production as Director Self-Isolates (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 13, 2020. Retrieved March 13, 2020. Kroll, Justin (March 13, 2020). "Disney Halts Production on Most Live-Action Films Including The Last Duel". Variety. Archived from the original on March 14, 2020. Retrieved March 15, 2020. Fisher, Jacob (April 7, 2020). "Ronny Chieng Joins Shang Chi And The Legend Of The Ten Rings (Exclusive)". Discussing Film. Archived from the original on April 7, 2020. Retrieved April 7, 2020. Welk, Brian (April 3, 2020). "Black Widow Moves to November as Other MCU Films Shift Back to 2021, 2022". TheWrap. Archived from the original on April 3, 2020. Retrieved April 3, 2020. Laman, Douglas (August 2, 2020). "Shang-Chi: News Chopper Captures Clear Look of MCU Film's Asian Set". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved August 2, 2020. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 1, 2020). "Shang-Chi And The Legend Of The Ten Rings Prepping To Restart Production In Australia By End Of July". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 1, 2020. Retrieved July 1, 2020. Frater, Patrick (August 19, 2020). "Australia Launches Insurance-Replacement Fund to Restart Film, TV Production". Variety. Archived from the original on August 19, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Gonzalez, Umberto; Welk, Brian (September 23, 2020). "Disney Pushes Black Widow Back to 2021". TheWrap. Archived from the original on September 23, 2020. Retrieved September 23, 2020. Kukura, Joe (October 19, 2020). "Video: Marvel Kung Fu Flick Shang-Chi (Starring Awkwafina!) Now Shooting in SF". SFist. Archived from the original on October 20, 2020. Retrieved October 20, 2020. Graf, Carly (October 21, 2020). "Marvel Superhero film now shooting in San Francisco". San Francisco Examiner. Archived from the original on October 21, 2020. Retrieved October 21, 2020. "Behind the scenes of the Shang-Chi bus chase through San Francisco — from the film's director". San Francisco Chronicle. September 6, 2021. Archived from the original on September 7, 2021. Retrieved September 7, 2021. Barnhardt, Adam (October 24, 2020). "Shang-Chi Wraps Principal Photography". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on October 25, 2020. Retrieved October 25, 2020. Sirikul, Laura (August 23, 2021). "Shang-Chi And The Legend Of The Ten Rings Review". Empire. Archived from the original on August 23, 2021. Retrieved August 23, 2021. Noble, Alex (August 7, 2021). "Brad Allan, Stuntman and Jackie Chan Protege, Dies at 48". TheWrap. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved August 23, 2021. Hartlaub, Peter. "Behind the scenes of the 'Shang-Chi' bus chase through San Francisco — from the film's director". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on September 6, 2021. Retrieved July 2, 2023. Tangcay, Jazz (September 5, 2021). "How the Kick-Ass Shang-Chi Bus Scene Came Together". Variety. Archived from the original on September 9, 2021. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Travis, Ben (June 7, 2021). "Shang-Chi And The Legend Of The Ten Rings Is Inspired By Jackie Chan And Wuxia – Exclusive Image". Empire. Archived from the original on June 7, 2021. Retrieved June 7, 2021. Morales, Wilson (October 28, 2019). "Exclusive: Nat Sanders & Elísabet Ronaldsdóttir Named Co-Editors On Marvel's Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings". Black Film. Archived from the original on October 30, 2019. Retrieved February 17, 2021. "Harry Yoon, ACE" (PDF). Gersh. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 23, 2021. Retrieved February 22, 2021. Boone, John (December 10, 2020). "Marvel Debuts New Trailers for Loki and Falcon and Winter Soldier, Announces Fantastic Four Movie". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved December 12, 2020. Kit, Borys (March 9, 2021). "Creed II Actor Florian Munteanu Joining Cate Blanchett, Kevin Hart in Borderlands Movie (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 10, 2021. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Rubin, Rebecca (March 23, 2021). "Black Widow, Cruella to Debut on Disney Plus and in Theaters as Disney Shifts Dates for Seven Films". Variety. Archived from the original on March 23, 2021. Retrieved March 23, 2021. Ramos, Dino-Ray (March 31, 2021). "Pen15's Dallas Liu To Appear in Marvel's Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 31, 2021. Retrieved March 31, 2021. Bonaime, Ross (June 24, 2021). "New Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings Trailer Gives a Closer Look at Tony Leung As the Real Mandarin". Collider. Archived from the original on June 25, 2021. Retrieved June 24, 2021. Anderson, Jenna (June 24, 2021). "Shang-Chi Trailer Reveals Shocking Marvel Villain's Return". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 25, 2021. Retrieved June 24, 2021. Parker, Ryan (May 17, 2022). "'She-Hulk: Attorney at Law' Drops First Disney+ Trailer". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 18, 2022. Retrieved May 17, 2022. Davis, Brandon (August 16, 2022). "She-Hulk Writer Reveals Why Abomination Returned in Shang-Chi". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 16, 2022. Retrieved August 16, 2022. Bennett, Tara (July 19, 2021). "Benedict Wong Says Joining Marvel's Shang-Chi is 'To Be Sat At A Table of Asian Excellence'". SyFy Wire. Archived from the original on July 20, 2021. Sneider, Jeff (July 22, 2021). "Shang-Chi Star Benedict Wong Says "Asians Assemble" in Marvel Movie; Also Teases Doctor Strange 2". Collider. Archived from the original on July 22, 2021. Retrieved July 27, 2021. B. Vary, Adam (September 4, 2021). "Shang-Chis' Director Explains Those Post-Credits Scenes". Variety. Archived from the original on September 4, 2021. Retrieved September 5, 2021. Davis, Brandon (August 30, 2021). "Shang-Chi Has Major Ties to MCU Past And Future". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 31, 2021. Retrieved September 1, 2021. Perception [@exp_perception] (November 2, 2021). "Experience Shang-Chi's story in our end credits main on end title sequence for Shang-Chi and The Legend of The Ten Rings! We designed this sequence to celebrate water, with moments from the film rendered into its splashes and droplets. Watch the sequence: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y0606tpMVx4" (Tweet). Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved April 19, 2022 – via Twitter. AWN Staff, ed. (November 16, 2021). "It's A Jungle Out There for Rising Sun Pictures' 'Shang-Chi' VFX". Animation World Network. Archived from the original on November 16, 2021. Retrieved April 19, 2022. Paige, Rachel (September 9, 2021). "Shang-Chi and The Legend of The Ten Rings: Meet Morris, the Creature from Ta Lo". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on September 9, 2021. Retrieved September 10, 2021. Marshall, Rick (December 21, 2021). "Ten rings, two dragons, and imagination: Behind Shang-Chi's visual effects magic". Digital Trends. Archived from the original on December 12, 2021. Retrieved April 19, 2022. Barnhardt, Adam (September 17, 2021). "Shang-Chi's Ten Rings Nearly Looked Entirely Different". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on September 17, 2021. Retrieved September 17, 2021. Fleming, Ryan (January 24, 2022). "Weta Visual Effects Supervisor Sean Walker Breaks Down The Process Of Bringing Dragons To Life In 'Shang-Chi And The Legend Of The Ten Rings'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 24, 2022. Retrieved April 18, 2022. "Joel P West Scoring Marvel's Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings". Film Music Reporter. June 21, 2021. Archived from the original on June 21, 2021. Retrieved June 21, 2021. Burlingame, Jon (September 8, 2021). "Joel P West on Composing the Music of 'Shang Chi' and Tony Leung's Villainous Score". Variety. Archived from the original on September 8, 2021. Retrieved July 2, 2023. "Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings Score Album Details". Film Music Reporter. August 31, 2021. Archived from the original on August 31, 2021. Retrieved August 31, 2021. Outlaw, Kofi (August 9, 2021). "Marvel's Shang-Chi Reveals Soundtrack Single "Lazy Susan" With 21 Savage and 88Rising". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Perine, Aaron (August 10, 2021). "Marvel's Shang-Chi: Listen to First Singles From Legend of the Ten Rings Soundtrack". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. Paige, Rachel (August 12, 2021). "A New Marvel Hero Rises In Latest Shang-Chi and The Legend of The Ten Rings Spot". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on August 12, 2021. Retrieved August 12, 2021. Tigg, Fnr (August 19, 2021). "Swae Lee and Jhene Aiko Drop New Track "In The Dark"". Complex. Archived from the original on August 20, 2021. Retrieved August 20, 2021. "Swae Lee's & Jhené Aiko's Song 'In the Dark' from Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings Released". Film Music Reporter. August 20, 2021. Archived from the original on August 20, 2021. Retrieved August 20, 2021. "Shang-Chi and The Legend of The Ten Rings: The Album Drops September 3". Marvel.com. September 2, 2021. Archived from the original on September 2, 2021. Retrieved September 3, 2021. Delbyck, Cole (April 19, 2021). "Shang-Chi Trailer Introduces Marvel's First Asian Superhero Movie". HuffPost. Archived from the original on April 19, 2021. Retrieved April 19, 2021. Bricken, Rob (April 19, 2021). "Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings's First Trailer Promises Martial Arts Galore". io9. Archived from the original on April 19, 2021. Retrieved April 19, 2021. Davis, Rebecca (May 11, 2021). "Marvel's Shang-Chi, Eternals May Face Uphill Battle to Enter China". Variety. Archived from the original on May 12, 2021. Retrieved May 12, 2021. Keane, Sean (June 25, 2021). "Shang-Chi trailer hints at classic Marvel villain's return". CNET. Archived from the original on June 25, 2021. Retrieved June 25, 2021. Geisinger, Gabriella (June 25, 2021). "What the Abomination's appearance in the Shang-Chi trailer means for the MCU". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on June 26, 2021. Retrieved June 25, 2021. Lussier, Germain (June 24, 2021). "Shang-Chi's New Trailer Blasts the Marvel Universe into Phase 4". io9. Archived from the original on June 25, 2021. Retrieved June 25, 2021. Polo, Susana (June 24, 2021). "Marvel's new Shang-Chi trailer brings the fantastical fury". Polygon. Archived from the original on June 25, 2021. Retrieved June 25, 2021. Ouellette, Jennifer (June 25, 2021). "We have our best look yet at supervillain Mandarin in new Shang-Chi trailer". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on June 25, 2021. Retrieved June 27, 2021. Fink, Richard (August 15, 2021). "Shang-Chi Director Supports Fundraiser to Help Kids See His MCU Movie". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on August 16, 2021. Retrieved August 29, 2021. Sun, Rebecca (August 27, 2021). "Gold House Teams With GoFundMe to Fund Shang-Chi Private Screenings". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 28, 2021. Retrieved August 29, 2021. Siegal, Jacob (August 17, 2021). "Every new movie and show coming to Disney Plus in September 2021". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved August 17, 2021. Paige, Rebecca (September 3, 2021). "Shang-Chi and Death Dealer Arrive at Avengers Campus at Disney California Adventure Park". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on September 3, 2021. Retrieved September 3, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (September 7, 2021). "Shang-Chi To The Moon: Marvel Asian American Superhero Movie Wraps Labor Day Weekend With Record $94M+ & Best Monday During Pandemic". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 8, 2021. Retrieved September 8, 2021. "The BMW iX3 makes its film debut in Marvel Studios' Shang-Chi and The Legend of The Ten Rings" (Press release). BMW. August 30, 2021. Archived from the original on September 4, 2021. Retrieved September 4, 2021. Bentz, Adam (November 15, 2021). "Simu Liu Talks to a Dragon in Hilarious Shang-Chi Old Spice Commercial". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 24, 2021. Retrieved November 30, 2021. Knutson, Troy (July 1, 2021). "Shang-Chi Closure Request" (PDF). Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 21, 2021. Retrieved July 21, 2021. "Watch the Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings Red Carpet Premiere on August 16". Marvel.com. August 13, 2021. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2021. Barnhardt, Adam (August 4, 2021). "Shang-Chi: Marvel Screening Movie Week Ahead of Release". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 16, 2021. Retrieved August 26, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony; Tartaglione, Nancy (September 1, 2021). "Shang-Chi Bound For Labor Day Weekend Record With $90M+ WW Launch – Box Office Preview". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 1, 2021. Retrieved September 1, 2021. Couch, Aaron; McClintock, Pamela (May 13, 2021). "Free Guy and Shang-Chi to Get Exclusive Theatrical Releases". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 13, 2021. Retrieved May 13, 2021. Oddo, Marco Vito (July 24, 2022). "'She-Hulk: Attorney at Law' and 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' End Marvel's Phase 4". Collider. Archived from the original on July 26, 2022. Retrieved July 26, 2022. Lee, Edmund (July 22, 2019). "Marvel's Shang-Chi: five reasons Tony Leung's casting is huge – Hong Kong actor to play villain The Mandarin". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on September 5, 2019. Retrieved September 6, 2019. Neill, Rosemary (August 19, 2021). "Movie release paused for some while others Marvel". The Australian. Archived from the original on August 30, 2021. Retrieved August 30, 2021. Williams, Leah J. (September 30, 2021). "NSW Cinemas Are Set To Reopen This October, Here's What You Can Finally Watch". Gizmodo Australia. Archived from the original on October 1, 2021. Retrieved October 12, 2021. Chitwood, Adam (August 12, 2021). "Disney Confirms Marvel's Shang-Chi Will Not Premiere on Disney+; CEO Calls It an "Interesting Experiment"". Collider. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021. Retrieved August 19, 2021. Vary, Adam B. (August 12, 2021). "Why Disney's Free Guy Will Be on HBO Before It's on Disney Plus". Variety. Archived from the original on August 17, 2021. Retrieved August 19, 2021. Couch, Aaron; Drury, Sharareh (August 16, 2021). "Kevin Feige Talks Shang-Chi Representation and "Experiment" Comment Controversy". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 19, 2021. Retrieved August 19, 2021. Tartaglione, Nancy (September 10, 2021). "Shang-Chi China Release Unlikely In Wake Of Unearthed Comments By Star Simu Liu; The Eternals Hopes In Question". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 10, 2021. Retrieved September 10, 2021. Tartaglione, Nancy (October 3, 2021). "No Time To Die Thrives With $119M Bow; Venom 2 Sets Russia Record; Dune Tops $100M Offshore – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 4, 2021. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Cain, Sian; Davidson, Helen (January 18, 2023). "China ends de facto ban on Marvel films after more than three years". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 18, 2023. Retrieved June 26, 2023. Goldberg, Matt (October 1, 2021). "Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings 4K Gets a Holiday-Friendly Release Date". Collider. Archived from the original on October 1, 2021. Retrieved October 1, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (September 21, 2021). "Shang-Chi Heading Into Homes On November 12, Which Bob Chapek Announces As "Disney+ Day"; Here's Lineup Of Content". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 21, 2021. Retrieved September 21, 2021. Byford, Sam (November 8, 2021). "Disney Plus is upgrading Marvel movies to IMAX aspect ratio". The Verge. Archived from the original on November 8, 2021. Retrieved November 8, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 15, 2021). "Red Notice: Dwayne Johnson, Gal Gadot & Ryan Reynolds Netflix Movie KOs Shang-Chi In Streaming Debut Per Samba TV". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 16, 2021. Retrieved November 16, 2021. Prange, Stephanie (November 16, 2021). "Shang-Chi, Big Mouth Top Weekly Whip Media Streaming Charts". Media Play News. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved November 16, 2021. Hayes, Dade (December 14, 2021). "Netflix's Red Notice Beats Out Disney's Shang-Chi And Jungle Cruise On Movie-Heavy Nielsen U.S. Streaming Chart". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 14, 2021. Retrieved December 22, 2021. Hayes, Dade (December 21, 2021). "The Wheel Of Time Tops 1 Billion Weekly Streaming Minutes, But Red Notice Holds On To Top Spot On Nielsen Chart". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 22, 2021. Prange, Stephanie (November 23, 2021). "Netflix's Red Notice, Tiger King Top Weekly Whip Media Streaming Charts". Media Play News. Archived from the original on November 24, 2021. Retrieved November 24, 2021. Prange, Stephanie (December 27, 2021). "'Squid Game,' 'Black Widow' Top Whip Media's 2021 TV Time Charts; App Bows Personalized Rankings". Media Play News. Archived from the original on January 6, 2022. Retrieved January 22, 2022. Latchem, John (December 9, 2021). "Shang-Chi Debuts at No. 1 on Disc Sales Charts". Media Play News. Archived from the original on December 11, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2021. Latchem, John (December 16, 2021). "Shang-Chi Tops Disc Sales Charts for Second Week". Media Play News. Archived from the original on December 18, 2021. Retrieved December 22, 2021. Latchem, John (January 15, 2022). "'Venom: Let There Be Carnage' Tops December Disc Sales; 'F9' Takes Crown for 2021". Media Play News. Archived from the original on April 24, 2022. Retrieved January 16, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy (September 5, 2021). "Shang-Chi Ringing Up $140M Global Bow, Sets Pandemic Record In UK; Free Guy Still Capturing China – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 8, 2021. Retrieved September 8, 2021. Mendelson, Scott (September 8, 2021). "Box Office: Shang-Chi Nabs $6.9M Tuesday To Top $100M Domestic". Forbes. Archived from the original on September 9, 2021. Retrieved September 9, 2021. Galuppo, Mia (September 12, 2021). "Box Office: Shang-Chi Remains No. 1 with $35.8M". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 13, 2021. Retrieved September 13, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (September 19, 2021). "Shang-Chi Ruling Box Office In Third Weekend With $21M+ – Sunday Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 20, 2021. Retrieved September 19, 2021. Rosen, Christopher (September 27, 2021). "Shang-Chi sets pandemic box office record as Dear Evan Hansen scuffles". Gold Derby. Archived from the original on September 27, 2021. Retrieved September 28, 2021. McClintock, Pamela (September 26, 2021). "Box Office Milestone: Shang-Chi Is First Pic of Pandemic Era to Cross $200M Domestically". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 1, 2021. Retrieved October 1, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (October 3, 2021). "Venom: Let There Be Carnage Devours Black Widow's Pandemic Opening Record With $90.1M Debut". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 4, 2021. Retrieved October 4, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (October 11, 2021). "No Time To Die Now Seeing $60M+ Over 4-Day Holiday — Monday Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 12, 2021. Retrieved October 12, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (October 17, 2021). "Halloween Kills Grabs Best Horror & R-Rated Opening Records During Pandemic With $50.4M, Even With Peacock Day & Date". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 19, 2021. Retrieved October 19, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (October 24, 2021). "Dune $40M+ Domestic Opening Is Best For Warner Bros HBO Max Day/Date Title & Denis Villeneuve". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 24, 2021. Retrieved October 25, 2021. "Domestic Box Office For 2021". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on August 13, 2022. Retrieved January 7, 2023. Tartaglione, Nancy (September 12, 2021). "Shang-Chi Lifts To $258M Global; Free Guy At $277M – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 13, 2021. Retrieved September 13, 2021. Tartaglione, Nancy (September 19, 2021). "Dune Reaps A Heap With $37M From Early Offshore Debut; Shang-Chi Tops $320M WW – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 20, 2021. Retrieved September 19, 2021. Tartaglione, Nancy (September 26, 2021). "Dune Mines $77M Cume Through Second Early Offshore Frame – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 27, 2021. Retrieved September 27, 2021. Tartaglione, Nancy (October 31, 2021). "No Time To Die Reels In $600M+ Global As Venom 2 Licks At $400M & Dune Has Eyes On $300M – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 1, 2021. Retrieved November 1, 2021. "Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved August 14, 2023. "Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings Reviews". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved August 14, 2023. Edwards, Belen (August 23, 2021). "'Shang-Chi' reviews are in: Here's what critics think of Marvel's latest movie". Mashable. Archived from the original on August 23, 2021. Retrieved August 14, 2023. Han, Angie (August 23, 2021). "Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings: Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 23, 2021. Retrieved August 23, 2021. Rivera, Francesca (August 23, 2021). "Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings Review". IGN. Archived from the original on August 23, 2021. Retrieved August 14, 2023. Nedd, Alexis (August 23, 2021). "'Shang-Chi' reshapes the MCU to make room for a phenomenal new hero". Mashable. Archived from the original on August 23, 2021. Retrieved August 14, 2023. Cole, Jake (August 23, 2021). "Review: Save for Tony Leung, Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings Is a Bust". Slant Magazine. Archived from the original on August 23, 2021. Retrieved August 28, 2021. Rife, Katie (August 23, 2021). "Eastern action meets Marvel formula in Shang-Chi And The Legend Of The Ten Rings". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on August 23, 2021. Retrieved August 14, 2023. Greenblatt, Leah (August 23, 2021). "'Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings' finds a fresh superhero sweet spot". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 23, 2021. Retrieved August 14, 2023. Ma, Wenlei (October 11, 2021). "Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings review: Strong starting point for Marvel's newest superhero". News.com.au. Archived from the original on October 11, 2021. Retrieved August 14, 2023. Goldberg, Matt (August 23, 2021). "'Shang-Chi' Masters Kung-Fu Action but Struggles to Tell a Captivating Story | Review". Collider. Archived from the original on August 23, 2021. Retrieved August 14, 2023. Hartlaub, Peter (August 23, 2021). "Review: 'Shang-Chi' — and its S.F. bus chase — make good transfer to Marvel Universe". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on August 23, 2021. Retrieved August 14, 2023. Bui, Hoai-Tran (August 23, 2021). "'Shang-Chi And The Legend Of The Ten Rings' Review: Tony Leung's Villain Eclipses The MCU's First Asian Superhero". /Film. Archived from the original on August 24, 2021. Retrieved August 14, 2023. Del Rosario, Alexandra (December 12, 2021). "Shang-Chi's Simu Liu Talks "Super Power" Of Being "Unapologetically Asian" At Unforgettable Gala; Sandra Oh, John Cho & More Receive Honors". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 12, 2021. Retrieved December 13, 2021. "2021 Music in Visual Media Nomination". Hollywood Music in Media Awards. November 17, 2021. Archived from the original on November 18, 2021. Retrieved November 17, 2021. Huff, Lauren; Gettell, Oliver (December 7, 2021). "2021 People's Choice Awards: See the full list of winners". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 8, 2021. Retrieved December 8, 2021. "Annual StLFCA Awards". St. Louis Film Critics Association. December 19, 2021. Archived from the original on January 8, 2022. Retrieved January 12, 2022. "2021 FFCC Nominations". Florida Film Critics Circle. December 15, 2021. Archived from the original on December 18, 2021. Retrieved December 15, 2021. Hazlett, Allison (December 22, 2021). "2021 FFCC Winners". Florida Film Critics Circle. Archived from the original on December 24, 2021. Retrieved December 22, 2021. "2021 San Diego Film Critics Society Nominations". San Diego Film Critics Society. January 7, 2022. Archived from the original on January 9, 2022. Retrieved January 12, 2022. "2021 San Diego Film Critics Society Award Winners". San Diego Film Critics Society. January 10, 2022. Archived from the original on January 11, 2022. Retrieved January 12, 2022. "Austin Film Critics Association Announces 2021 Awards Short Lists". The Austin Chronicle. January 4, 2022. Archived from the original on January 4, 2022. Retrieved January 9, 2022. Whittaker, Richard (January 11, 2022). "The Power of the Dog, Pig Split Austin Film Critics Awards". The Austin Chronicle. Archived from the original on January 12, 2022. Retrieved January 12, 2022. "The Power of the Dog Leads the 2021 Seattle Film Critics Society Nominations". Seattle Film Critics Society. January 10, 2022. Archived from the original on January 12, 2022. Retrieved January 12, 2022. Vonder Haar, Pete (January 4, 2022). "The Power Of The Dog Is Compelling Enough To Lead The 2021 Houston Film Critics Society Nominations". Houston Press. Archived from the original on January 7, 2022. Retrieved January 9, 2022. Nordyke, Kimberly (February 27, 2022). "SAG Awards: Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 1, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Meltzer, Lee (December 2, 2021). "Dune, Coda, and Belfast Lead the 5th Annual HCA Film Awards Nominations" (Press release). Los Angeles, California: Hollywood Critics Association. Archived from the original on December 3, 2021. Retrieved December 4, 2021. Shafer, Ellise (November 11, 2021). "Simu Liu, Jude Hill, Greig Fraser Among Honorees at Hollywood Critics Association Film Awards (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on December 5, 2021. Retrieved January 12, 2022. Hipes, Patrick (January 18, 2022). "VES Awards Nominations Led By 'Dune', 'Encanto', 'Loki'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 18, 2022. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Schmidt, Ingrid (March 9, 2022). "'Cruella,' 'Emily in Paris,' 'Dune' Among Costume Designers Guild Awards Winners". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 10, 2022. Retrieved March 10, 2022. Giardina, Carolyn (March 12, 2022). "The Mitchells vs. the Machines Wins Big at Annie Awards". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 13, 2022. Retrieved March 13, 2022. "Film Nominations Announced for the 27th Annual Critics Choice Awards" (Press release). Los Angeles, California: Critics Choice Association. December 13, 2021. Archived from the original on December 14, 2021. Retrieved December 14, 2021. Hammond, Pete (February 22, 2022). "Critics Choice Super Awards Nominations Include 'Shang-Chi', 'Spider-Man', 'Midnight Mass' & 'Evil'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 22, 2022. Retrieved February 22, 2022. Lang, Brent; Moreau, Jordan; Grantham-Philips, Wyatte (February 8, 2022). "Oscar Nominations 2022: 'Power of the Dog' Leads With 12 Nods, 'Dune' Follows With 10 (Full List)". Variety. Archived from the original on February 8, 2022. Retrieved February 8, 2022. Fuster, Jeremy (December 1, 2021). "Power of the Dog and Belfast Lead Nominations for IPA Satellite Awards". TheWrap. Archived from the original on December 2, 2021. Retrieved January 11, 2022. Nordyke, Kimberly (June 5, 2022). "MTV Movie & TV Awards: 'Spider-Man: No Way Home,' 'Euphoria' Top Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 6, 2022. Retrieved June 6, 2022. Codega, Linda (September 6, 2022). "The 2022 Hugo Award Winners Are Here". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on September 6, 2022. Retrieved October 6, 2023. Simons, Dean (October 27, 2022). "Here are the winners of the Saturn Awards 2022". Comics Beat. Archived from the original on October 27, 2022. Retrieved October 27, 2022. Paige, Rachel (February 16, 2021). "Marvel Studios Announces Assembled, a Behind-the-Scenes Look at the Making of the Marvel Cinematic Universe". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on February 16, 2021. Retrieved February 16, 2021. Spangler, Todd (November 8, 2021). "Disney Plus Priced at $1.99 for First Month as Part of Company-Wide 'Disney Plus Day' Promotions". Variety. Archived from the original on November 8, 2021. Retrieved November 8, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony; Andreeva, Nellie; Kroll, Justin (December 6, 2021). "Destin Daniel Cretton Inks Overall Deal With Marvel Studios & Hulu's Onyx Collective; Set For Disney+ MCU Series & Shang-Chi Sequel". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 6, 2021. Retrieved December 6, 2021. Gheciu, Alex Nino (January 7, 2022). "Simu Liu on Shang-Chi 2, Online Hate, Mississauga Love, and Making Music". Complex. Archived from the original on January 11, 2022. Retrieved January 11, 2022. Russell, Bradley (July 7, 2023). "Shang-Chi 2 has seemingly been pushed back – thanks to an Avengers movie". Total Film. GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on July 8, 2023. Retrieved July 8, 2023. Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Data from Wikidata Official website at Marvel.com Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings at IMDb Portals:  Film  United States  Speculative fiction  Comics