The 1998 FIFA World Cup was the 16th FIFA World Cup, a quadrennial football tournament contested by the senior men's teams of the national associations affiliated to FIFA (the International Federation of Association Football). The tournament was played in France from 10 June to 12 July 1998 and featured 32 teams divided into eight groups of four. Each team was required to submit a squad of 22 players – numbered sequentially from 1 to 22 – from whom they would select their teams for each match at the tournament, with the final squads to be submitted by 1 June 1998. In total, 704 players were selected for the tournament. It featured players born in four different decades, the 1950s, the 1960s, the 1970s and the 1980s. The only other times this has happened at a World Cup was in the 1958, 1970 and 1990 editions. Players' ages as of 10 June 1998, the tournament's opening day. Head coach: Mário Zagallo Head coach: Henri Michel Head coach: Egil Olsen Head coach: Craig Brown Head coach: Herbert Prohaska Head coach: Claude Le Roy Head coach: Nelson Acosta Head coach: Cesare Maldini Head coach: Bo Johansson Head coach: Aimé Jacquet Head coach: Carlos Alberto Parreira (fired after two matches, replaced by Mohammed Al-Kharashy for the final match) Head coach: Philippe Troussier Andre Arendse (#22) was injured before the start of the tournament. His replacement, Paul Evans, was also injured shortly after arriving as a replacement. Simon Gopane was then called up, and sat on the bench for the last two matches. Head coach: Hristo Bonev Head coach: Bora Milutinović Head coach: Paulo César Carpegiani Head coach: Javier Clemente Head coach: Georges Leekens Head coach: Manuel Lapuente Head coach: Guus Hiddink Head coach: Cha Bum-kun (fired after two matches, replaced by Kim Pyung-seok for the final match) Head coach: Berti Vogts Note: Kirsten and Marschall also earned additional caps for East Germany (49 and 4, respectively). Head coach: Jalal Talebi Head coach: Steve Sampson Head coach: Slobodan Santrač Head coach: Hernán Darío Gómez Head coach: Glenn Hoddle Head coach: Anghel Iordănescu Head coach: Henryk Kasperczak (fired after two matches, replaced by Ali Selmi for the final match) Head coach: Daniel Passarella Head coach: Miroslav Blažević Head coach: Renê Simões Head coach: Takeshi Okada The English, Spanish, Japanese and Saudi Arabian squads were made up entirely of players from the respective countries' domestic leagues. The Nigeria squad was made up entirely of players employed by foreign clubs. Only three teams, Japan, Mexico, and Saudi Arabia, had no players from European clubs. Although Turkey and Portugal failed to qualify for the finals, their domestic leagues were represented by 18 and 9 players, respectively. Altogether, there were 38 national leagues who had players in the tournament. FIFA.com (in English) Planet World Cup website weltfussball.de [1]