A cable ferry (including the types chain ferry, swing ferry, floating bridge, or punt) is a ferry that is guided (and in many cases propelled) across a river or large body of water by cables connected to both shores. Early cable ferries often used either rope or steel chains, with the latter resulting in the alternative name of chain ferry. Both of these were largely replaced by wire cable by the late 19th century. Cable ferries can be typified by their size and construction, their usage (passenger, animal, vehicle) and requirements (length of crossing, amount of other shipping), their cables (wire rope, chain, or both), and their propulsion (water current, engine, manual). The choice of cable depends partially on the requirements of the crossing but also on the historical context. For example, the numerous cable ferries across Australian and Canadian rivers seem to use wire rope exclusively, whereas the older crossings across busy tidal rivers in England all use chain. In Germany, several river crossings were originally reaction ferries and later kept a wire rope for holding position but introduced a chain for propulsion. The reaction ferry uses the power of the river to tack across the current; the powered cable ferry uses engines or electric motors (e.g., the Canby Ferry in the U.S. State of Oregon) to wind itself across; or is hand-operated, such as the Stratford-upon-Avon chain ferry in the UK and the Saugatuck Chain Ferry in Saugatuck, Michigan, United States. Powered cable ferries use powered wheels or drums on board the vessel to pull itself along by the cables. The chains or wire ropes can be used with a sufficient amount of slack to allow sinking below the surface as the ferry moves away, allowing other vessels to pass without becoming snared or trapped. Chain ferries in strong tidal currents use two chains, those in inland rivers often only one chain on the upstream side. Some cable ferries use a wire rope on the upstream side in order to hold the position and a chain on the downstream side for propulsion. A special type are electrically powered overhead-cable ferries like Straussee Ferry, which have an onboard propulsion unit and can float free, but are connected to the overhead wire for the power supply, using an electrical cable that slides along the cable as the ferry moves. A very rare type are cable-ferries that are not propelled by themselves but rather are pulled from land side. An example of such a cable ferry was the Kungälv – Fästningsholmen ferry in Sweden. Today, the Jonen ferry in the Netherlands is pulled by a winch on the banks. These cable ferries can be operated electrically without having to provide electricity by rechargeable batteries or an overhead wire. Saving the weight of the engine on board, these ferries can also be operated using less energy. Two or more ferries can be provided in order to increase availability and capacity and as a backup during maintenance, as with the Torpoint Ferry. Cable ferries have probably been used to cross rivers and similar bodies of water since before recorded history. Examples of ferry routes using this technology date back to the 13th century (Hampton Ferry in England). In 1831 James Meadows Rendel introduced chain ferries worked by steam and in 1832 constructed one crossing the Dart at Dartmouth. Between 1832 and 1836 similar chain ferries were implemented between Torpoint and Saltash across the Tamar, and between Woolston and Southampton across the Itchen. The Woolston Floating Bridge switched from chains to wire ropes between 1878 and 1887 and was replaced by a bridge in 1977. In the early 1900s, Canadian engineer William Pitt designed an underwater cable ferry in New Brunswick, which would later be installed on the Kennebecasis River in order to connect the Kingston Peninsula to the Kennebecasis Valley. There are now eight cable ferries along the Saint John River system in southern New Brunswick. In Canada a cable ferry is proposed to transport automobiles across the Ottawa River in Ontario. There are several in British Columbia: two on the Fraser, one at Lytton, one at Big Bar (reaction ferries), three on Arrow Lakes. A suspended cable ferry worked until the 1980s in Boston Bar. A small seasonal reaction ferry carries cars across the Rivière des Prairies from Laval, Quebec (Sainte-Dorothée neighbourhood) to Île Bizard (part of Montreal). Cable ferries were particularly prominent in early transportation in the Sacramento Delta of California. Dozens of cable ferries operated on the Columbia River in the US northwest, and most have been rendered obsolete by bridges. A suspended cable ferry for railway cars crossed the American River in Northern California. Most of the road crossings of the Murray River in South Australia are cable ferries operated by the state government using diesel engines. The platforms at the ends can be moved up or down according to the water level. At one time, cable ferries were a primary means of automobile transportation in New South Wales in Australia. In Tasmania, for a century before 1934, the Risdon Punt at Hobart was the only fixed method of crossing the Derwent River within Hobart city limits. In the fishing village of Tai O on Lantau Island, Hong Kong, the Tai O Ferry (橫水渡) crossed the Tai O River before a bascule bridge was built. The largest and busiest cable ferry is the Torpoint Ferry in Plymouth, England. It was first converted to cable operation in 1831 and currently operates 3 ferries, carrying 8000 vehicles per day. The longest cable ferry link is MV Baynes Sound Connector south of Courtenay, British Columbia, Canada with a length of 1961.48 metres.[1] The earliest punts were privately owned by local landowners, and charged a toll. As governments started to build roads, they started to build and operate punts as required. Private punts might be bought out, or made to impose more standard tolls. The energy needed for operating cable ferries is in general especially small, as the crossing distances are mostly short, the speeds low, and there is almost no maneuvering. Whereas a free ferry is especially inefficient when starting off or moving slowly against a current or wind, a cable ferry is more or less rigidly connected to the ground with side forces held by the cable(s). As the frictional drag of a displacement hull decreases with about the third power of the speed, even the smallest amount of power can effect movement with enough leverage or if suitably geared down. The majority of the world's cable ferries are indeed manually propelled either with a crank turning a chain wheel or by pulling directly on a cable. For example the Saugatuck Chain Ferry taking up to 24 passengers is cranked by a single person at about 0.3 m/s. The former cable ferry at Malgas in South Africa even carried several cars, pulled by a couple of men at a slow walking speed. Ferries of this size that were hand-operated, such as the Reedham Ferry, have since been motorised in order to reduce the level of hard work and increase the speed. For these and other ferries of up to 20 t or so displacement, typical installed motor power in kilowatts ranges from single figures to low double figures. For example, the 22 meter, 22 tonne Pritzerbe Ferry has 23 kW installed. This allows comparison with free ferries. The motor ferry "Luise" on the Wannsee near Berlin, of similar tonnage, size and construction, has 290 kW installed. With electric drive the installed power requirements are reduced further. A very low-power installation is in the chain ferry Föri for up to 75 passengers. It uses battery-supplied twin electric motors. The average power during continuous operation (crossing two minutes and docking one minute) is given as 3 kW in summer and 4 kW in winter with thin ice, thus when moving 4.5 kW in summer and 6 kW in winter. Side forces from strong water currents or winds are held by the cables, yet when moving introduce extra friction in these that can considerably exceed the water resistance. Also in deep water with heavy chains or long cables not lying on the ground, large tension forces with corresponding friction are created. The world's longest cable crossing, nearly 2 km with the 750 t MV Baynes Sound Connector uses three wire ropes pretensioned with 200 kN. In spite of careful planning, the expected large energy savings compared to the former free ferry are not realised, also due to fouling and a speed of 8.5 knots. 998 kW engine power is installed, in the former 1099 t MV Quinitsa it is 1416 kW. With dependable water currents, most cable ferries are or were reaction ferries, powered by the current. Some of these are or were hybrid ferries with the cable passing through moveable pulleys or belaying points whose location sets the ferry's angle. In order to set off, manual work is required to initially pull the cable and also to maneuver, as described in the referenced video. Another hybrid seems to be the cable ferry at Sendelingsdrift with adjustable tethers to a high wire rope and also two outboard motors. Cables can hinder other navigation or pose a hazard. Whether a risk exists, and to which degree, depends on the situation (nature of body of water and extent of shipping) and on the type of cable(s): Overhead wire ropes suspended over shipping height. Ropes suspended at operating level, permanently or temporarily. Ropes held on the water surface by buoys. Cables suspended underwater, permanently or temporarily. Ground cables normally resting on the bottom, pulled to the surface near the ferry. Only the first type normally presents no risk for other vessels, as evident in the 15 reaction ferries of this type in Switzerland. Suspended cables near the water surface block navigation and are dangerous especially in strong currents and if difficult to see. The ropes of reaction ferries attached to one shore and suspended by buoys block the river on one side of the crossing ferry and can be made highly visible. The greatest risk comes from cables that are held underwater to a lesser degree than anticipated or are not visible at all. Suspended cables (ferry to shore or to water bottom) form catenaries of a shape (entry angle and depth) that depends on the cable weight and amount of tension. Chains are in general rather heavy and can function even with very steep catenaries going to the bottom within very short distances, except very near the shore. As they are also easy to see, the risk to other navigation is usually minimal, as is evident with the 6 or so chain ferries in southern England operating in waters with heavy shipping. In strong water currents, the catenaries become more stretched and chain collisions have occurred. Wire ropes are lighter than chains of the same strength and may be operated under strong tension, both giving rise to shallow catenaries which may be difficult to judge or even see. Some cable ferry operators warn vessel operators to exercise caution. They may indicate distances to keep clear, special lights, or that the depth of the cable is unknown, both when the ferry is stationary and when it is operating. Current cable ferry routes include: Butrint Ferry, across the Vivari Channel near Butrint Berowra Waters Ferry, at Berowra Waters in New South Wales Blanchetown Punt Bombah Point Ferry, at Bombah Point Cadell Ferry, across the Murray River at Cadell, South Australia Daintree River Ferry, across the Daintree River in Queensland Hibbard Ferry, across the Hastings River near Port Macquarie, New South Wales Lawrence Ferry, across the Clarence River in New South Wales Lower Portland Ferry, across the Hawkesbury River near the village of Lower Portland, New South Wales Lyrup Ferry, across the Murray River at Lyrup, South Australia Mannum Ferry, across the Murray River at Mannum, South Australia (two parallel ferries) Moggill Ferry, across the Brisbane River near Ipswich, Queensland Morgan Ferry, across the Murray River in Morgan, South Australia Mortlake Ferry, across the Parramatta River in Sydney, New South Wales Narrung Ferry, across the Murray River at Narrung, South Australia Noosa River Ferry, across the Noosa River in Queensland Purnong Ferry, across the Murray River in Purnong, South Australia Raymond Island Ferry, chain ferry from Paynesville to Raymond Island in Victoria Sackville Ferry, across the Hawkesbury River near the village of Sackville, New South Wales Settlement Point Ferry, across the Hastings River near Port Macquarie, New South Wales Speewa Ferry, across the Murray River between New South Wales and Victoria at Speewa Swan Reach Ferry, across the Murray River in Swan Reach, South Australia Tailem Bend Ferry, across the Murray River in Tailem Bend, South Australia Ulmarra Ferry, across the Clarence River in New South Wales Waikerie Ferry, across the Murray River in Waikerie, South Australia Walker Flat Ferry, across the Murray River in Walker Flat, South Australia Webbs Creek Ferry, across the Hawkesbury River in the village of Wisemans Ferry, New South Wales Wellington Ferry, across the Murray River in Wellington, South Australia Wisemans Ferry, across the Hawkesbury River in the village of Wisemans Ferry, New South Wales Wymah Ferry, across the Murray River between New South Wales and Victoria The Mannum Ferry. The Moggill Ferry Wisemans Ferry Rollfähre Klosterneuburg, across the Danube River at Klosterneuburg Drahtseilbrücke Ottensheim, across the Danube River at Ottensheim Belgium has about 20 cable ferries. 7 of them are small manual self-service ones. Xunantunich Ferry, across the Mopan River at Xunantunich Adams Lake Cable Ferry, across Adams Lake in British Columbia Baynes Sound Connector, across Baynes Sound from Buckley Bay to Denman Island in British Columbia. The longest cable ferry in the world. Belleisle Bay Ferry, across Belleisle Bay in New Brunswick Big Bar Ferry, across the Fraser River at Big Bar, British Columbia Bleriot Ferry, across the Red Deer River near Drumheller, Alberta Clarkboro Ferry, across the South Saskatchewan River near Saskatoon, Saskatchewan Country Harbour Ferry, across Country Harbour near Port Bickerton, Nova Scotia. Crowfoot Ferry, across the Bow River in Alberta Ecolos Ferry, across Ottawa River between Clarence-Rockland ON and Thurso QC Englishtown Ferry, across the mouth of St. Anns Bay in Nova Scotia Estuary Ferry, across the South Saskatchewan River near Estuary, Saskatchewan Evandale Ferry, across the Saint John River in New Brunswick Finnegan Ferry, across the Red Deer River in Alberta Gagetown Ferry, across the Saint John River in New Brunswick GladeFerry, across the Kootenay River in British Columbia Gondola Point Ferry, across the Kennebecasis River in New Brunswick Hampstead Ferry, across the Saint John River in New Brunswick Harrop Cable Ferry, across Kootenay Lake in British Columbia Howe Island ferries, across the Bateau Channel, St Lawrence River, Ontario Kennebecasis Island Ferry, across the Kennebecasis River in New Brunswick Klondyke Ferry, across the Athabasca River in Alberta LaHave Cable Ferry, across the LaHave River in Nova Scotia Lancer Ferry, across the South Saskatchewan River near Lancer, Saskatchewan Laval-sur-le-Lac Île-Bizard Ferry, across the Rivière des Prairies between Montreal and Laval, Quebec Lemsford Ferry, across the South Saskatchewan River near Lemsford, Saskatchewan Little Fort Ferry, across the North Thompson River in British Columbia Little Narrows Cable Ferry, across the Little Narrows of Whycocomagh Bay in Nova Scotia Low Bar Ferry, across the Fraser River at High Bar, British Columbia Lytton Ferry, across the Fraser River at Lytton, British Columbia McLure Ferry, across the North Thompson River in British Columbia Needles Cable Ferry, across Lower Arrow Lake in British Columbia Quyon Ferry, across Ottawa River between Fitzroy Harbour ON & Quyon, QC Riverhurst Ferry, across Lake Diefenbaker, Saskatchewan Rosevear Ferry, across the McLeod River near Edson, Alberta Simcoe Island Ferry, between Wolfe Island and Simcoe Island, St Lawrence River, Ontario Usk Ferry, across the Skeena River at Usk, British Columbia Westfield Ferry, across the Saint John River in New Brunswick Lytton Ferry (Fraser River) Needles Cable Ferry (Arrow Lakes) Riverhurst Ferry Laval-sur-le-Lac–Île-Bizard Ferry Balseo de San Javier, across San Pedro River, Los Ríos Region. Medsave Ferry, across the Sava River (Medsave–Zaprešić) in Zagreb County, overhead cable Otočanka Ferry, across the Sava River (Otok Samoborski–Savski Marof) in Zagreb County, overhead cable Oborovo, across the Sava River (Oborovo–Vrbovo Posavsko) in Zagreb County, overhead cable Martinska ves, across the Sava River (Dubrovčak Lijevi–Dubrovčak Desni) in Sisak-Moslavina County, overhead cable Tišina, across the Sava River (Tišina Kaptolska–Tišina Erdedska) in Sisak-Moslavina County, overhead cable Sunjanka, across the Sava River (Graduša Posavska–Lukavec Posavski) in Sisak-Moslavina County, overhead cable Kratečko, across the Sava River (Kratečko–Sunjsko Selište) in Sisak-Moslavina County, overhead cable Pitomača Jelkuš Ferry, across the Drava River, in Virovitica–Podravina County Pitomača Križnica, across the Drava River, in Virovitica–Podravina County Osijek Zoološki vrt, across the Drava River, Osijek-Baranja County Dolní Žleb Ferry, reactive ferry across the Elbe at Dolní Žleb near Děčín, lower cable Vrané nad Vltavou – Strnady, reactive ferry across the Vltava before Prague, with overhead cable Klecánky – Roztoky ferry over the Vltava under Prague, secured by overhead cable Máslovice, Dol - Libčice ferry over the Vltava under Prague, secured by lower cable Lužec nad Vltavou ferry over the Vltava, secured by overhead cable Zlenice - Senohraby swimming pool, ferry over the Sázava river, overhead security cable installed but usually unused Oseček ferry, Elbe river, formerly secured by overhead cable, now without it Kazín ferry, Berounka river, 1992–2007 propelled through lower chain, since 2015 unsecured boat Nadryby ferry, Berounka river, secured by the overhead cable Darová ferry, Berounka river, propelled through the overhead cable Østre Ferry, across Isefjord between Hammer Bakke and Orø. Uses cables for steering, but propellers for propulsion. Udbyhøj Ferry, across Randers Fjord. Kavastu Ferry, across Emajõgi in Kavastu (manual mechanism, more than century old flywheel) Ahvionsaari Ferry, from Kiviapaja to Ahvionsaari in Savonlinna Alassalmi Ferry, across Alassalmi strait on lake Oulujärvi between Manamansalo island and mainland Arvinsalmi Ferry, across Arvinsalmi strait between the municipalities of Rääkkylä and Liperi Barösund Ferry, across Barösund strait between Barölandet and Orslandet islands Bergö Ferry, in Bergö Eskilsö Ferry Föri in Turku Hanhivirta Ferry, in Enonkoski Haukkasalo Ferry Hirvisalmi Ferry, across Hirvisalmi strait between the mainland and Paalasmaa island in Juuka Hämmärönsalmi Ferry, across Hämmärönsalmi strait (Rimito-Hanka) in Rimito, Nådendal (part of r. road 1890) Högsar Ferry, between Högsar and Storlandet islands in Nagu, Pargas (part of r. road 12019) Karhun Cable Ferry, between the mainland and the island of Karhu, Ii Keistiö Ferry, between Keistiö and Iniö islands in Iniö, Pargas Kietävälänvirta Ferry, between Partalansaari and Viljakansaari in Puumala (part of road 15176) Koivukanta Ferry, to Kesamonsaari in Savonlinna Kokonsaari Ferry, from Kesamonsaari to Kokonsaari in Savanlinna Kivimo Ferry, between Roslax on mainland Houtskär and Kivimo islands in Houtskär, Pargas Kokkila Ferry, between Kokkila on the mainland and Angelniemi on Kimitoön (part of r. road 1835) Kuparonvirta Ferry, between Hirvensalo and Anttola in Mikkeli (part of road 15147) Kyläniemi Ferry, between Utula and Kyläniemi Mossala Ferry, between Björkö and Mossala islands in Houtskär, Pargas (part of regional road 12003) Pellinki Ferry, between the mainland and the island of Pellinki Pettu Ferry, between Pettu and Utö islands in Finby, Salo Pikkarala Ferry, across Oulujoki river in Pikkarala, Oulu Potkusalmi Ferry, to Ritosaari in Savonlinna Puutossalmi Ferry, in Kuopio Rongonsalmi Ferry, between Viljakansaari and Lieviskä in Puumala, (part of road 15170) Saverkeit Ferry, between mainland Houtskär and Västra Saverkeit islands in Houtskär, Pargas (part of r. road 12005) Skagen Ferry, between Jumo and Iniö islands in Iniö, Pargas (part of r. road 12230) Skåldö Ferry, between Degerö and Skåldö islands in Ekenäs, Raseborg Tappuvirta Ferry, Tappuvirrantie Tuohisaari Ferry, from Liistonsaari to Tuohisaari in Savonlinna Vartsala Ferry, between Vartsala and Kivimaa islands in Kustavi (part of r. road 192) Vånö Ferry, between Vånö and Attu islands in Pargas (part of r. road 12027) Alassalmi cable ferry Karhun cable ferry Koivukanta ferry in winter and parallel ice road for lighter vehicles Pikkarala ferry wintering on the shore of Oulujoki. Björkölinjen, across Björkösund strait between the islands of Korsö (in Kumlinge municipality) and Bockholm (in Brändö m.) Embarsundlinjen, across Embarsund strait in Föglö municipality, between the islands of Finholma and Jyddö Töftölinjen, across Prästösund strait between the islands of Töftö (in Vårdö municipality) and Prästö (in Sund m.) Seglingelinjen, across the strait between the islands of Seglinge and Snäckö (both in Seglinge village in Kumlinge municipality) Simskälalinjen, across the strait between the islands of Alören and Östra Simskäla (both in Vårdö municipality) Ängsösundlinjen, across Ängösund strait between the islands of Lumparland (in Lumparland municipality) and Ängö (in Vårdö m.) Bac du Sauvage Ferry, across a branch of the Rhône in the Camargue Bansang Ferry, across the River Gambia at Bansang in the Central River Division Aken Ferry, across the Elbe at Aken in Saxony-Anhalt Barby Ferry, across the Elbe at Barby in Saxony-Anhalt Caputh Ferry, across the Havel at Caputh in Brandenburg Coswig Ferry, across the Elbe at Coswig in Saxony-Anhalt Ellikon–Nack Ferry [de], across the Rhine from Lottstetten in Baden-Württemberg to Marthalen in Switzerland Ferchland Grieben Ferry, across the Elbe between Ferchland and Grieben in Saxony-Anhalt Gräpel Cable Ferry [de], across the Oste at Gräpel in Lower Saxony Ketzin Cable Ferry, across the Havel at Ketzin in Brandenburg Kiewitt Ferry, across the Havel at Potsdam in Brandenburg Maintal–Dörnigheim Ferry, across the Main near Maintal in Hesse Friesenheimer Insel – Sandhofen Ferry, across an old arm of the Rhine in Mannheim Pritzerbe Ferry, across the Havel between Havelsee and Kützkow in Brandenburg Rathen Ferry, across the Elbe at Rathen in Saxony Räbel Ferry, across the Elbe between Räbel and Havelberg in Saxony-Anhalt Rothenburg Ferry, across the Saale at Rothenburg in Saxony-Anhalt Sandau Ferry, across the Elbe at Sandau in Saxony-Anhalt Straussee Ferry, across the Straussee at Strausberg in Brandenburg Teterower See Ferry, to an island in the Teterower See in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern Veckerhagen Ferry, across the Weser between Veckerhagen in Hesse and Hemeln in Lower Saxony Westerhüsen Ferry, across the Elbe at Magdeburg in Saxony-Anhalt The Pritzerbe Ferry The Rathen Ferry Nam Sang Wai Ferry, at Nam Sang Wai in northwestern New Territories One cable ferry across the Danube between Csepel and Soroksár, in Budapest A cable ferry crosses the Tisza between Tiszalök and Tiszatardos A cable ferry serves Little Island and Waterford Castle in the River Suir Two cable ferries across the port of Cesenatico, in Romagna One cable ferry across the port of Bellaria-Igea Marina, in Romagna An engineless cable ferry (Traghetto di Leonardo) between Imbersago (Lecco) e Villa d'Adda (Bergamo), in Lombardia, in the Ecomuseo Adda di Leonardo da Vinci river museum Another "Traghetto di Leonardo" across the Tevere river, in Lazio, in the Riserva Naturale di Nazzano natural reserve Ferry across Shire River, 37 km south of Malawi's southernmost border There are about 150 cable ferries in the Netherlands,. About 111 of these are small hand-powered self-service ones and of these 24 use chains. Some examples: Cuijk ferry, across the Meuse at Cuijk Genemuiden ferry, across the Zwarte Water at Genemuiden Jonen ferry, across the Walengracht at Jonen, only taking foot passengers and cyclists, winched to the other bank by an electric motor on one of the banks. Lexkesveer, across the Nederrijn near Wageningen, first mentioned in 1426 Oijen Ferry, across the Meuse at Oijen Wijhe Ferry, across the IJssel at Wijhe Wijk bij Duurstede ferry, across the Lek. This one uses a floating cable. Tuapeka Mouth Ferry, in Tuapeka – South Island, on the Clutha River Fjone ferry, across lake Nisser in Nissedal, Telemark Espevær Ferry, in Bømlo, Hordaland Duesund–Masfjordnes, in Nordhordland Mjånes-Hisarøy, in Gulen, Sogn og Fjordane Biechowy Ferry, across the Warta between Biechowy and Piersk Borusowa Ferry, across the Vistula between Borusowa and Nowy Korczyn road no. 973 Brody Ferry, across the Oder at Brody road no. 280 Brzeg Dolny Ferry, across the Oder between Brzeg Dolny and Głoska Ciszyca Ferry, across the Vistula between Tarnobrzeg and Ciszyca road no. 758 Czchów Ferry, across the Dunajec between Czchów and Piaski Drużków Czeszewo Ferry, across the Warta at Czeszewo Dębno Ferry, across the Warta between Dębno and Orzechowo Gniew Ferry, across the Vistula between Gniew and Janowo road no. 510 Grzegorzowice Ferry, across the Oder between Grzerorzowice and Ciechowice road no. 421 Janowiec Ferry, across the Vistula between Kazimierz Dolny and Janowiec Korzeniewo Ferry, across the Vistula between Korzeniewo and Opalenie road no. 232 Kozubów Ferry, across the Warta between Kozubów and Osina Krzemienna Ferry, across the San between Krzemienna and Jabłonica Ruska Milsko Ferry, across the Oder between Milsko and Przewóz road no. 282 Nozdrzec Ferry, across the San between Nozdrzec and Dąbrówka Starzeńska Opatowiec Ferry, across the Vistula between Opatowiec and Ujście Jezuickie Otfinów Ferry, across the Dunajec between Otfinów and Pasieka Otfinowska Pogorzelica Ferry, across the Warta between Pogorzelica and Nowa Wieś Podgórna Połaniec Ferry, across the Vistula between Połaniec and Gliny Małe Połęcko Ferry, across the Oder between Połęcko and Chlebowo road no. 138 Pomorsko Ferry, across the Oder at Pomorsko road no. 281 Siedliszowice Ferry, across the Dunajec between Siedliszowice and Wietrzychowice Sławsk Ferry, across the Warta between Sławsk and Węglewskie Holendry Świniary Ferry, across the Vistula between Baranów Sandomierski and Świniary road no. 872 Waki Ferry, across the Warta at Waki Ferry in Kazimierz Dolny-Janowiec (Poland – Vistula river) Ferry in Gniew (Poland, Vistula river) High-rope ferry in Borusowa on the Vistula River Perec Ferry, across the Perec distributary of the river Hron, between Starý Tekov and Nový Tekov in Levice district - Foot ferry, came into use in the late 18th century and ceased operations in 2014, replaced by a bridge. Malgas Ferry for 2-3 cars, 120 m across the Breede River at Malgas, Western Cape, powered by 2-4 men walking a rope, in operation from 1860 to 2019, when it was replaced by a diesel-powered ferry in spite of a petition with over 21000 signatures appealing to save the unique historic crossing. Octha Ferry at Sendelingsdrift, for 2 cars, across the Garib (Orange) River to Namibia, guided by tethers on high rope, powered by two outboard motors and possibly the water current. Abai village ferry in Sokcho Pas de barca de Flix, across the Ebro river, in Flix, Catalonia Pas de barca de Miravet, across the Ebro river, in Miravet, Catalonia Adelsön Ferry [sv], in Lake Mälaren from Munsö to Adelsö Ammerö Ferry [sv], in Lake Revsund from Ammer to Stavre Ängö Ferry [sv], between Ängön and Fruvik on Bokenäset Arnö Ferry [sv], in Lake Mälaren from Oknö to Arnö Avan Ferry [sv], across Lule River from Avan to Norra Sunderbyn Boheden Ferry [sv], across Djupträsket from Sandudden to Boheden Bohus Malmön Ferry [sv], from Malmön to Roparöbacken Bojarkilen Ferry, across Bojarkilen in Strömstad Bolmsö Ferry [sv], across Lake Bolmen from Sunnaryd to Bolmsö Hamburgsund Ferry [sv], across Hamburgsund from Hamburgsund to Hamburgön Högmarsö Ferry, from Högmarsö to Svartnö Högsäter Ferry [sv], across Byälven from Högsäter to Fryxnäs Isö Ferry [sv], across Storsjön from Isön to Norderön Ivö Ferry [sv], across Ivö Lake between Barum and Ivö Island Kornhall Ferry [sv], across the Nordre älv between Kornhall and Brunnstorpsnäs Kostersundet Ferry, across Kostersundet from Nordkoster to Sydkoster Lyr Ferry [sv], between the islands of Lyr and Orust Malö Ferry [sv], between the islands of Malö and Orust Rödupp Ferry [sv], across the Kalix river at Rödupp Stegeborg Ferry [sv], across the Slätbaken between Slottsholmen and Norrkrog Sund-Jaren Ferry [sv], across the Stora Le lake Töreboda Ferry, across the Göta Canal in Töreboda Torpön Ferry, across Lake Sommen from Torpön to Blåvik Vaxholmen Ferry, from the town of Vaxholm to Vaxholm Castle Ytterö Ferry, from Ytterön to Yttre park The Swedish ferry Saga on the Hamburgsund route. The yellow colour is typical for car ferries in Sweden. The Swedish ferry Vaxholmen with its destination, Vaxholm Castle, in the Stockholm Archipelago. All reaction ferries: Basel Ferries [de], four routes across the Rhine in the city of Basel Ferry across the Sitter at Bischofszell Bodenacker Ferry [de], across the Aare Ferry across the Doubs at Tariche Ellikon–Nack Ferry [de], across the Rhine from Marthalen to Lottstetten in Germany Fahr Abbey Ferry [de], across the Limmat river at Fahr Abbey, since 1896. Ferry Mumpf–Bad Säckingen [de] across the Rhine to Germany Ferry Reichenbach across the Aare at Zollikofen Ferry across the Reuss at Sulz Fähre Wolfwil–Wynau across the Aare Ferry Zehendermätteli across the Aare near Bern Ferry Zurzach-Kadelburg [de], across the Rhine to Germany Butts Ferry, across the River Exe in Exeter, Devon Cowes Floating Bridge, across the River Medina on the Isle of Wight Dartmouth Higher Ferry, across the River Dart in Devon Hampton Ferry, across the River Avon near Evesham in Worcestershire Hampton Loade Ferry, across the River Severn in Shropshire (closed 2016) King Harry Ferry, across the River Fal in Cornwall Normanton-on-Soar Chain Ferry, across the River Soar in Nottinghamshire Reedham Ferry, across the River Yare in Norfolk Sandbanks Ferry, across the entrance to Poole Harbour in Dorset Stratford-upon-Avon Ferry, across the River Avon at Stratford-upon-Avon in Warwickshire Symonds Yat river crossings, a pair of hand powered ferries across the River Wye in Herefordshire Torpoint Ferry, across the River Tamar between Devon and Cornwall. Trowlock Island Ferry, a hand powered ferry to Trowlock Island in the River Thames in south-western Greater London Windermere Ferry, across Windermere in Cumbria Akers Ferry, across the Current River near Salem in Missouri Avoca Island Ferry, across the intracoastal waterway to Avoca Island near Morgan City in Louisiana Bemus Point-Stow Ferry, across Chautauqua Lake in New York Buena Vista Ferry, across the Willamette River in Oregon Canby Ferry, across the Willamette River in Oregon Los Ebanos Ferry, across the Rio Grande between Los Ebanos, Texas and Gustavo Díaz Ordaz, Tamaulipas Elwell Ferry, across the Cape Fear River in North Carolina Fredericktown Ferry, closed in 2013 across the Monongahela River in southwestern Pennsylvania Green River Ferry, across the Green River in Mammoth Cave National Park Hatton Ferry, across the James River in Virginia Ironton Ferry, across an arm of Lake Charlevoix in Michigan J-Mack Ferry, across an arm of the Sacramento River in California Merrimac Ferry, across the Wisconsin River in Wisconsin Merry Point Ferry, across the Corrotoman River in Virginia Parker's Ferry, across the Meherrin River in North Carolina Princeton Ferry, across the Sacramento River in California Reed's Ferry, across the Green River northeast of Rochester, KY Rochester Ferry, across the Green River in Rochester, KY Sans Souci Ferry, across the Cashie River in North Carolina Saugatuck Chain Ferry, across the Kalamazoo River in Michigan Sunnybank Ferry, across the Little Wicomico River in Virginia Sycamore Island Ferry, across the Potomac River in Maryland Ticonderoga Ferry, across Lake Champlain between Ticonderoga, New York and Shoreham, Vermont Upper Ferry, across the Wicomico River in Maryland Valley View Ferry, across the Kentucky River in Kentucky Wheatland Ferry, across the Willamette River in Oregon White's Ferry, across the Potomac River in Maryland Whitehaven Ferry, across the Wicomico River at Whitehaven, Maryland Woodland Ferry, across the Nanticoke River in Delaware Canby Ferry White's Ferry on the Potomac River Wheatland Ferry Princeton Ferry (undergoing renovation) Chambeshi Ferry, across the Chambeshi River near Mbesuma Kabompo Ferry, across the Kabompo River 80 km south-east of Kabompo Kafue Ferry, across the Kafue River 4.5 km west of the Zambezi Ekusileni Ferry, across the Insiza River downstream of Filabusi Aerial tramway Cable car Funicular Pontoon (boat) Punt (boat) Pünte Transporter bridge Schmidt, Theo. "Efficiency of Cable Ferries - Part 3". hupi.org. Human Power eJournal. Retrieved 2024-01-04. "Schweden Fährstellen". www.fjordfaehren.de. Retrieved 2023-02-21. "Schweden und Finnland". www.fjordfaehren.de. Retrieved 2023-02-21. "Ferry tale: How cable ferries became a way of life in southern N.B." Archived from the original on November 22, 2023. Retrieved November 30, 2023. Ng, Joyce (25 July 2009). "Last operator happy hand-pulled Tai O ferry may return to service". South China Morning Post. South China Morning Post Publishers Ltd. Retrieved 1 September 2020. "Another Torpoint Ferry will be out of service for two months". Plymouth Herald. Plymouth Herald. 8 March 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2019. "Webcams". Torpoint Ferry. Torpoint Ferry. Retrieved 30 August 2019. "ORIGINAL CORRESPONDENCE". The Argus. Melbourne: National Library of Australia. 7 April 1856. p. 5. Retrieved 7 June 2012. Schmidt, Theo. "Efficiency of Cable Ferries - Part 1". hupi.org. Human Power eJournal. Retrieved 2024-01-07. Luckmann, Detlev (1974). "Prahmfähre über die Oste, Baujahr 1911, Oberndorf" (Video 17 Min. with transcript and article). German National Library of Science and Technology (TIB) (in German). Institut for the Scientific Film (IWF) (Göttingen). "Navigable depth across cable ferry wires" (Website). NSW Government. NSW Government: Transport for NSW. 2023. Archived from the original on 2023-10-03. Retrieved 3 October 2023. de:Vivar-Kanal "Blanchetown Punt". The Advertiser. Adelaide: National Library of Australia. 25 November 1954. p. 4. Retrieved 4 June 2012. Mount, Stephen (2019-02-18). "BOMBAH POINT FERRY CLOSED". NBN News. Retrieved 2019-08-30. "Ferry Locations and Operational Status". Government of South Australia. Archived from the original on 2009-05-22. Retrieved 2008-11-27. "Council rejects call to change ferry service management". ABC News. ABC. 4 August 2008. Archived from the original on 2009-03-01. Retrieved 2008-12-24. "New Settlement Point Ferry". Port Macquarie – Hastings Council. Archived from the original on 2009-03-01. Retrieved 2008-12-24. "Speewa Ferry – Murray River". New South Wales Roads and Traffic Authority. Archived from the original on 2009-03-01. Retrieved 2008-11-18. NSW Roads and Maritime Services. "Vehicle ferries". Roads and Maritime Services. Retrieved 2019-08-30. Dickinson, Alex; Earley, David (2008-09-25). "Moggill Ferry master saves man after Brisbane River mishap". Courier Mail. Archived from the original on 2008-09-26. Retrieved 2008-12-09. "Walkabout – Meningie". Fairfax Digital. Archived from the original on 2008-07-22. Retrieved 2008-11-27. "Noosa North Shore Car Ferries". Noosa North Shore Car Ferries. Archived from the original on 2008-10-04. Retrieved 2008-11-11. "List of ferry types in the Netherlands" (in Dutch). Vrienden van de voetveren. Archived from the original on 2023-05-31. Retrieved 2023-12-03. "Inland Ferry Schedules". Province of British Columbia. Archived from the original on 2008-12-16. Retrieved 2008-11-25. "New Cable Ferry for Buckley Bay-Denman Island Service". BC Ferries. Archived from the original on 2016-03-09. "Government of Alberta Transportation Ferries". Government of Alberta. Archived from the original on 2009-05-17. Retrieved 2009-07-03. "100 mts Balseo San Javier – Descubre Los Ríos". descubrelosrios.cl. Archived from the original on 21 April 2018. Retrieved 23 March 2018. "Köteles komp Soroksár és Csepel között (csepeli-soroksári komp) - Wikimapia". wikimapia.org. Archived from the original on 2016-12-21. Retrieved 2016-06-02. "Fjoneferja". Archived from the original on 2015-04-02. Retrieved 2019-08-30. – Fjone cable ferry, in Norwegian with English summary "Scandinavia's First Lithium-Battery Electric Car-Ferry". Retrieved 2019-03-04. "Prom rzeczny (52.215265,18.434951)" [River ferry (52.215265,18.434951)]. Google Maps. Google Maps. Retrieved 2012-01-29. "Prom rzeczny (50.290066,20.801754)" [River ferry (50.290066,20.801754)]. Google Maps. Google Maps. Retrieved 2012-01-29. "Prom rzeczny (52.055176,15.42901)" [River ferry (52.055176,15.42901)]. Google Maps. Google Maps. Retrieved 2012-01-29. Fleminger, David. "Malgas Pontoon". Retrieved 5 January 2024. "Malgas Pontoon Ferry". sa-venues.com. Retrieved 5 January 2024. "Save Historic Malgas ferry (pont)". theheritageportal.co.za. The Heritage Portal. 17 October 2019. Retrieved 5 January 2024. "Pontoon at Sendelingsdrift". namahariplaasmark.com. 10 February 2022. Retrieved 5 January 2024. "Healing Retreat in Sokcho". Visit Korea. Archived from the original on 2016-09-20. "File:Adelson farja 2008.JPG". Wikimedia Commons. Archived from the original on 2009-03-18. Retrieved 2009-01-19. "Ammeröleden". Trafikverket. Archived from the original on 2013-05-28. "Ängöleden". Trafikverket. Archived from the original on 2017-09-16. Retrieved 2017-09-05. "Arnöleden". Trafikverket. Archived from the original on 2012-06-27. "Avanleden". Trafikverket. Archived from the original on 2013-06-04. "Bohedenleden". Trafikverket. Archived from the original on 2013-12-19. "Bohus Malmönleden". Trafikverket. Archived from the original on 2013-08-07. "Linfärja Bojarkilen". Archived from the original on 2014-07-15. Retrieved 2019-08-30. "Bolmsöleden". Trafikverket. Archived from the original on 2013-08-29. "Hamburgsundsleden". Trafikverket. Archived from the original on 2013-08-07. carita holmberg. "Högmarsö Färja". Archived from the original on 2014-05-17. "Högsäterleden". Trafikverket. Archived from the original on 2013-04-03. "Isöleden". Trafikverket. Archived from the original on 2013-08-06. "File:Linfärjan Karna, Ivösjön.jpg". Wikimedia Commons. Archived from the original on 2009-03-18. Retrieved 2009-01-19. "Kornhallsleden". Trafikverket. Archived from the original on 2017-09-16. Retrieved 2017-09-05. "Trädfällning inom tätort". Archived from the original on 2014-07-14. "Lyrleden". Trafikverket. Archived from the original on 2017-09-15. Retrieved 2017-09-05. "Sund-Jarenleden". Trafikverket. Archived from the original on 2017-09-16. Retrieved 2017-09-16. "Röduppleden". Trafikverket. Archived from the original on 2017-09-15. Retrieved 2017-09-05. "Stegeborgsleden". Trafikverket. Archived from the original on 2017-09-16. Retrieved 2017-09-16. "The ferry line, Töreboda". West Sweden Tourist Board. Archived from the original on 2017-12-01. Retrieved 2017-11-20. "Camping, Boende & Hyra stuga i Östergötland av Torpöns Färjeläge". "Hem". Archived from the original on 2013-12-08. Hamill, Sean D. (2009-05-17). "Getting There From Here, Is It Better by the Ferry?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2012-01-28. Retrieved 2010-04-28. "The Cable Guy – Piloting the Delta's J-Mack ferry beats working for a living". Prosper Media, LLC. Archived from the original on 2009-03-04. Retrieved 2008-12-01. "Ferries". California Delta Chambers and Visitor's Bureau. Archived from the original on 2008-12-09. Retrieved 2008-12-01. Shellenberger, William H (2001). Cruising the Chesapeake. McGraw-Hill Professional. pp. 236–237. ISBN 0-07-136371-8. Media related to Cable ferries at Wikimedia Commons Twyford chain ferry with unique overhead chain across the River Trent, UK, 1899 Cable ferries operating in New Brunswick, Canada