This article lists the national football squads for the 1990 FIFA World Cup final tournament held in Italy, between 8 June and 8 July 1990. Each country's final squad consisted of 22 players and had to be confirmed by 29 May. Replacement of injured players was permitted during the tournament at the discretion of FIFA. Two goalkeepers (for Argentina and England) were allowed to replace their injured counterparts under this ruling. Players marked (c) were named as captain for their national squad. Number of caps counts until the start of the World Cup, including all pre-tournament friendlies. A player's age is also at the start of the tournament. Head coach: Josef Hickersberger Head coach: Jozef Vengloš Head coach: Azeglio Vicini Note: with the exception of the goalkeepers, who were assigned the traditional shirt numbers for the role (1, 12 and 22) the Italian team was numbered alphabetically within their respective positions: Defenders (from 2 to 8), Midfielders (from 9 to 14) and Forwards (from 15 to 21). Head coach: Bob Gansler Head coach: Carlos Bilardo  *Following a rupture of goalkeeper Pumpido's tibia and fibula, the Argentine team was authorized to replace him with Comizzo, who joined the team as third goalkeeper. Head coach: Valery Nepomnyashchy Head coach: Emerich Jenei Head coach: Valeriy Lobanovskyi Head coach: Sebastião Lazaroni Head coach: Bora Milutinović Head coach: Andy Roxburgh The Scotland squad was numbered according to the number of caps that each player had won at the time. The exception to this was Goalkeeper Jim Leighton who was given the traditional number 1 jersey. Head coach: Olle Nordin Head coach: Francisco Maturana Head coach: Carlos Alberto Parreira Head coach: Franz Beckenbauer Head coach: Ivica Osim Head coach: Guy Thys Head coach: Lee Hoe-taik Head coach: Luis Suárez Head coach: Óscar Tabárez Head coach: Mahmoud Al-Gohari Head coach: Bobby Robson  * David Seaman was originally selected, but after the first game in Italy, he had to pull out of the squad due to a thumb injury and was replaced by Dave Beasant. Head coach: Leo Beenhakker Head coach: Jack Charlton Each national team had to submit a squad of 22 players. All the teams included 3 goalkeepers, except Colombia and Republic of Ireland who only called two. (in English) Planet World Cup website weltfussball.de [1]