The Academy Award for Best Sound is an Academy Award that recognizes the finest or most euphonic sound mixing, recording, sound design, and sound editing. The award used to go to the studio sound departments until a rule change in 1969 said it should be awarded to the specific technicians. The first were Murray Spivack and Jack Solomon for Hello, Dolly!. It is generally awarded to the production sound mixers, re-recording mixers, and supervising sound editors of the winning film. In the lists below, the winner of the award for each year is shown first, followed by the other nominees. Before the 93rd Academy Awards, Best Sound Mixing and Best Sound Editing were separate categories. For the second and third years of this category (i.e., the 4th Academy Awards and the 5th Academy Awards) only the names of the film companies were listed. Paramount Publix Studio Sound Department won in both years. † = includes special achievement awards BAFTA Award for Best Sound Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Sound These nominations were not associated with any individual film title. This was presented as a Special Achievement Award, not competitively. A tie in voting resulted in two winners. Greg P. Russell was announced as a nominee for 13 Hours, but his nomination was rescinded by a vote of the Academy's Board of Governors on recommendation of the Sound Branch Executive Committee. Russell had violated a campaign regulation prohibiting telephone lobbying by calling his fellow members of the Sound Branch during the nominations phase to make them aware of his work on the film. No replacement nominee was named. Koehler, Robert (May 8, 1999). "Pros play favorites". Variety. Hammond, Pete (April 28, 2020). "Oscars Keeping Show Date But Make Big News As Academy Lightens Eligibility Rules, Combines Sound Categories, Ends DVD Screeners and More". Deadline Hollywood. "Academy Awards 2017: Complete list of Oscar winners and nominees". Los Angeles Times. February 26, 2017. Retrieved January 8, 2018. Calvario, Liz (February 25, 2017). "Academy Rescinds Sound Mixing Nomination for Greg P. Russell of '13 Hours'". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved February 25, 2017. "Academy Awards 2017: Complete list of Oscar winners and nominees". Los Angeles Times. February 26, 2017. Retrieved January 8, 2018.