Kokshetau (Kazakh: Көкшетау, romanized: Kökşetau; [kɵkʂʲetɑw] , lit. 'Blueish Mountain/Smoky-Blue Mountain'; Russian: Кокшета́у, IPA: [kəkʂɛtaʊ]), formerly known as Kokchetav (Russian: Кокчета́в, [kəktɕʲetav]; the official name between 1868 and 1993) is a lakeside city in northern Kazakhstan and the capital of Akmola Region (oblys), which stretches along the southern shore of Lake Kopa, lying in the north of Kokshetau Hills, a northern subsystem of the Kokshetau Uplands (Saryarka) and the southern edge of the Ishim Plain. It is named after the Mount Kokshe. It was the administrative center of Kokshetau Region (oblast) from 1944 to 1991 as part of the Soviet Union and from 1991 as part of Kazakhstan to 1997 when it was abolished. It is also situated at the junction of the Trans-Kazakhstan and South Siberian railways. Kokshetau lies at an elevation of approximately 234 m (768 ft) above sea level. The climate of Kokshetau features hot summers and cold winters. It has 150,649 inhabitants (2022 est.), up from 123,389 (1999 census), while Akmola Region had a total population of 738,587 (2019 est.), down from 1,061,820 (1989 census), making it the tenth most populous region in Kazakhstan. The city's history has been influenced by people of many nations and religions. Kokshetau retains multiethnic population, with 59% ethnic Kazakhs (up from 36%), the rest being mostly 28% ethnic Russians (down from 42%) and other ethnic groups such as Ukrainians, Tatars and Germans. Kokshetau City Administration (area of 425 km2 [164 sq mi]), with a population of roughly 165,153 residents, includes one settlement administration (which consists of the work settlement of Stantsyonny) and the Krasnoyarsk rural district, which includes two rural settlements (the villages of Krasny Yar and Kyzyl-Zhuldyz). The city is considered to have been founded in 1824 as a military fortress, while it was granted city status in 1895. It was the centre of Kokshetau Region, which was abolished in 1997. It is well known for its nature and tourist sites, such as Burabay and Zerendi, among others. The city's main football team is FC Okzhetpes. Kokshetau is about 185 km (115 mi) from Petropavl, 300 km (190 mi) northwest of the national capital Astana along the A1, 318 km (198 mi) from Omsk along the A13, and 384 km (239 mi) from Kostanay. The city is served by Kokshetau Airport (KOV). The akim (mayor) is Bauyrzhan Gaisa from the Amanat Party. Kokshetau is an important economic, educational, and cultural centre of the Akmola Region. Attractions in and around Kokshetau include Akmola Regional Museum of History and Local Lore, Bukpa Hill, Kokshetau City Park, Kokshetau City History Museum, Museum of Literature and Art. The northwest entrance to Burabay National Park (Kazakh: Burabai memlekettık ūlttyq tabiği parkı) and Burabay spa town is a little over 43 miles (70 km) from Kokshetau. Kokshetau was awarded the title Kazakhstan City of Culture for the year 2021. English: Kokshetau, a transliteration of the Russian form Kazakh: Көкшетау, romanized: Kökşetau [kɵkʂʲetɑw] Russian: Кокшета́у, romanized: Kokshetau Russian pronunciation: [kəkʂɛtaʊ] The name Kokshetau (Kazakh: Kökşetau; pronounced [køkɕetɑw]) is of Kazakh origin literally meaning a (lit. 'smoky-blue mountain'), kokshe / "көкше", meaning (lit. 'blueish') and tau / "тау", meaning (lit. 'mountain') — the name of always turning blue, as if in a deep haze of mountains, thus "Blueish Mountain/Smoky-Blue Mountain" in English. That is how from ancient times Kazakhs were calling the highest mountain in Akmola Region "Mount Kokshe" (947 m), located 60 miles away from the city. Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, Kazakhstan declared its independence on 16 December 1991 (Kazakhstan Independence Day), and on 7 October 1993, by the Resolution of the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the Republic of Kazakhstan, the city of Kokchetav (Russian: Кокчета́в, IPA: [koktɕɪˈtav]) was renamed to the more Kazakh sounding Kokshetau as part of the government's campaign to apply Kazakh names to cities, but the city's airport still retains KOV as its IATA code. In Russian it became known as Kokshetau. Historically, several names in various languages have identified Kokshetau. Stanitsa Kokchetavskaya (1827–1868; which is a romanized back-transliteration from Russian name in Cyrillic: стани́ца Кокчетавская; Kazakh: Көкшетау бекінісі, lit. 'The village of Kokshetau') Kokchetav (1868–1993; in publications dating from the Soviet period, the city name was occasionally spelled in English as "Kokchetav", which is a back-transliteration from post-revolution Russian name in Cyrillic: Кокчета́в, Russian name in Cyrillic script (1868-1918): Кокчѣтавъ; Kazakh name in Yañalif script (1929-1940): Kɵkşetau, Kazakh name in Cyrillic script (after 1940): Көкшетау) Kokshetau (since 1993; which is a romanized back-transliteration from Russian name in Cyrillic: Кокшета́у; Kazakh name in Cyrillic script: Көкшетау, Kazakh name in Latin script (new version before 2021): Kókshetaý, Kazakh name in Latin script (latest version of the Kazakh Latin alphabet after 2021): Kökşetau) Kokshetau is located in the country of Kazakhstan and lies in the northern portion of Akmola Region. The city is located on the border of the West Siberian Plain, on the southeastern shore of Lake Kopa, at an altitude of 234 meters above sea level, in the Kokshetau Mountains, north part of the Kokshetau Hills, the foothills of which surround the city from the south and west. It covers an area of 234 km2 (90 sq mi). It is located about 300 kilometres (190 mi) north-west of the national capital of Astana. The city lay along low hills and by a kidney-shaped lake. There are numerous hills in the vicinity of the city (Bukpa Hill). The city is located in the flat part of the interfluve of the Kylshakty river, flowing in the eastern part of the city, and the Shagalaly river, flowing from the western side of the city. The city has several parks and gardens. Also, within the city limits can be found small forests, mostly consisting of birches and pine plantations. The Kokshetau area is known for its two national parks, Burabay and Kokshetau. Nearby places The village of Krasny Yar lies adjoined directly to the west of Kokshetau, on the bank of the River Shagalaly. Also contiguous with Kokshetau, directly to the east, with no natural border, is the smaller village of Stantsyonny. Nearby cities Petropavl Astana Ekibastuz Omsk (Russia) Kostanay Rudny Shchuchinsk Karaganda Kurgan (Russia) Tyumen (Russia) Nearby towns Atbasar Arkalyk Tara (Russia) Taiynsha Akkol Derzhavinsk Ereymentau Esil Ishim (Russia) Makinsk Stepnyak Stepnogorsk Nearby villages Krasny Yar Stantsyonny Kyzylzhulduz Kyzyltan Kaindy Akkol (Zerendi District) Kishkenekol Astrakhanka Balkashino Shortandy Zerendi Zhaksy The time offset from the UTC used by Kokshetau is 5 hours after UTC, or UTC+5:00 (Kazakhstan Time). This is also used by all of Kazakhstan. This time apply throughout the year as Kazakhstan does not observe Daylight saving time (DST). According to the Köppen climate classification, Kokshetau lies in a cold semi-arid climate zone (Köppen climate classification: BSk) with extreme continental influences. The city has an extreme continental climate with long, very cold, frigid, snowy, dry winters and warm, dry, sunny summers (featuring occasional brief rain showers). Winter is frosty and long (more than 5 months). In spring, prevails clear and dry weather, with a large number of sunny days. Autumn begins in August or September, and the weather is observed from clear at the beginning of the season, to cloudy in October–November. The average annual temperature in Kokshetau is 3.6 °C (38.5 °F). Summer temperatures occasionally reach 35 °C (95 °F) while −30 to −35 °C (−22 to −31 °F) is not unusual between mid-December and early March. The warmest month is July with daily mean temperature near 20.5 °C (68.9 °F), and the coldest month is January, with a daily mean of −14 °C (7 °F). Snow and ice are dominant during the winter season. July is the wettest month (averaging 68.5 mm (2.7 in) of precipitation) while March is the driest (averaging 10.5 mm (0.4 in) of precipitation). Yearly precipitation amounts to 313 mm (12.3 in). Typically, the city's Lake Kopa and rivers of Kylshakty and Shagalaly are frozen over between the second week of November and the beginning of April. Average January temperature: −14 °C (7 °F) Average July temperature: +20.5 °C (68.9 °F) Average annual precipitation: 176 mm (7 in) to 512.5 mm (20 in) Kokshetau is the capital (administrative centre) of the Akmola Region (oblys, county, area). Kokshetau city administration (Kazakh: Kökşetau qalasy äkımdıgı, Russian: Городская администрация Кокшетау) (area of 425 km2 [164 sq mi]), with a population of roughly 165 153 residents, includes one settlement administration and the Krasnoyarsk rural district, which includes two rural settlements, served by the city public transport system. Kokshetau was the centre of a region covering seventy-eight thousand square kilometres of the Virgin Lands; it administered 15 agricultural districts and connected 4 other towns, 116 state farms, and 25 collective farms, and that region encompassed a population of more than 600,000. Kokshetau is divided into seven administrative districts (Kazakh: аудандар). Listed alphabetically Aul Beybitshilik Bostandyk Bukpa Kokshe Sary-Arka Zhaylau Traditionally, Kokshetau was divided into seventeen administrative microdistricts (Kazakh: шағын аудандар) that today have no administrative function. These are administrative units that possess no independent governance structures. They are used for management of utilities and publicly owned housing. Kokshetau includes the following microdistricts: The city administration and Kokshetau City Mäslihat is in the Kokshetau Akimat building on Mukhtar Auezov Street. Kokshetau City Mäslihat is a representative body of the city, elected every four years and holds its sessions in Kokshetau Akimat. The Mayor of Kokshetau is Amanat Party member Bauyrzhan Gaisa. Local government The bodies of local self-government of Kokshetau are: Kokshetau City Mäslihat, a representative body. Consisting of 17 deputies for four years. Mayor of Kokshetau, head of the Kokshetau City Administration manages the administration on the principles of unity of command. Most key buildings of the regional government are along Abai Street and Mukhtar Auezov Street. Abai Street is named after a Kazakh poet, composer and Hanafi Maturidi theologian philosopher Abai Qunanbaiuly. On the eastern side of Abai Street on Abylai Khan Square sits the Akmola Regional Akimat, in a modern cream and brown-toned building. Local government The bodies of local self-government of Akmola region are: Akmola Regional Mäslihat (parliament of Akmola Region), a representative body. Consisting of 32 deputies for five years. Administrative buildings in Kokshetau The seat of Kokshetau City Administration and Kokshetau City Mäslihat on Mukhtar Auezov Street The Akim (Kazakh: әкім, äkım) of Kokshetau is the chief authority in the city of Kokshetau. The position was established in 1992. The mayor is responsible for the administration of government services, the composition of councils and committees overseeing Kokshetau City Administration departments and serves as the chairperson for the meeting of the Kokshetau City Mäslihat. The mayor also functions to help devise long-term development plans in consultation with other stakeholders and bodies to improve the condition, livability, and sustainability of the city. The city council (Kokshetau City Mäslihat) of Kokshetau is made up of 17 representatives that are elected every four years. The Kokshetau City Mäslihat governs the city alongside the Akim (Mayor). The 2023 local government elections for Kokshetau City Mäslihat in Kokshetau yielded the following results: Historical affiliations Omsk Oblast 1827–1838 ∟ part of the Russian Empire Border control of the Siberian Kirghiz 1838–1854 ∟ part of the Russian Empire Siberian Kirghiz Oblast 1854–1868 ∟ part of the Russian Empire Akmolinsk Oblast 1868–1917 ∟ part of the Russian Empire Alash Autonomy 1917–1918 The Ufa Directory 1918–1918 Russian Government 1918–1919 Kirghiz Territory 1919–1920 ∟ part of the Russian SFSR Kirghiz ASSR 1920–1922 ∟ autonomous part of the Russian SFSR Kirghiz ASSR 1922–1925 ∟ part of the Russian SFSR in the USSR Kazakh ASSR 1925–1936 ∟ part of the Russian SFSR in the USSR Soviet Kazakhstan 1936–1991 ∟ constituent republic of the Soviet Union  Kazakhstan 1991–present Kokshetau past incorporates all the main stages and turning points of the history of Kazakhstan. For many centuries, nomadic Kazakh tribes lived on the territory of the former Kokshetau Region. The territory of Kokshetau was part of the Middle Horde, the clans of the tribal union of the Argyns that occupied vast regions of Northern and Central Kazakhstan. In the 18th – 19th centuries, the headquarters of famous khans, such as Abylai Khan, Kasym Khan, Kenesary Khan, were located on the land of Kokshetau Region. As Russia's hand stretched southwards, Kokshetau was initially founded on 29 April 1824 as an administrative outpost at the foot of the southern side of Mount Kokshe on the shores of Lake Ulken Shabakty. The Middle Horde signed treaties of protection with Russia. The local population strongly opposed the fact that the new settlement was placed in the chosen place. In the summer of 1827, the district order was transferred to the new place where the city of Kokshetau is now located. The settlement began to be called Kokchetav. The construction of the settlement began at the foot of Bukpa Hill, on the southern shores of Lake Kopa, and a picket was set up to protect the district order. By the middle of 19th-century, the population of the settlement was significantly increasing due to the migration of the peasants from Russia (Povolzhye) and Ukraine who were driven to migrate by starvation and poverty to farm the steppe. In 1868, when the Akmolinsk Oblast was formed, Kokshetau became a district city in this region, which further developed as a center of agricultural and animal husbandry and as a resort town. In 1876, the city lost its military significance. The line and fortress were abolished. In 1895, Kokshetau was granted city status. By that time the population in the town was above 5 thousand people. In 1928, Kokshetau District was divided into several boroughs and until 1944 Kokshetau's territory was part of Karaganda Region and later part of North Kazakhstan Region. On 16 March 1944, according to the Decree of the Presidium of Supreme Soviet of Kazakh SSR, Kokshetau became the administrative center of the newly created Kokchetav Oblast. Relatively rapid growth and development of Kokshetau took place during the years of development of virgin lands, especially in the second half of the 1950s. On 3 May 1997, Kokshetau Oblast was abolished, the city was deprived of the status of a regional center. On 8 April 1999, after Akmola and North Kazakhstan regions were reorganized, Kokshetau became the center of Akmola Region. A 19th-century panorama view looking into the city of Kokshetau before rebuilding as seen from the Bukpa Hill Lookout. The Lake Kopa is visible to the left, and the St George's Church to the right. General plan of Kokchetav stanitsa, 19th century Map of Kokchetav uezd in the late 19th century A 19th-century view of the city An 1880 image of Bukpa Hill in the background Market Square (modern-day Abylai Khan Square) in the late 19th early 20th century 1916: Military hospital in Kokchetav Kokshetau is the eighteenth-largest city in Kazakhstan. Kokshetau ranks fourth in terms of population in Northern Kazakhstan, ranking after Pavlodar, Kostanay and Petropavl. Residents of Kokshetau are referred to as "көкшетаулықтар" (kökşetaulyqtar) in Kazakh and "кокшета́уцы" (kokshetautsy) in Russian. Histogram of population evolution of Kokshetau from 1959. Note: 2020 and 2018 are population estimates; 1897 is the Russian Imperial Census; 1959, 1970, 1979 and 1989 are the Soviet Census. Throughout its history Kokshetau has been a city of many languages. The state and official language in Kokshetau, as in all Kazakhstan, is the Kazakh language. Kazakh is one of the Turkic languages and the mother tongue of Kazakhs living in Kokshetau. Despite Kokshetau's Kazakh majority, Russian language is the most-widely spoken native language in the city, although Kazakh is understood as well. Russian language is used as official language and as one of mediums of instruction and media administration. Russian is used in theaters and newspapers from Kokshetau. It is also common to find the Kazakh being spoken in the city, mainly by Kazakhs and other Turkic people, while many elderly people speak Kazakh or Russian, depending on their upbringing. Russians, Ukrainians, some Tatars, Germans, Poles, Ingush, Belarusians, Koreans, Azerbaijanis, Armenians, Bashkirs, Moldovans, Mari in Kokshetau speak Russian. Substantial numbers of people also use Shala Kazakh (a Russo-Kazakh mixed language) in their everyday lives. Kokshetau is an ethnically and culturally diverse city. It has changed its demographics, nowadays having more ethnic Kazakhs in a city that formerly had a Slavic majority. It is the only regional center in Northern Kazakhstan where Kazakhs make up the majority. As of January 2022, the population of Kokshetau is 150,649, and the extended urbanized area has 165,153 inhabitants. Historically, Kokshetau was ethnically diverse. As of the 2020 Census, ethnic Kazakhs made up (~58%) of the city population, representing an increase from 36% in 1999. The ethnic makeup of the city's population as of year 2020 was: In 1989, Kokshetau had a population of 136,757. The ethnic mix was about 18.5% Kazakh, 54.5% Russian and 27.0% other ethnic groups. Kazakh and Russian are both the main spoken languages. Kokshetau is one of the most religiously diverse cities of Kazakhstan with more than 56.65 per cent of its population adhering to Islam. Religious buildings are scattered around the city. Islam (primarily Sunni Islam) is the predominant religion within Kokshetau, with 56.65% of residents identifying as Muslims in the 2009 Census. There were 83,436 Muslims reported in the 2009 census. Kokshetau's first Mosque was established by Ablay (Abilkhair) Gabbas in 1846. Kokshetau has a mosque constructed in the beginning of the 20th century. A new mosque for 1,200 people named after Nauan Hazrat opened in 2015. Mosques: Nauan Hazrat Mosque (capacity 1,200—1,400), located at the corner of Momishuly and Auelbekov streets. It is the largest mosque in Akmola Region. Zhakiya Kazhi Mosque, located on the Aulbekova Street. Kokshetau has a Russian Orthodox Church temple of Archangel Michael. The Kokshetau and Akmola diocese is located in the Church of the Resurrection in the city. Russian Orthodox churches: Church of the Resurrection, Kokshetau (capacity 1,500), (ROC). It is located on the new embankment of Lake Kopa. The church was built in the traditions of Russian church architecture of the mid-XIX century. Church of the Holy Archangel Michael, Kokshetau, (ROC) St George's Church, Kokshetau. Kokshetau's first Christian Church. Other religions practiced are Christianity (primarily Roman Catholicism, and Protestantism). Christianity is Kokshetau's second largest religion. There were 60,168 Christians reported in the 2009 census. Much of Kokshetau's civic life and civil society is secular in the sense that it has no religious character. In 1997, a Roman Catholic Church was built in neo-Gothic style using red bricks. Roman Catholic churches: Church of St. Anthony of Padua, Kokshetau Kokshetau is the major cultural center of Akmola Region. Culture in Kokshetau, first developed during the period of Russian Empire, grew under the Soviet Union, which established many of the first cultural institutions of the city. Now it has 2 theatres and 5 museums. There is 1 cinema and 12 libraries. The city is full of clubs, restaurants, and bars. As the capital of Akmola Region, Kokshetau is a melting pot of cultures from all ethnic groups of the region. Though Kazakh people are an indigenous community of Kokshetau, the city's culture represents many languages and ethnic groups, supports differences regarding religion, traditions and linguistics, rather than any single and dominant culture. Kokshetau has a strong theater culture. Kokshetau is home to many theatre groups, mainly operating under the support of the ministry of culture. Theatre halls in the city organize several shows and performances throughout the year. Kokshetau's major theaters are: From the central Abylai Khan Square, pedestrianised Kanysh Satbayev Street runs south a couple of blocks to the Palace of Culture (Kazakh: Mädeniet Saraiy; opened in 1977), which also incorporates Akmola Regional Russian Drama Theater, and it is quite popular among locals. Akmola Regional Kazakh Music and Drama Theatre named after Shahhmet Kussainov (opened in 1996) is the biggest theatre in Kokshetau and is popular among Kazakh speaking people. Children's puppet theater "Altyn Saka" (opened in 2022) The city organises many public celebrations that greatly attract the locals as well as the visitors. "Dombra Fest" "Sabantuy" (annual) "Festival of Kazakh culture" (annual). It is the most widely celebrated festival among Kazakhs. "Bir shanyrak astynda" "Russian (Russkaya) Pesnya" Akmola Regional Philharmonic named after Ükılı Ybyrai was founded in 1956. Kokshetau is home to several of Akmola Region's most important museums. Kokshetau has several museums dedicated to Akmola Region's history and culture. Museums in the city include: Akmola Regional Museum of History and Local Lore (opened in 1920) offers a display of minerals and semi-precious stones in the foyer, and rooms on the ground floor devoted to palaeontology and to World War II, the latter focused on displays related to local war heroes. It is the largest museum in Kokshetau. Kokshetau City History Museum (KCHM; opened as Valerian Kuybyshev’s Memorial Museum in 1949), located at the a street on a hillside. The wooden house of the museum is where Valerian Kuybyshev, one of the Revolution's most famous heroes, had grown up. The house is surrounded by trees, with a stable or coach-house at the back and a particular memorial tree planted by his mother in 1903 in memory of Valerian's brother, accidentally shot and killed by a friend. This little museum initially was dedicated to a really tough revolutionary. As a boy Valerian Kuybyshev had started taking part in the anti-tsarist movement and then in the days of the Bolshevik struggle had led troops against the White Guards in the Civil War, he was one of those revolutionaries in the true spirit of the Revolution. There were also Amankeldı İmanov and Alibi Dzhangildin who are national heroes of the Central Asian uprising in 1916. The city's museum offers a view of Kokshetau's history through old maps and photos. Museum of Mercy and Courage (opened in 1982) Biographical museums: Museum of the Hero of the Soviet Union Malik Gabdullin (opened in 1993), located at the corner of Auelbekov and Nazarbayev streets, on the eastern side of the town centre, the modern-looking two-storey wooden building. Malik Gabdullin was born in 1915, in a village 30 km away from Kokshetau. When he was made a Hero of the Soviet Union in 1943, the authorities constructed for his family a larger and nicer wooden house adjacent to this, but his pious father donated the wood from this building to efforts to reconstruct the Kokshetau Mosque, when the latter was damaged by fire in 1956. Literature museums: Museum of Literature and Art (opened in 1989) The first film screening in the city of Kokchetav (now Kokshetau) took place in 1910. Cinema Alem (formerly known as the Druzhba Cinema; it was built in 1963, and as of 2023 was still being used as a cinema). It is located in Independence Square and is currently the largest cinema in the city. The city has 12 libraries. In addition to the libraries affiliated with the various universities and schools, the Akmola Regional Universal Scientific Library is a major research library. There are several archives in Kokshetau. Akmola Regional Universal Scientific Library (ARUSL) named after Magzhan Zhumabayev. ARUSL was inaugurated in 1946. It is Akmola Region's main academic library and scientific information centre. The Kokshetau State University library contains over 735,000 units of educational and scientific literature and a rare fund, which consists of 104 copies of printed works published in the 19th century in Kazakh, Russian, German and English languages, making it one of the largest libraries in all of Akmola Region. Kokshetau was selected as a Kazakhstan Capital of Culture for 2021. Kokshetau Palace of Culture Palace of Culture «Dostar» Palace of Childhood and Youth «Bolashak Sarayi» Kokshetau Wedding Palace, a civil registry building. Nauan Hazrat Mausoleum. The construction of the mausoleum began in 2020. It was built around the grave of the famous religious figure Nauryzbay Talasuly. It is located near the old Muslim cemetery. This site was added to the list of objects of historical and cultural heritage of Akmola Region, as well as the list of 100 sacred places of Kazakhstan. There are 5 cemeteries in Kokshetau. Old Cossack cemetery. It is located at the area of Barmashino where a monument to a Soviet soldier is situated. The mass grave of Soviet officers and soldiers who died in local hospitals is also located there. Old Orthodox cemetery. The cemetery was closed to new burials in the 1969. Old Muslim cemetery Muslim cemetery (Second Cemetery) Christian cemetery (Third Cemetery) The statue of Shoqan Walikhanov who had been a traveller, scientist, geographer, and one of the first Kazakh democrat, a tall handsome figure in a granite officer's greatcoat. He had been an officer in the tsar's army and was supposed to be a descendant of Genghis Khan himself, no less. His grandfather Abylai Khan had been called the last Khan of the Kazakh Khanate. On the west side of the Abylai Khan Square there is a statue of Abylai Khan, depicted squatting regally, his right hand on his hip in a display of relaxed strength. Behind the Kazakh ruler rises a very tall stalk of wheat, on the tip of which a bird is flying. In the central park there is also a statue of Vladimir Lenin, standing next to a simple Soviet monument to the Kazakhstnis killed in the Civil War; it was removed from the central square. A bust of Talgat Bigeldinov, a pilot who notched up 305 combat missions, shot down seven enemy aircraft and was twice made Hero of the Soviet Union, is followed by a series of polished stones inscribed with he names of the Hero Cities of the Soviet Union. These run for two blocks, ending up at the War Memorial. A young flag-bearing soldier kneels before an eternal flame. Behind him rises peculiar silvery sculpture of a star with a point missing. The portraits of local war heroes are presented on the surrounding wall, in alphabetical order, starting with Talgat Bigeldinov. In the centre of the city, just in front of the Akmola Regional Museum of History and Local Lore, an inscription on a wall-like monument records a decree of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR from 1958, awarding Kokshetau Oblast the Order of Lenin by virtue of its success in surpassing the yearly plan for bread production. There is also a statue of a young, rathe studently-looking Valerian Kuybyshev, a Bolshevik military commander during the Civil War and key figure behind the first Five-Year Plan, who gave his name to the city of Samara during the Soviet period. In autumn 1941, the Podolskiy Sewing Machines Plant, two factories from the city of Ordzhonikidze and military hospitals were evacuated to Kokshetau. Kokshetau has traditionally been an important commercial center in northern Kazakhstan, but after the collapse of the Soviet Union most of the old manufacturing lines, whose markets included the entire Soviet Union, either stopped working or had to greatly reduce their operations. The collapse of the Soviet Union also meant the collapse of Kazakhstan's industrial base. Nevertheless, the city continues to be an important regional center for the Akmola Region, acting as a commercial hub for the surrounding areas in the region. In recent years, the city has started attracting more investment from various corporations. Kokshetau Oblast had really started developing as the machine factories and other industries grew, and the numerous rest homes, sanatoria, and holiday spots were set up. From Ekibastuz to Kokshetau runs an overhead power line designed for a transmission voltage of 1,150 kV, the Ekibastuz-Kokshetau powerline. Kokshetau's retail business is growing with several newly built malls and shopping centres. Major industrial employers of Kokshetau include: Altyntau Kokshetau – gold mining enterprise. The site comprises a gold deposit and the Gold Recovery Plant commissioned in 2009. The innovative high-tech equipment manufactured in Canada, Australia, USA, Sweden, Finland, Germany, Italy and Russia is installed at the plant. Over the last eight years of operation, the output increased 2.5 times and metal recovery increased by one fifth hitting 75% in 2019. Tynys – the production of medical products, weighing equipment, water meters, aircraft units and assemblies, polyethylene pipes. KamAZ-Engineering – machine-building plant. Kokshetau Mineral Waters – TURAN water is bottled at Kokshetau Mineral Waters plant using KHS equipment. TURAN water is produced from Kuskol water deposit located in an ecologically pristine area near Kokshetau. The deposit is subject to constant government control, and the water well is guarded 24/7. Food factories supply Kokshetau and Akmola Region with sausages, semi-finished meat products, bread, dairy products, and confectionery. The city also has a new ceramic brick factory. Kokshetau is policed by Police Department of the Akmola Region (a territorial police force) whose headquarters are in the city. Fire services in Kokshetau are provided by Department of Emergency Situations of the Akmola Region. Domestic waste services in Kokshetau are provided by Kokshe Tazalyk and EcoGroup 2020 Services under contract. Kokshetau has an extensive network of municipal and regional health facilities. Kokshetau is a major healthcare and medical service centre in Akmola Region. During the war five evacuated hospitals were places on the territory of North-Kazakhstan region, including 3 hospitals in Kokshetau. Several hospitals of Kokshetau, refurbished with modern technologies, provide healthcare and conduct medical research. Local hospitals include the Avicenna Medical Centre, Viamedis Rehabilitation Centre among many others. Temporary hospitals were established and vaccines were available in all major hospitals during the 2020-2021 COVID-19 pandemic. Private medical institutions also operate in the city. The official opening of the Kokshetau city telephone network took place on 1878. As of 2005, the total capacity of the telephone network in Kokshetau was about 42,634 numbers. The city has several mobile operators (Kcell/Altel, Tele2 Kazakhstan, Beeline). In addition to the mobile network providers, Kazakhtelecom provides internet services. Kazpost is the official national postal operator of Kazakhstan. Based in Kokshetau, it currently operates through 10 postal offices in city. Kokshetau is the center of television and radio broadcasting in Akmola Region. Many public and private TV and radio channels operate in Kokshetau. Media in Kokshetau covers print media, newspapers, publisher, broadcast, local TV stations, and Internet, with some media having influence over the region. All major Kazakhstani newspapers are active in Kokshetau. The city has a developed telecommunications system. Kokshetau's first newspaper was the weekly Tselinnyy kray, established in 1920, which would change its name to the Akmolinskaya Pravda in 1992. In the city, there are some popular urban newspapers. Akmolinskaya Pravda, Stepnoy mayak and Kokshetau are Russian-language media headquartered in the city. Akmolinskaya Pravda is the oldest newspaper of the city. Regional socio-political newspaper "Akmolinskaya Pravda" is a long-running daily local paper, with local and regional coverage. Republican newspaper "Bukpa" Regional newspaper "Arka Azhary" Regional newspaper "Stepnoy mayak" Kokshetau television networks: Local television news is covered by TV channel Kazakhstan–Kokshetau. It is main city channel. The channel tells about the events of social, cultural, economic life, the activities of scientific and educational institutions of the city. Balapan Cartoon Network Channel One Eurasia Channel 31 Disney Channel Euronews Gakku TV Khabar 24 MTV Nickelodeon Qazsport Kokshetau radio stations: "Kazakh Radio": 101.0 FM "Russian Radio Asia": 102.0 FM "Autoradio Kazakhstan": 102.5 FM "Shalkar Radio": 103.7 FM "Europe Plus Kazakhstan": 104.2 FM "Energy FM": 104.8 FM "Radio NS": 105.7 FM "Zhuldyz FM": 106.1 FM "Radio Dacha": 106.5 FM "People's Radio": 107.0 FM "Tengri FM": 107.6 FM Kokshetau City Administration (in English) (in Kazakh) (in Russian) Kokshetau - Kazakhstan (in Kazakh) (in Russian) Aqmola News (in Kazakh) (in Russian) Akmolinskaya Pravda (in Russian) Main entrance to Kokshetau Railway Station, designed by V. Utebekov as viewed from vokzal alañy, 1992 Façade of terminal building and apron area of the Kokshetau Airport (IATA/ICAO: KOV/UACK) near Akkol A full cloverleaf interchange near Kokshetau Partly due to its location, Kokshetau is a major transport hub on the highway and rail networks. Kokshetau has a strong public-transport system. The city transport in Kokshetau consists of a network of buses, minibuses (marshrutka; which are GAZelle light commercial vehicles) and taxis that are available 24 hours a day. Public transport in Kokshetau is heavily privatized and mostly handled by private operators. The first bus services in Kokshetau were introduced in 1939. Bus timetables and detailed schematic map of the route are at every stop. Distances between stops are about 300–500 meters. Buses in the city cost ₸80-₸120. Buses, mostly Yutong, LiAZ and MAZ buses, are the most common and popular mode of transport in the city. In the square between the bus and railway stations gather a range of taxis and minibuses offering to take you to Astana or Petropavl. In Kokshetau taxis are available at any time of the day or night. Ride-sharing services such as Yandex Taxi and inDrive are available in the city via mobile apps. Taxi fare is from 400 to 2500 tenge, depending on the distance from the city center and the results of negotiations with the driver. The city is an important railroad hub in the northern part of Kazakhstan. Kokshetau Railway station is served by the Kazakhstan Railways, which links Petropavl to Almaty. The first train pulled into the Kokshetau Railway station on 2 June 1922. Railways are Kokshetau's one of the main modes of intracity and suburban transportation. Kazakhstan Railways (who manage the station) provide freight and passenger traffic to and from Kokshetau. There are two railway stations in the city: Kokshetau-1 and Kokshetau-2. The main railway station Kokshetau-1 station is located 1.3 km (0.81 mi) north-east from the centre of Kokshetau and includes a main building (built in 1981) and some other technical buildings. Kokshetau-1 station is the city's main station and a major stop for numerous passenger trains traveling between Petropavl and the other regions of Kazakhstan each day. The popular Tulpar-Talgo service to Almaty takes sixteen hours. It sits at the eastern end of the long Abai Qunanbaiuly Street, Kokshetau's central thoroughfare. A tall concrete clock tower guides you to it. Among the trains passing Kokshetau-1 station are the daily services between Almaty and Petropavl, Kyzylorda and Petropavl, and Karaganda and Kostanay. There are also less frequent trains passing northwards on to various Russian destinations, including Moscow, Yekaterinburg and Omsk, and local electric train services to Ereymentau and Astana. Kokshetau Central Bus Terminal (Kökşetau avtobeketı), which opened in 1981, serves the city of Kokshetau. The bus station is on the Vernadsky Street 8 across the road from Kokshetau Railway Station. It links the city with the villages in Akmola Region and other cities in Kazakhstan and the neighboring countries. Frequent schedules of bus routes connect Kokshetau to Astana, Petropavl, Zerenda, Burabay, Karaganda, Pavlodar, Kostanay, Omsk, Yekaterinburg, Tobolsk, Tyumen and Kurgan. Many of these are cross-country services operating from north to south, for which Kokshetau provides interchange facilities. Kokshetau and surrounding communities are served by one commercial international airport: Kokshetau International Airport (IATA: KOV, ICAO: UACK), which is the seventeenth-busiest airport (2019) by passenger traffic in Kazakhstan. It is located 12.5 km (7.8 mi) north-east from the centre of city, on the route to Omsk, and used to be the headquarters of now-defunct Air Kokshetau. The airport has a capacity of handling 200 passengers per hour. The Kokshetau International Airport, which opened in 1945, was significantly upgraded in 2013 with a new 2850-metre runway capable of accommodating all aircraft types without any restrictions. In 2013, the airport received its first scheduled flight after the renovation to Moscow, Russia. The airport can be reached by car, public transport, or taxi. Seasonal flights to Frankfurt am Main, were available in 2004 but have been cancelled since. It serves mostly domestic flights. SCAT Airlines fly to and from Aktau and Shymkent as well as Qazaq Air operates two weekly flights to Almaty. The former largest carrier of the Kokshetau Airport — Air Kokshetau — is not serving any regular destinations as of 2021. There are a number of municipal, regional and republican roads that serve Kokshetau. The main roads to/from Kokshetau are: Republican roads (National Highways) The city is served by the A1, which begins in Petropavl (189 km [117 mi]) and leads to Astana (292 km [181 mi]) passing Kokshetau, Shchuchinsk and Makinsk. European route intersect in Kokshetau; The A13 (Omsk–Kokshetau road), which connects Kokshetau to Omsk (Russia). Kokshetau is located a couple of hours' drive south of Russia's Siberian border; Other major roads passing through Kokshetau include: Regional roads (Regional Highways) The R11 highway connects Kokshetau to Saumalkol and Kostanay (via the M36); The R12 highway connects Kokshetau to Zerendi and Atbasar There are seven Kylshakty bridges and dozens of grade-separated intersections in the city. Historical building (1904) in the centre of Kokshetau. Panorama to the historical center of Kokshetau. Soviet-style residential area buildings in Kokshetau. The city centres on a large and bare Abylai Khan Square, at the intersection of Abai Qunanbaiuly and Kanysh Satbayev streets. Independence Square. It is the center of Kokshetau. West of the centre many attractive single-storey log-built houses survive, usually featuring painted wooden shutters. A couple of particularly fine examples, both enjoying official recognition as historical monuments, are the whitewashed wooden cottage at 22 Kenesary Khan Kasymuly Street, at the corner of Abai Qunanbaiuly Street, with intricate carving at the base of the roof, and the cottage at 33 Felix Dzerzhinsky Street. The latter sits opposite a small Kokshetau City History Museum (32 Kanay-bi Street), itself housed in a single-storey wooden building. The city is full of numerous buildings and monuments that reflect its rich and diverse history. The architecture of Kokshetau has been shaped through its history by the progression of historical eras. Many buildings of Kokshetau are ranged from a different number of architectural styles. The architecture of the city dates back to 19th century, the city had numerous wooden buildings with elaborate decor. Kokshetau is the home of a unique architectural tradition and community with number of historical buildings in city. There are a number of two-story wooden houses in the city built mostly in the middle of the 20th century as temporary habitations. Among other notable buildings are the mansions of the merchant Andrei Vasilievich Sokolov (late of the 19th century - beginning of the 20th century), the Akmola Regional Museum of History and Local Lore (beginning of the 20th century). Industrialization in Kokshetau started in the late 1920s. The city's 3,000-worker Soviet construction trust built some of the large, gray, faceless apartment buildings that were so typical of Soviet society and still stand, often in disrepair, today. The apartments housed the trust's own construction workers, among others, in units of one to three rooms. The city's apartment houses are called “Khrushchyovka” and “Stalinka” due to the peculiarities of architectural approaches in their construction. When the Iron Curtain was falling, but the Soviet Union still was intact, five citizens from the city paid a visit to Waukesha. Among them was then mayor of the city, Askar Khassen, who took the idea of building more single homes in Kokshetau, as comfortable as the homes in the US. On the hilly outskirts of Kokshetau, someone may find the fingerprint of Waukesha County. There are big, expensive, single-family homes. They're inching up the hills. In Kokshetau, the locals have a name for this high-priced neighborhood of single-family homes, "Small America" or "Khassen's Cottages". Prominently located at the opening of this housing development are tall brick pillars, a sign outlining location of lots, and a decorative brick wall, all reminiscent of the gated entries seen in some Waukesha County subdivisions. When the Soviet Union crumbled and Kazakhstan became an independent country in 1991, the city's construction trust-turned-business began to put a face on their buildings. One of the first schools in the city. Kokshetau is a major educational centre in Akmola Region. Kokshetau's education system includes institutions of all grades and conditions: preschool, general, special (correctional), and vocational (secondary and higher education), as well as others. Kokshetau is a regional centre of education and has a large number of educational establishments, including universities, professional colleges and gymnasiums (high schools). Primary and secondary schools in Kokshetau include state-run and private institutions. Primary and secondary education system of Kokshetau includes: 48 nurseries, 27 of which are municipal, 4 mini-centers - 3 state and 1 private, 17 private kindergartens 24 (secondary education) schools, including 6 lyceums and 6 gymnasiums 16 colleges 1 center for the correctional development of children "Meyirim" 5 institutions of additional education for children (the center for extracurricular activities "Aulet", the State Enterprise "Children's Music School", the State Enterprise "Children's Art School" founded in 1979, the educational enterprise of labor training, the center for the development of gifted children "Kokshetau Daryny") Additionally, there are evening schools for adults and specialist technical schools. Some of the top high schools are: Kokshetau Nazarbayev Intellectual School of Physics and Mathematics (NIS Kokshetau PhM) was established in 2009, as a branch of the Nazarbayev Intellectual Schools (NIS), a network of schools in Kazakhstan. Kokshetau Bilim-Innovation Public Lyceum (former “Kazakh-Turkish Lyceum”) for gifted children. Kokshetau higher medical college trains intermediate level specialists in eight specialisations. Kokshetau is home to most of Akmola Region's major universities. The city is currently home to the following state higher educational institutions that are accredited and licensed to operate in the Republic of Kazakhstan, with more than 12,000 students: Kokshetau State University (which is named after Shokan Ualikhanov), established 1962 — offers opportunities to study undergraduate, graduate and PhD programs in most fields. It is the biggest university in Kokshetau with 499 academic staff. The university has over 7,400 students, who have a choice of eight faculties. The main university building located in the city center. Since 2018, a medical faculty has been opened at Kokshetau State University with 740 students, 200 of whom receive grants from the akim (50 grants are allocated annually). The Kokshetau University (named after Abay Myrzakhmet). It was founded in 2000. The largest private higher educational institution in Kokshetau. Kokshetau Technical Institute of the Ministry of Emergency Situations of the Republic of Kazakhstan Kokshetau Academy of Economics and Management A number of other non-state-funded institutions for further education operate in the city. Okzhetpes Stadium is an outdoor stadium that is home to the FC Okzhetpes, 2005. Sport has always been important in Kokshetau. The city has a long sporting heritage. Kokshetau is a center of Akmola Region sports. A number of well-known athletes, both world and Olympics champions, are associated with the city. Football and ice hockey are by far the most popular sports in the city. Kokshetau has many parks that provide excellent pitches for impromptu games. The city is home to the FC Okzhetpes football club, based in the Okzhetpes Stadium, and which has a capacity of 4,500, which participates in the Kazakhstan Premier League, the top division of football in Kazakhstan. In 2015 and 2018, they finished first place in the Kazakhstan First Division. Burabay Sports Complex serves as home arena to the ice hockey club Arlan Kokshetau, which competes in the Kazakhstan Hockey Championship. Arlan Kokshetau hockey players were the champions of Kazakhstan in the season 2017/2018. Arlan Kokshetau players also became the first team from Kazakhstan to win IIHF Continental Cup in the season 2018/2019. The city has an ice rink for winter sports. Several sports clubs are active in the city: The BC Sinegorie of the Kazakhstan Basketball League is the only professional basketball team in Kokshetau. It was founded in 2014 and its home arena is the Triatlon Sport Complex. Okzhetpes Stadium – stadium with capacity 4,500, home ground for FC Okzhetpes Burabay Sport Complex – sport complex, capacity 3,000. Home to Arlan Kokshetau Ice arena for winter sports – indoor sporting arena. Professional sports teams based in Kokshetau include: The hotels in the city have good occupancy year round due to a lot of commuters who travel to work and meetings in Kokshetau. Kokshetau Airport has also conducted renovation projects. The largest hotel of the city is the Dostyk Hotel. The Kokshetau Hotel is located at the Abylai Khan Square at the centre of Kokshetau, while the Green Which Hotel Kokshetau is located near the Amanat Party building. The location of Kokshetau itself, is an inspiring factor for the foreigners to visit the city in order to enjoy the view of the Mount Kokshe. Kokshetau is home to Akmola Region's largest shopping mall, RIO, opened in 2009, which is a major regional shopping destination within a radius of 150 kilometers from Kokshetau and with a floorspace of 252,952 sq ft (23,500.0 m2). Many renowned brands have a presence at the centre including LC Waikiki, Beeline Kazakhstan, Miniso, Koton and Detsky Mir. Attracting over 800,000 visitors a year, the centre's retail areas contain shops (including eateries) from chain stores up to high-end boutiques. The centre has over 900 parking spaces. Local residents also tend to shop at traditional bazaars: Ortalyk Bazaar, Zhibek Zholy Bazaar, and Eastern Bazaar. Modern shopping areas are found mostly in central streets of the city. Kokshetau is home to a large number of parks, recreation areas and open spaces, mainly established in the early years of the Independence and well maintained and expanded thereafter. Central Park, the city's largest and oldest park, established in 1957. It is the oldest city park. It features a few run-down fairground rides, and discos on summer weekend evenings. From the park, the pedestrianised Bauyrzhan Momyshuly Street runs south. It covers a territory of approximately 3,5 hectares. Revolution Fighters Park. The park is located in east-southern part of Kokshetau. As of 2021 the city had 10 fountains. Elikti is a ski resort near Kokshetau, located on the slopes of Mount Elikti, at the elevation of 500 metres above sea level. The resort area is about 25 kilometres (16 mi) of Kokshetau city by the P11 road on the way from Kokshetau to Ruzayevka. It is popular for its mild climate, a large quantity of sunny days and a great amount of snow through the winter. Visitors can buy or rent any necessary skiing and snowboarding equipment. Around Kokshetau, there are numerous nearby freshwater lakes such as Lake Burabay, Lake Ulken Shabakty, Lake Kishi Shabakty, Lake Aiyrtau and the Lake Zerendi, which are popular among Kokshetau residents for recreation, swimming and watersports and can be quickly reached by car. Lake Burabay Lake Ulken Shabakty Lake Kishi Shabakty Lake Aiyrtau Lake Zerendi The city was marked by the ethnographer and publicist Grigory Potanin, who visited it in the 1890s. Anastasia Tsvetayeva dedicated to the city the story in her famous and one of the best-known work Old Age and Youth, 1967 (Russian: Starost i molodost'). The city was depicted and documented from a South African writer and leftist Alex La Guma's perspective in his book A Soviet Journey (1978), who visited it in the late 1960s. The city of Kokshetau is member of some international organizations: United Cities and Local Governments (UCLG), and the International Assembly of CIS Countries' Capitals and Big Cities (MAG). Kokshetau is twinned with: In addition to its sister city, Kokshetau has an official co-operation agreements (yntymaqtastyq turaly kelısım) with: Krasnoyarsk, Russian Federation (since August 2022) One road in Kokshetau has been named after its sister city; a road in Beybitshilik district is named Waukesha (Waukeshskaya) Street. Nikolay Kuibyshev (1893-1938), military leader Lazzate Maralbayeva (born 1951), French painter and architect Bakhytzhan Kanapyanov (born 1951), poet and publisher Daryn Zhunussov (born 1991), ice dancer Timur Dosmagambetov (born 1989), footballer Sultan Abilgazy (born 1997), footballer Anna Nurmukhambetova (born 1993), weightlifter Vedat Albayrak (born 1993), judoka Vladimir Niederhaus (born 1967), football official Alexandr Chervyakov (born 1980), biathlete Yevgeniy Gidich (born 1996), professional racing cyclist Gleb Brussenskiy (born 2000), professional cyclist Nikolay Ivanov (born 1971), cross-country skier Yevgeniya Voloshenko (born 1979), cross-country skier Mariya Grabovetskaya (born 1987), weightlifter Tatyana Osipova (born 1987), cross-country skier Mykhailo Burch (born 1960), footballer Yekaterina Babshuk (born 1991), footballer Pavel Dubitskiy (born 1982), athlete Sergey Kopytov (born 1965), weightlifter Anton Kuksin (born 1995), footballer Yevgeniy Meleshenko (born 1981), hurdler Nikolay Ozhegin (born 1971), judoka Yaroslava Yakushina (born 1993), boxer European route E125 Kokshetau Mountain Lake Kopa Kokshetau National Park Kokshetau Region List of cities in Kazakhstan References Supported unanimously "New akim of Kokshetau appointed". 25 March 2021. Retrieved 25 October 2022. "Results Of The 2009 National Population Census Of The Republic Of Kazakhstan Analytical Report" (PDF). The Agency On Statistics of the Republic of Kazakhstan. "Birth and death rates in January-March 2010-2011". Archived from the original on 26 May 2011. Retrieved 22 October 2009. "Population of the Republic of Kazakhstan by individual ethnic groups at the beginning of 2020". Statistics Committee of the Ministry of National Economy of the Republic of Kazakhstan. Retrieved 28 April 2020. "KATO base". Statistics Committee of the Ministry of National Economy of the Republic of Kazakhstan. Retrieved 19 June 2017. "Cities and towns in Qаzаqstаn". Population Statistics. Retrieved 28 December 2022. "Kokshetau Named Cultural Capital of Kazakhstan in 2021". 20 May 2021. Retrieved 21 May 2021. "Kokshetau - the cultural capital of Kazakhstan". 19 May 2021. Retrieved 28 May 2021. "In 1993, Kokchetav city was renamed to Kokshetau". Retrieved 26 May 2023. "Akmola region". Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Weather and Climate – Climate of Kokshetau" (in Russian). Weather and Climate. Retrieved 8 November 2021. "Kokshetay (Kokshetau) Climate Normals 1961–1990". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved 8 November 2021. "World Meteorological Organization Climate Normals for 1991–2020". World Meteorological Organization. Retrieved 2 August 2023. "The population of Kokshetau. Kazakhstan, the city of Kokshetau: population". Retrieved 21 December 2020. "Kokshetau: a beautiful 'Blue Mountain'". 14 May 2018. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "Day of unity of the people of Kazakhstan was celebrated in Kokshetau". 1 May 2017. Retrieved 28 May 2023. Map of Kazakhstan Akmolinskaya Oblast 1868 Sibir Kirgizy "History of the town". Retrieved 21 December 2020. "Kokshetau: the area of blue lakes". 23 February 2017. Retrieved 21 December 2020. "Akmola region". Retrieved 21 December 2020. "How did the 14 regions become?". Retrieved 26 May 2023. "Kokshetau city (Kokchetav) in Akmola Region, Kazakhstan". Retrieved 21 December 2020. Cities & towns of Kazakhstan "Implementation of language policy". gov.kz. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Population of the Republic of Kazakhstan by individual ethnic groups at the beginning of 2020". Stat.kz. Retrieved 6 August 2020. "Religious composition of the population of Kazakhstan in 2009". Archived from the original on 22 November 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2021. "Religion". 13 October 2021. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Cultural and spiritual excursion to one of the largest mosques in Kazakhstan - Juma mosque "Nauan Hazret" Kokshetau". Retrieved 28 May 2023. "The old-timer building. Mosque named after Nauan Hazrat". Retrieved 26 May 2023. "Orthodoxy history in Kazakhstan". Retrieved 26 May 2023. "A place of spiritual unity". 17 September 2021. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Evangelical Lutheran Archbishop: Religious harmony in Kazakhstan means respecting our faith, respecting others'". 10 August 2018. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "Akmola Regional Russian Drama Theater". ticketon.kz. Ticketon Kazakhstan. 15 June 2015. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "The festival "Dombra Fest" dedicated to the National Day of Dombra was held in Kokshetau". gov.kz. Department of Culture of Akmola Region. 1 July 2022. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Sabantui-2017 in Kokshetau". assembly.kz. Assembly of People of Kazakhstan. 4 June 2019. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Kokshetau Hosted I Festival of Kazakh Culture". assembly.kz. Assembly of People of Kazakhstan. 4 June 2019. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Songs and Dances of Ethnic Groups of Kazakhstan Performed at Festival in Kokshetau". assembly.kz. Assembly of People of Kazakhstan. 25 April 2019. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "The festive concert of the national ensemble "Russian song"". assembly.kz. Assembly of People of Kazakhstan. 9 October 2017. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "At the site of the Regional Communications Service, a briefing will be held on the topic: "A unique project festival "Folk-symphony Kokshetau" of the Akmola Regional Philharmonic named after Ukili Ybyrai"". gov.kz. Department of Culture of Akmola region. 23 May 2023. Retrieved 28 May 2023. ""Akmola Regional Local History Museum"". akmomuzey.kz. Akmola Regional Local History Museum. 15 June 2015. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "The history has revived in the museum of Kokshetau". Electronic History of Kazakhstan. 15 June 2015. Retrieved 26 May 2023. "Large-scale research and archaeological work is being carried out in Akmola region". Department of Culture of Akmola Region. 20 September 2022. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Cultural Walk: Museum of Kokshetau's History". "List of institutions and enterprises subordinated to SI "Department of culture and language development of Kokshetau"". culture-kokshetau.kz. 15 June 2015. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "The library of Kokshetau University named after Sh. Ualikhanov". Retrieved 23 May 2023. "Kokshetau Named Cultural Capital of Kazakhstan in 2021". 20 May 2021. Retrieved 21 May 2021. "Kokshetau - the cultural capital of Kazakhstan". 19 May 2021. Retrieved 28 May 2021. "Kokshetau Palace of Culture". ticketon.kz. Ticketon Kazakhstan. 15 June 2015. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "A mausoleum in honor of the memory of Nauan Khazret is being built in Kokshetau". Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Kokshetau hosted a campaign "Along the roads of memory"". Retrieved 26 May 2023. "In 1998, in Kokshetau the monument to Shoqan Walikhanov was opened". Retrieved 23 May 2023. "Kokshetau hosted a campaign "Along the roads of memory"". Retrieved 26 May 2023. "Kazakhstan restores domestic flights with seven cities". Retrieved 25 October 2022. "Economy". Retrieved 16 January 2023. "Milestones of industrialization". Retrieved 26 May 2023. "Police Department of the Akmola Region". Retrieved 29 May 2023. "Department of Emergency Situations of the Akmola Region". Retrieved 29 May 2023. "Evacuation of people and industrial facilities from Western parts of the USSR to North-Kazakhstan region (1941-1943)". Retrieved 26 May 2023. "Kazakh President pays visit to Viamedis Kokshetau clinical and rehabilitation center". 14 February 2023. Retrieved 2 April 2023. "Construction of a new prefabricated modular hospital". Retrieved 28 May 2023. "In 1930, the first issue of the regional newspaper "Kolkhoz Zholy" (since 1990, city newspaper "Kokshetau") was released". Retrieved 26 May 2023. "Akimat of the city of Kokshetau". gov.kz. "Kokshetau TV". "Aqmola News". 24 August 2023. "Akmolinskaya Pravda". "North Kazakhstan improves tourism infrastructure". 25 June 2018. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "Railway transport". Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Electric Passenger Trains Launched from Astana to Karaganda, Kokshetau". 23 December 2016. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "Kazakh Airlines Overview Shows Four Major Airlines Dominating Market". 14 October 2016. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "Benin joins EU aviation blacklist". 8 April 2009. Retrieved 8 April 2009. "Reconstruction of Kokshetau Airport". "Government Works to Reform Civil Aviation". 15 May 2013. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "Turkish Airlines Launch Flights From Turkistan". 28 May 2021. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "Number of domestic subsidized flights and new air routes to be increased in Kazakhstan". Retrieved 25 October 2022. "Central Asia's Largest Bridge Crossing Unveiled in Pavlodar". 20 December 2016. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "Uskenbayev reports to Majilis deputies on road sector development". Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Imantau: pearl of Blue Mountains in North Kazakhstan". 17 February 2018. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "The old-timer building. The house of merchant Sokolov". Retrieved 23 May 2023. "Intellectual schools". Nazarbayev Intellectual Schools. Archived from the original on 13 October 2014. Retrieved 7 October 2014. "About School - Kokshetau Nazarbayev Intellectual School of Physics and Mathematics". Retrieved 7 January 2023. "International Educational Fund "BILIM-INNOVATION"". Retrieved 16 January 2023. "Kokshetau Bilim Innovation Public Lyceum". Retrieved 16 January 2023. "Ministry of Science and Higher Education prioritises modernisation of regional higher education institutions — Sayasat Nurbek". Retrieved 23 May 2023. "Akmola region shows 27% decrease in total mortality in 9 months of 2022". Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Arlan Hockey Club Wins Kazakhstan Cup for Second Consecutive Year". 11 September 2013. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "The Arlan Kokshetau players celebrate and staff celebrate the historic Continental Cup win". Retrieved 14 September 2022. "Belfast Giants beaten by Arlan Kokshetau in Continental Cup shootout". BBC Sport. Retrieved 14 January 2019. "Ice arena built in Kokshetau". 27 March 2023. Retrieved 28 May 2023. ""Burabay" sport complex". Retrieved 28 September 2022. "About us". Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Shops". Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Akmola region akim inspects park construction in Kokshetau". 28 July 2017. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Yelikti ski resort is perfect destination for beginner, expert skiers and snowboarders". 6 December 2018. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "Cultural Walk: Museum of Kokshetau's History". Electronic History of Kazakhstan. 1 July 2015. Retrieved 26 May 2023. "Krasnoyarsk signed a memorandum of cooperation with the city of Kokshetau of the Republic of Kazakhstan". Krasnoyarsk - City Administration. 25 August 2022. Retrieved 27 August 2022. Sources Bureau of National Statistics: http://www.stat.gov.kz Tsvetayeva, Anastasia. Old Age and Youth (1988), Moscow: Progress Publishers. La Guma, Alex. A Soviet Journey (1978), Moscow: Progress Publishers ISBN 9781498536042. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Kokshetau. Wikimedia Atlas of Kazakhstan Kokshetau travel guide from Wikivoyage Official web site (in Kazakh, Russian, and English) 360° QTVR fullscreen panoramas of the Kokshetau Visitaqmola.kz – Tourism website for Akmola Region (in Kazakh, Russian, and English) Geographic data related to Kokshetau at OpenStreetMap WikiSatellite view of Kokshetau at WikiMapia Portals:  Geography  Asia Kokshetau at Wikipedia's sister projects: Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel guides from Wikivoyage Data from Wikidata