Māori (Māori: [ˈmaːɔɾi] ), or te reo Māori ('the Māori language'), commonly shortened to te reo, is an Eastern Polynesian language and the indigenous language of the Māori people, the indigenous population of mainland New Zealand. A member of the Austronesian language family, it is closely related to Cook Islands Māori, Tuamotuan, and Tahitian. The Maori Language Act 1987 gave the language recognition as one of New Zealand's official languages along side New Zealand Sign Language which was added as an Official language in New Zealand in 2006. There are several regional dialects of the language, all of which are mutually intelligible. Speakers of the Māori language may be called kaikōrero Māori in both English and Māori. Māori Aotearoa lacked a conventional written language or script outside of tā moko. The Māori language is known for its highly metaphorical poetry and prose, often in the form of karakia, whaikōrero, whakapapa and karanga, and in performing arts such as mōteatea, waiata, and haka. It uses the Latin script, which was adopted and the spelling standardised by high-ranking Northern Māori in collaboration English Protestant clergy in the 19th century. Māori was New Zealand’s lingua franca until the 1870s, when it declined due to the increase of the European population and linguistic discrimination through legislation such as the Native Schools Act, which barred the speaking of Māori in schools. The number of speakers of the language fell sharply after 1945, but a Māori-language revitalisation effort that has begun since the late 20th century has helped to slow the decline. The Māori protest movement and the Māori renaissance of the 1970s caused greater social awareness of and support for the language. The spread of kōhanga reo, or Māori-language kindergartens, has helped increase the number of native speakers. The 2018 New Zealand census reported that about 186,000 people, or 4.0% of the New Zealand population, could hold a conversation in Māori about everyday things. As of 2015[update], 55% of Māori adults reported some knowledge of the language; of these, 64% use Māori at home and around 50,000 people can speak the language "very well" or "well". Ideological support for the Māori language remains high among Māori and relatives so among other New Zealanders in general, with the number of second language students increasing by 76% between 2013 and 2023. In Māori culture, the language is considered to be among the greatest of all taonga, or cultural treasures. The English word Maori is a borrowing from the Māori language, where it is spelled Māori. In New Zealand, the Māori language is often referred to as te reo [tɛ ˈɾɛ.ɔ] ("the language"), short for te reo Māori ("the Māori language"). The Māori-language spelling ⟨Māori⟩ (with a macron) has become common in New Zealand English in recent years, particularly in Māori-specific cultural contexts, although the traditional macron-less English spelling is still sometimes seen in general media and government use. Preferred and alternative pronunciations in English vary by dictionary, with /ˈmaʊri/ being most frequent today, and /mɑːˈɒri/, /ˈmɔːri/, and /ˈmɑːri/ also given, while the 'r' is always a voiced alveolar flap. New Zealand has two de jure official languages: Māori and New Zealand Sign Language, whereas New Zealand English acts as a de facto official language. Te reo Māori gained its official status with the passing of the Māori Language Act 1987. Most government departments and agencies have bilingual names—for example, the Department of Internal Affairs is alternatively Te Tari Taiwhenua—and places such as local government offices and public libraries display bilingual signs and use bilingual stationery; some government services now even use the Māori version solely as the official name. Personal dealings with government agencies may be conducted in Māori, but in practice, this almost always requires interpreters, restricting its everyday use to the limited geographical areas of high Māori fluency, and to more formal occasions, such as during public consultation. An interpreter is on hand at sessions of the New Zealand Parliament for instances when a member wishes to speak in Māori. Māori may be spoken in judicial proceedings, but any party wishing to do so must notify the court in advance to ensure an interpreter is available. Failure to notify in advance does not preclude the party speaking in Māori, but the court must be adjourned until an interpreter is available and the party may be held liable for the costs of the delay. A 1994 ruling by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council (then New Zealand's highest court) held the Government responsible under the Treaty of Waitangi (1840) for the preservation of the language. Accordingly, since March 2004, the state has funded Māori Television, broadcast partly in Māori. On 28 March 2008, Māori Television launched its second channel, Te Reo, broadcast entirely in the Māori language, with no advertising or subtitles. The first Māori TV channel, Aotearoa Television Network (ATN) was available to viewers in the Auckland region from 1996 but lasted for only one year. In 2008, Land Information New Zealand published the first list of official place names with macrons. Previous place name lists were derived from computer systems (usually mapping and geographic information systems) that could not handle macrons.[failed verification] According to legend, Māori came to New Zealand from Hawaiki. Current anthropological thinking places their origin in eastern Polynesia, mostly likely from the Southern Cook or Society Islands region (see Māori history § Origins from Polynesia), and says that they arrived by deliberate voyages in seagoing canoes, possibly double-hulled, and probably sail-rigged. These settlers probably arrived by AD 1350 at the latest. Their language evolved in isolation from other Polynesian languages. Six dialectal variations emerged among iwi due to geographical separation. The language had no written form, but historian Sarah J.K. Gallagher has argued that tā moko, the indigenous art of tattooing, is arguably "a pre-European textual culture in New Zealand... as the Moko can be read, it can be accepted as a form of communication". The idea that tā moko is a written language of sorts has been discussed before. Since its origin, the Māori language has been rich in metaphorical poetry and prose. Forms of this include karakia, whaikōrero, whakapapa and karanga, and in performing arts such as mōteatea, waiata, and haka. Karakia are Māori incantations used to invoke spiritual guidance and protection, and are used before eating or gathering, to increase spiritual goodwill and to declare things officially open. Whaikōrero is the term given to traditional oratory given on marae, and whakapapa is the story of one's ancestry. Both of these incorporate Te Reo Māori. According to historian Atholl Anderson, whakapapa utilised "mnemonic devices, repetitive patterns [and] rhyme" in order to leave a lasting impression. "Casting knowledge in formulaic or other standarised story forms.. helped to fix the information in the minds of speakers and listeners". Since about 1800, the Māori language has had a tumultuous history. It started this period as the predominant language of New Zealand, and was considered the country's lingua franca. In the 1860s, it became a minority language in the shadow of the English spoken by many settlers, missionaries, gold-seekers, and traders. In the late 19th century, the colonial governments of New Zealand and its provinces introduced an English-style school system for all New Zealanders. From the mid-19th century, due to the Native Schools Act and later the Native Schools Code, the use of Māori in schools was slowly filtered out of the curriculum in order to become more European. Increasing numbers of Māori people learned English. Until the Second World War (1939–1945), most Māori people spoke Māori as their first language. Worship took place in Māori; it functioned as the language of Māori homes; Māori politicians conducted political meetings in Māori, and some literature appeared in Māori, along with many newspapers. Before 1880, some Māori parliamentarians suffered disadvantages because parliamentary proceedings took place in English. However, by 1900, all Māori members of parliament, such as Āpirana Ngata, were university graduates who spoke fluent English. From this period greater emphasis was placed on Māori learning English, but it was not until the migration of Māori to urban areas after the Second World War (the Urban Māori) that the number of speakers of Māori began to decline rapidly. During this period, Māori was forbidden at many schools, and any use of the language was met with corporal punishment. In recent years, prominent Māori have spoken with sadness about their experiences or experiences of their family members being caned, strapped or beaten in school. By the 1980s, fewer than 20 per cent of Māori spoke the language well enough to be classed as native speakers. Even many of those people no longer spoke Māori in their homes. As a result, many Māori children failed to learn their ancestral language, and generations of non-Māori-speaking Māori emerged. By the 1950s some Māori leaders had begun to recognise the dangers of the loss of te reo Māori. By the 1970s there were many strategies used to save the language. This included Māori-language revitalization programs such as the Kōhanga Reo movement, which from 1982 immersed infants in Māori from infancy to school age. There followed in 1985 the founding of the first Kura Kaupapa Māori (Years 1 to 8 Māori-medium education programme) and later the first Wharekura (Years 9 to 13 Māori-medium education programme). In 2011 it was reported that although "there was a true revival of te reo in the 1980s and early to mid-1990s ... spurred on by the realisation of how few speakers were left, and by the relative abundance of older fluent speakers in both urban neighbourhoods and rural communities", the language has continued to decline." The decline is believed "to have several underlying causes". These include: the ongoing loss of older native speakers who have spearheaded the Māori-language revival movement complacency brought about by the very existence of the institutions which drove the revival concerns about quality, with the supply of good teachers never matching demand (even while that demand has been shrinking) excessive regulation and centralised control, which has alienated some of those involved in the movement an ongoing lack of educational resources needed to teach the full curriculum in te reo Māori natural language attrition caused by the overwhelming increase of spoken English. Based on the principles of partnership, Māori-speaking government, general revitalisation and dialectal protective policy, and adequate resourcing, the Waitangi Tribunal has recommended "four fundamental changes": Te Taura Whiri (the Māori Language Commission) should become the lead Māori language sector agency. This will address the problems caused by the lack of ownership and leadership identified by the Office of the Auditor-General. Te Taura Whiri should function as a Crown–Māori partnership through the equal appointment of Crown and Māori appointees to its board. This reflects [the Tribunal's] concern that te reo revival will not work if responsibility for setting the direction is not shared with Māori. Te Taura Whiri will also need increased powers. This will ensure that public bodies are compelled to contribute to te reo's revival and that key agencies are held properly accountable for the strategies they adopt. For instance, targets for the training of te reo teachers must be met, education curricula involving te reo must be approved, and public bodies in districts with a sufficient number and/or proportion of te reo speakers and schools with a certain proportion of Māori students must submit Māori language plans for approval. These regional public bodies and schools must also consult iwi (Māori tribes or tribal confederations) in the preparation of their plans. In this way, iwi will come to have a central role in the revitalisation of te reo in their own areas. This should encourage efforts to promote the language at the grassroots. The changes set forth by the Tribunal are merely recommendations; they are not binding upon government. There is, however, evidence that the revitalisation efforts are taking hold, as can be seen in the teaching of te reo in the school curriculum, the use of Māori as an instructional language, and the supportive ideologies surrounding these efforts. In 2014, a survey of students ranging in age from 18 to 24 was conducted; the students were of mixed ethnic backgrounds, ranging from Pākehā to Māori who lived in New Zealand. This survey showed a 62% response saying that te reo Māori was at risk. Albury argues that these results come from the language either not being used enough in common discourse, or from the fact that the number of speakers was inadequate for future language development. The policies for language revitalisation have been changing in attempts to improve Māori language use and have been working with suggestions from the Waitangi Tribunal on the best ways to implement the revitalisation. The Waitangi Tribunal in 2011 identified a suggestion for language revitalisation that would shift indigenous policies from the central government to the preferences and ideologies of the Māori people. This change recognises the issue of Māori revitalisation as one of indigenous self-determination, instead of the job of the government to identify what would be best for the language and Māori people of New Zealand. Beginning in about 2015, the Māori language underwent a revival as it became increasingly popular, as a common national heritage and shared cultural identity, even among New Zealanders without Māori roots. Surveys from 2018 indicated that "the Māori language currently enjoys a high status in Māori society and also positive acceptance by the majority of non-Māori New Zealanders". As the status and prestige of the language rose, so did the demand for language classes. Businesses, including Google, Microsoft, Vodafone NZ and Fletcher Building, were quick to adopt the trend as it became apparent that using te reo made customers think of a company as "committed to New Zealand". The language became increasingly heard in the media and in politics. Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern—who gave her daughter a Māori middle name, and said she would learn both Māori and English—made headlines when she toasted Commonwealth leaders in 2018 with a Māori proverb, and the success of Māori musical groups such as Alien Weaponry and Maimoa further increased the language's presence in social media. In August 2017, Rotorua became the first city in New Zealand to declare itself as bilingual in the Māori and English languages, meaning that both languages would be promoted. During the same year, Disney's Moana received a Māori-language dubbing, which premiered in Auckland on 11 September, during Te Wiki o te Reo Māori. Moana became the first of at least three titles the company agreed to have dubbed in Māori, in collaboration with Matewa Media: a dubbing of The Lion King premiered in Auckland on 21 June 2022, and the Māori version of Frozen premiered on 25 October of the same year. The project was then continued with the production of a Māori dubbing of Pixar's Coco, which premiered on 13 July 2023, during Matariki. A dubbing of Disney's Encanto is set to be released at a yet to be announced date. In 2019, the New Zealand government launched the Maihi Karauna Māori language revitalisation strategy with a goal of 1 million people speaking te reo Māori by 2040. Also in 2019, Kotahi Rau Pukapuka Trust and Auckland University Press began work on publishing a sizeable library of local and international literature in the language, including the Harry Potter books. Some New Zealanders have pushed against the revival, debating the replacement of English-language place names with original Māori names, criticising a Police car having Māori language and graphics, and complaining about te reo Māori being used by broadcasters. In March 2021, the Broadcasting Standards Authority (BSA) said it would no longer entertain complaints regarding the use of the Māori language in broadcasts. This followed a fivefold increase in complaints to the BSA. The use of Māori in itself does not breach any broadcasting standards. Comparative linguists classify Māori as a Polynesian language, specifically as an Eastern Polynesian language belonging to the Tahitic subgroup, which includes Cook Islands Māori, spoken in the southern Cook Islands, and Tahitian, spoken in Tahiti and the Society Islands. Other major Eastern Polynesian languages include Hawaiian, Marquesan (languages in the Marquesic subgroup), and the Rapa Nui language of Easter Island. While the preceding are all distinct languages, they remain similar enough that Tupaia, a Tahitian travelling with Captain James Cook in 1769–1770, communicated effectively with Māori. Māori actors, travelling to Easter Island for production of the film Rapa-Nui noticed a marked similarity between the native tongues, as did arts curator Reuben Friend, who noted that it took only a short time to pick up any different vocabulary and the different nuances to recognisable words. Speakers of modern Māori generally report that they find the languages of the Cook Islands, including Rarotongan, the easiest amongst the other Polynesian languages to understand and converse in. Nearly all speakers are ethnic Māori resident in New Zealand. Estimates of the number of speakers vary: the 1996 census reported 160,000, while other estimates have reported as few as 10,000 fluent adult speakers in 1995 according to the Māori Language Commission. As reported in the 2013 national census, only 21.31 per cent of Māori (self-identified) had a conversational knowledge of the language, and only around 6.5 per cent of those speakers, 1.4 per cent of the total Māori population, spoke the Māori language only. This percentage has been in decline in recent years, from around a quarter of the population[when?] to 21 per cent. In the same census, Māori speakers were 3.7 per cent of the total population. The level of competence of self-professed Māori speakers varies from minimal to total. Statistics have not been gathered for the prevalence of different levels of competence. Only a minority of self-professed speakers use Māori as their main language at home. The rest use only a few words or phrases (passive bilingualism).[citation needed] Māori still[update] is a community language in some predominantly Māori settlements in the Northland, Urewera and East Cape areas. Kohanga reo Māori-immersion kindergartens throughout New Zealand use Māori exclusively. Increasing numbers of Māori raise their children bilingually. Urbanisation after the Second World War led to widespread language shift from Māori predominance (with Māori the primary language of the rural whānau) to English predominance (English serving as the primary language in the Pākehā cities). Therefore, Māori speakers almost always communicate bilingually, with New Zealand English as either their first or second language. Only around 9,000 people speak only in Māori. The use of the Māori language in the Māori diaspora is far lower than in New Zealand itself. Census data from Australia show it as the home language of 11,747, just 8.2% of the total Australian Māori population in 2016. The modern Māori alphabet has 15 letters, two of which are digraphs (character pairs). The five vowels have both short and long forms, with the long forms denoted by macrons marked above them. The order of the alphabet is as follows: A, E, H, I, K, M, N, O, P, R, T, U, W, Ng, Wh. This standard orthography may be tweaked to represent certain dialects of Māori: An underlined "k" sometimes appears when writing the Southern dialect, to indicate that the /k/ in question corresponds to the ng of the standard language. Both L and G are also encountered in the Southern dialect, though not in standard Māori. Various methods are used to indicate glottal stops when writing the Whanganui dialect. There was originally no native writing system for Māori. It has been suggested that the petroglyphs once used by the Māori developed into a script similar to the Rongorongo of Easter Island. However, there is no evidence that these petroglyphs ever evolved into a true system of writing. Some distinctive markings among the kōwhaiwhai (rafter paintings) of meeting houses were used as mnemonics in reciting whakapapa (genealogy) but again, there was no systematic relation between marks and meanings. Attempts to write Māori words using the Latin script began with Captain James Cook and other early explorers, with varying degrees of success. Consonants seem to have caused the most difficulty, but medial and final vowels are often missing in early sources. Anne Salmond records aghee for aki (in the year 1773, from the North Island East Coast, p. 98), Toogee and E tanga roak for Tuki and Tangaroa (1793, Northland, p. 216), Kokramea, Kakramea for Kakaramea (1801, Hauraki, p. 261), toges for tokis, Wannugu for Uenuku and gumera for kumara (1801, Hauraki, pp. 261, 266 and 269), Weygate for Waikato (1801, Hauraki, p. 277), Bunga Bunga for pungapunga, tubua for tupua and gure for kurī (1801, Hauraki, p. 279), as well as Tabooha for Te Puhi (1823, Northern Northland, p. 385). From 1814, missionaries tried to define the sounds of the language. Thomas Kendall published a book in 1815 entitled A korao no New Zealand, which in modern orthography and usage would be He Kōrero nō Aotearoa. Beginning in 1817, professor Samuel Lee of Cambridge University worked with the Ngāpuhi chief Tītore and his junior relative Tui (also known as Tuhi or Tupaea), and then with chief Hongi Hika and his junior relative Waikato; they established a definitive orthography based on Northern usage, published as the First Grammar and Vocabulary of the New Zealand Language (1820). The missionaries of the Church Missionary Society (CMS) did not have a high regard for this book. By 1830 the CMS missionaries had revised the orthography for writing the Māori language; for example, 'Kiddeekiddee' became, what is the modern spelling, 'Kerikeri'. This orthography continues in use, with only two major changes: the addition of wh to distinguish the voiceless bilabial fricative phoneme from the labio-velar phoneme /w/; and the consistent marking of long vowels. The Māori embraced literacy enthusiastically, and missionaries reported in the 1820s that Māori all over the country taught each other to read and write, using sometimes quite innovative materials in the absence of paper, such as leaves and charcoal, and flax. Missionary James West Stack recorded the scarcity of slates and writing materials at the native schools and the use sometimes of "pieces of board on which sand was sprinkled, and the letters traced upon the sand with a pointed stick". The alphabet devised at Cambridge University does not mark vowel length. The examples in the following table show that vowel length is phonemic in Māori. Māori devised ways to mark vowel length, sporadically at first. Occasional and inconsistent vowel-length markings occur in 19th-century manuscripts and newspapers written by Māori, including macron-like diacritics and doubling of letters. Māori writer Hare Hongi (Henry Stowell) used macrons in his Maori-English Tutor and Vade Mecum of 1911, as does Sir Āpirana Ngata (albeit inconsistently) in his Maori Grammar and Conversation (7th printing 1953). Once the Māori language was taught in universities in the 1960s, vowel-length marking was made systematic. Bruce Biggs, of Ngāti Maniapoto descent and professor at the University of Auckland, promoted the use of double vowels (e.g. waahine); this style was standard at the university until Biggs died in 2000. Macrons (tohutō) are now the standard means of indicating long vowels, after becoming the favoured option of the Māori Language Commission—set up by the Māori Language Act 1987 to act as the authority for Māori spelling and orthography. Most news media now use macrons; Stuff websites and newspapers since 2017, TVNZ and NZME websites and newspapers since 2018. Technical limitations in producing macronised vowels on typewriters and older computer systems are sometimes resolved by using a diaeresis or circumflex instead of a macron (e.g., wähine or wâhine). Double vowels continue to be used in a few exceptional cases, including: The Waikato-Tainui iwi preference is for using doubled vowels; hence in the Waikato region, double vowels are used by the Hamilton City Council, Waikato District Council and Waikato Museum. Inland Revenue continues to spell its Māori name Te Tari Taake instead of Te Tari Tāke, mainly to reduce the resemblance of tāke to the English word 'take'. A considerable number of governmental and non-governmental organisations continue to use the older spelling of ⟨roopu⟩ ('association') in their names rather than the more modern form ⟨rōpū⟩. Examples include Te Roopu Raranga Whatu o Aotearoa ('the national Māori weavers' collective') and Te Roopu Pounamu (a Māori-specific organisation within the Green Party of Aotearoa New Zealand). Double vowels are also used instead of macrons in long vowels resultant from compounding (e.g. Mātaatua) or reduplication. Māori has five phonemically distinct vowel articulations, and ten consonant phonemes. Although it is commonly claimed that vowel realisations (pronunciations) in Māori show little variation, linguistic research has shown this not to be the case. Vowel length is phonemic, but four of the five long vowels occur in only a handful of word roots, the exception being /aː/. As noted above, it has recently become standard in Māori spelling to indicate a long vowel with a macron. For older speakers, long vowels tend to be more peripheral and short vowels more centralised, especially with the low vowel, which is long [aː] but short [ɐ]. For younger speakers, they are both [a]. For older speakers, /u/ is only fronted after /t/; elsewhere it is [u]. For younger speakers, it is fronted [ʉ] everywhere, as with the corresponding phoneme in New Zealand English. Due to the influence of New Zealand English, the vowel [e] is raised to be near [i], so that pī and kē (or piki and kete) now largely share the very same vowel space.: 198–199  Beside monophthongs Māori has many diphthong vowel phonemes. Although any short vowel combinations are possible, researchers disagree on which combinations constitute diphthongs. Formant frequency analysis distinguish /aĭ/, /aĕ/, /aŏ/, /aŭ/, /oŭ/ as diphthongs. As in many other Polynesian languages, diphthongs in Māori vary only slightly from sequences of adjacent vowels, except that they belong to the same syllable, and all or nearly all sequences of nonidentical vowels are possible. All sequences of nonidentical short vowels occur and are phonemically distinct. The consonant phonemes of Māori are listed in the following table. Seven of the ten Māori consonant letters have the same pronunciation as they do in the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA). For those that do not, the IPA phonetic transcription is included, enclosed in square brackets per IPA convention. The pronunciation of ⟨wh⟩ is extremely variable, but its most common pronunciation (its canonical allophone) is the labiodental fricative, IPA [f] (as in the English word fill). Another allophone is the voiceless bilabial fricative, IPA [ɸ], which is usually supposed to be the sole pre-European pronunciation, although linguists are not sure of the truth of this supposition.[citation needed] At least until the 1930s, the bilabial fricative was considered to be the correct pronunciation. The fact that English ⟨f⟩ gets substituted by ⟨p⟩ and not ⟨wh⟩ in borrowings (for example, English February becomes Pēpuere instead of Whēpuere) would strongly hint that the Māori did not perceive English /f/ to be the same sound as their ⟨wh⟩. Because English stops /p, t, k/ primarily have aspiration, speakers of English often hear the Māori nonaspirated stops as English /b, d, ɡ/. However, younger Māori speakers tend to aspirate /p, t, k/ as in English. English speakers also tend to hear Māori /r/ as English /l/ in certain positions (cf. Japanese r). These ways of hearing have given rise to place-name spellings which are incorrect in Māori, like Tolaga Bay. (Teraki in Māori). /ŋ/ can come at the beginning of a word (like 'sing-along' without the "si"), which may be difficult for English speakers outside of New Zealand to manage. In some western areas of the North Island, ⟨h⟩ is pronounced as a glottal stop [ʔ] instead of [h], and the digraph ⟨wh⟩ is pronounced as [ʔw] instead of [f] or [ɸ]. /ɾ/ is typically a flap, especially before /a/. However, elsewhere it is sometimes trilled. In borrowings from English, many consonants are substituted by the nearest available Māori consonant. For example, the English affricates /tʃ/ and /dʒ/, and the fricative /s/ are replaced by /h/, /f/ becomes /p/, and /l/ becomes /ɾ/ (the /l/ is sometimes retained in the southern dialect, as noted below). Syllables in Māori have one of the following forms: V, VV, CV, CVV. This set of four can be summarised by the notation, (C)V(V), in which the segments in parentheses may or may not be present. A syllable cannot begin with two consonant sounds (the digraphs ng and wh represent single consonant sounds), and cannot end in a consonant, although some speakers may occasionally devoice a final vowel. All possible CV combinations are grammatical, though wo, who, wu, and whu occur only in a few loanwords from English such as wuru, "wool" and whutuporo, "football". As in many other Polynesian languages, e.g., Hawaiian, the rendering of loanwords from English includes representing every English consonant of the loanword (using the native consonant inventory; English has 24 consonants to 10 for Māori) and breaking up consonant clusters. For example, "Presbyterian" has been borrowed as Perehipeteriana; no consonant position in the loanword has been deleted, but /s/ and /b/ have been replaced with /h/ and /p/, respectively. Stress is typically within the last four vowels of a word, with long vowels and diphthongs counting double. That is, on the last four moras. However, stressed moras are longer than unstressed moras, so the word does not have the precision in Māori that it does in some other languages. It falls preferentially on the first long vowel, on the first diphthong if there is no long vowel (though for some speakers never a final diphthong), and on the first syllable otherwise. Compound words (such as names) may have a stressed syllable in each component word. In long sentences, the final syllable before a pause may have a stress in preference to the normal stressed syllable. Biggs proposed that historically there were two major dialect groups, North Island and South Island, and that South Island Māori is extinct. Biggs has analysed North Island Māori as comprising a western group and an eastern group with the boundary between them running pretty much along the island's north–south axis. Within these broad divisions regional variations occur, and individual regions show tribal variations. The major differences occur in the pronunciation of words, variation of vocabulary, and idiom. A fluent speaker of Māori has no problem understanding other dialects. There is no significant variation in grammar between dialects. "Most of the tribal variation in grammar is a matter of preferences: speakers of one area might prefer one grammatical form to another, but are likely on occasion to use the non-preferred form, and at least to recognise and understand it." Vocabulary and pronunciation vary to a greater extent, but this does not pose barriers to communication. In the southwest of the island, in the Whanganui and Taranaki regions, the phoneme ⟨h⟩ is a glottal stop and the phoneme ⟨wh⟩ is [ʔw]. This difference was the subject of considerable debate during the 1990s and 2000s over the then-proposed change of the name of the city Wanganui to Whanganui. In Tūhoe and the Eastern Bay of Plenty (northeastern North Island) ⟨ng⟩ has merged with ⟨n⟩. In parts of the Far North, ⟨wh⟩ has merged with ⟨w⟩.[citation needed] In South Island dialects, ng merged with k in many regions. Thus Kāi Tahu and Ngāi Tahu are variations in the name of the same iwi (the latter form is the one used in acts of Parliament). Since 2000, the government has altered the official names of several southern place names to the southern dialect forms by replacing ng with k. New Zealand's highest mountain, known for centuries as Aoraki in southern Māori dialects that merge ng with k, and as Aorangi by other Māori, was later named "Mount Cook". Now its sole official name is Aoraki / Mount Cook, which favours the local dialect form. Similarly, the Māori name for Stewart Island, Rakiura, is cognate with the name of the Canterbury town of Rangiora. Likewise, Dunedin's main research library, the Hocken Collections, has the name Uare Taoka o Hākena rather than the northern (standard) Te Whare Taonga o Hākena. Maarire Goodall and George Griffiths say there is also a voicing of k to g, which explains why the region of Otago (southern dialect) and the settlement it is named after – Otakou (standard Māori) – vary in spelling (the pronunciation of the latter having changed over time to accommodate the northern spelling). The standard Māori r is also found occasionally changed to an l in these southern dialects and the wh to w. These changes are most commonly found in place names, such as Lake Waihola, and the nearby coastal settlement of Wangaloa (which would, in standard Māori, be rendered Whangaroa), and Little Akaloa, on Banks Peninsula. Goodall and Griffiths suggest that final vowels are given a centralised pronunciation as schwa or that they are elided (pronounced indistinctly or not at all), resulting in such seemingly bastardised place names as The Kilmog, which in standard Māori would have been rendered Kirimoko, but which in southern dialect would have been pronounced very much as the current name suggests. This same elision is found in numerous other southern placenames, such as the two small settlements called The Kaik (from the term for a fishing village, kainga in standard Māori), near Palmerston and Akaroa, and the early spelling of Lake Wakatipu as Wagadib. In standard Māori, Wakatipu would have been rendered Whakatipua, showing further the elision of a final vowel. Despite the dialect being officially regarded as extinct, its use in signage and official documentation is encouraged by many government and educational agencies in Otago and Southland. Māori has mostly a verb-subject-object (VSO) word order. It is also analytical, featuring almost no inflection, and makes extensive use of grammatical particles to indicate grammatical categories of tense, mood, aspect, case, topicalization, among others. The personal pronouns have a distinction in clusivity, singular, dual and plural numbers, and the genitive pronouns have different classes (a class, o class and neutral) according to whether the possession is alienable or the possessor has control of the relationship (a category), or the possession is inalienable or the possessor has no control over the relationship (o category), and a third neutral class that only occurs for singular pronouns and must be followed by a noun. There is also subject-object-verb (SOV) word order used in passive sentences. Examples of this include Nāku te ngohi i tunu ("I cooked the fish"; literally I the fish cooked) and Mā wai te haka e kaea? ("Who will lead the haka?"). Biggs (1998) developed an analysis that the basic unit of Māori speech is the phrase rather than the word. The lexical word forms the "base" of the phrase. Biggs identifies five types of bases. Noun bases include those bases that can take a definite article, but cannot occur as the nucleus of a verbal phrase; for example: ika (fish) or rākau (tree). Plurality is marked by various means, including the definite article (singular te, plural ngā), deictic particles tērā rākau (that tree), ērā rākau (those trees), possessives taku whare (my house), aku whare (my houses). A few nouns lengthen a vowel in the plural, such as wahine (woman); wāhine (women). In general, bases used as qualifiers follow the base they qualify, e.g. "matua wahine" (mother, female elder) from "matua" (parent, elder) "wahine" (woman). Universal bases are verbs which can be used passively. When used passively, these verbs take a passive form. Biggs gives three examples of universals in their passive form: inumia (drunk), tangihia (wept for), and kīa (said). Stative bases serve as bases usable as verbs but not available for passive use, such as ora, alive or tika, correct. Grammars generally refer to them as "stative verbs". When used in sentences, statives require different syntax than other verb-like bases. Locative bases can follow the locative particle ki (to, towards) directly, such as runga, above, waho, outside, and placenames (ki Tamaki, to Auckland). Personal bases take the personal article a after ki, such as names of people (ki a Hohepa, to Joseph), personified houses, personal pronouns, wai? who? and mea, so-and-so. Like all other Polynesian languages, Māori has a rich array of particles, which include verbal particles, pronouns, locative particles, articles and possessives. Verbal particles indicate aspectual, tense-related or modal properties of the verb which they relate to. They include: i (past) e (non-past) i te (past continuous) kei te (present continuous) kua (perfect) e ... ana (imperfect, continuous) ka (inceptive, future) kia (desiderative) me (prescriptive) kei (warning, "lest") ina or ana (punctative-conditional, "if and when") kāti (cessative) ai (habitual) Locative particles (prepositions) refer to position in time and/or space, and include: ki (to, towards) kei (at) i (past position) hei (future position) Possessives fall into one of two classes of prepositions marked by a and o, depending on the dominant versus subordinate relationship between possessor and possessed: ngā tamariki a te matua, the children of the parent but te matua o ngā tamariki, the parent of the children. The definite articles are te (singular) and ngā (plural). Several other determiners termed definitives are related to the singular definite article te, such as the definitive possessive constructions with tā and tō and the demonstrative determiners. The Māori definite articles are frequently used where the equivalent, the, is not used in English, such as when referring generically to an entire class. In these cases, the singular te can even be used with a morphologically plural noun, as in te DEF.SG tamariki child.PL te tamariki DEF.SG child.PL "children (in general)" as opposed to ngā DEF.PL tamariki child.PL ngā tamariki DEF.PL child.PL "the (specific group of) children" In other syntactic environments, the definite article may be used to introduce a noun-phrase which is pragmatically indefinite due to the restrictions on the use of he as discussed below. The indefinite article he is used most frequently in the predicate and occasionally in the subject of the sentence, although it is not allowed in subject position in all sentence types. In the predicate, the indefinite article he can introduce either nouns or adjectives. The article either can be translated to the English 'a' or 'some', but the number will not be indicated by he. With nouns that show morphological number, he may be used either with singular or plural forms. The indefinite article he when used with mass nouns like water and sand will always mean 'some'. The indefinite article he is highly restricted in its use and is incompatible with a preceding preposition. For this reason, it cannot be used in the grammatical object of the sentence as these are marked prepositionally, either with i or ki. In many cases, speakers simply use the definite articles te and ngā in positions where he is disallowed, however the indefinite articles tētahi and ētahi may be used in these situations to emphasise the indefiniteness. I PST kite see ahau 1S i ACC te DEF.SG kurī. dog I kite ahau i te kurī. PST see 1S ACC DEF.SG dog "I saw the dog." ("I saw a dog.") I PST kite see ahau 1S i ACC tētahi INDEF.SG kurī. dog I kite ahau i tētahi kurī. PST see 1S ACC INDEF.SG dog "I saw a dog." In positions where both he and tētahi/ētahi may occur, there are sometimes differences of meaning between them as the following examples indicate. Kāore NEG tētahi SG.INDEF tangata person.SG i PST haere go mai. towards.speaker Kāore tētahi tangata i haere mai. NEG SG.INDEF person.SG PST go towards.speaker (1) "Someone didn't come." / "A particular person didn't come." (2) "Nobody came." Kāore NEG he INDEF tangata person.SG i PST haere go mai. towards.speaker Kāore he tangata i haere mai. NEG INDEF person.SG PST go towards.speaker "Nobody came." The proper article a is used before personal and locative nouns acting as the subject of the sentence or before personal nouns and pronouns within prepositional phrases headed by prepositions ending in i (namely i, ki, kei and hei). Kei PRES.LOC hea where a ART Pita? Peter Kei hea a Pita? PRES.LOC where ART Peter "Where is Peter?" Kei PRES.LOC hea where ia? 3S Kei hea ia? PRES.LOC where 3S "Where is he?" Kei PRES.LOC Tāmaki Makaurau Auckland a ART Pita Peter Kei {Tāmaki Makaurau} a Pita PRES.LOC Auckland ART Peter "Peter is in Auckland." Kei PRES.LOC Tāmaki Makaurau Auckland ia 3S Kei {Tāmaki Makaurau} ia PRES.LOC Auckland 3S "He is in Auckland." I PST kite see ahau 1S i ACC a ART Pita Peter I kite ahau i a Pita PST see 1S ACC ART Peter "I saw Peter." I PST kite see ahau 1S i ACC a ART ia 3S I kite ahau i a ia PST see 1S ACC ART 3S "I saw him." The personal nouns are not accompanied by definite or indefinite articles unless they are an intrinsic part of the name, as in Te Rauparaha. Kei PRES.LOC hea where a ART Te Te Rauparaha? Rauparaha Kei hea a Te Rauparaha? PRES.LOC where ART Te Rauparaha "Where is Te Rauparaha?" Kei PRES.LOC t-ō-ku DEF.SG-INAL-1s kāinga home a ART Te Te Rauparaha. Rauparaha Kei t-ō-ku kāinga a Te Rauparaha. PRES.LOC DEF.SG-INAL-1s home ART Te Rauparaha "Te Rauparaha is at my home." Proper nouns are not preceded by the proper article when they are neither acting as the subject of the sentence nor in a prepositional phrase headed by i, ki, kei or hei. For example, after the focusing particle ko, the proper article is not used. Ko FOC Rāwiri Rāwiri t-ō-ku DEF.SG-INAL-1S ingoa. name Ko Rāwiri t-ō-ku ingoa. FOC Rāwiri DEF.SG-INAL-1S name "My name is Rāwiri." Ko FOC Te Te Rauparaha Rauparaha tērā DEM.SG.DIST tangata. person.SG Ko Te Rauparaha tērā tangata. FOC Te Rauparaha DEM.SG.DIST person.SG "That person (over there) is Te Rauparaha." Demonstratives occur after the noun and have a deictic function, and include tēnei, this (near me), tēnā, that (near you), tērā, that (far from us both), and taua, the aforementioned (anaphoric). These demonstratives, having a connection to the definite article te are termed definitives. Other definitives include tēhea? (which?), and tētahi, (a certain). The plural is formed just by dropping the t: tēnei (this), ēnei (these). The related adverbs are nei (here), nā (there, near you), rā (over there, near him). Phrases introduced by demonstratives can also be expressed using the definite article te or ngā preceding a noun followed by one of the deictic particles nei, nā or rā. The t of the singular definite article appears in the singular demonstratives but is replaced by ∅ in the plural, having no connection with ngā in the majority of dialects. te DEF.SG whare house nei PROX = = tēnei DEM.SG.PROX whare house te whare nei = tēnei whare DEF.SG house PROX = DEM.SG.PROX house "this house" ngā DEF.PL whare house nei PROX = = ēnei DEM.PL.PROX whare house ngā whare nei = ēnei whare DEF.PL house PROX = DEM.PL.PROX house "these houses" However, in dialects of the Waikato area, plural forms of demonstratives beginning with ng- are found, such as ngēnei 'these' instead of the more widespread ēnei (as well as and possessives such as ng(e)ōku 'my (plural, inalienable)' instead of ōku). The following table shows the most common forms of demonstratives across dialects. Pronouns have singular, dual and plural number. Different first-person forms in both the dual and the plural are used for groups inclusive or exclusive of the person(s) addressed. Like other Polynesian languages, Māori has three numbers for pronouns and possessives: singular, dual and plural. For example: ia (he/she), rāua (those two), rātou (they, three or more). Māori pronouns and possessives further distinguish exclusive "we" from inclusive "we", second and third. It has the plural pronouns: mātou (we, exc), tātou (we, inc), koutou (you), rātou (they). The language features the dual pronouns: māua (me and another), tāua (me and you), kōrua (you two), rāua (those two). The difference between exclusive and inclusive lies in the treatment of the person addressed. Mātou refers to the speaker and others but not the person or persons spoken to ("I and some others but not you"), and tātou refers to the speaker, the person or persons spoken to and everyone else ("you, I and others"): Tēnā koe: hello (to one person) Tēnā kōrua: hello (to two people) Tēnā koutou: hello (to more than two people) The possessive pronouns vary according to person, number, clusivity, and possessive class (a class or o class). Example: tāku pene (my pen), āku pene (my pens). For dual and plural subject pronouns, the possessive form is analytical, by just putting the possessive particle (tā/tō for singular objects or ā/ō for plural objects) before the personal pronouns, e.g. tā tātou karaihe (our class), tō rāua whare (their [dual] house); ā tātou karaihe (our classes). The neuter one must be followed by a noun and only occur for singular first, second and third persons. Taku is my, aku is my (plural, for many possessed items). The plural is made by deleting the initial [t]. wai ('who') aha ('what') hea ('where') nō hea ('whence') āhea ('when') e hia ('how many [things]') tokohia ('how many [people]') pēhea ('how') tēhea ('which'), ēhea ('which [pl.]') he aha ... ai ('why [reason]') nā te aha ... ai ('why [cause]') A phrase spoken in Māori can be broken up into two parts: the "nucleus" or "head" and "periphery" (modifiers, determiners). The nucleus can be thought of as the meaning and is the centre of the phrase, whereas the periphery is where the grammatical meaning is conveyed and occurs before and/or after the nucleus. The nucleus whare can be translated as "house", the periphery te is similar to an article "the" and the periphery nei indicates proximity to the speaker. The whole phrase, te whare nei, can then be translated as "this house". A definite and declarative sentence (may be a copulative sentence) begins with the declarative particle ko. If the sentence is topicalized (agent topic, only in non-present sentences) the sentence begins with the particle nā (past tense) or the particle mā (future, imperfective) followed by the agent/subject. In these cases the word order changes to subject-verb-object. These agent topicalizing particles can contract with singular personal pronouns and vary according to the possessive classes: nāku can be thought of as meaning "as for me" and behave like an emphatic or dative pronoun. Nominative: ko Accusative: i Dative/directional locative: ki Genitive: a/o Forming negative phrases in Māori is quite grammatically complex. There are several different negators which are used under various specific circumstances. The main negators are as follows: Kīhai and tē are two negators which may be seen in specific dialects or older texts, but are not widely used. The most common negator is kāhore, which may occur in one of four forms, with the kāo form only being used in response to a question. Negative phrases, besides using kāore, also affect the form of verbal particles, as illustrated below. The general usage of kāhore can be seen in the following examples. The subject is usually raised in negative phrases, although this is not obligatory. Each example of a negative phrase is presented with its analogue positive phrase for comparison. The passive voice of verbs is made by a suffix to the verb. For example, -ia (or just -a if the verb ends in [i]). The other passive suffixes, some of which are very rare, are: -hanga/-hia/-hina/-ina/-kia/-kina/-mia/-na/-nga/-ngia/-ria/-rina/-tia/-whia/-whina/. The use of the passive suffix -ia is given in this sentence: Kua hangaia te marae e ngā tohunga (The marae has been built by the experts). The active form of this sentence is rendered as: Kua hanga ngā tohunga i te marae (The experts have built the marae). It can be seen that the active sentence contains the object marker 'i', that is not present in the passive sentence, while the passive sentence has the agent marker 'e', which is not present in the active sentence. Polar questions (yes/no questions) can be made by changing the intonation of the sentence. The answers may be āe (yes) or kāo (no). Although Māori is mostly analytical there are several derivational affixes: -anga, -hanga, -ranga, -tanga (-ness, -ity) (the suffix depends on whether the verb takes, respectively, the -ia, -hia, -ria or -tia passive suffixes) (e.g. pōti 'vote', pōtitanga 'election') -nga (nominalizer) kai- (agentive noun) (e.g. mahi 'work', kaimahi 'worker/employee') ma- (adjectives) tua- (ordinal numerals) (e.g. tahi 'one', tuatahi 'first/primary') whaka- (causative prefix) From missionary times, Māori adopted phonetic variants of the English names for the days of the week and the months of the year. Since about 1990, the Māori Language Commission has promoted new "traditional" sets. Its days of the week have no pre-European equivalent, but reflect the pre-Christian origins of the English names.[citation needed] The commission based the months of the year on those of the traditional Māori lunar calendar (maramataka). New Zealand English has gained many loanwords from Māori, mainly the names of birds, plants, fishes and places. For example, the kiwi, the national bird, takes its name from te reo. "Kia ora" (literally "be healthy") is a widely adopted greeting of Māori origin, with the intended meaning of "hello". It can also mean "thank you", or signify agreement with a speaker at a meeting. The Māori greetings tēnā koe (to one person), tēnā kōrua (to two people) or tēnā koutou (to three or more people) are also widely used, as are farewells such as haere rā. The Māori phrase kia kaha, "be strong", is frequently encountered as an indication of moral support for someone starting a stressful undertaking or otherwise in a difficult situation. Many other words such as whānau (meaning "family") and kai (meaning "food") are also widely understood and used by New Zealanders. The Māori phrase Ka kite anō means 'until I see you again' is quite commonly used. In 2023, 47 words or expressions from New Zealand English, mostly from te reo Māori were added to the Oxford English Dictionary. Māori is available on Google Translate, Microsoft Translator and Yandex Translate. Another popular online dictionary is Te Aka Māori Dictionary. Languages portal New Zealand portal Māori Language Day Te Wiki o te Reo Māori (Māori Language Week) Bauer mentions that Biggs 1961 announced a similar finding. Bauer even raised the possibility of analysing Māori as really having six vowel phonemes, a, ā, e, i, o, u ([a, aː, ɛ, i, ɔ, ʉ]). The Hocken Library contains several early journals and notebooks of early missionaries documenting the vagaries of the southern dialect. Several of them are shown at Blackman, A. Some Sources for Southern Maori dialect. As with many "dead" languages, there is a possibility that the southern dialect may be revived, especially with the encouragement mentioned. "The Murihiku language — Mulihig' being probably better expressive of its state in 1844 — lives on in Watkin's vocabulary list and in many muttonbirding terms still in use, and may flourish again in the new climate of Maoritaka." "Ngā puna kōrero: Where Māori speak te reo – infographic". Statistics New Zealand. Archived from the original on 17 February 2021. Retrieved 2 September 2017. "2018 Census totals by topic – national highlights (updated)". Statistics New Zealand. 30 April 2020. Archived from the original on 24 January 2022. Retrieved 7 May 2022. Glottopedia article on Māori language. "Māori in New Zealand | UNESCO WAL". "History of the Māori language". nzhistory.govt.nz. Retrieved 14 March 2024. "'A Curious Document': Ta Moko as Evidence of Pre-European Textual Culture in New Zealand | NZETC". nzetc.victoria.ac.nz. Retrieved 14 March 2024. Cowan, James: The Maori: Yesterday and To-day Author: Publication details: Whitcombe and Tombs Limited, 1930, Christchurch. Part of: New Zealand Texts Collection. This text is the subject of: Victoria University of Wellington Library Catalogue Krupa, Victor: METAPHORS IN MAORI VOCABULARY AND TRADITIONAL POETRY* (2006) Institute of Oriental Studies, Slovak Academy of Sciences Taylor, Richard (1855). Te Ika a Maui ; or, New Zealand and its inhabitants: illustrating the origin, manners, customs, mythology, religion, rites, songs, proverbs, fables, and language of the natives : together with the geology, natural history, productions, and climate of the country; its state as regards Christianity; sketches of the principal chiels, and their present position. London: Wertheim and Macintosh. p. 72. Retrieved 2 September 2013. "History of the Māori language". nzhistory.govt.nz. Retrieved 14 March 2024. "The Post". www.thepost.co.nz. Retrieved 15 March 2024. "The Post". www.thepost.co.nz. Retrieved 15 March 2024. "Native Schools Act 1867 (31 Victoriae 1867 No 41)". www.nzlii.org. Retrieved 14 March 2024. Calman, Ross. "Māori education – mātauranga – The native schools system, 1867 to 1969". teara.govt.nz. New Zealand Ministry for Culture and Heritage Te Manatu. p. 3. Archived from the original on 16 April 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2021. Ko Aotearoa tēnei: A report into claims concerning New Zealand law and policy affecting Māori culture and identity – Te taumata tuarua (PDF). Wellington, New Zealand: Waitangi Tribunal. 2011. ISBN 978-1-869563-01-1. Wai 262. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 October 2021. Retrieved 5 October 2021. "Māori Language Issues - Te Taura Whiri i te Reo Māori - Māori Language Commission". 2 January 2002. Archived from the original on 2 January 2002. Retrieved 14 March 2024. "Ngā puna kōrero: Where Māori speak te reo – infographic". Statistics New Zealand. Archived from the original on 17 February 2021. Retrieved 2 September 2017. Reassessing Māori Regeneration Bernard Spolsky Language in Society Vol. 32, No. 4 (Sep., 2003), pp. 553-578 (26 pages) Published By: Cambridge University Press "The Post". www.thepost.co.nz. Retrieved 14 March 2024. "Te reo Māori (Māori language)". New Zealand Government. 7 July 2021. Retrieved 14 March 2024. TAONGA, RIGHTS AND INTERESTS: SOME OBSERVATIONS ON WAI 262 AND THE FRAMEWORK OF PROTECTIONS FOR THE MĀORI LANGUAGE - Stephens, Māmari, (2010) NZACL YEARBOOK 16 Higgins, Rawinia; Keane, Basil (1 September 2015). "Te reo Māori – the Māori language". Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand. Retrieved 29 June 2017. "Māori Language Act 1987 No 176 (as at 30 April 2016), Public Act Contents – New Zealand Legislation". legislation.govt.nz. Archived from the original on 9 October 2014. Retrieved 29 June 2017. For example: "Maori and the Local Government Act". New Zealand Department of Internal Affairs. Archived from the original on 11 October 2017. Retrieved 29 June 2017. The New Oxford American Dictionary (Third Edition); Collins English Dictionary – Complete & Unabridged 10th Edition; Dictionary.com "Our Languages – Ō Tātou Reo". Ministry for Ethnic Communities. Archived from the original on 18 May 2022. Retrieved 5 May 2022. "Languages in Aotearoa New Zealand" (PDF). royalsociety.org.nz. The Royal Society of New Zealand Te Apārangi. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 March 2022. Retrieved 5 May 2022. Walters, Laura (16 February 2018). "ANALYSIS: Why English does not need to be made an official language". Stuff.co.nz. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 5 May 2022. "Recognition of Māori Language". New Zealand Government. Archived from the original on 7 February 2012. Retrieved 29 December 2011. Stock, Rob (14 September 2021). "Government and business leaders explain their organisations' te reo Māori names". Stuff. Archived from the original on 20 February 2022. Retrieved 21 February 2022. Iorns Magallanes, Catherine J. (December 2003). "Dedicated Parliamentary Seats for Indigenous Peoples: Political Representation as an Element of Indigenous Self-Determination". Murdoch University Electronic Journal of Law. 10. SSRN 2725610. Archived from the original on 16 May 2017. Retrieved 29 June 2017. "Te Ture mō Te Reo Māori 2016 No 17 (as at 01 March 2017), Public Act 7 Right to speak Māori in legal proceedings – New Zealand Legislation". legislation.govt.nz. Archived from the original on 8 July 2019. Retrieved 8 July 2019. New Zealand Maori Council v Attorney-General [1994] 1 NZLR 513 Dunleavy, Trisha (29 October 2014). "Television – Māori television". Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand. Retrieved 24 August 2015. "New Zealand Gazetteer of Official Geographic Names". Land Information New Zealand. Archived from the original on 11 October 2014. Retrieved 22 February 2009. Howe, K. R. (4 March 2009). "Ideas of Māori origins – 1920s–2000: new understandings". Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand. p. 5. Walters, Richard; Buckley, Hallie; Jacomb, Chris; Matisoo-Smith, Elizabeth (7 October 2017). "Mass Migration and the Polynesian Settlement of New Zealand". Journal of World Prehistory. 30 (4): 351–376. doi:10.1007/s10963-017-9110-y. Reese, Elaine; Keegan, Peter; Mcnaughton, Stuart; Kingi, Te Kani; Carr, Polly Atatoa; Schmidt, Johanna; Mohal, Jatender; Grant, Cameron; Morton, Susan (March 2018). "Te Reo Māori: indigenous language acquisition in the context of New Zealand English". Journal of Child Language. 45 (2): 340–367. doi:10.1017/S0305000917000241. "'A Curious Document': Ta Moko as Evidence of Pre-European Textual Culture in New Zealand | NZETC". nzetc.victoria.ac.nz. Retrieved 15 March 2024. "Ta moko important expression of culture". NZ Herald. 15 March 2024. Retrieved 15 March 2024. "Tā Moko Now, Tā Moko Forever". Critic - Te Ārohi. Retrieved 15 March 2024. "Karakia", Otago University website. Retrieved 23 July 2019. Anderson, Atholl; et al. (November 2015). Tangata Whenua (1st ed.). Auckland: Bridget Williams Books. pp. 47, 48. ISBN 9780908321537.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: date and year (link) Coffey, Clare. "Demand For Māori Language Skills at Work Rises in New Zealand". Lightcast. Retrieved 15 March 2024. Calman, Ross. "Māori education – mātauranga – The native schools system, 1867 to 1969". teara.govt.nz. New Zealand Ministry for Culture and Heritage Te Manatu. p. 3. Archived from the original on 16 April 2019. Retrieved 16 March 2021. "History of the Māori Language". Ministry for Culture and Heritage. 10 October 2017. Archived from the original on 6 April 2020. Retrieved 22 September 2019. "Māori MPs". Ministry for Culture and Heritage. 15 July 2014. Archived from the original on 22 September 2019. Retrieved 22 September 2019. "'I was beaten until I bled'". RNZ. 1 September 2015. Archived from the original on 22 February 2021. Retrieved 3 January 2021. "Compulsory classes will help right the wrong after Te Reo Māori 'beaten' out of school children a generation ago – Sir Pita Sharples". 1 News. Archived from the original on 24 November 2022. Retrieved 24 November 2022. Graham-McLay, Charlotte (12 September 2022). "As Māori language use grows in New Zealand, the challenge is to match deeds to words". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 24 November 2022. Retrieved 24 November 2022. "Rosina Wiparata: A Legacy of Māori Language Education". The Forever Years. 23 February 2015. Archived from the original on 15 November 2017. Retrieved 15 November 2017. Harris, Aroha (2015), "Te Ao Hurihuri: The Changing World", Tangata Whenua: A History, Bridget Williams Books, doi:10.7810/9780908321537_3, ISBN 9780908321537, retrieved 23 November 2022 Ko Aotearoa tēnei: A report into claims concerning New Zealand law and policy affecting Māori culture and identity – Te taumata tuarua (PDF). Wellington, New Zealand: Waitangi Tribunal. 2011. ISBN 978-1-869563-01-1. Wai 262. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 October 2021. Retrieved 5 October 2021. Waitangi Tribunal (2011, p. 440). Waitangi Tribunal (2011, p. 470). "Controller and Auditor-General". Office of the Auditor-General. Wellington, New Zealand. 2017. Archived from the original on 4 December 2017. Retrieved 3 December 2017. Waitangi Tribunal (2011, p. 471). "Waitangi Tribunal". waitangi-tribunal.govt.nz. Archived from the original on 14 November 2013. Retrieved 9 November 2016. Albury, Nathan John (2 October 2015). "Collective (white) memories of Māori language loss (or not)". Language Awareness. 24 (4): 303–315. doi:10.1080/09658416.2015.1111899. ISSN 0965-8416. S2CID 146532249. Albury, Nathan John (2 April 2016). "An old problem with new directions: Māori language revitalisation and the policy ideas of youth". Current Issues in Language Planning. 17 (2): 161–178. doi:10.1080/14664208.2016.1147117. ISSN 1466-4208. S2CID 147076237. Roy, Eleanor Ainge (28 July 2018). "Google and Disney join rush to cash in as Māori goes mainstream". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 July 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018. John McCaffery, a language expert at the University of Auckland school of education, says the language is thriving, with other indigenous peoples travelling to New Zealand to learn how Māori has made such a striking comeback. 'It has been really dramatic, the past three years in particular, Māori has gone mainstream,' he said. Graham-McLay, Charlotte (16 September 2018). "Maori Language, Once Shunned, Is Having a Renaissance in New Zealand". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 7 November 2022. Retrieved 7 November 2022. "In New Zealand, 'Hello' Has Become 'Kia Ora.' Will That Save the Māori Language?". Time. Retrieved 7 November 2022. "Bilingual Rotorua". Te Arawa Stories. Ngā Pūmanawa e Waru Education Trust. Archived from the original on 20 February 2022. Retrieved 21 February 2022. "Moana in Māori hits the big screen". RNZ. 11 September 2017. Archived from the original on 9 August 2020. Retrieved 29 May 2022. "Disney to produce te reo Māori versions of The Lion King, Frozen". NZ Herald. Archived from the original on 26 June 2022. Retrieved 29 May 2022. "Matewa Media and Disney to Dub Classics in Māori | MultiLingual". multilingual.com. 27 July 2021. Archived from the original on 29 May 2022. Retrieved 29 May 2022. "Cast for Lion King Te Reo Māori announced". 1 News. Archived from the original on 29 May 2022. Retrieved 29 May 2022. "Te Reo Māori version of The Lion King coming to cinemas". Mai FM. Archived from the original on 27 May 2022. Retrieved 29 May 2022. "Frozen launched in te reo Māori". Māori Television. 26 October 2022. Archived from the original on 7 November 2022. Retrieved 7 November 2022. "Coco Reo Māori | Auditions". Matewa Media. Archived from the original on 26 January 2023. Retrieved 26 January 2023. "Why Coco Reo Māori is being released in time for Matariki". Newshub. 12 July 2023. Archived from the original on 18 December 2023. Retrieved 18 December 2023. "Disney's Encanto to be revoiced in te reo Māori". 1 News. Archived from the original on 12 June 2023. Retrieved 10 June 2023. "Plan to have 1 million people speaking te reo Māori by 2040". RNZ. 21 February 2019. Archived from the original on 7 November 2022. Retrieved 7 November 2022. "Maihi Karauna". www.tpk.govt.nz. Archived from the original on 10 November 2022. Retrieved 7 November 2022. "Harry Potter to be translated into te reo Māori". Stuff.co.nz. Archived from the original on 8 December 2019. Retrieved 10 December 2019. "BSA signals end to te reo Māori complaints". RNZ. 9 March 2021. Archived from the original on 15 March 2021. Retrieved 25 March 2021. Biggs 1994, pp. 96–105. Clark 1994, pp. 123–135. Harlow 1994, pp. 106–122. Banks 1771, 9 October 1769: "we again advanc'd to the river side with Tupia, who now found that the language of the people was so like his own that he could tolerably well understand them and they him.". "Rapanui expedition reveals similarities to Te Reo Maori". Radio New Zealand. 16 October 2012. Archived from the original on 29 March 2019. Retrieved 29 March 2019. "QuickStats About Māori". Statistics New Zealand. 2006. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 14 November 2007. (revised 2007) "Māori Language Issues – Te Taura Whiri i te Reo Māori". Māori Language Commission. Archived from the original on 2 January 2002. Retrieved 12 February 2011. "Māori language speakers". Statistics New Zealand. 2013. Archived from the original on 2 September 2017. Retrieved 2 September 2017. Albury, Nathan (2016). "Defining Māori language revitalisation: A project in folk linguistics". Journal of Sociolinguistics. 20 (3): 287–311. doi:10.1111/josl.12183. hdl:10852/58904, p. 301. "Census 2016, Language spoken at home by Sex (SA2+)". Australian Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. Retrieved 28 October 2017. Aldworth, John (12 May 2012). "Rocks could rock history". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on 21 August 2017. Retrieved 5 May 2017. Salmond, Anne (1997). Between Worlds: Early Exchanges between Maori and Europeans, 1773–1815. Auckland: Viking. Brownson, Ron (23 December 2010). "Outpost". Staff and friends of Auckland Art Gallery Toi o Tāmaki. Archived from the original on 26 January 2018. Retrieved 13 January 2018. Hika, Hongi. "Sample of Writing by Shunghie [Hongi Hika] on board the Active". Marsden Online Archive. University of Otago. Archived from the original on 25 May 2015. Retrieved 25 May 2015. "The Missionary Register". Early New Zealand Books (ENZB), University of Auckland Library. 1831. pp. 54–55. Archived from the original on 18 February 2018. Retrieved 9 March 2019. May, Helen; Kaur, Baljit; Prochner, Larry (2016). Empire, Education, and Indigenous Childhoods: Nineteenth-Century Missionary Infant Schools in Three British Colonies. Routledge. p. 206. ISBN 978-1-317-14434-2. Retrieved 16 February 2020. Stack, James West (1938). Reed, Alfred Hamish (ed.). Early Maoriland adventures of J.W. Stack. p. 217. Stowell, Henry M. (November 2008). Maori-English Tutor and Vade Mecum. Read Books. ISBN 9781443778398. This was the first attempt by a Māori author at a grammar of Māori. Apanui, Ngahiwi (11 September 2017). "What's that little line? He aha tēnā paku rārangi?". Stuff. Stuff. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 16 June 2018. "Māori Orthographic Conventions". Māori Language Commission. Archived from the original on 6 September 2009. Retrieved 11 June 2010. Keane, Basil (11 March 2010). "Mātauranga hangarau – information technology – Māori language on the internet". Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand. Retrieved 29 June 2017. "Why Stuff is introducing macrons for te reo Māori words". Stuff. 10 September 2017. Retrieved 10 October 2018. "Seven Sharp – Why are macrons so important in te reo Māori". tvnz.co.nz. Archived from the original on 11 October 2018. Retrieved 10 October 2018. Staff Reporters. "Official language to receive our best efforts". The New Zealand Herald. ISSN 1170-0777. Archived from the original on 7 April 2020. Retrieved 10 October 2018. Keane, Basil (11 March 2010). "Mātauranga hangarau – information technology – Māori language on the internet". Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand. Retrieved 16 February 2020. Lai, Jessica Christine (2014). Indigenous Cultural Heritage and Intellectual Property Rights. Switzerland: Springer. p. 1. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-02955-9. ISBN 978-3-319-02954-2. "Te Wiki o Te Reo Maaori Discovery Trail – Waikato Museum". waikatomuseum.co.nz. Archived from the original on 10 October 2018. Retrieved 10 October 2018. "Māori Language Week 2017 – Hamilton City Council". hamilton.govt.nz. Archived from the original on 31 July 2021. Retrieved 10 October 2018. "Proposed District Plan (Stage 1) 13 Definitions" (PDF). Waikato District Council. 18 July 2018. p. 28. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2018. Retrieved 10 October 2018. Goldsmith, Paul (13 July 2012). "Taxes – Tax, ideology and international comparisons". Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand. Retrieved 14 June 2013. "Māori Dictionary Project". Archived from the original on 2 December 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2020. Bauer 1993, p. 537. Bauer 1997, p. 536. Zuckermann, Ghil'ad (2020), Revivalistics: From the Genesis of Israeli to Language Reclamation in Australia and Beyond, Oxford University Press Archived 25 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine. ISBN 9780199812790 / ISBN 9780199812776 Harlow 2007, p. 69. Harlow 2007, p. 79. Harlow 1996, p. 1. Bauer 1997, p. 534. Bauer 1997, On page 532, Bauer lists seven allophones (variant pronunciations). Williams, H. W. and W. L (1930). First Lessons in Maori. Whitcombe and Tombs Limited. p. 6. McLintock, A. H., ed. (1966). "MAORI LANGUAGE – Pronunciation". Encyclopedia of New Zealand. Archived from the original on 24 October 2007. Harlow 2007, p. 42. Biggs 1988, p. 65. Bauer 1997, p. xxvi. Bauer 1993, p. xxi–xxii. Goodall & Griffiths 1980, pp. 46–48. Goodall & Griffiths 1980, page 50: "Southern dialect for 'wai' – water, 'hora' – spread out.". Goodall & Griffiths 1980, page 45: "This hill [The Kilmog]...has a much debated name, but its origins are clear to Kaitahu and the word illustrates several major features of the southern dialect. First we must restore the truncated final vowel (in this case to both parts of the name, 'kilimogo'). Then substitute r for l, k for g, to obtain the northern pronunciation, 'kirimoko'.... Though final vowels existed in Kaitahu dialect, the elision was so nearly complete that pākehā recorders often omitted them entirely.". Natusch, S (1999). Southward Ho! The Deborah in Quest of a New Edinburgh, 1844. Invercargill, NZ: Craig Printing. ISBN 978-0-908629-16-9. "Approved Māori signage". University of Otago. Archived from the original on 7 June 2019. Retrieved 6 June 2019. "Eastern Southland Regional Coastal Plan", from "Regional Coastal Plan for Southland – July 2005 – Chapter 1". See section 1.4, Terminology. Retrieved 3 December 2014. Keegan, Peter J. (2017). "Brief (200) Word Description of the Māori Language". Archived from the original on 21 September 2019. Retrieved 16 September 2019. Biggs 1998, pp. 32–33. Biggs 1998, pp. 46–48. Biggs 1998, p. 3. Biggs 1998, pp. 54–55. Bauer 1997, pp. 144–147. Bauer 1997, pp. 153–154. Bauer 1997, pp. 394–396. Bauer 1997, p. 160. Biggs 1998, p. 153. Biggs 1998, p. 55. Biggs 1998, pp. 23–24. Biggs 1998, p. 57. Biggs 1998, pp. 107–108. Bauer 1997, pp. 84–100. Bauer 1997, p. 447. Bauer 1997, p. 98. Bauer 1997, p. 30. Biggs 1998, pp. 42. Biggs 1998, pp. 7–8. Harlow 2007, p. 141. Harlow 2007, pp. 143, 144. Harlow 2007, p. 143. Biggs 1998, p. 7. Harlow 2007, p. 144. Harlow 2007, p. 145. Biggs 1998, pp. 8–9. Bauer 1997, pp. 152–154. Harlow 2007, p. 142. Harlow 2007, p. 48. Bauer 1997, pp. 261–262. "Greetings – Mihi". MāoriLanguage.net. Archived from the original on 22 September 2019. Retrieved 22 September 2019. "Questions". kupu.maori.nz. Kupu o te Rā. Archived from the original on 1 September 2019. Retrieved 22 September 2019. Biggs 1998, p. 4. Biggs 1998, p. 5. Biggs 1998, pp. 15–17. Biggs 1998, pp. 87–89. Bauer 1997, p. 181. Bauer 1997, pp. 175–176. Bauer 1997, pp. 176–179. Bauer 1997, pp. 183–184. Bauer, Evans & Parker 2001, p. 139. Bauer, Evans & Parker 2001, p. 141. Bauer, Evans & Parker 2001, p. 140. Harlow 2015, p. 113. "Passive sentences". kupu.maori.nz. Kupu o te Rā. Archived from the original on 1 September 2019. Retrieved 14 September 2019. Bauer 1997, pp. 424–427. Bauer 1997, pp. 517–524. Bauer 1997, pp. 25–26. Harlow 2015, p. 112. Bauer 1997, pp. 282–283. Bauer 1997, pp. 44–45. "Māori Orthographic Conventions". Te Taura Whiri i Te Reo Māori (Māori Language Commission). Archived from the original on 23 September 2019. Retrieved 23 September 2019. Taonga. "Lunar months". Te Ara. New Zealand Ministry for Culture and Heritage Te Manatu. Archived from the original on 13 January 2022. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Swarbrick, Nancy (5 September 2013). "Manners and social behaviour". teara.govt.nz. Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand. Archived from the original on 22 February 2018. Retrieved 21 February 2018. Graham-McLay, Charlotte (15 March 2023). "Kia ora e hoa: dozens of New Zealand and Māori words added to Oxford English Dictionary". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 March 2023. Retrieved 15 March 2023. "Language spoken at home | Australia | Community profile 120". profile.id.com.au. Archived from the original on 8 March 2022. Retrieved 2 May 2021. "Language spoken at home | Australia | Community profile 130". profile.id.com.au. Archived from the original on 8 December 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2021. "Language spoken at home | Australia | Community profile 100". profile.id.com.au. Archived from the original on 17 November 2022. Retrieved 2 May 2021. "Language spoken at home | Australia | Community profile 110". profile.id.com.au. Archived from the original on 19 January 2022. Retrieved 2 May 2021. "Language spoken at home | Australia | Community profile 160". profile.id.com.au. "Language spoken at home | Australia | Community profile 170". profile.id.com.au. "Language spoken at home | Australia | Community profile 150". profile.id.com.au. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 2 May 2021. "Māori Dictionary". maoridictionary.co.nz. Archived from the original on 12 May 2020. Retrieved 28 May 2018. Banks, Sir Joseph (1771). The Endeavour Journal of Sir Joseph Banks, Journal from 25 August 1768 – 12 July 1771. Project Gutenberg. Archived from the original on 10 October 2014. Retrieved 18 March 2012. Also available at Wikisource. Bauer, Winifred (1993). Maori. Routledge descriptive grammars. Routledge. Bauer, Winifred (1997). Reference Grammar of Māori. Auckland: Reed. Bauer, Winifred; Evans, Te Kareongawai; Parker, William (2001). Maori. Routledge descriptive grammars. Routledge. Biggs, Bruce (1988). "Towards the study of Maori dialects". In Harlow, Ray; Hooper, Robin (eds.). VICAL 1: Oceanic languages. Papers from the Fifth International Conference on Austronesian linguistics. Auckland, New Zealand. January 1988, Part I. Auckland: Linguistic Society of New Zealand. Biggs, Bruce (1994). "Does Māori have a closest relative?". In Sutton, Douglas G. (ed.). The Origins of the First New Zealanders. Auckland: Auckland University Press. pp. 96–105. ISBN 1-86940-098-4. Biggs, Bruce (1998). Let's Learn Māori. Auckland: Auckland University Press. Griffiths, George John; Goodall, Maarire (1980). Maori Dunedin. Dunedin: Otago Heritage Books. Clark, Ross (1994). "Moriori and Māori: The Linguistic Evidence". In Sutton, Douglas G. (ed.). The Origins of the First New Zealanders. Auckland: Auckland University Press. pp. 123–135. ISBN 1-86940-098-4. Harlow, Ray (1994). "Māori Dialectology and the Settlement of New Zealand". In Sutton, Douglas G. (ed.). The Origins of the First New Zealanders. Auckland: Auckland University Press. pp. 106–122. ISBN 1-86940-098-4. Harlow, Ray (1996). Maori. Languages of the world. LINCOM Europa. ISBN 9783895861208. Harlow, Ray (2007). Māori: A Linguistic Introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-80861-3. Harlow, Ray (2015). A Māori Reference Grammar. Wellington: Huia. ISBN 9781775502036. Goodall, Maarire; Griffiths, George J. (1980). Maori Dunedin. Dunedin: Otago Heritage Books. Benton, R. A. (1984). "Bilingual education and the survival of the Māori language". The Journal of the Polynesian Society, 93(3), 247–266. JSTOR 20705872. Benton, R. A. (1988). "The Māori language in New Zealand education". Language, culture and curriculum, 1(2), 75–83. doi:10.1080/07908318809525030. Benton, N. (1989). "Education, language decline and language revitalisation: The case of Maori in New Zealand". Language and Education, 3(2), 65–82. doi:10.1080/09500788909541252. Benton, R. A. (1997). The Maori Language: Dying or Reviving?. NZCER, Distribution Services, Wellington, New Zealand. Gagné, N. (2013). Being Maori in the City: Indigenous Everyday Life in Auckland. University of Toronto Press. JSTOR 10.3138/j.ctt2ttwzt. Holmes, J. (1997). "Maori and Pakeha English: Some New Zealand Social Dialect Data". Language in Society, 26(1), 65–101. JSTOR 4168750. doi:10.1017/S0047404500019412. Sissons, J. (1993). "The Systematisation of Tradition: Maori Culture as a Strategic Resource". Oceania, 64(2), 97–116. JSTOR 40331380. doi:10.1002/j.1834-4461.1993.tb02457.x. Smith, G. H. (2000). "Maori education: Revolution and transformative action". Canadian Journal of Native Education, 24(1), 57. Smith, G. H. (2003). "Indigenous struggle for the transformation of education and schooling". Transforming Institutions: Reclaiming Education and Schooling for Indigenous Peoples, 1–14. Spolsky, B.. (2003). "Reassessing Māori Regeneration". Language in Society, 32(4), 553–578. JSTOR 4169286. doi:10.1017/S0047404503324042. Kendall, Thomas; Lee, Samuel (1820). A Grammar and Vocabulary of the Language of New Zealand. London: R. Watts. Tregear, Edward (1891). The Maori-Polynesian comparative dictionary. Wellington: Lyon and Blair. Māori language at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Phrasebook from Wikivoyage Māori edition of Wikipedia Ngata Māori–English English–Māori Dictionary from Modern Teaching Aids; gives several options and shows use in phrases. Te Aka Māori-English, English-Māori Dictionary and Index, online version A Dictionary of the Maori Language by Herbert W. Williams, at the New Zealand Electronic Text Collection, Te Pūhikotuhi o Aotearoa Collection of historic Māori newspapers Maori Phonology maorilanguage.net Learn the basics of Māori Language with video tutorials Maori Language Week at NZHistory – includes a history of the Māori language, the Treaty of Waitangi Māori Language claim and 100 words every New Zealander should know Huia Publishers, catalogue includes Tirohia Kimihia the world's first Māori monolingual dictionary for learners Publications about Māori language from Te Puni Kōkiri, the Ministry of Māori Development Te Reo Maori word list A glossary of commonly used Māori words with English translation Materials on Maori are included in the open access Arthur Capell collections (AC1 and AC2) held by Paradisec.