Kateřina Siniaková (Czech pronunciation: [ˈkatɛr̝ɪna ˈsɪɲakovaː]; born 10 May 1996) is a Czech professional tennis player. She is a former world No. 1 in doubles. Siniaková is a seven-time Grand Slam champion in women's doubles, partnering fellow Czech Barbora Krejčíková, having completed the career Super Slam in the discipline. The pairing also finished runners-up at the 2021 Australian Open, and Siniaková reached the final at the 2017 US Open with Lucie Hradecká. She became world No. 1 for the first time in October 2018, and has held the top ranking in doubles for a total of 115 weeks, the sixhth highest total since the beginning of the WTA rankings. Siniaková has won 24 doubles titles on the WTA Tour, including the 2021 WTA Finals and three at WTA 1000 level. In singles, Siniaková reached her career-high ranking of world No. 31 in October 2018, and has won five WTA titles, at the Shenzhen Open and Swedish Open in 2017, the Slovenia Open in 2022, and the Bad Homburg Open and Jiangxi Open in 2023. Her best major result was at the 2019 French Open, upsetting world No. 1 and reigning US and Australian Open champion Naomi Osaka en route to the fourth round; she has also reached the third round at seven other major tournaments. Siniaková was part of the Czech team which won the 2018 Fed Cup, and also won doubles gold at the 2020 Tokyo Olympics alongside Krejčíková. Siniaková was born to a Czech mother Hana, an accountant, and Russian father Dmitry, a former boxer and her coach. Her younger brother Daniel (born 2003) is also a professional tennis player. Since the COVID-19 quarantine at the 2021 Australian Open, Siniaková has been dating fellow Czech tennis player Tomáš Macháč. She was ranked the world No. 2 junior tennis player in December 2012. With fellow Czech Barbora Krejčíková, she won the girls' doubles titles at the French Open, at Wimbledon and the US Open in 2013. She began playing on the ITF Women's Circuit in the Czech Republic in June 2012. There in a doubles competition, she won her first ITF title. She then made big progress in 2013. She started outside top 1000 in both singles and doubles, but finished year inside top 200 in singles and top 300 in doubles. In March 2013, she won her first ITF singles title at the $10k Frauenfeld, defeating Kathinka von Deichmann in the three sets. Two weeks later, Siniaková made her debut on the WTA Tour in the qualifying draw of Miami Open. She passed qualifying defeating Mandy Minella and Alexa Glatch, but then lost a three-set encounter with Garbiñe Muguruza in the first round of the main draw. In November 2013, she reached her first major ITF final at the $75k Sharm El Sheikh event in doubles, but lost alongside Anna Morgina. At the 2014 Australian Open, she made her major debut, after passing qualifying but then lost to Zarina Diyas in the first round of the main draw. In July 2014, she won her first match on WTA Tour at the İstanbul Cup defeating Julia Glushko in the first round. Nearly after that, she reached her first WTA doubles final at the Silicon Valley Classic alongside Paula Kania, but they lost to Garbiñe Muguruza and Carla Suárez Navarro. She then went one step further, winning her first WTA doubles title at the Tashkent Open, partnering Aleksandra Krunić. Right after that she made her top 100 debut in doubles. In October 2014, she reached singles semifinals of the Premier-level Kremlin Cup but lost her match against Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova. This brought her into the top 100 in singles, and a week later, she won the title at the $50k Open Nantes Atlantique defeating Ons Jabeur. She finished year with another title at the Open de Limoges, alongside Renata Voráčová. At the Australian Open, Siniaková had her first singles Grand Slam win, defeating Elena Vesnina in the first round. In the following round, she lost to Irina-Camelia Begu. In March 2015, she won her first WTA 1000 match at the Premier Mandatory-level Indian Wells Open, defeating another Russian player, Evgeniya Rodina. In May 2015, she had good performances, reaching the singles semifinal and taking the doubles title with Belinda Bencic at the Prague Open. However, after a run to the third-round at the French Open alongside Bencic, she reached top 50. In June 2015, she reached the quarterfinal of the Premier-level Birmingham Classic. By the end of the year, she was standing out more in doubles, reaching final of the Tashkent Open and semifinal of the Premier-level Kremlin Cup. Siniaková started slowly into the 2016 season, but then shone at the French Open, where she reached semifinals in doubles alongside Barbora Krejčíková. Then, at 2016 Wimbledon, she reached her first singles Grand Slam third round, after defeating Pauline Parmentier and 30th seed Caroline Garcia before being defeated by former world No. 2, Agnieszka Radwańska. Things even got better in July 2016, when she reached her first singles WTA final in Båstad, at the Swedish Open. She lost the final to Laura Siegemund. But then she advanced to the doubles quarterfinals of the US Open, alongside Krejčíková. She followed this up with another singles WTA final at the Japan Women's Open in Tokyo, but lost to Christina McHale. In late October, after a first-round loss at the Kremlin Cup, she made her top-50 debut in singles. Siniaková had a strong start to the 2017 season, winning her first WTA singles title at the Shenzhen Open. Siniaková began the tournament by defeating Peng Shuai in the first round in two sets, followed by a victory over world No. 4, Simona Halep in three sets, claiming her first win over a top-10 player. Her run continued by beating qualifier Nina Stojanović and world No. 9, Johanna Konta, in three sets. In the final, she defeated Alison Riske to take the title. She then struggled with results, not even reaching a quarterfinal until May 2017. However, during that period, she had success in doubles where she reached the final of Indian Wells and the Premier-level Charleston Open alongside Lucie Hradecká. Then in May 2017, she reached the quarterfinal of the Prague Open in singles, as well as the final in doubles. She continued this form, with good results in doubles, reaching the quarterfinals of the Premier Mandatory Madrid Open and Premier 5 Italian Open with Hradecka. She then reached the doubles semifinal of the French Open for the second year in a row, alongside Lucie Hradecká. However, in singles, things still were not good until Swedish Open, where she reached her second final. A losing finalist in 2016, this time she succeeded in winning the title, after she defeated world No. 6, Caroline Wozniacki, in the final. On her way to the title, she also defeated two top-20 players, Anastasija Sevastova and Caroline Garcia. She then continued struggling with results in singles, but made did make progress in doubles. At the US Open, she reached her first major doubles final. Alongside Lucie Hradecká, she did not drop a singles set on the way to the final, but then they lost to Latisha Chan and Martina Hingis. Later in the year, she reached the quarterfinal of the Premier-Mandatory China Open and semifinal of the Premier-level Kremlin Cup in doubles. As a result of that, she achieved No. 11 ranking in doubles and finished year as world No. 13, while in singles she ended as world No. 49. Siniaková started year well, playing at the Shenzhen Open where she reached the finals in both singles and doubles, but lost to Simona Halep in both. Her run to the singles final included a semifinal-win over Maria Sharapova. She played in the doubles final alongside Krejčíková, but they lost to Halep and Irina-Camelia Begu. She then lost to Elina Svitolina in the first-round match at the Australian Open, and in doubles reached the third round with Krejčíková. Siniaková then reached the quarterfinals in singles at the Premier-level St. Petersburg Ladies' Trophy, and then in May, she reached the quarterfinal of the Prague Open and the semifinal of the Nuremberg Cup. During that period, things got better in doubles where she first reached the semifinals of the Premier 5 Qatar Ladies Open and then the final of the Premier Mandatory Miami Open. In the summer, she had her biggest success in doubles. Alongside Krejčíková, she won two major titles at the French Open and Wimbledon, while in singles at both tournaments, she reached third rounds. Winning two slams back to back and winning the junior and senior Grand Slam titles at these two events was a great achievement for Siniaková and Krejčíková. At the US Open, she reached the third round in singles, and made the semifinals in doubles, alongside Krejčíková. During the Asian hardcourt tour, Siniaková alsö improved her singles results. First, she reached the quarterfinal of the Premier 5 Wuhan Open, where she also defeated world No. 4 Caroline Garcia and former No. 1, Garbiñe Muguruza. She followed this up with another quarterfinal, but this time at the Premier Mandatory China Open where she defeated world No. 11, Kiki Bertens, but later lost to world No. 2, Caroline Wozniacki. At the end of the year, she reached the final of the Tour Championships in doubles, alongside Krejčíková, but they lost to Tímea Babos and Kristina Mladenovic. On 22 October 2018, she made her then-highest singles ranking of place 31, while on the same day, she became world No. 1 in doubles, along with Krejčíková. She finished year with the same positions, in singles and in doubles. During the first four months of 2019, Siniaková did not have any significant results in singles, but was more successful in doubles. She started year with the semifinal of the Premier-level Brisbane International, followed with title at another Premier-level tournament, Sydney International with Krejčíková. Then, at the Australian Open, alongside Krejčíková, she reached the quarterfinal and completed reaching the quarterfinals at all four Grand Slam tournaments. She did not stop there, reaching quarterfinal of the Premier 5 Dubai Championships and soon after that the final of the Premier Mandatory Indian Wells Open. Then, on clay court, she started with better results in singles, first reaching quarterfinal of the Prague Open, followed by semifinal at Nuremberg. At the Madrid Open and Italian Open, she lost early in singles, but reached quarterfinal and semifinal, respectively, in doubles. Siniaková then made progress at the French Open, reaching her first Grand Slam singles round of 16, after defeating world No. 1, Naomi Osaka. She then lost to Madison Keys in the quarterfinal-match. The following month, she continued to struggle with results in singles, but reached the semifinal of Wimbledon in doubles with Krejčíková. In late August, she reached another WTA Tour singles semifinal at the Bronx Open. However, by the end of the year, she continued to struggle in singles, but in doubles she and Krejčíková won the Canadian Open and Linz Open. At the WTA Finals, alongside Krejčíková, she exited in the round-robin stage, after winning one match and losing two others. She finished year as world No. 58 in singles and No. 7 in doubles, after spending the whole year inside the top 60 in singles and top 10 in doubles. During the 2020 season, Siniaková continued to struggle with results in singles. Her first stand out result was when she defeated former world No. 1, Angelique Kerber, in the first round of the Premier 5 Italian Open, in straight sets. In the following round, she lost to Daria Kasatkina. After that, she reached the quarterfinal of the Internationaux de Strasbourg and then the third round of the French Open. In doubles, she had strong start, winning the title at the Shenzhen Open in the opening week. She followed this with a strong performance at the Australian Open, where alongside Krejčíková, she reached the semifinals. With this result, she completed the achievement of reaching the quarter finals all four Grand Slam tournaments. Siniaková then reached the semifinal of the Premier 5 Qatar Ladies Open. Then, after six months absence of the WTA Tour due to COVID-19 outbreak, Siniaková started slow with the semifinal of the Prague Open, first round of Cincinnati Open, second round at the US Open, but then reached the quarterfinals of the Italian Open and semifinals of the French Open. The end of the year saw her reach the doubles final of the Linz Open, alongside Lucie Hradecká. Siniaková spent the whole year inside top 70 in singles, while in doubles inside top 10. She finished the season as the world No. 64 in singles, and No. 8 in doubles. There was a positive start to 2021, when Siniaková and Krejčíková reached the doubles final at the Australian Open, before losing to Elise Mertens and Aryna Sabalenka. At the Madrid Open, Siniaková and Krejčíková won the title, defeating Demi Schuurs and Gabriela Dabrowski in the final for their biggest title since Wimbledon 2018. At the French Open in doubles, Siniaková and Krejčíková defeated the Plíšková twins in an all Czech quarterfinals and Bernarda Pera & Magda Linette in the semifinals to reach their second French Open final. They then beat Bethanie Mattek-Sands and Iga Świątek in straight sets to claim their second title at Roland Garros, while Siniakova's partner Barbora Krejčíková won her maiden Grand Slam singles title at the same event. As a result, Krejčíková and Siniaková reclaimed the No. 1 and No. 2 spots in the doubles rankings, respectively. At the Olympics, the pair won gold in women's doubles, defeating the Swiss pair of Belinda Bencic and Viktoria Golubic in the gold medal match. However, the pair lost in the first round of the US Open. But the season ended on a high for Siniaková as she partnered with Jeļena Ostapenko to win the doubles title in Moscow, and then reteamed with Krejčíková to win the WTA Finals doubles title in Guadalajara, going through the tournament unbeaten. Consequently, Siniaková rose to the top of the rankings and ended the year as the world No. 1 doubles player. In singles, Siniaková had a few significant wins. She reached the quarterfinals at the WTA 250 in Istanbul, in April before losing to Elisa Mertens. In May, she beat Clara Tauson, Serena Williams and Caroline Garcia at the WTA 250 Parma Open, before losing to Coco Gauff in the semifinals. Siniaková had a good run to the third round at the French Open, before losing to Tamara Zidanšek. She then reached her first WTA Tour singles final in several years at the Bad Homburg Open which she lost to Angelique Kerber. With her summer singles form she reached third round at Wimbledon, before losing to eventual champion Ashleigh Barty. Siniaková then reached the quarterfinals of the Prague Open in July, being beaten heavily by her double partner Krejčíková who would also go in to take the title. Siniaková beat former world No. 1 Muguruza at the WTA-1000 tournament in Montreal in August and then in October 2021, defeated returning former No. 1, Kim Clijsters, at the Indian Wells Open. She ended the year ranked No. 49 for singles. Siniaková began the 2022 season by winning the doubles title at the Melbourne Summer Set 2 with Bernarda Pera. As the top seed at the Australian Open, Siniaková reached the doubles final with Krejčíková, in which they defeated Anna Danilina and Beatriz Haddad Maia to claim their first Australian Open women's doubles title. Siniaková's season in doubles was affected by an elbow injury to Krejčíková in Doha in February that meant they did not play together again until Wimbledon. Siniaková herself was affected by an abdominal injury that forced her to withdraw in matches in Miami and Madrid. However, she won the doubles title at the German Open with Storm Sanders in June. The Czech duo was forced to withdraw from the French Open draw as well, after Krejčíková tested positive for COVID-19. In singles, Siniaková's grass-court season did not go well as she had tough draws against Simona Halep and Bianca Andreescu in Bad Homburg and Berlin. At Wimbledon, she lost in the first round in singles to first-time qualifier Maja Chwalińska in straight sets. At the same tournament in doubles, she reached the final with Krejčíková and won the title for a second time at this major defeating top seeds Elise Mertens and Zhang Shuai, in straight sets. After poor results in singles, Siniaková dropped down to play an ITF tournament in Poland in August, which she won beating Magda Linette. At the US Open, she won the doubles title with Krejčíková completing the career Golden Slam. Siniaková followed up this success in doubles a week later, with her third singles title at the Portorož Open in Slovenia, defeating 2022 Wimbledon champion Elena Rybakina in the final, in three sets. Siniaková then teamed up with Kristina Mladenovic to win the doubles title at the Jasmin Open. She had another good win in singles to beat top-20 player Haddad Maia in the first round of the last WTA 1000 of the year at the Guadalajara Open and made the semifinals in doubles alongside Krejčíková. The pair then played the WTA Finals in Fort Worth, Texas. They went undefeated in the round robin stage but were defeated in the final by Veronika Kudermetova and Elise Mertens. Siniaková began season at the 2023 Adelaide International 1 where she failed to qualify in singles, but teamed up with Storm Hunter to reach the final in which they were defeated by Taylor Townsend and Asia Muhammed. At the Australian Open, she reunited with Krejčíková in the women's doubles, where they won their 24th consecutive major match, and their seventh doubles Grand Slam title and for the first time, defended a major title. With this win, Siniaková retained the world No. 1 doubles ranking. She and Krejčíková won the Indian Wells Open doubles title, but Siniaková then sustained a wrist injury at the next tournament in Miami that affected her for some months. She reached her first singles final of the season at the Bad Homburg Open and second at this tournament, defeating second seed Liudmila Samsonova and Emma Navarro in the same day. Finally, she won her fourth singles title defeating Lucia Bronzetti in two sets. After an unsuccessful run of doubles and singles results, she won her 23rd career doubles title alongside Krejčíková at the 2023 San Diego Open. She reached her third singles final of the year at the Jiangxi Open and tenth on the WTA Tour overall, after reaching the Hong Kong Open final a week earlier where she lost in three sets to Leylah Fernandez. Next, in the longest final of 2023, Siniaková defeated compatriot Marie Bouzková to win her fifth WTA Tour singles title and second of the year. In November, it was announced that Siniaková and Krejčíková would no longer play doubles together, a change initiated by Siniaková. She ended the year ranked No. 45 in singles and No. 10 in doubles – her lowest year-end doubles ranking since 2017. At the 2024 Dubai Tennis Championships she won her fourth WTA 1000 title with new partner Storm Hunter. At the 2024 BNP Paribas Open, she reached the final with Hunter but lost to top seeded pair Hsieh/Mertens. In February 2017, she was nominated to the Fed Cup team for the first time by the captain Petr Pála as she was the third best ranked woman Czech tennis player (considering Petra Kvitová's injury) after Karolína Plíšková and Barbora Strýcová. Anyway, the captain announced eventually that Siniaková would first of all collect experience. Siniaková along with Barbora Krejčíková won the gold medal in the women's doubles at the 2020 Summer Olympics. Siniaková was also part of the Czech team at the 2020-21 Billie Jean King Cup Finals in Prague, where she played doubles alongside Lucie Hradecká. She was again part of the Czech team at the 2022 Billie Jean King Cup Finals held in Glasgow, Scotland. In the group stage, she teamed up with Markéta Vondroušová to win a doubles tie against Poland and earned the winning point by beating Coco Gauff in singles. (W) winner; (F) finalist; (SF) semifinalist; (QF) quarterfinalist; (#R) rounds 4, 3, 2, 1; (RR) round-robin stage; (Q#) qualification round; (P#) preliminary round; (DNQ) did not qualify; (A) absent; (Z#) Davis/Fed Cup Zonal Group (with number indication) or (PO) play-off; (G) gold, (S) silver or (B) bronze Olympic/Paralympic medal; (NMS) not a Masters tournament; (NTI) not a Tier I tournament; (P) postponed; (NH) not held; (SR) strike rate (events won / competed); (W–L) win–loss record. To avoid confusion and double counting, these charts are updated at the conclusion of a tournament or when the player's participation has ended. "Katerina Siniakova". Wtatennis.com. Retrieved 23 October 2021. "Krejcikova, Siniakova win US Open to complete career Grand Slam". "Katerina Siniakova Bio". wtatennis.com. WTA Tour. Retrieved 25 February 2021. Švéd, Jan (17 August 2010). "Tenisová bojovnice s ruskou krví touží po Wimbledonu". iDnes (in Czech). Retrieved 16 October 2014. "Daniel Siniakov". itftennis.com. International Tennis Federation. Retrieved 5 October 2021. "Láska z australské karantény. Siniaková randí s českým tenisovým talentem". IHNED.cz (in Czech). Hospodářské noviny. 9 April 2021. Retrieved 27 February 2022. "Kateřina Siniaková". Itftennis.com. International Tennis Federation. Archived from the original on 21 January 2021. Retrieved 6 February 2020. "Kateřina Siniaková ITF". ITF. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "Kateřina Siniaková Rankings History". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 20 March 2021. admin. "Kateřina Siniaková career statistics". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "Simona Halep loses in 2nd round of Shenzhen Open". ESPN. Associated Press. 4 January 2017. Retrieved 18 March 2021. "Siniakova upsets Konta to set up Riske final". bein sports. 6 January 2017. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "Katerina Siniakova captures maiden title with Shenzhen Open win". The Indian Express. Reuters. 7 January 2017. Retrieved 18 March 2021. staff, WTA (30 July 2017). "A year after making her maiden WTA final in Bastad, Katerina Siniakova wins her second career title at the Ericsson Open, stunning former WTA World No.1 Caroline Wozniacki in straight sets". wtatennis.com. Retrieved 30 July 2017. "US Open: Martina Hingis wins women's doubles to grab second slam in two days". The Indian Express. Reuters. 11 September 2017. Retrieved 20 March 2021. WTA Staff (6 January 2018). "Halep finds Shenzhen success, edges Siniakova in indoor final". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 10 January 2018. Alex Macpherson (5 January 2018). "Siniakova supreme over Sharapova to make second straight Shenzhen final". Retrieved 10 January 2018. "Svitolina serves up comeback win over Siniakova". 17 January 2018. Retrieved 21 January 2018. "Caroline Wozniacki falls to Daria Kasatkina in St. Petersburg quarters". USA Today. Associated Press. 2 February 2018. Retrieved 18 March 2021. WTA Staff (17 February 2018). "Dabrowski and Ostapenko reach maiden final together in Doha". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 18 March 2021. David Kane (1 April 2018). "Barty, Vandeweghe hop to Miami Open triumph". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 18 March 2021. WTA Staff (10 June 2018). "Krejcikova and Siniakova win first Grand Slam title in Paris". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 10 February 2019. WTA Staff (14 July 2018). "Krejcikova and Siniakova secure doubles 'double' at Wimbledon". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 10 February 2019. Heather Crowley (6 September 2018). "Women's Doubles Wrap: Vandeweghe/Barty to meet Babos/Mladenovic in final". US Open. Retrieved 18 March 2021. Alessandro Mastroluca (27 September 2018). "WTA Wuhan: don't stop Aryna Sabalenka now". tennis world. Retrieved 18 March 2021. Tennis Now (25 September 2018). "Siniakova Edges Defending Champ Garcia in Wuhan". Tennis Now. Retrieved 18 March 2021. Efe (26 September 2018). "WTA Wuhan 2018: GarbiÑe Muguruza-Katerina Siniakova: otro adiÓs doloroso (6–7(3) y 6–7 -1-)" [WTA Wuhan 2018: GarbiÑe Muguruza-Katerina Siniakova: Another painful goodbye (6–7 (3) and 6–7 -1-)]. Eurosport Espana. Retrieved 18 March 2021. Tennis Now (5 October 2018). "Wang Snaps Sabalenka's Streak, Into Beijing Semifinals". tennis now. Retrieved 18 March 2021. WTA Staff (22 October 2018). "Krejcikova and Siniakova earn World No.1 doubles ranking". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 18 March 2021. WTA Staff (29 October 2018). "Krejcikova and Siniakova secure 2018 WTA Year-End World No.1 Doubles ranking". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 18 March 2021. WTA Staff (21 January 2019). "Krejcikova, Siniakova pass Mertens, Sabalenka test to make Aussie Open quarters". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 20 March 2021. WTA Staff (22 January 2019). "Stosur and Zhang upset top-seeded Czechs as Aussie Open semis are set". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 20 March 2021. Alex Macpherson (1 May 2019). "Supreme Siniakova storms past Cepelova into Prague quarters". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 20 March 2021. Alex Macpherson (1 June 2019). "Siniakova ousts Osaka in Roland Garros stunner". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 20 March 2021. WTA Staff (3 June 2019). "'It's always special' – Keys stops Siniakova to make Roland Garros quarters". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 20 March 2021. Alex Macpherson (23 August 2019). "Linette leaps past Siniakova into Bronx final". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 20 March 2021. WTA Staff (11 August 2019). "'From the beginning, we gave them the pressure' – Krejcikova, Siniakova claim Toronto doubles title". WTA Tennis. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "Rome Masters Kerber bows out; Rublev advances". The Hindu. 15 September 2020. Retrieved 16 September 2020. "Barbora Krejcikova aims for Roland Garros sweep with good friend Katerina Siniakova by her side". Tennis.com. Retrieved 13 June 2021. "Krejcikova, Siniakova to face Mattek-Sands, Swiatek in Paris doubles final". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 13 June 2021. "Krejcikova, Siniakova win 3rd women's doubles major at French Open". Women's Tennis Association. "Kerber triumphs on home soil in Bad Homburg for 13th career title". "Krejcikova ousts doubles partner Siniakova in Prague QF: Highlights". "Clijsters loses in 3 sets in opener at Indian Wells". 8 October 2021. "Anisimova captures Melbourne crown to win second career title". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 30 January 2022. "Krejcikova, Siniakova to face Danilina, Haddad Maia in Australian Open doubles final". Wtatennis.com. "Krejcikova, Siniakova battle to first Australian Open women's doubles title". Wtatennis.com. "Storm Sanders and Katerina Siniakova are the Doubles Champions". "Defending champion Barbora Krejcikova tests positive for virus at French Open". 25 May 2022. "Czechs Krejcikova, Bouzkova withdraw from French Open due to COVID". Reuters. 25 May 2022. "Tennis, WTA – Wimbledon 2022: Chwalinska downs Siniakova". Tennis Majors. 27 June 2022. Retrieved 15 July 2022. "Krejcikova and Siniakova win second doubles title". BBC Sport. Retrieved 11 July 2022. "Krejcikova and Siniakova roll to second Wimbledon doubles title". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved 15 July 2022. "Champions Corner: Krejcikova, Siniakova want more after career Golden Slam". wtatennis.com. Women's Tennis Association. 12 September 2022. O. Koiki, Adesina (11 September 2022). "Krejcikova/Siniakova storm back to win US Open title, complete career Grand Slam". usopen.org. US Open. "Siniakova outlasts Rybakina in Portoroz for third career singles title". wtatennis.com. 18 September 2022. "Tennis, WTA – Guadalajara Open 2022: Siniakova sees off Haddad Maia". 18 October 2022. "Kudermetova and Mertens claim WTA Finals doubles championship". wtatennis.com. 8 November 2022. "Krejcikova, Siniakova win second straight Australian Open title". wtatennis.com. Women's Tennis Association. 29 January 2023. "Rankings Watch: Rybakina makes Top 10 debut, Sabalenka returns to No.2". wtatennis.com. Women's Tennis Association. 30 January 2023. "Swiatek withdraws from Bad Homburg; Siniakova, Bronzetti reach final". "Siniakova saves match points in Nanchang, wins longest final of 2023". "Šok královen deblu. Siniaková se rozešla s Krejčíkovou. Prý v dobrém". iSport.cz (in Czech). Retrieved 15 November 2023. https://www.reuters.com/sports/tennis/doubles-powerhouse-krejcikova-siniakova-part-ways-2023-11-12/ "STORM HUNTER CROWNED DOUBLES CHAMPION IN DUBAI". Jirásek, Ondřej (7 February 2017). "Siniaková bude v Ostravě hlavně sbírat zkušenosti, říká Pála". Tenisportal.cz (in Czech). Retrieved 9 February 2017. "Top-seeded Krejcikova, Siniakova take women's doubles gold". Nbcolympics.com. Retrieved 11 August 2021. "Switzerland, Czechs return to semifinals at Billie Jean King Cup". wtatennis.com. Women's Tennis Association. 11 November 2022. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Kateřina Siniaková. Kateřina Siniaková at the Women's Tennis Association Kateřina Siniaková at the International Tennis Federation Kateřina Siniaková at the Billie Jean King Cup