Cape Schmidt (Russian: Мыс Шми́дта; Mys Shmidta or Мыс Отто Шмидта; Mys Otto Shmidta; Chukchi: Ир-Каппея ; Ir-Kappeya), formerly known as Cape North, is a headland in the Chukchi Sea, part of Iultinsky District of the Chukotka Autonomous Okrug, Russian Federation. This headland is a rocky promontory located at the end of a spit. Cape Yakan is located to the west and Cape Vankarem to the east of Cape Schmidt. The settlement of Mys Shmidta is located southeast of the headland and the Chukchi locality of Ryrkaypiy is located closer to the southwest. An abandoned military base sits on the coast of the headland. A Neolithic site of ancient marine hunters was found on the shore of Cape Schmidt. There are remains of ancient huts at the foot of the cliffs on the western side and there was an ancient Chukchi fortification at the top. The local name of the landhead was Ir-Kappeya, meaning "Walrus constipation" in the Chukchi language. James Cook named the headland "Cape North" in 1778 when he sailed through the Bering Strait and into the Chukchi Sea, demonstrating to people in Europe and North America that Russia and Alaska were separated. The cape was renamed after Soviet scientist and first head of the Chief Directorate of the Northern Sea Route, Otto Schmidt in 1934. Mys Shmidta Airport J. C. Beaglehole. The Life of Captain James Cook. M. C. Serreze and R. G. Barry. The Arctic Climate System "Mys Shmidta". Mapcarta. Archived from the original on 19 April 2016. Retrieved 8 April 2016. Mallonee, Laura (8 December 2016). "Explore This Eerie Soviet Base at the Edge of the World". Retrieved 4 January 2019 – via www.wired.com. "Moyennes 1981-2010 Russie (Asie)" (in French). Retrieved 8 November 2019. "Météo Climat stats for Mys Shmidta". Météo Climat. Retrieved 8 November 2019. "Climate Normals for Cape Smidta". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved January 20, 2013. Валерий Купецкий. Мыс Отто Шмидта // газета «Полярная звезда», 3 октября 1991 г. Beaglehole, p. 621 Serreze & Barry, p. 5 Weather in Schmidt (cape) v t e