Eternals is a 2021 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics race of the same name. Produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the 26th film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). The film was directed by Chloé Zhao, who wrote the screenplay with Patrick Burleigh, Ryan Firpo, and Kaz Firpo. It stars an ensemble cast including Gemma Chan, Richard Madden, Kumail Nanjiani, Lia McHugh, Brian Tyree Henry, Lauren Ridloff, Barry Keoghan, Don Lee, Kit Harington, Salma Hayek, and Angelina Jolie. In the film, the Eternals, immortal alien beings, emerge from hiding after thousands of years to protect Earth from their ancient counterparts, the Deviants. In April 2018, Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige announced that a film based on the Eternals was in development and would explore the group as ancient aliens living throughout human history. Ryan and Kaz Firpo were hired to write the script, and Zhao was set to direct in September. She was given significant creative freedom to rewrite the script, taking especial inspiration from Terrence Malick's films, and to use more locations and natural lighting than previous MCU films had. Casting began in early 2019 and Burleigh joined to work on the script ahead of principal photography, which took place from July 2019 to February 2020 at Pinewood Studios and on location in England and the Canary Islands. Eternals premiered at the Dolby Theatre in Hollywood, Los Angeles, on October 18, 2021, and was released in the United States on November 5 as part of Phase Four of the MCU. The film grossed $402 million worldwide and received some awards and nominations, but it also became the first MCU film to not receive generally positive reviews. Particular criticism went to the screenplay and pacing, with commentators feeling it did not live up to Zhao's previous work or to previous MCU films. It received some praise for its themes and visuals. In 5000 BC, ten superpowered beings known as Eternals—Ajak, Sersi, Ikaris, Kingo, Sprite, Phastos, Makkari, Druig, Gilgamesh, and Thena—are sent to Earth by Arishem, a Celestial, on the starship Domo. They are charged with exterminating invasive entities known as the Deviants. The last Deviant is killed in 1521 when the group's opinions differ over their continued relationship with humankind. Over the next 500 years, they mostly live apart, waiting for Arishem's orders. In the present day, Sersi and Sprite live together in London. After Sersi's partner Ikaris left her without explanation centuries earlier, she is now in a relationship with human Dane Whitman who works at the Natural History Museum. When the trio is attacked by the Deviant Kro, Ikaris arrives and chases the creature away. The three Eternals travel to South Dakota to reunite with their leader, Ajak, only to find her dead. Sersi is posthumously chosen by Ajak as her successor, granting her the ability to communicate with Arishem. Sersi learns that the Eternals' mission was actually to prepare Earth for the Emergence of a new Celestial. Arishem explains that, for millions of years, he has been planting Celestial seeds inside planets where the energy from large populations allows new Celestials to be born. The Deviants were sent to destroy the apex predators of each planet to ensure the development of intelligent life, but when they evolved and began hunting the planets' native populations, Arishem created the Eternals to counter them. With the recent end of the Blip restoring Earth's population, humankind has reached the necessary size to allow the Celestial Tiamut to be born, which will result in Earth's destruction. Hoping to delay the Emergence, the Eternals reunite. At Druig's residence in the Amazon rainforest, they are attacked by the Deviants. They kill them all except for Kro, who kills Gilgamesh before fleeing. Phastos proposes they use the Uni-Mind, a connection between all the Eternals that would give Druig enough power to put Tiamut to sleep with his mind-control abilities. However, Ikaris is loyal to Arishem and refuses to help stop the Emergence. He reveals that Ajak wanted to stop the Emergence and save humanity, so he led her to the Deviants and allowed them to kill her. Sprite joins Ikaris due to her unrequited love for him while Kingo chooses to leave. Makkari locates the place of the Emergence, an active volcano in the Indian Ocean, where Ikaris and Sprite attempt to stop them. Druig knocks out Sprite, and Phastos restrains Ikaris. Kro arrives and is killed by Thena. Druig is unable to put Tiamut to sleep, and Sersi instead attempts to turn him into marble. Ikaris breaks free of his restraints and goes to kill Sersi, but is unable to due to his love for her. Both he and Sprite join with the others in the Uni-Mind, and Sersi gains enough power to turn Tiamut into marble. Guilt-ridden, Ikaris flies into the Sun. Sersi uses the remaining Uni-Mind energy to turn Sprite into a human, ending her permanent childlike state. Thena, Druig, and Makkari depart on the Domo to warn Eternals on other planets of the Emergences. Whitman professes his love for Sersi and is about to reveal a secret about his family history when she, Phastos, and Kingo are lifted into space by Arishem. Displeased with their treason, Arishem says he will spare humanity if the Eternals' memories show that humans are worthy of living. He vows to return for judgment and takes the trio into a singularity. In a mid-credits scene, Thena, Makkari, and Druig meet the Eternal Eros and his assistant Pip the Troll. In a post-credits scene, an unseen person questions whether Whitman is ready to wield the Ebony Blade. Gemma Chan as Sersi: An empathetic Eternal with a strong connection to humanity and the Earth, who can manipulate and transform matter through physical contact. Sersi has been in love with Ikaris for centuries and has a strong connection with Sprite. In the present day, she is a museum curator on Earth and dating Dane Whitman. Producer Kevin Feige said Sersi was the lead character of the film. Director Chloé Zhao said she and Chan were interested in creating the kind of nuanced female superhero that they felt was rarely seen in the genre, and Zhao felt Chan had imbued the character with gentleness, compassion, and vulnerability that would "invite viewers to rethink what it means to be heroic". Chan said Sersi was free-spirited and loved being around humans. Richard Madden as Ikaris: A powerful Eternal who can fly and project cosmic energy beams from his eyes. Speaking to the relationship between Ikaris and Sersi, Madden said the fact that they had loved each other for centuries showed a "deep level of romance" between the two. They are on opposing sides of how the Eternals connect to the world, with Sersi having compassion for humans while Ikaris is more disconnected. The biggest struggle for Madden was showing that Ikaris has "seen everything and done everything" without the character coming across as bored. Zhao's take on Ikaris was influenced by director Zack Snyder's interpretation of Superman in Man of Steel (2013) which left a strong impression on her for its "authentic and very real" approach. Kumail Nanjiani as Kingo: An Eternal who can create cosmic energy projectiles. Enamored with fame, Kingo becomes a popular Bollywood film star to blend in on Earth. Nanjiani wanted to combine the wisecracking attitude of John McClane from the Die Hard film series with the look of Bollywood actor Hrithik Roshan, and also studied Errol Flynn films and some of the original Zorro films to help emulate "old school Hollywood stars whose characters really enjoyed fighting". Nanjiani, who is not a dancer, grew up watching Bollywood dance sequences and spent several months training for the film's own such sequence in hopes of capturing the same energy and joy. He also underwent rigorous fitness training to build up muscle for his role. Lia McHugh as Sprite: An Eternal who can project life-like illusions. Sprite is in a permanent childlike state, appearing as a young girl despite being thousands of years old. The film explores her struggles with this, including her jealousy of humans who can grow old, know love, and have families. She has an unrequited love for Ikaris which Kingo compares to that of Tinker Bell for Peter Pan. Similarly, Neil Gaiman and John Romita Jr.'s 2006 Eternals comic book miniseries compared Sprite to the never-aging Peter Pan and gave them similar short, red hair, which the film also uses. The film ends with Sprite becoming human and being able to grow old. Brian Tyree Henry as Phastos: An Eternal and an intelligent weapons and technology inventor. He is the first superhero to be depicted as gay in an MCU film. Lauren Ridloff as Makkari: An Eternal who can move at superhuman speed. The character is the first deaf superhero in the MCU. After starting to run more in anticipation of the role, she shifted to muscle building in order to have "the symmetry of somebody who looks like a sprinter". Barry Keoghan as Druig: An aloof Eternal who becomes frustrated with the inaction of the other Eternals in human affairs. He can manipulate the minds of others. Don Lee as Gilgamesh: The strongest Eternal, with a deep connection to Thena. Lee pursued the role in order to be an inspiration to the younger generation as the first Korean superhero, and was able to utilize his boxing training for the role. Kit Harington as Dane Whitman: A human who works at the Natural History Museum in London as a history professor and is dating Sersi. Salma Hayek as Ajak: The wise and spiritual leader of the Eternals, who has the ability to heal and is the "bridge" between the Eternals and the Celestials. Changing the character from a man in the comics allowed Hayek to lean into Ajak's femininity and make her the "mother figure" of the Eternals. Hayek was initially hesitant to work with Marvel, assuming she would have a supporting or "grandmother" role. Angelina Jolie as Thena: An elite warrior Eternal who can form any weapon out of cosmic energy and develops a close bond with Gilgamesh over the centuries. She also suffers from a psychological condition called Mahd Wy'ry. Jolie trained with various swords, spears, and staffs for the role, as well as taking ballet. Additionally, Bill Skarsgård provides the voice of Kro, one of the Deviants, and David Kaye voices the Celestial Arishem. Harish Patel appears as Karun Patel, Kingo's human valet; Haaz Sleiman and Esai Daniel Cross respectively portray Phastos's husband Ben and son Jack; and Zain Al Rafeea plays a villager who comes across the Eternals when they first arrive on Earth. Harry Styles appears in the mid-credits scene as Eros / Starfox, the brother of MCU character Thanos, while Patton Oswalt voices Eros's assistant Pip the Troll. Mahershala Ali has an uncredited voice-only cameo as Blade in the post-credits scene ahead of starring in his own film. In April 2015, Marvel Television was working with screenwriter John Ridley to craft a new television series for ABC, "reinventing" an existing Marvel character or property, which was revealed years later to be the Eternals. Through its development, which ultimately had eventually been abandoned during the folding of Marvel Television in December 2019, Ridley stated that he was trying to make a superhero television series that viewers had not necessarily seen before, with hopes that it could occupy "a space that [was] not currently being filled" by Marvel. His approach to the characters would have been "a really weird story", though he stated the characters are "a really hard property" to adapt while conceding that while he believed his series would have been good it may not have been entertaining for everyone. Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige said in April 2018 that the studio was actively developing a film based on the Marvel Comics series Eternals, created by Jack Kirby, to be released as part of their Phase Four slate of films. Marvel Studios had met with multiple screenwriters, and was believed to be focusing on the character Sersi in the film. Marvel set Ryan and Kaz Firpo to write the script a month later, with their outline including a love story between the characters Sersi and Ikaris. In June, Feige said Marvel was interested in exploring the "ancient aliens kind of sci-fi trope" by having the Eternals be the inspiration for myths and legends throughout the history of the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). During late August, Marvel's director search for Eternals narrowed to a shortlist that included Chloé Zhao—who had also been in the running to direct Marvel's Black Widow (2021)—Nicole Kassell, Travis Knight, and the pair of Cristina Gallego and Ciro Guerra. Zhao approached Marvel Studios about making the film as she had been a fan of the MCU. She wanted to work with the studio to bring her own take and world-building to the franchise, and impressed them with a presentation that Feige described as fascinating, with "reams of visuals". Zhao worked with producer Nate Moore to develop her pitch. The presentation left Marvel concerned that she might take on a different big-studio project instead of Eternals, forcing them to move quickly to secure her, and Zhao was hired as director in September. Zhao hoped to push the scope of the film further than Marvel's Avengers: Endgame (2019), but also wanted it to have intimacy. Zhao described the film as a melting pot of influences, from Kirby's original work, Neil Gaiman's 2006 run, previous MCU projects, Zhao's fandom of the MCU, and her love of science fiction and fantasy films and manga. Speaking specifically to her love of manga, she hoped those influences would create a "marriage of East and West". Zhao cited the TV series Ancient Aliens, the Final Fantasy video game series, the concepts from Yuval Noah Harari's book Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind, and the films of Terrence Malick as her inspirations for the film. Marvel considered Eternals to be a perfect transition into its next phase of films along with projects such as Captain Marvel (2019), allowing the studio to cast a diverse group of actors to portray the various Eternals. Moore's initial planning documents for the project including the swapping of genders, sexualities, and ethnicities of some characters from the comic books, with Zhao further advocating for this approach. In February 2019, Feige reiterated that Marvel was interested in the Eternals due to Kirby's epic, century-spanning story, with the film version spanning 7,000 years and exploring humanity's place in the cosmos. Zhao noted that the Eternals "have lived among us for so long, [they have] the same struggles like identity, purpose, faith, personal freedom versus greater good — all the duality and flaws that make us human". When trying to develop a story that spanned so many years, Marvel realized that the characters would likely be a family unit, with friendship that would "turn into frenemies, and then turn into enemies, and then come back to friendship". Zhao also looked to the Earth as an eleventh character in the film, chronicling its journey alongside the Eternal characters. Marvel also wanted to create more ensemble films that were not crossover films, like Guardians of the Galaxy (2014), while introducing relatively unknown characters to audiences as they did with that film's title characters and the Avengers. "I wanted it to reflect the world we live in. But also I wanted to put a cast together that feels like a group of misfits. I didn't want the jocks. I want you to walk away at the end of the movie not thinking, 'This person is this ethnicity, that person is that nationality.' No. I want you to walk away thinking, 'That's a family.' You don't think about what they represent." —Zhao on the diverse cast of the film Throughout early 2019, Zhao began working on a draft of the script, building upon the multiple drafts submitted by the Firpos. Approximately four months ahead of filming, the script was not finalized, so Moore introduced Patrick Burleigh, who had been part of Marvel's writers program, to Zhao in the hopes he could assist with the writing. Zhao hired him to work on the screenplay, which he did for about three months ahead of filming. Burleigh believed Zhao needed to write on the film as well as direct to "process the film through her own filter", and noted her draft showed she was "trying to make the Terrence Malick version of a Marvel film"; Zhao citing his film The Tree of Life (2011) as an inspiration. Burleigh called his work with Zhao on the script mostly "structural" to find "the flow of the film", likening the story to a road trip film. Angelina Jolie joined the cast in March 2019, reportedly as Sersi, with Kumail Nanjiani and Don Lee cast in undisclosed roles the next month. At that time, the film was expected to feature Marvel Studios' first gay superhero. In May, Richard Madden entered negotiations for the role of Ikaris, and Salma Hayek had entered early negotiations for an undisclosed role the following month. In July, Variety reported that the cast included Jolie, Madden, and Millie Bobby Brown, but Brown denied that she had been cast. At the 2019 San Diego Comic-Con, Feige officially announced The Eternals with a release date of November 6, 2020. He officially announced the casting of Jolie as Thena, Nanjiani as Kingo, Lee as Gilgamesh, Madden as Ikaris, and Hayek as Ajak, along with Lauren Ridloff as Makkari, Brian Tyree Henry as Phastos, and Lia McHugh as Sprite. Zhao looked for actors for each role that could "find a bit of themselves in their character". Feige added that one of these actors was portraying an LGBTQ character, with actor Haaz Sleiman later revealing that Phastos is depicted as gay in the film. Sleiman portrays the character's husband, and the pair have a child in the film. Sleiman felt it was important to depict "how loving and beautiful a queer family can be" rather than the "sexual or rebellious" depiction in some previous media. Feige said the relationship was "always sort of inherent in the story" and he felt it was "extremely well done" in the film, while Sleiman said it was a "thoughtful" depiction. Eternals is set around eight months after the events of Avengers: Endgame, and addresses why the Eternals did not interfere in any past conflicts in the MCU. Both Feige and Moore said the film would have "major ripple effects" on the future of the MCU, and at times, it was "a challenge" to balance the grounded nature of the MCU with the "mythic grandeur" of the Eternals property. By the film's official announcement in July 2019, principal photography had begun at Pinewood Studios in Buckinghamshire, England. Ben Davis served as director of photography, after doing so on several previous MCU films. Zhao said Marvel Studios allowed her creative freedom to shoot the film on location, "exactly the way [she] wanted to shoot" it. She was able to use a similar style to her previous films, including 360° shots and working with the same camera and rigs as were used for her film Nomadland (2020), which Zhao was set to complete back-to-back with The Eternals. Zhao felt that she "got lucky in that Marvel wants to take risks and do something different." Zhao cited The Revenant (2015) as a primary influence when composing the film's action sequences. Gemma Chan and Barry Keoghan were in talks to join the cast in August 2019. Chan previously portrayed Minn-Erva in Captain Marvel, but reports noted that she was potentially being looked at by Marvel to play a separate character in this film. Since Minn-Erva dies in that film, Chan had felt that it was unlikely she would return to the MCU, but after working on the film she was told by Feige that the studio wanted to "make better use" of her in a future project. This led to Chan auditioning for Sersi, one of the last actresses to be considered for the role. Chan later described Sersi as the most difficult role for the film to cast. Chan and Keoghan were confirmed to be cast in the film at the D23 Expo in August, in the roles of Sersi and Druig, respectively, along with Kit Harington as Dane Whitman. Chan said she and Marvel Studios were surprised by how soon after Captain Marvel her new MCU role came, with both assuming that it would have been a project further in the future. Harish Patel was cast at the end of August as Karun, Kingo's manager, and filmed his role from September 2019 until January 2020. By early November, filming took place in the Canary Islands. The filming cast and crew, including Jolie and Madden, had to be evacuated from a shooting location on the island of Fuerteventura when an explosive device was found there. The device was thought to be a remnant armament from a Nazi base. Later that month, Zain Al Rafeea joined the cast. In early January 2020, filming took place outside the Oxford University Museum of Natural History in Oxford, England, as well as Hampstead Heath and in Camden in London, under the working title Sack Lunch. Chan said the filming process felt very different from what she experienced on Captain Marvel, explaining that Eternals shot more on location and utilized natural light while Captain Marvel had more studio work and bluescreen. Filming wrapped on February 4, 2020. In March 2020, Scanline VFX, one of the companies working on the film's visual effects, confirmed that they would be working remotely due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Industrial Light & Magic, Luma Pictures, RISE, and Weta Digital also worked on the film's visual effects. In early April, Disney shifted much of their Phase Four slate of films due to the pandemic, moving The Eternals' release date to February 12, 2021. In August, the film's title was officially shortened from The Eternals to Eternals, and the next month, the release date was pushed back to November 5, 2021. Reshoots had taken place by mid-November 2020. Additional filming occurred in Los Angeles in early February, also under the working title Sack Lunch. Dylan Tichenor and Craig Wood serve as co-editors of the film. Tichenor said Zhao usually edits her own films and has "strong opinions", but on Eternals she was relying on Tichenor and Wood due to the size of the production and the ongoing awards season for Nomadland. Tichenor added that Zhao respected the pair's editing experience and point of view, and they made their first cut of the film without much input from her. They began adjusting the film based on Zhao's feedback, and were still working on the editing in April 2021. At the end of the month, Zhao said editing for the film was in its "final stretch", and Jashaun St. John was revealed to appear in the film, after previously starring in Zhao's film Songs My Brothers Taught Me (2015). At the end of May 2021, with the release of the first teaser trailer and poster for the film, the official writing credits were revealed: Zhao was credited as the screenwriter, both as a solo contributor and as part of a writing team with Burleigh, while Ryan and Kaz Firpo received story credit. Additionally, Gil Birmingham was revealed to have been cast in the film, although he was absent in the final film.[citation needed] In July 2021, Writers Guild of America West presented the film's final writing credits, awarding Ryan and Kaz Firpo screenplay credit along with Zhao and the team of Zhao and Burleigh, in addition to their story credit. Moore believed the studio had "bit off as much as we could chew" with the film, creating one that "felt urgent and present and had [a fast] pace, but also took time to reflect back over the centuries". At the film's world premiere, Matt Donnelly of Variety tweeted that Harry Styles made an appearance in a post-credits scene as Eros, Thanos' brother in the comics, which was not shown in early press screenings of the film. Zhao later revealed that she "kept tabs on [Styles]" since his appearance in Dunkirk (2017), believing that he "makes me think of Eros as a character". WWE wrestler Becky Lynch had a role in the film for a planned post-credits scene that was intended to set up a future project. The scene was removed for being reportedly "too depressing". Ramin Djawadi composed the score for the film, after previously doing so for Marvel's Iron Man (2008). Two songs from the film's soundtrack, "Across the Oceans of Time" and "Eternals Theme", were released as singles on October 22, 2021, while the full album was released on November 3. The first footage of the film was released in May 2021 as part of a promotional video from Marvel Studios celebrating their films and a return to movie theaters. Though the footage was limited and "vague", Hoai-Tran Bui at /Film still felt it was "very exciting". Chaim Gartenberg of The Verge felt one of the biggest moments of the footage was seeing Jolie wielding a sword made of light. He was also encouraged that Eternals appeared to be one of Marvel's first films to "deliver on [their] years-long promise of creating films with more diverse casts". Nerdist's Michael Arbeiter said the footage was quick, but felt that it "manages an air of wonderment". The first teaser for the film was released on May 24, 2021. Gartenberg felt the teaser was light on plot elements, with it instead focusing on the "civilization-spanning scope of the superhero team and its members throughout human history". He also believed the film was "a big swing" from Marvel Studios to entice audiences with a lesser-known comics property, but believed that it would succeed due to its diverse cast of well-known actors and Zhao's status as "one of the most exciting directors around". io9's Charlies Pulliam-Moore felt the trailer was a "multiple millennia-spanning recap of Earth's history", and said it was unclear how much the larger MCU would impact on the film outside of a brief reference to the Avengers at the end of the trailer. Writing for Entertainment Weekly, Nick Romano felt the teaser was a combination of "thrilling, goosebump-inducing moments" and some jokes. Erik Adams of The A.V. Club felt the spot teased some fresh angles for the MCU in a similar way to Thor: Ragnarok (2017) and Guardians of the Galaxy (2014), and he enjoyed the images of Kingo's Bollywood dance, Sprite performing karaoke, and the end scene of the Eternals eating together and joking about the Avengers. After seeing the teaser, Variety's Adam B. Vary described the film as "unquestionably a Chloé Zhao movie", but wished more action set pieces were featured in the teaser to see how Zhao would approach them in the film. Adele Ankers of IGN discussed the poster that was released at the same time as the trailer, highlighting how the Eternals appear in silhouette against a sunlit background which she described as "another taste of Chloé Zhao's signature filming style and the use of natural light to illuminate a frame" that would be seen in the film. Upon release, the teaser quickly became the number one trending video on YouTube and amassed 77 million global views in its first 24 hours. Disney's president of marketing Asad Ayaz said the teaser was designed to just be an introduction to the characters and tone and not give much of the film away, adding the marketing team would be "very judicious" on when more material would be revealed, while also using the releases of Black Widow and Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings before Eternals to help expose audiences to the characters. The final trailer was released in August 2021, with Ethan Shanfeld and Manori Ravindran of Variety feeling it was "more serious in tone" than the teaser with the Eternals "grappling with the prospect of emerging after centuries living apart in order to help humans". Entertainment Weekly's Devan Coggan felt that the trailer was the "best glimpse yet" of the film and gave a "sense of the vast scale and scope of the film", while answering "one important question" about the absence of the Eternals during the conflict against Thanos in Avengers: Infinity War and Avengers: Endgame. Aaron Couch at The Hollywood Reporter said the trailer "reveals much of [the film's] plot as well as its characters' powers, teasing the answers to key questions about who the Eternals answer to, their relationship to Earth and why they ultimately didn't intervene" in the conflict against Thanos. In October 2021, Lexus released a commercial promoting the film and its Lexus IS 500 sports sedan starring Nanjiani as Kingo, with frequent MCU directors Joe and Anthony Russo guiding its development and Framestore working on the visual effects. Lexus created ten concept cars based on the ten Eternals characters from the film. The LS 500h and NX are featured in the film. Beginning on November 20, 2021, select costumes from the film were part of the Futures exhibit at the Smithsonian Institution's Arts and Industries Building, which ran through July 2022. Behind-the-scenes content looking at the evolution of the film's visuals as well as an augmented reality experience were also included in the exhibit. Eternals had its world premiere at the Dolby Theatre in Hollywood, Los Angeles, on October 18, 2021, and was screened at the Rome Film Festival on October 24. The film was released theatrically in many European countries on November 3, and in the United States and the United Kingdom on November 5 in RealD 3D and 4DX. In September 2021, Disney announced that the film would have an exclusive theatrical release for a minimum of 45 days. Eternals was previously set for release on November 6, 2020, before it was shifted to February 12, 2021, and then to the November 2021 date, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. It is part of Phase Four of the MCU. In May 2021, a Chinese state media report excluded Eternals, as well as Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings, from its list of upcoming MCU films releasing, which Variety noted "added to rumors" that the films would not be released in China, especially since Zhao had become "an unexpected persona non grata" in the country after she was scrutinized by Chinese netizens over her remarks in a 2013 interview with Filmmaker magazine in which she described China as "a place where there are lies everywhere". By September 2021, Deadline Hollywood reported it remained "an open question" if the Chinese government or Zhao would attempt to "rehabilitate" the situation, but it "seems likely" the film would not be released in China following the country's response to Nomadland as well as Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings likely not being released in the country either following backlash to comments made by star Simu Liu in 2017. The film was not released in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Qatar, Bahrain and Oman due to the depiction of a gay couple. Theaters in the United Arab Emirates, Jordan, Lebanon and Egypt were set to show an edited version of the film which is missing all the love scenes. Angelina Jolie criticized the countries' decision to ban the film, saying: "I'm sad for [those audiences]. And I'm proud of Marvel for refusing to cut those scenes out. I still don't understand how we live in a world today where there's still [people who] would not see the family Phastos has and the beauty of that relationship and that love. How anybody is angry about it, threatened by it, doesn't approve or appreciate it is ignorant." Lebanese actor Haaz Sleiman, who played Phastos' husband Ben in the film, also voiced the same reaction towards the matter: "They stood their ground and said, 'Nope, we are not going to compromise the integrity of our film.' It made these Arab countries looks [sic] so ignorant and pathetic. I have no respect for those governments. They have displayed to the world that they are not only a disgrace to humanity, but to God. Hopefully this will inspire the Saudi people, the Kuwaiti people and the people in Qatar to fight back." Marvel later agreed to cut any kind of love scenes, including the gay couple kiss for the film's release in Indonesia, which received praise by the Indonesian Film Censorship Board (LSF). Eternals began streaming on Disney+ on January 12, 2022, with the option to view the theatrical version of the film or an IMAX Enhanced version. Audio commentary and additional bonus features for the film were added to Disney+ in March 2022. It was released on Ultra HD Blu-ray, Blu-ray, and DVD on February 15. The home media includes audio commentary, deleted scenes, a gag reel, and various behind-the-scenes featurettes. According to Samba TV, Eternals was watched by 2 million U.S. households during its first five days on Disney+. Eternals was also the top streaming film for viewers in the United States for the week ending January 16, 2022, according to Whip Media's TV Time. Eternals grossed $164.9 million in the United States and Canada, and $237.2 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $402.1 million. The film's opening weekend earned $162 million globally, which was the second-largest worldwide opening weekend in the COVID-19 pandemic for a Hollywood film, of which IMAX contributed to over $13.6 million. Advanced ticket sales for Eternals were estimated to be $2.6 million in its first 24 hours, outpacing those for Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings ($1.4 million) and Black Widow ($2 million) during the same time frame, while AMC Theatres had the largest first day sales of 2021 for the film. In November, Fandango reported that pre-sales for Eternals were second-largest of 2021, behind Black Widow. In October, Boxoffice Pro initially projected that the film would earn $82–102 million within its opening weekend, and around $210–280 million in total domestic box office. At the end of the month, Boxoffice Pro modified their projections to $67–92 million for the film's opening weekend, and around $165–215 million in total domestic box office, due to mixed early critical reception. According to Deadline Hollywood, Eternals was expected to earn $75 million within its domestic opening weekend, and around $150 million globally. In the United States and Canada, Eternals earned $30.7 million in its opening day, which included $9.5 million from Thursday night previews, marking the third-largest opening day of the pandemic, behind Black Widow and Venom: Let There Be Carnage. Its opening weekend earned $71.3 million from 5.5 million theater admissions, making it the top film of the weekend. IMAX accounted for over $7.6 million of the weekend. This marked the fourth-largest opening weekend of the pandemic. The domestic opening weekend gross was lower than various pre-release projections. Deadline attributed this to the film's overall mixed reception from critics and audiences. In its second weekend, Eternals remained the top film, grossing over $27.5 million. Eternals became the sixth-highest-grossing film of 2021 in the United States. Outside of North America, Eternals earned over $90.7 million within its opening weekend from 46 markets. It was number-one in nearly all of these markets. The international opening weekend gross had exceeded various pre-release projections. IMAX contributed to $6 million of the opening gross, from 58 countries. The film scored the largest opening of the pandemic in Italy, Brazil, and Hong Kong. In South Korea, Eternals earned $14.4 million, marking the largest debut for a Hollywood film amid the pandemic. In Russia, the film earned an opening of $5.4 million through six days. In its second weekend, Eternals earned $48 million from 49 markets, a drop of 49%. It remained number one in many of these territories. The following weekend, the film earned $22.7 million. It was the top film of the weekend internationally, remaining the top film in many territories, including all markets across Latin America, except for Mexico. As of November 28, 2021, the film's largest markets were South Korea ($26.4 million), the United Kingdom ($18.7 million), France ($14.9 million), Mexico ($14.3 million), and Brazil ($11.1 million). The review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports an approval rating of 47% based on 413 reviews, with an average rating of 5.6/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "An ambitious superhero epic that soars as often as it strains, Eternals takes the MCU in intriguing—and occasionally confounding—new directions." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 52 out of 100, based on 62 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Upon release, it became the lowest-rated MCU film on both websites and the first installment to be classified as "rotten" on Rotten Tomatoes. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B" on an A+ to F scale, the lowest grade for an MCU film, and PostTrak reported 78% of audience members gave it a positive score, with 60% saying they would definitely recommend it. Charlotte O'Sullivan of the Evening Standard described the film as "lavish" and "ambitious", and praised the fight sequences as "astounding, beautifully paced and crammed with detail". Robert Abele of TheWrap commended the cinematography and felt "an earnestness to the operatic stakes". Oliver Jones of the Observer called it "full of wonder and romance and fueled by an agenda and audacity all its own". Owen Gleiberman was disappointed over Zhao's missing filmmaking style that shaped her films The Rider (2017) and Nomadland (2020) to "embrace the straight-up expository conventionality of Marvel filmmaking", but felt that the film was a "squarely fun and gratifying watch". Moira Macdonald of The Seattle Times thought "it's got some pretty slow spots midfilm and it's desperately in need of a bit more wit ... what it does have is a palpable, artful mood; this is a movie full of superheroes who spend time thinking and feeling, and of special effects that aren't just zippy but often delicately elegant". Linda Marric of The Jewish Chronicle described it as "a mishmash of well-meaning, yet jarringly verbose and bafflingly incoherent nonsense which is only just about saved by some half decent performances"; Nicholas Barber of BBC Culture called Zhao's direction "workmanlike"; and Clarisse Loughrey of The Independent said that it "strives for the same expansive soulfulness" as Nomadland "but discovers there's room enough only for the occasional burst of it". Brian Truitt of USA Today praised Zhao's "penchant for naturalistic environments", but wrote that the narrative "struggles to juggle its many subplots and tries to do too much". Mark Kennedy of the Associated Press criticized the dialogue and fight scenes, but praised the visual effects and Nanjiani's performance. Shirley Li of The Atlantic felt that "Zhao's delicate examination of her characters outshines Eternals' duller and more convoluted moments". Robbie Collin wrote the film was "constantly engaged in a kind of grit-toothed authenticity theatre, going out of its way to show you it's doing all the things proper cinema does, even though none of them bring any discernible benefit"; Kevin Maher felt "a strange self-sabotaging energy at the heart"; and Steve Rose of The Guardian missed "the breezy wit of Marvel's best movies ... like coming into Avengers: Endgame cold without having seen any of the preceding installments". K. Austin Collins of Rolling Stone felt that the film was "good at telling us where to look, at impressing us with its manufactured sense of grandeur", but lacked "any credible sense of what's actually worth seeing". Justin Chang of the Los Angeles Times had a "depressing realization that you've just seen one of the more interesting movies Marvel will ever make, and hopefully the least interesting one Chloé Zhao will ever make". Brian Lowry of CNN thought "the movie's structural flaws offset its stunning visuals and strong performances". Kyle Smith of National Review was harsher, describing it as "one of the dumbest, cheesiest, most trite, and least human" of the MCU films. The mixed reception surprised some commentators, given the MCU's positive track record and the acclaim of Zhao's previous work. Richard Newby of The Hollywood Reporter wrote that "much of the criticism of Kirby's work", which was divisive for its subject matter and relationship to the wider Marvel Universe, "has followed Zhao in her adaptation." He compared the divisive response to that of Zack Snyder's DC Extended Universe films Man of Steel and Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice (2016), writing that they and Eternals share "a deconstructive approach to superheroes and force them to question their purpose in the world, through meditative and melancholy narrative beats, and a tragic yet hopeful ending." This approach, he felt, subverted critics and audiences' expectations, which made them review the film more harshly. Zhao addressed some of the criticisms of the film, believing some of the divisiveness came from everyone "having an existential crisis" because of the COVID-19 pandemic and the film being an "existential crisis, both for humanity and God". She also felt the reactions to how the film incorporated her filmmaking sensibilities with Marvel's were "a testament to how much we had merged with each other; how uncomfortable that might make people feel". The film was given the Seal of Authentic Representation from the Ruderman Family Foundation for Ridloff's role as Makkari. The seal is given to films and series that feature actors with disabilities who have at least five lines of dialogue. Eternals was also one of 28 films that received the ReFrame Stamp for 2021, awarded by the gender equity coalition ReFrame for films that are proven to have gender-balanced hiring. In February 2021, the documentary series Marvel Studios: Assembled was announced. The special on this film, "The Making of Eternals", was released on Disney+ on February 16, 2022. In October 2021, Zhao said she was open to making a sequel. The next month, Kaz and Ryan Firpo expressed interest in making a prequel series for Disney+ that would focus on one Eternal in a different time period each episode, such as an episode about Thena in Ancient Greece and one about Kingo in 1890s Mumbai where he balances his life as a film star with Mahatma Gandhi's campaign for India's independence from British rule. They also felt there were opportunities to continue the film's story by further exploring Dane Whitman and showing the Eternals confronting the Celestials. Chan said in January 2022 that she would reprise the role of Sersi in the future. Feige was asked about Styles's future in the MCU that July and said Marvel Studios was excited to further explore the characters Eros and Pip as part of the MCU's more cosmic stories. A month later, Oswalt said a sequel had been confirmed by Marvel Studios and Zhao was returning to direct. He hoped it would further explore Eros and Pip, and expressed interest in a spin-off film for the characters. In October, Moore said Marvel intended to bring back the Eternals characters in the future of the MCU. Nanjiani said the following month that he was unaware of a sequel and believed Oswalt was mistaken, but expressed interest in reprising his role as Kingo. Don Lee's talent agency indicated in December that he would reprise his role as Gilgamesh in an Eternals sequel. Oswalt clarified his statements in February 2023, saying a sequel was not in development at that time and that he had been misled. List of films featuring the deaf and hard of hearing Zhao is credited both as a solo writer and as part of a writing team with Burleigh. As depicted in Avengers: Endgame (2019) Identified off-screen as Blade Vary, Adam B. (May 24, 2021). "The 'Eternals' Trailer Finally Reveals How Chloé Zhao's Vision Will Fit in the MCU". Variety. Archived from the original on May 24, 2021. Retrieved May 24, 2021. "The Eternals". Writers Guild of America West. Archived from the original on August 14, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2021. "Eternals (12A)". British Board of Film Classification. Archived from the original on October 29, 2021. Retrieved October 29, 2021. Reid, Caroline (February 13, 2023). "Eternals Was Over Budget Says Marvel". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 8, 2023. Retrieved May 8, 2023. "Eternals". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved February 1, 2022. "Eternals". The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Retrieved February 1, 2022. Vary, Adam B. (November 5, 2021). "How 'Eternals' Pulled Off Those Wild Post-Credits Scenes: 'I Still Can't Believe It Happened'". Variety. Archived from the original on November 6, 2021. Retrieved November 6, 2021. Tsjeng, Zing (August 5, 2021). ""The Industry Has Shifted. Changing The Culture Takes Longer": Gemma Chan Is Finally Taking The Lead". Vogue. Archived from the original on August 5, 2021. Retrieved August 5, 2021. Coogan, Devan (August 18, 2021). "Hope Springs: Go behind the scenes of Marvel's Eternals". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved August 18, 2021. Arthur, Kate (April 28, 2021). "Kevin Feige on Chloé Zhao's 'Spectacular' Approach to 'Eternals' and Who the Film's 'Lead' Character Is (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on April 29, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2021. Coggan, Devan (August 18, 2021). "Meet the Eternals: A guide to Marvel's 10 newest heroes". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved August 18, 2021. Portnoi, Olivier (November 3, 2021). "Les Eternels: Superman chez Marvel ? La réalisatrice Chloé Zhao s'explique et cite Zack Snyder". FilmsActu (in French). Archived from the original on November 3, 2021. Retrieved November 6, 2021. Ridlehoover, John (March 4, 2020). "Eternals: Nanjiani's Kingo Will Hide in Plain Sight - As a Bollywood Star". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on March 5, 2020. Retrieved March 5, 2020. St.Clair, Josh (March 10, 2020). "Kumail Nanjiani Says John McClane Inspired His Marvel 'Eternals' Character". Men's Health. Archived from the original on March 12, 2020. Retrieved March 11, 2020. Thorp, Charles (November 26, 2021). "Kumail Nanjiani's 'Eternals' Workout". Men's Journal. Archived from the original on February 7, 2024. Retrieved March 15, 2024. Newby, Richard (November 7, 2021). "Nine Easter Eggs You Might Have Missed in Eternals". Vulture. Archived from the original on November 8, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Peterson, Troy (January 31, 2022). "How Peter Pan Foreshadows Eternals' Big Twist". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved August 14, 2023. Ferber, Lawrence (February 13, 2020). "Haaz Sleiman on "Little America" and Kissing Marvel's First Gay Superhero". NewNowNext. Archived from the original on February 13, 2020. Retrieved February 13, 2020. Maytum, Matt; Shepherd, Jack (September 13, 2021). "Kit Harington teases secretive Eternals role: "I think this is the tip of the iceberg for my character"". GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on September 14, 2021. Retrieved September 14, 2021. Bacon, Thomas (October 30, 2021). "Eternals: Thena's Mahd Wy'ry Illness & Dementia Explained". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 31, 2021. Retrieved October 31, 2021. Sandwell, Ian (November 5, 2021). "Eternals 2: Release date, cast and everything you need to know". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved November 5, 2021. Rooney, David (October 24, 2021). "Chloe Zhao's 'Eternals': Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved November 5, 2021. Klein, Brennan (October 14, 2021). "Eternals' Hidden Human Character Explained". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 19, 2021. Retrieved November 8, 2021. Vary, Adam (October 25, 2021). "'Eternals' Director Chloé Zhao Explains How She Got Superman in the MCU". Variety. Archived from the original on November 4, 2021. Retrieved November 4, 2021. "Angelina Jolie's iconic Elie Saab gown nabs spotlight at 'Eternals' premiere". Arab News. October 19, 2021. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved November 5, 2021. Gullapalli, Vishal; Robinson, Tasha (November 4, 2021). "Eternals' post-credit scene brings the Marvel universe back to Thanos". Polygon. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved November 5, 2021. Hibberd, James (April 17, 2015). "Marvel teaming with John Ridley for mysterious superhero project – exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 17, 2015. Retrieved April 17, 2015. Mitovich, Matt Webb (January 3, 2024). "John Ridley: My Scrapped Marvel TV Series Was About the Eternals — and 'So F–king Weird'". TVLine. Archived from the original on January 3, 2024. Retrieved January 3, 2024. Goldberg, Lesley (December 8, 2019). "Marvel TV Division Folded Into Studio Unit, Layoffs Expected". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 11, 2019. Retrieved June 19, 2022. Schwartz, Terri (January 10, 2017). "John Ridley Promises Marvel TV Project Is A 'Unique' Take on Superhero Genre". IGN. Archived from the original on January 11, 2017. Retrieved January 11, 2017. González, Umberto (April 23, 2018). "Marvel Boss Kevin Feige Confirms 'Eternals' Movie in Development (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on April 23, 2018. Retrieved April 23, 2018. Kit, Borys (May 15, 2018). "Marvel Sets Black List Writers for 'Eternals' Movie (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 16, 2018. Retrieved May 15, 2018. Kit, Borys (September 21, 2018). "Marvel Studios' 'The Eternals' Finds Its Director With Chloe Zhao". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 21, 2018. Retrieved September 21, 2018. Hood, Cooper (June 25, 2018). "Exclusive: The Eternals Movie Can Play With MCU History". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on June 26, 2018. Retrieved June 26, 2018. Barfield, Charles (December 16, 2020). "Chloe Zhao Was The One To Approach Marvel Studios About A Film: "I Just Wanted To Work With That Team"". The Playlist. Archived from the original on December 16, 2020. Retrieved January 4, 2021. Keegan, Rebecca (September 2, 2020). "Director Chloe Zhao Arrives With Early Oscar Contender 'Nomadland' and Next Year's 'Eternals': "It's a Bit Surreal"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 3, 2020. Retrieved September 2, 2020. Arthur, Kate (April 28, 2021). "Chloé Zhao on Making Oscars History and How She Stayed True to Herself Directing Marvel's 'Eternals'". Variety. Archived from the original on April 28, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2021. Kroll, Justin (September 21, 2018). "Marvel's 'The Eternals' Taps 'The Rider' Director Chloe Zhao". Variety. Archived from the original on September 21, 2018. Retrieved September 22, 2018. Chitwood, Adam (January 4, 2021). "Chloe Zhao Says She's Also the Writer on Marvel's 'Eternals'; Talks Blending Scope with Intimacy". Collider. Archived from the original on January 4, 2021. Retrieved January 4, 2021. Watercutter, Angela (November 2, 2021). "Chloé Zhao Upends the Marvel Formula With Eternals". Wired. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved November 2, 2021. Mancuso, Vinnie (February 25, 2019). "Marvel's 'Eternals' Movie Might Be an Epic Spanning "Tens of Thousands of Years," Says Kevin Feige". Collider. Archived from the original on February 26, 2019. Retrieved April 19, 2019. Couch, Aaron (November 16, 2021). "'Eternals' Writer Patrick Burleigh Reflects on His Marvel Journey". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 11, 2023. Retrieved May 22, 2023. Galuppo, Mia (March 27, 2019). "Angelina Jolie in Talks to Make Marvel Debut With 'The Eternals' (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved March 27, 2019. Kit, Borys (April 5, 2019). "Kumail Nanjiani in Talks to Join Angelina Jolie in Marvel's 'The Eternals' (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 5, 2019. Retrieved April 5, 2019. González, Umberto (April 17, 2019). "Marvel Studios Taps Ma Dong-seok for 'The Eternals' (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on April 17, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2019. Sneider, Jeff (April 17, 2019). "Marvel's 'The Eternals' Adds 'Train to Busan' Star Ma Dong-seok". Collider. Archived from the original on April 18, 2019. Retrieved April 19, 2019. Kroll, Justin (May 7, 2019). "Richard Madden in Talks to Star in Marvel's 'Eternals'". Variety. Archived from the original on May 7, 2019. Retrieved May 7, 2019. González, Umberto (June 26, 2019). "Salma Hayek Eyed to Join Marvel Studios' 'The Eternals' (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on June 27, 2019. Retrieved June 26, 2019. Donnelly, Matt (July 10, 2019). "What to Expect From Marvel's Comic-Con Presentation — and Why It's So Pivotal". Variety. Archived from the original on July 10, 2019. Retrieved July 10, 2019. Stolworthy, Jacob (July 14, 2019). "Stranger Things' Millie Bobby Brown shuts down claims she's joining Marvel universe". The Independent. Archived from the original on July 14, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony; Ramos, Dino-Ray (July 20, 2019). "'The Eternals' Details Unveiled At Marvel's Comic-Con Panel, Angelina Jolie Surprises Hall H; Pic To Open November 2020". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved July 20, 2019. Chitwood, Adam (July 21, 2019). "Kevin Feige Confirms LGBTQ Marvel Characters in 'Eternals' and 'Thor 4'". Collider. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019. Erao, Math (January 26, 2021). "Eternals Star Discusses the MCU's First Openly Gay Couple". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved January 26, 2021. Power, Tom (September 8, 2021). "Where does Eternals take place on the MCU timeline?". TechRadar. Archived from the original on September 8, 2021. Retrieved September 8, 2021. Bucksbaum, Sydney (July 21, 2019). "See the exclusive first portrait of Angelina Jolie and the cast of The Eternals". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019. Barnhardt, Adam (July 23, 2019). "The Eternals: First Photos of Reported Sets Surface Online". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on July 24, 2019. Retrieved July 23, 2019. Allard, Matthew (October 6, 2019). "Working with LUTs- Ben Davis BSC". News Shooter. Archived from the original on December 9, 2019. Retrieved April 1, 2020. Ellwood, Gregory (February 20, 2021). "Chloe Zhao Says 'The Revenant' Is Her 'Eternals' Inspiration [Interview]". The Playlist. Archived from the original on February 20, 2021. Retrieved February 20, 2021. Kroll, Justin (August 5, 2019). "Gemma Chan in Talks to Join Marvel's 'The Eternals' (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on August 5, 2019. Retrieved August 5, 2018. Sneider, Jeff (August 5, 2019). "Exclusive: 'Dunkirk' Star Barry Keoghan in Talks to Join Marvel's 'The Eternals'". Collider. Archived from the original on August 5, 2019. Retrieved August 5, 2019. Davids, Brian (December 11, 2020). "Gemma Chan on 'Let Them All Talk' and How She Wound Up in 'Eternals' after 'Captain Marvel'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved December 12, 2020. Couch, Aaron (August 24, 2019). "Marvel Confirms Kit Harington for 'Eternals,' Sets 'Black Panther II' Date". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 24, 2019. Retrieved August 24, 2019. Pandey, Devasheesh (May 8, 2021). "Harish Patel on Starring in Marvel's Eternals: People will Say Ibu Hatela Did Something New". News18. Archived from the original on May 8, 2021. Retrieved September 14, 2021. HT Entertainment Desk (August 19, 2021). "The Eternals: Harish Patel gets billing on new poster with Angelina Jolie, Kit Harington and others". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on August 19, 2021. Retrieved August 20, 2021. Ankers, Adele (November 5, 2019). "Marvel's The Eternals Reportedly Evacuated After Unexploded Bomb Discovery on Set". IGN. Archived from the original on November 5, 2019. Retrieved November 5, 2019. "Salma Hayek hints that Syrian refugee star Zain Al-Rafeea could be in Marvel film". Arab News. November 18, 2019. Archived from the original on November 20, 2019. Retrieved March 27, 2021. Ffrench, Andrew (January 8, 2020). "Did you see Angelina Jolie at Marvel's museum film shoot?". Oxford Mail. Archived from the original on January 9, 2020. Retrieved January 9, 2020. Frodsham, Isobel; Ennals, Ethan (January 10, 2020). "Gemma Chan suspended in mid-air while filming Marvel's The Eternals in London". Evening Standard. Archived from the original on January 10, 2020. Retrieved January 10, 2020. Evans, Mel (January 21, 2020). "Marvel's Eternals using fake title 'Sack Lunch' as filming takes over Camden for the week". Metro.co.uk. Archived from the original on January 22, 2020. Retrieved March 27, 2021. Burwick, Kevin (October 16, 2020). "Love and Thunder Gets a Seinfeld Inspired Working Title That Hints at Thor's Big Diet". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on January 4, 2021. Retrieved March 27, 2021. Chase, Stephanie (February 4, 2020). "Marvel's The Eternals star Gemma Chan confirms Phase 4 movie has wrapped filming". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on February 7, 2020. Retrieved February 6, 2020. Perry, Spencer (March 25, 2020). "Marvel's The Eternals VFX Studio Confirms They Are Still Working Remotely Amid Coronavirus Quarantine". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on March 26, 2020. Retrieved March 26, 2020. Frei, Vincent (October 25, 2021). "Eternals - The Art of VFX". Art of VFX. Archived from the original on November 9, 2021. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Welk, Brian (April 3, 2020). "'Black Widow' Moves to November as Other MCU Films Shift Back to 2021, 2022". TheWrap. Archived from the original on April 3, 2020. Retrieved April 3, 2020. Welk, Brian (August 27, 2020). "'The King's Man' Pushed to February 2021". TheWrap. Archived from the original on August 27, 2020. Retrieved August 27, 2020. Gonzalez, Umberto; Welk, Brian (September 23, 2020). "Disney Pushes 'Black Widow' Back to 2021". TheWrap. Archived from the original on September 23, 2020. Retrieved September 23, 2020. Barhardt, Adam (November 18, 2020). "Eternals Star Lauren Ridloff Confirms Reshoots Have Taken Place". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on November 18, 2020. Retrieved November 27, 2020. Carolina (February 7, 2021). "Monday, Feb. 8 Filming Locations". On Location Vacations. Archived from the original on February 7, 2021. Retrieved February 11, 2021. Sharma, Abhishek (April 8, 2021). "Marvel's Eternals Final Cut Isn't Finished Despite Yearlong Delay". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on April 8, 2021. Retrieved April 13, 2021. Aguilar, Carlos (April 24, 2021). "The magic of Chloé Zhao: How the Oscars favorite gets brilliant performances from non-actors". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 27, 2021. Retrieved April 29, 2021. Anderton, Ethan (May 24, 2021). "Why Does Marvel's 'Eternals' Poster Credit Chloé Zhao With Two Writing Credits?". /Film. Archived from the original on May 24, 2021. Retrieved May 24, 2021. Marshall, Rick (May 24, 2021). "Marvel's Eternals trailer delivers first look at Oscar winner's superhero saga". Digital Trends. Archived from the original on May 24, 2021. Retrieved May 25, 2021. Paul, Larisha (October 19, 2021). "Harry Styles Will Apparently Arouse Everyone as Eros in MCU's 'Eternals'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 19, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2021. Stolworthy, Jacob (November 5, 2021). "Eternals credits scene: Marvel fans react to 'perfect' arrival of [spoiler] in new film". The Independent. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved November 6, 2021. Aguilar, Matthew (December 2, 2022). "WWE: Becky Lynch's Cut Marvel Role Details Reportedly Revealed". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on December 4, 2022. Retrieved December 3, 2022. Sharf, Zack (May 3, 2021). "'Eternals' First Footage: Oscar Winner Chloé Zhao Enters the MCU with Angelina Jolie and More". IndieWire. Archived from the original on May 3, 2021. Retrieved May 3, 2021. "First Tracks from Ramin Djawadi's 'Eternals' Score Released". Film Music Reporter. October 22, 2021. Archived from the original on October 22, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2021. "'Eternals' Soundtrack Album Details". Film Music Reporter. November 2, 2021. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved November 2, 2021. Gartenberg, Chaim (May 3, 2021). "Marvel drops the first glimpse of Oscar-winner Chloé Zhao's Eternals". The Verge. Archived from the original on May 3, 2021. Retrieved May 3, 2021. Arbeiter, Michael (May 3, 2021). "Marvel Reveals Eternals Look, Black Panther 2 and Captain Marvel 2 Titles". Nerdist. Archived from the original on May 3, 2021. Retrieved May 3, 2021. Bui, Hoai-Tran (May 3, 2021). "First 'Eternals' Footage Revealed in Marvel Studios Teaser of Upcoming MCU Films". /Film. Archived from the original on May 3, 2021. Retrieved May 3, 2021. Gartenberg, Chaim (May 24, 2021). "The first full trailer for Chloé Zhao's Eternals promises an epoch-spanning epic from Marvel". The Verge. Archived from the original on May 24, 2021. Retrieved May 24, 2021. Pulliam-Moore, Charles (May 24, 2021). "Marvel's Eternals Trailer Introduces Earth's Secret Super Team". io9. Archived from the original on May 24, 2021. Retrieved May 24, 2021. Romano, Nick (May 24, 2021). "Eternals teaser trailer assembles Marvel's family of immortals to debate who should lead the Avengers". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 24, 2021. Retrieved May 24, 2021. Adams, Erik (May 24, 2021). "The Eternals teaser hints at a different type of Marvel movie". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on May 24, 2021. Retrieved May 24, 2021. Ankers, Adele (May 24, 2021). "Marvel's Eternals: First Teaser Trailer Released". IGN. Archived from the original on May 24, 2021. Retrieved May 24, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 26, 2021). "'Eternals' Trailer Clocks 77 Million Views In First Day, Tops For A Marvel Movie During Pandemic". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 26, 2021. Retrieved May 26, 2021. Couch, Aaron (June 18, 2021). "Disney Studios Marketing Head Asad Ayaz on Mischievous 'Loki' Campaign". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 19, 2021. Retrieved June 19, 2021. Shanfeld, Ethan; Ravindran, Manori (August 19, 2021). "'Eternals' Trailer: Gemma Chan, Angelina Jolie, Kit Harrington Fight to Defend Humanity in Chloé Zhao's Marvel Film". Variety. Archived from the original on August 19, 2021. Retrieved August 19, 2021. Coggan, Devan (August 19, 2021). "New Eternals trailer teases an epic cosmic showdown". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 19, 2021. Retrieved August 19, 2021. Couch, Aaron (August 19, 2021). "New 'Eternals' Trailer Teases Epic Battle". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 19, 2021. Retrieved August 19, 2021. Steinberg, Brian (October 4, 2021). "Lexus Teams Up With Marvel's 'Eternals' in Advertising Alliance". Variety. Archived from the original on October 4, 2021. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Falkenberg-Hull, Eileen (October 18, 2021). "Lexus Creates 10 Cars Inspired by Marvel's 'Eternals' Superheroes". Newsweek. Archived from the original on October 18, 2021. Retrieved October 18, 2021. Drum, Nicole (November 12, 2021). "Marvel's Eternals Costumes to Debut at Smithsonian's FUTURES Exhibit". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on December 17, 2021. Retrieved December 31, 2021. Johnson, Zach (October 19, 2021). "Stargazing at World Premiere of Marvel Studios' Eternals". D23. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved October 21, 2021. Vivarelli, Nick (October 5, 2021). "Chloé Zhao's 'Eternals,' From Marvel Studios, Gets Early Film Festival Premiere in Rome". Variety. Archived from the original on October 5, 2021. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Vary, Adam B.; Saperstein, Pat (September 10, 2021). "Disney Releasing 'Eternals,' 'Encanto' Exclusively in Theaters". Variety. Archived from the original on September 10, 2021. Retrieved September 10, 2021. "SDCC 2019: All of the Marvel Studios News Coming Out of Hall H at San Diego Comic-Con". Marvel.com. July 21, 2019. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019. Oddo, Marco Vito (July 24, 2022). "'She-Hulk: Attorney at Law' and 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' End Marvel's Phase 4". Collider. Archived from the original on July 26, 2022. Retrieved July 26, 2022. Davis, Rebecca (May 11, 2021). "Marvel's 'Shang-Chi,' 'Eternals' May Face Uphill Battle to Enter China". Variety. Archived from the original on May 12, 2021. Retrieved May 12, 2021. Davis, Rebecca (March 1, 2021). "China Both Celebrates and Slams Chloe Zhao's 'Nomadland' Golden Globe Glory". Variety. Archived from the original on August 6, 2021. Retrieved October 31, 2021. Zhang, Phoebe (April 26, 2021). "Nomadland director Chloé Zhao's historic Oscars win censored in China, months after she was accused of insulting the country". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on October 7, 2021. Retrieved October 31, 2021. Tartaglione, Nancy (September 10, 2021). "'Shang-Chi' China Release Unlikely In Wake Of Unearthed Comments By Star Simu Liu; 'The Eternals' Hopes In Question". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 10, 2021. Retrieved September 10, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony; Tartaglione, Nancy (November 4, 2021). "'Eternals' Won't Be Playing Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Kuwait, Bahrain & Oman". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 6, 2021. Retrieved November 6, 2021. Ma, Wenlei (November 5, 2021). "Angelina Jolie reacts to Eternals ban over gay scenes". News.com.au. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Malkin, Marc (November 6, 2021). "'Eternals' Actor Haaz Sleiman on Being Arab and Openly Gay in the MCU, the Film's 'Ignorant' Ban in Middle Eastern Countries (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on November 6, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Angelina, Tarida (November 11, 2021). Lestari, Puput Puji (ed.). "Bukan LSF yang Potong Adegan Ciuman Gay di Film Eternals, Ini Faktanya" [Fact Check: Indonesia Censorship Board Did Not Cut Eternals Film]. VOI (in Indonesian). Jakarta. Archived from the original on November 11, 2021. Retrieved November 12, 2021. "'Eternals' Comes to Disney+ on January 12". Marvel.com. December 10, 2021. Archived from the original on December 10, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2021. Bonomolo, Cameron (January 14, 2022). "Marvel's Eternals Extras and Commentary Coming to Disney+". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 17, 2022. Retrieved January 17, 2022. Oddo, Marco Vito (December 15, 2021). "Exclusive: 'Eternals' 4K + Blu-ray Walmart Artwork for Home Release Revealed". Collider. Archived from the original on December 16, 2021. Retrieved December 18, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (June 27, 2022). "'Obi-Wan Kenobi' Finale Audience 20% Higher Than 'Book Of Boba Fett'; 'Dr. Strange 2' Ahead Of 'Eternals' In Disney+ Viewership". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 4, 2022. Retrieved October 4, 2022. Prange, Stephanie (January 19, 2022). "'Eternals,' 'Book of Boba Fett' Top Weekly Whip Media Streaming Charts". Media Play News. Archived from the original on February 23, 2022. Retrieved October 4, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 6, 2021). "'Eternals' Seeing Possible $70M+ Opening Weekend: Why This Is A Wake-Up Call For The MCU; 'Red Notice' Box Office Unreported". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (October 13, 2021). "'Eternals' First-Day Advance Tickets Beating 'Shang-Chi' & 'Black Widow'; AMC Sees Biggest Day 1 Presales Of Year". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 13, 2021. Retrieved October 13, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 3, 2021). "'Eternals' Eyeing $75M Opening Weekend; Ranks As Fandango's 2nd Best Preseller Of The Year". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 3, 2021. Retrieved November 3, 2021. Robbins, Shawn (October 15, 2021). "Long Range Box Office Forecast: Marvel Studios' Eternals". Boxoffice Pro. Archived from the original on October 16, 2021. Retrieved October 16, 2021. Robbins, Shawn (October 29, 2021). "Long Range Box Office Forecast: Ghostbusters: Afterlife Outlook, Eternals Tracking Softens, and More Updates". Boxoffice Pro. Archived from the original on October 29, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony; Tartaglione, Nancy (November 3, 2021). "'Eternals' Zaps Up 2nd Best Opening Day In Korea During Pandemic; MCU Movie Eyes $150M WW Opening". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 3, 2021. Retrieved November 3, 2021. "Domestic 2021 Weekend 45". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on November 7, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 14, 2021). "'Eternals' Powers $27M+ Second Weekend; 'Clifford' Louder With $22M 5-Day: Is Theatrical Hybrid Model Really The Answer For Family Movies? – Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 15, 2021. Retrieved November 15, 2021. "Domestic Box Office For 2021 (In-year release)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on August 13, 2022. Retrieved January 16, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy (November 7, 2021). "'Eternals' Is Weekend King(o) With $91M Overseas & $162M Global Bows – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 7, 2021. Retrieved November 8, 2021. Tartaglione, Nancy (November 14, 2021). "'No Time To Die' Crosses $700M Global, Becomes Biggest Hollywood Pic Of Pandemic Overseas; 'Eternals' Assembles $281M WW Through Second Session – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 14, 2021. Retrieved November 15, 2021. Tartaglione, Nancy (November 21, 2021). "'Ghostbusters: Afterlife' Lives It Up With $60M Global Debut; 'Eternals' Leads Offshore Hollywood Weekend – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 22, 2021. Retrieved November 22, 2021. Tartaglione, Nancy (November 29, 2021). "'Encanto' Chimes In With $70M Global Bow; 'No Time To Die' Overtakes 'Spectre' In UK, Now Market's No. 3 Movie Ever – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 30, 2021. Retrieved November 30, 2021. "Eternals". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved February 15, 2023. "Eternals Reviews". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved January 14, 2022. Colbert, Stephen M. (November 4, 2021). "Eternals' Rotten Tomatoes Score Was An Inevitability For The MCU". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved November 5, 2021. O'Sullivan, Charlotte (October 26, 2021). "Eternals film review: Lavish, ambitious, and right to take its time". Evening Standard. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved October 27, 2021. Abele, Robert (October 24, 2021). "'Eternals' Film Review: Chloe Zhao's MCU Movie Is Colossal, Cosmic and Refreshingly Close Up". TheWrap. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved November 2, 2021. Jones, Oliver (October 24, 2021). "'Eternals' Is a Refreshingly Romantic Reminder of the Power & Purpose of Event Films". Observer. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved November 2, 2021. Gleiberman, Owen (October 24, 2021). "'Eternals' Review: Chloé Zhao's Marvel Movie Is Finely Crafted but Needed More of Her Personality to Be Marvelous". Variety. Archived from the original on October 26, 2021. Retrieved October 26, 2021. Macdonald, Moira (October 27, 2021). "'Eternals' review: Chloé Zhao creates a different kind of superhero movie, and it lingers long after you leave the theater". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved October 28, 2021. Marric, Linda (October 24, 2021). "Film review: Eternals". The Jewish Chronicle. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved October 27, 2021. Barber, Nicholas (October 25, 2021). "Three stars for Chloé Zhao's 'disappointing' Eternals". BBC Culture. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved October 27, 2021. Loughrey, Clarisse (November 5, 2021). "Chloé Zhao meets far too much CGI in Marvel's Eternals – review". The Independent. Archived from the original on November 6, 2021. Retrieved November 6, 2021. Truitt, Brian (October 24, 2021). "Review: Marvel's overstuffed 'Eternals' is a star-studded exercise in superhero excess". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 27, 2021. Retrieved October 26, 2021. Kennedy, Mark (November 4, 2021). "Review: 'Eternals' has a lot of firsts but way too much else". Associated Press. Archived from the original on November 6, 2021. Retrieved November 6, 2021. Li, Shirley (October 24, 2021). "The Most Poetic Marvel Film Yet". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved October 29, 2021. Collin, Robbie (October 24, 2021). "Eternals, review: Marvel attempts to push boundaries, but the result is insipid". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved October 27, 2021. Maher, Kevin (October 25, 2021). "Eternals review — Navel-gazing superheroes in quest for a decent script". The Times. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved October 28, 2021. Rose, Steve (October 24, 2021). "Eternals review – magic hour meets PowerPoint in Chloe Zhao's Marvel yarn". The Guardian. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved October 27, 2021. Collins, K. Austin (October 26, 2021). "The Hot Gods of 'Eternals' Will Bore You to Death With Their Feelings". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on November 6, 2021. Retrieved October 27, 2021. Chang, Justin (October 24, 2021). "Review: In Marvel's epic 'Eternals,' a cosmic breath of fresh air ultimately turns stale". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 6, 2021. Retrieved October 28, 2021. Lowry, Brian (October 24, 2021). "'Eternals' expands the Marvel universe with a messy, history-spanning origin saga". CNN. Archived from the original on November 6, 2021. Retrieved October 29, 2021. Smith, Kyle (October 31, 2021). "Eternals Shows How to Go from Auteur to Hack in One Movie". National Review. Archived from the original on November 6, 2021. Retrieved November 6, 2021. Newby, Richard (November 6, 2021). "Why 'Eternals' Is Dividing Audiences". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 6, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Sharf, Zack (March 15, 2022). "Chloé Zhao Reckons With 'Eternals' Dividing Fans: Its Style 'Made People Uncomfortable'". Variety. Archived from the original on March 16, 2022. Retrieved March 16, 2022. Sun, Rebecca (April 14, 2022). "Marvel's 'Eternals,' 'Hawkeye' Earn Recognition for Disability Representation (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 14, 2022. Retrieved April 14, 2022. Hipes, Patrick (March 1, 2022). "ReFrame Stamp Recipients Hit 28 In 2021 Including Oscar Nominees 'CODA', 'Power Of The Dog', 'West Side Story'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 9, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2022. "'Shang-Chi' Tops Second Annual Gold List for Asian Achievement in Film". The Hollywood Reporter. January 18, 2022. Archived from the original on January 27, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. "Best Actress 2022 Archives". GoldOpen. Archived from the original on November 26, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Meltzer, Lee (December 2, 2021). "Dune, Coda, and Belfast Lead the 5th Annual HCA Film Awards Nominations" (Press release). Los Angeles, California: Hollywood Critics Association. Archived from the original on December 3, 2021. Retrieved December 4, 2021. Urban, Sasha (February 28, 2022). "Hollywood Critics Association Awards 2022: 'CODA' Wins Best Picture, Jane Campion and Denis Villeneuve Tie for Director". Variety. Archived from the original on March 1, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Hipes, Patrick (January 18, 2022). "VES Awards Nominations Led By 'Dune', 'Encanto', 'Loki'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 18, 2022. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Couch, Aaron (February 22, 2022). "'Spider-Man,' 'Shang-Chi' Lead Critics Choice Super Awards Film Nominations". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 30, 2022. Retrieved May 15, 2022. Fuster, Jeremy (December 1, 2021). "'Power of the Dog' and 'Belfast' Lead Nominations for IPA Satellite Awards". TheWrap. Archived from the original on December 2, 2021. Retrieved January 11, 2022. "GLAAD Announces Nominees For The 33rd Annual GLADD Media Awards" (Press release). GLAAD. January 19, 2022. Archived from the original on January 30, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Erik Pedersen (March 9, 2022). "Kids' Choice Awards Nominations Set; Miranda Cosgrove & Rob Gronkowski To Host Show". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 9, 2022. Retrieved March 9, 2022. Burlingame, Jon (May 12, 2022). "'Fast and Furious' Composer Brian Tyler Named BMI Icon at Film, TV and Visual Media Awards". Variety. Archived from the original on February 2, 2023. Retrieved July 5, 2022. "2022 BMI Film, TV & Visual Media Awards". BMI.com. Archived from the original on July 28, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Simons, Dean (October 27, 2022). "Here are the winners of the Saturn Awards 2022". Comics Beat. Archived from the original on October 27, 2022. Retrieved October 27, 2022. Paige, Rachel (February 16, 2021). "Marvel Studios Announces Assembled, a Behind-the-Scenes Look at the Making of the Marvel Cinematic Universe". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on February 16, 2021. Retrieved February 16, 2021. Ridgely, Charlie (January 18, 2022). "Disney+: Every Movie & TV Show Arriving in February 2022". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 19, 2022. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Ellwood, Gregory (October 20, 2021). "'Eternals': Chloe Zhao On Kevin Feige, Potential Sequels & Saying Yes To 'Star Wars' If Asked [Interview]". The Playlist. Archived from the original on October 20, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2021. Couch, Aaron (November 9, 2021). "'Eternals' Writers Wish for a Disney+ Prequel". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 10, 2021. Retrieved November 9, 2021. Hirschberg, Lynn (January 11, 2022). "Gemma Chan Creates Her Own Good Work". W. Archived from the original on January 11, 2022. Retrieved January 11, 2022. Amidon, Aurora (July 25, 2022). "Marvel's Kevin Feige Teases Harry Styles' Cosmic MCU Future". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 26, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Barnhardt, Adam (August 3, 2022). "Eternals 2 Possibly Revealed by Patton Oswalt With Harry Styles and Chloe Zhao Returning". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 3, 2022. Retrieved August 3, 2022. Davis, Brandon (October 29, 2022). "Eternals Confirmed to be Returning in the MCU (Exclusive)". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on October 29, 2022. Retrieved November 8, 2022. Barfield, Charles (November 7, 2022). "Kumail Nanjiani Has "No Idea If Or When" 'Eternals 2' Might Happen But Is Keen On A Future Ms. Marvel Team-Up". The Playlist. Archived from the original on November 7, 2022. Retrieved November 8, 2022. Barnhardt, Adam (December 26, 2022). "Eternals 2 Reportedly in the Works According to New Update". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on December 26, 2022. Retrieved December 26, 2022. – via Kwon, Gil-yeo (December 26, 2022). "길가메시 부활하나...마동석 측 "'이터널스2'와 글로벌 프로젝트 제작" [공식]" [Is Gilgamesh resurrected... Ma Dong-seok side "'Eternals 2' and global project production" [Official]]. YTN (in Korean). Archived from the original on December 26, 2022. Retrieved December 26, 2022. Joseph, André (February 16, 2023). "Patton Oswalt Addresses His Eternals 2 Claim: 'I Was Catfished by the Internet'". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on February 17, 2023. Retrieved February 17, 2023. Eternals at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Data from Wikidata Official website at Marvel.com Eternals at IMDb Portals:  Comics  Film  Speculative fiction  United States