The Trial (French: Le Procès) is a 1962 drama film written and directed by Orson Welles, based on the 1925 posthumously published novel of the same name by Franz Kafka. Welles stated immediately after completing the film: "The Trial is the best film I have ever made". The film begins with Welles narrating Kafka's parable "Before the Law" to pinscreen scenes created by the artists Alexandre Alexeieff and Claire Parker. Anthony Perkins stars as Josef K., a bureaucrat who is accused of a never-specified crime, and Jeanne Moreau, Romy Schneider and Elsa Martinelli play women who become involved in various ways in Josef's trial and life. Welles plays the Advocate, Josef's lawyer and the film's principal antagonist. The Trial has grown in reputation over the years, and some critics, including Roger Ebert, have called it a masterpiece. It is often praised for its scenic design and cinematography, the latter of which includes disorienting camera angles and unconventional use of focus. Josef K. is sleeping in his bedroom, in an apartment he shares with other lodgers. He is awakened when a man in a suit opens his bedroom door. Josef assumes the glib man is a policeman, but the intruder does not identify himself and ignores Josef's demand to produce police ID. Several detectives enter and tell Josef he is under open arrest. In another room Josef K. sees three co-workers from his place of employment; they are there to provide evidence regarding some unstated crime. The police refuse to inform Josef K. of his misdeeds, or if he is even being charged with a crime, and they do not take him into custody. After the detectives leave, Josef converses with his landlady, Mrs. Grubach, and neighbor, Miss Bürstner, about the strange visit. Later he goes to his office, where his supervisor thinks he has been having improper relations with his teenaged female cousin. That evening, Josef attends the opera, but is abducted from the theater by a police inspector and taken to a courtroom, where he attempts in vain to confront the still-unstated case against him. Josef returns to his office and discovers the two police officers who first visited him being whipped in a small room. Josef's uncle Max suggests that Josef consult with Hastler, a law advocate. After brief encounters with the wife of a courtroom guard and a roomful of condemned men awaiting trial, Josef is granted an interview with Hastler, which proves unsatisfactory. Hastler's mistress suggests that Josef seek the advice of the artist Titorelli, but this also proves unhelpful. Seeking refuge in a cathedral, Josef very briefly discusses his case with a priest. Hastler abruptly appears at the cathedral to confirm the priest's assertion. On the evening before his thirty-first birthday, Josef is apprehended by two executioners and taken to a quarry pit, where he is ordered to remove some of his clothing. The executioners pass a knife back and forth, apparently deliberating on who will do the deed, before handing the knife to the condemned man, who refuses to commit suicide. The executioners leave Josef in the quarry and toss dynamite in the pit. Josef laughs at his executioners and picks up the dynamite. From a distance one can hear an explosion and smoke billows into the air. Anthony Perkins – Josef K. Jeanne Moreau – Marika Bürstner Romy Schneider – Leni Elsa Martinelli – Hilda Suzanne Flon – Miss Pittl Orson Welles – Albert Hastler, The Advocate Akim Tamiroff – Bloch Madeleine Robinson – Mrs. Grubach Paola Mori – Court archivist Arnoldo Foà – Inspector A Fernand Ledoux – Chief Clerk of the Law Court Michael Lonsdale – Priest Max Buchsbaum – Examining Magistrate Max Haufler – Uncle Max Maurice Teynac – Deputy Manager Wolfgang Reichmann – Courtroom Guard Thomas Holtzmann – Bert the law student Billy Kearns – First Assistant Inspector Jess Hahn – Second Assistant Inspector Naydra Shore – Irmie, Joseph K.'s cousin Carl Studer – Man in Leather Jean-Claude Rémoleux – Policeman #1 Raoul Delfosse – Policeman #2 William Chappell – Titorelli Peter Sallis - Dubbing (Voice) In 1960, Welles was approached by producer Alexander Salkind to make a film from a public domain literary work. Salkind had originally wanted Welles to make a film of Nikolai Gogol's novella Taras Bulba. When Salkind found out that producer Harold Hecht was already making a version of Taras Bulba with Yul Brynner in the lead, he offered Welles a list of 82 other film titles to choose from. From that selection, Welles decided The Trial would be the most feasible film to make. (Earlier that year, Michael Lindsay-Hogg—who may have been Welles's son—had casually mentioned an idea to Welles about adapting The Trial as a stage play, prompting Welles to state that The Trial was an important book and that he, Welles, should re-read it.) Salkind promised that Welles would have total artistic freedom and he would not interfere with Welles' creation. They later discovered that the book was not yet in the public domain and that they needed to obtain the rights to the property. Salkind committed 650 million French francs (U.S.$1.3 million in 1962 currency) to the budget for The Trial and secured backing from West German, French and Italian investors. Welles took six months to write the screenplay. In adapting the work, he rearranged the order of Kafka's chapters. In this version, the chapter line-up read 1, 4, 2, 5, 6, 3, 8, 7, 9, 10. However, the order of Kafka's chapters was arranged by his literary executor, Max Brod, after the writer's death, and this order is not definitive. Welles also modernized several aspects of the story, introducing computer technology and changing Miss Bürstner's profession from a typist to a cabaret performer. Welles also opened the film with a fable from the book about a man who is permanently detained from seeking access to the Law by a guard. To illustrate this allegory, he used the pin screen animation of Alexandre Alexeieff and Claire Parker, who created animated prints using thousands of pins. Welles also changed the manner of Josef K.'s death. Kafka originally had the executioners pass the knife over the head of Josef K., thus giving him the opportunity to take the weapon and kill himself, in a more dignified manner—Josef K. does not; instead he is fatally stabbed by his executioners in the heart, and as he dies Josef K. says "like a dog." In the film, whilst the executioners still offer him the knife, Josef K. refuses to take it, and goads the executioners by yelling "You'll have to do it!" The film ends with the smoke of the fatal dynamite blast forming a mushroom cloud in the air while Welles reads the closing credits on the soundtrack. Another notable change is that of Josef's relationships with the numerous women in the film. Although Josef seems to be interested in Miss Bürstner, his later interactions with Hilda and Leni are dispassionate and awkward. In the film, Josef shows little romantic attention to Leni, and she often touches him sexually without him asking her to. Henry Jaglom, a friend of Welles's, claimed that Welles confided in him, saying that he knew Perkins was gay "and used that quality in Perkins to suggest another texture in Joseph K, a fear of exposure. The whole homosexuality thing—using Perkins that way—was incredible for that time. It was intentional on Orson's part: He had these three gorgeous women (Jeanne Moreau, Romy Schneider, Elsa Martinelli) trying to seduce this guy, who was completely repressed and incapable of responding." Jaglom went on to say, "The closetedness of Perkins' homosexuality... he thought that brought a whole wonderful subtext. I remember him saying that they never talked about it, but he felt that Perkins definitely knew what he was doing." Film critic Roger Ebert theorized that this "could be interpreted as a nightmare in which women make demands [Josef] K is uninterested in meeting." This has led some to believe that The Trial might have queer undertones. Welles initially hoped to cast U.S. comic actor Jackie Gleason as Hastler, but he took the role himself when Gleason rejected the part. Welles also dubbed the dialogue for 11 actors in The Trial. Welles reportedly dubbed a few lines of Anthony Perkins’ dialogue and challenged Perkins to identify the dubbing. Perkins was unable to locate the lines where Welles dubbed his voice. British actor Peter Sallis was brought in to dub Max Haufler's dialogue, which had been delivered in Hungarian, into American-accented English. Welles began the production in Yugoslavia. To create Josef K.’s workplace, he created a set in an exposition hall just outside Zagreb, where 850 secretaries banged typewriters at 850 office desks. Other sequences were later shot in Dubrovnik, Rome, Milan and Paris. Welles was not able to film The Trial in Kafka’s home city of Prague, as his work was seen as decadent by the communist government in Czechoslovakia. In Paris, Welles planned to shoot the interiors of his film at the Boulogne Studios, but Salkind had difficulties collecting promised capital to finance the film. Instead, he used the Gare d'Orsay, an abandoned Parisian railway station. Welles rearranged his set design to accommodate this new setting, and he later defended his decision to film at Gare d'Orsay in an interview with Cahiers du cinéma, where he stated: "Everything was improvised at the last moment, because the whole physical concept of my film was quite different. It was based on the absence of sets. And the gigantic nature of the sets, which people have objected to, is partly due to the fact that the only setting I had was that old abandoned station." Welles edited The Trial in Paris while technically on vacation; he commuted in on weekends from Málaga, Spain, where he was taking time to film sequences (reported as being "the prologue and epilogue") for his self-financed film adaptation of Don Quixote, to oversee the post-production work. In a later interview with Peter Bogdanovich, Anthony Perkins stated that Welles gave him the direction that The Trial was meant to be seen as a black comedy. Perkins would also state his greatest professional pride came in being the star of a Welles-directed feature. While filming in Zagreb, Welles met 21-year-old Croatian actress Olga Palinkaš. He renamed her Oja Kodar, and she became Welles' companion and occasional artistic collaborator during the latter years of his career. Welles initially planned to premiere The Trial at the Venice Film Festival in September 1962, but the film was not completed in time. The festival organizers showed the Academy Award winning musical West Side Story instead. Welles continued to edit the film up until its December 1962 premiere in Paris. In an interview with the BBC, he mentioned that on the eve of the premiere he jettisoned a ten-minute sequence (it is actually about six minutes long) where Josef K. meets with a computer scientist (played by Greek actress Katina Paxinou) who uses her technology to predict his fate. Welles explained the last-minute cut by noting: "I only saw the film as a whole once. We were still in the process of doing the mixing, and then the premiere fell on us... [The scene] should have been the best in the film and it wasn't. Something went wrong, I don't know why, but it didn't succeed." Ultimately, the US theatrical release of The Trial came in 1963. The film earned US $1,403,700 in North America, the UK and the British Commonwealth. It did not make a profit. The Trial polarized critics upon release. Immediately after its completion, Welles said, "Say what you like, but The Trial is the best film I have ever made." The film was reacted to more positively in France, where it won the Best Film award of the French Syndicate of Cinema Critics in 1963. Charles Higham's 1970 biography of Welles dismissed the film as "an agonizing experience [...] a dead thing, like some tablet found among the dust of forgotten men, speaking a language that has much to say to us, but whose words have largely been rubbed away." The film has continued to polarize film critics and scholars. The film has its detractors, but contemporary analysis is more positive. In his 1996 biography of Welles, David Thomson said the film was "an astonishing work, and a revelation of the man... a stunning film". Today, the film enjoys enthusiastic reviews; on Rotten Tomatoes, 84% of 44 critical reviews awarded the film a positive review, with an average rating of 7.7/10. Film critic Roger Ebert called the film "an exuberant use of camera placement and movement and inventive lighting," awarding it a full four stars. Film critic Leonard Maltin gave The Trial a rating of 3 and a half out of 4 stars and described it as "[g]ripping, if a bit confusing" and "not for all tastes." In the British Film Institute's 2002 Sight & Sound poll, Argentine film critic and historian Fernando Martín Peña voted The Trial one of his 10 favorite films. In 1981, Welles planned to create a documentary on the making of The Trial. Cinematographer Gary Graver was hired to film Welles addressing a University of Southern California audience on the film's history. The footage was shot with a 16mm camera on color reversal stock, but Welles never completed the proposed documentary. The footage is now in the possession of Germany’s Filmmuseum Munich, and has since been restored. No copyright was ever filed on The Trial, which resulted in the film being a public domain title in the US. Although it is possible that the copyright was restored by the URAA, no "Notice of Intent to Enforce" was filed with the US Copyright Office. In 2000, a restored version based on the long-lost original 35mm negative was released on DVD by Milestone Films. As of 2015, a 2K restoration by Rialto Pictures is playing in DCP format in various North American cities. A 4K restoration of the film was released by the Criterion Collection on September 19, 2023. Trial film Soyer, Renaud (20 June 2014). "Box Office Orson Welles". Box Office Story. Retrieved 13 July 2018. Wheldon, Huw (1962). "Orson Welles on THE TRIAL". BBC. Retrieved 6 March 2010 – via Wellesnet. Ebert, Roger (25 February 2000). "The Trial". RogerEbert.com. Ebert Digital LLC. Retrieved 13 July 2018. Taubin, Amy (20 June 2000). "Are You Defending Your Life?". The Village Voice. Archived from the original on 21 October 2012. Retrieved 13 August 2010. Cowie, Peter (1973). A Ribbon of Dreams: The Cinema of Orson Welles. New York: A.S. Barnes & Co. ISBN 9780498079986. Welles, Orson (1981). Filming 'The Trial' (Documentary). Munich Film Museum. Archived from the original on 2021-12-19. Retrieved 11 March 2018 – via YouTube. Lindsay-Hogg, Michael (2011). Luck and Circumstance: A Coming of Age in Hollywood, New York and Points Beyond. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. p. 76. ISBN 9780307594686.. Hall, Phil (27 July 2007). "The Bootleg Files: The Trial". Film Threat. Archived from the original on 2018-07-13. Retrieved 6 March 2010. Brady, Frank (1989). Citizen Welles. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. ISBN 9780684189826. Guthmann, Edward (2000). "REPEAT PERFORMANCE / Welles' Rare Masterpiece Restored / Film based on Kafka's 'The Trial' opens at the Castro". Retrieved 30 July 2022. Grossman, Andrew (2013). "Orson Welles' 'The Trial' Is a Study in Transcendental Psychology". Retrieved 30 July 2022. Bogdanovich, Peter (2004). Who the Hell's In It?. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 9780375400100. Sallis, Peter (18 September 2008). Fading Into The Limelight: The Autobiography. Orion. ISBN 978-1-4091-0572-5. "Movies Abroad: Prodigal Revived". Time. 29 June 1962. Retrieved 6 March 2010. "Orson Welles Film Dropped at Venice". The New York Times. 7 September 1962. p. 35. Retrieved 6 March 2010. "The Trial (1963)". TCM. James Chapman (2021) Film Finances and the Trial (1963): Alexander Salkind, Orson Welles, and European Co-Production in the 1960s, Historical Journal of Film, Radio and Television, 41:4, 788-807, DOI: 10.1080/01439685.2021.1916149 "Prix du Syndicat français de la critique 1963". Syndicat de la Critique de Cinéma (in French). Retrieved 2023-10-10. Higham, Charles (1985). Orson Welles: The Rise and Fall of an American Genius. St. Martin's Publishing Group. Higham, Charles (1970). The Films of Orson Welles. Univ of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-01567-8. Thomson, David (1997). "Xanadu, 1958-85". Rosebud: The Story of Orson Welles. New York: Vintage Books. p. 366. ISBN 9780679772835. "Orson Welles' 'The Trial' flawed yet unforgettable". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Hearst Seattle Media. 12 May 2000. Retrieved 6 March 2010.[permanent dead link] "Le Procès (The Trial) (1962)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved 3 October 2023. Maltin, Leonard (2014). Leonard Maltin's 2015 Movie Guide. Penguin. ISBN 9780698183612. "Who voted for which film". Sight & Sound. British Film Institute. Archived from the original on 3 August 2012. Retrieved 24 April 2015. Christley, Jamie N. (January 2003). "Orson Welles: An Incomplete Education". Senses of Cinema. Retrieved 13 July 2018. "Notices of Restored Copyrights". Copyright.gov. United States Copyright Office. Retrieved 13 July 2018. Goldstein, Bruce (November 2014). "Film Forum Calendar" (PDF). Film Forum. Retrieved 25 June 2015. Rialto Pictures [@RialtoPictures] (May 22, 2015). "Orson Welles' THE TRIAL, starring Anthony Perkins, is @CharlesTheatre starting tomorrow!" (Tweet). Retrieved 25 June 2015 – via Twitter. "The Trial (Le procès)". Film Series: Recently Restored. Gene Siskel Film Center. Archived from the original on 26 June 2015. Retrieved 25 June 2015. 2K DCP digital restoration from Rialto Pictures. "The Trial (Le procès)". The Cinematheque. Archived from the original on 26 June 2015. Retrieved 25 June 2015. "Orson Wells: The Trial". Criterion Collection. Retrieved 24 July 2023. Wikiquote has quotations related to The Trial (1962 film). The Trial at IMDb The Trial at AllMovie The Trial at the TCM Movie Database The Trial at Rotten Tomatoes PopMatters article on The Trial