Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (born Mahesh Prasad Varma, 12 January 1918 – 5 February 2008) was the creator of Transcendental Meditation (TM) and leader of the worldwide organization that has been characterized in multiple ways, including as a new religious movement and as non-religious. He became known as Maharishi (meaning "great seer") and Yogi as an adult. After earning a degree in physics at Allahabad University in 1942, Maharishi Mahesh Yogi became an assistant and disciple of Swami Brahmananda Saraswati (also known as Guru Dev), the Shankaracharya (spiritual leader) of the Jyotir Math in the Indian Himalayas. The Maharishi credits Brahmananda Saraswati with inspiring his teachings. In 1955, the Maharishi began to introduce his Transcendental Deep Meditation (later renamed Transcendental Meditation) to India and the world. His first global tour began in 1958. His devotees referred to him as His Holiness, and because he laughed frequently in early TV interviews, he was sometimes referred to as the "giggling guru." The Maharishi trained more than 40,000 TM teachers, taught the Transcendental Meditation technique to "more than five million people" and founded thousands of teaching centres and hundreds of colleges, universities and schools, while TM websites report that tens of thousands have learned the TM-Sidhi programme. His initiatives include schools and universities with campuses in several countries, including India, Canada, the United States, the United Kingdom and Switzerland. The Maharishi, his family and close associates created charitable organisations and for-profit businesses, including health clinics, mail-order health supplements and organic farms. The reported value of the Maharishi's organization has ranged from the millions to billions of U.S. dollars; in 2008, the organization placed the value of their United States assets at about $300 million. In the late 1960s and early 1970s, the Maharishi achieved fame as the guru to the Beatles, the Beach Boys, and other celebrities. In the late 1970s, he started the TM-Sidhi programme, which proposed to improve the mind–body relationship of practitioners through techniques such as Yogic flying. The Maharishi's Natural Law Party was founded in 1992 and ran campaigns in dozens of countries. He moved to near Vlodrop, the Netherlands, in the same year. In 2000, he created the Global Country of World Peace, a non-profit organization, and appointed its leaders. In 2008, the Maharishi announced his retirement from all administrative activities and went into silence until his death three weeks later. Maharishi Mahesh Yogi belonged to the Kayastha caste, a caste of scribes in India. The birth name and the birth dates of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi are not known with certainty, in part because of the tradition of ascetics and monks to relinquish family connections. Many accounts say he was born Mahesh Prasad Varma into a Kayastha family living in the Central Provinces of British India. A different name appears in the Allahabad University list of distinguished alumni, where he is listed as M.C. Srivastava, and an obituary says his name was "Mahesh Srivastava". Various accounts give the year of his birth as 1911, 1917 or 1918. Authors Paul Mason and William Jefferson say that he was born 12 January 1917 in Rajim, Central Provinces, British India (Chhattisgarh, India). The place of birth given in his passport is "Pounalulla", India, and his birth date 12 January 1918. Mahesh "most likely" came from an upper-caste family of the high-status Kayastha caste, whose traditional profession is writing. Mahesh studied physics at Allahabad University and earned a degree in 1942. While a few sources say that he worked at the Gun Carriage Factory in Jabalpur for some time, most report that in 1941 he became an administrative secretary to the Shankaracharya of the Jyotir Math, Swami Brahmananda Saraswati (also known as Guru Dev, which means "divine teacher") and took a new name, Bal Brahmachari Mahesh. Coplin refers to bala brahmachari as both a title and a name and considers that it "identified him as a fully dedicated student of spiritual knowledge and life-long celibate ascetic." Brahmananda insisted that before accepting Mahesh as a pupil he must first complete his university degree and get permission from his parents. The Maharishi recalls how it took about two and a half years to attune himself to the thinking of Brahmananda Saraswati and to gain "a very genuine feeling of complete oneness". At first Brahmachari Mahesh performed common chores but gained trust and became Guru Dev's "personal secretary" and "favored pupil". He was trusted to take care of the bulk of Swami Brahmananda Saraswati's correspondence without direction and was also sent out to give public speeches on Vedic (scriptural) themes. The Maharishi said his life truly began in 1940, at the feet of his master, when he learned the secret of swift and deep meditation. Brahmachari Mahesh remained with Swami Brahmananda Saraswati until the latter died in 1953, when he moved to Uttarkashi in Uttarakhand in the Himalayas, where he undertook a reclusive life for two years. Although Brahmachari Mahesh was a close disciple, he could not be the Shankaracharya's spiritual successor, because he was not a Brahmin. The Shankaracharya, at the end of his life, charged him with the responsibility of travelling and teaching meditation to the masses, while he named Swami Shantananda Saraswati as his successor. In 1955, Brahmachari Mahesh left Uttarkashi and began publicly teaching what he stated was a traditional meditation technique learned from his master Brahmananda Saraswati, and that he called Transcendental Deep Meditation. Later the technique was renamed Transcendental Meditation. It was also then that he was first publicly known with the name "Maharishi", an honorific title meaning "great sage", after the title was given to him according to some sources from "Indian Pundits"; according to another source the honorific was given along with Yogi by followers in India. Later in the west, the title was retained as a name. He traveled around India for two years interacting with his "Hindu audiences" in an "Indian context". At that time, he called his movement the Spiritual Development Movement, but renamed it the Spiritual Regeneration Movement in 1957, in Madras, India, on the concluding day of the Seminar of Spiritual Luminaries. According to Coplin, in his visits to southern India, the Maharishi spoke English rather than the Hindi spoken in his home area to avoid provoking resistance among those seeking linguistic self-determination, and to appeal to the "learned classes". According to William Jefferson, in 1958, the Maharishi went to Madras to address a large crowd of people who had gathered to celebrate the memory of Guru Dev. It was there that he spontaneously announced that he planned to spread the teaching of TM throughout the world. Hundreds of people immediately asked to learn TM. In 1959, Maharishi Mahesh Yogi began his first world tour, writing: "I had one thing in mind, that I know something which is useful to every man". The Maharishi's 1986 book, Thirty Years Around the World, gives a detailed account of his world tours, as do two biographies, The Story of the Maharishi, by William Jefferson, and The Maharishi by Paul Mason. The first world tour began in Rangoon, Burma (now Myanmar), and included the countries of Thailand, Malaya, Singapore, Hong Kong and Hawaii. He arrived in Hawaii in the spring of 1959, and the Honolulu Star Bulletin reported: "He has no money, he asks for nothing. His worldly possessions can be carried in one hand. Maharishi Mahesh Yogi is on a world odyssey. He carries a message that he says will rid the world of all unhappiness and discontent." In 1959, the Maharishi lectured and taught the Transcendental Meditation technique in Honolulu, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Boston, New York and London. While in Los Angeles, the Maharishi stayed at the home of author Helena Olson,[unreliable source?] and during this period he developed a three-year plan to propagate Transcendental Meditation to the whole world. Though most of his audience consisted of average middle class individuals, he also attracted a few celebrities, such as Efrem Zimbalist Jr., Nancy Cooke de Herrera and Doris Duke. When the Maharishi came to the U.S. in 1959, his Spiritual Regeneration Movement was called Transcendental Meditation. That same year, he began the International Meditation Society and other organizations to propagate his teachings, establishing centres in San Francisco and London. For years, the sole teacher of Transcendental Meditation in America was a San Diego woman named Beulah Smith. In 1960, the Maharishi travelled to many cities in India, France, Switzerland, England, Scotland, Norway, Sweden, Germany, the Netherlands, Italy, Singapore, Australia, New Zealand and Africa. While in Manchester, England, the Maharishi gave a television interview and was featured in many English newspapers, such as the Birmingham Post, the Oxford Mail and the Cambridge Daily News. This was also the year in which the Maharishi trained Henry Nyburg to be the first Transcendental Meditation teacher in Europe. In 1961, the Maharishi visited the United States, Austria, Sweden, France, Italy, Greece, India, Kenya, England, and Canada. While in England, he appeared on BBC television and gave a lecture to 5,000 people at the Royal Albert Hall in London, organised by Leon MacLaren of the School of Economic Science. In April 1961, the Maharishi conducted his first Transcendental Meditation Teacher Training Course in Rishikesh, India, with sixty participants from various countries. Teachers continued to be trained as time progressed. During the course, the Maharishi began to introduce additional knowledge regarding the development of human potential and began writing his translation and commentary on the first six chapters of the ancient Vedic text, the Bhagavad Gita. His 1962 world tour included visits to Europe, India, Australia and New Zealand.[citation needed] In Britain, he founded a branch of the Spiritual Regeneration Movement. The year concluded in California, where the Maharishi began dictating his book The Science of Being and Art of Living. In Rishikesh, India, beginning on 20 April 1962, a forty-day course was held for "sadhus, sanyasis, and brahmacharis" to introduce TM to "religious preachers and spiritual masters in India". The Maharishi toured cities in Europe, Asia, North America and India in 1963, and also addressed ministers of the Indian Parliament. According to his memoirs, twenty-one members of parliament then issued a public statement endorsing the Maharishi's goals and meditation technique. His Canadian tour was also well covered by the press. The Maharishi's fifth world tour, in 1964, consisted of visits to many cities in North America, Europe and India. During his visit to England, he appeared with the Abbot of Downside, Abbot Butler, on a BBC television show called The Viewpoint. In October of that year, in California, the Maharishi began teaching the first Advanced Technique of Transcendental Meditation to some experienced meditators. While travelling in America, the Maharishi met with Robert Maynard Hutchins, the head of the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions, and U Thant, the Secretary General of the United Nations. During this same year, the Maharishi finished his book The Science of Being and Art of Living, which sold more than a million copies and was published in fifteen languages. The Maharishi's activities in 1966 included a course in India and a one-month tour in South America. He established Transcendental Meditation centers in Port of Spain, Trinidad; Caracas, Venezuela; Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Porto Alegre, Brazil; Buenos Aires, Argentina; Santiago, Chile; Lima, Peru; and Bogota, Colombia. In addition, in 1966 the Maharishi founded the Students' International Meditation Society ("SIMS"), which The Los Angeles Times later characterised as a "phenomenal success". In the 1970s, SIMS centres were established at "over one thousand campuses", including Harvard University, Yale University, and UCLA. In 1967, the Maharishi gave a lecture at Caxton Hall in London, which was attended by Leon MacLaren, the founder and leader of the School of Economic Science (SES). He also lectured at UCLA, Harvard, Yale and Berkeley. That year, an article in Time magazine reported that the Maharishi "has been sharply criticised by other Indian sages, who complain that his programme for spiritual peace without either penance or asceticism contravenes every traditional Hindu belief". Religion and culture scholar Sean McCloud also reported that traditional Indian sages and gurus were critical of the Maharishi for teaching a simple technique and making it available to everyone and for abandoning traditional concepts of suffering and concentration as paths to enlightenment. At the end of 1968, the Maharishi said that after ten years of teaching and world tours, he would return to India. In 1967, the Maharishi's fame increased and his movement gained greater prominence when he became the "spiritual advisor to the Beatles", though he was already well known among young people in the UK and had already had numerous public appearances that brought him to the band's attention. Following the Beatles' endorsement of TM, during 1967 and 1968 the Maharishi appeared on American magazine covers such as Life, Newsweek, Time and many others. He gave lectures to capacity crowds at the Felt Forum in New York City and Harvard's Sanders Hall. He also appeared on The Tonight Show and the Today TV shows. He and the Beatles met in London in August 1967, when George Harrison and his wife Pattie Boyd urged their friends to attend the Maharishi's lecture at the Hilton on Park Lane. The band members went to study with the Maharishi in Bangor, Wales, before travelling to Rishikesh, India, in February 1968 to "devote themselves fully to his instruction". Ringo Starr and his wife Maureen left after ten days, Paul McCartney and Jane Asher left after five weeks; the group's most dedicated students, Harrison and John Lennon, departed with their wives sixteen days later. During their stay, the Beatles heard that the Maharishi had allegedly made sexual advances towards Mia Farrow. On 15 June 1968, in London, the Beatles formally renounced their association with the Maharishi as a "public mistake". "Sexy Sadie" is the title of a song Lennon wrote in response to the episode. Lennon originally wanted to title the song "Maharishi", but changed the title at Harrison's request. Harrison commented years later, "Now, historically, there's the story that something went on that shouldn't have done – but nothing did." In 1992, Harrison gave a benefit concert for the Maharishi-associated Natural Law Party and later apologised for the way the Maharishi had been treated, by saying, "We were very young" and "It's probably in the history books that Maharishi 'tried to attack Mia Farrow' – but it's bullshit, total bullshit." Cynthia Lennon wrote in 2006 that she "hated leaving on a note of discord and mistrust, when we had enjoyed so much kindness from the Maharishi". Asked if he forgave the Beatles, the Maharishi replied, "I could never be upset with angels." McCartney took his daughter, Stella, to visit the Maharishi in the Netherlands in 2007, which renewed their friendship. The New York Times and The Independent reported that the influence of the Maharishi, and the journey to Rishikesh to meditate, steered the Beatles away from LSD and inspired them to write many new songs. In 2009, McCartney commented that Transcendental Meditation was a gift the Beatles had received from the Maharishi at a time when they were looking for something to stabilise them. The Beatles' visit to the Maharishi's ashram coincided with a thirty-participant Transcendental Meditation teacher training course that was ongoing when they arrived. Graduates of the course included Prudence Farrow and Mike Love. Although the Rishikesh ashram had thrived in its early days, it was eventually abandoned in 2001. By 2016, some of it had been reclaimed with building repairs, cleared paths, a small photo museum, murals, a cafe and charges for visitors, although the site remains essentially a ruin. In 1968, the Maharishi announced that he would stop his public activities and instead begin the training of TM teachers at his new global headquarters in Seelisberg, Switzerland. In 1969, he inaugurated a course in his Science of Creative Intelligence at Stanford University, which was then offered at 25 other American universities. In 1970, the Maharishi held a TM teacher training course at a Victorian hotel in Poland Springs, Maine, with 1,200 participants. Later that year, he held a similar four-week course with 1500 participants at Humboldt State College in Arcata, California. In 1970, after having trouble with Indian tax authorities, he moved his headquarters to Italy, returning to India in the late 1970s. That same year, the City of Hope Foundation in Los Angeles gave the Maharishi their "Man of Hope" award. By 1971, the Maharishi had completed 13 world tours, visited 50 countries, and held a press conference with American inventor Buckminster Fuller at his first International Symposium on SCI at the University of Massachusetts in Amherst, Massachusetts. From 1970 to 1973, about 10,000 people attended the Maharishi sponsored symposia on his modern interpretation of Vedanta philosophy, called Science of Creative Intelligence. During these conferences, held at universities, the Maharishi spoke with "leading thinkers" of the day, such as Hans Selye, Marshall McLuhan, and Jonas Salk. The Maharishi announced his World Plan in 1972, the goal of which was to establish 3,600 TM centres around the world. That year, a TM training course was given by the Maharishi at Queen's University and was attended by 1,000 young people from the US and Canada. At the start of the course, the Maharishi encouraged the attendees to improve their appearance by getting haircuts and wearing ties. He also persuaded the U.S. Army to offer courses in TM to its soldiers and made videotaped recordings of what was thought to be the West's first comprehensive recitation of the Rig Veda. In March 1973, the Maharishi addressed the legislature of the state of Illinois. That same year, the legislature passed a resolution in support of the use of Maharishi's Science of Creative Intelligence in Illinois public schools. Later that year, he organized a world conference of mayors in Switzerland. In that same year, he also addressed 3000 educators at an American Association of Higher Education (AAHE) conference on quality of life and higher education. In 1974, Maharishi International University was founded at the site of the former Parsons College in Fairfield, Iowa. In October 1975, the Maharishi was pictured on the front cover of Time magazine. He made his last visit to the Spiritual Regeneration Movement centre in Los Angeles in 1975, according to film director David Lynch, who met him for the first time there. In 1975, the Maharishi embarked on a five-continent trip to inaugurate what he called "the Dawn of the Age of Enlightenment". The Maharishi said the purpose of the inaugural tour was to "go around the country and give a gentle whisper to the population". He visited Ottawa during this tour and had a private meeting with Canadian prime minister Pierre Trudeau, during which he spoke about the principles of TM and "the possibility of structuring an ideal society". That same year, the Pittsburgh Press reported that "The Maharishi has been criticised by other Eastern yogis for simplifying their ancient art." The Maharishi appeared as a guest on The Merv Griffin Show in 1975 and again in 1977, and this resulted in "tens of thousands of new practitioners" around the USA. In the mid 1970s, the Maharishi's U.S. movement was operating 370 TM centres manned by 6,000 TM teachers. At that time, the Maharishi also began approaching the business community via an organisation called the American Foundation for SCI (AFSCI), whose objective was to eliminate stress for business professionals. His TM movement came to be increasingly structured along the lines of a multinational corporation. The teaching of TM and the Science of Creative Intelligence in a New Jersey public school was stopped when a US court, in 1977, declared the movement to be religious, and ruled adoption of TM by public organisations to be in breach of the separation of church and state (First Amendment). During the 1980s, the organisation continued to expand and his meditation technique continued to attract celebrities, despite its "outlandish claims" and accusations of fraud from disaffected former disciples. The TM organization made a number of property investments, buying a former Rothschild mansion in England, Mentmore Towers in Buckinghamshire, Roydon Hall in Maidstone, Swythamley Park in the Peak District, and a Georgian rectory in Suffolk. In the United States, resorts and hotels, many in city centres, were purchased to be used as TM training centres. Doug Henning and the Maharishi planned a magical Vedic amusement park, Vedaland, and bought large tracts of land near Orlando, Florida, and Niagara Falls, Ontario, to host the park. The theme park was supposed to be a gateway into understanding the mysteries of the universe. According to the Maharishi's official Vedic city website, "Entering Veda Land through a secret cave on a windswept plateau high in the Himalayas the adventure starts as one travels through a waterfall that leads to a forest where an ancient Vedic civilization awaits to reveal the deepest secrets of the universe (sic)". These plans were never executed and, for Niagara Falls, Veda Land turned out to be just another theme park proposal that never materialized, joining an eclectic list that includes the Worlds of Jules Verne, the Ancient Chinese City and even Canada's Wonderland when it was first being planned. The Maharishi commissioned plans from a prominent architect for the world's tallest building, a Vedic-style pyramid to be built in São Paulo, Brazil, and to be filled with Yogic Flyers and other TM endeavours. The Maharishi founded Maharishi Ved Vigyan Vishwa Vidyapeetham, a self-described educational institution located in Uttar Pradesh, India, in 1982. The institution reports that it has trained 50,000 pundits in traditional Vedic recitation. In 1983, the Maharishi invited government leaders to interact with his organization called "World Government". In January 1988, offices at the Maharishinagar complex in New Delhi were raided by Indian tax authorities, and the Maharishi and his organisation were accused of falsifying expenses. Reports on the value of stocks, fixed-deposit notes, cash and jewels confiscated vary from source to source. The Maharishi, who was "headquartered in Switzerland" at the time, reportedly moved to the Netherlands "after the Indian government accused him of tax fraud".) Following an earthquake in Armenia, the Maharishi trained Russian TM teachers and set up a Maharishi Ayurveda training centre in the Urals region. Beginning in 1989, the Maharishi's movement began incorporating the term "Maharishi" into the names of their new and existing entities, concepts and programmes. In 1990, the Maharishi relocated his headquarters from Seelisberg, Switzerland, to a former Franciscan monastery in Vlodrop, the Netherlands, which became known as MERU, Holland, on account of the Maharishi European Research University (MERU) campus there. During his time in Vlodrop, he communicated to the public mainly via video and the internet. He also created a subscription-based, satellite TV channel, called Veda Vision, which broadcast content in 22 languages and 144 countries. In 1991, the Maharishi called Washington, D.C., a "pool of mud" after a decade of attempts to lower the rate of crime in the city, which had the second-largest TM community in the US. He told his followers to leave and save themselves from its "criminal atmosphere". The Maharishi is believed to have made his final public appearance in 1991, in Maastricht, the Netherlands. Deepak Chopra, described as "one of the Maharishi's top assistants before he launched his own career", wrote that the Maharishi collapsed in 1991 with kidney and pancreas failure, that the illness was kept secret by the Maharishi's family, and that he tended to Maharishi during a year-long recovery. According to Chopra, the Maharishi accused him, in July 1993, of trying to compete for the position of guru and asked him to stop travelling and writing books, which led to Chopra's decision to leave the movement in January 1994. As part of a world plan for peace, the Maharishi inaugurated the Natural Law Party (NLP), calling it a "natural government". His adherents founded the NLP in 1992. It was active in forty-two countries. John Hagelin, the NLP's three-time candidate for U.S. president, denied any formal connection between the Maharishi and the party. According to spokesman Bob Roth, "The Maharishi has said the party has to grow to encompass everyone." Critics charged that the party was an effort to recruit people for Transcendental Meditation, and that it resembled "the political arm of an international corporation" more than a "home-grown political creation". The Indian arm of the NLP, the Ajeya Bharat Party, achieved electoral success, winning one seat in a state assembly in 1998. The Maharishi shut down the political effort in 2004, saying, "I had to get into politics to know what is wrong there." In 1992, the Maharishi began to send groups of Yogic Flyers to countries like India, Brazil, China and America in an effort to promote world peace through "coherent world consciousness". In 1993 and 2003, he decided to raise the fees for learning the TM technique. In 1997, the Maharishi's organization built the largest wooden structure in the Netherlands without using any nails. The building was the Maharishi's residence for the last two decades of his life. In later years, the Maharishi rarely left his two-room quarters in order to preserve his health and energy. He used videoconferencing to communicate with the world and with his advisors. Built to Maharishi Sthapatya Veda architectural standards, the structure, according to the Maharishi, is said to have helped him infuse "the light of Total Knowledge" into "the destiny of the human race". In 2000, the Maharishi founded the Global Country of World Peace (GCWP) "to create global world peace by unifying all nations in happiness, prosperity, invincibility and perfect health, while supporting the rich diversity of our world family". The Maharishi crowned Tony Nader, a physician and MIT-trained neuroscientist, as the king or Maharaja of the GCWP in 2000. The GCWP unsuccessfully attempted to establish a sovereign micronation when it offered US$1.3 billion to the President of Suriname for a 200-year lease of 3,500 acres (14 km2) of land and in 2002, attempted to choose a king for the Talamanca, a "remote Indian reservation" in Costa Rica. In 2001, Maharishi University Of Information Technology was founded at Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh India. In 2001, followers of the Maharishi founded Maharishi Vedic City a few miles north of Fairfield, Iowa, in the United States. This new city requires that the construction of its homes and buildings be done according to the Maharishi Sthapatya Veda principles of "harmony with nature". In a 2002 appearance on the CNN show, Larry King Live, the first time in 25 years that the Maharishi had appeared in the mainstream media, he said "Transcendental Meditation is something that can be defined as a means to do what one wants to do in a better way, a right way, for maximum results". It was occasioned by the reissue of the Maharishi's book The Science of Being and Art of Living. That same year, the Maharishi Global Financing Research Foundation issued the "Raam" as a currency "dedicated to financing peace promoting projects". In 2003, David Lynch began a fundraising project to raise US$1 billion "on behalf of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi" to build a meditation centre large enough to hold 8,000 skilled practitioners. The Maharishi ordered a suspension of TM training in Britain in 2005 due to his opposition to prime minister Tony Blair's decision to support the Iraq War. The Maharishi said that he did not want to waste the "beautiful nectar" of TM on a "scorpion nation". He lifted the ban after Blair's resignation in 2007. During this period, skeptics were critical of some of the Maharishi's programmes, such as a US$10 trillion plan to end poverty through organic farming in poor countries and a US$1 billion plan to use meditation groups to end conflict. Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, concerned about his health, became increasingly secluded in two rooms of his residence. During this period, he rarely had in-person meetings and instead communicated with his followers almost exclusively by closed-circuit television. On 12 January 2008, his 90th birthday, the Maharishi declared: "It has been my pleasure at the feet of Guru Dev (Brahmananda Saraswati), to take the light of Guru Dev and pass it on in my environment. Now today, I am closing my designed duty to Guru Dev. And I can only say, 'Live long the world in peace, happiness, prosperity, and freedom from suffering.'" A week before his death, the Maharishi said that he was "stepping down as leader of the TM movement" and "retreating into silence" and that he planned to spend his remaining time studying "the ancient Indian texts". The Maharishi died peacefully in his sleep of natural causes on 5 February 2008 at his residence in Vlodrop, Netherlands. The cremation and funeral rites were conducted at the Maharishi's Allahabad ashram in India, overlooking the confluence of the Ganges and Yamuna rivers. The funeral, with state honours, was carried by Sadhana TV station and was presided over by one of the claimants to the seat of Shankaracharya of the North, Swami Vasudevananda Saraswati Maharaj. Indian officials who attended the funeral included central minister Subodh Kant Sahay; Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) leader Ashok Singhal; and former Uttar Pradesh assembly speaker and state BJP leader Keshri Nath Tripathi, as well as top local officials. Also in attendance were thirty-five rajas of the Global Country of World Peace, one-time disciple Sri Sri Ravi Shankar, and David Lynch. A troop of uniformed policemen lowered their arms in salute. The funeral received its status as a state funeral because the Maharishi was a recognised master in the tradition of Advaita Vedanta founded by Shankara. The Maharishi is survived by a brother and "a number of nephews". One nephew, Girish Chandra Varma, is chairman of the Maharishi Vidya Mandir Schools Group and a "senior functionary of the Transcendental Meditation (TM) movement in India." Other nephews include Prakash Shrivastav, president of Maharishi Vidya Mandir Schools and Anand Shrivastava, chairman of the Maharishi Group. In its obituary, BBC News reported that the Maharishi's master had bequeathed him "the task of keeping the tradition of Transcendental Meditation alive" and that "the Maharishi's commercial mantras drew criticism from stricter Hindus, but his promises of better health, stress relief and spiritual enlightenment drew devotees from all over the world". Paul McCartney commented, saying that "Whilst I am deeply saddened by his passing, my memories of him will only be joyful ones. He was a great man who worked tirelessly for the people of the world and the cause of unity." The Maharishi left a legacy that includes the revival of India's ancient spiritual tradition of meditation, which he made available to everyone. He is considered responsible for the popularisation of meditation in the west, something he accomplished by teaching Transcendental Meditation worldwide through a highly effective organization of his own development. The Maharishi is also credited with "the proposal of the existence of a unique or fourth state of consciousness with a basis in physiology" and the application of scientific studies to research on the physiological effects of Transcendental Meditation and the development of higher states of consciousness, areas previously relegated to mysticism. Partly because of this, Newsweek credited him with helping to launch "a legitimate new field of neuroscience". According to The Times of India, his "unique and enduring contribution to humankind was his deep understanding of – and mechanics of experiencing – pure consciousness". A memorial building, the Maharishi Smarak, was inaugurated at Allahabad in February 2013. The Maharishi had come out to teach with the "avowed intention" to change "the course of human history". When he first began teaching, he had three main aims: to revive the spiritual tradition in India, to show that meditation was for everyone and not just for recluses, and to show that Vedanta is compatible with science. The Maharishi had a message of happiness, writing in 1967 that "being happy is of the utmost importance. Success in anything is through happiness. Under all circumstances be happy. Just think of any negativity that comes at you as a raindrop falling into the ocean of your bliss". His philosophy featured the concept that "within everyone is an unlimited reservoir of energy, intelligence, and happiness". He emphasised the naturalness of his meditation technique as a simple way of developing this potential. Beginning in 1962, the Maharishi began to recommend the daily practice of yoga exercises or asanas to further accelerate growth. He also taught that practising Transcendental Meditation twice a day would create inner peace and that "mass meditation sessions" could create outer peace by reducing violence and war. According to a TM website, the performance of yagyas by 7,000 pandits in India, plus hundreds of Yogic Flyers in Germany, brought "coherence and unity in the collective consciousness of Germany" and caused the fall of the Berlin Wall. One religion scholar, Michael York, considers the Maharishi to have been the most articulate spokesman for the spiritual argument that a critical mass of people becoming enlightened through the practice of "meditation and yogic discipline" will trigger the New Age movement's hoped-for period of postmillennial "peace, harmony, and collective consciousness". Religious studies scholar Carl Olson writes that the TM technique was based on "a neo-Vedanta metaphysical philosophy in which an unchanging reality is opposed to an ever-changing phenomenal world" and that the Maharishi says it is not necessary to renounce worldly activities to gain enlightenment, unlike other ascetic traditions. According to author Jack Forem, the Maharishi stated that the experience of transcendence, which resulted in a naturally increasing refinement of mind and body, enabled people to naturally behave in more correct ways. Thus, behavioral guidelines did not need to be issued, and were best left to the teachings of various religions: "It is much easier to raise a man's consciousness than to get him to act righteously" the Maharishi said. Some religious studies scholars have further said that Maharishi Mahesh Yogi is one of a number of Indian gurus who brought neo-Hindu adaptations of Vedantic Hinduism to the west. Author Meera Nanda calls neo-Hinduism "the brand of Hinduism that is taught by Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, Deepak Chopra, and their clones". J. R. Coplin, a sociologist and MIU graduate, says that the Maharishi saw his own purpose as "the 'revival' of the knowledge of an integrated life based upon Vedic principles and Vedantist reality". Author Barry Miles writes that, in spite of the media's scepticism for the Maharishi's spiritual message, they seized upon him because young people seemed to listen to his pro-establishment, anti-drug message, with one TM participant saying the Maharishi "signaled the beginning of the post-acid generation". During a CNN interview in 2002, the Maharishi said, "Transcendental Meditation is something that can be defined as a means to do what one wants to do in a better way, a right way, for maximum results". His movement offered in-residence style TM advanced courses. By the time of his death, there were nearly 1,000 TM training centres around the world. The Maharishi is credited with having contributed to the western world a meditation technique that is both simple and systematic as well as introducing the scientific study of meditation. In the mid 1970s, the Maharishi began the TM-Sidhi programme, which included Yogic Flying, as an additional option for those who had been practising the Transcendental Meditation technique for some time. According to Coplin, this new aspect of knowledge emphasised not only the individual, but also the collective benefits created by group practice of this advanced programme. This new programme gave rise to a new principle called the Maharishi Effect, which is said to "create coherence in the collective consciousness" and to suppress crime, violence, and accidents. Maharishi Vedic Science (MVS) is based on the Maharishi's interpretation of the ancient Vedic texts based on his master, Brahmananda Saraswati's teachings. MVS aims to put forward traditional Vedic literature in the light of Western traditions of knowledge and understanding. According to Roy Ascott, MVS also explains the potential for every human being to experience the infinite nature of transcendental consciousness, also defined as Being or Self, while engaged in normal activities of daily life. Once this state is fully established, an individual is no longer influenced by outer aspects of existence and perceives pure consciousness in everything. MVS includes two aspects, the practical aspect of the Transcendental Meditation technique and the TM-Sidhi programme, as well as the theoretical aspect of how MVS is applied to day to day living. These applications include programmes in: Maharishi Vedic Approach to Health (MVAH); Maharishi Sthapatya Veda, a mathematical system for the design and construction of buildings; Maharishi Gandharva Veda, a form of classical Indian music; Maharishi Jyotish (also known as Maharishi Vedic Astrology), a system claiming the evaluation of life tendencies of an individual; Maharishi Vedic Agriculture, a trademarked process for producing fresh, organic food; and Consciousness-Based Education. According to educator James Grant, a former Maharishi University of Management Associate Professor of Education and the former Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences, Maharishi brought out a "full revival of the Vedic tradition of knowledge from India" and demonstrated its relevance in many areas, including education, business, medicine and government. The Maharishi wrote more than twenty books on the Transcendental Meditation technique and Maharishi Vedic Science. In 1955, the organisers of the Great Spiritual Development Conference of Kerala published The Beacon Light of the Himalayas, a transcribed 170-page "souvenir" of the conference. Authors Chryssides, Humes and Forsthoefel, Miller, and Russel cite this as the Maharishi's first published book on Transcendental Meditation, although Transcendental Meditation is not mentioned in the text of the book. The book is dedicated to Maharshi Bala Brahmachari Mahesh Yogi Rajaram by his devotees of Kerala and contains photographs, letters and lectures by numerous authors, which appear in various languages, such as English, Hindi and Sanskrit. In 1963, the Maharishi audiotaped the text of the book Science of Being and Art of Living, which was later transcribed and published in fifteen languages. K.T. Weidmann describes the book as the Maharishi's fundamental philosophical treatise, one in which its author provides an illustration of the ancient Vedic traditions of India in terms that can be easily interpreted and understood by the scientific thinking of the western world. In the Science of Being, the Maharishi illustrates the concepts of relative existence as the experience of everyday reality through one's senses, and absolute reality as the origin of being, and the source of all creative intelligence. The Maharishi describes this absolute reality, or Being, as unchanging, omnipresent, and eternal. He also identifies it with bliss consciousness. The two aspects of reality, the relative and the absolute, are like an ocean with many waves. The waves represent the relative, and the ocean beneath is the foundation of everything, or Being. Establishing oneself in the field of Being, or unchanging reality, ensures stability. In his Science of Being, the Maharishi introduced an additional concept: that of fulfillment viewed as something to be obtained not through exertion or self effort, but through the progressive settling of the mind during the practice of TM. This was the first full systematic description of the principles underlying the Maharishi's teachings. In his 1967 publication, Bhagavad-Gita: A New Translation and Commentary, the Maharishi describes the Bhagavad Gita as "the Scripture of Yoga". He says that "its purpose is to explain in theory and practice all that is needed to raise the consciousness of man to the highest possible level." According to Peter Russell, the Bhagavad-Gita deals with the concept of loss of knowledge and subsequent revival, and this is brought out by the Maharishi himself in the introduction. In the Preface, the Maharishi writes: "The purpose of this commentary is to restore the fundamental truths of the Bhagavad-Gita and thus restore the significance of its teaching. If this teaching is followed, effectiveness in life will be achieved, men will be fulfilled on all levels and the historical need of the age will be fulfilled also." A second concept, that of freedom, presented as the antithesis of fear, is also prevalent in the book, according to Jack Forem. Forem states that in his interpretation of the Gita, the Maharishi expressed several times that as man gains greater awareness through the practice of Transcendental Meditation, he gradually establishes a level of contentment which remain increasingly grounded within him and in which the mind does not waver and is not affected by either attachment or fear. The Maharishi was reported to be a vegetarian, an entrepreneur, a monk and "a spiritual man who sought a world stage from which to espouse the joys of inner happiness". He was described as an abstemious man with tremendous energy who took a weekly day of silence while sleeping only two hours per night. He did not present himself as a guru or claim his teachings as his own. Instead he taught "in the name of his guru Brahmananda Saraswati" and paid tribute to him by placing a picture of Saraswati behind him when he spoke. He was on a mission to bring the ancient techniques of TM to the world. Scientist and futurist Buckminster Fuller spent two days with the Maharishi at a symposium at the University of Massachusetts in 1971 and said, "You could not meet with Maharishi without recognizing instantly his integrity." Authors Douglas E. Cowan and David G. Bromley write that the Maharishi did not claim any "special divine revelation nor supernatural personal qualities". Still others said he helped to "inspire the anti-materialism of the late 60s" and received good publicity because he "opposed drugs". According to author Chryssides, "The Maharishi tended to emphasize the positive aspects of humanity, focusing on the good that exists in everyone." According to The Times, the Maharishi attracted scepticism because of his involvement with wealthy celebrities, his business acumen, and his love of luxury, including touring in a Rolls-Royce. A reporter for The Economist calls this a "misconception", saying: "He did not use his money for sinister ends. He neither drank, nor smoked, nor took drugs. ... He did not accumulate scores of Rolls-Royces, like Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh; his biggest self-indulgence was a helicopter. " When some observers questioned how his organisation's money was being used, the Maharishi said, "It goes to support the centres, it does not go on me. I have nothing." However, when the Maharishi died in 2008, he left behind an estate worth an estimated $300 million (U.S.). He was survived by four nephews, who inherited 12,000 acres of land in India, and Tony Nader, a Lebanese neuroscientist whom he had anointed as his successor in the movement. Since his death, several memoirs have been written by former followers and their children who described the Maharishi as a cult leader who could be controlling, and his Centers a financial business. He was often referred to as the "Giggling Guru" because of his habit of laughing during television interviews. Slightly over five feet tall, the Maharishi often wore a traditional cotton or silk, white dhoti while carrying or wearing flowers. He often sat cross-legged on a deerskin and had a "grayish-white beard, mustache and long, dark, stringy hair". Barry Miles described the Maharishi as having "liquid eyes, twinkling but inscrutable with the wisdom from the East". Miles said the Maharishi in his seventies looked much younger than his age. He had a high pitched voice and in the words of Merv Griffin, "a long flowing beard and a distinctive, high pitched laugh that I loved to provoke". Biographer Paul Mason's website says that Swami Swaroopananda, one of three claimants to the title Shankaracharya of Jyotir Math, is "an outspoken critic" of the Maharishi. According to Swaroopananda, the Maharishi "was responsible for the controversy over Shankaracharyas" because he gave Shankaracharya Swami Shantanand encouragement and assistance in fighting the court case which challenged Shantanand's inheritance of the title. In a review of the documentary film David Wants to Fly, Variety magazine reported Swaroopananda's assertion that "as a member of the trader caste" the Maharishi "has no right to give mantras or teach meditation". According to religious scholar Cynthia Humes, enlightened individuals of any caste may "teach brahmavidya" and author Patricia Drake writes that "when Guru Dev was about to die he charged Maharishi with teaching laymen ... to meditate". Mason says Shantanand "publicly commended the practice of the Maharishi's meditation" and sociologist J.R. Coplin says that Shantanand's successor, Swami Vishnudevanand, also "speaks highly of the Maharishi". While the Beatles were in Rishikesh, allegations of sexual improprieties by the Maharishi in his ashram were circulated but participants later denied them and no lawsuits were ever filed. The British satirical magazine Private Eye ridiculed him as "Veririchi Lotsamoney Yogi Bear". The Maharishi was also parodied by comedians Bill Dana and Joey Forman in the 1968 comedy album The Mashuganishi Yogi, by actor Cash Oshman in the film Man on the Moon, by comedian Mike Myers in the film The Love Guru,[citation needed] and in the BBC sketch show Goodness Gracious Me. He was portrayed by actor Gerry Bednob in the 2007 film Walk Hard: The Dewey Cox Story. He was also the subject of the Beatles' song "Sexy Sadie", in which John Lennon characterized him as a fraud. Maharishi International University (renamed Maharishi University of Management (MUM) in 1995), the first university the Maharishi founded, began classes in Santa Barbara, California, in 1973. In 1974 the university moved to Fairfield, Iowa, where it remains. The university houses a library of the Maharishi's taped lectures and writings, including the thirty-three-lesson Science of Creative Intelligence course, originally a series of lectures given by the Maharishi in Fiuggi, Italy, in 1972. Described in the MUM university catalogue as combining modern science and Vedic science, the course also defines certain higher states of consciousness, and gives guidance on how to attain these states. Though the university claims to grant PhDs, including in neuroscience and psychology, the university is not accredited by either the America Psychological Association (APA) or the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education. The Maharishi Vidya Mandir Schools (MVMS), an educational system established in sixteen Indian states and affiliated with the New Delhi Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE), was founded in 1995 by the Maharishi. It has 148 branches in 118 cities with 90,000 to 100,000 students and 5,500 teaching and support staff. In 1998, Maharishi Open University was founded by the Maharishi. It was accessible via a network of eight satellites broadcasting to every country in the world, and via the Internet. The Maharishi also introduced theories of management, defence, and government programmes designed to alleviate poverty, and introduced a new economic development currency called the Raam. In 2000, the Maharishi began building administrative and teaching centres called "Peace Palaces" around the world, and by 2008 at least eight had been constructed in the US alone. The Maharishi Institute, an African university that is part of a group of schools around the world that are named after him, was founded in 2007 and uses his Transcendental Meditation technique in their teaching. Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, in his farewell message on 11 January 2008, announced the establishment of the Brahmananda Saraswati Trust (BST), named in honour of his teacher, to support large groups totalling more than 30,000 peace-creating Vedic Pandits in perpetuity across India. The Patron of the Brahmanand Saraswati Trust is the Shankaracharya of Jyotir Math. The Maharishi is credited with heading charitable organisations, for-profit businesses, and real estate investments whose total value has been estimated at various times, to range from US$2 to US$5 billion. The real estate alone was valued in 2003 at between $3.6 and $5 billion. Holdings in the United States, estimated at $250 million in 2008, include dozens of hotels, commercial buildings and undeveloped land. The Maharishi "amassed a personal fortune that his spokesman told one reporter may exceed $1 billion". According to a 2008 article in The Times, the Maharishi "was reported to have an income of six million pounds". The Maharishi's movement is said to be funded through donations, course fees for Transcendental Meditation and various real estate transactions. In his biography of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, The Story of the Maharishi (published 1976), William Jefferson suggests that the financial aspect of the TM organisation was one of the greatest controversies it faced. Questions were raised about the Maharishi's mission, comments from leaders of the movement at that time, and fees and charges the TM organisation levied on followers. Jefferson says that the concerns with money came from journalists more than those who have learned to meditate. Beacon Light of the Himalayas, Azad Printers, 1955 Meditation : easy system propounded by Maharishi Mahesh Yogi., International Meditation Centre, 1962 Science of Being and Art of Living – Transcendental Meditation, Allied Publishers, 1963 ISBN 0-452-28266-7 Love and God, Spiritual Regeneration Movement, 1965 Yoga asanas, Spiritual Regeneration Movement, 1965 Maharishi Mahesh Yogi on the Bhagavad-Gita – A New Translation and Commentary, Chapters 1–6, Arkana 1990 ISBN 0-14-019247-6 Meditations of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, Bantam books, 1968 Alliance for knowledge, Maharishi International University, 1974 Creating an ideal society: a global undertaking, International Association for the Advancement of the Science of Creative Intelligence, 1976 Results of scientific research on the Transcendental Meditation program, MERU Press, 1976 Enlightenment to every individual, invincibility to every nation, Age of Enlightenment, 1978 ISBN 99911-608-9-2 Freedom behind bars: enlightenment to every individual and invincibility to every nation, International Association for the Advancement of the Science of Creative Intelligence, 1978 Dawn of the age of enlightenment, MVU Press, 1986 ISBN 978-90-71750-02-1 Life supported by natural law : discovery of the Unified Field of all the laws of nature and the Maharishi Technology of the Unified Field, Age of Enlightenment Press, 1986 ISBN 978-0-89186-051-8 Thirty years around the world: dawn of the Age of Enlightenment, Maharishi Vedic University, 1986 ISBN 978-90-71750-01-4 Maharishi's Programme to create world peace: global inauguration, Age of Enlightenment Press, 1987 ISBN 978-0-89186-052-5 Maharishi's master plan to create heaven on earth, Maharishi Vedic University Press, 1991 ISBN 978-90-71750-11-3 A Proven program for our criminal justice system: Maharishi's Transcendental Meditation and Corrections, Maharishi International University, 1993 Vedic knowledge for everyone: Maharishi Vedic University, an introduction, Maharishi Vedic University Press, 1994 ISBN 90-71750-17-5 Maharishi's Absolute Theory of Government – Automation in Administration, Maharishi Prakshan, 1995 ISBN 81-7523-002-9 Maharishi University of Management – Wholeness on the Move, Age of Enlightenment Publications, 1995 ISBN 81-7523-001-0 Constitution of India Fulfilled through Maharishi's Transcendental Meditation, Age of Enlightenment Publications, 1996 ISBN 81-7523-004-5 Inaugurating Maharishi Vedic University, Maharishi Vedic University Press, 1996 ISBN 978-81-7523-006-4 Maharishi's Absolute Theory of Defence – Sovereignty in Invincibility, Age of Enlightenment Publications, 1996 ISBN 81-7523-000-2 Celebrating Perfection in Education – Dawn of Total Knowledge, Maharishi Vedic University Press, 1997 ISBN 81-7523-013-4 Maharishi Forum of Natural Law and National Law for Doctors – Perfect Health for Everyone, Age of Enlightenment Publications, 1997 ISBN 81-7523-003-7 Maharishi Speaks to Educators – Mastery Over Natural Law, Age of Enlightenment Publications, 1997 ISBN 81-7523-008-8 Maharishi Speaks to Students – Mastery Over Natural Law, Age of Enlightenment Publications, 1997 ISBN 81-7523-012-6 Celebrating Perfection in Administration, Maharishi Vedic University, 1998 ISBN 81-7523-015-0 Ideal India – The Lighthouse of Peace on Earth, Maharishi University of Management, 2001 ISBN 90-806005-1-2 Maharishi Mahesh Yogi on Bhagavad-Gita – Chapter 7, 2009, Maharishi Foundation International-Maharishi Vedic University, The Netherlands Discography The master speaks, World Pacific Records, 1967 Koppel, Lily (6 February 2008). "Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, Spiritual Leader, Dies". The New York Times. Yogi's passport. paulmason.info Beckford, James A. (1985). Cult controversies: the societal response to new religious movements. Tavistock Publications. p. 23. ISBN 978-0-422-79630-9. Parsons, Gerald (1994). The Growth of Religious Diversity: Traditions. The Open University/Methuen. p. 288. ISBN 978-0-415-08326-3. Weidmann, K.T. (1999). "Maharishi Mahesh Yogi". In von Dehsen, Christian (ed.). Philosophers and Religious Leaders: An Encyclopedia of People Who Changed the World. Greenwood. p. 120. ISBN 978-1573561525. Mason (1994), p. 28 Goldberg, Philip (2010). American Veda: from Emerson and the Beatles to yoga and meditation. Harmony Books, Crown Publishing/Random House. p. 362. ISBN 9780307719614. Oates, Robert M. (1976). Celebrating the dawn: Maharishi Mahesh Yogi and the TM technique. New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons. p. 40. ISBN 978-0-399-11815-9. Carlton, Jim (15 April 1991). "For $1,500 a Head, Maharishi Promises Mellower Inmates --- Transcendental Meditation Goes to Prison as Backers Try to Lock Up Contracts". The Wall Street Journal. New York, N.Y. p. A.1. Shankar, Jay (6 February 2008). "Maharishi Mahesh Yogi". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 20 July 2012. Retrieved 15 August 2010. Richardson, Mark (12 October 1993). "A leap of faith". The Ottawa Citizen. p. A.1. Woo, Elaine (6 February 2006). "Maharishi Mahesh Yogi". Los Angeles Times. Hudson, Alexandra (6 February 2008). "Beatles Indian Guru Maharishi Mahesh Yogi". Reuters. Archived from the original on 29 August 2010. Page, Jeremy; Hoyle, Ben (6 February 2008). "Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Dies a Recluse". The Times. London. "Gifts of the Global Country of World Peace: Education Products Services". gifts.globalgoodnews.com. Archived from the original on 26 March 2010. Retrieved 28 August 2010. Warren, Jenifer (27 October 1995). "Party Asks Voters to Put Their Faith in Meditation; Politics: Skeptics scoff at Natural Law Party's answer to nation's ills, but backers say they have more to offer". Los Angeles Times. p. 1. Koppel, Lily (8 October 2006). "Encounter: Outer Peace". The New York Times. Srinivasan, 2008. Hinduism For Dummies. John Wiley & Sons. Goldberg, Philip, 1944– (2013). American Veda : from Emerson and the Beatles to yoga and meditation—how Indian spirituality changed the West (First paperback ed.). New York. ISBN 9780385521352. OCLC 808413359.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Coplin, Ch. 2, Socio-Historical Context for SRM's Emergence, Footnote #73: "Maharishi Mahesh Yogi's caste background is a matter of some uncertainty because it is the tradition of yogis, ascetics, and renunciants to relinquish their family ties. His education and family status are known by many long-time movement members, however. Shrivastava is the family name of his cousins and nephews, and that name can be traced to the Hindu Kayasthas." Humes, p. 61 Distinguished Alumni. Allahabad University Kalambakal, Jupiter (6 February 2008). "Transcendental Meditation Founder Maharishi Dies". All Headline News. Archived from the original on 17 March 2008. Retrieved 3 September 2010. "Our Proud Past, Allahabad University Alumni Association". archive.is. 7 July 2012. Archived from the original on 7 July 2012. Kroll, Una (1974) The Healing Potential of Transcendental Meditation, John Knox Press. Ch. 1: The Guru, pp 17–25. ISBN 9780804205986 Jefferson, William (1976) The Story of The Maharishi, Pocket Books. pp 7–21. ISBN 9780671805265 Simon, Alyssa (14 February 2010). "David Wants to Fly". Variety. [Swami Swaroopanand, successor to Guru Dev, in a village near Tibet. The swami tells Sieveking that the Maharishi, from a trader caste, was merely Guru Dev's bookkeeper and, besides, he notes, "Gurus don't sell their knowledge, they share it."] Lewis, James (2001) Prometheus Books, Odd Gods, New Religions and the Cult Controversy, pp 230–233, Coplin, p. 48: "Maharishi Mahesh Yogi . . . was most likely born into a family of Hindu Kayasthas, a well-known and high-status literary caste of Hindustan – with reference to varna, a kshatryia not a brahmin jati". Ruthven, Malise (6 February 2008). "Maharishi Mahesh Yogi". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 5 April 2010. "Obituary: Maharishi Mahesh Yogi". BBC News. 6 February 2008. Coplin, Ch.2, footnote 74 Humes, pp. 59–60. Williamson, p. 81 Goldberg, Philip (2011). American Veda. Harmony Books. p. 154. Mason (1994), p. 22 Coplin, Ch. 3, SRM as Cultural Revitalization Text: "While his association with the illustrious Shankaracharya tradition served as vital letter of introduction throughout India, his title, "bala brahmachari" identified him as a fully dedicated student of spiritual knowledge and life-long celibate ascetic. Literally, the name means "childhood or boy" (bala) "student of sacred knowledge" (brahmachari), and it has signified from Vedic times one who has taken the vow of chastity." 'Thirty Years Around the World- Dawn of the Age of Enlightenment', MVU, 1986, pp185-6 Chryssides, George D. (1999). Exploring new religions. London: Cassell. pp. 293–296. ISBN 978-0-8264-5959-6. Page 293 Mason, Paul, 1952– (1994). The Maharishi : the biography of the man who gave transcendental meditation to the world. Shaftesbury, Dorset. ISBN 1852305711. OCLC 31133549.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Bloomfield, Harold H (1975). TM*: discovering inner energy and overcoming stress. Cain, Michael Peter, 1941–, Jaffe, Dennis T. New York: Delacorte Press. pp. 32. ISBN 0440060486. OCLC 1047008. Williamson, p. 84: "Guru Dev represented the tradition well, for he did not allow anyone who was not of the Brahmin. Since Mahesh was born into a scribe caste (kayastha), he was not allowed to join the order of monks. Thus when Saraswati died in Calcutta in 1953, Mahesh would not have been considered a candidate to replace him." Coplin, p. 49: "Because he was not a brahmin, Mahesh could not become a member of the dandi sannyasi order and succeed his master as Shankaracharya; the honor passed to Swami Shantanand Saraswati in June, 1953." (This from an interview by the author with the Shankaracharya of Jyotir Math, Swami Vishnudevananda Saraswati on 12 June 1983.) Mason (1994), pp. 23–24 AP (5 February 2008). "Beatles guru dies in Netherlands". USA Today. Epstein, Edward (29 December 1995). "Politics and Transcendental Meditation". San Francisco Chronicle. Morris, Bevan (1992). "Maharishi's Vedic Science and Technology: The Only Means to Create World Peace" (PDF). Journal of Modern Science and Vedic Science. 5 (1–2): 200. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 July 2008. Rooney, Ben (6 February 2008). "Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, guru to Beatles, dies". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Williamson, pp. 97–99 Russell, p. 25 Bajpai, R.S. (2002) Atlantic Publishers, The Splendours And Dimensions of Yoga 2 Vols. Set, page 554, "received the title Maharishi, from some Indian Pundits" Mason (1994) pp. 27–34 Gablinger, Tamar (2010). The Religious Melting Point: On Tolerance, Controversdial Religions and The State. Germany: Tectum Verlag Marburg. p. 76. Coplin, Ch. 2, Socio-Historical Context for SRM's Emergence: "In South India Maharishi spoke in English because his Hindi would not only be little understood outside of the North, but it would provoke hostility among many who were fighting for linguistic self-determination in the period immediately following Independence. The use of English, however, had greater connotations, as it presumed an audience of Indians familiar with British administration and education. More significantly, it appealed to the 'learned classes', mostly brahmins, but also lower caste officials whose families had escaped their more humble backgrounds by means of acquiring an English education." Devi, Priya (21 February 2008). "Naturally in Self; Maharishi Mahesh Yogi". One India. Archived from the original on 25 July 2011. Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1986) p. 237 "Summary 1958: The first countries he visited on his first world tour were Burma, Thailand, Malaya, Singapore, Hong Kong and the USA (Hawaii)." Mason (1994), p. 34 Mason (1994), p. 37: "He has no money; he asks for nothing. His worldly possessions can be carried in one hand. Maharishi Mahesh Yogi is on a world odyssey. He carries a message that he says will rid the world of all unhappiness and discontent..." Mason (1994), pp. 41–46 Blume, Mary (8 July 1995). "A Little Meditation on the Bottom Line". International New York Times. Retrieved 26 November 2013. Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1986) p. 275 "Summary 1959: In January Maharishi travelled to the [mainland] USA for the first time, establishing the movement in Hawaii and then moving on to San Francisco and Los Angeles. Towards the end of the year, he once again visited Hawaii, then flew to the East Coast cities of Boston and New York" Olson, Helena, Hermit in the House, p. 44, Los Angeles, 1967 Hunt, Stephen (2003). Alternative religions: a sociological introduction. Aldershot, Hampshire, England; Burlington, VT: Ashgate. pp. 197–198. ISBN 978-0-7546-3410-2. Leigh, Spencer (7 February 2008). "Maharishi Mahesh Yogi: Spiritual leader who introduced millions, including the Beatles, to transcendental meditation". Artistic Yoga. London. Archived from the original on 6 December 2014. Mason (1994), pp. 52–54 Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1986) pp. 318–320 Note: The source contains a 3-page itinerary of 40+ cities visited by the Maharishi with corresponding dates of visit ranging from 1/1/60 and 12/30/60, "Summary 1960: Maharishi brought TM to the countries of Europe and in his many lectures in England, Scotland, Norway, and Germany he...""In the first half of the year he visited France, Switzerland, Austria and Germany." "...then travelled to the Scandinavian countries of Norway, Denmark and Sweden." Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1986) p. 305 "In Manchester, Maharishi gave a television interview which reached millions of people in the north of England" "In Cambridge, the Daily News carried headline: 'Maharishi shows a simple method of meditation', while the Oxford Mail reporter who asked Maharishi ...." Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1986) p. 302 "Maharishi made Henry Nyburg his personal representative for Europe and gave him the training and authority to teach Transcendental Meditation, thus making him the first European teacher." Mason (1994), p. 52 Mason (1994), pp. 54–55 Mason (1994), p. 55 Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1986) pp. 318–344 From Chapter Titled '1961' pg 328 "The following day, BBC Television interviewed Maharishi and chose as the setting for the interview the Acropolis, one of the glories of ancient Greece." "On 20 April Maharishi inaugurated... Maharishi then conducted the first international course to train teacher of TM" "The graduation ceremony of the course was held on 12 July and 60 new teachers of TM returned to their countries...." Wiliams, Martyn (2 October 2014) Maharishi and the 7 step Teachers Program. enlightenmenthow.com Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1986) p. 400 "...it was on this course that Maharishi started his commentary on the Bhagavad Gita – a commentary later to be published..." Mason (1994), pp. 62, 69 Mason (1994), p. 62 Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1986) pp. 490–491 and 503: "And in the final days of 1962, in the silent surroundings of Lake Arrowhead, California, Maharishi brought out yet another gift for the world – The Science of Being and Art of Living – a treasury of pure knowledge to guide mankind in its evolution to perfection." Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1986) p. 414 "Chapter Titled "1962": On 20 April, Maharishi in the presence of His Holiness Swami Shantanand Saraswati, the Shankaracharya of northern India, inaugurated a special course" "In the Prospectus, this special 40-day course was announced for 'sadhus, sannyasis and brahmacharis, and retired persons of energetic calibre'." Mason (1994), pp. 66–67 Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1986) pp. 544–545 "Twenty one members of the parliament, representing each of the Indian states, issued a statement entitled a 'timely Call to the Leaders of Today and Tomorrow' for the speedy introduction of the system [of TM] into the daily routine of national life." NOTE: the text of the 3-page statement from the parliament is also included in the book on pages 504–507 Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1986) p. 504-507 "Twenty one members of parliament, representing each of the Indian states, issued a statement entitled a 'timely Call to the Leaders of Today and Tomorrow' for the speedy introduction of the system [of TM] into the daily routine of national life." NOTE: the text of the 3-page statement from the parliament is also included in the book on pages 504–507 Mason (1994), p. 69 Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1986) p. 530-536 "Tributes were later printed in the Canadian magazine, Enjoy"--"A front page news article in the local Daily Colonist newspaper" "The Calgary Herald reported an entertaining incident, which took place during an interview in Maharishi's hotel room". "The Albertan newspaper of Wednesday, 25 September quoted Maharishi as saying that there were now 1,000 TM meditators in Canada." Mason (1994), pp. 71–75 Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1986) pp 587–588 "On his fifth world tour, Maharishi conducted a Meditation Guides Course in Norway, a course in London, where advanced techniques of TM were given for the first time, and Meditation Guides Courses in Austria, Canada, and Germany/" Mason (1994), p. 72 Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1986) p. 553 "But the highlight of this London visit was the popular BBC television interview with Robert Kee, featuring Maharishi and the Abbot of Downside, Abbot Butler." Mason (1994), p. 75 Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1986) p. 572 "On his fifth world tour, Maharishi conducted a Meditation Guides Course in Norway, a course in London, where advanced techniques of TM were given for the first time, and Meditation Guides Courses in Austria, Canada, and Germany" Mason (1994), p. 79 Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1986) pp 576–577 "On the 17th Maharishi went to Santa Barbara to meet with Dr. Robert Maynard Hutchins, head of the Centre for Democratic Studies. Maharishi left for NYC on 19 December to meet with U Thant, Secretary General of the United Nations." van den Berg, Stephanie (5 February 2008). "Beatles Guru Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Dies". The Sydney Morning Herald. AFP. Archived from the original on 29 August 2010. Cooke de Herrera, Nancy (2003). BAll You Need Is Love: An Eyewitness Account of When Spirituality Spread from the East to the West. Jodere Group. pp. 149–164. ISBN 978-1588720412. "Maharishi Mahesh Yogi". The Times. London (UK). 7 February 2008. Olson, Carl (1 January 2005) Transcendental Meditation, Encyclopedia of Religion Bainbridge, William Sims (1997 Routledge, The Sociology of Religious Movements, page 188 "Mystics: Soothsayer for Everyman". Time magazine. 20 October 1967. Archived from the original on 15 December 2008. McCloud, Sean (2004). Making the American Religious Fringe: Exotics, Subersives and Journalists, 1955–1993. UNC Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-5496-9. Needleman, Jacob (1970). "Transcendental Meditation". The New Religions ([1st ed.]. ed.). Garden City N.Y.: Doubleday. pp. 139–155. Corder, Mike (10 February 2008). "Maharishi Mahesh Yogi; The Beatles' mentor had global empire". The San Diego Union-Tribune. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Humes, p. 64 Needleman, Jacob (1970). "Transcendental Meditation". The New Religions ([1st ed.]. ed.). Garden City N.Y.: Doubleday. pp. 139. Kozinn, Allan (7 February 2008). "Meditation on the Man Who Saved the Beatles". The New York Times. Barry Miles (1998). Paul McCartney: many years from now. Macmillan. pp. 412–. ISBN 978-0-8050-5249-7. "Ringo Starr Leaves India". beatlesbible.com. March 1968. Miles, Barry (2007). The Beatles Diary: An Intimate Day by Day History. East Bridgewater, MA: World Publications Group. pp. 262–63. ISBN 978-1-57215-010-2. Miles, Barry (1998). Paul McCartney: Many Years from Now. Macmillan. p. 427. ISBN 978-0-8050-5249-7. The Beatles Anthology. San Francisco: Chronicle Books. 2000. pp. 284–85. ISBN 0-8118-2684-8. Wenner, Jann (2000) [1971]. Lennon Remembers. Verso, W.W. Norton & Co. p. 27. ISBN 1-85984-376-X. Yeah, there was a big hullabaloo about him trying to rape Mia Farrow or trying to get off with Mia Farrow and a few other women, things like that. Spitz, Bob (1 November 2005). The Beatles: The Biography (1St ed.). Little, Brown and Company. p. 757. ISBN 0-316-80352-9. MacDonald, Ian (2007). Revolution in the Head: The Beatles' Records and the Sixties (3rd revised ed.). Chicago Review Press. ISBN 978-1-84413-828-9. Harry, Bill (1985). The Book of Beatle Lists. Javelin. ISBN 0-7137-1521-9. The Beatles Anthology. Chronicle Books. 2000. pp. 285–86. ISBN 0-8118-2684-8. Nichols, Michelle (3 April 2009). "McCartney says meditation helped stabilize Beatles". Reuters. Russell, pp. 26–30 Magee, David (17 October 2009). "How the real 'Dear Prudence' in John Lennon's song inspired me". Chattanooga Times Free Press. p. B.1. Doyle, Jack (27 July 2009). "Dear Prudence, 1967–1968". PopHistoryDig.com. Retrieved 15 May 2010. "Beatles Indian hideaway – 50 years on". Live Mint. 13 August 2018. Retrieved 13 August 2018. Sherlock, Pat (3 July 1970). "The Transcendental Gospel Solution to Life's Problems Says Guru at Poland Springs". Lewiston Evening Journal. Associated Press. Jones, Constance; Ryan, James (2007). Encyclopedia of Hinduism. New York City: Facts on File. p. 273. ISBN 9780816075645. The Maharishi returned to India in the late 1970s and moved to the Netherlands in 1990. "Maharishi Mahesh Yogi". The Telegraph. London. 7 February 2008. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Goldhaber, Nat, Denniston, Denise, McWilliams, Peter, (1976). TM: an alphabetical guide to the transcendental meditation program, p. 109. Ballantine, New York. ISBN 0-345-24096-0 Note: "It was in honor of his great contribution to humankind that Maharishi was named Man of Hope in 1970 by the City of Hope Foundation in Los Angeles". Williamson, p. 92 Walcott, James (15 September 2010) Beam Me Up, Bucky. Vanity Fair Maharishi Channel on YouTube "Maharishi tells Queen's student to continue short-hair culture". Montreal Gazette. CP. 2 August 1972. Stark, Rodney and Bainbridge, William Sims (1985), The Future of Religion, University of California Press. p. 288. ISBN 9780520057319 "People", Anchorage Daily News, 14 March 1973. Note: "The Maharishi addressed the Illinois legislature Tuesday and made a few suggestions on how to handle fiscal problems. "The basis of a restful budget is no problems in society", he told legislators." Retrieved on 1 December 2010. "The TM believers are expanding their universe", Bangor Daily News, 6 March 1973. Note: "The legislature in the State of Illinois passed a resolution this past year recommending the inclusion of SCI teaching in the public schools." Retrieved on 1 December 2010. Hoffman, Claire (7 February 2008). "David Lynch's Guru and His Art". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 11 February 2008. Retrieved 1 May 2010. McPherson, Don (24 March 1975). "Maharishi Claims Meditation Push Can Help Canada". Montreal Gazette. Caffery, Bethia (27 March 1975). "Maharishi Carries Roses, Quiets World". The Evening Independent. "Maharishi says Trudeau 'Receptive'", Canadian Press, The Windsor Star, 22 March 1975. Retrieved on 21 October 2010. The Gazette, 22 March 1975, "PM and TM leader" The Citizen, 22 March 1975, "Trudeau "intelligent man" Guru Says After Long Talk" Gigler, Rich (10 February 1975). "Transcendental Meditation can be relaxing hobby". Pittsburgh Press. Royko, Mike (13 September 1985). "Flighty Lawsuit Has Lousy Karma". Chicago Tribune. p. 3. Merv: making the good life last, Merv Griffin, David Bender, page 177 Bezalel, Mel (1 May 2009). "Trance 101". Jerusalem Post. p. 14. "Maharishi Veda Land". maharishivediccity-iowa.gov. Archived from the original on 24 April 2016. Retrieved 18 April 2016. Ricciuto, Tony (8 February 2008) A dreamland by the QEW. Niagara Falls Review Braun, Frank Dirceu (7 August 1999). "La Jolla resident involved with maharishi in plans for world's tallest high-rise, Brazil project expected to cost $1.6 billion". The San Diego Union-Tribune. p. A.12. Unknown author E-Gyan web site Archived 17 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine accessed 9 March 2013 Unknown author MVVVP Maharishi India web site Archived 15 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine accessed 9 March 2013 Johnson, Bryan (1 March 1988). "India: 'Buried' holy man fosters skepticism". The Globe and Mail. p. A.8. Waters, Shaun (11 April 1988). "Canadians urged to help build guru's heavenly housing". The Globe and Mail. p. A.13. Ehmann, James (5 May 1988). "Ehmann's People". The Post-Standard (Syracuse, NY). p. A2. Sub-head: We'll Transcend Our Mistake. "$60,000 in undeclared cash and jewelry were confiscated. Speers, W. (24 December 1987). "Von Bulow Lawsuit is Settled". The Philadelphia Inquirer. p. C02. Ehmann, James (5 May 1988). "Ehmann's People". The Post-Standard (Syracuse, NY). p. A2. Sub-head: We'll Transcend Our Mistake. Section: Back in December, we repeated a wire service's assertion that offices in India of the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi had been raided and that $60,000 in undeclared cash and jewelry were confiscated. Recently, we heard from the Age of Enlightenment News Service in Livingston Manor, which asserted that, according to "official documents from the Indian government", nothing of value was confiscated in the raids. Richardson, Mark (16 October 1993). "Natural Law confident its 'new knowledge' can solve the nation's problems". The Ottawa Citizen. p. A.9. Borden, Charles W. (8 Jul 2010) "Transcendental Meditation in Russia". Passport Magazine Mason (1994), pp. 272–273 "Beatles Meditation Guru Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Dies". Fox News. AP. 6 February 2008. Archived from the original on 23 May 2013. Retrieved 26 December 2018. Hodgson, Martin (6 February 2008). "Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, in peace". Guardian. UK. Naughton, Jim (16 December 1991). "Head for the Hills, Disciples!; TM's Maharishi Holds Out No Hope for D.C." The Washington Post. p. a.01. Osborn, Andrew (4 December 2001). "Real lives: Holy man of Maastricht: Since George Harrison's death, the papers have been full of pictures of him with his Indian guru in the 60s. So what is the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi up to these days? Andrew Osborn tracks him down – to Holland". The Guardian. Manchester (UK). p. 4. Chopra, Deepak (13 February 2008). "The Maharishi Years – The Untold Story: Recollections of a Former Disciple". Huffington Post. Maier, Scott (22 September 1992). "Don't Take It Personal: Meditation Technique Advocates Bring You Natural Law Party". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. p. b.1. Schulte, Brigid (23 June 1996). "Imagine You Are Our Next President Meditation Is Key In Third-Party Bid. Series: Another in an occasional series of profiles of long-shot candidates for president". The Record. Bergen County, N.J. p. 32. Howard, Phoebe Wall (8 January 1996). "New laid-back national party calls philosophy only natural". The Fresno Bee. Fresno, Calif. p. A.1. Cobb, Chris (30 October 1993). "Party of the flying yogics gets a free ride from the taxpayers". The Vancouver Sun. p. A.10. Kapica, Jack (27 November 1993). "Veda Land: The New Incarnation of the Maharishi: Rejection by the voters only serves to make the Natural Law Party's appeals more urgent, its plans more grandiose, its claims more strident". The Globe and Mail. Toronto, Ont. p. D.3. "Madhya Pradesh: State Election Of 25 November 1998". Psephos. Retrieved 31 December 2009. Keller, James (17 October 2005). "Indian guru who taught the Beatles sets sights on Canada". The Globe and Mail. Toronto, Ont. p. A.8. Naedele, Walter Jr. (30 August 1994). "Meditation program goes from 'Om' to 'Ouch'". Philadelphia Inquirer. p. B.2. Overton, Penelope (15 September 2003). "Group promotes meditation therapy in schools". Hartford Courant. p. B1. Greening, Benedict (16 August 2003). "TM courses halted as fees soar". Royal Gazette. Bermuda. Honigsbaum, Mark (15 August 2005). "All you need is love and peace – but not in destructive Britain, so maharishi pulls out: Followers split as 95-year-old guru ends meditation teaching in 'scorpion nation'". The Guardian, London (UK). p. 3. "Global Reconstruction will provide fortunate living conditions for everyone" (Press release). Global Good News Service. 5 June 2007. Williamson "Global Country of World Peace: Welcome". globalcountryofworldpeace.org. Archived from the original on 26 May 2010. "Global Organization". globalcountry.org. "Costa Rica: Secta divide a indígenas". La Fogata (in Spanish). 24 July 2002. Archived from the original on 27 July 2011. "Costa Rica expels foreigners for naming king of remote Indian reservation". AP World Politics. 18 July 2002. It was obvious that they were promoting an independent state within Costa Rica, and we can't tolerate that" said the Central American nation's security minister Rogelio Ramos. Shorter version at Costa Rica Expels Foreign Group. Orlando Sentinel. 19 July 2002 "First Chancellor's Message". 5 April 2023. "Beatles Guru Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Dies". News vine. Associated Press. 5 February 2008. Easterling, Keller (31 October 2007). Enduring Innocence: Global Architecture and Its Political Masquerades. The MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-55065-9. Borger, Julian (10 December 2003). "Peace Man". The Guardian. London. Honigsbaum, Mark (15 August 2005). "All you need is love and peace – but not in destructive Britain, so maharishi pulls out: Followers split as 95-year-old guru ends meditation teaching in 'scorpion nation'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 February 2010. "Press Conference Highlights". globalgoodnews.com. 11 May 2005. Archived from the original on 11 July 2011. Lackey, Richard (8 August 2007). "Skelmersdale's yogic flyers". Champion. Southport, UK. Archived from the original on 8 July 2011. Max, Arthur (19 February 2006). "A Yogi's Plan for Today's Troubled World". Los Angeles Times. Associated Press. "Inauguration of Maharishi's Year of Invincibility – Global Raam Raj: Rejoicing in the supreme fulfilment of Invincibility for the world – Global Country of World Peace celebrates the dawn of administration of eternal silence". Global Good News. 12 January 2008. Retrieved 1 September 2010. "Historic address of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi on 11 January 2008". Global Good News. 11 January 2008. Hagelin, John (8 January 2008). "Dear Fellow Governors, Sidhas and Meditators of America" (Press release). invincibleamerica.org. Archived from the original on 5 November 2010. "Indian guru Maharishi Yogi dies". BBC News. 6 February 2008. Chatterjee, Madhusree (11 February 2008). "20,000 followers throng Allahabad for Mahesh Yogi's funeral". India eNews. Archived from the original on 10 March 2012.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "The Beatles' guru Maharishi Mahesh Yogi cremated", Krittivas Mukherjee, Reuters, 11 February 2008 Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine Williamson, p. 80 Brier, Soren (2010). "The Conflict between Indian Vedic Mentality and Western Modernity". In Durst-Anderson, Per; Lange, Elsebeth (eds.). Mentality and Thought: North, South, East and West. Copenhagen: Copenhagen Business School Press. pp. 53–86. "Mahesh Yogi cremated with state honours". The Hindustan Times. New Delhi. 11 February 2008. Pradhanl, Sharat; Chatterjee, Madhusree. "Mahesh Yogi cremated as large gathering pays tribute". IANS. Archived from the original on 1 June 2011. "Veneration marks 'Shodashi Sanskar'". The Hindustan Times. New Delhi. 20 February 2008. Brahmachari Girish (Dr Girish Chandra Varma) Archived 28 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine, accessed 22 April 2013 "Maharishi National Cultural Celebration – 2009" (PDF). E-Gyan. No. 5. 12 November 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 July 2011. Retrieved 1 February 2010. Pradhan, Sharat (10 February 2008). "Maharishi Mahesh Yogi to be cremated in grand ceremony". Rediff.com. Retrieved 6 April 2010. "About Chairman". Maharishi Vidya Mandir public school. Archived from the original on 1 September 2009. Retrieved 6 April 2010. Chopra, Deepak (13 February 2008). "The Maharishi Years – The Untold Story: Recollections of a Former Disciple". Huffington Post. Retrieved 5 April 2010. "Human Dimension: Anand Shrivastava". UNEP-Tongji Institute of Environment for Sustainable Development. Archived from the original on 18 July 2011. Retrieved 5 April 2010. "Beatles pay tribute to late Maharishi Mahesh Yogi", AFP (7 February 2008) Greenberg, Jerrold S. (2006). Comprehensive Stress Management. McGraw-Hill. "Mantras that made Maharishi's mission successful". Hindustan Times. 8 February 2008. James Dalen, James and Devries, Stephen (2011) Oxford University Press (New York) Integrative Cardiology, The Integrative Approach to Hypertension, Ch. 11, page 237 Wagger, Lane (16 June 2011) The prime mover of life Archived 17 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Times of India Goldberg, Philip (2011). American Veda. Harmony Books. p. 173. Rosenthal, Norman (2011) Transcendence, Tarcher Books. p. 4. ISBN 978-1-58542-873-1 Jevning, Ronald; Walsh, Deane H (1984). "Chapter 33: Metabolic Effects of Transcendental Meditation: Toward a New Paradigm of Neurobiology". In Shapiro, Deane H (ed.). Meditation: Classic and Contemporary Perspectives. Roger Walsh. Hawthorne, New York: Aldine Publishing Company. p. 470. ISBN 0-202-25136-5. Begley, Sharon (18 February 2008). "His Magical Mystery Tour". Newsweek: 18. "Whatever you think of the 'White Album', give the Maharishi credit for helping launch what's become a legitimate new field of neuroscience." Goldberg, (2010) American Veda, New York, Harmony Books pp154-155. "Maharishi Smarak Inaugurated". maharishivastu.org. March 2013. Retrieved 4 September 2015. "Maharishi Smarak inaugurated during Kumbh Mela". India Post. 10 April 2013. Retrieved 27 November 2013. Olsen, Carl (2007). The many colors of Hinduism. Rutgers University Press. pp. 338–341. ISBN 978-0-8135-4068-9. Mason (1994), p. 59 "Maharishi's Programme to Create World Peace led to fall of Berlin Wall: Rising coherence in national and world consciousness". Global Good News. 9 November 2009. Archived from the original on 24 July 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2010. Gardner, Martin (1996). Weird water & fuzzy logic: more notes of a fringe watcher. Prometheus Books. p. 142. ISBN 1573920967. Cummins, Ken (3 November 1990). "U.s. Meditation Believers Seek To Give Peace A Chant". Sun Sentinel. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. Retrieved 9 May 2013. York, Michael (2006). "New Age and Magic". In Barger, Helen A. (ed.). Witchcraft and Magic: Contemporary North America. University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 16. ISBN 978-0-8122-1971-5. Retrieved 5 December 2010. Forem, Jack (2012). Transcendental Meditation-The classic text revised and updated (2nd ed.). Hay House, Inc. p. 250. ISBN 978-1-4019-3156-8. Larson, Gerald James (2009). "Hinduism in India and in America". In Neusner, Jacob (ed.). World Religions in America: An Introduction. Westminster John Knox Press. p. 192. ISBN 978-0-664-23320-4. Alper, Harvey P. (December 1991). Understanding mantras. Motilal Banarsidass. p. 442. ISBN 978-81-208-0746-4. Raj, Selva J.; William P. Harman (2007). Dealing With Deities: The Ritual Vow in South Asia. SUNY Press. p. 129. ISBN 978-0-7914-6708-4. Nanda, Meera (2004). Prophets facing backward: postmodern critiques of science and Hindu nationalism in India. Piscataway N.J.; London: Rutgers University Press. p. 46. ISBN 978-0-8135-3357-5. "More than 1200 Yogic Flyers Assemble in Washington, D.C., and Iowa to Promote Invincibility in America and Permanent World Peace" (Press release). Invincible America. 25 July 2006. Archived from the original on 17 October 2015. Goldberg, Phiilip (2010). American Veda. New York: Harmony Books. p. 163. ISBN 978-0-385-52134-5. Coplin, p. 71 WAGER, GREGG (11 December 1987). "Musicians Spread the Maharishi's Message of Peace". Los Angeles Times. p. 12. Humes, p. 66 Meyer-Dinkgräfe, Daniel (2005). Theatre And Consciousness: Explanatory Scope And Future Potential. Intellect Books. pp. appendix p1. ISBN 1841501301. Ascott, Roy (2000). Reframing Consciousness : Art, Mind and Technology. Intellect Books. pp. 285–290. ISBN 1841508152. Bonshek, Anna; Bonshek, Corrina; Fergusson, Lee C. (2007). The Big Fish: Consciousness as Structure, Body and Space. Consciousness, literature & the arts. Rodopi. pp. 6–9. ISBN 978-90-420-2172-3. Sharma, H.; Clark, Christopher (1998). "Chapter 13: Maharishi's Vedic Approach to Health". Contemporary Ayurveda, Medicine and Research in Maharishi Ayur-Veda. Churchill Livingstone. pp. 143–145. ISBN 978-0-443-05594-2. Schneider, Robert H.; Fields, Jeremy Z. (2006). Total Heart Health: How to Prevent and Reverse Heart Disease with the Maharishi Vedic Approach to Health. Basic Health Publications, Inc. ISBN 978-1-59120-087-1. Welvaert, Brandy, "Vedic homes seek better living through architecture", Rock Island Argus, (5 August 2005) Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine Spivack, Miranda (12 September 2008). "Bricks Mortar and Serenity". The Washington Post. Wallace, pp. 99–102 Wallace, pp. 107–109 Ingram, Jeanne (24 February 1984). "Meditation: Is it Really a Cure-all? Believers Include a Physician who Claims it Works Wonders". Rome News-Tribune. Retrieved 30 December 2013. Condon, Patrick (6 November 2004). "Transcendental Meditation Advocates Point to its Success at Private Iowa Academy". The Victoria Advocate. p. 3D. Retrieved 30 December 2013. Grant, James (2000). "Consciousness-based Education: A Future of Higher Education in the New Millennium". In Inayatullah, Sohail; Gidley, Jennifer (eds.). The university in transformation: global perspectives on the futures of the university. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 209. ISBN 9780897897181. "Maharishi's Books: Enlightenment for Everyone and Every Nation". globalgoodnews.com. Archived from the original on 25 May 2010. Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1955). Beacon Light of the Himalayas (PDF). Chryssides, George D. (1999). Exploring New Religions. Continuum International Publishing Group. p. 293. ISBN 978-0-8264-5959-6. Humes, p. 77 Miller, Timothy (1995). America's Alternative Religions. SUNY Press. p. 193. ISBN 978-0-7914-2397-4. Russell, p. 75 Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1986) p. 459, "There was not much time for writing a book, so Maharishi said, 'I'll speak it out on tape, and then you'll get it printed'." Jones, Lindsay, ed. (2005). Encyclopedia of Religion. Detroit: Macmillan Reference. p. 3. ISBN 0-02-865981-3. Bono, Joseph (11 September 2006). Caveat Emptor, Let the Buyer Beware: A Consumers Guide To Mental Health Services [Paperback]. AuthorHouse. p. 118. ISBN 978-1425945633. Olson, Carl (15 August 2007). The Many Colors of Hinduism: A Thematic-Historical Introduction. Rutgers University Press. ISBN 9780813540689. Russell, Peter (2011). From Science to God: A Physicist's Journey Into the Mystery of Consciousness. New World Library. p. 73. ISBN 9781577319917. Wujastyk, Dagmar; Smith, Frederick M. (10 July 2008). Modern and Global Ayurveda: Pluralism and Paradigms. SUNY Press. p. 288. ISBN 9780791478165. Maharishi Mahesh Yogi (1969). Maharishi Mahesh Yogi on the Bhagavad-Gita : A New Translation and Commentary, Chapters 1–6. New York: Penguin Books. pp. 20–21. ISBN 978-0-14-019247-6. Russell, p. 134 Yogi, Maharishi Mahesh (1969) page 17 Forem, p. 274 (2012) Forem, p. 275 (2012) Mason (1994), p. 221: "What makes Maharishi beloved and understood is that he has manifest love. You could not meet with Maharishi without recognizing instantly his integrity. You look in his eyes and there it is." Cowan, Douglas E.; Bromley, David G. (2008). Cults and New Religions: A Brief History. Blackwell Publishing. p. 68. ISBN 978-1-4051-6128-2. Allitt, Patrick (20 September 2005). Religion in America Since 1945: A History. Columbia University Press. p. 141. ISBN 978-0-231-12155-2. Chryssides, George D. (1999). Exploring new religions. London: Cassell. pp. 293–296. ISBN 978-0-8264-5959-6. "Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, guru and tycoon, died on February 5th, aged 91 (probably)". The Economist. 16 February 2008. Mason (1994), p. 221: "Other popular misconceptions are that he amassed a huge fleet of Rolls-Royce cars and private aeroplanes, but, people easily confuse him with other Indian teachers, such as Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh and Guru Maharaj Ji." .Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Guru of transcendental meditation who used his association with the Beatles to create a hugely profitable global movement Archived 24 May 2010 at the Wayback Machine, The Times, 7 February 2008 Mckenzie, Kevin Hinton & Ryan (4 April 2018). "Vancouver Magazine". Vancouver Magazine. Retrieved 18 May 2022. Garber-Paul, Elisabeth; Garber-Paul, Elisabeth (7 June 2016). "How a New Book Exposes the Dark Side of the TM Movement". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 18 May 2022. "My Experience Living In A Cult For 20 Years - Here's How I Broke Free". HuffPost UK. 17 October 2018. Retrieved 18 May 2022. Tresniowski, Alex (1998). "Feeling Guru-Vy". People. Retrieved 31 March 2013. "Invitation to Instant bliss". Life. 11 November 1967. p. 26. Miles, Barry (1998). Paul McCartney: Many Years from Now. Macmillan. p. 401. ISBN 978-0-8050-5249-7. Friend, David; Mehta, Dilip (November 1990). "The return of Mister Bliss". Life. p. 82. Mason, Paul. The Last Instruction, paulmason.info Humes, p. 57 Drake, Patricia Hemingway(1975) The Transcendental Meditation Primer. David Mckay Company. p. 17. ISBN 9780679505549 Mason (1994), p. 57: "On Tuesday, 30 May 1961, eight years to the day after his master's death, the Shankaracharya of Jyotir Math, Swami Shantanand Saraswati graced the teacher training course with his presence and was received with all due ceremony. Arriving at the site where the new Academy was being built, he addressed the Maharishi and the gathered meditators . . . . He commended the practice of the Maharishi's meditation, describing it as a 'master key to the knowledge of Vedanta' and added, 'There are other keys, but a master key is enough to open all the locks.'" Coplin, pp. 61–63: "Maharishi, though a devoted and favored disciple, was not eligible to become Shankarachaharya due to his caste background (non-brahmin). Nonetheless, he shares with the last two Shankaracharyas of Jyotir Math (who succeeded Brahmanand Saraswati) a brotherly relationship, known as "guru-bhais". Even today, Swami Vishnudevanand (the current Shankaracharya of Jyotir Math) speaks very highly of Maharishi and sees his teaching as a reflection of their master's. Both he and Swami Shantanand (his immediate predecessor) are frequent guests of Maharishi's both in India and abroad, personally endorsing his mission.".... "When Maharishi began teaching during his South Indian tour in the mid-1950s, he arrived as an informal representative of the Shankaracharya of Jyotir Math, being a 'great disciple of Shri Swami Brahmananda Saraswati (former Shankaracharya)'". Kamdar, Mira (20 June 2008). "Between Yogis and Gurus, It May be Time to Get Smart". Asia Society. Archived from the original on 21 June 2010. Retrieved 27 August 2010. Dunphy, Grahme & Emiq, Rainer, Rodopi (2009) Hybrid Humor: Comedy in Transnational Perspectives. p. 184. ISBN 978-9042028234 Wenner, Jann (2000) [1971]. Lennon Remembers. Verso, W.W. Norton & Co. p. 27. ISBN 1-85984-376-X. MUM Catalog of courses 2012–2013 (Page 23) Archived 6 June 2013 at the Wayback Machine King, Jeams Lynwood (2007). Fundamentals of Maharishi Vedic Science (Thesis). Maharishi University of Management. pp. 14–15. Archived from the original on 27 May 2010. "APA-Accredited Programs". www.apa.org. "ACGME – Accreditation Data System (ADS)". apps.acgme.org. "Maharishi Institute of Management: Introduction". Maharishi Institute of Management. Archived from the original on 4 August 2010. "Maharishi Vidya Mandir". Ekikrat.in. Archived from the original on 14 August 2010. Retrieved 30 August 2010. Owens, Nancy K. (26 October 2005). "Man Fails to Fly, Sues Camelot Owner". Greater Tulsa Reporter. Archived from the original on 11 July 2011. Retrieved 14 July 2010. Williams, Patrick Gresham (2002). The Spiritual Recovery Manual: Vedic Knowledge and Yogic Techniques to Accelerate Recovery. Incandescent Press. pp. 136, 228, 230. ISBN 9780970907813. Helman, Christopher (8 July 2002). "Queer as a three-raam bill". Forbes. Archived from the original on 13 February 2008. Hamill, Sean D. (22 February 2008). "Sites for 'Maharishi Effect' (Welcome to Parma) Spread Across U.S." The New York Times. About the Institute. Maharishi Institute Anderson, Alistair (26 March 2012) "CIDA Institute may become, self funded university", Business Day Das, Subhamoy (7 February 2008). "Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Passes Away". About.com. Archived from the original on 23 January 2012. Harris, Chris (13 November 2003). "The Maharishi's Hotel of Emptiness:Will the Beatles' former guru leave Hartford with a permanent blemish, or is there hope for the Clarion Hotel?". Hartford Advocate. "The 'Beatles' Yogi Became a Billionaire". Day to Day. 4 March 2008. Aspan, Maria (2 July 2007), Maharishi's Minions Come to Wall Street, NY Times Coplin, J.R. (1990). Text and Context in the Communication of a Social Movement's Charisma, Ideology, and Consciousness: TM for India and the West (PhD thesis). University of California, San Diego. Humes, C.A. (2005). "Maharishi Mahesh Yogi: Beyond the T.M. Technique". In Forsthoefel, Thomas A.; Humes, Cynthia Ann (eds.). Gurus in America. SUNY Press. ISBN 0-7914-6573-X. Mason, Paul (1994). The Maharishi – The Biography of the Man Who Gave Transcendental Meditation to the World. Shaftsbury, Dorset: Element Books Ltd. ISBN 1-85230-571-1. Russell, Peter (1977). The T.M. Technique: An Introduction to Transcendental Meditation and the Teachings of Maharishi Mahesh Yogi. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-7100-8539-9. Wallace, Robert Keith (1986). The Physiology of Consciousness. Maharishi International University Press. ISBN 978-0-923569-02-0. Williamson, Lola (2010). Transcendent in America. New York University Press. ISBN 978-0-8147-9449-4. Maharishi Mahesh Yogi at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Transcendental Meditation/Maharishi Official List of Lifetime Achievements Larry King interview with Maharishi 12 May 2002 List of books by Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Maharishi Mahesh Yogi at Curlie Works by or about Maharishi Mahesh Yogi at Internet Archive Portals:  Biography  Philosophy  Hinduism  India  Religion