The Suicide Squad is a 2021 American superhero film based on the DC Comics team Suicide Squad. Produced by DC Films, Atlas Entertainment, and The Safran Company, and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures, it is a standalone sequel to Suicide Squad (2016) and the 10th film in the DC Extended Universe (DCEU). The film was written and directed by James Gunn and stars an ensemble cast including Margot Robbie, Idris Elba, John Cena, Joel Kinnaman, Sylvester Stallone, Viola Davis, David Dastmalchian, Daniela Melchior, Michael Rooker, Jai Courtney, Peter Capaldi, Alice Braga, and Pete Davidson. In the film, several convicts join a task force known as the "Suicide Squad" in exchange for lighter sentences. They are sent to the South American island nation of Corto Maltese to destroy all traces of the giant alien starfish Starro the Conqueror before it falls into the local government's control. David Ayer was set to return as director for a Suicide Squad sequel by March 2016, but in December he chose to work on other projects. Warner Bros. considered several replacements before hiring Gavin O'Connor in September 2017. He left due to creative differences, and Gunn was hired in October 2018 to write and direct the film after being temporarily fired by Disney and Marvel Studios as director of Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3 (2023). He drew inspiration from war films and John Ostrander's 1980s Suicide Squad comics, and explored new characters in a story separate from the first film's narrative, though some cast members do return from Suicide Squad. Filming took place from September 2019 to February 2020, primarily in Atlanta, Georgia, as well as in Colón, Panama, and Porto, Portugal. The film had the biggest sets ever built for a Warner Bros. production. The Suicide Squad premiered theatrically in the United Kingdom on July 30, 2021. It was released in the United States on August 5, simultaneously in theaters and on the streaming service HBO Max. Although it bombed at the box office after grossing just $169 million worldwide against a production budget of $185 million, the film received positive reviews from critics and became the most-streamed DCEU film on HBO Max. The film's box office performance was attributed to factors such as the COVID-19 pandemic, the film's availability on HBO Max, and its relationship to the first Suicide Squad. Peacemaker, a spin-off television series starring Cena, debuted on HBO Max in January 2022. Two other spin-off series are in development for Max, including Waller. Intelligence officer Amanda Waller assembles two separate Task Force X teams, colloquially known as the "Suicide Squad", which consists of Belle Reve penitentiary inmates who agree to carry out a mission in exchange for shortened sentences. The teams are sent to the South American island nation of Corto Maltese after an anti-American regime overthrows its government, and are tasked with destroying the Nazi-era laboratory Jötunheim, which houses the secret experiment "Project Starfish." The Corto Maltese military almost entirely wipes out one team upon landing, with only team leader Colonel Rick Flag and Harley Quinn surviving. The ambush on the first team serves as a diversion, allowing the second team to enter the country undetected. The team is led by assassin Bloodsport, who Waller blackmailed in exchange for dropping the court trial of his estranged daughter Tyla, and it also consists of Peacemaker, King Shark, Polka-Dot Man and Ratcatcher 2. Waller orders the squad to find Flag, who escaped from the military but is held at a rebel base. The team massacres the rebel soldiers, only to learn that rebellion leader Sol Soria had saved Flag. Despite the group's actions, Soria agrees to help them infiltrate the capital, where they capture Project Starfish's lead scientist, the Thinker. Harley is captured by the Corto Maltese government and taken to the new dictator, Silvio Luna, who wishes to marry her. After learning of Luna's plans to use Project Starfish on political dissidents, Harley kills him and escapes. She joins the others, who use the Thinker to break into Jötunheim and begin rigging it with explosives. Flag and Ratcatcher 2 enter the Project Starfish laboratory with the Thinker and find Starro the Conqueror, a giant starfish-like alien that creates smaller versions of himself to kill people and control their bodies. The Thinker explains that Starro was brought to Earth by the U.S. government, which has secretly funded the experiments for decades using Corto Maltese citizens as test subjects. An enraged Flag decides to leak a hard drive containing evidence of this but is killed by Peacemaker, who is under orders from Waller to cover up the U.S.'s involvement. Meanwhile, a skirmish between the rest of the team and the military leads to Polka-Dot Man accidentally setting off the explosives prematurely. As Jötunheim crumbles, the drive falls into Ratcatcher 2's possession. Peacemaker attempts to kill her before she can escape with the drive, but Bloodsport shoots him and takes it. Starro escapes the destroyed Jötunheim, brutally kills the Thinker and much of the military, and begins taking control of the island's population. Waller tells the squad that their mission is complete and orders them to leave, but Bloodsport decides to lead the team in fighting Starro. Waller attempts to execute them for this, but her subordinates knock her out. After Starro kills Polka-Dot Man, Harley pierces a hole in its eye, allowing Ratcatcher 2 to summon the city's rats to chew Starro to death from the inside. With the military diverted, Soria takes control of the government, promising democratic elections. Bloodsport blackmails Waller into releasing him and the surviving squad members and dropping Tyla's charges in exchange for keeping the contents of the drive confidential. Waller reluctantly agrees, and the remaining squad members are airlifted out of Corto Maltese. In a mid-credits scene, it is revealed that Weasel, one of the members of the first team, has survived his supposed drowning and runs off into the jungle. In a post-credits scene, Waller assigns her subordinates to a new mission with the still-living Peacemaker, who is recovering in a hospital. Margot Robbie as Harley Quinn: A crazed criminal and former psychiatrist. Robbie said the film would show a new side of the character compared to her previous DC Extended Universe (DCEU) appearances due to her being in a new place and surrounded by new characters. Despite inheriting this version of Harley from previous films, writer/director James Gunn loved the character and felt very comfortable writing for her. He wanted her to be "the most Harley of all Harleys" depicted on film, including making "healthy" choices, following her toxic relationship with the Joker, that other people would find insane. He likened Harley's relationship with Bloodsport to the comedy duo Abbott and Costello, with Harley being Costello. Idris Elba as Robert DuBois / Bloodsport: A mercenary with a technologically advanced suit that he can use to create different gadgets and transforming weaponry (an adaptation of the comic book character's ability to manifest weapons). After being convicted of shooting Superman with a Kryptonite bullet, Bloodsport shortens his prison sentence by joining Task Force X so he can help his daughter Tyla. Gunn said each member of the Suicide Squad in the film was inspired by a different film genre, and described Bloodsport as an unsentimental portrayal of a 1960s action hero like Steve McQueen, without their "moral repercussions". The character's story in the film takes him from a "toxic asshole to a true leader". John Cena as Christopher Smith / Peacemaker: A ruthless, jingoistic killer who believes in achieving peace at any cost. Gunn told Cena not to read any Peacemaker comics before filming, and Cena originally approached the role with an "angular, drill sergeant, Full Metal Jacket-esque personality" before Gunn told him to act like a "douchey, bro-y Captain America" who could have appeared in a 1970s television series like Wonder Woman. The character does not get as much exploration or development as the other members of the Suicide Squad, which is one of the reasons that Gunn decided to create the spin-off television series Peacemaker despite him originally intending for the character's apparent death in the film to be permanent. Joel Kinnaman as Colonel Rick Flag: The field leader of the Suicide Squad. Gunn said Flag was the character that changed the most compared to the first Suicide Squad (2016), with Kinnaman describing this version as sillier, less jaded, more naive, and funnier. Gunn said Kinnaman was not used to comedic acting but "quickly showed a talent and an affinity" for it. Flag begins the film on the Suicide Squad team that Amanda Waller sends as a decoy, and a deleted scene would have explained that she did this because he made fun of an ugly shirt she was wearing. Gunn said Flag has grown sick of being taken advantage of and doing bad things, which leads to him disobeying Waller and being killed by Peacemaker. Sylvester Stallone as the voice of Nanaue / King Shark: A man-eating shark-human hybrid, created with visual effects. Steve Agee, a longtime friend of Gunn's, developed King Shark's portrayal on set. He was chosen partly because he is 6 feet 7 inches (2.01 m), and wore a wireframe version of a shark head as well as a body suit to further approximate the character's size and shape. Gunn wanted the underlying story for King Shark to explore his loneliness as someone who wants to be part of the world and connect with other people, but is not able to due to his appearance. This is seen in moments where he pretends to read or looks longingly out a window at a couple who are together. Viola Davis as Amanda Waller: The director of A.R.G.U.S. who runs the Task Force X program. Gunn said Waller, along with the U.S. government, is the true villain of the film, which explores the different reactions that the Suicide Squad have to her asking them to cover up illegal experiments in Corto Maltese. He added that there was "no better Amanda Waller" than Davis, and said she was "incredibly intimidating" when portraying the character. David Dastmalchian as Abner Krill / Polka-Dot Man: An "experiment gone wrong" in a suit covered with polka dots. Gunn described Polka-Dot Man as "the dumbest DC character of all time" whom he hoped to turn into a tragic character, with the film's version being infected with an interdimensional virus by his mother in an attempt to turn him into a superhero. The virus develops into colorful balls of acid under Krill's skin that cause him pain unless he expels them as polka-dot weapons or vomits them up. Unbeknownst to Gunn, Dastmalchian felt a personal connection to the character because he has the skin condition vitiligo, for which he was bullied as a child and called "polka dots". Daniela Melchior as Cleo Cazo / Ratcatcher 2: A thief who inherited the mantle of "Ratcatcher" from her father, along with equipment that allows her to control rats and communicate with them. Gunn described her as the "heart of the film", and noted that she is different from the other characters because she had her father's love growing up where the other characters had problematic relationships with their parents. Gunn explained that the moment where Ratcatcher 2 covers Bloodsport to protect him from the rats at the end of the film signifies her being able to share her father's love with him, which is why the moment is intercut with a flashback of her sitting with her father. Michael Rooker as Brian Durlin / Savant: a hand-to-hand combat and weapons expert. He is killed in the opening scene when Waller detonates a bomb in his head for deserting the mission. Jai Courtney as Digger Harkness / Captain Boomerang: an unhinged Australian thief who wields boomerangs. Courtney said the character was "the same shitbag liability" he was in the first film. Peter Capaldi as Gaius Grieves / The Thinker: the lead scientist of Project Starfish, who has been experimenting on Starro the Conqueror on behalf of the U.S. government. Alice Braga as Sol Soria: the leader of a rebel faction on Corto Maltese who aligns herself with the Suicide Squad. Pete Davidson as Richard "Dick" Hertz / Blackguard: an easily manipulated mercenary. He betrays the first Suicide Squad team to the Corto Maltese military, who then kill him. In addition to playing King Shark on set, Steve Agee portrays John Economos, an A.R.G.U.S. agent who is an aide to Waller. Other aides to Waller include Jennifer Holland as Emilia Harcourt and Tinashe Kajese as Flo Crawley, the aide who knocked out Amanda Waller before she could execute the squad and was later arrested in Peacemaker. The ill-fated first Suicide Squad team includes Savant, Captain Boomerang, and Blackguard, as well as Nathan Fillion as Cory Pitzner / T.D.K. (The Detachable Kid), a metahuman who can detach his arms from his body; Flula Borg as Gunter Braun / Javelin, a former Olympic athlete who wields javelins as weapons; Mayling Ng as Mongal, an alien mass murderer; and Sean Gunn as Weasel, an anthropomorphic weasel whose portrayal is based on Bill the Cat from the comic strip Bloom County. James Gunn said Weasel was "barely more than an animal" which raised some ethical questions about his involvement in the squad. Also appearing in the film are Juan Diego Botto as President General Silvio Luna, the dictator of Corto Maltese who tries to woo Harley Quinn; Joaquín Cosío as Major General Mateo Suárez of Corto Maltese; Storm Reid as Bloodsport's daughter Tyla; Julio Ruiz as Milton, an associate of Task Force X; Lynne Ashe as Polka-Dot Man's Mom; and Taika Waititi as Ratcatcher 2's father, the original Ratcatcher. In addition to Weasel, Sean Gunn also portrays Calendar Man, one of several DC villains that appear as Belle Reve inmates. Others include Natalia Safran as Kaleidoscope and Jared Leland Gore as Double Down. John Ostrander, creator of the 1980s Suicide Squad team that influenced the film, makes a cameo appearance as Dr. Fitzgibbon, while Stephen Blackehart has a small role as the pilot Briscoe, and both Lloyd Kaufman and Gunn's Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2 (2017) collaborator Pom Klementieff appear as dancers in a nightclub in uncredited appearances. Ratcatcher 2's pet rat Sebastian was voiced by Dee Bradley Baker and portrayed on-set by rats named Jaws and Crisp Ratt. Before the first Suicide Squad film was released in August 2016, director David Ayer and star Will Smith were expected to return for a sequel. Filming was planned to begin in 2017 after the pair completed their work on the film Bright (2017). Karen Fukuhara expressed her interest in fleshing out Tatsu Yamashiro / Katana's backstory in a sequel, though she also noted that if not, that could be in a spin-off film of her own. In September, Ayer said the first film had been rated PG-13 because it had originally been envisioned that way by the studio, and an R-rating needed to be planned from the start of a production. He said that it would be worth "lobbying" to make a sequel R-rated, as he felt the first film had the "edge" and "attitude" of an R-rated film already. Suicide Squad was released to a polarized response and was reported to have a difficult production, but the film grossed enough for Warner Bros. Pictures to fast-track development of a sequel. Several spin-off films were also in development by December, including one featuring Smith as Deadshot. The project that was furthest along was Gotham City Sirens, an all-female team-up film with Margot Robbie planned to reprise her role as Harley Quinn. Ayer was set to direct and produce that film rather than Suicide Squad 2. Warner Bros. began searching for a new director for Suicide Squad 2, and was courting Mel Gibson by mid-February 2017. Ruben Fleischer, Daniel Espinosa, Jonathan Levine, and David S. Goyer were also considered. Adam Cozad entered negotiations to write the film a month later, at which point there was still no director attached to the project. It was described as being a priority for Warner Bros. Script delays led to the planned filming start being pushed to mid-2018, at which point Gibson moved on from the project. Jaume Collet-Serra became the new frontrunner to direct in early July, by which time both Smith and Robbie were set to reprise their roles. Zak Penn had pitched a new story treatment for the film to Warner Bros., and wrote a draft of the script as a favor to the studio. Later in July, Collet-Serra was hired to direct Disney's Jungle Cruise (2021) and withdrew from directing Suicide Squad 2 after deciding he would rather originate a new story than continue an existing franchise; Collet-Serra went on to direct the DC Extended Universe (DCEU) film Black Adam (2022). In August, Jared Leto was expected to reprise his role as the Joker from the first film, while production was not expected to begin until Smith completed his work on Aladdin (2019) and Gemini Man (2019) in late 2018. The next month, Gavin O'Connor was chosen to direct the film and co-write it with his writing partner Anthony Tambakis, based on his own vision. The character Black Adam was reportedly the main villain of O'Connor's script, with Dwayne Johnson already attached to that role for DC Films. Michael De Luca joined the film as a producer in January 2018, working with the first film's producer Charles Roven. David Bar Katz and Todd Stashwick were co-writing the film with O'Connor in June, and they had completed their draft by that September. O'Connor left the film by early October to focus on The Way Back (2020). This was reportedly out of frustration that Warner Bros. was already moving ahead with Birds of Prey (2020), a new Harley Quinn spin-off film with a similar story to the one he wrote for Suicide Squad 2. During the development process, the character Deathstroke appeared in four or five different version of the script to fight Deadshot. Joe Manganiello was attached to reprise his role as Deathstroke from Justice League (2017), and the experience left him feeling that he would never portray the character again until he was asked to return for Zack Snyder's Justice League (2021). In October 2018, James Gunn was hired to write and possibly direct the next Suicide Squad film. His deal with Warner Bros. closed following the completion of his exit settlement with The Walt Disney Company, after he was dismissed by Disney and Marvel Studios as director of Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3 (2023) in July 2018 when conservative commentators, such as Mike Cernovich, circulated controversial Twitter posts he made involving rape, pedophilia, AIDS, the Holocaust, bestiality and 9/11. Warner Bros. had been interested in recruiting Gunn for the DCEU immediately after his dismissal by Disney and asked him to make a new Superman film. Gunn was uncertain if he wanted to take on Superman, so Warner Bros. told him that he could adapt any DC property he liked. He chose to make a Suicide Squad film, recalling that it was the one DC property he dreamed of adapting and had been jealous when Ayer's Suicide Squad film performed well. Ayer supported Gunn's hiring as a "brave and smart move" and called him "the right man for the job". Dave Bautista, who starred in the Guardians of the Galaxy films for Gunn, expressed interest in appearing in his Suicide Squad film. One of the first things Gunn did when discussing the film with Warner Bros. was watch Suicide Squad for the first time. The studio said he could take or leave any elements he wanted from the first film, but they hoped that he would bring back Robbie as Harley Quinn. The day after he was hired, Disney decided to reinstate Gunn as director of Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3. He discussed his new DCEU commitment with Marvel Studios President Kevin Feige, who encouraged him to "make a great movie" and agreed to delay production on Guardians until Gunn had completed work on the Suicide Squad sequel. In January 2019, the film was officially titled The Suicide Squad and was scheduled for release on August 6, 2021. The title was suggested by Gunn as a joke, but executives at Warner Bros. liked it. At that time, Gunn was in negotiations to direct the film which was described as a relaunch rather than a direct sequel that would take the franchise in a new direction and feature a largely new cast. Roven and Peter Safran were set as producers, with Zack Snyder and Deborah Snyder as executive producers. Safran, who produced the DCEU films Aquaman (2018) and Shazam! (2019), had pushed Gunn to take on the project and felt there was no better director to "bring together a disparate group of outsiders on a mission". We really wanted to make sure that this stands on its own two feet. So... it's not a sequel, but there are some characters that were in the first movie, right? So it's not really a full reboot either. So we just call it James Gunn's The Suicide Squad. —Producer Peter Safran on the relationship between The Suicide Squad and the first Suicide Squad film Gunn wrote a treatment that was a few pages long, and then quickly produced several drafts of the script that Warner Bros. was "extremely high" on. He said the film was "its own thing", rather than a sequel or reboot; it does not explicitly address the events of the first film or Birds of Prey, but it also does not contradict them. Warner Bros. asked Gunn to make the film PG-13, but he insisted on it being R-rated if he was going to direct it; the studio felt Gunn's involvement was "worth the trade-off" for the higher rating. He took inspiration from John Ostrander's original 1980s run on the Suicide Squad comic books, which he was drawn to because it was about a "bunch of loser, B-grade supervillains". Safran described The Suicide Squad as a "gritty 1970s war movie combined with the brilliance of James Gunn's characters and comedy", and Gunn was influenced by war films such as The Great Escape (1963), The Dirty Dozen (1967), Where Eagles Dare (1968), and Kelly's Heroes (1970). Already knowing the kind of story that he wanted to tell, Gunn's first step in writing the film was picking the characters for the Suicide Squad roster. He spent days going through the library of existing DC Comics characters and deciding which group would work well together. He wanted to create a blend of characters by having each feel like they were part of a different film genre. The first new character that Gunn added to the roster was King Shark, who was intended to appear in the first film before being replaced by Killer Croc. Gunn sought to feature an animal on the team, and chose King Shark because he enjoyed the concept of a man-eating fish-human hybrid. Other new characters that Gunn added include Polka-Dot Man, Peacemaker, and a female version of Ratcatcher. He said one of the main differences between this film and the Guardians of the Galaxy films was that it would be unclear whether some Suicide Squad members would turn out to be good or bad, unlike the Guardians of the Galaxy who are portrayed as heroes despite their flaws. Characters that were considered but ultimately rejected include Sportsmaster, Dogwelder, Bat-Mite, Livewire, Punch and Jewelee, Black Spider, Deathstroke, Man-Bat, Plastique, Chemo, KGBeast, Solomon Grundy, Rainbow Creature, Gunhawk, Knockout, Killer Frost, Mr. Freeze, and Yahya Abdul-Mateen II's Black Manta from Aquaman. He did not consider using the Joker because he felt Amanda Waller would not have any use for the character, and chose not to use Kite Man because he felt the character was already a punchline in the comics and would not feel fresh for the film. Gunn also avoided characters like Bronze Tiger and Katana since they are antiheroes rather than villains. Gunn felt he was in a position, and had the responsibility, to take risks with the property and try make "an all-out entertaining film from start to finish that didn't play by the rules". This included "post-modern" aesthetic decisions such as creating sequences that showed the perspectives of Harley Quinn and Polka-Dot Man, adding an extended subplot where Harley Quinn is on her own away from the action, and adding title cards that segue between sequences. These elements were written into the script, including what Gunn referred to as "Harley-vision" where gory murders are depicted through Harley's "starry-eyed way of looking at life" by mixing "hearts and beautiful little things" with the blood that is coming out of the people Harley is killing. The "Harley-vision" visuals were inspired by a video game that Gunn helped develop called Lollipop Chainsaw (2012). The main villains of the film are Amanda Waller and the U.S. government, who are trying to cover up their involvement in illegal experiments on the island of Corto Maltese. Gunn did not feel that this storyline was specifically critical of the U.S. government, just realistic given the real-world history of the U.S. interfering in other countries. He also wanted to use this to make dramatic points rather than political ones, with the different stances on the government's actions that the film's main characters take leading to dramatic conflict. For the antagonist that Waller sends the Suicide Squad to fight, Gunn initially considered using Superman before deciding to feature Starro the Conqueror instead. He found the character to be both ridiculous and terrifying, which reflected what he was trying to accomplish with the film, and he felt Starro was the only major DC Comics villain that was unlikely to appear in another live-action film or who would not be adapted faithfully by another filmmaker if it was. He also wanted to avoid potential questions regarding who should be portraying Superman in the DCEU and what that would mean for the film's connections to the wider shared universe. DC allowed Gunn to kill any character, including Harley Quinn, and he ignored the potential backlash from doing this to prioritize the natural evolution of the story. He did not want it to be like other films which might kill off some characters early on but then not kill any of the main characters at the end, so he knew that one of the Suicide Squad members would die during the final battle. He originally intended for this to be Ratcatcher, but ultimately felt that this would be too heartless. He chose Polka-Dot Man instead because he thought the character had the most complete story arc at that point in the film. When acknowledging the first film's negative reception, Gunn said there were aspects of it that he loved and defended Ayer's casting choices; the first decision Gunn made on the new film was to bring back Robbie as Harley Quinn and Viola Davis as Amanda Waller. On February 27, 2019, Smith was revealed to no longer be in the film's cast due to scheduling issues. On March 1, Gunn met with Idris Elba to discuss him joining the film, reportedly as a replacement for Smith as Deadshot. Elba was Gunn's only choice for the role, and he wrote the script with Elba in mind—something Gunn rarely does for actors he has not met. Elba agreed to join the film during that conversation, as he wanted to work with Gunn and felt "so touched and honored that someone of [Gunn's] talent was really keen to work with" him. Elba was in official negotiations the next week. Joel Kinnaman's Rick Flag was expected to return from the first film at that point, and Jai Courtney revealed later that month that he was returning as Captain Boomerang from the first film. Scott Eastwood, who played GQ Edwards in the first film, was approached to reprise his role by Warner Bros. offering him a three-picture deal for more Suicide Squad movies, but the studio didn't wish to pay him for those movies nor send him a script, leading Eastwood to be unaware of the plans he was signing up for, so after seeking advice from his father Clint, Scott declined to return because he didn't feel Warner really needed him back and wasn't answering his questions. In April, the film's creative team decided that Elba would play a new character rather than Deadshot. This decision was made, following weeks of discussions that included Gunn and Elba, to be respectful to Smith and allow him the option to return to the role in the future. Elba later stated that Gunn never intended to cast him as Deadshot, while Gunn said he changed his mind about who Elba would portray "a lot". Gunn ultimately chose to cast Elba as Bloodsport because he liked the character in the comics. Though the film has an ensemble cast, Gunn felt Bloodsport was the main protagonist due to being the most prominent and because of the amount of character growth that he goes through. Gunn wrote King Shark with Sylvester Stallone in mind, but tested three other voice actors before asking Stallone to join the film. Stallone agreed to voice the character due to his experience working with Gunn on Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2 (2017). Gunn was looking to cast Bautista as Peacemaker, but the actor had a scheduling conflict with Zack Snyder's Army of the Dead (2021). John Cena entered talks for a role in the film that was believed to be Peacemaker in late April, as Gunn had wanted to work with Cena since seeing his performance in Trainwreck (2015). Cena made numerous unsuccessful attempts to join the DCEU prior to his casting in this film. David Dastmalchian and Daniela Melchior were respectively cast as Polka-Dot Man and Ratcatcher 2 at the end of April. Gunn said the role of Polka-Dot Man was "tailor made" for Dastmalchian, who had been friends with Gunn for a long time. In contrast, Melchior was cast from a group of 200 actors. She did a chemistry test with live rats as part of her audition process because her character controls rats in the film and had to interact with them on set. Gunn's frequent collaborator Michael Rooker was in talks to join the cast in May, while Storm Reid was cast as the daughter of Elba's character in July. Flula Borg, Nathan Fillion, and Steve Agee joined the film in August, with Agee initially reported to be portraying King Shark. Also in August, Taika Waititi entered negotiations for a role. Peter Capaldi joined the cast in early September, when Pete Davidson was in talks to make a cameo appearance during a break from his work on Saturday Night Live. Davidson agreed to join the film because his character is called "Dick Hertz", which Davidson found to be funny. A table read for the film with the full cast was held on September 11, ahead of the start of filming later that month. Gunn later announced the film's full main cast and characters: Dastmalchian as Polka-Dot Man, Cena as Peacemaker, Courtney as Captain Boomerang, Joaquín Cosío as Mateo Suarez, Fillion as T.D.K., Kinnaman as Rick Flag, Mayling Ng as Mongal, Borg as Javelin, his brother Sean Gunn as Weasel, Juan Diego Botto as Silvio Luna, Reid as Tyla, Davidson as Blackguard, Waititi as the first Ratcatcher, Alice Braga as Sol Soria, Agee, Tinashe Kajese as Flo Crawley, Melchior as Ratcatcher 2, Capaldi as Thinker, Julio Ruiz as Milton, Jennifer Holland as Emilia Harcourt, Davis as Waller, Elba as Bloodsport, Robbie as Quinn, and Rooker as Savant. Agee was the on-set reference for King Shark, and also portrays John Economos. Production designer Beth Mickle said Gunn wanted the film to be "grey and drab and monotone" until the characters arrive in Corto Maltese, which he wanted to "explode with color" like Panama and Cuba. The design team took inspiration from photos of Havana, Cuba, and São Paulo, Brazil. Gunn said the film featured the biggest sets ever built for a Warner Bros.' film, with Mickle building a set the size of three football fields for the outside of Jötunheim where the final battle was filmed, and an even bigger beach set that had real waves and a palm tree forest which Gunn called "the greatest set [he had] ever been on". The jungle featured a bamboo cage that was 8 feet (2.4 m) deep. Gunn said building a whole beach was expensive, but it was more cost-effective than using a real beach due to changing tides and the limited amount of time available for filming in a real environment. Because of the mixture of characters that Gunn selected for the film's Suicide Squad roster, there are "dorky comics costumes" alongside "modern, scary, grimdark" costumes. One of the biggest costume challenges for Gunn was creating Bloodsport's suit, from which the character can form various weapons. Robbie wears a new costume that features Harley's traditional red and black color palette, with Gunn taking inspiration from the character's costume in the video game Batman: Arkham City (2011). He wanted her jacket to have "motorcycle gang style"-writing on the back, and chose "Live fast, die clown" over other potential options "Clown AF" and "World's Best Grandpa". Gunn also removed Harley's "Rotten" facial tattoo that she had in previous DCEU films because both he and Robbie disliked it. Flag wears a yellow T-shirt with a cartoon character called "Ultra Bunny" on it. Gunn drew the character, and added the text "obstacles are opportunities" which is his slogan when directing on set. Gunn initially used a hammerhead shark design from the New 52 comics for King Shark, but found that it would be awkward to film the character with other actors due to his eyes being on the sides of his head. Gunn settled on a great white shark design that is similar to the one seen in the Harley Quinn animated series, though this was a coincidence as that series was released after filming for The Suicide Squad began. Gunn gave King Shark a dad bod to make him look less like a mammal, as well as small eyes, a big mouth, and a small head to avoid the "cute anthropomorphic beast" design seen in popular characters like Baby Groot from Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2 (2017) and The Mandalorian's Grogu. Principal photography began on September 20, 2019, at Pinewood Atlanta Studios in Atlanta, Georgia, under the working title El Dorado. Henry Braham served as cinematographer, after previously doing so for Gunn's Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2. Feige and Marvel Studios co-president Louis D'Esposito visited the set during filming. Gunn took several precautions to try to avoid details about the film leaking, such as referring to Elba's character in the script and on set as "Vigilante" to prevent his actual role from being revealed, and also not giving some of the actors script pages from after their characters' deaths. Gunn extensively storyboards his films, but the opening shot of The Suicide Squad—in which the camera rotates out of a puddle's reflection on the ground to reveal Savant bouncing a ball—was a spontaneous decision that he made on set when he saw the reflections on the ground. For a scene where Bloodsport smokes a cigarette, Elba—who has asthma and does not smoke himself—was left with tears in his eyes that had to be removed digitally since Gunn otherwise liked the shot. Gunn said the film used more practical effects than any other blockbuster comic book film, with on-set special effects provided by Dan Sudick and prosthetics created by Legacy Effects. Gunn highlighted a shot in the film where King Shark, who is created with visual effects, rips a person in half, which was done practically using special effects and prosthetics. Stunt supervisor Guy Norris served as second unit director for the car scenes in the film. Gunn explained that he rarely uses second unit directors on his films and has never liked working with them, but he enjoyed the experience of working with Norris as he was not comfortable shooting with cars and had already known Norris for a long time. Filming in Atlanta was expected to last three months before moving to Panama for a month, with Colón, Panama standing in for the streets of Corto Maltese. Gunn said the city was "beautiful but falling-apart... we were able to use all the colors but to keep the grime" as well. The cast and crew rescued several animals from the streets of Panama. Filming also took place in Porto, Portugal, and wrapped on February 28, 2020. Fred Raskin and Christian Wagner served as editors on the film. Raskin previously worked alongside Gunn on Guardians of the Galaxy (2014) and Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2. By April 2020, Gunn was editing the film at his home due to the COVID-19 pandemic, which he said had not affected post-production or the release schedule at that time. The initial assembly cut for the film was around two hours and forty minutes long, and around twenty minutes of that was soon cut down during editing. Gunn felt the film was still too long, and removed some elements such as part of Harley Quinn's separate storyline that he felt was "pushing audiences away a little bit too much", as well as a sequence with Ratcatcher, King Shark, Polka-Dot Man, and the Thinker when they exit a Corto Maltese bar. Gunn felt the latter was "pretty dynamite stuff" but it was slowing down the film and at the wrong time. A smaller scene that was cut involved Waller's aide Flo Crawley being arrested for knocking Waller out during the final battle; Gunn explained that this was a mostly unnecessary detail which made the audience feel uncomfortable since it felt less like the villain, Waller, had lost, but he included the moment in a recap of the film that begins the spin-off series Peacemaker to explain why Crawley is not in that series. In December, Gunn said editing for the film's final cut had been completed and work on the remaining visual effects, sound, and score was continuing. The final runtime is two hours and twelve minutes. Kelvin McIlwain was the visual effects supervisor for the film, with visual effects vendors including Framestore, Weta Digital, Trixter, Scanline VFX, and Cantina Creative. Gunn said the visual effects for King Shark, primarily handled by Framestore and Weta Digital, were particularly difficult to get right. In May 2020, John Murphy was set as the composer for the film. Tyler Bates, who scored all of Gunn's previous films, was originally attached to compose the score for The Suicide Squad but eventually left the project. During pre-production, Bates wrote music for Gunn to use on set as he had previously done for Gunn on the Guardians of the Galaxy films. The single "Rain" by grandson and Jessie Reyez from the film's soundtrack album was released on June 22, 2021, with the artists also expected to contribute songs individually to the album. A single from Murphy's score, "So This Is The Famous Suicide Squad", was made available on July 8. On August 6, two full albums for the film were released by WaterTower Music: one featuring Murphy's score, and a soundtrack album featuring songs from the film, including "Rain". In January 2021, at the beginning of filming for Peacemaker in Vancouver, Canada, Gunn filmed a post-credits scene for The Suicide Squad that sets-up the series. He had not planned an alternative post-credits scene before deciding to make Peacemaker. A month later, the film was fully finished. Gunn said Warner Bros. had not interfered with his vision for the film and had only given a few minor notes. He added that The Suicide Squad was the most fun he had making a film, which he attributed to prioritizing creativity over perfectionism, being in the best place mentally and emotionally of his career, having a "stupendous" cast and crew and supportive studio, and feeling that he was at the height of his directing abilities with the film. It came in under budget and had no days of additional photography. In July, the film's release date was moved up by a day to August 5. A behind-the-scenes featurette was released on August 22, 2020, during the virtual DC FanDome event. A panel for the film was held during Comic Con Experience's digital event CCXP Worlds on December 6, with James Gunn and members of the cast in attendance. The cast members discussed their characters, and a design for Elba's costume as Bloodsport was revealed. Cena decided to wear the Peacemaker costume for interviews and other promotional events as a way to familiarize the audience with the lesser-known character, which was a tactic that he had previously used when he was a professional wrestler. The film's first trailer was released on March 26, 2021, with Alex McLevy of The A.V. Club praising its jokes and action. He felt everything about the trailer perfectly captured the Suicide Squad's inherent "outlandish fun" from the comics. Anthony D'Alessandro at Deadline Hollywood felt the trailer had all the trademarks of Gunn's Guardians of the Galaxy films, noting the use of a "retro hit single" in Steely Dan's "Dirty Work", with The Verge's Jay Peters also getting "some serious Guardians of the Galaxy vibes" from the trailer. D'Alessandro and Peters both compared it to the recently released DC film Zack Snyder's Justice League and noted how the trailer was much more colorful and humorous than that film. McLevy, Jennifer Bisset and Sean Keane of CNET, and CinemaBlend's Sean O'Connell all highlighted King Shark and his R-rated scenes. The trailer was viewed 150 million times within a week of its release, breaking the record for red band trailers that was established earlier in the year by the trailer for Mortal Kombat (2021). A green band trailer was released online on April Fool's Day, after debuting in front of theatrical screenings of Godzilla vs. Kong (2021). It features new footage because Gunn did not want to use an edited version of the red band trailer as is usually done. Jennifer Ouellette at Ars Technica noted that the new trailer had a darker, more ominous tone than the red band version, without the jokes and King Shark scenes and with added character beats. Another trailer was released on June 22 by the main cast of the film in a marketing stunt where they pretended that they were leaking the trailer early. Gunn and Warner Bros. also joked about the trailer's "early release". The trailer features the song "Rain" by grandson and Jessie Reyez from the film's soundtrack album. Footage from the film is included in the music video for "Rain", which was released the next month. The Suicide Squad premiered theatrically in the United Kingdom on July 30, 2021. It was scheduled to debut in the United States on August 6, but was moved up a day to August 5, for early preview screenings. The film was also made available on the streaming service HBO Max on August 5, for a one-month premiere streaming window. This was done as part of Warner Bros.' joint theatrical and streaming release strategy for 2021 films that was announced in December 2020 amid the COVID-19 pandemic. Reflecting on this release strategy in January 2022, Gunn acknowledged suggestions that it negatively impacted on the film's box office performance and said the approach was not ideal for the film. He added that the film was widely pirated following its streaming debut, with a high quality version of the film appearing on piracy websites almost immediately after it was released on HBO Max. Internet technology company Akamai reported, based on global unlicensed streaming and torrent data, that The Suicide Squad was the sixth most pirated film between January and September 2021. Despite this, Gunn was grateful that people had been able to see the film online during the pandemic and that it had otherwise been well received. The film was made available for digital purchase and rental on September 17, 2021, after leaving its HBO Max same day premiere window. The Suicide Squad was then released on DVD, Blu-ray, and Ultra HD Blu-ray on October 26, with special features including a commentary by Gunn, deleted and extended scenes, a gag reel, three retro style trailers, breakdowns of key scenes from the film, and several making-of featurettes. The film was the top-seller for home media sales in the United States for two weeks after its release, on both the NPD Videoscan First Alert chart (which tracks combined Blu-ray and DVD sales) and the dedicated Blu-ray sales chart. According to The Numbers, it sold a combined 146,752 Blu-ray and DVD units in its first week for a total of $3.8 million. It was the fourth highest-selling title for the month of October on the VideoScan First Alert chart. The Suicide Squad grossed $55.8 million in the United States and Canada, and $112.9 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $168.7 million, against a production budget of $185 million. In the United States and Canada, the film made $12.2 million on its first day, including $4.1 million from Thursday night previews, which was the biggest first day for an R-rated film during the pandemic. That contributed to $26.2 million (47.0% of total gross) across the film's opening weekend, which was also the biggest for an R-rated film during the pandemic. Despite the pandemic-era records, the film fell short of Warner Bros. and industry projections of a $30 million opening, projections that themselves were considered low and were closer to the underperforming Birds of Prey than the successful first Suicide Squad. The film dropped 72% in its second weekend, finishing fifth with just $7.5 million. This drop was similar to those seen in the second weekends of other films released simultaneously in theaters and on HBO Max, such as Space Jam: A New Legacy (2021). It dropped 55% in its third weekend, grossing $3.4 million, before crossing $50 million in its fourth weekend with an additional $2 million. The week prior to its domestic release, the film made $6.7 million from five countries, including $4.5 million in the United Kingdom and $1.6 million in France. The Suicide Squad expanded to 69 countries, covering all major markets except Japan, in its second week of international release. It made $35 million, finishing first in Russia ($4.2 million), Mexico ($2 million), Brazil ($1.4 million), Spain ($1.3 million), and Italy ($1 million), and only dropped 25% in markets that it opened in the previous week. Even when taking into account the pandemic limiting theaters in territories such as Italy, Australia, Mexico, and South East Asia, the weekend's total grosses were below expectations. The film opened at number one in Japan the following week with $1.9 million, retained first position in Brazil, and moved to first in Australia as well. Overall, the weekend total was $17 million, down 50% from the previous week and behind new release Free Guy in many markets. The film added $8.7 million in its fourth international weekend, before passing $100 million internationally the next week with an additional $4.6 million. The United Kingdom, Russia, France, Germany, and Mexico were the leading markets for the film outside of the U.S. and Canada. The film's box office underperformance was generally attributed to its release during the COVID-19 pandemic, the fact that it was also available for streaming on HBO Max at the same time as its theatrical release, piracy allowed by the streaming release, the R-rating which limited younger audiences, the poor reception to the first Suicide Squad, and confusion from general audiences over its relationship to the first film caused by their similar titles. Anthony D'Alessandro of Deadline Hollywood felt the HBO Max availability and feelings about the first film outweighed the impacts of the pandemic, and noted that other films had made significantly more money at the box office in recent weeks. Writing for Forbes, Scott Mendelson felt that general audiences would not be compelled by Gunn's involvement and instead would see the film as a sequel without the main draws of the first film, such as Will Smith. Mendelson added that the film's $185 million budget was an "absurd amount to spend" on an R-rated film and was significantly more than what was spent on previous R-rated superhero films. He said the film required a "best-case-scenario box office" just to break even with that budget, and that did not turn out to be the case. HBO Max reported that The Suicide Squad had the second-biggest opening weekend of all the films that premiered simultaneously on the streaming service and in theaters. The service did not provide further details or data, but analytics company Samba TV, which gathers viewership data from certain Smart TVs and content providers, reported that 2.8 million U.S. households watched the film over its first four days of release on HBO Max, which placed it only behind Mortal Kombat (3.8 million) for simultaneous theater and streaming releases. Also according to Samba TV, The Suicide Squad had the biggest HBO Max debut for a DC film, ahead of both Wonder Woman 1984 (2.2 million) and Zack Snyder's Justice League (1.8 million). While discussing Nielsen Media Research's streaming ratings—which HBO Max does not participate in—for the week of the film's release, Forbes' Scott Mendelson estimated that around 369 million minutes of the film had been viewed based on Samba TV's figures, which would have placed it third on Nielsen's list of top streaming films for the week behind Netflix's Vivo (493 million minutes) and Disney+'s Jungle Cruise (407 million minutes). Samba TV later reported that 3.5 million American households had watched the film within its first week of release. This grew to 4.7 million for the first 17 days, which placed it third after Mortal Kombat (5.5 million) and Godzilla vs. Kong (5.1 million). These rankings remained the same for Samba TV's 30 day figures, which reported 5.1 million households having viewed The Suicide Squad in that time. According to Whip Media, who track viewership data for the 19 million worldwide users of their TV Time app, The Suicide Squad was the seventh-most-streamed-film of 2021 and the most-streamed-project of the year for HBO Max. On Rotten Tomatoes, The Suicide Squad holds an approval rating of 90% based on 382 reviews, with an average score of 7.5/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Enlivened by writer-director James Gunn's singularly skewed vision, The Suicide Squad marks a funny, fast-paced rebound that plays to the source material's violent, anarchic strengths." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 72 out of 100, based on 55 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale, the same score that the first film and Birds of Prey received, while PostTrak reported that 83% of audience members gave it a positive score compared to 73% for the first film. 62% told PostTrak that they would definitely recommend the film. Reviewing for The A.V. Club, Katie Rife gave the film a "B+" grade and said, "Now that superhero movies have gone from disreputable entertainment for children to global events ushered in with awed reverence, it was time for someone to come along and pop the balloon. Pulpy and outrageous, irreverent and ultraviolent, The Suicide Squad does so with a smile." Writing for Variety, Owen Gleiberman called the film what "the first Suicide Squad should have been" and said that "The Suicide Squad comes sizzlingly alive as all-cylinders comic-book moviemaking. There's a frowsy destructive joy to the staging". Clarisse Loughrey of The Independent also praised the film and considered it an improvement over Suicide Squad, writing "Gunn's distinct and self-assured vision, which he's said was left untouched and unbothered by studio interference, puts The Suicide Squad alongside the very best of modern comic-book filmmaking. His film, which now comes with an all-important 'The' at the beginning of its title, functions both as a sequel and a fresh start." Brian Truitt of USA Today gave the film 3.5 stars out of 4 and said "The Suicide Squad shifts superhero movies into a hilarious, gory and exceedingly bonkers new direction but writer/director James Gunn still makes time to show one goofy supervillain making sure another's buckled up for a plane ride headed for certain doom" and also said that the film "is a bloody marvel that blows up the superhero genre." Justin Chang from Los Angeles Times stated: "After 2016's ugly, bludgeoning Suicide Squad, I couldn't imagine liking—and could barely stomach the idea of seeing—another movie called Suicide Squad. I'm delighted to be proven wrong", and called the film "redemption for James Gunn and DC". Richard Trenholm of CNET gave the film a positive review and praised it for its themes, writing "This irreverent comic book movie takes shots at very big and serious themes, raging against Western imperialism, American foreign policy and government deception as it indicts interference in foreign countries. Representing this chilling bureaucratic evil, Amanda Waller emerges as perhaps the most hateful villain in the DC universe — certainly the coldest". Alonso Duralde of the TheWrap wrote: "The Suicide Squad is by no means perfect, but like the Deadpool movies, it's a showcase for what can happen when a superhero movie is allowed to be sprightly, self-aware, and sardonic while also indulging in hard-R violence, gore, and language. Gunn's latest creation is not without moments that drag, but when it pops, it pops brilliantly". Entertainment Weekly's Leah Greenblatt gave the film a C+ grade and wrote: "The script, accordingly, herks and jerks along with a sort of forced-festive glee, its mounting body count buffeted by goofball banter and pounding soundtrack cues. A good half of the jokes don't land, but unlike his predecessor's joyless slog, Gunn's version at least celebrates the nonsense." Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian gave the film 3 out of 5 stars, and called it "a long, loud, often enjoyable and amusing film that blitzes your eyeballs and eardrums and covers all the bases". Some critics have interpreted The Suicide Squad as a critique and even a parody of American foreign policy and noted some anti-imperialist themes, which was arguably done in greater extent than the film's predecessor. Noah Berlatsky of Foreign Policy compares the rationale of the Suicide Squad's intervention in the Corto Maltese civil war to the 2003 invasion of Iraq on the grounds of an anti-American regime purportedly gaining access to and weaponizing a destructive force such as Starro. He also notes that American interference in Corto Maltese is "as every bit as disastrous as the 2003 Iraq invasion," also commenting that The Suicide Squad depicts the U.S. government as "bumbling" and "corrupt", citing the squad's accidental slaughter of the very fighters they were supposed to protect and Amanda Waller's desire to cover up America's role in Project Starfish and ambivalence towards Starro's rampage. Reuben Baron of Comic Book Resources compares the torture and experimentation of Corto Maltese civilians in Project Starfish to the Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse scandal and allegations of prisoner torture at Guantanamo Bay detention camp. He opines that the evil actions of Silvio Luna's regime and Starro, while heinous, are "just symptomatic of the ultimate villain of The Suicide Squad: the United States government," describing Peacemaker's betrayal of the team as "misguided patriotism", and that the "heroes in this movie are those who are willing to defy the orders given to them by the government". Lucy Nichols of Counter Fire writes that the film "bizarrely, openly critiques American imperialism in Latin America", and like Baron, comments that The Suicide Squad is unusual among superhero films with its direct criticism of the U.S. government and military. Gunn began working on a spin-off series featuring Peacemaker while completing work on The Suicide Squad. In January 2021, Gunn said he had ideas for more television spin-offs beyond Peacemaker. DC Films president Walter Hamada said a month later that they had plans for more projects with Gunn, and Safran said there was potential for more spin-offs based on Suicide Squad members such as Ratcatcher and Bloodsport if a filmmaker had a unique vision for them. Gunn said in February that he did not necessarily intend to write and direct every The Suicide Squad spin-off himself, like he did for Peacemaker. In November 2022, Stallone said he would reprise his role as King Shark in the future. While completing work on The Suicide Squad during the COVID-19 pandemic, Gunn began writing a spin-off television series centered on Peacemaker. In September 2020, HBO Max ordered Peacemaker straight-to-series, with Gunn writing all eight episodes and directing five of them. Cena stars as Peacemaker, with Agee, Holland, and Davis also reprising their respective film roles. Gunn and Safran executive produce the series, which premiered in January 2022. HBO Max renewed the series for a second season a month later, with Gunn set to write and direct all episodes. Gunn revealed in January 2022 that he was developing a new television project for DC, and it was confirmed to be based on a character from The Suicide Squad at the end of the month. HBO Max had not greenlit the series, for which writing had yet to begin, but the streaming service was said to be "high" on the idea based on Gunn's enthusiasm for it. The next month, Gunn said that they had been "working heavily" on the series and it had "advanced a lot", and said more details should be revealed soon. The series was reported to feature Amanda Waller in May 2022, but Gunn stated a month later that the series was separate from a potential Amanda Waller project though there would be "some blending" of characters from Peacemaker in the series. A spin-off series featuring Amanda Waller was revealed in May 2022, with Christal Henry writing and serving as executive producer alongside Gunn and Safran. Davis was in negotiations to reprise her role and also executive produce the series, which was expected to build off Waller's appearances in Peacemaker which publicly revealed her work with the Suicide Squad. The series was revealed to be titled Waller in January 2023. In July 2021, Gunn said he had ideas for a sequel film that would go in a different direction from just assembling a new Suicide Squad team. In June 2022, Gunn said there had been discussions about a sequel to The Suicide Squad and he was considering it for his next feature film but his focus was on television for the foreseeable future following his positive experience making Peacemaker. The following June, Gunn said there would not be a sequel. This scene sets up the events of the spin-off television series Peacemaker (2022–present) "The Suicide Squad (15)". British Board of Film Classification. July 27, 2021. Archived from the original on July 31, 2021. Retrieved July 31, 2021. Rubin, Rebecca (August 4, 2021). "Box Office: 'The Suicide Squad' Targets $30 Million-Plus Opening Weekend". Variety. Archived from the original on August 6, 2021. Retrieved August 4, 2021. That isn't a bad start for pandemic times, but it's a soft debut for a film with a $185 million production budget. "The Suicide Squad". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved February 5, 2023. "The Suicide Squad (2021) – Financial Information". The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Retrieved February 5, 2023. Couch, Aaron (January 15, 2022). "'Peacemaker' Star Jennifer Holland's Journey to Harcourt". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 15, 2022. Retrieved January 16, 2022. Vary, Adam B. (August 22, 2020). "'The Suicide Squad' First Look, Full Cast Revealed by Director James Gunn at DC FanDome". Variety. Archived from the original on August 22, 2020. Retrieved August 22, 2020. Libbey, Dirk (August 21, 2020). "Margot Robbie Explains How Harley Quinn Is Different In The Suicide Squad". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on August 22, 2020. Retrieved April 7, 2021. Weintraub, Steve (August 15, 2021). "James Gunn on 'The Suicide Squad' Deleted Scenes, Creating "Harley-Vision," His Filmmaking Process and More". Collider. Archived from the original on August 15, 2021. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Goldman, Eric (July 16, 2021). "James Gunn on Why He Wanted to Take Risks With 'The Suicide Squad'". Fandom. Archived from the original on July 16, 2021. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Crow, David (April 27, 2021). "The Suicide Squad: James Gunn Talks the Creative Freedom of That R-Rating". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on April 27, 2021. Retrieved May 8, 2021. Schedeen, Jesse (June 25, 2021). "The Suicide Squad: Exclusive Trailer Breakdown With Director James Gunn". IGN. Archived from the original on June 27, 2021. Retrieved June 27, 2021. Bonomolo, Cameron (December 6, 2020). "The Suicide Squad Reveals New Look at Idris Elba's Badass and Brutal Bloodsport". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on December 7, 2020. Retrieved December 7, 2020. Hunter, Rob (October 27, 2021). "43 Things We Learned from 'The Suicide Squad' Commentary with James Gunn". Film School Rejects. Archived from the original on October 27, 2021. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (July 12, 2021). "King Shark – Nanaue TDK – Cory Pitzner Peacemaker – Christopher Smith Mongal – Mongal Weasel – Unknown Captain Boomerang – Digger Harkness" (Tweet). Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Harley, Nick (April 27, 2021). "The Suicide Squad: John Cena and the Secrets of Peacemaker". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on April 28, 2021. Retrieved May 20, 2021. Horner, Al (August 2021). "Episode 26: The Suicide Squad with James Gunn". Script Apart (Podcast). Retrieved February 19, 2022. Larsen, Peter (August 2, 2021). "Why 'The Suicide Squad' is not a sequel, according to James Gunn and Joel Kinnaman". Daily Democrat. Archived from the original on August 2, 2021. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Clarke, Cass (January 25, 2021). "The Suicide Squad Isn't a Sequel – But It's Not Quite a Reboot". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved February 7, 2021. Haring, Bruce (November 14, 2020). "'The Suicide Squad' Adds Sylvester Stallone To Its Lineup, Confirmed By James Gunn On Instagram". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 14, 2020. Retrieved November 14, 2020. Peters, Jay (March 26, 2021). "The Suicide Squad's first trailer steals all the color from the Snyder Cut". The Verge. Archived from the original on March 27, 2021. Retrieved March 27, 2021. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (March 27, 2021). "One final King Shark bit of trivia from #TheSuicideSquad. In this bit of footage, the Shark is CG of course, but the person is real. Well, not a real person, but a practical effect by our SFX & prosthetics teams that I shot" (Tweet). Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Salazar, Andrew J. (August 4, 2021). "Steve Agee on Becoming King Shark in 'The Suicide Squad' – Exclusive Interview". DiscussingFilm. Archived from the original on August 4, 2021. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Anderton, Ethan (August 22, 2020). "The Suicide Squad DC FanDome Panel Recap: Meet the Bad Guys". /Film. Archived from the original on August 24, 2020. Retrieved August 24, 2020. Itzkoff, Dave (July 14, 2021). "James Gunn Nearly Blew Up His Career. Now He's Back With 'The Suicide Squad'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 16, 2021. Retrieved July 18, 2021. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (April 3, 2021). "We haven't even begun to show you the truth behind Abner Krill – I can't wait for you to discover his many dark & sad secrets. #TheSuicideSquad #PolkaDotMan @Dastmalchian" (Tweet). Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Kurp, Josh (July 16, 2021). "It's Time To Meet King Shark, Ratcatcher 2, And The Rest Of 'The Suicide Squad' Weirdos In A New Featurette". Uproxx. Archived from the original on July 17, 2021. Retrieved July 17, 2021. Edwards, Richard (July 1, 2021). "The Suicide Squad: Everything we learnt from the set of 2021's most exciting superhero movie". Total Film. Archived from the original on July 1, 2021. Retrieved July 2, 2021. Erin, Brady (August 15, 2021). "'The Suicide Squad': The Bizarre Empowerment of Polka-Dot Man". Collider. Archived from the original on August 15, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2022. Holland, Patrick (August 5, 2021). "The Suicide Squad's David Dastmalchian has a very personal connection to Polka Dot Man". CNET. Archived from the original on August 6, 2021. Retrieved August 7, 2021. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (July 4, 2021). "No. It's Cleo Cazo. #TheSuicideSquad" (Tweet). Archived from the original on September 5, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Collis, Clark (July 12, 2021). "This time it's war: How James Gunn took 'The Suicide Squad' over the top". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 12, 2021. Retrieved July 18, 2021. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (July 12, 2021). "Quick guide to #TheSuicideSquad members: Javelin – Gunter Braun Bloodsport – Robert Dubois Ratcatcher 2 – Cleo Cazo Polka-Dot Man – Abner Krill Blackguard – Richard Hertz Savant – Brian Durlin The Thinker – Gaius Grieves Harley Quinn – Harleen Quinzel" (Tweet). Archived from the original on July 13, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Michel, Katie (August 8, 2021). "Who is Javelin? Flula Borg's Suicide Squad Character Explained". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved August 12, 2021. Crow, David (August 6, 2021). "The Suicide Squad: Who Lives and Who Dies". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on February 20, 2022. Retrieved February 20, 2022. Guerrasio, Jason (March 30, 2019). "Jai Courtney says he will be back playing Captain Boomerang in the James Gunn 'Suicide Squad' movie". Business Insider. Axel Springer SE. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved April 6, 2019. Mancuso, Vinnie (September 23, 2020). "'The Suicide Squad': Captain Boomerang Is the "Same Shitbag Liability," Says Jai Courtney". Collider. Archived from the original on September 25, 2020. Retrieved May 14, 2021. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (July 4, 2021). "[In response to "Is it true the Thinker's real name is Gaius Grieves?"] Yes" (Tweet). Archived from the original on July 5, 2021. Retrieved July 4, 2021 – via Twitter. Wasserman, Ben (September 19, 2021). "The Suicide Squad: Why The Thinker's Gorier Death Didn't Make the Final Cut". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on September 20, 2021. Retrieved February 20, 2022. Mithaiwala, Mansoor (August 5, 2021). "The Suicide Squad Cast, Character & DC Cameo Guide". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on August 6, 2021. Retrieved August 7, 2021. Gillespie, Daniel (April 7, 2021). "The Suicide Squad: Pete Davidson Took His Role Because Of The Character's Crude Name". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 7, 2021. Retrieved April 7, 2021. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (August 22, 2020). "Amanda Waller (played by @violadavis), John Economos (played by @steveagee) & Flo Crawley (played by Tinashe Kajese – not revealed in today's materials – well until now) – are all from those books" (Tweet). Archived from the original on November 15, 2020. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. D'Alessandro, Anthony (October 29, 2020). "'The Suicide Squad' HBO Max Spinoff Series 'Peacemaker' Adds Steve Agee". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved October 29, 2020. D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 11, 2020). "'Peacemaker': Robert Patrick, Jennifer Holland & Chris Conrad Also Join HBO Max 'Suicide Squad' Spinoff Series". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved November 11, 2020. Parker, Ryan (April 1, 2021). "New 'Suicide Squad' Trailer Confirms Nathan Fillion Playing Arm-Fall-Off-Boy". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 1, 2021. Retrieved April 7, 2021. Hickson, Colin (October 29, 2020). "James Gunn's The Suicide Squad Involves Nazi Prisons and Experiments". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved December 4, 2020. Brooks, Nicholas (April 1, 2021). "The Suicide Squad Reveals One New Villain Is Truly Evil". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on April 1, 2021. Retrieved July 17, 2021. Schaeffer, Sandy (April 2, 2021). "The Suicide Squad's Weasel Was Inspired by Bloom County's Bill the Cat". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on April 2, 2021. Retrieved April 7, 2021. Hibberd, James (September 13, 2019). "James Gunn reveals all 24 actors cast for The Suicide Squad". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 18, 2019. Retrieved December 4, 2020. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (March 26, 2021). "Oh, that? That's Milton" (Tweet). Archived from the original on September 5, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Dick, Jeremy (July 15, 2021). "Sean Gunn Is Calendar Man in New The Suicide Squad Character Trailer". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on July 16, 2021. Retrieved July 15, 2021. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (October 29, 2020). "Good eye, Justin! Yes, John Ostrander – the creator of the late '80s Squad in the comics – who just happens to have started in the entertainment industry as an actor (he's really good!) – plays Dr. Fitzgibbon in the #TheSuicideSquad" (Tweet). Archived from the original on August 4, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Blackehart, Stephen [@blackehart] (May 24, 2021). "@jamesgunn let the cat out of the bag today. It's a small role, but I'm playing this guy, Briscoe (the pilot), in #TheSuicideSquad. I had a blast hanging out with all the cool characters on the set". Retrieved June 27, 2021 – via Instagram. Collis, Clark (July 14, 2021). "One of the rodent performers in 'The Suicide Squad' was named Crisp Ratt". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 14, 2021. Retrieved August 17, 2021. Kroll, Justin (March 2, 2016). "Will Smith, David Ayer Reteaming on Max Landis Spec 'Bright'". Variety. Archived from the original on September 29, 2016. Retrieved March 5, 2016. Siegal, Lucas (July 31, 2016). "Suicide Squad's Karen Fukuhara Pitches Her Katana Spin-Off Idea". ComicBook.com. Retrieved November 27, 2022. Bell, Crystal (April 14, 2016). "Suicide Squad Director David Ayer Wants to Make an R-Rated Sequel Happen". MTV. Archived from the original on July 23, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Kit, Borys (December 13, 2016). "David Ayer, Margot Robbie Reteam for All-Female DC Villains Movie 'Gotham City Sirens' (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 13, 2017. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Kit, Borys (February 15, 2017). "Warner Bros. Courts Mel Gibson to Direct 'Suicide Squad' Sequel". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 16, 2017. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Kroll, Justin (February 15, 2017). "Suicide Squad 2: Mel Gibson, Jonathan Levine, Ruben Fleischer Among Directors Being Considered for Sequel". Variety. Archived from the original on February 16, 2017. Retrieved September 22, 2019. Goldberg, Matt (March 17, 2017). "Rumor: David Goyer Could Direct Suicide Squad 2 or Green Lantern Corps". Collider. Archived from the original on March 17, 2017. Retrieved September 22, 2019. Kit, Borys (March 15, 2017). "'Suicide Squad 2' Lands 'Legend of Tarzan' Writer (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 9, 2017. Retrieved September 7, 2017. Fleming, Mike Jr. (July 11, 2017). "Jaume Collet-Serra Frontrunner For 'Suicide Squad' Sequel". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 12, 2017. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Kit, Borys (July 11, 2017). "'Suicide Squad 2': 'The Shallows' Helmer Frontrunner to Direct". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 13, 2017. Retrieved September 7, 2017. Deckelmeir, Joe (March 13, 2018). "Exclusive: Zak Penn Wants To Expand The Matrix Universe". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 19, 2018. Retrieved September 22, 2019. Fleming, Mike Jr. (July 31, 2017). "Jaume Collet-Serra To Direct Dwayne Johnson In 'Jungle Cruise:' No 'Suicide Squad 2'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 31, 2017. Retrieved July 31, 2017. Kroll, Justin (June 7, 2019). "Jaume Collet-Serra Eyed to Direct DC's 'Black Adam' Starring Dwayne Johnson". Variety. Archived from the original on June 7, 2019. Retrieved June 7, 2019. Fleming, Mike Jr. (August 22, 2017). "The Joker Origin Story On Deck: Todd Phillips, Scott Silver, Martin Scorsese Aboard WB/DC Film". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 23, 2017. Retrieved August 23, 2017. Kroll, Justin [@krolljvar] (August 29, 2017). "So hearing at the earliest, SUICIDE SQUAD 2 won't go in to production until fall 2018 because of Smith's schedule with Aladdin and Gemini" (Tweet). Archived from the original on August 6, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Fleming, Mike Jr. (September 6, 2017). "Gavin O'Connor To Direct 'Suicide Squad 2'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 10, 2017. Retrieved September 7, 2017. Kroll, Justin (September 6, 2017). "'Suicide Squad 2': Gavin O'Connor to Write and Direct Sequel". Variety. Archived from the original on September 7, 2017. Retrieved September 7, 2017. Gonzalez, Umberto (November 7, 2017). "How 'Suicide Squad 2' May Introduce The Rock's Black Adam (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on April 14, 2018. Retrieved April 15, 2018. Hood, Cooper (October 31, 2020). "Early Suicide Squad 2 Story Had Black Adam As Villain". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved November 12, 2020. Kroll, Justin (January 11, 2018). "Suicide Squad 2: Michael De Luca Joins Charles Roven on Producer Team". Variety. Archived from the original on January 11, 2018. Retrieved October 15, 2019. Kit, Borys; Couch, Aaron (June 8, 2018). "'Suicide Squad' Sequel Gets New Writers". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 10, 2018. Retrieved June 8, 2018. Fisher, Jacob (September 15, 2018). "Todd Stashwick Talks '12 Monkeys', 'Kim Possible', 'Suicide Squad 2 & More. (Exclusive)". Discussing Film. Archived from the original on March 26, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2019. Santangelo, Nick (October 9, 2018). "Birds of Prey Reportedly Why Suicide Squad 2 Lost Its Latest Director". IGN. Archived from the original on October 10, 2018. Retrieved April 17, 2019. Coach, Aaron (March 10, 2021). "How Joe Manganiello's 'Deathstroke' Ideas Seeped Into 'Zack Snyder's Justice League'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 11, 2021. Retrieved March 10, 2021. Breznican, Anthony (March 12, 2021). "Justice League: The Untold Story of Cyborg and Deathstroke". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on March 12, 2021. Retrieved March 14, 2021. Fleming, Mike Jr. (October 9, 2018). "James Gunn Boards 'Suicide Squad 2' To Write And Possibly Direct". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 9, 2018. Retrieved October 9, 2018. Kit, Borys; Couch, Aaron (July 20, 2018). "James Gunn Fired as Director of 'Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 21, 2018. Retrieved July 20, 2018. Kit, Borys (August 8, 2018). "James Gunn in Demand for Major Studio Movies After Disney Firing". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 9, 2018. Retrieved August 10, 2018. Kaye, Don (February 4, 2019). "Report: Before The Suicide Squad, James Gunn was offered Superman". Syfy Wire. Archived from the original on February 28, 2019. Retrieved February 28, 2019. Butler, Mary Anne (October 9, 2018). "David Ayer, Dave Bautista Respond to James Gunn Suicide Squad 2 News". Bleeding Cool. Archived from the original on September 27, 2019. Retrieved October 9, 2018. Travis, Ben (October 29, 2020). "The Suicide Squad: James Gunn Reconnected With Marvel One Day After Joining DC Movie". Empire. Archived from the original on October 29, 2020. Retrieved October 29, 2020. Couch, Aaron; McClintock, Pamela (January 30, 2019). "'The Batman,' 'The Suicide Squad' Set 2021 Release Dates". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 31, 2019. Retrieved January 30, 2019. Chichizola, Corey (June 15, 2020). "James Gunn Reveals Hilarious Story Behind The Suicide Squad's Title". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on July 18, 2020. Retrieved January 16, 2021. Kit, Borys (January 30, 2019). "James Gunn in Talks to Direct 'Suicide Squad' Sequel (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 31, 2019. Retrieved January 16, 2021. Mancuso, Vinnie (July 6, 2021). "'The Suicide Squad' Producer Explains How the Film Connects to 'Suicide Squad': "We Don't Address It"". Collider. Archived from the original on July 6, 2021. Retrieved July 18, 2021. Kit, Borys (March 6, 2019). "Idris Elba in Talks to Replace Will Smith in 'Suicide Squad' Sequel (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 7, 2019. Retrieved April 6, 2019. Travis, Ben (October 26, 2020). "The Suicide Squad: James Gunn On How It Relates To David Ayer's Film, And Why It's Different From Guardians – Exclusive Images". Empire. Archived from the original on October 26, 2020. Retrieved December 4, 2020. Davis, Brandon (July 6, 2021). "The Suicide Squad Producer Rules Out Connections To Previous Film". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on July 6, 2021. Retrieved July 6, 2021. Beasley, Tom (August 22, 2020). "James Gunn unveils 'The Suicide Squad' character list". Yahoo! Movies UK. Archived from the original on August 22, 2020. Retrieved August 24, 2020. Mancuso, Vinnie (July 6, 2021). "James Gunn and 'The Suicide Cast' Break Down That Hard-R Rating: "Heads Will Absolutely Blow Up"". Collider. Archived from the original on July 6, 2021. Retrieved July 18, 2021. Crow, David (May 11, 2021). "The Suicide Squad: King Shark Was First New Character James Gunn Added to Roster". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on May 11, 2021. Retrieved May 17, 2021. Foutch, Haleigh (July 29, 2016). "'Suicide Squad': David Ayer Reveals Which Fan-Favorite Villian Was Almost on the Squad". Collider. Archived from the original on July 30, 2016. Retrieved May 17, 2021. Sneider, Jeff (March 7, 2019). "'Suicide Squad 2' Exclusive: Meet the New Characters James Gunn Will Introduce in Sequel". Collider. Archived from the original on March 8, 2019. Retrieved May 3, 2019. Anderson, Jenna (September 9, 2020). "The Suicide Squad: James Gunn Says He Considered Using Sportsmaster". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on September 11, 2020. Retrieved September 12, 2020. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (August 30, 2020). "@Mind7Lazy Dog Welder was considered of course. But, you know, being an animal lover, I'm not sure it's something I'd personally want to see expressed cinematically" (Tweet). Archived from the original on October 29, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (July 3, 2021). "When I first considered taking the job of writing #TheSuicideSquad I kept a file folder of characters I was considering. Here are just a few (of many) that didn't make the cut (for now!)" (Tweet). Archived from the original on December 12, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (July 3, 2021). "Every character in #TheSuicideSquad was chosen for a purpose, great or small, and although I love many of these other characters, they didn't serve the story quite as well" (Tweet). Archived from the original on July 26, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (July 3, 2021). "I am of course open to using them in the future. And there are many more wonderful @DCComics characters where these came from. See #TheSuicideSquad in theaters next month!" (Tweet). Archived from the original on July 28, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (July 3, 2021). "@CartoonGuy6372 @DCComics I considered Black Manta – @yahya is a great guy and great actor – but his power set wasn't helpful to my story" (Tweet). Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (August 30, 2020). "@freekbass I don't imagine Waller would have any use for him, which is why he's never been in the Suicide Squad comics" (Tweet). Archived from the original on August 8, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (August 30, 2020). "@gutts92 I love Kite Man but he's been fucked with (and used as a punchline) so much in the comics – sometimes in wonderful ways – I didn't think it was the freshest way to go. But who knows what the future holds" (Tweet). Archived from the original on August 14, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (July 3, 2021). "@actionremakepod @DCComics Yes, I considered him. But I was pretty much only using actual villains (other than Flag), so I ruled him out pretty early. Same reason I didn't use Katana" (Tweet). Archived from the original on August 1, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Sepinwall, Alan (February 17, 2022). "'They Let Me Do Whatever I Want': James Gunn on the 'Peacemaker' Finale". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 17, 2022. Retrieved February 20, 2022. Kroll, Justin (February 27, 2019). "Will Smith Exits 'Suicide Squad' Sequel (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on February 28, 2019. Retrieved December 4, 2020. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (September 6, 2020). "I rarely write roles for actors I've never met, but I did exactly that for @idriselba in #TheSuicideSquad & couldn't be happier I did – you went beyond my expectations as an actor AND as a human being. I can't wait for folks to see you as #Bloodsport. Happy Birthday, my friend!" (Tweet). Archived from the original on September 18, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Kroll, Justin (April 5, 2019). "'The Suicide Squad': Deadshot Removed from Sequel as Idris Elba Moves to New Character (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved April 6, 2019. Mullally, William (July 1, 2021). "Redemption Song: James Gunn, Idris Elba and company talk The Suicide Squad". Esquire Middle East. Archived from the original on July 1, 2021. Retrieved July 18, 2021. Guerrasio, Jason (February 17, 2022). "Hollywood broke Scott Eastwood's heart, but he's not giving up — yet". Insider. Retrieved June 3, 2023. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (March 27, 2021). ""I wrote this role for you in The Suicide Squad. It won't take too much of your time." "Oh yeah?" "Yeah. It's a big, kinda chubby, human-eating shark." Laughs. "Anything for you, brother." @TheSlyStallone #TheSuicideSquad" (Tweet). Archived from the original on August 20, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. O'Connell, Sean (July 15, 2021). "Why King Shark Was A 'Very, Very Difficult' Suicide Squad Character To Create, Until Sylvester Stallone Helped". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on July 16, 2021. Retrieved July 15, 2021. Stevens, Colin (April 17, 2019). "John Cena in Talks to Join Suicide Squad 2, Margot Robbie Returns as Harley Quinn". IGN. Archived from the original on April 17, 2019. Retrieved May 3, 2019. Hibberd, James (January 6, 2021). "Zack Snyder reveals a first look at his zombie heist Netflix movie Army of the Dead". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 6, 2021. Retrieved January 16, 2021. Galuppo, Mia (April 17, 2019). "John Cena Eyed for Role in 'Suicide Squad' Sequel". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 17, 2019. Retrieved April 18, 2019. Burlingame, Russ (February 23, 2021). "The Suicide Squad's James Gunn Reveals Why He Cast John Cena as Peacemaker". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on February 23, 2021. Retrieved February 27, 2021. Couch, Aaron; Kit, Borys (April 29, 2019). "James Gunn's 'The Suicide Squad' Casts 'Ant-Man' Actor David Dastmalchian (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 30, 2019. Retrieved April 29, 2019. Kroll, Justin (April 30, 2019). "Newcomer Daniela Melchior Eyed for Ratcatcher Role in 'Suicide Squad' Sequel (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on May 1, 2019. Retrieved June 1, 2019. Davids, Brian (August 5, 2021). "James Gunn on 'The Suicide Squad,' "Grounded" 'Peacemaker' and the Day Kevin Feige Came to Set". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 5, 2021. Retrieved August 7, 2021. Gonzalez, Umberto (May 9, 2019). "Michael Rooker in Talks to Join Cast of 'The Suicide Squad' (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on January 17, 2022. Retrieved January 17, 2022. Kit, Borys (July 10, 2019). "Storm Reid Joins Idris Elba in James Gunn's 'The Suicide Squad'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 10, 2019. Retrieved July 12, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 19, 2019). "'Pitch Perfect 2's Flula Borg Joins James Gunn's 'The Suicide Squad'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 19, 2019. Retrieved August 19, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 25, 2019). "Nathan Fillion Boarding James Gunn's 'The Suicide Squad'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 25, 2019. Retrieved August 25, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 24, 2019). "Comedian Steve Agee Joining James Gunn's 'Suicide Squad' Gang". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 24, 2019. Retrieved August 24, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 27, 2019). "Taika Waititi In Talks For Role In James Gunn's 'Suicide Squad'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 27, 2019. Retrieved August 27, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (September 3, 2019). "'Doctor Who's Peter Capaldi Joining James Gunn's 'The Suicide Squad'; Is 'SNL's Pete Davidson Next?". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 3, 2019. Retrieved September 3, 2019. Mancuso, Vinnie (July 6, 2021). "What Is 'The Suicide Squad' Actually About? Jotunheim, Secret Nazi Fortresses, a Military Coup, and More". Collider. Archived from the original on July 6, 2021. Retrieved July 18, 2021. Travis, Ben (July 5, 2021). "The Suicide Squad Is 'An Unedited Version Of James Gunn' – Exclusive Images". Empire. Archived from the original on July 5, 2021. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Meyer, Joshua (June 29, 2021). "Here's Why Harley Quinn's Face Tattoo Was Removed for 'The Suicide Squad'". /Film. Archived from the original on June 29, 2021. Retrieved June 30, 2021. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (March 27, 2021). "I did tests with the hammerhead design, which I love & originally thought I'd use. But having eyes on the sides far apart made it incredibly awkward shooting interactions with other people. You couldn't really see him looking at the other person & the shots tended to be too wide" (Tweet). Archived from the original on December 20, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (March 27, 2021). "I love that design & the Harley Quinn show & @RonFunches version, but it was a complete coincidence as we were shooting a year before they debuted. @TheSlyStallone's version (developed by @steveagee on set) is very different" (Tweet). Archived from the original on August 16, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (March 27, 2021). "But I was insistent on the dad-bod from the beginning as I didn't think King Shark would have such mammalian body structure" (Tweet). Archived from the original on August 6, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (March 27, 2021). "Yes, I realize he's cute: strange since we actively avoided neotenic designs used on cute anthropomorphic beasts to elicit that evolutionary "awww." Think Baby Groot/Yoda. His eyes are small, not big. His mouth is big, not small. And his head is tiny" (Tweet). Archived from the original on September 24, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Schmidt, J.K. (September 20, 2019). "James Gunn Reveals The Suicide Squad Begins Filming". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on September 21, 2019. Retrieved September 22, 2019. Barnhardt, Adam (March 10, 2019). "'Suicide Squad 2' Working Title Revealed". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on May 21, 2020. Retrieved February 19, 2022. DiscussingFilm [@DiscussingFilm] (July 7, 2019). "Cinematographer Henry Braham ('Guardians of the Galaxy Vol 2', 'Maleficent: Mistress Of All Evil') has joined the crew for James Gunn's 'The Suicide Squad'. (Exclusive)" (Tweet). Archived from the original on August 11, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Barnhardt, Adam (September 13, 2020). "James Gunn Says Kevin Feige Visited The Suicide Squad Set, Reassures Fans There's No Marvel and DC Feud". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on September 14, 2020. Retrieved November 2, 2020. Bui, Hoai-Tran (June 23, 2021). "'The Suicide Squad' Director James Gunn Went to Extreme Lengths to Keep Character Deaths a Secret on Set". /Film. Archived from the original on June 23, 2021. Retrieved June 24, 2021. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (March 4, 2020). "CGI's important. But I used practical effects whenever possible with #TheSuicideSquad – including the biggest, most beautiful sets I've ever seen by Beth Mickle, real locations, real costumes by Judianna Makovsky, pyrotechnics by Dan Sudick, prosthetic effects by Legacy & more" (Tweet). Archived from the original on August 12, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (February 8, 2021). "I pick the 2nd unit directors. I didn't use a 2nd unit director on Vol 2, & very little on my other films. I never liked using them until working with my old friend Guy Norris on one scene in The Suicide Squad, an experience I enjoyed" (Tweet). Archived from the original on February 9, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Davis, Brandon (September 13, 2019). "James Gunn's The Suicide Squad to Begin Filming in Atlanta, Head to Panama". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on September 14, 2019. Retrieved September 14, 2019. ""There is no place like Porto", as the Invicta is under the Hollywood's radar, this time starring in 'The Suicide Squad'". Porto.pt. July 30, 2021. Archived from the original on August 2, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2022. Collis, Clark (February 28, 2020). "James Gunn announces shooting has wrapped on The Suicide Squad". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 29, 2020. Retrieved February 28, 2020. Fisher, Jacob (September 15, 2019). "Fred Raskin Joins 'The Suicide Squad' (Exclusive)". DiscussingFilm. Archived from the original on September 16, 2019. Retrieved November 26, 2020. Moreau, Jordan (April 12, 2020). "'Guardians of the Galaxy 3,' 'The Suicide Squad' Won't Be Delayed, Says James Gunn". Variety. Archived from the original on April 12, 2020. Retrieved April 12, 2020. Outlaw, Kofi (January 14, 2022). "Peacemaker: James Gunn Explains Why Opening Shows Deleted The Suicide Squad Scene". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 14, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Anderson, Jenna (December 6, 2020). "The Suicide Squad: James Gunn Says the Movie Is Almost Finished". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved December 7, 2020. Frei, Vincent (August 22, 2020). "The Suicide Squad". Art of VFX. Archived from the original on September 20, 2020. Retrieved November 26, 2020. Pearson, Ben (May 7, 2020). "Exclusive: 'The Suicide Squad' Score to Be Composed By John Murphy". /Film. Archived from the original on May 8, 2020. Retrieved May 8, 2020. "John Murphy to Score James Gunn's 'The Suicide Squad'". Film Music Reporter. May 7, 2020. Archived from the original on May 8, 2020. Retrieved January 17, 2021. Carter, Josh (June 22, 2021). "grandson and Jessie Reyez team up on "Rain" for 'The Suicide Squad'–listen". Alternative Press. Archived from the original on June 22, 2021. Retrieved June 27, 2021. Malhotra, Rahul (July 9, 2021). "James Gunn Reveals Playlist of Songs He Almost Used for 'The Suicide Squad'". Collider. Archived from the original on July 9, 2021. Retrieved July 11, 2021. "'The Suicide Squad' Score Album Details". Film Music Reporter. August 5, 2021. Archived from the original on August 5, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2022. "'The Suicide Squad' Soundtrack Album Details". Film Music Reporter. August 5, 2021. Archived from the original on August 5, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2022. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (February 5, 2021). "@JustEdLeng #TheSuicideSquad is fully finished and cut and I made every single choice and they never once even slightly interfered. They gave very few notes – they were usually good and minor and I took them if I wanted to and didn't if I didn't want to. Warners was creatively amazing" (Tweet). Archived from the original on May 19, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Warner, Sam (January 29, 2021). "Marvel and DC's James Gunn reveals his favourite ever movie to direct". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on January 29, 2021. Retrieved February 7, 2021. Couch, Aaron (August 4, 2021). "Margot Robbie and 'The Suicide Squad' Team Reflect on Script "No One Could Pull" Off But James Gunn". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 4, 2021. Retrieved August 7, 2021. Melendez, Marcos (July 9, 2021). "New 'The Suicide Squad' Poster and Early Preview Screening Date Revealed by James Gunn". Collider. Archived from the original on July 10, 2021. Retrieved July 11, 2021. Elderkin, Beth (August 22, 2020). "Your Explosive First Look at James Gunn's The Suicide Squad Is Here". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on August 24, 2020. Garner, Glenn (February 24, 2022). "John Cena on Peacemaker Season 2, Possibilities of a Crossover with Dwayne Johnson's Black Adam". People. Archived from the original on February 24, 2022. Retrieved February 26, 2022. McLevy, Alex (March 27, 2021). "The trailer for James Gunn's The Suicide Squad is finally here". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on March 27, 2021. Retrieved March 27, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 26, 2021). "'The Suicide Squad' Trailer: Margot Robbie, Idris Elba, John Cena & More In A Ton Of James Gunn Fun". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 27, 2021. Retrieved March 27, 2021. Bisset, Jennifer; Keane, Sean (March 26, 2021). "The Suicide Squad trailer is here, and the film looks wonderfully bonkers". CNET. Archived from the original on March 27, 2021. Retrieved March 27, 2021. O'Connell, Sean (March 26, 2021). "James Gunn's The Suicide Squad Trailer Has A Crazy Harley Quinn And King Shark Ripping A Man In Half". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on March 27, 2021. Retrieved March 27, 2021. El-Mahmoud, Sarah (April 3, 2021). "James Gunn's The Suicide Squad Has Broken A Huge Trailer Record". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on April 3, 2021. Retrieved April 7, 2021. Ouellette, Jennifer (April 2, 2021). "Not an April Fool's joke: Theatrical trailer for The Suicide Squad drops". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on April 2, 2021. Retrieved April 7, 2021. Ferme, Antonio (June 22, 2021). "New 'Suicide Squad' Trailer Leaks Online Early". Variety. Archived from the original on June 22, 2021. Retrieved June 22, 2021. Blistein, Jon (July 4, 2021). "Grandson and Jessie Reyez Battle Bad Guys in New Video for 'The Suicide Squad' Song 'Rain'". Yahoo! Entertainment. Archived from the original on January 17, 2022. Retrieved January 17, 2022. Alexander, Susannah (May 11, 2021). "The Suicide Squad lands earlier release date in the UK". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on May 11, 2021. Retrieved May 15, 2021. Rubin, Rebecca; Donnelly, Matt (December 3, 2020). "Warner Bros. to Debut Entire 2021 Film Slate, Including 'Dune' and 'Matrix 4,' Both on HBO Max and In Theaters". Variety. Archived from the original on December 4, 2020. Retrieved December 4, 2020. Goldberg, Lesley; Feinberg, Daniel (January 14, 2022). "James Gunn on 'Peacemaker' and the Differences Between Marvel and DC". The Hollywood Reporter (Podcast). Retrieved January 16, 2022. Watson, R. T.; Schwartzel, Erich (August 24, 2021). "Hollywood Movies Flood Piracy Sites Hours After Release". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on August 24, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2022. Ortiz, Andi (January 26, 2022). "'Zack Snyder's Justice League,' 'Black Widow' Among 2021's Most Pirated Movies". TheWrap. Archived from the original on February 2, 2022. Retrieved February 2, 2022. Evangelista, Chris (September 8, 2021). "The Suicide Squad Blu-Ray Arrives In October And Features A James Gunn Commentary Track". /Film. Archived from the original on September 8, 2021. Retrieved January 12, 2022. Latchem, John (November 4, 2021). "'The Suicide Squad' Easily Tops Disc Sales Charts". Media Play News. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Latchem, John (November 11, 2021). "'The Suicide Squad' Tops Disc Sales Charts for Second Week". Media Play News. Archived from the original on November 12, 2021. Retrieved November 12, 2021. "The Suicide Squad". The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Retrieved October 15, 2021. Latchem, John (November 13, 2021). "'Free Guy' Tops October Disc Sales Chart". Media Play News. Archived from the original on November 14, 2021. Retrieved February 11, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 8, 2021). "'The Suicide Squad' Posts Best R-Rated Opening During Pandemic With $26.5M, But Worst For Franchise: Here's Why". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 6, 2021. Retrieved August 8, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 15, 2021). "How Ryan Reynolds & Shawn Levy's 'Free Guy' Triumphed At The Weekend Pandemic B.O. With A Great $28M+". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 16, 2021. Retrieved August 15, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 22, 2021). "'Free Guy' Posts Best Summer Second Weekend Hold During Pandemic; 'Paw Patrol' Arrests $13M – Sunday Box Office Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 23, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 29, 2021). "'Candyman' Makes The Box Office Taste Good With $22M+ Opening". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 29, 2021. Retrieved August 29, 2021. Tartaglione, Nancy (August 1, 2021). "'Jungle Cruise' Sets Sail With $62M Global Theatrical, Faces Choppy Overseas Waters; 'Suicide Squad' Slays $7M In Early Debut – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved August 4, 2021. Tartaglione, Nancy (August 8, 2021). "'The Suicide Squad' Misses Mark At $72M Global; Overseas On Par With 'Birds Of Prey' As Covid Complications Continue – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Tartaglione, Nancy (August 15, 2021). "'Free Guy' Unleashes $51M Global Bow; 'The Suicide Squad' Marches To $118M WW; 'F9' Tops $500M Overseas – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 16, 2021. Retrieved August 16, 2021. Tartaglione, Nancy (August 22, 2021). "'Free Guy' Banks $112M Global; 'Paw Patrol' Collars $35M; 'F9' & 'Quiet Place 2' Near Milestones – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 23, 2021. Retrieved August 23, 2021. Tartaglione, Nancy (August 29, 2021). "'Free Guy' Flies To $100M+ Overseas With China Assist, Global Now $180M – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 30, 2021. Retrieved August 30, 2021. Rubin, Rebecca (August 9, 2021). "Why 'The Suicide Squad' Stumbled at the Box Office". Variety. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Mendelson, Scott (August 8, 2021). "10 Reasons Why 'The Suicide Squad' Is A Box Office Disaster". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 17, 2022. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Pallotta, Frank (August 8, 2021). "'The Suicide Squad' underperformed at the box office. Here's why". CNN. Archived from the original on August 8, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 9, 2021). "'The Suicide Squad' HBO Max Weekend Viewership Off 26% From 'Mortal Kombat' In Samba TV U.S. Households". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2022. Mendelson, Scott (September 3, 2021). "Nielsen's: 'Vivo' Tops As 11-Year-Old, Not-Quite 'Suicide Squad' Movie Rocks Netflix". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 17, 2022. Retrieved January 17, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 25, 2022). "The Batman First Week Viewership On HBO Max Bigger Than Streamer's Theatrical Day & Date Titles – CinemaCon". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 25, 2022. Retrieved April 25, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 27, 2021). "'The Suicide Squad' Most Watched DC Film On HBO Max In Samba TV Households, But Trails 'Mortal Kombat'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 27, 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (January 3, 2022). "With Tentpoles Bound To Surge The 2022 Box Office, The Great Theatrical-Streaming Day & Date Experiment Goes Out Like A Dud In 2021". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 3, 2022. Retrieved January 3, 2022. Prange, Stephanie (December 27, 2021). "'Squid Game,' 'Black Widow' Top Whip Media's 2021 TV Time Charts; App Bows Personalized Rankings". Media Play News. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved January 6, 2022. "The Suicide Squad (2021)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved August 16, 2023. "The Suicide Squad Reviews". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved January 17, 2022. "The Suicide Squad is vulgar, immature, and gratuitous—and that's what's great about it". The A.V. Club. July 28, 2021. Archived from the original on July 28, 2021. Retrieved July 28, 2021. Gleiberman, Owen (July 28, 2021). "'The Suicide Squad' Review: James Gunn Stages a Do-Over With Destructive Style". Variety. Archived from the original on July 28, 2021. Retrieved July 28, 2021. "DC's semi-sequel The Suicide Squad is a vast improvement on 2016's Suicide Squad – review". The Independent. July 29, 2021. Archived from the original on July 29, 2021. Retrieved July 29, 2021. Truitt, Brian. "Review: James Gunn's 'The Suicide Squad' is a bloody marvel that blows up the superhero genre". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 30, 2021. Retrieved July 29, 2021. Chang, Justin (July 28, 2021). "'The Suicide Squad' review: Redemption for James Gunn and DC". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 28, 2021. Retrieved July 28, 2021. Trenholm, Richard. "The Suicide Squad review: A gory, glorious and deranged delight". CNET. Archived from the original on July 29, 2021. Retrieved July 29, 2021. Duralde, Alonso (July 28, 2021). "'The Suicide Squad' Film Review: Margot Robbie and a New Crew of Villains Face Certain Death with Quips on Their Lips". TheWrap. Archived from the original on July 28, 2021. Retrieved July 28, 2021. "The Suicide Squad review: James Gunn's do-over is goofier and bloodier than the original". Entertainment Weekly. July 28, 2021. Archived from the original on July 28, 2021. Retrieved July 28, 2021. Bradshaw, Peter (July 28, 2021). "The Suicide Squad review – eyeball-blitzing supervillain reboot". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 29, 2021. Retrieved July 29, 2021. Berlatsky, Noah (August 7, 2021). "'The Suicide Squad' Is a Dark Parody of America's Imperial Fiascos". Foreign Policy. Retrieved May 9, 2022. Baron, Reuben (August 9, 2021). "The Suicide Squad Is a Takedown of American Foreign Policy". Comic Book Resources. Retrieved May 9, 2022. Nichols, Lucy (August 12, 2021). "The Suicide Squad review: Gunn takes aim at US imperialism". Counterfire. Retrieved May 9, 2022. Giardina, Carolyn (December 21, 2021). "'Raya and the Last Dragon' Leads 2022 Annie Awards Feature Nominations". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 5, 2022. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Hipes, Patrick (January 26, 2022). "Costume Designers Guild Awards Nominees Include 'House Of Gucci', 'Cruella', 'Zola'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 26, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Hammond, Pete (February 22, 2022). "Critics Choice Super Awards Nominations Include 'Shang-Chi', 'Spider-Man', 'Midnight Mass' & 'Evil'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 22, 2022. Retrieved February 22, 2022. Anderson, Erik (January 14, 2022). "Georgia Film Critics winners: Licorice Pizza takes Best Pic, Best Actress, Supporting Actor". AwardsWatch. Archived from the original on January 16, 2022. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Crist, Allison; Perez, Lexy (July 22, 2021). "Golden Trailer Awards: A Quiet Place: Part II, Black Widow Among Winners". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021. Retrieved November 20, 2022. Davis, Clayton (August 2, 2022). "Golden Trailer Awards: The Batman and Top Gun: Maverick Among Nominees, Disney Leads for Studios (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on August 3, 2022. Retrieved April 12, 2023. "Winners of the 22nd Annual Golden Trailer Awards" (PDF). Golden Trailer Awards. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 12, 2022. Retrieved April 12, 2023. "'Dune,' 'Coda,' And 'Belfast' Lead The 5th Annual HCA Film Awards Nominations". Hollywood Critics Association. December 2, 2021. Archived from the original on December 2, 2021. Retrieved January 1, 2021. Grein, Paul (November 4, 2021). "Ariana Grande, Beyonce & More Vie for Hollywood Music in Media Awards: Complete Film Nominations List". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 19, 2021. Retrieved January 1, 2021. Pedersen, Erik (January 11, 2022). "Make-Up Artists & Hair Stylists Guild Awards Nominations: 'House Of Gucci', 'The Suicide Squad' & 'Legendary' Among Leaders". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 11, 2022. Retrieved January 11, 2022. Lenker, Maureen Lee (October 27, 2021). "Here are the nominees for the 2021 People's Choice Awards". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 27, 2021. Retrieved January 1, 2021. Fuster, Jeremy (December 1, 2021). "'Power of the Dog' and 'Belfast' Lead Nominations for IPA Satellite Awards". TheWrap. Archived from the original on December 2, 2021. Retrieved December 29, 2021. Tinoco, Armando (August 12, 2022). "Saturn Awards Nominations: The Batman, Nightmare Alley, Spider-Man, Better Call Saul Top List". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 12, 2022. Retrieved August 12, 2022. O'Rourke, Ryan (October 26, 2022). "Saturn Award Winners Headlined By Everything Everywhere All At Once, Top Gun Maverick, and Better Call Saul". Collider. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved April 11, 2023. Tangcay, Jazz (January 18, 2022). "'Dune' and 'Encanto' Lead Visual Effects Society Nominations". Variety. Archived from the original on January 18, 2022. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Gunn, James [@JamesGunn] (September 23, 2020). "I'm doing #Peacemaker in the time always allotted between #TheSuicideSquad & #GotGVol3. Normally I would have been taking more of a break in this space but it's Covid, I'm stuck at home, so I wrote a TV series" (Tweet). Archived from the original on August 23, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Twitter. Perine, Aaron (January 31, 2021). "The Suicide Squad Director James Gunn Has More Spinoff Ideas Beyond Peacemaker". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 31, 2021. Retrieved February 7, 2021. Ankers, Adele (January 11, 2022). "The Suicide Squad Producer Sees 'Opportunity' to Give More Characters Solo TV Spin-Offs". IGN. Archived from the original on January 11, 2022. Retrieved January 16, 2022. Vary, Adam B. (February 17, 2022). "'Peacemaker' Season Finale: James Gunn on Pulling Off [Spoilers'] Shocking Cameo". Variety. Archived from the original on February 17, 2022. Retrieved February 17, 2022. Perry, Spencer (November 10, 2022). "Sylvester Stallone Confirms King Shark Return (Exclusive)". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on November 24, 2022. Retrieved December 7, 2022. White, Peter (September 23, 2020). "'The Suicide Squad' TV Spinoff 'Peacemaker' Starring John Cena From James Gunn Ordered By HBO Max". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 23, 2020. Retrieved September 23, 2020. Silverio, Ben F. (January 13, 2022). "Why That Big Cameo In Peacemaker Episode 1 Is So Important". /Film. Archived from the original on January 11, 2022. Retrieved January 14, 2022. Goldberg, Lesley (February 10, 2021). "HBO and HBO Max Chief Details 'Game of Thrones' Expansion Plans". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021. Retrieved February 12, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (February 16, 2022). "'Peacemaker' Renewed For Season 2 By HBO Max". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 16, 2022. Retrieved February 16, 2022. Oddo, Marco Vito (January 10, 2022). "James Gunn Reveals He's Involved in Another DC TV Project". Collider. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved January 16, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony; Patten, Dominic (January 27, 2022). "James Gunn Eyeing Second 'Suicide Squad' Spinoff Series For HBO Max, Says 'Peacemaker' Has "Really Good Chance" For Season 2". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 27, 2022. Retrieved January 28, 2022. Otterson, Joe (May 3, 2022). "Viola Davis in Talks to Star as Amanda Waller in 'Peacemaker' Spinoff Series at HBO Max". Variety. Archived from the original on May 3, 2022. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Perez, Rodrigo (June 6, 2022). "James Gunn Says He's Involved In Multiple DC Projects Plus A Spinoff Show That "Blends" Characters From 'Peacemaker'". The Playlist. Archived from the original on June 6, 2022. Retrieved June 26, 2022. Kit, Borys (January 31, 2023). "DC Slate Unveiled: New Batman, Supergirl Movies, a Green Lantern TV Show, and More from James Gunn, Peter Safran". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 31, 2023. Retrieved January 31, 2023. McPherson, Christopher (June 14, 2023). "James Gunn Gives First 'Peacemaker' Season 2 Update Since Taking Over DC". Collider. Archived from the original on June 14, 2023. Retrieved June 14, 2023. Official website (Archived December 17, 2021, at the Wayback Machine) The Suicide Squad at WarnerBros.com The Suicide Squad at DC.com The Suicide Squad at IMDb The Suicide Squad at AllMovie Portals:  Film  United States  Speculative fiction  Comics