Ugolnye Kopi (Russian: У́гольные Ко́пи, lit. coal mines) is an urban locality (an urban-type settlement) in Anadyrsky District of Chukotka Autonomous Okrug, Russia, located east of Anadyr, the administrative center of the autonomous okrug, on the opposite side of the Anadyr River. It served as the administrative center of Anadyrsky District until June 2011. Population: 3,368 (2010 Census); 3,863 (2002 Census); 12,357 (1989 Census), with an estimated population as of 1 January 2015 of 3,666. It is a mainly mining town that also hosts the region's main airport. Traces of fossil flora and fauna dating to the late Cretaceous and Paleocene were discovered on the territory of modern Ugolnye Kopi in 2003, in the area known as the Golden Ridge, in the Ugolnoye and Pervomaysky fields. These areas exhibit extensive fossil flora and fauna composition; the fossilized plant remains are well-preserved. There are currently about 130 items in the Chukotka Heritage Museum in Anadyr.[failed verification] Pollen grains extracted from the shells show that for about two million years ago coniferous and deciduous forests existed on the Gold Ridge. In the sediments of the Golden Ridge, fossil remains of teeth, vertebrae, and jaw fragments have been found. It was founded at the beginning of the 20th century to provide accommodation and facilities for those working in or administering the nearby mines, hence the name, and later to provide the same services to those working in the air industry at the local airport. Within the framework of administrative divisions, Ugolnye Kopi is directly subordinated to Anadyrsky District. As a municipal division, the urban-type settlement of Ugolnye Kopi is incorporated within Anadyrsky Municipal District as Ugolnye Kopi Urban Settlement. Ugolnye Kopi is located on the road between the Ugolny Airport and Shakhtyorsky. Unlike a large number of localities in the region, Ugolnye Kopi's demographics is mainly Caucasian. The Red Cross reports that only eighty-four people in Ugolnye Kopi are of indigenous origin; the remainder are of Slavic origin. This is as a result of the settlement's reason for existence being to provide accommodation and services to the local miners, servicemen, and aircraftmen, rather than it initially being an indigenous settlement that was turned into a collective farm such as, for example, Chuvanskoye. The settlement houses all district institutions and several military units. There are various stores, a post-office, a library, a hostel for children, the District Center of Children's Art, a youth sports school, a daycare center, Chukotka Economic Lyceum, a high school, the Municipal Center of Education, and a cultural center. The settlement is also home to the main airport in the autonomous okrug, the Ugolny Airport. This is the main transport hub for the region offering vital links to all airports within the district with Chukotavia as well as Alaska through Bering Air. In summer, those arriving to the airport and heading to Anadyr may do so using a ferry crossing; however, winter arrivals need to use the ice road across the Anadyr River which leads straight into the town. In 2003, power cables were finally laid across the water from the Anadyr power station to these settlements. The use of natural gas as basic fuel will allow for the considerable improvement of the ecological situation in the autonomous okrug by decreasing the level of emissions in the atmosphere caused by coal burning. Hence the cost of power will drop, and reliability and quality of power supply will be higher. Ugolnye Kopi has a polar climate (Köppen ET) because the warmest month has an average temperature between 0 and +10 °C (32 and 50 °F). List of inhabited localities in Anadyrsky District Directive #517-rp Futé, pp. 88f "Self-Government" All-Russia Information Agency. Ugolnye Kopi (in Russian) Russian Federal State Statistics Service (2011). Всероссийская перепись населения 2010 года. Том 1 [2010 All-Russian Population Census, vol. 1]. Всероссийская перепись населения 2010 года [2010 All-Russia Population Census] (in Russian). Federal State Statistics Service. "26. Численность постоянного населения Российской Федерации по муниципальным образованиям на 1 января 2018 года". Federal State Statistics Service. Retrieved January 23, 2019. Law #148-OZ "Об исчислении времени". Официальный интернет-портал правовой информации (in Russian). June 3, 2011. Retrieved January 19, 2019. Почта России. Информационно-вычислительный центр ОАСУ РПО. (Russian Post). Поиск объектов почтовой связи (Postal Objects Search) (in Russian) Office of the Federal State Statistics Service for Khabarovsk Krai, Magadan Oblast, Jewish Autonomous Oblast and Chukotka Autonomous Okrug. Численность населения Чукотского автономного округа по муниципальным образованиям на 1 января 2018 года (in Russian) Russian Federal State Statistics Service (May 21, 2004). Численность населения России, субъектов Российской Федерации в составе федеральных округов, районов, городских поселений, сельских населённых пунктов – районных центров и сельских населённых пунктов с населением 3 тысячи и более человек [Population of Russia, Its Federal Districts, Federal Subjects, Districts, Urban Localities, Rural Localities—Administrative Centers, and Rural Localities with Population of Over 3,000] (XLS). Всероссийская перепись населения 2002 года [All-Russia Population Census of 2002] (in Russian). Всесоюзная перепись населения 1989 г. Численность наличного населения союзных и автономных республик, автономных областей и округов, краёв, областей, районов, городских поселений и сёл-райцентров [All Union Population Census of 1989: Present Population of Union and Autonomous Republics, Autonomous Oblasts and Okrugs, Krais, Oblasts, Districts, Urban Settlements, and Villages Serving as District Administrative Centers]. Всесоюзная перепись населения 1989 года [All-Union Population Census of 1989] (in Russian). Институт демографии Национального исследовательского университета: Высшая школа экономики [Institute of Demography at the National Research University: Higher School of Economics]. 1989 – via Demoscope Weekly. "Крайний Север" (Krayny Sever), №5 (1762), February 11, 2011 Culbilibino.ru. Экспонаты «под ногами». По материалам газеты «Золотая Чукотка» №27 (5336) от 14 июля 2011 г. ("Палеонтологическая коллекция главного музея округа... пополнилась образцами ископаемой флоры Чукотки", Samples of fossil flora of Chukotka were added to the paleontological collection of the main district museum... Музейный центр «Наследие Чукотки» Chukotka Heritage Museum Report. A. A. Grabovsky and Ya. V. Dyachenko, Новые палеонтологические находки из нижнеюрских-среднеплейстоценовых морских отложений Нижне-Анадырской низменности (New paleontological finds from the Lower Jurassic-Middle Pleistocene marine deposits of the Lower Anadyr Lowlands). Archived February 1, 2014, at the Wayback Machine Red Cross of Chukotka – Anadyrsky District (Archived) McKnightand Hess, pp. 235–237 "Weather Averages – Ugolnye Kopi". www.meoweather.com. Retrieved June 29, 2012. Правительство Чукотского автономного округа. Распоряжение №517-рп от 30 декабря 2008 г. «Об утверждении реестра административно-территориальных и территориальных образований Чукотского автономного округа», в ред. Распоряжения №323-рп от 27 июня 2011 г. «О внесении изменений в Распоряжение Правительства Чукотского автономного округа от 30 декабря 2008 года №517-рп». Опубликован: База данных "Консультант-плюс". (Government of Chukotka Autonomous Okrug. Directive #517-rp of December 30, 2008 On the Adoption of the Registry of the Administrative-Territorial and Territorial Formations of Chukotka Autonomous Okrug, as amended by the Directive #323-rp of June 27, 2011 On Amending the Government of Chukotka Autonomous Okrug Directive No. 517-rp of December 30, 2008. ). Дума Чукотского автономного округа. Закон №148-ОЗ от 24 ноября 2008 г. «О статусе, границах и административных центрах муниципальных образований на территории Анадырского муниципального района Чукотского автономного округа», в ред. Закона №24-ОЗ от 1 апреля 2011 г. «О внесении изменений в Приложение 2 к Закону Чукотского автономного округа "О статусе, границах и административных центрах муниципальных образований на территории Анадырского муниципального района Чукотского автономного округа"». Вступил в силу через десять дней со дня официального опубликования. Опубликован: "Ведомости", №46/1 (373/1), 28 ноября 2008 г. (Duma of Chukotka Autonomous Okrug. Law #148-OZ of November 24, 2008 On the Status, Borders, and Administrative Centers of the Municipal Formations on the Territory of Anadyrsky Municipal District of Chukotka Autonomous Okrug, as amended by the Law #24-OZ of April 1, 2011 On Amending Appendix 2 of the Law of Chukotka Autonomous Okrug "On the Status, Borders, and Administrative Centers of the Municipal Formations on the Territory of Anadyrsky Municipal District of Chukotka Autonomous Okrug". Effective as of the day which is ten days after the official publication date.). McKnight, Tom L; Hess, Darrel (2000). "Climate Zones and Types". Physical Geography: A Landscape Appreciation. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-020263-0. Petit Futé, Chukotka Ugolnye Kopi Photo Gallery More photos of Ugolnye Kopi