Galium trifidum is a species of flowering plant in the coffee family, known by the common name three-petal bedstraw. It grows widespread in the arctic, temperate and subtropical regions of the Northern Hemisphere: northern and central Asia (Siberia, the Russian Far East, China, Korea, Japan, Kazakhstan), northern and eastern Europe (Scandinavia, France, Austria, Poland, Russia, Ukraine, Baltic states) and much of North America (from Greenland and the Aleutians as far south as Oaxaca and Hispaniola). Galium trifidum is a usually perennial herb forming tangles of thin stems up to half a meter long, ringed with whorls of several linear to oval leaves. The inflorescence is a cluster of small white or pinkish flowers, each with usually three petal-like lobes in its corolla. Five subspecies are currently recognized (May 2014): Galium trifidum subsp. brevipes (Fernald & Wiegand) Á.Löve & D.Löve - Canada and the northern United States (Dakotas to Maine) Galium trifidum subsp. columbianum (Rydb.) Hultén - Russian Far East (Kamchatka, Khabarovsk, Primorye, Sakhalin), Japan, Korea, China, Taiwan, Alaska, British Columbia, Washington state, Oregon, California, Nevada, Idaho, Montana Galium trifidum subsp. halophilum (Fernald & Wiegand) Puff - Quebec, Newfoundland, Canadian Maritimes, Maine, Massachusetts Galium trifidum subsp. subbiflorum (Wiegand) Puff - Alaska, Yukon, Northwest Territories, Alberta, British Columbia, high elevations in the western United States as far south as California and New Mexico Galium trifidum subsp. trifidum - widespread throughout most of species range Lee, Sangtae; Chang, Kae Sun, eds. (2015). English Names for Korean Native Plants (PDF). Pocheon: Korea National Arboretum. p. 475. ISBN 978-89-97450-98-5. Retrieved 3 March 2019 – via Korea Forest Service. Kew World Checklist of Selected Plant Families Biota of North America Program, Galium trifidum Biota of North America Program, Galium brevipes Cody, W. J. 1996. Flora of the Yukon Territory i–xvii, 1–669. NRC Research Press, Ottawa. Voss, E. G. 1996. Michigan Flora, Part III: Dicots (Pyrolaceae-Compositae). Cranbrook Inst. of Science, Ann Arbor. Moss, E. H. 1983. Flora of Alberta (ed. 2) i–xii, 1–687. University of Toronto Press, Toronto. Media related to Galium trifidum at Wikimedia Commons Jepson Manual Treatment, Galium trifidum USDA Plants Profile, Galium trifidum Go Botany, New England Wildflower Society, Galium trifidum Wildflowers of the Pacific Northwest, Turner Photographics (Bellingham Washington State USA), Galium trifidum Botanik im Bild / Flora von Österreich, Liechtenstein und Südtirol, Dreizählig-Labkraut, Rubiaceae / Galium trifidum v t e