Galium triflorum (also known as cudweed, sweet-scented bedstraw, and fragrant bedstraw) is a herbaceous plant of the family Rubiaceae. It is widespread in northern Europe (Scandinavia, Switzerland, Russia, Baltic States), eastern Asia (Kamchatka, Japan, Korea, Guizhou, Sichuan), the Middle East and Indian subcontinent (parts of North India and Nepal), and North America (from Alaska and Greenland south to Veracruz). The plant is considered a noxious weed in New York, Pennsylvania, Vermont, New Hampshire, Connecticut and Massachusetts. Galium triflorum grows on the forest floor, spreading vegetatively by means of stolons. It has whorled leaves and single fruiting peduncles rising above basal rosettes. There are six bracts in a whorl below the peduncle. Each peduncle has three fruiting structures, each having a single fuzzy ball. Stems are square in cross-section. The entire vine does not feel very coarse, but it is rough enough to stick to clothing. This species is sometimes confused with Galium odoratum, a species with traditional culinary uses. Kew World Checklist of Selected Plant Families, Galium triflorum Biota of North America Program, Galium triflorum Böcher, T. W. 1978. Greenlands Flora 326 pp. Cody, W. J. 1996. Flora of Yukon Territory i–xvii, 1–669. NRC Research Press, Ottawa. Gleason, H. A. & A.J. Cronquist. 1991. Manual of the Vascular Plants of Northeastern United States and Adjacent Canada (ed. 2) i–910. New York Botanical Garden, Bronx. Hultén, E. 1968. Flora of Alaska i–xxi, 1–1008. Stanford University Press, Stanford. Flora of China v 19 p 139, Galium triflorum Wikimedia Commons has media related to Galium triflorum. Cincinnati Nature Jepson Manual Treatment USDA Plants Profile Photo gallery Illinois Wildflowers, Sweet-scented bedstraw California Flora taxon report, Galium triflorum Blackfoot Native Plants, Potomac Montana, sweet-scented bedstraw, Galium triflorum Czech Botany, Sweet-scented bedstraw Den virtuella floran: Myskmåra, Galium triflorum v t e