Galium palustre, the common marsh bedstraw or simply marsh-bedstraw, is a herbaceous annual plant of the family Rubiaceae. This plant is widely distributed, native to virtually every country in Europe, plus Morocco, the Azores, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Western Siberia, Greenland, eastern Canada, St. Pierre & Miquelon, and parts of the United States (primarily the Michigan and the Northeast, but with isolated populations in Tennessee, Montana, Washington and Oregon). The species is classified as a noxious weed in New York, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Vermont and New Hampshire. It is considered naturalized in Kamchatka, Australia, New Zealand and Argentina. In Britain, Galium palustre is part of the British NVC Community M23 (Juncus effusus/acutiflorus – Galium palustre rush-pasture). It is a component of Purple moor grass and rush pastures - a type of Biodiversity Action Plan habitat in the UK. It occurs on poorly drained neutral and acidic soils of the lowlands and upland fringe. It is found in the South West of England, especially in Devon. USDA, NRCS (n.d.). "Galium palustre". The PLANTS Database (plants.usda.gov). Greensboro, North Carolina: National Plant Data Team. Retrieved 19 January 2016. BSBI List 2007 (xls). Botanical Society of Britain and Ireland. Archived from the original (xls) on 2015-06-26. Retrieved 2014-10-17. "USDA Plants Database". Kew World Checklist of Selected Plant Families Biota of North America Program Altervista Flora Italiana Wikimedia Commons has media related to Galium palustre. Emorsgate Seeds (King's Lynn, Norfolk UK), Marsh Bedstraw Tela Botanica, Gaillet des marais Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources Wilde Planten in Nederland en Belgie, Moeraswalstro Naturespot, recording the wildlife of Leicestershire & Rutland, marsh-bedstraw Flora-on Portugal Flore-alpes, Gaillet chétif Go Botany, New England Wildflower Society New Zealand Plant Conservation Network Plant Identification United Kingdom, West Highland Flora, Marsh-bedstraw Flora Emslandia, Pflanzen im Emsland (plants in northwestern Germany), Sumpf-Labkraut, Galium palustre v t e