Look up organoleptic in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Organoleptic properties are the aspects of food, water or other substances that create an individual experience via the senses—including taste, sight, smell, and touch. In traditional U.S. Department of Agriculture meat and poultry inspections, inspectors perform various organoleptic procedures to detect disease or contamination. Such techniques are part of the effort to detect invisible foodborne pathogens that cause food poisoning.[citation needed] Organoleptic tests are sometimes conducted to determine if food or pharmaceutical products can transfer tastes or odors to the materials and components they are packaged in. Shelf life studies often use taste, sight, and smell (in addition to food chemistry and toxicology tests) to determine whether a food product is safe to consume.[citation needed] Organoleptic analyses are, occasionally, still used when the protocol for a certain sample does not have a high enough sample throughput to meet the demand. In this case, organoleptic analyses serve as a primary screen to determine which samples must be analyzed according to the original method protocol, and which samples need no further sensory analysis.[citation needed] Measurements of pepper spiciness on the Scoville scale depend upon an organoleptic test. The quality of extracts used in phytotherapy is assessed in part using organoleptic tests. Organoleptic qualities are considered part of hurdle technology. Indicators identified organoleptically as part of European Union wine regulations are assessed when qualifying for a Quality Wine indicator. Evian water claims that it should be consumed by the expiration date marked on the bottle "to take advantage of the best organoleptic quality". Chevreul, Michel Eugène (1883). "Considérations générales sur les méthodes scientifiques et applications à la méthode a posteriori de Newton et à la methode a priori de Leibnitz". Mémoires de l'Académie des Sciences de l'Institut de France. 42. Yi, J; Zhou, L; Bi, J; Chen, Q; Liu, X; Wu, X (2016). "Influence of pre-drying treatments on physicochemical and organoleptic properties of explosion puff dried jackfruit chips". J Food Sci Technol. 53 (2): 1120–29. doi:10.1007/s13197-015-2127-2. PMC 4837745. PMID 27162392. Chauhan, Valentina Singh; Sharma, Alka (1 April 2003). "Studies on organoleptic properties of food products from fresh egg and egg powder through principal component analysis". Nahrung/Food. 47 (2): 102–05. doi:10.1002/food.200390018. PMID 12744287. Evian bottle quality and sustainability FAQs  This article incorporates public domain material from Jasper Womach. Report for Congress: Agriculture: A Glossary of Terms, Programs, and Laws, 2005 Edition (PDF). Congressional Research Service.