Lake Annecy (French: Lac d'Annecy, French pronunciation: [lak dansi]) is a perialpine lake in Haute-Savoie in France. It is named after the city of Annecy, which marks the start of the Thiou, Lake Annecy's outflow river.: 958  It is the third-largest lake in France, after the Lac du Bourget and Lac de Grand-Lieu, if the French part of Lake Geneva, which is shared between Switzerland and France, is excluded.[citation needed] It is known as "Europe's cleanest lake" because of strict environmental regulations introduced in the 1960s.[citation needed] It is a popular tourist destination known for its swimming and water sports.[citation needed] The lake was formed about 18,000 years ago, at the time the large alpine glaciers melted.[citation needed] It is fed by many small rivers from the surrounding mountains (Ire, Eau morte, Laudon, Bornette and Biolon) and a powerful underwater source, the Boubioz, at an 82-metre depth (269 ft).[citation needed] Annecy Veyrier-du-Lac Menthon-Saint-Bernard Talloires Doussard Duingt Saint-Jorioz Sévrier A cycle path goes partially around Lake Annecy past Sevrier and St Jorioz to Ugine. It has an aim to reach Albertville. The lake is around 14 km long.[citation needed] View of Lake Annecy from Talloires. Paul Cézanne. Le lac bleu, 1896. Lake Annecy, with the mountains of Dents de Lanfon, Lanfonnet and La Tournette in the background. 2023 Annecy stabbing Faverges Montmin "Activity Weekend in the French Alps". Blue Ocean. Retrieved 2020-12-10. Jean-Daniel Stanley and Thomas F. Jorstad, Direct Sediment Dispersal from Mountain to Shore, with Bypassing via Three Human-Modified Channel Systems to Lake Annecy, SE France (2004) Vol 20 (4) Journal of Coastal Research pp 958 - 969 JStor.  This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Coolidge, William Augustus Brevoort (1911). "Annecy". Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 2 (11th ed.). p. 72; see last two lines. The Lake of Annecy is... Jean-Daniel Stanley and Thomas F. Jorstad, Direct Sediment Dispersal from Mountain to Shore, with Bypassing via Three Human-Modified Channel Systems to Lake Annecy, SE France (2004) Vol 20 (4) Journal of Coastal Research pp 958 – 969 JStor. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lake Annecy. Official website of Lake Annecy (tourism information center) Association of the Friends of the Old Annecy (French) Best Cycling Climbs from Lake Annecy