Batman: The Killing Joke is a 2016 American adult animated superhero film produced by Warner Bros. Animation and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures. Featuring the DC Comics character Batman, the film is the 27th of the DC Universe Animated Original Movies, based on the graphic novel of the same name by Alan Moore and Brian Bolland. The film is directed by Sam Liu, written by Brian Azzarello and stars the voices of Kevin Conroy, Mark Hamill, Tara Strong, and Ray Wise. Like the novel, the film follows the Joker,Batman's archnemesis, and his efforts to drive police commissioner James Gordon insane as Batman works desperately to stop him. Development of a film adaptation of the novel began in 2009. Production was stalled due to the under-performance of DC's live-action adaptation of Moore's Watchmen. In 2011, Hamill expressed interest in reprising his role of the Joker for the adaptation, resulting in a fan campaign for its production. In 2015, producer Bruce Timm confirmed that an animated feature based on the book was in development. It is the first Batman film and Warner Bros. Animation film to be rated R by the MPAA. Batman: The Killing Joke premiered at the San Diego Comic-Con on July 22, 2016. The film was originally intended to be released directly on home video but, due to its popularity, was instead released simultaneously in theaters and digitally on July 25, 2016, for a special one-night event. It released on DVD and Blu-ray August 2, 2016. The film received mixed reviews from critics, with the bulk of the criticism aimed towards the first half of the film. It grossed $4.4 million worldwide and became the 13th highest-grossing R-rated animated film worldwide. While out on patrol, Barbara Gordon (Batgirl) fails to stop a robbery, but manages to stop one criminal with help from Batman. Paris Franz, the robbers' leader and the nephew of a powerful mob boss, develops a dangerous obsession with her and starts sending her messages. After Franz tricks her into finding his uncle's dead body, Batman becomes concerned about her safety and takes her off the case, telling her that she will eventually be tempted to kill the criminals she pursues. Outraged, Batgirl attacks Batman physically and verbally, which leads to them having sex. A few nights later, Batgirl tries to apologize to Batman, but he is ambushed by Franz and his men, prompting her to come to his aid. When she arrives and overpowers Franz, he makes her lose control and give him a savage beating, stopping just short of killing him. Realizing Batman was right, she retires from crime-fighting. Later, Batman investigates a murder scene with Detective Harvey Bullock and concludes that the Joker, currently held at Arkham Asylum, might be behind the crime. He goes to Arkham to talk to him, only to discover that he has escaped and put a decoy in his place. Joker then attacks Barbara and her father, Commissioner James Gordon. He shoots her in the stomach, paralyzing her from the waist down, and takes Gordon to an abandoned amusement park. There, Joker strips him naked and subjects him to torture, especially showing him photos he took of Barbara, naked and in pain, much to Gordon’s horror. The story is intercut with flashbacks of Joker's origin. It is revealed that he was once a lab technician who quit his job to become a stand-up comedian, only to fail miserably. Desperate to support his pregnant wife Jeannie, he agrees to help two criminals rob his former workplace. The criminals tell him that he has to use the Red Hood's mask and caped costume, secretly intending to frame him. During the planning, the police inform him that Jeannie and their unborn child have died in a household accident. Grief-stricken, he tries to withdraw from the plan, but the criminals strong-arm him into keeping his commitment to them. At the plant, the criminals and the costumed comedian run into security personnel, and a shootout occurs. The criminals are gunned down and the comedian is confronted by Batman. Terrified, the comedian trips and falls into the chemical plant's waste pond, and is swept through a pipe leading to the outside. As he removes his mask, he is shocked to see the chemicals have permanently disfigured his face, giving him a clown-like appearance. His disfigurement, combined with the loss of his family, and what he had experienced in the chemical plant drives him completely insane and transforms him into the Joker. In the present, Batman finds and saves Gordon, while the Joker flees. Despite his ordeal, Gordon remains sane and demands that Batman capture the Joker "by the book". Batman follows the Joker as the latter tries to persuade him that the world is just one big joke and that "one bad day" is enough to drive an ordinary man insane. Batman subdues Joker, tells him that Gordon has remained sane, and concludes that Joker is alone in his madness. He then attempts to reach out to him, offering rehabilitation. Joker apologetically declines, saying it is too late for him. Joker then says that the situation reminds him of a joke about two patients in an insane asylum who try to escape by leaping over to the adjoining building. The first patient makes it across, but the second patient is afraid that he will fall. The first patient gets an idea: "Hey, I got this flashlight with me. I'll just shine it across the gap between the buildings and you can walk across the beam and join me." The second patient questions the idea: "What do you think I am, crazy? You'll just turn it off when I'm halfway across!" Initially stoic, Batman soon joins Joker in having a good laugh at the joke. As the police arrive, the Joker's laugh trails off, but Batman continues to laugh. In a post-credits scene, a now-wheelchair-bound Barbara, having retired as Batgirl due to her past behaviour and paralysis, is shown taking on the mantle of Oracle while preparing to go "back to work". Kevin Conroy as Bruce Wayne / Batman Mark Hamill as Joker / Red Hood Tara Strong as Barbara Gordon / Batgirl / Oracle Ray Wise as Commissioner James Gordon Robin Atkin Downes as Det. Harvey Bullock John DiMaggio as Carlos Francesco Brian George as Alfred Pennyworth J.P. Karliak as Reese Andrew Kishino as Murray Nolan North as Mitch Maury Sterling as Parry Francesco / Paris Franz Fred Tatasciore as Carnival Owner Bruce Timm as Patrolman Anna Vocino as Jeannie Kari Wahlgren as Call Girl Rick D. Wasserman as Sal Maroni In 2011, during San Diego Comic-Con, actor Mark Hamill, who wanted to quit playing the Joker at that time, stated that he would be willing to voice him for an adaptation of The Killing Joke, encouraging fans to campaign for said adaptation, most notably in a tweet on October 24, 2011. Since then, a Facebook page titled "Petition to get Mark Hamill to play the Joker in animated Killing Joke" was set up by his fans. In 2013, Bruce Timm also expressed a desire to create the project, saying it was only a possibility. On July 10, 2015, during the Justice League: Gods and Monsters panel at San Diego Comic-Con, Timm announced that an animated film based on the novel was in development and slated to be released in 2016. Sam Liu would direct and Timm would executive produce the film. The film features a 15-minute prologue that sets up the story. On July 17, Hamill tweeted that he had his "fingers crossed" in hopes that he would be contacted to reprise his role as the Joker. On July 27, Collider reported that Hamill would voice the Joker in the film and ComicBook.com spoke with Kevin Conroy who stated he would reprise his voice role as Bruce Wayne / Batman "in a heartbeat". On March 14, 2016, it was officially announced that Conroy, Hamill and Tara Strong would reprise their roles as Batman, Joker and Barbara Gordon, and Ray Wise would voice Commissioner Gordon. The rest of the voice cast was revealed on Apple's iTunes digital release of the film. In January 2016, Timm revealed that the film would be screened at San Diego Comic-Con in July. He added that the team had to "add a lot more story" for the film due to the source novel not being long enough to make a feature-length film. Month later, concept artist Phil Bourassa revealed that in 2009, Timm was slated to produce an R-rated version of The Killing Joke, but development on the film was stalled after two weeks due to the under-performance of Watchmen, while also showcasing concept art of the Joker. In April, Warner Home Video confirmed that The Killing Joke would be the first film in the DC Universe Animated Original Movies series and the first Batman film to receive an R rating from the MPAA, with Warner Bros. Animation and Warner Digital Series president Sam Register explaining, "From the start of production, we encouraged producer Bruce Timm and our team at Warner Bros. Animation to remain faithful to the original story—regardless of the eventual MPAA rating... We felt it was our responsibility to present our core audience—the comics-loving community—with an animated film that authentically represented the tale they know all too well." In terms of animation production, the crew admitted that trying to adapt Bolland's art style was challenging due to the realistic quality; they then sought out another artist with a simpler yet very similar style that would be easier to animate, settling on Kevin Nowlan. The animation was done by The Answer Studio Co. LTD, an outsourced studio in Japan. Warner Home Video hosted the world premiere of The Killing Joke during the 2016 San Diego Comic-Con on July 22, 2016. The film was released digitally on July 26, 2016, while the deluxe edition and combo pack Blu-ray of the film was released on August 2, 2016. On June 8, 2016, Fathom Events and Vue cinemas announced they would release the film in select theaters for one night only on July 25, 2016, throughout the US and the UK. On July 18, 2016, Fathom Events announced that the film would receive an additional two showings on July 26 due to "unprecedented demand." It also received a limited release in Australia, New Zealand and Mexico on July 24, 2016. Batman: The Killing Joke grossed $3.8 million in the United States and Canada and $586,038 in other countries, for a total gross of $4.4 million. In the US, the film grossed $3.2 million on the first night of the Fathom Events screenings and became the biggest theatrical event in Fathom's history. The film earned $2,910,693 from domestic DVD sales and $5,743,188 from domestic Blu-ray sales, bringing its total domestic home video earnings to $8,653,881. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 37% based on 46 reviews and an audience score of 50% based on 10,000+ ratings. The site's critics' consensus reads: "This stilted retelling of the Joker's origin adds little to its iconic source material, further diminished by some questionable story additions that will have fans demanding justice for Barbara Gordon." Many critics and fans have agreed the first half of the film strays from source material and feels disjointed from the second half. Ben Travers of IndieWire commented that "instead of humanizing her, [the prologue] turns Barbara/Batgirl into a comic book cliché: the female character that feigns complexity, but, when given an expanded role, is only viewed through a sexual lens." Tommy Cook of Collider wrote that, "The prologue never quite gels with the rest of the film. It feels tacked on like a short before the actual feature." Jesse Schedeen of IGN remarks, "The creep factor comes from the fact that Batgirl has such a clearly subordinate relationship to Batman. He's the seasoned veteran and mentor. She's the newbie pupil. That Batman would take advantage of that relationship reflects very poorly on him as a superhero... Batgirl still comes across as a sacrificial lamb in the end. Her insipid romantic drama adds no weight to her eventual trauma." In response to criticism of the prologue, Azzarello stated, "The thing about this is that it's controversial, so we added more controversy." Bruce Timm further added: We were aware that it's a little risky. There's definitely some stuff in that first part of the movie that's going to be controversial. Here's where we came down on that specific issue: it was really important to us to show that both of the characters make some pretty big mistakes. I mean, his "parental skills" aren't that great. Maybe never having had any kids of his own, he doesn't realize that if you tell a kid to not do something, they're going to want to do it even more. And then she makes some mistakes and then he kind of overreacts to her mistakes and then she overreacts to his overreaction. So it's very human; it's a very understandable story. It's tricky because it's messy, because relationships are sometimes messy. But to me and to Alan and Brian, it was all very fascinating to us to explore that angle. The film's second half was received more positively for its outstanding voice acting and faithfulness to source material. Nick Bosworth of JoBlo.com wrote that "the best strength of this film however hands down in the voice talent behind it. Kevin Conroy is in top form returning as Bruce Wayne … and of course Mark Hamill as Joker." Gavia Baker-Whitelaw of The Daily Dot wrote of the film's art and animation: "Each scene is recreated with painstaking accuracy, but DC's animation style does not measure up to the impact of Brian Bolland's 1980s noir aesthetic." "Batman: The Killing Joke (15)". BBFC. Retrieved June 12, 2023. "Batman The Killing Joke – Production info & rumors". Retrieved August 15, 2016. "Batman: The Killing Joke". The Numbers. Retrieved August 15, 2016. "Batman: The Killing Joke on iTunes". iTunes Store. Retrieved May 25, 2016. 1:30 mark of Interview with Mark Hamill at Comic-Con 2011 on YouTube SDCC 2011-BAC: Mark Hamill Interview. YouTube. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Hamill, Mark [@HamillHimself] (October 24, 2011). "I'd come back for THAT! Spread the word! Campaign for #TheKillingJoke!! RT: @Cha_Luz #DC lets see #TheKillingJoke Mark said hed voice Joker" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "Petition to get Mark Hamill to play the Joker in animated Killing Joke". Facebook. Retrieved October 21, 2012. Bruce W. Timm on Killing Joke Animated Film and Future DC films. YouTube. January 29, 2013. Retrieved January 30, 2013. Beetle, Tim (July 10, 2015). "Batman: The Killing Joke Gets an Animated Adaptation". DCComics.com. Retrieved July 11, 2015. "SDCC: Timm Announces "Batman: The Killing Joke" As Next Animated Project". Comic Book Resources. July 11, 2015. Archived from the original on June 9, 2016. Retrieved July 11, 2015. Hamill, Mark [@HamillHimself] (July 17, 2015). "You're not the only one w/ fingers crossed!" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Goldberg, Matt (July 27, 2015). "Exclusive: Mark Hamill to Voice The Joker for Batman: The Killing Joke Animated Film". Collider. Retrieved July 27, 2015. Burlingame, Russ (July 27, 2015). "Kevin Conroy Would Love To Do The Killing Joke With Mark Hamill". Comicbook.com. Retrieved July 27, 2015. White, Brett (March 15, 2016). "Exclusive: Kevin Conroy & Mark Hamill Star In Animated "Batman: The Killing Joke"". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on March 15, 2016. Retrieved March 15, 2016. Jayson, Jay (January 9, 2016). "Batman: The Killing Joke Animated Film To Add To Story, Premiere In July". Comicbook.com. Retrieved January 10, 2016. Blaine, Louise (February 23, 2016). "Batman: The Killing Joke almost got an animated movie back in 2009". GamesRadar. Retrieved April 15, 2016. Gettell, Oliver (April 14, 2016). "Batman: The Killing Joke animated movie receives R rating—exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved April 15, 2016. "Batman: The Killing Joke Extended Sneak Peek". Screenrant.com. April 3, 2016. Metros Events (June 27, 2016). Batman: The Killing Joke Sneak Peek & Trailer (2016) – via YouTube. "Comic-Con 2016: World Premiere of Batman: The Killing Joke". San Diego Comic-Con. Retrieved July 14, 2016. "Batman: The Killing Joke gets a Blu-ray release date with killer extras—exclusive". Entertainment Weekly. May 4, 2016. Retrieved May 5, 2016. "Animated BATMAN: THE KILLING JOKE To Get Limited Theatrical Release". Newsarama. June 8, 2016. Retrieved June 9, 2016. "'Batman: The Killing Joke' screens in Australian and New Zealand cinemas in July". The Reel Bits. June 23, 2016. Retrieved July 15, 2016. "Estrenarán Batman: The Killing Joke en México". Sdpnoticias.com. July 1, 2016. Retrieved July 25, 2016. "Batman: The Killing Joke Has Biggest Theatrical Launch Ever For Fathom". comicbook.com. Retrieved July 28, 2016. "Batman: The Killing Joke (2016) The Numbers Listing". The Numbers. Retrieved January 22, 2018. "Batman: The Killing Joke (2016)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. Retrieved April 14, 2022. Hughes, William (July 23, 2016). "Batman: The Killing Joke somehow manages to get even more controversial". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on September 6, 2019. Retrieved September 6, 2019. Travers, Ben (July 23, 2016). "Batman The Killing Joke Review: Sex & Violence Don't Justify R-Rating". IndieWire. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on July 24, 2016. Retrieved September 6, 2019. Cook, Tommy (July 23, 2016). "Batman: The Killing Joke Review and Comic-Con Panel Recap". Collider. Archived from the original on July 24, 2016. Retrieved September 6, 2019. Schedeen, Jesse (August 1, 2016). "Batman: The Killing Joke Movie Review". IGN. IGN Entertainment. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved September 6, 2019. Girding, Stephen (July 23, 2016). "SDCC: "Batman: The Killing Joke" Screenwriter Explains Controversial Sex Scene". Comic Book Resources. Valnet Inc. Archived from the original on September 15, 2016. Retrieved September 6, 2019. Riesman, Abraham (July 23, 2016). "Behind Batman: The Killing Joke's Sexual Themes". Vulture. New York Media, LLC. Archived from the original on July 24, 2016. Retrieved September 6, 2019. Trumbore, Dave (July 24, 2016). "Batman The Killing Joke Reactions Are Divided Over Batgirl". Collider. Archived from the original on July 26, 2016. Retrieved September 6, 2019. Bosworth, Nick (July 24, 2016). "Review: Batman: The Killing Joke (Comic Con 2016) – Movie News". JoBlo.com. Archived from the original on July 25, 2016. Retrieved September 6, 2019. Baker-Whitelaw, Gavia (July 26, 2016). "Review: 'Batman: The Killing Joke' is a huge disappointment". Daily Dot. Archived from the original on July 27, 2016. Retrieved September 6, 2019. Wikiquote has quotations related to Batman: The Killing Joke (film). Batman: The Killing Joke at IMDb Batman: The Killing Joke at Rotten Tomatoes Batman: The Killing Joke at Metacritic Batman: The Killing Joke at Box Office Mojo Batman: The Killing Joke at AllMovie Batman: The Killing Joke at The World's Finest