Veronica anagallis-aquatica is a species of flowering plant in the family Plantaginaceae known by the common names water speedwell, blue water-speedwell,brook pimpernel. It is a rhizomatous perennial herb with stems growing 10 centimeters to about a meter in maximum length. It may be decumbent, the stem spreading along the ground and rooting where it touches moist substrate, or erect in form. The oppositely arranged leaves are green, smooth-edged or toothed, and sometimes clasping the stem where the leaf pairs meet at the bases. The inflorescence is a raceme of many flowers arising from the leaf axils. Each flower is borne on a short, curving pedicel. The flower corolla is up to a centimeter wide with four lobes, the upper lobe being widest. It is blue, lavender, or violet with purple lines near the base of each lobe. At the center are two small protruding stamens. It is native throughout the old world from southern Africa to Eurasia, and is introduced elsewhere. It occurs in many types of moist and wet habitat, and it is semi-aquatic, often growing in shallow water along streambanks, in ponds, and in other wetland environments.[citation needed] It is listed as threatened in Indiana, and as endangered in Massachusetts, New Jersey, and Tennessee. Gupta, A.K. & Lansdown, R.V. (2013). "Veronica anagallis-aquatica". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. 2013: e.T164036A1019922. Retrieved 8 February 2024. USDA, NRCS (n.d.). "Veronica anagallis-aquatica". The PLANTS Database (plants.usda.gov). Greensboro, North Carolina: National Plant Data Team. Retrieved 6 January 2016. BSBI List 2007 (xls). Botanical Society of Britain and Ireland. Archived from the original (xls) on 2015-06-26. Retrieved 2014-10-17. "Veronica anagallis-aquatica L." Plants of the World Online. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. Retrieved 12 January 2024. "Plants Profile for Veronica anagallis-aquatica (water speedwell)". plants.usda.gov. Retrieved 29 May 2018. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Veronica anagallis-aquatica. Jepson Manual Treatment Washington Burke Museum Illinois Wildflowers v t e