Gentianaceae is a family of flowering plants of 103 genera and about 1600 species. The family takes its name from the genus Gentiana, named after the Illyrian king Gentius.[citation needed] Distribution is cosmopolitan.[citation needed] The family consists of trees, shrubs and herbs showing a wide range of colours and floral patterns. Flowers are actinomorphic and bisexual with fused sepals and petals. The stamens are attached to the inside of the petals (epipetalous) and alternate with the corolla lobes. There is a glandular disk at the base of the gynoecium, and flowers have parietal placentation. The inflorescence is cymose, with simple or complex cymes. The fruits are dehiscent septicidal capsules splitting into two halves, rarely some species have a berry. Seeds are small with copiously oily endosperms and a straight embryo. The habit varies from small trees, pachycaul shrubs to (usually) herbs, with ascending, erect or twining stems. Plants are usually rhizomatous. Leaves opposite, less often alternate or in some species whorled, simple in shape, with entire edges and bases connately attached to the stem. Stipules are absent. Plants usually accumulate bitter iridoid substances; bicollateral bundles are present. Ecologically, partial myco-heterotrophy is common among species in this family with a few genera such as Voyria and Voyriella lacking chlorophyll and being fully myco-heterotrophic. Some of these plants have limited ranges and are protected under governmental oversight.[which?] For example, Gentianella uliginosa (Dune Gentian), which occurs in some limited areas of Wales and Scotland, is a priority species under the Biodiversity Action Plan of the United Kingdom. Gentianaceae are distributed worldwide, but most species occur in temperate zones. According to Merckx et al., the neotropics were an important area for the early diversification events in Gentianaceae, most of which occurring during the Eocene. However, Pirie et al. suggested that ancient vicariance cannot be ruled out as an explanation for the early origins of Exaceae across Africa, Madagascar and the Indian subcontinent unless a strong assumption is made about the maximum age of Gentianales. Economically, some species are cultivated ornamental plants and many species yield bitter principles used medicinally and in flavorings.[citation needed] The family was described for the first time by Antoine Laurent de Jussieu in 1789. tribe Chironieae (G.Don) Endl. subtribe Canscorinae Thiv & Kadereit subtribe Chironiinae G.Don subtribe Coutoubeinae G.Don tribe Exaceae Colla tribe Gentianeae Colla subtribe Gentianinae G.Don subtribe Swertiinae (Griseb.) Rchb. tribe Helieae Gilg tribe Potalieae Rchb. subtribe Faroinae Struwe & V.A.Albert subtribe Lisianthiinae G.Don subtribe Potaliinae (Mart.) Progel tribe Saccifolieae (Maguire & Pires) Struwe, Thiv, V.A.Albert & Kadereit incertae sedis Voyria Adenolisianthus (Spruce ex Progel) Gilg Anthocleista Afzel. ex R.Br. Aripuana Struwe, Maas & V.A.Albert Bartonia Muhl. ex Willd. Bisgoeppertia Kuntze Blackstonia Huds. Calolisianthus Gilg Canscora Lam. Celiantha Maguire Centaurium Hill Chelonanthus (Griseb.) Gilg Chironia L. Chorisepalum Gleason & Wodehouse Cicendia Adans. Comastoma Toyok. Congolanthus A.Raynal Coutoubea Aubl. Cracosna Gagnep. Crawfurdia Wall. Curtia Cham. & Schltdl. Cyrtophyllum Reinw. Deianira Cham. & Schltdl. Djaloniella P.Taylor Duplipetala Thiv Enicostema Blume Eustoma Salisb. Exaculum Caruel Exacum L. Exochaenium Griseb. Fagraea Thunb. Faroa Welw. Frasera Walter Geniostemon Engelm. & A.Gray Gentiana Tourn. ex L. Gentianella Moench Gentianopsis Ma Gentianothamnus Humbert Gyrandra Griseb. Halenia Borkh. Helia Mart. Hockinia Gardner Hoppea Willd. Irlbachia Mart. Ixanthus Griseb. Jaeschkea Kurz Karina Boutique Klackenbergia Kissling Kuepferia Adr.Favre Lagenanthus Gilg Lagenias E.Mey. Latouchea Franch. Lehmanniella Gilg Limahlania K.M.Wong & Sugumaran Lisianthius P.Browne Lomatogoniopsis T.N.Ho & S.W.Liu Lomatogonium A.Braun Macrocarpaea (Griseb.) Gilg Megacodon (Hemsl.) Harry Sm. Metagentiana T.N.Ho & S.W.Liu Microrphium C.B.Clarke Neblinantha Maguire Neurotheca Salisb. ex Benth. & Hook.f. Obolaria L. Oreonesion A.Raynal Ornichia Klack. Orphium E.Mey. Phyllocyclus Kurz Picrophloeus Blume Potalia Aubl. Prepusa Mart. Pterygocalyx Maxim. Purdieanthus Gilg Pycnosphaera Gilg Rogersonanthus Maguire & B.M.Boom Roraimaea Struwe, S.Nilsson & V.A.Albert Sabatia Adans. Saccifolium Maguire & Pires Schenkia Griseb. Schinziella Gilg Schultesia (plant) Mart. Sebaea Sol. ex R.Br. Senaea Taub. Sinogentiana Adr.Favre & Y.M.Yuan Sinoswertia T.N.Ho, S.W.Liu & J.Q.Liu Sipapoantha Maguire & B.M.Boom Swertia L. Symbolanthus G.Don Symphyllophyton Gilg Tachia Aubl. Tachiadenus Griseb. Tapeinostemon Benth. Tetrapollinia Maguire & B.M.Boom Tripterospermum Blume Urogentias Gilg & Gilg-Ben. Utania G.Don Veratrilla Franch. Voyria Aubl. Voyriella (Miq.) Miq. Xestaea Griseb. Yanomamua J.R.Grant, Maas & Struwe Zeltnera G.Mans. Zonanthus Griseb. Zygostigma Griseb. Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (2009). "An update of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group classification for the orders and families of flowering plants: APG III". Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society. 161 (2): 105–121. doi:10.1111/j.1095-8339.2009.00996.x. "Gentianaceae Juss". Plants of the World Online (POWO). Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. Retrieved 9 January 2021. Struwe L, Albert VA (2002). Gentianaceae: systematics and natural history. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-80999-3. "Report on the Species and Habitat Review (UK BAP) | JNCC Resource Hub". hub.jncc.gov.uk. Retrieved 2021-01-31. Merckx, Vincent S.F.T.; Kissling, Jonathan; Hentrich, Heiko; Janssens, Steven B.; Mennes, Constantijn B.; Specht, Chelsea D.; Smets, Erik F. (2013). "Phylogenetic relationships of the mycoheterotrophic genus Voyria and the implication for the biogeographic history of Gentianaceae". American Journal of Botany. 100 (4): 712–721. doi:10.3732/ajb.1200330. PMID 23535773. Pirie, Michael; Litsios, Glenn; Bellstedt, Dirk; Salamin, Nicolas; Kissling, Jonathan (2015). "Back to Gondwanaland: can ancient vicariance explain (some) Indian Ocean disjunct plant distributions?". Biology Letters. 11 (6): 20150086. doi:10.1098/rsbl.2015.0086. PMC 4528461. PMID 26063747. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gentianaceae. Wikispecies has information related to Gentianaceae. Gentian Research Network