Tigran Khzmalyan (also known as Xmalian) (Armenian: Տիգրան Խզմալյան) is an Armenian politician, political activist, independent filmmaker, screenwriter, and producer. Since 2018, Khzmalyan serves as the Chairman of the European Party of Armenia. Since 2023, Khzmalyan serves as the Chair of the Board of Trustees of PanEuropa Armenia. Khzmalyan was born in 1963. Khzmalyan's father Eduard was a construction engineer, who worked on several historically important buildings in Yerevan, including the Moscow Cinema. 1979-1984 - Yerevan State University, Department of Russian Philology 1990-1992 - Moscow Highest Courses for Film Directors, Russia 1994, 1998 - International Writing Courses, Reuters, BBC, London, UK Khzmalyan holds a PhD in Philology and in 1989, defended a thesis on Leo Tolstoy's works. In the 1980's, Khzmalyan taught literature and history at the Yerevan State University. Between 1988–1990, Khzmalyan was a participant in the Karabakh movement for the unification of Nagorno-Karabakh with Armenia. Between 1991–1993, he worked as a war correspondent for Armenian and international media in Nagorno-Karabakh, as well as an information assistant to the chairman of the Nagorno-Karabakh Supreme Council, Georgi Petrosian. Between 1993–1996, he worked as a political analyst for the Armenian Assembly of America, a lobby group of the Armenian diaspora in Washington, D.C. Between 1997–1998, he was appointed a Deputy Director of UNDP in Armenia. Between 1998–2005, he was the general manager of Yerevan Film Studio. In 2009, together with Jirair Sefilian and Alexander Yenikomshian, Khzmalyan founded the Sardarapat Movement. In early 2012, Khzmalyan was one of the leaders of the Mashtots Park Movement. Since 2014, he quit his cooperation with the Sardarapat Movement due to disagreements on the role of Russia in the Russo-Ukrainian War and in regional developments. Khzmalyan held an anti-Kremlin position, claiming that Vladimir Putin and his KGB regime had annihilated Armenian statehood and colonized Armenia. In 2016, he joined veteran dissident Paruyr Hayrikyan in a pro-Western political movement, called Independence. He underwent three trials on accusations of disobedience to the police during public rallies in 2012, 2014 and 2015. Being extremely critical of Russia's influence on Armenia and its state apparatus, Khzmalyan repeatedly assessed Russo-Armenian relations as colonial, and Armenia is seen by Khzmalyan as a de facto occupied country. On 6 November 2018, Tigran Khzmalyan along with his supporters, established the European Party of Armenia (EPA), being elected as the party's Chairman. During the Second Nagorno-Karabakh War, Khzmalyan joined the Armenian Armed Forces as a volunteer and took part in military engagements with Azerbaijan near Martakert, Artsakh. In May 2020, Khzmalyan endorsed and joined the National Democratic Pole. On 10 May 2021, Khzmalyan announced that the European Party of Armenia is leaving the National Democratic Pole alliance, and that the party would participate in the 2021 Armenian parliamentary elections independently. Khzmalyan participates on the National Assembly's Standing Committee on European Integration as an observer member. Khzmalyan is known for his vigorous support of Ukraine in the ongoing war with Russia. On 24 February 2022, when Russia started a full-scale invasion of Ukraine, Khzmalyan and members of European Party of Armenia held an anti-war rally near the Russian Embassy in Yerevan. In 2023, he and Armenian singer-songwriter Ruben Hakhverdyan, visited Kyiv and held a concert to collect donations for the Armed Forces of Ukraine. The European Party of Armenia nominated Khzmalyan as their candidate for Mayor of Yerevan prior to the 2023 Yerevan City Council election. Following the election, the EPA received just 1.11% of the vote, failing to gain any seats in the Yerevan City Council. Khzmalyan serves as the Chair of the Board of Trustees of PanEuropa Armenia, the Armenian branch of the Paneuropean Union which was founded in September 2023. Khzmalyan is married to Narine Mirzoyan, PhD in Medicine, Head of Department of Pharmacology at the Yerevan State Medical University. The couple has two children. Khzmalyan speaks Armenian, Russian, English, and French. "Facebook". www.facebook.com. "Один взгляд на ситуацию с русской литературой в Армении". Центр поддержки русско-армянских стратегических и общественных инициатив. October 2, 2014. "Лидер Европейской партии Армении: «Мы все проходим общий этап распада Российской империи и деколонизации»". dumskaya.net. "«Арарат нельзя покорить, ему можно только покориться», - Тигран Хзмалян". barev.today. "«Բոլորիս են սպանելու՝ մեկ-մեկ, դանդաղ, պատերին կրակոցների հետքերով». Տիգրան Խզմալյան". KENTRON.am. January 17, 2020. "«Հայաստանը մնում է սեփական շահերին հակասող քաղաքական դաշտի պատանդը». Տիգրան Խզմալյան - MediaLab Newsroom-Laboratory". November 21, 2018. "Как РФ теряет влияние на Армению и пойдет ли Ереван на Запад". Европейская правда. "Հայաստանի Եվրոպական կուսակցության հիմնադիր համագումարի անցկացման ժամանակի և վայրի, ինչպես նաև կուսակցության կանոնադրության և ծրագրի նախագծերի հիմնական դրույթների մասին հայտարարություն - Հայտարարություններ - Հայաստանի Հանրապետության ինտերնետով ծանուցման պաշտոնական կայք". www.azdarar.am. Retrieved 2020-01-12. "Օր առաջ դուրս գալ ԵԱՏՄ-ից. "Հայաստանի Եվրոպական կուսակցությունը" համագումար է..." A1Plus (in Armenian). Retrieved 2020-01-12. "Facebook". www.facebook.com. "Արտախորհրդարանական երկու ուժ պատրաստակամություն է հայտնել ներգրավվել ԱԺհանձնաժողովի աշխատանքներին". armenpress.am. [1] LLC, Helix Consulting. "Ռուբեն Հախվերդյանը Կիևում բարեգործական համերգ է ունեցել, որի ողջ հասույթը տրամադրվել է Ուկրաինայի Զինված ուժերին՝ վիրավոր զինվորների բուժման նպատակով.Տիգրան Խզմալյան". www.pastinfo.am. "In Yerevan's Mayoral Election, Coming In First Won't Be Enough". September 14, 2023. "Facebook". www.facebook.com. "Narine Mirzoyan". The amazing vanishing movie by BBC News 30th Montpellier Mediterranean Film Festival Թուրքերը դիմել են Իրանի հյուպատոսարան, պահանջում են Թեհրանում չցուցադրել Հայոց ցեղասպանության մասին ֆիլմը Biography portal