Mala Vyska (Ukrainian: Мала Виска, Russian: Ма́лая Ви́ска) is a city in Novoukrainka Raion, Kirovohrad Oblast (region) of Ukraine. It hosts the administration of Mala Vyska urban hromada, one of the hromadas of Ukraine. As of 2022, the population is 9,960 (2022 estimate), down from 13,132 in 2001. The city is situated on the river Vysi (Вись). According to some sources, on the most of the territory of a modern town known as Mala Vyska Nykodymiv Khutir was located (those times Ukrainian kozaks' slobodas were there). Despite the fact that a lot of tribes, including Scythian, went through the territory of Mala Vyska, no one lived there permanently. Officially, the history of Mala Vyska dated back to the year 1752, when the first Moldovan emigrants arrived and founded a village at the bench of the river Vysi. Nowadays, that settlement is one of the town's districts called Bessarabia. In the early 19th century, some of the lands were given as a gift to prince Kudashev by Katherine II. That very prince named the town after himself, Kudesheve. The modern name Mala Vyska was given by Kniaz Ulashyn, who happened to buy Kudashev's land in the middle of the 19th century. Until 18 July 2020, Mala Vyska was the administrative center of Mala Vyska Raion. The raion was abolished in July 2020 as part of the administrative reform of Ukraine, which reduced the number of raions of Kirovohrad Oblast to four. The area of Mala Vyska Raion was merged into Novoukrainka Raion. Nowadays, 6 districts constitute Mala Vyska. There are Mistechko (northern part of the town separated from the central part by the river Vysi); Mikrorayon Vysi (sleeping area of the town); Bessarabia (rural area of the town); Storchakivka; Kudrivka; Raion piaty hektar. There are three secondary schools functioning in Mala Vyska and liceum. There is also a boarding school, youth centre, school of arts and two kindergartens. In the town there is a higher vocational school, where people can get secondary professional education. Cultural center functions in Mala Vyska. In this centre the Museum of Local History is placed. In addition, there is also a library named by Lesia Ukrainka. In Mala Vyska there are some agricultural companies. "Mayak", "Zoriane", "Ptahivnyk", "Stepove" are among them: Small business is particularly prolific in the town. There is a big number of specialized shops besides the town market in the town centre and three supermarkets. Before the year 1993 sugar and spirit factory were functioning for a long period of time, providing Ukrainian Republic with their production in addition to exporting them into other countries. The population of Mala Vyska are predominantly Orthodox. Due to this fact, there are three Orthodox churches in the town. In Mala Vyska Raion, a newspaper called "Malovyskivski Visti" is published. In addition, every organization and company's website or webpage can be found on the Mala Vyska official website. "Маловисковская громада" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2022 [Number of Present Population of Ukraine, as of January 1, 2022] (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2022. "Про утворення та ліквідацію районів. Постанова Верховної Ради України № 807-ІХ". Голос України (in Ukrainian). 2020-07-18. Retrieved 2020-10-03. "Нові райони: карти + склад" (in Ukrainian). Міністерство розвитку громад та територій України. Сільськогосподарські підприємства. Офіційний сайт Маловисківської районної державної адміністрації Сільськогосподарські підприємства. Офіційний сайт Маловисківської районної державної адміністрації