Kódyma (Ukrainian: Ко́дима, pronounced [ˈkɔdɪmɐ]; Romanian: Codâma) is a city in Odesa Oblast (region) of central Ukraine, located in the historic region of Podolia, south-eastern Podilia. It hosts the administration of Kodyma urban hromada, one of the hromadas of Ukraine. Population: 8,404 (2022 estimate). Kodyma is named after a river Kodyma, on which it is located. On maps of the 16th century of Wenceslaus Grodecki there is a region identified as "Codima solitudo, uastissima" (a very vast desert). The area is located around the mid-stream of Southern Bug. It is believed that the Kodyma's etymology of Turkic origin and means a lower saturated with water place. In the Polish Geographic dictionary (Słownik geograficzny) it is mentioned as a small town (miasteczko) in Balta county and has a train station on the Kyiv–Odesa railroad. The city foundation date is stated as 1754, however according to the Geographic Dictionary Kodyma as a real estate existed before and belonged to the family of Zamoyski. Later it transferred to the family of Koniecpolski after Johanna Barabara Zamoyska married Aleksander Koniecpolski. In 1694 Cossacks of Semen Paliy defeated a Tatar army at the battle of Kodyma. The modern city of Kodyma was founded by Józef Lubomirski (son of Jerzy Aleksander Lubomirski) in 1754. Until 18 July 2020, Kodyma was the administrative center of Kodyma Raion. The raion was abolished in July 2020 as part of the administrative reform of Ukraine, which reduced the number of raions of Odesa Oblast to seven. The area of Kodyma Raion was merged into Podilsk Raion. Leon Feinberg, Jewish-American Yiddish poet and journalist, was born in Kodyma Stanisław Skalski, a Polish fighter ace of the Polish Air Force in World War II, was born in Kodyma Anatoliy Pushnyakov, Ukrainian general and former commander of the Ukrainian Ground Forces Travel guide and useful information Information and news site Kodyma City Council website "Кодымская городская громада" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2022 [Number of Present Population of Ukraine, as of January 1, 2022] (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2022. Map of Poland and Eastern Europe. Historical note (Історична довідка (Кодимщина)). Kodyma Raion website. Mochar (мочар). Ukrainian language dictionary of Borys Hrinchenko. "Про утворення та ліквідацію районів. Постанова Верховної Ради України № 807-ІХ". Голос України (in Ukrainian). 2020-07-18. Retrieved 2020-10-03. "Нові райони: карти + склад" (in Ukrainian). Міністерство розвитку громад та територій України. "Kodyma". Geographical Dictionary of the Kingdom of Poland (in Polish). 4. Warszawa: Kasa im. Józefa Mianowskiego. 1883. p. 241.