Vylkove (Ukrainian: Ви́лкове, pronounced [ˈwɪɫkowe]; Russian: Вилково; Romanian: Vâlcov) is a small city located in the Ukrainian part of the Danube Delta, at utmost southwest of Ukraine, on the border with Romania. Administratively it is part of Izmail Raion (district) of Odesa Oblast (region). Vylkove hosts the administration of Vylkove urban hromada, one of the hromadas of Ukraine. Population: 7,712 (2022 estimate). Vylkove is located inside the Danube Delta marshlands, which makes grain growing almost impossible, thus making fishery in the Danube, delta lakes and in the Black Sea the main occupation of the local people. In addition, the city is famous for its viticulture and cultivation of strawberries on the islands in the river delta.[citation needed] Due to a number of channels excavated inside its territory, get town is also known as "Ukraine's Venice". Boats are the most common method of transportation. The administration of the Ukrainian Danube Biosphere Reserve is based in Vylkove. The territory of the Reserve includes the islands upstream and downstream the Danube, reedbeds to north from Danube, delta water bodies and adjacent area of the sea (2 km or 1.2 mi from the coast). Vylkove was founded in 1746 and was assigned the status of "town" in 1762. Until 18 July 2020, Vylkove belonged to Kiliia Raion. The raion was abolished in July 2020 as part of the administrative reform of Ukraine, which reduced the number of raions of Odesa Oblast to seven. The area of Kiliia Raion was merged into Izmail Raion. The population is about 9,300, according to the Ukrainian Census conducted in 2001. About 70% of the population consists of Lipovans, about 25% are Ukrainians, and the remainder are Romanians, Gagauz (Turkic-speaking followers of the Russian Orthodox Church), and Bulgarians. The main confession is Christian Old Believers (Lipovans) (about 70%, mainly Russians), the rest are the members of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church. There are three churches in Vylkove: two belong to Old Believers and one to Ukrainian Orthodox Church. Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2022 [Number of Present Population of Ukraine, as of January 1, 2022] (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2022. "Вилковская громада" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. Tondo, Lorenzo (5 July 2022). "How Ukraine's 'Venice' has borne the brunt of fight for Snake Island". The Guardian. "Про утворення та ліквідацію районів. Постанова Верховної Ради України № 807-ІХ". Голос України (in Ukrainian). 18 July 2020. Retrieved 3 October 2020. "Нові райони: карти + склад" (in Ukrainian). Міністерство розвитку громад та територій України. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Vylkove. museum-collections.odessa.ua — The Bleschunov Municipal Museum of Personal Collections vilkovo.info – Vylkove boat guide. Info and rest-day in Vylkove