Britney Jean Spears (born December 2, 1981) is an American singer. Often referred to as the "Princess of Pop", she is credited with influencing the revival of teen pop during the late 1990s and early 2000s. Spears has sold over 150 million records worldwide, making her one of the world's best-selling music artists. She has earned numerous awards and accolades, including a Grammy Award, 15 Guinness world records, six MTV Video Music Awards, seven Billboard Music Awards (including the Millennium Award), the inaugural Radio Disney Icon Award, and a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Her heavily choreographed videos earned her the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award. After appearing in stage productions and television series, Spears signed with Jive Records in 1997 at age fifteen. Her first two studio albums, ...Baby One More Time (1999) and Oops!... I Did It Again (2000), are among the best-selling albums of all time and made Spears the best-selling teenage artist of all time. With first-week sales of over 1.3 million copies, Oops!... I Did It Again held the record for the fastest-selling album by a female artist in the United States for fifteen years. Spears adopted a more mature and provocative style for her albums Britney (2001) and In the Zone (2003), and starred in the 2002 film Crossroads. She was executive producer of her fifth studio album, Blackout (2007), often referred to as her best work. Following a series of highly publicized personal problems, promotion for the album was limited, and Spears was involuntarily placed in a conservatorship. Subsequently, Spears released the chart-topping albums, Circus (2008) and Femme Fatale (2011), the latter of which became her most successful era of singles in the US charts. With "3" in 2009 and "Hold It Against Me" in 2011, Spears became the second artist after Mariah Carey in the Billboard Hot 100's history to debut at number one with two or more songs. She embarked on a four-year concert residency, Britney: Piece of Me, at Planet Hollywood Resort & Casino in Las Vegas to promote her next two albums Britney Jean (2013) and Glory (2016). In 2019, Spears' legal battle over her conservatorship became more publicized and led to the establishment of the #FreeBritney movement. In 2021, the conservatorship was terminated following her public testimony in which she accused her management team and family of abuse. In the United States, Spears is the fourth best-selling female album artist of the Nielsen SoundScan era, as well as the best-selling female album artist of the 2000s. She was ranked by Billboard as the eighth-biggest artist of the 2000s. Spears has had six number-one albums on the Billboard 200 and five number-one singles on the US Billboard Hot 100: "...Baby One More Time", "Womanizer", "3", "Hold It Against Me", and "S&M (Remix)". Other hit singles include "Oops!... I Did It Again", "I'm a Slave 4 U", "Toxic", "Gimme More", and "Piece of Me". "...Baby One More Time" was named the greatest debut single of all time by Rolling Stone in 2020. In 2004, Spears launched a perfume brand with Elizabeth Arden, Inc.; sales exceeded $1.5 billion as of 2012[update]. Forbes has reported Spears as the highest-earning female musician of 2001 and 2012. By 2012, she had topped Yahoo!'s list of most searched celebrities seven times in twelve years. Time named Spears one of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2021. Spears placed first in the Time reader poll. Britney Jean Spears was born on December 2, 1981, in McComb, Mississippi, the second child of James "Jamie" Parnell Spears and Lynne Irene Bridges. Her maternal grandmother, Lillian Portell, was English (born in London), and one of Spears' maternal grandfathers was Maltese. Her siblings are Bryan James Spears and Jamie Lynn Spears. In her memoir The Woman in Me, Spears wrote that her paternal grandmother, Emma Jean Spears, was sent to an asylum by Spears' paternal grandfather. Their three-day-old baby had died and Emma Jean was overwhelmed by grief. While at the asylum, she was put on lithium; subsequently, she shot herself over the child's grave. Born in the Bible Belt, where socially conservative evangelical Protestantism is a particularly strong religious influence, she was baptized as a Southern Baptist and sang in a church choir as a child. As an adult, she has studied Kabbalist teachings. On August 5, 2021, Spears announced that she had converted to Catholicism. Her mother, sister, and nieces Maddie Aldridge and Ivey Joan Watson, are also Catholic. However, on September 5, 2022, after Spears' ex-husband, Kevin Federline, and youngest son did an interview defending her father's actions during her conservatorship, she stated: "I don't believe in God anymore because of the way my children and my family have treated me. There is nothing to believe in anymore. I'm an atheist y'all". At age three, Spears began attending dance lessons in her hometown of Kentwood, Louisiana, and was selected to perform as a solo artist at the annual recital. Aged five she made her local stage debut, singing "What Child Is This?" at her kindergarten graduation. During her childhood, she also had gymnastics and voice lessons and won many state-level competitions and children's talent shows. In gymnastics, Spears attended Béla Károlyi's training camp. She said of her ambition as a child, "I was in my own world, ... I found out what I'm supposed to do at an early age". When Spears was eight, she and her mother Lynne traveled to Atlanta, Georgia, to audition for the 1990s revival of The Mickey Mouse Club. Casting director Matt Casella rejected her as too young, but introduced her to Nancy Carson, a New York City talent agent. Carson was impressed with Spears' singing and suggested enrolling her at the Professional Performing Arts School; shortly afterward, Lynne and her daughters moved to a sublet apartment in New York.[citation needed] Spears was hired for her first professional role as the understudy for the lead role of Tina Denmark in the off-Broadway musical Ruthless! She also appeared as a contestant on the popular television show Star Search and was cast in a number of commercials. In December 1992, she was cast in The Mickey Mouse Club alongside Christina Aguilera, Justin Timberlake, Ryan Gosling, and Keri Russell. After the show was canceled in 1994, she returned to Mississippi and enrolled at McComb's Parklane Academy. Although she made friends with most of her classmates, she compared the school to "the opening scene in Clueless with all the cliques. ... I was so bored. I was the point guard on the basketball team. I had my boyfriend, and I went to homecoming and Christmas formal. But I wanted more." In June 1997, Spears was in talks with manager Lou Pearlman to join the female pop group Innosense. Lynne asked family friend and entertainment lawyer Larry Rudolph for his opinion and submitted a tape of Spears singing over a Whitney Houston karaoke song along with some pictures. Rudolph decided that he wanted to pitch her to record labels, for which she needed a professional demo made. He sent Spears an unused song of Toni Braxton; she rehearsed for a week and recorded her vocals in a studio. Spears traveled to New York with the demo and met with executives from four labels, returning to Kentwood the same day. Three of the labels rejected her, saying that audiences wanted pop bands such as the Backstreet Boys and the Spice Girls, and "there wasn't going to be another Madonna, another Debbie Gibson, or another Tiffany." Two weeks later, executives from Jive Records returned calls to Rudolph. Senior vice president of A&R Jeff Fenster said about Spears' audition that "it's very rare to hear someone that age who can deliver emotional content and commercial appeal ... For any artist, the motivation—the 'eye of the tiger'—is extremely important. And Britney had that." Spears sang Houston's "I Have Nothing" (1992) for the executives, and was subsequently signed to the label. They assigned her to work with producer Eric Foster White for a month; he reportedly shaped her voice from "lower and less poppy" delivery to "distinctively, unmistakably Britney". After hearing the recorded material, president Clive Calder ordered a full album. Spears had originally envisioned "Sheryl Crow music, but younger; more adult contemporary". She felt secure with her label's appointment of producers, since "It made more sense to go pop, because I can dance to it—it's more me." She flew to Cheiron Studios in Stockholm, Sweden, where half of the album was recorded from March to April 1998, with producers Max Martin, Denniz Pop, and Rami Yacoub, among others. After Spears returned to the United States, she embarked on a shopping mall promotional tour, titled L'Oreal Hair Zone Mall Tour, to promote her upcoming debut album. Her show was a four-song set and she was accompanied by two back-up dancers. Her first concert tour followed, as an opening act for NSYNC. Her debut studio album, ...Baby One More Time, was released on January 12, 1999. It debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200 and was certified two-times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America after a month. Worldwide, the album topped the charts in fifteen countries and sold over 10 million copies in a year. It became the biggest-selling album ever by a teenage artist. "...Baby One More Time" was released as the lead single from the album on September 29, 1998. Originally, Jive Records wanted the associated music video to be animated; however, Spears rejected this idea, and suggested the final concept of a Catholic schoolgirl. The single peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot 100, topping the chart for two consecutive weeks in January–February 1999. It sold more than 10 million copies, making it one of the best-selling singles of all time. "...Baby One More Time" later received a Grammy nomination for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance. The title track also topped the singles chart for two weeks in the United Kingdom, and became the fastest-selling single ever by a female artist, shipping over 460,000 copies. It would later become the 25th-most successful song of all time in British chart history. Spears is the youngest female artist to have a million seller in the UK. The album's third single "(You Drive Me) Crazy" became a top-ten hit worldwide and further propelled the success of the ...Baby One More Time album. The album has sold 30 million copies worldwide, making it one of the best-selling albums of all time. It is the best-selling debut album by any artist. On June 28, 1999, Spears began her first headlining ...Baby One More Time Tour in North America, which was positively received by critics. It also generated some controversy due to her racy outfits. An extension of the tour, titled (You Drive Me) Crazy Tour, followed in March 2000. Spears premiered songs from her upcoming second album during the show. Oops!... I Did It Again, Spears' second studio album, was released in May 2000. It debuted at number one in the US, selling 1.3 million copies, breaking the Nielsen SoundScan record for the highest debut sales by any solo artist. It has sold over 20 million copies worldwide to date, making it one of the best-selling albums of all time. Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone said that "the great thing about Oops! – under the cheese surface, Britney's demand for satisfaction is complex, fierce and downright scary, making her a true child of rock & roll tradition." The album's lead single, "Oops!... I Did It Again", peaked at the top of the charts in Australia, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and many other European nations, while the second single "Lucky", peaked at number one in Austria, Germany, Sweden, and Switzerland. The album as well as the title track received Grammy nominations for Best Pop Vocal Album and Best Female Pop Vocal Performance, respectively. The same year, Spears embarked on the Oops!... I Did It Again Tour, which grossed $40.5 million; she also released her first book, Britney Spears' Heart to Heart, co-written with her mother. On September 7, 2000, Spears performed at the 2000 MTV Video Music Awards. Halfway through the performance, she ripped off her black suit to reveal a sequined flesh-colored bodysuit, followed by heavy dance routine. It is noted by critics as the moment that Spears showed signs of becoming a more provocative performer. Amidst media speculation, Spears confirmed she was dating NSYNC member Justin Timberlake. Spears and Timberlake both graduated from high school via distance learning from the University of Nebraska High School. She also bought a home in Destin, Florida. In her 2023 memoir, Spears revealed that she had an abortion during late 2000 while dating Timberlake after he said they were not prepared for parenthood. Spears called the abortion "one of the most agonizing things I have ever experienced in my life." In January 2001, Spears hosted the 28th Annual American Music Awards, starred at Rock in Rio alongside NSYNC, and performed as a special guest in the Super Bowl XXXV halftime show headlined by Aerosmith and NSYNC. In February 2001, she signed a $7–8 million promotional deal with Pepsi, and released another book co-written with her mother, A Mother's Gift. Her third studio album, Britney, was released in November 2001, with a funkier sound inspired by hip hop artists such as Jay-Z and the Neptunes. Britney debuted at number one in the Billboard 200 and reached top five positions in Australia, the United Kingdom, and mainland Europe, and has sold 10 million copies worldwide. Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic called Britney "the record where she strives to deepen her persona, making it more adult while still recognizably Britney. ... It does sound like the work of a star who has now found and refined her voice, resulting in her best record yet." It was nominated for the Grammy awards for Best Pop Vocal Album and Best Female Pop Vocal Performance for "Overprotected", and in 2007 it was named one of the best albums of the preceding 25 years by Entertainment Weekly. The lead single, "I'm a Slave 4 U", became a top-ten hit in several countries. Spears' performance of the single at the 2001 MTV Video Music Awards featured a caged tiger (wrangled by Bhagavan Antle) and a large albino python draped over her shoulders. It was harshly received by animal rights organization PETA, who claimed the animals were mistreated and scrapped plans for an anti-fur billboard that was to feature Spears. Jocelyn Vena of MTV summarized Spears' performance at the ceremony, saying, "draping herself in a white python and slithering around a steamy garden setting – surrounded by dancers in zebra and tiger outfits – Spears created one of the most striking visuals in the 27-year history of the show." To support the album, Spears embarked on the Dream Within a Dream Tour. The show was critically praised for its technical innovations, the pièce de résistance being a water screen that pumped two tons of water into the stage. The tour grossed $43.7 million, becoming the second highest-grossing tour of 2002 by a female artist, behind Cher's Farewell Tour. Her career success was highlighted by Forbes in 2002, as Spears was ranked the world's most powerful celebrity. Spears also landed her first starring role in Crossroads, released in February 2002. Although the film was largely panned, critics praised Spears' acting and the film was a box office success. Crossroads, which had a $12 million budget, went on to gross over $61.1 million worldwide. In June 2002, Spears opened her first restaurant, Nyla, in New York City, but terminated her relationship in November, citing mismanagement and "management's failure to keep her fully apprised". In July 2002, Spears announced she would take a six-month break from her career; however, she went back into the studio in November to record her new album. Spears' relationship with Justin Timberlake ended after three years. In November 2002, Timberlake released the song "Cry Me a River" as the second single from his solo debut album. The music video featured a Spears look-alike and fueled the rumors that she had been engaging in an affair, fueled by further rumors of possible relationships involving Timberlake's choreographer Wade Robson and Limp Bizkit frontman Fred Durst. Spears had initially denied the allegations of a possible affair involving Durst, despite the two being spotted together on multiple occasions; even claiming the two had a friendly connection. Though in 2022, she later admitted to engaging in an affair with Robson. As a response, Spears wrote the ballad "Everytime" with her backing vocalist and friend Annet Artani. In 2003, Spears worked with the electronic musician James Murphy of LCD Soundsystem, but the collaboration was unsuccessful. A track from their collaboration was leaked online in 2006. In August, Spears opened the MTV Video Music Awards with Christina Aguilera, performing "Like a Virgin". Halfway through they were joined by Madonna, whom they both kissed. The incident was highly publicized. In 2008, MTV listed the performance as the number-one opening moment in the history of MTV Video Music Awards, while Blender cited it as one of the 25 sexiest music moments on television history. Spears released her fourth studio album, In the Zone, in November 2003. She assumed more creative control by writing and co-producing most of the material. Vibe called it "A supremely confident dance record that also illustrates Spears' development as a songwriter." NPR listed the album as one of "The 50 Most Important Recording of the Decade", adding that "the decade's history of impeccably crafted pop is written on her body of work." In the Zone sold over 609,000 copies in the United States during its first week of availability in the United States, debuting at the top of the charts, making Spears the first female artist in the SoundScan era to have her first four studio albums to debut at number one. It also debuted at the top of the charts in France and the top ten in Belgium, Denmark, Sweden, and the Netherlands. The album produced four singles: "Me Against the Music", a collaboration with Madonna; "Toxic"—which won Spears her first Grammy for Best Dance Recording; "Everytime", and "Outrageous". In January 2004, Spears married her childhood friend Jason Allen Alexander at A Little White Wedding Chapel in Las Vegas, Nevada. The marriage was annulled 55 hours later, following a petition to the court that stated that Spears "lacked understanding of her actions". In March 2004, Spears embarked on the Onyx Hotel Tour in support of In the Zone. The tour was canceled in June 2004, when she fell and injured her left knee during the music video shoot for "Outrageous". She underwent arthroscopic surgery and wore a thigh brace for six weeks, followed by eight to twelve weeks of rehabilitation. That year, Spears became involved in the Kabbalah Centre through her friendship with Madonna. In July 2004, Spears became engaged to dancer Kevin Federline, whom she had met three months earlier. The romance was the subject of intense media attention, since Federline had recently broken up with actress Shar Jackson, who was still pregnant with their second child at the time. The stages of their relationship were chronicled in Spears' first reality show Britney and Kevin: Chaotic, which premiered on May 17, 2005, on UPN. Spears later referred to the show in a 2013 interview as "probably the worst thing I've done in my career". They held a wedding ceremony on September 18, 2004, but were not legally married until three weeks later on October 6 due to a delay finalizing the couple's prenuptial agreement. Shortly after, she released her first perfume, Curious, with Elizabeth Arden, which broke the company's first-week gross for a perfume. In October 2004, Spears took a career break to start a family. Greatest Hits: My Prerogative, her first greatest hits compilation album, was released in November 2004. Spears' cover version of Bobby Brown's "My Prerogative" was released as the lead single from the album, reaching the top of the charts in Finland, Ireland, Italy, and Norway. The second single, "Do Somethin'", was a top ten hit in Australia, the United Kingdom, and other countries of mainland Europe. In August 2005, Spears released "Someday (I Will Understand)", which was dedicated to her first child, a son named Sean Preston, who was born the following month. In November 2005, she released her first remix compilation, B in the Mix: The Remixes, which consists of 11 remixes. In February 2006, pictures surfaced of Spears driving with her son, Sean, on her lap instead of in a car seat. Child advocates were horrified by the photos of her holding the wheel with one hand and Sean with the other. Spears claimed that the situation happened because of a frightening encounter with paparazzi, and that it was a mistake on her part. The following month, she guest-starred on the Will & Grace episode "Buy, Buy Baby" as closeted lesbian Amber-Louise. She announced she no longer studied Kabbalah in May 2006, explaining, "my baby is my religion". Spears posed nude for the August 2006 cover of Harper's Bazaar; the photograph was compared to Demi Moore's August 1991 Vanity Fair cover. In September 2006, she gave birth to her second son, Jayden James. In November 2006, Spears filed for divorce from Federline, citing irreconcilable differences. Their divorce was finalized in July 2007, when the two reached a global settlement and agreed to share joint custody of their sons. Spears' maternal aunt Sandra Bridges Covington, with whom she had been very close, died of ovarian cancer in January 2007. In February, Spears stayed in a drug rehabilitation facility in Antigua for less than a day. The following night, she shaved her head with electric clippers at a hair salon in Tarzana, Los Angeles. She admitted herself to other treatment facilities during the following weeks. In May 2007, she produced a series of promotional concerts at House of Blues venues, titled The M+M's Tour. In October 2007, Spears lost physical custody of her sons to Federline. The reasons of the court ruling were not revealed to the public. Spears was also sued by Louis Vuitton over her 2005 music video "Do Somethin'" for upholstering her Hummer interior in counterfeit Louis Vuitton cherry blossom fabric, which resulted in the video being banned on European TV stations. In October 2007, Spears released her fifth studio album, Blackout. The album debuted atop the charts in Canada and Ireland, at number two in the U.S. Billboard 200, France, Japan, Mexico, and the United Kingdom, and the top ten in Australia, South Korea, New Zealand, and many European nations. In the United States, it was Spears' first album not to debut at number one, although, she did become the only female artist to have her first five studio albums debut at the two top slots of the chart. The album received positive reviews from critics and had sold 3.1 million copies worldwide by the end of 2008. Blackout won Album of the Year at the 2008 MTV Europe Music Awards and was listed as the fifth Best Pop Album of the Decade by The Times. Spears performed the lead single "Gimme More" at the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards. The performance was widely panned by critics. Despite the criticism, the single enjoyed worldwide success, peaking at number one in Canada and within the top ten in almost every country it charted. The second single "Piece of Me" reached the top of the charts in Ireland and reached the top five in Australia, Canada, Denmark, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. The third single "Break the Ice" was released the following year, and respectively reached numbers seven and nine in Ireland and Canada. In December 2007, Spears began a relationship with paparazzo Adnan Ghalib. In January 2008, Spears refused to relinquish custody of her sons to Federline's representatives. She was hospitalized at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center after police that had arrived at her house noted she appeared to be under the influence of an unidentified substance. The following day, Spears' visitation rights were suspended at an emergency court hearing, and Federline was given sole physical and legal custody of their sons. She was committed to the psychiatric ward of Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center and put on 5150 involuntary psychiatric hold under California state law. The court placed her under a conservatorship led by her father, Jamie Spears, and attorney Andrew Wallet, giving them complete control of her assets. She was released five days later. The following month, Spears guest-starred on the How I Met Your Mother episode "Ten Sessions" as receptionist Abby. She received positive reviews for her performance, as well as bringing the series its highest ratings ever. In July 2008, Spears regained some visitation rights after coming to an agreement with Federline and his counsel. In September 2008, Spears opened the MTV Video Music Awards with a pre-taped comedy sketch with Jonah Hill and an introduction speech. She won Best Female Video, Best Pop Video, and Video of the Year for "Piece of Me". A 60-minute introspective documentary, Britney: For the Record, was produced to chronicle Spears' return to the recording industry. Directed by Phil Griffin, For the Record was shot in Beverly Hills, Hollywood, and New York City during the third quarter of 2008. The documentary was broadcast on MTV to 5.6 million viewers for the two airings on the premiere night. It was the highest rating in its Sunday night timeslot and in the network's history. In December 2008, Spears' sixth studio album Circus was released. It received positive reviews from critics and debuted at number one in Canada, Czech Republic, and the United States, and within the top ten in many European nations. In the United States, Spears became the youngest female artist to have five albums debut at number one, earning a place in Guinness World Records. She also became the only act in the SoundScan era to have four albums debut with 500,000 or more copies sold. The album was one of the fastest-selling albums of the year, and has sold 4 million copies worldwide. Its lead single, "Womanizer", became Spears' first chart-topper on the Billboard Hot 100 since "...Baby One More Time". The single also topped the charts in Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Norway, and Sweden. It was also nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Dance Recording. In January 2009, Spears and her father obtained a restraining order against her former manager Sam Lutfi, ex-boyfriend Adnan Ghalib, and attorney Jon Eardley, all of whom had been accused of conspiring to gain control of Spears' affairs. Spears embarked on The Circus Starring Britney Spears tour in March 2009. With a gross of U.S. $131.8 million, it became the fifth highest-grossing tour of the year. In November 2009, Spears released her second greatest hits album, The Singles Collection. The album's lead and only single, "3", became her third number-one single in the U.S. In May 2010, Spears' representatives confirmed she was dating her agent, Jason Trawick, and that they had decided to end their professional relationship to focus on their personal relationship. Spears designed a limited edition clothing line for Candie's, which was released in stores in July 2010. In September 2010, she made a cameo appearance on a Spears-themed tribute episode of the television series Glee, titled "Britney/Brittany"; the episode drew the highest Nielsen rating – up to that point in the series's run – in the 18–49 demographic. In March 2011, Spears released her seventh studio album, Femme Fatale. The album peaked at number one in the United States, Canada, and Australia, and within the top ten on nearly every other chart. Its peak in the United States tied Spears with Mariah Carey and Janet Jackson for the third-most number ones among women. Femme Fatale has been certified platinum by the RIAA and as of February 2014, it had sold 2.4 million copies worldwide. The album's lead single, "Hold It Against Me" debuted atop the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Spears' fourth number-one single on the chart and making her the second artist in history to have two consecutive singles debut at number one, after Mariah Carey. The second single "Till the World Ends" peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 in May, while the third single "I Wanna Go" reached number seven in August. Femme Fatale became Spears' first album in which three of its songs reached the top ten of the chart. The fourth and final single "Criminal" was released in September 2011. The music video sparked controversy when British politicians criticized Spears for using replica guns while filming the video in a London area that had been badly affected by the 2011 England riots. Spears' management briefly responded, stating, "The video is a fantasy story featuring Britney's boyfriend, Jason Trawick, which literally plays out the lyrics of a song written three years before the riots ever happened." In April 2011, Spears appeared in a remix of Rihanna's song "S&M". It reached number one in the US later that month, giving Spears her fifth number one on the chart. On Billboard's 2011 Year-End list, Spears was ranked number fourteen on the Artists of the Year, thirty-two on Billboard 200 artists, and ten on Billboard Hot 100 artists. Spears co-wrote "Whiplash", a song from the album When the Sun Goes Down (2011) by Selena Gomez & the Scene. In June 2011, Spears embarked on her Femme Fatale Tour. The first ten dates of the tour grossed $6.2 million, landing the fifty-fifth spot on Pollstar's Top 100 North American Tours list for the half-way point of the year. The tour ended on December 10, 2011, in Puerto Rico after 79 performances. A DVD of the tour was released in November 2011. In August 2011, Spears received the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards. The next month, she released her second remix album, B in the Mix: The Remixes Vol. 2. In December 2011, Spears became engaged to her long-time boyfriend Jason Trawick, who had formerly been her agent. Trawick was legally granted a role as co-conservator, alongside her father, in April 2012. In May 2012, Spears was hired to replace Paula Abdul as a judge for the second season of the USA show of The X Factor, joining Simon Cowell, L.A. Reid, and fellow new judge Demi Lovato, who replaced Nicole Scherzinger. With a reported salary of $15 million, she became the highest-paid judge on a singing competition series in television history. However, Katy Perry broke her record in 2018 after Perry was signed for a $25-million salary to serve as a judge on ABC's revival of American Idol. Spears mentored the Teens category; her final act, Carly Rose Sonenclar, was named the runner-up of the season. Spears did not return for the show's third season and was replaced by Paulina Rubio. Spears appeared on the song "Scream & Shout" with will.i.am, which was released as the third single from his fourth studio album, #willpower (2013). The song later became Spears' sixth number-one single on the UK Singles Chart and peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100. "Scream & Shout" was among the best-selling songs of 2012 and 2013 with denoting sales of over 8.1 million worldwide, the accompanying music video was the third most-viewed video in 2013 on Vevo despite the video being released in 2012.[failed verification] In December 2012, Forbes named her music's top-earning woman of 2012, with estimated earnings of $58 million. Spears began work on her eighth studio album, Britney Jean, in December 2012, and enlisted will.i.am as its executive producer in May 2013. In January 2013, Spears and Jason Trawick ended their engagement. Trawick was also removed as Spears' co-conservator, restoring her father as the sole conservator. Following the breakup, she began dating David Lucado in March; the couple split in August 2014. During the production of Britney Jean, Spears recorded the song "Ooh La La" for the soundtrack of The Smurfs 2, which was released in June 2013. On September 17, 2013, she appeared on Good Morning America to announce her two-year concert residency at Planet Hollywood Resort & Casino in Las Vegas, titled Britney: Piece of Me. It began on December 27, 2013, and included a total of 100 shows throughout 2014 and 2015. During the same appearance, Spears announced that Britney Jean would be released on December 3, 2013, in the United States. It was released through RCA Records due to the disbandment of Jive Records in 2011, which had formed the joint RCA/Jive Label Group (initially known as BMG Label Group) between 2007 and 2011. Britney Jean became Spears' final project under her original recording contract with Jive, which had guaranteed the release of eight studio albums. The record received a low amount of promotion and had little commercial impact, reportedly due to time conflicts involving preparations for Britney: Piece of Me. Upon its release, the record debuted at number four on the U.S. Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 107,000 copies, becoming her lowest-peaking and lowest-selling album in the United States. Britney Jean debuted at number 34 on the UK Albums Chart, selling 12,959 copies in its first week. In doing so, it became Spears' lowest-charting and lowest-selling album in the country. "Work Bitch" was released as the lead single from Britney Jean in September 2013. It debuted and peaked at number 12 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 marking Spears' 31st entry on the chart and the fifth highest debut of her career on the chart, and her seventh in the top 20. It also marked Spears' 19th top 20 entry and overall her 23rd top 40 single. The song marked Spears' highest sales debut since her 2011 number-one single "Hold It Against Me". "Work Bitch" debuted and peaked at number seven on the UK Singles Chart. The song also peaked within the top ten of the charts in Brazil, Canada, France, Italy, Mexico, and Spain. The second single "Perfume" premiered in November 2013. It debuted and peaked at number 76 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100. In October 2013, she was featured as a guest vocalist on the song "SMS (Bangerz)" by Miley Cyrus, from the latter's fourth studio album Bangerz (2013). On January 8, 2014, Spears won Favorite Pop Artist at the 40th People's Choice Awards at the Microsoft Theater in Los Angeles. In August 2014, Spears confirmed she had renewed her contract with RCA and that she was writing and recording new music for her next album. Spears announced via Twitter in August 2014 that she would be releasing an intimate apparel line called "The Intimate Britney Spears". It was available to be purchased beginning on September 9, 2014, in the United States and Canada through Spears' Intimate Collection website. It was later available on September 25 for purchase in Europe. The company now ships to over 200 countries including Australia and New Zealand. On September 25, 2014, Spears confirmed on Good Morning Britain that she had extended her contract with The AXIS and Planet Hollywood Resort & Casino, to continue Britney: Piece of Me for two additional years. Spears began dating television producer Charlie Ebersol in October 2014. The pair were split in June 2015. On May 14, 2015, Spears released a single, "Pretty Girls", with Iggy Azalea. It reached number 29 on the Billboard Hot 100 and charted moderately in international territories. Spears and Azalea performed the track live at the 2015 Billboard Music Awards from The AXIS, the home of Spears' residency, to positive critical response. Entertainment Weekly praised the performance, noting "Spears gave one of her most energetic televised performances in years." On June 16, 2015, Giorgio Moroder released the album Déjà Vu, which featured Spears on "Tom's Diner". The song was released as the fourth single from the album on October 9, 2015. In an interview, Moroder praised Spears' vocals and said she "sounds so good that you would hardly recognize her". At the 2015 Teen Choice Awards, Spears received the Candie's Style Icon Award, her ninth Teen Choice Award. In November 2015, Spears guest-starred as a fictionalized version of herself on the CW series Jane the Virgin. On the show, she danced to "Toxic" with Gina Rodriguez's character. In 2016, Spears confirmed via social media that she had begun recording her ninth studio album. On March 1, 2016, V announced that Spears would appear on the cover of its 100th issue, dated March 8, 2016, in addition to revealing three different covers shot by photographer Mario Testino for the milestone publication. The V editor-in-chief, Stephen Gan, said Spears was selected because of her status as an icon in the industry, and asked: "Who in our world did not grow up listening to her music?" In May 2016, Spears launched a casual role-play gaming application, Britney Spears: American Dream. The app, created by Glu Mobile, was made available through both iOS and Google Play. On May 22, 2016, Spears performed a medley of her past singles at the 2016 Billboard Music Awards. In addition to opening the show, Spears was honored with the Billboard Millennium Award. On July 15, 2016, Spears released the lead single, "Make Me", from her ninth studio album, featuring guest vocals from American rapper G-Eazy. The album, Glory, was formally released on August 26, 2016. On August 16, 2016, MTV and Spears announced that she would perform at the 2016 MTV Video Music Awards. The performance marked Spears' first time returning to the VMA stage after her widely panned performance of "Gimme More" at the 2007 show nine years earlier. Along with "Make Me", Spears and G-Eazy also performed the latter's hit song "Me, Myself & I". Spears appeared on the cover of Marie Claire UK for the October 2016 issue. In the publication, Spears revealed that she had suffered from crippling anxiety in the past, and that motherhood played a major role in helping her overcome it. "My boys don't care if everything isn't perfect. They don't judge me", Spears said in the issue. In November 2016, during an interview with Las Vegas Blog, Spears confirmed she had already begun work on her next album, stating: "I'm not sure what I want the next album to sound like. ... I just know that I'm excited to get into the studio again and actually have already been back recording." In the same month, she released a remix version of "Slumber Party" as the second single from Glory, featuring Tinashe. She began dating "Slumber Party"'s music video co-star Sam Asghari after the two met on set. In January 2017, Spears received four wins out of four nominations at the 43rd People's Choice Awards, including Favorite Pop Artist, Female Artist, Social Media Celebrity, as well as Comedic Collaboration for a skit with Ellen DeGeneres for The Ellen DeGeneres Show. In March 2017, Spears announced that her residency concert would be performed abroad as a world tour, Britney: Live in Concert, with dates in select Asian cities. In April 2017, the Israeli Labor Party announced that it would reschedule its July primary election to avoid conflict with Spears' sold-out Tel Aviv concert, citing traffic, and security concerns. Spears' manager Larry Rudolph also announced the residency would not be extended following her contract expiration with Caesars Entertainment at the end of 2017. On April 29, 2017, Spears became the first recipient of the Icon Award at the 2017 Radio Disney Music Awards. On November 4, 2017, Spears attended the grand opening of the Nevada Childhood Cancer Foundation Britney Spears Campus in Las Vegas. Later that month, Forbes announced that Spears was the 8th highest earning female musician, earning $34 million in 2017. On December 31, 2017, Spears performed the final show of Britney: Piece of Me. The final performance reportedly brought in $1.172 million, setting a new box office record for a single show in Las Vegas, and breaking the record previously held by Jennifer Lopez. Performances of "Toxic" and "Work Bitch" were recorded on earlier dates and aired on ABC's Dick Clark's New Year's Rockin' Eve to a record audience of 25.6 million. In January 2018, Spears released her 24th perfume with Elizabeth Arden, Sunset Fantasy, and announced the Piece of Me Tour which took place in July 2018 in North America and Europe. Tickets were sold out within minutes for major cities, and additional dates were added to meet the demand. Pitbull was the supporting act for the European leg. The tour ranked at 86 and 30 on Pollstar's 2018 Year-End Top 100 Tours chart both in North America and worldwide, respectively. In total, the tour grossed $54.3 million with 260,531 tickets sold and was the sixth highest-grossing female tour of 2018, and was the United Kingdom's second best-selling female tour of 2018. On March 20, 2018, Spears was announced as part of a campaign for French luxury fashion house Kenzo. The company said it aimed to shake up the 'jungle' world of fashion with Spears' 'La Collection Memento No. 2' campaign. On April 12, 2018, Spears was honored with the 2018 GLAAD Vanguard Award at the GLAAD Media Awards for her role in "accelerating acceptance for the LGBTQ community". On April 27, 2018, Epic Rights announced a new partnership with Spears to debut her own fashion line in 2019, which would include clothing, fitness apparel, accessories, and electronics. In July 2018, Spears released her first unisex fragrance, Prerogative. On October 18, 2018, Spears announced her second Las Vegas residency show, Britney: Domination, which was set to launch at Park MGM's Park Theatre on February 13, 2019. Spears was slated to make $507,000 per show, which would have made her the highest paid act on the Las Vegas Strip. On October 21, 2018, Spears performed at the Formula One Grand Prix in Austin, the final performance of her Piece of Me Tour. On January 4, 2019, Spears announced an indefinite hiatus and the cancellation of her Las Vegas residency after her father, Jamie, suffered a near-fatal colon rupture. In March 2019, Andrew Wallet resigned as co-conservator of her estate after 11 years. Spears entered a psychiatric facility amidst stress from her father's illness that same month. The following month, a fan podcast, Britney's Gram, released a voicemail message from a source who claimed to be a former member of Spears' legal team. They alleged that Jamie had canceled the residency due to Spears' refusal to take her medication, that he had been holding her in the facility against her will since January 2019 after she violated a no-driving rule, and that her conservatorship was supposed to have ended in 2009. The allegations gave rise to a movement to terminate the conservatorship, #FreeBritney, which received support from celebrities including singers Cher, Paris Hilton, and Miley Cyrus, and the nonprofit organization American Civil Liberties Union. On April 22, 2019, fans protested outside the West Hollywood City Hall and demanded Spears' release. Spears said "all [was] well" two days later and left the facility later that month. In a May 2019 hearing, Judge Brenda Penny ordered a professional evaluation of the conservatorship. In September, Spears' ex-husband Federline obtained a restraining order against Britney's father, Jamie, following an alleged physical altercation between Jamie and one of her sons. Spears' longtime care manager, Jodi Montgomery, temporarily replaced Jamie as her conservator that same month, which also saw a hearing where no decisions about the arrangement were reached. An interactive pop-up museum dedicated to Spears, dubbed "The Zone", opened in Los Angeles in February 2020, though it was later suspended in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. She released Glory's Japanese-exclusive bonus track, "Mood Ring" as a single, and debuted a new cover of the album to streaming and digital platforms worldwide in May 2020. In August, Jamie called the #FreeBritney movement "a joke" and its organizers "conspiracy theorists". On August 17, 2020, Spears' court-appointed lawyer, Samuel D. Ingham III, submitted a court filing that documented Spears' desire to have her conservatorship altered to reflect her wishes as well as lifestyle, to instate Montgomery as her permanent conservator, and to replace Jamie with a fiduciary as conservator of her estate. Four days later, Penny extended the established arrangement until February 2021. In November 2020, Penny approved Bessemer Trust as co-conservator of Spears' estate alongside Jamie. The following month, Spears released a new deluxe edition of Glory, which includes "Mood Ring" and new songs "Swimming in the Stars" and "Matches". A documentary about Spears' career and conservatorship, Framing Britney Spears, premiered on FX in February 2021. Spears later revealed that she had seen parts of the documentary, stating that she felt humiliated by the perception of her that was presented and that she "cried for two weeks" following the initial broadcast. The following month, Ingham filed a petition to permanently replace Jamie with Montgomery as the conservator of Spears' person, citing a 2014 order that determined that Spears did not have the capacity to consent to medical treatment of any form. On June 22, 2021, shortly before Spears was set to speak to the court, The New York Times obtained confidential court documents stating that Spears had pushed for years to end her conservatorship. Spears spoke to the court on June 23, calling the conservatorship "abusive". She said she had lied by "telling the whole world I'm OK and I'm happy", and that she was traumatized and angry. The court statement received widespread media coverage and generated over 1 million shares on Twitter, over 500,000 messages using the tag #FreeBritney, and more than 150,000 messages with a new hashtag referencing the court appearance, #BritneySpeaks. On July 1, Bessemer Trust asked the judge to allow them to withdraw from the conservatorship, saying that they had been misled and had entered into the arrangement on the understanding that the conservatorship was voluntary. The same day, senators Elizabeth Warren and Bob Casey Jr. called on federal agencies to increase oversight of the country's conservatorship systems. Spears' manager of 25 years, Larry Rudolph, resigned on July 6 due to her "intention to officially retire" and on that same day, it was reported that Ingham planned to file documents to the court asking to be dismissed. In a July 14 hearing, Judge Penny approved the resignations of Bessemer Trust and Ingham. The court also approved of Spears' request to hire attorney Mathew S. Rosengart to represent her. Rosengart informed the court that he would be working to terminate the conservatorship. Later that day, Spears publicly endorsed the #FreeBritney movement for the first time, using the hashtag in a caption on an Instagram post. She mentioned feeling "blessed" after earning "real representation", referring to Judge Penny's decision to allow her to choose her own counsel. On July 26, Rosengart filed a petition seeking to remove Jamie as conservator of Spears' estate and to replace him with Jason Rubin, a Certified Public Accountant (CPA) at Certified Strategies Inc. in Woodland Hills, California. On August 12, Jamie agreed to step down as conservator at some future date, with his lawyers stating that he wanted "an orderly transition to a new conservator". On September 7, Jamie filed a petition to end the conservatorship. Five days later, Spears announced her engagement to her longtime boyfriend, Sam Asghari, through an Instagram post. On September 29, Judge Penny suspended Jamie as conservator of Spears' estate, with accountant John Zabel replacing him on a temporary basis. On November 12, Judge Penny terminated the conservatorship. In April 2022, she announced her pregnancy with Asghari's child, which ended in a miscarriage the following month. The couple married on June 9 at her home in Thousand Oaks, Los Angeles. None of Spears' immediate family (including her parents, sister, and brother) were invited; her two sons did not attend. Spears' first husband, Jason Alexander, attempted to crash the wedding by breaking into her home, armed with a knife, but was arrested. Spears had a three-year restraining order against him. On August 26, Spears and English musician Elton John released the duet "Hold Me Closer", a remake of John's 1972 single "Tiny Dancer". It was Spears' first musical release since the termination of her conservatorship. "Hold Me Closer" debuted at number six on the US Billboard Hot 100, becoming her 14th top-ten single and her highest-charting song in the chart since "Scream & Shout" (2012). It debuted at number three on the UK Singles Chart, earning Spears her 24th top-ten. Since the termination of her conservatorship, Spears' personal life, social media presence, and overall well-being have been subject to renewed media interest and fan speculation, giving rise to conspiracy theories. On January 24, 2023, deputies from the Ventura County Sheriff's Office performed a welfare check at Spears' residence after receiving several calls from fans who were concerned after she deleted her Instagram account. A spokesperson for the Sheriff's Department stated that Spears "was safe and in no danger." Spears addressed the incident on her Twitter account, asking fans to respect her privacy. Spears and the rapper will.i.am released their single, "Mind Your Business", on July 21, 2023. On August 16, it was announced Spears and Asghari separated after 14 months of marriage. In September 2023, an additional welfare check was initiated when Spears posted an Instagram video of herself dancing with knives. Her security team assured the attending officer that there was no immediate threat to her safety, and the officer departed. Spears also clarified that the knives were not real. In February 2022, Spears signed a $15 million book deal for a memoir in one of the biggest book deals of all time. The memoir, The Woman in Me, was released on October 24, 2023. It details her rise to fame, public media events, her conservatorship, and her newfound freedom. In the United States, it sold 1.1 million copies, while worldwide it sold 2.4 million copies in print sales during its first week of release. In January 2024, reports circulated that Charli XCX and Julia Michaels had been asked to write songs for Spears, and Rolling Stone reported that "management and A&R are trying to get her excited for the music". Spears denied the reports, saying she would never return to the music industry. However, she also said that she had written more than 20 songs for other artists in the previous two years. Spears has cited Madonna, Janet Jackson, and Whitney Houston as major influences, her "three favorite artists" as a child, whom she would "sing along to ... day and night in [her] living room"; Houston's "I Have Nothing" was the song she auditioned to that landed her record deal with Jive Records. Spears also named Mariah Carey as "one of the main reasons I started singing". Throughout her career, Spears has drawn frequent comparisons to Madonna and Jackson in particular, in terms of vocals, choreography, and stage presence. According to Spears: "I know when I was younger, I looked up to people ... like, you know, Janet Jackson and Madonna. And they were major inspirations for me. But I also had my own identity and I knew who I was." In the 2002 book Madonnastyle by Carol Clerk, she is quoted saying: "I have been a huge fan of Madonna since I was a little girl. She's the person that I've really looked up to. I would really, really like to be a legend like Madonna." Spears cited "That's the Way Love Goes" as the inspiration for her song "Touch of My Hand" from her album In the Zone, saying "I like to compare it to 'That's the Way Love Goes,' kind of a Janet Jackson thing." She also said her song "Just Luv Me" from her Glory album also reminded her of "That's the Way Love Goes". After meeting Spears face to face, Janet Jackson stated: "she said to me, 'I'm such a big fan; I really admire you.' That's so flattering. Everyone gets inspiration from some place. And it's awesome to see someone else coming up who's dancing and singing, and seeing how all these kids relate to her. A lot of people put it down, but what she does is a positive thing." Madonna said of Spears in the documentary Britney: For the Record: "I admire her talent as an artist ... There are aspects about her that I recognize in myself when I first started out in my career". Spears has also named Michael Jackson, Mariah Carey, Sheryl Crow, Otis Redding, Shania Twain, Brandy, Beyoncé, Natalie Imbruglia, Cher, and Prince as inspirations, and younger artists such as Selena Gomez and Ariana Grande. Spears is described as a pop artist and generally explores the genre in the form of dance-pop. Following her debut, she was credited with influencing the revival of teen pop in the late 1990s. Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone wrote: "Spears carries on the classic archetype of the rock & roll teen queen, the dungaree doll, the angel baby who just has to make a scene." In a review of ...Baby One More Time, Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic described her music as a "blend of infectious, rap-inflected dance-pop and smooth balladry." Oops!... I Did It Again saw Spears working with several R&B producers to create "a combination of bubblegum, urban soul, and raga". Her third studio album, Britney derived from the teen pop niche "[r]hythmically and melodically", but was described as "sharper, tougher than what came before", incorporating genres such as R&B, disco, and funk. Spears has explored and heavily incorporated the genres of electropop and dance music in her records, as well as influences of urban and hip hop, which are most present on In the Zone and Blackout. In the Zone also experiments with Euro trance, reggae, and Middle Eastern music. Femme Fatale and Britney Jean were also heavily influenced by electronic music genres. Spears' ninth studio album Glory is more eclectic and experimental than her previous released work. She commented that it "took a lot of time ... it's really different ... there are like two or three songs that go in the direction of more urban that I've wanted to do for a long time now, and I just haven't really done that." ...Baby One More Time and Oops!... I Did It Again address themes such as love and relationships from a teenager's point of view. Following the massive commercial success of her first two studio albums, Spears' team and producers wanted to maintain the formula that took her to the top of the charts. Spears, however, was no longer satisfied with the sound and themes covered on her records. She co-wrote five songs and choose each track's producer on her third studio album, Britney, which lyrics address the subjects of reaching adulthood, sexuality, and self-discovery. Sex, dancing, freedom, and love continued to be Spears' music main subjects on her subsequent albums. Her fifth studio effort, Blackout, also addresses issues such as fame and media scrutiny, including on the song "Piece of Me". Spears' music has also been noted for some catchphrases. The opening in her debut single "...Baby One More Time", "Oh, baby baby" is considered to be one of her signature lines and has been parodied in the media by various artists such as Nicole Scherzinger and Ariana Grande. It has been used in variating forms throughout her music, such as simply, "baby" and "oh baby", as well as the Blackout track, "Ooh Ooh Baby". On the initial development of "...Baby One More Time", Barry Weiss noted Spears' inception of the catchphrase from her strange ad-libbing during the recording of the song. He commented further, "We thought it was really weird at first. It was strange. It was not the way Max wrote it. But it worked! We thought it could be a really good opening salvo for her." The opening line in "Gimme More", "It's Britney, bitch" has become another signature phrase. An early review of Blackout suggested the phrase was "simply laughable". Amy Roberts of Bustle called it "an indelible cultural turning point, transforming a frenetic, floundering moment in the superstar's career to one of strength and empowerment". "You Got It All" The cover of the Jets's song was Spears's first recording for her then-label Jive in 1997. The prominent use of melisma and vibrato as she continuously raises key into a high range was viewed as a Mariah Carey influence. "Freakshow" The track is built around the 'wobbler' effect of dubstep, and her vocals are pitched down low, making her sound masculine. She has been credited as one of the artists who prompted the genre within a pop mainstream audience. Problems playing these files? See media help. Spears is a soprano. Other sources state that she possesses a contralto vocal range. Prior to her breakthrough success, she is described as having sung "much deeper than her highly recognizable trademark voice of today", with Eric Foster White, who worked with Spears on her debut album ...Baby One More Time, being cited as "[shaping] her voice over the course of a month" upon being signed to Jive Records "to where it is today—distinctively, unmistakably Britney". Rami Yacoub, who co-produced Spears' debut album with lyricist Max Martin, commented, "I know from Denniz Pop and Max's previous productions, when we do songs, there's kind of a nasal thing. With N' Sync and the Backstreet Boys, we had to push for that mid-nasal voice. When Britney did that, she got this kind of raspy, sexy voice." Guy Blackman of The Age wrote that "[t]he thing about Spears, though, is that her biggest songs, no matter how committee-created or impossibly polished, have always been convincing because of her delivery, her commitment and her presence. ... Spears expresses perfectly the conflicting urges of adolescence, the tension between chastity and sexual experience, between hedonism and responsibility, between confidence and vulnerability." Producer William Orbit, who worked with Spears on her album Britney Jean, stated regarding her vocals: "[Britney] didn't get so big just because [she] put on great shows; [she] got to be that way because [her voice is] unique: you hear two words and you know who is singing". Spears has also been criticized for her reliance on Auto-Tune and her vocals being "over-processed" on records. Erlewine criticized Spears' singing abilities in a review of her Blackout album, stating: "Never the greatest vocalist, her thin squawk could be dismissed early in her career as an adolescent learning the ropes, but nearly a decade later her singing hasn't gotten any better, even if the studio tools to masquerade her weaknesses have." Joan Anderman of The Boston Globe remarked that "Spears sounds robotic, nearly inhuman, on her records, so processed is her voice by digital pitch-shifters and synthesizers." Kayla Upadhyaya of The Michigan Daily has provided a different point of view, stating: "Auto-tuned and over-processed vocals define [Spears]'s voice as an artist, and in her music, auto-tune isn't so much a gimmick as it is an instrument used to highlight, contort and make a statement." Adam Markovitz of Entertainment Weekly opines that "Spears is no technical singer, that's for sure. But backed by Martin and Dr. Luke's wall of pound, her vocals melt into a mix of babytalk coo and coital panting that is, in its own overprocessed way, just as iconic and propulsive as Michael Jackson's yips or Eminem's snarls." Spears is known for her stage performances, particularly the elaborate dance routines which incorporate "belly-dancing and tempered erotic moves" that are credited with influencing "dance-heavy acts" such as Danity Kane and the Pussycat Dolls. Rolling Stone readers voted Spears their second-favorite dancing musician. Spears is described as being much more shy than her stage persona suggests. She said that performing is "a boost to [her] confidence. It's like an alter-ego type thing. Something clicks and I go and turn into this different person. I think it's kind of a gift to be able to do that." Her 2000, 2001, and 2003 MTV Video Music Awards performances were lauded, while her 2007 presentation was widely panned by critics, as she "teetered through her dance steps and mouthed only occasional words". Billboard called her 2016 "comeback" performance at the show "an effective, but not entirely glorious, bid to regain pop superstardom". After her knee injuries and personal problems, Spears' "showmanship" and dance abilities came under criticism. Serge F. Kovaleski of The New York Times watched her Las Vegas concert residency in 2016 and stated: "Once a fluid, natural dancer, Ms. Spears can appear stiff, even robotic, today, relying on flailing arms and flashy sets." Las Vegas Sun's Robin Leach seemed more impressed over Spears' efforts on the concert by saying that she delivered a "flawless performance" on the residency's opening night. It has been widely reported that Spears lip-syncs during live performances, which often prompts criticism from music critics and concert goers. Some, however, claimed that, although she "got plenty of digital support", she "doesn't merely lip-sync" during her live shows. In 2016, Sabrina Weiss of Refinery29 referred to her lip-syncing as a "well-known fact that's not even taboo anymore." Noting on the prevalence of lip-syncing, the Los Angeles Daily News opined: "In the context of a Britney Spears concert, does it really matter? ... you [just] go for the somewhat-ridiculous spectacle of it all". Spears herself has commented on the topic, arguing: "Because I'm dancing so much, I do have a little bit of playback, but there's a mixture of my voice and the playback. ... It really pisses me off because I'm busting my ass out there and singing at the same time and nobody ever gives me credit for it". In 2012, VH1 ranked Spears as the fourth Greatest Woman of the Video Era, while Billboard ranked her as the eight Greatest Music Video Artist of All Time in 2020, explaining: "The storylines, the dancing, the outfits. Right from the start, the pop princess established the lengths of her creativity with some of the most memorable videos of the last three decades." She has been retroactively noted as the pioneer for her early career videography. She conceptualized the "iconic Catholic schoolgirl and cheerleader motif" in the "...Baby One More Time" video, rejecting the animation video idea. She also made the "Oops!... I Did It Again" video "dance-centric rather than space-centric as her producers suggested". She also used her dancer's intuition to help select the beats for each track. Upon launching her music career with ...Baby One More Time, Spears was labeled a teen idol, and Rolling Stone described her as "the latest model of a classic product: the unneurotic pop star who performs her duties with vaudevillian pluck and spokesmodel charm." The April 1999 cover of Rolling Stone featured Spears lying on her bed, wearing an open top revealing her bra, and shorts, while clutching a Teletubby. The American Family Association (AFA) referred to the shoot as "a disturbing mix of childhood innocence and adult sexuality" and called on "God-loving Americans to boycott stores selling Britney's albums." Spears addressed the outcry, commenting: "What's the big deal? I have strong morals. ... I'd do it again. I thought the pictures were fine. And I was tired of being compared to Debbie Gibson and all of this bubblegum pop all the time." Shortly prior, Spears had announced publicly she would remain abstinent until marriage. An early criticism of Spears dismissed her as a "manufactured pop star, the product of a Swedish songwriting factory that had no real hand in either her music or her persona", which Vox editor Constance Grady assesses as being perpetuated from the fact that Spears debuted in the late 1990s, when music was dominated by rockism, that prizes "so-called authenticity and grittiness of rock above all else". Spears' "slick, breezy pop was an affront to rockist sensibilities, and claiming that Spears was fake was an easy way to dismiss her." Ron Levy for Rolling Stone noted that "I have to tell you, if the record company could have created more than one Britney Spears, they would have done it, and they tried!" Billboard opined that, by the time Spears released her sophomore album Oops!... I Did It Again, "There was a shift occurring in both the music and her public image: She was sharper, sexier and singing about more grown-up fare, setting the stage for 2001's Britney, which shed her innocent skin and ushered her into adulthood." Britney's lead single "I'm a Slave 4 U" and its music video were also credited for distancing her from her previous "wholesome bubblegum star" image. Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic remarked, "If 2001's Britney was a transitional album, capturing Spears at the point when she wasn't a girl and not yet a woman, its 2003 follow-up, In the Zone, is where she has finally completed that journey and turned into Britney, the Adult Woman." Erlewine likened Spears to fellow singer Christina Aguilera, explaining that both equated "maturity with transparent sexuality and the pounding sounds of nightclubs". Brittany Spanos of LA Weekly stated that Spears "set the bar for the 'adulthood' transition teen pop stars often struggle with". Spears' erratic behavior and personal problems during 2006–2008 were highly publicized and affected both her career and public image. Erlewine reflected on this period of her life, stating that "each new disaster [was] stripping away any residual sexiness in her public image". In a 2008 article, Rolling Stone's Vanessa Grigoriadis described her much-publicized personal issues as "the most public downfall of any star in history". Spears later received favorable media attention; Billboard wrote that her appearance at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards "was a picture of professionalism and poise" after her "disastrous" performance the previous year, while Business Insider ran an article on how she had "lost control of her life ... and then made an incredible career comeback". In 2017, Spears said: "I think I had to give myself more breaks through my career and take responsibility for my mental health. ... I wrote back then, that I was lost and didn't know what to do with myself. I was trying to please everyone around me because that's who I am deep inside. There are moments where I look back and think: 'What the hell was I thinking?'" In September 2002, Spears was placed at number eight on VH1's 100 Sexiest Artists list. She was placed at number one on FHM's 100 Sexiest Women in the World list in 2004, and, in December 2012, Complex ranked her 12th on its 100 Hottest Female Singers of All Time list. Remarking upon her perceived image as a sex symbol, Spears stated: "When I'm on stage, that's my time to do my thing and go there and be that — and it's fun. It's exhilarating just to be something that you're not. And people tend to believe it." In 2003, People cited her as one of the 50 Most Beautiful People. Spears is recognized as a gay icon and received the 2018 GLAAD Vanguard Award at the GLAAD Media Awards for her role in "accelerating acceptance for the LGBTQ community". She addressed the "unwavering loyalty" and "lack of judgment" of her LGBTQ fans in Billboard's Love Letters to the LGBTQ Community. She said: "Your stories are what inspire me, bring me joy, and make me and my sons strive to be better people." Manuel Betancourt of Vice wrote about the "queer adoration", especially of gay men, on Spears, and said that "Where other gay icons exude self-possession, Spears' fragile resilience has made her an even more fascinating role model, closer to Judy Garland than to Lady Gaga ... she's a glittering mirror ball, a fractured reflection of those men on the dance floor back onto themselves." HuffPost's Ben Appel attributed Spears' status as a gay icon to "her oh-so-innocent/"not that innocent" Monroe-like sensuality, her sweet, almost saccharine nature, her beyond basic but addictive pop songs, her dance moves, her phoenix-out-of-the-fire comeback from a series of mental health crises, and her unmistakable tenderness. Britney is camp. She is a fashion plate. A doll. Britney is a drag queen." Since her early years in the public eye, Spears has been a tabloid fixture and a paparazzi target. Steve Huey of AllMusic remarked that "among female singers of [Spears'] era ... her celebrity star power was rivaled only by Jennifer Lopez." 'Britney Spears' was Yahoo!'s most popular search term between 2005 and 2008, and has been in a total of seven different years. Spears was named as Most Searched Person in the Guinness World Records book edition 2007 and 2009. She was later named as the most searched person of the decade 2000–2009. As a public figure, Spears "has never been known to her fans as a politically active, committed—or even aware—entertainer." In a 2003 interview with Tucker Carlson, she commented on President George W. Bush and the Iraq War, saying that "we should just trust our president in every decision that he makes ... and be faithful in what happens". Michael Moore included the footage of Spears' answer in his "anti-Bush" documentary Fahrenheit 9/11, which, according to The Washington Times's James Frazier, presented her "as an example of a naive American blindly trusting a dishonest commander in chief" and fueled the "urban legend" of a "conservative" Spears. Frazier also said that "the few positions she has taken can hardly be considered conservative", such as supporting same-sex marriage. In 2016, Spears posted pictures of a meeting with Hillary Clinton on social media. She described Clinton as "an inspiration and [a] beautiful voice for women around the world". In December 2017, Spears publicly showed support for the DREAM Act in the wake of the announcement that Donald Trump would end the DACA policy, which previously granted undocumented immigrants who came to the country as minors a renewable two-year period of deferred action from deportation. She posted a photo of herself on social media wearing a black T-shirt that reads "We Are All Dreamers" in white letters. The caption read, "Tell Congress to pass the #DreamAct". In 2020, amidst the COVID-19 pandemic, Spears posted an image on Instagram and wrote: "During this time of isolation ... We will feed each other, redistribute wealth, strike. We will understand our own importance from the places we must stay", along with three emoji roses, "a symbol commonly used by the Democratic Socialists of America". She later voiced support for the Black Lives Matter movement and George Floyd protests in the wake of his murder, saying: "My heart breaks for my friends in the black community ... and for everything going on in our country. Right now I think we should all do what we can to listen, learn, do better, and use our voices for good." On September 15, 2021, Spears was named one of the 100 most influential people of 2021 by Time. A few days before the editors's list was released, Spears was put at the top of the readers voting list of which personalities should be included on the annual Time 100 list. Deemed an icon of 2021, editors highlighted the impact of her fight against her conservatorship as well as of the #FreeBritney movement. In October 2021, Spears thanked her fans and the #FreeBritney movement for "freeing me from my conservatorship". Britney Spears was also named most famous celebrity from Louisiana according to a study done by Baton Rouge. Referred to as the "Princess of Pop", Spears was credited as one of the "driving force[s] behind the return of teen pop in the late 1990s". Rolling Stone's Stacy Lambe explained that she "help[ed] to usher in a new era for the genre that had gone dormant in the decade that followed New Kids on the Block. ... Spears would lead an army of pop stars ... built on slick Max Martin productions, plenty of sexual innuendo and dance-heavy performances. [She became] one of the most successful artists of all time—and a cautionary tale for a generation, whether they paid attention or not." In a 2021 article for Time, Maura Johnston opined that "Spears' legacy as a pop artist is complex, made up of dazzling musical heights and music-business-borne lows". Johnston also commented: "While Spears' catalog is part of the canon that defines the first 20 years of this millennium, one hopes that her public struggles, and the strength she's shown while enduring them, will lead to her cementing her true legacy: Reshaping the machine that turns those songs into cultural touchstones." Glamour contributor Christopher Rosa described her as "one of pop music's defining voices. ... When she emerged onto the scene in 1998 with ...Baby One More Time, the world hadn't seen a performer like her. Not since Madonna had a female artist affected the genre so profoundly." Billboard's Robert Kelly observed that Spears' "sexy and coy" vocals on her debut single "...Baby One More Time" "kicked off a new era of pop vocal stylings that would influence countless artists to come." In 2020, Rolling Stone ranked the song at number one on a list of the 100 Greatest Debut Singles of All Time and Rob Sheffield described it as "One of those pop manifestos that announces a new sound, a new era, a new century. But most of all, a new star ... With "...Baby One More Time", [Spears] changed the sound of pop forever: It's Britney, bitch. Nothing was ever the same." Spears was at the forefront of the female teen pop explosion starting in 1999 and extending through the 2000s, leading the pack of Christina Aguilera, Jessica Simpson, and Mandy Moore. All of these performers had been developing material in 1998, but the market changed dramatically in December 1998 when Spears' single and video were charting highly. RCA Records quickly signed Aguilera and released her debut single to capitalize on Spears' success, producing her debut hit single "Genie in a Bottle". Simpson consciously modeled her persona as more mature than Spears; her "I Wanna Love You Forever" charted in September 1999, and her album Sweet Kisses followed shortly after. Moore's first single, "Candy", hit the airwaves a month before Simpson's single, but it did not perform as well on the charts; Moore was often seen as less accomplished than Spears and the others, coming in fourth of the "pop princesses". Fueling media stories about their competition for first place, Spears and Aguilera traded barbs but also compliments through the 2000s. Alim Kheraj of Dazed called Spears "one of pop's most important pioneers". After eighteen years as a performer, Billboard described her as having "earned her title as one of pop's reigning queens. Since her early days as a Mouseketeer, [Spears] has pushed the boundaries of 21st century sounds, paving the way for a generation of artists to shamelessly embrace glossy pop and redefine how one can accrue consistent success in the music industry." Entertainment Weekly's Adam Markovitz described Spears as "an American institution, as deeply sacred and messed up as pro wrestling or the filibuster." In 2012, she was ranked as the fourth VH1's 50 Greatest Women of the Video Era show list. VH1 also cited her among its choices on the 100 Greatest Women in Music in 2012 and the 200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons in 2003. In 2020, Billboard ranked her eight on its 100 Greatest Music Video Artists of all-time list. Spears and her work have influenced various artists including Katy Perry, Meghan Trainor, Demi Lovato, Kelly Key, Kristinia DeBarge, Little Boots, Charli XCX, Marina Diamandis, the Weeknd, Tegan and Sara, Pixie Lott, Grimes, Selena Gomez, Hailee Steinfeld, Pabllo Vittar, Tinashe, Victoria Justice, Cassie, Leah Wellbaum of Slothrust, the Saturdays, Normani, Miley Cyrus, Cheryl, Lana Del Rey, Ava Max, Billie Eilish, Sam Smith, and Rina Sawayama. During the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards, Lady Gaga said that Spears "taught us all how to be fearless, and the industry wouldn't be the same without her." Gaga has also cited Spears as an influence, calling her "the most provocative performer of my time." Before Spears joined The X Factor, Simon Cowell explained that he is "fascinated by [Britney]. The fact that she's one of the most talked about – not just pop stars – but people in the world today, means that you've got this star power. ... She's still hot, she's still having hit records and she's still controversial, there's a reason for that." Marina Diamandis named Spears as the main influence behind her album Electra Heart. Lana Del Rey has said that the music video for "Toxic" inspires her. Spears has had a direct influence on singer Porcelain Black's work after growing up around her music as a child. Black describes her music as a "love child between" Spears and Marilyn Manson. Rita Ora's 2019 music video for "Only Want You" was inspired by Spears' "Everytime" music video, and said in a stories from Instagram, "Hey @britneyspears this was for you because I love you so. Pay homage to the ones who inspire! #icon." Spears has been credited with redefining Las Vegas residencies as a retirement place for musicians. Her debut concert residency Britney: Piece of Me was described as "the natural evolution of Celine Dion's powerhourse Vegas residency, a still-charting star of another generation redefining the role of Strip headliner." Forbes named Spears the sixth-highest-earning female musician of 2015." She is credited with influencing and paving the way for other artists's residencies such as Jennifer Lopez's Jennifer Lopez: All I Have, Bruno Mars's Bruno Mars at Park MGM, and Backstreet Boys' Backstreet Boys: Larger Than Life. The arrival of Spears "saw the pop promoters finally tap into the younger crowd arriving in town for a good time." Spears' much-publicized personal problems and her subsequent career comeback have inspired some artists. Gwyneth Paltrow's character in the 2010 film Country Strong was inspired by Spears' treatment by the media. According to film director Shana Fest, "that's where this movie came from. I mean, I was seeing what was happening in the media to Britney Spears. I think it's tragic how we treat people who give us so much, and we love to see them knocked down to build them back up again, to knock them down again." Nicki Minaj has cited Spears' comeback after her much-publicized personal issues as an inspiration. Spears' hounding by paparazzi and personal problems also inspired Barry Manilow's album 15 Minutes. Manilow said: "She couldn't have a life without them pulling up next to her car and following her and driving her crazy to the point where, that was around the time she shaved off her hair. ... We all looked at it in horror ... So it seemed like a thing to be writing an album about." Bebo Norman wrote a song about Spears, called "Britney", which was inspired by "culture's make-or-break treatment of celebrities." In 2008, Salon published an article titled "The Britney Economy" describing how Spears is a driving force in music and fashion, stimulating consumer purchases and media coverage. Magazines, paparazzi, and record labels make millions of dollars, and Spears profits to a lesser degree. Along with Alicia Silverstone, Christy Turlington, and Naomi Campbell, Spears has been credited with introducing the navel piercing to mainstream culture. Spears' awards and accolades include a Grammy Award; 15 Guinness world records; six MTV Video Music Awards, including the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award; seven Billboard Music Awards, including the Millennium Award; the inaugural Radio Disney Icon Award; the GLAAD Media Award's Vanguard Award; and a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Spears is listed by the Guinness World Records as having the "Best-selling album by a teenage solo artist" for her debut studio album, ...Baby One More Time, which sold over 13 million copies in the United States. Melissa Ruggieri of the Richmond Times-Dispatch reported: "She's also marked for being the best-selling teenage artist. Before she turned 20 in 2001, Spears had sold over 37 million albums worldwide". As of 2023[update], according to the Evening Standard, Spears has sold over 150 million records worldwide, making her one of the best-selling music artists of all time. She also sold more than 70 million records in United States, including 36.9 million digital singles and 33.6 million digital albums. Spears is further recognized as the best-selling female albums artist of the 2000s in the United States, as well as the fifth overall. In December 2009, Billboard ranked Spears the 8th Artist of the 2000s decade in the United States. She is one of the few artists in history to have had a number-one single and a number-one studio album in the US during each of the three decades of her career. With "3" in 2009 and "Hold It Against Me" in 2011, she became the second artist after Mariah Carey in the Hot 100's history to debut at number one with two or more songs. In 2016, Spears ranked at number twenty on Billboard's Greatest Of All Time Top Dance Club Artists list. In 2000, Spears released a limited edition of sunglasses titled Shades of Britney. In 2001, she signed a deal with shoe company Skechers, and a $7–8 million promotional deal with Pepsi, their biggest entertainment deal at the time. Aside from numerous commercials with the latter during that year, she also appeared in a 2004 Pepsi television commercial in the theme of "Gladiators" with singers Beyoncé, Pink, and Enrique Iglesias. On June 19, 2002, she released her first multi-platform video game, Britney's Dance Beat, which received positive reviews. In March 2009, Spears was announced as the new face of clothing brand Candie's. Dari Marder, chief marketing officer for the brand, said: "Everybody loves a comeback and nobody's doing it better than Britney. She's just poised for even greater success." In 2010, Spears designed a limited edition line for the brand, which was released in stores in July 2010. In 2011, she teamed up with Sony, Make Up For Ever, and Plenty of Fish to release her music video for "Hold It Against Me", earning her $500,000 for the product placement. Spears also teamed up with Hasbro in 2012 to release an exclusive version of Twister Dance, which includes a remix of "Till the World Ends". She was also featured on a commercial, which was directed by Ray Kay, to promote the game. Spears was also featured on the commercial of Twister Dance Rave, and the game included a Twister remix of "Circus". In March 2018, it was revealed that Spears would be the face of Kenzo, a contemporary French luxury clothing house. Spears' range of commercial deals and products also includes beauty care products and perfumes. She released her first perfume with Elizabeth Arden, Curious in 2004, which broke the company's first-week gross for a perfume. By 2009, she had released seven more perfumes including Fantasy. In 2010, Spears released her eighth fragrance, Radiance. In 2011, Radiance was reissued as a new perfume titled Cosmic Radiance. Worldwide, Spears sold over one million bottles in the first five years, with gross receipts of $1.5 billion. In 2016, Spears contacted Glu Mobile to create her own role-playing game, Britney Spears: American Dream. The app officially launched in May 2016 and is compatible with iOS and Android. On June 17, 2016, Spears announced the release of her twentieth fragrance, Private Show. As of January 2018[update], Spears has released 24 fragrances through Elizabeth Arden. Spears founded The Britney Spears Foundation, a charitable entity set up to help children in need. The philosophy behind the Foundation was that music and entertainment has a healing quality that can benefit children. The Foundation also supported the annual Britney Spears Camp for the Performing Arts, where campers had the opportunity to explore and develop their talents. In April 2002, through the efforts of Spears and The Britney Spears Foundation, a grant of $1 million was made to the Twin Towers Fund to support the children of uniformed service heroes affected by the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, including New York City Fire Department and its Emergency Medical Services Command, the New York City Police Department, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, the New York State Office of court Administration and other government offices. However, it was reported in 2008 that the Foundation had a deficit of $200,000. After Spears went through conservatorship, her father and lawyer Andrew Wallet zeroed out the effort, leading to its closure in 2011. On October 30, 2001, Spears, alongside Bono and other popular recording artists under the name "Artists Against AIDS Worldwide", released an album consisting of multiple versions of Marvin Gaye's "What's Going On", intending to benefit AIDS programs in Africa and other impoverished regions. In the wake of Hurricane Katrina in 2005, Spears donated $350,000 to Music Rising. Later in 2011, she raised $200,000 during An Evening of Southern Style at a private residence in Beverly Hills to benefit the St. Bernard Project, with the help of several celebrities, including Hilary Duff, Selena Gomez, Kelly Osbourne, Kellan Lutz, and Kim Kardashian. Spears has also helped several charities during her career, including Madonna's Kabbalah-based Spirituality for Kids, cancer charity Gilda's Club Worldwide, Promises Foundation, and United Way, with the latter two focused on giving families from various disadvantaged situations new hope and stable foundations for the future. On October 24, 2015, Spears donated $120,000 to the Nevada Childhood Cancer Foundation. In addition, $1 of each ticket sale for her Las Vegas residency, Britney: Piece of Me, was donated to the nonprofit organization. Spears also fundraised for the charity through social media, in addition to selling limited edition merchandise, with all proceeds going to the NCCF. On October 27, 2016, Spears partnered with Zappos and XCYCLE to host the Britney Spears Piece of Me Charity Ride in Boca Park, Las Vegas to raise additional money toward her goal of $1 million for the NCCF, with $450,000 having already been raised from Spears' ticket sales and merchandise. Participants were entered for a chance to win a spin class with Spears herself. The event ultimately went on to raise $553,130. The fundraising ultimately led to the development of the NCCF Britney Spears Campus in Las Vegas, which saw its grand opening on November 4, 2017. Spears also regularly participates in Spirit Day to combat bullying of LGBTQ youth and bullying. In March 2020, Spears was participating in the #DoYourPartChallenge, which entails helping people with anything they might need during the COVID-19 pandemic. She told fans to send her messages on Instagram if they need supportive words during the coronavirus pandemic, with Spears picking three fans. In February 2024, Spears partnered with New York City dessert shop Glace, to create the "Britney Brûlée" dessert, with a portion of the proceeds from its sales being donated to The Trevor Project. ...Baby One More Time (1999) Oops!... I Did It Again (2000) Britney (2001) In the Zone (2003) Blackout (2007) Circus (2008) Femme Fatale (2011) Britney Jean (2013) Glory (2016) Longshot (2001) Crossroads (2002) Austin Powers in Goldmember (2002) Pauly Shore Is Dead (2003) Fahrenheit 9/11 (2004) Corporate Animals (2019) ...Baby One More Time Tour (1999) (You Drive Me) Crazy Tour (2000) Oops!... I Did It Again Tour (2000) Dream Within a Dream Tour (2001–2002) The Onyx Hotel Tour (2004) The M+M's Tour (2007) The Circus Starring Britney Spears (2009) Femme Fatale Tour (2011) Britney: Live in Concert (2017) Piece of Me Tour (2018) Britney: Piece of Me (2013–2017) Heart to Heart (with Lynne Spears) (2000) A Mother's Gift (with Lynne Spears) (2001) Crossroads Diary (with Felicia Culotta) (2002) The Woman in Me (2023) Biography portal Pop music portal Mississippi portal United States portal Artists with the most number-one European singles Forbes Celebrity 100 List of artists who reached number one in the United States List of best-selling singles List of Billboard Hot 100 chart achievements and milestones List of dancers List of highest-certified music artists in the United States List of most expensive music videos List of most-followed Twitter accounts Time 100 Peters, Beth (July 1, 1999). True Brit: The Story of Singing Sensation Britney Spears. Random House Digital, Inc. pp. 11–12. ISBN 978-0-345-43687-0. Retrieved July 10, 2012. Sheffield, Rob (October 30, 2017). "Britney Spears' 'Blackout': A Salute to Her Misunderstood Punk Masterpiece". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 3, 2020. Retrieved June 9, 2019. "Britney Spears asks to address court over conservatorship case". BBC News. April 28, 2021. Archived from the original on May 6, 2021. Retrieved May 6, 2021. Coscarelli, Joe (November 12, 2021). "Britney Spears Conservatorship Has Been Terminated: Live Updates". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 12, 2021. Retrieved November 12, 2021. "Ask Billboard: Britney Spears' Career Sales". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 20, 2018. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Grein, Paul (May 29, 2009). "Chart Watch Extra: The Top 20 Album Sellers Of The 2000s". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on January 15, 2012. Retrieved May 3, 2010. "Nielsen SoundScan 2009 End Decade Report (Page 7)" (PDF). Nielsen Soundscan. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 12, 2019. Retrieved January 11, 2019. "Beyonce, 'NSYNC, Outkast Top Decade-End Sales List". MTV. Archived from the original on January 11, 2019. Retrieved January 11, 2019. "Artists of the Decade". Billboard. December 9, 2009. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Britney Spears Snares Sixth No. 1 on Billboard 200 with 'Femme Fatale'". Billboard. April 6, 2011. Archived from the original on March 19, 2022. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Britney Spears 'X Factor' Deal: By The Numbers". MTV. October 5, 2012. Archived from the original on August 21, 2014. Retrieved June 26, 2014. "Beatles, Britney Most Powerful Music Artists, Forbes Says | News". MTV. October 2, 2001. Archived from the original on July 27, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Billboard, Jason Lipshutz (November 29, 2012). "Dr. Dre Is Forbes' 2012 Highest-Paid Musician". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 27, 2022. Retrieved July 28, 2022. "Most-Searched Celebrities Of The Past 12 Years: Britney Spears Dominates List". HuffPost. December 5, 2012. Archived from the original on April 7, 2019. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Hilton, Paris (September 15, 2021). "Britney Spears: The 100 Most Influential People of 2021". Time. Archived from the original on September 15, 2021. Retrieved November 16, 2021. "Here's Who Won Time's 2021 Time100 Reader Poll". Time. Archived from the original on December 6, 2021. Retrieved December 7, 2021. "Britney Spears – Age, Songs, & Kids – Biography". A&E Television Networks. Biography. Retrieved June 17, 2019. Day, Liz; Stark, Samantha; Coscarelli, Joe (June 22, 2021). "Britney Spears Quietly Pushed for Years to End Her Conservatorship". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 23, 2021. Retrieved June 22, 2021. Spears & Craker 2008, pp. 4, 8. "But on my mama's side, the family tree is a little more colorful and glamorous. Her father, my grandfather, was Anthony Portelli, who came from the island of Malta." Spears & Craker 2008, p. 211 Thomas, Holly (October 27, 2023). "Opinion: Britney Spears' howl of rage is one we all need to hear". CNN. Archived from the original on October 27, 2023. Retrieved October 27, 2023. Soper, Matt (October 1, 2010). Raising Up a Testimony. Xulon Press. ISBN 9781609578183. Archived from the original on October 26, 2023. Retrieved December 2, 2017 – via Google Books. Smit, Christopher R. (December 29, 2017). The Exile of Britney Spears: A Tale of 21st Century Consumption. Intellect Books. ISBN 9781841504100. Archived from the original on October 26, 2023. Retrieved December 2, 2017 – via Google Books. Lofton, Kathryn (September 12, 2017). Consuming Religion. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 9780226482125. Archived from the original on October 26, 2023. Retrieved December 2, 2017 – via Google Books. Rousselle, Christine (August 6, 2021). "Update: Britney Spears says she is 'Catholic now' in social media post". Catholic News Agency. Archived from the original on August 7, 2021. Retrieved August 7, 2021. Naumann, Ryann (September 5, 2022). "'I Don't Believe In God Anymore': Britney Spears Posts 2-Minute Recording Speaking To Son Jayden As Public Family Fight Intensifies". Radar Online. Archived from the original on September 5, 2022. Retrieved September 5, 2022. Spears & Craker 2008, p. 56 Daly, Steven (April 1999). "Britney Spears, Teen Queen: Rolling Stone's 1999 Cover Story". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 26, 2018. Retrieved June 11, 2019. "Britney Spears' Biography". Fox News. July 31, 2008. Archived from the original on January 31, 2011. Retrieved June 6, 2010. "Pop's (Sexy) Teen Angel". Newsweek. February 28, 1999. Archived from the original on July 11, 2021. Retrieved July 28, 2021. Spears & Craker 2008, p. 75 Laufenberg 2005, p. 616 Mundy, Chris (May 25, 2000). "Cover Story: The Girl Can't Help It". Rolling Stone. ISSN 0035-791X. Hughes 2005, p. 145 Taylor, Chuck (October 24, 1998). "Air Waves: Jive's Britney Spears Sets Top 40 Abuzz With Rhythm-Leaning 'Baby One More Time'". Billboard. Vol. 110, no. 43. ISSN 0006-2510. Archived from the original on October 26, 2023. Retrieved March 11, 2011. Hughes 2005, p. 147 Blandford 2002, p. 28 Blandford 2002, p. 30 Blandford 2002, p. 29 Bronson 2003, p. 377 "Rock on the Net: 42nd Annual Grammy Awards – 2000". National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. RockOntheNet.com. 2010. Archived from the original on December 20, 2007. Retrieved June 5, 2010. "Record-Breakers and Trivia". Everyhit.com. 2010. Archived from the original on April 19, 2012. Retrieved June 5, 2010. "Best Selling Singles of All Time". Everyhit.com. 2010. Archived from the original on September 28, 2018. Retrieved June 5, 2010. "Britney Spears". The Official Charts Company. 2010. Archived from the original on November 4, 2014. Retrieved June 5, 2010. Pellegrini, Francesca (January 12, 2024). "«...Baby One More Time» fête ses 25 ans : 10 anecdotes sur le premier album de Britney Spears". Vanity Fair (in French). Archived from the original on January 12, 2024. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "The Evolution of Britney". ELLE. Archived from the original on November 12, 2018. Retrieved May 14, 2019. "Britney Spears' Debut Album 'Baby One More Time' Turns 15". HuffPost. Archived from the original on November 9, 2018. Retrieved May 14, 2019. Stevenson, Jane (July 10, 1999). "Spears takes aim at fame". Jam!. Quebecor Inc. Archived from the original on July 10, 2012. Retrieved January 1, 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Blandford 2002, p. 38 Skanse, Richard (May 25, 2000). "Oops!...She Sold 1.3 Million Albums: Britney Spears". Rolling Stone. ISSN 0035-791X. Strecker, Erin (May 15, 2015). "Britney Spears' 'Oops!...I Did It Again': 15 Best Moments for 15th Anniversary". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Sheffield, Rob (June 8, 2000). "Britney Spears: Oops!...I Did It Again: Music Reviews : Rolling Stone". Rolling Stone. ISSN 0035-791X. "ultratop.be – Britney Spears – Oops!... I Did It Again". Ultratop. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on August 23, 2011. Retrieved June 5, 2010. "Rock on the Net: 43rd Annual Grammy Awards – 2001". National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. RockOntheNet.com. 2010. Archived from the original on March 11, 2015. Retrieved June 6, 2010. Spears, Britney (May 9, 2000). Britney Spears' Heart to Heart (three rivers press ed.). New York: Three Rivers Press. ISBN 978-0-609-80701-9. Montgomery, James (September 6, 2007). "Britney Spears' Greatest VMA Hits: Barely There Costumes, Giant Snakes And A Scandalous Lip-Lock". MTV. Archived from the original on April 2, 2010. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Roper, Will (September 19, 2017). "University of Nebraska High School provides online education to students across the world". Daily Nebraskan. Archived from the original on September 20, 2017. Retrieved February 19, 2019. Gornstein, Leslie (March 11, 2007). "Did Britney and Jessica go to high school?". E!. Archived from the original on February 20, 2019. Retrieved February 19, 2019. "Guess Which Celebrities Vacation in Destin, Florida?". TripShock. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved January 14, 2016. "Britney Spears says she had abortion when dating Justin Timberlake". BBC News. October 17, 2023. Archived from the original on October 20, 2023. Retrieved October 20, 2023. "Britney Spears and Justin Timberlake: Everytime video revisited following abortion news". BBC News. October 18, 2023. Archived from the original on October 22, 2023. Retrieved October 21, 2023. Nelson, Jeff (October 17, 2023). "Britney Spears Reveals She Had an Abortion Because Justin Timberlake 'Didn't Want to Be a Father' (Exclusive)". People. Archived from the original on October 21, 2023. Retrieved October 22, 2023. "BRITNEY SPEARS TO HOST AMERICAN MUSIC AWARDS". MTV. November 2, 2000. Archived from the original on February 9, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2022. "The most memorable Super Bowl halftime shows". Entertainment Weekly. February 2, 2009. Archived from the original on April 17, 2021. Retrieved December 1, 2020. Moss, Corey (October 25, 2001). "Britney Says Britney Reflects Who Britney Is". MTV. Archived from the original on October 6, 2010. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "ultratop.be – Britney Spears – Britney". Ultratop. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on August 29, 2011. Retrieved June 5, 2010. Porto, Bruno (January 7, 2003). "Sex Machines". O Globo (in Brazilian Portuguese). Globo.com. Archived from the original on June 3, 2020. Retrieved June 21, 2019. and 'Britney', released in 2001, sold 10 million copies (150,000 in Brazil). Alt URL Erlewine, Stephen Thomas (2001). "Britney – Overview". AllMusic. Archived from the original on October 26, 2023. Retrieved June 5, 2010. "Rock on the Net: 45th Annual Grammy Awards – 2001". National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. RockOntheNet.com. 2010. Archived from the original on July 4, 2013. Retrieved June 6, 2010. "The New Classics: Music". Entertainment Weekly. June 18, 2007. Archived from the original on July 13, 2015. Retrieved December 22, 2021. "ultratop.be – Britney Spears – I'm a Slave 4 U". Ultratop. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on March 19, 2013. Retrieved June 6, 2010. Rubin, Rebecca (March 30, 2020). "'Tiger King's' Doc Antle and Britney Spears Shared Stage for 'I'm a Slave 4 U' VMAs Performance". Variety. Archived from the original on March 31, 2020. Retrieved March 31, 2020. Vena, Jocelyn (August 25, 2011). "Britney Spears' Iconic VMA History: Snakes, Stripteases And Smooches". MTV. Archived from the original on January 3, 2022. Retrieved December 21, 2021. McHugh, Catherine (July 1, 2002). "Britney's Big Splash". Live Design. Archived from the original on October 14, 2013. Retrieved June 6, 2010. Singlerland, Amy L. (August 1, 2002). "Singin' in the Rain". Live Design. Archived from the original on April 4, 2012. Retrieved June 6, 2010. "McCartney Notches Year's Highest-Grossing Tour". Billboard. 2002. Archived from the original on April 28, 2022. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Forbes Celebrity 100 2002". Forbes. 2002. Archived from the original on December 2, 2010. Retrieved June 6, 2010. "Crossroads Movie Reviews, Pictures". Rotten Tomatoes. Flixster. 2002. Archived from the original on June 9, 2010. Retrieved June 6, 2010. "Crossroads Film Review – Crossroads Film Pictures, Crossroads Film Trailer". View London. 2 View Group Ltd. April 2, 2002. Archived from the original on June 17, 2011. Retrieved June 6, 2010. Hughes 2005, p. 152 Moss, Corey (November 26, 2002). "Britney Spears Bails on Her New York Restaurant, Nyla". MTV. Archived from the original on September 7, 2014. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Moss, Corey (November 5, 2002). "Britney Spears' Hiatus Is History". MTV. Archived from the original on August 31, 2014. Retrieved December 21, 2021. McIntosh, Steven (April 30, 2021). "Britney Spears: Does the latest documentary tell us anything new?". BBC News. Archived from the original on July 2, 2021. Retrieved May 6, 2021. Sanchez, Rowena Joy A. (October 4, 2009). "'This one's for you': Ex-music couples sing of their love woes". Manila Bulletin. Archived from the original on October 29, 2009. Retrieved June 6, 2010. Sawyer, Diane (November 23, 2003). "Britney revealed". ninemsn. PBL Media / Microsoft. Archived from the original on March 6, 2012. Retrieved June 6, 2010. "Fred Durst Just Won't Drop Britney". Archived from the original on September 1, 2023. Retrieved September 19, 2023. "New Limp Bizkit Song Disses Durst's Fizzled Flame". MTV. Archived from the original on October 9, 2023. Retrieved September 19, 2023. "Britney Spears Admits to Cheating on Justin Timberlake with Wade Robson". E! Online. October 19, 2022. Archived from the original on October 20, 2023. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Stern, Bradley (February 2010). "Annet Artani: From "Everytime" to "Alive"". MuuMuse.com. Archived from the original on February 11, 2010. Retrieved June 6, 2010. "Fred tells all about Britney affair". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 1, 2023. Retrieved September 19, 2023. "Britney not that innocent, says Limp Bizkit front man". March 2, 2003. Archived from the original on September 1, 2023. Retrieved September 19, 2023. Jacks, Brian (March 19, 2009). "Fred Durst Looks Back at His Relationship With Britney Spears". MTV. Archived from the original on September 7, 2014. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "New Limp Bizkit Song with Lil Wayne Mocks Britney Spears, Hits On Jessica Biel". March 25, 2013. Archived from the original on October 26, 2023. Retrieved September 19, 2023. "James Murphy recalls working with 'strange' Britney". NME. March 21, 2007. Archived from the original on May 7, 2023. Retrieved August 30, 2019. Vera, Jocelyn (August 24, 2008). "The Top 10 Opening Moments in VMA History: From Madonna To The Present". Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Collis, Jonah; Weiner (February 15, 2004). "The 25 Sexiest Music Moments in TV History!". Blender. ISSN 1534-0554. "In The Zone reviews at Metacritic.com". Metacritic. 2003. Archived from the original on August 30, 2012. Retrieved June 6, 2010. "The 50 Most Important Recordings: S-Z". NPR. November 16, 2009. Archived from the original on January 22, 2011. Retrieved June 6, 2010. "ultratop.be – Britney Spears – In the Zone". Ultratop. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on August 29, 2011. Retrieved June 6, 2010. "Judge dissolves Britney's 'joke' wedding". NBCUniversal / Microsoft. Associated Press. April 6, 2004. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Vineyard, Jennifer (March 2, 2004). "Britney Checking into Onyx Hotel Wearing Rubberlike Outfit". MTV. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Silverman, Stephen M. (June 16, 2004). "Britney Cancels Tour Due to Bad Knee". People. Archived from the original on May 11, 2022. Retrieved October 19, 2019. Walls, Jeannette (May 23, 2006). "Forget Kabbalah, Britney's baby is her religion". Archived from the original on July 4, 2017. Retrieved June 10, 2010. Robinson, Peter (December 8, 2013). "Britney Spears: 'More expectations of me now'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on October 5, 2018. Heller 2007, p. 80 Vineyard, Jennifer (October 16, 2004). "Britney Spears Announces She's Taking A Break From Her Career". MTV. Archived from the original on September 7, 2014. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Vineyard, Jennifer (August 13, 2004). "Britney Covers Bobby Brown's 'My Prerogative' For Forthcoming LP". MTV. Archived from the original on September 7, 2014. Retrieved October 6, 2010. "Britney Spears – My Prerogative (song)". Ultratop. Hung Medien. 2004. Archived from the original on September 7, 2014. Retrieved October 6, 2010. "UK Singles Chart". Official Charts Company. aCharts. March 7, 2005. Archived from the original on September 24, 2011. Retrieved October 6, 2010. "Britney Spears – Do Somethin' (song)". UltratopHung Medien. 2005. Archived from the original on August 25, 2011. Retrieved October 6, 2010. "Britney Welcomes Home Sean Preston". People. September 21, 2005. Archived from the original on January 16, 2007. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Vineyard, Jennifer (October 31, 2005). "Surprise: Britney's Releasing An Album In Just Two Weeks". MTV. Archived from the original on January 21, 2022. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Thomas, Karen (March 29, 2006). "USATODAY.com – Britney maybe one more time". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 10, 2012. Retrieved October 6, 2010. "Britney's Baby Name: Jayden James Federline". People. October 24, 2006. Archived from the original on July 16, 2007. Retrieved October 19, 2019. "Britney Spears Files for Divorce". People. November 7, 2006. Archived from the original on October 19, 2019. Retrieved October 19, 2019. Hall, Sarah (July 30, 2007). "Britney, Kevin Back to Being Single". E!. Archived from the original on October 26, 2012. Retrieved October 6, 2010. "Lynne Spears Visits Sister's Grave Amid Crisis". People. January 5, 2008. Archived from the original on October 14, 2020. Retrieved October 19, 2019. Marikar, Sheila (February 19, 2007). "Bald and Broken: Inside Britney's Shaved Head". ABC News. Archived from the original on February 20, 2007. Retrieved October 6, 2010. Van Horn, Teri (May 2, 2007). "Britney's Back! Spears Returns to the Stage With Five-Song Dirty Dance Party". MTV. Archived from the original on January 6, 2010. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Spears will lose custody of children". CNN. October 2, 2007. Archived from the original on September 1, 2010. Retrieved June 11, 2010. Hollyscope Team, "Louis Vuitton Sues Britney Spears", hollyscoop.com, November 19, 2007. "Britney Spears Debuts #1 on European Albums Chart and Debuts #1 on U.S. Digital Albums Chart". PR Newswire. November 8, 2007. Archived from the original on June 20, 2012. Retrieved June 11, 2010. Petridis, Alexis (November 28, 2008). "CD review: Britney Spears: Circus". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on July 22, 2013. Retrieved June 11, 2010. Robinson, Peter (November 11, 2007). "CDs: Britney Spears, Blackout and Kylie Minogue, X". The Observer. UK. Archived from the original on December 22, 2015. Retrieved June 11, 2010. Lyons, Bev; Sutherland, Laura (November 7, 2008). "Britney Spears seals comeback with two gongs at MTV Europe Music Awards". Daily Record. Scotland. Archived from the original on October 14, 2012. Retrieved June 11, 2010. Asthana, Anushka (November 21, 2009). "The 100 best pop albums of the Noughties". The Times. UK. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Willis, David (September 10, 2007). "Britney's MTV comeback falls flat". BBC. Archived from the original on October 16, 2018. Retrieved February 24, 2010. "Canada Singles Top 100". Billboard. acharts.us. October 13, 2007. Archived from the original on August 14, 2011. Retrieved February 23, 2010. "Britney Spears – Gimme More (song)". Ultratop. Hung Medien. 2007. Archived from the original on October 13, 2021. Retrieved February 23, 2010. "Third Single: Inside Scoop!". Britney.com. February 11, 2008. Archived from the original on July 25, 2011. Retrieved February 6, 2010. "Discography Britney Spears". irish-charts.com. Archived from the original on March 14, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2012. "Britney Spears Chart History (Canadian Hot 100)". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 15, 2020. Retrieved June 29, 2021. "Britney Pap-Happy with Her New Guy". People. January 3, 2008. Archived from the original on October 19, 2019. Retrieved October 19, 2019. McKay, Holly (October 28, 2008). "Britney Spears Under Permanent Conservatorship". Fox News. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved July 16, 2014. Blankstein, Andrew; Winton, Richard (February 7, 2008). "Spears is released from UCLA hospital psychiatric ward". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 5, 2010. Retrieved June 12, 2010. Day, Nate (April 30, 2021). "Britney Spears' father Jamie claims singer has dementia in court docs: report". Fox News. Archived from the original on May 6, 2021. Retrieved May 6, 2021. Hinckley, D. (March 25, 2008). "Britney Spears begins rehab of image with wacky cameo on CBS sitcom". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on October 21, 2012. Retrieved June 12, 2010. Hibberd, James (March 25, 2008). "Spears delivers 'Mother's' highest ratings". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 6, 2008. Retrieved June 12, 2010. Lee, Ken (July 18, 2008). "It's Over: Britney & Kevin Reach a Custody Settlement". People. Archived from the original on September 29, 2020. Retrieved February 12, 2010. "Highlights, Winners, Performers and Photos from the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards". MTV. 2008. Archived from the original on December 14, 2009. Retrieved June 12, 2010. Vena, Jocelyn (October 9, 2008). "Britney Spears 'Sets The Record Straight' In Documentary Airing November 30 on MTV". MTV. Archived from the original on September 24, 2020. Retrieved December 21, 2021. ""Britney: For the Record" scores staggering 3.54 P12–34 rating in Sunday debut on MTVh". MTV. December 2, 2008. Archived from the original on January 3, 2010. Retrieved January 2, 2011. "Circus reviews at Metacritic.com". Metacritic. Archived from the original on August 30, 2012. Retrieved June 12, 2010. Hasty, Katie (December 10, 2008). "Britney's 'Circus' Debuts Atop Album Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 13, 2022. Retrieved June 12, 2010. "Britney Earns (Another) Guinness World Record". Britney.com. September 27, 2009. Archived from the original on December 24, 2010. Retrieved June 12, 2010. "#13 Britney Spears – The 2009 Celebrity 100". Forbes. March 6, 2009. Archived from the original on July 30, 2010. Retrieved June 12, 2010. "Britney Spears' Singles Collection". HMV Store Japan. June 1, 2010. Archived from the original on April 3, 2012. Retrieved June 1, 2010. "Spears Scores Record-Setting Hot 100 Jump". Billboard. October 15, 2008. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Britney Spears – Womanizer (song)". Ultratop. Hung Medien. 2008. Archived from the original on March 19, 2013. Retrieved June 12, 2010. "Nominees list for the 52nd Grammy Awards". Los Angeles Times. December 2, 2009. Archived from the original on September 27, 2010. Retrieved December 3, 2009. Mitovich, Matt (January 31, 2009). "Britney Gets Restraining Order Against Former Manager, Ex-Beau and Attorney". TV Guide. OpenGate Capital. Archived from the original on January 29, 2022. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "2009 Year End Top 50 Worldwide Concert Tours" (PDF). Pollstar. 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 15, 2010. Retrieved February 8, 2010. Pietroluongo, Silvio (October 14, 2009). "'3' To 1: Britney Beats Odds To Debut Atop Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 22, 2021. Retrieved January 4, 2010. Jordan, Julie (May 11, 2010). "Britney Spears and Jason Trawick Split – Professionally". People. Archived from the original on October 19, 2019. Retrieved October 19, 2019. Vena, Jocelyn (June 30, 2010). "Britney Spears To Design Clothing For Candie's". MTV. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Seidman, Robert (February 8, 2011). "Sunday Final Ratings: Super Bowl Demos Galore, Plus 'Glee' 15 Minute Detail". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on February 10, 2011. Retrieved May 12, 2021. (data for season 2 episode 11 "The Sue Sylvester Shuffle") 26.796 million viewers ... 11.1/29 A18-49 Porter, Rick (September 29, 2010). "'Glee' ratings: Britney is bigger than Madonna". Zap2it. Tribune Media Services. Archived from the original on October 2, 2010. Retrieved September 29, 2010. (data for season 2 episode 2 "Britney/Brittany") it scored a 5.9 rating among adults 18–49 (the latter figure is an all-time high for the series) Gorman, Bill (September 29, 2010). "Tuesday Finals: Glee, No Ordinary Family, NCIS, Dancing Up; Raising Hope, Detroit 1–8–7, Running Wilde Down". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on November 17, 2010. Retrieved September 29, 2010. (data for season 2 episode 2 "Britney/Brittany") 13.508 million viewers ... 5.9/17 A18-49 "7th Britney Spears Album 'Femme Fatale' Set for March 29th Release". Jive Records. August 2, 2011. Archived from the original on May 16, 2012. Retrieved March 6, 2011. "American album certifications – Britney Spears". Recording Industry Association of America. "Britney Spears song 'Unbroken' surfaces online". Digital Spy. February 17, 2014. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Britney Spears' 'Hold It Against Me' Single Premieres". Billboard. January 10, 2011. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Listen: Britney Spears, Nicki Minaj and Ke$ha's 'Till the World Ends' Remix". Billboard. April 23, 2011. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved August 20, 2011. Copsey, Robert (October 31, 2011). "Britney Spears angers MPs over 'Criminal' video shoot". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Montgomery, James (September 26, 2011). "Britney Spears Responds To 'Criminal' Video Controversy". MTV. Archived from the original on December 22, 2011. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Vena, Jocelyn (April 11, 2011). "Rihanna Says Britney Spears' 'S&M' Remix 'Had To Be Major'". MTV. Archived from the original on May 11, 2022. Retrieved April 24, 2011. Trust, Gary (April 20, 2011). "Rihanna's 'S&M' Reigns on Hot 100, Lady Gaga's 'Judas' Debuts". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 12, 2022. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Best of 2011: The Artists". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved December 19, 2011. "Best of 2011: Billboard 200 Artists". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 10, 2016. Retrieved December 19, 2011. "Best of 2011: Hot 100 Artists". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved December 19, 2011. "Britney Spears Pens New Song 'Whiplash' for Selena Gomez". PopCrush (Press release). April 14, 2011. Archived from the original on October 23, 2018. Retrieved October 23, 2018. "Pop Superstar Britney Spears Announces Special Guest Nicki Minaj to Join the Highly Anticipated All Female Femme Fatale Tour" (Press release). Live Nation. PR Newswire. April 12, 2011. Archived from the original on April 15, 2011. Retrieved April 12, 2011. "Top 100 North American Tours" (PDF). Pollstar. June 30, 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 15, 2011. Retrieved July 9, 2011. "Britney Spears Wraps Femme Fatale Tour". MTV. December 12, 2011. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Britney Spears Live: The Femme Fatale Tour (2011)". Amazon. October 25, 2011. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved October 25, 2011. "Britney Spears Accepts Video Vanguard VMA – And A Kiss From Lady Gaga". MTV. August 28, 2011. Archived from the original on September 7, 2014. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Bain, Becky (September 9, 2011). "Britney Spears Reveals 'B in the Mix: The Remixes Vol. 2' Track Listing". Idolator. Buzz Media. Archived from the original on October 26, 2023. Retrieved September 9, 2011. Vena, Jocelyn (December 19, 2011). "Britney Spears' Engagement Ring: How Does It Stack Up?". MTV News. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Eggenberger, Nicole (April 25, 2012). "Britney Spears' Fiance Jason Trawick Approved as Co-Conservator". Us Weekly. Archived from the original on April 26, 2012. Retrieved January 12, 2013. Bromley, Melanie (April 12, 2012). "Britney Spears Will Get Record $15 Million Payday to Be X Factor Judge". E!. Archived from the original on July 12, 2012. Retrieved April 12, 2012. O'Connell, Michael (August 3, 2017). "'American Idol' Producer Talks Revival Salaries, New ABC Home". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 10, 2017. Retrieved August 23, 2017. Gelman, Vlada (September 29, 2017). "American Idol Taps Lionel Richie as Third Judge for ABC Revival". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on October 26, 2017. Retrieved October 25, 2017. "Britney Spears Officially Leaving 'The X Factor'". ABC News. January 11, 2013. Archived from the original on May 18, 2013. Retrieved May 25, 2013. "Top 10 Digital Songs of 2013" (PDF). IFPI. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 17, 2021. Retrieved October 3, 2020. Kitchener, Shaun (January 30, 2012). "will.i.am Teases Britney Spears, Shakira, Alicia Keys Collaborations". Entertainment Wise. Archived from the original on February 4, 2012. Retrieved September 11, 2011. "Britney Spears Is Music's Top Earning Woman of 2012". ABC News. December 12, 2012. Archived from the original on January 1, 2013. Retrieved January 4, 2013. "Britney Spears begins work on eighth studio album". Digital Spy. December 12, 2012. Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved January 4, 2013. Lipshutz, Jason (May 1, 2013). "Will.i.am Executive Producing New Britney Spears Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Laudadio, Marisa (January 11, 2013). "Britney Spears and Jason Trawick Split". People. Archived from the original on October 19, 2019. Retrieved October 19, 2019. "Britney Spears and Jason Trawick – SPLIT". TMZ. January 11, 2013. Archived from the original on January 12, 2013. Retrieved January 12, 2013. Gomez, Patrick (August 28, 2014). "Britney Spears Splits with Boyfriend David Lucado". People. Archived from the original on February 26, 2021. Retrieved October 16, 2020. "Britney Spears Records New Song For 'Smurfs 2' Soundtrack". Billboard. April 17, 2013. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Williott, Carl (September 17, 2013). "Britney Spears Announces 2-Year 'Piece of Me' Vegas Residency, December 3 Album Release". Idolator. Buzz Media. Archived from the original on October 26, 2023. Retrieved September 17, 2013. "Britney Spears: Las Vegas Show Will Be 'A Massive Party From Start To Finish'". Billboard. May 8, 2013. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Joannou, Andy (October 15, 2013). "Britney Spears names new album 'Britney Jean'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Britney Spears' Album Release Date Announced As Dec. 3 On 'Good Morning America'". HuffPost. September 17, 2013. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Christman, Ed (August 23, 2011). "RCA's New Executive Team Named Under CEO Peter Edge Amid Layoffs". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 29, 2019. Retrieved October 19, 2011. "Daily B: Britney's Record Deal is Ready to Be Renewed And Everyone Wants A Piece of B". MuuMuse. August 8, 2012. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved November 30, 2013. Pearlman, Jake (November 25, 2013). "Britney Spears' new album 'Britney Jean' now streaming on iTunes". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 19, 2019. Retrieved October 19, 2019. Kaufman, Gil (December 11, 2013). "Britney Spears Has Lowest Chart Debut With Britney Jean". MTV News. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "You Better Work, Britney: 'Britney Jean' Debuts at No. 34 in UK". The Honesty Hour. December 8, 2013. Archived from the original on December 14, 2013. Retrieved December 8, 2013. "Britney Spears Debuts 'Work Bitch' Following Leak By 'One Bad Apple': Listen". Billboard. September 15, 2013. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Grein, Paul (September 25, 2013). "Week Ending Sept. 22, 2013. Songs: The Brit Is Back". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on September 26, 2013. Retrieved September 27, 2013. Lansky, Sam (October 25, 2013). "Britney Spears Unveils 'Britney Jean' Album Cover, Pens Emotional Letter To Fans". Idolator.com. Archived from the original on February 23, 2023. Retrieved November 20, 2013. Busis, Hillary (November 3, 2013). "Britney Spears spritzes fans with new single 'Perfume' – Listen". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 15, 2021. Retrieved October 19, 2019. ""Britney Spears Album & Song Chart History" Billboard Hot 100 for Britney Spears". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved December 16, 2013. "Miley Cyrus Reveals 'Bangerz' Tracklist as 'Wrecking Ball' Breaks VEVO Record". Billboard. September 10, 2013. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "People's Choice Awards 2014 Nominees". PeoplesChoice.com. Archived from the original on April 26, 2015. Retrieved April 3, 2014. Barker, Andrew (August 28, 2014). "Britney Spears: Popstar Directs Clear Vision of Her Billion-Dollar Empire". Variety. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Retrieved August 29, 2014. "The Intimate Britney Spears". Archived from the original on March 30, 2015. Rigby, Sam (September 25, 2014). "Britney Spears confirms 2-year Las Vegas residency extension". Digital Spy. Hearst Corporation. Archived from the original on September 27, 2014. Retrieved October 2, 2014. Nelson, Jeff. "Britney Spears and Charlie Ebersol Split". People. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved November 16, 2020. Corner, Lewis (March 25, 2015). "Britney Spears dates new single 'Pretty Girls' for May". Digital Spy. United Kingdom. Archived from the original on April 5, 2015. Retrieved March 25, 2015. O'Donnell, Kevin (May 17, 2015). "Britney Spears & Iggy Azalea perform 'Pretty Girls' live for the first time at Billboard Music Awards". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 20, 2015. Retrieved May 18, 2015. "Disco Godfather Giorgio Moroder Goes Back to the Future on Déjà Vu". Vulture. June 15, 2015. Archived from the original on June 15, 2015. Retrieved June 16, 2015. "Shuffle: Britney Spears and Giorgio Moroder drone on in Tom's Diner". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved October 16, 2015. "Giorgio Moroder: Britney Spears "did a good job" with collab". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on June 27, 2015. Retrieved June 16, 2015. "EDM Godfather Giorgio Moroder Raves About Recording With Britney Spears: 'She Sounds So Good'". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Britney Spears wins Teen Choice Award 2015 choice style icon, shows off cleavage in plunging dress". Daily News. New York. August 17, 2015. Archived from the original on August 18, 2015. Retrieved August 17, 2015. "Britney Spears Is Ruffling Feathers in This 'Jane The Virgin' Promo". November 3, 2015. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved November 4, 2015. VanArendonk, Kathryn (November 10, 2015). "Jane the Virgin Recap: The Writing on the Wall". Archived from the original on March 13, 2017. Retrieved March 12, 2017. "Britney Spears Confirms She's 'Working Hard' on a New Album". Billboard. November 4, 2015. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Britney Spears sizzles on 3 covers for the 100th issue of 'V Magazine'". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 17, 2019. Retrieved October 11, 2019. "V100 Starring Britney Spears | V Magazine". Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. Retrieved October 11, 2019. "Britney Spears Helps You Chase the 'American Dream' in New Mobile Game". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Find Out When and Where Adele's New Video Will Debut". E!. May 16, 2016. Archived from the original on June 29, 2016. Retrieved May 16, 2016. "Britney Spears Opened The Billboard Music Awards With a Sexy Performance of Her Biggest Hits". Archived from the original on October 30, 2016. Retrieved November 4, 2017. "Britney Spears to receive Billboard Millennium Award". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 13, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. "Britney Spears' "Make Me" Receiving Hourly Airplay on July 15; Officially Impacts July 19". July 14, 2016. Archived from the original on July 16, 2016. Retrieved July 15, 2016. Pallotta, Frank (August 16, 2016). "Britney Spears to perform at MTV VMAs". CNN. Archived from the original on July 23, 2018. Retrieved September 13, 2019. Marcus, Stephanie (August 16, 2016). "Britney Spears Is Ready To Make History at the VMAs 9 Years After Disastrous Performance". Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021 – via Huff Post. "Britney Spears Absolutely Slays VMAs Performance". E!. August 28, 2016. Archived from the original on October 11, 2019. Retrieved October 11, 2019. "Britney Spears is Marie Claire's October cover star". September 13, 2016. Archived from the original on September 15, 2016. Retrieved September 1, 2016. Williams, Cat (August 31, 2016). "Britney Spears on Having A Bad Date: 'Being Famous Doesn't Make You Different'". Archived from the original on November 16, 2018. Retrieved March 12, 2017. Slattery, Ryan (November 17, 2016). "Glory: With A New Album and a Record-Breaking Hit Show in Las Vegas, Britney Spears Finds Her Energy And Her Peace". Las Vegas Blog. United States: Caesar Palace. Archived from the original on November 30, 2016. Retrieved November 29, 2016. Britton, Luke (November 16, 2016). "Watch Britney Spears and Tinashe's raunchy 'Slumber Party' video". NME. United States: Caesar Palace. Archived from the original on October 2, 2020. Retrieved October 16, 2020. Sanchez, Chelsey (February 9, 2021). "Who Is Britney Spears' Boyfriend, Sam Asghari?". Harper's Bazaar. Archived from the original on September 15, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2021. "People's Choice Awards 2017: See the Full List of Winners". Billboard. January 19, 2017. Archived from the original on January 20, 2017. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Red Carpet Report: Britney Spears announces shows in Israel, The Philippines; Diplo's Raider Nation at XS". Las Vegas Review-Journal. March 28, 2017. Archived from the original on March 29, 2017. Retrieved March 29, 2017. "Britney Spears to make first tour of Japan since 2002". Japan Today. April 2, 2017. Archived from the original on October 14, 2017. Retrieved April 30, 2017. "Britney Spears announces Manila concert". ABS-CBN News. Archived from the original on April 6, 2017. Retrieved April 6, 2017. Strunk, Delaney (April 6, 2017). "Israel postpones vote due to Britney Spears concert". CNN. Archived from the original on April 6, 2017. Retrieved April 6, 2017. "Hailee Steinfeld, Sofia Carson & Kelsea Ballerini to Perform Britney Spears Medley at Radio Disney Music Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Britney Spears Opens Children's Cancer Foundation Campus in Vegas After Donating $1 Million". People. Archived from the original on December 3, 2017. Retrieved November 25, 2017. "Beyoncé has replaced Taylor Swift as the richest woman in music". The Fader. Archived from the original on November 22, 2017. Retrieved November 25, 2017. "Britney Spears Ends 'Piece Of Me' Vegas Residency With Box Office Record". iHeartRadio. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved January 9, 2018. "Dick Clark's New Year's Rockin' Eve With Ryan Seacrest Bests Grammys as 2017's Top Music Special". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Britney Spears Unveils New Fragrance 'Sunset Fantasy'". January 8, 2018. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019. Retrieved January 9, 2018. "Pop queen Britney Spears announces world tour dates for 2018". Time Out. Archived from the original on February 17, 2020. Retrieved February 14, 2018. Flook, Harriet (February 13, 2018). "Britney Spears adds extra dates to UK 2018 tour due to overwhelming demand". mirror. Archived from the original on February 13, 2018. Retrieved February 14, 2018. "Britney Spears adds new dates to 'Piece of Me' UK tour and announces support act". NME. February 9, 2018. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019. Retrieved February 14, 2018. "Year End Top 100 Worldwide Tours" (PDF). Pollstar. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022. "Year End Top 200 North American Tours" (PDF). Pollstar. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022. Anastasiou, Zoe. "Britney Spears Just Landed A Major Fashion Campaign With Kenzo". Harper's Bazaar. Archived from the original on March 21, 2018. Retrieved March 20, 2018. "Kenzo". LVMH. May 30, 2023. Archived from the original on February 19, 2015. Retrieved March 21, 2018. "Britney Spears to be Honored at 29th Annual GLAAD Media Awards". Billboard. February 13, 2018. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Lieber, Chavie (April 27, 2018). "Now Is the Perfect Moment for a Britney Spears Fashion Line" Archived March 30, 2019, at the Wayback Machine. Racked. Retrieved June 24, 2018. Rosenstein, Jenna (July 18, 2018). "Britney Spears Is Launching a A Unisex Fragrance Called Prerogative" Archived November 9, 2018, at the Wayback Machine HarpersBazaar.com. Retrieved November 9, 2018. Willman, Chris (October 19, 2018). "Britney Spears' Strange Vegas Residency Rollout Belies a Big Raise" Archived March 30, 2019, at the Wayback Machine Variety. Retrieved November 9, 2018. "Britney Spears Announces 'Domination' Las Vegas Residency: See The Dates". iHeartRadio. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019. Retrieved January 2, 2019. "Britney Spears and Bruno Mars 'Look to Boost the US Grand Prix in Austin'". ESPN. April 26, 2018. Archived from the original on May 3, 2020. Retrieved June 24, 2018. Coscarelli, Joe (January 4, 2019). "Britney Spears Announces 'Indefinite Work Hiatus,' Cancels Las Vegas Residency". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved September 4, 2020. Chung, Gabrielle (August 20, 2020). "Britney Spears' Father Jamie Calls on Court to Reappoint Co-Conservator Who Resigned in 2019". People. Archived from the original on August 22, 2020. Retrieved September 4, 2020. "Britney Spears' Fans Demand Release of Pop Star from Psychiatric Facility". Variety. April 22, 2019. Archived from the original on April 23, 2019. Retrieved April 23, 2019. Gutowitz, Jill (April 24, 2019). "All Your Questions About Britney Spears' Latest Mental-Health Crisis, Answered". Vulture. Archived from the original on April 25, 2020. Retrieved May 2, 2020. Martinelli, Marissa (April 24, 2019). "Why Did Britney Spears Have to Confirm She's Not Being Held Hostage?". Slate. Archived from the original on August 14, 2020. Retrieved September 5, 2020. Jacobs, Julia (May 17, 2019). "What Is Actually Happening With Britney Spears?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved May 18, 2019. Milton, Josh (September 1, 2020). "Cher sides with Britney Spears as she weighs in on conservatorship". PinkNews. Archived from the original on September 3, 2020. Retrieved September 4, 2020. White, Adam (August 25, 2020). "Paris Hilton 'heartbroken' over Britney Spears conservatorship battle: 'It's not fair to be treated like a child'". The Independent. Archived from the original on October 10, 2020. Retrieved September 4, 2020. Willman, Chris (May 6, 2019). "Miley Cyrus Calls to 'Free Britney!' Spears at Memphis Concert". Variety. Archived from the original on March 29, 2021. Retrieved September 4, 2020. Kirkpatrick, Emily (August 24, 2020). "The ACLU Is Ready to Help Free Britney". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on October 1, 2020. Retrieved September 4, 2020. "Britney Spears tells fans 'all is well' after #FreeBritney campaign". BBC News. April 24, 2019. Archived from the original on April 25, 2019. Retrieved April 25, 2019. Gonzalez, Sandra (April 26, 2019). "Britney Spears leaves treatment facility". CNN. Archived from the original on September 10, 2020. Retrieved September 4, 2020. "Britney Spears appears in court over conservatorship, judge orders evaluation". USA Today. May 10, 2019. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved September 4, 2020. Dasrath, Diana (September 5, 2019). "Kevin Federline files complaint alleging altercation between his son and Britney Spears' father". NBC News. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved September 4, 2020. D'Zurilla, Christie (September 10, 2019). "Britney Spears' dad, Jamie Spears, is out as her conservator—at least for now". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 4, 2020. Retrieved September 4, 2020. "The Latest: No rulings, no Britney Spears at court hearing". Associated Press. September 19, 2019. Archived from the original on January 27, 2021. Retrieved September 4, 2020. Shapiro, Dan (March 31, 2020). "You are now entering 'The Zone': An immersive Britney Spears experience brings early 2000s teen pop back to LA". Roadtrippers. Archived from the original on July 5, 2021. Retrieved June 24, 2021. Lambert, Molly (February 2, 2020). "At the Britney Spears pop-up museum (yes, museum), a vacant Kmart becomes a selfie shrine". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 10, 2021. Retrieved September 4, 2020. Murphy, Chris (May 29, 2020). "Britney Spears Drops 'Mood Ring (By Demand),' Her First New Music in 4 Years". Vulture. Archived from the original on March 5, 2021. Retrieved September 4, 2020. Kaufman, Amy (August 1, 2020). "Britney Spears' father calls #FreeBritney followers 'conspiracy theorists'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 3, 2020. Retrieved September 4, 2020. Beresford, Trilby (July 6, 2021). "Britney Spears' Conservatorship Lawyers to Resign". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 6, 2021. Retrieved July 7, 2021. Coscarelli, Joe (August 18, 2020). "Britney Spears Seeking Substantial Changes to Conservatorship". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 18, 2020. Retrieved August 24, 2020. Coscarelli, Joe (August 21, 2020). "Britney Spears Conservatorship to Remain As Is Until 2021". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 21, 2020. Retrieved September 4, 2020. Dalton, Andrew (November 10, 2020). "Lawyer: Britney Spears fears father, wants him out of career". Associated Press. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved November 11, 2020. Blistein, Jon (December 11, 2020). "Britney Spears, Backstreet Boys Team Up for New Song 'Matches'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 18, 2021. Retrieved February 11, 2021. Grisafi, Patricia (February 5, 2021). "'Framing Britney Spears' on FX shows how the singer gets used for everyone else's purposes". NBC News. Archived from the original on February 6, 2021. Retrieved February 6, 2021. "Britney Spears 'cried for two weeks' over Framing documentary". BBC News. March 31, 2021. Archived from the original on March 31, 2021. Retrieved March 31, 2021. Snapes, Laura (March 25, 2021). "Britney Spears asks for father to be removed from running personal affairs". The Guardian. Archived from the original on March 25, 2021. Retrieved March 25, 2021. Melas, Chloe (March 25, 2021). "Britney Spears' attorney files petition to remove her father from overseeing her medical decisions". CNN. Archived from the original on March 25, 2021. Retrieved March 25, 2021. Day, Liz; Stark, Samantha; Coscarelli, Joe (June 22, 2021). "Britney Spears Quietly Pushed for Years to End Her Conservatorship". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on June 23, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. Serjeant, Jill (April 27, 2021). "Britney Spears to speak directly to LA court on her conservatorship". Reuters. Archived from the original on April 27, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2021. Melas, Chloe; Rocha, Veronica; Wagner, Meg; Alfonso III, Fernando; Hayes, Mike (June 23, 2021). "Live updates: Britney Spears addresses court over conservatorship". CNN. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. Baer, Stephanie K. (June 23, 2021). "Britney Spears Asked A Judge To End The Conservatorship That Sparked The #FreeBritney Movement". BuzzFeed News. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. "Britney Spears' Explosive Court Hearing Generated 1M Tweets". Billboard. June 24, 2021. Archived from the original on January 29, 2022. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Aswad, Jem (June 23, 2021). "Read Britney Spears' Full Statement Against Conservatorship: 'I Am Traumatized'". Variety. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 26, 2021. "Company Set to Manage Britney Spears' Estate Asks to Withdraw". The New York Times. July 1, 2021. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. "Britney Spears' case leads 2 senators to question the country's conservatorship systems". The New York Times. July 1, 2021. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. "Britney Spears' manager resigns after 25 years". BBC News. July 6, 2021. Archived from the original on July 11, 2021. Retrieved July 6, 2021. Limbong, Andrew (July 6, 2021). "Britney Spears' Lawyer, Samuel Ingham III, Requests To Resign". NPR. Archived from the original on April 12, 2022. Retrieved May 15, 2022. Lozano, Alicia Victoria; Madani, Doha (July 14, 2021). "Britney Spears granted right to hire own lawyer; accuses father of 'conservatorship abuse'". NBC News. Archived from the original on July 15, 2021. Retrieved July 14, 2021. Day, Nate (July 14, 2021). "Britney Spears joins #FreeBritney chorus after new representation in conservatorship is approved: 'Blessed'". Fox News. Archived from the original on July 15, 2021. Retrieved July 15, 2021. Melas, Chloe; Passantino, Jon; Jones, Julia (July 26, 2021). "Britney Spears files to remove her father as conservator of her estate". CNN. Archived from the original on July 27, 2021. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Coscarelli, Joe; Day, Liz (August 12, 2021). "Britney Spears' Father Says He Will Step Aside in Conservatorship Battle". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 12, 2021. Retrieved August 19, 2021. Dalton, Andrew (September 7, 2021). "Britney Spears' father files to end court conservatorship". Associated Press. Archived from the original on September 8, 2021. Retrieved September 8, 2021. Avila, Daniela; Chiu, Melody (September 12, 2021). "Britney Spears and Sam Asghari Are Engaged: 'I Can't ... Believe It!'". People. Archived from the original on September 13, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2021. Richwine, Lisa (September 30, 2021). "Britney Spears 'on cloud nine' after father suspended from conservatorship". Reuters. Archived from the original on January 15, 2022. Retrieved October 1, 2021. Puckett-Pope, Lauren (April 11, 2022). "Britney Spears Is Pregnant With Her First Child With Fiancé Sam Asghari". Elle. Archived from the original on April 11, 2022. Retrieved April 11, 2022. Melas, Chloe (May 14, 2022). "Britney Spears says she has lost her baby early in her pregnancy". CNN. Retrieved July 28, 2022. Gardner, Chris (June 9, 2022). "Britney Spears Marries Sam Asghari in Intimate Los Angeles Ceremony". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 9, 2022. Soteriou, Stephanie (June 15, 2022). "Britney Spears Asked Why She'd Want Her Brother Bryan At Her Wedding As She Revealed She "Never Invited" Him Amid Claims He Didn't Attend Due To A Scheduling Conflict". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved June 16, 2022. Slater, Georgia; DeSantis, Rachel (June 9, 2022). "Britney Spears' Sons Preston and Jayden Won't Be at Wedding but Are 'Happy' for Her: Lawyer". People. Retrieved June 16, 2022. O'Kane, Caitlin (June 10, 2022). "Britney Spears' ex-husband arrested after trying to crash her wedding". CBS News. Draughorne, Kenan (June 14, 2022). "After crashing Britney Spears' wedding, ex Jason Alexander hit with restraining order". Los Angeles Times. Keller, Erin (August 8, 2022). "Elton John, Britney Spears duet 'Hold Me Closer' confirmed". New York Post. Retrieved August 26, 2022. Garcia, Thania (August 26, 2022). "Britney Spears and Elton John Finally Drop 'Hold Me Closer' Duet". Variety. Retrieved August 26, 2022. Richards, Will (August 26, 2022). "Listen to Elton John and Britney Spears' new collaboration 'Hold Me Closer'". NME. Retrieved August 26, 2022. "Harry Styles' 'As It Was' Holds Atop Hot 100, Elton John & Britney Spears' 'Hold Me Closer' Launches in Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 6, 2022. Retrieved September 6, 2022. Damshenas, Sam (September 5, 2022). "Britney lands highest-charting single in the UK in 10 years with Elton John duet". Gay Times. Archived from the original on September 5, 2022. Retrieved September 5, 2022. Pullar, Jess (January 9, 2023). "Everything You Need To Know About Those Wild Britney Spears Conspiracy Theories". Elle. Retrieved January 28, 2023. DeSantis, Rachel (January 26, 2023). "Britney Spears Asks Fans to 'Respect' Her Privacy After Calls to Police Prompt Welfare Check". People. Retrieved January 28, 2023. Mier, Tomás (July 18, 2023). "Britney Spears to Return With New Will.i.am Song". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 19, 2023. Retrieved July 19, 2023. Avila, Daniela (August 16, 2023). "Britney Spears and Husband Sam Asghari Separate After 14 Months of Marriage: Sources". People. United States. ISSN 0093-7673. OCLC 794712888. Archived from the original on August 17, 2023. Retrieved August 16, 2023. Campbell, Josh (September 28, 2023). "Authorities dispatched to Britney Spears' home over video showing singer dancing with knives". CTV News. Retrieved September 29, 2023. "Britney Spears Lands Multimillion-Dollar Book Deal". Deadline Hollywood. February 21, 2022. Retrieved February 22, 2022. Voytko, Lisette (February 22, 2022). "Britney Spears' $15 Million Book Deal Shows Why Success Is The Best Revenge". Forbes. Retrieved June 16, 2022. Leonard, Elizabeth (July 12, 2023). "Britney Spears Sets Fall Date for 'Brave' Memoir 'The Woman in Me' — See the Book Cover Reveal (Exclusive)". People. Retrieved July 15, 2023. Snapes, Laura (October 24, 2023). "'I felt like I was being ritually tortured': the most shocking moments in Britney Spears' memoir". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved October 27, 2023. Jacobs, Julia (November 1, 2023). "Britney Spears's Memoir Sells 1.1 Million Copies in U.S. in First Week". The New York Times. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Saunders, Angel (November 1, 2023). "Britney Spears' Memoir Sells Over 1 Million Copies in First Week: 'I Am Grateful to My Fans and Readers'". People. Retrieved November 2, 2023. Snapes, Laura (January 4, 2024). "Britney Spears denies reports of a new album: 'I will never return to the music industry'". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved January 4, 2024. Horvitz, Louis J. (Director) (November 16, 2012). Britney Spears Wishes Mariah Carey a Happy Birthday With the Sweetest Message. Billboard. Aniftos, Rania (March 27, 2020). "Britney Spears Wishes Mariah Carey a Happy Birthday With the Sweetest Message". Billboard. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Masley, Ed (November 2, 2001). "The State of Britneydom: Teen-pop Queen declares 'I'm on the verge of being a woman'". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. p. W.22. ISSN 1068-624X. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Clerk, Carol (2002). Madonnastyle. Omnibus Press. p. 56. ISBN 978-0-7119-8874-3. Vineyard, Jennifer (May 30, 2003). "Britney Previews LP, Denies Rumors Of 'Cry Me A River' Response". MTV News. Archived from the original on February 21, 2014. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Britney Gives Sirius XM Venus A Track By Track of "Glory"". ukbritney.tv. September 3, 2016. Retrieved September 19, 2020. Gardner, Elysa (July 28, 2000). "Luscious Jackson". USA Today. p. 1.E. ISSN 0734-7456. Griffin, Phil (Director) (November 30, 2008). Britney: For the Record (Documentary). United States: MTV. Harrison, Shane (November 6, 2001). "'Britney' strengthens claim to pop tiara". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. p. C.1. "Britney Spears flashback – March 1999". Archived from the original on November 23, 2021. Retrieved May 25, 2013 – via YouTube. "Exclusive Interview: Britney Spears On Tabloid Fame and Vegas Takeover". Vegas Player. November 12, 2013. Archived from the original on November 12, 2013. Retrieved November 12, 2013. "Britney Spears 1998 first interview". Archived from the original on November 23, 2021. Retrieved January 2, 2015 – via YouTube. Cava, Marco (December 29, 2013). "Who inspires Britney? Beyonce, Bruno and her ex JT". USA Today. Retrieved June 3, 2014. "Britney Spears 'comeback' album inspired by Selena Gomez". Francais Express. September 28, 2016. Retrieved October 18, 2016.[permanent dead link] "Britney Spears revela que Selena Gomez e Ariana Grande são "inspirações"". Vagalume (in Portuguese). September 28, 2016. Retrieved October 18, 2016. Shuker 2012, p. 99. Appell & Hemphill 2006, "Dance Pop". Frazier, James (May 15, 2012). "Credulous Republicans and the urban legend of a 'conservative' Britney Spears". The Washington Times. Archived from the original on May 16, 2012. Retrieved May 13, 2020. "Britney Spears: Biography: Rolling Stone". Rolling Stone. 2008. Archived from the original on August 12, 2017. Retrieved August 9, 2008. Sheffield, Rob (June 9, 2004). "Oops!...I Did It Again – Album Review". Rolling Stone. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Erlewine, Stephen (1999). "...Baby One More Time". Retrieved October 8, 2009. Erlewine, Stephen (2000). "Oops!...I Did It Again". Retrieved October 8, 2009. Kessler, Ted. "Britney Spears : Britney". NME. Archived from the original on November 21, 2001. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Rosa, Christopher (May 4, 2015). "Twitter Reacts to Britney Spears and Iggy Azalea's "Pretty Girls"". VH1. Archived from the original on July 22, 2022. Retrieved October 17, 2017. Kennedy, Gerrick D. (September 7, 2016). "Why Britney Spears and her team opted for tradition with the release of 'Glory'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 14, 2017. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas (November 18, 2003). "In the Zone – Britney Spears | AllMusic". AllMusic. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved November 15, 2010. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Blackout – Britney Spears". AllMusic. Retrieved December 18, 2016. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas (March 28, 2011). "Femme Fatale – Britney Spears". AllMusic. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved March 28, 2011. Harley, Kevin (December 1, 2013). "Britney Spears, 'Britney Jean' (RCA) – album review". The Independent. London. Retrieved December 2, 2013. "Interview: Britney Spears Says 'Glory' Album Is 'Different,' Will Have Some Hip-Hop". On Air with Ryan Seacrest. Archived from the original on August 8, 2016. Retrieved August 15, 2016. Nashawaty, Chris (November 9, 2001). "Britney Spears: Sex & The Singles Girl". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved June 11, 2019. Veitch, David (May 13, 2000). "Britney hits us one more time". Calgary Sun. Mike Power. Archived from the original on July 19, 2012. Retrieved December 19, 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Petridis, Alexis (October 26, 2007). "Britney Spears, Blackout". The Guardian. Retrieved August 8, 2011. Bakkila, Blake (August 27, 2016). "Oh Baby Baby! Nicole Scherzinger Does a Near-Flawless Impersonation of Britney Spears". People. Retrieved July 27, 2020. Goldstein, Jessica M. (October 23, 2018). "'Britney Spears wanted to be a star': An oral history of '...Baby One More Time'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved July 27, 2020. Roberts, Amy (October 5, 2017). "Yep, 'It's Britney, B*tch,' Is Still The Most Inspirational Catchphrase Ever". Bustle. Retrieved July 27, 2020. Knopper 2009, p. 92 "...Baby One More Time – Album Review". CD Universe. Retrieved March 4, 2011. Ewing, Tom (November 20, 2007). "Poptimist #10: Britney in the Black Lodge (Damn Fine Album)". Pitchfork. Ryan Schreiber. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Cragg, Michael (January 10, 2011). "New music: Britney Spears – Hold It Against Me". The Guardian. London. "Britney Spears – Blackout Review". IGN. October 23, 2007. Archived from the original on July 12, 2012. Retrieved January 28, 2012. Rhys-Evans, Tim. "Soprano to bass: Can you find your voice?". BBC. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved November 29, 2017. Armstrong, Jennifer Keishin (August 26, 2016). "Britney Spears' 2016 VMAs Performance: An Effective, But Not Entirely Glorious, Bid to Regain Pop Superstardom". Billboard. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Riggs, Jonathan (August 29, 2016). "Britney Spears' 'Glory': Album Review". Idolator. Retrieved December 22, 2017. Fisher, Jeremy; Kayes, Gillyanne (May 27, 2014). Successful Singing Auditions. Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 9781472538499. Thakur, Pradeep (2010). Britney Spears Is Coming-back!. Pradeep Thakur & Sons. p. 20. ISBN 978-1-257-0870-4-4. Bronson 2003, p. 377. Blackman, Guy (August 25, 2009). "Musical Spears". The Age. Retrieved November 21, 2009. "The Interview: William Orbit". Hunger TV. June 20, 2014. Archived from the original on January 2, 2015. Retrieved January 2, 2015. Weisman, Aly (July 1, 2014). "Unedited Britney Spears Song Without Auto-Tune Leaks And It's Painful". Business Insider. Retrieved April 8, 2018. Brown, Jonathan (July 9, 2014). "Britney Spears: The Outworldly Confusion of 'Alien' [Video]". Guardian Liberty Voice. Retrieved June 13, 2019. Anderman, Joan (December 7, 2001). "Beneath Her Sexy Growls, a Girlhood Interrupted". The Boston Globe. p. D.1. ISSN 0743-1791. Upadhyaya, Kayla (December 10, 2013). "Pop queen loses voice on 'Britney Jean'". The Michigan Daily. Retrieved June 13, 2019. Markovitz, Adam (March 23, 2011). "Music Review: Femme Fatale". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved March 24, 2011. Abad-Santos, Alex (August 19, 2014). "It's not just Ariana Grande; female pop stars are becoming terrible dancers". Vox. Retrieved June 13, 2019. Allaire, Christian (December 2, 2018). "These Were Britney Spears' Best Performances of All Time". Vogue. Retrieved June 12, 2019. Perpetua, Matthew (July 14, 2011). "Rolling Stone Readers Pick Their 10 Favorite Dancing Musicians". Rolling Stone. Retrieved June 13, 2019. Betancourt, Manuel (February 21, 2017). "Why Do Gay Men Love Britney Spears?". Vice Media. Vice. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Cragg, Michael (August 11, 2018). "'It was a bit of a blur': Britney Spears on the making of ...Baby One More Time". The Guardian. Retrieved June 17, 2019. "Britney Spears Says Her Stage Persona is 'Healthy' Way to Combat Shyness". Billboard. May 10, 2018. Retrieved December 21, 2021. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) Lang, Cady (August 26, 2016). "VMAs 2016: A Brief History of Britney Spears At The MTV VMAS". Time. Retrieved June 13, 2019. Leeds, Jeff (September 13, 2007). "Spears' Awards Fiasco Stirs Speculation About Her Future". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 13, 2007. Retrieved June 14, 2019. Sehlinger, Bob (2017). The Unofficial Guide to Las Vegas 2017. Unofficial Guides. ISBN 9781628090604. Retrieved June 13, 2019. Kovaleski, Serge F.; Coscarelli, Joe (May 4, 2016). "Is Britney Spears ready to Stand On Her Own?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2019. Leach, Robin (December 28, 2013). "Photos: Britney Spears reigns supreme as pop royalty with 'Piece of Me' at Planet Hollywood". Las Vegas Sun. Archived from the original on January 1, 2014. Retrieved December 28, 2013. Levine, Nick (June 28, 2017). "Britney Spears responds to claims she lip-syncs at her live shows". NME. Retrieved June 13, 2019. Unterberger, Andrew (January 4, 2017). "The Ten Most Infamous Lip Sync Incidents in Pop History: Where Does Mariah Rank?". Billboard. Retrieved December 21, 2021. McCormick, Neil (October 28, 2011). "Britney Spears, O2 Arena, London, review". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved November 12, 2011. Juzwiak, Rich (June 29, 2017). "In Sync We Trust: Pop Music's History of Lip-Syncing (and Lying About It)". Jezebel. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. McDonnell, Evelyn (June 20, 2011). "Haters Go Home: Britney Dominates L.A. Show". Spin. Retrieved June 21, 2011. Weiss, Sabrina (November 9, 2016). "12 Times Britney Spears Actually Sang Live". Refinery29. Retrieved June 13, 2019. "The Hype; Navel Maneuvers; Britney Spears, Fronting Her Own Career Now, Gives The Pond A Bellyful". Los Angeles Daily News. November 22, 2001. pp. L.5. Archived from the original on August 12, 2011. Retrieved December 17, 2008. "The Greatest: 50 Greatest Women of the Video Era". VH1. MTV Networks. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012. Retrieved June 13, 2019. "The 100 Greatest Music Video Artists of All Time: Staff List". Billboard. August 27, 2020. Archived from the original on August 27, 2020. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Grady, Constance (July 24, 2020). "Why Britney Spears' fans are convinced she's being held captive". Vox. Retrieved July 27, 2020. "Britney Spears". madametussauds.com. Greene, Andy (May 11, 2012). "25 Teen Idol Breakout Moments". Rolling Stone. Retrieved June 11, 2019. "First Time on the Cover". Rolling Stone. November 1, 2011. Retrieved May 13, 2020. Blandford 2002, p. 36 Huey, Steve (2007). "Biography – Britney Spears". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 6, 2008. Retrieved June 12, 2019. "The Evolution of Britney Spears". Billboard. October 12, 2016. Archived from the original on October 14, 2016. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Graham, Mark; George, Kat (December 2, 2011). "The 30 Greatest Britney Spears Songs (In Honor of Her 30th Birthday)". VH1. Archived from the original on December 5, 2011. Retrieved March 6, 2012. "Schoolyard Superstar Aims For a Second Act, as an Adult". The New York Times. October 6, 2002. Archived from the original on May 27, 2015. Retrieved June 24, 2019. Spanos, Brittany (September 30, 2013). "Is Britney Spears a Next Level Gay Icon?". LA Weekly. Singer, Michelle (February 20, 2007). "Timeline: Britney's Meltdown". CBS News. Retrieved August 6, 2019. Grigoriadis, Vanessa (February 21, 2008). "The Tragedy of Britney Spears: Rolling Stone's 2008 Cover Story". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 13, 2018. Retrieved August 19, 2019. "Britney Bounces Back With Three VMA Wins". Billboard. September 8, 2008. Retrieved December 21, 2020. "How Britney Spears lost control of her life 8 years ago and then made an incredible career comeback". Business Insider. August 25, 2016. Retrieved August 6, 2019. Gordon, Naomi (June 26, 2017). "Britney Spears opens up about taking "responsibility" for her mental health". Cosmopolitan. Retrieved June 11, 2019. "Madonna Tops the List as VH1 Counts Down Music's '100 Sexiest Artists'". PR Newswire. September 18, 2002. Archived from the original on June 6, 2011. Retrieved June 11, 2013. "Every FHM 100 Sexiest Women in the world number one: Then and now". MSN. Retrieved March 25, 2021. Nostro, Lauren; Patterson, Julian (December 10, 2012). "The 100 Hottest Female Singers of All Time". Complex. Retrieved June 11, 2019. Tauber, Michelle (May 12, 2003). "50 Most Beautiful People". People. Retrieved June 11, 2019. Crowley, Patrick (February 13, 2018). "7 Times Britney Spears Earned Her Gay Icon Status". Billboard. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Appel, Ben (October 16, 2017). "Lest We Forget Why Gay Men Love Britney And Madonna". HuffPost. Retrieved May 10, 2020. Bromley, Melanie (February 16, 2017). "The Fall and Rise of Britney Spears: The Real Story Behind the Day the Biggest Celebrity in the World Lost Everything". E!. Retrieved June 11, 2019. "Britney Spears Tops Yahoo Searches". NBC Washington. December 1, 2008. Retrieved April 5, 2012. "Angelina, Brad & Britney Set Guinness World Records". NBC Chicago. September 15, 2008. Retrieved March 6, 2012. Lynch, Gerald (December 21, 2009). "Britney Spears is the most searched for celebrity of the decade". Tech Digest. Retrieved May 26, 2012. Carlson, Tucker (September 4, 2003). "Britney Spears: 'Trust our president in every decision'". CNN. Retrieved October 31, 2019. Duboff, Josh (February 19, 2016). "Hillary Clinton Meets with Britney Spears for a Semi-Awkward Las Vegas Summit". Vanity Fair. Peters, Mitchell (December 23, 2017). "Britney Spears Shows Support for Dream Act: 'We Are All Dreamers'". Billboard. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Lange, Jeva (March 24, 2020). "Britney Spears calls for wealth redistribution, general strike on Instagram". The Week. Retrieved March 25, 2020. Wilson, Samantha (June 2, 2020). "Britney Spears Will 'Listen, Learn & DoBetter': Supports Black Lives Matter After George Floyd Death". HollywoodLife. Retrieved August 6, 2020. Hilton, Paris (September 15, 2021). "Britney Spears". Time. Retrieved September 30, 2021. "Pop Icon Britney Spears Wins Time's 2021 Time100 Reader Poll". Time. September 10, 2021. Retrieved September 30, 2021. Patten, Dominic (October 4, 2021). "Britney Spears Thanks #FreeBritney Movement For "Freeing Me From My Conservatorship"". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Eschette, Tyler (March 28, 2024). "Britney Spears named most famous celebrity from Louisiana, study shows". Yahoo! News. Retrieved March 29, 2024. Murphy, Keith (February 11, 2011). "The Curious Case Of Britney Spears: 5 Reasons Why The Princess of Pop Rules". Vibe. Retrieved June 12, 2019. Spanos, Brittany (October 17, 2018). "The Millennial 100". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 8, 2019. Johnston, Maura (July 21, 2021). "Britney Spears' Pop Legacy Goes Way Beyond Her Music". Time. Rosa, Christopher (November 27, 2019). "Britney Spears' 10 Best (and Worst) Songs of All Time". Glamour. Archived from the original on February 3, 2020. Retrieved December 8, 2020. Kelly, Robert (October 25, 2018). "Britney Spears' Singing Voice: How Her 'Baby One More Time' Vocals Influenced a Generation". Billboard. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "The 100 Greatest Debut Singles of All Time". Rolling Stone. May 19, 2020. Retrieved July 18, 2020. Cohen, Jess (July 25, 2018). "Mandy Moore Reflects on Her Early Days in Pop Music Alongside Britney Spears". E!. Retrieved July 15, 2021. Dominguez, Pier (2003). Christina Aguilera: A Star is Made: The Unauthorized Biography. Amber Communications Group, Inc. p. 45. ISBN 978-0-970-222-459. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Jessica Simpson – Sweet Kisses". AllMusic. Retrieved July 15, 2021. Dougherty, Terri (2005). Jessica Simpson and Nick Lachey. Lucent. p. 52. ISBN 9781590187210. Callegari, Caitlyn (February 19, 2016). "Rankings The '00s Pop Princesses". Bustle. Retrieved July 14, 2021. Brow, Jason (March 6, 2020). "Mandy Moore on Being Compared to Britney Spears & Christina Aguilera: I Never Had Their 'Success'". Hollywood Life. Retrieved July 15, 2021. Grossbart, Sarah (May 9, 2018). "The Complete History of Christina Aguilera and Britney Spears' Long-Running Rivalry—Including Everything You Forgot". E!. Retrieved July 15, 2021. Kheraj, Alim (October 26, 2017). "Britney's Blackout ten years on – a mutant pop classic". Dazed. "The 100 Greatest Women In Music". VH1. MTV Networks. February 2, 2012. Archived from the original on April 18, 2015. Retrieved June 13, 2019. "The 200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons Complete Ranked List". PR Newswire. July 21, 2003. Archived from the original on May 11, 2016. Retrieved June 13, 2019. Boyce, Shannon (September 1, 2011). "She Did It Again: Britney Spears Lands Back On Top". Young Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 20, 2012. Retrieved January 7, 2012. Copsey, Rob (April 19, 2016). "Meghan Trainor talks new album Thank You, Grammys backlash and working with her mum – Interview". The Official UK Charts Company. Retrieved April 20, 2016. "Kelly Key busca o sucesso de Christina Aguilera, Jennifer Lopez, Britney Spears, Madonna e Janet Jackson". Universo Musical. Archived from the original on March 7, 2016. Retrieved January 7, 2012. "Kristinia DeBarge – Rhapsody Music". Rhapsody.com. Retrieved August 14, 2010. "Artist to Watch 2009: Little Boots: Little Boots". Rolling Stone. August 7, 2009. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Van Nguyen, Dean (September 12, 2014). "Charli XCX reveals she would 'love' to write a song with Britney Spears". NME. Retrieved May 21, 2015. Crowley, Gary (June 9, 2009). "Marina and The Diamonds in the BBC Introducing hotseat". BBC Music. Retrieved March 12, 2012. Mamo, Heran (August 11, 2021). "The Weeknd's Next Album Is Taking Inspiration From These 2 Britney Spears Songs". Billboard. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Daniels, Colin (January 15, 2013). "Tegan and Sara unveil new song 'I Was a Fool' – listen". Digital Spy. Retrieved March 16, 2016. Lott, Pixie (August 27, 2009). "Pixie Lott's diary: 'After the single hit No 1, it went crazy'". The Guardian. UK. Retrieved August 14, 2010. Sanneh, Kelefa (September 28, 2015). "Pop for Misfits". The New Yorker. Retrieved September 5, 2016. Gomez, Selena (May 7, 2013). "Selena Gomez's Evolution Mirrors Britney Spears'". USA: MTV. Retrieved October 25, 2014. Vain, Madison (July 26, 2016). "How Justin Bieber and Britney Spears inspired Hailee Steinfeld's tour". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved September 15, 2016. Flores, Felipe (December 2, 2015). "A noite da diva: na balada com Pabllo Vittar". Vice (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on December 9, 2018. Retrieved December 9, 2020. "Tinashe Video Interview: On Bringing More Females Into the Mainstream & The Success of '2 On'". Billboard. December 8, 2014. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Harp, Justin (December 13, 2010). "Victoria Justice 'reveals musical influences'". Digital Spy. Retrieved June 8, 2015. "Cassie Ventura Profile and biography". Celebrity Days. Archived from the original on October 14, 2011. Retrieved April 18, 2013. Kaye, Ben (October 12, 2017). "Slothrust turn Britney Spears' "...Baby One More Time" into a slinky blues rock song: Stream". Consequence of Sound. Retrieved December 21, 2019. King, Mollie (May 2010). "The Saturdays influences". The Saturdays official website. London. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Grant, Sarah. "Normani on 'Love Lies' Going Number One, Her Relationship Style, Writing for Women". Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 20, 2018. Vena, Jocelyn (August 11, 2009). "Miley Cyrus on Britney Spears: 'I'm Proud Of Her'". MTV. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Watts, Beverley. "Cheryl Cole: Britney Spears was my inspiration as a teen". CelebsNow. Retrieved November 20, 2018. "Lana Del Rey: "Britney Spears inspires me"". Digital Spy. February 2, 2012. Retrieved February 2, 2012. "Ava Max Explains the Meaning Behind her Hit 'Sweet but Psycho'". Warner Music New Zealand. Retrieved January 27, 2019. "Billie Eilish Explains Her Britney Spears-Inspired Outfit: 'I Love Her So Much'". Archived from the original on November 23, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2019 – via YouTube. "Sam Smith Talks How Britney Spears Inspired the New Album, Love for Normani, & More [Watch]". thatgrapejuice. Retrieved August 7, 2020. "The Women Reclaiming Nu-Metal ft. Rina Sawayama". switchedonpop. Retrieved July 25, 2020. "Lady GaGa: I don't have time for dating". Now. February 9, 2009. Archived from the original on September 22, 2013. Retrieved May 22, 2015. Blickley, Leigh (February 28, 2012). "Simon Cowell Wants Britney Spears on 'The X Factor': 'I'm Fascinated By Her'". OK!. Archived from the original on March 6, 2012. Retrieved March 1, 2012. Stern, Bradley (April 27, 2012). "Daily B: Marina and the Diamonds Talks Britney to Q Magazine". MuuMuse. Retrieved October 2, 2012. Anitai, Tamar (January 11, 2012). "Lana Del Rey Visits MTV, Talks Britney & Bruce, We All Collectively Fall in Love Even Harder (PHOTO)". MTV. Archived from the original on March 14, 2012. Retrieved February 24, 2012. Kennedy, Gerrick. "Porcelain Black knows she's rock and roll, and doesn't care who says otherwise". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved September 16, 2011. Nunes, Caian (July 3, 2019). "Rita Ora confirma inspiração em Britney Spears para o novo clipe "Only Want You"". Portal POPline (in Portuguese). Retrieved July 27, 2020. Radke, Brock (October 20, 2016). "Britney Spears Continues to Define the Modern Strip Residency". Las Vegas Weekly. Retrieved August 6, 2020. Somerlad, Joe (October 20, 2016). "Lady Gaga in Las Vegas: A history of Sin City residencies, from Liberace and Frank Sinatra to Celine Dion". The Independent. Retrieved August 6, 2020. Ziegbe, Mawuse (December 16, 2010). "Britney Spears Inspired 'Country Strong' Lead, Director Says". MTV. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Michelson, Noah (September 5, 2011). "Catching Up With Nicki Minaj". Out. Joe Landry. Retrieved March 6, 2012. Lacher, Irene (June 5, 2011). "The Sunday Conversation: Barry Manilow". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 8, 2012. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Farias, Andree (September 16, 2008). "Bebo Norman – Album Review". AllMusic. Retrieved February 13, 2011. "'Britney Spears Economy' Brings In Millions For Magazines, Label, Paparazzi". MTV. Retrieved December 22, 2023. Inman, Phillip (July 2, 2022). "Dashboard of decline: seven charts that explain Britain's economic crisis". The Observer. ISSN 0029-7712. Retrieved December 22, 2023. "The Britney Economy". Entrepreneur. January 1, 2008. Retrieved December 22, 2023. "Navel-Gazing: Britney Spears, Belly Buttons, and Me". Vanity Fair. August 19, 2021. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Britney Spears to Perform Hits Medley at Billboard Music Awards". Billboard. May 2, 2016. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Britney Spears". Hollywood Walk of Fame. October 25, 2019. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Folkard, Claire (2003). Guinness World Records 2003. Bantam Books. p. 288. ISBN 978-0-553-58636-7. Ruggieri, Melissa (December 19, 2000). "Music Notes". Richmond Times-Dispatch. pp. D.13. Gregory, Elizabeth (October 19, 2023). "The Woman in Me: Britney Spears' best songs of all time, ranked, from Piece Of Me to Toxic". Evening Standard. Retrieved October 28, 2023. "Ask Billboard: Britney Spears' Career Album & Song Sales, on the 20th Anniversary of '...Baby One More Time' LIST". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 15, 2019. Retrieved February 27, 2019. "Britney Spears' '3' Decades of No. 1s". Billboard. February 11, 2011. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Greatest Of All Time Top Dance Club Artists". Billboard. December 2016. Retrieved June 15, 2019. "Britney Brands, Inc". Everything2 Media, LLC. June 18, 2012. Retrieved May 14, 2012. "Britney Spears to Promote Pepsi". American Broadcasting Company. February 7, 2011. Retrieved May 14, 2012. "Britney joins the Pepsi generation". BBC. February 7, 2001. Retrieved May 14, 2012. "Britney, Beyoncé, Pink star in Pepsi ad". USA Today. January 27, 2004. Archived from the original on June 28, 2012. "Britney's Dance Beat". Game Spot. June 19, 2002. Retrieved May 14, 2012. Miller, Korin (March 3, 2009). "Britney Spears, Candie's Girl?! Jr. brand banks on pop star's future – not her past". Daily News. Archived from the original on October 25, 2012. Retrieved May 14, 2012. Roberts, Soraya (January 22, 2011). "Britney Spears 'Hold It Against Me' video earns her $500,000; Katy Perry slams product placement". Daily News. Archived from the original on February 25, 2011. Retrieved January 28, 2011. Catarinella, Alex (April 12, 2012). "Britney Spears Looks Amazing In $20,000 Bra". MTV. Archived from the original on April 14, 2012. Retrieved April 12, 2012. Hinant, Cindy (2012). Britney Spears Fantasy Fantasy Britney Spears (1 ed.). New York: Cindy Hinant. pp. 2–33. "Britney's Perfume Line On Top". BritneySpears.com. May 21, 2009. Archived from the original on May 25, 2009. "Britney Spears Facing $10 Million Lawsuit in Connection With Fragrance Deal". x17 Online. March 30, 2011. Retrieved August 21, 2011. "Cosmic Radiance Britney Spears perfume – a new fragrance for women 2011". Fragantica. Retrieved August 20, 2011. Willis, Jackie (June 17, 2016). "Britney Spears Unveils Her 20th Perfume 'Private Show,' Scent Inspired in Part by Singer's Love of Iced Coffee". Entertainment Tonight. United States: CBS Television Distribution. Retrieved June 17, 2016. "NEW Women Fragrance December 2017 – Britney Spears Sunset Fantasy The Luxury Perfumes at Your Door". Archived from the original on January 14, 2018. Retrieved January 13, 2018. "The Britney Spears Foundation: Helping Children in Need". BritneySpears.com. Archived from the original on November 2, 2004. Retrieved May 14, 2012. "The Britney Spears Camp for the Performing Arts". BritneySpears.com. Archived from the original on October 25, 2004. Retrieved May 14, 2012. "The Britney Spears Foundation: Mission Statement". BritneySpears.com. Archived from the original on October 18, 2004. Retrieved May 14, 2012. Friedman, Roger (July 22, 2008). "Britney Spears' $200G Deficit". Fox News. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved May 14, 2012. Friedman, Roger (July 21, 2011). "Britney Spears Zeroes Out Her Charitable Foundation: It's Over". Showbiz 411. Retrieved May 14, 2012. "Artists Against AIDS Worldwide's New Superstar Version of Marvin Gaye's 'What's Going On' in Stores Tuesday, October 30". Hope for African Children. October 29, 2001. Archived from the original on August 25, 2003. Retrieved May 14, 2012. "Britney Spears Charity Work, Events and Causes". Look to the Stars. Retrieved May 14, 2012. "Britney Spears Raises $200,000 For Hurricane Katrina Charity". Starpulse. May 13, 2011. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved May 14, 2012. Friedman, Roger (June 19, 2008). "Britney Spears' Charity in the Red". Fox News. Archived from the original on January 8, 2014. Retrieved May 14, 2012. "Britney Spears Donates $50,000 To Cancer Charity". Softpedia. July 14, 2005. Archived from the original on September 10, 2012. Retrieved May 14, 2012. "Britney donates to childhood cancer charity". Digital Spy. October 27, 2015. Retrieved May 18, 2016. "Britney Spears donates $120,000 to Nevada Childhood Cancer Foundation". LasVegasSun.com. October 26, 2015. Archived from the original on May 22, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. "Limited Edition Piece of Me Tank Tops on Sale To Benefit Nevada Childhood Cancer Foundation". Britney Spears. Archived from the original on June 2, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016. "Want to Spin With Britney Spears? Check Out Her Charity Cycling Class". Billboard. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Britney Spears Leads Charity Spin Class for Nevada Childhood Cancer Foundation: See Pics". Billboard. Retrieved December 21, 2021. "Britney Spears Campus – Grand opening". nvccf.org. Archived from the original on November 9, 2017. Retrieved November 25, 2017. "#SpiritDay 2016: Entertainers, Performers and Celebrities – GLAAD". Retrieved October 11, 2019. "Need Help? Slide Into Britney's DMs". Paper. March 22, 2020. Retrieved November 16, 2020. "Britney Spears Partners with N.Y.C.'s Glace on a 'Special' Valentine's Day Dessert for a Good Cause (Exclusive)". Spears, Britney; Culotta, Felicia (January 1, 2002). Britneys Spears's Crossroads Diary. Scholastic. ISBN 978-0-439-39745-2. Appell, Glenn; Hemphill, David (2006). American Popular Music: A Multicultural History. Thomson Wadsworth. ISBN 0-15-506229-8. Blandford, James R. (2002). Britney. Music Sales Group. ISBN 978-0-7119-9419-5. Bronson, Fred (2003). The Billboard Book of Number One Hits. Billboard Books. ISBN 978-0-8230-7677-2. Dennis, Steve (2009). Britney: Inside the Dream. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-00-731751-6. Heller, Dana Alice, ed. (2007). Makeover Television: Realities Remodelled. I.B.Tauris. ISBN 978-1-84511-330-8. Hughes, Mark (2005). Buzzmarketing: Get People to Talk about Your Stuff. Penguin Group. ISBN 978-1-59184-092-3. Knopper, Steve (2009). Appetite for Self-Destruction: The Spectacular Crash of the Record Industry in the Digital Age. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4165-5215-4. Laufenberg, Norbert B. (2005). Entertainment Celebrities. Trafford Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4120-5335-8. Peters, Beth (1999). True Brit: The Story of Singing Sensation Britney Spears. Ballantine Books. ISBN 978-0-345-43687-0. Scott, Kieran (2001). I was a Mouseketeer!. Disney Press. ISBN 978-0-7868-4470-8. Shuker, Roy (2012). Understanding Popular Music Culture (4th ed.). Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-51713-3. Smith, Sean (2006). Britney: The Unauthorized Biography of Britney Spears. Pan Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-330-44077-6. Spears, Britney; Spears, Lynne (2001). A Mother's Gift. Delacorte Books for Young Readers. ISBN 978-0-385-72953-6. Spears, Britney; Spears, Lynne (2000). Britney Spears' Heart to Heart. Three Rivers Press. ISBN 978-0-609-80701-9. Spears, Lynne; Craker, Lorilee (2008). Through the Storm: A Real Story of Fame and Family in a Tabloid World. Thomas Nelson Inc. ISBN 978-1-59555-156-6. Stevens, Amanda (2001). Britney Spears: The Illustrated Story. Billboard Books. ISBN 978-0-8230-7867-7. Britney Spears at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website Britney Spears at IMDb 