Biliaivka (Ukrainian: Біля́ївка, romanized: Biliaivka, pronounced [b⁽ʲ⁾iˈlʲɑ.jiu̯.kɐ] ) is a city in Odesa Raion, Odesa Oblast, Ukraine. It hosts the administration of Biliaivka urban hromada, one of the hromadas of Ukraine. The city is located in the Dniester Delta, on the left bank of the Turunchuk River. Lake Safiany is located near by the city. Population: 12,355 (2022 estimate). The populated place (village at that time) was founded by the Ukrainian Cossacks after the elimination of the Zaporizhian Sich. The village called Holovkivka was first mentioned in 1792. The settlers from the Poltava region were moved here in 1794. The first name of the settlement originated from the name of famous Ukrainian Cossack leader, cossack general judge Antin Holovaty. There are several versions of the name origin, but all the versions are connected with his name. The village started to be a volost administrative center in Odesa county in 1886. It had a population of 2917 people with 250 farmyards. There were two Orthodox churches, schools, six shops, and markets. The river crossing over the Turunchuk River was here. The settlement gained town status on 2 January 1957, and city status in 1975. Until 2016, Biliaivka was part of Biliaivka Raion, center of Biliaivka Municipality, and the administrative center of the raion. On 28 January 2016, it was designated the city of oblast significance but remained the administrative center of the raion. The municipality was abolished as administrative unit on 18 July 2020 as part of the administrative reform of Ukraine, which reduced the number of raions of Odesa Oblast to seven. The area of Biliaivka Municipality was merged into Odesa Raion. Besides the Ukrainians, the city of Biliaivka has a significant number of Germans, Bulgarians, Greeks and Romani.[citation needed] The Saint Nicholas church The Dormition church The World War II memorial in the downtown The boat station View from Lake Safiany [1][permanent dead link] Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2022 [Number of Present Population of Ukraine, as of January 1, 2022] (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2022. "Беляевская громада" (in Russian). Портал об'єднаних громад України. Волости и важнѣйшія селенія Европейской Россіи. По данным обслѣдованія, произведеннаго статистическими учрежденіями Министерства Внутренних Дѣл, по порученію Статистическаго Совѣта. Изданіе Центральнаго Статистическаго Комитета. Выпуск VIII. Губерніи Новороссійской группы. СанктПетербургъ. 1886. – VI + 157 с. Історія міст і сіл УРСР. Одеська область. – 1969, Харків, ст. 324–335. "Беляевка официально стала городом областного значения". Dumskaya (in Russian). 28 January 2016. "Про утворення та ліквідацію районів. Постанова Верховної Ради України № 807-ІХ". Голос України (in Ukrainian). 18 July 2020. Retrieved 3 October 2020. "Нові райони: карти + склад" (in Ukrainian). Міністерство розвитку громад та територій України. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Biliaivka. Інформаційний портал Біляївки Archived 16 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine Аліса Ложешник. Спадок родини Антона Андрійовича Головатого – військового судді Чорноморського козацького війська. Біляївка — Інформаційно-пізнавальний сайт | Одеська область у складі УРСР (На основі матеріалів енциклопедичного видання про історію міст та сіл України, том – Історія міст і сіл Української РСР. Одеська область. – К.: Головна редакція УРЕ АН УРСР, 1969. – 911 с.) ВРУ[permanent dead link]