Sarcoscypha austriaca is a saprobic fungus in the family Sarcoscyphaceae of the order Pezizales of Ascomycota. It is commonly known as the scarlet elfcup, pézize écarlate and scharlachroter kelchbecherling. The species name means "from Austria". This species is found in Europe and the Northeast of North America where it can be separated from Sarcoscypha dudleyi on spore characteristics. This species is found growing on fallen pieces of dead hardwood among mosses and leaf litter in damp habitats in winter and early spring. The fruiting body is cup-shaped with a scarlet smooth, shiny interior. The exterior is covered with a felted mass of short hairs in varying shades of white and pink and a stubby stem. The flesh is white and rubbery with a thin red layer lining the cup. The spore print is white and the spores are ellipsoidal with flattened ends and containing several oil droplets. On the outside of the cup the hairs are curly or corkscrew shaped. These features distinguishes this species from the rather similar Sarcoscypha coccinea and Sarcoscypha jurana It is reported to grow on the dead wood of such hosts as Alnus incana, species of Salix, Acer and Robinia. It is part of a complex of species which includes Sarcoscypha coccinea and Sarcoscypha dudleyi. Sarcoscypha austriaca is generally considered inedible, but is considered edible by the Norwegian Association for Mycology and Foraging. Rogers Mushrooms Archived 2012-08-17 at the Wayback Machine Gary Emberger: Sarcoscypha austriaca Leif Goodwin: Sarcoscypha austriaca Grzyby Polski: Sarcoscypha austriaca Miller Jr., Orson K.; Miller, Hope H. (2006). North American Mushrooms: A Field Guide to Edible and Inedible Fungi. Guilford, CN: FalconGuides. p. 536. ISBN 978-0-7627-3109-1. nettbrygga.no. "Skarlagen vårbeger". Norges sopp- og nyttevekstforbund (in Norwegian). Retrieved 2022-02-27. "Soppsesongen er i gang!", (In Norwegian. "The mushroom season has started!") includes food recipes involving Sarcoscypha austriaca, Matriket, 25 March 2020