Krówki ([ˈkrufki], plural; krówka singular), literally meaning "little cows," are Polish fudge, semi-soft milk toffee candies. When hand-made, they are hard and crispy on the outside, but the inside is more fluid than solid. It is one of the most common Polish confections, sold worldwide, and might be considered "dulce de leche candy". Commercially, many brands are available; most of them have each individual candy wrapped in white-and-yellow paper with a picture of a Holstein cow. Widely known across Europe even before the end of the Cold War, they are something of an equivalent of the White Rabbit Creamy Candy famous across East Asia, or Scottish Tablet. The original recipe usually contains milk, sugar, and sometimes butter, cream and vanilla flavor. There are also fruit (e.g. banana), cocoa, coffee, nut, liquorice flavored krówki available, as well as versions made from soy milk for lactose intolerant consumers. Krówki can be prepared at home, using a simple cast iron pan and the above-mentioned ingredients. The confectionery company "L. Pomorski i syn" claims that the first krówki were produced in Poznań by the Pomorski family, which was later expelled by Nazi Germans to Milanówek near Warsaw during World War II. In Germany, krówki are often called Muh-Muhs (after the sound cows make) or Kuhbonbons (cow bonbons). In Latvia, this candy is called gotiņa and is considered the national candy. Originally it was made at home, and has been produced commercially since 1930s. Krówki added to the list of Polish Traditional Products by Minister of Agriculture: "Krówka opatowska" - is being made since 1982, produced in a traditional way, handmade cut and packed in Opatów, Świętokrzyskie Voivodeship. Added to the list on 7 February 2011 "Krówka szczecinecka" - is produced since 1971, in Szczecinek, West Pomeranian Voivodeship, added to the list on 19 January 2016 "Wyborowa krówka bełchatowska" – added to the list on 30 November 2017, Łódź Voivodeship "Krówka regulicka" – added to the list on 15 May 2020, Lesser Poland Voivodeship "Krówka mleczna strzyżowska" – added to the list on 9 June 2020, Podkarpackie Voivodeship Cajeta Caramel Confiture de lait Flan Dulce de Leche List of Polish desserts Maillard reaction Penuche Prince Polo Teja  Food portal "Why? you should TRY !!". Archived from the original on 2007-05-26. "Krówka". Retrieved 22 August 2020. "Advertising cream fudge L. Pomorski and sonCukierki reklamowe L. Pomorski i syn". www.krowki-pomorski.pl (in Polish). Archived from the original on March 17, 2012. "Home". www.muh-muhs.de (in German). July 1, 2021. "Kuhbonbon Online Shop". Kuhbonbon Online-Shop (in German). "Latvijas garša. Labākais no piena | Laikmeta zīmes". v t e