Eleocharis acicularis is a species of spikesedge known by the common names needle spikerush and least spikerush. It is widespread across Europe, central and southeastern Asia, North America and northeastern South America as far south as Ecuador. It is also found in Australia, where it is probably an introduced species. Eleocharis acicularis is an annual or perennial spikesedge with long, grasslike stems to about 15 centimeters (6 inches) in height, shorter in bog conditions, from a creeping rhizome. In shallow water it will form short spikes of tiny flowers amongst flat overlapping bracts. The tiny flowers are less than five millimeters in diameter and are borne at the tip of each stem in single, sharply pointed, lanceoloid spikelets up to about six millimeters long. This is a plant of marshes, vernal pools, and bogs. Eleocharis acicularis is sold commercially as an aquascape plant suitable for inclusion in artificial aquatic environments. It thrives with plenty of light and a high concentration of carbon dioxide. The specific epithet, acicularis, is derived from Latin and means "needle-shaped". Two varieties are recognized: Eleocharis acicularis var. acicularis – most of species range Eleocharis acicularis var. porcata S.G.Sm. – western North America from Alberta south to New Mexico and Louisiana "The Plant List: A Working List of All Plant Species". Retrieved 4 January 2015. USDA, NRCS (n.d.). "Eleocharis acicularis". The PLANTS Database (plants.usda.gov). Greensboro, North Carolina: National Plant Data Team. Retrieved 18 January 2016. Kew World Checklist of Selected Plant Families Flora of North America, Vol. 23 Page 108, Eleocharis acicularis (Linnaeus) Roemer & Schultes in J. J. Roemer et al., Syst. Veg. 2: 154. 1817. Roe, Colin D. (1967), A Manual of Aquarium Plants, Shirley Aquatics, Solihull "Aquascaping World Plantpedia, Eleocharis acicularis". Archived from the original on 2014-07-28. Retrieved 2014-07-25. Eggli, Urs; Newton, Leonard E. (2004). Etymological Dictionary of Succulent Plant Names. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. p. 1. ISBN 978-3-540-00489-9. Retrieved 14 November 2018. Media related to Eleocharis acicularis at Wikimedia Commons Jepson Manual Treatment WetWebMedia: Hair Grass Archived 2014-02-22 at the Wayback Machine USGS Species Profile Washington State Water Quality Program v t e