Korea University (KU, Korean: 고려대학교; RR: Goryeo Daehakgyo) is a private university in Seoul, South Korea. Established in 1905, the university was named after Goguryeo. The university is one of the SKY universities. The student body consists of over 20,000 undergraduate students and over 10,000 graduate students. The university has 81 departments in 19 colleges and divisions, as well as 18 graduate schools. It has over 1,500 full-time faculty members with over 95% of them holding Ph.D. or equivalent qualification in their field. The Korea University Alumni Association consists of more than 280,000 university graduates. Korea University was established on May 5, 1905, as Bosung College by Lee Yong-Ik, Treasurer of the Royal Household. The first College President was Hae-Uoung Shin. As an academic institution of nationalistic origin, it was regarded as a symbol of national pride during the colonial period (1910–1945). Shortly after Bosung College was established, the "Korea–Japan Protocol" was signed, and Lee Yong-Ik went into exile to lead the resistance movement against Japan. His exile created financial hardship for the institution. The financial crisis was overcome when Sohn Byong-Hee, a leader of Chundokyo, a nationalist, religious, and political movement at the time, took over the management of the institution. By 1929, the institution once again faced a serious financial crisis as a result of the worldwide recession. This was alleviated when Kim Seong-su became the president of the college in 1932. At that time, Kim was managing Choong-Ang High School and the Dong-A Ilbo, a daily newspaper. In 1934, the main building was completed on a 63,000-pyeong area of land located in Anam-dong. Construction of the library started in 1935 to commemorate the thirtieth anniversary of the founding of Bosung College and was completed two years later. In July of the following year, a large athletic field, was added to the campus. In April 1944, the Japanese colonial government forced Bosung College to change its name and placed it under the supervision of the Japanese authorities. Following the legacy of Bosung Professional School, the predecessor institution was placed under the management of a foundation and relocated to a vast area in Anam-dong, where remarkable facilities were established. Following independence in 1945, the status of Bosung College was elevated to that of a university comprising three colleges, Political Science and Law, Economics and Commerce, and Liberal Arts. The goal was to create a major cradle for nurturing talented individuals and cultivating national culture. Upon liberation from the fervent longing for independence from Japan, in the year 4279 by the traditional Korean calendar (1946), Bosung Professional School was reorganized and elevated to Korea University. This expansion significantly enhanced its offerings and scope, reflecting the grand ambitions of its founders. Hyun Sang-Yun, the first president, initiated an expansion of the campus by purchasing forest and land. In June 1949, Korea University awarded its first bachelor's degree and in September of the same year, the graduate school was established. Yu Chin-O, the fourth president, continued to expand Korea University with the establishment of the Division of Science within the College of Liberal Arts, as well as a fourth college, the College of Agriculture. After that, Kim Seoung-su, the founder of Korea University, became the Vice President of Government of Korea. This influenced the Korea University's development. In June 1961 the present Liberal Arts building (Seokwan) was completed. Various facilities were also completed such as the museum, the agriculture laboratory, the greenhouse, and other buildings for student services. In the same year, an experimental farm of about 1,680,000 pyeong was added to the facilities. In addition, the Science and Engineering Departments were equipped with laboratories and instruments. In December 1963, the Graduate School of Business Administration, the first of its kind in Korea, was established. In October 1965, Yu Chin-O retired after fifteen years of service as the fourth president of Korea University and was succeeded by Lee Chong-Woo as the fifth president. After 1966, Korea University continued to expand with a gradual increase in the number of departments within the College of Science and Engineering and in the College of Agriculture. The Graduate School of Education was also founded. More facilities, including the new annex buildings, the General Education Building (Kyoyangkwan), and the Mass Communication Building (Hongbokwan), were added. In October 1970, Kim Sang-Hyup, professor of political science, was appointed as the sixth president, succeeding Lee Chong-Woo who retired in September of that year. In December 1971, a major reorganization of Korea University took place, all Woosuk University colleges, including Medicine, Liberal Arts, and Sciences, Law and Economics, Junior College of Allied Health Sciences, as well as Woosuk University Hospital, was completely integrated into Korea University. In June 1972, the Business Administration Building (Kyoyangkwan) was completed to accommodate the College of Commerce and the Graduate School of Business Administration. In December of the same year, the college of Education was established. In April 1975, President Kim Sang-Hyup was succeeded by Cha Rak-Hoon who became the seventh president. In December 1976, the College of Commerce was renamed the College of Business Administration. The Graduate School of Food and Agriculture was established in January of the following year. In December 1977, the College of Science and Engineering was separated into the College of Science and the College of Engineering. In addition, the new Central Library, the largest of its kind in South Korea at that time, was opened in March 1978. In July 1983, Medical School and hospital were expanded and reorganized into the Korea University Medical Center, which then included four new hospitals: Haewha, Guro, Yeoju and Ansan. In September 1983, the Science Library opened as the Center for Science and Technology Research and was at that time the largest and most modern building on the campus. In June 2001, Korea University concluded a joint academic program with the University of British Columbia in Canada. The Korea University Lyceum was completed and SK Telecom made a significant contribution in the same month. In July, the Division of International Studies and the School of Journalism and Mass Communication were founded. In October, Korea University obtained ISO9001 authentication in all educational and administrative areas. In 2005, Korea University celebrated its Centennial Anniversary of Foundation Day, May 5. In March the College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology and the College of Life and Environmental Sciences were integrated into the College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology. At the same time, the Junior College of Health Sciences was abolished and merged into the new highly developed College of Health Sciences. Korea University is composed of twenty-two graduate schools as well as eighteen undergraduate schools and colleges. Additionally, there are eleven auxiliary facilities, including libraries, a museum, and a press office for public relations. Korea University's 59 academic departments and programs are organized into 17 colleges and schools: Law School Business School College of Liberal Arts College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology College of Political Science and Economics College of Science College of Engineering College of Medicine College of Education College of Nursing College of Informatics College of Health Science School of Art and Design Division of International Studies School of Media and Communication Mechatronics School of Interdisciplinary Studies Law Business Administration Korean Language and Literature Philosophy Korean History History Psychology Sociology Classical Chinese English Language and Literature German Language and Literature French Language and Literature Chinese Language and Literature Russian Language and Literature Japanese Language and Literature Spanish Language and Literature Linguistics Life Sciences Biotechnology Food Bioscience and Technology Environmental Science and Ecological Engineering Food and Resource Economics Political Science and International Relations Economics Statistics Public Administration Mathematics Physics Chemistry Earth and Environmental Science Materials Science and Engineering Chemical Engineering and Biological engineering Civil, Environmental and Architectural engineering Architecture Mechanical Engineering Industrial Management Engineering Electrical Engineering Medical Science Education Physical Education Home Economics Education Mathematics Education Korean Language Education English Language Education Geography Education History Education Nursing Biomedical Engineering Biosystem and Biomedical Science Health and Environmental Science Health Policy and Management Computer Science and Engineering Cyber Defense Art and Design International Studies Media and Communication Interdisciplinary Studies Science and Technology Studies Liberal Arts and Law EML (Emerging Market & Latin America) Program Language, Brain & Computer Humanities and Creative Industry Global Leader for the East Asian Century Ecologic landscape Climate Change Program Medical Science and Engineering Financial Engineering Law and Public Administration PEL(Politics, Economics and Law) Cryptology Fashion Design and Merchandising Multicultural Korean Education Brain and Cognitive Sciences Software Technology & Entrepreneurship Program (STEP) Food Industrial Management Public Governance and Leadership Medical Convergence Engineering Convergence Security Information Security Social Welfare DMC (Digital Media Culture) Financial Derivatives Engineering GKS (Global Korea Scholarship) Major Convergence Admissions decisions are based on the applicant's high school transcripts and scores on the South Korean College Scholastic Ability Test. For the freshman class entering in 2016, the overall admission rate was 5.13%. In 2021, the university was ranked 69th in the world. In 2016–17, the university was ranked 16th in Asia by QS World University Rankings. Also, in the 2014 QS World University Subject Rankings, the university's politics program, economics program, chemical engineering program, and communications program were all ranked within the top 50 in the world. In 2003, Korea University Law School students accounted for more than 15% of the nearly 900 people who passed the annual Korean bar examination. The business programs at Korea University obtained international certification by acquiring Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB) certifications in both undergraduate and graduate levels and European Quality Improvement System (EQUIS). Accordingly, in 2007, the Ministry of Education, after assessing domestic MBA programs, named Korea University as having the MBA program in South Korea. In the 2015 Financial Times' EMBA Rankings, Korea University Business School's Executive MBA (E-MBA) program was ranked 27th in the world. From 2003 to 2006, Euh Yoon-Dae, the current Chairman of President's Council on National Branding, Steering Committee of Korea Investment Corporation (KIC), and the former (15th) President of Korea University, drastically changed the image of Korea University, a change symbolized by the adoption of red wine over the traditional rice wine. He doubled the publication requirements required for faculty promotion and raised the ratio of the classes taught in English to 35% of all courses taught. He also required that core liberal arts classes be taught by full-time faculty and required every student except those in the Colleges of Engineering, Law, and Medicine to do a double major. He also signed academic exchange agreements with 172 universities overseas and dispatched 60% of administration staff to the world's top 100 universities for training. Korea University also expanded its international-level facilities. It built the Centennial Memorial Samsung Hall, Hwajung Gymnasium, Tiger Plaza, and Hana Square, and also expanded educational and cultural spaces. The overall number of international students is about 4,000. Korea University offers English degree programs in the College of International Studies (CIS) and Graduate School of International Studies (GSIS). International students can also apply toward other degree programs through the Office of International Affairs. However, the language of instruction is usually Korean. Battelle@KU Laboratory Center for Information Security Technologies IBS Center for Molecular Spectroscopy and Dynamics - Cho Minhaeng, Choi Wonshik Ilmin International Relations Institute Institute of Biotechnology Korean Language and Culture Center Research Institute for Information and Communication Technology Research Institute of Korean Studies Korea University Sejong Campus is Korea University's second campus. It was established in Jochiwon, Yeongi County(later annexed to Jochiwon District of Sejong City, the governmental capital of South Korea), South Korea in 1980. Korea University Sejong Campus is a leading research oriented one. The campus consists of the Biomedical Campus in Osong Bio-health technopolis established by Korea's Ministry of Health & Welfare, New Research Campus (provisional name) in Sejong City which is established as Korea's new government district (Sejong Special Self-Governing City) Six colleges and schools in Sejong Campus are part of the twenty schools of Korea University. The installation plan of Korea University Sejong Campus was approved on September 22 in 1979. College of Public Policy College of Science and Technology College of Business and Economics School of Public Administration School of Sports and Leisure Studies College of Pharmacy Division of Smart Cities Seoul campus is divided into four subdivisions; Science and Engineering, Humanities and Social Sciences, Medicine and Life Sciences, and Jeongneung. It is located in the greater Seoul area and boasts a population of over 20 million. Within a five-minute walk from the campus are an array of restaurants, bars, shops, and even a famous Buddhist temple. It takes about 20 minutes from some buildings of the main campus to some buildings on the science or medical campus on foot. Library System University Museum - The first university museum in Korea, the museum contains over 100,000 pieces of data covering history, the study of antiquities, ethnology, and the arts. Centennial Memorial Samsung Hall - Completed in commemoration of KU's centennial, the building houses both a digital library and a number of national treasure-level cultural properties. LG-POSCO Hall - A new building for the Business School completed on a site of 14,122 m2 with funds of KRW 25 billion donated by companies and schoolfellows. Lyceum Central Square Hana Square Tiger Dome - A multi-purpose sports complex of 18,182 m2, the gym was completed in 2006. With three floors above the ground and another three below. Dongwon Hall Korean Studies Hall - Established to teach the Korean language and promote Korean culture. Chungsan-MK Culture Center - a 6-story building opened in 2007 to encourage cultural exchanges between Korea and Japan and promote Japanese studies. Ice Rink - Containing an Olympic-sized skating rink and the finest in facilities, the Ice Rink also functions as a training base for national athletes. Media Hall - Building for students of the School of Media & Communication. Completed in August 2011 on a site of 11,663  m2. Contains various media facilities and studios that enable students to create media outputs. International Center for Converging Technology - Built in August 2008 with a total floor area of 7,665  m2. Scientific technology research activities are supported by various facilities and equipment. Green tract of land sports field - Established to play soccer or teach physical education. Social Science: Philosophy Village, The Wagon Wheel, Saram Saneun Saesang, Study Group of Culture, Working People, KUCC, Economics Institute of Current Events, UNSA (UN Student's Association), Korean Modern History Research Association, Current Affairs & Economy Society, Korean Society Research Association, Korean Spirit Training, B&B Exhibition and Creative Art: Institute of Arts Criticism, Our Literature Research Institute, KU Literature Association, Institute of Korean Painting Dolbit (KU Movie Critique Club), Geurim Madang (KU Cartoon Club), Keul mal Literature Institute (KU poet's society), Hoyounghoi Jinbo Creative Literature Club, Seowha PAPCON Social Studies: One, Two, Five (a campaign for the disabled), Red Cross Student's Association Rotarect (university federation public service club), Nadal Moeum (an agricultural club) Howoo Hwe (KU public service club), Eunwhawhe (a student association for night studies), Saebyok Kwangjang (a club for preserving the environment), KUSA Art: Korea University Choir (former KU Glee Club), KU Nongak (Korean instrumental music of peasants), KU Orchestra We love Tal (Korean Traditional Mask), KU Wind Ensemble Noraeol Theater, Korean Classical Music Classic Guitar Club, 1905, Crimson, Korea University A cappella Group LoGS, KUDT (Korea University Dance Team), Geurootogi (an Acoustic Guitar Club), TTP, Bulas (Sports Dance), TERRA (hip hop) Religion: Won-Buddhism Student's Association, Every Nation Mission (ENM), Jeung San Do, Student Christian Association, Campus Crusade for Christ (CCC), Korean Christian Students' Union, Christ's Ambassador Mission (CAM) University Mission, Buddhist Student's Association, Joy Mission, Catholic Student's Association, Student For Christ (SFC), IVF Language Studies: Nid d'amis (French Club), Dongsuchoi, KU Research Institute on Korean and Japanese Culture, S.I. S TIME, KU China Research Institute, E.C.S (English Conversation Researching Society), LECA (English Conversation Club), A.L.C Life Culture: Leisure and recreation Research Association, Youth Hostel (Travelling Club), Ho-Jin Hwe (theatre appreciation and critique club), Scout / Ho-Dong Hwe (a club made by Japanese Koreans), Paduk Sarang Meeting (a club for people who play Korean checkers) Sports: Fencing Club, Amateur Soccer team, Skin Scuba Diving, Korea University Amateur Baseball Club, KU Archery Club, Swimming Tiger's Club, Badminton / Ping-pong Club, Soobakdo Literary Art: Norae Madang, Talpae Hanaldarae, KU Folk Music Band, Yeol Gu Rim, ICCUS, TERRA, Sun Hyang Jae, Darkroom Science and Technology: KULS, KUERA, Amateur Astronomer's Club (KUAAA), Amateur Radio Association (HAM), Intelligent Robot Club (KAsimov) Others: Honong-hoe, The Morning Dew, Breaking The Cell, Buddhist Student Society, Sunlight Village, Youth & Future, Korea University Extreme Sports Club (KESC) The Granite Tower Festival (Seoktap Daedongje) is an annual week of festivities usually held in May. Many celebrities are invited to perform throughout the week (around four celebrity performers every night) in the Minju-Gwangjang (민주광장) in front of Woodang Hall. The final day of celebration is called Ipselenti. April 18 Marathon (418 민주대장정) is a marathon honoring the students who were assaulted in the "April 18th Korea University student assault incident." 3,000 Korea University students gathered on April 18, 1960, in a peaceful demonstration against the rigged presidential election of Syngman Rhee on March 15, demanding rightful democracy. The government mobilized organized gangster groups to forcefully shut down this demonstration, injuring and incarcerating many. Korea University students take great pride in being one of the most active participants in Korean modern history, and the April 18 Marathon is one of the ways in which they honor their seniors who strived for a better future. Ipselenti- Cry of "Ji Ya" (입실렌티- 지.야의 함성) is a cheering festival that is held by the Korea University Cheerleaders on the last and biggest night of Seoktap Daedongje (Granite Tower University Festival). Students gather in the Nokji Field (녹지운동장) and sing Korea University's cheering songs, dance along and enjoy. Some of the country's best-known singers are also invited to perform there; Blackpink, Twice, Psy, Be-Why, AKMU, Red Velvet, 2NE1 being some of them. "Ipselenti" is part of Korea University's slogan that has been used since Bosung College, and "Ji" and "Ya" mean jiseong and yaseong (wisdom and wildness). Yonsei-Korea Friendship Games (see Athletics) Korea University is a member of the Korea University Sports Federation (KUSF) and its men's football/soccer, men's basketball, baseball, and men's ice hockey teams participate in the KUSF U-League. It has a historic athletic rivalry with the nearby Yonsei University which dates back to the Japanese occupation era. Outside KUSF-sanctioned competitions, both institutions also compete in an annual "friendship games" across two days each fall in five team sports – football, basketball, baseball, ice hockey and rugby – a tradition dating back to the 1940s. Korea University's mascot and symbol is the tiger and its student-athletes are informally known as "Tigers". The following is a list of presidents of Korea University. With the opening as Kyoung-sung Women's Medical College in 1938, the university's college of medicine was later renamed and annexed as Seoul Women's Medical College in 1948. Then, in 1967, it was renamed as Woosuk College of Medicine. Finally, the medical school merged with Korea University in 1971, and was officially renamed as Korea University College of Medicine. In 1983, the Korea University Medical Center (KUMC) was formed and its first director was inaugurated. Since then, KUMC has been performing the duties as a university hospital, such as education, research, patient care, and voluntary work in world-disaster areas as well as disadvantaged areas in South Korea. Korea University Medical Center is a comprehensive medical institution that includes three hospitals (Anam, Guro, and Ansan), the College of Medicine, three graduate schools, ten laboratories, and several specialized centers. It also has acquired JCI certification, the second medical center in South Korea to do so. Korea University offers scholarships, fellowships and awards under the auspices of the Korea University Foundation, established in 1905. Close to 245 institutional scholarships, totaling more than 11.5 billion won, are available to Korea University students. Almost 90 percent of the admitted international students are awarded Korea University Scholarships. Scholarships are established as either endowed or restricted, in accordance with the wishes of the donor. Scholarships are awarded to students based on criteria such as matriculation status, school and department affiliation, financial need, academic achievement, grade point average and expected graduation date. The rivalry between Korea University and Yonsei University, the country's top two private schools, regularly gains national attention. There is an annual fall sports festival between the two universities. Since 1956, the annual Korea–Yonsei University Friendship Games comprises five events every year: Football, Rugby, Baseball, Basketball, and Ice Hockey. The history of the Yonsei–Korea rivalry: Yeonhee College, the forerunner of Yonsei University, and Boseong College, the forerunner of Korea University participated in the fifth Jeonbok . It was the confrontation between the soccer team of Boseong professional school and the soccer team of Yeonhee professional school in the semi-finals of the eighth Jeonbuk Soccer Contest held in Kyungsung Stadium in 1927. In 2012, out of the five sports, Korea University won three (baseball, basketball, soccer) and lost two (ice hockey, rugby). In 2014, out of the five sports, Korea University won all of them, the first time ever in history. In 2009, Korea University claimed approximately 280,000 living alumni. Among the notable alumni of Korea University are prominent lawyers, physicians, engineers, researchers, Olympic athletes, and others who have gained both national and world fame in their respective fields. Korea University has produced many famous politicians, including the tenth President of the Republic of Korea, Lee Myung Bak, 20th Speaker of the Assembly , Chung Sye-kyun, and the 34th Mayor of Seoul, Oh Se-hoon. Also, a recent survey of South Korea's Fortune 500 companies revealed that Korea University has produced the greatest number of CEOs of these Fortune 500 companies. After graduating from the prestigious Waseda University in Japan, Kim Seong-su, who founded Korea University and served as the Vice President of Government of Korea, influenced the establishment of a close relationship between Korea University and Waseda University starting in 1973. From the 2010s, this partnership has offered rare dual degree programs at both the bachelor's and master's levels. Association of Pacific Rim Universities Education in South Korea KU-Yonsei rivalry List of universities in Seoul List of colleges and universities in South Korea List of Korea University people SKY Universities S3 Asia MBA - Joint MBA program by Fudan University, Korea University and NUS Business School Universitas 21 "캠퍼스" (Revised Romanization of Korean: kaempeoseu) is a loanword from English "campus". "President of Korea University". Korea University. Retrieved June 28, 2023. "About KU". Korea University. Retrieved June 28, 2023. "고려대학교의 탄생". The Inchon Memorial Foundation (in Korean). The Dong-a Ilbo. Retrieved 3 August 2023. "How the 'SKY' universities dominate". Korea JoongAng Daily. Retrieved 2022-04-28. "Global KU – Frontier Spirit". Archived from the original on 2010-05-27. Retrieved 2009-11-12. "About KU|Promotion|Brochures". www.korea.edu (in Korean). Retrieved 2022-04-28. "About KU|History|Outline". www.korea.edu (in Korean). Retrieved 2022-04-28. "[정경연 풍수기행] 고창 인촌 김성수 생가, 북향 명당… 청룡·백호가 감싸 보국 형성". 중부일보 - 경기·인천의 든든한 친구 (in Korean). 2018-10-03. Retrieved 2023-11-21. "세계가 부러워하는 대한민국은 왜 과거에 빠진 '선동 천국' 됐나? [송의달 LIVE]". Naver News (in Korean). Retrieved 2023-11-21. 윤, 지은 (2023-10-10). "[Who Is ?] 윤을식 고려대의료원장". [Who Is ?] 윤을식 고려대의료원장. Retrieved 2023-11-21. "고대소개|고대역사|연표|연표". Korea University (in Korean). Retrieved 2023-11-21. "About KU|History|Chronology|Chronology". www.korea.edu (in Korean). Retrieved 2023-07-22. "Schools|Graduate Schools". Korea University (in Korean). Retrieved 2023-07-22. "대학·대학원|대학|서울캠퍼스". Korea University (in Korean). Retrieved 2023-11-21. "입학안내|대학입학". Korea University (in Korean). Retrieved 2023-11-21. "고려대학교 노어노문학과". "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 2017-03-23. Retrieved 2017-03-22.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) "2023 JoongAng Ilbo University Rankings". JoongAng Ilbo. 2022. Retrieved November 20, 2023. "QS University Rankings 2024". Top Universities. 2024. Retrieved June 27, 2023. "THE University Rankings 2024 - South Korea". Times Higher Education (THE). 2024. Retrieved October 21, 2023. World University Rankings - 2023 (2023). "South Korea Universities in Top 500 universities". Academic Ranking of World Universities. Retrieved August 21, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "QS Asian University Rankings". QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. 2024. Retrieved November 8, 2023. "Times Higher Education Asia University Rankings". Times Higher Education. 2023. Retrieved August 21, 2023. U.S.News & World Report (2022). "Best Global Universities in Asia - US News Education". Retrieved July 20, 2023. "Academic Ranking of World Universities". Institute of Higher Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. 2023. Retrieved August 20, 2023. "QS World University Rankings". QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. 2024. Retrieved June 27, 2023. "THE World University Rankings". Times Higher Education. 2024. Retrieved October 21, 2023. U.S.News & World Report (2022). "Best Global Universities - US News". Retrieved July 20, 2023. U.S.News & World Report (2022). "Search Best Global Universities - US News Education". Retrieved July 20, 2023. "Young University Rankings 2023: South Korea". Times Higher Education (THE). 2024. Retrieved July 21, 2023. "Korea University". 16 July 2015. . Top Universities "Korea University Rankings". Top Universities. Retrieved 3 July 2015. "제 58회 사법시험 합격자 배출 사립대 1위". Retrieved 8 April 2018. (in Korean) [1] Archived 2007-09-28 at the Wayback Machine "Save Internet 뉴데일리". www.newdaily.co.kr. Archived from the original on June 18, 2009. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 20 April 2019. Retrieved 3 July 2015.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) "고려대학교". Korea University. Archived from the original on January 13, 2015. Global KU - Frontier Spirit Archived 2010-05-27 at the Wayback Machine. Korea.edu. Retrieved on 2010-10-19. "Korea University COLLEGE OF INTERNATIONAL STUDIES & GRADUATE SCHOOL OF INTERNATIONAL STUDIES | Undergraduate Program | Academic Curriculum | Bachelor of International Studies". Korea University Division of International Studies & Graduate School of International Studies. Retrieved 2022-12-10. "Office of International Affairs". oia.korea.ac.kr. Retrieved 2022-12-10. "고려대학교 연구포탈". rms.korea.ac.kr. Retrieved 2023-11-21. "About KU". Korea University. Retrieved February 20, 2019. "고대소개|캠퍼스안내|찾아오시는길". Korea University (in Korean). Retrieved 2023-11-21. "고려대학교 동아리연합회". app.club.ku.ster.ws. Retrieved 2023-11-21. "한국대학스포츠협의회: 회원대학" (in Korean). Korea University Sports Federation. "'사학 라이벌' 고려대-연세대, 정기전 우정의 맞대결". The Dong-a Ilbo (in Korean). September 3, 2019. "[게시판] 고려대·연세대, 6~7일 정기 고연전 개최". Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). September 4, 2019. "고려대학교". Retrieved 3 July 2015. 네이버 백과사전. 100.naver.com. Retrieved on 2010-10-19. 한국경영학회. kasba.or.kr (in Korean). Korean Academic Society of Business Administration. Retrieved 2018-06-07. KB금융지주. Kbfng.com (2009-01-22). Retrieved on 2010-10-19. "KOREA UNIVERSITY MEDICAL CENTER". KOREA UNIVERSITY MEDICAL CENTERy. Retrieved 2022-04-28. Korea University Anam Hospital Archived 2010-07-06 at the Wayback Machine. Anam.kumc.or.kr (2009-07-18). Retrieved on 2010-10-19. 장학금안내 - 고려대학교 Global KU - Frontier Spirit!. Korea.ac.kr. Retrieved on 2010-10-19. 성적,면학장학금 - 고려대학교 Global KU - Frontier Spirit!. Korea.ac.kr. Retrieved on 2010-10-19. "고려대학교". Korea University. Archived from the original on January 13, 2015. "[Sc 매거진] 연고전의 역사". 2 September 2008. "고려대학교 교우회". Archived from the original on 8 June 2004. Retrieved 3 July 2015. "500대 기업 총수 최대 學脈 '경복고-고려대 경영학'". 24 July 2013. Retrieved 3 July 2015. "[공지] 고려대-와세다 복수학위 프로그램 참여 정경대 학부생 공모[공지] 고려대-와세다 복수학위 프로그램 참여 정경대 학부생 공모". 고려대학교 경제학과 (in Korean). Retrieved 2023-11-21. Official website KU Alumni Association Association of Pacific Rim Universities The scholarships blog