Pulsatilla pratensis (syn. Anemone pratensis), the small pasque flower, is a species of flowering plant in the family Ranunculaceae, native to central and eastern Europe, from southeast Norway and western Denmark south and east to Bulgaria. It grows from near sea level in the north of the range, up to 2,100 m (6,900 ft) in the south of its range. The Latin specific epithet pratensis means "from the meadow", referring to one of its typical habitats. It is a herbaceous perennial plant growing to 8–30 cm (3–12 in) tall. The leaves are finely divided and thread-like, and densely covered with silvery hairs. The flowers are 2–3 cm (0.8–1.2 in) long, pendulous, bell-like, the tepals with reflexed tips; flower colour varies from purple in the north of the species' range to greenish-violet in the south. The flowers are hermaphrodite, and are pollinated by bees; flowering is from early to mid spring. There are a number of subspecies: Pulsatilla pratensis subsp. pratensis Pulsatilla pratensis subsp. bohemica Skalický Pulsatilla pratensis subsp. hungarica (Soó) Soó Pulsatilla pratensis subsp. nigricans (Störck) Zämelis Pulsatilla pratensis subsp. ucrainica (Ugr.) ined. Pulsatilla pratensis nothosubsp. zichyi (Schur) Zämelis & Paegle Pulsatilla pratensis subsp. hungarica grows in E Slovakia, NE Hungary and NW Romania. In Slovakia and Romania it is categorized as critically endangered CR. In Hungary it is protected by law. It occurs on open sand-plains and avoids limestone. In Hungary it can be found in two regions, the Nyírség and Bodrogköz. This plant is toxic, but can be dissipated through heat or drying.[citation needed] "Pulsatilla pratensis (L.) Mill". Plants of the World Online. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. Retrieved 26 March 2022. "Pulsatilla pratensis". Germplasm Resources Information Network. Agricultural Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture. Flora Europaea: Pulsatilla pratensis Blamey, M. & Grey-Wilson, C. (1989). Flora of Britain and Northern Europe. ISBN 0-340-40170-2. Harrison, Lorraine (2012). RHS Latin for Gardeners. United Kingdom: Mitchell Beazley. ISBN 978-1845337315. Plants of Hungary: Pulsatilla pratensis (in Hungarian) Naturfoto: Pulsatilla pratensis subsp. bohemica (in Czech) Pulsatilla hungarica in Slovakia Pulsatilla hungarica in Romania European plant data sheets: Plant conservation in Hungary Archived 2007-08-19 at the Wayback Machine Tibor, Simon (2000). A magyarországi edényes flóra határozója : harasztok - virágos növények (in Hungarian). Nemzeti Tankönyvkiadó. ISBN 9631903494.