Under the Silver Lake is a 2018 American surrealist neo-noir black comedy mystery film written, produced and directed by David Robert Mitchell. Set in 2011 Los Angeles, it follows a young man (Andrew Garfield) investigating the sudden disappearance of his neighbor (Riley Keough), only to stumble upon an elusive and dangerous conspiracy. Under the Silver Lake premiered on May 15, 2018, at the 2018 Cannes Film Festival, where it competed for the Palme d'Or, before being released nationwide in France on August 8. It was theatrically released in the United States on April 19, 2019, by A24. The film received mixed reviews from critics. In the summer of 2011, Sam is an aimless 33-year-old in Silver Lake, Los Angeles, interested in conspiracy theories and hidden messages in popular culture, and uninterested in paying his overdue rent. One morning, Sam sees a news report detailing the disappearance of billionaire Jefferson Sevence. He spies on his mysterious new neighbor, Sarah, who notices him and later gets high with Sam while watching How to Marry a Millionaire. As they begin to kiss, Sarah's two roommates interrupt and Sarah suggests Sam come back the next day. Fireworks go off nearby as they stand outside Sarah's apartment, and Sam comments that it's a bit late in the summer for them. For a moment Sarah seems transfixed, before giving him a breathless goodbye. In the morning, Sam discovers Sarah and her roommates have moved out overnight, and becomes obsessed with learning what happened. He breaks into Sarah's former apartment encountering a strange symbol and flees when a woman, Troy, comes by to pick up a box. Sam follows Troy and her two friends to Downtown Los Angeles to a rooftop party, meeting Allen and Emerald who points out Jefferson's daughter, Millicent, who becomes upset and leaves over learning of her father's death, and he meets the Balloon Girl and a Jesus bandmate "bride" who gives Sam a cookie that is a ticket to a private show at Hollywood Forever Cemetery. On television, Sam discovers that Jefferson burned to death in a car with three women. He recognizes Sarah's hat at the scene, and a small dog similar to hers is found dead. Sam visits the Comic Fan, the author of comics called Under the Silver Lake, Sam finds out that the symbol seen in Sarah's apartment is a Hobo code meaning; "stay quiet" and the Comic Fan explains that hidden messages are everywhere in modern society and that Sarah's disappearance, the Dog Killer and the Owl's Kiss - a homicidal supernatural entity appearing to be a nude woman in an owl mask - and hidden messages are part of the same conspiracy. He gives Sam a collector's cereal box with the reverse side that is a Los Angeles map. At the Jesus and the Brides show at the Hollywood Forever Cemetery, Sam is given a vinyl album handout and meets the Balloon Girl who takes him down below to the Crypt Club and asks her about Sarah who claims to have seen her but never met her and then ditches him when he becomes sick from the cookie but he spots Troy there who gives chase with Sam passing out in front of Janet Gaynor's grave. Throughout his following journey, Sam encounters several strange characters, all of which are seemingly connected to the women's disappearance and the secrets of Los Angeles itself, who all claim to only have seen Sarah but having never met her. After decoding a hidden message within the lyrics of a song by Jesus and the Brides of Dracula, Sam makes his way to the Griffith Observatory, where he meets the Homeless King, advising that Coyotes are divine beings who should always be followed. He takes Sam to a hidden cave before letting him venture alone into a secret bomb shelter. Sam makes his way back to the Comic Fan’s house before being notified by the police of his apparent suicide. Sam views the footage from the Comic Fan CCTV, and confirms that the presence of the Owl's Kiss was the perpetrator of the Comic Fan’s murder. With his friend Allen, Sam goes to a chess party hosted by "a cable TV actor" attended by the band members of Jesus and the Brides of Dracula. Sam then follows and attacks the lead singer Jesus on the toilet, and violently forces him to reveal that only 3 songs on the album are not his but were record label imports, written by someone he calls the Songwriter and likely encrypted. Sam has the Balloon Girl and the two Shooting Stars lead him to the Songwriter, a very old man who reveals that he has encoded many songs with secret messages over the decades. He claims that he wrote most of the songs that Sam grew up with, including Beethoven's Symphony No. 9, which was written in the 1820s. After Sam demands to know who paid him to write those songs, the Songwriter attempts to kill him before Sam beats him to death with an electric guitar. Sam survives a murder attempt by the Owl's Kiss when he is met by the landlord who has brought a police officer over Sam's last chance of paying the rent. On total impulse, Sam follows a coyote who takes him to another party, where Sam encounters Millicent again, who knows that she has been followed and wants help to solve Jefferson's death. In the titular Silver Lake, Millicent gives Sam a bracelet with a set of chess moves before they are mysteriously shot at by an unknown group of people. Sam is able to survive but Millicent is fatally shot, dying eerily similar to a vintage Playboy magazine cover that Sam owns as memorabilia. The next morning, Sam realizes that the codes on the bracelet are chess moves and using a pull out map from Nintendo Power magazine and the cereal box's back map is able to pinpoint the exact location of the shadow entity's location. Eventually, Sam finds his way to an off-the-grid location where he finds a man and three women (one of them Troy) in a small hut. As Sam holds them at gunpoint, the man reveals the truth: throughout history, wealthy men such as himself chose to seal themselves in underground "tombs," like the bomb shelter from earlier, much like Egyptian Pharaohs, in order for their souls to "ascend," accompanied by three wives, to an unexplained and unearthly domain. Sarah and her roommates were Jefferson's wives, and their deaths were faked. Their tomb has already been sealed, but Sam speaks with Sarah on the phone, and she confirms that she entered the tomb willingly. At peace with her fate, she and Sam share a brief farewell. Sam drinks the tea the wealthy man offers him and starts passing out when the Homeless King arrives. When he wakes up the Homeless King has him chained to a chair. When Sam tells him that he did not actually have a dog and kept biscuits only in memory of his painful breakup and in the knowledge that he would never see his girlfriend's dog again, the Homeless King lets him go. Returning home, Sam has sex with the Bird Woman, a neighbor whose parrot repeats incomprehensible words. From the balcony, Sam watches as his landlord and a police officer enter his apartment to evict him. They notice one of his walls has been painted with the Hobo code symbol for "stay quiet". Andrew Garfield as Sam Riley Keough as Sarah, Sam's new neighbor who mysteriously disappears Topher Grace as Bar Buddy, Sam's unnamed friend who helps him with an investigation surrounding the disappearance of Sarah Callie Hernandez as Millicent Sevence Don McManus as Final Man Jeremy Bobb as Songwriter Riki Lindhome as Actress Zosia Mamet as Troy Patrick Fischler as Comic Fan, creator of Under the Silver Lake zine who is obsessed with conspiracy theories Jimmi Simpson as Allen Grace Van Patten as Balloon Girl Bobbi Salvör Menuez as Shooting Star #1 Wendy Vanden Heuvel as Topless Bird Woman Chris Gann as Jefferson Sevence Jessica Makinson as Mrs. Sevence Stephanie Moore as Brunette Roommate Sibongile Mlambo as Blonde Roommate Rex Linn as Manager Laura-Leigh as Mae Luke Baines as Jesus, leader and songwriter of the band Jesus and the Brides of Dracula Allie MacDonald as Meek Bride Victoria Bruno as Clara Bow Bride Lola Blanc as Reading Glasses Bride Silversun Pickups as Band Sydney Sweeney as Shooting Star #2 Guy Nardulli as Door Guard David Yow as Homeless King Adam Bartley as Cop June Carryl as Sheriff Sky Elobar as Clerk Summer Bishil as EX/Billboard Girl Karen Nitsche as Owl's Kiss In May 2016, David Robert Mitchell was announced to be writing and directing the film with Andrew Garfield and Dakota Johnson starring. Michael De Luca, Adele Romanski, Jake Weiner, and Chris Bender were also announced as producers. In October 2016, Riley Keough replaced Johnson and Topher Grace also joined the cast of the film. In November 2016, Zosia Mamet, Laura-Leigh, Jimmi Simpson, Patrick Fischler, Luke Baines, Callie Hernandez, Riki Lindhome and Don McManus joined the cast. Composer Disasterpeace, who provided the original score for Mitchell's previous film It Follows, returned to write the music. Principal photography began on October 31, 2016. It took place throughout Los Angeles, including Silver Lake neighborhood, Silver Lake Reservoir, Griffith Observatory and The Last Bookstore. In May 2016, A24 acquired U.S distribution rights to the film. The film had its world premiere at the Cannes Film Festival on May 15, 2018. The first country it was released in nationwide was France on August 8, followed by Belgium on August 15. The film was originally scheduled to be released in the United States on June 22, 2018, but on June 4 was pushed back to December 7, 2018. The theatrical release was then pushed back again to April 19, 2019, and three days later it was available to stream. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 59% based on 157 reviews, with an average rating of 6.10/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Under the Silver Lake hits its stride slightly more often than it stumbles, but it's hard not to admire - or be drawn in by - writer-director David Robert Mitchell's ambition." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 60 out of 100, based on 31 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Joshua Rothkopf of Time Out gave the film a perfect five rating, calling it "Hypnotic, spiraling and deliriously high" and stating "the ambition of Under the Silver Lake is worth cherishing. It will either evaporate into nothingness or cohere into something you'll want to hug for being so wonderfully weird." Eric Kohn of IndieWire gave a positive review, calling it "a bizarre and outrageous drama grounded in the consistency of Garfield's astonishment at every turn... It's fascinating to watch Mitchell grasp for a bigger picture with the wild ambition of his scruffy protagonist." Owen Gleiberman of Variety gave a positive review, calling it "a down-the-rabbit-hole movie, at once gripping and baffling, fueled by erotic passion and dread but also by the code-fixated opacity of conspiracy theory. The movie is impeccably shot and staged, with an insanely lush soundtrack that's like Bernard Herrmann-meets-Angelo-Badalamenti-on-opioids." A.A. Dowd of The A.V. Club gave the film a B rating, stating "Mitchell is taking a big swing with his third feature, trying something not just new but also more unconventional, ambitious, and even potentially off-putting." Emily Yoshida of Vulture stated about the film's message: "I kept coming back to the women in this extremely boy-driven movie—Mitchell suspects that they're all on one big conveyor belt to be chewed up and spit out by Hollywood, or if they're lucky, locked away in the dungeons of the rich and powerful. It's a rather pedestrian imagining for an otherwise admirably cuckoo film—you keep hoping for Mitchell to land on something weirder, more radical." Despite praising Garfield's performance and the film's originality, Bilge Ebiri of The Village Voice gave a negative review, stating: "If you're going to make a postmodern neo-noir sex-conspiracy... set in Los Angeles, it helps to have some personality, or at least a sense of style... Mitchell has interesting ideas, and his actors seem to be having fun, but that's not enough when the film itself lacks atmosphere, or tension, or emotional engagement." In 2018, the film had positive reactions at the Neuchâtel International Fantastic Film Festival in Switzerland where it was awarded with the Denis-De-Rougemont Youth Award. At Sitges Film Festival Under the Silver Lake was awarded with the Special Mention of the Jose Luis Guarner Critics' Award. While not initially a box-office success with audiences, Under the Silver Lake has garnered a cult following who are convinced that there are hidden meta-clues, codes and ciphers sprinkled throughout the film waiting to be discovered. These include references to the mystery surrounding the identity of the dog killer, various different cyphers or codes, geocoding systems, and even analysis of fireworks in the film, connecting the sound pattern they emit to Morse code. In certain scenes in the film there is graffiti that can be seen in the toilets and on a wall and which are coded with the Copiale cipher. The film's cryptography consultant was computer scientist Kevin Knight, who in 2011 co-created a program to translate the Copiale cipher. Rooney, David (May 15, 2018). "'Under the Silver Lake': Film Review Cannes 2018". The Hollywood Reporter. Penske Media Corporation. Retrieved September 28, 2023. "David Robert Mitchell on His Ambitious, Divisive Follow-up to It Follows". Vulture. April 17, 2019. "Under the Silver Lake". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved May 24, 2020. "Under the Silver Lake (2018) - Cast". Cinema.com. Retrieved November 14, 2022. Hipes, Patrick (May 4, 2016). "Andrew Garfield To Star In 'Under The Silver Lake' As 'It Follows' Follow-Up For David Robert Mitchell – Cannes". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved November 2, 2016. Jafaar, Ali (May 12, 2016). "Dakota Johnson Joins Andrew Garfield In 'Under The Silver Lake' – Cannes". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved November 2, 2016. Busch, Anita (October 27, 2016). "Topher Grace Joins Cast Of 'Under The Silver Lake'". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved November 2, 2016. Lee, Ashley (October 31, 2016). "Riley Keough Joins Andrew Garfield in A24's 'Under the Silver Lake'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved November 2, 2016. Kroll, Justin (October 31, 2016). "Riley Keough to Star Opposite Andrew Garfield in A24's 'Under the Silver Lake' (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Retrieved November 2, 2016. N'Duka, Amanda (November 4, 2016). "'Under The Silver Lake' Adds Zosia Mamet, Jimmi Simpson, Patrick Fischler & More To Round Out Cast". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved November 4, 2016. Gordon, Lewis (July 27, 2016). "It Follows composer Disasterpeace on his intimate soundtrack for Hyper Light Drifter". Fact. Retrieved December 13, 2016. Mitchell, David Robert [@DRobMitchell] (November 1, 2016). "Finished Day 1 of UTSL. Happy Halloween!!" (Tweet). Retrieved November 2, 2016 – via Twitter. Stuart, Gwynedd (April 19, 2019). "Neo-Noir Under the Silver Lake Is a Puzzle of L.A. Locations". Lamag - Culture, Food, Fashion, News & Los Angeles. Retrieved November 14, 2022. Doty, Meriah (May 12, 2016). "Andrew Garfield's 'Under the Silver Lake' Picked Up by A24". TheWrap. Retrieved November 2, 2016. "The 2018 Official Selection". Cannes Film Festival. April 12, 2018. Retrieved April 12, 2018. Debruge, Peter; Keslassy, Elsa (April 12, 2018). "Cannes Lineup Includes New Films From Spike Lee, Jean-Luc Godard". Variety. Retrieved April 12, 2018. "Under the Silver Lake". AlloCiné. Retrieved December 15, 2018. Sharf, Zack (March 1, 2018). "'Under the Silver Lake' First Details: 'It Follows' Director Returns This Summer With Andrew Garfield and Neo-Noir Crime". IndieWire. Retrieved March 1, 2018. Squires, John (June 1, 2018). "'It Follows' Director's 'Under the Silver Lake' Gets Bumped Back Six Months". Bloody Disgusting. Retrieved June 1, 2018. Kohn, Eric (November 1, 2018). "A24 Moves Andrew Garfield Noir 'Under the Silver Lake' to 2019, As It Searches For a Fresh Start — Exclusive". IndieWire. Retrieved November 1, 2018. McNary, Dave (April 4, 2019). "David Robert Mitchell's 'Under the Silver Lake' Heads for VOD Three Days After Theatrical Opening". Variety. Retrieved October 28, 2023. "Under the Silver Lake (2018)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. Retrieved October 10, 2021. "Under the Silver Lake". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved April 19, 2018. "Under the Silver Lake". Time Out. May 15, 2018. Retrieved May 15, 2018. "'Under the Silver Lake' Review: Andrew Garfield Soars in Baffling and Inventive L.A. Noir About White Male Privilege". Indiewire. Retrieved May 15, 2018. Gleiberman, Owen. "Cannes Film Review: 'Under the Silver Lake'". Variety. Retrieved May 15, 2018. Dowd, A.A. "Lars von Trier doesn't need a press conference to shock the hell out of the Cannes Film Festival". The A.V. Club. Retrieved May 15, 2018. Yoshida, Emily. "Under the Silver Lake Is Loopy, Paranoid, and Extremely of Its Time". Vulture. Retrieved May 16, 2018. Ebiri, Bilge (May 17, 2018). "Sex, Obsession, and Class in "Under the Silver Lake" and "Burning"". The Village Voice. Retrieved May 17, 2018. "Gaspar Noé scoops the H.R. Giger "Narcisse" Award at NIFFF". Cineuropa - the best of european cinema. July 17, 2018. Retrieved July 29, 2020. Mayorga, Emilio (October 15, 2018). "Gaspar Noé's 'Climax' Takes Top Honors at Sitges". Variety. Retrieved July 29, 2020. Nordine, Michael (April 20, 2019). "'Under the Silver Lake' Is Turning Cinephiles Into Self-Styled Sleuths". IndieWire. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Knight, Kevin; Megyesi, Beáta; Schaefer, Christiane (June 2011). "The Copiale Cipher". Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Building and Using Comparable Corpora: Comparable Corpora and the Web. Portland, Oregon: Association for Computational Linguistics: 2–9. Official website Under the Silver Lake at AllMovie Under the Silver Lake at IMDb Under the Silver Lake at Metacritic Under the Silver Lake at Rotten Tomatoes Under the Silver Lake at Box Office Mojo Wikiquote has quotations related to Under the Silver Lake. Portals:  Film  United States  Comedy  2010s