Jurassic World Dominion is a 2022 American science fiction action film directed by Colin Trevorrow, who co-wrote the screenplay with Emily Carmichael from a story by Derek Connolly and Trevorrow. It is the sequel to Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom (2018), the third and final installment in the Jurassic World trilogy, and the sixth installment overall in the Jurassic Park film series, concluding the storyline that began with Jurassic Park (1993). Chris Pratt, Bryce Dallas Howard, BD Wong, and Omar Sy reprise their roles from the previous films, along with Laura Dern, Jeff Goldblum, and Sam Neill, who appear together for the first time since the original Jurassic Park. New cast members include DeWanda Wise and Mamoudou Athie. The film is set four years after the events of Fallen Kingdom, with dinosaurs now living alongside humans around the world. It follows Owen Grady and Claire Dearing as they embark on a rescue mission, while Alan Grant, Ellie Sattler, and Ian Malcolm work to expose a conspiracy by the genomics corporation Biosyn. Planning for the film began in 2014, before the release of the first Jurassic World film. Filming took place from February to November 2020 in Vancouver, Canada, England's Pinewood Studios, Malta and Switzerland. Legendary Pictures was not involved in the film's production due to the expiration of its four-year partnership with Universal. With an estimated budget of $265 million, it is one of the most expensive films ever made. Jurassic World Dominion premiered in Mexico City on May 23, 2022, and was released in the United States by Universal Pictures on June 10, 2022. It received generally negative reviews from critics. However, like its predecessors, the film was a financial success and grossed over $1 billion worldwide, becoming the third-highest-grossing film of 2022. Jurassic World Dominion was also the third film released in the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic to reach the $1 billion milestone. A seventh film is in development. Four years after the Lockwood Estate incident and the volcanic eruption on Isla Nublar, once-extinct dinosaurs freely roam the Earth. Amid global efforts to control them, Biosyn Genetics establishes a dinosaur preserve in Italy's Dolomites which conducts genomics research, ostensibly for pharmacological applications. Claire Dearing, Zia Rodriguez, and Franklin Webb investigate illegal dinosaur breeding sites; Claire's partner, Owen Grady, helps relocate stray dinosaurs. At their remote cabin in the Sierra Nevada Mountains, Claire and Owen secretly raise 14-year-old Maisie Lockwood (Benjamin Lockwood's biogenetic granddaughter) and protect her from groups seeking to exploit her unique genetic makeup. When Blue, the Velociraptor Owen raised, arrives at the cabin with an asexually-reproduced hatchling, Maisie names it Beta. Increasingly frustrated living in seclusion, Maisie sneaks away to explore. Mercenaries searching for Maisie find and kidnap her and capture Beta. Meanwhile, swarms of giant locusts are decimating U.S. crops. Dr. Ellie Sattler observes that crops grown with Biosyn seeds are left uneaten, raising suspicions that Biosyn created the insects. Ellie takes a captured locust to her former partner, paleontologist Dr. Alan Grant. They determine the locust was genetically engineered with Cretaceous-period and contemporary DNA. Franklin, now with the CIA's dangerous-species division, believes Maisie may have been taken to Malta. Upon arrival there, Claire and Owen infiltrate a dinosaur black market with Owen's former Jurassic World colleague Barry Sembène, who is leading a French Intelligence raid. Carnivorous dinosaurs are unleashed during the foray, wreaking havoc. When Claire and Owen learn that Maisie and Beta were transported to the Biosyn facility, sympathetic cargo pilot Kayla Watts agrees to fly them there. Chaotician Dr. Ian Malcolm now works for Biosyn. He sought Ellie's help to expose CEO Dr. Lewis Dodgson after communications director Ramsay Cole warned him of Dodgson's illegal activities. Dodgson is exploiting dinosaurs and coerces former InGen geneticist Dr. Henry Wu to modify the transgenic locust to let Biosyn corner the world's food supply. Wu denounces the plan, warning it will cause an ecological collapse as the locusts spread unchecked. Wu meets Maisie and explains that his former colleague, Dr. Charlotte Lockwood (Benjamin Lockwood's deceased daughter), used her own DNA to replicate and give birth to the genetically identical Maisie. Charlotte altered Maisie's DNA to prevent her from inheriting the fatal disease which she had. Wu believes that Maisie and Beta's asexual conception and DNA are key to creating a pathogen to halt the locust outbreak. A Quetzalcoatlus attacks Kayla's plane in Biosyn's airspace, forcing Owen and Kayla to crash land while Claire is ejected. After separate dinosaur encounters, the three regroup. Inside Biosyn, Ian and Ramsay covertly advise Ellie and Alan on where to obtain a locust DNA sample. While searching for the lab, they encounter Maisie. Discovering the breach, Dodgson attempts to incinerate the locusts to destroy evidence; some locusts escape through an air vent, sparking a wildfire around the preserve. Alan, Ellie, and Maisie barely escape the facility before finding Ian. They meet Owen, Claire and Kayla, with Ramsay later joining them. Dodgson flees with dinosaur embryos via a hyperloop, but becomes trapped after Claire and Ellie reroute the power and is then killed by three Dilophosaurus. As the group works together, Owen, with Alan and Maisie's help, captures Beta. They and Wu escape in a Biosyn helicopter. Ellie and Alan rekindle their romantic relationship before testifying with Ian and Ramsay against Biosyn. Owen, Claire, and Maisie return home and reunite Beta and Blue. Wu releases a host locust carrying the pathogen, gradually eradicating the swarms. Dinosaurs and humans adapt to a new co-existence, and the United Nations declares Biosyn Valley an international dinosaur sanctuary. Chris Pratt as Owen Grady: Ethologist, US Navy veteran, and former Jurassic World employee responsible for training Velociraptors. Claire's boyfriend and Maisie's adoptive father. Bryce Dallas Howard as Claire Dearing: Former Jurassic World manager and founder of the Dinosaur Protection Group. Owen's girlfriend and Maisie's adoptive mother. Laura Dern as Dr. Ellie Sattler: Paleobotanist and consultant who traveled to John Hammond's original Jurassic Park. Jeff Goldblum as Dr. Ian Malcolm: Chaos theory mathematician, former consultant for Jurassic Park, and a key figure in the San Diego incident depicted in The Lost World: Jurassic Park (1997). Sam Neill as Dr. Alan Grant: Paleontologist, a consultant who traveled to John Hammond's original Jurassic Park, and a survivor of the Isla Sorna expedition depicted in Jurassic Park III (2001). DeWanda Wise as Kayla Watts: Former US Air Force pilot who aids Owen and Claire on their mission. Mamoudou Athie as Ramsay Cole: Head of communications of Biosyn Genetics and Lewis Dodgson's delegate. Secretly allied with Ian Malcolm and his friends to bring Dodgson down. Isabella Sermon as Maisie Lockwood: Genetic descendant of Sir Benjamin Lockwood's daughter, Charlotte, whom he raised as his granddaughter, under the care of Owen and Claire. A troubled, courageous and resourceful 14-year-old mentored by Owen in understanding animal behavior, she helps dinosaurs who enter human settlements. Sermon also plays the young Charlotte Lockwood, and Elva Trill plays her as an adult. Campbell Scott as Dr. Lewis Dodgson: Biosyn's multi-billionaire CEO who masterminds the abductions of Maisie and Beta and hires Soyona Santos and Henry Wu to sell dinosaurs to the black markets and breed a swarm of giant hybrid locusts. Scott replaces Cameron Thor from Jurassic Park (1993). BD Wong as Dr. Henry Wu: Lead geneticist of the dinosaur-cloning programs at Jurassic Park and Jurassic World. Maisie's late mother was one of his colleagues. Omar Sy as Barry Sembène: Former animal trainer who worked with Owen at Jurassic World and is now a French Intelligence agent. Justice Smith as Franklin Webb: Former Jurassic World technician and dinosaur rights activist. Daniella Pineda as Dr. Zia Rodriguez: Paleo-veterinarian and dinosaur-rights activist. Scott Haze also appears as Rainn Delacourt, a poacher who captures Maisie and Beta for Biosyn; Dichen Lachman appears as Soyona Santos, a dinosaur smuggler; Kristoffer Polaha appears as Wyatt Huntley, a CIA officer working undercover as one of Delacourt's men; Caleb Hearon appears as Jeremy Bernier, a CIA analyst; Freya Parker appears as Denise Roberts, a Biosyn employee; Varada Sethu appears as Shira, a Fish & Wildlife officer, and Dimitri "Vegas" Thivaios appears as a Maltese mercenary. OutsideXbox's Jane Douglas appears in a cameo role as a Biosyn scientist. During early conversations about Jurassic World (2015), executive producer Steven Spielberg told director Colin Trevorrow that he was interested in having more films made. In April 2014, Trevorrow announced that sequels to Jurassic World had been discussed. He said that they wanted to create something "less arbitrary and episodic", which could "potentially arc into a series that would feel like a complete story". Trevorrow, later asked how much planning he had put into a trilogy while he was filming Jurassic World in 2014, replied that he knew where the story would end. He said that planning the beginning, middle, and end of the trilogy ahead of time "is crucial to a franchise like this if you really want to bring people along with you and make sure they stay interested. It needs to be thought through on that level. It can't be arbitrary [...] the earlier Jurassic Park movies had pretty clear definitive endings. They were much more episodic." In May 2015, Trevorrow expressed his desire to have different directors work on future films, believing that others could bring different qualities to the series: "I think this is one of those franchises — like Mission: Impossible and like what they're currently doing with Star Wars — that is going to really benefit from new voices and new points of view. […] down the line, looking at the way that franchises have been working, I'm pretty confident this is the right answer for this one. We need to keep it new and keep it changing and constantly let it evolve." He said that the series would not always be about a dinosaur theme park, and future films could explore the concept of dinosaurs and humans co-existing. Jurassic World producer Frank Marshall confirmed plans for a third Jurassic World film later in 2015, and Universal Pictures chair Donna Langley said that Trevorrow and Spielberg had a story idea for the film. Chris Pratt, who played Owen in Jurassic World, was signed for future films in the series. Trevorrow said that the friendship in Jurassic World between Owen and Barry (played by Omar Sy) could continue into the sequels. He also said that Bryce Dallas Howard's character, Claire, would evolve the most during the Jurassic World trilogy. Universal announced in February 2018 that the untitled film, known then as Jurassic World 3, would be released on June 11, 2021. It was also announced that Trevorrow would write the script with Emily Carmichael, based on a story by Trevorrow and writing partner, Derek Connolly (who worked with him on the scripts for the previous Jurassic World films). Like the previous films, Marshall and Patrick Crowley would be producers and Trevorrow and Spielberg would return as executive producers. A month after the announcement, Trevorrow was also confirmed as director. J. A. Bayona had directed the previous installment, Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom; Trevorrow was inspired by Bayona's work on the film, saying that it "made me want to finish what we started." Spielberg had asked Trevorrow to return as director. Trevorrow had been set to direct Star Wars: Episode IX before leaving the project in September 2017, and Episode IX was the finale of the Star Wars sequel trilogy. He applied his experience in the Star Wars project, which he viewed as a "practice run" for creating a finale film, to Jurassic World Dominion. People who worked with Trevorrow on Episode IX later joined him for Jurassic World Dominion. Legendary Entertainment co-financed the two previous films but was not involved with the third, since its five-year contract with Universal expired in 2018. Trevorrow met Carmichael in 2015, after seeing a short film of hers. Trevorrow was also impressed with Carmichael's writing on Pacific Rim Uprising (2018) and a remake of The Black Hole, leading him to choose her as a co-writer for Jurassic World 3. Trevorrow and Carmichael were writing the script in April 2018. Trevorrow said that the third film would be a "science thriller", describing it as the Jurassic World film which would most closely match the tone of Jurassic Park (1993). He said about the third film and its predecessors, "I have a dinosaur movie that I've always wanted to see, and it took two movies to earn it." Trevorrow later described the film as a "celebration of everything that has existed in the franchise up until now", and compared it to the Jason Bourne and James Bond films. During the development of Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom in 2015, Trevorrow said that that film's storyline could involve dinosaurs becoming open-source: a number of entities around the world could create their own dinosaurs for a variety of purposes. Scenes and concepts about the integration of dinosaurs into the world were removed from the Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom script to be saved for the third film and to keep the second film's story focused. According to Bayona, "There were moments that we thought, this is more like a Jurassic [World] 3 scene so we took them out from the script. Some of those scenes we thought were better seen in a world where dinosaurs had spread all over the world. Colin, from time to time, came to me and said, 'I want this character to say that line because this is a moment that's referencing something I want to use in Jurassic 3'." Trevorrow did not want to depict dinosaurs terrorizing cities, which he considered unrealistic. He wanted to honor Michael Crichton's novels Jurassic Park (1990) and The Lost World (1995), believing that humans and dinosaurs "battling it out in the city streets is a different kind of film than what he would've done". Trevorrow described a world where "a dinosaur might run out in front of your car on a foggy backroad, or invade your campground looking for food. A world where dinosaur interaction is unlikely but possible—the same way we watch out for bears or sharks. We hunt animals, we traffic them, we herd them, we breed them, we invade their territory and pay the price, but we don't go to war with them." About the film's realism, Trevorrow said that dinosaurs would not be "everywhere all the time. I think any kind of global acceptance that they are just around doesn't feel real to me because, even now when you think of animals, when was the last time you saw a tiger walking down the street? We know there are tigers. We know they're out there. But to me, it's very important that we keep this grounded in the context of our relationship with wild animals today." For inspiration, he watched episodes of Planet Earth and alien-invasion films with a realistic perspective. Trevorrow said that his goal for the Jurassic World trilogy was to have Claire's line from the first film ("No one is impressed by a dinosaur anymore") disproved in the final film. With input from Carmichael and cast members, the film's storyline evolved from Trevorrow's initial vision. During production of the previous Jurassic World films, Howard kept a list of possible ideas for the final film (including a baby raptor and an underground dinosaur market in Malta). Trevorrow consulted the list while writing the script with Carmichael. He considered the Malta black market a departure from the dinosaur-auction scene in Fallen Kingdom: "I felt that what would really happen is a hive of scum and villainy. I wanted to see that". The writers wanted Dr. Ellie Sattler, a paleobotanist in the Jurassic Park trilogy, to lead the story in Dominion. Trevorrow consulted scientists for story ideas, seeking to depict a global ecological crisis caused by genetic tampering which would be first noticed by a paleobotanist. He learned about Insect Allies (a DARPA program in which insects spread pesticides to crops), which inspired the film's locust plot. Trevorrow and Carmichael also consulted with screenwriters Michael Arndt, Krysty Wilson-Cairns and David Koepp, who wrote the first two Jurassic Park films. Trevorrow wanted the film to explore the idea of dinosaurs created by people other than Dr. Henry Wu. He said that Wu as the only person who knew how to create a dinosaur was far-fetched "after 30 years of this technology existing" in the films' universe. Biosyn, which appears in Crichton's novels but is absent from their film adaptations, debuts in Dominion. Trevorrow also wanted to see the return of Lewis Dodgson, a prominent character in the novels who appeared only briefly in the first Jurassic Park film. Other returning characters from the original trilogy included Dr. Alan Grant and Dr. Ian Malcolm, rejoining Ellie Sattler. According to Trevorrow, striking a balance of screen time for the trio and the newer characters was the most difficult aspect of developing the film's story. Wu, who also appeared in the first film and the Jurassic World films, returned as well. Other characters from the series – including Lex and Tim Murphy and Kelly Curtis – were considered, but Trevorrow felt that the film had enough returning characters. Spielberg advised Trevorrow to remember the importance of the film's characters: "Don't forget that these are humans. These are real people, scientists, parents going through something spectacular, something fantastic". In 2017, Laura Dern (who played Dr. Ellie Sattler in the Jurassic Park trilogy) expressed an interest in reprising her role. Trevorrow announced in April 2018 that Pratt and Howard would reprise their roles in the previous films, and other characters in Fallen Kingdom "you'll realize [as] major characters". Howard said later that year that her main desire for the film was to include more characters from the Jurassic Park trilogy, including Ellie Sattler and Ian Malcolm (Jeff Goldblum). Trevorrow said that Sam Neill and Dern might reprise their roles in the film; Neill had played Dr. Alan Grant in earlier films. In September 2019, Neill, Dern, and Goldblum were confirmed as returning in major roles. They appear throughout the film, Neill and Dern's first appearances in the series since Jurassic Park III (2001). It was the trio's first film appearance together since the original Jurassic Park film, although Goldblum briefly reprised his role in Fallen Kingdom. Goldblum and Neill had starred in their own Jurassic Park sequel, but Trevorrow considered Dominion as Dern's film because its plot is partially driven by her character. Trevorrow collaborated with the three actors to ensure that their characters would be consistent. He said that the film would answer questions about the characters: "Who are these people now? What do they make of the new world they're living in, and how do they feel about being part of its history?" Trevorrow, Dern and Neill agreed about having Grant and Sattler reunite romantically. Neill said that he would get into shape for his role by running. Mamoudou Athie and DeWanda Wise were cast in lead roles in October 2019 without auditioning. Trevorrow was impressed by Athie's performance in The Front Runner (2018), and Wise was cast after Trevorrow saw her in the television series She's Gotta Have It. At the end of 2019, Justice Smith and Daniella Pineda were confirmed as reprising their roles in Fallen Kingdom; Isabella Sermon would also return as Maisie from that film. In early 2020, Jake Johnson and Omar Sy were announced as reprising their roles from Jurassic World, and Dichen Lachman and Scott Haze were cast. BD Wong was confirmed as reprising his role as Dr. Henry Wu. Campbell Scott was cast in June 2020 as Dodgson; the role, played by Cameron Thor in the original Jurassic Park, was recast for Jurassic World Dominion after Thor's imprisonment for sexual assault. Pratt compared Jurassic World Dominion to Avengers: Endgame (2019), another film in which he appeared; a number of characters returned to both from previous films. Andy Buckley (Scott Mitchell in Jurassic World) said that he had been signed to reprise his role, but his character was dropped in a rewrite. On February 19, 2020, a production unit used drones to film aerial scenes at Cathedral Grove on Canada's Vancouver Island. Principal photography began in British Columbia on February 24, and the film's title was announced the following day as Jurassic World Dominion. Canadian filming ended in early March 2020. Production moved to England, where a major location was Pinewood Studios (the facility used for Fallen Kingdom). Filming was also done in Malta. The film's budget was between $165 million and $185 million. John Schwartzman was its cinematographer, returning to the position after working with Trevorrow on the first Jurassic World film and in the process, becoming the first person to serve as director of photography on two Jurassic Park films. Schwartzman shot the film with 35mm film, 65mm film, and VistaVision. Some night scenes were shot digitally to aid the visual effects team during post-production. It had the working title of Arcadia, the name of the ship which transported dinosaurs to the U.S. mainland in the previous film. Filming went on hiatus in March 2020 as a safety precaution due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and a decision about resuming production was originally expected within several weeks. During the delay, the filmmakers saved time by doing post-production work on footage already shot. Most of these scenes included dinosaurs, allowing the visual effects team to get started on the creatures. Universal eventually confirmed that filming would resume in July 2020 at Pinewood Studios. The company planned to spend about $5 million on safety protocols, including thousands of COVID-19 tests for each cast and crew member (who would be tested before production resumed and several times during filming). A medical facility would be commissioned to perform the tests, and doctors and nurses would be on site during filming. The cast and crew would receive COVID-19 training, and the Pinewood set would include 150 hand-sanitizer stations and 1,800 safety signs to remind them of safety precautions such as social distancing. Walk-through temperature-testing stations would be built. All members of the production team would be required to wear masks, except for the actors during filming. The cast received a 109-page document outlining the safety protocols. The 750-person production team was divided into two groups, with the larger group consisting of crew members involved in construction, props, and other pre-filming activities. The smaller group consisted of Trevorrow, the cast, and essential crew members. Filming resumed on July 6, 2020. An English hotel was rented by Universal for the remainder of the shoot, allowing the cast and crew to quarantine for two weeks before filming resumed. After quarantine, they were allowed to roam the hotel without social distancing or mask-wearing. The cast and hotel employees were tested three times a week. Renting the hotel, combined with the COVID-19 precautions, convinced the cast that it would be safe to resume filming because the hotel was a protective "bubble" for the cast and crew. Trevorrow encouraged the cast to make suggestions regarding their characters. He and the cast formed a close relationship while they lived together for four months, allowing them to create the characters "in a way that I never would have had the opportunity to do" if not for the pandemic protocols. The safety measures cost approximately $9 million, including the hotel. Jurassic World Dominion was one of the first major films to resume production during the pandemic and was an example to other major productions on how to resume. Universal considered the film ideal to resume; it required few real locations outside of the studio sets and had a relatively small cast and few extras. The earlier start of filming in England also made it easier to resume. Neill, Dern and Goldblum began filming in early August. By that time, four crew members in England had tested positive for COVID-19; another four tested positive in Malta after arriving there before production. The main crew was scheduled to shoot in Malta with Pratt, Howard and Neill, although these plans were canceled after an increase in COVID-19 cases. As a result of the increase, the United Kingdom added Malta to its list of countries from which arrivals must quarantine for 14 days. Scenes set in Malta were rewritten by Trevorrow, and sets were reconfigured to continue the filming. The actors were no longer part of the Malta shoot, which was handled by a second unit. Filming in Malta began at the end of August, and continued into September. After the Malta shoot, filming continued at Pinewood Studios. Because of the rescheduling caused by the pandemic, Trevorrow and Johnson struggled to find an ideal time in Johnson's schedule for filming. Johnson ultimately had to drop out of the project because of quarantine and travel restrictions which prevented him from reaching the set. Pineda appeared early in the film, and was meant to film a later scene, but quarantine restrictions interfered with these plans. Varada Sethu was signed to replace her in the later scene as a different character. Filming was slowed on October 7, after several people tested positive for COVID-19. Although the individuals later tested negative, the film's safety protocols required a two-week quarantine. During the partial shutdown, the main cast members continued to film secondary scenes before full production resumed later in the month. Shooting ended on November 7, after nearly 100 days. Like the previous films, Spielberg was minimally involved during filming; COVID-19 protocols would have prevented him from visiting the set. Trevorrow wanted the film to take place in locations not previously featured in the series, including Malta and the Dolomites. Location shooting was preferred to sets, and blue screens were rarely used. Jurassic World Dominion is the first film in the franchise with dinosaurs in a snowy environment. Some scenes, set in the Sierra Nevada, were filmed in British Columbia during a snowy winter. Merritt was among the British Columbia locations, which included its downtown and a lumber yard. In an early scene, Owen and others ride horses to herd a group of Parasaurolophus. For years, Trevorrow had wanted to introduce such a scene (also filmed in British Columbia). It was influenced by the 1969 film The Valley of Gwangi and 1960s and 1970s Western films set in snowy landscapes. Filming at Pinewood Studios included the 007 Stage, where large sets were assembled. A total of 112 sets were built for the film, including the black market. Another set was the interior of Kayla's C-119 cargo plane, and a miniature plane was used for exterior shots. Other filming locations in England included Hawley Common, where part of the previous film was shot. Filming in Hawley Common and Minley Woods was done over three nights, with helicopter filming on the final night. These locations were used for a drive-in-theater scene with a T. rex which was cut from the film's theatrical version. Winterfold Forest was used for some scenes set in the Sierra Nevada, including Owen and Claire's cabin. Another scene was shot at a farm near Aylesbury, used as a Texas farm where Ellie Sattler investigates the locust outbreak. Several locations were used for Biosyn headquarters, including Blavatnik School of Government and Wolfson College (both part of the University of Oxford). A lecture hall at Wolfson was used for a scene introducing Malcolm as he makes a speech. Black Park, adjacent to Pinewood Studios, was used for Biosyn's exterior with two British Columbia locations: Cathedral Grove and the town of Squamish. Switzerland's Grande Dixence Dam and its surrounding mountains were digitally scanned during wintertime and recreated in the film as a frozen Biosyn dam. Kayla's crashed plane in the frozen lake was an exterior set at Pinewood, and the distant mountains in the background were added with blue screens. The Dolomites mountains were also scanned and added into the film. Biosyn's locust lab was a set, which Dodgson eventually sets afire. Trevorrow had planned to use special effects for the fire but agreed to burn down the set at the suggestion of special-effects supervisor Paul Corbould. Eight or nine cameras filmed the set as it burned. Filming in Malta included Valletta, its capital. Malta was chosen as a location after the country's film commission presented financial incentives in April 2019 in the hope of attracting the project to the area. Trevorrow also chose it because he wanted to see "dinosaurs around old stones, around something that's ancient to us, just to illustrate how much more ancient these things are". Because Pratt and Howard could not travel to Malta, they were filmed with stunt doubles and their faces were added digitally during post-production. Valletta's streets were scanned with lidar, allowing Pratt and Howard to act against a blue screen of the city. In a Valletta chase scene, an Atrociraptor pack pursues Claire across rooftops while Owen flees the dinosaurs on motorcycle. Shooting the chase was complicated, and required up to nine cameras filming simultaneously. Pratt filmed his part of the chase in a UK blue-screen studio, riding a stationary bike on a treadmill. A car-crash scene was filmed in the town of Floriana. Malta is itself in the film except for Mellieħa, which was part of Grant's dig site in Utah. Jurassic World Dominion features 35 dinosaur species. The film uses more animatronic dinosaurs than the previous Jurassic World films did. Eighteen animatronics of various sizes were created for the film by designer John Nolan. Partial animatronics and puppetry were also used. Like the previous films, Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) worked on CGI versions of the animals. Animatronics and puppets were used for close-ups with humans, and CGI was used for certain movements. ILM scanned miniature clay maquettes of each dinosaur to create a digital version, which was then given to Nolan's team to create the dinosaurs. Paleontologist Jack Horner, a longtime advisor for the series, returned for Dominion. Paleontologist Steve Brusatte was also a consultant. Trevorrow wanted to strike a balance between realism and "awesome-movie-scary". Jurassic Park III had featured Velociraptors with quills along the head, but Dominion (and a five-minute prologue) introduces feathered dinosaurs to the series. Within the previous films' storyline, the dinosaurs were created by InGen and partially engineered with frog DNA to explain inaccuracies in their appearance. In Dominion, feathered dinosaurs are introduced with advanced methods by Biosyn. Pyroraptor and Therizinosaurus are among the feathered dinosaurs introduced in the film, as well as a feathered Tyrannosaurus in the extended version's prologue. Nolan and ILM researched to accurately simulate feathers. Trevorrow intended the Therizinosaurus encounter with Claire to be a "quiet and still and suspenseful" scene, more similar to the original Jurassic Park than the action scenes in the Jurassic World trilogy. He noted that Claire "never really had even one sequence where it was just her alone with a dinosaur". The film's dinosaur antagonist is a Giganotosaurus, which Trevorrow saved for the trilogy's final installment to set up a rivalry with the T. rex from Isla Nublar seen in previous films. He said about the Giganotosaurus, "I wanted something that felt like the Joker. It just wants to watch the world burn". The showdown between the dinosaurs was written by Trevorrow; he filmed it primarily from the humans' perspective, hoping that this would "make it feel like it was actually happening to you". An animatronic Giganotosaurus was created, which Nolan said was "probably the biggest challenge" for his team. The dinosaur was expected to take six months to build, but his team only had about four months to finish it. Trevorrow wanted to reuse an animatronic created for Fallen Kingdom for the T. rex, but it had deteriorated (common with animatronics). Dimetrodon, a synapsid which existed before the dinosaurs, also appears in the film. Although the creature had appeared in franchise merchandise over the years, Dominion was its film debut. Another new creature is the Atrociraptor, which Trevorrow described as brutish compared to Velociraptors. Hybrid dinosaurs had prominent roles in the earlier Jurassic World films, but none appear in Dominion because Trevorrow felt that the concept had "narratively run its course". Among the returning dinosaurs is Dilophosaurus, appearing in the flesh for the first time since the original Jurassic Park film. Like the first film, no CGI was used to create the Dilophosaurus (the only dinosaur in the film without a digital model). Nolan created animatronic locusts 30 inches (76 centimetres) in length. After filming ended, Trevorrow worked on post-production in a converted barn behind his UK home. The film's release had been delayed for a year due to the pandemic, allowing Trevorrow time to work on visual effects, sound mixing, and scoring as separate processes (unlike most films). When the visual effects were almost done, he screened the nearly-finished film for friends and Jurassic Park fans to obtain feedback and make improvements. Trevorrow said that it was a "much more involved process with the audience this time". The film was completed on November 6, 2021. With a runtime of two hours and 26 minutes, it is the longest film in the Jurassic Park series. The film was initially two hours and 40 minutes, prompting concern from the studio about whether moviegoers would watch such a long film during a pandemic. Trevorrow then worked to shorten the theatrical cut to under 2+1⁄2 hours, although he expressed interest in releasing a director's cut with the deleted footage. About fourteen minutes were removed from the theatrical cut, including five minutes which were released online as a prologue. Other deleted scenes include a fight between an Oviraptor and a Lystrosaurus in the black market and a two-minute confrontation between Ramsay and Dodgson. The home-media release includes an extended cut with the deleted scenes restored; Trevorrow preferred the extended version, his original vision of the film. The film's music was composed by Michael Giacchino, who scored the previous Jurassic World films. It was recorded at England's Abbey Road Studios over a 10-day period which ended in May 2021. Like his previous Jurassic World scores, Giacchino incorporated themes from John Williams's earlier Jurassic Park soundtracks. The score, distributed by Back Lot Music, was digitally released on June 3, 2022, and physically released three weeks later. A five-minute preview of the film was released in June 2021 with IMAX screenings of F9. Trevorrow had intended for the footage to be the film's first five minutes before removing it from the theatrical cut. The footage was posted online on November 23, 2021, as a standalone short film and prologue for Jurassic World Dominion. It is also included in the film's extended home media release. The prologue, which includes a Cretaceous segment where a Giganotosaurus kills a T. rex in battle, establishes the main film's rivalry between the cloned dinosaurs. Universal partnered with Olympians Mikaela Shiffrin, Nathan Chen, and Shaun White, who appeared in commercials promoting the film and the 2022 Winter Olympics. In the ads, each athlete has a dinosaur encounter in a snowy environment. The first trailer was released online on February 10, 2022, four months before the film's release and later than those for previous Jurassic World films. Broadcast during Super Bowl LVI, it had 86 million views on social media websites during the 24 hours after it aired – nearly three times the post-Super Bowl traffic of Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom. A second trailer was released on April 28. Universal established an in-universe website for the fictional Department of Prehistoric Wildlife (DPW) a month before the film's release. The site showcases video and image sightings of dinosaurs around the world. The site's content was created by an eight-person team, including Jack Ewins, who worked on promotional websites for the previous Jurassic World films. An exhibit in London's Trafalgar Square several weeks before the film's release included an interactive billboard with the Giganotosaurus, which reacted to people passing by. Mattel and The Lego Group sold toys based on the film, as did Funko and Bandai's Tamagotchi. An expansion pack tied into the film was released for the video game Jurassic World Evolution 2 shortly after its theatrical premiere. The Smithsonian Institution produced educational products based on the film. Barbasol released limited-edition cans of its shaving cream with dinosaurs from the film. Jeep, several of whose vehicles appeared in Dominion, aired a dinosaur-themed commercial as a tie-in to the film. Other promotional partners included CKE Restaurants and Ten Thousand Villages. All-in-all, Universal spent $145 million marketing the film. Jurassic World Dominion premiered in Mexico City on May 23, 2022, and began its theatrical rollout on June 1 in Mexico and South Korea. In the United States, Dominion was released theatrically by Universal Pictures on June 10; its scheduled release on June 11, 2021, was delayed by the pandemic. The film was released for digital purchase and rental on July 14, 2022 and was released on 4K Ultra HD, Blu-ray and DVD on August 16. Its home video release includes an extended version of Jurassic World Dominion with the 14 minutes of cut footage restored, bringing the total runtime to 160 minutes. In the United States, the theatrical and extended versions debuted on Universal's Peacock website on September 2, 2022, as part of an 18-month deal in which the film will move to Amazon Prime Video for 10 months before returning to Peacock for a final four months. After the 18-month deal, it will air on Starz as part of Universal's Post Pay-One licensing agreement with the network. In Europe, the movie made its television premiere over the course of December 2022 and January 2023 through Sky in the UK, Italy and Germany, Canal+ in France and Movistar Plus+ in Spain. The movie also became available for streaming on SkyShowtime in Portugal on January 22, 2023, and was a launch title for the service in Central and Eastern Europe on February 14, 2023. The movie was released on Netflix on January 1, 2023, in Australia. Jurassic World Dominion grossed $376.9 million in the United States and Canada, and $626.8 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $1.004 billion. It is the third-highest-grossing film of 2022, and was the 50th film to pass the billion-dollar mark, the fourth Jurassic film, and the third film released during the COVID-19 pandemic (after Spider-Man: No Way Home and Top Gun: Maverick). Deadline Hollywood calculated the film's net profit as $229.7 million, accounting for production budgets, marketing, talent participations, and other costs; box office grosses and home media revenues placed it sixth on their list of 2022's "Most Valuable Blockbusters". Forbes calculated the net profit for Universal to be $235.5 million. In the U.S. and Canada, the film was expected to gross about $125 million from 4,676 theaters in its opening weekend. After making $59.55 million on its first day (including $18 million from Thursday night previews, just below the first Jurassic World's $18.5 million and above Fallen Kingdom's $15.3 million), weekend estimates were raised to $142 million. Its debut earnings were $145.1 million, topping the box office. It was the best opening weekend for a non-superhero film during the pandemic, with Deadline Hollywood calling its performance "amazing" given its unfavorable critical reception and mediocre audience-exit scores. This was the fourth-highest opening weekend for a Universal film, behind its two predecessors and Furious 7 (2015). When it opened, it had the third-highest number of screens of any film, behind The Lion King (2019) and Top Gun: Maverick. The film earned $59.2 million in its second weekend (a drop of 59%), topping newcomer Lightyear to remain in first place. In its third weekend, it earned $26.7 million and fell to third place behind newcomer Elvis and Top Gun: Maverick. It ended its box office run as the fifth highest-grossing film of 2022 in this region. Outside the U.S. and Canada, the film earned $55.7 million in 15 early offshore markets and $178 million in 72 markets during its second weekend. It added $76.1 million during its third weekend (topping the box office in countries experiencing heat waves such as the UK, France, and Germany), and another $43 million in its fourth. By the film's fifth weekend, it was the fourth Hollywood film since the start of the pandemic to pass the $800 million mark. Worldwide IMAX earnings totaled $53.5 million by October 2, 2022, with the top markets China ($157.6 million), Japan ($46 million), Mexico ($43 million), the United Kingdom ($42.9 million), and France ($29.5 million). On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 29% of 403 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 4.80/10. The website's consensus reads: "Jurassic World Dominion might be a bit of an improvement over its immediate predecessors in some respects, but this franchise has lumbered a long way down from its classic start." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 38 out of 100, based on 59 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable" reviews. It is the lowest-rated film of the series on both websites. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A−" on an A+ to F scale, while PostTrak reported that filmgoers gave it a 73% overall positive score, with 57% saying that they would definitely recommend it. Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune gave the film two out of four stars, describing Dominion as the franchise's weakest entry, criticizing its dialogue and calling Owen and Claire "thinly conceived". For Rolling Stone, David Fear wrote that compared to the original Jurassic Park, "Dominion feels like a contractual obligation at best, and a D.O.A. attempt to wring one last drop out of an already depleted brand at worst." According to a Variety review, "Of the three Jurassic World movies, Dominion is the least silly and most entertaining. But that's not saying much. This 'stop to ask if they should' cycle's human characters were never especially interesting, and why should we trust Trevorrow to suddenly make them so?" The Jewish Chronicle critic Linda Marric gave the film two out of five stars and wrote, "Overall, and bar a few good performances, Dominion fails on almost all accounts by delivering a story that is too preposterous even for a franchise that has demanded that we suspend disbelief for the last 3 decades." Mark Feeney of The Boston Globe wrote, "The movie has its moments, and the CGI really is fabulous, but this go-round feels fairly tired. It's also too long, and much of it is paced in a somewhat ... leisurely? ... fashion." For Tribune News Service, Katie Walsh praised the performances of newcomers DeWanda Wise and Mamoudou Athie and called the motorcycle chase scene "the film's best, and most innovative, set piece" but called Dominion "not exactly satisfying, lacking in true suspense, tension and the kind of thrilling spectacle that Spielberg so effortlessly mastered in the first Jurassic Park, a cinematic high that we'll be chasing forever". Reactions to Grant, Malcolm, and Sattler's returns were particularly polarized. Bilge Ebiri of Vulture.com wrote, "While it's certainly nice to see Dern, Neill, and Goldblum play these people again, it'd be nicer if the script gave them well-written dialogue or placed them in interesting situations". Maggie Boccella of Collider praised their acting but was also critical of the writing. She stated that the trio "feel like aimless last-minute additions, like their presence only serves to remind audiences of how good things used to be". Ian Freer of Empire praised their return, stating that it "provides a sharp contrast" to Owen and Claire, the "relatively colourless heroes of the later trilogy". Mashable's Kristy Puchko felt that the trio were given little to do in the film. According to Johnny Oleksinski of the New York Post, "You'd think it would be nostalgic to see Dern, Neill and Jeff Goldblum together again, but they all act like old fogies, and they're written to sound like morons". Zoe Jordan of Screen Rant opined that the film "undermines the unique characteristics that define" the trio. David Crow, writing for Den of Geek, praised the romantic reunion between Grant and Sattler. Several reviewers were also critical of the locust subplot. Chase Hutchinson of Collider wrote, "If you were expecting a story that actually grappled with what the impact of the dinosaurs would be on the world, then you are in for a big letdown". John Squires of Bloody Disgusting stated that Dominion "makes the bizarre decision to skirt around the issue presented in the final moments of Fallen Kingdom, instead jumping four years" and picking up in a world where dinosaurs are "little more than a minor nuisance" to humans. In contrast, Kimberly Terasaki of The Mary Sue stated that "the biggest threat to the world has never been the dinosaurs, but the technology and corporations that created them". Explaining his decision to feature the locusts, Trevorrow said that he "wanted to make a film about genetic power and its consequences". The extended edition was met with slightly more positive reviews. Samantha Coley of Collider praised it for adding story depth and fixing "some clunky editing issues". John Orquiola of Screen Rant praised the extended edition for restoring the prologue sequence and more character moments. Jesse Hassenger of Polygon recommended the extended edition but stated that the additional scenes "play to the movie's strengths and weaknesses — which is to say the dinosaur stuff is fun, and the human stuff is a bit half-assed". Jurassic World Dominion concludes the second film trilogy (and the storyline which began in the original trilogy), although Marshall has not ruled out the possibility of future films. In January 2022, he said: "We're going to sit down, and we're going to see what the future is." In January 2024, The Hollywood Reporter reported that a new Jurassic World installment was in the early stages of development. David Koepp, screenwriter of the first two Jurassic films, is penning the screenplay with Frank Marshall, Patrick Crowley, and Steven Spielberg returning as producers. Sam Neill, Laura Dern, Jeff Goldblum, Chris Pratt, and Bryce Dallas Howard are not expected to return, with the studio opting for a fresh take on the franchise. In February 2024, Universal scheduled the film for July 2, 2025. David Leitch was in discussions to direct the film but ultimately passed on the project over creative differences. Weeks later, Gareth Edwards had signed on to direct. List of films featuring dinosaurs As depicted in Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom (2018). Initially stolen by Dennis Nedry on Dodgson's orders in Jurassic Park (1993), and obtained by Dodgson in the fifth season of Jurassic World Camp Cretaceous (2022). Dilophosaurus appeared as a hologram in Jurassic World (2015) and as a diorama in Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom (2018). Blair, Iain (June 9, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion Director Talks Dinosaur VFX and Workflow". postPerspective. Archived from the original on June 10, 2022. Retrieved August 19, 2022. "Film Releases". Variety. Archived from the original on October 21, 2018. "The Kennedy/Marshall Company". Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. "Jurassic World Dominion – Official Trailer". YouTube. February 10, 2022. Retrieved April 29, 2022. Universal Pictures and Amblin Entertainment present, in association with Perfect World Pictures, a Colin Trevorrow film. Bell, Gabriel (April 5, 2022). "'Jurassic World Dominion's Dino-Sized Runtime Revealed". Collider. Archived from the original on April 5, 2022. Reid, Caroline (April 14, 2023). "Revealed: Two Latest 'Jurassic World' Movies Cost $845 Million". Forbes. Retrieved May 4, 2023. This gave Fallen Kingdom net spending of $431.6 million whilst Dominion's costs came to $264.5 million. "Jurassic World Dominion (2022)". The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Retrieved October 10, 2022. "Jurassic World Dominion (2022)". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved October 10, 2022. Rubin, Rebecca (October 6, 2020). "'Jurassic World: Dominion' Delays Release to 2022". Variety. Archived from the original on October 24, 2020. Retrieved October 9, 2020. Stack, Tim (April 18, 2018). "Jurassic World 3 will be a 'science thriller,' says Colin Trevorrow". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 21, 2018. Retrieved April 18, 2018. "Jurassic Park trio Laura Dern, Sam Neill, & Jeff Goldblum returning for Jurassic World 3". September 25, 2019. Archived from the original on December 17, 2019. Retrieved February 19, 2020. "'Jurassic World 3' Lands DeWanda Wise". Deadline. October 18, 2019. Archived from the original on December 28, 2019. Retrieved February 19, 2020. "Jurassic World Dominion: Meet DeWanda Wise's Pilot Kayla – Exclusive Image". Empire. March 14, 2022. Archived from the original on March 14, 2022. Retrieved March 14, 2022. Travis, Ben (April 9, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion's Huge New Dinosaur The 'Giga' Is 'Like The Joker', Says Colin Trevorrow – Exclusive Image". Empire. Archived from the original on April 9, 2022. Retrieved April 9, 2022. Anderton, Ethan (April 20, 2020). "'Jurassic World: Dominion' Set Photo Takes the Franchise into the Snow for the First Time". /Film. Archived from the original on May 5, 2020. Retrieved May 18, 2020. "Irish actress Elva Trill set for stardom as she gears up for release of new Jurassic World movie". Sunday World. Archived from the original on October 5, 2021. Retrieved August 30, 2021. Sneider, Jeff (June 25, 2020). "Exclusive: 'Jurassic World: Dominion' Adds Campbell Scott as Key Character from Original Movie". Collider. Archived from the original on June 26, 2020. Retrieved June 25, 2020. Evans, Nick (March 2, 2020). "One Jurassic World Character Colin Trevorrow Is Especially Proud Of". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on July 27, 2020. Retrieved May 18, 2020. "Jurassic World 3 bringing back Jake Johnson and Omar Sy". Collider. Archived from the original on February 14, 2020. Retrieved February 19, 2020. "Jake Johnson, Omar Sy to Return for New 'Jurassic World' Movie". The Hollywood Reporter. February 13, 2020. Archived from the original on February 14, 2020. Retrieved February 19, 2020. "Jurassic World 3 bringing back Justice Smith, Daniella Pineda". Collider. Exclusive. November 7, 2019. Archived from the original on January 9, 2020. Retrieved February 19, 2020. D'Alessandro, Anthony (February 19, 2020). "Jurassic World 3: Venom & Antlers actor Scott Haze ioins Colin Trevorrow pic". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 20, 2020. Retrieved February 19, 2020. "Jurassic World Dominion". AMC Theatres. Archived from the original on April 22, 2022. Retrieved May 10, 2022. "'Jurassic World 3': 'Altered Carbon' & 'Animal Kingdom' Actress Dichen Lachman Joins Cast". Deadline. February 18, 2020. Archived from the original on February 18, 2020. Retrieved February 19, 2020. "Reno actor lands role in Jurassic World Dominion". May 6, 2022. Archived from the original on May 6, 2022. Retrieved May 6, 2022. "Missouri State graduate Caleb Hearon lands role in 'Jurassic World: Dominion' as CIA agent". June 15, 2022. Archived from the original on July 4, 2022. Retrieved July 3, 2022. "Ukmalayalee | Home". "Dimitri Vegas Joins Jurassic World: Dominion Cast". ScreenRant. October 14, 2020. Archived from the original on October 19, 2020. Retrieved October 21, 2020. @penny_dreadful (July 14, 2022). "doing a science in the background of jurassic world dominion 👩🏻‍🔬 ilu laura dern xxx" – via Instagram. Weintraub, Steve (June 13, 2015). "Jurassic World: Colin Trevorrow Talks Building a Foundation for Future Installments". Collider. Archived from the original on June 15, 2015. Retrieved June 13, 2015. Phil de Semlyen (April 23, 2014). "Exclusive: Jurassic World Sequels Planned". Empire. Archived from the original on June 17, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015. "Colin Trevorrow Talks Jurassic World 2 and More! (Surprise Guest: J.A. Bayona!)". Jurassic Outpost. September 30, 2016. Archived from the original on October 1, 2016. Retrieved September 30, 2016. Anderton, Ethan (December 27, 2017). "'Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom' Isn't a Retread of 'The Lost World', Will Set Up 'Jurassic World 3'". /Film. Archived from the original on December 28, 2017. Retrieved February 22, 2018. "Colin Trevorrow Not Directing the Next Jurassic Park Film". ComingSoon.net. May 31, 2015. Archived from the original on June 2, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015. Ryan, Mike (June 8, 2015). "'Jurassic World' Director Colin Trevorrow Explains Why He Won't Be Making Another 'Jurassic World'". Uproxx. Archived from the original on February 2, 2018. Retrieved February 22, 2018. Frank Marshall Interview – Jurassic World (Jurassic Cast ep 22). Jurassic Cast Podcast. October 19, 2015. Archived from the original on March 11, 2016. Retrieved February 22, 2018 – via YouTube. McClintock, Pamela; Masters, Kim (November 4, 2015). "Studio Chiefs Unleashed: 6 Top Execs Spar Over Gender Pay, Sony Hack and 'Star Wars' Box Office". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved February 22, 2018. Langley: Colin Trevorrow is busy working on an outline. He's been working with Steven [Spielberg]. And they have an idea for the next two movies actually. It was designed as a trilogy, unbeknown to us. It's a happy surprise. Stack, Tim (June 13, 2015). "Chris Pratt is signed on for more Jurassic World movies". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 15, 2015. Retrieved June 13, 2015. Han, Angie (September 21, 2015). "Which 'Jurassic Park' Quote Inspired 'Jurassic World'? Which One Will Inspire 'Jurassic World 2'?". /Film. Archived from the original on June 9, 2017. Retrieved February 22, 2018. Romano, Nick (February 21, 2018). "Jurassic World 3 rampaging toward 2021 release date". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 21, 2018. Retrieved February 22, 2018. Squires, John (February 21, 2018). "Life Continues to Find a Way as 'Jurassic World 3' is Already Dated for Release!". Bloody Disgusting. Archived from the original on February 24, 2018. Retrieved February 22, 2018. Variety is reporting that Jurassic World 3, which surely won't actually be the official title, will be hitting theaters on June 11, 2021, three years after Fallen Kingdom. "Universal launches plans for third 'Jurassic World' film". ABC. Associated Press. February 21, 2018. Archived from the original on February 22, 2018. Retrieved February 22, 2018. Kroll, Justin (February 21, 2018). "'Jurassic World 3' to Hit Theaters in June 2021". Variety. Archived from the original on February 21, 2018. Retrieved February 22, 2018. Stack, Tim (March 30, 2018). "Steven Spielberg confirms Colin Trevorrow will direct third Jurassic World". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 30, 2018. Retrieved March 30, 2018. Libbey, Dirk (January 21, 2021). "Jurassic World's Colin Trevorrow Explains Why He Returned To Direct Dominion". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on January 30, 2021. Retrieved February 6, 2021. Erbland, Kate (June 11, 2022). "Why Colin Trevorrow Didn't End 'Jurassic World' Trilogy with 'Fantasy Movie' About 'Chomping' Dinosaurs". IndieWire. Archived from the original on June 12, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Garbutt, Emily (June 6, 2022). "Exclusive: Colin Trevorrow reveals how his canceled Star Wars movie helped him make Jurassic World Dominion". GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on June 7, 2022. Retrieved June 8, 2022. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on November 24, 2021. Retrieved November 24, 2021.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) Davids, Brian (March 25, 2018). "How 'Pacific Rim' Screenwriter Emily Carmichael Became a Go-To for Blockbusters". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 7, 2021. Retrieved June 10, 2021. "Exclusive: Colin Trevorrow Shares His Experiences with 'Fallen Kingdom' + Talks Hopes for 'Jurassic World 3'". Jurassic Outpost. December 13, 2018. Archived from the original on December 19, 2018. Retrieved December 18, 2018. Lussier, Germain (March 23, 2018). "Meet Emily Carmichael, the Next Big Name in Scifi and Fantasy Filmmaking". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on December 19, 2018. Retrieved December 18, 2018. Next up was a gig writing a remake of The Black Hole for Disney. Trevorrow was so impressed with that, as well as with Carmichael's work on Pacific Rim Uprising, he brought her on to help him write Jurassic World 3. Travis, Ben; De Semlyen, Nick (July 3, 2018). "18 Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom Secrets from JA Bayona and Colin Trevorrow". Empire. Archived from the original on November 22, 2018. Retrieved December 4, 2018. Carbone, Gina (July 27, 2019). "Jurassic World 3 Will Be 'A Celebration' Of The Entire Franchise, Colin Trevorrow Says". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on September 1, 2019. Retrieved January 23, 2020. Mancuso, Vinnie (June 9, 2021). "Colin Trevorrow Compares 'Jurassic World: Dominion' to Bourne and Bond: "A Science Thriller With Dinosaurs"". Collider. Archived from the original on June 10, 2021. Retrieved June 10, 2021. Fullerton, Huw (June 3, 2015). "Jurassic World sequel could see Apple vs Microsoft-style dinosaur tech race". Radio Times. Archived from the original on June 14, 2015. Rundle, Michael (July 24, 2015). "Exclusive: Jurassic World 2 may be off-island, with open-source dinos". Wired UK. Archived from the original on July 27, 2015. Sciretta, Peter (June 26, 2018). "Exclusive: Colin Trevorrow Explains the 'Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom' Ending, Teases Where 'Jurassic World 3' Will Go". /Film. Archived from the original on December 5, 2018. Retrieved December 4, 2018. Anderton, Ethan (December 14, 2018). "Sorry, But 'Jurassic World 3' Won't Have Dinosaurs Attacking Cities". /Film. Archived from the original on December 19, 2018. Retrieved December 18, 2018. Lussier, Germain (June 25, 2018). "The Makers of Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom Solve Some of the Film's Biggest Mysteries". io9. Archived from the original on December 5, 2018. Retrieved December 4, 2018. Vorel, Jim (December 14, 2018). "Colin Trevorrow Shoots Down (Stupid) Fan Theories of a Dinosaur vs. Human War in Jurassic World 3". Paste. Archived from the original on April 29, 2022. Retrieved April 29, 2022. Weiss, Josh (December 9, 2021). "Trevorrow explains why 'Jurassic World: Dominion' doesn't follow typical Hollywood structure". Syfy. Archived from the original on April 29, 2022. Retrieved April 29, 2022. Gilchrist, Todd (June 10, 2022). "Jurassic World: Dominion's Colin Trevorrow and Emily Carmichael on those T-Rex-sized expectations". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on June 13, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Nemiroff, Perri (May 10, 2022). "Chris Pratt & Bryce Dallas Howard Reveal the 'Jurassic World Dominion' Plot Points They Pitched". Collider. Archived from the original on May 10, 2022. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Weiss, Josh (April 15, 2022). "'Jurassic World' director Colin Trevorrow teases a 'Star Wars' callback in 'Dominion'". Syfy. Archived from the original on May 10, 2022. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Erbland, Kate (June 7, 2022). "'Jurassic World: Dominion': Colin Trevorrow Knew Sequel Had to Honor Laura Dern with 'Ellie Sattler's Story'". IndieWire. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. Retrieved June 8, 2022. Taylor, Drew (June 8, 2022). "Colin Trevorrow Explains How He Crafted 'Jurassic World: Dominion' as Ellie Sattler's Story". The Wrap. Archived from the original on June 10, 2022. Retrieved June 8, 2022. Ryan, Mike (June 7, 2022). "Colin Trevorrow On 'Jurassic World: Dominion' And That Time His 'Star Wars' Script Leaked Online". Uproxx. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. Retrieved June 8, 2022. Stack, Tim (June 22, 2018). "Jurassic World: Colin Trevorrow answers Fallen Kingdom burning questions". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 5, 2018. Retrieved December 4, 2018. Nemiroff, Perri (June 10, 2022). "'Jurassic World Dominion' Director Colin Trevorrow Explains How Biosyn Got Back in the Dinosaur Game". Collider. Archived from the original on June 13, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Travis, Ben (April 11, 2022). "Jurassic Park's Original Cast Returns In Jurassic World Dominion: 'Colin Was Keen To Make It Matter,' Says Laura Dern". Empire. Archived from the original on June 13, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Kaye, Don (May 17, 2022). "How Jurassic World Dominion Finally Gives Laura Dern Her Due". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on May 19, 2022. Retrieved May 20, 2022. "The director and cast of Jurassic World Dominion on bringing back old favorites and knowing their dinosaurs". Yahoo. June 9, 2022. Archived from the original on June 10, 2022. Retrieved June 10, 2022. Davids, Brian (June 10, 2022). "'Jurassic World Dominion' Filmmaker Colin Trevorrow Discusses Key Moments in Franchise's Concluding Chapter". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 11, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Meyer, Joshua (June 10, 2022). "Steven Spielberg's Advice For Colin Trevorrow On Jurassic World Dominion Was Very Spielbergian". /Film. Archived from the original on July 21, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2022. Scott, Ryan (March 24, 2017). "Laura Dern wants to return in final Jurassic World sequel". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on March 25, 2017. Retrieved February 22, 2018. "Laura Dern: The Oscar-winning star talks armour, Vader and extreme rebelling". Total Film. November 17, 2017. Archived from the original on February 22, 2018. Retrieved February 22, 2018. Reyes, Mike (September 2018). "The plan for Jurassic World 3, according to Bryce Dallas Howard". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on December 26, 2018. Retrieved December 4, 2018. Reyes, Mike (September 12, 2018). "The Jurassic Park actor Bryce Dallas Howard wants for Jurassic World 3". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on January 4, 2019. Retrieved December 4, 2018. El-Mahmoud, Sarah (October 3, 2018). "Bryce Dallas Howard is all-in on original characters returning in Jurassic World 3". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on December 5, 2018. Retrieved December 4, 2018. Yasharoff, Hannah (September 25, 2019). "Laura Dern, Jeff Goldblum, and Sam Neill to return for 'major roles' in Jurassic World 3". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 9, 2019. Retrieved December 5, 2019. "Neill, Dern, and Goldblum return for Jurassic World 3". Archived from the original on December 7, 2019. Retrieved February 19, 2020. Oller, Jacob (July 1, 2020). "Jurassic Park's original trio will be in Jurassic World: Dominion 'all the way through' says Sam Neill". Syfy Wire. Archived from the original on July 7, 2020. Retrieved July 7, 2020. Whalen, Andrew (December 10, 2019). "Jurassic Park cast reunite before Jurassic World 3 in new Jurassic World: Evolution expansion". Newsweek. Archived from the original on January 3, 2020. Retrieved January 23, 2020. Travis, Ben (October 28, 2019). "Colin Trevorrow on bringing back Jurassic Park's iconic trio in Jurassic World 3". Empire. Archived from the original on February 15, 2020. Retrieved January 23, 2020. Garbutt, Emily (June 7, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion: Colin Trevorrow and Jeff Goldblum talk 'conclusive end' to Jurassic story". GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on June 9, 2022. Retrieved June 9, 2022. Bennett, Tara (June 13, 2022). "Shippers satisfied! Trevorrow, Dern, and Neill on that 'Jurassic World Dominion' scene". Syfy. Archived from the original on August 7, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2022. "Sam Neill on Jurassic Park, James Bond, [and] why he hates golf". News Breakfast. December 4, 2019. 4:40. Archived from the original on July 11, 2020. Retrieved May 18, 2020. "Sam Neill is nervous about Jurassic World 3". Fitzy and Wippa. December 4, 2019. 1:04. Archived from the original on September 26, 2020. Retrieved May 18, 2020 – via YouTube. N'Duka, Amanda (October 17, 2019). "Jurassic World 3 adds Sorry for Your Loss actor Mamoudou Athie". Deadline. Archived from the original on October 17, 2019. Retrieved October 17, 2019. Kroll, Justin (October 18, 2019). "Jurassic World 3 casts DeWanda Wise in leading role". Variety. Exclusive. Archived from the original on December 5, 2019. Retrieved December 5, 2019. Davids, Brian (August 31, 2020). "Mamoudou Athie on Oh Jerome, No Emmy nomination and landing Jurassic World: Dominion". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 1, 2020. Retrieved September 1, 2020. Nemiroff, Perri (June 8, 2022). "DeWanda Wise Details Her Journey from NYU to 'Jurassic World Dominion' Scene-Stealer". Collider. Archived from the original on June 13, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Betts, Emma-Jane (June 8, 2022). "Mamoudou Athie reveals how he was cast in Jurassic World Dominion". The Digital Fix. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. Retrieved June 8, 2022. Jackson, Angelique (May 25, 2022). "The Feminist Evolution of 'Jurassic World Dominion': How Laura Dern, Bryce Dallas Howard and DeWanda Wise Became Summer's Breakout Action Stars". Variety. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved June 1, 2022. Bui, Hoai-Tran (February 20, 2020). "'Jurassic World 3' Will Be Like 'Avengers: Endgame', According to Chris Pratt". /Film. Archived from the original on February 20, 2020. Retrieved February 20, 2020. Jirak, Jamie (January 8, 2021). "Jurassic World's Andy Buckley Shares Update on Dominion Involvement". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 8, 2021. Retrieved January 11, 2021. Trivedi, Sachin (February 20, 2020). "'Jurassic World 3' Begins Production With Exciting New Characters". International Business Times. Archived from the original on June 16, 2020. Retrieved February 25, 2020. Youds, Mike (February 24, 2020). "Latest Jurassic World movie lands in Vancouver Island park for filming". Victoria News. Archived from the original on September 26, 2020. Retrieved February 25, 2020. Couch, Aaron (February 25, 2020). "Next 'Jurassic World' Movie Is Called 'Dominion'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 26, 2020. Retrieved February 25, 2020. Welk, Brian (February 25, 2020). "'Jurassic World 3' Title Revealed by Director Colin Trevorrow". TheWrap. Archived from the original on September 26, 2020. Retrieved February 25, 2020. Production on the film began on Monday [...] "B.C. boy crashes Jurassic World wrap party in T-Rex costume". CBC.ca. March 7, 2020. Archived from the original on March 8, 2020. Retrieved March 10, 2020. "Someone Just Crashed A "Jurassic World" Wrap Party In BC In A Full Body T-Rex Costume". Narcity. March 8, 2020. Archived from the original on October 7, 2020. Retrieved March 10, 2020. Evans, Nick (September 17, 2019). "Looks Like Jurassic World 3 Is Beginning Filming Soon". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on September 26, 2020. Retrieved September 18, 2019. Scott, Ryan (September 17, 2019). "'Jurassic World 3' Will Shoot at Pinewood Studios in England". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on September 18, 2019. Retrieved September 18, 2019. "Jurassic World Dominion Production Information". Universal Pictures. 2022. pp. 6, 26, 28–29. Archived from the original on August 1, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2022. Wiseman, Andreas (November 7, 2020). "'Jurassic World: Dominion' Wraps Unprecedented Shoot After 18 Months, 40,000 COVID Tests & Millions On Protocols; Colin Trevorrow & Donna Langley On The 'Emotional' Journey". Deadline. Archived from the original on November 7, 2020. Retrieved November 7, 2020. D'Alessandro, Anthony (June 13, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion Leaves Big Footprint With $145M+ Opening, Not Far From Fallen Kingdom's Debut – Monday Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 11, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Singer, Matt (February 25, 2020). "Colin Trevorrow Reveals 'Jurassic World 3's Official Title as Shooting Begins". ScreenCrush. Archived from the original on September 26, 2020. Retrieved February 25, 2020. "'Jurassic World 3' Starts Shooting and Gets an Official Title". MovieNewsNet. February 25, 2020. Archived from the original on December 18, 2021. Retrieved December 19, 2021. Beasley, Tom (December 5, 2019). "'Jurassic World 3' filming under working title 'Arcadia', heading to Canada in 2020". Yahoo. Archived from the original on September 26, 2020. Retrieved December 5, 2019. Phillips, Jamie (March 9, 2020). "Filming for latest Jurassic World blockbuster Dominion taking place near Camberley and Fleet, fan site suggests". Surrey Live. Archived from the original on March 10, 2020. Retrieved March 10, 2020. Kroll, Justin (March 13, 2020). "Universal Halts Production on Live-Action Films Including 'Jurassic World: Dominion' Due to Coronavirus". Variety. Archived from the original on March 14, 2020. Retrieved March 13, 2020. Kemp, Ella (May 11, 2021). "Jurassic World: Dominion Director Colin Trevorrow Recalls The Moment Filming Shut Down – Exclusive Image". Empire. Archived from the original on June 10, 2021. Retrieved June 10, 2021. Fraser, Kevin (March 31, 2020). "Colin Trevorrow shares Jurassic World: Dominion peek as he works from home". JoBlo. Archived from the original on July 7, 2020. Retrieved July 7, 2020. Travis, Ben (July 7, 2020). "Colin Trevorrow Talks Jurassic World: Dominion Shoot Resuming". Empire. Archived from the original on July 7, 2020. Retrieved July 7, 2020. Wiseman, Andreas (June 15, 2020). "Universal's 'Jurassic World: Dominion' On Course To Be First Major Studio Movie Back Underway In UK, Detailed Safety Protocols Revealed". Deadline. Archived from the original on June 15, 2020. Retrieved June 15, 2020. Seemayer, Zach (July 15, 2020). "Jeff Goldblum on '109-Page' List of Safety Protocols as 'Jurassic World 3' Starts Filming Again". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on July 24, 2020. Retrieved July 24, 2020. Sperling, Nicole; Barnes, Brooks (August 13, 2020). "'We Are the Guinea Pigs': Hollywood Restarts Its Blockbuster Machine". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 13, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2020. Grater, Tom (July 10, 2020). "'Jurassic World: Dominion' UK Shoot On Track in Week One; Universal Says No Disruption After Reports Of Positive COVID Tests". Deadline. Archived from the original on July 10, 2020. Retrieved July 10, 2020. Sandberg, Bryn Elise (September 22, 2020). "Lights, Camera … COVID! The Perils of Shooting Amid a Pandemic". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved November 7, 2020. Shields, Bevan (October 3, 2020). "Three decades on from Jurassic Park, Sam Neill is more adored than ever". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved November 7, 2020. Couch, Aaron (January 25, 2021). "Colin Trevorrow on 'Jurassic World: Camp Cretaceous' and Creative Highs of 'Dominion'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved February 6, 2021. El-Mahmoud, Sarah (January 30, 2021). "How Jurassic World: Dominion's Jeff Goldblum Hilariously Drove Sam Neill And The Cast 'Crazy Every Day'". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved February 6, 2021. Anderson, Jenna (January 24, 2021). "Jurassic World: Dominion Director Colin Trevorrow Calls Film 'Emotionally Rich'". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved February 6, 2021. White, James (August 4, 2020). "Sam Neill Celebrates Returning To Work For Jurassic World: Dominion". Empire. Archived from the original on August 6, 2020. Retrieved August 5, 2020. Reichert, Corinne (August 4, 2020). "Jurassic World 3 resumes filming after coronavirus shutdown". CNET. Archived from the original on August 28, 2020. Retrieved August 5, 2020. Sarkisian, Jacob (August 29, 2020). "Jeff Goldblum talks 'life and death' in 'Jurassic World: Dominion', dancing for Laura Dern, and the impact of coronavirus on his Disney Plus documentary". Insider. Archived from the original on September 26, 2020. Retrieved August 29, 2020. Azzopardi, Karl (August 11, 2020). "Four Jurassic World crew members test positive for COVID-19". Malta Today. Archived from the original on September 26, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2020. Wiseman, Andreas (August 19, 2020). "'Jurassic World: Dominion' Scales Back Malta Shoot After Country Sees Surge In COVID-19 Infections". Deadline. Archived from the original on August 19, 2020. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Shepherd, Jack (December 18, 2020). "Frank Marshall talks Jurassic World: Dominion, Indiana Jones 5, and Bee Gees". GamesRadar. Archived from the original on December 21, 2020. Retrieved December 29, 2020. "More films choosing Malta for their production – government". The Malta Independent. August 29, 2020. Archived from the original on September 26, 2020. Retrieved August 29, 2020. Fuge, Jon (August 31, 2020). "'Jurassic World 3: Dominion' Set Images Reveal Terrifying New Dinosaur Breed". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on September 26, 2020. Retrieved September 1, 2020. Cilia, Johnathan (September 5, 2020). "'Cool But Underwhelming': Behind The Scenes Of The Jurassic World Set In Floriana". Lovin Malta. Archived from the original on September 27, 2020. Retrieved September 27, 2020. Rubin, Rebecca (October 23, 2020). "'Jurassic World: Dominion' Resumes Filming With Legacy Cast After Positive Coronavirus Cases". Variety. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved October 24, 2020. Chitwood, Adam (August 12, 2020). "Jake Johnson Says "We're Trying to Figure Out" His Return to 'Jurassic World: Dominion'". Collider. Archived from the original on October 20, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2020. Holmes, Adam (October 15, 2020). "Surprise, Jurassic World: Dominion Is Still Adding Cast Members". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on October 18, 2020. Retrieved November 1, 2020. Webber, Stephanie (July 30, 2021). "Jake Johnson Reveals He Won't Be in 'Jurassic Park: Dominion' After All: It Was 'Disappointing'". Us Weekly. Archived from the original on July 30, 2021. Retrieved July 30, 2021. Mitchell, Harriet; Sandwell, Ian (June 7, 2022). "Jurassic World: Dominion had to replace a character after filming delays". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on June 9, 2022. Retrieved June 9, 2022. Mike Fleming Jr. (October 7, 2020). "'Jurassic World: Dominion' Halts Shooting Two Weeks Due To COVID Cases". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 8, 2020. Retrieved October 7, 2020. Busch, Jenna (June 6, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion Director Colin Trevorrow On Feathered Dinos And Combining Casts". /Film. Archived from the original on June 9, 2022. Retrieved June 8, 2022. Courtepatte, Jake (February 7, 2020). "Jurassic World 3 filming coming to Merritt". Merritt Herald. Archived from the original on February 8, 2020. Retrieved February 12, 2020. Davies, Colton (February 24, 2020). "Jurassic World 3 to begin filming in Merritt tomorrow". Radio NL. Archived from the original on September 27, 2020. Retrieved February 25, 2020. Leclair, Kim (February 26, 2020). "Midweek edition". Merritt Morning Market. Archived from the original on February 27, 2020. Retrieved February 27, 2020. "A cameo of prehistoric proportions". Merritt Herald. February 23, 2022. Archived from the original on August 11, 2022. Retrieved June 10, 2022. "A Closer Look: Jurassic World Dominion filming in Merritt, B.C." Thompson-Nicola Film Commission. June 9, 2022. 3:03. Archived from the original on June 13, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Chappell, Caitlin (June 15, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion Director Dives Into the Film's Real-World Parallels". CBR. Archived from the original on June 28, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2022. Arnold, Ben (May 18, 2020). "Sam Neill updates on coronavirus-postponed 'Jurassic World: Dominion'". Yahoo Sports. Archived from the original on June 7, 2020. Retrieved May 18, 2020. Bria, Bill (August 17, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion VFX Supervisor Talks Combining Digital With Practical Effects And Putting Dinosaurs Into The Real World [Interview]". /Film. Archived from the original on August 17, 2022. Retrieved August 19, 2022. Phillips, Jamie (March 11, 2020). "Trailers spotted at rumoured Jurassic World: Dominion filming locations near Camberley and Fleet". Surrey Live. Archived from the original on March 20, 2020. Retrieved March 14, 2020. Ellis, Joely (June 28, 2022). "A roaring sequel to Jurassic Park, 'Jurassic World: Dominion'". Filming in England. Archived from the original on July 20, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2022. Hermanns, Grant (August 16, 2022). "David Vickery Interview: Jurassic World Dominion Home Release". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on August 19, 2022. Retrieved August 19, 2022. "Jurassic World featuring Wolfson's auditorium in cinemas now". Wolfson College. June 29, 2022. Archived from the original on August 10, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2022. "Closure notice". Black Park Country Park. July 12, 2020. Archived from the original on July 18, 2020. Retrieved July 24, 2020. Zinski, Dan (July 16, 2020). "Jurassic World 3 Set Photos Reveal Downed Plane In Arctic Landscape". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on July 16, 2020. Retrieved July 24, 2020. Crossan, Ash (June 11, 2022). "DeWanda Wise Interview: Jurassic World Dominion". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on August 2, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2022. Bria, Bill (July 13, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion's Crew Actually Burned Down The Locust Containment Set". /Film. Archived from the original on August 19, 2022. Retrieved August 19, 2022. Sansone, Kurt (January 22, 2020). "Jurassic World 3 to be filmed in Malta". Malta Today. Archived from the original on January 22, 2020. Retrieved January 23, 2020. Azzopardi, Karl (August 3, 2020). "Jurassic World to start filming in Malta at the end of August". Malta Today. Archived from the original on August 6, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2020. Weiss, Josh (January 7, 2022). "New 'Jurassic World: Dominion' pics reveal exotic locales, motorcycle chase & 'brutal' dinosaurs". Syfy. Archived from the original on May 19, 2022. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Levine, Gina (August 14, 2022). "How Jurassic World Dominion VFX Was Able to Continue Through the Pandemic". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on August 19, 2022. Retrieved August 19, 2022. Colangelo, B. J. (August 17, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion's Biggest Challenge For Its Chase Sequence Had Nothing To Do With Dinosaurs". /Film. Archived from the original on August 18, 2022. Retrieved August 19, 2022. Giardina, Carolyn (December 7, 2022). "Dinosaurs, Demons and the Deep Sea: Behind the Visual Effects of the Year's Biggest Movies". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 18, 2023. Retrieved March 18, 2023. Williams, Hayley (July 23, 2020). "Jurassic World: Dominion Will Use More Practical Effects Than Previous Films". GameSpot. Archived from the original on July 24, 2020. Retrieved July 24, 2020. Coggan, Devan (June 9, 2021). "Colin Trevorrow teases 'Jurassic World: Dominion' as 'a culmination of six movies'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 9, 2021. Retrieved June 10, 2021. Anderson, Corey (September 17, 2019). ""Dark Crystal" Animatronic Creator John Nolan Heads to Jurassic World 3". Jurassic Outpost. Archived from the original on September 25, 2019. Retrieved September 18, 2019. Hewitt, Chris (September 16, 2019). "Empire Podcast #381: Live From The London Podcast Festival Ft. Colin Trevorrow". Empire. Archived from the original on September 18, 2019. Retrieved September 18, 2019. Sblendorio, Peter (June 7, 2022). "'Jurassic World Dominion' director Colin Trevorrow says it was an 'honor' to reunite Sam Neill, Laura Dern and Jeff Goldblum". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on June 12, 2022. Retrieved June 8, 2022. Lorenz, Jonna (November 23, 2021). "Dinosaurs fight in 'Jurassic World: Dominion' prologue". UPI. Archived from the original on April 9, 2022. Retrieved April 9, 2022. Weintraub, Steve (June 11, 2022). "'Jurassic World Dominion' Director Colin Trevorrow on Which Dinosaur is the Strongest, Deleted Scenes & Easter Eggs". Collider. Archived from the original on June 11, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Tangcay, Jazz (June 11, 2022). "'Jurassic World Dominion': Meet the Franchise's New Dinosaurs, From Its Biggest Ever Foe to Feathered Predators". Variety. Archived from the original on June 11, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Katwala, Amit (June 10, 2022). "The Real Story Behind the Dino Feathers in 'Jurassic World Dominion'". Wired. Archived from the original on June 12, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022. "Jurassic World Dominion Director Colin Trevorrow Reveals Which Dinosaurs Are Animatronics". ComicBook.com. June 10, 2022. Archived from the original on July 2, 2022. Retrieved August 9, 2022. Anderton, Ethan (June 10, 2021). "'Jurassic World: Dominion' Finally Has Feathered Dinosaurs – Here's How They Got the Details Right". /Film. Archived from the original on June 17, 2021. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Brusatte, Steve (February 19, 2020). "Yes it's true: I'm delighted to be working with @colintrevorrow & his superstar team as science consultant for the next @JurassicWorld (2021)". Twitter. Archived from the original on February 19, 2020. Retrieved February 19, 2020. Bui, Hoai-Tran (February 19, 2020). "'Jurassic World 3' Casts 'Altered Carbon' Star Dichen Lachman, Hires New Dinosaur Consulting Team". /Film. Archived from the original on February 19, 2020. Retrieved February 20, 2020. Seddon, Gem (June 10, 2021). "New Jurassic World: Dominion image features dinosaurs – and this time, they have feathers". Total Film. Archived from the original on June 10, 2021. Retrieved June 10, 2021. Milner, Sarah Bea (June 23, 2021). "How Jurassic World 3 Can Have Feathered Dinosaurs Without Creating A Plot Hole". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on May 15, 2022. Retrieved May 15, 2022. Bressan, David (June 11, 2021). "Jurassic World: Dominion Trailer Finally Features Feathered Dinosaurs". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 6, 2022. Retrieved May 15, 2022. "'Jurassic World Dominion' Brings The Thrills... And Feathered Dinosaurs". Forbes. June 10, 2022. Archived from the original on July 17, 2022. Retrieved August 9, 2022. Weiss, Josh (June 20, 2022). "Was the T. rex 'weak' in 'Jurassic World Dominion'? Colin Trevorrow defends our favorite dino". Syfy. Archived from the original on June 28, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2022. Evangelista, Chris (June 10, 2021). "The 'Jurassic World: Dominion' Villain is a Dinosaur Director Colin Trevorrow Has Been Saving for the Third Movie". /Film. Archived from the original on June 21, 2021. Retrieved December 7, 2021. Truitt, Brian (June 11, 2022). "Get it, girl! An ode to the T. rex, the true unsung hero of the 'Jurassic World' franchise". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 11, 2022. Retrieved June 12, 2022. "'Jurassic World: Dominion': How the Giganotosaurus Became the Joker of the Franchise". IndieWire. June 25, 2022. Archived from the original on August 11, 2022. Retrieved August 9, 2022. Salazar, Andrew J. (June 10, 2022). "Colin Trevorrow and Emily Carmichael on Legacy Tropes and the New Dinos of 'Jurassic World Dominion' - Exclusive Interview". DiscussingFilm. Archived from the original on July 1, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2022. Bennett, Tara (June 10, 2022). "Colin Trevorrow's 'bucket list' scenes he made sure to get into 'Jurassic World Dominion'". Syfy. Archived from the original on August 2, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2022. Davis, Derrick (April 1, 2022). "New Animatronic Images From 'Dominion' Featured In Upcoming Fangoria Magazine Issue". Jurassic Outpost. Archived from the original on April 2, 2022. Retrieved April 9, 2022. Connellan, Shannon (June 11, 2022). "The scariest dinosaur in 'Jurassic World: Dominion' isn't actually a dinosaur". Mashable. Archived from the original on June 11, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Kemp, Ella (December 20, 2021). "Jurassic World Dominion: Meet The 'Brutal, Vicious' New Atrociraptors – Exclusive Image". Empire. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Holmes, Adam (May 7, 2018). "Jurassic World 3 Won't Include Any Hybrid Dinosaurs". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on May 8, 2018. Retrieved May 8, 2018. Lund, Anthony (May 20, 2022). "Jurassic World: Dominion Director Addresses Why There Are No More Hybrid Dinosaurs". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on June 6, 2022. Retrieved May 20, 2022. Erdmann, Kevin (June 11, 2022). "Dominion's Biggest Death Is A Perfect Jurassic Park Callback". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on June 12, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022. de Semlyen, Nick (May 17, 2018). "How is Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom planning to top its astonishingly lucrative predecessor?". Empire. Archived from the original on June 13, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Ettenhofer, Valerie (June 7, 2022). "One Jurassic World Dominion Dino Was Too Famous For CGI". /Film. Archived from the original on June 10, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Couch, Aaron (May 29, 2021). "Colin Trevorrow on Wide-Open Future of 'Jurassic World: Camp Cretaceous'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 30, 2021. Retrieved June 10, 2021. De Semlyen, Nick (June 9, 2021). "Exclusive: Colin Trevorrow Talks Jurassic World: Dominion IMAX Preview". Empire. Archived from the original on June 10, 2021. Retrieved June 10, 2021. Weintraub, Steve (June 11, 2021). "Colin Trevorrow Teases New 'Jurassic World: Dominion' Plot Details, Breaks Down IMAX Preview". Collider. Archived from the original on November 23, 2021. Retrieved November 27, 2021. Lutz, John (November 9, 2021). "'Jurassic World: Dominion' Is Finally Complete, Confirms Director Colin Trevorrow". Collider. Archived from the original on November 9, 2021. Retrieved November 9, 2021. Reyes, Mike (August 19, 2022). "The Major Reasons Jurassic World Dominion's Extended Cut Wasn't Released To Theaters". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on September 1, 2022. Retrieved September 13, 2022. Thompson, Simon (June 7, 2022). "Director Colin Trevorrow On Why 'Jurassic World: Dominion' Isn't Just Dinosaurs Fighting In The Streets Of New York". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. Retrieved June 8, 2022. "Jurassic World Dominion Director Colin Trevorrow Explains Why the Extended Edition Is the Version You Should See". ComicBook.com. August 16, 2022. Archived from the original on August 31, 2022. Retrieved August 31, 2022. "Jurassic World Dominion Extended Edition Is the Original Version, Not a Director's Cut". CBR.com. August 17, 2022. Archived from the original on August 31, 2022. Retrieved August 31, 2022. "Michael Giacchino to Return for 'Jurassic World: Dominion'". Film Music Reporter. March 11, 2020. Archived from the original on January 7, 2021. Retrieved March 12, 2020. Holmes, Adam (April 29, 2021). "Jurassic World: Dominion Director Colin Trevorrow Shares Update Including… Kermit The Frog?". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved May 7, 2021. Libby, Dirk (May 3, 2021). "Latest Jurassic World: Dominion Update Makes The Threequel Feel So Real". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on January 23, 2022. Retrieved May 7, 2021. Reyes, Mike (May 4, 2021). "Colin Trevorrow Shared Some Of Michael Giacchino's Jurassic World: Dominion Score, And It's Terrifying". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved May 7, 2021. Mithaiwala, Mansoor (June 10, 2021). "Colin Trevorrow Interview – Jurassic World: Dominion". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on June 10, 2021. Retrieved June 10, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (June 9, 2021). "'Jurassic World: Dominion' Preview To Drop Exclusively On 'F9' Imax Screens". Deadline. Archived from the original on June 10, 2021. Retrieved June 10, 2021. Purslow, Matt (November 2021). "Jurassic World Dominion Prologue Breakdown with Director Colin Trevorrow". IGN. Archived from the original on January 27, 2022. Retrieved November 23, 2021. Pulliam-Moore, Charles (November 23, 2021). "New Jurassic World: Dominion Prologue Brings Back that Damned Mosquito". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on January 23, 2022. Retrieved November 23, 2021. "Everything Added In The Jurassic World Dominion Extended Version". Screen Rant. August 18, 2022. Archived from the original on August 30, 2022. Retrieved August 30, 2022. Kimble, Lindsay (January 21, 2022). "Mikaela Shiffrin Narrowly Avoids a T-Rex in Fun Olympics and Jurassic World Crossover". People. Archived from the original on February 15, 2022. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Weiss, Josh (January 25, 2022). "'Jurassic World' dinosaurs crash Winter Olympics in 'Dominion' crossover spot for NBC Sports". Syfy. Archived from the original on February 15, 2022. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Mathai, Jeremy (January 21, 2022). "The Marketing Campaign For Jurassic World Dominion Is Getting Weird". /Film. Archived from the original on February 15, 2022. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Pallotta, Frank (February 10, 2022). "'Jurassic World Dominion' trailer has stars new and old tracking down dinosaurs". CNN. Archived from the original on February 15, 2022. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Husein, Baker (January 11, 2022). "When Will Jurassic World: Dominion's Trailer Release?". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on February 15, 2022. Retrieved February 15, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (February 16, 2022). "'Doctor Strange' Sequel, 'Jurassic World Dominion', 'LOTR' Trailers Saw Biggest Super Bowl Spikes On Social Media". Deadline. Archived from the original on February 26, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2022. White, Abbey (April 28, 2022). "New 'Jurassic World: Dominion' Trailer Delivers Bigger Look at Terrifyingly Toothy Giganotosaurus". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 28, 2022. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Vejvoda, Jim (May 10, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion: New Dinotracker Site Advises Humans About Dinosaur Encounters". IGN. Archived from the original on May 10, 2022. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Squires, John (May 10, 2022). "'Jurassic World Dominion' Launches Official Dino Tracker Website". Bloody Disgusting. Retrieved June 9, 2023. Hanson, Reece (June 22, 2022). "From Beccles to Hollywood: How town became part of Jurassic Park universe". Eastern Daily Press. Retrieved June 9, 2023. England, Sophie (June 24, 2022). "Jurassic World marketing campaigns filmed in Southend". The Echo. Retrieved June 9, 2023. Oddo, Marco Vito (May 25, 2022). "'Jurassic World Dominion': Come Face to Face With the Giganotosaurus at a New Interactive Billboard in London". Collider. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved June 1, 2022. Calimbahin, Samantha (May 25, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion Gets Amazing Interactive Dinosaur Billboard". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved June 1, 2022. King, Jack (February 11, 2022). "Exclusive: New 'Jurassic World Dominion' Toys Coming To Walmart Include a Damaged Tyrannosaurus Rex and LEGO Triceratops". Collider. Archived from the original on February 19, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Liszewski, Andrew (February 16, 2022). "The Jurassic World Dominion Toys Are Here to Stomp All Over Your Responsible Budgeting". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on February 19, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Ankers, Adele (February 18, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion LEGO Sets Announced". IGN. Archived from the original on February 18, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Squires, John (April 18, 2022). "Funko Unveils Massive Line of 'Jurassic World Dominion' Toys". Bloody Disgusting. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Retrieved April 19, 2022. Lada, Jenni (April 18, 2022). "Jurassic World Tamagotchi Will Appear in Japan in July". Siliconera. Archived from the original on May 10, 2022. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Wilson, Mike (May 29, 2022). "New 'Jurassic World Evolution 2' Expansion Announced Just in Time for 'Dominion' Hitting Theatres". Bloody Disgusting. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. Retrieved June 8, 2022. Leishman, Rachel (April 18, 2022). "'Jurassic World Dominion' Collaborates With Smithsonian to Inspire a New Generation of Dino Lovers". Collider. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Retrieved April 19, 2022. Squires, John (May 3, 2022). "Limited Edition 'Jurassic World Dominion' Barbasol Cans Now Available!". Bloody Disgusting. Archived from the original on May 10, 2022. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Lawrence, Eric D. (June 1, 2022). "New ad teases Jeep's return to 'Jurassic World' movie franchise". Detroit Free Press. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved June 1, 2022. Bond Jr., Vince (June 1, 2022). "See Jeep's Ad Promoting 'Jurassic World: Dominion'". Ad Age. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved June 1, 2022. Century, Sara (May 18, 2022). "Hardee's and Carl's Jr. Get Prehistoric With a Primal Menu for Jurassic World Dominion". Adweek. Archived from the original on May 19, 2022. Retrieved May 20, 2022. Directo-Meston, Danielle (May 20, 2022). "Dino Devotees Will Dig This 'Jurassic World' Line of Ethical Home Goods and Decor". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 20, 2022. Retrieved May 20, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 6, 2023). "'Jurassic World Dominion': Universal's Dino Franchise Roars To No. 6 In Deadline's 2022 Most Valuable Blockbuster Tournament". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved April 7, 2023. "Jon Hamm and Girlfriend Anna Osceola Hit the Red Carpet in N.Y.C., Plus Kelly Clarkson and More". People. May 24, 2022. Archived from the original on June 2, 2022. Retrieved May 24, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy (June 1, 2022). "'Jurassic World: Dominion' Stomps Into Korea With Top Pandemic Opening Day; Early Overseas Bow Eyes $45M+ In 15 Markets – International Box Office Preview". Deadline. Archived from the original on June 9, 2022. Retrieved June 1, 2022. Andrade, Jorge (June 1, 2022). "Chris Pratt revela los secretos de la esperada Jurassic World: Dominion". Esquire (in Spanish). Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved June 1, 2022. "'Jurassic World: Dominion' Delays Summer 2021 Release to 2022". The Hollywood Reporter. October 6, 2020. Archived from the original on October 9, 2020. Retrieved October 7, 2020. Leston, Ryan (July 15, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion Now Available On Streaming Just Over a Month After Release". IGN. Archived from the original on July 21, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2022. Brueggemann, Tom (July 18, 2022). "'Jurassic World: Dominion' and 'Black Phone' VOD Successes Prove Universal Knows What It's Doing". IndieWire. Archived from the original on July 21, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2022. Taylor, Drew (August 16, 2022). "'Jurassic World Dominion' Director Implores Fans to Watch Extended Edition: 'Friends Don't Let Friends Watch the Theatrical Cut'". TheWrap. Archived from the original on August 19, 2022. Retrieved August 19, 2022. Anderson, Jenna (August 16, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion Director Doesn't Want You to Watch the Theatrical Cut". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 17, 2022. Retrieved August 19, 2022. "'Jurassic World Dominion' Extended Cut Set for Digital and Blu-ray Release This Month". TheWrap. August 9, 2022. Archived from the original on August 10, 2022. Retrieved August 10, 2022. "'Jurassic World Dominion' Extended Edition Adds 14-Minutes of Epic Footage". Collider. August 9, 2022. Archived from the original on August 10, 2022. Retrieved August 10, 2022. Tingley, Anna (August 19, 2022). "'Jurassic World Dominion' Extended Version to Stream on Peacock Next Month". Variety. Archived from the original on August 19, 2022. Retrieved August 19, 2022. Grobar, Matt (August 19, 2022). "'Jurassic World Dominion' Extended Cut To Join Theatrical Version On Peacock Next Month". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 19, 2022. Retrieved August 19, 2022. Murphy, J. Kim (July 6, 2021). "Jurassic World: Dominion and Other Universal Films Will Stream on Peacock Four Months After Theatrical Release In New Deal". IGN. Archived from the original on December 11, 2021. Retrieved August 31, 2021. Singer, Matt (July 9, 2021). "'Jurassic World: Dominion' Will Stream on Amazon Prime". ScreenCrush. Archived from the original on December 14, 2021. Retrieved August 31, 2021. Andreeva, Nellie (July 15, 2021). "Starz Inks Post Pay-One Licensing Deal for Universal Movies". Deadline. Archived from the original on January 11, 2022. Retrieved January 11, 2022. "El cine de estreno en enero de 2023 en Movistar Plus+". MundoPlus. December 20, 2022. Archived from the original on December 20, 2022. Retrieved December 20, 2022. "Mundo Jurássico: Domínio estreia na SkyShowtime". MagazineHD. January 14, 2023. Archived from the original on January 23, 2023. Retrieved January 14, 2023. "Jurassic World Dominion on Netflix". The StreamBible. August 2, 2023. Retrieved August 2, 2023. "Top 2022 Movies at the Worldwide Box Office". The Numbers. Archived from the original on March 19, 2023. Retrieved August 7, 2022. "'Jurassic World Dominion' Slowly but Surely Crosses $1 Billion Globally". Variety. September 23, 2022. Archived from the original on September 25, 2022. Retrieved September 26, 2022. "Dino-Might: 'Jurassic World Dominion' Crosses $1B At Worldwide Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. September 23, 2022. Archived from the original on September 24, 2022. Retrieved September 24, 2022. "Box Office: 'Jurassic World Dominion' Passes $1 Billion Worldwide". Forbes. September 23, 2022. Archived from the original on September 27, 2022. Retrieved September 26, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony; Tartaglione, Nancy (June 7, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion Making Tentpoles Serious Again With Running $325M+ WW Total By Sunday – Box Office Preview". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 7, 2022. Retrieved June 8, 2022. Mendelson, Scott (June 12, 2022). "Box Office: 'Jurassic World Dominion' Nabs Dino-Mite $143 Million Weekend". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 21, 2022. Retrieved June 21, 2022. "Weekend Box Office: Jurassic World: Dominion Dominates with $143.3M Domestic, $319M Global". Boxoffice. June 12, 2022. Archived from the original on June 21, 2022. Retrieved June 21, 2022. "Domestic 2022 Weekend 24". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on June 29, 2022. Retrieved June 23, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (June 27, 2022). "Elvis Shakes No. 1 Away From Top Gun: Maverick After Dead Heat With $31M+ – Monday AM Box Office Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 25, 2022. Retrieved June 27, 2022. "Domestic Box Office For 2022". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Archived from the original on August 15, 2022. Retrieved January 7, 2023. Tartaglione, Nancy (June 6, 2022). "Top Gun: Maverick Soars To $557M Global Through Sunday; Jurassic World Dominion Grabs $56M In Early Bow & Doctor Strange 2 Crosses $900M WW – International Box Office Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 5, 2022. Retrieved June 6, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy (June 14, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion Roars To $392M WW As Top Gun: Maverick Soars To $747M – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 25, 2022. Retrieved June 19, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy (June 19, 2022). "Lightyear Lacks Luster With $86M WW Bow; Jurassic World 3 Crosses $600M & Top Gun: Maverick Nears $900M – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 22, 2022. Retrieved June 20, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy (June 26, 2022). "Top Gun Tops $1B WW, Jurassic World Dominion Nears $750M Global & Elvis Enters With $51M – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 4, 2022. Retrieved June 27, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy (July 3, 2022). "Minions: The Rise Of Gru Boogies To $202M WW As Top Gun: Maverick Flies By $1.1B & Jurassic World Dominion Rumbles Past $800M – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 5, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. "Jurassic World Dominion". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved October 3, 2022. "Jurassic World Dominion". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved June 15, 2022. Rowan, Iona (June 10, 2022). "Jurassic World 3 is lowest-rated of the series on Rotten Tomatoes". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on June 10, 2022. Retrieved June 11, 2022. Reiher, Andrea (June 10, 2022). "Every 'Jurassic Park' and 'Jurassic World' Movie, Ranked by Metacritic". Metacritic. Archived from the original on June 16, 2022. Retrieved June 16, 2022. Phillips, Michael (June 8, 2022). "'Jurassic World Dominion' review: The weakest entry in the dinosaur franchise is a warning to humankind". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on June 9, 2022. Retrieved June 20, 2022. Fear, David (June 8, 2022). "'Jurassic World Dominion' Isn't a Movie. It's an Extinction-Level Event". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 11, 2022. Retrieved June 10, 2022. "'Jurassic World Dominion' Review: Laura Dern and Sam Neill Are Back in a Franchise That's Stubbornly Determined to Repeat Itself". June 8, 2022. Archived from the original on June 11, 2022. Retrieved June 10, 2022. Marric, Linda (June 8, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion Film review: 'Deeply muddled, overlong and preposterously themed'". The Jewish Chronicle. Archived from the original on June 20, 2022. Retrieved June 20, 2022. Feeney, Mark (June 8, 2022). "'Jurassic World Dominion': An extinction-level event". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. Retrieved June 20, 2022. Walsh, Katie (June 8, 2022). "Movie review: 'Jurassic World Dominion' a nostalgia-filled romp that fails to entirely satisfy". Tribune News Service. Archived from the original on June 20, 2022. Retrieved June 20, 2022. Ebiri, Bilge (June 9, 2022). "The Jurassic World Trilogy Has Painted Itself Into a Corner". Vulture. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2023. Boccella, Maggie (June 25, 2022). "Why 'Jurassic World: Dominion' Fails as a Legacy Sequel". Collider. Retrieved March 6, 2023. Freer, Ian (June 8, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion Review". Empire. Archived from the original on June 12, 2022. Retrieved January 11, 2023. Puchko, Kristy (June 8, 2022). "'Jurassic World: Dominion' review: A big, dumb animal that deserves extinction". Mashable. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2023. Oleksinski, Johnny (June 9, 2022). "'Jurassic World Dominion' review: The worst movie of the series". New York Post. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2023. Jordan, Zoe (June 21, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion Fails The Franchise's 3 Major Legacy Characters". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2023. Crow, David (June 12, 2022). "How Jurassic World Dominion 'Fixes' Jurassic Park III". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2023. Hutchinson, Chase (June 10, 2022). "Of All the Dinosaur Worlds We Could've Gotten In 'Jurassic World Dominion,' We Got Giant Locusts". Collider. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2023. Squires, John (June 13, 2022). "'Jurassic World Dominion' – How the Ball Was Dropped on an All-Time Great Sequel Premise". Bloody Disgusting. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2023. Terasaki, Kimberly (June 13, 2022). "'Jurassic World: Dominion' Complaints Forget Dinosaurs Weren't the Real Threat in the Original". The Mary Sue. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2023. Trevorrow, Colin [@colintrevorrow] (August 17, 2022). "Honest answer, I wanted to make a film about genetic power and its consequences. The Extended Edition is a more balanced version of that story, but for those who feel Cretaceous-era insects don't belong in the franchise, there's nothing I can do. We all take our swings" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "'Jurassic World Dominion' Extended Edition Review: Fan Service and Fun Make for a Dino-sized Good Time". Collider. August 15, 2022. Archived from the original on September 20, 2022. Retrieved September 18, 2022. "Jurassic World Dominion's Extended Version Is Definitely Better". Screen Rant. August 19, 2022. Archived from the original on September 20, 2022. Retrieved September 18, 2022. Hassenger, Jesse (September 7, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion's extended edition is half fluff, half repair job". Polygon. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2023. Tinoco, Armando (August 12, 2022). "Saturn Awards Nominations: The Batman, Nightmare Alley, Spider-Man, Better Call Saul Top List". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 12, 2022. Retrieved December 7, 2022. O'Rourke, Ryan (October 26, 2022). "Saturn Award Winners Headlined By Everything Everywhere All At Once, Top Gun Maverick, and Better Call Saul". Collider. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved December 7, 2022. Gui, Ming. "Golden Angel Award Ceremony of 2022 CAFF Announced The Winners !". Chinese American Film Festival. Archived from the original on January 28, 2023. Retrieved January 24, 2023. Piña, Christy (December 6, 2022). "People's Choice Awards: Doctor Strange 2, Don't Worry Darling Take Top Prizes". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 7, 2022. Retrieved December 7, 2022. Giardina, Carolyn (February 16, 2023). "Avatar 2 Sweeps Visual Effects Society Awards Feature Competition". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 16, 2023. Retrieved April 7, 2023. Giardina, Carolyn (February 26, 2023). "'Guillermo Del Toro's Pinocchio' Wins Five Trophies Including the Top Prize at the 50th Annie Awards". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 26, 2023. Retrieved February 26, 2023. Nordyke, Kimberly (March 4, 2023). "Wednesday, Sonic the Hedgehog 2, Taylor Swift, Harry Styles Among Winners at 2023 Kids' Choice Awards". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 5, 2023. Retrieved April 7, 2023. Nordyke, Kimberly (March 10, 2023). "Razzie Awards: Blonde Named Worst Picture; Other 'Winners' Include Tom Hanks, Jared Leto and the Razzies Themselves". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 11, 2023. Retrieved April 7, 2023. Anderton, Ethan (January 20, 2021). "'Jurassic World: Dominion' Is A Celebration Of The Entire 'Jurassic Park' Franchise, Says Colin Trevorrow". /Film. Archived from the original on April 16, 2022. Retrieved April 16, 2022. Schaefer, Sandy (January 31, 2022). "Jurassic World Dominion Ends The Trilogy, But There Could Be More Jurassic Movies To Come". /Film. Archived from the original on April 12, 2022. Retrieved April 16, 2022. Chitwood, Adam (May 22, 2020). "Exclusive: 'Jurassic World: Dominion' Will Be the "Start of a New Era" Says Producer Frank Marshall". Collider. Archived from the original on May 25, 2020. Retrieved May 22, 2020. Kit, Borys (January 22, 2023). "New 'Jurassic World' Movie in the Works with David Koepp Writing (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 22, 2023. Stephan, Katcy (February 5, 2024). "New 'Jurassic World' Movie Gets 2025 Release Date, David Leitch in Talks to Direct". Variety. Retrieved February 6, 2024. Kroll, Justin; Jr, Mike Fleming (February 5, 2024). "New 'Jurassic World' Movie At Universal Circling David Leitch To Direct–The Dish". Deadline. Retrieved February 9, 2024. Couch, Aaron (February 9, 2024). "'Jurassic World' Loses Director David Leitch". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 9, 2024. Kit, Borys (February 21, 2024). "'Jurassic World' Director Found in 'Rogue One' Filmmaker Gareth Edwards". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 21, 2024. Official website Jurassic World Dominion at IMDb Portals:  United States  Film  Speculative fiction  Science fiction  Dinosaurs