Thor: Love and Thunder is a 2022 American superhero film based on Marvel Comics featuring the character Thor. Produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the sequel to Thor: Ragnarok (2017) and the 29th film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). The film was directed by Taika Waititi, who co-wrote the screenplay with Jennifer Kaytin Robinson, and stars Chris Hemsworth as Thor alongside Christian Bale, Tessa Thompson, Jaimie Alexander, Waititi, Russell Crowe, and Natalie Portman. In the film, Thor tries to find inner peace, but must return to action and recruit Valkyrie (Thompson), Korg (Waititi), and Jane Foster (Portman)—who is now the Mighty Thor—to stop Gorr the God Butcher (Bale) from eliminating all gods. Hemsworth and Waititi had discussed plans for a sequel to Ragnarok by January 2018. Love and Thunder was announced in July 2019, with Hemsworth, Waititi, and Thompson all set to return, as well as Portman who did not appear in Ragnarok. Waititi wanted to differentiate Love and Thunder from Ragnarok, seeking to make a romance film and 1980s-inspired adventure. He adapted elements from Jason Aaron's run on Thor comic books during the 2010s, which similarly debuted Gorr and saw Foster take on the mantle and powers of Thor whilst under treatment for cancer. Robinson joined to contribute to the script in February 2020, and further casting was revealed later that year including the appearance of the Guardians of the Galaxy. Production was expected to begin in late 2020 but was delayed by the COVID-19 pandemic. Filming ultimately began in January 2021 in Sydney, Australia with Barry Idoine as the director of photography, and concluded at the beginning of June. Thor: Love and Thunder premiered at the El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood, Los Angeles, on June 23, 2022, and was released in the United States on July 8, as part of Phase Four of the MCU. The film received mixed reviews from critics, who praised the film for its light-heartedness, action sequences, and the performances of Hemsworth, Bale and Portman, but criticized the screenplay and tonal inconsistencies; while its humor and visual effects were met with polarized responses, many critics deemed the film inferior to Ragnarok. The film grossed $760.9 million worldwide, making it the eighth-highest-grossing film of 2022, as well as the second highest-grossing film in the Thor franchise. Gorr and his daughter, Love, the last of their race, struggle in a barren desert. Despite their prayers to their god, Rapu, Love dies. The god-killing Necrosword calls to Gorr, leading him to Rapu's lush realm. After Rapu cruelly mocks and dismisses Gorr's plight, he renounces the god, causing Rapu to start strangling him. The Necrosword offers itself to Gorr, who kills Rapu with it and vows to kill all gods. Gorr is granted the ability to manipulate shadows and produce monsters but is cursed with impending death and corruption under the sword's influence. Thor has joined the Guardians of the Galaxy after the Avengers' battle against Thanos. He learns of a distress signal from Sif, so he parts ways with the team. He finds an injured Sif, who warns that Gorr's next target is New Asgard. Meanwhile, Dr. Jane Foster, Thor's ex-girlfriend, has been diagnosed with stage four terminal cancer. With medical treatment proving ineffective, she travels to New Asgard hoping that Thor's hammer Mjolnir, which was previously fractured by Hela, might heal her. Due to an enchantment Thor unknowingly placed on it years earlier to protect Foster, Mjolnir reforges and bonds itself to her. Thor arrives in New Asgard just as Gorr's attack begins. Thor is surprised to find Foster wielding Mjolnir, but teams up with her, Valkyrie, and Korg to fight Gorr. The group thwarts Gorr, but he escapes, kidnapping several Asgardian children and imprisoning them in the Shadow Realm. The group travels to Omnipotence City to warn the other gods and ask for their help in creating an army. The leader of the gods, Zeus, is unwilling to help, thinking they can remain safe and hidden from Gorr in the city; he also believes that Gorr will not be able to achieve his stated goal of visiting the realm of Eternity, where he will be granted one wish, presumably to destroy all gods. As a security precaution, Zeus orders the group's capture to prevent them from exposing the city's location to Gorr. When Zeus injures Korg, Thor impales Zeus with his thunderbolt, which Valkyrie steals before they escape to confront Gorr in the Shadow Realm. On the way, Thor learns of Foster's cancer diagnosis. The group arrive at the Shadow Realm but are unable to locate the children. Foster sees ancient drawings that depict Thor's battle-axe Stormbreaker as a way to summon the Bifrost to enter Eternity, and deduces the trap laid out by Gorr. She throws away Stormbreaker to prevent Gorr from accessing it. However, Gorr overpowers the group and threatens to kill Foster, forcing Thor to summon it back. Gorr successfully steals Stormbreaker and injures Valkyrie before a weakened Foster collapses. Upon traveling back to New Asgard, Thor discovers that Foster's Thor form is not allowing her body to naturally fight the cancer. Due to this, Thor travels to Eternity's altar alone and using Zeus's thunderbolt, imbues the children with his power to fight Gorr's monsters while he battles Gorr. When Foster senses that Gorr is about to kill Thor, she joins the battle with Mjolnir to save him. They destroy the Necrosword, freeing Gorr from its influence, but the three are brought into Eternity's realm. With Gorr poised to make his wish, Thor implores Gorr to revive his daughter instead of destroying the gods. Thor then leaves Gorr to make his decision and attends to Foster, who succumbs to her illness and dies in his arms. Moved by their display, Gorr wishes for Eternity to revive Love, which it grants. As Gorr dies from the curse, he requests Thor to take care of Love. In the aftermath, the children return to New Asgard, where Valkyrie and Sif commence their training, and a monument is erected in Foster's memory. Thor adopts Love, who accompanies him in his heroics, with Thor wielding Mjolnir and Love wielding Stormbreaker. In a mid-credits scene, back in Omnipotence City, a recuperating Zeus sends his son Hercules to kill Thor. In a post-credits scene, Foster arrives at the gates of Valhalla, where Heimdall welcomes her. Chris Hemsworth as Thor: An Avenger and the former king of Asgard, based on the Norse mythological deity of the same name. Director Taika Waititi said that Thor is going through a midlife crisis in the film, as he is "just trying to figure out his purpose, trying to figure out exactly who he is and why he's a hero or whether he should be a hero". Thor has a large tattoo on his back that memorializes his family and friends that have previously died. Hemsworth's twin sons Sasha and Tristan portray Thor as a child. Christian Bale as Gorr the God Butcher: A scarred wielder of the Necrosword and manipulator of shadows who seeks the extinction of the gods. Waititi described Gorr as being "very formidable" and layered. Bale felt the character had a "sort of a Nosferatu slight attitude", and took inspiration from the music video for the Aphex Twin song "Come to Daddy" (1997). Waititi opted to change Gorr's facial features in the film since his original look in the comics resembles Lord Voldemort from the Harry Potter film series. Odd Studio created Gorr's practical makeup. Tessa Thompson as Valkyrie: The king of New Asgard, based on the mythological being Brynhildr. Thompson and producer Kevin Feige said the character's bisexuality would be addressed in the film. Waititi said Valkyrie had to adjust to the bureaucratic aspects of ruling, away from the battlefield, such as dealing with the infrastructure and economy of New Asgard and hosting delegates from other countries. Jaimie Alexander as Sif: An Asgardian warrior and Thor's childhood friend, based on the Norse mythological deity of the same name. Taika Waititi as Korg: A Kronan gladiator who befriended Thor. Waititi also voices the Kronan god Ninny of the Nonny. Russell Crowe as Zeus: The king of the Olympians, based on the Greek mythological deity of the same name. Crowe wanted to perform the role in a Greek accent, but Waititi thought it would sound "too silly", so he had Crowe do takes in both a Greek and British accent, with Waititi suggesting the British accent be similar to the one Crowe used for Maximus Decimus Meridius in Gladiator (2000). Waititi finally concluded that Crowe was correct and used the Greek accent in the final film. Natalie Portman as Jane Foster / Mighty Thor: An astrophysicist and Thor's ex-girlfriend who is undergoing cancer treatment and who gains powers to become the Mighty Thor by wielding a reconstructed Mjolnir, the hammer previously wielded by Thor. Portman, who did not appear in the previous film Thor: Ragnarok (2017), agreed to return after a meeting with Waititi, who said Foster's return to Thor's life after eight years would be a big adjustment for him since she has had another life without him. Waititi added that Foster showing up dressed like Thor would be a "real mindfuck" for him. In preparation for her role, Portman took the Mjolnir prop home to practice using it for her stunts. Additionally, the Guardians of the Galaxy are featured in the film, with Chris Pratt, Karen Gillan, Dave Bautista, Pom Klementieff, Sean Gunn, Vin Diesel, and Bradley Cooper reprising their respective MCU roles as Peter Quill / Star-Lord, Nebula, Drax the Destroyer, Mantis, Kraglin Obfonteri, Groot, and Rocket. Matt Damon, Sam Neill, and Luke Hemsworth reprise their roles as Asgardian actors respectively playing Loki, Odin, and Thor from Ragnarok, with Melissa McCarthy joining them as an Asgardian actress playing Hela, and McCarthy's husband Ben Falcone as the stage manager. Miek, who previously appeared in Ragnarok and Avengers: Endgame (2019) via CGI, is voiced by Stephen Murdoch, while Carly Rees provides the motion capture performance for the character. Also returning from previous MCU media are Kat Dennings and Stellan Skarsgård as Foster's colleagues Darcy Lewis and Erik Selvig, respectively, and Idris Elba as Heimdall in the post-credits scene. Daley Pearson appears as New Asgard tour guide Darryl Jacobson, after first portraying the role in Marvel Studios' Team Thor short film series. Archive footage from previous MCU films of Tom Hiddleston as Loki, Anthony Hopkins as Odin, Rene Russo as Frigga, Ray Stevenson as Volstagg, Tadanobu Asano as Hogun, and Zachary Levi as Fandral is featured at the beginning of the film. Chanique Greyling portrays a young Frigga during a flashback sequence. Deities introduced in the film include Simon Russell Beale as the Olympian god Dionysus, Jonathan Brugh (who appeared in Waititi's 2014 film What We Do in the Shadows) as Rapu, a god from Gorr's home planet who becomes his first victim, Akosia Sabet as Bast, a goddess who is a member of both the Heliopolitan and Wakandan pantheons, Kuni Hashimoto as the Japanese god Jademurai, and Carmen Foon as the Roman goddess Minerva. Also appearing in the film are Kieron L. Dyer as Axl, Heimdall's son, Chris Hemsworth's daughter India as Love, Gorr's daughter, and Stephen Curry as Yakan, the ruler of the planet Indigarr. Cameos in the film include Bale, Portman, and Waititi's children as New Asgard children; Hemsworth's wife, Elsa Pataky, as the wolf woman who was one of Thor's past lovers; Indiana Evans as one of the Zeusettes; Jenny Morris as a New Asgard citizen; Chloé Gouneau as Foster's mother Elaine in a flashback sequence; Dave Cory as Dwayne, a Kronan who becomes Korg's partner in a romantic relationship; and Brett Goldstein as Zeus's son Hercules in the mid-credits scene. Jeff Goldblum and Peter Dinklage were both originally set to reprise their respective roles as Grandmaster from previous MCU media and Eitri from Avengers: Infinity War (2018), but their scenes were cut from the theatrical release. Lena Headey was also set to appear in the film, but her scenes were cut as well. Shortly after the release of the third Thor film, Thor: Ragnarok, in November 2017, that film's director Taika Waititi and executives from Marvel Studios met to discuss ideas for another film, which was green-lit following the positive responses to Ragnarok. Chris Hemsworth indicated in January 2018 that he was interested in continuing to play Thor in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU), despite his contract with Marvel Studios being set to end with his role in Avengers: Endgame (2019). By then, Hemsworth and Waititi had discussed what they would want in a potential fourth Thor film, and Hemsworth said a month later that he would consider returning if there was "another great script". Tessa Thompson, who plays Valkyrie in the MCU films, believed in April 2019 that a pitch had been made for a Ragnarok sequel that involved Waititi returning. Hemsworth said then that he would continue to play Thor for as long as possible, crediting Waititi with revitalizing his interest in the role after he became exhausted and underwhelmed with it prior to making Ragnarok. In July 2019, Waititi officially signed on to write and direct a fourth Thor film, with Hemsworth expected to reprise his role. Waititi was not interested in repeating what they did with Ragnarok, instead wanting to do "something more interesting for myself to keep the whole thing ignited and to make sure that I'm feeling creatively stimulated". Later that month, at San Diego Comic-Con, Marvel Studios President Kevin Feige announced the film as Thor: Love and Thunder, with a release date of November 5, 2021. Hemsworth and Thompson were confirmed to be returning along with Natalie Portman, reprising her role of Jane Foster from Thor (2011) and Thor: The Dark World (2013). Hemsworth, who would also serve as an executive producer, was paid $20 million upfront for the film, an increase from the $15 million upfront salary he earned for each of his appearances in Ragnarok, Avengers: Infinity War (2018), and Endgame. Portman agreed to return to the franchise, after her character had not been included in Ragnarok, following a single meeting with Waititi, who was given creative freedom from Marvel Studios to reimagine her role in the film, in which he offered to portray the character in a different and fresh way, with a "license to be adventurous and fun and funny". Thompson and Feige added that Valkyrie's bisexuality would be addressed in the sequel, retroactively making her Marvel Studios' first LGBTQ superhero. Marvel Studios executive Brad Winderbaum was producing the film alongside Feige. Don Harwin, the Minister for the Arts for the Australian state of New South Wales, announced at the end of July that Thor: Love and Thunder would be filmed at Fox Studios Australia in Sydney back-to-back with Marvel Studios' Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings (2021), with work set to begin on Love and Thunder there in March 2020 ahead of an August 2020 filming start. The production was set to receive over AU$24 million (US$18 million) of subsidies from the Australian and New South Wales governments. Marvel Studios vice president David Grant said shooting the two films back-to-back would provide continuous employment for local crews, with Love and Thunder expected to generate over AU$178 million (US$134 million) for the local economy. He added that the studio would work with "local educational institutions in creating internship opportunities". Jeff Goldblum said in August 2019 that there was a chance he could reprise his Ragnarok role of the Grandmaster in the sequel, and Waititi confirmed in October that he would be reprising his own role of Korg from Ragnarok and Endgame. Christian Bale entered talks to join the cast in January 2020, with pre-production expected to begin in April. Thompson confirmed a month later that Bale would star as the villain in the film, while Vin Diesel, who voices Groot in the MCU films, said he had discussed the film with Waititi and had been told the Guardians of the Galaxy would be appearing in it. In early April, Disney shifted much of their Phase Four slate of films due to the COVID-19 pandemic, moving Thor: Love and Thunder's release date to February 18, 2022. Pre-production on the film was delayed due to the pandemic, with Waititi unsure when production would continue. At the end of the month, Disney moved the release date up to February 11, 2022. By July, filming was set to start in early 2021. When announcing the film in July 2019, Waititi said it would adapt elements from Jason Aaron's Mighty Thor comic books by having Foster become a hero called the Mighty Thor. Feige said that the film would include a lot of elements from Marvel comics and that the story line of Foster becoming the Mighty Thor would be an important part, explaining that Marvel considered the Mighty Thor run to be one of the best recent comic books. Waititi read the comic while working on Ragnarok, and when he agreed to direct another Thor film, he told Marvel that he wanted to include Foster as the Mighty Thor. The studio agreed to adapt Aaron's storyline and include Portman following discussions with Waititi about where the story could lead. Waititi said they stuck close to Foster's storyline from those comics and tried to adapt its best parts. He also explained that Thor having his axe Stormbreaker and then seeing his hammer Mjolnir return "in the hands of someone else" and "no longer [being] his hammer" would explore "the idea that someone's taking his place", which he felt some fans assumed would occur, but did not believe this as such. Aaron served as a consultant on the film. A. C. Bradley, the head writer of the animated series What If...?, pitched an episode of that series in which Foster would have become Thor, but the idea was rejected because the storyline was already being used for Love and Thunder. In August, Waititi was reported to have completed a script for the film, but he denied this later that month. While promoting his film Jojo Rabbit in October, Waititi said he had completed the first draft of the screenplay, but the story would change throughout filming and editing. He was unsure if the film would include the storyline from Aaron's run in which Foster suffers from breast cancer, which he said was a powerful part of the comics. Portman later said Foster's treatment from cancer would be explored in the film. Waititi added that Marvel was still discussing how much time would pass between Endgame and Love and Thunder, and that this would affect whether Thor is still carrying the extra weight he is depicted with in Endgame, which earned him the nicknames "Fat Thor" and "Bro Thor". Waititi did note that he wanted to "keep changing it up with Thor. He's so interesting when he's changing all the time." The film is set eight years after Thor and Foster broke up, around 2024. Waititi also acknowledged fans "shipping" Valkyrie with Carol Danvers / Captain Marvel but said he did not intend to include a romantic relationship between the pair because he would rather surprise fans than do something by popular demand. Jennifer Kaytin Robinson was hired to work on the film's screenplay with Waititi in February 2020. Waititi received sole screenplay credit on the film's theatrical poster, with Robinson credited with him for the story, before the final credits from the Writers Guild of America credited both Waititi and Robinson as the film's writers. Thor: Love and Thunder follows Thor as he attempts to find inner peace, but must return to action and recruit Valkyrie, Korg, and Foster to stop Gorr the God Butcher from eliminating all gods. Four or five drafts of the screenplay had been completed by mid-April 2020, when Waititi said the sequel was "so over the top now in the very best way" and would make Ragnarok look like a "run of the mill, very safe film" by doubling down on its crazier aspects. He wanted to up the ante and make the film as if "10-year-olds told us what should be in a movie and we said yes to every single thing." Waititi added that the film would explore more of Korg's Kronan culture and indicated that it would include the Space Sharks alien race from the comics. He expressed interest in featuring the character Beta Ray Bill, but was unsure at that point if he would. The film also features Falligar the Behemoth, one of the gods slain by Gorr, the cosmic wish-granting entity Eternity, Thor's magical goats Toothgnasher and Toothgrinder, based on the Norse mythological animals Tanngrisnir and Tanngnjóstr, and Warsong, Valkyrie's winged steed. The steed was renamed from Aragorn as in the comics to Warsong for Love and Thunder, after previously appearing unnamed in Ragnarok and Endgame. Waititi had planned to have Jesus make a cameo appearance as part of a cutaway gag in the Omnipotence City sequence, after Valkyrie mentioned a "God of Carpentry". At the end of July, Waititi said they had been writing the script off and on for over a year and he was taking another pass on it that week. He said it was very romantic, and explained that he wanted to make a romance film because he wanted to make something that he had not done before, and, as such, wrote the film as a love story. He later said the film was "about love, with superheroes and outer space", and that he wanted to "embrace this thing that I was always a bit dismissive of, and explore this idea of love, and show characters who do believe in love". That October, Hemsworth said Waititi was still writing the script and expressed his excitement for doing something drastically different with his character, as he did in his previous three MCU films. Waititi later described Love and Thunder as the craziest film he had ever made and explained that each element was intended to not make sense. He said it would have its own "distinct flavour" from Ragnarok, which he called a 1970s space opera with a festive, party-like tone. He saw this film as a 1980s adventure, taking inspiration from posters for films such as Conan the Barbarian (1982) and The Beastmaster (1982) as well as art seen on vans in Venice Beach, with the works of Jack Kirby and the cover of "old" Mills & Boon romance novels also serving as "visual touchstones" for the film. He said it was not serious or dramatic, but it did explore themes such as love, loss, and "our place in the world" while making the characters ask themselves the questions: "What is your purpose? What is the reason that you're a hero, and what do you do when you have these powers?" The film's ending involving Love underwent multiple revisions. James Gunn, the writer and director of the three Guardians of the Galaxy films, consulted on how the Guardians characters were used in Love and Thunder, with Gunn and Waititi discussing where the characters were going before Waititi began writing. Waititi read Gunn's script for Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3 (2023), which is set after Love and Thunder, and then Gunn read Waititi's script and shared his thoughts, asking for some adjustments to be made. In January 2021, Gunn said the Guardians were "in great hands" with Waititi, and he later praised Waititi's work on the script. Chris Pratt said Love and Thunder would continue the rivalry between Guardians leader Peter Quill / Star-Lord and Thor that was established in Infinity War and Endgame, while Karen Gillan said Waititi brought out the "bonkers side" of Nebula through her "pure aggression". Pre-production began in Australia by October 2020. A month later, Chris Pratt was revealed to be reprising his role as Guardians of the Galaxy leader Peter Quill / Star-Lord. Given the ensemble nature of the cast, industry insiders described the film as feeling like "Avengers 5". In December, Feige revealed that the film's release was delayed again, this time to May 6, 2022, and he announced that Bale would portray Gorr the God Butcher in the film. Jaimie Alexander was also revealed to be reprising her MCU role, returning as Sif from the first two Thor films, alongside other members and allies of the Guardians of the Galaxy: Pom Klementieff as Mantis, Dave Bautista as Drax the Destroyer, Karen Gillan as Nebula, and Sean Gunn as Kraglin Obfonteri; Gunn also provides on set reference for Guardians member Rocket. Matt Damon was set to appear, after making a cameo appearance in Ragnarok as an Asgardian actor playing Loki. He received special permission to enter Australia, despite the country's strict travel restrictions during the pandemic, since Love and Thunder was providing jobs for Australians. This prompted criticism as it was perceived that Damon, who traveled with his family, received preferential treatment to enter when many Australian nationals abroad were unable to return to the country. Sam Neill—who appeared alongside Damon in Ragnarok as an actor playing Odin—said there was a good chance he would be in the film as well, as long as he could travel from New Zealand to Australia during the pandemic. Costume designer Mayes C. Rubeo focused on making clothes that reflect faithfully to the comics and fit Thor's mythology in the film. Making of Foster's costumes required 10 set constructions. Rubeo created Foster's costume "based on the old comics" while maintaining her heroic attributes, with advanced technology that was "flexible and versatile". As Portman was vegan, her costume was made of synthetic plastic. To differentiate Foster from Thor, Rubeo added "silver metallic and deeper red hues" to Foster's costume since Thor's one used "new colors", as well as her winged helmet. Rubeo created 25 costumes for Hemsworth. These included many types of Thor's typical uniform which Rubeo integrated "more vibrant colors, like reds, blues and metallic golds to match the exaggerated aesthetic of the film." Thor's 1980s costume was influenced by Kurt Russell's character in Big Trouble in Little China (1986), and his other costumes made more "flashier" compared to Foster's. Gorr's costume during the draping process took inspiration from classical sculptures. For a "great contrast to vibrant colors" used by other characters, Rubeo applied white to his costume rather than black, reflecting his supernatural nature. Rubeo bought 50 yards (46 m) of linen to hide the costume's wire rigger and the heating, ventilation, and air conditioning system; this prevented Bale from overheating. Leather masters Augusto and Giampaolo Grassi were hired to make a breastplate for Russell Crowe's Zeus using gold leaf. Principal photography began on January 26, 2021, at Fox Studios Australia in Sydney, under the working title The Big Salad. Barry "Baz" Idoine serves as the cinematographer, after previously working with Waititi on the Disney+ Star Wars series The Mandalorian. Filming was delayed from an initial August 2020 start date due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Industrial Light & Magic provided the same StageCraft virtual production technology used on The Mandalorian which Waititi directed an episode of, creating a custom volume space at Fox Studios Australia. It featured more LED panels and offered a higher resolution than the original volume created for The Mandalorian. Waititi also used Satellite Lab's PlateLight technology (after previously using their Dynamiclight technology on Ragnarok), which is a special rig designed to capture multiple lighting set-ups simultaneously within a single shot at a high frame rate, allowing Waititi to select which lighting set up he would like in post-production. Waititi believed he was able to shoot Love and Thunder more efficiently than Ragnarok due to already having experience working on a Marvel Studios film. Filming occurred at Centennial Park in Sydney in early February, with Klementieff, Gillan, Bautista, and Pratt completing their scenes shortly afterward. In early March, set photos revealed Damon and Neill were reprising their roles as the Asgardian actors playing Loki and Odin, along with Luke Hemsworth in his Ragnarok role as the actor playing Thor. Melissa McCarthy was also revealed to be portraying an actress playing Hela alongside her husband Ben Falcone in an undisclosed role; these cameos were for a sequence where actors reenact scenes from Ragnarok. Damon filmed his part over two days. Alexander completed filming her scenes by the end of the month, while Goldblum was confirmed to appear as the Grandmaster, and Crowe was revealed to be portraying Zeus in what was described as a "fun cameo". Crowe was originally set to play Satan in the film before his character was changed to Zeus. Septimus Caton would later be cast as Satan and had makeup and prosthetic tests done, but the character does not appear in the film. Crowe finished filming his scenes in April. At the beginning of May, Waititi said there were four weeks left of shooting, while Idoine said he would continue work on the film through the end of 2021. Filming wrapped on June 1, 2021, by which point Neill had revealed that singer Jenny Morris would appear in the film. Goldblum and Peter Dinklage, who was set to reprise his role as Eitri from Infinity War, had their scenes cut from the theatrical release, as did Lena Headey, who was approached by Waititi for a role in the film. Waititi said in early June 2021 that post-production would be completed by February 2022. Later in June, Diesel was confirmed to be reprising his voice role as Groot. In October 2021, the film's release date was delayed to July 8, 2022, while Simon Russell Beale was revealed to be appearing. Additional photography for the film took place in early 2022. At the start of March, further reshoots were revealed to be happening "in the coming weeks", and were said to have begun with Bale by the week of March 18. With the release of the teaser trailer in April, Bradley Cooper was confirmed to be reprising his voice role as Rocket, and the following month, Akosia Sabet was revealed to be appearing as the goddess Bast. Following the appearance of Brett Goldstein in the film's mid-credits scene as Hercules, Waititi revealed in July 2022 that Feige "really wanted him" to be cast for that role. Visual effects for the film were created by Wētā FX, Rising Sun Pictures, Framestore, Industrial Light & Magic, Method Studios, Luma Pictures, Raynault VFX, Base FX, EDI Effetti Digitali Italiani, Mammal Studios, Fin Design + Effects, and Cinesite. Matthew Schmidt, Peter S. Elliot, Tim Roche, and Jennifer Vecchiarello serve as the film's editors. Perception designed the film's main-on-end title sequence, drawing inspiration from 1980s rock band logos and designing approximately 250 custom fonts for the sequence. In December 2021, Michael Giacchino revealed that he would be scoring the film; he previously scored Doctor Strange (2016) and the MCU Spider-Man trilogy for Marvel Studios, as well as Waititi's previous film Jojo Rabbit (2019). A soundtrack album, featuring Giacchino's original themes along with the score composed by him and Nami Melumad, was released by Hollywood Records and Marvel Music on July 6, 2022. The single "Mama's Got a Brand New Hammer", the film's main suite, was released on June 30. Waititi wanted the music to reflect the same aesthetic of the film with its "bombastic, loud, colorful palette". "Sweet Child o' Mine" by Guns N' Roses is featured in the film, given Guns N' Roses is one of Waititi's favorite bands, and helped "reflect the sort of crazy adventure that we're [visually] presenting"; the song was also used in the film's marketing. The film features the song "Rainbow in the Dark" by Dio, according to Wendy Dio, widow of band member Ronnie James Dio. Lego sets and Hasbro figures based on the film were revealed in February 2022, with additional Lego sets and Funko Pops revealed that April. The teaser trailer was released on April 18, and commentators discussed its ending, which debuted Portman's Foster in the Mighty Thor costume and wielding a restored version of Thor's hammer Mjolnir. Marco Vito Oddo of Collider and Ryan Parker from The Hollywood Reporter highlighted the use of "Sweet Child o' Mine", which Oddo felt indicated Waititi would "keep the hard rock aesthetics that helped Thor: Ragnarok become a huge success", while Parker called it a "bright, stylish, fun trailer [that] sets a tone for the film in true Taika Waititi form". Justin Harp of Digital Spy felt the humor from Ragnarok was "clearly back in this film too", while Tom Power of TechRadar felt the trailer was a "superhero, intergalactic glam rock feast for the senses" and contained intriguing footage that did a good job of teasing the film. Both The Ringer's Daniel Chin and Empire's Sophie Butcher highlighted the trailer's focus on Thor's journey of self-discovery as well as the lack of footage of Bale's Gorr. Chin remarked that the trailer was "dedicated to catching up with Thor as he rediscovers himself", and was excited for Portman's performance as Foster. He thought the trailer was a "far cry from the Thor we witnessed over a decade ago, as the franchise has transformed into a full-blown space comedy". Butcher felt the trailer's introspection was not surprising due to the film being set after Endgame, and said the trailer was brief but exciting. The trailer had 209 million global views in its first 24 hours, becoming the seventh most viewed trailer in that time period. A second trailer was released on May 23, during Game 4 of the 2022 NBA Eastern Conference finals. Many commentators highlighted Bale's appearance as Gorr the God Butcher in the trailer. Eric Francisco of Inverse noted the similar comedic tone from Ragnarok while adding "some darker shades" with the inclusion of Gorr. He said Bale brought an "absolutely terrifying vision of Gorr the God Butcher to the screen", adding that it appears Hemsworth was ready to pass the mantle of Thor to Portman. Jennifer Ouellette of Ars Technica noted that Gorr's scenes featured a different color palette, being shown in "primarily gray tones", which she felt made the contrast between other characters "more stark". Zach Seemayer from Entertainment Tonight felt that it "gives fans everything they've been hoping for from the brief flashes of important moments from the first trailer in April", citing scenes featuring Portman's the Mighty Thor, Thor "living up to his 'Space Viking' title", and Gorr's footage. Similarly, The A.V. Club's Sam Barsanti and William Hughes also highlighted Portman and Hemsworth's Thor, Gorr's appearance, and other comedic moments in the trailer, such as when Thor is nude after Crowe's Zeus exposes his disguise. Scott Mendelson of Forbes called the trailer "the real deal" compared to the teaser, and noted similarities with the Masters of the Universe franchise. He speculated that Thor and Foster would be "pining" for each other despite it being 11 years after their first encounter, and called it "a little depressing", as he hoped the two "A+ dating specimens would have moved on". He also highlighted how Gorr's scenes played with color and contrast, and the "interplay" between Foster and Valkyrie. Footage from the film was also featured in the 2022 CineEurope presentation. Ulta Beauty partnered with Marvel Studios to create a makeup collection based on the film. On July 9, 2022, Waititi and Thompson appeared on Vanity Fair's Notes on a Scene series, analysing the "Taste the Rainbow" scene. The video was met with criticism for what some viewers perceived as Waititi and Thompson "mocking" the visual effects, on the same day that multiple VFX artists who worked for Marvel had spoken out against being "underpaid" and "overworked" by the studio's productions. Thor: Love and Thunder premiered at the El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood, Los Angeles, on June 23, 2022. The film was theatrically released in Australia on July 6, 2022, in the United Kingdom, Ireland, and New Zealand on July 7, and in the United States on July 8, 2022, in 4DX, RealD 3D, IMAX, ScreenX, and Dolby Cinema. It was previously set for release on November 5, 2021, but was delayed to February 18, 2022, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. It was then moved up a week to February 11 once Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness was rescheduled from November 2021 to March 2022, and delayed once again to May 6, 2022, in December 2020, before shifting to the July 2022 date in October 2021. It is part of Phase Four of the MCU. The El Capitan Theatre hosted two sensory inclusive screenings of the film in July 2022, featuring expedited check in, a "calming" lobby, reduced capacity, and gift bags for guests with items to aid with anxiety. The film was not released in Malaysia, Brunei, Kuwait, Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Oman, Qatar, and Jordan due to containing LGBT elements. Variety reported that the Malaysian release did not happen because Disney refused to make cuts to the film requested by the Film Censorship Board of Malaysia. The Malaysian government confirmed that this was due to LGBT elements not being cut from the film. Thor: Love and Thunder was released on Disney+ on September 8, 2022, part of Disney+ Day, with the option to view the theatrical version of the film or an IMAX Enhanced version. It was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on Ultra HD Blu-ray, Blu-ray, and DVD on September 27. The home media includes audio commentary, deleted scenes, a gag reel, and various behind-the-scenes featurettes. According to the streaming aggregator JustWatch, Thor: Love and Thunder was the 3rd most streamed film in the United States in 2022. Thor: Love and Thunder grossed $343.3 million in the United States and Canada, and $417.7 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $760.9 million. It is the eighth-highest-grossing film of 2022. The film's opening weekend earned $303.3 million globally, of which IMAX contributed $23 million, making it the third-largest July debut of all-time for the format. Deadline Hollywood calculated the film's net profit as $103 million, accounting for production budgets, marketing, talent participations, and other costs; box office grosses and home media revenues placed it ninth on their list of 2022's "Most Valuable Blockbusters". In the United States and Canada, the film was projected to gross $140–167 million from 4,375 theatres in its opening weekend, along with a total gross of $345–420 million. The film earned $69.5 million on its first day, which included $29 million from Thursday night previews. This marked the second-highest opening day and preview night of 2022, behind fellow MCU film Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness, as well as the fifth-highest opening day ever for an MCU film. Its opening weekend earned $144.2 million, which was the largest debut of the Thor franchise, the twelfth-largest for the MCU, and the third-largest for 2022, behind Multiverse of Madness ($187.4 million) and Jurassic World Dominion ($145 million). Of the $144.2 million figure, over $13.8 million came from IMAX, making it the fifth-highest July debut of all-time for the format domestically. Love and Thunder was also the sixth film in the COVID-19 pandemic to earn over 10 million theater admissions in its opening weekend. Its second weekend grossed $46.6 million, a decline of nearly 68%, representing one of the MCU's largest sophomore weekend drops. Deadline Hollywood attributed this to its CinemaScore grade and generally mixed reception from critics and audiences. In its third weekend the film made $22.6 million, finishing second behind newcomer Nope. Outside of North America, Love and Thunder grossed $15.7 million from 17 markets on its opening day, surpassing the first-day overall results of Thor: Ragnarok (2017) by 39%. Its weekend gross was $159.2 million from 47 markets, making it the MCU's ninth-largest overseas debut ever and the third-largest for any Hollywood film released in the COVID-19 pandemic. It surpassed Ragnarok's opening by 19%. IMAX contributed $9.2 million to the weekend, becoming the third-largest July debut ever overseas. It also set several pandemic box office milestones in its opening weekend, marking the second-highest pandemic opening in Australia, New Zealand and the Philippines, while earning the third-highest in numerous territories, including Brazil, Italy, Thailand, Singapore and Argentina. As of July 24, 2022, the film's largest markets are the United Kingdom ($31.5 million), Australia ($25.5 million), Mexico ($23.2 million), South Korea ($22.3 million), and Brazil ($17.2 million). The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an approval rating of 63%, with an average rating of 6.4/10, based on 447 reviews. The site's critics consensus reads: "In some ways, Thor: Love and Thunder feels like Ragnarok redux – but overall, it offers enough fast-paced fun to make this a worthy addition to the MCU." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 57 out of 100, based on 64 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale, and PostTrak reported 77% of audience members gave it a positive score, with 63% saying they would definitely recommend it. In early reactions to the film, Screen Rant noted that the performances from Christian Bale and Natalie Portman were praised. Owen Gleiberman of Variety said there are "many words to describe [Thor: Love and Thunder]", stating "comedy is all part of the package" that made Ragnarok "such a genuine Marvel wildflower." Gleiberman wrote that the film "sustains its freshness" to the end, although it started with a "more awkward" first act with the Guardians of the Galaxy. He also praised Gorr's characterization–a "power[ful introduction]"–and concluded the review by saying he felt "moved" by the end. David Ehrlich of IndieWire praised the film for its light tone and humorous moments, writing that "[Taika] Waititi continues to brighten up the Thor movies with his own flavor of wackiness, which is as welcome here as it was grating in Jojo Rabbit." However, he noted that the film "is clouded by its uncertain place in the universe from the moment it starts". Nick Allen at RogerEbert.com gave the film 3 out of 4 stars, stating that it was "more or less a victory lap for all that [Waititi] achieved with his previous Marvel film, the often hilarious, rousing, and plainly refreshing Thor: Ragnarok. And while it has too many familiar flourishes and jokes, this entertaining sequel is still a force for good, with enough visual ambition and heart in front of and behind the camera to stand on its own." He praised Natalie Portman's performance that "conveys why it's great to see Jane again" and Christian Bale's "striking" role that he considered as the "closest we'll get to seeing him play Pennywise the Clown, with a dash of Voldemort, but tethered to the same humility [he] brings to his most human, humbled characters." Todd Gilchrist at The A.V. Club graded the film 'B', feeling that it did "[revisit] the cheeky, sentimental tone of the nearly universally beloved Thor: Ragnarok, and propels its eponymous hero into new adventures that bring full circle a journey that started with the very first, much-less-beloved Thor back in 2011." He praised Portman and Bale's performances, with the latter's character being considered "the most interesting and sympathetic Marvel adversary since Michael B. Jordan's Killmonger in Black Panther", and Waititi's "distinctive imagery [in the film] that may disturb and upset some viewers", outpacing Sam Raimi's accomplishments in Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness (2022). Leah Greenblatt at Entertainment Weekly also gave a similar grade, feeling that although "its cheerful melee of starry cameos, in-jokes, and Cliffs-Notes mythology, feels a lot like franchise fatigue, it also has frequent moments of gonzo charm, thanks largely to the Technicolor lunacy of writer-director [Waititi] and a cast that seems inordinately game to follow his lead." David Rooney of The Hollywood Reporter stated, "The movie feels weightless, flippant, instantly forgettable, sparking neither love nor thunder." David Sims of The Atlantic felt the film delivered a "usual lightning-streaked action and tossed-off gags, but this time, there's not enough heft behind the flashiness." He found it a "hasty-feeling mess of a movie" and "disappointing given that it's directed by [Waititi]", although he praised Bale's and Russell Crowe's performances. David Fear of Rolling Stone felt the film was "oddly unengaging; even the love and death aspects often feel like cold transmissions from distant sources." He saw it as a mess due to the "collision of competing tones, subplots, conceptual big swings and chaos masquerading as pathos". Eric Francisco at Inverse found Chris Hemsworth's Thor in the film becoming "meandering, left in the purgatory of a roundabout tale that makes some sense on paper but in execution fails to maintain viscosity", feeling that Marvel "doesn't know what to do with [the character] anymore." He felt that despite "striv[ing] for an emotional story about loss and love, the movie gets in its own way with tiresome relentless comedy, distracted plotting, and uneven tone." Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film 2 out of 4 stars, calling it "one of the goofiest and least consequential sagas in MCU history—an allegedly wild and wacky but ultimately disappointing and disjointed chapter in the ongoing story of the God of Thunder, who seems to get more clueless with each passing movie." At the London premiere Q&A, in response to the question "How gay will the film be?" Waititi exclaimed that it would be "super gay"; critics and moviegoers who saw the film expressed disappointment that this statement was false and that Marvel queerbaited the audience. Jade King of TheGamer felt expectations from queer audiences for prominent "LGBTQ+ characters and themes" in Thor: Love and Thunder were not met, writing that "the film's creators have been out there talking up the LGBTQ+ representation when it isn't really a massive part of the experience. [...] it's time to temper your expectations and stop letting Marvel continue to queerbait us into disappointment." In June 2023, Hemsworth commented on the film's response, stating: "I think we just had too much fun. It just became too silly. It's always hard being in the center of it and having any real perspective[...] you just don't know how people are going to respond." In February 2021, the documentary series Marvel Studios: Assembled was announced. The special on this film, "The Making of Thor: Love and Thunder", was released on Disney+ on September 8, 2022, part of Disney+ Day. Waititi was unaware that the tagline "Thor will return" was added to the end of the film. Waititi was open to directing another Thor film if Hemsworth was also involved, stating the story would need to be "something surprising and unexpected", suggesting a low-budget road trip film with no fight scenes, similar to Nebraska (2013). Hemsworth hoped that a future installment would have a "drastically different tone" that would "close the book" on the character. In June 2023, Hemsworth said informal conversations had discussed potential ideas for future appearances for the character. He also explained that he would want to return to Thor if all creatives were able to find another way to reinvent the character again to keep the experience "a little unpredictable" in order to not become stale with audiences. Waititi noted in Titan Books' Thor: Love and Thunder – The Official Movie Special Book, which was published in August 2023, that any additional Thor film would need to continue the character's evolution "but still in a very fun way and still giving him things to come up against" and would need to have a villain more powerful than Hela, who is featured in Ragnarok. In November 2023, Waititi confirmed that he would not be involved with a fifth Thor film. As depicted in Avengers: Endgame (2019) As depicted in Thor: Ragnarok (2017) Also for Spider-Man: No Way Home (2021) and The Batman (2022) "Thor: Love and Thunder (12A)". Irish Film Classification Office. June 23, 2022. Archived from the original on June 24, 2022. Retrieved June 24, 2022. Ehrlich, David (July 5, 2022). "'Thor: Love and Thunder' Review: Fun and Quirky Space Epic Confronts Aimlessness of Post-Thanos MCU". IndieWire. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Murphy, J. Kim (July 9, 2022). "Box Office: 'Thor: Love and Thunder' Sparking Up 2022's Third-Biggest Domestic Opening". Variety. Archived from the original on July 9, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2022. "Thor: Love and Thunder". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved November 14, 2022. "Thor: Love and Thunder". The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Retrieved November 14, 2022. Leite, Marcelo (July 7, 2022). "Why Thor: Love & Thunder's Reviews Are So Divided". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on January 16, 2023. Retrieved January 16, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony; Ramos, Dino-Ray (July 20, 2019). "Natalie Portman Is Female Thor In 'Thor Love And Thunder' Opening Fall 2021 –Comic-Con". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019. Bahr, Lindsey (May 4, 2022). "Movies love a comeback story. This summer, it's their turn". Associated Press. Archived from the original on May 4, 2022. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Hale-Stern, Kaila (July 22, 2022). "We Now Know What Thor's Loki Tattoos Really Said in Thor: Love and Thunder". The Mary Sue. Archived from the original on July 22, 2022. Retrieved October 6, 2023. Echebiri, Makuochi (June 5, 2022). "'Thor: Love and Thunder' Includes Surprise Appearance From Chris Hemsworth's Kids". Collider. Archived from the original on July 5, 2022. Retrieved June 6, 2022. Chapman, Wilson (April 18, 2022). "'Thor: Love and Thunder' Teaser Reveals Natalie Portman as the New Thor". Variety. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Retrieved April 18, 2022. Osborne, James (April 11, 2022). "Thor: Love & Thunder Art Reveals Detailed Look at Christian Bale's Gorr". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 11, 2022. Retrieved April 13, 2022. Coggan, Devan (May 10, 2022). "Taika Waititi teases Thor: Love and Thunder as Thor's 'midlife crisis' film". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 10, 2022. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Maytum, Matt (June 21, 2022). "Christian Bale reveals the surprise influences behind his terrifying Thor: Love and Thunder villain". Total Film. Archived from the original on June 21, 2022. Retrieved June 24, 2022. Sarrubba, Stefania (July 4, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder changed Gorr's design due to Harry Potter". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on July 4, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Barnhardt, Adam (March 25, 2023). "Unused Thor: Love and Thunder Makeup Teases Look of MCU's Devil". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved April 22, 2023. Galuppo, Mia (July 20, 2019). "'Thor' Star Tessa Thompson Teases Valkyrie as Marvel's First LGBTQ Superhero". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved July 22, 2019. Kroll, Justin (December 11, 2020). "Sif Returns To The MCU: Jaimie Alexander To Reprise Role In 'Thor: Love And Thunder'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved December 11, 2020. Romano, Nick (October 16, 2019). "Taika Waititi confirms Korg's glorious return for Thor: Love and Thunder". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 16, 2019. Retrieved October 16, 2019. Garbutt, Emily (July 8, 2022). "Every Thor: Love and Thunder cameo, listed and explained". Total Film. GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Evangelista, Chris (April 22, 2021). "Russell Crowe is Playing Zeus in 'Thor: Love and Thunder'". /Film. Archived from the original on April 22, 2021. Retrieved April 21, 2021. Guerrasio, Jason (July 13, 2022). "Russell Crowe did all of his Zeus scenes in 'Thor: Love and Thunder' twice because Taika Waititi couldn't decide on which accent to use". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on July 16, 2022. Retrieved July 16, 2022. Jirak, Jamie (April 21, 2023). "Thor: Love and Thunder: Russell Crowe Reveals Marvel Wanted Him to Use His Gladiator Voice". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on April 23, 2023. Retrieved April 23, 2023. Freydkin, Donna (October 7, 2020). "Natalie Portman Is Forging New Fairy Tales and Swinging Thor's Hammer". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on October 8, 2020. Retrieved October 7, 2020. Huver, Scott (July 22, 2019). "Kevin Feige reveals the thinking behind Marvel's Phase Four". CNN. Archived from the original on July 22, 2019. Retrieved July 27, 2019. Travis, Ben (May 7, 2022). "Thor: Love And Thunder: Jane Foster's Return Is 'A Real Mindf–k For Thor', Says Taika Waititi – Exclusive Image". Empire. Archived from the original on May 7, 2022. Retrieved May 7, 2022. "Natalie Portman talks about holding Mjolnir, Tessa Thompson on working with Chris Hemsworth on Thor: Love and Thunder". GMA Integrated News. July 1, 2022. Archived from the original on July 2, 2022. Retrieved October 2, 2023. Reimer, Amanda (July 8, 2022). "Every Single Cameo in 'Thor: Love and Thunder'". Collider. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Atad, Corey (March 2, 2021). "Melissa McCarthy & Husband Ben Falcone Film Scenes Alongside Matt Damon In 'Thor: Love And Thunder'". ET Canada. Archived from the original on March 2, 2021. Retrieved March 2, 2021. Taylor, Robert Brian (July 8, 2022). "'Thor: Love and Thunder': All the Easter Eggs You Might Have Missed". Collider. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Abdulbaki, Mae (July 8, 2022). "Every Cameo In Thor: Love & Thunder Explained". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Gallagher, Simon (July 7, 2022). "Everything We Know About Thor 5: Story, Setting & Cast". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 5, 2022. Retrieved September 5, 2022. Grauso, Alisha (July 10, 2022). "Every God In Thor: Love & Thunder". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 26, 2022. Retrieved August 5, 2022. Lealos, Shawn (July 17, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder Fixes Ragnarok's Warriors Three Problem". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 21, 2022. Retrieved August 5, 2022. Barnhardt, Adam (May 16, 2022). "New Thor: Love and Thunder Photo Confirms Major Black Panther 2 Connection". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on May 17, 2022. Retrieved May 16, 2022. Matadeen, Renaldo (July 27, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder Proves the Question of the Eternals' God Status Is Irrelevant". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on August 20, 2022. Retrieved August 20, 2022. Loftus, Meredith (July 8, 2022). "All The Questions We Have After 'Thor: Love and Thunder'". Collider. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Keenan, Alex (July 13, 2022). "What The Hell Is Up With Thor: Love and Thunder's Screaming Goats?". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 19, 2022. Retrieved August 20, 2022. Abdulbaki, Mae (July 9, 2022). "Every celebrity Thor: Love and Thunder cameo from Thor 4". Bam! Smack! Pow!. Archived from the original on July 10, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Mohan, Monita (July 11, 2022). "Jane Foster Is a Hero in the MCU — With or Without Mjolnir". Collider. Archived from the original on September 5, 2022. Retrieved September 5, 2022. Dodge, John (July 18, 2022). "Love and Thunder's Taika Waititi Confirms Korg's Boyfriend Is a Tribute to 'The Rock'". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 19, 2022. Retrieved September 6, 2022. Miller, Leon (June 30, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder Star Confirms Two Major Marvel Characters Were Cut". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on June 30, 2022. Retrieved June 30, 2022. Yossman, K.J. (June 30, 2022). "Lena Headey Sued for $1.5 Million Over Cut 'Thor: Love and Thunder' Role and More". Variety. Archived from the original on June 30, 2022. Retrieved June 30, 2022. Barnhardt, Adam (June 13, 2022). "Thor: Love & Thunder Director Reveals When & How the Movie Got Greenlit". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 14, 2022. Retrieved June 14, 2022. Prudom, Laura (January 6, 2018). "Chris Hemsworth wants to do more Thor movies after Avengers 4". IGN. Archived from the original on January 7, 2018. Retrieved January 7, 2018. Alexander, Bryan (January 10, 2018). "Chris Hemsworth visualized 'Thor 4' with director Taika Waititi on New Year's Eve". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 12, 2018. Retrieved January 11, 2018. Warner, Sam (February 9, 2018). "Thor's Chris Hemsworth says he's done with the character unless they can make a good script". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on February 10, 2018. Retrieved February 9, 2018. Kelley, Sonaiya (April 17, 2019). "Tessa Thompson on Valkyrie's 'Avengers: Endgame' whereabouts and Captain Marvel shippers". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 18, 2019. Retrieved April 18, 2019. Butler, Tom (April 18, 2019). "Chris Hemsworth: I was exhausted and underwhelmed with Thor before 'Ragnarok' (exclusive)". Yahoo! Movies UK. Archived from the original on April 18, 2019. Retrieved April 19, 2019. Kit, Borys (July 16, 2019). "Taika Waititi to Direct 'Thor 4' (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 16, 2019. Retrieved July 16, 2019. Hickson, Colin (May 24, 2022). "Thor's Chris Hemsworth Has Another Major Role in Love and Thunder". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on May 24, 2022. Retrieved May 24, 2022. Donnelly, Matt (August 18, 2021). "From Daniel Craig to Dwayne Johnson, Inside the Biggest Movie Stars' Salaries". Variety. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved August 18, 2021. Siegel, Tatiana; Kit, Borys (October 11, 2018). "Scarlett Johansson Lands $15 Million Payday for Black Widow Movie". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 11, 2018. Retrieved October 11, 2018. Schmidt, JK (August 24, 2019). "Taika Waititi Explains Why Natalie Portman Returns for Thor: Love and Thunder". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 25, 2019. Retrieved August 25, 2019. Graves, Sabina (June 13, 2022). "Natalie Portman Came Back for Thor: Love and Thunder Because They Let Her Be Fun". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on June 14, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Chitwood, Adam (July 21, 2019). "Kevin Feige Confirms LGBTQ Marvel Characters in 'Eternals' and 'Thor 4'". Collider. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved July 21, 2019. Frater, Patrick (July 25, 2019). "Marvel's 'Thor: Love and Thunder' and 'Shang-Chi' to Shoot in Sydney, Australia". Variety. Archived from the original on July 26, 2019. Retrieved July 27, 2019. Huff, Lauren (August 23, 2019). "Jeff Goldblum teases potential role in Thor: Love and Thunder". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 24, 2019. Retrieved August 24, 2019. Sneider, Jeff (January 6, 2020). "Exclusive: Christian Bale in Talks to Join 'Thor: Love and Thunder'". Collider. Archived from the original on January 6, 2020. Retrieved January 6, 2020. Goldberg, Matt (January 6, 2020). "Taika Waititi Says 'Thor: Love and Thunder' Should Start Filming in August". Collider. Archived from the original on January 7, 2020. Retrieved January 7, 2020. Boone, John (March 6, 2020). "Tessa Thompson Reacts to Christian Bale Playing the Villain in 'Thor: Love and Thunder' (Exclusive)". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on March 7, 2020. Retrieved March 7, 2020. Davis, Brandon (March 9, 2020). "Thor 4 to Feature the Guardians of the Galaxy". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on March 9, 2020. Retrieved March 9, 2020. Welk, Brian (April 3, 2020). "'Black Widow' Moves to November as Other MCU Films Shift Back to 2021, 2022". TheWrap. Archived from the original on April 3, 2020. Retrieved April 3, 2020. Foutch, Haleigh (April 9, 2020). "'Thor 4': Taika Waititi Teases More Korg, Says His Script Is "So Over the Top"". Collider. Archived from the original on April 10, 2020. Retrieved April 10, 2020. McClintock, Pamela; Couch, Aaron (April 24, 2020). "'Spider-Man' Sequel Delays Release to November 2021 Amid Sony Date Shuffle". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 24, 2020. Retrieved April 24, 2020. Gemmill, Allie (July 26, 2020). "'Thor: Love and Thunder' Filming Start Date & Plot Details Shared by Natalie Portman, Taika Waititi". Collider. Archived from the original on July 27, 2020. Retrieved July 26, 2020. Perine, Aaron (October 29, 2020). "Thor: Love and Thunder Star Natalie Portman Clarifies "Lady Thor" Nickname, Calls Her "The Mighty Thor"". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved October 29, 2020. Maytum, Matt (May 24, 2022). "Taika Waititi teases Thor: Love and Thunder: "Fans assume it's the passing on of the torch... I don't think that's the case"". Total Film. GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on May 26, 2022. Retrieved May 25, 2022. Adams, Timothy (June 23, 2022). "Thor Writer Jason Aaron Confirms He Consulted On Love and Thunder". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 24, 2022. Retrieved September 3, 2022. Salazar, Andrew J. (September 6, 2019). "'What If...?' Showrunner Ashley Bradley Talks 'Trollhunters', The Beginning Of 'What If...?', Captain Carter, The Watcher & Star-Lord T'Challa (Exclusive)". Discussing Film. Archived from the original on September 22, 2019. Retrieved September 27, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 7, 2019). "Taika Waititi's Fox Searchlight Project Will Be 'Next Goal Wins', Details Revealed". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 8, 2019. Retrieved August 8, 2019. Gelman, Samuel (August 23, 2019). "Taika Waititi Debunks Report Regarding Thor: Love and Thunder". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on August 25, 2019. Retrieved August 25, 2019. Polowy, Kevin (October 17, 2019). "Taika Waititi has finished 'Thor: Love and Thunder' script, says Chris Hemsworth's weight remains 'ongoing discussion' with Marvel". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on October 19, 2019. Retrieved October 17, 2019. Moreau, Jordan (October 14, 2019). "Taika Waititi: 'Thor 4' Could Include Breast Cancer Storyline for Natalie Portman's Jane Foster". Variety. Archived from the original on October 14, 2019. Retrieved October 19, 2019. Gonzalez, Umberto; Lincoln, Ross A. (May 23, 2022). "'Thor: Love and Thunder' Trailer Tells the Heartwarming Love Story of 'Space Viking Thor' (Video)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on May 24, 2022. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Watercutter, Angela (October 23, 2019). "Taika Waititi Has Even Bigger Plans for Thor: Love and Thunder". Wired. Archived from the original on October 23, 2019. Retrieved October 24, 2019. Kroll, Justin (February 10, 2020). "'Thor' Sequel Writing Staff Recruits 'Someone Great's' Jennifer Kaytin Robinson (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on February 11, 2020. Retrieved February 11, 2020. Couch, Aaron (May 23, 2022). "'Thor: Love and Thunder' Launches Electrifying New Trailer". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 24, 2022. Retrieved May 24, 2022. "Thor: Love and Thunder – WGA Directory". Writers Guild of America West. June 1, 2022. Archived from the original on June 11, 2022. Retrieved June 10, 2022. Lovett, Jamie (April 18, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder Trailer Reveals Shot Straight From the Comics". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Retrieved April 19, 2022. Drum, Nicole (August 6, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder's Ending With Eternity Never Changed". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 7, 2022. Retrieved August 20, 2022. Hood, Cooper (April 18, 2022). "Thor: Love & Thunder Trailer Breakdown: 18 Story Reveals & Secrets". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 19, 2022. Retrieved April 18, 2022. Garcia, Mayra (July 10, 2022). "10 Times Thor: Love And Thunder Broke Our Hearts". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 11, 2022. Retrieved August 20, 2022. Mitchell, Tyler (July 10, 2022). "Love & Thunder Fixed Valkyrie's Annoying Endgame Plot Hole". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 6, 2022. Retrieved September 6, 2022. Busch, Jenna (October 6, 2022). "Thor: Love And Thunder Could've Featured A Cameo From Jesus Christ". /Film. Archived from the original on October 6, 2022. Retrieved April 23, 2023. Taika Waititi on charity, homeschooling, racism and Star Wars. BBC News. July 23, 2020. Event occurs at 3:30. Archived from the original on July 23, 2020. Retrieved July 23, 2020. Kahn, Jennifer (May 31, 2022). "The Multifarious Multiplexity of Taika Waititi". Wired. Archived from the original on May 31, 2022. Retrieved June 5, 2022. Travis, Ben (May 9, 2022). "Taika Waititi Says Thor: Love And Thunder Is 'A Fantastic Film' – And Cooler Than He Expected It To Be". Empire. Archived from the original on May 11, 2022. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Perine, Aaron (October 18, 2020). "Thor: Love and Thunder Star Chris Hemsworth Confirms Filming Begins in January". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on October 19, 2020. Retrieved October 18, 2020. Travis, Ben (July 7, 2021). "Thor: Love And Thunder Is So Crazy 'It Shouldn't Make Sense', Says Taika Waititi – Exclusive". Empire. Archived from the original on July 7, 2021. Retrieved July 9, 2021. Couch, Aaron (August 6, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder Co-Writer Jennifer Kaytin Robinson Talks Cracking the Ending and the Key Scene Found in Additional Photography". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved October 6, 2023. Jirak, Jamie (January 27, 2021). "James Gunn Confirms He's Helping Taika Waititi on Thor: Love and Thunder". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 28, 2021. Retrieved January 27, 2021. Jennings, Collier (February 5, 2021). "Thor 4's Taika Waititi & GotG 3's James Gunn Collaborated on Their MCU Films". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved February 7, 2021. Edwards, Molly (April 25, 2022). "James Gunn asked for some adjustments in Thor 4". Total Film. GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on April 25, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Edwards, Molly (February 5, 2021). "James Gunn explains his involvement in Thor: Love and Thunder". Total Film. GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Polowy, Kevin (June 14, 2021). "Chris Pratt hypes up 'Thor 4' and Chris Hemsworth: 'It's next-level. ... He is a man-god in real life'". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on June 14, 2021. Retrieved June 14, 2021. Nemiroff, Perry (June 30, 2021). "Karen Gillan Teases a "Bonkers" Nebula in 'Thor 4' and Specifies James Gunn, The Russos, and Taika Waititi's Unique Contributions to the Character". Collider. Archived from the original on July 2, 2021. Retrieved July 3, 2021. Jackson, Angelique (November 13, 2020). "Chris Pratt to Reprise Star-Lord Role in 'Thor: Love and Thunder'". Variety. Archived from the original on November 13, 2020. Retrieved November 13, 2020. Kit, Borys; Couch, Aaron (November 20, 2020). "Marvel's 'Black Panther' Sequel Shoot to Begin in July (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 20, 2020. Retrieved November 20, 2020. Sneider, Jeff (December 10, 2020). "Here's the Marvel Villain Christian Bale Is Playing in 'Thor: Love and Thunder'". Collider. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved December 10, 2020. McCreesh, Louise (December 22, 2020). "New Guardians of the Galaxy star linked to Thor: Love and Thunder". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on December 22, 2020. Retrieved December 22, 2020. Ma, Wenlei (January 17, 2021). "Matt Damon lands in Sydney for Thor: Love and Thunder role". News.com.au. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2021. Moss, Ethan (February 1, 2021). "Thor: Love and Thunder Photos Reveal Yondu's Influence on a GotG Character". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on February 2, 2021. Retrieved February 1, 2021. Wiseman, Andreas (January 18, 2021). "Matt Damon Touches Down In Australia Ahead Of 'Thor: Love And Thunder' Role". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. Heath, Chris (September 8, 2021). "The Evolution of Matt Damon". GQ. Archived from the original on September 27, 2021. Retrieved September 28, 2021. Boone, John (January 29, 2021). "Sam Neill Teases 'Jurassic World: Dominion' and a Role in 'Thor: Love and Thunder' (Exclusive)". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on January 29, 2021. Retrieved February 1, 2021. Fleming, Ryan (December 23, 2022). "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever, The Batman And Thor: Love And Thunder Costume Designers On Redesigning Supersuits". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 23, 2022. Retrieved October 6, 2023. Combemale, Leslie (July 14, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder Costume Designer Mayes C. Rubeo on Dressing Gods & Goddesses". Motion Picture Association. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved October 6, 2023. Ilchi, Layla (July 6, 2022). "How Costume Designer Mayes C. Rubeo Created the Colorful World of Thor: Love and Thunder". Women's Wear Daily. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved October 6, 2023. Buchanan, Kyle (July 13, 2022). "How the Colorful Costumes of Thor: Love and Thunder Were Made". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 13, 2022. Retrieved October 6, 2023. McCreesh, Louise (January 26, 2021). "Chris Hemsworth confirms Thor: Love and Thunder has started filming with behind-the-scenes photos". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved January 26, 2021. "Production Weekly – Issue 1221 – Thursday, November 19, 2020 / 173 Listings – 38 Pages". Production Weekly. November 18, 2020. Archived from the original on November 18, 2020. Retrieved February 11, 2021. Rooney, David (July 5, 2022). "Chris Hemsworth and Natalie Portman in Taika Waititi's 'Thor: Love and Thunder': Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. "A chat with Emmy award winning Kiwi cinematographer, Baz Idoine". Kea New Zealand. May 7, 2021. Archived from the original on May 7, 2021. Retrieved May 7, 2021. Giardina, Carolyn (September 10, 2020). "Industrial Light & Magic Expands Virtual Production Services, Supports 'Thor 4'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 10, 2020. Retrieved September 10, 2020. Kelly, Stephen (August 11, 2021). "Taika Waititi talks Free Guy, Star Wars and Thor". Wired. Archived from the original on August 20, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Fuge, Joe (February 1, 2021). "Thor & Star-Lord Reunite in Love and Thunder First Look Set Photos". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on February 1, 2021. Retrieved February 1, 2021. Edwards, Molly (February 10, 2021). "Two Guardians of the Galaxy actors appear to have already completed filming on Thor: Love and Thunder". GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on February 10, 2021. Retrieved February 12, 2021. Jamie, Jirak (February 12, 2021). "Thor: Love and Thunder Star Dave Bautista Might Already Be Done Filming". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on February 13, 2021. Retrieved February 13, 2021. Petterson, Adreon (February 18, 2021). "Chris Pratt Seemingly Wrapped Thor: Love And Thunder Just In Time For Another Important Family Event". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on February 19, 2021. Retrieved March 23, 2021. Fuge, Jon (March 23, 2021). "Jaimie Alexander Wraps as Lady Sif on Thor: Love and Thunder". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on March 24, 2021. Retrieved March 23, 2021. Savage, Nic (March 27, 2021). "Hollywood superstars invade NRL derby at Sydney Olympic Park". News.com.au. Archived from the original on March 27, 2021. Retrieved March 27, 2021. Kroll, Justin (March 29, 2021). "'Thor: Love And Thunder': Russell Crowe Lands Role In Sequel". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 29, 2021. Retrieved March 29, 2021. Leston, Ryan (July 20, 2022). "Russell Crowe Was Originally Set To Play Satan in Thor: Love and Thunder". IGN. Archived from the original on August 20, 2022. Retrieved August 20, 2022. Bonomolo, Cameron (May 1, 2021). "Thor: Love and Thunder Director Taika Waititi Reveals Filming Is Almost Finished on the "Best Marvel Film Ever"". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on May 2, 2021. Retrieved May 1, 2021. Coogan, Devan (June 1, 2021). "Chris Hemsworth and his giant arms tease 'bats--- crazy' Thor: Love and Thunder". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 2, 2021. Retrieved June 1, 2021. Darmon, Aynslee (May 31, 2021). "Sam Neill Admits The 'Whole Marvel Universe Is A Complete Mystery To Me' Despite Starring In 'Thor'". ET Canada. Archived from the original on May 31, 2021. Retrieved June 1, 2021. Maddox, Garry (June 8, 2021). "'In the world of the internet, everything goes away pretty quick': Taika Waititi". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on June 8, 2021. Retrieved June 26, 2021. Davis, Brandon (June 15, 2021). "F9 Star Vin Diesel Teases Groot's "Return To Planet X" in Guardians of the Galaxy Special". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 17, 2021. Retrieved June 16, 2021. Rubin, Rebecca (October 18, 2021). "Disney Delays 'Doctor Strange 2,' 'Thor 4,' 'Black Panther' Sequel and 'Indiana Jones 5'". Variety. Archived from the original on October 18, 2021. Retrieved October 18, 2021. Jirak, Jamie (October 22, 2021). "Thor: Love And Thunder Revealed To Include Role From Penny Dreadful Star". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on October 22, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2021. Barnhardt, Adam (March 21, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder Reportedly Begins Reshoots With Christian Bale". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on March 22, 2022. Retrieved March 23, 2022. Taylor, Drew (March 9, 2022). "The Untold Story of Disney's $307 Million Bomb 'John Carter': 'It's a Disaster'". TheWrap. Archived from the original on March 10, 2022. Retrieved March 12, 2022. Fuge, Jonathan (March 22, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder Undergoing Reshoots With Christian Bale". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on March 23, 2022. Retrieved March 23, 2022. Ryan, Mike (July 8, 2022). "Taika Waititi Tells Us How The Big 'Thor: Love And Thunder' Mid Credit Scene Came To Be". Uproxx. Archived from the original on July 9, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2022. Frei, Vincent (May 24, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder". Art of VFX. Archived from the original on June 5, 2022. Retrieved June 5, 2022. "Thor: Love and Thunder Title Design". Perception. January 20, 2023. Archived from the original on February 22, 2023. Retrieved February 22, 2023. Abbate, Jake (December 9, 2021). "Michael Giacchino is Scoring Thor: Love and Thunder". SuperHeroHype. Archived from the original on December 9, 2021. Retrieved December 9, 2021. "First Track from Michael Giacchino's 'Thor: Love and Thunder' Score Released". Film Music Reporter. June 30, 2022. Archived from the original on July 2, 2022. Retrieved July 3, 2022. "'Thor: Love and Thunder' Soundtrack Album Details". Film Music Reporter. July 5, 2022. Archived from the original on July 5, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Chappell, Caitlin (June 28, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder Is a Love Letter to '80s Rock". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 2, 2022. Retrieved July 3, 2022. Vito Oddo, Marco (April 18, 2022). "'Thor: Love and Thunder' Trailer Breakdown: The God of Thunder is Lost in the MCU Cosmos". Collider. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Retrieved April 18, 2022. Trapp, Philip (March 9, 2020). "Dio Music to Be Featured in New 'Thor' Movie, Band Shirt in 'Stranger Things'". Loudwire. Archived from the original on March 9, 2020. Retrieved March 9, 2020. Rusak, Rotem (February 22, 2022). "New Thor LEGO Set and Toys Reveal Look at Love And Thunder". Nerdist. Archived from the original on February 22, 2022. Retrieved February 22, 2022. Bricken, Rob (April 18, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder Meets Love and Merchandise". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Retrieved June 22, 2022. Mendoza, Jordan (April 18, 2022). "Chris Hemsworth, Natalie Portman flex in new trailer for 'Thor: Love and Thunder'". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Retrieved April 18, 2022. Parker, Ryan (April 18, 2022). "'Thor: Love and Thunder' Drops First Hilarious, Stylish Trailer". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Harp, Justin (April 18, 2022). "Thor 4 trailer – first look at Thor Love and Thunder". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Retrieved April 18, 2022. Power, Tom (April 18, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder trailer delivers lightning quick tease of superpowered Jane Foster". TechRadar. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Chin, Daniel (April 18, 2022). "The 'Thor: Love and Thunder' Trailer Reminds Us That Thor Has Come a Long Way". The Ringer. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Butcher, Sophie (April 18, 2022). "Thor: Love And Thunder Teaser Shows Thor On A Journey Of Self-Discovery". Empire. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Parker, Ryan (April 19, 2022). "'Thor: Love and Thunder' Trailer Hammers Out 209M Views in 24 Hours". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 19, 2022. Retrieved April 19, 2022. Urban, Sasha (May 24, 2022). "'Thor: Love and Thunder' Trailer Reveals Christian Bale as Gorr the God Butcher". Variety. Archived from the original on May 24, 2022. Retrieved May 24, 2022. Francisco, Eric (May 23, 2022). "Christian Bale Looks Unholy in New Trailer For Thor: Love and Thunder". Inverse. Archived from the original on May 24, 2022. Retrieved May 23, 2022. Ouellette, Jennifer (May 24, 2022). "Gorr the God Butcher is coming for Thor in new Love and Thunder trailer". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on May 24, 2022. Retrieved May 24, 2022. Seemayer, Zach (May 23, 2022). "Chris Hemsworth and Natalie Portman Bring the Action in New 'Thor: Love and Thunder' Trailer – Watch!". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on May 25, 2022. Retrieved May 24, 2022. Barsanti, Sam; Hughes, William (May 23, 2022). "Gods get flirty, butchered, and nude in the full Thor: Love And Thunder trailer". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on May 25, 2022. Retrieved May 24, 2022. Mendelson, Scott (May 24, 2022). "New 'Thor: Love And Thunder' Trailer Goes Full 'He-Man' And 'She-Ra'". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 26, 2022. Retrieved May 25, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy (June 22, 2022). "Disney Screens New Scenes From 'Avatar: The Way Of Water,' Extended 'Thor: Love And Thunder' Footage – CineEurope". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 23, 2022. Retrieved June 24, 2022. Michelle (May 30, 2022). "Ulta x Marvel Studios' Thor: Love and Thunder Collection". Beauty Velle. Archived from the original on May 30, 2022. Retrieved August 12, 2022. "Taika Waititi and Tessa Thompson Break Down 'Thor: Love and Thunder' "Taste The Rainbow" Scene". Vanity Fair. July 9, 2022. Archived from the original on July 9, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Multiple sources: Dumaraog, Ana (July 11, 2022). "Taika Waititi Mocks Thor: Love & Thunder VFX Mistake In Interview". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 11, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Burton, Jamie (July 11, 2022). "VFX Artist Calls Marvel 'Horrible' To Work For as Taika Waititi Mocks CGI". Newsweek. Archived from the original on July 11, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Liu, Narayan (July 11, 2022). "Thor 4 Director Faces Backlash for Poking Fun at His Own Film's VFX". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 11, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Lovett, Jamie (June 7, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder Reactions and Reviews Release Date Revealed". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 7, 2022. Retrieved June 7, 2022. "See Natalie Portman, Chris Hemsworth, more stars at 'Thor: Love and Thunder' premiere". USA Today. June 24, 2022. Archived from the original on June 25, 2022. Retrieved June 24, 2022. Boulter, Velentina (July 4, 2022). "When Does Thor: Love And Thunder Get Released In Australia?". LADBible. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Warner, Sam (June 7, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder confirms earlier UK release date". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on June 13, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Tricarico, Angela (June 13, 2022). "'Thor: Love and Thunder' hits theaters on July 8 — here's how to buy pre-sale tickets now". Business Insider. Archived from the original on June 27, 2022. Retrieved June 27, 2022. Oddo, Marco Vito (July 24, 2022). "'She-Hulk: Attorney at Law' and 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' End Marvel's Phase 4". Collider. Archived from the original on July 26, 2022. Retrieved July 26, 2022. "'Thor: Love and Thunder' Offers Sensory Inclusive Screenings at the El Capitan Theatre". Marvel.com. July 11, 2022. Archived from the original on July 15, 2022. Retrieved July 15, 2022. Frater, Patrick (July 28, 2022). "Malaysia Confirms Cancellation of 'Thor: Love and Thunder' Release". Variety. Archived from the original on July 28, 2022. Retrieved July 28, 2022. "Brunei ikut Malaysia, 'haramkan' tayangan Thor: Love and Thunder". Kosmo! (in Malay). July 30, 2022. Archived from the original on July 30, 2022. Retrieved July 30, 2022. Milhelm, Russ (July 27, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder Gets Banned In Middle East Country". TheDirect.com. Archived from the original on July 27, 2022. Retrieved July 27, 2022. "Bahrain latest to ban block-buster Thor". France 24. July 29, 2022. Archived from the original on July 29, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. "The new Thor movie was banned in a number of Arab countries due to homosexuality". MiddleEast-24.com. July 28, 2022. Archived from the original on October 24, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "JMC band 'Thor: Love and Thunder'". JordanNews.com. July 31, 2022. Archived from the original on October 24, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Frater, Patrick (August 11, 2022). "After 'Thor' and 'Lightyear,' Malaysia Government Is Committed to Banning More LGBT Films". Variety. Archived from the original on August 11, 2022. Retrieved August 11, 2022. Mitovich, Matt Webb (August 22, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder, DWTS Special Among Disney+ Day Premieres". TVLine. Archived from the original on August 22, 2022. Retrieved August 22, 2022. Bonomolo, Cameron (August 26, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder to Stream in IMAX Enhanced on Disney+". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 28, 2022. Retrieved August 29, 2022. Oddo, Marco Vito (August 25, 2022). "'Thor: Love and Thunder' 4K, Blu-ray, and DVD Walmart Release Delivers Epic Artwork [Exclusive]". Collider. Archived from the original on August 25, 2022. Retrieved August 25, 2022. Gruenwedel, Erik (December 31, 2022). "JustWatch: 'Top Gun: Maverick,' 'Stranger Things 4' Top Streamed Movie, Show in 2022". Media Play News. Archived from the original on April 9, 2023. Retrieved January 3, 2023. "Top 2022 Movies at the Worldwide Box Office". The Numbers. Archived from the original on March 19, 2023. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy (July 10, 2022). "'Thor: Love And Thunder' Nails $302M Global Debut; 'Minions' Gru-ving To $400M WW – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 11, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 4, 2023). "Thor: Love And Thunder, Despite Not Swinging As Big A Hammer As Ragnarok, Still Profits As No. 9 In Deadline's 2022 Most Valuable Blockbuster Tournament". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved April 4, 2023. Robbins, Shawn (July 1, 2022). "Long Range Box Office Forecast: DC League of Super-Pets, Plus the Latest Thor: Love and Thunder Tracking". Boxoffice Pro. Archived from the original on July 2, 2022. Retrieved July 3, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony; Tartaglione, Nancy (July 3, 2022). "Thor: Love And Thunder Gets Ready To Rumble With $300M Worldwide Opening". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 10, 2022). "'Thor: Love And Thunder' Goes Loud With $143M Opening Weekend – Sunday AM Box Office Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 9, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 17, 2022). "'Thor: Love And Thunder' Drops −68% In Weekend 2; 'Crawdads' Sings $17M Tune – Sunday AM Box Office Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 17, 2022. Retrieved July 17, 2022. "Domestic 2022 Weekend 29". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on October 19, 2022. Retrieved July 28, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy (July 7, 2022). "'Thor: Love And Thunder' Harnesses $15.7M In First Day Of Overseas Play". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy (July 10, 2022). "'Thor: Love And Thunder' Nails $302M Global Debut; 'Minions' Gru-ving To $400M WW – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 11, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy (July 24, 2022). "Minions Mints $640M Global As Thor Closes In On $600M; Top Gun: Maverick Soaring To $1.3B WW This Week – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 20, 2022. Retrieved July 24, 2022. "Thor: Love and Thunder". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved January 10, 2023. "Thor: Love and Thunder". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Hood, Cooper (June 23, 2022). "Thor: Love & Thunder Early Reactions Praise Humor & Christian Bale". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Gleiberman, Owen (July 5, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder Review: Chris Hemsworth and Natalie Portman Sequel Proves Taika Waititi's Ragnarok Was No Fluke". Variety. Archived from the original on July 5, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Allen, Nick (July 5, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Gilchrist, Todd (July 5, 2022). "Thor: Love And Thunder trades on Chris Hemsworth's charm, and tests Taika Waititi's". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Greenblatt, Leah (July 5, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder goes full Waititi weirdo in a hectic, starry fourth installment". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Sims, David (July 6, 2022). "Maybe Ridding the World of Superheroes Isn't Such a Bad Idea". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Fear, David (July 5, 2022). "'Thor: Love and Thunder' Is Part Marvel Rom-Com, Part Greek Tragedy — and a Total Mess". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Francisco, Eric (July 5, 2022). "Like Guns N Roses, Thor: Love And Thunder Asks: Where Do We Go Now?". Inverse. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Roeper, Richard (July 7, 2022). "Thor: Love and Thunder' a campy letdown after the rewards of 'Ragnarok'". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Murphy, Chris (July 8, 2022). "So, How Gay Is 'Thor: Love and Thunder,' Really?". Vanity Fair. Retrieved August 1, 2022. Cheung, Kylie (July 8, 2022). "'Thor: Love and Thunder' Could Have Been Gayer, Honestly". Jezebel. Archived from the original on July 22, 2022. Retrieved August 1, 2022. Jaworski, Michelle (July 8, 2022). "Taika Waititi and Natalie Portman called out for over-hyping the queerness in 'Thor: Love and Thunder'". The Daily Dot. Archived from the original on July 10, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2022. King, Jade (July 8, 2022). "We Need To Stop Letting Ourselves Be Queerbaited By The MCU". TheGamer. Archived from the original on July 9, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Yee, Hannah-Rose (June 14, 2023). "Chris Hemsworth crests the wave". GQ UK. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved June 26, 2023. "Elvis Sweeps AACTA Technical Craft Award Nominees". Variety. October 20, 2022. Archived from the original on October 20, 2022. Retrieved December 21, 2023. Keast, Jackie (December 5, 2022). "Elvis dominates AACTA Industry Awards". IF Magazine. Archived from the original on December 5, 2022. Retrieved December 21, 2023. Sangster, Ella. "From Heartbreak Hotel to Heartbreak High: All of the 2022 AACTA winners". Harper's Bazaar. Archived from the original on December 21, 2023. Retrieved December 17, 2023. Pener, Degen; Schmidt, Ingrid (February 28, 2023). "Costume Designers Guild Award 2023 Winners Include Elvis, Wednesday and House of the Dragon". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 28, 2023. Retrieved February 28, 2023. Vlessing, Etan (March 16, 2023). "Everything Everywhere All at Once Wins Big at 2023 Critics Choice Super Awards". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 16, 2023. Retrieved March 16, 2023. Tinoco, Armando (June 5, 2023). "Golden Trailer Awards Nominations List: Stranger Things, Black Panther: Wakanda Forever, Ted Lasso & Glass Onion: A Knives Out Mystery Among Most Nominated". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 5, 2023. Retrieved June 5, 2023. Pedersen, Erik (June 29, 2023). "Golden Trailer Awards: Cocaine Bear, Only Murders In The Building & Oppenheimer Among Top Winners – Full List". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 30, 2023. Retrieved June 30, 2023. Anderson, Erik (November 17, 2022). "Rihanna, Billy Eichner, Elvis, Guillermo del Toro's Pinocchio top Hollywood Music in Media Awards (HMMA) winners". AwardsWatch. Archived from the original on November 18, 2022. Retrieved November 18, 2022. Nordyke, Kimberly (March 4, 2023). "Wednesday, Sonic the Hedgehog 2, Taylor Swift, Harry Styles Among Winners at 2023 Kids' Choice Awards". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 5, 2023. Retrieved March 5, 2023. Piña, Christy (December 6, 2022). "People's Choice Awards: Doctor Strange 2, Don't Worry Darling Take Top Prizes". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 7, 2022. Retrieved December 7, 2022. Tinoco, Armando (August 12, 2022). "Saturn Awards Nominations: 'The Batman', 'Nightmare Alley', 'Spider-Man', 'Better Call Saul' Top List". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 12, 2022. Retrieved August 12, 2022. O'Rourke, Ryan (October 26, 2022). "Saturn Award Winners Headlined By Everything Everywhere All At Once, Top Gun Maverick, and Better Call Saul". Collider. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 31, 2022. Paige, Rachel (February 16, 2021). "Marvel Studios Announces Assembled, a Behind-the-Scenes Look at the Making of the Marvel Cinematic Universe". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on February 16, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2022. Sharf, Zack (July 11, 2022). "Taika Waititi: 'I Would Definitely' Direct 'Thor 5,' but Only if Chris Hemsworth Returns". Variety. Archived from the original on July 16, 2022. Retrieved September 1, 2022. Breznican, Anthony (November 17, 2022). "Chris Hemsworth Changed His Life After an Ominous Health Warning". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on November 17, 2022. Retrieved November 17, 2022. Coggan, Devan (June 15, 2023). "Extraction 2's Chris Hemsworth on his family, future, and fiery action sequel". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved June 26, 2023. Zee, Michaela (August 19, 2023). "Taika Waititi Reveals What He'd Do With a Hypothetical 'Thor 5': New Worlds, 'Outlandish' Monsters and an Enemy Stronger Than Hela". Variety. Archived from the original on August 20, 2023. Retrieved August 20, 2023. Guerrasio, Jason (November 14, 2023). "Taika Waititi says he 'won't be involved' in 'Thor 5'". Business Insider. Archived from the original on November 14, 2023. Retrieved November 14, 2023. Thor: Love and Thunder at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Data from Wikidata Official website at Marvel.com Thor: Love and Thunder at IMDb Portals:  Film  United States  Speculative fiction  Comics