The 1982 FIFA World Cup took place in Spain from 13 June to 11 July 1982. Each of the 24 participating nations had to submit a squad of no more than 22 players, three of whom had to be goalkeepers. The El Salvador squad comprised just 20 players. Head coach: Jean Vincent Head coach: Enzo Bearzot Note: With the exception of the goalkeepers, who were assigned the traditional shirt numbers for the role (1, 12 and 22) the Italian team was numbered alphabetically within their respective positions – Defenders (from 2 to 8), Midfielders (from 9 to 14), Wingers (from 15 to 17) and Forwards (from 18 to 21). Head coach: Tim Head coach: Antoni Piechniczek Head coaches: Mahieddine Khalef and Rachid Mekhloufi Head coaches: Felix Latzke and Georg Schmidt Head coach: Luis Santibáñez Head coach: Jupp Derwall Although they were in the list, they didn't travel to Spain and stayed in West Germany as reserves, waiting if Derwall would require their services. He didn't. (in Spanish) Head coach: César Luis Menotti Note that this squad is numbered alphabetically by surname, unlike traditional numbering systems where the goalkeeper has shirt number 1 and so forth. However, Diego Maradona and Patricio Hernández were swapped round to give Maradona his favoured 10. Head coach: Guy Thys Jozef Daerden was a replacement to René Vandereycken in at the last moment due to an injury of the latter. Head coach: Mauricio Rodríguez Only 20 players in El Salvador's squad. Head coach: Kálmán Mészöly Head coach: Jozef Vengloš Head coach: Ron Greenwood Note that this squad is numbered alphabetically by surname, unlike traditional numbering systems. Despite this, the goalkeepers are given the usual England goalkeepers' shirts 1, 13 & 22 (again alphabetically) and Kevin Keegan is given his favoured 7. Head coach: Michel Hidalgo Note: This squad is numbered alphabetically within the players' positions, including the goalkeepers. The exception is Michel Platini, who was given his favoured number 10. Head coach: Carlos Alberto Parreira Head coach: José de la Paz Herrera Head coach: Billy Bingham Head coach: José Santamaría Head coach: Miljan Miljanić Head coach: Telê Santana Head coach: John Adshead Head coach: Jock Stein Head coach: Konstantin Beskov "Edición del Sunday 6 June 1982, Página 8 – Hemeroteca – MundoDeportivo.com". Hemeroteca.mundodeportivo.com. 6 June 1982. Retrieved 31 August 2022. Scotland – International Matches 1981-1985, Alan Brown and Gabriele Tossani, RSSSF, 12 May 2021 Planet World Cup website weltfussball.de WM 1982 in Spanien – Mannschaften