Kobuleti (Georgian: ქობულეთი, pronounced [kʰobuletʰi] ; Mingrelian: ქობულეთი) is a town in Adjara, western Georgia, situated on the eastern coast of the Black Sea. It is the seat of Kobuleti Municipality and a seaside resort, visited annually by Georgians and many former Soviet Union residents. It is especially popular with Armenian tourists. It was known as Çürüksu during Ottoman rule. The city is situated in the south-western part of Georgia, i.e. the northern part of the Autonomous Republic of Ajara. It borders with Ozurgeti Region to the north. The Regional centre is Kobuleti City, which stretches along the Black Sea shore. After the civil wars of 1990–1993, the once sophisticated sanatoriums remained abandoned and plundered until 2004. In the meantime Kobuleti has developed into an upscale tourist center again. Kobuleti Region consists of one municipal, two district and seventeen village councils. There are 48 villages in the region. Representatives of 24 different nationalities live together with Georgians in the region.[citation needed] Kobuleti is known with its traditions, hospitality, climatic areas, mild subtropical climate, ionized maritime air, bright shining sun and warm sea.[citation needed] The unique pebbly beach widely inclined to the sea is noted with its marvelous views beautified by sky-scraped endemic pine trees, eucalypts, bamboo, cypress grove, date and cocoa palms.[citation needed] The Kintrishi and Tikeri reserve areas are unique with their bio-diversity. One can find rare flora in the Ispani marsh.[citation needed] The surrounding region has diverse soil: seashore lowland is rich in peatbog soil. There are alpine rocks in the highlands, red soil is found in the hill areas. The mountainous area is good for subtropical species. Kobuleti has several rivers. The most important ones are the Kintrishi River, the Chakvistskali River, the Acharistskali River, the Ochkhamuri River, the Achkva River, and the Dekhva River. Kintrishi Protected Landscape and Kobuleti Managed Reserve are located in Kobuleti. Shukura Kobuleti are a professional football team, playing at the Chele Arena. Nino Katamadze, singer and composer Kakhaber Mzhavanadze, footballer Jano Ananidze, footballer Revaz Chelebadze, footballer Çürüksulu Mahmud Pasha, Ottoman general and politician Adjara Batumi "Population Census 2014". www.geostat.ge. National Statistics Office of Georgia. November 2014. Retrieved 28 June 2021. German, Tracey (2016). Regional Cooperation in the South Caucasus: Good Neighbours Or Distant Relatives?. Routledge. p. 42. ISBN 9781317069133. ...the Georgian Black Sea resort of Kobuleti, which is very popular with Armenian tourists... "Thousands Of Armenians Evacuated From Georgia". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 11 August 2008. Batumi and Kobuleti have in recent years become one of the most popular destinations for Armenian holidaymakers. https://dergipark.org.tr/tr/download/article-file/188259 Çürüksu Kazası (District of Çürüksu) Kodaman, B and İpek, N. (1992), On Dokuz Mayıs University Education Faculty Journal, Vol. 7, No. 1, 103-124 "World Meteorological Organization Climate Normals for 1991-2020: Qobuleti-37481" (CSV). ncei.noaa.gov (Excel). National Oceanic and Atmosoheric Administration. Retrieved 18 March 2024.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: postscript (link) "World Meteorological Organization Climate Normals for 1981–2010" (XLS). National Centers for Environmental Information. p. 9. Archived from the original (XLS) on 9 October 2021. Retrieved 9 October 2021. Media related to Kobuleti at Wikimedia Commons v t e