Acer pseudosieboldianum, the Korean maple or purplebloom maple, is a species of maple. It is native to northeastern China, Korea, and the Russian Far East. Acer pseudosieboldianum is a small tree or shrub. It is deciduous. It grows about 12 to 18 inches per year. The mature tree is 15 to 25 feet tall. The leaves are 4 to 6 inches wide and have usually 9 to 11 lobes. The green leaves turn shades of red, yellow, and orange in fall. This species exhibits Marcescence (tends to hold on to a portion of its dried leaves through the winter). The flowers are white with purple bracts. New growth is coated in white, sticky hairs. This characteristic distinguishes the plant from the similar Acer sieboldianum, which lacks hairs. The bark of the plant is thin and easily damaged by mechanical injury or in harsh weather. Tears in the bark make it vulnerable to insect and fungal infestation. The species is susceptible to canker and Verticillium wilt when stressed. Korean Maple flowers emerging with leaves Korean Maple fall color Korean Maple fall color closeup The Korean maple is cultivated as an ornamental plant. It withstands a cold climate better than the comparable Japanese maple. It has been grown in North Dakota, where it has done well in temperatures as low -43 °F. The species has been hybridized with Japanese Maple at the University of Wisconsin to produce a cold hardy tree with intermediate characteristics between the two parents. This hybrid has been named Acer pseudosieboldianum × palmatum 'Hasselkus' and marketed under the trade name Northern Glow®. The Plant List, Acer pseudosieboldianum (Pax) Kom. Hokanson, S. Acer pseudosieboldianum - A Japanese-like maple for the North? Archived March 22, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Yard & Garden Line News 5(15) September 15, 2003. University of Minnesota Extension. "Acer pseudosieboldianum". Germplasm Resources Information Network. Agricultural Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture. Retrieved 19 January 2018. Cultural Details for Acer pseudosieboldianum. Archived 2011-09-05 at the Wayback Machine Boone County Arboretum. Union, Kentucky, USA. Flora of China, Acer pseudosieboldianum (Pax) Komarov, 1904. 紫花枫 zi hua feng Komarov, Vladimir Leontjevich 1904. Trudy Imperatorskago S.-Peterburgskago Botaničeskago Sada 22: 725-727 in Russian Media related to Acer pseudosieboldianum at Wikimedia Commons