The Portugal women's national football team (Portuguese: Seleção Portuguesa de Futebol Feminino) represents Portugal in international women's football competition. The team is controlled by the Portuguese Football Federation (FPF) and competes as a member of UEFA in various international football tournaments such as the FIFA Women's World Cup, UEFA Women's Euro, the Summer Olympics, and the Algarve Cup. The Portuguese women's team historically was one of the weakest in Western Europe since its formation. In recent years however the team has made major strides, qualifying for the newly expanded UEFA Women's Euro 2017, marking the team's first appearance in a major tournament. Despite ultimately finishing last in their group, the team put in a respectable performance, picking up a win in their second match against a Scottish side which had been favored to beat them, and only losing to England by one goal. After finishing a distant third in their qualifying group for the 2019 FIFA Women's World Cup behind Italy and Belgium and failing to qualify, the Portuguese team then looked forward to trying to repeat their achievement of four years prior by qualifying for UEFA Women's Euro 2022, which they eventually did under quite unusual circumstances. After a strong group stage campaign in which Portugal won all its games except for the two games against group winner Finland, including beating the heavily favored top seed Scotland both home and away, the team reached the play-off stage where they were drawn against Russia. The team came agonizingly close as they narrowly lost the first game in Portugal 0–1 before managing a goalless draw in the second leg in Russia. As a result Russia originally qualified for the Euro, but due to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine all Russian representative teams were banned from competition by FIFA, thus giving Portugal a reprieve as they took Russia's place in Group C of the Women's Euro. Portugal is placed in group C with Sweden, the Netherlands and Switzerland as opponents. They were eliminated in the first round, finishing last with a point obtained thanks to a draw against Switzerland (2–2 after being 0–2 down and having dominated the game overall), and two defeats against the favorites of the group (a close one 2–3 against the Dutch title holders after having recovered a two-goal handicap for a while, then a much heavier defeat 0–5 against Sweden). Portugal qualified for their first World Cup at the 2023 edition after beating Cameroon 2–1 at the International Playoff Final. They were placed in group E, with the United States, the Netherlands, and Vietnam. They finished third in the group stage, winning against Vietnam, drawing with the USA, and losing to the Netherlands, and we're eliminated from the competition. The Portugal women's national football team has been known or nicknamed as "A Selecção das Quinas". The following is a list of match results in the last 12 months, as well as any future matches that have been scheduled. Legend   Win   Draw   Lose   Fixture Portugal  v  Japan Portugal  v  Wales England  v  Portugal Portugal  v  Ukraine Netherlands  v  Portugal Portugal  v  Vietnam Portugal  v  United States France  v  Portugal Portugal  v  Norway Austria  v  Portugal Portugal  v  Austria Norway  v  Portugal Portugal  v  France Portugal  v  Czech Republic Portugal  v  South Korea Official Portugal results and fixtures Francisco Neto (2014–) Caps and goals may be incorrect. The following players were called up for the friendly matches against Czech Republic and South Korea on 21 and 24 February 2024. Caps and goals correct as of 26 September 2023, after the match against Norway The following players were named to a Portugal squad in the last 12 months. Active players in bold, statistics correct as of 25 October 2023. *Draws include knockout matches decided via penalty shoot-out. *Draws include knockout matches decided on penalty kicks. Portugal originally failed to qualify after losing to Russia in the play-offs, but Russia was banned from FIFA and UEFA International matches after invading Ukraine (28 February 2022). On 2 May, Portugal was declared as the replacement. The Algarve Cup is an invitational tournament for national teams in women's association football hosted by the Portuguese Football Federation (FPF). Held annually in the Algarve region of Portugal since 1994, it is one of the most prestigious and longest-running women's international football events and has been nicknamed the "Mini FIFA Women's World Cup." Selecção das Quinas refers to the five shields ("Team of the Escutcheons") or the five dots inside them ("Team of the Bezants") in the Portuguese flag, used until the 70s as the shirt badge. Refer to Flag of Portugal for symbolism associated with these bezants. "The FIFA/Coca-Cola Women's World Ranking". FIFA. 15 March 2024. Retrieved 15 March 2024. "Russia Women To Be Replaced By Portugal At UEFA Women's Euro 2022". Forbes. Retrieved 16 June 2022. Nowakowski, Wojciech (8 August 2023). "Morocco, Ireland, Portugal: All 8 Women's World Cup debutants and how far they made it". Her Football Hub. Retrieved 24 October 2023. Selecção das Quinas refers to the five shields ("Team of the Escutcheons") or the five dots inside them ("Team of the Bezants") in the Portuguese flag, used until the 70s as the shirt badge. Refer to Flag of Portugal for symbolism associated with these bezants. "Giovana Maia: "Sempre quis representar Portugal" (in Portuguese). Federação Portuguesa de Futebol. 19 February 2024. Retrieved 25 February 2024. UEFA Women's Nations League UEFA Women's Euro 2017 squad "Women's game thriving in the Algarve". FIFA. 9 March 2011. Archived from the original on 13 March 2014. Retrieved 13 March 2014. Official website (in Portuguese) FIFA profile Portals:  Women's association football  Association football  Sports  Portugal