Lumen Field is a multi-purpose stadium in Seattle, Washington, United States. Located in the city's SoDo neighborhood, it is the home field for the Seattle Seahawks of the National Football League (NFL), Seattle Sounders FC of Major League Soccer (MLS), and Seattle Reign FC of the National Women's Soccer League (NWSL). Originally called Seahawks Stadium, it was renamed Qwest Field in June 2004 when telecommunications carrier Qwest acquired the naming rights. The stadium became known as CenturyLink Field following Qwest's June 2011 acquisition by CenturyLink and was nicknamed "The Clink" as a result; it received its current name in November 2020 with CenturyLink's rebrand to Lumen Technologies. It is a modern facility with views of the Downtown Seattle skyline and a seating capacity of 68,740 spectators for NFL games and 37,722 for most MLS matches. The complex also includes the Event Center which is home to the Washington Music Theater (WaMu Theater), a parking garage, and a public plaza. The venue hosts concerts, trade shows, and consumer shows along with sporting events. Located within a mile (1.6 km) of Downtown Seattle, the stadium is accessible by multiple freeways and forms of mass transit. The stadium was built between 2000 and 2002 on the site of the Kingdome after voters approved funding for the construction in a statewide election held in June 1997. This vote created the Washington State Public Stadium Authority to oversee public ownership of the venue. The owner of the Seahawks, Paul Allen, formed First & Goal Inc. to develop and operate the new facilities. Allen was closely involved in the design process and emphasized the importance of an open-air venue with an intimate atmosphere. Seahawks fans at Lumen Field have twice claimed the Guinness World Record for loudest crowd roar at an outdoor stadium, first at 136.6 decibels in 2013, followed by a measurement of 137.6 decibels in 2014. The crowd's notorious noise has also contributed to the team's home field advantage with an increase in false start (movement by an offensive player prior to the play) and delay of game (failure of the offense to snap the ball prior to the play clock expiring) penalties against visiting teams. The stadium was the first in the NFL to install a FieldTurf artificial surface. Numerous college and high school football games have also been played at the stadium, including the 2011 Apple Cup and all Washington Huskies home games during the renovation of Husky Stadium in 2012. The XFL's Seattle Dragons began playing at Lumen Field in 2020 and returned in 2023 as the Sea Dragons. Lumen Field is also designed for soccer. The first sporting event held included a United Soccer Leagues (USL) Seattle Sounders match. The USL team began using the stadium regularly for home games in 2003. The MLS expansion team, Seattle Sounders FC, began its inaugural season in 2009 at the stadium. Lumen Field was the site of the MLS Cup in 2009 and 2019; the latter set a new attendance record for the stadium with 69,274 spectators. The venue also hosted the 2010 and 2011 tournament finals for the U.S. Open Cup as well as the second leg of the 2022 tournament final for the CONCACAF Champions League; the Sounders won all three finals, with new tournament attendance records set for each final (or leg) hosted at Lumen Field. The stadium hosted several CONCACAF Gold Cup matches across multiple editions, and the Copa América Centenario in 2016. It will also host matches during the 2026 FIFA World Cup, which was awarded to the United States, Canada, and Mexico. The Seahawks played their home games at the Kingdome from their 1976 inaugural season until 1999, sharing the stadium with Major League Baseball's Seattle Mariners and the National Basketball Association's Seattle SuperSonics. In 1995 a proposal was made to issue county bonds to fund a remodeling project of the facility. The proposal failed, and as a result, Seahawks' owner Ken Behring threatened to sell or move the team (likely to Los Angeles). In 1997 local billionaire Paul Allen pledged to acquire the team if a new stadium could be built and said that the team could not be profitable until they left the Kingdome. He asked the state legislature to hold a special statewide referendum on a proposal to finance a new stadium. Allen also agreed to cover any cost overruns. With Allen agreeing to pay the $4 million cost, the legislature agreed. The vote was scheduled to be held in June 1997 but in May a Seattle resident filed a lawsuit that claimed the legislature did not have authority to call for such a vote, since it would be paid for by a private party who could gain from the result. The case was delayed until after the vote. The proposal was pitched to voters as providing both a new home for the Seahawks and a venue for top-level soccer. It passed on June 17, 1997, with 820,364 (51.1%) in favor and 783,584 against. The vote was close in Seattle, but it received 60% approval in Seattle's northern and eastern suburbs. The public funding was unpopular farther away in the eastern portion of the state. In October, a Thurston County Superior Court judge ruled that the legislature acted properly and in the public's interest, and he dismissed the pending lawsuit. The Washington Supreme Court upheld the decision that December. Voter approval of the referendum created a public–private partnership. The Washington State Public Stadium Authority was created to oversee public ownership of the stadium, exhibition center, and parking garage complex. Allen purchased the Seahawks and formed First & Goal Inc. to build and operate the facility. The budget for the project was $430 million. Of this cost, $44 million was allotted to build the Event Center, $26 million for the parking garage, and $360 million for the stadium. First & Goal was to cover cost overruns and pay up to $130 million of the project while the contribution from the public was capped at $300 million. The public funding package included new sports-related state lottery games, taxes on the facility's admissions and parking, sales tax credits and deferrals, and an eight-year extension of the 2% tax on hotel rooms in King County. The taxes on admissions and parking were set below the authorized 10% to preserve the tax-exempt status of the project's bonds, which were first issued on May 1, 1999; the percentage was increased to the full amount when the bonds were completely paid on January 1, 2021, with the taxes subsequently serving as dedicated funding sources for maintenance and modernization of the facilities. Furthermore, a clause in the referendum requires Allen or his estate to give the Public Stadium Authority 10% of the proceeds from the sale of a majority or all of their interest in the Seahawks if they do so before or on the 25th anniversary of the first bond sale. The proceeds would have been reserved for the state's public schools had a sale of the team occurred before the bonds were fully paid off; any sale in between the bond retirement and the clause expiration would see the proceeds go towards improvements to the stadium instead. In September 1998, First & Goal signed a 30-year stadium lease that includes options to extend for another 20. Per the agreement, the Public Stadium Authority receives $850,000 a year from First and Goal (adjusted for inflation), and First & Goal keeps all revenue from the stadium and parking garage. The company receives 80% of the revenue from the exhibition center while the other 20 percent is allotted to a state education fund. First & Goal is responsible for all operating and maintenance costs, expected to be $6 million a year, and must keep the facility in "first-class" condition. Other details of the lease include the availability of affordable seats, a coordinated effort with neighboring T-Mobile Park (the Mariners' current ballpark) to prevent gridlock, a provision for naming rights, the investment in public art at the stadium, and the giveaway of a luxury suite to a fan each Seahawks' game. The architectural firm Ellerbe Becket, in association with Loschky, Marquardt and Nesholm (LMN) Architects of Seattle, designed the 1.5 million square feet (140,000 m2) project. Allen was closely involved during the design process. While growing up he attended games at the University of Washington's (UW) outdoor Husky Stadium. His goal was to create a similar experience and atmosphere at the new venue. The exhibition center portion of the project was designed over a period of 14 months by LMN Architects while First & Goal managed the construction. Town meetings were held to discuss the impact on the public, and the company created a $6 million mitigation fund for nearby neighborhoods. In accordance with a program established by the building team, contracts totaling $81 million were awarded to minority- and women-owned businesses. Union apprentices made up 19% of the workforce through another program with local trade unions. Construction of the new exhibition center and parking garage was set to commence on September 19, 1998, but prolonged lease discussions between First & Goal and the Public Stadium Authority delayed the official groundbreaking to September 28. The exhibition center opened on October 30, 1999, and subsequently hosted its first event on November 4. On March 26, 2000, to make way for the stadium, the Kingdome was demolished in the world's largest implosion of a single concrete structure. Almost all of the Kingdome rubble was recycled with roughly half used for the new stadium. The designers were challenged by the soft soil at the site since it was a tidal marsh until public works projects in the early 20th century adjusted the waterline of nearby Elliott Bay. The top layer is a soft fill taken from the grading projects that had leveled portions of Seattle's hills. To account for the soft soil, the complex sits on over 2,200 pilings driven 50 to 70 ft (15 to 21 m) below the ground to form what is essentially a pier for the foundation. Eight individually connected sections were built to account for the soil concerns, temperature effects, and the potential for earthquakes. The adjoining exhibition center and parking garage are separate structures and are not part of the eight-section stadium. The site of Lumen Field is the smallest of those developed for new NFL stadiums, at 30 acres (12 ha). The upper levels were cantilevered over the lower sections to fit within the limited space. Along with the angle of seats and the placement of the lower sections closer to the field, this provided a better view of the field than typically seen throughout the country and allowed for a 67,000-seat capacity. Space is available to increase the total capacity to 72,000 for special events. Included in the capacity are 111 suites and over 7,000 club seats. The stadium has 1,400 seats for those with disabilities and their companions located in various sections. In 2009, Qwest Field ranked 21st out of the 31 stadiums in the NFL for total seating capacity. The configuration of Lumen Field is a U-shape with an open north end to provide views of downtown Seattle and the large north plaza. The large retractable roof of T-Mobile Park along with Mount Rainier to the southeast can be seen from the partially open south end. The stadium's concourses were built to be wide, and they provide additional views of the surrounding area. A 13-story tower was erected at the north end of the stadium that visually complements the Seattle skyline. The tower features a vertically oriented scoreboard which is the first of its kind in the NFL. At the base is bleacher seating for 3,000 called the "Hawks' Nest". Another addition not previously seen in the NFL are field-level luxury suites located directly behind the north end zone. Allen rejected plans for a retractable roof during the early stages of the stadium's design. The lack of a retractable roof made it open to the elements, provided better views, and reduced the total cost of the project. The roof, at 200,000 sq ft (19,000 m2), covers 70% of the seats but leaves the field open. The roof spans 720 ft (220 m) between concrete pylon supports at the north and south ends of the stadium. Its two expansive sections are held from below by trusses. From above, two arches with additional supports rise 200 ft (61 m) over the field. Post-tensioned cables were used to achieve its final shape and positioning. To minimize damage in the event of an earthquake, the roof has a friction pendulum damper system. This disconnects the roof from the support pylons so that it can move independently of the structure. The technology had never been applied to a large-scale roof before Lumen Field. A 6.8-magnitude earthquake struck the Seattle area during construction. The structure responded as expected by the designers, and there was minimal damage. The project was completed on budget and a month ahead of schedule. The roof was originally painted white to aesthetically distinguish it from both T-Mobile Park and the nearby industrial area; however, the paint gradually turned ash gray despite cleanings and repaintings, prompting a blue-colored repaint of the roof from May to July 2010. Light-emitting diodes following the outline of the stadium's logo were subsequently installed on the roof in October 2019. The east side of the stadium has a large glass curtain wall that faces the nearby International District. The exterior of the stadium also consists of salmon-colored concrete, and the west side of the structure is partially clad with red brick. The coloring and facade were designed so the stadium would blend with the older buildings in neighboring Pioneer Square. To reduce costs, the exterior was not completed with brick or ornate steel work. In 2015, the stadium was expanded with the addition of the Toyota Fan Deck on 5,775 square feet (536.5 m2) of space at its southern end; privately funded by the Seahawks, it consisted of a new 12 Flag raising platform flanked by two 500-seat sections, pushing the capacity of the stadium to 68,000. The 1,000 additional seats were made available to then-current season ticket holders, with remaining seats allocated to the Blue Pride waiting list for season tickets. The stadium also has additional seats that can be deployed for special events, bringing the maximum capacity to 72,000. Lumen Field underwent minor renovations in 2022 as the stadium marked its twentieth anniversary. Improvements to the stadium made before the start of the 2022 Seahawks season include the conversion of an unused 6,300-square-foot (590 m2) space below the Hawks' Nest into a food and beverage area, the addition of an open cashierless concession area on the concourse behind the Toyota Fan Deck, and the replacement of a pair of video display boards at the north end of the stadium with Diamond Vision boards from Mitsubishi Electric that were more than double the size of the pre-existing ones. A 1,800-square-foot (170 m2) pregame hospitality area adjacent to the home team's locker room was then opened for the 2023 Seahawks season; named the Tunnel Club, it allows spectators to view players walking between the locker room and the field. Additional planned renovations include the creation of two standing room open-air decks. The 1997 state referendum stated that the stadium would feature a natural grass surface, but FieldTurf was not an option when the stadium was originally presented to voters according to the Public Stadium Authority. Seahawks management reconsidered the playing surface after the Seahawks played on FieldTurf at Husky Stadium during the 2000 and 2001 seasons. Artificial turf was installed because it was easier to maintain than natural grass. The potential damage to a natural grass field caused by Seattle's frequent rain also made the surface an appealing option. In order to keep a grass surface robust under heavy football use during late fall and early winter rains, a $1.8 million irrigation and heating system would have been required. The coach of the Seahawks at the time, Mike Holmgren, said that FieldTurf installation was the right decision and stated that "the players love it, and I think this surface will offer a better product on the field for the fans." Local soccer fans were concerned that the lack of a natural grass field would hinder Seattle's chances of receiving an MLS expansion franchise. They asserted that voters had approved the facility with the understanding that the new stadium was intended for soccer as well as football. In a compromise, First & Goal agreed to pay for grass to be installed for special events when needed. In 2002, Seahawks Stadium became the first stadium in the NFL to install a FieldTurf artificial field. The surface is made of plastic fibers rooted in a mixture of ground rubber and sand. The field was replaced in early 2008 after tests showed that compression of sand and rubber increased the risk of player injuries. For the second installation, FieldTurf won the bid over Polytan. For the replacement surface, a one-inch (two and one-half centimeters) poured rubber foundation was added to prevent the compression from reoccurring. Under the naming rights agreement, Qwest paid $500,000 for the installation and First & Goal paid the remaining amount, which was undisclosed. By 2010 the FieldTurf's quality had decreased with the blades becoming matted down. It also failed FIFA's quality testing to be ranked 2 Star. A new FieldTurf surface was laid down in 2012 and it met the requirements of a 2 Star field after testing. A new turf field, using the FieldTurf Revolution 360, was installed in February 2016 ahead of the 2016 Sounders season. There have been various opinions regarding both the artificial surface and temporary grass surfaces used for soccer matches. After the Brazilian national team defeated Canada's side 3–2 in 2008, Brazil's coach commented that one reason for his team's unexpectedly poor performance was the loosely installed grass field. The Grenada national team struggled to cope with the artificial surface during their loss at the 2009 CONCACAF Gold Cup. In July 2009, the U.S. Soccer Federation chose D.C. United's RFK Stadium over Qwest Field for the U.S. Open Cup. The general manager of D.C. United speculated that RFK's grass field was one of the reasons his team had a stronger bid. The general manager of the Sounders, Adrian Hanauer, told The Seattle Times in 2010 that replacement of the surface was a continuing conversation between the Sounders and Allen's Vulcan Inc. When the Los Angeles Galaxy traveled to Seattle in May 2012, the FieldTurf was noted as one of the reasons David Beckham and Robbie Keane were left out of the line-up. In 2014, the field was criticized during an ESPN broadcast after an Amazon corporate event involving a game of Quidditch damaged the pitch before a Sounders match. Zach Scott expressed concerns over the same installation of the field and its effects on his body. The 10-year lease extension between Sounders FC and First & Goal announced in 2015 mandates new turf every four years or sooner; the first such new installation was in 2016. Between August and November, both the Seahawks and Sounders FC host games at Lumen Field. Each team has emphasized the importance of playing their games without the other team's painted lines on the field. Around 2003, at the Seahawks' request, local company EcoChemical developed for the field a new kind of paint that is "designed to fail". The new paint is relatively easy to remove with a power washer and a special chemical solution, a process that the company describes as environmentally friendly. With the new paint, converting the field between American football and soccer takes 14 hours in dry weather, though painting logos and other colors takes additional time. Despite various preparations, some Sounders matches—particularly in the playoffs—have had Seahawks logos and American football lines painted on the turf. Prior to the stadium opening in 2002, Allen and Bob Whitsitt said that they hoped the new stadium would help turn the Seahawks into a Super Bowl contender and that Seattle would be considered to host the championship game. The seating is expandable to 72,000 for the purpose of holding the game, but the NFL typically does not consider cities with outdoor stadiums where the average temperature in February is below 50 °F (10 °C). The number of season tickets available at Qwest was capped at 61,000 following the Super Bowl appearance. The ensuing waiting list was the first for the Seahawks since the early 1990s. The team's first season at their new home was in 2002. Their first game at the new facility was a 28–10 preseason loss to the Indianapolis Colts on August 11, 2002. They went on to end their first season at the new field with a 7–9 record. In the 2003 season, the team went undefeated at home and reached the playoffs. It was the first time the franchise had won 10 games in a single season in 17 years. The Seahawks again reached the postseason during the 2004 season and played their first playoff game at Qwest Field on January 8, 2005. In that game, they lost to the St. Louis Rams who had already defeated them twice that season. The following season, the Seahawks went undefeated at home for the second time in three years and won their first-ever NFC Championship, but lost in Super Bowl XL. Between 2002 and 2005, the Seahawks won 24 of their 32 regular season games at the stadium. In 2006, the Seahawks had a 9–7 record and hosted the Dallas Cowboys in the wild card round of the playoffs. The Seahawks trailed 20–13 with less than 7 minutes remaining but came back to win 21–20. In 2007, the team won seven of their eight home games and clinched their fourth consecutive division title. Qwest Field was again the site for their wild card game, and they defeated the Washington Redskins 35–14. In 2008, the Seahawks went 4–12 and had only two home wins. Holmgren left the organization after the season. When he was interviewed about memorable moments and the fans, he said that Qwest Field was "a remarkable place to compete in and to play professional football". He called a game at the stadium "an experience". In 2010, the Seahawks were the first NFL team with a losing record ever to win a division title in a season not shortened by a strike. Seattle earned its fifth consecutive home playoff victory with a 41–36 win over the New Orleans Saints. "God bless the voters," defensive tackle Craig Terrill said after the game in reference to the stadium's importance to the franchise. Under Pete Carroll, the Seahawks were undefeated at home during the 2012 season. Season tickets for 2013 sold-out with a franchise-record 98% renewal rate. Through the 2018 season, the Seahawks compiled a regular season record of 95–41 at the stadium. Lumen Field often sells out for Seahawks games; although the team struggled to sell out games (with two resulting blackouts) in its inaugural season at the stadium, it has sold out every game after the 2003 home opener, with 146 consecutive games sold out through the 2019 season. Despite dismal on-field performances in 2008 and 2009, the team maintained its base of season ticket holders; Before the 2008 season, the 14,000 single game tickets not already allotted sold out less than 15 minutes after they became available. After going 9–23 over two seasons in 2008 and 2009, the number of available season tickets was increased to 62,000. The largest crowd to attend a Seahawks game at Lumen Field was 69,190, against the Philadelphia Eagles on November 20, 2016. Lumen Field has earned a reputation as one of the loudest stadiums in the NFL. It was, at one point in time, in the Guinness World Record books for being the loudest stadium in the world. The seating decks and partial roof, both trap and amplify exceptional amounts of noise and reflect it back onto the field. This noise possibly contributes to increased false start penalties since opposing offenses can miss audibles and the snap count, as well as delay of game penalties due to the reduced efficiency of communicating plays to the offense. From 2002 through 2012, there have been 143 false-start penalties on visiting teams in Seattle, second only to the Minnesota Vikings. During that same time period, the Seahawks have accumulated a home win record of 59–29, with a simultaneous road record of 33–55. When Tod Leiweke was hired as the Seahawks' new CEO in 2003, he had a large flagpole installed in the south end to fly the 12th Man Flag as a tribute to the team's fans, collectively known as the 12th man. The team had retired the number 12 in 1984 to honor its fans, who had gained notoriety for intensifying the Kingdome's noisy acoustics such that the NFL enacted a rule in 1989 penalizing home teams for disruptive crowd noise when visiting teams are on offense; the rule itself is rarely enforced due to the futility of controlling such noise leaguewide. A local celebrity, sometimes a former Seahawk, raises the flag during the network television pre-game events. In 2005, the stadium gained national attention when the visiting New York Giants committed 11 false start penalties. Seahawks head coach Mike Holmgren attributed the penalties to the enthusiasm and noise from the crowd. He dedicated the ball used to make the game-winning field goal to the fans, and it is now displayed at the stadium. The Giants' general manager, Ernie Accorsi, asked an NFL senior vice president whether the Seahawks had broadcast artificial crowd noise over the public address system during this game. The NFL sent a memorandum early in the 2006 season about such complaints and sent officials to monitor two games. Holmgren denied the allegations, and the crowd responded by being even louder than usual when the Giants returned to Qwest Field. Since 2005 the Seahawks have tracked the number of false starts committed by visiting teams and display the statistic on a scoreboard to motivate the crowd. As of 2013, the stadium has had a league-high number of false starts since. In preparation for the 2005 NFC Championship Game at Qwest Field, the Carolina Panthers practiced with the recorded sounds of jet engines in the background to prepare for the volume of the crowd. Kickers experience further disadvantages when attempting field goals at Lumen Field. Both the stadium's proximity to Puget Sound and the open north end create winds that are challenging to gauge. Former Seahawks kicker Josh Brown adjusted to the winds, and he believed the moisture in the air caused trouble for others. On September 15, 2013, Seattle Seahawks fans successfully broke the Guinness World Records for the loudest stadium in the world. The 131.9-decibel record occurred during the sack of San Francisco 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick in the first quarter. Fans then broke their new record during the third quarter of the same game when a level of 136.6 decibels was achieved during a goal line stand by the Seahawks defense. The record was broken by the crowd at Arrowhead Stadium on October 13, 2013, with a sound pressure level of 137.57 decibels. The record was later regained by the Seahawks fans on December 2, 2013, with 137.6 decibels against the New Orleans Saints, but lost once again to Arrowhead Stadium in a Monday Night Football game between the Kansas City Chiefs and New England Patriots on September 29, 2014, setting the record that still stands at 142.2 decibels. The Seattle Dragons of the XFL played their only two home games at CenturyLink Field during the short-lived league's 2020 season. The team was among seven in the XFL to share its stadium with NFL teams and drew a league-record 29,172 fans at the home opener on February 15, 2020. The second game had 22,060 in attendance, with the team among the highest-drawing in the XFL before the league suspended operations in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. The team resumed play in 2023 at Lumen Field as the Sea Dragons, holding their first home game on February 23. The Sea Dragons played their last game at the stadium on April 23, clinching a playoff berth with a 28–9 victory over the Vegas Vipers; the team did not survive the XFL's merger with the United States Football League to form the United Football League the following year. Lumen Field has hosted several college football games. The hometown Washington Huskies played their 2005 season opener against the Air Force Falcons at the stadium in Tyrone Willingham's first game as head coach. The Huskies played their entire 2012 home schedule at the stadium while their home field, Husky Stadium, underwent a $250 million renovation; to expedite the start of the renovation by three weeks, the Huskies and the Washington State Cougars also played the Apple Cup in 2011 at then-CenturyLink Field. From 2002 through 2014, the stadium hosted a Washington State Cougars' non-conference home game each season (except for 2010). This included the 86th "Battle of the Palouse" against the Idaho Vandals in 2003. The attendance for the dozen Cougar games ranged from 30,927 to 63,588. CenturyLink Field is approximately 300 miles (480 km) from WSU, but closer to many alumni in the Seattle metro area. The university's athletic director said that an attendance of 50,000 was needed to make it worth moving the game from Martin Stadium in Pullman. The Cougars went 6–6 in their annual Seattle home game, which generated additional revenue that was invested in facilities for the football program while also increasing exposure to the western side of the state. In April 2009, it was proposed that the annual Apple Cup between the Seattle-based Huskies and the Pullman-based Cougars be hosted at CenturyLink Field for six years beginning in 2010. The two programs could not reach an agreement on how to divide tickets. Pullman's business community had expressed concerns that playing the game away from the Palouse would be detrimental to the local economy. Qwest Field hosted the second and final Seattle Bowl in late 2002, in which Wake Forest beat Oregon 38–17. The inaugural Seattle Bowl was played a year earlier at Safeco Field, but the game was discontinued when organizers could not secure financing before 2003. Later attempts to revive the Seattle Bowl were unsuccessful. The Seattle Sports Commission led a push in 2008 for a new bowl game starting in 2010 that would have been a fundraiser for Seattle Children's Hospital. Lower division NCAA teams have played at the stadium throughout the years. From 2003 to 2008, the Division II football teams from Western Washington University and Central Washington University met each year in a rivalry game called "The Battle in Seattle." Central won all but the 2004 game, and each meeting attracted more than 11,000. Western (of Bellingham) discontinued its football program after the 2008 season, but Central (of Ellensburg) agreed to continue the series with Western Oregon University (of Monmouth) for games in 2009 and 2010. "Battle in Seattle VII" saw Central make a comeback to win 23–21 in front of 5,374. On October 31, 2009, the Division I FCS Eastern Washington University Eagles played a home game in Seattle for the first time. Along with the goal of drawing alumni from the metropolitan area, the athletic directors from both Eastern Washington (of Cheney) and Washington State had expressed the importance of connecting with alumni at receptions and other events on the western side of the state. Billed as the "Showdown on the Sound", the game was a 47–10 victory over the Portland State Vikings. According to Eastern's athletic director, Qwest Field's rental was $50,000 for the day. The stadium subsequently hosted a game on September 11, 2010, between Eastern and Central; coined the "Battle of the Sound", the game saw Eastern prevail over Central 35–32. Lumen Field has been used for high school football. The Washington Interscholastic Activities Association (WIAA) puts on the annual Emerald City Kickoff Classic at the stadium. The event is a season-opening series of games between some of the best teams in the state. The WIAA approached the Seahawks regarding use of the stadium for their high school football state championship games after moving them out of the Tacoma Dome in 2019, but the latter declined and recommended using Husky Stadium instead, noting that they were unable to match the offer terms from UW's athletic department. The stadium features a meeting between one of the best teams in Washington and one of the best from another state in the "Best of the West" game. On September 4, 2004, Washington's Bellevue High School and California's De La Salle High School played in front of over 25,000, a state high school event attendance record. Bellevue ended De La Salle's national-record 151-game winning streak in a 39–20 win. On September 16, 2009, Bellevue defeated another highly regarded California school at Qwest Field in a 30–16 victory over Long Beach Polytechnic. USA Today had recently rated both teams highly with Long Beach third and Bellevue at 16th in the nation. After the organizer of the event announced a match-up between Washington's Skyline High School and Oregon's Jesuit High School in 2009, he said that he proposed the possibility of televising games to Fox Sports, but Fox did not televise the game. Skyline went on to shut out Jesuit 17–0 during that year's Emerald City Classic. Within Lumen Field, a large art piece called The State of Football pays tribute to high school football in the state of Washington. The piece features a depiction of Washington and holds replica football helmets from every high school football team in the state. The installation is part of the Stadium Art Program commissioned through First & Goal's lease of the facility, costing nearly $1.75 million. Lumen Field is also designed for soccer. The stadium meets FIFA sight line requirements and provides separate locker rooms for soccer teams. Camera locations were chosen for optimal television coverage of the sport. Numerous exhibition games have taken place at Lumen Field, including high-profile clubs such as Manchester United, Barcelona, Celtic, Real Madrid, Chelsea, Club América and Chivas de Guadalajara. These games have proved to be highly popular, and the first sell-out of 66,772 fans at the stadium was a soccer match between Manchester United and Celtic. National teams such as Brazil, Venezuela, Mexico, and China have played exhibition games at the stadium. The artificial turf has been temporarily overlaid with grass for international matches. Seattle was the site of the 2005 CONCACAF Gold Cup Group B opening round between the national teams of the United States, Costa Rica, Canada, and Cuba. Two matches of the 2009 CONCACAF Gold Cup opening round were also played at the stadium on July 4, 2009. In the second match, the United States comfortably defeated Grenada, who were playing in their first major international competition, 4–0. The Gold Cup returned in 2013 with Panama beating Martinique and Mexico defeating Canada in opening group play matches. CenturyLink Field also hosted three matches during the 2016 Copa América Centenario, a special inter-continental tournament, including two group stage fixtures and a quarterfinal match between the United States and Ecuador attended by 47,322 spectators. On November 22, 2009, Seattle was the site of the 14th annual MLS Cup between Real Salt Lake and the Los Angeles Galaxy, where Salt Lake won the Cup on penalty kicks (5–4) in front of 46,011. The stadium was the eighth venue to host the event and had the fourth-largest attendance for an MLS Cup. The MLS Cup returned to Seattle in 2019, with the Sounders hosting Toronto FC as the higher seed. The Sounders won in front of 69,274 spectators, setting a new record for a sporting event at Lumen Field and recording the second-highest cup attendance in league history. Lumen Field is one of sixteen venues that will host the 2026 FIFA World Cup, to be played in Canada, Mexico, and the United States. The stadium is scheduled to host four matches during the group stage and two matches in the knockout stage. It is one of two Pacific Northwest venues hosting the event, together with BC Place in Vancouver. Seattle had two venues—Lumen Field and Husky Stadium—among 58 facilities considered in the unsuccessful United States bid for the 2022 FIFA World Cup. When discussing Seattle as a candidate, Sunil Gulati of the U.S. Soccer Federation called Lumen Field (then Qwest Field) "a world-class facility". Seattle finally hosted a World Cup qualifier on June 11, 2013; the qualifier, which was the city's second overall and the first since 1976, saw the United States defeat Panama 2–0 in front of a raucous crowd of 40,847. The combined Canada–Mexico–United States won the right to host the 2026 FIFA World Cup following a 2018 vote by FIFA; Lumen Field was one of the 23 finalist venues named by the organizing committee. Lumen Field was subsequently announced in June 2022 as one of the 11 American venues, as well as one of five current MLS venues selected to host matches. Under preliminary plans by the city government, it would cost up to $10.5 million to host the World Cup matches, including installation of a temporary grass surface, policing the venue and practice fields, and managing a fan festival at the Seattle Center or on the city's waterfront. During the event, the stadium will be temporarily renamed to "Seattle Stadium" in accordance with FIFA's policy on corporate sponsored names. The first sporting event at the stadium was a double-header on July 28, 2002, that included both the Sounders Select Women and the men's Seattle Sounders of the USL team. The women defeated the Vancouver Breakers 4–3, while the men beat the Vancouver Whitecaps 4–1 in front of 25,515 people. The USL team began using the facility regularly as their home field in 2003. Although team management was concerned with the high rent and the underused seating capacity, they were drawn by the sponsorship opportunities and location. The Sounders increased their average attendance from 2,583 at Seattle's Memorial Stadium in 2002 to 3,452 at the new stadium in 2003. In 2005, the Sounders beat the Richmond Kickers 2–1 in a penalty shootout for the USL championship in front of 8,011. Scott Jenkins scored the final goal and announced his retirement after the game. In 2008, the MLS expansion franchise Sounders FC decided to develop the Starfire Sports Complex in nearby Tukwila, and the USL team played most of the season at that facility. At the time, team management thought that practicing and playing at Starfire could provide a better transition for those hoping to play for the new MLS team. The last match for the USL Sounders at Qwest Field was the 2008 season opener against the rival Portland Timbers. The game ended in a scoreless draw in front of 10,184. The potential to draw an MLS expansion team helped drive public support for building the stadium in 1997. In 1996, Seattle was considered for one of the 10 original MLS teams; however, the region lacked an adequate outdoor stadium. In 2007, it was announced that Seattle would be the home of an expansion team. The first Sounders FC regular season match was at the stadium on March 19, 2009. Fredy Montero scored the first goal in a 3–0 Seattle victory. Before the opening of their first season, the Sounders already had the highest number of season ticket holders in the MLS after they sold all 22,000 of the offered season ticket packages. The team created a web site that was used to identify seating arrangements for season ticket holders based on personal interests including preferred method for watching a game and foreign team preference. For the first half of the inaugural season, the upper and lower sections were tarped off, limiting the seating capacity to 27,700. The club hoped to create an intimate environment as well as a supply-and-demand factor that would reward season ticket holders and encourage early purchase of seats. The stadium has continuously sold out league matches in the limited seating configuration. However, majority owner Joe Roth has said that he "won't be happy" until the entire venue is open. The stadium was designed to easily open seating sections in stages if needed. After repeated sellout crowds, additional sections were opened, increasing total capacity to 32,400. In the Sounders' first year they set an MLS record with an average home attendance of 30,943 people. Official capacity was increased to 35,700 after the 2009 season. In 2011, The Sounders continued to hold the highest average attendance in the league with 38,496. Official capacity was increased again to 38,500 with the opening of the Hawk's Nest for the 2012 season. The team averaged 44,247 spectators in the 2015 MLS season, its all-time record. As of 2019[update], the regular season MLS capacity at Lumen Field is listed as 37,722 seats, with four matches scheduled to use larger sections of the stadium. The Sounders set the state's single game soccer attendance record when they hosted Manchester United in front of 67,052 in July 2011. On October 15, 2011, additional seats were available for a record crowd of 64,140 during the final regular season home match, a Sounders 2–1 win followed by ceremonies honoring retiring goalkeeper Kasey Keller. And on October 7, 2012, another attendance record was broken when 66,452 fans were present for a 3–0 win over the Portland Timbers, following a ceremony awarding retired Forward Roger Levesque a Golden Scarf. The Sounders set an attendance record for sporting events at the stadium of 69,274 when Seattle hosted the 2019 MLS Cup Final against Toronto FC, winning 3-1 for their 2nd MLS Cup trophy. CenturyLink Field has hosted two U.S. Open Cup tournament finals. On October 5, 2010, the tournament's 81-year-old attendance record was broken when Sounders FC defeated the Columbus Crew 2–1 in front of 31,311. That record was broken one year later when CenturyLink Field again hosted the final on October 4, 2011, as 36,615 spectators watched Seattle defeat the Chicago Fire 2–0. The stadium has also hosted a CONCACAF Champions League tournament final; on May 4, 2022, the Sounders defeated Pumas UNAM 3–0 in the second leg of the final before a tournament-record crowd of 68,741 to win 5–2 on aggregate, becoming the first MLS team to win the tournament under its current format. Like the Seahawks, the Sounders have received attention for sellout crowds and boisterous fans. The Seattle Times reported that a "new standard for attendance and game-day atmosphere has been set" due to the loud sellout crowds. The passionate Emerald City Supporters have dubbed the general admission sections behind the south goal the "Brougham End" for the street that runs along the south edge of the complex. OL Reign played against Portland Thorns FC at the stadium on August 29, 2021, as part of a doubleheader with the Sounders and Timbers. The Reign defeated the Thorns 2–1 in front of 27,248, breaking the then NWSL's attendance record. The Reign later announced on December 15 that they would move into the stadium for the 2022 season, leaving their previous home, Cheney Stadium in Tacoma, as plans to build a soccer-specific stadium in the city stalled amid the COVID-19 pandemic. The stadium's capacity is reduced to 10,000 seats for most OL Reign home matches. A new NWSL attendance record of 34,130 was set on October 6, 2023, by the Reign for Megan Rapinoe's final home match. The stadium became a yearly site for Supercross races in 2005. Seattle had been left out of the circuit since the Kingdome hosted the race in 1999. It takes more than 650 truckloads of dirt to build the course for the event that around 50,000 spectators attend. In May 2004, Qwest Field hosted the first Major League Lacrosse game played outside the East Coast; it hosted a second game the following year. The stadium has also been used for public speaking engagements. For example, the 14th Dalai Lama of Tibet, Tenzin Gyatso, delivered a 28-minute speech to 50,817 people on April 12, 2008. The largest concert attendance in the stadium's history was set on July 22, 2023, by Taylor Swift's The Eras Tour; 72,171 spectators watched at Lumen Field on the first of two days. The record was surpassed a month later by Ed Sheeran's The Mathematics Tour, which drew 77,286 to Lumen Field on August 26. Lumen Field hosted several events related to the 2023 MLB All-Star Game, which was played at the adjacent T-Mobile Park. The first two rounds of the Major League Baseball draft took place at Lumen Field on July 9. The playing surface was divided into several pitching areas while the north lot and event center include performance stages, batting cages, and museum exhibits. The Lumen Field Event Center connects to the stadium's west field plaza and consists of two exhibition halls, a conference room, and a concourse. The center hosts pre-game events for the Seahawks and Mariners. According to the Public Stadium Authority's website, the event center contributes more than half a billion dollars to the region's economy. Originally debuting as the Washington State Stadium Exhibition Center, the center became known as the Seahawks Exhibition Center upon the stadium's opening in 2002. The center was renamed the Qwest Field Event Center in 2004 after Qwest acquired naming rights to the complex; it retained the "Event Center" name in subsequent renamings of the complex. The Event Center had previously been called "the worst venue in town" for concerts, but in 2006, AEG Live and First & Goal formed a partnership to create a new theater within the Event Center space. Washington Mutual (WaMu) obtained the naming rights to the new theater in a 10-year deal, calling it the WaMu Theater. The theater space can be assembled on an as-needed basis within the building and equipment, including the 104-foot (32 m) wide stage, can be dismantled and stored in the stadium. The theater's acoustics were improved by installing panels on the ceiling and a large curtain. Depending on the seating configuration, the capacity can be 3,300, 4,000, or 7,000. Seal performed the inaugural concert on November 6, 2006. Though the naming rights deal was terminated following the bankruptcy of Washington Mutual in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis, the theater retained the WaMu name, with AEG intending to seek a new sponsor for it; the meaning of the WaMu abbreviation was subsequently altered to represent "Washington Music" instead. During the early weeks of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Event Center was contracted for use as a field hospital. The temporary hospital was erected in April 2020 with 250 beds under the management of the Federal Emergency Management Agency and Army Corps of Engineers. On April 8, the state government announced that the field hospital would be dismantled and relocated to another state by the federal government, as the pandemic's spread in Washington had slowed. In March 2021, the Event Center was converted into a mass vaccination center with capacity for 4,000 to 5,000 doses per week administered by the city government in partnership with First & Goal and Swedish Health Services. The Event Center was also used as a vote center during the 2020 and 2022 elections by King County. During a Seahawks football game on January 8, 2011, the Pacific Northwest Seismic Network (PNSN) recorded what was dubbed a "Beast Quake", for Marshawn "Beast Mode" Lynch, a player whose performance on one running play excited the Qwest Field stadium crowd enough for the resultant shaking to be recorded on PNSN instruments. In 2014 and 2015 additional sensors were added in and around the stadium. Motivations for the experiment included conducting a quick-reaction exercise for the seismometer network team to install sensors and interpret results, and to test the ability to handle increased web traffic from interested visitors from the general public. Shaking was detected at the stadium after a 90-yard touchdown run during a January 10, 2015 playoff game, dubbed a "Kam Quake" for the player making the run, Kam Chancellor. The PNSN scientists stated that the biggest event of all was the "Dance Quake", which was caused by all the jumping and dancing that followed Marshawn Lynch's touchdown and 2-point conversion during 2014–15 NFC Championship Game on January 18, 2015. PNSN has also recorded seismic activity from Sounders fans; multiple earthquakes were recorded on November 10, 2019, during the MLS Cup final between the Sounders and Toronto FC. Further "RaveQuakes" were recorded on May 4, 2022, during the second leg of the CONCACAF Champions League Final between the Sounders and Pumas UNAM. During two Taylor Swift concerts for The Eras Tour in July 2023, PSNS recorded a maximum ground acceleration of 0.011 meters per second (2.2 ft/min) with peaks similar to a magnitude 2.3 earthquake. The readings were attributed to fan noise and dancing as well as the sound system used for the concerts. The stadium was originally named Seahawks Stadium. The name was changed to Qwest Field in June 2004 after telecommunications carrier Qwest bought the naming rights for $75 million for a period of 15 years. According to the agreement, the proceeds must be used for maintenance and upgrades. A portion of any profit then goes into a $10 million fund Allen guaranteed for youth playfields. As a result of CenturyLink's acquisition of Qwest, the stadium was officially renamed CenturyLink Field on June 23, 2011. CenturyLink renewed its naming rights contract in 2017, paying $162.7 million for the stadium from 2019 to 2033. Although CenturyLink changed its corporate name to Lumen Technologies in September 2020, the stadium was to retain the CenturyLink Field name due to a clause in the contract that permits a one-time name change only if a corporate takeover occurs. Despite that clause, the name was changed to Lumen Field on November 19 following approval from the Washington State Public Stadium Authority. After the stadium was renamed for CenturyLink in 2011, fans and media outlets speculated on potential nicknames for the venue. An informal reader poll conducted by The Seattle Times showed that "The Clink" was a popular suggestion; it was subsequently used among fans and locals. From 2009 to 2018, the field was entitled "The Xbox Pitch at CenturyLink Field" during Sounders FC matches as part of a sponsorship deal with Microsoft. However, when Zulily took over the Sounders FC sponsorship before the start of the 2019 season, the field was left unnamed; the deal did not include naming rights to the field. A new sponsorship with the Puyallup Tribe of Indians was announced in September 2022, renaming the field to "Emerald Queen Casino Pitch at Lumen Field". In addition to its 48 concession stands, restaurants and lounges are located throughout the stadium. Along with typical fare, local Pacific salmon sandwiches, Dungeness crab cakes, and microbrews are served, as well as food from Chinatown–International District restaurants. Aramark was the initial food and beverage service provider for the stadium and exhibition center, having signed a five-year contract in 2001. Levy Restaurants followed with a five-year deal to provide the service for the complex in 2006, while Delaware North Sportservice took over service operations in 2013; under both contracts, First & Goal paid a management fee to the vendor while covering operational costs. The Seahawks subsequently created First & Goal Hospitality to provide the food and beverage service in-house in 2017, doing so until Levy regained the rights via a partnership in 2020; the service continued to operate under the former brand as part of the agreement. The pouring rights of non-alcoholic beverages at the stadium were initially held by The Coca-Cola Company, which had a longstanding partnership with the Seahawks prior to 1998, when the team partnered with PepsiCo. In May 2007, Seattle-based Jones Soda outbid Coca-Cola to sign a five-year contract for the rights, making it the only venue in the NFL that did not have a contract with either Coca-Cola or PepsiCo. Jones Soda, known for unusual and holiday-themed soda flavors such as Blue Bubblegum and Turkey & Gravy, said it was working to develop football-related soda flavors, such as "grass-stain". Amid increasing financial turmoil for Jones Soda, the company renegotiated its contract with the Seahawks in September 2009, relinquishing the rights to provide energy drinks and water along with a luxury suite. Both parties ultimately announced their mutual decision to end the Jones sponsorship in June 2010, following which Coca-Cola reclaimed the vending rights with a five-year agreement. The Seahawks and Coca-Cola announced a multi-year partnership extension in 2018. Lumen Field is bordered by the Pioneer Square, International District, and Industrial District neighborhoods of Seattle. The stadium's referendum approval required a transportation management program to coordinate transportation options. First & Goal's facility lease agreement also included a provision to ease gridlock. A "dual event agreement" with T-Mobile Park was established so that two events with a combined attendance of over 58,000 would not occur within four hours of each other. The agreement was also implemented to coordinate mass transit to the stadiums on game days. The Link light rail system has two stations on the 1 Line that serve Lumen Field: Stadium station near the south entrances and International District/Chinatown station near the north entrances. Light rail trains run every 15 minutes on weekends and serve Seattle, Tukwila, and SeaTac. It began service on July 18, 2009, the same day as an exhibition match between the Sounders and Chelsea. Local and regional buses service the area with stops within three blocks of the stadium, and the county's King County Metro bus service formerly offered express routes from several area park and ride lots for games. Intercity trains serve the stadium through Seattle's King Street Station and overflow tracks accommodate extra trains during events. Sounder commuter trains operate regional service on Sundays if the Seahawks have a home game or for mid-day Sounders FC games on Saturdays. In 2008, the commuter trains carried 64,000 event goers to the two nearby stadiums. Amtrak, primarily through the Pacific Northwest corridor's Cascades route, also serves the station. Lumen Field is located near the junction of Interstate 5 and Interstate 90 to the east. It is bordered by State Route 99 and the south portal of the State Route 99 tunnel to its west, while the State Route 519 corridor connects I-90 to the neighborhood. Local governments compromised with both the Seahawks and Mariners on the location of new ramps over the train tracks that run along the east sides of Lumen Field and T-Mobile Park. An overpass for South Royal Brougham Way, the road that borders the south edge of the Lumen Field complex, to improve access and safety was completed in May 2010. The stadium has 2,000 parking spaces in its parking garage and 8,400 in the surrounding lots to accommodate automobile traffic. Beginning in December 2011, construction of the Stadium Place mixed-use development project replaced much of the north lot. The developer must replace the 500 lost parking spots and turn over parking revenue to the Public Stadium Authority per an agreement with King County. View from the southernmost point of the eastern grandstand's upper deck, looking northwards. The field, dressed in an American football format, is decorated with the livery of the Seattle Seahawks, the stadium's home tenant. The Toyota Fan Deck is sponsored by the Western Washington Toyota Dealers, an association of local Toyota dealers; it is not sponsored directly by Toyota. 2002 also marked the Seahawks' first season in the National Football Conference (NFC) since their inaugural season in 1976; they were members of the American Football Conference (AFC) between 1977 and 2001. Under then-current NFL policy, a game that failed to sell out 72 hours prior to its start time would result in its blackout in the home team's television market. This policy was effectively suspended in 2015. All Seahawks home games during the 2020 season were played without spectators due to the COVID-19 pandemic in Seattle. As of 2014, the Seahawks refer to their fans as the "12s" due to licensing restrictions from Texas A&M University, which holds the rights to the "12th Man" trademark. 1634–1699: McCusker, J. J. (1997). How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States: Addenda et Corrigenda (PDF). American Antiquarian Society. 1700–1799: McCusker, J. J. (1992). How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States (PDF). American Antiquarian Society. 1800–present: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. "Consumer Price Index (estimate) 1800–". Retrieved February 29, 2024. "Ellerbe Becket". January 23, 2013. Archived from the original on January 23, 2013. "Welcome, Seahawks Stadium". Seattle Daily Journal of Commerce. June 27, 2002. Retrieved July 22, 2012. "A New Chapter in the Legacy of Sports in Seattle Begins". Seattle Seahawks. June 23, 2011. Archived from the original on December 9, 2015. Retrieved October 10, 2015. Condotta, Bob (November 19, 2020). "CenturyLink Field, home of the Seahawks and Sounders, to be renamed Lumen Field". The Seattle Times. Retrieved November 19, 2020. Branch, John (September 9, 2004). "For N.F.L., Crowd Noise Is a Headache". The New York Times. p. 1. Retrieved November 14, 2009. Evans, Jayda (November 1, 2021). "There are a lot of factors in considering Seattle as a 2026 men's World Cup city. The biggest might just be the surface of Lumen Field". The Seattle Times. Retrieved December 15, 2021. Clare Farnsworth (March 27, 2000). "A month of Sundays with the Hawks". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved March 20, 2012.[permanent dead link] David Schaefer (June 7, 1997). "Stadium 'Not A Good Deal' – Hawks To Lose Money Until New Facility Is Open". Seattle Times. Retrieved December 23, 2009. "Washington state voters approve funding for new Seahawks Stadium on June 17, 1997". HistoryLink.org. Retrieved September 27, 2009. "Lawsuit Dismissed: Seahawks stadium vote withstands court challenge". Kitsap Sun. Archived from the original on November 17, 2009. Retrieved September 27, 2009. "Seattle expansion franchise to begin play in '09". ESPN. Associated Press. Retrieved September 27, 2009. "Seattle Gets OK to Build New Stadium". The Rocky Mountain News. News Wire Services. June 27, 1997. Schaefer, David; Serrano, Barbara; Varner, Lynne (June 19, 1997). "Stadium Won Big In Suburbs – But Far Away, And In Seattle, Seahawk Issue Less Popular". The Seattle Times. Retrieved November 5, 2009. "Financing for football stadium upheld by court". Seattle Daily Journal of Commerce. Retrieved November 5, 2009. "Qwest Field and Event Center" (PDF). Washington State Legislature. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 19, 2009. Retrieved October 19, 2009. Goldberg, Carey (May 27, 1997). "A Decision on the Seattle Seahawks' Home". The New York Times. p. 2. Retrieved April 4, 2009. Condotta, Bob (June 22, 2022). "Why a sale of the Seahawks is unlikely before May 2024". The Seattle Times. Retrieved January 12, 2024. Dudley, Brier (September 25, 1998). "Seahawks Sign Lease For 30 Years At New Stadium". The Seattle Times. Retrieved September 9, 2009. Bruscas, Anfelo (July 7, 2002). "Seahawks owner believes stadium will help drive team to higher level". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved April 4, 2009. Robin, Acton (January 29, 2006). "Profile of Allen, Seahawks owner". Tribune-Review. Archived from the original on October 22, 2006. Retrieved November 28, 2009. Smith, Rob (July 7, 2002). "Multiple options: Building Seahawks Stadium was a challenge for architects and engineers". Puget Sound Business Journal. Retrieved September 9, 2009. Smith, Rob (July 7, 2002). "Sustained drive: Seahawks Stadium's opening culminates a six-year effort". Puget Sound Business Journal. Retrieved April 4, 2009. Graham, J. Todd (June 27, 2002). "The six million dollar mitigation". Seattle Daily Journal of Commerce. Retrieved December 8, 2009. Young, Renée (May 1, 2003). "Building Team Project of the Year Awards". Building Design+Construction. Retrieved March 20, 2012. Barber, Mike (September 4, 1998). "Lease signing on stadium delayed again – Seahawks, board won't explain reasons why". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. p. B2 – via NewsBank. Modie, Neil (September 24, 1998). "Groundbreaking for new Seahawk stadium on again – Public board, Allen's people on verge of deal". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. p. B2 – via NewsBank. Fryer, Alex (October 29, 1999). "New exhibition center to open – Facility to host trade and consumer shows". The Seattle Times. p. B5 – via NewsBank. MacIntosh, Heather (March 27, 2000). "Kingdome stadium is imploded on March 26, 2000". HistoryLink.org. Retrieved April 27, 2009. Page, Martin (June 27, 2002). "Driven piles make stadium strong". Seattle Daily Journal of Commerce. Retrieved December 8, 2008. Magnusson, Jon (June 27, 2002). "Soft soil makes for tough design". Seattle Daily Journal of Commerce. Retrieved November 5, 2009. Newnham, Blaine (August 2, 2002). "Allen's vision: Open venue with a view". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 17, 2004. Retrieved April 14, 2004. Newcomb, Tim (February 5, 2014). "NFL now has three legitimate Los Angeles stadium sites in play". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved February 16, 2022. Smith, Rob (July 19, 2002). "Close to the action: Fans come first in Seahawks Stadium". Puget Sound Business Journal. Retrieved April 14, 2004. "Rating the stadiums: Team-by-team glance". ESPN. September 17, 2009. Retrieved November 16, 2009. Kressback, Jim (June 27, 2002). "Taking fans beyond the game". Seattle Daily Journal of Commerce. Retrieved November 5, 2009. Gans, Ron (June 27, 2002). "Designing Seattle's newest landmark". Seattle Daily Journal of Commerce. Retrieved May 25, 2009. "Seahawks Stadium – Sustainable Building Case Studies". Johns Manville Inc. Retrieved April 14, 2009. "EAE Award Seattle Seahawks Stadium" (PDF). Modern Steel Construction. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 26, 2010. Retrieved April 28, 2009. Brown, James (November 1, 2001). "Tackling a Stadium Project". Point of Beginning Magazine. A/E/C Media Group. Cover Story. Retrieved December 10, 2009. "Filthy Qwest Field roof could use a little love". Seattle Sports Blog. Seattle Post-Intelligencer. May 4, 2010 – via NewsBank. "It turned blue! Qwest Field roof painted". Seattle Sports Blog. Seattle Post-Intelligencer. July 15, 2010. "Seahawks, CenturyLink Field Shine Bright From The Rooftop With Connected Lighting From Signify" (Press release). Seattle Seahawks. October 3, 2019. Retrieved April 9, 2023. "Seahawks adding 1,000 seats to CenturyLink Field" (Press release). Seattle Seahawks. February 23, 2015. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved November 15, 2015. Stiles, Marc (February 23, 2015). "The ruling on the field is confirmed: Seahawks expanding the Clink". Puget Sound Business Journal. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Baker, Geoff (August 16, 2015). "With new deck, Seahawks cater more to quality than quantity". The Seattle Times. Retrieved May 19, 2023. "Venue Information". CenturyLink Field. Retrieved August 2, 2019. "New bars, food market teed up at Lumen Field". Seattle Daily Journal of Commerce. July 22, 2022. Retrieved April 1, 2023. McCormick, Bret (February 9, 2023). "New premium space opening at Lumen Field for '23 NFL season". Sports Business Journal. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Introducing The Tunnel Club At Lumen Field" (Press release). Lumen Field. February 8, 2023. Retrieved January 12, 2024. McCormick, Bret (July 20, 2022). "Lumen Field to get fan experience upgrades". Sports Business Journal. Retrieved April 1, 2023. "Turf battle ends as stadium board approves FieldTurf". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. September 27, 2001. Retrieved September 27, 2009. Bruscas, Angelo (July 27, 2001). "Showdown looms over turf in new stadium". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved November 5, 2009. Pedulla, Tom (September 10, 2002). "Seahawks' artificial turf earns praise from players". USA Today. Retrieved August 3, 2009. Lamm, Greg (February 8, 2008). "Qwest Field playing surface to be replaced". Puget Sound Business Journal. Retrieved May 14, 2009. Mayers, Joshua (May 4, 2012). "CenturyLink turf passes FIFA 2-Star testing". The Seattle Times. Retrieved May 4, 2012. Pentz, Matt (February 19, 2016). "Seahawks, Sounders announce new FieldTurf installation at CenturyLink Field". The Seattle Times. Retrieved February 21, 2016. Bell, Greg (June 1, 2008). "Brazil survives Canada 3–2". USA Today. Retrieved April 4, 2009. "U.S. make winning start in Gold Cup". Reuters. July 4, 2009. Retrieved November 6, 2009. Goff, Steven (July 23, 2009). "Payne Responds to Sounders". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 25, 2009. Mayers, Joshua (September 15, 2010). "Talking about the Qwest turf and injuries with Sounders FC". The Seattle Times. Retrieved January 28, 2011. Bueno, Luis (May 3, 2012). "Galaxy's lineup shifts fall flat in defeat at Sounders". Major League Soccer. Retrieved May 4, 2012. Oshan, Jeremiah (August 1, 2014). "CenturyLink's turf looked awful, here's what the Sounders had to say about it". Sounder At Heart. Retrieved March 10, 2019. Pentz, Matt (March 16, 2015). "Sounders announce CenturyLink Field lease extension through 2028 season". The Seattle Times. Retrieved March 10, 2019. Pentz, Matt (February 19, 2016). "Seahawks, Sounders announce new FieldTurf installation at CenturyLink Field". The Seattle Times. Retrieved November 6, 2022. Romero, José Miguel (August 25, 2009). "Qwest Field pulls off quick turnaround between Sounders FC and Seahawks games". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on August 27, 2009. Retrieved November 30, 2009. Chris, Daniels (September 12, 2013). "CenturyLink to convert from soccer to football field in 48 hours". KING 5. Archived from the original on September 22, 2013. Retrieved September 29, 2013. Oshan, Jeremiah (November 1, 2013). "CenturyLink Field turf to have football lines for Seattle Sounders-Portland Timbers playoff matchup". MLSsoccer.com. Retrieved November 7, 2022. O'Neil, Danny (May 25, 2010). "Chill on those Super Bowl-to-Seattle questions". The Seattle Times. Retrieved May 25, 2010. O'Niel, Danny (July 20, 2010). "No waiting for Seahawks' season tickets". The Seattle Times. Retrieved August 5, 2010. Dugar, Michael-Shawn (September 29, 2022). "What Seahawks lost, gained in AFC-to-NFC move in NFL realignment 20 years ago". The Athletic. Retrieved April 9, 2023. "2002 NFL Preview – Recap:Indianapolis Colts 28, Seattle Seahawks 10". CNN/Sports Illustrated. Retrieved April 4, 2004. Miller, Ira (December 12, 2003). "Playoffs or not, Holmgren should stay as coach". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved September 9, 2009. Romero, José Miguel (January 18, 2001). "Seahawks disappointed a third time as Rams continue dominance". The Seattle Times. Romero, José Miguel (December 12, 2005). "Ho-ho-home field: Beating Colts assures best NFC record". The Seattle Times. Retrieved September 9, 2009. Johnson, Scott M. (January 10, 2006). "The Sound Has Effects in Seattle". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 8, 2008. Corbett, Jim (January 7, 2007). "Seahawks saved by Babineaux's corner-turning play". USA Today. Retrieved September 9, 2009. Romero, José Miguel (January 6, 2007). "Hawks win a wild, wild wild-card game". The Seattle Times. Retrieved November 18, 2009. Farnsworth, Clare (January 1, 2008). "Seahawks counting on Qwest mystique to stop Redskins". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved November 18, 2009. "Redskins give valiant effort, but Seahawks advance to face Packers". ESPN. Retrieved November 18, 2009. Froschauer, John (December 30, 2008). "The Big Boss Holmgren Says Goodbye". Kitsap Sun. Archived from the original on December 31, 2008. Retrieved November 26, 2009. Romero, José Miguel (December 21, 2008). "Seahawks vs. Jets Preview". The Seattle Times. Retrieved November 26, 2009. O'Neil, Danny (January 8, 2011). "Seahawks upset Saints, 41–36". The Seattle Times. Retrieved January 28, 2011. Kelley, Steve (January 8, 2010). "It's been a great two weeks for Seattle sports fans". The Seattle Times. p. C-6. Retrieved January 28, 2011. Booth, Tim (December 30, 2012). "Wilson leads Seahawks past Rams 20-13". Northwest Cable News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 3, 2013. Retrieved January 13, 2013. Eatpm, Nick (June 20, 2013). "Seahawks see franchise-record renewal rate as 2013 season tickets sell out". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved July 21, 2013. Furman, T. J. (January 3, 2020). "The Eagles host the Seahawks Sunday, but home-field advantage is the worst it's been since 1972". The Philadelphia Inquirer. Retrieved April 21, 2023. Condotta, Bob (March 23, 2015). "NFL scraps blackout policy for 2015". The Seattle Times. Retrieved April 16, 2023. Kaplan, Daniel (September 15, 2003). "Leiweke: Wins will chase away TV blackouts". Sports Business Journal. Retrieved April 16, 2023. Bell, Gregg (August 19, 2020). "Seahawks make it official: no fans for at least the first 3 home games because of COVID-19". The News Tribune. Retrieved September 1, 2020. "Seahawks to allow full crowds at Lumen Field next season". Associated Press. June 22, 2021. Retrieved April 19, 2023. O'Neil, Danny (July 30, 2009). "Seahawks single-game tickets go on sale Monday morning". The Seattle Times. Retrieved November 24, 2009. Kelleher, Susan (August 5, 2008). "Hawks tickets gone in a flash". The Seattle Times. Retrieved May 1, 2009. "Seattle Seahawks fans set stadium noise record Sunday". Fox Sports. Retrieved September 16, 2013. Pompei, Dan (September 28, 2009). "Chicago Bears beat Seattle Seahawks 25–19". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved September 28, 2009. "Redskins on Qwest Field: 'That stadium was loud'". KOMO News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on August 1, 2009. Retrieved April 30, 2009. Clayton, John (January 21, 2006). "Crowd noise makes venues tough for road teams". ESPN. Retrieved September 9, 2009. Parolin, John (October 10, 2012). "Three-point stance: Seattle Seahawks". ESPN. Retrieved November 9, 2012. "How Important is the Seahawks' Home Field Advantage?". thesportspost.com. The Sports Post. Archived from the original on September 5, 2014. Retrieved September 5, 2014. Levesque, John (January 13, 2006). "Leiweke's handiwork best seen in Seahawks aura". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved April 18, 2009. Farnsworth, Clare (October 12, 2012). "On This Date: 12th Man flag raised for first time". Seahawks.com. Retrieved February 8, 2016. "The Seahawks' ubiquitous 12s". Kitsap Sun. February 1, 2014. Retrieved April 18, 2022. Rovell, Darren (August 11, 2016). "Seahawks reach 5-year licensing deal with Texas A&M". ESPN. Retrieved April 18, 2022. Belson, Ken (January 19, 2014). "Seahawks Fans Act as Extra Player, Tormenting Opponents and Eardrums". The New York Times. Retrieved May 20, 2023. "The 12s". Seahawks.com. August 24, 2014. Archived from the original on December 3, 2016. "Three missed FGs doom Giants in OT loss to Seahawks". ESPN. Retrieved November 18, 2009. Romero, José Miguel (November 29, 2005). "Hawk Notes: "12th man" key to latest victory over Giants". The Seattle Times. Retrieved September 9, 2009. Raissman, Bob (September 26, 2006). "A Giant Mistake, Loud & Clear". Daily News. New York. Retrieved March 20, 2012. Farnsworth, Clare (September 21, 2006). "Seahawks: The sound by the sound". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved November 18, 2009. Langland, Tyson (February 8, 2013). "Seattle's 12th Man Helped the Seahawks Set a New Record and More NFC West News". Bleacher Report. Retrieved January 21, 2016. "Seahawks, A&M resolve '12th man' dispute". ESPN. May 8, 2006. Retrieved November 3, 2009. Colsto, Chris (September 24, 2006). "Hasselbeck, Seahawks light up Giants 42–30". USA Today. Retrieved January 7, 2008. Brown, Clifton (January 22, 2006). "Pro Football; Hold the Coffee: The Seahawks and Their Fans Have a Thirst for the Bubbly". The New York Times. Retrieved September 9, 2009. Farnsworth, Clare (September 23, 2006). "Giants kicker back at scene of meltdown". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved November 19, 2009. 136.6 decibels! Hawks fans break Guinness mark for loudest stadium The Seattle Times "Kansas City Chiefs fans set loudest stadium record at Arrowhead". NFL.com. National Football League. Retrieved October 13, 2013. Thorman, Joel (September 29, 2014). "Kansas City Chiefs break Guinness World record against Patriots with 142.2 decibels". SB Nation. Retrieved January 21, 2016. Benjamin, Cody (December 7, 2018). "Pete Carroll thinks Seattle should embrace XFL team that will share the Seahawks' stadium". CBS Sports. Retrieved May 10, 2020. Arthur, Ben (April 10, 2020). "Seattle Dragons president thanks locals for 'incredible support' after XFL shutdown". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved May 10, 2020. Calkins, Matt (February 22, 2020). "Dragons and XFL have been an early hit in Seattle, but jury's still out on league's staying power". The Seattle Times. Retrieved April 22, 2023. Lantz, Shane (October 31, 2022). "Seattle's XFL team has a new name, but familiar roots". The Seattle Times. Retrieved October 31, 2022. Hanson, Scott (January 16, 2023). "Seattle Sea Dragons make their pitch to local fans as XFL season nears". The Seattle Times. Retrieved April 21, 2023. "Sea Dragons clinch playoff spot after win vs. Vipers". The Seattle Times. April 23, 2023. Retrieved January 1, 2024. Russell, Jake (December 31, 2023). "XFL, USFL announce merger to form the United Football League". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 1, 2024. Miller, Ted (August 26, 2005). "What you see is what you get with Willingham". ESPN. Associated Press. Retrieved January 7, 2008. "Washington 17, Air Force 20". ESPN. Retrieved November 22, 2009. Condotta, Bob (September 30, 2010). "Huskies will play 2012 football season and 2011 Apple Cup at Qwest Field". The Seattle Times. Retrieved May 21, 2023. "Washington State 25, Idaho 0". ESPN. Retrieved November 16, 2009. Grippi, Vince (September 9, 2009). "Washington State has no agreement to play at Qwest Field beyond Saturday". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on September 13, 2009. Retrieved September 15, 2009. Withers, Bud (September 12, 2009). "Cougars football team is no match for Hawaii, falls 38–20". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on September 23, 2009. Retrieved November 3, 2009. "Rutgers rallies in 4th to beat Cougars 41-38". ESPN. August 29, 2014. Retrieved January 21, 2016. "Wazzu to return to Qwest Field in 2011". ESPN. Associated Press. January 27, 2010. Retrieved February 11, 2010. Eaton, Nick (August 27, 2014). "WSU Cougars discontinue annual football game in Seattle". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved January 21, 2016. Geranios, Nicholas (April 24, 2009). "WSU won't seek Apple Cup at Qwest". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 28, 2009. Retrieved April 25, 2009. "MacPherson's three TDs power Wake's rout". ESPN. Retrieved November 10, 2009. "Seattle Bowl may be back in '04". ESPN. Associated Press. December 17, 2003. Retrieved September 16, 2009. Condotta, Bob (August 13, 2008). "Group pushing for new bowl game in Seattle". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on August 17, 2008. Retrieved May 21, 2023. Smith, Craig (October 11, 2008). "Battle in Seattle / Central quarterback attracts NFL interest". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on October 14, 2008. Retrieved April 18, 2009. Abbott, Ian (October 19, 2009). "Small crowd shows up to Battle in Seattle VII". Daily Record. Archived from the original on January 27, 2013. Retrieved November 12, 2009. "Eastern Washington's football schedule includes game at Qwest Field". The Olympian. March 27, 2009. Archived from the original on October 10, 2013. Retrieved September 27, 2009. "E. Washington 47, Portland St. 10". ESPN. October 31, 2009. Retrieved November 11, 2009. "Eastern vs. Portland State". The Spokesman-Review. October 31, 2009. Retrieved November 11, 2009. Bergum, Steve (November 1, 2009). "Qwest experience worth doing again". The Spokesman-Review. Seattle. Retrieved November 1, 2009. Collingwood, Ryan (September 6, 2020). "10 years after the title: Central Washington gave Eastern Washington all it could handle in Seattle". The Spokesman-Review. Retrieved May 20, 2023. Joyce, Nathan (September 7, 2009). "Washington: Skyline wins showdown of top-ranked football teams". MaxPreps. Retrieved September 10, 2009. Manley, Jon (June 6, 2023). "Why Husky Stadium? WIAA leader explains reasons for moving state football championships". The News Tribune. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Grippi, Vince (September 9, 2004). "Bellevue's win over De La Salle had bit of deja vu". The Spokesman-Review. Retrieved April 16, 2019. Cameron, Sam (September 20, 2009). "Bellevue headlines Classic". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved July 5, 2009. Wilson, Mike; Ulmer, Jerry (September 3, 2009). "High school football taking to NFL stadium, national television in 2009". The Oregonian. Archived from the original on January 11, 2010. Retrieved November 3, 2009. Huber, Christopher (September 8, 2009). "Skyline shuts out Oregon's best". Sammamish Review. Archived from the original on October 7, 2011. Retrieved September 10, 2009. "Seahawks Stadium Scores World-Class Soccer; Manchester United Kicks Off U.S. Tour in Seattle". TheFreeLibrary.com. Business Wire. Retrieved March 20, 2012. "Man Utd thump Celtic". BBC News. July 23, 2003. "Qwest Field goes Au Naturel". Seattle Seahawks. March 19, 2003. Archived from the original on March 27, 2009. Retrieved March 20, 2012. Mayers, Joshua (July 10, 2013). "Much at stake for Mexico in Gold Cup match in Seattle". The Seattle Times. Retrieved July 22, 2013. Goff, Steven (June 15, 2016). "Soccer is different in Seattle. You'll see why in the Copa America quarterfinals". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 12, 2019. Pentz, Matt (June 16, 2016). "Clint Dempsey guides U.S. to 2-1 victory over Ecuador, berth in Copa America semifinals". The Seattle Times. Retrieved July 12, 2019. Steve Davis. "Galaxy and RSL earn deserved spots in MLS Cup final". ESPN. Retrieved November 15, 2009. Romero, José Miguel (November 22, 2009). "Real Salt Lake wins MLS Cup on penalty kicks". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 26, 2009. Retrieved November 26, 2009. "Galaxy's star power can't stop Salt Lake". The Register-Guard. Eugene, Oregon. Associated Press. November 23, 2009. Retrieved April 16, 2019. Romero, José Miguel (March 12, 2009). "Seattle awarded 2009 MLS Cup". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on May 25, 2009. Retrieved November 4, 2009. Goff, Steven (November 10, 2019). "Seattle Sounders claim MLS Cup for 2nd time in 4 seasons by roaring past Toronto FC, 3-1". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 10, 2019. Evans, Jayda (February 4, 2024). "Here's how many World Cup matches Seattle will host and when the U.S. team is town". The Seattle Times. Retrieved February 4, 2024. Romero, José Miguel (April 23, 2009). "Qwest Field and Husky Stadium confirm interest in World Cup". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 23, 2009. Retrieved April 30, 2009. Romero, José Miguel (April 10, 2009). "Qwest Field could play host to a World Cup match". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 12, 2009. Retrieved April 30, 2009. Brewer, Jerry (June 11, 2013). "U.S. World Cup qualifier shows Seattle in its best soccer light". The Seattle Times. Retrieved June 16, 2022. Schaerlaeckens, Leander (July 12, 2013). "Seattle crowd lives up to top billing". Fox Sports. Archived from the original on July 6, 2013. Retrieved July 22, 2013. Goff, Steven (June 16, 2018). "2026 World Cup host cities: Ranking the contenders". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 12, 2019. Hernandez, Cesar (June 16, 2022). "World Cup 2026 host cities revealed, with 11 venues in U.S., 3 in Mexico and 2 in Canada". ESPN. Retrieved June 16, 2022. Evans, Jayda (June 16, 2022). "Seattle selected as one of 11 U.S. cities to host 2026 men's World Cup". The Seattle Times. Retrieved June 16, 2022. Beekman, Daniel (October 22, 2018). "Hosting 2026 World Cup would cost Seattle millions, but almost all money would be recovered, city says". The Seattle Times. Retrieved July 12, 2019. "The FIFA World Cup 2026™ stadiums". FIFA. Retrieved March 16, 2023. Steven Rouse, Joel (July 28, 2002). "Sounders christen Seahawks Stadium before 25,515". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved December 27, 2011. Massey, Matt (September 23, 2003). "What's next for the Sounders?". The Seattle Times. Retrieved August 5, 2009. Masey, Matt (October 2, 2005). "Sounders win championship in extra lengthy finale". The Seattle Times. Retrieved August 15, 2009. Massey, Matt (May 10, 2008). "USL Sounders to make Starfire their home base". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on June 18, 2008. Retrieved August 15, 2009. Massey, Matt (May 11, 2008). "Sounders come up empty, "just a little off" in shooting". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on June 16, 2008. Retrieved August 15, 2009. Sherwin, Bob (May 10, 2000). "MLS team in Seattle no sure bet". The Seattle Times. Retrieved June 23, 2009. Almond, Elliott (May 11, 1996). "Want A Stadium For Football? Try A Little Soccer". The Seattle Times. Retrieved June 23, 2009. "Sounders triumphant in MLS debut, blank Red Bulls". ESPN. May 20, 2009. Retrieved June 20, 2009. Sounders FC Public Relations (March 2, 2009). "Sounders FC Sells Out Home Opener". SoundersFC.com. Retrieved March 3, 2009. Gaschk, Mathew (May 1, 2008). "Sounders FC expected to sign star". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved April 30, 2009. "MLS awards Seattle expansion team for 2009". MLSsoccer.com. November 17, 2007. Retrieved March 20, 2012. Greg, Johns (May 8, 2009). "Sounders likely to open up more seating at Qwest". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved September 22, 2010. Mayers, Joshua (September 26, 2012). "Majority owner Joe Roth on attendance, an expiring jersey deal with Xbox, the NBA/NHL in Seattle, and more". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on November 12, 2019. Retrieved November 12, 2019. "Sounders increase capacity at Qwest Field". SportsIllustrated.com. May 14, 2009. Retrieved May 15, 2009. Winner, Andrew (October 25, 2009). "Home crowd gives Sounders FC big boost". MLSsoccer.com. Retrieved March 20, 2012. Romero, José Miguel (January 23, 2010). "Success in the second season won't be easy for Sounders FC". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on January 27, 2010. Retrieved January 24, 2010. "Top MLS stories in 2011". FOX News. December 30, 2011. Retrieved January 2, 2012. Mayers, Joshua (November 16, 2011). "Hawks Nest will be open in '12, season tickets on sale Thurs". The Seattle Times. Retrieved January 2, 2012. "MLS sets new attendance records, Seattle hold highest average in league". MLSsoccer.com. October 26, 2015. Retrieved April 16, 2019. Goff, Steven (September 17, 2017). "Professional soccer attendance records fall in Atlanta and Cincinnati". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 17, 2019. "CenturyLink Field". Seattle Sounders FC. Retrieved April 16, 2019. Mayers, Joshua (July 20, 2011). "Manchester United schools Sounders FC 7–0 before record crowd". Seattle Times. Archived from the original on July 23, 2011. Retrieved July 22, 2011. Evans, Jayda (October 15, 2011). "Kasey Keller's retirement party draws crowd of 64,140". Seattle Times. Archived from the original on February 27, 2012. Retrieved March 20, 2012. "Eddie Johnson, Sounders pound Timbers". ESPN.com. October 7, 2012. Retrieved October 15, 2012. "2019 MLS Cup breaks Seattle Sounders all-time attendance record". "Seattle Sounders FC Earn Second Consecutive Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup Title in Front of Record-Setting Crowd at Qwest Field". United States Soccer Federation. October 5, 2010. Archived from the original on October 9, 2010. Retrieved October 9, 2010. "Lamar Hunt U.S. Open Cup-Record crowd". FOX Chicago News. October 5, 2011. Archived from the original on October 21, 2011. Retrieved March 12, 2012. Evans, Jayda (May 4, 2022). "One for the history books: Sounders clinch MLS' first CCL title in front of record crowd in Seattle". The Seattle Times. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Freedman, Jonah (April 27, 2009). "Seattle keeper Kasey Keller chats about coming home, future of MLS". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved November 5, 2009. Romero, José Miguel (April 4, 2009). "Sounders, Toronto crowds cheer for supremacy". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on May 8, 2009. Retrieved November 5, 2009. Romero, José Miguel (July 19, 2009). "Fans came out in full force on Saturday". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved November 6, 2009. Evans, Jayda (August 29, 2021). "Megan Rapinoe scores a brace to lead OL Reign past Portland before an NWSL-record crowd". The Seattle Times. Retrieved December 15, 2021. Evans, Jayda (December 15, 2021). "OL Reign to play 2022 home games in Seattle at Lumen Field". The Seattle Times. Retrieved December 15, 2021. Evans, Jayda (March 17, 2022). "With move to Lumen Field, OL Reign get set to embark on a new era in Seattle". The Seattle Times. Retrieved March 26, 2022. Peterson, Anne M. (October 6, 2023). "Retiring U.S. soccer star Rapinoe honoured by OL Reign in front of record NWSL crowd". CBC Sports. Associated Press. Retrieved November 17, 2023. McNerthney, Casey (April 16, 2010). "Qwest field gets down and dirty for supercross". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved April 24, 2010. McNerthney, Casey (April 15, 2010). "Supercross roars back onto Seattle stage". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved April 24, 2010. Romero, José Miguel (May 29, 2005). "Seattle welcomes big-league lacrosse". The Seattle Times. p. C4. Retrieved February 1, 2024. Iwasaki, John; Wong, Brad (April 12, 2008). "Qwest Field crowd hears Dalai Lama's call for greater compassion". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved April 30, 2009. Rietmulder, Michael (July 24, 2023). "Taylor Swift Night 2 surprise songs in Seattle dig deep". The Seattle Times. Retrieved July 24, 2023. Smith, Owen R. (August 27, 2023). "Ed Sheeran smashes Taylor Swift's Lumen Field attendance record". The Seattle Times. Retrieved August 31, 2023. "MLB amateur draft to be held at Lumen Field during All-Star week". ESPN. Associated Press. May 8, 2023. Retrieved July 4, 2023. Nall, Marissa (July 7, 2023). "Lumen Field gets a baseball makeover for MLB All-Star festivities". Puget Sound Business Journal. Retrieved July 7, 2023. "Event Center Information". Public Stadium Authority. Archived from the original on August 22, 2009. Retrieved September 10, 2009. "Around the Northwest". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. June 22, 2002. Retrieved May 2, 2022 – via CT Insider. Farnsworth, Clare (July 28, 2004). "Seahawks Stadium sponsor's new logo to debut". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved May 2, 2022. Condotta, Bob (June 20, 2011). "Qwest Field renamed CenturyLink Field". The Seattle Times. Retrieved May 16, 2023. Young, Bob (September 9, 2006). "New theater to open at Qwest Field Event Center". The Seattle Times. Retrieved August 26, 2008. Stout, Gene (November 3, 2006). "Seal's the deal at the giant, portable WaMu Theater at Qwest center". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved May 25, 2009. Bower, Meg (September 22, 2009). "The Last WaMu Branches Standing Don't Offer Free Checking". Seattle Weekly. Retrieved April 16, 2022. Banel, Feliks (March 17, 2023). "Before it collapsed, WaMu ad campaign was the 'Friend of the Family'". The Resident Historian (Podcast). KIRO Radio. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Gutman, David (March 27, 2020). "CenturyLink Field Event Center, home to boat shows and concerts, will become a field hospital during coronavirus pandemic". The Seattle Times. Retrieved March 27, 2020. O'Sullivan, Joseph (April 8, 2020). "Inslee sending back CenturyLink field hospital to federal government to help states hit harder by coronavirus". The Seattle Times. Retrieved April 8, 2020. Gutman, David (March 10, 2021). "Lumen Field Event Center opens Saturday as huge COVID-19 vaccination clinic; here's how it will work". The Seattle Times. Retrieved March 10, 2021. Arthur, Ben (October 28, 2020). "Seahawks, King County Elections to open CenturyLink Field vote center on Saturday". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved November 8, 2022. Zhou, Amanda (November 8, 2022). "2 hour line to vote in-person at Lumen Field, election officials say". The Seattle Times. Retrieved November 8, 2022. Reed, Christina (January 14, 2011). "Seahawks' Seismic 12th Man". discovery.com. Discovery Channel. Retrieved January 12, 2015. Vidale, John (December 31, 2011). "One year ago, Seattle Seahawks 12th Man Earthquake". PNSN. Retrieved January 12, 2015. Johnson, Kirk (January 9, 2015). "Sizing Up Seismic Activity of Football Fans: Scientists to Track Effects of Fans at Seahawks-Panthers Game". The New York Times. Retrieved January 12, 2015. Pittman, Travis (January 7, 2015). "Seahawks fans to help test earthquake early warning system". Seattle, Washington: KING-TV. Archived from the original on January 11, 2015. Retrieved January 12, 2015. Valdes, Manuel (January 9, 2015). "Panthers-Seahawks game will be site of earthquake experiment". Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 12, 2015. Retrieved January 12, 2015 – via The Charlotte Observer. Malone, Steve (January 11, 2014). "Seismic Game Analysis". PNSN. Retrieved January 12, 2015. Vienna Cat. (January 11, 2015). "Researchers: 'Kam Quake' shakes CenturyLink Field". Portland, Oregon: KATU-TV. Retrieved January 12, 2015. Malone, Steve (January 11, 2015). "Panther versus Seahawk Game Analysis". PNSN. Retrieved January 22, 2015. "2-point conversion quake bigger than 'Beast Quake'". Seattle, Washington: KING-TV. Associated Press. January 21, 2015. Archived from the original on January 23, 2015. Retrieved January 21, 2015. Malone, Steve (January 19, 2015). "Packers versus Seahawks game analysis -- too exciting". PNSN. Retrieved January 22, 2015. Williams, David (November 11, 2019). "Each time Seattle scored in the MLS Cup final, the fans' reaction registered on earthquake measuring devices". CNN. Retrieved May 5, 2022. Clarridge, Christine (May 5, 2022). "Triumphant Sounders fans shake the Earth, celebrate, spread the love on Twitter". The Seattle Times. Retrieved May 5, 2022. Che, Chang (July 28, 2023). "'Swift Quake': Taylor Swift Fans Shake Ground During Seattle Concert". The New York Times. Retrieved July 28, 2023. Bruscas, Angelo (June 25, 2004). "'Qwest Field' approved". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved April 30, 2009. Bruscas, Angelo (June 18, 2002). "Seahawks owner believes stadium will help drive team to higher level". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved April 30, 2009. Spratt, Gerry (June 20, 2011). "Qwest Field to become CenturyLink Field on Thursday". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Archived from the original on June 22, 2011. Retrieved June 20, 2011. Condotta, Bob (June 7, 2017). "CenturyLink set to more than double its pay to keep sponsoring Seahawks' stadium". The Seattle Times. Retrieved December 19, 2018. Svaldi, Aldo (September 14, 2020). "CenturyLink rebrands itself as Lumen Technologies". The Denver Post. Retrieved October 7, 2020. Baker, Geoff (October 22, 2018). "Analysis: Why CenturyLink Field is unlikely to be renamed for Paul Allen any time soon". The Seattle Times. Retrieved October 7, 2020. "What to call CenturyLink Field? Here are some ideas". The Seattle Times. June 21, 2011. Archived from the original on June 24, 2011. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Pete von Reichbauer (January 2015). "Celebrating 40 years of Seahawk History" (Press release). King County Council – Councilmember Pete von Reichbauer. Retrieved June 10, 2022. Stone, Larry (September 10, 2020). "Without 12s at CenturyLink, the Seahawks created their own hostile environment — and rode it to a 2-0 record". The Seattle Times. Retrieved June 10, 2022. Romero, José Miguel (May 29, 2008). "Microsoft launches deal with MLS, Sounders FC". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on September 17, 2008. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Baker, Geoff (January 17, 2019). "Sounders, Reign ink new jersey sponsorship deals with Seattle-based online retailer Zulily". The Seattle Times. Retrieved January 18, 2019. Shefte, Kate (September 7, 2022). "Sounders, Emerald Queen Casino announce naming-rights deal for Lumen Field pitch". The Seattle Times. Retrieved September 11, 2022. Romero, José Miguel (August 2, 2002). "Concessions to the fans". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on December 4, 2008. Retrieved November 3, 2009. Pedulla, Tom (September 6, 2002). "Seahawks Stadium". USA Today. p. E.05. "Seahawks stadium food contract worth $10 million". Puget Sound Business Journal. June 28, 2002. Retrieved March 19, 2023. Shrestha, Bibeka (July 22, 2006). "Qwest Field hires new food vendor". The Seattle Times. p. E1 – via NewsBank. Fink, James (December 19, 2012). "Seattle next order for Del. North's Sportservice". Buffalo Business First. Retrieved June 16, 2022. Muret, Don (August 7, 2017). "Seahawks, Jazz take new paths to food service". Sports Business Journal. Retrieved March 19, 2023. "Seattle Seahawks And Levy Partner To Elevate The First & Goal Hospitality Experience At CenturyLink Field" (Press release). Seattle Seahawks. August 5, 2020. Archived from the original on August 7, 2020. Retrieved June 16, 2022. Harris, Craig (May 23, 2007). "Jones Soda lands soft drink rights at Qwest Field". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Archived from the original on February 3, 2012. Retrieved November 15, 2009. "Jones Soda chases down Qwest Field deal". ABCmoney.co.uk. Associated Press. Archived from the original on July 22, 2011. Retrieved November 3, 2009. Allison, Melissa (September 26, 2009). "Jones Soda scales back sponsorship, sales deal with Seattle Seahawks". The Seattle Times. p. A8. Retrieved April 20, 2023. Johns, Greg (June 29, 2010). "Pop! Seahawks end partnership with Jones Soda". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Archived from the original on December 3, 2011. Retrieved December 31, 2014. "Coca-Cola, the Official Soft Drink of the Seahawks, now Available for Fans at Qwest Field" (Press release). Seattle Seahawks. June 30, 2010. Archived from the original on July 5, 2010. Retrieved November 30, 2010. "Seahawks, Coca-Cola Announce Multi-Year Partnership Extension" (Press release). Seattle Seahawks. August 1, 2018. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020. Retrieved April 20, 2023. "Mitigating Traffic Congestion – The Role of Demand Side Strategy Seahawks Stadium (Qwest Field) – Seattle WA". Federal Highway Administration. Retrieved September 27, 2009. Goodwin, Shaun; Van de Venter, Karlee (July 21, 2023). "Your ultimate mega-guide to Taylor Swift in Seattle: Parking, tailgating, merch & more". The News Tribune. Retrieved March 1, 2024. Lindblom, Mike (May 26, 2009). "International District/Chinatown Station is switching point for many commuters". The Seattle Times. p. B1. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved December 2, 2017. "Sounder kicks off Seahawks service for season opener vs. the Los Angeles Rams" (Press release). Sound Transit. September 7, 2023. Retrieved March 1, 2024. Lindblom, Mike (June 1, 2009). "Sports fans to find relief at Stadium light-rail stop". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on June 12, 2009. Retrieved July 3, 2009. Transit Routs to Stadiums & Events Center, Weekday Service (PDF) (Map). King County Metro. September 2023. Retrieved March 1, 2024. Gutman, David (October 20, 2017). "Seahawks cancel gameday shuttle from Eastside to CenturyLink Field". The Seattle Times. Retrieved December 2, 2017. "Qwest Field: Covering all the routes". The Seattle Times. December 15, 2004. Archived from the original on September 23, 2015. Retrieved December 2, 2017. Gutierrez, Scott (March 15, 2010). "Take the train to Mariners and Sounders FC games". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved March 16, 2010. Haeck, Tim (April 19, 2009). "Expect construction delays for Mariners Opening Day". KIRO Radio. Archived from the original on July 14, 2011. Retrieved April 30, 2009. Young, Bob (June 5, 2007). "Council OKs selling lot near Qwest Field". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on February 15, 2010. Retrieved April 30, 2009. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lumen Field. Official website Washington State Public Stadium Authority Lumen Field page at the Seattle Seahawks site Lumen Field page at the Seattle Sounders FC site Project information from Ellerbe Becket Lumen Field Seating Chart Lumen Field on StadiumDB Portals:  American football  Soccer