Wayne Hamilton Black (born 17 November 1973) is a former professional tennis player from Zimbabwe. The son of former player Don Black, Black turned professional in 1994 and reached his highest singles ranking of 69 on 30 March 1998. He is the younger brother of fellow ATP Tour player Byron Black, with the pair forming the mainstay of the Zimbabwe Davis Cup team for over a decade. Black struggled for consistency in his singles game and by the new millennium had converted to a doubles specialist, in which he experienced greater success. He won two men's doubles Grand Slam titles at the 2001 U.S. Open and 2005 Australian Open with compatriot Kevin Ullyett, as well as two Grand Slam mixed doubles titles at the 2002 French Open and 2004 Wimbledon with sister Cara Black. He reached his career-high doubles ranking of 4 on 31 January 2005, following his second Grand Slam title win, and retired from professional play in 2005. Black and his siblings Byron and Cara were drilled in tennis from a young age by their father; they frequently played at least an hour of tennis before the school day began, another hour after school, followed by a third hour once homework had been completed. He was educated at St. John's College in Harare and the University of Southern California, but left before completing his degree to go professional. Black married Kazakhstani tennis player Irina Selyutina and settled in the United Kingdom following retirement, where both of his children were born. He competed in club tennis for Sutton Tennis & Squash Club for a period of time alongside his former coach Miles Maclagan. Citing a failure to get used to the colder climate of London, he later moved back to his home country and ran a tourist lodge with his wife. (W) winner; (F) finalist; (SF) semifinalist; (QF) quarterfinalist; (#R) rounds 4, 3, 2, 1; (RR) round-robin stage; (Q#) qualification round; (DNQ) did not qualify; (A) absent; (NH) not held; (SR) strike rate (events won / competed); (W–L) win–loss record. "Wayne Black Tennis Player Profile | ITF". www.itftennis.com. Retrieved 19 October 2023. Madzokere, Munyaradzi (17 August 2016). "Wayne Black reveals biggest regret". The Standard. Retrieved 18 November 2022. Amos, Stuart (30 August 2007). "Sutton eye national tennis title". Sutton & Croydon Guardian. Retrieved 18 November 2022. Wayne Black at the Association of Tennis Professionals Wayne Black at the International Tennis Federation Wayne Black at the Davis Cup