Black Panther: Wakanda Forever is a 2022 American superhero film based on Marvel Comics featuring the character Shuri / Black Panther. Produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the sequel to Black Panther (2018) and the 30th film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). Directed by Ryan Coogler, who co-wrote the screenplay with Joe Robert Cole, the film stars Letitia Wright as Shuri / Black Panther, alongside Lupita Nyong'o, Danai Gurira, Winston Duke, Florence Kasumba, Dominique Thorne, Michaela Coel, Mabel Cadena, Tenoch Huerta Mejía, Martin Freeman, Julia Louis-Dreyfus, and Angela Bassett. In the film, the leaders of Wakanda fight to protect their nation in the wake of King T'Challa's death. Ideas for a sequel began after the release of Black Panther in February 2018. Coogler negotiated to return as director in the following months, and Marvel Studios officially confirmed the sequel's development in mid-2019. Plans for the film changed in August 2020 when Black Panther star and T'Challa actor Chadwick Boseman died from colon cancer, with Marvel choosing not to recast his role. The return of other main cast members from the first film was confirmed that November, and the title was announced in May 2021. Filming began in late June 2021 in Atlanta, taking place at both Trilith Studios and Tyler Perry Studios, before moving to Massachusetts in August, but was halted in November to allow Wright to recover from an injury sustained during filming. It resumed by mid-January 2022 and wrapped in late March in Puerto Rico. Black Panther: Wakanda Forever premiered at the El Capitan Theatre and the Dolby Theatre in Hollywood, Los Angeles, on October 26, 2022, and was released in the United States on November 11, as the final film in Phase Four of the MCU. The film received generally positive reviews from critics and grossed $859.2 million worldwide, becoming the sixth highest-grossing film of 2022. Wakanda Forever and Bassett's performance received numerous awards and nominations, including five Academy Awards (winning Costume Design), one British Academy Film Award, six Critics' Choice Movie Awards (winning two), two Golden Globe Awards (winning one), and two Screen Actors Guild Awards. T'Challa, king of Wakanda, is suffering from an unspecified terminal illness which his sister Shuri believes can be cured by the "heart-shaped herb". Shuri attempts to synthetically recreate the herb after it was burned by Erik Killmonger, but fails to do so before T'Challa dies. A year later, Wakanda is under pressure from other nations to share their vibranium, with some parties attempting to steal it by force. Queen Ramonda implores Shuri to continue her research on the herb, hoping to create a new Black Panther that will defend Wakanda, but she refuses due to her belief that the Black Panther is a figure of the past. In the Atlantic Ocean, the CIA and U.S. Navy SEALs utilize a vibranium detector to locate a potential vibranium deposit underwater. The expedition is killed by a group of blue-skinned, water-breathing superhumans led by Namor, with the CIA believing Wakanda to be responsible. Namor confronts Ramonda and Shuri, easily bypassing Wakanda's advanced security. Blaming Wakanda for the vibranium race, he gives them an ultimatum: deliver him the scientist responsible for the vibranium detector, or he will attack Wakanda. Shuri and Okoye learn from CIA agent Everett K. Ross that the scientist in question is MIT student Riri Williams and arrive at the university to confront her. The group is pursued by the FBI and then by Namor's warriors, who defeat Okoye before taking Shuri and Williams underwater to meet Namor. Angered by Okoye's failure to protect Shuri, Ramonda strips her of her title as general of the Dora Milaje and seeks out Nakia, who has been living in Haiti since The Blip. Namor shows Shuri his vibranium-rich underwater kingdom of Talokan, which he has protected for centuries from discovery by the world. Bitter at the surface world for enslaving the Maya, Namor proposes an alliance with Wakanda against the rest of the world but threatens to destroy Wakanda if they refuse. Nakia helps Shuri and Williams escape, killing a Talokanil guard in the process, and Namor retaliates with an attack against Wakanda, during which Ramonda drowns while saving Williams. Namor vows to return with his full army, and the citizens of Wakanda relocate to the Jabari mountains for their safety. Meanwhile, Ross is arrested by his ex-wife, CIA director Valentina Allegra de Fontaine, for secretly exchanging classified intelligence with the Wakandans. After Ramonda's funeral, Shuri uses a remnant of the herb that gave Namor's people their superhuman abilities to reconstruct the heart-shaped herb. She ingests it, gaining superhuman abilities and meeting Killmonger in the Ancestral Plane, who urges her to seek revenge. Shuri dons a new Black Panther suit and is accepted by the other Wakandan tribes as the Black Panther. Despite M'Baku's urges for peace, Shuri is determined to exact vengeance on Namor for Ramonda's death and orders an immediate counterattack on Talokan. Preparing for battle, with Ayo assuming the position of general of the Dora Milaje, Shuri bestows the Midnight Angel armor upon Okoye, who in turn recruits Dora Milaje member Aneka to join her. Williams creates an Iron Man-esque powered exoskeleton to aid the Wakandans. Using a seafaring vessel, the Wakandans lure Namor and his warriors to the surface with another vibranium detector as a battle ensues. Shuri traps Namor in a fighter aircraft, intending to dry him out and weaken him. The pair crash on a desert beach and fight. Shuri gains the upper hand but has a vision of Ramonda and implores Namor to yield, offering him a peaceful alliance. Namor accepts, and the battle ends. Namor's cousin, Namora, is upset at Namor's surrender, but he assures her that the new alliance will allow them to conquer the surface world one day. Williams returns to MIT, leaving her suit behind, while Okoye rescues Ross from captivity. Shuri plants more heart-shaped herbs to ensure the future of the Black Panther mantle. In Shuri's absence, M'Baku steps forward to challenge for the throne. Shuri visits Nakia in Haiti where she burns her funeral robe in accordance with Ramonda's wishes, allowing herself to finally grieve for T'Challa. In a mid-credits scene, Shuri learns that Nakia and T'Challa had a son named Toussaint, whom Nakia has been raising in secret. Toussaint reveals his Wakandan name is T'Challa. Letitia Wright as Shuri / Black Panther: The princess of Wakanda who designs new technology for the nation. Wright was given a larger role in the film following the death of Chadwick Boseman, who starred in previous MCU media as Shuri's older brother T'Challa / Black Panther. Wright said Shuri turns to her technology as a way to grieve T'Challa. Lupita Nyong'o as Nakia: A former War Dog, an undercover spy for Wakanda, from the River Tribe. Nyong'o said Nakia has "matured" following both the Blip and the death of T'Challa, explaining that her character's "priorities have shifted and sharpened" while adding that Nakia still remains "the one you want to call when you're in trouble". Danai Gurira as Okoye: The general of the Dora Milaje, Wakanda's all-female special forces, and a former Avenger. Okoye later takes on the mantle of the Midnight Angels, along with Aneka. It is revealed in the film that Okoye's husband, W'Kabi, was imprisoned following the events of Black Panther (2018). Gurira said the film would explore "many facets" of Okoye's humanity. Winston Duke as M'Baku: A powerful warrior and leader of Wakanda's mountain tribe, the Jabari. Duke indicated that following the Jabari's involvement in the events of Avengers: Infinity War (2018) and Avengers: Endgame (2019), the tribe is no longer isolated from the rest of Wakanda. He also felt M'Baku was trying to figure "out how to move forward" in this new world for Wakanda, much like many in the real world were trying to do in regards to the COVID-19 pandemic. Florence Kasumba as Ayo: A member and the second-in-command who later becomes the general of the Dora Milaje after Okoye is stripped of her duties. She is romantically involved with Aneka. Dominique Thorne as Riri Williams: An MIT student and genius inventor from Chicago who creates a suit of armor that rivals the one built by Tony Stark / Iron Man. Director Ryan Coogler noted that Williams is a foil to Shuri, adding "there's a thread of similarity" between the two, but they are "also very, very different", with Williams and Shuri's relationship representing a similar exploration of the "diversity of the Black experience" as T'Challa and Killmonger's relationship did in Black Panther. Michaela Coel as Aneka: A Wakandan warrior and member of the Dora Milaje. Aneka later takes upon the mantle of the Midnight Angels, along with Okoye. Aneka is romantically involved with Ayo. Coel was drawn to the character being queer as in the comics, and Coogler described Aneka as "kind of a rebel". Mabel Cadena as Namora: Namor's cousin. Tenoch Huerta Mejía as Namor: The king of Talokan, an ancient civilization of underwater dwelling people, who refer to him as the feathered serpent god K'uk'ulkan. Huerta said Namor decides to get involved in the surface world after T'Challa publicly reveals the truth of Wakanda at the end of the first film, which consequently puts Talokan in "jeopardy", leading Namor and his people to "take action to protect themselves". Huerta also confirmed that the character is a mutant as in the comics. Huerta called Namor an anti-hero, explaining that it was important to both him and Coogler to humanize the character by making his motivations understandable despite him having an antagonistic role in the film. Coogler was enthused to include Namor's "really unique features" from the comics, including his ankle wings and pointy ears. He also described the character as "kind of an asshole, kind of romantic, and just incredibly powerful". Huerta learned the Yucatec Maya language for the role, as well as how to swim. Martin Freeman as Everett K. Ross: An agent of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) who has previous ties to Wakanda. Julia Louis-Dreyfus as Valentina Allegra de Fontaine: The new director of the CIA and the ex-wife of Ross. Angela Bassett as Ramonda: The Sovereign Queen regnant of Wakanda who is grieving the death of her son T'Challa. Bassett explained that Ramonda would be trying to balance leading her people, being a mother to Shuri, and keeping threats to Wakanda "at bay", all while grieving the death of T'Challa, which is "a lot for her to handle". While Bassett was initially unhappy with Ramonda being killed off in the film, Coogler reassured her that death is not necessarily permanent in the MCU, and she felt that it was possible for her character to return in the future, similar to how people were brought back to life following the Blip in Endgame. Additionally, Michael B. Jordan reprises his MCU role as N'Jadaka / Erik "Killmonger" Stevens, T'Challa and Shuri's cousin. Returning from Black Panther are Isaach de Bankolé, Danny Sapani, and Dorothy Steel (in her final, posthumous role) as the Wakandan River Tribe, Border Tribe, and Merchant Tribe elders, respectively; Connie Chiume reprises her role as Zawavari, previously the Mining Tribe Elder, but now the Elder Statesman, taking over the role held by Zuri in the first film; and comedian Trevor Noah also reprises his voice role as Shuri's A.I. Griot. Alex Livinalli portrays the Talokanil warrior Attuma, while María Mercedes Coroy portrays Princess Fen, Namor's mother. Lake Bell (who previously voiced Natasha Romanoff / Black Widow in Marvel Studios' animated series What If...?) and Robert John Burke appear as Dr. Graham and Smitty, respectively, a pair of CIA officials in charge of the vibranium mining operation. Richard Schiff appears as the U.S. Secretary of State, while Kamaru Usman appears as a naval officer. Archival footage from previous MCU films of Boseman as T'Challa / Black Panther is used in the film's ending, with Divine Love Konadu-Sun appearing as T'Challa II / Toussaint, T'Challa and Nakia's son. CNN news anchor Anderson Cooper appears as himself reporting on the Wakandan activities. With the release of Black Panther in February 2018, producer Kevin Feige said there were "many, many stories" to tell about the character, and he wanted director and co-writer Ryan Coogler to return for any sequel; Marvel Studios wanted to keep the creative team as intact as possible, while Walt Disney Studios chairman Alan F. Horn, despite feeling it was too early to discuss a sequel, was also positive about the desire to have Coogler return as director. Coogler wanted to see how Chadwick Boseman's T'Challa / Black Panther would grow as a king in future films, since his reign had only recently begun in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) in contrast to the comics, where he was king since childhood. In March 2018, Feige said there was nothing specific to reveal about a sequel, but Marvel had ideas and a "pretty solid direction" on where they wanted to take a second film. That month, Boseman's agent Michael Greene was in negotiations for the actor to return as T'Challa in two planned Black Panther sequels for a reported pay of $10 million and $20 million, respectively. By October, Coogler had closed a deal to write and direct a sequel to Black Panther. Despite both Marvel and Coogler having always intended to work together again after the first film's success, Coogler avoided rushing into a deal. Negotiations with Coogler were completed "under the radar" in the months following the first film's release. He was expected to begin writing the sequel in 2019, ahead of a planned filming start in late 2019 or early 2020. In November 2018, Letitia Wright was confirmed to be reprising her role of T'Challa's sister Shuri for the sequel. When Angela Bassett, who played Ramonda in Black Panther, was asked if the main cast would return for the sequel, her husband Courtney B. Vance said they would. He said this included Michael B. Jordan as Killmonger, who was killed in the first film, and Bassett agreed. Feige dismissed Vance's statement in June 2019 as "pure rumor", saying there were no set plans for the film as Coogler had just begun outlining it and had not yet shared his plans with Feige or co-producer Nate Moore. The next month, John Kani expressed interest in reprising his role as T'Challa's father T'Chaka in the film, and Danai Gurira stated that Coogler had confirmed she would be reprising her role of Okoye in the sequel. Feige confirmed the sequel's development at the 2019 San Diego Comic-Con, while Martin Freeman confirmed in August that he would reprise his role as Everett K. Ross in the sequel. A release date of May 6, 2022, was announced at D23 along with the placeholder title Black Panther II. Feige said Coogler had completed a script treatment for the film that included a villain and new title. At the end of 2019, Ruth E. Carter confirmed that she would be returning from the first film as costume designer for the sequel, and said that she was set to begin work on it in "the fall". Feige, Boseman, and Coogler discussed adapting elements of Boseman's more "Gung ho" T'Challa performance in the second episode of What If...? for the film. Chadwick Boseman was an immensely talented actor and an inspirational individual who affected all of our lives professionally and personally. His portrayal of T'Challa the Black Panther is iconic and transcends any iteration of the character in any other medium from Marvel's past. And it's for that reason that we will not recast the character. —Producer Kevin Feige in December 2020 on the decision to not recast Boseman's role of T'Challa following his death On August 28, 2020, Boseman died from colon cancer. Coogler stated that he had been unaware of Boseman's illness, and had spent the last year "preparing, imagining and writing words for him to say [in the film] that we weren't destined to see". Feige and other executives at Marvel Studios were also unaware of Boseman's illness. Boseman, who had become thinner from his illness in the weeks prior to his death, had been prepared to begin gaining the weight back in September 2020 ahead of filming the sequel in March 2021. According to The Hollywood Reporter, industry observers felt Disney could recast the role, but that might generate a "fan outcry" and prompt comparisons between actors. Another suggestion was for Disney to shift their plans and have Shuri take on the mantle of the Black Panther, which occurred in the comic books. By the time of Boseman's death, Coogler was in the middle of writing the script and had already turned in a draft. In mid-November, executive producer Victoria Alonso said a digital double of Boseman would not be created for the film, and added that Marvel was taking their time to work out what they were going to do next and how. Later in the month, Lupita Nyong'o, Winston Duke, and Bassett were confirmed to be reprising their roles for the sequel as Nakia, M'Baku, and Ramonda, respectively, while Tenoch Huerta was in talks for an antagonist role. At that time, filming was expected to begin in June or July 2021 in Atlanta, Georgia. In December 2020, the film's release date was moved back to July 8, 2022. Feige also confirmed that the role of T'Challa would not be recast, and said the sequel would explore the world and characters of the first film as a way to honor the legacy that Boseman helped build. He would later reaffirm that visual effects would not be used to include Boseman in the film, and also said it "felt like it was much too soon to recast" noting how the world outside and within the MCU was still processing the loss of Boseman. By the end of the month, Boseman's makeup designer Siân Richards was set to return for the sequel, while his personal costumer Craig Anthony said he would not commit to the film due to Boseman's death. Hair designer Deidra Dixon was unsure if she would return following Boseman's death, as well as the death of her sister. Feige said in January 2021 that the primary focus of the sequel was always about further exploring the characters and "different subcultures" of Wakanda. That same month, Jordan said he was willing to reprise his role as Killmonger as he felt returning to the MCU would "always be on the table in some capacity" due to his love for the character and for working with Coogler. In February, Daniel Kaluuya said he was unsure if he would reprise his role of W'Kabi; he ultimately did not due to scheduling conflicts with Jordan Peele's Universal Pictures film Nope (2022). In March 2021, Coogler said he was still writing the script, and described working on the film without Boseman as the hardest thing he had ever done in his career. He added that Boseman had held together the first film, and now as the director, he was the one trying to keep it going. He was able to reuse many elements of his planned film before Boseman's death while incorporating and applying "the themes that the people who were hurting just as much as me could actually perform and execute and come out on the other side whole". According to Coogler, the original version of the script would have explored T'Challa dealing with resuming life after the Blip "grieving the loss of time... after being gone for five years," and involved T'Challa's relationship with his son Toussaint who he never met because of the Blip. Coogler also said that Namor and Valentina Allegra de Fontaine were in the original script, with de Fontaine having a larger role compared to the final film. Wright added that Shuri would have become Black Panther alongside T'Challa. Freeman said he would soon meet with Coogler to discuss the project. In April, Coogler wrote an op-ed in which he said the film would still shoot in Georgia despite the state passing its controversial Election Integrity Act of 2021 law. Though Coogler did not support the bill, he felt that boycotting film production in the state would have a negative effect on the people who otherwise would have been employed by the film. He instead planned to raise awareness of how to overturn the bill. Nyong'o expressed excitement for Coogler's plans and how everyone involved was dedicated to continuing Boseman's legacy, later saying that Coogler had reshaped his ideas for the film to respect Boseman, which she felt was "spiritually and emotionally correct" to do. Moore described the film as "how you move forward while dealing with a tragic loss. All of the characters, both old and new, are dealing with how loss can affect your actions in ways that are emotional and surprising." The film continues exploring feminist themes from the first film, with Nyong'o saying the film would tackle the "beliefs, passions, loves and arguments" of the women characters, creating "a robust drama". She also felt that Wakanda was a "world we are striving to get to". The film introduces Namor to the MCU, while changing his homeworld from the comics, Atlantis, to Talokan. Talokan is a "lavish", hidden, underwater Mesoamerican civilization that was inspired by ancient Mayan culture. The creatives worked with Mayan historians and experts to portray it. Coogler noted Talokan was similar to Wakanda in that it was also an advanced civilization "hiding in plain sight", with Moore stating the two "often find themselves in conflict because they're not dissimilar. They are these nations that would prefer to be hidden and isolated, with monarchs who are incredibly powerful and have strong points of view about how the world should be." Hannah Beachler returns from the first film as production designer, noting she did a "deep dive" to portray this version of Atlantis in the film; she was visually inspired by the films Jaws (1975) and Close Encounters of the Third Kind (1977), and Jack Kirby's comic imagery. Carter included jade and aquatic elements in her costumes for the Talokan people, and referenced sea creatures such as the lionfish and sharks for their feather headdresses. Many of the costumes needed to be tested in water given the amount of underwater filming that occurred. One of the reasons would have been that there were no comparisons with Aquaman from competing company DC Entertainment, the association between the legendary Atlantis and Mesoamerica came from the book Atlantis: The Antediluvian World (1882) by Ignatius L. Donnelly. In May 2021, Marvel Studios revealed the film's title as Black Panther: Wakanda Forever, which Ethan Anderton of /Film believed was a fitting tribute to Boseman since "Wakanda Forever" is the battle cry of the Wakandans. Wakanda Forever was originally intended to be used as the title of a potential third Black Panther film before the creatives decided to use it for the second film, with Moore stating that the title "felt right because it's a story about triumph through adversity. It's a story about legacy, it's a story about persistence, and Wakanda Forever says all of those things." By the end of that month, Freeman said he had read the script and expressed excitement for it. At the end of June, Edgar Luna, the business development manager of Worcester, Massachusetts's Economic Development Office, said the technical department of Wakanda Forever was in the city the week of June 25 to scout and inspect filming locations, including at the Worcester Police Department headquarters. Production started at Trilith Studios in Atlanta, Georgia, on June 29, 2021, under the working title Summer Break. Prior to Boseman's death, filming had been set to start in March 2021. At the start of filming, Feige announced that "everyone" from the first film was expected to return. Autumn Durald Arkapaw serves as the cinematographer, after doing so on Marvel Studios' Disney+ series Loki, replacing the first film's cinematographer Rachel Morrison. A long time collaborator of Coogler's, Morrison planned to return for Wakanda Forever but was unable to due to a scheduling conflict with her film Flint Strong caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Discussing the use of anamorphic lenses as opposed to spherical lenses, Coogler explained that anamorphic lenses "warp the image a little bit", which fit with the film having "the fog of loss over it"; a "profound loss... can warp how you look at the world". Arkapaw used Panavision T Series anamorphic lenses which were specifically modified by Panavision. Wright, Gurira, Nyong'o, and Kasumba bonded together on set while dealing with their grief for Boseman's death, with Wright and Gurira particularly connecting through taking walks together. Gurira described feeling emotional while entering the throne set, as she remembered filming scenes with Boseman during the first film and said that Coogler helped her process her grief. Bassett said in July that the screenplay was still undergoing changes due to Boseman's death, and had gone through at least five incarnations. She also indicated that the first film's co-writer Joe Robert Cole was contributing to the sequel, which Feige soon confirmed. Michaela Coel joined the cast in an undisclosed role. In August, Isaach de Bankolé was set to reprise his role as the Wakandan River Tribe elder, and Dominique Thorne began filming scenes for Wakanda Forever as Riri Williams before starring as that character in the Disney+ series Ironheart. Filming that month was expected to take place at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and in Worcester, with the production preparing to film a car chase in Worcester by August 18. A chase scene was filmed in the Ernest A. Johnson Tunnel on August 23 and 24. On August 25, Wright was temporarily hospitalized with what were believed to be minor injuries sustained in an accident while filming a stunt in Boston. Wright went to her home in London for recovery in September while filming continued to shoot around her character. Dorothy Steel, who portrayed the Wakandan Merchant Tribe elder in the first film, died on October 15; she was in the middle of reprising her role for the sequel when she died. In late October, the film's release was delayed to November 11, 2022. The production moved to the Mary Ross Waterfront Park in Brunswick, Georgia by October 22, where filming occurred from October 28 to November 2. Michael Torras, the manager of the Brunswick Landing Marina, said a 300-foot cruise ship would join the production in the following days, and most of the filming occurred on the water. Matthew Hill, Brunswick's downtown development authority director, said most of the scenes were shot at night. By November 5, filming of the scenes that did not require Wright was completed, before the production went on hiatus on November 19. This was to accommodate Wright's fractured shoulder and a concussion, which were more serious than initially determined, and was not expected to affect the film's release date. The United States' Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) implemented new rules on November 8 requiring non-U.S. citizens to be fully vaccinated against COVID-19 and provide proof of vaccination before traveling to the country. The Hollywood Reporter noted that this could present an issue for Wright's return to filming in Atlanta since she is not a U.S. citizen and was reportedly not vaccinated. In mid-December, The Hollywood Reporter confirmed that filming would resume in late January 2022 in Atlanta with Wright involved; Feige, Moore, and executive producer Louis D'Esposito confirmed upon the start of the hiatus that Wright was the film's new lead. Filming resumed by mid-January 2022, with a recovered Wright returning, and was expected to continue for four weeks. Filming was originally scheduled to resume on January 10 but was delayed by a week after cast and crew members, including Nyong'o, tested positive for COVID-19. At that time, The Hollywood Reporter reported that Duke had negotiated a pay raise for his return because of his character's expanded role in the sequel. The following month, Nyong'o revealed that Danny Sapani would be reprising his role as the Wakandan Border Tribe elder in the film. Thorne completed filming her scenes by March 13. Additional photography began on March 18, in Puerto Rico, where filming officially wrapped on March 24. In June 2022, Huerta confirmed that he was appearing in the film, and he was officially announced to be playing Namor at the 2022 San Diego Comic-Con the next month, when Coel, Mabel Cadena, and Alex Livinalli were also revealed to be respectively playing Aneka, Namora, and Attuma, and Florence Kasumba was confirmed to be reprising her role as Ayo. Reshoots occurred with the cast following their appearance at Comic-Con. Huerta described them as being for "little missing pieces". In late July, it was revealed that Kamaru Usman would appear in the film, while Richard Schiff was revealed to be cast in September. Lake Bell was revealed to be appearing in the film in October; she previously voiced alternate versions of Natasha Romanoff / Black Widow in What If...?. Michael P. Shawver returns as editor from the first film. 2,233 out of the film's 2,548 shots involved the use of visual effects, which were created by more than a dozen VFX vendors. Perception designed the film's main-on-end title sequence, which depicts Shuri's funeral clothes being burned to reveal a Black Panther suit underneath. The sequence was filmed practically using a specialized fireproof Panavision camera, with Perception igniting controlled flames on cloth similar to the fabric worn by Shuri in the film. The film only features one post-credits scene, with Moore explaining that the creatives "felt the ending was so kind of poetic", that including an additional scene after the credits would have "felt a little disingenuous tonally from what we were doing". In September 2021, it was revealed that Ludwig Göransson was set to return as composer for the sequel. His score was released by Hollywood Records on November 11, 2022. Black Panther: Wakanda Forever Prologue, a soundtrack extended play, was released by Hollywood Records and Marvel Music on July 25, 2022, and includes Tems' cover of Bob Marley's "No Woman, No Cry", which was used in the film's teaser trailer, "A Body, A Coffin" by Amaarae, and "Soy" by Santa Fe Klan. Göransson produced all three songs, and co-wrote "A Body, A Coffin" with Amaarae, Kyu Steed, KZ, Cracker Mallo, and Maesu. In late October 2022, it was announced that the film's lead single would be "Lift Me Up" by Rihanna, written by Tems, Göransson, Rihanna, and Coogler, as a tribute to Boseman. The single marks Rihanna's first solo musical output since 2016 and was released on October 28, through Westbury Road, Roc Nation, Def Jam Recordings, and Hollywood Records. Tems stated she wanted to write a song that "portrays a warm embrace from all the people that I've lost in my life". "Lift Me Up" was featured on the film's soundtrack, Black Panther: Wakanda Forever – Music from and Inspired By, which was released on November 4, 2022, by Roc Nation, Def Jam Recordings, and Hollywood Records. Voices Rising: The Music of Wakanda Forever, a three-part documentary series detailing the creation process of Wakanda Forever's soundtrack, had its first episode released on Disney+ on February 28, 2023. In the first episode, "Nigeria: Past Is Present", Coogler and Göransson work in Lagos, Nigeria to incorporate the sounds of traditional music along with contemporary artists such as Fireboy DML, Bloody Civilian, and Busiswa into the score. The second episode, "Mexico: Con La Brisa", sees Göransson working in Mexico to once again blend traditional music and instruments alongside modern artists such as Foudeqush, Vivir Quintana, and Mare Advertencia, to create the sound of Namor and the Talokkan people. The third episode, "London: Bring It Home", sees Göransson recording the orchestra for the score at the Abbey Road Studios in London in mid-2022, while working to infuse it with the elements he recorded in Mexico and Nigeria alongside artists including Jorja Smith and Burna Boy. Göransson also collaborates again with Senegalese singer Baba Maal, who returned from the first film to provide vocals.[citation needed] The series was produced by Actual Films, JM Films, and Proximity Media. The series was originally scheduled to be removed from Disney+ on May 26, 2023, as part of Disney's efforts to reduce content costs, but it was ultimately decided that it would remain on the service at that time. The first footage from the film was shown in a sizzle reel of Disney's upcoming films during the studio's presentation at CinemaCon in April 2022. Feige, Coogler, and the cast promoted the film at the 2022 San Diego Comic-Con alongside a live performance from singer Baaba Maal, tama player Massamba Diop, and other African drummers and dancers and the debut of the teaser trailer on July 23, 2022. It featured a cover of Bob Marley's "No Woman, No Cry" that transitions into Kendrick Lamar's "Alright" (2015). Both Leah Simpson and Giovana Gelhoren of People called the footage "powerful", while Sandra Gonzalez of CNN felt the teaser commemorated Boseman's performance and wrote "amid the grief that permeates the preview, there's hope, the birth of new life (literally) and a glimpse at the future, with a clawed sneak peek of a new suited hero". Writing for IndieWire, Christian Zilko also felt the teaser commemorated Boseman's performance while also opining that this presented a "daunting" challenge for Marvel Studios for Black Panther's future, due to Boseman being regarded as "one of the cornerstones of the MCU moving forward" and the studio not recasting his role. Variety's Carson Burton and J. Kim Murphy felt the teaser focused on who would "take on the mantle" of Black Panther, noting the presence of a mysterious figure at the end of the trailer. The teaser trailer received 172 million views in its first 24 hours of release. Funko Pops for the film were also revealed a day after. The film was included in a sizzle reel shown ahead of screenings during National Cinema Day that highlighted upcoming films from various studios. Coogler, Wright, Duke, Bassett, and Huerta promoted the film at the 2022 D23 Expo with exclusive footage, which Aaron Couch from The Hollywood Reporter described as a "gripping sequence". An official trailer was released on October 3, 2022. EJ Panaligan at Variety and Narayan Liu of Comic Book Resources both called it an "exciting" trailer that provided a better look at the new Black Panther costume, with Liu adding it teased "a more intense storyline centered on loss, strength and the heroes" of the MCU. Devan Coggan of Entertainment Weekly said the trailer was "the best look yet at Wakanda's future" which ended with "a stunning look at the new Panther suit". Gizmodo's Linda Codega found everything in the trailer from "the music, the energy, [and] the intensity" to be "incredible" and exclaimed the film appeared to be "balanc[ing] political maneuvering, spycraft, and the kind of goofiness [one would] expect out of a Marvel film". In October 2022, Marvel partnered with Target for an ad campaign featuring Thorne reprising her role as Riri Williams. The minute-long ad was directed by Malik Vitthal and shows Williams working on her Mark I Ironheart suit concurrent with a group of young Black girls creating with Lego. Williams sees one of the girls at Target, who gives her inspiration for her suit's power source. Shannon Miller at Adweek called the ad "a rare occurrence in mainstream marketing" of two young Black STEM girls interacting. The ad featured a number of MCU-themed Easter eggs and the song "I Got the Juice" by Janelle Monáe featuring Pharrell Williams. It debuted online on October 16, 2022, with an airing during Monday Night Football the following day; 30 and 15-second versions were also created. Marvel and Target's partnership also includes exclusive merchandise and augmented reality experiences within Target stores. Also in October, Sprite Zero Sugar launched a marketing campaign to promote the film from Wieden + Kennedy and Momentum Worldwide. Lexus ran an advertisement promoting its RZ 450e with Danai Gurira portraying Okoye. Lexus and Adidas teamed up for designing a custom Lexus LC 500 Convertible for JuJu Smith-Schuster during the world premiere. Both it and the Lexus GX feature in the film. On November 1, McDonald's began selling Black Panther: Wakanda Forever Happy Meals which included one of ten toys based on characters from the film. Additionally, Kraft Foods released macaroni and cheese with Black Panther: Wakanda Forever-inspired shapes. A six-episode podcast hosted by Ta-Nehisi Coates, titled Wakanda Forever: The Official Black Panther Podcast, features interviews with the cast and crew discussing the making of the film. The first episode premiered on November 3, 2022, and the subsequent episodes will be released weekly beginning January 2023. Three episodes of the series Marvel Studios: Legends were released on November 4, 2022, exploring T'Challa, Shuri, and the Dora Milaje using footage from their previous MCU appearances, while a 20/20 TV special entitled Black Panther: In Search of Wakanda hosted by Robin Roberts and featuring interviews with the film's cast was aired on ABC. To celebrate the launch of Adidas' "Wakanda Forever Collection", Calty Design Research, Adidas School for Experiential Education in Design and Carbon partnered to design a custom Lexus RX 500h F SPORT inspired by the film. Advertisers paid more than $100 million for the promotional campaign of Wakanda Forever according to Deadline Hollywood. Black Panther: Wakanda Forever premiered at the El Capitan Theatre and the Dolby Theatre in Hollywood, Los Angeles, on October 26, 2022. It also premiered in Lagos, Nigeria on November 6, 2022, an occasion Deadline Hollywood described as the first local premiere for a Marvel film. It began releasing internationally on November 9, 2022, and in the United States on November 11. It was previously scheduled for May 6 and then for July 8, 2022. The film was released theatrically in France, despite the country's 17-month waiting period for when films can appear on streaming services after its theatrical release. Disney's decision to release Wakanda Forever in theaters was encouraged by the French government's acknowledgment that their media chronology needed to be modernized and their timeline to do so, after previously opting to skip the theatrical release of their film Strange World and release it directly to Disney+. Under the current chronology, Wakanda Forever will first become available on Disney+ in France in early 2024. The removal of a depiction of a same-sex relationship between Ayo and Aneka, along with some other edits, were made in order for the film to be released in Kuwait. Wakanda Forever was released in China on February 7, 2023, becoming the first MCU film to be released in the country since Spider-Man: Far From Home (2019). It is the final film of Phase Four of the MCU. The film was released on Disney+ on February 1, 2023, with an IMAX Enhanced version also available. It was also released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on Ultra HD Blu-ray, Blu-ray, and DVD on February 7, 2023. The home media includes audio commentary, deleted scenes, a gag reel, and various behind-the-scenes featurettes. Upon its release on Disney+, the film became the most-watched Marvel film premiere globally on the service, based on hours streamed in its first five days. Black Panther: Wakanda Forever has grossed $453.8 million in the United States and Canada, and $405.4 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $859.2 million. It is the sixth-highest-grossing film of 2022. Its worldwide opening weekend earned $331.6 million, marking the third-largest opening of the pandemic era, behind Spider-Man: No Way Home ($601 million) and Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness ($452 million). Deadline Hollywood calculated the film's net profit as $259 million, accounting for production budgets, marketing, talent participations, and other costs; box office grosses and home media revenues placed it fifth on their list of 2022's "Most Valuable Blockbusters". According to The Hollywood Reporter, Black Panther: Wakanda Forever was projected to earn $175 million in the US and Canada on its opening weekend. By November 2022, Boxoffice Pro estimated the film's opening weekend in the US and Canada to be between $170–205 million, and projected the film would earn $435–543 million for its total domestic gross. The film made $84.3 million on its first day, which included $28 million from Thursday night previews. Its opening weekend earned $181.3 million, becoming the top film of the weekend. This marked the largest November opening weekend ever, surpassing The Hunger Games: Catching Fire ($158.1 million), and the third-biggest opening for a film during the pandemic era, behind No Way Home ($260 million) and Multiverse of Madness ($187 million). Wakanda Forever remained the top film in its sophomore weekend, grossing over $66.5 million, representing a drop of 63%. The following weekend, the film remained atop the box office, grossing $45.6 million (a decline of 31%). Its gross over the five-day Thanksgiving weekend was $63.8 million. The film remained atop the chart for its fourth and fifth weekend, earning $17.5 million and $11.2 million, respectively. In its sixth weekend, Wakanda Forever earned $5.3 million and was displaced by Avatar: The Way of Water. It is the third highest-grossing film of 2022 in the region behind Top Gun: Maverick and Avatar: The Way of Water. Outside of the US and Canada, the film grossed $150.3 million from 50 markets in its first weekend. It had the biggest opening ever for a film in Nigeria, as well as the second-biggest for a film released in 2022 in France and South Africa. Disney Africa reported that the film set an all-time box office record in West Africa and accumulated the biggest opening of 2022 in East Africa, as well as the second-highest box office gross ever in Southern Africa. The five highest openings for the film were in the United Kingdom and Ireland ($15 million), France ($13.7 million), Mexico ($12.8 million), South Korea ($8.9 million) and Brazil ($7.1 million). In its second weekend, Wakanda Forever grossed $69.8 million, for a drop of 49%, while in its third weekend, it grossed $32.1 million, for a drop of 53%. As of March 12, 2023[update], the highest grossing territories were the United Kingdom ($41 million), Mexico ($35.9 million), France ($33.2 million), Brazil ($21.4 million), and Australia ($19.5 million). The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an approval rating of 83% with an average rating of 7.1/10, based on 447 reviews. The site's critics consensus reads: "A poignant tribute that satisfyingly moves the franchise forward, Black Panther: Wakanda Forever marks an ambitious and emotionally rewarding triumph for the MCU." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 67 out of 100, based on 62 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, while PostTrak reported audience members gave the film an overall positive score of 93%, with 85% saying that they would definitely recommend it. Kambole Campbell at Empire Online gave the film 4 out of 5 stars, stating that the film "stands out from a somewhat formulaic era of Marvel movies: held together by its compelling sense of place, and by acting as a passionate eulogy for Chadwick Boseman" and feeling that it was "imaginative and... grounded, which makes the tilt to the usual CG-dominated spectacle a little jarring." Campbell lauded the performances of Wright, Duke, Bassett, and Coel, and described Huerta's character as "a highlight, an imaginative adaptation of the veteran comics character, one who here speaks truth with convincing venom." Tom Jorgensen at IGN gave the film 7 out of 10, stating that it was "an effective, emotional farewell to T'Challa—a meditation on forging one's own future out of a painful past—but with a plot that has to introduce an entirely new nation and pave the way for a new wave of Marvel stories, it does struggle under the weight of all that expectation." Jorgensen lauded Bassett and Huerta's performances, but he felt that Talokan had not been "establish[ed]... quite as gracefully" and the film's third act had "push[ed] its luck too far... with a poorly conceived and logically baffling tactical choice". Owen Gleiberman of Variety wrote: "The movie doesn't have the classic comic-book pow of Black Panther, and it's easily 20 minutes too long (we could probably have lived without the Talokan backstory). Yet Wakanda Forever has a slow-burn emotional suspense. Once the film starts to gather steam, it doesn't let up." Similarly, Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune felt Wakanda Forever "is not special like the first movie was. The quality of the storytelling and especially the action sequences grows less effective as the film proceeds." Nevertheless, he singled out that "every actor on screen here is marvelous, even when the script and effects-driven spectacle settles for the wrong kind of 'more'." Peter Travers of ABC News commended the performances from Bassett, Wright and Thorne, but wrote the film's runtime "feels loooong, with dragged out battle scenes, excessive computer effects and way too much franchise building." The BBC's Nicholas Barber said that the sequel struggled due to the loss of Boseman, but commended the visual effects and Bassett, Wright, and Lupita Nyong'o's acting. David Rooney of The Hollywood Reporter felt that "[e]ven if the length feels overextended, Coogler and his editors deserve credit for allowing breathing space between the action scenes for character and relationship development, with Ludwig Göransson's African-inflected score enhancing both those quieter moments and the big smackdowns. It's impossible for Wakanda Forever to match the breakthrough impact of its predecessor, but in terms of continuing the saga while paving the way for future installments, it's amply satisfying." Ann Hornaday of the Washington Post wrote: "Wakanda Forever winds up feeling hopelessly stalled, covering up an inability to move on by resorting to repetitive, over-familiar action sequences, maudlin emotional beats and an uninvolving, occasionally incoherent story." James Berardinelli of ReelViews gave the film two stars out of four, criticizing the film's runtime and worldbuilding subplots. He further wrote that the sequel is "not so much a bad movie as it is disappointing and frustrating. There are some strong moments both in terms of character development (primarily for Shuri, who has the deepest and most compelling arc) and action (the car chase is perfunctory but some of the battle scenes are well-executed), but not enough of them. There are no rousing moments designed to elicit a mass cheer from the audience". French Minister of Armed Forces Sébastien Lecornu took issue with the portrayal of the French Armed Forces in the film, calling it a "false and misleading representation". A scene in the film shows French mercenaries that were captured by Wakandans after they attacked an outpost in Mali being brought before the United Nations in uniforms similar to those worn by French soldiers in Operation Barkhane. This was considered a "sensitive" storyline for France, given its soldiers withdrew from is involvement in the Mali War in 2022, and were replaced by Russia's Wagner Group. Black Panther: Wakanda Forever was nominated for five Academy Awards (winning one), a British Academy Film Award, six Critics' Choice Movie Awards (winning two), two Golden Globe Awards (winning one), and two Screen Actors Guild Awards, among others. Bassett became the first actress to win a major acting award for her role in a Marvel film. In addition, with Bassett's nomination for Best Supporting Actress at the 95th Academy Awards, Black Panther: Wakanda Forever became the first Marvel film to be nominated for an Academy Award in an acting category. In February 2021, the documentary series Marvel Studios: Assembled was announced. The special on this film, "The Making of Black Panther: Wakanda Forever", was released on Disney+ on February 8, 2023. In November 2022, Coogler and Feige were revealed to have discussed a potential third Black Panther film. In January 2023, Wright believed a third film was being considered, noting that the cast and Coogler needed "a little bit of a break... to regroup" before starting work on a third film. In November 2022, Moore stated that the Disney+ series Ironheart would serve as a direct sequel to Wakanda Forever, with Thorne returning to reprise her role as Riri Williams. Ironheart is scheduled to be released as part of Phase Five. List of Afrofuturist films As depicted in Black Panther (2018) As depicted in Avengers: Infinity War (2018) "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever (12A)". British Board of Film Classification. Archived from the original on November 15, 2022. Retrieved November 3, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 7, 2023). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Claws Way To No. 5 In Deadline's 2022 Most Valuable Blockbuster Tournament". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 8, 2023. Retrieved April 7, 2023. Rubin, Rebecca (November 8, 2022). "Will 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Beat 'Doctor Strange 2' for Biggest Opening Weekend of the Year?". Variety. Archived from the original on November 9, 2022. Retrieved November 8, 2022. "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved May 1, 2023. "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever". The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Fleming, Mike Jr. (November 8, 2018). "Hot Package: John Boyega, Letitia Wright To Star In Mike Cahill-Directed Sci-Fi 'Hold Back The Stars'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 9, 2018. Retrieved November 9, 2018. Kit, Borys; Couch, Aaron (November 20, 2020). "Marvel's 'Black Panther' Sequel Shoot to Begin in July (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 20, 2020. Retrieved November 20, 2020. Coggan, Devan (October 3, 2022). "Forever changed: The grief and joy of Black Panther: Wakanda Forever". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 4, 2022. Retrieved October 5, 2022. Tyrrell, Caitlin (November 3, 2022). "Black Panther 2 Sees Nakia Changed By The Blip And Loss Of T'Challa". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 4, 2022. Retrieved November 4, 2022. Bonomolo, Cameron (July 26, 2019). "Black Panther 2: Danai Gurira Confirms Return as Okoye". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on July 26, 2019. Retrieved July 26, 2019. Vincent, Maxance (October 31, 2022). "Black Panther 2's Okoye Actor Teases Emotional Arc In MCU Sequel". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 31, 2022. Retrieved October 31, 2022. Gearan, Hannah (July 26, 2022). "Black Panther 2 Star Teases M'Baku & Jabari Tribe's New Role In Wakanda". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 28, 2022. Retrieved July 30, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony; Fleming, Ryan; Grobar, Matt (July 23, 2022). "Marvel At Comic-Con 2022: What Phase 5 & 6 Look Like – Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Retrieved July 24, 2022. Mishra, Shrishty (October 3, 2022). "Ironheart Takes Flight in the 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Trailer". Collider. Archived from the original on October 4, 2022. Retrieved October 4, 2022. Coggan, Devan (October 3, 2022). "Ryan Coogler breaks down the emotional Black Panther: Wakanda Forever trailer". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 4, 2022. Retrieved October 4, 2022. Nnadi, Chioma (October 6, 2022). "Michaela Coel on Creativity, Romance, and the Path to Wakanda Forever". Vogue. Archived from the original on October 7, 2022. Retrieved October 7, 2022. "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever': Latest Action-Packed Trailer Arrives". Marvel.com. October 3, 2022. Archived from the original on October 4, 2022. Retrieved October 4, 2022. Panaligan, EJ (October 3, 2022). "'Wakanda Forever' Trailer Shows New Black Panther, Flying Namor and Ironheart Armor". Variety. Archived from the original on October 4, 2022. Retrieved October 4, 2022. Travis, Ben (September 26, 2022). "Namor Is 'A Dream Antagonist' For Black Panther: Wakanda Forever, Says Ryan Coogler – Exclusive Image". Empire. Archived from the original on September 26, 2022. Retrieved September 26, 2022. Dominguez, Noah (October 2, 2022). "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever's Namor Is an Anti-Hero, Not a Villain". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on October 17, 2022. Retrieved October 30, 2022. Laudenbach, Sarah (October 29, 2022). "Black Panther 2 Humanizes MCU Antagonist, Teases Namor Actor". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 29, 2022. Retrieved October 30, 2022. Green, Emily (June 2, 2022). "New 'Black Panther' Star Is Calling Out Mexico for Its Racism". Vice. Archived from the original on June 2, 2022. Retrieved June 2, 2022. Codega, Linda (September 1, 2022). "Black Panther 2's Tenoch Huerta Didn't Know How to Swim When He Became Namor". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on September 1, 2022. Retrieved September 1, 2022. Mancuso, Vinnie (August 16, 2019). "'Black Panther 2': Martin Freeman Confirms the Return of Everett Ross". Collider. Archived from the original on August 16, 2019. Retrieved August 16, 2019. Polo, Susana; Patches, Matt; Goslin, Austen (November 10, 2022). "Valentina Allegra de Fontaine is now one of Marvel's most important characters". Polygon. Archived from the original on November 11, 2022. Retrieved November 11, 2022. Jones, Marcus (November 14, 2022). "Angela Bassett Had Mixed Feelings About Queen Ramonda's Arc in 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever'". IndieWire. Archived from the original on December 6, 2022. Retrieved November 16, 2022. Moreau, Jordan (November 11, 2022). "Those Two Shocking 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Cameos Explained". Variety. Archived from the original on November 12, 2022. Retrieved December 3, 2022. Morales, Wilson (August 6, 2021). "Exclusive: Isaach de Bankolé To Reprise Role In Black Panther: Wakanda Forever". BlackFilmandTV.com. Archived from the original on August 6, 2021. Retrieved September 20, 2021. Jacobs, Mira (February 18, 2022). "Black Panther 2 BTS Photo Confirms Another Returning MCU Star". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on February 20, 2022. Retrieved February 20, 2022. "95-year-old actress who played tribal elder in 'Black Panther' dies". WSB-TV. October 15, 2021. Archived from the original on October 16, 2021. Retrieved October 16, 2021. "Here's All The MCU Easter Eggs in 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever'". collider.com. November 11, 2022. Archived from the original on November 19, 2022. Retrieved November 11, 2022. García, Ana Lucía (November 2, 2022). "María Mercedes Coroy publica video de "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever" en el que revela más detalles del filme (y en el que aparece su personaje)" [María Mercedes Coroy releases video of "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever" in which she reveals more details of the film (and in which her character appears)]. Prensa Libre (in Spanish). Archived from the original on November 6, 2022. Retrieved November 6, 2022. Adams, Timothy (October 27, 2022). "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever Confirms Casting of What If? Black Widow Star Lake Bell". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on October 27, 2022. Retrieved October 27, 2022. "Who Was Lake Bell's Character in 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever'?". Collider. November 11, 2022. Archived from the original on November 15, 2022. Retrieved November 14, 2022. Chapman, Tom (November 14, 2022). "Black Panther 2 Just Set up a Major Phase 5 MCU Movie". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on November 14, 2022. Retrieved November 14, 2022. Martin, Damon (July 29, 2022). "Kamaru Usman scores guest starring role in 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever'". MMA Fighting. Archived from the original on July 30, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Maisonet III, Eddie (November 11, 2022). "MMA fighters turned actors: Our favorite moments from combat sports stars in TV and film". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on November 11, 2022. Retrieved November 11, 2022. Singer, Matt (November 8, 2022). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Review: The King Is Dead". ScreenCrush. Archived from the original on November 18, 2022. Retrieved November 11, 2022. Lussier, Germain (November 11, 2022). "Why Black Panther: Wakanda Forever Has the Best End Credit Scene in Marvel History". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on November 11, 2022. Retrieved November 11, 2022. Ranno, Katie (November 13, 2022). "Wakanda Forever's Anderson Cooper Scene Sneaks In Another Ant-Man Side-Hustle". Looper. Archived from the original on December 7, 2022. Retrieved December 7, 2022. Setoodeh, Ramin (February 14, 2018). "'Black Panther': Marvel Studios President Kevin Feige on Casting Chadwick Boseman and Sequel Talk". Variety. Archived from the original on February 18, 2018. Retrieved April 26, 2018. Kit, Borys (October 11, 2018). "Ryan Coogler Signs on to Write and Direct 'Black Panther' Sequel (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 12, 2018. Retrieved October 11, 2018. Setoodeh, Ramin (February 5, 2018). "Chadwick Boseman and Ryan Coogler on How 'Black Panther' Makes History". Variety. Archived from the original on February 7, 2018. Retrieved February 6, 2018. Erao, Matthew (February 6, 2018). "Coogler Interested in Seeing What Kind of King Black Panther Becomes in Sequels". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on February 9, 2018. Retrieved April 26, 2018. Breznican, Anthony (March 9, 2018). "Marvel Studios chief Kevin Feige on the future of Black Panther, Captain Marvel, X-Men – and beyond". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 10, 2018. Retrieved April 26, 2018. Siegel, Tatiana (December 17, 2020). "Chadwick Boseman's Close Confidants Share Untold Memories of the Late Actor". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 18, 2020. Retrieved December 17, 2020. McRady, Rachel (January 28, 2019). "Angela Bassett's Husband Courtney B. Vance Might Have Confirmed a Major 'Black Panther 2' Spoiler (Exclusive)". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on January 28, 2019. Retrieved February 1, 2019. Barrow, Jerry L. (June 28, 2019). "We Asked Marvel Studios President If 'Into The Spider-Verse' Had Him Shook And If Nick Fury Will Ever Make It To Wakanda". BET. Archived from the original on July 2, 2019. Retrieved July 27, 2019. Davis, Brandon (July 12, 2019). "Black Panther's John Kani on Sequel Return, Marvel's Real Life Importance". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on July 13, 2019. Retrieved July 26, 2019. Agar, Chris (July 20, 2019). "Black Panther 2 Confirmed By Marvel At SDCC". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 21, 2019. Retrieved August 17, 2019. Couch, Aaron (August 24, 2019). "Marvel Confirms Kit Harington for 'Eternals,' Sets 'Black Panther II' Date". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 24, 2019. Retrieved August 24, 2019. Nyren, Erin (August 24, 2019). "'Black Panther' Sequel Set for 2022 Release". Variety. Archived from the original on August 24, 2019. Retrieved August 24, 2019. Hewitt, Chris (April 3, 2020). "Empire Podcast #408: Larry Karaszewski, Scott Alexander, Ruth E. Carter". The Empire Film Podcast (Podcast). Event occurs at 59:08. Archived from the original on April 6, 2020. Retrieved April 4, 2020. Mitovich, Matt (August 18, 2021). "What If...?: Chadwick Boseman's Lighter, 'Gung Ho' Take on T'Challa Was to Carry Over Into Black Panther 2". TVLine. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved August 18, 2021. Pearson, Ben (December 10, 2020). "'Black Panther II' Will Not Recast T'Challa in the Wake of Chadwick Boseman's Death". /Film. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved December 10, 2020. Rubin, Rebecca (August 30, 2020). "Ryan Coogler Pays Emotional Tribute to Chadwick Boseman: 'What an Incredible Mark He's Left for Us'". Variety. Archived from the original on August 30, 2020. Retrieved August 30, 2020. Siegel, Tatiana; Kit, Borys (September 2, 2020). "Disney Grapples With How to Proceed on 'Black Panther' Without Chadwick Boseman". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 2, 2020. Retrieved September 2, 2020. Keegan, Rebecca (March 31, 2021). "Despite History-Making Noms, 'Judas and the Black Messiah's' All-Black Producing Team Find Oscar Success to Be "Bittersweet"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 1, 2021. Retrieved March 31, 2021. Sneider, Jeff (March 17, 2021). "'Black Panther 2': Martin Freeman on Making the Sequel Without Chadwick Boseman". Collider. Archived from the original on March 18, 2021. Retrieved March 17, 2021. Scholz, Pablo O. (November 12, 2020). "En la cima de la meca del cine Entrevista exclusiva: quién es la argentina vicepresidenta de Marvel, la mujer más poderosa de Hollywood". Clarín (in Spanish). Archived from the original on November 13, 2020. Retrieved November 12, 2020. – via Haring, Bruce (November 15, 2020). "'Black Panther 2' Will Not Use Digital Double Of Chadwick Boseman, Says EP". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 15, 2020. Retrieved November 15, 2020. Gonzalez, Umberto (December 15, 2020). "Marvel Is Exploring New Talent Deals in Case Films End Up Going to Disney+ (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on December 16, 2020. Retrieved December 16, 2020. D'Alessandro, Anthony (January 10, 2021). "'WandaVision' Team On MCU Connections & How Disney+ Series Is "Cute-Cute Until It's Not"". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 10, 2021. Retrieved January 10, 2021. Travis, Ben (September 26, 2022). "Kevin Feige On Not Recasting T'Challa In The MCU: 'It Was Much Too Soon' – Exclusive". Empire. Archived from the original on October 4, 2022. Retrieved October 4, 2022. Juneau, Jen (January 27, 2021). "Michael B. Jordan Says He Would Return for Black Panther 2 If Asked: 'We Created a Family'". People. Archived from the original on January 27, 2021. Retrieved January 27, 2021. Hood, Cooper (February 20, 2021). "Daniel Kaluuya Isn't Sure If W'Kabi Will Return In Black Panther 2". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on February 21, 2021. Retrieved April 5, 2022. Grobar, Matt (July 13, 2022). "Daniel Kaluuya Won't Reprise Role As W'Kabi In 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 13, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Perine, Aaron (March 10, 2021). "Black Panther 2: Ryan Coogler Talks Difficulty of Moving On Without Chadwick Boseman". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on March 11, 2021. Retrieved March 17, 2021. Francisco, Eric (November 1, 2022). "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever Originally Had An Endgame-Centric Story, Director Reveals". Inverse. Archived from the original on November 2, 2022. Retrieved November 1, 2022. Ugwu, Reggie (December 23, 2022). "The 'Black Panther' Sequel That Never Was". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 23, 2022. Retrieved December 23, 2022. Hermanns, Grant (December 31, 2022). "Wakanda Forever Originally Had Two Black Panthers, Says MCU Star". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on January 1, 2023. Retrieved January 1, 2023. Coogler, Ryan (April 16, 2021). "Ryan Coogler Pens Op-Ed Denouncing Georgia's New Voting Law [Exclusive]". Shadow and Act. Archived from the original on April 16, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. VanHoose, Benjamin (March 3, 2021). "Lupita Nyong'o Says Black Panther 2 Director Ryan Coogler Has 'Really Exciting Ideas' for Sequel". People. Archived from the original on March 3, 2021. Retrieved March 3, 2021. Polowy, Kevin (April 28, 2021). "'Super Sema' star Lupita Nyong'o: 'Black Panther 2' without Chadwick Boseman 'feels spiritually and emotionally correct'". Yahoo! Entertainment. Archived from the original on April 28, 2021. Retrieved April 29, 2021. Tilet, Salamishah (September 7, 2022). "The Women of 'Wakanda Forever'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 7, 2022. Retrieved September 11, 2022. Klissmman, Daniel (November 8, 2022). "Does Namor's Talokan Exist In Marvel Comics?". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 8, 2022. Retrieved November 10, 2022. "The Mesoamerican Influences Behind Namor From 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever'". Archived from the original on November 10, 2022. Retrieved November 10, 2022. Couch, Aaron (May 3, 2021). "Marvel Unveils 'Black Panther II' Title, First 'Eternals' Footage and More". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 3, 2021. Retrieved May 3, 2021. Anderton, Ethan (May 3, 2021). "Marvel Studios Reveals 'Black Panther' and 'Captain Marvel' Sequel Titles". /Film. Archived from the original on May 3, 2021. Retrieved May 3, 2021. Wasalamudalige, Hansini (November 15, 2022). "Wakanda Forever Was Originally Part of Black Panther 3's Title". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on November 15, 2022. Retrieved November 16, 2022. Ruiz, Michael (May 30, 2021). "Martin Freeman Praises Black Panther: Wakanda Forever's Script". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on May 31, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. "'Black Panther 2' to film scenes in Worcester this summer, sources say". Spectrum News 1. June 24, 2021. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 26, 2021. Bonner, Michael (July 21, 2021). "Worcester will have a role in 'Black Panther' sequel". MassLive. Archived from the original on July 21, 2021. Retrieved August 16, 2021. Vary, Adam B.; Malkin, Marc (June 29, 2021). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Production Starts in Atlanta: 'We're Going to Make Chad Proud' (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on June 30, 2021. Retrieved June 30, 2021. "Production Weekly – Issue 1242 – Thursday, April 15, 2021 / 200 Listings – 45 Pages". Production Weekly. April 15, 2021. Archived from the original on April 15, 2021. Retrieved April 15, 2021. Fisher, Jacob (June 30, 2021). "Autumn Durald set as Cinematographer on 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' (Exclusive)". Discussing Film. Archived from the original on July 1, 2021. Retrieved June 30, 2021. Sharf, Zack (August 7, 2020). "Rachel Morrison on Lessons From 'Black Panther' and Directing Her First Feature". IndieWire. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved June 30, 2021. Mulcahey, Matt (March 1, 2023). ""Anamorphic's Biggest Fan": DP Autumn Durald Arkapaw on Black Panther: Wakanda Forever". Filmmaker Magazine. Archived from the original on April 24, 2023. Retrieved April 24, 2023. Romano, Nick (July 8, 2021). "Angela Bassett says there have been 5 versions of the Black Panther sequel script". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 8, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2021. Meares, Joel (July 12, 2021). "Kevin Feige Previews the MCU's Upcoming Phase 4: Shang-Chi, Eternals, No Way Home, Wakanda Forever, and More". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on July 12, 2021. Retrieved July 12, 2021. Donnelly, Matt (July 21, 2021). "'Black Panther' Sequel Casts Michaela Coel (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on July 21, 2021. Retrieved July 21, 2021. Davis, Brandon (August 19, 2021). "Dominique Thorne's Riri Williams to Debut in Black Panther: Wakanda Forever (Exclusive)". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 19, 2021. Retrieved August 19, 2021. Johnston, Dais (August 16, 2021). "Exclusive: Black Panther 2 to film at MIT this weekend". Inverse. Archived from the original on August 16, 2021. Retrieved August 16, 2021. Semon, Craig S. (August 18, 2021). "'Black Panther II' could be latest flick to take in the Worcester movie scene". Telegram & Gazette. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved August 20, 2021. "'Black Panther' sequel filming at Johnson Tunnel in downtown Worcester". Spectrum News 1. August 23, 2021. Archived from the original on August 24, 2021. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Kroll, Justin (August 25, 2021). "Letitia Wright Hospitalized With Minor Injuries After Stunt Rig Incident On 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Shoot". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 25, 2021. Retrieved August 25, 2021. Kit, Borys (November 5, 2021). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Shutting Down Production as Letitia Wright Recovers From On-Set Injury (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved November 5, 2021. Beresford, Trilby (October 15, 2021). "Dorothy Steel, Actress in 'Black Panther,' Dies at 95". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 16, 2021. Retrieved October 16, 2021. Rubin, Rebecca (October 18, 2021). "Disney Delays 'Doctor Strange 2,' 'Thor 4,' 'Black Panther' Sequel and 'Indiana Jones 5'". Variety. Archived from the original on October 18, 2021. Retrieved October 18, 2021. "'Black Panther 2' movie being filmed in Georgia town this weekend, next week". WSB-TV. October 22, 2021. Archived from the original on October 31, 2021. Retrieved November 2, 2021. Sokoni, Opio (October 28, 2021). "Black Panther Sequel Shoots Scenes In Small Georgia Town". Seattle Medium. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved November 2, 2021. Jackson, Gordon (November 1, 2021). "Marvel movie preparations ongoing". The Brunswick News. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved November 2, 2021. Kroll, Justin (November 19, 2021). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Begins Production Hiatus As Letitia Wright Continues To Recover From Her On Set Injuries". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 19, 2021. Retrieved November 19, 2021. Siegel, Tatiana; Kit, Borys (November 10, 2021). "Hollywood Studio Projects Get Stricter About COVID-19 Vaccine Mandates". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 10, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2021. Couch, Aaron; Kit, Borys (December 10, 2021). "Heat Vision". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 12, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2021. Youngs, Ian (January 14, 2022). "Letitia Wright returns to Black Panther II set months after accident". BBC News. Archived from the original on January 14, 2022. Retrieved January 14, 2022. Kit, Borys; Couch, Aaron (January 14, 2022). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' to Resume Filming Next Week With Letitia Wright". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 14, 2022. Retrieved January 14, 2022. LaBonte, Rachel (March 13, 2022). "Black Panther 2 Ironheart Actress Confirms She's Wrapped On MCU Film". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 14, 2022. Retrieved March 13, 2022. "Production Weekly – Issue 1289 – Thursday, March 10, 2022 / 179 Listings – 41 Pages". Production Weekly. March 9, 2022. Archived from the original on March 13, 2022. Retrieved June 9, 2022. Perry, Spencer (March 24, 2022). "Marvel's Black Panther: Wakanda Forever Wraps Filming". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on March 25, 2022. Retrieved March 24, 2022. Bailey, Kat (July 23, 2022). "Tenoch Huerta Confirmed To Play Namor In Black Panther: Wakanda Forever". IGN. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Retrieved July 23, 2022. Christopherson, David (August 9, 2022). "Black Panther 2 Required Reshoots Following Comic-Con Panel". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on August 12, 2022. Retrieved August 12, 2022. Busch, Jenna; Scott, Lyvie (September 10, 2022). "Black Panther 2 Footage Description: Wakanda Needs A New Protector [D23]". /Film. Archived from the original on September 10, 2022. Retrieved September 23, 2022. "Michael P. Shawver" (PDF). Worldwide Production Agency. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 10, 2022. Retrieved August 10, 2022. Giardina, Carolyn (December 7, 2022). "Dinosaurs, Demons and the Deep Sea: Behind the Visual Effects of the Year's Biggest Movies". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 18, 2023. Retrieved March 18, 2023. "Perception Designs Intimate and Emotional Title Sequence For Marvel Studios' Black Panther: Wakanda Forever". Perception. Archived from the original on December 9, 2022. Retrieved December 9, 2022. Jirak, Jamie (October 29, 2022). "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever Producer Reveals Why There's Only One Post-Credits Scene (Exclusive)". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on October 30, 2022. Retrieved October 31, 2022. Burlingame, Jon (September 7, 2021). "'Black Panther' Score Headed to Hollywood Bowl for Live-to-Picture Performance". Variety. Archived from the original on September 7, 2021. Retrieved September 7, 2021. "Rihanna Leads The 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Soundtrack With New Original Song "Lift Me Up"". Marvel.com. October 26, 2022. Archived from the original on October 28, 2022. Retrieved October 27, 2022. "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Prologue Soundtrack Single Released". Film Music Reporter. July 25, 2022. Archived from the original on July 25, 2022. Retrieved July 25, 2022. Garcia, Thania; Rubin, Rebecca (October 26, 2022). "Rihanna Returns to Music With 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Original Song". Variety. Archived from the original on October 27, 2022. Retrieved October 27, 2022. Jirak, Jamie (February 22, 2023). "Voices Rising: The Music of Wakanda Forever Trailer Teases "Collection of Sounds From All Over the World"". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on February 22, 2023. Retrieved February 22, 2023. "Now Streaming on Disney+: 'Voices Rising: The Music of Wakanda Forever'". Marvel.com. February 28, 2023. Archived from the original on February 28, 2023. Retrieved February 28, 2023. "Shows A-Z - voices rising: the music of wakanda forever". The Futon Critic. Archived from the original on March 15, 2023. Retrieved March 15, 2023. "'Voices Rising: The Music of Wakanda Forever' Arrives on Disney+ on February 28". Marvel.com. February 21, 2023. Archived from the original on February 21, 2023. Retrieved December 19, 2023. "Voices Rising: The Music of Wakanda Forever". Marvel.com. Retrieved January 21, 2024. Andreeva, Nellie (May 18, 2023). "Disney Removes Dozens Of Series From Disney+ & Hulu, Including 'Big Shot', 'Willow', 'Y' & 'Dollface'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 21, 2023. Retrieved May 21, 2023. Gardner, Chris; Giardina, Carolyn; McClintock, Pamela (April 27, 2022). "Disney Debuts First Look at David O. Russell's Star-Packed Film, 'Lightyear' and 'Doctor Strange' at CinemaCon". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 28, 2022. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Phillips, Jevon (July 23, 2022). "Marvel unveils 'Black Panther 2' trailer, two new 'Avengers' films at Comic-Con". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Retrieved July 24, 2022. "SDCC 2022: Marvel Studios' 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Teaser Trailer and Poster Released". Marvel.com. July 23, 2022. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Retrieved July 24, 2022. Simpson, Leah; Gelhoren, Giovana (July 23, 2022). "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever Debuts Emotional First Trailer After Chadwick Boseman Death". People. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Retrieved August 1, 2022. Gonzalez, Sandra (July 23, 2022). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' teaser trailer is here and...wow". CNN. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Retrieved August 1, 2022. Zilko, Christian (July 23, 2022). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Trailer: Chadwick Boseman Is Gone, but Not Forgotten". IndieWire. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Retrieved August 1, 2022. Burton, Carson; Murphy, J. Kim (July 23, 2022). "'Black Panther 2' First Trailer Unveils Marvel's Emotional Return to Wakanda and War With Namor". Variety. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Retrieved August 1, 2022. Sharf, Zack; Murphy, J. Kim (July 25, 2022). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Trailer Nabs 172 Million Views in 24 Hours, One of Marvel's Biggest (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on July 25, 2022. Retrieved July 25, 2022. Kit, Borys (July 24, 2022). "Comic-Con: 'Wakanda Forever' Pop! Figures Coming From Funko (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Retrieved August 1, 2022. Goldsmith, Jill (September 3, 2022). "National Cinema Day Sizzle Reel Features 'Avatar 2', 'Bros', 'Black Panther', 'Don't Worry Darling', 'Woman King' & More". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 3, 2022. Retrieved September 3, 2022. Couch, Aaron (September 10, 2022). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Shows Off Gripping Sequence at D23". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 11, 2022. Retrieved September 10, 2022. Liu, Narayan (October 3, 2022). "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever Trailer Debuts the Avenger's New Costume". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on October 3, 2022. Retrieved October 4, 2022. Codega, Linda (October 3, 2022). "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever's New Trailer Is a War for the Ages". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on October 4, 2022. Retrieved October 5, 2022. Miller, Shannon (October 13, 2022). "Marvel's Riri Williams Finds Inspiration—and the Future of STEM—in a Target Aisle in New Ad". Adweek. Archived from the original on October 20, 2022. Retrieved October 20, 2022. Nelson, Samantha (October 10, 2022). "Sprite Zero Sugar Opens a Portal to Wakanda in Latest Campaign". Adweek. Archived from the original on October 17, 2022. Retrieved October 20, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 14, 2022). "How 'Wakanda Forever' $100M+ Promo Partner Campaign Fueled A November-Record $181M+ Opening". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 8, 2023. Retrieved November 15, 2022. "McDonald's Brings the World of Wakanda to Families with the New "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever" Happy Meal". McDonald's. November 1, 2022. Archived from the original on November 2, 2022. Retrieved November 2, 2022. "Kraft Mac & Cheese Launches Limited-Edition Black Panther: Wakanda Forever Boxes". Anderson, Julia (November 1, 2022). "The MCU Branches Out Into Podcasts With Official Black Panther Series". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on November 1, 2022. Retrieved November 2, 2022. Johnson, Zach (October 18, 2022). "Everything New You Can Stream on Disney+ in November 2022". D23. Archived from the original on October 19, 2022. Retrieved October 18, 2022. Luchies, Adam (November 3, 2022). "'Black Panther: In Search of Wakanda' TV Special Premieres Tonight on ABC". Collider. Archived from the original on November 4, 2022. Retrieved November 10, 2022. Jonston, Bryan (November 14, 2022). "Wakanda Forever Black Panther Purple & Gold Lexus". AUTO Connected Car News. Archived from the original on November 15, 2022. Retrieved November 15, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy; Hipes, Patrick (October 27, 2022). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Red Carpet World Premiere – Photo Gallery". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 29, 2022. Retrieved October 30, 2022. Sullivan, Marisa (October 27, 2022). "Janeshia Adams-Ginyard Honors Chadwick Boseman in Body Paint at 'Black Panther 2' Premiere". People. Archived from the original on October 28, 2022. Retrieved October 27, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy (November 6, 2022). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Holds Historic Premiere In Nigeria". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 7, 2022. Retrieved November 8, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy (October 17, 2022). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever': Disney Confirms French Theatrical Release Despite "Anti-Consumer" Windows". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 17, 2022. Retrieved October 17, 2022. Ritman, Alex (November 11, 2022). "LGBTQ Scene Among Cuts Made to 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' for Kuwait Release (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 12, 2022. Retrieved November 12, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy (January 17, 2023). "China: 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever', 'Ant-Man And The Wasp: Quantumania' Secure February Release Dates; First Marvel Movies In Market Since 2019". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 17, 2023. Retrieved January 17, 2023. Vary, Adam B. (July 23, 2022). "Marvel Studios' Phases 5 and 6: Everything We Learned at Comic-Con About the Multiverse Saga". Variety. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Retrieved July 24, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (January 4, 2023). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Sets Disney+ Streaming Date After 82-Day Theatrical Window". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 4, 2023. Retrieved January 4, 2023. Leonte, Tudor (January 9, 2023). "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever 4K and Blu-ray Release Date & Special Features". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on January 12, 2023. Retrieved January 13, 2023. Spangler, Todd (February 6, 2023). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Is Most-Streamed Marvel Movie Premiere on Disney+". Variety. Archived from the original on February 8, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2023. "Top 2022 Movies at the Worldwide Box Office". The Numbers. Archived from the original on March 19, 2023. Retrieved December 15, 2022. Gant, Charles (November 14, 2022). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' delivers second-best opening of 2022". Screen International. Archived from the original on November 21, 2022. Retrieved November 15, 2022. McClintock, Pamela (October 27, 2022). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Tracking for Huge $175M-Plus Debut". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 20, 2022. Retrieved October 27, 2022. Robbins, Shawn (November 4, 2022). "Long Range Box Office Forecast: Violent Night and the Latest Black Panther: Wakanda Forever Updates". Boxoffice Pro. Archived from the original on November 4, 2022. Retrieved November 4, 2022. "Domestic Box Office For Nov 11, 2022". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on November 18, 2022. Retrieved November 18, 2022. Moreau, Jordan (November 11, 2022). "Box Office: 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Makes $28 Million in Previews". Variety. Archived from the original on November 15, 2022. Retrieved November 15, 2022. Buckley, Thomas (November 13, 2022). "Disney's 'Wakanda Forever' Reaps $181.3 Million, Lifting AMC". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on November 13, 2022. Retrieved November 14, 2022. Rubin, Rebecca; Lang, Brent (November 14, 2022). "From Chadwick Boseman's Legacy to Marvel's Might: How 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Landed One of the Biggest Debuts of the Year". Variety. Archived from the original on November 15, 2022. Retrieved November 15, 2022. "Domestic 2022 Weekend 46". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on December 4, 2022. Retrieved November 22, 2022. Mendelsohn, Sam (December 4, 2022). "'Violent Night's' Solid $13 Million Start Can't Top 'Wakanda Forever's' $18 Million In Another Slow Weekend". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on December 10, 2022. Retrieved December 6, 2022. Mendelsohn, Sam (December 1, 2022). "'Wakanda Forever' To Win 4th Weekend While 'Violent Night' Could Continue Solid Run Of Mid-Budget Genre Films". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on December 2, 2022. Retrieved December 2, 2022. Childress, Erik (December 5, 2022). "Weekend Box Office Results: Another Week, Another Win for Wakanda Forever". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on December 6, 2022. Retrieved December 6, 2022. "Domestic 2022 Weekend 49". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on December 22, 2022. Retrieved December 12, 2022. Buckley, Thomas; Palmeri, Christopher (December 18, 2022). "Disney's 'Avatar 2' Brings In $134 Million in Domestic Opening". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on January 10, 2023. Retrieved December 24, 2022. "Domestic Box Office For 2022". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Archived from the original on August 15, 2022. Retrieved January 29, 2023. "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' makes African box office history". The Citizen. November 14, 2022. Archived from the original on December 31, 2022. Retrieved November 15, 2022. Matos, Clinton (November 15, 2022). "Wakanda Forever breaks records on African opening weekend". HTXT. Retrieved November 15, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy (November 20, 2022). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Closes In On $550M WW – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 27, 2022. Retrieved November 20, 2022. Tartaglione, Nancy (November 27, 2022). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Leaps To $676M WW; 'Strange World' Inanimate – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 1, 2022. Retrieved November 29, 2022. Vary, Adam B.; Murphy, Kim (January 10, 2023). "Angela Bassett Wins Golden Globe for 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' as First Actor to Earn Major Award for Marvel Movie". Variety. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved January 12, 2023. "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved February 19, 2024. "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved November 11, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 14, 2022). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Conquers November Box Office Opening Record With $181M – Monday Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 18, 2022. Retrieved November 18, 2022. Campbell, Kambole (November 9, 2022). "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever Review". Empire Online. Archived from the original on November 9, 2022. Retrieved November 9, 2022. Jorgensen, Tom (November 9, 2022). "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever Review". IGN. Archived from the original on November 8, 2022. Retrieved November 9, 2022. Gleiberman, Owen (November 8, 2022). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Review: Ryan Coogler Builds a Furious Slow-Burn Sequel Around Chadwick Boseman's Loss". Variety. Archived from the original on November 8, 2022. Retrieved November 15, 2022. Phillips, Michael (November 8, 2022). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' review: After T'Challa, a new protector, in an ungainly but engaging sequel". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on November 8, 2022. Retrieved November 15, 2022. Travers, Peter (November 11, 2022). "Review: 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' springs surprises you won't see coming". ABC News. Archived from the original on November 11, 2022. Retrieved November 15, 2022. Barber, Nicholas (November 8, 2022). "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever review: Overshadowed by loss". BBC. Archived from the original on November 8, 2022. Retrieved November 12, 2022. Rooney, David (November 8, 2022). "'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Review: Ryan Coogler's Rousing Sequel Doubles as a Soulful Chadwick Boseman Tribute". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 8, 2022. Retrieved November 15, 2022. Hornaday, Ann (November 8, 2022). "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever': One long eulogy to Chadwick Boseman". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 8, 2022. Berardinelli, James (November 9, 2022). "Black Panther: Wakanda Forever (United States, 2022)". ReelViews. Archived from the original on November 9, 2022. Retrieved November 15, 2022. Vlessing, Etan (February 13, 2023). "France Slams Marvel's 'Black Panther: Wakanda Forever' Over Portrayal of French Army". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 21, 2023. Retrieved September 3, 2023. Nordyke, Kimberly (March 12, 2023). "Oscars: Complete Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 13, 2023. Retrieved March 13, 2023. Yossman, K.J.; Ravindran, Manori (February 19, 2023). "All Quiet on the Western Front Dominates BAFTA Awards With Record-Breaking Seven Wins". Variety. Archived from the original on February 19, 2023. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Nordyke, Kimberly (January 15, 2023). "Critics Choice Awards: Full List of Winners". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 16, 2023. Retrieved January 16, 2023. Nordyke, Kimberly (January 10, 2023). "Golden Globes: Full List of Winners". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2023. Hipes, Patrick (January 11, 2023). "SAG Awards Nominations: The Complete List". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 14, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2023. McIntosh, Steven (January 24, 2023). "Oscar nominations 2023: Top Gun leads sequels surge". BBC. Archived from the original on January 24, 2023. Retrieved January 24, 2023. Paige, Rachel (February 16, 2021). "Marvel Studios Announces Assembled, a Behind-the-Scenes Look at the Making of the Marvel Cinematic Universe". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on February 16, 2021. Retrieved June 22, 2022. Theodore-Vachon, Rebecca (January 17, 2023). "Disney+: What's Coming in February 2023". Adweek. Archived from the original on January 18, 2023. Retrieved January 19, 2023. Jackson, Angelique; Vary, Adam B. (November 9, 2022). "Rebuilding 'Black Panther': How the 'Wakanda Forever' Family Fought Through Grief and Injury to Create a $250 Million Superhero Tribute". Variety. Archived from the original on November 9, 2022. Retrieved November 9, 2022. Barnhardt, Adam (January 10, 2023). "Black Panther 3 Star Says Film Already in the Works, But There's a Catch". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved January 12, 2023. Eisenberg, Eric (November 10, 2022). "How Riri Williams' Part In Black Panther: Wakanda Forever Will Lead Into The Disney+ Ironheart Series". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on November 12, 2022. Retrieved November 14, 2022. Wikiquote has quotations related to Black Panther: Wakanda Forever. Official website at Marvel.com Black Panther: Wakanda Forever at IMDb Official screenplay Portals:  Film  United States  Speculative fiction  Comics