There are 10 cities (Latvian: valstspilsēta, "state city", pl. valstspilsētas) and 71 towns (Latvian: novada pilsēta, "municipality town", pl. novada pilsētas) in Latvia. By Latvian law, towns are settlements that are centers of culture and commerce with a well-developed architectural infrastructure and street grid, and have at least 2,000 residents. A settlement can still be designated a town if it has fewer residents, but fulfills all other requirements (or has been a historic town). To become a city, a town must typically have at least 25,000 residents. Additionally, cities should have a well-developed commercial district, transport, public utilities, social infrastructure, and be a significant center of culture. However, these requirements may be disregarded if there is sufficient population. In 2020, an agreement was reached in Latvian parliament, Saeima, to rename the previous nine "republic" cities with the new title of "state city" (valstspilsēta). It was at this time that a tenth state city, Ogre (formerly a town), was added to the list. The 7 largest state cities have their own local governance independent of any municipalities, whereas the smallest 3 (Jēkabpils, Ogre and Valmiera) belong to their wider corresponding municipalities. Administrative divisions of Latvia Districts of Latvia Cultural regions of Latvia List of former cities of Latvia List of the most populated municipalities in the Nordic countries Law On Administrative Territories and Populated Areas "Vienojas par desmit valstspilsētām". LA.LV (in Latvian). Retrieved 2023-10-07. "Levits izsludina Administratīvi teritoriālās reformas likumu". Sabiedrība un politika (in Latvian). 2020-06-22. Retrieved 2023-10-07. "Latvijas iedzīvotāju skaits pašvaldībās" (PDF). Centrālās statistikas pārvaldes datubāzes (in Latvian). Retrieved 2019-10-25. "Iedzīvotāju skaits un tā izmaiņas statistiskajos reģionos, republikas pilsētās, novadu pilsētās un novados". Centrālās statistikas pārvaldes datubāzes (in Latvian). Retrieved 2019-06-16. "Population in regions, cities, municipalities, towns, rural territories, neighbourhoods and densely populated areas by ethnicity". National Statistical System of Latvia. Retrieved 8 July 2023. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cities in Latvia. Vietas.lv- Map and information of Cities and Districts MillionMetersAroundLatvia.Com- Map, information and photos of Cities Map at archive.today (archived 2012-12-04) Searchable map