Tilia amurensis, commonly known as the Amur lime or Amur linden, is a species of Tilia native to eastern Asia. It differs from the better-known Tilia cordata in having somewhat smaller leaves, bracts and cymes. It is an important timber tree in Russia, China and Korea, and is occasionally planted as a street tree in cities with colder climates. Tilia amurensis is a medium sized shade tree which can grow up to 30 m (98 ft) tall. The appearance is quite similar to Tilia japonica besides the difference in size of leaves, bracts and a shorter cyme. Tilia amurensis is a hermaphrodite, which means it contains both female and male organs, and is mainly pollinated by insects. Tilia amurensis prefer a medium moisture level and fertile, well drained, loamy soil. It has the ability to adapt to several different ranges of soil conditions as well as a good tolerance for urban conditions.[citation needed] It is often found in mixed forests across China, North Korea, South Korea, Russia and north-east Siberia. The leaves of the tree tend to begin to emerge around late spring to early June. In areas with clement winters, the tree is known for badly frosting after emerging early. Its life span is generally around 50 years, with many going on to live much longer in situations where they are maintained well and kept free of disease.[citation needed] Tilia amurensis can grow up to 32 meters tall with a dark bark color. It has irregular scaled ridges that become more apparent as it matures. The twigs measure (1.3 - 2.6 mm thick). Primarily they start with tangled stellate indumentum, which becomes glabrous as they mature. The buds are smooth, with 2 exposed scales. The leaves tend to measure between 4-8 x 4-7 cm and are orbicular alongside a long skinny tip with a cordata base. The lower base of the leaves are pale green with a loose stellate indumentum and strong tufts with red hair under the vein axils. The teeth with micronate tips can grow up to 1.2 mm long. with the floral bracts growing to 4-10 cm x 0.5-1.5 cm. The leaves are rather droopy with 10-30 flowers on each pedicel. Tea can be made from the leaves, which has an antispasmodic, diaphoretic and sedative effect.[citation needed] Tilia amurensis is not commonly used as a supplement for food. The leaves are edible, but it is known as a famine food, only to be consumed if there are no better options.[citation needed] The leaves can also be used to make tea. A substitute for chocolate can be made from a paste of its ground fruits and flowers. This has not become a popular product due to the paste decomposing very easily and rapidly.[citation needed] http://temperate.theferns.info/plant/Tilia+amurensis https://www.missouribotanicalgarden.org/PlantFinder/PlantFinderDetails.aspx?taxonid=287373&isprofile=0& https://pfaf.org/User/Plant.aspx?LatinName=Tilia+amurensis Mém. Acad. Imp. Sci. Saint Pétersbourg, sér. 7. 15(2) [Fl. Caucasi]: 253. 1869 Fl. Caucasi 1: 253 (1869) "Tilia amurensis Rupr.". Plants of the World Online. Board of Trustees of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. Retrieved 23 January 2020. Pigott, Donald (2012). Lime-trees and Basswoods: A Biological Monograph of the Genus Tilia. Cambridge University Press. p. 137–150. ISBN 9780521840545.