The Fifteenth Doctor is the current incarnation of the Doctor, the protagonist of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who. He is portrayed by Rwandan-Scottish actor Ncuti Gatwa. His first series companion is Ruby Sunday, played by Millie Gibson. Within the series' narrative, the Doctor is a millennia-old alien Time Lord from the planet Gallifrey, with somewhat unknown origins, who travels in time and space in their TARDIS, frequently with companions. Usually, at the end of each incarnation's life, the Doctor regenerates; as a result, their physical appearance and personality changes. However, the Fifteenth Doctor emerged unconventionally, via "bi-generation", in which he split from his predecessor, the Fourteenth Doctor's body, rather than replacing him, allowing both incarnations to co-exist. In contrast to his predecessors, Gatwa portrays a Doctor who is attempting to let go of much of his recent emotional trauma, with a more emotionally balanced, liberated, fun-loving, and affectionate outward persona. Gatwa had previously been announced as Jodie Whittaker's successor as the programme's lead, and many reports stated he would play the Fourteenth Doctor and that Whittaker's Thirteenth Doctor would regenerate into an incarnation portrayed by Gatwa. Upon Whittaker's final appearance as the character, she instead regenerated into a form seemingly similar to the Tenth Doctor. This character, portrayed by David Tennant, was confirmed to be the Fourteenth Doctor, with later clarification that Gatwa would portray the Fifteenth Doctor. His first episode as lead actor aired on 25 December 2023, and his first full series will screen in 2024. Before Gatwa's casting was announced, several actors were heavily rumoured to be taking over from Whittaker, including Hugh Grant, Michael Sheen, Kris Marshall, Richard Ayoade, Michaela Coel, Kelly Macdonald, and Lenny Henry. Davies' return also led to speculation that an actor he had previously worked with in other projects would join him as the Fourteenth Doctor, with Olly Alexander, Lydia West, Omari Douglas, T'Nia Miller, and Fisayo Akinade ranking highly in bookies' odds. Rumours also circulated that David Tennant would reprise his role, having previously portrayed the Tenth Doctor during Davies' initial time as showrunner, or that Jo Martin, who debuted as the Fugitive Doctor during Whittaker's tenure, would be revealed as the Fourteenth incarnation. On 8 May 2022, Gatwa posted an Instagram picture featuring two red heart emojis, a plus sign, and a blue box emoji. The post, alongside comments from incoming Doctor Who showrunner Russell T Davies, led to speculation that Gatwa had been cast as the Doctor. This was later confirmed that same day by the official Doctor Who Twitter account. Gatwa is the first black actor, first African-born actor, first openly queer actor, and fourth Scottish actor to portray the Doctor. In an article released on the Doctor Who website, Gatwa said, "This role and show means so much to so many around the world, including myself, and each one of my incredibly talented predecessors has handled that unique responsibility and privilege with the utmost care. I will endeavour my utmost to do the same." Davies added, "Ncuti dazzled us, seized hold of the Doctor and owned those TARDIS keys in seconds... I promise you, 2023 will be spectacular!" Gatwa was initially expected to be playing the Fourteenth Doctor in May 2022 and would have taken over from actress Jodie Whittaker in the role following a series of special episodes throughout 2022. During the special, "The Power of the Doctor", it was revealed following Whittaker's regeneration the Doctor had regenerated into David Tennant. Gatwa was confirmed to eventually be starring in the role as the Fifteenth Doctor, with executive producer Russell T Davies stating "The path to Ncuti's 15th Doctor is laden with mystery, horror, robots, puppets, danger and fun!" Gatwa appeared in character for the first time in the trailer for the 60th anniversary specials, that preceded his ascension to the lead role on 9 December 2023. Early images from the set show Gatwa in a range of ensembles that are decidedly more ostentatious than what his predecessors wore, from a tangerine-coloured knit and a bright blue double-breasted pinstripe suit, to a glossy leather trench paired with a sweatshirt zipped down to expose his chest and a set of delicate gold necklaces. Let’s just say it: Doctor Who is getting sexy. Radhika Seth, British Vogue In a departure for the character of the Doctor, the Fifteenth Doctor wears a variety of clothing rather than adopting one distinct style. Gatwa approved of the idea in an interview with Rolling Stone; he also expressed an affinity for the style of the Third Doctor (Jon Pertwee), claiming that "our Doctors are the only two who dress like sluts". Louise Griffin of Radio Times noted that Gatwa was shown in promotional images for a Regency era-set episode wearing a burgundy velvet jacket reminiscent of the Third Doctor's style, after costume designer Pam Downe disclosed that she had incorporated references to previous Doctors in Gatwa's costumes. Gatwa's initial inclination for the Fifteenth Doctor's style was inspired by Ralph Lauren's "preppy" designs in collaboration with Morehouse College and Spelman College, noting the colleges' Black histories. The production team opted for less "traditional" looks, wanting to "push it forward". Prior to the first appearance of the Fifteenth Doctor, Gatwa made an uncredited cameo as himself, in costume as the Doctor, during an edited repeat of the 2013 docudrama An Adventure in Space and Time, airing on 23 November 2023, Doctor Who's sixtieth anniversary. In the original version, while preparing to film his regeneration scene, William Hartnell (David Bradley) looks across the TARDIS console and sees a vision of Matt Smith, the actor who played the then-incumbent Eleventh Doctor during the show's fiftieth anniversary year. For the 2023 repeat, the scene was edited to replace Smith with Gatwa. Gatwa first appears as the Fifteenth Doctor in the 60th anniversary special episode "The Giggle", appearing in the final third of the story as the Fourteenth Doctor (David Tennant) appears to regenerate but instead "bi-generates", introducing the new Doctor as a separate physical entity. The two Doctors team up to defeat the Toymaker, and later use the remaining power of the latter's lingering reality-warping domain to duplicate the TARDIS. The Fifteenth Doctor shares some words of wisdom with his predecessor, who returns the favour by wishing him luck, before setting off for new adventures in his version of the TARDIS. The Doctor next appears in "The Church on Ruby Road" in which he meets new companion Ruby Sunday (Millie Gibson) and faces off against goblins. Angus Robertson, Scotland's Culture Secretary, congratulated Gatwa on his casting. Actor and singer Olly Alexander, thought to be among the front-runners for the role, tweeted his joy at the casting. Fellow Scot Sylvester McCoy, who portrayed the Seventh Doctor, tweeted his pleasure over another Scottish actor taking the reins of the Doctor. At the 2022 Paris Fan Festival, Matt Smith, who portrayed the Eleventh Doctor, openly expressed his support to Gatwa taking on the role. In an interview with STV News, Peter Capaldi, who portrayed the Twelfth Doctor, stated that he believed that Gatwa would be "an amazing Doctor." During the 2022 British Academy Television Awards, Gatwa stated that David Tennant, who portrayed the Tenth and Fourteenth Doctors, and Jodie Whittaker, who played the Thirteenth Doctor, both called him to express their support. Following the broadcast of "The Church on Ruby Road", Martin Belam of The Guardian said Gatwa's performance "totally owned the episode". "Ncuti Gatwa: BBC names actor as next Doctor Who star". BBC News. 8 May 2022. Travis, Emlyn. "'Doctor Who' reveals first look at Ncuti Gatwa as 15th Doctor". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 29 November 2023. Martin Belam (8 May 2022). "Doctor Who: Ncuti Gatwa to replace Jodie Whittaker, BBC announces". The Guardian. Retrieved 25 October 2022. Laford, Andrea (6 November 2023). "Doctor Who Christmas special air date and title revealed". CultBox. Retrieved 20 November 2023. Kilbane, Aoife (23 October 2022). "Doctor Who: Here they come..." BBC Media Centre. Retrieved 23 October 2022. "Doctor Who: Every 14th Doctor Actor Rumor, Candidate & Favorites Explained". Screen Rant. 5 April 2022. "Doctor Who: 6 People Rumored or Speculated to Play the 14th Doctor, So Far". 19 July 2021. "♥️♥️➕🟦 - Ncuti Gatwa - @ncutigatwa Mystalk". mystalk.net. Archived from the original on 18 May 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2022. "♥️♥️➕🟦 - Russell T Davies - @russelltdavies63 Mystalk". mystalk.net.[permanent dead link] "Ncuti Gatwa is the Doctor | Doctor Who". www.doctorwho.tv. Archived from the original on 24 May 2022. Retrieved 19 July 2022. Belam, Martin (8 May 2022). "Doctor Who: Ncuti Gatwa to replace Jodie Whittaker, BBC announces". The Guardian. Retrieved 9 May 2022. "Ncuti Gatwa to take over from Jodie Whittaker as new Doctor Who, BBC announces". The Scotsman. 9 May 2022. Retrieved 9 May 2022. "Ncuti Gatwa becomes first person of color to play Doctor Who and fourth Scot". The National. Retrieved 9 May 2022. Ward, Victoria (8 May 2022). "Sex Education star Ncuti Gatwa announced as first black Doctor Who". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved 9 May 2022. "Why Ncuti Gatwa's Doctor Is a Step Forward for 'Doctor Who'". Collider. 4 September 2023. Retrieved 26 November 2023. Hegarty, Tasha (23 October 2022). "Doctor Who trailer confirms when 60th anniversary specials and Ncuti Gatwa's first episode will air". Digital Spy. Retrieved 10 November 2022. Seth, Radhika (25 December 2024). "Ncuti Gatwa On Doctor Who And Baring It All In British Vogue". British Vogue. Retrieved 24 March 2024. Cormack, Morgan (27 April 2023). "Doctor Who changes things up with Ncuti Gatwa costume twist". Radio Times. Retrieved 24 March 2024. Rumfitt, Alison. "Ncuti Gatwa on Doctor Who: 'The Doctor is me'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 24 March 2024. Griffin, Louise (29 February 2024). "Ncuti Gatwa's Doctor Who costumes will include "nods" to past Doctors". Radio Times. Retrieved 24 March 2024. Griffin, Louise (23 November 2023). "Doctor Who's Ncuti Gatwa appears in revamped An Adventure in Space and Time". Radio Times. Retrieved 24 November 2023. Rowlands, Robert (8 May 2022). "Doctor Who fan reaction as Ncuti Gatwa announced as new Time Lord". CoventryLive. "Olly Alexander talks about Doctor Who rumours". Belfast Telegraph. Craig, David (9 May 2022). "Matt Smith and Sylvester McCoy congratulate Ncuti Gatwa on Doctor Who role". Radio Times. Retrieved 11 May 2022. Carr, Flora (13 May 2022). "Doctor Who's Peter Capaldi says Ncuti Gatwa will make "amazing" Doctor". Radio Times. Retrieved 13 May 2022. Belam, Martin (25 December 2023). "Doctor Who: The Church on Ruby Road – 2023 Christmas special recap". The Guardian. Portals:  Doctor Who  2020s Fifteenth Doctor at Wikipedia's sister projects: Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote