Stewart Grand Prix was a Formula One constructor and racing team founded by triple Formula One champion Jackie Stewart and his son Paul Stewart in 1996. The team competed in F1, as the Ford works-supported team, for only three seasons, from 1997 to 1999. The 1999 season was by far its strongest, yielding one win (Johnny Herbert at the European Grand Prix) and one pole position (Rubens Barrichello at the French Grand Prix) en route to finishing fourth overall in the Constructors Championship. At the end of 1999, Ford bought the team outright and it was renamed Jaguar Racing. In 2004 Jaguar Racing was sold to energy drink company Red Bull GmbH and was rebranded Red Bull Racing in 2005. The team's origins are traced back to the end of 1988 when Jackie Stewart's son Paul set up Paul Stewart Racing, having bought the Gary Evans Motorsport Team. This team entered the 1989 British Formula 3 season with a workforce of 10 employees. The team attracted the sponsor Camel. Paul Stewart drove the car alongside German Otto Rensing. The team had a single win with Stewart at Snetterton. In 1990, the team expanded with a move to new headquarters in Milton Keynes, and was divided into three sections; preparation for European Formula 3000, Formula 3 and Formula Vauxhall Lotus. Within a few years, the team enjoyed success, winning 12 titles and 119 races in various categories. In late 1995, Stewart Racing expressed disinterest in moving up to F1, considering that short-lived entries Simtek, Pacific and Forti either had folded or looked likely to fold. This position was reversed in January 1996 when Jackie Stewart secured a five-year development deal with Ford to make it a factory team. Before, Ford had been in a deal as a factory engine supplier to Sauber. The team gained finance from Malaysia as a promotion for the country in general. Stewart were in consultation with John Barnard about a business plan with a budget of £24 million. The first car, named the Stewart SF01 was launched on 19 December 1996. With backing from Ford, Stewart Grand Prix entered the 1997 Australian Grand Prix with drivers Rubens Barrichello and Jan Magnussen. The only success of their first year came at the rain-affected Monaco Grand Prix where Barrichello finished second. Magnussen in the second car finished just outside the points in seventh after losing his front wing at the chicane. Elsewhere, the cars were consistent midfield runners and Barrichello was often in a position to challenge for points. Stewart's reliability was poor, as the Ford Zetec-R V10 engine installed in the SF01 chassis proved to be powerful, yet extremely fragile. This restricted the team to just eight classified finishes out of a possible thirty-four. Stewart finished the season in ninth place in the constructors' championship with six points, ahead of other established teams like Tyrrell and Minardi. For the next year, the team developed the Stewart SF02, hoping to improve results and score regular points as well as some more podiums. However it turned out that 1998 was also a struggle for the team, with neither driver able to step onto the podium. Indeed, even points were hard to come by. The first came at the hands of Barrichello in Spain with a fifth place finish. The only highlight of the season came two rounds later with a double points finish in Canada where Barrichello and Magnussen finished fifth and sixth respectively. After a number of poor drives, Magnussen was replaced mid season by Dutchman Jos Verstappen from the French Grand Prix onward. Ironically it was the race after Magnussen scored his first and only world championship point. Both drivers did not score any more points for the rest of the season. Despite this and scoring one point less than the year before, Stewart finished the season eighth in the constructors' championship, one place better than in 1997. In the end the driver change did not make a great difference as Verstappen also struggled with the car. Unhappy with the team, Verstappen left Stewart at the end of the season and was replaced by Johnny Herbert for the next year. At the end of the 1998 season, technical director Alan Jenkins left Stewart Grand Prix, and was replaced by Jordan's Gary Anderson. After Ford acquired Cosworth in July 1998, they risked designing and building a brand-new engine for 1999. The Stewart SF3 was quick out of the box, however both cars over-heated on the grid of the first race, the Australian Grand Prix, after qualifying competitively. This put Herbert out instantly and made Barrichello start from the pit lane. Barrichello received a stop-go penalty during the race and finished fifth. The car was consistently competitive throughout the season, however the engine initially proved fragile as both cars blew their engines at the Brazilian race which meant the engine was rarely run at full power. Stewart's competitiveness was affirmed by running first in Brazil for a long spell of the race and qualifying on pole for the French Grand Prix with Barrichello. Johnny Herbert won a popular victory at the rain soaked 1999 European Grand Prix at the new Nürburgring after other leading contenders crashed off the track or lost time in the pits changing tyres. Barrichello finished third, in a result most observers indicated that Stewart deserved given their strength over the season. Herbert also became unwittingly influential in the championship at the next and penultimate race, the Malaysian Grand Prix. Running third behind the Ferraris of Michael Schumacher and Eddie Irvine, a mistake in the closing laps allowed Mika Häkkinen to slip past and claim the final podium position which gave the championship contender vital points. The Ferraris were disqualified for car irregularities and the win allowed Häkkinen to gain his second championship. The Stewarts as a result finished second and third in the race. However Ferrari won an appeal and the initial result was reinstated. Häkkinen however went on to win the championship and Stewart came fourth in the constructors' championship with 36 points, beating teams such as Williams and Benetton. Stewart's last race was the 1999 Japanese Grand Prix. After Ford increased its commitment by buying the team out, it became known as Jaguar Racing for the 2000 season. Poor results however, led to the team being sold for the 2005 season, becoming Red Bull Racing. (key) Formula One portal "NMP Case Studies - Stewart Grand Prix". The UK's National Measurement Laboratory. Archived from the original on 11 April 2005. Retrieved 10 January 2016. Karolak, Mariusz (30 August 2006). "Paul Stewart - from the PSR to the SGP" (in Polish). Wyprzedz Mnie!. F1 News > Pacific closing down F1 News > Stewart gets Ford Hamilton, Maurice (1998). Racing Stewart: The Birth of a Grand Prix Team. Motorbooks International. ISBN 0-7603-0514-5. http://fidonet.sensationcontent.com/echomail/grand-prix/ff3c687c95f8716f.html[permanent dead link] 1999 European Grand Prix Race Report www.sportinglife.com Archived 21 November 2000 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 11 May 2006 "Stewart Grand Prix". F1technical. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Stewart Grand Prix.