Aira is a genus of Old World plants in the grass family, native to western and southern Europe, central and southwest Asia, plus Africa. The common name, shared with the similar related genera Deschampsia and Koeleria, is hair-grass, from the very slender leaves and stems. The species typically occur on dry, sandy sites, and grow to 20–40 cm tall. Several species are grown as ornamental plants for their very delicate airy seed heads, used in dried flower arrangements. Species Aira caryophyllea - Europe, North Africa, alpine Africa, Madagascar, Mauritius, Caucasus, Tibet Aira cupaniana - Canary Islands, Mediterranean Aira elegantissima - Central Europe, Mediterranean, Iran, Caucasus Aira × hybrida - Switzerland Aira praecox - Europe, Canary Is, Turkey Aira provincialis - France incl Corsica Aira scoparia - Macedonia Aira tenorei - Mediterranean Aira uniaristata Portugal, Spain, Libya, Morocco formerly included Many species now considered better suited to other genera: Agrostis, Antinoria, Arundinella, Arundo, Catabrosa, Colpodium, Corynephorus, Cyrtococcum, Deschampsia, Ehrharta, Eragrostis, Eriachne, Eustachys, Hierochloe, Koeleria, Molinia, Pentameris, Peyritschia, Poa, Puccinellia, Rostraria, Scolochloa, Sesleria, Sphenopholis, Sporobolus, Tricholaena, Trisetum etc. List of Poaceae genera Wikimedia Commons has media related to Aira. Wikispecies has information related to Aira. lectotype designated by Hitchcock, International Bot. Congr. Cambridge (England), 1930. Nomenclature. Proposals by British Botanists 114–155 (1929) Tropicos, Aira L. Soreng, R. J., G. Davidse, P. M. Peterson, F. O. Zuloaga, E. J. Judziewicz, T. S. Filgueiras & O. Morrone. 2003 and onwards. On-line taxonomic novelties and updates, distributional additions and corrections, and editorial changes since the four published volumes of the Catalogue of New World Grasses (Poaceae) published in Contr. U.S. Natl. Herb. vols. 39, 41, 46, and 48. http://www.tropicos.org/Project/CNWG:. In R. J. Soreng, G. Davidse, P. M. Peterson, F. O. Zuloaga, T. S. Filgueiras, E. J. Judziewicz & O. Morrone (eds.) Internet Catalogue of New World Grasses. Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis. Linnaeus, Carl von. 1753. Species Plantarum 1: 63-66 in Latin Altervista Flora Italiana, genere Aira Kew World Checklist of Selected Plant Families The Plant List search for Aira v t e