The UEFA Euro 2024 qualifying tournament was a football competition that was played from March 2023 to March 2024 to determine the 23 UEFA member men's national teams that would join the automatically qualified host team Germany in the UEFA Euro 2024 final tournament. The competition was linked with the 2022–23 UEFA Nations League, which gave countries a secondary route to qualify for the final tournament. A total of 53 UEFA member associations entered the qualifying process. The draw for the qualifying group stage took place at the Festhalle in Frankfurt on 9 October 2022. Bold indicates champion for that year. Italic indicates host for that year. From 1972 to 1988, Germany competed as West Germany. From 1960 to 1980, Slovakia and the Czech Republic competed as Czechoslovakia. From 1960 to 1984, Serbia competed as Yugoslavia, and in 2000 as FR Yugoslavia. FR Yugoslavia were initially to appear in 1992 (after qualifying as Yugoslavia), but were replaced after being banned by the United Nations from all international sport. The format is similar to the UEFA Euro 2020 qualifying competition: the group stage decided 20 of the 23 teams that would advance to the final tournament to join host Germany. The 53 UEFA member associations were divided into ten groups, with seven groups containing five teams and three containing six teams. The draw for the qualifying group stage took place on 9 October 2022, after conclusion of the league phase of the 2022–23 UEFA Nations League. The four UEFA Nations League Finals participants were drawn into groups of five teams (so they were able to compete in the Nations League Finals in June 2023). The qualifying group stage was played in a home-and-away, round-robin format on double matchdays in March, June, September, October, and November 2023. The winners and runners-up from the ten groups qualified directly to the final tournament. Following the qualifying group stage, the remaining three teams will be decided through the play-offs, to be held in March 2024. Twelve teams were selected based entirely on their performance in the 2022–23 UEFA Nations League. These teams will be divided into three paths, each containing four teams, with one team from each path qualifying for the final tournament. The group winners of Nations Leagues A, B, and C automatically qualified for the play-off path of their league, unless they qualified for the final tournament via the qualifying group stage. If a group winner had already qualified through the qualifying group stage, they would be replaced by the next best-ranked team in the same league. However, if there were not enough non-qualified teams in the same league, then the spot would go first to the best-ranked group winner of League D, unless that team had already qualified for the final tournament. The remaining slots were then allocated to next best team in the Nations League overall ranking. However, group winners of Leagues B and C could not face teams from a higher league. The three play-off paths will each feature two single-leg semi-finals, and one single-leg final. In the semi-finals, the best-ranked team will host the lowest-ranked team, and the second-ranked team will host the third-ranked team. The host of the final will be drawn between the winners of the semi-final pairings. The three play-off path winners will join the twenty teams that already qualified for the final tournament through the group stage. If two or more teams were equal on points on completion of the group matches, the following tie-breaking criteria were applied: Higher number of points obtained in the matches played among the teams in question; Superior goal difference in matches played among the teams in question; Higher number of goals scored in the matches played among the teams in question; If, after having applied criteria 1 to 3, teams still had an equal ranking, criteria 1 to 3 were reapplied exclusively to the matches between the teams in question to determine their final rankings. If this procedure did not lead to a decision, criteria 5 to 11 applied; Superior goal difference in all group matches; Higher number of goals scored in all group matches; Higher number of away goals scored in all group matches; Higher number of wins in all group matches; Higher number of away wins in all group matches; Fair play conduct in all group matches (1 point for a single yellow card, 3 points for a red card as a consequence of two yellow cards, 3 points for a direct red card, 4 points for a yellow card followed by a direct red card); Position in the UEFA Nations League overall ranking. Notes When there were two or more teams tied in points, criteria 1 to 3 were applied. After these criteria were applied, they may define the position of some of the teams involved, but not all of them. For example, if there was a three-way tie on points, the application of the first three criteria may only break the tie for one of the teams, leaving the other two teams still tied. In this case, the tiebreaking procedure was resumed, from the beginning, for those teams that were still tied. To determine the overall rankings of the European Qualifiers, results against teams in sixth place were discarded and the following criteria were applied: Position in the group; Higher number of points; Superior goal difference; Higher number of goals scored; Higher number of goals scored away from home; Higher number of wins; Higher number of wins away from home; Fair play conduct (1 point for a single yellow card, 3 points for a red card as a consequence of two yellow cards, 3 points for a direct red card, 4 points for a yellow card followed by a direct red card); Position in the UEFA Nations League overall ranking. Below is the schedule of the UEFA Euro 2024 qualifying campaign. The qualifying group stage draw was held on 9 October 2022, 12:00 CEST, at the Festhalle in Frankfurt. Of UEFA's 55 member associations, 53 compete in the qualifying competition. Host team Germany qualified directly to the final tournament, while it was confirmed on 20 September 2022 that Russia were ineligible due to the suspension from FIFA and UEFA competitions following their country's invasion of Ukraine. The 53 UEFA national teams were seeded into six pots based on the 2022–23 UEFA Nations League overall ranking following the conclusion of the league phase. The four participants of the 2023 UEFA Nations League Finals were placed into the UNL Pot and drawn into Groups A–D, which only had five teams, so that they only had to play eight qualifying matches, leaving two free matchdays to play in the Nations League Finals in June 2023. The next six-highest teams were then placed into Pot 1. If Germany had won their Nations League group, the UNL Pot would have contained three teams, and Pot 1 would have instead contained seven teams. Pots 2 to 5 contained ten teams, while Pot 6 contained the three lowest-ranked teams. The teams were drawn into ten groups: seven groups of five teams (Groups A–G) and three groups of six teams (Groups H–J). The draw started with the UNL Pot and Pot 1, and continued from Pot 2 to Pot 6, from where a team was drawn and assigned to the first available group (based on draw conditions) in alphabetical order. The following restrictions were applied with computer assistance: Prohibited clashes: For political reasons, matches between the following pairs of teams were considered prohibited clashes, unable to be drawn into the same group: Armenia / Azerbaijan, Belarus / Ukraine, Gibraltar / Spain, Kosovo / Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo / Serbia. Winter venues: A maximum of two teams whose venues were identified as having high or medium risk of severe winter conditions could be placed in each group: Belarus, Estonia, Faroe Islands, Finland, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway. The two "hard winter venues", Faroe Islands and Iceland, generally could not host games in March or November; the others were to play as few home matches as possible in March and November. Excessive travel: A maximum of one pair of teams identified with excessive travel distance in relation to other countries could be placed in each group: Azerbaijan: with Gibraltar, Iceland, Portugal. Iceland: with Cyprus, Georgia, Israel. (Armenia were also identified with Iceland for excessive travel distance, but the teams were in the same pot for the draw.) Kazakhstan: with Andorra, England, France, Gibraltar, Iceland, Malta, Northern Ireland, Portugal, Republic of Ireland, Scotland, Spain, Wales. (Faroe Islands were also identified with Kazakhstan for excessive travel distance, but the teams were in the same pot for the draw.) The teams were seeded based on the September 2022 UEFA Nations League overall rankings.   Group winners and runners-up qualified directly for UEFA Euro 2024   Teams advanced to the play-offs, selected based on their performance in the 2022–23 UEFA Nations League   Other teams were eliminated after the qualifying group stage The fixture list was confirmed by UEFA on 10 October 2022, the day following the draw. The schedule was initially released on the day of the draw, but was withdrawn shortly after its distribution due to an alleged calendar issue. However, UEFA ultimately confirmed the initial schedule the following day, with no changes made. Group matches took place from 23 March to 21 November 2023. Source: UEFA Source: UEFA Source: UEFA Notes: Head-to-head points: Italy 4, Ukraine 1. Source: UEFA Source: UEFA Notes: Head to head points: Albania 4, Czech Republic 1. Source: UEFA Notes: The Belgium v Sweden match was abandoned at 1–1 at half-time for security reasons, as two Swedish supporters had been killed in a terrorist shooting in Brussels prior to the match; the score was later confirmed as final. Source: UEFA Source: UEFA Notes: Head to head points: Denmark 4, Slovenia 1. Goal difference in all group matches: Finland +8, Kazakhstan +4. Source: UEFA Source: UEFA Teams that failed in the qualifying group stage could still qualify for the final tournament through the play-offs. Leagues A, B, and C in the UEFA Nations League were allocated one of the three remaining final tournament spots. Four teams from each league that had not already qualified for the European Championship finals competed in the play-offs of their league. The play-off berths were first allocated to each Nations League group winner, and if any of the group winners already qualify for the European Championship finals, then to the next-best ranked team of the league. The team selection process determined the twelve teams that competed in the play-offs based on the Nations League overall rankings, using a set of criteria that obeyed these principles: Leagues A, B, and C each formed a path with the four best-ranked teams not yet qualified. If one of those leagues had fewer than four non-qualifying teams, spots were taken first by the best group winner from League D (unless already qualified), and then by any other eligible teams based on ranking. Group winners from Leagues B and C could not face teams from higher leagues. Key GW Group winner from Nations League A, B or C BD Best group winner from Nations League D   Team in bold advanced to play-offs   Team qualified directly to final tournament  †  UEFA Euro 2024 host, qualified automatically  ‡  Banned from qualifying competition The qualifying play-off draw took place on 23 November 2023, 12:00 CET, at the UEFA headquarters in Nyon, Switzerland. The draw followed the path formation rules to determine the paths in which the non-group winners will participate. Three separate draws determining the host of the play-off final of each path also took place between the winners of the semi-final pairings (identified as semi-final 1 for seed 1 v 4, and semi-final 2 for seed 2 v 3). Due to the specificity of the draw, the exact procedure could only be finalised following the conclusion of the qualifying group stage. No restrictions were applied to the draw, as none of the clashes prohibited by UEFA for political reasons could occur. Based on the twelve teams that advanced to the play-offs, the three play-off paths were formed following the path formation rules, starting with League C and working up to League A: As there were four teams from League C (three group winners and one non-group winner), they were all placed in Path C. As there were five teams from League B (two group winners and three non-group winners), the two group winners were placed in Path B, while a draw decided which two of the three non-group winners were also placed in Path B. As there were two teams from League A (both non-group winners), they were both placed in Path A, along with the best-ranked League D group winner. The one remaining non-group winner from League B that was not drawn to Path B was then placed in Path A. The following three non-group winners from League B (ordered by Nations League ranking) took part in the draw, with two being drawn into Path B, while the remaining team was allocated to Path A:  Finland (21)  Ukraine (22)  Iceland (23) The two teams drawn into Path B occupied positions B3 and B4, following their Nations League ranking, while the team drawn into Path A occupied position A3. The following was the composition of the play-off paths: In the semi-finals of each path, the best-ranked team hosted the fourth-ranked team, and the second-ranked team hosted the third-ranked team. The following semi-final winners were drawn to host the play-off final: Path A: Winner semi-final 2 (Wales v Finland) Path B: Winner semi-final 2 (Bosnia and Herzegovina v Ukraine) Path C: Winner semi-final 1 (Georgia v Luxembourg) There were 690 goals scored in 239 matches, for an average of 2.89 goals per match. 14 goals Romelu Lukaku 10 goals Cristiano Ronaldo 9 goals Kylian Mbappé 8 goals Harry Kane 7 goals Rasmus Højlund Scott McTominay 6 goals Erling Haaland Bruno Fernandes Zeki Amdouni 5 goals Georgios Masouras Gerson Rodrigues Aleksandar Mitrović Benjamin Šeško 4 goals Marcel Sabitzer Andrej Kramarić Bukayo Saka Daniel Håkans Khvicha Kvaratskhelia Anastasios Bakasetas Dominik Szoboszlai Barnabás Varga Albert Guðmundsson Bakhtiyar Zaynutdinov Ion Nicolaescu Joselu Álvaro Morata 3 goals Jasir Asani Nedim Bajrami Lucas Zelarayán Christoph Baumgartner Michael Gregoritsch Emin Mahmudov Max Ebong Kiril Despodov Václav Černý Tomáš Souček Jonas Wind Oliver Antman Teemu Pukki Olivier Giroud Georges Mikautadze Budu Zivzivadze Hákon Arnar Haraldsson Alfreð Finnbogason Aron Gunnarsson Davide Frattesi Abat Aymbetov Vedat Muriqi Milot Rashica Pijus Širvys Danel Sinani Stevan Jovetić Cody Gakpo Calvin Stengs Wout Weghorst Enis Bardhi Elif Elmas Dion Charles Robert Lewandowski João Cancelo João Félix Gonçalo Ramos Bernardo Silva Denis Alibec Valentin Mihăilă Nicolae Stanciu John McGinn Dušan Vlahović Lukáš Haraslín Andraž Šporar Ferran Torres Viktor Gyökeres Renato Steffen Ruben Vargas Viktor Tsyhankov Harry Wilson 2 goals Taulant Seferi Albert Rosas Grant-Leon Ranos Marko Arnautović Konrad Laimer Dmitry Antilevsky Vladislav Morozov Dodi Lukebakio Leandro Trossard Rade Krunić Mateo Kovačić Mario Pašalić Bruno Petković Ladislav Krejčí Pierre-Emile Højbjerg Joakim Mæhle Robert Skov Marcus Rashford Rauno Sappinen Benjamin Källman Joel Pohjanpalo Pyry Soiri Kingsley Coman Youssouf Fofana Marcus Thuram Fotis Ioannidis Konstantinos Mavropanos Dimitrios Pelkas Martin Ádám Roland Sallai Andri Guðjohnsen Orri Óskarsson Gylfi Sigurðsson Oscar Gloukh Shon Weissman Eran Zahavi Domenico Berardi Federico Chiesa Mateo Retegui Islam Chesnokov Maksim Samorodov Askhat Tagybergen Yan Vorogovsky Fedor Černych Gytis Paulauskas Yvandro Borges Sanches Vladislav Baboglo Nikola Krstović Stefan Savić Nathan Aké Jani Atanasov Isaac Price Alexander Sørloth Jakub Piotrowski Karol Świderski Sebastian Szymański Ricardo Horta Gonçalo Inácio Diogo Jota Evan Ferguson Adam Idah Mikey Johnston Ianis Hagi Dušan Tadić Ondrej Duda Dávid Hancko Juraj Kucka Róbert Mak Erik Janža Žan Vipotnik Gavi Dani Olmo Lamine Yamal Viktor Claesson Emil Forsberg Remo Freuler Xherdan Shaqiri Granit Xhaka Kerem Aktürkoğlu Cenk Tosun Artem Dovbyk Mykhailo Mudryk David Brooks Daniel James Neco Williams 1 goal Kristjan Asllani Sokol Cikalleshi Mirlind Daku Ernest Muçi Márcio Vieira Tigran Barseghyan Artak Dashyan Nair Tiknizyan Florian Kainz Philipp Lienhart Toral Bayramov Renat Dadashov Anton Kryvotsyuk Ramil Sheydayev Denis Laptev Denis Polyakov Johan Bakayoko Yannick Carrasco Charles De Ketelaere Jan Vertonghen Amar Dedić Edin Džeko Renato Gojković Amar Rahmanović Miroslav Stevanović Preslav Borukov Spas Delev Marin Petkov Georgi Rusev Ante Budimir Luka Ivanušec Lovro Majer Grigoris Kastanos Kostas Pileas Ioannis Pittas Tomáš Chorý Tomáš Čvančara David Douděra Jan Kuchta Thomas Delaney Christian Eriksen Yussuf Poulsen Trent Alexander-Arnold Kalvin Phillips Declan Rice Kyle Walker Callum Wilson Martin Vetkal Mads Boe Mikkelsen Odmar Færø Glen Kamara Robin Lod Robert Taylor Jonathan Clauss Ousmane Dembélé Antoine Griezmann Randal Kolo Muani Benjamin Pavard Adrien Rabiot Aurélien Tchouaméni Dayot Upamecano Warren Zaïre-Emery Giorgi Chakvetadze Zuriko Davitashvili Otar Kiteishvili Levan Shengelia Giorgos Giakoumakis Dimitrios Kourbelis Manolis Siopis Ádám Nagy Willi Orbán Bálint Vécsei Mikael Egill Ellertsson Arnór Ingvi Traustason Davíð Kristján Ólafsson Gabi Kanichowsky Gadi Kinda Dor Peretz Raz Shlomo Manor Solomon Giacomo Bonaventura Matteo Darmian Stephan El Shaarawy Ciro Immobile Matteo Pessina Giacomo Raspadori Gianluca Scamacca Ramazan Orazov Muhamet Hyseni Altin Zeqiri Edon Zhegrova Daniels Balodis Eduards Emsis Jānis Ikaunieks Kristers Tobers Sandro Wolfinger Edvinas Girdvainis Maxime Chanot Mathias Olesen Paul Mbong Yannick Yankam Vadim Rață Edvin Kuč Slobodan Rubežić Memphis Depay Marten de Roon Quilindschy Hartman Teun Koopmeiners Virgil van Dijk Mats Wieffer Darko Churlinov Jovan Manev Jonny Evans Josh Magennis Conor McMenamin Paul Smyth Fredrik Aursnes Aron Dønnum Mohamed Elyounoussi Martin Ødegaard Ola Solbakken Jørgen Strand Larsen Adam Buksa Przemysław Frankowski Arkadiusz Milik Damian Szymański Piotr Zieliński Rafael Leão Otávio Nathan Collins Matt Doherty Callum Robinson Andrei Burcă Florinel Coman Dennis Man Răzvan Marin George Pușcaș Filippo Berardi Simone Franciosi Alessandro Golinucci Stuart Armstrong Lyndon Dykes Callum McGregor Kenny McLean Ryan Porteous Lawrence Shankland Srđan Babić Darko Lazović Strahinja Pavlović Miloš Veljković Róbert Boženík Dávid Ďuriš Stanislav Lobotka Ľubomír Šatka Tomáš Suslov Denis Vavro David Brekalo Adam Gnezda Čerin Žan Karničnik Sandi Lovrić Jan Mlakar Benjamin Verbič Álex Baena Robin Le Normand Mikel Merino Mikel Oyarzabal Oihan Sancet Nico Williams Anthony Elanga Emil Holm Alexander Isak Jesper Karlsson Dejan Kulusevski Robin Quaison Manuel Akanji Cedric Itten Silvan Widmer Yunus Akgün Barış Alper Yılmaz Abdülkerim Bardakcı Arda Güler İrfan Kahveci Orkun Kökçü Umut Nayir Cengiz Ünder Yusuf Yazıcı Bertuğ Yıldırım Oleksandr Karavayev Yukhym Konoplya Heorhiy Sudakov Roman Yaremchuk Andriy Yarmolenko Illya Zabarnyi Oleksandr Zinchenko Nathan Broadhead Brennan Johnson Kieffer Moore Aaron Ramsey 1 own goal Joan Cervós (against Israel) Styopa Mkrtchyan (against Latvia) Nair Tiknizyan (against Wales) Bəhlul Mustafazadə (against Sweden) Orel Mangala (against Austria) Nihad Mujakić (against Luxembourg) Aleks Petkov (against Hungary) Karol Mets (against Poland) Solomon Kvirkvelia (against Spain) Luka Lochoshvili (against Spain) Aymen Mouelhi (against France) Ethan Santos (against France) Attila Szalai (against Serbia) Eli Dasa (against Kosovo) Yerkin Tapalov (against Greece) Amir Rrahmani (against Switzerland) Simon Lüchinger (against Bosnia and Herzegovina) Ferdinando Apap (against England) Ryan Camenzuli (against Ukraine) Enrico Pepe (against England) Jani Atanasov (against England) Jonny Evans (against Slovenia) Leo Skiri Østigård (against Scotland) Roberto Di Maio (against Slovenia) Patrik Hrošovský (against Bosnia and Herzegovina) Ozan Kabak (against Armenia) Mykola Matviyenko (against Bosnia and Herzegovina) The overall rankings were used for seeding in the final tournament draw. Results against sixth-placed teams were not considered in the ranking. Source: UEFA Rules for classification: Ranking criteria Notes: Goals scored away from home: Belgium 10, England 8. Fair play points: Bosnia and Herzegovina −20, Latvia −29. The fixtures of matchdays 7 and 8 of Group I involving Israel were moved to 15 and 12 November 2023, respectively, due to the Israel–Hamas war. The restriction would have applied to the following pairings: Armenia–Azerbaijan, Belarus–Ukraine, Gibraltar–Spain, Kosovo–Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo–Serbia. "Euro 2024: All you need to know". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 12 July 2021. Retrieved 27 September 2021. "UEFA Euro 2024 qualifying group stage draw to be staged in Frankfurt in 2022". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 7 October 2021. Retrieved 7 October 2021. UEFA.com (17 November 2015). "UEFA EURO 2016: How all the teams qualified". UEFA.com. Retrieved 2 January 2024. UEFA.com (22 February 2021). "UEFA EURO 2020 contenders in focus: Czech Republic". UEFA.com. Retrieved 6 January 2024. UEFA.com (3 March 2021). "UEFA EURO 2020 contenders in focus: Slovakia". UEFA.com. Retrieved 6 January 2024. UEFA.com (28 December 2023). "Who has qualified for UEFA EURO 2024?". UEFA. Retrieved 5 January 2024. "UEFA EURO 2024 qualifying: All you need to know". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 27 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "Regulations of the UEFA European Football Championship, 2022–24". Union of European Football Associations. 10 May 2022. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 May 2022. Retrieved 16 May 2022. "Regulations of the UEFA Nations League, 2022/23". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 22 September 2021. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 September 2021. Retrieved 27 September 2021. "European Qualifiers match between Israel and Switzerland to be played on 15 November 2023". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 10 October 2023. Retrieved 10 October 2023. "New dates for three UEFA matches involving Israel". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 23 October 2023. Retrieved 23 October 2023. "UEFA European Football Championship 2022–24 – competition regulations, entry form and qualifying draw" (ZIP). UEFA Circular Letter. No. 31/2022. Union of European Football Associations. 16 May 2022. Retrieved 17 May 2022. "UEFA EURO 2024 qualifying draw: When is it? How does it work? Who is seeded?". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 27 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "UEFA EURO 2024 qualifying draw". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "UEFA EURO 2024 qualifying draw: Dutch get France, Italy pooled with England". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 9 October 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022. "UEFA EURO 2024 qualifying draw procedure approved". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 20 September 2022. Retrieved 20 September 2022. "Qualifying Draw Procedure: European Qualifiers 2022–24" (PDF). UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 20 September 2022. Retrieved 20 September 2022. "European Qualifiers 2022-24 – draw and fixture list procedures". UEFA Circular Letter. No. 67/2022. Union of European Football Associations. 28 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "Overall ranking of the 2022/23 UEFA Nations League" (PDF). UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 27 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "UEFA Euro 2024 qualifying group fixtures". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 10 October 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022. "European Qualifiers 2022–24, Group stage: Fixture List (by group)" (PDF). Union of European Football Associations. 10 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. "European Qualifiers 2022–24, Group stage: Fixture List (by match-day)" (PDF). Union of European Football Associations. 10 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. "Confusion surrounds Euro 2024 fixtures". RTÉ. 9 October 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022. "UEFA je odagnala sumnje i potvrdila raspored kvalifikacija, Vatreni otvaraju s Walesom kod kuće" [UEFA has dispelled doubts and confirmed the qualification schedule, the Vatreni open with Wales at home]. Telesport (in Croatian). 10 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. "Belgium v Sweden: Euro 2024 qualifier abandoned after Brussels shooting". BBC Sport. 16 October 2023. Retrieved 19 October 2023. "European Qualifier match between Belgium and Sweden declared abandoned with half-time result confirmed as final" (Press release). Union of European Football Associations. 19 October 2023. Retrieved 19 October 2023. "EURO 2024 play-offs: How they work". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 27 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "UEFA EURO 2024 play-off draw". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. Retrieved 23 November 2023. "UEFA EURO 2024 play-off draw: All you need to know". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 1 October 2023. Retrieved 18 November 2023. "EURO 2024 play-off draw: Wales vs Finland, Israel vs Iceland, Bosnia-Herzegovina vs Ukraine". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 23 November 2023. Retrieved 23 November 2023. "European Qualifiers 2022-24 – Play-off draw procedure (Executive Committee version)" (PDF). UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 28 June 2023. Retrieved 18 November 2023. "European Qualifiers 2022-24 – Play-off draw procedure (Final version)" (PDF). UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 22 November 2023. Retrieved 23 November 2023. "EURO 2024 play-offs: How they work". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 27 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "European Qualifiers: How the play-offs are shaping up". UEFA.com. Union of European Football Associations. 16 November 2023. Retrieved 18 November 2023. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Qualification for the 2024 UEFA European Championship. UEFA Euro 2024, UEFA.com European Qualifiers, UEFA.com