The little finger or pinkie, also known as the baby finger, fifth digit, or pinky finger, is the most ulnar and smallest digit of the human hand, and next to the ring finger. The word "pinkie" is derived from the Dutch word pink, meaning "little finger". The earliest recorded use of the term "pinkie" is from Scotland in 1808. The term (sometimes spelled "pinky") is common in Scottish English and American English, and is also used extensively in other Commonwealth countries such as New Zealand, Canada, and Australia. The little finger is nearly impossible for most people to bend independently (without also bending the ring finger), due to the nerves for each digit being intertwined.[citation needed] There are also nine muscles that control the fifth digit: Three in the hypothenar eminence, two extrinsic flexors, two extrinsic extensors, and two more intrinsic muscles: Hypothenar eminence: Opponens digiti minimi muscle Abductor minimi digiti muscle (adduction from third palmar interossei) Flexor digiti minimi brevis (the "longus" is absent in most humans) Two extrinsic flexors: Flexor digitorum superficialis Flexor digitorum profundus Two extrinsic extensors: Extensor digiti minimi muscle Extensor digitorum Two intrinsic hand muscles: Fourth lumbrical muscle Third palmar interosseous muscle Note: the dorsal interossei of the hand muscles do not have an attachment to the fifth digit Among American children, a "pinky swear" or "pinky promise" is made when a person wraps one of their pinky fingers around another person's pinky and makes a promise. Something similar is also seen in China and Korea, where people link their pinky fingers and then stamp their thumbs together to make a yaksok (promise). Among members of the Japanese yakuza (gangsters), the penalty for various offenses is removal of parts of the little finger (known as yubitsume). It is a common misconception that one should extend their little finger when drinking from a teacup. This practice is generally deprecated by etiquette guides as a sign of snobbery amongst the socially inferior, with various cultural theories as to the origin of the practice including the idea that finger food should be eaten with only the first three digits. The messaging application Teams from Microsoft has an emoji which is a representation of a closed hand with the little finger raised. The description is "Nature's call" which is a polite euphemism used when someone feels a need to urinate or defecate. The signet ring is traditionally worn on the little finger of a gentleman's left hand, a practice still common especially in the United Kingdom, Australia, and European cultures. A signet ring is considered part of the regalia of many European monarchies, and also of the Pope, with the ring always worn on the left little finger. In modern times the location of the signet ring has relaxed, with examples worn on various different digits, although little fingers still tend to be the most usual. The Iron Ring is a symbolic ring worn by most Canadian engineers. The Ring is a symbol of both pride and humility for the engineering profession, and is always worn on the little finger of the dominant hand. In the United States, the Engineer's Ring is a stainless steel ring worn on the fifth digit of the working hand by engineers who belong to the Order of the Engineer and have accepted the Obligation of an Engineer. The little finger is often used as a support when smartphone users type one-handed. The little finger is positioned underneath the phone, allowing it to be propped with the three middle fingers, and the user to type with their thumb. Some users reported dents on their little finger and pain in the hand after prolonged use in this way, doctors referred to this as "iPhone pinky" or "smartphone pinky". The skin indentations were reported to be nothing of alarm, as they disappeared on their own after a short while without cell phone use. Finger numbering Fifth metacarpal bone, the bone in the hand proximal to the little finger Pinky ring, a ring worn on the little finger Red string of fate, a Chinese belief that soulmates are bound by a string attached to the little finger "Pinkie". World Wide Words. Retrieved 25 July 2018. "Scots word of the season: pinkie". Association for Scottish Literary Studies. May 2008. Retrieved 28 January 2020. "Little Finger". Cambridge English Dictionary. Retrieved 26 July 2019. Arthurs, Deborah; Gladwell, Hattie (21 January 2016). "Has your smartphone given you 'smartphone pinky'?". Metro. Retrieved 6 April 2020. Barrie, Joshua (15 February 2018). "Woman cuts off finger, names it 'Wiggles' and wears it as pendant necklace". The Mirror. Retrieved 6 April 2020. A woman cut off half her pinky finger and now wears it as a pendant around her neck. Roud, Steve. The Lore of the Playground. Random House. 2010. Hill, Peter B. E.: "The Japanese Mafia: Yakuza, law, and the state", p. 75. Oxford Univ. Press, 2003 "Tea Etiquette". Tea Laden. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "Etiquette and History of Afternoon Tea". An Afternoon to Remember. Archived from the original on Jul 29, 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018. Arden (2014-11-21). "Raised pinky fingers, scone slicing and other tea faux pas". Clise Etiquette. Retrieved 2020-03-10. "View all available emojis in Microsoft Teams (free)". Microsoft Support. Retrieved 2021-06-02. Mark_N13 (8 Feb 2018). "Emoji". Microsoft Community. Archived from the original on Dec 15, 2023. Retrieved 2022-03-27. "Engineer's Ring". Order Of The Engineer. Archived from the original on Feb 16, 2020. "Obligation". Order Of The Engineer. Archived from the original on Feb 14, 2020. Schlitz, Heather (Nov 6, 2021). "People are sharing pictures of their dented 'smartphone pinky' after holding their phones, so asked doctors what the deal is". Business Insider. Retrieved 2022-04-13. Chiu, Allyson (Oct 29, 2021). "How to avoid 'smartphone pinkie' and other pains and problems from being glued to your phone". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on Mar 6, 2023. Retrieved 2022-04-13. Media related to Little fingers at Wikimedia Commons The dictionary definition of little finger at Wiktionary