Arrhenatherum, commonly called oatgrass or button-grass, is a genus of Eurasian and North African plants in the grass family. Wild forms can resemble wild oat (Avena) or fescue (Festuca). Oatgrasses are very common perennials with yellowish roots. The shining stems grow to a height of 1.5 meters, but die off in winter. The leaves are hairless with blunt ligules. The inflorescence is a panicle with two-flowered bisexual spikelets. Species Arrhenatherum album - tall oatgrass - Mediterranean from Portugal to Cyprus Arrhenatherum calderae - Tenerife in Canary Islands Arrhenatherum elatius - false oatgrass, tall oatgrass, tall meadow oat - Eurasia + North Africa from Iceland to Canary Islands + Kazakhstan; naturalized in East Asia, Australia, New Zealand, the Americas Arrhenatherum kotschyii - Turkey, Caucasus, Syria, Lebanon, Palestine, Jordan, Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan Arrhenatherum longifolium - France, Spain, Portugal, Morocco Arrhennatherum palaestinum - eastern Mediterranean from Greece to Iraq Arrhenatherum pallens - Portugal formerly included numerous species now considered better suited to other genera: Avenula Danthoniastrum Duthiea Helictochloa Helictotrichon Sphenopholis List of Poaceae genera lectotype designated by L.K. Pfeiffer, Nom. 1: 274 (1872) Tropicos, Arrhenatherum P. Beauv. "World Checklist of Selected Plant Families: Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew". Watson L, Dallwitz MJ. (2008). "The Grass Genera of the World: Arrhenatherum". The Grass Genera of the World. Retrieved 2009-08-19. Palisot de Beauvois, Ambroise Marie François Joseph. 1812. Essai d'une Nouvelle Agrostographie 55-56 descriptions in Latin, commentary in French Palisot de Beauvois, Ambroise Marie François Joseph. 1812. Essai d'une Nouvelle Agrostographie plate XI (11), figure V (5) at lower left line drawings of Arrhenatherum avenaceum Altervista Flora Italiana genere Arrhenatherum Valdes, B. & H. Scholz. 2006. The Euro+Med treatment of Gramineae - a generic synopsis and some new names. Willdenowia 36(2): 657–669 The Plant List search for Arrhenatherum Flora of China Vol. 22 Page 322 燕麦草属 yan mai cao shu Arrhenatherum P. Beauvois Atlas of Living Australia, Oatgrass, Arrhenatherum elatius (L.) P.Beauv. ex J.Presl & C.Presl Biota of North America Program 2013 county distribution map Rosengurtt, B., B. R. A. Maffei & P. I. Artucio. 1970. Gramíneas Uruguayas [i–vii], 1–489. Universidad de la República, Montevideo