The Tigray War was an armed conflict that lasted from 3 November 2020 to 3 November 2022. The war was primarily fought in the Tigray Region of Ethiopia between forces allied to the Ethiopian federal government and Eritrea on one side, and the Tigray People's Liberation Front (TPLF) on the other. After years of increased tensions and hostilities between the TPLF and the governments of Ethiopia and Eritrea, fighting began when TPLF forces attacked the Northern Command headquarters of the Ethiopian National Defense Force (ENDF), alongside a number of other bases in Tigray. The ENDF counterattacked from the south – while Eritrean Defence Forces (EDF) began launching attacks from the north – which Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed described as a "law enforcement operation". Federal allied forces captured Mekelle, the capital of the Tigray Region, on 28 November, after which Abiy declared the operation "over." However, the TPLF stated soon afterwards that it would continue fighting until the "invaders" were out, and on 28 June 2021, the Tigray Defense Forces (TDF) retook Mekelle; by July the same year, they had also advanced into the Amhara and Afar regions. In early November 2021, the TDF, together with the Oromo Liberation Army (OLA), took control of several towns on the highway south from Tigray Region towards Addis Ababa, and the TPLF stated that it considered "marching on [the capital]." Together with seven smaller rebel groups, the TPLF and OLA declared a coalition aiming to "dismantle Abiy's government by force or by negotiations, and then form a transitional authority." After a successful government counter-offensive in response, and then a series of negotiations with the TPLF, Ethiopia declared an indefinite humanitarian truce on 24 March 2022, in order to allow the delivery of humanitarian aid into Tigray. However, fighting dramatically re-escalated in late August 2022, after peace talks broke down. Rapid mobilization of troops soon followed, with Ethiopia, Eritrea and Tigray reportedly organizing hundreds of thousands of troops against each other by October the same year. After a number of peace and mediation proposals in the intervening years, Ethiopia and the Tigrayan rebel forces agreed to a cessation of hostilities on 2 November, which went into effect the day after; Eritrea was not a party to the agreement, however, and they largely continued to occupy parts of Tigray as of 2023. All sides, particularly the ENDF, EDF, Amhara forces and TDF, committed war crimes during the conflict. Mass extrajudicial killings of civilians took place throughout, including in Axum, Bora, Chenna, Kobo, the Hitsats refugee camp, Humera, Mai Kadra, the Mahbere Dego, and Zalambessa. Between 162,000 and 600,000 people were killed, and war rape became a "daily" occurrence, with girls as young as 8 and women as old as 72 being raped, often in front of their families. A major humanitarian crisis developed as a result of the war, which led to widespread famine. It also inflicted immense economic damage on the region, with the cost of rebuilding alone estimated to be roughly $20 billion. Following the end of the Ethiopian Civil War in 1991, Ethiopia became a dominant-party state under the rule of the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF), a coalition of four ethnically based parties. The founding and most influential member was the Tigray People's Liberation Front (TPLF), led by Meles Zenawi, who was the prime minister of Ethiopia until his death in 2012. He was succeeded by Deputy Prime Minister Hailemariam Desalegn, the chairman of the Southern Ethiopian People's Democratic Movement (SEPDM), a coalition member. On 15 February 2018, Hailemariam announced his resignation as both prime minister and chairman of the EPRDF, owing to a growing discontent within the public, fueled by a reaction to 27 years of repressive governance. On 28 March 2018, in a closed-door election to chair the EPRDF, executive committee members elected the Oromo Peoples' Democratic Organisation (OPDO) chairman Abiy Ahmed. On 2 April 2018, Ethiopian parliament elected Abiy as prime minister. One of Abiy's first actions after his election was to initiate a warming of relations with Eritrea, a long-time rival of the TPLF, to end a 20-year long border conflict. While this decision was considered a cause of celebration at the time, many within the Tigray Region were heavily critical of this, seeing it as a betrayal of those who died in the 1998–2000 war. The TPLF condemned the peace initiatives, saying they were hastily made, had "fundamental flaws", and also claimed it was decided on without consulting long-time TPLF members. On 1 December 2019, Abiy merged the ethnic and region-based parties of the EPRDF (which had governed Ethiopia for 28 years) and several opposition parties into his new Prosperity Party. The TPLF, which had long dominated Ethiopian politics, refused to join this new party. After losing the election and being ousted from the federal government, TPLF officials relocated to the Tigray Region, continuing to administer control there while frequently clashing with the federal government. In one instance, the Tigray regional government was reported to have defied the federal government and refused to allow Ethiopian Federal Police to arrest Getachew Assefa, the former chief of the National Intelligence and Security Service (NISS) of Ethiopia and executive member of the TPLF. The Ethiopian government and its supporters accused the TPLF of trying to re-establish their rule over the country through violence and force. In turn, the TPLF accused the federal government of accumulating too much power for itself, and that it was engaging in ethnic discrimination of Tigrayans. Throughout 2020, tensions between the federal government and the TPLF escalated in the months leading up to November. In March, the National Election Board of Ethiopia delayed the general elections – originally scheduled for 29 August 2020 – to a then-undetermined date, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The terms of federal and regional lawmakers, as well as the executive branch, were then extended by federal parliament beyond the October 2020 constitutional mandates. The TPLF, led by its chairman Debretsion Gebremichael, rejected these measures, arguing that they were unconstitutional, and held its own regional election on 9 September, in defiance of the federal government. Several journalists were barred by the Ethiopian government from travelling to cover Tigray's regional election. Ethiopia considered the Tigray election to be illegal, and responded by slashing federal funding to the region, a decision the TPLF described as "tantamount to declaration of war." In late September 2020, the TPLF stated that the constitutional term limit of the House of Federation, the House of Peoples' Representatives, the prime minister, and the Council of Ministers was 5 October 2020 and that for this reason, it would consider "the incumbent" constitutionally illegitimate after 5 October; they proposed replacing the government with a technocratic caretaker government, as detailed in a plan posted on Facebook by the Coalition of Ethiopian Federalist Forces. Ethiopian elite units were transported to Gherghera base near Asmara, as part of an alleged pact between Prime Minister Abiy and Eritrean President Isaias Afwerki to "strike out of existence the TPLF," according to former Eritrean Minister of Defence Mesfin Hagos. In late October 2020, the Ethiopian Reconciliation Commission stated that it was trying to mediate between the federal government and the TPLF, as well as the other regional governments, but that the pre-conditions set by all sides were blocking progress. As tension continued to grow, a brigadier general appointed by Abiy was prevented by the Tigray government from taking up his military post. The same day before the Tigray forces launched the Northern Command attacks, the federal parliament of Ethiopia had suggested designating the TPLF as a terrorist organization. The 1995 Constitution of Ethiopia states in Article 39.1, "Every Nation, Nationality, and People in Ethiopia has an unconditional right to self-determination, including the right to secession." Article 62.9 grants the House of Federation the right to "order Federal intervention if any State [government], in violation of [the] Constitution, endangers the constitutional order." Northern Command attacks Just before midnight on 3 November 2020, Tigray Special Forces and allied local militia attacked the Ethiopian National Defense Force (ENDF) Northern Command headquarters in Mekelle, the Fifth Battalion barracks in Dansha, and other Northern Command bases. Several people were killed and the TPLF claimed the attack was carried out in self-defence or preemptive self-defense. In retaliation, an Ethiopian offensive was launched on 4 November, which was accompanied by the declaration of a state of emergency, the creation of the State of Emergency Inquiry Board and a shutdown of government services in the Tigray Region. During the subsequent days, skirmishes continued and the Ethiopian federal parliament declared the creation of an interim government for Tigray. Ethiopian offensives in the north were accompanied with airstrikes and several towns and cities were retaken. Early massacres On the night of 9 to 10 November 2020, 600 civilians, mostly Amharas and Welkait, were killed in a massacre in the town of Mai Kadra with machetes and knives used by local militias and police loyal to the TPLF, according to preliminary investigations by Amnesty International and the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission; other refugees, interviewed by the Financial Times and Reuters, said it was the Amhara militia who were the perpetrators and Tigrayans who were the victims. Two days later, refugees interviewed by the Daily Telegraph, The Guardian and The New York Times stated that Amhara militias, including Fano, and the ENDF carried out beatings and massacres of 92 Tigrayans in Humera. Humera was shelled from the direction of the Eritrean–Ethiopian border for two days around 9–11 November. The ENDF gained control of the town one day later. Within the same month, Amhara Region forces took over and occupied Western Tigray. Offensives of joint ENDF-Amhara Region-Eritrean forces into Tigray were facilitated by the intervention of "Pterosaurus" drones, launched by the United Arab Emirates from its base in Assab, Eritrea. The Chinese-made, armed drones bombed Tigrayan artillery and weapons depots. In the late hours of 13 November 2020, Tigray forces fired a rocket towards the airports of Bahir Dar and Gondar in the Amhara Region. On 14 November, Tigray forces launched rockets at the Eritrean capital of Asmara, but the missiles missed. The Tigray government claimed these locations contained military terminals that served as bases to carry out airstrikes. Mekelle offensive From 17 to 19 November, Ethiopian forces captured the Raya district and the towns of Shire, Alamata, Adwa, and Axum, and began moving towards Adigrat. Fighting between Tigray and Eritrea took place in Adi Quala, Zalembesa, Taruna, Ali Tina, Wadqomdi, and Badme. On 23 November, Ethiopian forces reached the regional capital of Mekelle and encircled it. A military spokesperson for Ethiopia, Colonel Dejene Tsegaye, announced that Mekelle would be shelled, and told Tigray civilians to flee the city because Ethiopian forces would show no mercy. Though TPLF leaders and special forces had already left the city, Ethiopian forces continued their direct assault on Mekelle on the morning of 28 November, and started heavily shelling the city. By the evening, Prime Minister Abiy declared Ethiopian forces had taken full control of the city. In total, 27 civilians were killed and 100 others were injured. The Tigray government vowed to continue fighting. Formation of the Tigray Defense Forces After Ethiopian federal forces and their allies captured Mekelle and other major cities, forces loyal to the Tigray government began to regroup into mountainous areas of the region and reorganized under the banner of the Tigray Defense Forces (TDF). This retreat was partially caused by the fact that a large portion of the TDF's artillery had been destroyed by air strikes. The TDF also began to dig into their positions in rural Tigray, marking the start of a guerrilla campaign against Ethiopian-allied forces from the mountains. Eritrean occupation of the northeast On 28 and 29 November, witnesses and survivors, including refugees in Sudan, reported that the Eritrean Defence Forces (EDF) carried out the Axum massacre of about 720 to 800 civilians. The Eritrean government stated that it was angered by Amnesty International's report on the massacre, calling it "transparently unprofessional" and "politically motivated" and accusing Amnesty of fabricating evidence. However, refugees also spoke of the EDF killing 80–150 people in Idaga Hamus on 30 November, as part of a larger series of extrajudicial killings known as the Adigrat massacres. A witness told Al Jazeera that, on 4 December, Eritrean troops entered her town in southeastern Tigray and attempted to rape her; this statement is corroborated by other survivors and witnesses, who spoke of rampant sexual violence, massacres and destruction of civilian infrastructure committed by the EDF. In February 2021, the UN chief coordinator of humanitarian efforts Mark Lowcock said that up to 40% of Tigray was not controlled by Ethiopian troops. Aside from Tigrayan rebel forces, he said that much of that area was under the control of the EDF, pursuing their own objectives independent of Ethiopian command. By early March, residents said that the number of Eritrean soldiers in Tigray was in the thousands. Continued insurgency By mid-December, fighting had reached Hagere Selam, Samre, Dogu'a, Kolla Tembien, May Tsemre and localities around Maychew. During this time, a violently enforced curfew was set up by Ethiopian forces along with Eritrean soldiers. According to the Europe External Programme with Africa (EEPA), in Wukro over 200 people were killed and the town was left deserted. The Ethiopian government denied involvement in the killing. On 9 January 2021, Ethiopian TV reported that 300 refugees in Hitsats camp were executed by the TPLF. According to refugees, pro-TPLF forces used Hitsats as a base for several weeks in November 2020, killing several refugees who wanted to leave the camp to get food and, in one incident, killed nine young Eritrean men in revenge for having lost a battle against the EDF. On 18 February, unidentified militiamen ambushed a passenger bus in Adi Mesino, killing six and injuring 10. Ultimately, the early gains made by the ENDF and EDF against Tigrayan forces did not lead to a decisive defeat of the re-organized and invigorated TDF. In late January, the TDF had rallied and were intensifying their insurgency against Ethiopian forces despite the initial setbacks and heavy losses. During this time fighting was reported to have taken place around Mekelle, and the ENDF had retreated from rural positions towards the city. Several of these clashes took place in mid-February at Samre, a small town 45 km (28 mi) south-west of Mekelle. Thousands of Ethiopian troops supported by artillery, tanks, and airstrikes fought dug-in forces loyal to the Tigray regional government. According to a report by Ghent University, massacres of civilians continued into March, including around 250 in Humera over the course of three days by unconfirmed perpetrators, and 13 in Grizana by the EDF. That same month, an undated video surfaced that purported to show Ethiopian troops executing 11 unarmed men before throwing their bodies off a cliff near Mahibere Dego. TDF regains territory Fighting intensified in early April; by this point, the TDF was in control of the rural areas of central and southern Tigray along with parts of eastern and south-eastern Tigray, while the ENDF was in control of the main roads and urban areas. Amhara and Eritrean forces also controlled parts of Tigray in the west and north, respectively. All sides wished to secure a military victory, but they lacked the ability to do so in the near term, and so they began to prepare for a prolonged conflict. The Tigray Defense Forces were engaged in a war of attrition with popular support from the people of Tigray, who were infuriated by war crimes committed by Eritrean and Ethiopian soldiers and worried about a potential decrease in the region's autonomy. This resulted in the TDF growing in strength and the concept of secession from Ethiopia gaining popularity in Tigray, a stance which was considered likely to inflame Amhara-Tigray territorial disputes. On 6 May, Ethiopia's House of Peoples' Representatives declared the TPLF as a terrorist organization. On 21 May, Ethiopia's military prosecutors convicted 3 soldiers of rape, and pressed charges against more than 50 others suspected of killing or raping civilians in Tigray. Retaking of Mekelle On 22 June 2021, an Ethiopian military cargo plane was shot down over Samre, marking a turn of the war in the TDF's favor. On 28 June 2021, the Tigray Defense Forces retook the city of Mekelle. People celebrated in the streets of Mekelle as the TDF took the city. Ethiopian soldiers, police and administrators were seen leaving, ahead of the occupation by the TDF. Shortly after hearing news of the TDF advance, the Ethiopian government declared an immediate unilateral ceasefire across the Tigray Region. BBC News reporter Vivienne Nunis characterised the ceasefire as an attempt by Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed to save face, the government having little other option. On 29 June, Tigrayan forces vowed to continue their offensive and drive into Eritrea or the Amhara Region if necessary, and said that Mekelle was 100% under the control of Tigrayan forces. On 30 June 2021, the TDF had entered the town of Shire, some 140 kilometres (87 mi) northwest of Mekelle, after it had been abandoned by Eritrean troops. The International Crisis Group claimed that the TDF now controlled most of the Tigray region. The Ethiopian government claimed, on 30 June, that it could re-enter Mekelle in less than three weeks if it wanted to. In the same announcement, the Ethiopian government stated that all Eritrean forces had withdrawn from the region, though this was not confirmed by the Eritrean government. Tigrayan push in Afar and Amhara On 6 July 2021, the Tigrayan government mobilised to retake western Tigray from Amhara forces. A TDF offensive starting on 12 July resulted in Tigrayan forces capturing southern Tigray, including the towns of Alamata and Korem. The TDF subsequently crossed the Tekezé River and advanced westward, capturing the town of Mai Tsebri in the Tselemti district, and prompting Amhara officials to call on its militias to arm themselves and mobilise. Following the TDF's rapid advances, Abiy threatened to resume war with Tigray and crush the rebels, raising fears of genocide. He called on other regions of Ethiopia to mobilise their special forces. The Oromia, Sidama, and SNNPR regions answered the call and mobilised. From 17 to 19 July, the TDF began launching attacks in the Afar Region to its east, prompting the Benishangul-Gumuz, Gambela, Harari and Somali regions to join the war. Heavy fighting in western Afar displaced over 54,000 people, and resulted in the TDF reportedly capturing three districts in the region. While the Tigray government claimed it only entered Afar to target federal forces, experts believe their aim was to sever a portion of National Highway A1, a vital trade route for landlocked Ethiopia, linking the capital of Addis Ababa to the Port of Djibouti, from which most of its petroleum products are imported. Following the TDF's counter-attack on two districts of his region, the Amhara regional President, Agegnehu Teshager, called for the total mobilisation of all people of all ages who are armed in the region to fight against the Tigrayans. A similar call was made in Afar. Meanwhile, the city of Weldiya was captured by the TDF on 12 August 2021. On 4 August 2021, some Agew people declared themselves independent from the Amhara Region and formed the Agew Liberation Front (ALF). The next day, Lalibela was reported to have been seized by Tigrayan forces. On 9 August, UNICEF executive director Henrietta Fore expressed concern about reports that over 200 people, including 100 children, had been killed in attacks on displaced families sheltering at a health facility and a school in the Afar Region. On 11 August, the TDF and the Oromo Liberation Army (OLA) announced an alliance to overthrow Abiy Ahmed's government, saying they were also in talks with other rebel groups to establish a "grand coalition". With the TDF advancing deeper into Amhara, various cities across the region began enforcing curfews. On 9 September 2021, the Ethiopian government claimed Tigrayan forces had been "routed" and heavily defeated in the Afar Region. TPLF spokesperson Getachew Reda said its forces had seen no fighting in Afar and had redeployed to the adjoining Amhara Region. On 30 September, amid UN concerns about a blockade of aid deliveries to Tigray, the Ethiopian government expelled 7 top UN officials, reportedly because of "meddling" in its internal affairs, giving the officials 72 hours to leave the country. October 2021 government-allied offensive On 8 October 2021, Getachew said that an intensive air campaign by the Ethiopian Air Force began against TDF positions in the North Wollo and North Gondar zones of the Amhara Region, mostly around the towns of Wegeltena, Wurgessa and Haro. He also stated there was a "massive build up of forces on all fronts." The federal government and Amhara regional government did not respond to the claim. On 11 October, Ethiopian-allied forces launched coordinated ground attacks "on all fronts" against the TDF with combined arms including tanks, helicopters, heavy artillery, warplanes, and drones according to the Tigrayan government. General Tsadkan Gebretensae, member of the central command of the TDF said both sides had been preparing for the offensive for months, and predicted that battle would be "decisive". The new offensive effectively ended the unilateral ceasefire declared by the federal government in June and further deepened fears of the developing famine in Tigray, with a federal government blockade still preventing most aid from arriving. Meanwhile, the continued war prompted regional leaders, including Kenyan President Kenyatta, to voice their concerns and urge peace, while US Secretary of State Blinken met with the AU envoy to Ethiopia, former Nigerian President Olusegun Obasanjo, to discuss the crisis. On 13 October, Getachew claimed fighting continued intensifying with "staggering" casualties. He also claimed clashes were taking place near Weldiya and that fighting had resumed in Afar, within the Awra and Chifra districts near the Amhara border. A humanitarian worker citing witnesses said the EDF were fighting the TDF in Berhale, a town in Afar 71 kilometres (44 mi) northeast of Mekelle. Fall of Dessie and Kombolcha On 30 October, it was reported that Dessie had fallen to the TDF. However, control over the city was not immediately certain, with the federal government denying its capture and reports of fierce fighting coming from the town. On 31 October, the TDF claimed to have captured Kombolcha, a town 21 km (13 mi) east of Dessie, and the Ethiopian government accused the TDF of massacring over 100 youths in the town. On the same day, the Amhara regional government declared a state of emergency, which included a region-wide curfew. South of Kombolcha, the OLA claimed to have seized control over Kemise on the A2 Highway which links Mekelle to the Ethiopian capital of Addis Ababa, and later declared they were considering an offensive towards the capital. The TDF claimed they also linked up with the OLA. Meanwhile, it was reported that a new roundup of ethnic Tigrayans had occurred in Addis Ababa. State of emergency and rebel coalition On 2 November 2021, as the counter-offensive came deeper into federal-controlled territory, the Ethiopian government declared a six-month state of emergency, which envisages the possibility to arrest and detain critics of the government without a court warrant, impose curfews, institute censorship, restrict freedom of movement as well as to call any adult person to fight in the war, for fear of serving from three to ten years in prison. Authorities in Addis Ababa also told residents to register their weapons in order to fend off the anticipated offensive. Four other regional governments also made a call to arms. On 5 November, the TPLF, OLA and other rebel groups declared the creation of a nine-group coalition, called the United Front of Ethiopian Federalist and Confederalist Forces. On 22 November, Prime Minister Abiy stated that he will be leading the fight against the rebels from the battlefront after the TDF claimed to have captured Shewa Robit, saying; "We are now in the final stages of saving Ethiopia." Many countries also urged citizens to leave the country. From 26 November to 6 December 2021, Ethiopian allied forces recaptured several towns in the Amhara and Afar regions including Lalibela and Shewa Robit, according to the Ethiopian government. On 6 December, government forces claimed to have recaptured the strategic cities of Dessie and Kombolcha. This was later confirmed by TPLF spokesman Getachew Reda; however, he claimed this was a strategic withdrawal, which was "part of their plan". On 12 December, Reuters reported that forces loyal to the TPLF had recaptured the town of Lalibela less than two weeks after government forces and their allies had recaptured control of the town for themselves. Nevertheless, by the end of the month, the federal government had successfully repelled the incursion towards Addis Ababa, and Tigrayan forces were pushed back to Tigray. Fighting slows down On 20 December 2021, the TPLF announced they had withdrawn their troops from Amhara and Afar, saying they were hoping to create, as stated by TPLF chairman Debretsion Gebremichael, "a decisive opening for peace". Debretsion also requested the establishment of a no-fly zone over Tigray, as well as a weapons embargo against Ethiopia and Eritrea. Following these developments, the ENDF stated that it would not advance any deeper into the Tigray region. However, in January 2022, the Ethiopian Air Force began launching a bombing campaign in the Tigray Region, killing 108 people, including at least 56 from an airstrike targeting an IDP camp in Dedebit. On 7 January – the same day as the Dedebit airstrike – Ethiopia released a number of opposition leaders from prison, including some from the TPLF, and said they desired to have a dialogue with the Tigrayan leadership. On 26 January, the Ethiopian council of ministers also proposed to end the state of emergency. On 24 March 2022, the Ethiopian government declared an indefinite humanitarian truce, in order to allow the delivery of humanitarian aid into Tigray. During the ceasefire, both Ethiopia and the TPLF agreed to have talks about an official end to the war. A number of outstanding issues – in particular, the presence of pro-government troops in Tigray's Western Zone and restoring access to basic public service to Tigray – were topics of discussion throughout. Though there were initial hopes of finding a peaceful solution to ending the war, the talks soon became characterized by steadily increasing hostilities between the negotiation parties. By August, talks started to break down, with both the Ethiopian government and the TPLF accusing each other of refusing to make peace. In late August 2022, after months of ceasefire, fighting resumed. Both sides blamed each other for initiating the fighting, and both also expressed frustration "for a lack of progress towards negotiations to end the 21-month conflict." The fighting itself concentrated in the border area connecting Tigray, Amhara and Afar. Allegations emerged that the Tigray were smuggling in weapons, leading to the Ethiopian Air Force shooting down a plane, claiming it was carrying weapons for the TPLF; meanwhile, the government was accused of indiscriminate air bombardments on civilian targets. Civilians reported that pro-government militias, such as Fano, had gotten involved as well. Exacerbating tensions were severe food shortages, an issue that remained unsolved have particularly affected the Tigray region. Joint Eritrean–Ethiopian offensive On 27 August, the TDF captured the town of Kobo, following the ENDF's withdrawal. Ethiopia and Eritrea subsequently announced an offensive in North Tigray on 1 September. On 13 September 2022, the TPLF said Eritrea had taken Sheraro. The town's capture by Eritrea and the fighting in nearby areas displaced around 210,000 people, most of whom fled to the city of Shire. A day later Ethiopian airstrikes on Mekelle killed at least ten people. By mid-September, reports emerged of Eritrea engaging in mass mobilization of the country's reservists to be sent to Tigray. On 20 September, the government of Tigray said Eritrea had invaded the region, and that heavy fighting was taking place across northern Tigray. The TDF had, thus far, largely resisted the offensive, and reportedly launched a counterattack to retake Sheraro. Meanwhile, Ethiopian and Eritrean forces began massing in Abala and Berhale in the Afar Region, within striking distance of Mekelle. On 27 September, an airstrike – allegedly carried out by Eritrea – struck the northern town of Adi Dairo while it was celebrating Meskel, killing at least six civilians and injured 19 more. On 2 October, the TPLF announced it had withdrawn troops from Amhara's North Wollo Zone, including Kobo, to be redeployed north to reinforce lines under heavy Eritrean attack but warned it would return if their southern border is threatened. Three days later, a second airstrike hit Adi Dairo, killing between 50 and 65 people according to aid workers in the town. Full-scale mobilization On 10 October, the TPLF claimed that Eritrea was escalating its offensive, sending more forces towards Rama, Tserona, and Zalambessa in the far north, with one aid worker saying it is the heaviest fighting since hostilities resumed. Later reports confirmed that Eritrea was intensifying its efforts to mobilize more troops for the war; it detained "elderly mothers and fathers", and sought draft-dodgers. Tigray mobilized its citizens too, calling on every able-bodied person to join the fight. Amidst the three-front offensive launched by Ethiopia and Eritrea, estimates put the number of Ethiopian casualties at over 90,000 in a single month, while Tigrayan casualties were also deemed incredibly high. According to peace and conflict studies researcher Kjetil Tronvoll, it is likely that 100,000 people had been killed over the preceding few weeks, and alleged that Eritrea and Ethiopia were using human wave attacks to overwhelm Tigrayan defenses. On 17 October, Ethiopia said that it would seize every airport and other key infrastructure in the region; that same day, the strategic city of Shire was taken by Eritrea and Ethiopia, leading to the evacuation of thousands of its inhabitants. Ethiopian forces then took Alamata and Korem in the south. By 22 October, ENDF and EDF-allied forces had also captured Adwa and Axum, even as peace talks with the TPLF were about to commence in South Africa. Witnesses from a number of towns told the Associated Press that Eritrean forces were regularly killing civilians between 23 and 29 October. On 25 October 2022, AU Commission Chairperson, Moussa Faki, announced that peace talks involving the Ethiopian government and the TPLF had commenced in Pretoria, South Africa. Hopes that these talks could definitively stop the war, however, remained low, as fighting did not appear to slow down, and Ethiopia vocalized their distrust about the peace process. Still, negotiations continued onward, and on 2 November, Ethiopia and the TPLF announced that they had signed an agreement for a cessation of hostilities (made effective the next day on 3 November, marking the two-year anniversary of the war); however, Eritrea and other warring parties were not involved in the agreement, leaving their status ambiguous. On 12 November, both parties signed a deal to allow humanitarian aid into Tigray. By 29 December, federal police were reported to have returned to Tigray, while flights and internet access had also been restored. Despite important steps towards peace and deescalation being made between the government and the TPLF, Amhara and Eritrean forces continued to launch attacks on Tigrayans in the months after the agreement was signed. The intensity of the war led to spillover effects on the surrounding countries in the region, particularly in Sudan. By the end of November 2020, around 44,000 people fled to Sudan. On 15 December 2020, four Sudanese soldiers were killed, and 27 others were injured near the Ethiopia–Sudan border, in what Sudan claimed to be an ambush by Ethiopian forces and Amhara militias. Ethiopia claimed they were trying to stop a Sudanese militia from seizing farmlands on Ethiopian territory. In response to the killings, Sudan started to build up its military along the border with Ethiopia. In late July 2022, the Islamist militant group al-Shabaab launched a coordinated invasion of Ethiopia from Somalia. Multiple observers, including political analyst Matthew Bryden and CNRS researcher Roland Marchal, have speculated that the political instability caused by the Tigray War, the perceived weakening of the Ethiopian state, and the movement of federal troops away from Somalia and towards Tigray, gave al-Shabaab an "opportune time" to launch an offensive. Since the war began, both regional and international powers have been actively involved in the conflict. A number of reports have been made alleging that China, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates were all providing military support for the Ethiopian government via the sale of weaponized drones. As early as December 2020, there were unconfirmed rumors that Emirati drones were being stationed in the Eritrean port city of Assab. The victory of Ethiopian forces over Dessie and Kombolcha in December 2021 was partly attributed to the drones supplied by Ethiopia's allies. In Debretsion Gebremichael's order to withdraw all his forces from Tigray borders in December 2021, he mentioned "the drones provided by foreign powers" as a major factor that prompted his decision. There have been multiple unconfirmed reports of Somali troops being sent from a secret training base in Eritrea run by the National Intelligence and Security Agency to fight against the newly formed TDF. The first of these reports came in January 2021 from unverified social media accounts. The same month, Somalia's information minister, Osman Abukar Dubbe, confirmed Somali soldiers were training in Eritrea, but denied any of these troops had been sent to Tigray. According to the Voice of America, several sources with direct knowledge of the program, including three Somali officials and a foreign diplomat, confirmed to them that Somali troops have been training in neighbouring Eritrea. In January 2022, The Globe and Mail reported evidence of Somali troops were involved and they had committed atrocities in Tigray. The report noted that before the war began, Somali forces under the leadership of the Eritrean Army had been stationed in trenches along the border. A small group of parents also protested in Mogadishu about what they said was the government's mismanagement of the issue. They demanded information on their loved ones who they say they haven't seen in a year. The head of Somalia's parliamentary committee on foreign affairs asked the Somali president to investigate claims by family members that their sons had gone off to fight in Ethiopia and are now missing. On 19 January 2021, the Somali government denied the claim that Somali troops had trained in Eritrea and then deployed in the Tigray Region of Ethiopia. Former head of the Somali National Intelligence and Security Agency, Abdilsalan Guld, claimed that Somali troops were sent to Tigray. Guld stated that the soldiers, aged from 20 to 30 years old, were secretly taken from Mogadishu and sent to Asmara for military training. Guld stated that 370 of the Somali troops trained by Eritrea were killed in Tigray, and hundreds of others were wounded. As of May 2023, the combined impact of wartime violence, famine and a lack of medical access had killed an estimated 162,000-378,000 people, with other reported estimates reaching numbers as high as 600,000 killed. All sides in the conflict have been accused of committing war crimes and violating international human rights law, with evidence of unlawful killings, torture and sexual violence being widely reported. Many sources have accused the Ethiopian and Eritrean governments of engaging in crimes against humanity via ethnic cleansing of Tigrayans. The Ethiopian and Eritrean governments have also been accused of genocide. According to the EU's special envoy to Ethiopia, Pekka Haavisto, senior members of the Ethiopian government called for "wip[ing] out" all Tigrayans for 100 years. The Ethiopian Government denied the allegations. On 4 June 2021, the non-profit Genocide Watch classified the events in Tigray as step 9 of genocide (eradication), as well as step 10 (denial). They issued another emergency alert on 20 November 2021, stating that "both sides are committing genocide", referring to detentions of thousands of people based on Oromo or Tigrayan ethnic identity, and arguing that "Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed's hate speech and calls for war" together with attacks by the ENDF and TPLF put Ethiopia into stages 4 (dehumanization), 6 (polarization), 8 (persecution), and 9 (extermination) of the ten stages of genocide. Ethnic profiling against Tigrayans occurred during the Tigray War, with Ethiopians of Tigrayan ethnicity being put on indefinite leave from Ethiopian Airlines or refused permission to board, prevented from overseas travel, and an "order of identifying ethnic Tigrayans from all government agencies and NGOs" being used by federal police to request a list of ethnic Tigrayans from an office of the World Food Programme. Tigrayans' houses were arbitrarily searched and Tigrayans' bank accounts suspended. During the conflict, many Tigrayans were profiled both professionally and socially, with many fired or called names when out in public as a result of the conflict, such as Tigrayan military members having their weapons confiscated or dismissed from duty. A hotspot for this form of profiling took place in Addis Ababa, including disappearances of major Ethiopian officials and arrests of Tigrayans on the grounds that they supported the TPLF, which was designated as a terrorist organisation in May 2021 by Ethiopian parliament. Ethnic Tigrayan members of Ethiopian components of United Nations peacekeeping missions were disarmed and some forcibly flown back to Ethiopia, at the risk of torture or execution, according to United Nations officials. The State of Emergency Taskforce stated that the Tigrayan peacekeepers were returned to Ethiopia because of "infiltration of TPLF elements in various entities." On 1 November 2021, Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed stated that "we should closely follow those who work for the enemy and live amongst us," as reports of a new roundup of ethnic Tigrayans came out of Addis Ababa. Wartime rape and sexual violence was also widespread, being perpetrated by virtually all sides. There were "deeply distressing reports of sexual and gender-based violence, extrajudicial killings, [and the] widespread destruction and looting of public and private property by all parties" according to the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights. More than 136 cases of rape were reported in hospitals in Mekelle, Ayder, Adigrat and Wukro in eastern Tigray between December 2020 and January 2021, with indications that there are many more such unreported cases. As of August 2021, there were 512 to 514 rape victims registered with Ethiopian hospitals; however, the real number is probably much larger than that and can be as large as 120,000 by some estimations, and many sources believe the sexual violence in Tigray was intentionally committed with the purpose of destroying the morale of the enemy, to genocide and genetically cleanse certain populations, and to spread STIs as a form of biological warfare. Often, soldiers, and militias subjected Tigrayan women and girls, including pregnant women and young girls, to rape, gang rape, sexual slavery, sexual mutilation, and other forms of sexual torture. Such sexual violence is often accompanied with other forms of physical and mental abuse, including burning their victims with hot iron or cigarettes, forcing metal rods or nails into their victim's genitals, raping their victim in front of their family members, forcing their victims to rape their family members, calling their victims by derogatory words and ethnic slurs, etc. There were also reports that Tigrayan forces had gang-raped dozens of women and underage girls in at least two towns in the Amhara Region, and girls – some as young as 14 – were identified as victims of rape in the towns of Chenna and Kobo in August and September 2021. After being subjected to sexual violence, many women become infected with STIs like HIV, who face difficulty getting treatment due to a sense of shame, as well as the collapse of medical infrastructure caused by the war. Investigations into the war crimes include the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission (EHRC) and Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) joint investigation, and the ACHPR Tigray investigation by the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights (ACHPR). In February 2021, GOAL Ethiopia, the International Rescue Committee (IRC), MCMDO, MSF-Spain, and World Vision, found that nearly one in seven children in 16 woredas and town administrations across Tigray were acutely malnourished. While in Enderta, Abi Adi and Shire, GOAL and IRC reported that 16.6% of children screened had acute malnutrition with 3.5% suffering from severe acute malnutrition. There was limited access to clean water due to hygiene and sanitation services largely being disrupted across Tigray. The Tigray Regional Water Bureau reported that out of 36 villages it assessed, only 4 had partially functioning water sources. Along with that, an estimated 250 motorized water pumping systems have been out of order, and the status of 11,000 hand pumps in rural areas was unknown. Because of this, there was a heightened risk of outbreaks of waterborne diseases and COVID-19. According to the UN, in March 2021, out of more than 260 health centres in Tigray before the war, only 31 were fully functional, while 7 were partially functional. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), all of the functioning hospitals and health centres in Tigray had a lack of medical supplies, drugs, and equipment. UN partners reported continued looting of health facilities. Only 16% of the health facilities had vaccination services and only 17% had maternal services (antenatal care, birth delivery, etc.). In late October 2022, it was revealed that the Tigray Region was running out of medical supplies, with the CEO of their largest hospital saying it was "doomed to collapse soon". WHO officials stated that childhood vaccination rates had plummeted from 90% (before the war) to under 10%. According to the United Nations (UN), some 2.3 million children have been cut off from desperately needed aid and humanitarian assistance. Since the start of the conflict, the Ethiopian federal government has strictly controlled access to the Tigray Region, and the UN has said it is frustrated that talks with the Ethiopian government had not yet secured adequate humanitarian access for "food, including ready-to-use therapeutic food for the treatment of child malnutrition, medicines, water, fuel, and other essentials that are running low" said UNICEF. By 13 March 2021, the UN and its partners reached about 900,000 people with complete food baskets, and 700,000 people with clean water. Despite the progress made, many are still hard to reach due to ongoing fighting. About 4.5 million people of are still in need of aid and about 1 million of that are not in accessible areas due to ongoing fighting. On 31 August 2021, USAID's mission director in Ethiopia, Sean Jones said: "We do have proof that several of our warehouses have been looted and completely emptied in the areas, particularly in Amhara, where TPLF soldiers have gone into, I do believe that the TPLF has been very opportunistic," in a televised interview with state broadcaster EBC in Addis Ababa. All parties to the conflict have been accused by USAID of looting aid shipments. By the summer of 2022, the government blockade of essential services to Tigray was still in place, and the humanitarian situation remained severe, with roughly 13 million people being in need of food aid. According to the World Food Programme, while international aid had technically been allowed into the region during the 2022 ceasefire, in practice, very little aid was reaching the people that needed it most, largely due to fuel not being made available in these area. On 25 August (one day after the war resumed), the WFP accused the TPLF of stealing 570,000 liters of fuel meant to transport humanitarian aid. On 29 October the same year, UNICEF reported that around 29.7 million people in Ethiopia were in need of humanitarian assistance. In December 2020, the UN estimated more than one million people had been internally displaced by the fighting. More than 50,000 people have fled to Sudan due to the conflict. Communications and travel links were still blocked, and Human Rights Watch warned that "actions that deliberately impede relief supplies" would violate international humanitarian law. Possible COVID-19 outbreaks were feared as refugees fleeing the Tigray conflict sheltered in crowded camps. By March 2021, Shire had become a major centre for internally displaced people and humanitarian aid distribution. In September 2021, the humanitarian situation continued to worsen in Tigray, Afar and Amhara Regions, due both to the armed conflict itself and due to bureaucratic obstruction. Two thousand displaced people returned to the Fantí Rasu zone in Afar Region after the ENDF and Afar Special Forces regained control and OCHA partner organisations' access to improved. UNICEF stated that by the end of September 2022, around 574,000 more people in Afar, Amhara and Tigray were left displaced after fighting resumed in August 2022; they also reported that over 870,000 had become refugees. In November 2020, Amhara Region Special Forces and Amhara militias loyal to the Amhara regional government took control of the western zone of Tigray in order to settle a decades-old land dispute. They claim the area was taken from them by force in 1992 after TPLF forces overthrew the communist PDRE government and divided the country into ethnic regional states. They have also claimed the woredas (districts) of Welkait, Tegede, Kafta Humera, Tselemti, and Raya to be theirs. Since then, the area has been under the de facto control of Amhara regional authorities. Their control has been marked by reports of ethnically motivated violence and forced displacement. By February 2021, about 45,000 civilians had been forced to leave the zone due to extrajudicial killings, arbitrary detentions, and the disappearances of people, especially young men. One refugee interviewed by Reuters said that if they didn't leave when they did, they would have been killed by Amhara forces. 41 other refugees interviewed have also described attacks, looting, and threats by Amhara forces. In March 2021, Mulu Nega, then leader of the federal-government-appointed Transitional Government of Tigray, stated that Amhara de facto administrators of Western Tigray used violence against ethnic Tigrayans and forcibly displaced them. Yabsira Eshetie, the administrator of the area, denied the claims. The Amhara government also denied the reports of forced displacement and asked the Ethiopian government to modify the border between the Amhara and Tigray regions. US Secretary of State Antony Blinken stated that there had been acts of ethnic cleansing in Tigray. Some Tigrayans who fled to Sudan as refugees would later find themselves victimized again by human traffickers upon arrival. Many refugees had testified being kidnapped, regularly tortured, and transported to warehouses in Libya, where many would die due to poor living conditions. Eritrean refugees faced similar risks, as, in addition to the traffickers, they also risked getting kidnapped by the Eritrean government. This situation worsened further after Sudan descended into violence in 2023, placing refugees at further risk of being kidnapped. In November 2020, the UN warned of "very critical" supply shortages for the nearly 100,000 Eritrean refugees who, prior to the war, were registered in four camps in Tigray region. Later that same month, the UN reported that people in Tigray were fleeing Mekelle. The federal government had warned of "no mercy" if Tigray forces and residents remained intermingled. As of 2 February 2021, 20,000 of the Eritrean refugees in Tigray, mostly from the Hitsats and Shimelba camps, remained unaccounted for, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Claire Wilmot, writing in The Washington Post, found that a significant number of new, single-issue Twitter accounts were opened in the immediate aftermath of the Northern Command attacks. Most appeared to be authentic accounts from people seeking to raise international awareness of the conflict in the midst of a communications blackout in Tigray. The Ethiopian government cited disinformation and hate speech to justify communications blackouts. Researchers suggested that reducing access to information could help to create contexts where misinformation can thrive because it reduces the ability to verify information. In late July 2021, a report emerged that there was coordination in social media messaging and media reportage of the conflict in Ethiopia, to an extent it mirrored an earlier Syrian hybrid information campaign designated as Project Basma. The Ethiopian government tried to control the information environment by positioning itself as the sole provider of reliable information. In February, pro-government groups called on their supporters in Ethiopia and the diaspora to combat what they called "TPLF fake news" online. Pro-government groups used tactics similar to those of pro-Tigray groups to push their narrative of the conflict, though as of 5 February, pro-government campaigns had produced fewer Tweets overall. Both Agence France-Presse and BBC News have documented examples of old or manipulated photos, which misleadingly endorsed either the federal Ethiopian government or the TPLF. Researchers found that groups use tactics such as "copy and paste" campaigns hosted on websites, which include instructions for opening new accounts, copying and pasting pre-written tweets, and tagging influencers. Both campaigns produced disinformation and misinformation, though the majority of content produced was activist in nature. Wilmot suggested that the lines between authentic political activity and deliberate manipulation of online content during the conflict were increasingly blurred. Facebook has been heavily criticized for its perceived role in fuelling ethnic tensions during the war, and has faced accusations that, in choosing not to crack down on hate speech being spread by Ethiopian users, it is complicit in cases of ethnic cleansing in the country. The Ethiopian government had engaged in repeated crackdowns on media coverage throughout the war. In November 2021 (during the 2021–2022 state of emergency), the Ethiopian Media Authority (EMA) threatened to cancel the media licences of BBC News, Reuters, CNN and Associated Press, accusing the news organisations of having "consistently disseminated news that sowed seeds of animosity among people and compromised the sovereignty of the country." The EMA cited "reporting the Law enforcement operation as a genocidal campaign" as an example of misleading information aiming to "undermin[e] the [federal] government's efforts to address the humanitarian crisis in the Tigray region." On 20 May 2022, Ethiopian law enforcement began arresting journalists en masse, with 4,500 people in the Amhara Region alone being taken into custody. One Amhara law enforcement official described this as a way to maintain "law and order" and "get rid of outside enemies". The media restrictions resulted in what has been described as an "information blackout". Many journalists, both local and international, have noted the difficulty they face in trying to report on the war, as they risk the possibility of getting either killed or imprisoned by government forces. By December 2021, the Committee to Protect Journalists described both Ethiopia and Eritrea as the worst "jailers of journalists" in sub-Saharan Africa. Several proposals for peace negotiations and mediation were made involving some of the main groups involved in the war. Of these, this includes: an emergency Intergovernmental Authority on Development summit in December 2020; a joint statement by the National Congress of Great Tigray, the Tigray Independence Party, and Salsay Weyane Tigray describing their eight pre-conditions for peace in February 2021; a mediation group called "A3+1", (consisting of three African countries, Kenya, Niger and Tunisia, and one non-African country, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines) in July–August 2021; and a March–August 2022 ceasefire wherein Ethiopian and Tigrayan officials attempted to negotiate a peaceful end to the conflict. On 2 November 2022, the Ethiopian government and Tigrayan leaders signed a peace accord, with the African Union as a mediator, and agreed on "orderly, smooth and coordinated disarmament". The agreement was made effective the next day on 3 November, marking the two-year anniversary of the war. As part of this process, Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed appointed TPLF's Getachew Reda as head of the Interim Regional Administration of Tigray, and the Ethiopian parliament removed the TPLF from its terrorism list. The Tigray War has been the subject of numerous reactions and protests, both locally and worldwide. The war had a devastating impact on the healthcare system of Tigray; of the 853 health facilities in the region, 86% were at least partially damaged; 232 of them were left "completely unusable", and 28 were destroyed entirely. It also led to a higher rate of maternal and infant mortality in the Tigray Region. In a study funded by UNFPA Ethiopia and UNICEF Ethiopia, it was estimated that maternal mortality rates had increased from 186 deaths per 100,000 people pre-war to 840 deaths per 100,000 people post-war. A health coordinator at the Tigray Health Bureau said to Addis Standard in June 2023, that, according to their research, both maternal and infant mortality rates had regressed to the levels they were at in 2001. According to Tigrayan health official Tsegay Gidey, 81% of mothers in the Seharti Samre woreda had birth defects, and 32 newborn infants had died between January–June 2023. The war had a costly impact on the Ethiopian economy. In late November 2022, the cost of rebuilding was estimated to be around $20 billion. The cost of rebuilding healthcare facilities in the Tigray, Afar and Amhara Regions was at least $1.4 billion, being devastated by the war. Between June 2022 and March 2023, government debt had increased by 6%, reaching a debt total of roughly $60.6 billion (3.3 trillion birr). The Tigray War also damaged the country's relationship with foreign creditors. Shortly after it began in November 2020, the European Union suspended budget support to Ethiopia (citing reports of human rights abuses), a decision they would maintain until the end of the war. The credit agency Fitch Ratings downgraded Ethiopia's credit rating in January 2023, expressing lower confidence that the Ethiopian government would be able to pay off their external debt. Inflation hit the country hard in the months following the war. Ethiopia had an average inflation rate of 30% in 2022, largely driven by food prices; in February 2023, the overall inflation rate reached 32%; by 12 September 2023 (Enkutatash), Ethiopia continued to experience high inflation, with commonly purchased food items becoming more expensive. Although the war has not been considered the sole reason for these economic struggles, it has still been described as a contributing factor. Although the war largely came to a halt after the peace agreement was signed, Eritrea continues to occupy parts of Tigray as of mid-2023. The EDF has been responsible for the deaths of thousands of people in northern Ethiopia since November 2022; from 17 to 25 November alone, Eritrea was reported to have destroyed 241 houses and killed at least 111 people. by 30 December, it was estimated that Eritrean and Amhara forces killed 3,700 since the signing of the peace deal. The Tigray Health Bureau noted that 852 cases of rape and sexual assault were reported between November and December 2022; according to aid workers and interviews with survivors, most of these were committed by Eritrean forces. As of January 2023, over half of Irob district was occupied by Eritrea. Irob advocacy groups and former residents have described it as a "de-facto annexation" of the area. A religious Irob leader told The Guardian in August 2023 that Eritrea was blocking off international aid to the area, and lamented that "there has been no improvement for us since the peace." Africa portal 2020 in Eritrea 2020 in Ethiopia Eritrean–Ethiopian War Eritrean–Ethiopian border conflict Ethiopian Civil War (1974–1991) List of civil wars War in Amhara Some articles state that the war began on 4 November; however, the earliest instances of fighting are reported to have taken place during the very late hours of 3 November, EAT (UTC+03:00). Tigrinya: ኲናት ትግራይ, romanized: Quinat Tĭgray; Amharic: ትግራይ ጦርነት, romanized: Tigrāy t'Orinet; Afar: Tigray Qeebi. A few EEPA articles begin with the following injunction: "Unconfirmed report". "Ethiopia: Fear Tigray conflict could trigger all-out war". DW. 20 July 2021. Archived from the original on 20 July 2021. Retrieved 21 July 2021. Endeshaw, Dawit (16 July 2021). "Three more regions reinforce Ethiopia army, Amhara against Tigray forces". Reuters. Archived from the original on 3 June 2022. Retrieved 12 August 2021. "Ethiopian PM confirms Eritrean troops entered Tigray during conflict". Reuters. 23 March 2021. Archived from the original on 23 March 2021. "Eritrea confirms its troops are fighting in Ethiopia's Tigray". Al Jazeera. 17 April 2021. Archived from the original on 13 October 2022. Retrieved 20 April 2021. "UAE air bridge provides military support to Ethiopia gov't". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 23 June 2022. Retrieved 7 December 2021. Walsh, Declan (20 December 2021). "Foreign Drones Tip the Balance in Ethiopia's Civil War". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 28 February 2022. Retrieved 22 December 2021. Pamuk, Humeyra; Fick, Maggie (5 November 2021). Toby Chopra (ed.). "Ethiopian anti-government alliance says plans to dismantle government by force or negotiations". Reuters. Archived from the original on 5 June 2022. Retrieved 5 November 2021. Anna, Cara; Merchant, Norman (5 November 2021). "Tigray, other groups form alliance against Ethiopia's leader". The Washington Post. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 5 November 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2021. Anna, Cara (11 August 2021). "Ethiopia armed group says it has alliance with Tigray forces". AP News. Archived from the original on 27 October 2021. Retrieved 11 August 2021. "Leaked EU Diplomatic Cable: Delegation of the European Union to Ethiopia". Scoop. 25 August 2021. Archived from the original on 13 June 2022. Retrieved 25 August 2021. Kifle, Shuwa (16 August 2021). "Zerbricht Äthiopien im Bürgerkrieg?". heise online (in German). Archived from the original on 31 May 2022. Retrieved 17 August 2021. "The Sidama National Liberation Front to Join the Coalition of Resistance by the Federalist Forces". Sidama National Liberation Front. 23 August 2021. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 25 August 2021. Latif Dahir, Abdi; Jakes, Lara (5 November 2021). "Eight Groups Join Tigray Rebels Vowing to Oust Ethiopia's Leader". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 July 2022. Retrieved 6 November 2021. "An Afar-based armed group parts its ways with TPLF-led alliance". My Views on News. 1 February 2022. Archived from the original on 1 February 2022. Retrieved 1 February 2022. "Benishangul Gumuz regional govt, rebel group sign peace agreement". Addis Standard. 19 October 2022. Archived from the original on 22 October 2022. Retrieved 22 October 2022. "African Union: Agreement reached on permanent cessation of hostilities in Ethiopia". National Post. 2 November 2022. Winning, Alexander; Cocks, Tim (2 November 2022). "Combatants in Ethiopia's Tigray war agree to stop fighting". Reuters. Archived from the original on 25 November 2022. Retrieved 2 November 2022. Feleke, Bethlehem (3 November 2022). "Warring parties in Ethiopia agree on 'permanent cessation of hostilities'". CNN World. Archived from the original on 14 November 2022. Retrieved 17 January 2023. Mersie, Ayenat (12 November 2022). "Ethiopia combatants sign deal to start implementing truce". Reuters. Archived from the original on 25 July 2023. Retrieved 12 November 2022. "Ethiopia Truce Implementation to Start 'Immediately', Mediator Says". Asharq AL-awsat. Archived from the original on 6 April 2023. Retrieved 12 November 2022. "Ethiopia's Tigray War: A Deadly, Dangerous Stalemate". Crisis Group. 2 April 2021. Archived from the original on 30 July 2021. Retrieved 2 May 2021. Marks, Simon; Walsh, Declan (22 January 2021). "On 'Rooftop of Africa', Ethiopia's Troops Hunt Fugitive Former Rulers". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 30 July 2021. Retrieved 2 May 2021. "Wieder Luftangriffe der Armee in Tigray" (in German). Deutsche Welle. 9 November 2020. Archived from the original on 19 November 2020. Chothia, Farouk; Bekit, Teklemariam (19 October 2022). "Ethiopia civil war: Hyenas scavenge on corpses as Tigray forces retreat". BBC News. Archived from the original on 22 October 2022. Walsh, Declan (15 December 2021). "Ethiopia's Nobel-Winning Prime Minister Goes to War". The New York Times. Retrieved 15 January 2024. Martin Plaut (7 January 2024). "The Largest War in the World: Hundreds of Thousands Killed in Ethiopia's Tigray Conflict". Retrieved 7 January 2024. "Ethiopia's Tigray conflict: Thousands reported killed in clashes". BBC News. 6 September 2021. Archived from the original on 20 March 2022. Retrieved 5 September 2021. "After battlefield reversals, what next for Ethiopia's Tigray war?". Al Jazeera. 10 July 2021. Archived from the original on 16 October 2021. Retrieved 15 October 2021. "Aviation Occurrence N 267277 Mig-23". Aviation Safety Network. 6 December 2020. Archived from the original on 31 October 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021. Brhams, Jacob (30 November 2020). "Tigray Rebels Down Jet, Capture Pilot, One Day After Ethiopian Prime Minister Declares Victory". Overt Defense. Archived from the original on 30 November 2020. Retrieved 1 December 2020. "TDF downed A Mi-35 helicopter in central Tigray". Global Defense Corp. 22 April 2021. Archived from the original on 4 November 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021. Ranter, Harro. "Accident Mil Mi-35, 20 Apr 2021". aviation-safety.net. Archived from the original on 12 August 2021. Retrieved 24 April 2021. "فيديو : قوات دفاع تجراى تسقط مروحية عسكرية اثيوبية وتفتح جبهة قتال جديدة فى محافظة "شرق كوجام"" [Video: Defense forces shoot down an Ethiopian military helicopter and open a new battle front in “East Kojam” governorate]. Farajat (in Arabic). 12 November 2021. Archived from the original on 6 April 2023. "Ethiopia: C-130 aircraft downed south of Tigray region". monde24.com (in Arabic). 6 June 2021. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "Ethiopia: Thousands of Tigray rebels killed, military claims". BBC News. 4 September 2021. Archived from the original on 20 March 2022. Retrieved 5 September 2021. "HC a.i. statement on the killing of 23 aid workers in the Tigray region since the start of the crisis". Relief Web. 1 September 2020. Archived from the original on 3 September 2021. Retrieved 3 May 2022. "UNICEF Ethiopia Humanitarian Situation Report No. 9 - September 2022". ReliefWeb. UNICEF. 29 October 2022. Archived from the original on 30 October 2022. "Ethiopia: UN says 20,000 refugees missing in Tigray". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 4 February 2021. Paravicini, Giulia (20 August 2022). "Nearly half the people in Ethiopia's Tigray in 'severe' need of food aid, World Food Programme says". Reuters. Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. "War in Tigray may have killed 600,000 people, peace mediator says". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 19 June 2023. Retrieved 16 June 2023. York, Geoffrey (21 October 2022). "Surge of dehumanizing hate speech points to mounting risk of mass atrocities in northern Ethiopia, experts say". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 22 October 2022. Independent scholars, based at Ghent University in Belgium, suggest that the death toll in Tigray is now between 385,000 and 600,000. Negash, Emnet (24 May 2023). "Updated assessment of civilian starvation deaths during the Tigray war". Archived from the original on 4 July 2023. Retrieved 4 July 2023. As our estimate of the civilian deaths in the Tigray war is regularly mentioned in the media, it seems important to share our evolving understanding and updated (lower) number of civilian deaths as a result of the Tigray war and blockade. We concluded that the IPC/FEWS categorization, on which our Tigray statistics are mainly based, overestimates hunger mortality. Along with developing information on the ground, this would point to a total number of civilian deaths ranging from 162,000 to 378,000. "Ethiopia's Tigray war: The short, medium and long story". BBC News. 29 June 2021. Archived from the original on 28 November 2021. Retrieved 29 January 2022. The conflict started on 4 November… "Inside a military base in Ethiopia's Tigray: soldiers decry betrayal by former comrades". Reuters. 17 December 2020. Archived from the original on 17 December 2020. The government says fighters loyal to the TPLF attacked federal military bases at multiple locations in Tigray early on Nov. 4 after jamming communications […] Lt. Gen. Bacha Debele said radio communications were cut […] at 10:00 p.m. on Nov. 3. "Ethiopia's Tigray crisis: How a soldier survived an 11-hour gun battle". BBC News. 10 December 2020. Archived from the original on 10 December 2020. At around 23.30 on 3 November, I, and other soldiers, received text messages from our comrades at the base […] saying: 'We are surrounded. If you can come and rescue us, come.' "Ethiopia war: UN investigative Human rights commission debuts 6-day visit". Africanews. AFP. 26 July 2022. Archived from the original on 1 November 2022. Retrieved 1 November 2022. The [commission] is mandated […] to 'conduct a thorough and impartial investigation into allegations of violations and abuses of international human rights law […] in Ethiopia committed since 3 November 2020 by all parties to the conflict' "Ethiopia peace deal hailed as a 'new dawn'". Al Jazeera. 3 November 2022. Archived from the original on 7 November 2022. Retrieved 7 November 2022. "Agreement for Lasting Peace through a Permanent Cessation of Hostilities between the Government of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia and the Tigray People's Liberation Front" (PDF). Addis Standard. 2 November 2022. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 November 2022. This Agreement shall come into effect at 00:00 hours East Africa Time (EAT) on 3rd November 2022. Paravicini, Giulia; Endeshaw, Dawit (4 November 2020). "Ethiopia sends army into Tigray region, heavy fighting reported". Reuters. Archived from the original on 19 November 2020. "Exclusive: U.S. thinks Eritrea has joined Ethiopian war, diplomats say". Reuters. 8 December 2020. Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Kirby, Jen (24 April 2021). ""Dying by blood or by hunger": The war in Ethiopia's Tigray region, explained". Vox. Archived from the original on 27 October 2022. "The conflict in Ethiopia". Reuters. Archived from the original on 19 December 2020. "Concern of Outright War in Ethiopia Grows as PM Presses Military Offensive". Voice of America. Reuters. 9 November 2020. Archived from the original on 28 January 2022. Retrieved 28 January 2022. "Ethiopia says military operation in Tigray region is over, hunt for Tigray leaders begins". Reuters. 28 November 2020. Archived from the original on 12 January 2021. "Ethiopia's Tigray crisis: Army 'takes regional capital of Mekelle'". BBC News. 28 November 2020. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Mr Abiy said the army was in full control and that this "marks the completion of the [military's] last phase". "Ethiopia: 'We are in our homeland, the invaders are attacking us,' says Tigray's Gebremichael". France 24. 15 December 2020. Archived from the original on 16 December 2020. Debretsion Gebremichael told France 24 that [Tigray] would continue fighting as long as federal 'invaders' are on Tigrayan soil. […] [He] believes neighbouring Eritrea is playing a key role in the conflict. 'They already have 16 divisions in Tigray. They are fighting on the side of the federal army... They have a united front against us. Wherever you go, they are there.' "In Ethiopia, Abiy Ahmed's forces have won the battle but not the war". The Economist. 1 December 2020. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 2 December 2020. "Ethiopia's government announce ceasefire as Tigrayan troops retake region's capital". CNN. 28 June 2021. Archived from the original on 28 June 2021. Retrieved 29 June 2021. David Evans; Angus MacSwan, eds. (1 November 2021). "Tigrayan and Oromo forces say they have seized towns on Ethiopian highway". Reuters. Archived from the original on 5 November 2021. Wintour, Patrick (2 November 2021). "Ethiopia declares state of emergency as Tigrayan rebels gain ground". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 November 2021. Parivicini, Giulia; Flick, Maggie (11 August 2021). Giles Elgood; Mark Heinrich (eds.). "Ethiopia's Tigray forces seek new military alliance". Reuters. Archived from the original on 1 October 2021. "Ethiopia declares unilateral truce to allow aid into Tigray". Al Jazeera. 24 March 2022. Archived from the original on 28 December 2022. Retrieved 24 March 2022. "Fighting in northern Ethiopia shatters months-long truce". The Guardian. Agence France-Presse. 24 August 2022. Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Winning, Alexander; Cocks, Tim (2 November 2022). "Parties in Ethiopia conflict agree to cease hostilities". Reuters. Archived from the original on 25 November 2022. Retrieved 2 November 2022. "'People are under siege': why Ethiopia's war in Tigray isn't over". The Guardian. 7 August 2023. "US says all sides committed war crimes in Ethiopia conflict". Al Jazeera. 20 March 2023. Archived from the original on 17 August 2023. Retrieved 18 August 2023. Nebehay, Stephanie; Endeshaw, Dawit (3 November 2021). "Joint UN, Ethiopia rights team: all sides committed abuses in Tigray". Reuters. Archived from the original on 3 November 2021. Retrieved 3 November 2021. "'You don't belong': land dispute drives new exodus in Ethiopia's Tigray". Reuters. 29 March 2021. Retrieved 18 May 2021. Dahir, Abdi Latif; Hicks, Tyler (9 December 2020). "Fleeing Ethiopians Tell of Ethnic Massacres in Tigray War". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 10 December 2020. "Rapid Investigation into Grave Human Rights Violation Maikadra - Preliminary Findings". Ethiopian Human Rights Commission. 24 November 2020. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. "The massacre in Axum". Amnesty International. 26 February 2021. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 February 2021. Kassa, Lucy; Bulos, Nabih (23 March 2021). "In an out-of-sight war, a massacre comes to light". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 23 March 2022. "Tigray forces killed 120 civilians in village in Amhara - Ethiopia officials". Reuters. 9 September 2021. Archived from the original on 5 November 2022. Retrieved 5 November 2022. "Ethiopia: Tigrayan forces murder, rape and pillage in attacks on civilians in Amhara towns". Amnesty International. 16 February 2022. Archived from the original on 15 August 2022. Retrieved 17 August 2022. "'Then the killing started': Witnesses accuse Tigray fighters". Associated Press. 26 September 2021. Archived from the original on 26 September 2021. "Ethiopia: Tigray Forces Summarily Execute Civilians". Human Rights Watch. 9 December 2021. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. "Situation Report EEPA HORN No. 51 – 10 January 2021" (PDF). Europe External Programme with Africa. 10 January 2021. Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 January 2021. Akinwotu, Emmanuel (2 December 2020). "'I saw people dying on the road': Tigray's traumatised war refugees". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2 December 2020. Schipani, Andres (4 December 2020). "Refugees flee Ethiopia's brutal war with tales of atrocities on both sides". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 4 December 2020. Mas, Liselotte (12 March 2021). "Ethiopia: video of Tigray massacre lifts lid on 'war without photos'". France 24 (The Observers). Archived from the original on 11 August 2022. "'You can't even cry loudly': Counting Ethiopia's war dead". AP NEWS. 15 November 2021. Archived from the original on 5 November 2022. Retrieved 5 November 2022. "Rape is being used as weapon of war in Ethiopia, say witnesses". The Guardian. 14 May 2021. Archived from the original on 15 August 2021. Retrieved 22 August 2021. Akinwotu, Emmanuel (11 August 2021). "'Like I wasn't a person': Ethiopian forces accused of systematic rape in Tigray". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 11 August 2021. Retrieved 11 August 2021. "Ethiopia: Tigray on brink of humanitarian disaster, UN says". The Guardian. 14 January 2022. Archived from the original on 16 February 2022. Retrieved 15 February 2022. "Ethiopia: Status of western Tigray to be settled 'by law'". CityNews. AP. 15 November 2022. Archived from the original on 24 November 2022. Retrieved 24 November 2022. "Rise and fall of Ethiopia's TPLF – from rebels to rulers and back". The Guardian. 25 November 2020. Archived from the original on 15 February 2021. "Ethiopia's Hailemariam Desalegn sworn in as prime minister". BBC News. 21 September 2012. Archived from the original on 19 November 2020. Aalen, Lovise (17 February 2018). "Analysis | Why is Ethiopia in upheaval? This brief history explains a lot". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on 19 November 2020. "Ethiopia's Hailemariam Desalegn sworn in as prime minister". BBC News. 21 September 2012. Archived from the original on 19 November 2020. Retrieved 11 November 2020. "Ethiopia's PM resigns citing unrest". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Retrieved 28 December 2021. Moore, Jina (15 February 2018). "Ethiopia's Prime Minister Resigns Amid Political Turmoil". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Retrieved 28 December 2021. Ababa, Agencies in Addis (15 February 2018). "Ethiopian prime minister resigns after mass protests". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Retrieved 28 December 2021. "Ethiopia's ruling coalition elects new chairman". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Retrieved 28 December 2021. "Ethiopia swears in first PM from ethnic Oromo community". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 7 November 2020. Retrieved 28 December 2021. Schemm, Paul (8 July 2018). "After 20-year military standoff, Ethiopia and Eritrea agree to normalize ties in historic breakthrough". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 3 February 2021. Dahir, Abdi Latif (9 July 2018). "The giddy excitement that marked Ethiopia and Eritrea's historic summit". Quartz. Archived from the original on 29 March 2019. Retrieved 23 October 2022. York, Geoffrey (8 July 2018). "Surprise summit in militaristic Eritrea could bring peace to Horn of Africa". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 31 July 2018. Maasho, Aaron (11 June 2018). "On Ethiopia-Eritrea frontline, anger at Addis' olive branch". Reuters. Archived from the original on 10 August 2022. Abera, Etenesh (13 June 2018). "News: TPLF says Ethiopia's recent Eritrea, economy related decisions have "fundamental flaws"; calls for emergency meeting of the ruling EPRDF executive, council committee". Addis Standard. Archived from the original on 11 July 2022. "Analysis | Ethiopia's prime minister wants to change the ruling coalition. Who's getting left out?". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 29 January 2022. "Highlight 17/2021 - The Fallout of Ethnic Federalism". MEIG Programme. 12 May 2021. Archived from the original on 30 July 2021. Retrieved 21 February 2022. "Why there are fears that Ethiopia could break up". BBC News. 4 September 2020. Archived from the original on 1 May 2021. Retrieved 29 January 2022. "Tigray crisis: Ethiopia orders military response after army base seized". BBC News. 4 November 2020. Archived from the original on 19 November 2020. Retrieved 4 November 2020. Fisher, Jonathan; Gebrewahd, Meressa Tsehaye (13 December 2018). "'Game over'? Abiy Ahmed, the Tigrayan People's Liberation Front and Ethiopia's political crisis". African Affairs. 118 (470): 194–206. doi:10.1093/afraf/ady056. ISSN 0001-9909. Archived from the original on 19 November 2023. Retrieved 20 February 2021. AfricaNews (3 January 2019). "Ethiopia arrest warrant for ex-spy chief, Getachew Assefa". Africanews. Archived from the original on 25 October 2020. Retrieved 20 February 2021. "Diaspora Protesters in US, Canada Back Ethiopian Government's Handling of Tigray Conflict". Voice of America. 12 March 2021. Archived from the original on 14 March 2021. Retrieved 15 March 2021. Miridzhanian, Anait; Acharya, Bhargav (25 October 2022). "Ethiopia peace talks start in South Africa". Reuters. Archived from the original on 27 October 2022. Retrieved 25 October 2022. Burke, Jason (25 October 2022). "Tigray peace talks begin in South Africa but hopes low for halt to fighting". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 November 2022. Retrieved 26 October 2022. "Ethiopia postpones August election due to coronavirus". Reuters. 31 March 2020. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2022. "Ethiopia extends PM and lawmakers' terms, to hold polls within a year". Reuters. 10 June 2020. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2022. Gebre, Samuel (10 June 2020). "Ethiopia Extends Leaders' Terms Until Delayed Vote Is Held". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 11 July 2020. Peralta, Eyder (13 November 2020). "What To Know About Ethiopia's Tigray Conflict". NPR. Archived from the original on 9 March 2021. Retrieved 29 January 2022. "Ethiopia's Tigray region defies PM Abiy with 'illegal' election". France 24. Agence France-Presse. 9 August 2020. Archived from the original on 19 November 2020. Retrieved 9 November 2020. "Ethiopia appoints new Tigray leader, Amnesty reports 'massacre'". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 21 November 2020. Retrieved 21 November 2020. Paravicini, Giulia (17 December 2020). George Obulutsa; William Maclean (eds.). "Ethiopia bars journalists from flying to Tigray regional vote, passengers say". Reuters. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 22 December 2020. "Journalists Say They Were Barred from Traveling to Cover Ethiopian Regional Election". Voice of America. 17 December 2020. Archived from the original on 26 November 2020. Retrieved 22 December 2020. Corey-Boutlet, Robbie (7 October 2020). "Ethiopian lawmakers vote to slash funds for Tigray". Yahoo!. Agence France-Presse. Archived from the original on 10 November 2021. Retrieved 10 November 2021. "News: Tigray region says it will defy federal laws enacted as of Oct. 05; EDP calls for transitional gov't, inclusive dialogue & reconciliation". Addis Standard. 29 September 2020. Archived from the original on 24 November 2020. Retrieved 24 November 2020. Hagos, Mesfin (4 December 2020). "Eritrea's Role in Ethiopia's Conflict and the Fate of Eritrean Refugees in Ethiopia". africanarguments.org. Archived from the original on 7 February 2021. Retrieved 7 February 2021. Abiye, Yonas (24 October 2020). "Pre-conditions impede Commission's reconciliatory efforts". The Reporter. Archived from the original on 26 December 2020. Retrieved 26 December 2020. "Ethiopia's Tigray blocks general's appointment in blow to Abiy". Al Jazeera. 30 October 2020. Archived from the original on 22 November 2020. Retrieved 5 December 2020. "Constitution of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia" (PDF). WIPO. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 24 November 2020. Report of the Ethiopian Human Rights Commission (EHRC)/Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) Joint Investigation into Alleged Violations of International Human Rights, Humanitarian and Refugee Law Committed by all Parties - Ethiopia (Report). 3 November 2021. Archived from the original on 24 December 2021. Retrieved 24 December 2021. "The midnight confrontation that helped unleash Ethiopia's conflict". France 24. AFP. 27 November 2020. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Ten armed members of the Tigrayan special forces got out of the vehicle and demanded to see the camp's commander. "'We're not here for you,'" Hussen recalled them saying. "'We want to talk to the leaders.'" […] An argument ensued and gunfire rang out. They were the first shots in a conflict that has since engulfed northern Ethiopia's Tigray region... "Ethiopia: A timeline of the Tigray crisis". Deutsche Welle. 17 November 2020. Archived from the original on 7 December 2020. Retrieved 30 December 2020. Peralta, Eyder (13 November 2020). "What To Know About Ethiopia's Tigray Conflict". NPR. Archived from the original on 9 March 2021. Retrieved 7 April 2021. This conflict has the potential to be devastating. Some scholars have warned Ethiopia could break apart in the way Yugoslavia did in the 1990s. The government has downplayed the fighting, calling it a "law enforcement operation." Kiya Tsegaye, an Ethiopian political analyst, says the government has alienated Tigray from its neighbors. Abiy has made deals with Eritrea and the new government of Sudan, leaving Tigray with few ways to receive the weapons it would need to keep fighting. But he says the Tigray forces are no ordinary militia. "They have dominated the security and the military for almost three decades, and they have all the information and the top secrets of this country," he says. "They know the Achilles' heel." The government alleges that when TPLF fighters attacked their troops last week, they also stole missiles that may be able to reach the capital Addis Ababa. "State of Emergency Inquiry Board Begins Work". Ethiopian News Agency. 17 November 2020. Archived from the original on 23 January 2021. Retrieved 26 January 2021. "Ethiopia warns civilians of 'no mercy' in Tigray offensive". AP NEWS. 22 November 2020. Archived from the original on 23 November 2020. Retrieved 23 November 2020. "Ethiopia declares state of emergency in opposition-ruled Tigray". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 22 November 2020. Retrieved 23 November 2020. Addisstandard (7 November 2020). "News Alert: House of Federation adopts resolution to establish a transitional government in Tigray". Addis Standard. Archived from the original on 19 November 2020. Retrieved 23 November 2020. Feleke, Bethlehem; Rahim, Zamira. "Several injured in airstrikes on Tigray capital, humanitarian source says". CNN. Archived from the original on 22 November 2020. Retrieved 23 November 2020. "Ethiopia: Investigation reveals evidence that scores of civilians were killed in massacre in Tigray state". Amnesty International. 12 November 2020. Archived from the original on 19 November 2020. Retrieved 12 November 2020. Schipani, Andres (4 December 2020). "Refugees flee Ethiopia's brutal war with tales of atrocities on both sides". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 16 January 2021. Retrieved 27 February 2021. Siddig, Khalid Abdelaziz, El Tayeb (13 November 2020). "Ethiopians fleeing to Sudan describe air strikes and machete killings in Tigray". Reuters. Archived from the original on 25 November 2020. Retrieved 27 February 2021.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Brown, Will (23 November 2020). "After the bombs they attacked with knives, claim Ethiopians fleeing peace prize winner's war". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 24 November 2020. Retrieved 24 November 2020. Latif Dahir, Abdi (9 December 2020). "Fleeing Ethiopians Tell of Ethnic Massacres in Tigray War". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Retrieved 9 December 2020. "Situation of Civilians in Humera, Dansha, and Bissober – Brief Monitoring Report". Ethiopian Human Rights Commission. 17 January 2021. Archived from the original on 27 December 2021. Retrieved 7 November 2022. "Ethiopian state TV says 70 graves found town of Humera in Tigray region after conflict". Reuters. 30 November 2020. Archived from the original on 13 November 2022. Gebre, Samuel (16 March 2021). "Ethiopia's Amhara seize disputed territory amid Tigray conflict". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 18 May 2021. Retrieved 18 May 2021. Kirby, Jen (24 April 2021). ""Dying by blood or by hunger": The war in Ethiopia's Tigray region, explained". Vox. Archived from the original on 27 October 2022. Walsh, Declan (20 December 2021). "Foreign Drones Tip the Balance in Ethiopia's Civil War". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 28 February 2022. Retrieved 16 February 2022. "Situation Report EEPA HORN No. 64 – 23 January 2021" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 January 2021. Retrieved 2 February 2021. "Situation Report EEPA HORN No. 81 - 10 February 2021" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 February 2021. Retrieved 12 March 2021. has provided a summarized translation of the Chinese article. "Ethiopian cities hit by rockets from Tigray forces". Deutsche Welle. 14 November 2020. Archived from the original on 11 January 2021. Retrieved 20 December 2020. "Rockets fired from Ethiopia's Tigray hit Eritrean capital, diplomats say". Deutsche Welle. 15 November 2020. Archived from the original on 21 November 2020. Retrieved 23 November 2020. "EEPA situation report 17 November" (PDF). Europe External Programme with Africa. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 January 2021. Retrieved 22 February 2021. "Ethiopia crisis: Tigray leader vows to keep fighting as government advances". BBC News. 18 November 2020. Archived from the original on 19 November 2020. Retrieved 22 February 2021. geeskaadmin. "Ethiopia: Shire Town of Tigray Captured". geeskaafrika.com. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 22 February 2021. "Ethiopian government says troops take two towns from Tigray fighters". Reuters. 21 November 2020. Archived from the original on 24 November 2020. Retrieved 22 February 2021. "EEPA situation report 18 November" (PDF). Europe External Programme with Africa i. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 January 2021. Retrieved 22 February 2021. "Ethiopia's Tigray crisis: PM gives Tigray forces 72 hours to surrender". BBC News. 22 November 2020. Archived from the original on 2 March 2021. Retrieved 22 February 2021. "Ethiopia: Unlawful Shelling of Tigray Urban Areas". Human Rights Watch. 11 February 2021. Archived from the original on 14 February 2021. "Ethiopia's Tigray crisis: Mekelle hospital struggling after attack – Red Cross". BBC News. 29 November 2020. Archived from the original on 29 November 2020. Bekele, Eshete; Steinwehr, Uta (19 March 2021). "Fact check: Are other nations involved in the war in Tigray?". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 13 September 2021. Retrieved 29 August 2021. Burke, Jason (4 April 2021). "Ethiopia is fighting 'difficult and tiresome' guerrilla war in Tigray, says PM". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 November 2021. Retrieved 17 May 2021. Walsh, Declan (12 October 2021). "Ethiopia Launches New Offensive on Tigray Rebels as Famine Looms". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 12 October 2021. Retrieved 13 October 2021. "Ethiopia's Tigray War: A Deadly, Dangerous Stalemate". International Crisis Group. 2 April 2021. Archived from the original on 30 July 2021. Retrieved 21 May 2021. Mak, Getu (13 February 2021). "What happened in Aksum? My personal account". Tghat. Archived from the original on 13 February 2021. Retrieved 13 February 2021.[self-published source] Malagardis, Maria (11 February 2021). "Ethiopie : 'A Aksoum, j'ai aidé à transporter plus de 300 morts'" [Ethiopia: 'In Axum, I helped transport more than 300 dead bodies']. Libération (in French). Archived from the original on 14 February 2021. Retrieved 14 February 2021. "Situation Report EEPA HORN No. 53 – 12 January 2021" (PDF). Europe External Programme with Africa. 12 January 2021. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 January 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2021. "'Many hundreds' killed by Eritrean soldiers in Ethiopian massacre, Amnesty International says". Sky News. 27 February 2021. Archived from the original on 12 August 2022. Maruf, Harun (19 February 2021). "Clandestine Training of Somali Forces in Eritrea Stirs Families' Concern". VOA News. Archived from the original on 29 August 2021. Retrieved 29 August 2021. "Trauma, anger as Tigrayans recount Eritrea troops' 'grave crimes'". Al Jazeera. 1 March 2021. Archived from the original on 21 November 2022. Retrieved 21 November 2022. "UN: Ethiopia may not have control of a large part of Tigray". The Independent. 4 February 2021. Archived from the original on 4 February 2021. Retrieved 27 February 2021. Coessens, A. (16 December 2020). "News Highlights Extra No. 5: Conflict in the Horn". EEPA. Archived from the original on 21 January 2021. Retrieved 1 March 2021. "In Pictures: Eritrean refugees caught in crossfire in Ethiopia". Al Jazeera. 1 February 2021. Archived from the original on 1 March 2021. Retrieved 1 March 2021. "Ethiopia: Militant attack on passenger bus near Adi Mesino, Tigray Region, leaves at least six people dead, 10 others injured Feb. 18". GardaWorld. 22 February 2021. Archived from the original on 12 August 2021. Retrieved 28 February 2021. Horton, Michael (24 May 2021). "Tigray Defense Forces Resist Ethiopian Army Offensive as Sudan, Eritrea, and Ethnic Militias Enter the Fray". Jamestown. Archived from the original on 27 May 2021. Retrieved 27 May 2021. Storchi, L. (6 January 2021). "News Highlights Extra No. 6: Conflict in the Horn". EEPA. Archived from the original on 21 January 2021. Retrieved 1 March 2021. Burke, Jason (2 April 2021). "Ethiopia: 1,900 people killed in massacres in Tigray identified". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 August 2021. Retrieved 24 April 2021. Feleke, Bethlehem; et al. (1 April 2021). "Analysis of massacre video raises questions for Ethiopian Army". CNN. Archived from the original on 2 April 2021. Retrieved 2 April 2021. Burke, Jason (8 March 2021). "Young men take up arms in northern Ethiopia as atrocities fuel insurgency". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 November 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2021. "Ethiopia Declares Tigray, Oromia Groups Terrorist Organizations". Bloomberg News. 6 May 2021. Archived from the original on 24 November 2021. Retrieved 16 October 2021. "Ethiopia convicts soldiers of crimes against civilians in Tigray". Al Jazeera. 21 May 2021. Archived from the original on 12 June 2021. Retrieved 12 June 2021. Walsh, Declan (11 July 2021). "How Local Guerrilla Fighters Routed Ethiopia's Powerful Army". The New York Times. Samre, Ethiopia. Archived from the original on 12 July 2021. "Ethiopian forces withdraw from Tigray regional capital Mekelle". CNN. 28 June 2021. Archived from the original on 28 June 2021. Retrieved 28 June 2021. "Ethiopia's Tigray conflict: Unilateral ceasefire declared". Yahoo News. 28 June 2021. Archived from the original on 28 June 2021. Retrieved 28 June 2021. "Interim government of Tigray flees as rebels seize capital". The Guardian. 28 June 2021. Archived from the original on 30 June 2021. "Ethiopia Tigray conflict: Rebels build on capture of capital". BBC News. 30 June 2021. Archived from the original on 29 June 2021. "Tigray rebels vow to drive out 'enemies' after retaking Mekelle". Al Jazeera English. 29 June 2021. Archived from the original on 29 June 2021. "Ethiopia says army can re-enter seized Tigray capital Mekelle in weeks". Reuters. 30 June 2021. Archived from the original on 30 June 2021. Burke, Jason (6 July 2021). "Tigray forces mobilise against militias from neighbouring province". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 August 2021. Retrieved 6 July 2021. "Rebel forces in Ethiopia's Tigray region launch new offensive". France 24. 13 July 2021. Archived from the original on 22 July 2021. Retrieved 13 July 2021. Mersie, Ayenat; Fick, Maggie (13 July 2021). "Ethiopia: Tigray forces push south as Amhara militias mobilise". Reuters. Archived from the original on 30 July 2021. Retrieved 13 July 2021. Collins, Tom (19 July 2021). "Genocide fears after Ethiopian PM vows to crush 'weeds' of Tigray". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Archived from the original on 24 July 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2021. "Ethiopia regions send troops to back fight with Tigray rebels". Al Jazeera. 15 July 2021. Archived from the original on 3 August 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2021. Endeshaw, Dawit; Flick, Maggie (19 July 2021). "Ethiopia's Tigray forces enter neighbouring Afar region, Afar says". Reuters. Archived from the original on 30 July 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2021. "Tigray: thousands flee in neighbouring region as conflict spreads". The Guardian. 22 July 2021. Archived from the original on 4 August 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2021. Nunis, Vivienne (22 July 2021). "Ethiopia Tigray crisis: New front opens in war as aid fears grow". BBC. Archived from the original on 28 July 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2021. "Djiboutian troops close in to Ethiopia as TDF allegedly targets transport corridor". Garowe Online. 21 July 2021. Archived from the original on 22 July 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2021. "Ethiopia's Amhara state rallies residents to fight Tigrayans". Al Jazeera. 25 July 2021. Archived from the original on 10 May 2022. Retrieved 25 July 2021. Admin, NP (12 August 2021). "Tigray forces defiant in face of Ethiopia call-up". Nile Post. Archived from the original on 4 October 2023. Retrieved 13 August 2021. Kifle, Shuwa (16 August 2021). "Zerbricht Äthiopien im Bürgerkrieg?". heise online (in German). Archived from the original on 31 May 2022. Retrieved 28 August 2021. Mitglieder der Agaw haben sich in ihrem Gebiet – zu dem auch Lalibela gehört – inzwischen sogar von Amhara unabhängig erklärt und eine Agaw Liberation Front (ALF) gegründet. "Tigrayan forces take control of Ethiopian town Lalibela, a UN World Heritage Site – eyewitnesses". Reuters. 5 August 2021. Archived from the original on 5 August 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2021. "Lalibela: Ethiopia's Tigray rebels take Unesco world heritage town". BBC News. 5 August 2021. Archived from the original on 26 August 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2021. "Statement by UNICEF Executive Director Henrietta Fore on reported killing of hundreds of civilians, including children, in Afar, northern Ethiopia". UNICEF. Archived from the original on 9 August 2021. Retrieved 9 August 2021. "Ethiopia Armed Group Says it Has Alliance with Tigray Forces". Voice of America. 11 August 2021. Archived from the original on 11 August 2021. Retrieved 11 August 2021. "As the conflict expand in Amhara region, major cities in the region enforce curfews limiting vehicles, human movements". Addis Standard. 13 August 2021. Archived from the original on 16 August 2021. Retrieved 16 August 2021. "Ethiopia says Tigrayan forces beaten in Afar, Tigrayans say they redeployed". Reuters. 9 September 2021. Archived from the original on 11 September 2021. Retrieved 11 September 2021. "Ethiopia expels top UN officials amid Tigray aid crisis". BBC News. 30 September 2021. Archived from the original on 30 September 2021. Retrieved 30 September 2021. "Ethiopia orders expulsion of 7 top UN officials for 'meddling'". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 30 September 2021. Retrieved 30 September 2021. Houreld, Katharine (9 October 2021). "Airstrikes against Tigrayan forces intensify in Ethiopia's Amhara region -TPLF spokesman". Reuters. Archived from the original on 12 October 2021. Retrieved 13 October 2021. Houreld, Katharine (12 October 2021). "Ethiopian army starts ground attack on rebellious Tigray forces – regional party spokesman". Reuters. Archived from the original on 12 October 2021. Retrieved 13 October 2021. Bariyo, Nicholas (12 October 2021). "Ethiopia Launches Offensive Against Tigray Forces". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on 12 October 2021. Retrieved 13 October 2021. "Tigray forces say Ethiopia has launched a major offensive". AP News. 11 October 2021. Archived from the original on 12 October 2021. Retrieved 13 October 2021. Presse, Agence France (13 October 2021). "Fresh fighting in Ethiopia's Afar as army mounts 'offensive'". Capital News. Archived from the original on 21 October 2021. Retrieved 13 October 2021. Fick, Maggie (13 October 2021). "Ethiopian attack in two northern regions intensifies, Tigrayan forces say". Reuters. Archived from the original on 13 October 2021. Retrieved 13 October 2021. "Ethiopia: Tigrayan forces 'seize strategic town in Amhara region'". The Guardian. 30 October 2021. Archived from the original on 30 August 2022. Retrieved 30 October 2021. "Ethiopia's Tigray crisis: PM Abiy calls on citizens to take up arms against rebels". BBC News. 1 November 2021. Archived from the original on 2 November 2021. Retrieved 2 November 2021. "Update: Amhara State Council declares emergency, including region wide-curfew, suspension of activities by state institutions". Addis Standard. 31 October 2021. Archived from the original on 2 November 2021. Retrieved 2 November 2021. "Ethiopia's PM defiant as rival Tigray forces make advances". AP News. 1 November 2021. Archived from the original on 2 November 2021. Retrieved 2 November 2021. Walsh, Declan (2 November 2021). "Ethiopia Declares State of Emergency as Rebels Advance Toward Capital". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 16 November 2021. Retrieved 2 November 2021. "Ethiopia declares nationwide state of emergency". Al Jazeera. 2 November 2021. Archived from the original on 2 November 2021. Retrieved 2 November 2021. Flick, Maggie; et al. (2 November 2021). "Ethiopia declares state of emergency as Tigrayan forces gain ground". Reuters. Archived from the original on 17 December 2021. Retrieved 2 November 2021. "Nine anti-gov't groups team up as Ethiopia recalls ex-soldiers". Al Jazeera. 5 November 2021. Archived from the original on 6 November 2021. Retrieved 6 November 2021. "Ethiopia's PM vows to lead from the war front". BBC News. 23 November 2021. Archived from the original on 24 November 2021. Retrieved 24 November 2021. "Ethiopia's Haile Gebrselassie and Feyisa Lilesa ready to join Tigray war". BBC News. 24 November 2021. Archived from the original on 29 December 2021. Retrieved 25 November 2021. "France, Germany latest countries to urge nationals to leave Ethiopia". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 23 November 2021. Retrieved 25 November 2021. "Ethiopia's PM pledges victory in video from front line". 26 November 2021. Archived from the original on 1 December 2021. Retrieved 1 December 2021. "Ethiopian gov't forces in control of Chifra: State media". 28 November 2021. Archived from the original on 16 December 2021. Retrieved 1 December 2021. "Ethiopia's Tigray conflict: Lalibela retaken – government". BBC News. 1 December 2021. Archived from the original on 1 December 2021. Retrieved 1 December 2021. "Ethiopian forces recapture two key towns from rebels, gov't says". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 16 December 2021. Retrieved 6 December 2021. "Ethiopian forces recapture two key towns from Tigrayan forces". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 16 December 2021. Retrieved 8 December 2021. "Ethiopia claims strategic gains despite TPLF denials". Deutsche Welle. 7 December 2021. Archived from the original on 15 December 2021. Retrieved 15 December 2021. "Witnesses say Tigrayan forces in Ethiopia retook Lalibela, UN Heritage site". Reuters. Reuters. 12 December 2021. Archived from the original on 19 December 2021. Retrieved 12 December 2021. "Tigray forces withdraw from neighbouring Ethiopian regions -spokesman". Reuters. 20 December 2021. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Tigrayan Forces Retreat in Ethiopia". Crisis Group. 16 December 2021. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Tigrayan forces announce retreat to Ethiopia's Tigray region". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 8 June 2022. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Tigrayan forces announce retreat to Ethiopia's Tigray region". Al Jazeera. 20 December 2021. Archived from the original on 8 June 2022. Retrieved 5 October 2022. 'We decided to withdraw from these areas to Tigray. We want to open the door to humanitarian aid,' Getachew said. "Tigray forces withdraw from neighbouring Ethiopian regions -spokesman". Reuters. Reuters. 20 December 2021. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021. Retrieved 1 January 2022. "Ethiopia says its army will not advance further into Tigray". AP News. 23 December 2021. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2022. York, Geoffrey (14 January 2022). "Ethiopian air strikes kill 108 civilians in Tigray region, UN says". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 5 October 2022. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "Ethiopia: At least 56 killed in Tigray air strike on camp for internally displaced, aid workers say". Sky News. 8 January 2022. Archived from the original on 8 January 2022. Retrieved 3 October 2022. Endeshaw, Dawit (8 January 2022). "Ethiopia frees opposition leaders from prison, announces political dialogue". Reuters. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 10 January 2022. "Ethiopian ministers propose ending state of emergency now". ABC News. Archived from the original on 27 January 2022. Retrieved 27 January 2022. "Ethiopia PM says committee looking into possibility of peace talks with Tigray rebels". Africanews. 14 June 2022. Archived from the original on 16 July 2022. "Ethiopia says ready for talks with Tigray forces 'anytime'". Associated Press. 28 July 2022. Archived from the original on 13 September 2022. Retrieved 5 October 2022. "Tigray: Rebels set up team to negotiate peace with Ethiopian govt". Africanews and Agence France-Presse. 1 August 2022 [July 18, 2022]. Archived from the original on 22 October 2022. Retrieved 22 October 2022. "Ethiopia government proposes plan for peace in war-torn Tigray". Al Jazeera. 17 August 2022. Archived from the original on 19 September 2022. "Ethiopia: Tigray Rebels Lack 'Interest' in Peace Talks". Voice of America. Agence France-Presse. 18 August 2022. Archived from the original on 22 October 2022. Retrieved 22 October 2022. "Ethiopia forces accused of deadly attack as Tigray war escalates". Al Jazeera. 26 August 2022. Archived from the original on 13 October 2022. "Fighting flares for second day in northern Ethiopia -residents". Reuters. 26 August 2022. Archived from the original on 26 August 2022. Retrieved 26 August 2022. "UN calls for ceasefire amid renewed fighting in northern Ethiopia". Al Jazeera. 24 August 2022. Archived from the original on 14 October 2022. "Ethiopia's Tigray war: Tedros Ghebreyesus unable to send money to 'starving' family". BBC News. 26 August 2022. Archived from the original on 26 August 2022. Retrieved 26 August 2022. "Fighting erupts along border of Ethiopia's northern Tigray region". Reuters. Reuters. 24 August 2022. Archived from the original on 29 August 2022. Retrieved 29 August 2022. "Ethiopia, Eritrea forces launch new offensive in Tigray: TPLF". Archived from the original on 1 September 2022. Retrieved 1 September 2022. "Ten dead in second day of air raids in Ethiopia's Tigray region". Al Jazeera. 13 September 2022. Archived from the original on 14 September 2022. Retrieved 14 September 2022. Byaruhanga, Catherine; Higgins, Natalie (29 September 2022). "Ethiopia's Tigray war: Satellite images capture troop build-up near Eritrea border". BBC News. Archived from the original on 30 September 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2022. "Ten killed in air strikes on capital of Ethiopia's Tigray region - hospital". Reuters. 14 September 2022. Archived from the original on 14 September 2022. Retrieved 14 September 2022. "Eritrea's mass mobilisation as Ethiopia tensions rise". BBC News. 16 September 2022. Archived from the original on 16 September 2022. Retrieved 16 September 2022. Muhumuza, Rodney (20 September 2022). "Eritrea accused of starting offensive on Ethiopia's Tigray". The Washington Post. Retrieved 24 September 2022. "Tigrayan forces accuse Eritrea of launching offensive". Al Jazeera. 20 September 2022. Archived from the original on 20 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. "Tigrayan forces accuse Eritrea of launching full-scale offensive on border". The Guardian. 20 September 2022. Archived from the original on 21 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. Anyadike, Obi (28 September 2022). "Is there a path to peace in the Tigray conflict?". The New Humanitarian. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 29 September 2022. Marks, Simon; Tadesse, Fasika (29 September 2022). "Ethiopia's Civil War Is Heating Up Once Again". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 9 November 2023. Retrieved 1 October 2022. Vincenot, Aymeric (3 October 2022). "Tigray rebels announce troop deployment in northern Ethiopia". Yahoo News. AFP. Archived from the original on 14 October 2022. "More than 50 killed in northern Ethiopia air strike -aid workers and Tigray forces". Reuters. 5 October 2022. Archived from the original on 6 October 2022. Retrieved 6 October 2022. "Ethiopia's Tigray forces say Eritreans widen war offensive". ABC News. Associated Press. 10 October 2022. Archived from the original on 13 October 2022. Bekit, Teklemariam; Chothia, Farouk (12 October 2022). "Eritreans hunted down as military call-up intensifies over Ethiopia's Tigray war". BBC News. Archived from the original on 15 October 2022. "Ethiopia's civil war: Inside Tigray's capital Mekelle". BBC News. 13 October 2022. Archived from the original on 15 October 2022. Waal, Alex de (14 October 2022). "Tigray faces a new onslaught by Eritrean-Ethiopian forces". Responsible Statecraft. Archived from the original on 15 October 2022. Harper, Mary (16 October 2022). "Ethiopia's Tigray conflict: Civilian bloodbath warning as offensive escalates". BBC News. Archived from the original on 16 October 2022. "Ethiopia says it will seize airports in rebel-held Tigray region". Al Jazeera. 17 October 2022. Archived from the original on 18 October 2022. Retrieved 18 October 2022. Houreld, Katharine (17 October 2022). "Ethiopian soldiers take strategic city in Tigray amid civilian exodus". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on 9 November 2022. Retrieved 18 October 2022. "Why the capture of Shire is so important for Ethiopia". BBC News. Archived from the original on 23 October 2022. Retrieved 23 October 2022. "Ethiopian army captures several towns in war-torn Tigray". Al Jazeera. 18 October 2022. Archived from the original on 18 October 2022. Retrieved 18 October 2022. "Ethiopia takes Tigray town ahead of anticipated peace talks". ABC News. Archived from the original on 23 October 2022. Retrieved 23 October 2022. "Ethiopia takes Tigray town ahead of anticipated peace talks". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 23 October 2022. Marks, Simon (20 October 2022). "Ethiopia Steps up Offensive Against Tigray Rebels". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 19 November 2023. Retrieved 25 October 2022. Anna, Cara (29 October 2022). "Witnesses allege Eritrean abuses during Ethiopia peace talks". PBS NewsHour. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 15 November 2022. Retrieved 30 October 2022. An aid worker from Axum who relocated to Shire this week fearing for his life said civilians were being killed by Eritrean forces there since at least Sunday. "Peace talks aimed at ending Ethiopia's deadly Tigray conflict begin in South Africa". CBC News. AP. 25 October 2022. Archived from the original on 27 October 2022. "News: Ethiopia cautions to weigh its options, consider relations with unnamed "states and entities" making "unsubstantiated and politically motivated" accusations". Addis Standard. 28 October 2022. Archived from the original on 14 November 2022. Retrieved 30 October 2022. "Ethiopian rivals agree on humanitarian access for war-ravaged Tigray". The Guardian. AFP. 13 November 2022. Archived from the original on 13 November 2022. Romsi, Vilma (29 December 2022). "Etiopian poliisi palasi Tigrayhin rauhansopimuksen myötä" [Ethiopian police returned to Tigray with the peace deal]. Yle Uutiset (in Finnish). AFP. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2022. "Tears, prayers as flights resume to Ethiopia's Tigray region". Al Jazeera. 28 December 2022. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2022. "News: Tigrayan officials say peace agreement aims to "rescue people of Tigray", accuse Eritrean forces of continued atrocities on civilians". Addis Standard. 21 November 2022. Archived from the original on 7 December 2022. Retrieved 10 December 2022. Muhumuza, Rodney (27 November 2022). "Kidnappings, looting cited in Ethiopia's Tigray after truce". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 10 December 2022. "Looting, forced removals plague Ethiopia's Tigray despite truce, witnesses say". The Globe and Mail. Reuters. 2 December 2022. Archived from the original on 7 December 2022. Retrieved 10 December 2022. "Analysis-Spillover from Tigray conflict adds to pressure on Sudan". Reuters. 18 December 2020. Archived from the original on 7 March 2021. Retrieved 15 November 2023. Tyburski, Luke (3 March 2021). "The unintended consequence of Ethiopia's civil war might be a border war with Sudan". Atlantic Council. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. Anna, Cara (29 November 2020). "UN: Ethiopia's victory claim doesn't mean war is finished". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 9 November 2022. Retrieved 9 November 2022. "Factbox: The forces fighting in Ethiopia's Tigray conflict". Reuters. 13 November 2020. Archived from the original on 5 January 2021. Retrieved 29 December 2020. Eltahir, Khalid Abdelaziz, Ali Mirghani, Nafisa (18 December 2020). "Analysis-Spillover from Tigray conflict adds to pressure on Sudan". Reuters. Archived from the original on 18 December 2020. Retrieved 30 December 2020.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Tensions escalate as Sudanese forces gather near Ethiopian border". The Reporter Ethiopia. 19 December 2020. Archived from the original on 20 December 2020. Retrieved 30 December 2020. Harper, Mary (24 August 2022). "Somalia and al-Shabab: The struggle to defeat the militants". BBC News. Archived from the original on 19 August 2023. Retrieved 19 August 2023. Less than a month earlier, the group mounted an unprecedented invasion of neighbouring Ethiopia. Faruk, Omar (5 August 2022). "In a first, Somalia-based al-Shabab is attacking in Ethiopia". AP. Archived from the original on 21 April 2023. Retrieved 19 August 2023. Hochet-Bodin, Noé (14 September 2022). "Al-Shabab seeks to 'put down roots' in Ethiopia". Le Monde. Archived from the original on 19 August 2023. Retrieved 19 August 2023. Maruf, Harun (26 July 2022). "Why Did Al-Shabab Attack Inside Ethiopia?". VOA News. Archived from the original on 5 October 2022. Retrieved 19 August 2023. "Ethiopian prime minister in UAE as Tigray war rages on". Toronto Star. Associated Press. 30 January 2022. Archived from the original on 27 October 2022. Retrieved 27 October 2022. Spicer, Jonathan; Paravicini, Giulia; Coskun, Orhan (22 December 2021). "EXCLUSIVE U.S. concerned over Turkey's drone sales to conflict-hit Ethiopia". Reuters. Archived from the original on 2 March 2022. Retrieved 27 October 2022. Walsh, Declan (20 December 2021). "Foreign Drones Tip the Balance in Ethiopia's Civil War". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 28 February 2022. Retrieved 20 December 2021. Mwai, Peter (31 January 2022). "Tigray conflict: What do we know about drone strikes in Ethiopia?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 27 October 2022. Retrieved 27 October 2022. "Expert: No Evidence UAE Drones Are Being Used in Ethiopia's Tigray Conflict". The Voice of America. 10 December 2020. Archived from the original on 8 October 2021. Retrieved 10 December 2020. Walsh, Declan (20 December 2021). "Foreign Drones Tip the Balance in Ethiopia's Civil War". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 28 January 2023. Dahir, Abdi Latif (7 December 2021). "Ethiopia Says It Recaptured Strategic Towns From Rebels". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 27 March 2023. Kassa, Lucy (20 January 2022). "Somali troops committed atrocities in Tigray as new alliance emerged, survivors say". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 7 February 2022. Retrieved 6 March 2022. Marks, Simon; Ahmed, Mohammed Omar (21 January 2021). "Ethiopia Denies Somalia Forces Involved in Fighting in Tigray". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 22 January 2021. Retrieved 22 January 2021. "Somalia denies claims its soldiers killed in Tigray war helping ENDF". Garowe Online. 19 January 2021. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021. "Somalia rejects claims hundreds of its soldiers died fighting in Tigray". Africanews. 19 January 2021. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021. "Somalia denies involvement in Ethiopia conflict". BBC News. 19 January 2021. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021. "Ex-spy chief claims hundreds of Somali soldiers killed in Tigray region". Garowe Online. 18 January 2021. Archived from the original on 20 January 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021. Gebremedhn, Gebre (11 June 2021). "ነበርቲ ሓውዜን ግዳያት ኵናት ትግራይ ብጅምላ ይቐብርሉ ኣለው'ፀብፃብ ሄዘር ሞርዶክ" ['Hawzen residents are burying Tigray war victims en masse' reports Heather Murdoch] (in Tigrinya). Voice of America. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2021. "Destruction in Ethiopia's Tigray Region". Voice of America. 9 June 2021. Archived from the original on 6 April 2023. Retrieved 29 October 2022. "War in Tigray may have killed 600,000 people, peace mediator says". Financial Times. Retrieved 4 July 2023. "Ethiopia's Tigray crisis: Report says war crimes may have been committed". BBC. 3 November 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2022. "Ethiopia's Tigray conflict: Why the rest of the world is worried". BBC. 15 November 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2022. "Ethiopia: Tigray Forces Summarily Execute Civilians". Human Rights Watch. 9 December 2021. Retrieved 10 December 2021. "At scene of Ethiopia's new killings, some fight, some flee". AP News. Associated Press. 10 September 2021. Retrieved 11 September 2021. Walsh, Declan (26 February 2021). "Ethiopia's War Leads to Ethnic Cleansing in Tigray Region, U.S. Report Says". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 24 June 2021. The American report is not the first accusation of ethnic cleansing since the Tigray crisis erupted. Anna, Cara (26 April 2021). "'Leave no Tigrayan': In Ethiopia, an ethnicity is erased". AP NEWS. Retrieved 24 June 2021. Now, for the first time, they also bring proof of an official attempt at what is being called ethnic cleansing in the form of a new identity card that eliminates all traces of Tigray, as confirmed to The Associated Press by nine refugees from different communities... "I kept it to show the world," Seid said. He added that only 10 Tigrayans remained of the roughly 400 who worked at the hospital where he had been employed, the rest killed or fleeing. "This is genocide … Their aim is to erase Tigray." ... What started as a political dispute in one of Africa's most powerful and populous countries has turned into a campaign of ethnic cleansing against minority Tigrayans, according to AP interviews with 30 refugees in Sudan and dozens more by phone, along with international experts. Hansler, Jennifer (10 March 2021). "Blinken: Acts of 'ethnic cleansing' committed in Western Tigray". CNN. Retrieved 24 June 2021. Secretary of State Tony Blinken for the first time Wednesday used the term "ethnic cleansing" to describe human rights abuses he said have been carried out in the Western Tigray region of Ethiopia, calling the situation "unacceptable." "US congressman Michael McCaul raises spectre of 'genocide' in Tigray". The National. 16 June 2021. Retrieved 24 June 2021. "Tigray crisis: 'Genocidal war' waged in Ethiopia region, says ex-leader". BBC News. 31 January 2021. Retrieved 24 June 2021. "Ethiopian patriarch pleads for international help to stop rape and genocide by government troops". The Guardian. 8 May 2021. Retrieved 24 June 2021. "Ethiopia Tigray crisis: Warnings of genocide and famine". BBC News. 28 May 2021. Retrieved 24 June 2021. "Ethiopian leaders said they would 'wipe out' Tigrayans: EU envoy". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 24 June 2021. "EU envoy: Ethiopian leadership vowed to 'wipe out' Tigrayans". AP News. 18 June 2021. Retrieved 24 June 2021. "Ethiopia vowed to wipe out Tigrayan people "for 100 years," EU official says". Newsweek. 18 June 2021. Retrieved 24 June 2021. "Ethiopia rejects U.S. allegations of ethnic cleansing in Tigray". Reuters. 13 March 2021. Retrieved 24 June 2021. Watch, Genocide (4 June 2021). "Genocide Emergency: Ethiopia". genocidewatch. Retrieved 24 June 2021. Ross, Eric; Hill, Nat (20 November 2021). "Genocide Emergency: Ethiopia". Genocide Watch. Archived from the original on 23 November 2021. Retrieved 23 November 2021. Zelalem, Zecharias (4 December 2020). "Ethiopia Airlines accused of ethnic profiling over civil war with Tigray". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 4 January 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2021. Freudenthal, Emmanuel (17 December 2020). "Ethnic profiling of Tigrayans heightens tensions in Ethiopia". The New Humanitarian. Archived from the original on 16 January 2021. Retrieved 17 December 2020. Cawthorne, Andrew; Flick, Maggie (13 November 2020). William Maclean (ed.). "Ethiopian police seeking lists of ethnic Tigrayans – U.N. report". Reuters. Archived from the original on 16 January 2021. Retrieved 18 December 2020. Ethiopian police visited a U.N. World Food Programme (WFP) office in Amhara region to request a list of ethnic Tigrayan staff, according to an internal U.N. security report seen by Reuters on Friday. ... The U.N. report said that the local police chief informed the WFP office of "the order of identifying ethnic Tigrayans from all government agencies and NGOs". "Tigrayans 'profiled' in Ethiopia crackdown". The New Humanitarian. 16 December 2020. Retrieved 29 March 2022. "Ethiopia: Ethnic Tigrayans Forcibly Disappeared". Human Rights Watch. 18 August 2021. Retrieved 21 March 2022. Houreld, Katharine (17 December 2020). "Exclusive: Ethiopia says disarms Tigrayan peacekeepers in Somalia over security". Reuters. Archived from the original on 16 January 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2021. Lynch, Colum; Gramer, Robin (23 November 2020). "U.N. Fears Ethiopia Purging Ethnic Tigrayan Officers From Its Peacekeeping Missions". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 16 January 2021. Retrieved 17 December 2020. The Ethiopian government has been rounding up ethnic Tigrayan security forces deployed in United Nations and African peacekeeping missions abroad and forcing them onto flights to the Ethiopian capital of Addis Ababa, where it is feared they may face torture or even execution, according to an internal U.N. account. Ethiopia's Tigray conflict: Rape as a weapon of war, Deutsche Welle, 26 February 2022, retrieved 6 March 2022 Lumb, David (4 May 2023). "Ethiopia's Tigray war: 'I'm not even sure if my family is alive or not'". BBC News. "Ethiopia: Persistent, credible reports of grave violations in Tigray underscore urgent need for human rights access – Bachelet". United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. 4 March 2021. Archived from the original on 6 March 2021. Retrieved 6 March 2021. "Men forced to rape family members in Ethiopia's Tigray region, says UN". The Irish Times. Retrieved 6 March 2022. Kassa, Lucy; Pujol-Mazzini, Anna (27 March 2021). "'We're here to make you HIV positive': Hundreds of women rush to Tigray hospitals as soldiers use rape as weapon of war". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved 6 March 2022. "UNFPA Ethiopia Response to the Tigray Crisis - Situation report" (PDF). UNFPA. York, Geoffrey (29 November 2021). "Sexual violence as weapon of war spreads to new regions in Ethiopia". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 6 March 2022. Keaten, Jamey (22 September 2022). "UN experts detail extensive war crimes amid Tigray conflict". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 3 October 2022. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Ethiopia: Troops and militia rape, abduct women and girls in Tigray conflict – new report". Amnesty International. 10 August 2021. Retrieved 6 March 2022. "Ethiopia: "I don't know if they realized I was a person": Rape and sexual violence in the conflict in Tigray, Ethiopia". Amnesty International. Retrieved 6 March 2022. Boezio, Geraldine. "United Nations Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, urges all parties to prohibit the use of sexual violence and cease hostilities in the Tigray region of Ethiopia". United Nations Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Retrieved 6 March 2022. "Ethiopia: Tigrayan forces murder, rape and pillage in attacks on civilians in Amhara towns". Amnesty International. 16 February 2022. Retrieved 17 August 2022. "Tigrayan forces killed civilians, gang-raped dozens: Amnesty". www.aljazeera.com. Retrieved 17 August 2022. "Tigray rebels gang-raped women and girls in Ethiopia conflict, says Amnesty Int'l". France 24. 16 February 2022. Retrieved 17 August 2022. Mersie, Ayenat (10 November 2021). "Tigrayan forces raped women in Ethiopia's Amhara region - Amnesty". Reuters. Retrieved 17 August 2022. "Report of the EHRC/OHCHR Joint Investigation into Alleged Violations of International Human Rights, Humanitarian and Refugee Law Committed by all Parties to the Conflict in the Tigray Region of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia" (PDF). EHRC, OHCHR. 3 November 2021. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 November 2021. Retrieved 3 November 2021. "482 Resolution on the Fact-Finding Mission to the Tigray Region of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia – ACHPR/Res. 482 (EXT.OS/XXXII) 2021". African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights. 12 May 2021. Archived from the original on 23 October 2021. Retrieved 24 October 2021. "Probe in Ethiopia's Tigray did not reach site of Axum attack: UN". Al Jazeera. 13 September 2021. Archived from the original on 23 October 2021. Retrieved 24 October 2021. "OCHA: ETHIOPIA – TIGRAY REGION HUMANITARIAN UPDATE" (PDF). United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 March 2021. Retrieved 21 March 2021. "OCHA: ETHIOPIA – TIGRAY REGION HUMANITARIAN UPDATE" (PDF). United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 March 2021. Retrieved 21 March 2021. "Ethiopia's Tigray runs out of medical supplies as malaria spreads". Al Jazeera. 28 October 2022. "Analysis: Tigray's largest hospital "doomed to collapse soon" due to lack of medical supplies, doctors warn as hospital death rate surpass ten percent". Addis Standard. 31 October 2022. "Ethiopia's Tigray running out of medical supplies, WHO warns". Deutsche Welle. 28 October 2022. "Millions of children in Tigray remain out of reach, despite access agreement – UNICEF". UNICEF. 15 December 2020. Archived from the original on 17 December 2020. Retrieved 17 December 2020. "UN 'frustration' at lack of access to Tigray". Yahoo! News. 15 December 2020. Archived from the original on 16 December 2020. Retrieved 17 December 2020. "Ethiopia's Tigray crisis: About 2.3 million children cut off from aid, UN says". BBC. 15 December 2020. Archived from the original on 31 January 2021. Retrieved 17 December 2020. McSweeney, Eoin (15 December 2020). "More than two million children in Ethiopia's Tigray region cut off from humanitarian aid, UN says". CNN. "Ethiopia: EU suspends budget support over Tigray conflict". Deutsche Welle. 16 December 2020. Archived from the original on 17 December 2020. Retrieved 17 December 2020. Aid access:- The UN Security Council on Monday held an informal meeting on the humanitarian situation in Ethiopia's Tigray region, where the majority of humanitarian organizations are not allowed to enter. A humanitarian crisis is unfolding on such a scale that organizations are afraid of what they will find once allowed in. Psaledakis, Daphne; et al. (1 September 2021). "U.S. agency says Tigrayan forces looted aid warehouses in Ethiopia's Amhara region". Reuters. Retrieved 8 September 2021. "I do believe that the TPLF has been very opportunistic," he added. Representatives for the TPLF and Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed's office did not immediately respond to requests for comment. "Any interference or theft of humanitarian aid is unacceptable and prevents critical assistance from reaching people in need. Unfortunately, since the beginning of the conflict in northern Ethiopia, we've seen instances of looting from all parties," a USAID spokesperson said. "Tigray rebels loot humanitarian warehouses". Vatican News. Dicasterium pro Communicatione. 1 September 2021. Retrieved 11 September 2021. Rebels in Ethiopia's war-torn Tigray region have reportedly been looting aid warehouses. The pillaging compounds a deepening humanitarian crisis in the Horn of Africa nation which sees over five million people in urgent need of basic food aid. "Tigray: almost one in three children under five malnourished, UN says". The Irish Times. 20 August 2022. Archived from the original on 21 September 2022. "Ethiopia: Half of Tigray in 'severe' food shortage". Deutsche Welle. 20 August 2022. Archived from the original on 20 October 2022. Wilkins, Henry (25 August 2022). "WFP Chief Alleges TPLF Stole Fuel Designated for Humanitarian Use". Voice of America. Archived from the original on 23 September 2022. "Statement by Executive Director of WFP on seizure of humanitarian fuel supplies in Tigray". World Food Programme. 25 August 2022. Archived from the original on 19 October 2022. Boechat, Yan (20 June 2021). "In Pictures: World Refugee Day: No Safe Haven in Tigray". Voice of America. "More than a million displaced in Tigray as Ethiopian PM warns of 'final' offensive against region". France 24. 19 December 2020. Archived from the original on 19 December 2020. Retrieved 19 December 2020. The United Nations says shortages have become "very critical" in Ethiopia's embattled Tigray region as its population of 6 million remains sealed off and its capital is under threat of attack by Ethiopian forces seeking to arrest the regional leaders. Fuel and cash are running out, more than 1 million people are now estimated to be displaced and food for nearly 100,000 refugees from Eritrea will be gone in a week, according to a new report released overnight. Abdelaziz, Khalid; Mirghani, Ali; Eltahir, Nafisa (19 December 2020). "Analysis-Spillover from Tigray conflict adds to pressure on Sudan". Reuters. Archived from the original on 13 January 2021. Retrieved 19 December 2020. Internal conflict in Ethiopia has driven more than 50,000 refugees into Sudan in just over a month, triggering a complex aid operation in an impoverished region of Sudan. "Tigray refugees in cramped Sudanese camps fear coronavirus outbreak". Africanews. 19 December 2020. Archived from the original on 7 December 2020. Retrieved 19 December 2020. Cara, Anna (11 March 2021). "'People are starving': New exodus in Ethiopia's Tigray area". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 12 August 2021. Retrieved 21 November 2021. "Ethiopia: Northern Ethiopia Access Snapshot (September 2021)". United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. 12 October 2021. Archived from the original on 1 November 2021. Retrieved 6 November 2021. "News: Over half a million people newly displaced in Tigray, Afar and Amhara since militarized conflict resumed in August: UN". Addis Standard. 31 October 2022. "Ethiopia – Tigray Region Humanitarian Update Situation Report, 13 March 2021 – Ethiopia". ReliefWeb. 13 May 2021. Retrieved 18 May 2021. Gebre, Samuel (16 March 2021). "Ethiopia's Amhara seize disputed territory amid Tigray conflict". Bloomberg. "Finding a Path to Peace in Ethiopia's Tigray Region". Crisis Group. 11 February 2021. Retrieved 15 November 2023. Harter, Fred (15 May 2023). "'I saw many bodies': having escaped one conflict, Tigray refugees face new terrors". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 August 2023. Nashed, Mat (23 May 2023). "Eritrean refugees caught between crisis at home, Sudan conflict". Al Jazeera. Bociaga, Robert (23 May 2023). "Sudan crisis traps Ethiopians displaced by Tigray war between two conflicts". Arab News. Archived from the original on 2 July 2023. "Eritrean Refugees Caught in Crossfire of Ethiopia's Tigray War". VOA News. Agence France-Presse. 3 February 2021. Archived from the original on 4 February 2021. Retrieved 3 February 2021. "Ethiopian government begins offensive in Tigray capital city of Mekelle". Euronews. Associated Press. 19 December 2020. Archived from the original on 13 December 2020. Retrieved 19 December 2020. "Ethiopia: UN says 20,000 refugees missing in Tigray which are believed to have been detained by Eritrean forces and forcibly sent back for punishment by the Government". Al Jazeera. 2 February 2020. Archived from the original on 3 February 2021. Retrieved 3 February 2021. Wilmot, Claire (17 November 2020). "Ethiopia's cracking down in Tigray. But activists are spreading the news". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 17 November 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2020. Drew, Alexi; Wilmot, Claire (5 February 2021). "What's going on in Tigray". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 20 February 2021. Retrieved 18 February 2021. "From Basma to Ethiopia – How C2FC is Using Lethal Journalism to Conduct Information Warfare and Lawfare against Ethiopia". Geopolitics Press. July 2021. Retrieved 8 August 2022. Legesse, Getahun (16 February 2021). "Ethiopia: Diaspora Community to Debunk Fake News Using Mainstream Media". The Ethiopian Herald. Archived from the original on 10 March 2021. Retrieved 18 February 2021. Mwai, Peter (21 November 2020). "Ethiopia's Tigray crisis: Fact-checking misleading images". BBC News. Archived from the original on 26 November 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2020. Neguede, Amanuel (22 September 2021). "These old images do not show recent protests in Ethiopia's Tigray region". AFP Fact Check. Archived from the original on 5 December 2021. Retrieved 10 October 2022. Jackson, Jasper; Kassa, Lucy; Townsend, Mark (20 February 2022). "Facebook 'lets vigilantes in Ethiopia incite ethnic killing'". The Guardian and The Observer. Archived from the original on 12 October 2022. Cornish, Audie; Bior, Ayen; Donevan, Connor (11 October 2021). "Facebook is under new scrutiny for it's [sic] role in Ethiopia's conflict". NPR. Archived from the original on 12 October 2022. Mackintosh, Eliza (25 October 2021). "Facebook knew it was being used to incite violence in Ethiopia. It did little to stop the spread, documents show". CNN Business. Archived from the original on 16 September 2022. Jackson, Jasper; Kassa, Lucy; Hall, Kathleen; Zelalem, Zecharias (20 February 2022). "Facebook accused by survivors of letting activists incite ethnic massacres with hate and misinformation in Ethiopia". The Bureau of Investigative Journalism and The Observer. Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Faife, Corin (14 December 2021). "Oversight Board raises alarm over Facebook's role in Ethiopian conflict". The Verge. Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. "Eighteen journalists arrested in Ethiopia, two facing possible death sentence". Reporters Without Borders. 3 June 2022. "Ethiopian media regulator threatens to expel BBC, Reuters, CNN and AP for 'assisting' TPLF agenda". Sudans Post. 19 November 2021. Archived from the original on 19 November 2021. Retrieved 19 November 2021. "Ethiopia launches crackdown on journalists and activists". Associated Press. 23 May 2022. Solomon, Salem (4 December 2020). "Journalists Struggle Through Information Blackout in Ethiopia". Voice of America. Archived from the original on 4 October 2022. Zelalem, Zecharias (31 May 2022). "In Ethiopia, mass detention signals shrinking press freedom". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 13 September 2022. Laurent, Helena (27 January 2022). "Ethiopia: The daunting task of reporting the Tigray conflict". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. "Number of journalists behind bars reaches global high". Committee to Protect Journalists. 9 December 2021. Archived from the original on 31 October 2022. With 16 journalists behind bars on the date of the annual census, Ethiopia tied with Eritrea as the year's worst jailers of journalists in sub-Saharan Africa. "Communiqué of the 38th extraordinary assembly of IGAD heads of state and government – Djibouti, Republic of Djibouti – 20th December 2020" (PDF). Intergovernmental Authority on Development. 21 December 2020. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 February 2021. Retrieved 20 February 2021. "Ethiopia's regional Tigray forces name conditions for peace with government". Reuters. 19 February 2021. Archived from the original on 16 October 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Besheer, Margeret (2 July 2021). "UN Calls on Tigray Forces to Endorse Cease-fire". Voice of America. Archived from the original on 21 November 2021. "Ethiopia: Government, Tigrayan forces agree to end two-year war". Al Jazeera. 2 November 2022. "Ethiopia civil war: Tigray truce a triumph for PM Abiy Ahmed". BBC News. 3 November 2022. "Ethiopian PM appoints TPLF official as head of Tigray interim administration". The Guardian. Agence France-Presse. 23 March 2023. "Ethiopians protest U.S. sanctions over brutal Tigray war". CNBC. 30 May 2021. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Hundreds March in Washington to Denounce Ethiopian Government on 1st Anniversary of Tigray Conflict". Voice of America. 4 November 2021. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Ethiopia: Tepid international response to Tigray conflict fuels horrific violations over past six months". Amnesty International. 4 May 2021. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Tigray conflict sparks a war of fake tweets and intense propaganda". The Globe and Mail. 1 April 2021. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "News: Two-year war leaves 86% of Tigray's healthcare facilities devastated: new report". Addis Standard. 5 October 2023. Legesse, Awol Yemane; Tseghay, Hale Teka; Abraha, Hiluf Ebuy; Fisseha, Girmatsion; Ebrahim, Mohamedawel Mohamedniguss; Tsadik, Mache; Berhe, Bereket; Gebrekurstos, Gebrehaweria; Ayele, Brhane; Gebremeskel, Tesfit; Gebremariam, Tsega; Hadush, Marta Yemane; Hagos, Tigist; Gebreziabiher, Abreha; Muez, Kibrom (26 September 2023). "Maternal mortality during war time in Tigray, Ethiopia: A community-based study". BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology. doi:10.1111/1471-0528.17677. ISSN 1470-0328. PMID 37752662. Kristos, Mihret G (23 August 2023) [14 June 2023]. "News: Newborn mortality rising in Tigray's Seharti Samre district, officials urge nutritional food supplies". Addis Standard. Schipani, Andres (20 August 2023). "Ethiopia seeks help to find $20bn for post-conflict reconstruction". Financial Times. "News: Despite data limitation from Tigray, Ministry estimates $1.4 b needed to restore war damaged health facilities across Ethiopia". Addis Standard. 22 November 2022. "Ethiopia's domestic debt skyrockets, raising concerns over government borrowing practices". Addis Standard. 18 August 2023. "France, Germany urge Ethiopia on accountability after war". AP News. 12 January 2023. Mwakideu, Chrispin (12 January 2023). "Can Berlin, Paris reset 'strained' EU-Ethiopia ties?". DW. "Correction: Fitch Downgrades Ethiopia to 'CCC-'; Removes From UCO". Fitch Ratings. 3 January 2023. "'Everything increasing except wages': inflation batters Ethiopia". France 24. AFP. 11 December 2022. "WFP Ethiopia Market Watch, March 2023". Reliefweb. 25 April 2023 [31 Mar 2023]. "Ethiopians mark Coptic new year amid persistent inflation". Africanews and Associated Press. 12 September 2023. Marks, Simon; Gebre, Samuel (30 November 2022). "Ethiopia Peace Process Undermined as Eritrean Forces Continue Attacking Civilians". Bloomberg News. York, Geoffrey (16 January 2023). "Eritrean dictator emerges as Horn of Africa's biggest winner after Ethiopian war". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 23 January 2023. Byaruhanga, Catherine (15 February 2023). "Ethiopia war in Tigray: Eritrean soldiers accused of rape despite peace deal". BBC News. Afriyie, Frederick Appiah; Ayangbah, Shirley; Effah, Kwaku Obeng (13 July 2023). "Diagnosing Ethiopia's Tigray War: Reverberations in the Horn of Africa". Insight on Africa. 15 (2): 139–151. doi:10.1177/09750878231170177. ISSN 0975-0878. S2CID 259858380 – via Sage Journals. Ahmed, Ayman; Ali, Yousif; Siddig, Emmanuel Edwar; Hamed, Jehan; Mohamed, Nouh S.; Khairy, Amna; Zinsstag, Jakob (August 2022). "Hepatitis E Virus Outbreak among Tigray War Refugees from Ethiopia, Sudan". Emerging Infectious Diseases. 28 (8): 1722–1724. doi:10.3201/eid2808.220397. ISSN 1080-6059. PMC 9328910. PMID 35876603. Burki, Talha (June 2022). "Humanitarian crisis in Tigray amidst civil war". The Lancet Infectious Diseases. 22 (6): 774–775. doi:10.1016/s1473-3099(22)00304-8. ISSN 1473-3099. PMID 35643105. S2CID 249082498. Gilbert, David (14 September 2020). "Hate Speech on Facebook Is Pushing Ethiopia Dangerously Close to a Genocide". Vice. Archived from the original on 14 October 2020. Jima, Abdisa Olkeba (9 May 2023). "Ethiopian political crisis after reform: Causes of Tigray conflict". Cogent Social Sciences. 9 (1). doi:10.1080/23311886.2023.2209991. ISSN 2331-1886. Lashitew, Addisu (8 November 2019). "Ethiopia Will Explode if It Doesn't Move Beyond Ethnic-Based Politics". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 4 October 2020. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tigray War. Human Rights Watch (World Reports) Ethiopia: events of 2020 Ethiopia: events of 2021 Ethiopia: events of 2022 International Commission of Human Rights Experts on Ethiopia – United Nations