Belgium competed at the 1900 Summer Olympics in Paris, France. It was the first appearance of the European nation. Belgium was represented in France by 78 athletes, all of them male, who competed in 11 disciplines. They comprised 95 entries in 28 events. Medals awarded to participants of mixed-NOC teams are represented in italics. These medals are not counted towards the individual NOC medal tally. In the discipline sections below, the medalists' names are bolded. The following competitors won multiple medals at the 1900 Olympic Games. The following is the list of number of competitors in the Games. Belgium took three of seven gold medals, three of eight silver medals, and one of five bronze medals in the seven archery events that were Olympic. France and the Netherlands were the only other nations that competed, with France taking the remaining thirteen medals. Many of the French, Dutch, and Belgian competitors are unknown as their names were not recorded. 4 of the 18 Belgian archers are known by name, 14 are not. The 18 archers had 36 entries over all 7 events. Belgium's first cycling appearance was at the second Olympic cycling competition, 1900. One cyclist from Belgium competed in one event, winning no medals. Only his surname is known. Belgium competed in the inaugural Olympic equestrian events, taking gold medals in 3 of 5 events. The names of 11 Belgian equestrians are unknown. Belgium competed in fencing at the nation's debut. The nation sent five fencers. Université de Bruxelles represented Belgium in the football competition. The club squad lost its only match, to Club Française, to take third in the three-team competition. Summary Key: A.E.T – After extra time. P – Match decided by penalty-shootout. Team roster Source:[citation needed] Match 2 23 September 1900 Vélodrome de Vincennes, Paris Attendance: 1,500 Referee: Jack Wood (Great Britain) Belgium's inaugural Olympic appearance included competing in the gymnastics portion of the program. Belgium, through the Royal Club Nautique de Gand, sent coxed pairs and coxed eights boats to the first Olympic rowing competition. Belgium's first Olympic appearance included competing in the shooting events. Belgian shooters competed in the military pistol and military rifle sets of events. A man with the surname Hermand was Belgium's first Olympic swimmer. He competed in the 4000 metre freestyle but did not finish his first round heat. Brussels Swimming and Water Polo Club represented Belgium in this event. Summary Key: FT – After full time. P – Match decided by penalty-shootout. Roster First Round Semi-Finals Final This differs from de Wael's count of 84. De Wael counts three water poloists who are not included on the team roster according to the IOC, two equestrians who competed in only non-Olympic events (a third non-Olympic equestrian also competed in croquet), and two unknown coxswains in rowing where there was only one. 14 competitors are unknown. Raul Kelecom on site RSSSF and the list of players of the Belgian championship belgiumsoccerhistory.com Archived 29 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine written named René → René Kelecom De Wael, Herman. Herman's Full Olympians: "1900 Olympians from Belgium". Accessed 11 March 2006. Available electronically at [1]. Mallon, Bill (1998). The 1900 Olympic Games, Results for All Competitors in All Events, with Commentary. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Company, Inc., Publishers. ISBN 0-7864-0378-0.