Hungary competed at the 1900 Summer Olympics in Paris, France. Austrian and Hungarian results at early Olympic Games are generally kept separate despite the union of the two nations as Austria-Hungary at the time. The following Hungarian competitors won medals at the games. In the discipline sections below, the medalists' names are bolded. The following competitors won multiple medals at the 1900 Olympic Games. Hungary continued to win a medal with each entry in a swimming event, taking three medals in 1900 to add to the two won in 1896. Halmay's medals were silver and bronze, however, whereas Hajós had taken a pair of gold medals four year earlier. Men Hungary won a gold and a bronze medal in athletics, tying Canada for 4th place in the sport's medal leaderboard. 9 athletes competed in 13 events. Men Track & road events Field events Hungary first competed in fencing at the Olympics in the sport's second appearance. The nation sent seven fencers. Men According to Herman De Wael there were two other Hungarian fencers in the masters épée competition, but they did not advance from round 1. Their names are not known. Hungary's second gymnastics appearance included a second appearance by Gyula Kakas. The nation's two gymnasts won no medals in a heavily France-dominated single event. Men Born at Nádudvar in 1852, Endrédy established a fencing school in Budapest in 1888. The 1900 games were his only Olympics. In 1915 he became the commander of the Royal Hungarian Honvéd during World War I. He died at Budapest in 1929 aged 76. The masters foil used jury verdicts on art and skill in the bout rather than winning or losing to advance to the second round. Lécuyer withdrew after the first round, to be replaced by Todoresku. It can therefore be inferred that Todoresku was the fifth-place fencer in the same preliminary pool as Lécuyer. Márton Endrédy, Olympedia. Retrieved 25 May 2023. "Fencing - Men's Épée for Masters & Open". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 11 August 2012.