Rudny (Kazakh: Рудный, Rudnyi) (Russian: Рудный Rudnyy) is a city on the Tobol River in Kostanay Region of Kazakhstan. It appeared in 1957 in connection with the development of iron ore deposits, the construction Sokolovsko-Sarbai mining, and processing enterprise. Population: 109,659 (2009 Census results);109,515 (1999 Census results). On August 30, 1957, by a resolution of the Presidium of the Supreme Council of the Kazakh SSR, the village of builders SSGOK Rudny was transformed into a city with the preservation of the name - Rudny. Initially, “Rudny” was the name of the settlement of the builders of the Sokolovrudstroy trust. Later, miners began to call it Rudnogorsk. After the construction of the tent city, it was proposed to be called Semidesyatipalatinsk. In official documents, the name of the settlement changed many times. It is difficult to say what underlies the name of any settlement: more often than not, it is something very characteristic of it; less often - chance intervenes. Our city has had both. Here is how the first chief engineer of the Sokolovrudstroy trust, V.I. Buresh, talks about it: “We, the builders, called the village that we began to build on the site of the future city Rudny.” And so they began to write in all documents. The Kombinat comrades, also on their own, called it “Rudnogorsk”, and also designated it that way in their papers. In the first half of 1955, the director of the enterprise under construction - as the plant was then called - N. F. Sandrigailo and our trust manager J. M. Gimmelfard were in Moscow and Alma-Ata for about four months on the construction of the plant and the city. We, the chief engineers, remained in place for them. We used to prepare a general letter to some authority, put in it the date and our address “Rudny Village, Kustanai Region”; They brought it to the chief engineer of SSGOK Kandel for signature. He will cross out “Rudny Village” and write his own - “Rudnogorsk Village” and will always say: “It will be more optimistic that way!” When the plant workers prepared the paper, the trust workers crossed out “Village Rudnogorsk” and wrote their own - “Village Rudny”. To the builders, such a name seemed more original and significant: after all, such a grandiose construction was actually started for the sake of ore. It is difficult to say how long this “war” would have lasted if V. M. Polynin, a special correspondent for the magazine “Ogonyok,” had not arrived at the construction site. He inspected the quarry, the settlement of geologists Pavlovsky and Komsomolsky, got acquainted in detail with the construction of the SSGOK and the beginning of the construction of the city, spent a lot of time with the first builders... The article by V. M. Polynin, which appeared in the fourteenth issue of Ogonyok (1955), was called “New settlers of Rudny”. It was she who drew the line under the “war” by choosing the name. The article contains the following words: “This city is not on the map, it is not even registered in the official lists, it does not yet have a name, but the pioneers of the new Magnitka believe that the most suitable name for it is the city of Rudny!” And so, with Polynin’s light hand, letters from all over the Soviet Union flew to the construction site, bearing the address - the city of Rudny! When they began to prepare documents to obtain the status of a workers' settlement for the new building, the dispute resumed again. Just at this time, N.F. Sandrigailo was summoned to the director of the Magnitogorsk plant. As he was getting ready to set off on the road, he gave his final orders and advice. And suddenly he asked: “What should we call the workers’ settlement? Probably later the city will be called the same!” — Well, they’ve already given it a name and the status of a city — Rudny. Letters are pouring into our city from all over the country. It turns out that the people have already decided this issue, why should we rack our brains over it,” said V.K. Lyutikov, one of the seven first employees of SSGOK, head of the planning department. - Well then! - said N.F. Sandrigailo, - I decided, I decided. This is what we will propose to the regional executive committee and the Supreme Council of Kazakhstan. The Presidium of the Supreme Council of the Kazakh SSR supported this proposal and in August 1956 issued a Decree, which stated: to classify the settlement during the construction of the Sokolovsko-Sarbaisky mining and processing plant in the Kustanai district of the Kustanai region as a workers’ settlement, giving it the name “Workers’ settlement Rudny” . Include the settlement of Komsomolsky within the boundaries of the workers' settlement of Rudny. Seventy-palatinsk (tent city) V. N. Vysotsky and I. I. Dyachko The climate is continental, with a pronounced alternation of four seasons. In winter, during the week the temperature reaches the mark of minus 25-40 °C. Summer for two weeks to 30 °C. 18 February 1949 pilot Mikhail Grigorievich Surgutanov, flying over the natural boundary of «Sarbay locality» drew attention to the strange behavior of the compass. After a few months to magnetic anomaly profit geologists and geographers. So was opened Sokolovskoe Deposit of iron ores. The discovery and study of the field is attributed to the geologist B. N. Nosikov. In the summer of 1954, the government decided about the beginning of construction of the mill and the city. In May 1955 the profit of the first builders. Operating trust was Ya. M. Gimmel'marsh and chief engineer Century W. Buresh. Miners, geologists and builders of the first time were placed in the village of Komsomolsk. Additionally tents were installed and constructed temporary prefabricated panel houses. Already in 1955, the Komsomol profits for Big Turgai first 4 thousand people. The biggest tent town was in the cinema «Komsomol». It consisted of seventy tents, so he went down in history as . Other camps were in place 39 quarter, near the village of Komsomolsky, in the area of the bakery, settlers lived more than 200 tents for 20 people each. Tent camps had their streets whose names speak for themselves and that is still present in the city: Construction, Pionerskaya, Komsomolskaya, Ukrainian, Kiev and others. Future city was laid in 3 kilometers from Alekseyevka. The first General plan was developed in 1953 and was intended to 22 thousand people. But in 1954 this plan was revised, the population increased to 30 thousand people. In the summer of 1956 the Presidium of the Supreme Council of Kazakh USSR decided to give Ore status of a working settlement. Also in the line of working settlement was submitted to the town Komsomolsk. 30 August 1957 working settlement turned into a city of regional subordination. Over time, Rudniy city grew into a major industrial and cultural center of Kostanai region of the Republic of Kazakhstan. Volume of industrial production for 12 months of 2009 amounted to 145,6 billion tenge, or 76.1% of the fact of last year, due mainly from the decrease in the world prices for steel products. During the reporting period the volume of production of the main enterprise of JSC «SSGPO» amounted to KZT 128.3 billion tenge. Plant «Kazogneypor», «Transremvagon», LLP «Leader-2» - production of alcohol products, the firm «Arasan» - soft drinks, «Sarybay», «Irgiz», plant of metal structures «Imstalkon», «DOK-furniture», «Tannery. In 2008 in Rudny mosque was opened in the construction of which took part the best architects and artists of Kazakhstan and Russia, and in January 2012, in Ore opened the Cathedral of St. John the theologian. The city represented Kostanay Region at the bandy tournament of the second Kazakhstani Youth Winter Games. "Куандык Испергенов покинул пост акима Рудного". kapital.kz (in Russian). 2023-02-06. "Население Республики Казахстан" [Population of the Republic of Kazakhstan] (in Russian). Департамент социальной и демографической статистики. Retrieved 8 December 2013. "World Meteorological Organization Climate Normals for 1991-2020 — Rudny". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved January 18, 2024. Уральцы - чемпионы!