The House of Blois (French: [blwa]) was a noble family that arose in the Kingdom of West Francia in the early 10th century, and whose prominent members were often named Theobald (Thibaud, Thibault, Thibaut in French). This lineage came from Theobald the Elder, viscount of Tours before 908. Theobald became viscount of Blois before 922. Afterwards the House of Blois accumulated the counties of Blois, Chartres, Châteaudun and as successors of Herbertians the counties of Troyes, Reims and Meaux - core of the County of Champagne, and finally the kingdom of Navarre. The House of Blois-Champagne, which was founded by Theobold II in 1025, split into several branches. The House of Blois-Chartres, which was founded by Theobold V of Blois inherited the counties of Blois and Chartres and others in 1152. His descendants would hold the counties until the deaths of Margaret and Isabella, to which the branch became extinct in 1249. The House of Blois-Navarre, which was founded by Theobold I of Navarre, when he inherited the throne from his uncle, Sancho Garcés VI. This branch became the senior line later and eventually became extinct in 1305 with the death of Joan I of Navarre, wife of Philip IV of France. Champagne and Navarre passed to the Capetian dynasty. The House of Sancerre, which was founded by Stephen I, Count of Sancerre, a younger son of Theobold II, Count of Champagne. He inherited the county on his father’s death. This branch became extinct at the death of Margaret of Sancerre in 1418 or 1419. The final branch, the House of Lacarre, which was founded by Juan Enriquez, the illegitimate son of Henry I of Navarre. When Louis VII of France was greatly threatened by the vast collection of territories in the person of Henry II of England, he chose a wife from the House of Blois-Champagne (Adela of Champagne) as a counterpoise to Angevin power. When William married the Lady of Sully, Adela, sometime after 1100. He became jure uxoris Count or Lord of Sully. This would make him establish a cadet branch in Sully. This branch would also form its own cadet branch, the House of Sully-Beaujeu, which was when Odo, the son of Gilles III, Lord of Sully, acquired the Lordship of Beaujeu. Sometime during or past 1126, Odo I was taken over by his maternal family. He then became Lord of Champlitte, which he likely inherited from his mother, Isabella, or from the generosity of his uncle Renaud III, Count of Burgundy. He in turn would establish a new cadet branch in Champlitte. This Branch would also establish its own branch, the House of Champlitte-Pontailler. Which was when William I, son of Odo I, acquired the Lordship of Pontailler. King Stephen I of England, 1135–1154, was both a member of the House of Blois and the last Anglo-Norman King, being the grandson of William the Conqueror through his daughter Adela of Normandy. A branch of the family was established in Sancerre by Stephen I of Sancerre, a younger son of Theobald II, Count of Champagne. This branch became extinct at the death of Margaret of Sancerre in 1418 or 1419. Theobald the Old, Viscount of Blois Theobald I, Count of Blois Hugh, Archbishop of Bourges Odo I, Count of Blois Theobald II of Blois Odo II, Count of Blois Theobald III, Count of Blois Stephen, Count of Blois William, Count of Sully Odo Archambaud, Lord of Sully Gilles III, Lord of Sully Archambaud IV, Lord of Sully Henry I, Lord of Sully Henry II, Lord of Sully Henry III, Lord of Sully Henry IV, Lord of Sully John II, Lord of Sully Louis I, Lord of Sully Marie, Lady of Sully Odo I, Lord of Beaujeu Odo II, Lord of Beaujeu Odo III, Lord of Beaujeu Gilles, Lord of Beaujeu Guyon, Lord of Beaujeu William I, Lord of La Chapellette William II, Lord of La Chapellette William III, Lord of La Chapellette William IV, Lord of Vouillon Pierre I, Lord of Erry Pierre II, Lord of Erry Jeanne, Lady of Erry Odo, Lord of La Motte-Sully Elinor, Lady of La Motte-Sully Henry, Archbishop of Bourges Odo, Bishop of Paris Henry, Abbot of Fécamp Ranier, Abbot of Cluny Elizabeth, Abbess of Sainte-Trinité Theobald II, Count of Champagne Henry I, Count of Champagne Henry II, Count of Champagne Theobald III, Count of Champagne Theobald I of Navarre Theobald II of Navarre Henry I of Navarre Joan I of Navarre Theobald V, Count of Blois Louis I, Count of Blois Theobald VI, Count of Blois Margaret, Countess of Blois William White Hands Stephen I of Sancerre William I, Count of Sancerre Louis I, Count of Sancerre John I, Count of Sancerre Stephen II, Count of Sancerre John II, Count of Sancerre Louis II, Count of Sancerre John III, Count of Sancerre Margaret, Countess of Sancerre Louis de Sancerre, Constable of France Robert, Lord of Menetou Theobald, Lord of Sagonne Stephen, Lord of Vailly-sur-Sauldre Theobald, Bishop of Tournai Louis, Lord of Sagonne Robert, Lord of Menetou-Salon Stephen II, Lord of Châtillon-sur-Loing, Grand Butler of France Stephen III, Lord of Châtillon-sur-Loing Stephen, King of England Eustace IV, Count of Boulogne William I, Count of Boulogne Henry of Blois, Bishop of Winchester Philip, Bishop of Châlons-sur-Marne Odo V, Count of Troyes Hugh, Count of Champagne Odo I of Champlitte (disowned by father) Odo II of Champlitte Oda, Lady of Champlitte William of Champlitte, 1st prince of Achaea William II, Viscount of Dijon Hugh, Lord of Grancey Odo IV, Lord of Grancey William III, Viscount of Dijon William IV, Lord of Magny-ser-Tille Hugh, Lord of Magny-ser-Tille John, Lord of Magny-ser-Tille Simon, Lord of Pontailler Stephen, Lord of Vonges John William Erard, Master Falconer John, Lord of Vonges Guy, Viscount of Dijon Hugh, Lord of Talmay Guy II, Lord of Talmay Guy III, Lord of Talmay William II, Lord of Talmay Paul, Lord of Talmay Claude, Lord of Talmay Louis, Lord of Talmay Olivier, Lord of Bressey Philippe, Lord of Longvy François, Lord of Clémencey John, Lord of Talmay John Louis, Lord of Talmay Paul, Lord of Châtillon-en-Bazois Anatole Louis, Lord of Châtillon-en-Bazois Claude, Lord of Flaigey Henry, Lord of Flaigey Guyart, Lord of Magny-ser-Tille Robert, Lord of Larrey Odo III, Lord of La Marche Simon Mathieu, Lord of Longwy John II, Lord of Longwy Simon, Lord of Bellevesyre Stephen II, Count of Troyes and Meaux Odo, Count of Champagne Stephen, Count of Aumale William le Gros, 1st Earl of Albemarle Richard, Archbishop of Bourges House Arms Other House Arms House Arms Variants Personal Arms Other Personal Arms Navarre monarchs family tree List of Navarrese monarchs from the House of Blois Histoire des Ducs et Comtes de Champagne, Marie Henry d'Arbois de Jubainville, 1865. David Crouch. The Reign of King Stephen, 1135-1154, Pearson Education, Harlow, England, 2000.