Giorgia Meloni (Italian: [ˈdʒordʒa meˈloːni]; born 15 January 1977) is an Italian politician who has been serving as the prime minister of Italy since October 2022, the first woman to hold this position. A member of the Chamber of Deputies since 2006, she has led the Brothers of Italy (FdI) political party since 2014, and she has been the president of the European Conservatives and Reformists Party since 2020. In 1992, Meloni joined the Youth Front, the youth wing of the Italian Social Movement (MSI), a neo-fascist political party founded in 1946 by former followers of Italian fascism. She later became the national leader of Student Action, the student movement of the National Alliance (AN), a post-fascist party that became the MSI's legal successor in 1995 and moved towards national conservatism. She was a councillor of the Province of Rome from 1998 to 2002, after which she became the president of Youth Action, the youth wing of AN. In 2008, she was appointed Italian Minister of Youth in the fourth Berlusconi government, a role which she held until 2011. In 2012, she co-founded FdI, a legal successor to AN, and became its president in 2014. She unsuccessfully ran in the 2014 European Parliament election and the 2016 Rome municipal election. After the 2018 Italian general election, she led FdI in opposition during the entire 18th Italian legislature. FdI grew its popularity in opinion polls, particularly during the management of the COVID-19 pandemic in Italy by the Draghi Cabinet, a national unity government to which FdI was the only opposition party. Following the fall of the Draghi government, FdI won the 2022 Italian general election. A right-wing populist and nationalist, her political positions have been described as far-right. She describes herself as a Christian and a conservative, and she claims to defend "God, fatherland, and family". She is opposed to euthanasia, same-sex marriage, and LGBT parenting, saying that nuclear families are exclusively headed by male-female pairs. Her discourse includes femonationalist rhetoric and criticism of globalism. Meloni supports a naval blockade to halt immigration, and she has been accused of xenophobia and Islamophobia. A supporter of NATO, she maintains Eurosceptic views regarding the European Union, which she describes as Eurorealist, and was in favour of better relations with Russia before the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, after which she pledged to keep sending arms to Ukraine. Meloni has expressed controversial views, such as in 2020, when she praised Giorgio Almirante, a chief of cabinet in Mussolini's Italian Social Republic who produced racist propaganda and co-founded the MSI. In 2023, Meloni was the fourth on Forbes's list of most powerful women in the world. Giorgia Meloni was born in Rome on 15 January 1977. Her father, Francesco Meloni, was from Rome, born to radio director Nino Meloni from Sardinia and actress Zoe Incrocci from Lombardy, and her mother, Anna (née Paratore), is from Sicily. Her father was a tax advisor, and according to some political profiles had communist sympathies and voted for the Italian Communist Party, while her mother later became a novelist. Her father abandoned the family in 1978 when she was one year old, moving to the Canary Islands and remarrying. Meloni has four step-siblings from her father's second marriage. Seventeen years later, in 1995, he was convicted of drug trafficking and sentenced to nine years in a Spanish prison. He last contacted Meloni in 2006, when she became the Vice-President of the Chamber of Deputies. Legal documents have recently revealed a controversial indirect economic link through a network of real estate companies in which the ex-wife Anna Paratore, mother of Giorgia Meloni, was a partner at various times. Meloni was raised in the working-class district of Garbatella in Rome, moving there after the more affluent home she had first lived in as an infant with her parents was destroyed in a house fire a few years after her father left. Her upbringing has been described by her family as impoverished. In her autobiography, Meloni wrote that her childhood and her family's breakdown influenced her political outlook. Meloni has a sister, Arianna, who was born in 1975 and is married to Francesco Lollobrigida, the Italian Minister of Agriculture since 22 October 2022. In 1992, at 15 years of age, Meloni joined the Youth Front, the youth wing of the Italian Social Movement (MSI), a neo-fascist political party that dissolved in 1995. During this time, she founded the student coordination Gli Antenati (The Ancestors), which took part in the protest against the public education reform promoted by minister Rosa Russo Iervolino. In 1996, she became the national leader of Student Action, the student movement of the post-fascist National Alliance (AN), the national-conservative heir of the MSI, representing this movement in the Student Associations Forum established by the Italian Ministry of Education. In 1998, after winning the primary election, Meloni was elected as a councillor of the Province of Rome, holding this position until 2002. She was elected national director in 2000 and became the first woman president of Youth Action, the AN youth wing, in 2004. During these years, she worked as a nanny, waitress, and bartender at the Piper Club [it; fr], one of the most famous night clubs in Rome. Meloni graduated from l’Istituto tecnico professionale di Stato Amerigo Vespucci in 1996. After her election to the Italian Parliament in 2006, she declared in her curriculum vitae that she obtained a high school diploma in languages with the final mark of 60/60, and "Diploma di liceo linguistico; Giornalista". This created some controversy, as l’Istituto tecnico professionale di Stato Amerigo Vespucci was not a foreign language high school and was not qualified to issue any diploma in languages; instead, it was a Hospitality Institute (see Istituto tecnico [it]) specialised in issuing professional diplomas for job titles such as chef, waiter, entertainer, tour guide, hostess, depending on the course of studies chosen by the student. It is unknown what course of studies Giorgia Meloni selected at l’Istituto tecnico professionale di Stato Amerigo Vespucci. Giorgia Meloni mentioned the Hospitality Institute she attended became the Centro di Formazione Professionale Ernesto Nathan issuing diplomas in foreign languages. However, training Centers are not allowed to issue diplomas. The Ernesto Nathan Professional Trainin Center issues qualifications in beautician and hairdresser. In the 2006 Italian general election, she was elected to the Chamber of Deputies as a member of the National Alliance (AN), where she became its youngest ever vice-president. In the same year, she started to work as a journalist. In 2006, Meloni defended the laws passed by the third Berlusconi government that benefited companies of the prime minister and media mogul Silvio Berlusconi and also delayed ongoing trials involving him. Meloni stated "it is necessary to contextualise them. Those are laws that Silvio Berlusconi made for himself. But they are perfectly fair laws." In 2008, at 31 years old, she was appointed Italian Minister of Youth in the fourth Berlusconi government, a position she held until 16 November 2011, when Berlusconi was forced to resign as the prime minister amid a financial crisis and public protests. She was the second youngest-ever minister in the history of united Italy. In August 2008, she invited Italian athletes to boycott the opening ceremony of the Beijing Olympic Games in disagreement with the Chinese policy implemented towards Tibet; this statement was criticised by Berlusconi, as well as the foreign affairs minister Franco Frattini. In 2009, her party merged with Forza Italia (FI) into The People of Freedom (PdL) and she took over the presidency of the united party's youth section, called Young Italy. In the same year, she voted in favour of a decree law against euthanasia. In November 2010, on behalf of the ministry, she presented a 300 million euro package called the Right to the Future. It was aimed at investing in young people and contained five initiatives, including incentives for new entrepreneurs, bonuses in favour of temporary workers and loans for deserving students. In November 2012, she announced her bid to contest the PdL leadership against Angelino Alfano, in opposition to the party's support of the Monti government. After the cancellation of the primaries, she teamed up with fellow politicians Ignazio La Russa and Guido Crosetto to set out an anti-Monti policy, asking for renewal within the party and being also critical of the leadership of Berlusconi. In December 2012, Meloni, La Russa, and Crosetto founded a new political movement, Brothers of Italy (FdI), whose name comes from the words of the Italian national anthem. In the 2013 Italian general election, she stood as part of Berlusconi's centre-right coalition and received 2.0% of the vote and 9 seats. She was re-elected to the Chamber of Deputies for Lombardy and was later appointed the party's leader in the house, a position that she would hold until 2014, when she resigned to dedicate herself to the party. She was succeeded by Fabio Rampelli. In March 2014, she became president of FdI, and in April she was nominated for the 2014 European Parliament election in Italy as the leader of the FdI in all five constituencies. FdI party obtained 3.7% of the votes, not exceeding the threshold of 4%, and she did not become a Member of the European Parliament; she received 348,700 votes. On 4 November 2015, she founded Our Land, a conservative political committee in support of her campaigns. Our Land was a parallel organisation to FdI, and aimed at enlarging FdI's popular base. On 30 January 2016, she participated in the Family Day, an anti-LGBT rights demonstration, declaring herself against LGBT adoption. At the same Family Day, she announced that she was pregnant; her daughter Ginevra was born on 16 September. In the 2016 Rome municipal election in June, she ran for mayor with the support of Us with Salvini, a political party led by Matteo Salvini, and in opposition to the candidate supported by Berlusconi's Forza Italia (FI), Alfio Marchini. In May 2016, she promised to name a street after Giorgio Almirante if elected, causing controversy among the local Jewish community and the anti-fascist ANPI. Meloni won 20.6% of the vote, almost twice that of FI's candidate, but she did not qualify for the run-off, while FdI obtained 12.3% of the vote. During the campaign for the 2016 Italian constitutional referendum on the reform promoted by the Renzi government, Meloni founded the "No, Thanks" committee and participated in numerous television debates, including one against the then prime minister Matteo Renzi. As "No" won with almost 60% of the votes on 4 December, Meloni called for snap elections. When Renzi resigned the next day, she withheld confidence from the next government led by Paolo Gentiloni on 12 December. The 2–3 December 2017 congress of FdI in Trieste saw the re-election of Meloni as president of the party, as well as a renewal of the party logo and the joining of Daniela Santanchè, a long-time right-wing politician. As party leader, she decided to form the alliance with the League (Lega), led by Salvini, launching several political campaigns with him against the centre-left government led by the Democratic Party (PD), placing FdI in Eurosceptic and right-wing populist positions. In the 2018 Italian general election, FdI stood as part of the centre-right coalition, with Berlusconi's FI, Salvini's Lega, and Raffaele Fitto's Us with Italy. Meloni's party obtained 4.4% of the vote and more than three times the seats won in 2013. She was elected to the Chamber of Deputies for the single-member constituency of Latina, Lazio, with 41% of the vote. The centre-right coalition, in which the League emerged as the main political force, won a plurality of seats in the Chamber of Deputies; as no political group or party won an outright majority, it resulted in a hung parliament. On 19 October 2019, she participated in the Italian Pride rally in Rome against the newly formed second Conte government. In her speech, she criticised the proposal to replace on the Italian identity cards of minors the wording father and mother with parent 1 and parent 2, concluding with the slogan "I am Giorgia. I'm a woman, I'm a mother, I'm Italian, I'm Christian". This slogan was remixed by two Milanese DJs, becoming a disco-trash catchphrase with millions of views, imitations, and memes on social media, even winning a gold disc. By her own admission in her autobiography, the media and viral success of the remixed music video, having lost the original satirical intention in favour of the LGBT community with which it had been created, greatly increased her popularity as a politician, who she said was suddenly transformed "from a boring politician into a curious pop phenomenon". In February 2021, she joined the Aspen Institute, an international think tank headquartered in Washington, D.C., which includes many financiers, businessmen, and politicians, such as Giulio Tremonti. On 19 February 2021, the University of Siena professor Giovanni Gozzini insulted Meloni calling her vulgar names from a radio; both the president Sergio Mattarella and the prime minister Mario Draghi phoned Meloni and stigmatised Gozzini, who was suspended by the board of his university. In October 2021, Meloni signed the Madrid Charter, a 2020 document that describes left-wing groups as enemies of Ibero-America involved in a "criminal project" that are "under the umbrella of the Cuban regime". It was drafted by Vox, a Spanish ultranationalist party. She also took part at Vox's party congress, where she said: "Yes to the natural family. No to the LGBT lobby, yes to sexual identity. No to gender ideology. No to Islamist violence, yes to secure borders. No to mass migration, no to big international finance, no to the bureaucrats of Brussels." In February 2022, Meloni spoke at the annual Conservative Political Action Conference in Florida. She told the attending American conservative activists and officials they must defend their views against progressives. Heading into the 2022 Italian general election, a snap election that was called after the 2022 Italian government crisis, it was agreed among the centre-right coalition that the leader of the party receiving the most votes would be put forward as the prime minister candidate. As of July 2022, FdI was the first party in the coalition according to opinion polling, and she was widely expected to become Prime Minister of Italy if the centre-right coalition obtained an absolute majority in Parliament, which would be the most right-wing government in the history of the Italian Republic according to some academics. In an attempt to moderate herself to placate fears among those who describe FdI as neo-fascist or far right, including fears within the European Commission that she could lead Italy towards Hungary under Viktor Orbán, Meloni told the foreign press that Italian fascism is history. As president of the European Conservatives and Reformists Party since 2020, she said she shared the experiences and values of the Conservative Party in the United Kingdom, Likud in Israel, and the Republican Party in the United States. Critics were sceptical of her claims, citing her speeches on immigration and LGBT rights. She campaigned for lower taxes, less European bureaucracy, and a halt to immigration through a naval blockade, saying she would put national interests first. In a record-low voter turnout election, exit polls projected that the centre-right coalition would win a majority of seats in the 2022 general election. Meloni was projected to be the winner of the election with FdI receiving a plurality of seats, and per agreement with the centre-right coalition, which held that the largest party in the coalition would nominate the next prime minister, she was the frontrunner and would become the country's first female prime minister. The PD, head of the centre-left coalition, conceded defeat shortly after the exit polls, and Hungary's Orbán, Poland's Mateusz Morawiecki, United Kingdom's Liz Truss, and Marine Le Pen, former leader of National Rally (RN) in France, congratulated Meloni. European radical right parties and leaders, such as Alternative for Germany and Vox, also celebrated Meloni's results. After many years of absence from politics, Gianfranco Fini, former leader of the MSI and AN during the early years of Meloni's political career, expressed satisfaction for her victory, said he had voted for her party, and described her as an anti-fascist, despite her rejection of the label, which she considers to be political. Observers have debated how right-wing a Meloni-led government would be, and which label and position on the political spectrum would be more accurate or realistic. Many variously described it as Italy's first far-right-led government since World War II, and Meloni as the first far-right leader since Benito Mussolini, and some academics also described it as the most right-wing government since 1945. Many questioned its direction, citing Berlusconi's and Salvini's Russian ties, in contrast to Meloni's Atlanticism. Others, such as Sky News, while citing Meloni's and her party's neo-fascist roots, disagreed with the far-right label and said: "Giorgia Meloni is not a fascist." Steve Sedwick of CNBC summarised the discussion, saying: "Have we got a centre-right coalition, have we got a right coalition, have we got a far-right coalition, or have we got a fascist coalition? I have seen all four printed, depending on who you read." Immediately after the first meeting of the new legislature, tensions began to grow within the centre-right coalition. On 13 October, Berlusconi refused to support Ignazio La Russa, FdI's candidacy to be President of the Senate of the Republic. He succeeded in being elected by obtaining 116 votes out of 206 in the first round thanks to the support from opposition parties to the centre-right coalition. Tensions further grew, in particular between Berlusconi and Meloni, whom Berlusconi described as "patronising, overbearing, arrogant ... [and] offensive" in a series of written notes in the Senate. In the following days, after meetings between parties' leader, tensions loosened and the centre-right coalition parties reached an agreement on the formation of the new cabinet. On 20 October, consultations between President Sergio Mattarella and parties officially began. On the following day, delegates from FdI, the League, FI, and Civics of Italy–Us Moderates–MAIE, announced to Mattarella they had reached an agreement to form a coalition government with Meloni as Prime Minister. In the afternoon, Mattarella summoned Meloni to the Quirinal Palace, asking her to form a new government. She accepted the task and on the same day announced the composition of her cabinet, which was officially sworn in on 22 October. She is the first woman to hold the office of Prime Minister of Italy. On 25 October, Meloni gave her first official speech as Prime Minister in front of the Chamber of Deputies, before the confidence vote on her cabinet. During her speech, she stressed the weight of being the first woman to serve as head of the Italian government. She thanked several Italian women including Tina Anselmi, Samantha Cristoforetti, Grazia Deledda, Oriana Fallaci, Nilde Iotti, Rita Levi-Montalcini, and Maria Montessori, who she said, "with the boards of their own examples, built the ladder that today allows me to climb and break the heavy glass ceiling placed over our heads". The government won the confidence vote with a comfortable majority in both houses. One of the first measures implemented by the government regarded COVID-19 and concerned with the complete removal of the COVID-19 vaccination certificate, known in Italy as the Green Pass; moreover, non-vaccinated doctors were re-integrated into service. By this time, the government’s workforce vaccination mandate had been in place for over one year, rendering the edict largely symbolic. On 31 October, the government approved a decree providing for a penalty of up to six years of imprisonment for illegal parties and rallies. Despite being officially presented as a decree against illegal rave parties, the law was applicable to any illegal gathering that the public authority deemed dangerous, which garnered criticism, including from jurist Vitalba Azzolini. The decree also caused a lot of protests from opposition parties and civil rights associations, and was also contested by FI. According to Amnesty International, the decree "risked undermining the right to peaceful protest." The Meloni government has rejected the accusations and announced that it will accept minor changes to the text in Parliament. In the first weeks after taking office, Meloni implemented stricter policies than previous governments regarding the fight against illegal immigration. From an economic point of view, Meloni and her government have decided to prevent the increase in energy prices, in continuity with her predecessor Mario Draghi, by lowering prices, giving subsidies to families and businesses and making new drilling decisions in the Italian seas to increase national gas production. The government decided also to increase the cash ceiling from €2,000 to €5,000. On 26 February 2023, a boat carrying migrants sank amidst harsh weather conditions while trying to land on the coast of Steccato di Cutro, near Crotone, in the region of Calabria. The boat was carrying between 143 and 200 migrants when it sank, of whom at least 86 died, including 12 children, becoming one of the deadliest naval disasters in recent years. Meloni expressed her "deep sorrow for the many human lives torn away by human traffickers", and condemned the "exchange" of migrants' lives for "the 'price' of a ticket paid by them in the false prospect for a safe voyage". On 1 March 2023, the new leader of the Democratic Party, Elly Schlein, as well as More Europe and Greens and Left Alliance asked for the resignation of interior minister Matteo Piantedosi. In May 2023, the government had to face severe floods which affected Emilia-Romagna region, killing 17 people and displacing 50,000 others. The provisional cost of the damage caused by the floods amounts to more than €10 billion (US$11 billion). On 23 May, Italy's Council of Ministers officially announced the approval of the first law decree in response to the emergency, an estimated €2 billion recovery package that was aimed to public and private businesses, schools, universities, museums and farm workers, among other categories. On 25 May, Meloni and Ursula von der Leyen, the president of the European Commission, visited the flooded areas along with Bonaccini. Meloni underlined the strong spirit of the Romagnol people, stating: "Usually, when you lose everything, the prevailing feeling is anger, blame-seeking, or resignation. In Emilia-Romagna I found people shoveling mud with pride in their eyes, saying: all right, we have a problem, but we will solve it, we will rebuild." After weeks of tension within the government and between majority and opposition parties, on 27 June 2023 the Meloni cabinet officially appointed army corps general Francesco Paolo Figliuolo as Extraordinary Commissioner for the Reconstruction. In late December 2022, Meloni announced that Elisabetta Casellati, Minister for Constitutional Reforms, would meet with the opposition parties to officially begin the roadmap towards a constitutional reform to strengthen the powers of the Prime Minister, even if the coalition's electoral program comprehended only the direct election of the President. On 3 November 2023, Meloni officially presented the reform which provided the direct election of the Prime Minister, the so-called "premierato", and a new electoral law which gave 55% of parliamentary seats in both houses to the coalition that arrives first in the general election. Following new legislation in Italy passed by the Meloni government, only a child's biological parent can be named on their birth certificate. The first foreign leader met by Meloni was the French president Emmanuel Macron, who was in Rome on 23 October to meet President Mattarella and the Pope, and had a bilateral meeting with Meloni, primarily focused on the ongoing energy crisis and the Russian invasion of Ukraine. On 3 November, Meloni met European Union (EU) leaders such as Ursula von der Leyen, Charles Michel, Paolo Gentiloni, Roberta Metsola, and other politicians in Brussels. On 7 November, Meloni took part in her first international summit, the United Nations COP27 in Sharm El Sheik, Egypt. During her speech, Meloni stated: "Italy remains strongly convinced of its commitment to decarbonisation in compliance with the Paris Agreement. We must diversify energy suppliers, in close collaboration with African countries." During the conference, the prime minister also had a bilateral meeting with the Egyptian president Abdel Fattah el-Sisi. In the following week, Meloni participated in the G20 summit in Bali, Indonesia, where she had her first bilateral meeting with the U.S. President Joe Biden on 15 November. In January 2023, Meloni visited Algeria, where she met president Abdelmadjid Tebboune with whom she signed a deal regarding gas supply to Italy. Thanks to this deal, Algeria will become Italy's largest gas supplier. On 22 February 2023, Meloni visited Ukraine and met with President Volodymyr Zelenskyy to discuss about the ongoing Russian invasion. Meloni also visited Bucha, in the suburbs of Kyiv, where the Russian forces killed more than 400 Ukrainians in March 2022. Meloni stressed that Ukraine can count on Italy, adding "we have been with Ukraine from the beginning and will be until the end". She is an ally of Polish Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki and has praised Poland's support for Ukraine and Poland's acceptance of large numbers of Ukrainian refugees. On 2 March 2023, Meloni visited India, where she met Prime Minister Narendra Modi and President Droupadi Murmu. During a press conference, Meloni praised Modi and his policies, describing him as the "most loved leader in the world". In March 2023, she hosted Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu in Rome. In April 2023, Meloni had a state visit in Ethiopia, where she met Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed and Somali President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud. In Addis Ababa, Meloni announced the so-called "Mattei Plan" by the Italian government regarding investments in the African continent. Meloni was the first Western head of state to visit Ethiopia since the end of the Tigray War. During the visit, she also had a bilateral meeting with the chair of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki. In May 2023, Meloni attended the 49th G7 summit in Hiroshima, Japan. On 16 July, Prime Minister Meloni, along with President of the European Commission Ursula von der Leyen and Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte, travelled to Tunis in order to sign an agreement with President Kais Saied regarding the strengthening of the economic partnership between Europe and Tunisia, the European diplomatic support for the disbursement of the loan from IMF and, especially, the fight against irregular migration flows. She considered withdrawing from China's Belt and Road Initiative. In July 2023, she had a state trip to the United States. On 27 July, Meloni visited the U.S. Capitol where she met with Speaker of the House Kevin McCarthy and Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer and Minority Leader Mitch McConnell. Later she met with U.S. President Joe Biden at the White House, where they discussed about many issues, including Ukraine, China and Africa. They also talked about the strengthening of economic exchange between the two countries, trade relations between Europe and U.S., security policies and the forthcoming G7 Italian presidency. During the 2023 Israel–Hamas war, Meloni stated her support for "Israel’s full right to defend itself in accordance with international law, and to live in peace." Observers have described Meloni's political positions as far right; in August 2018, Friedel Taube wrote in Deutsche Welle that "Giorgia Meloni has a long history in far-right politics." In a July 2022 interview with Nicholas Farrell of The Spectator, Meloni rejected descriptions of her politics as far right, calling it a smear campaign by her opponents and cited British conservative philosopher Roger Scruton as one of her influences. She has described herself as a mainstream conservative. Additionally, Meloni has been described as hard right, right-wing populist, and nationalist. Meloni has been described as being close to Viktor Orbán, the Prime Minister of Hungary and leader of Fidesz, and Rishi Sunak, the British Prime Minister and Conservatives leader. Furthermore, she has been linked with the Vox political party in Spain, representatives of the Law and Justice party in Poland, and the Republican Party in the United States. Meloni has self-described her political party, Brothers of Italy (FdI), as a mainstream conservative party, and she has downplayed its post-fascist roots. She is in favour of presidentialism and supports changes to the Constitution of Italy. Meloni opposes abortion, euthanasia, and laws that recognise same-sex marriage, and describes herself as "pro-family". She has said she "wouldn't change" the abortion law in Italy but wanted to apply more fully the part of the law "about prevention", such as permitting doctors to refuse to carry them out (conscientious objection to abortion). She also stated that the recognition of same-sex unions in Italy is good enough, and she said it was something she would not change; in 2016, while she said she would respect the law if elected mayor of Rome, she had supported a referendum to abrogate the civil-union law. At a rally at the Piazza del Popolo in October 2019, she spoke against same-sex parenting; her speech became viral on Italian social media platforms. During a February 2016 interview to Le Iene, an Italian television show, she had also said that she would "rather not have a gay child". Meloni has opposed the 1993 Mancino law [it], a hate speech law. She is opposed to the DDL Zan, an anti-homophobia law that would expand the Mancino law to cover LGBT discrimination, declaring in 2020 that "there is no homophobia" in Italy. She is also opposed to surrogacy, which is pejoratively known in Italian as utero in affitto ("uterus renting"), and she has pushed in Parliament for a law to make it a "universal crime"; her efforts have been endorsed by the Catholic Church and by Pope Francis himself. Meloni is supportive of the anti-gender movement, based on Catholic theology in the 1990s that condemns gender studies, and she is sceptical of what she calls "gender ideology"; she says it is being taught in schools, and that it attacks female identity and motherhood. She is supportive of changing the Constitution of Italy to make it illegal for same-sex couples to adopt children. In March 2018, she criticised The Walt Disney Company for the decision to represent a gay couple in the musical fantasy film Frozen II. On Facebook, she wrote: "Enough! We are sick of it! Take your hands off the children." In her 2011 book We Believe, Meloni wrote: "I am a right-wing woman, and I proudly support women's issues. In recent years we have had to suffer contempt and racism by feminists. ... Perhaps as far as feminism is conceived in this way, it is more a question of ideology than of gender and substance." She is opposed to pink quotas and has denied being anti-women as accused by some critics. Giorgia Serughetti, a political philosopher and author of The Conservative Wind, said that femonationalism is working for Meloni. The possibility of Meloni becoming the first woman to become Prime Minister of Italy had been widely discussed both prior to and after the 2022 Italian general election. Some women did not see this as a victory due to her political positions, while others saw it at least partly in a positive light, and a few others called her a feminist despite Meloni's rejection of the label. Prior to the election, former U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton commented: "The election of the first woman prime minister in a country always represents a break with the past, and that is certainly a good thing." This prompted a response from some critics and observers, including historians Ruth Ben-Ghiat and David Broder. Ben-Ghiat wrote: "Meloni would also represent continuity with Italy's darkest episode." For her part, Meloni declared herself ready to govern and criticised feminists. Meloni has criticised Italy's approach towards illegal immigrants, calling for a zero-tolerance policy, and she wants to blockade migrants from reaching Italian ports, and boost the birth rate of Italian nationals to ease the need for migrant labour. She is opposed to birthright citizenship proposals, which would give citizenship including education rights to foreigners born and living in Italy. She has linked illegal immigration and crime, and refugee arrivals to human trafficking and prostitution. Amid the 2022 escalation of the Russo-Ukrainian War, Meloni said she supported to give refugee status to those coming from a war-shaken country but not to asylum seekers. She said: "It's time to call things by their name, to give refugee status to those fleeing war, women, and children, perhaps doing the opposite with those who aren't refugees." In August 2022, she reposted a pixelated video on Twitter that shows a woman being raped by an asylum seeker. The victim of the violence decried the publication of the video and said she was recognised by the video posted. After receiving backlash, Meloni defended herself by accusing other politicians of not having condemned the rape itself. Meloni has blamed neo-colonialism for Africa's underdevelopment and the 2015 European migrant crisis, and she said she favours co-operation over what she termed France's neocolonialism. She has been considered as opposed to the reception of migrants, as well as to multiculturalism, and she has been accused of making xenophobic statements, as well as of Islamophobia. In 2018, she said she would welcome Venezuelans, saying they are Christians and often of Italian origins. She has often criticised George Soros and what she terms globalists, at times reflecting the views of Soros conspiracy theories, once saying: "When you are a slave, you act in Soros's interests." She has endorsed the Great Replacement, a white nationalist conspiracy theory. She also believes there is a planned mass migration from Africa to Europe for the purpose of replacing and eliminating Italians, an antisemitic, white genocide, and far-right conspiracy theory known as the Kalergi Plan. She has described pro-immigration policies as part of an alleged left-wing conspiracy to "replace Italians with immigrants". In January 2017, she called immigration to Italy "ethnic substitution". Meloni complained about the danger of ethnic substitution also in her 2019 book on the Nigerian mafia, co-written with Alessandro Meluzzi [it], anti-vax psychiatrist, founder of the "Anti-Islamisation Party" and at the time primate of a schismatic Italian Orthodox Church. Along with other white supremacist stereotypes, the book argues that a project is underway to "change the European ethnicity and create Eurafrica", that the Nigerian mafia is the product of "local cultures that practice ritual murder and cannibalism", and that "the corpses of white people are very appreciated" by the Yoruba, who are said to be engaged in the trade of human flesh and organs. In 2023, amidst an unprecedented migration crisis, she asserted that Europe and Italy need immigration and that only illegal immigration must be fought in favor of legal immigration. Meloni tried to make a deal with Tunisian President Kais Saied, with a focus on stopping illegal migration from Tunisia to Europe. In September 2023, more than 120 boats carrying around 7,000 migrants from Africa arrived on the Italian island of Lampedusa within 24 hours, increasing the volume handled by the local migration reception center by 15 times and leading to the migrants outnumbering the island's native population. Meloni declared that she wrote to the European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen "to ask her to come with me to Lampedusa to personally realize the gravity of the situation we face, and to immediately accelerate the implementation of the agreement with Tunisia by transferring the agreed resources." Meloni followed the PdL party line in favour of the 2011 military intervention in Libya; however, in 2019, she criticised the French rationale for the intervention, stating it was because of Muammar Gaddafi's opposition to the CFA franc. She was critical of Italian relations with Saudi Arabia and Qatar, stating that these countries "systematically and deliberately spread fundamentalist theories that are the main causes of the growth of Islamic fundamentalism". She opposed the decision to host the Supercoppa Italiana final in Saudi Arabia, and stated that Italy should actively raise the issue of human rights in Saudi Arabia. However, upon taking office, Meloni reversed her position, with her government stating it was "keen to maintain the excellent relationship with Saudi Arabia" yet still calling for a "firm reaction" against Qatar to which several Italians were accused of involvement in Qatargate. Similarly, in 2021, Meloni stated her party "denounced the authoritarian, Islamist direction Erdogan's Turkey has taken for years and asked the EU to withdraw Ankara's status as a candidate country", but upon taking office, pursued closer ties with the Turkish government, due to Italy's interests in Libya, cooperation in stopping migration, shared nationalist values and common disagreement with French foreign policy. Meloni advocated for the expulsion of the Indian Ambassador to Italy as a result of the Enrica Lexie case, and she urged Alessandro Del Piero to refuse to play in the Indian Super League until the detained Italian marines were returned. Following the Asia Bibi blasphemy case, Meloni criticised what she called the "silence of the West" and advocated a stronger stance by the international community against human rights violations in Pakistan. Prior to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, she was in favour of better relations with Russia and supported lifting sanctions on the Russian Federation in 2014. In 2018, she congratulated Vladimir Putin for his re-election as president. In her 2021 biography book, she wrote that Russia under Putin defends European values and Christian identity. She has since condemned the invasion and pledged to keep sending arms to Ukraine, and moved towards Atlanticism. In September 2022, she said that Russia's annexation of four partially occupied provinces in south-eastern Ukraine has "no legal and political value." She is supportive of NATO, although she maintains Eurosceptic views towards the EU, having also previously advocated a withdrawal from the eurozone. She rejects the Eurosceptic label, favouring the Eurorealism of a confederal Europe of sovereign nations. A critic of China, she is a supporter of closer ties between Italy and Taiwan. She is a controversial figure in Croatia due to her Italian irredentist statements in which she claimed Dalmatia and Istria, and for being opposed to Croatian entry into the EU due to the unresolved dispute concerning properties of exiled Italians after World War II from these two Croatian regions. In 2018, she praised Iran and Lebanese militant group Hezbollah as protectors of Syrian Christians in the Syrian Civil War. In 2014, she condemned "another massacre of children in Gaza" during the Gaza War between Israel and the Palestinian militant group Hamas, but later changed her stance and became a supporter of closer relations with Israel. However, unlike Matteo Salvini, she is opposed to moving the Italian Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem. She never apologized to African nations for wrongs committed during the Italian colonial period, but is vocally critical of the legacy of the French colonial empire in Africa, arguing that France continues to exploit its former colonies through the CFA Franc. Meloni has exhibited support for vaccine hesitancy, such as not vaccinating her daughter during the COVID-19 pandemic in Italy because "it's not a religion". She has been criticised due to her statements on vaccines and COVID-19, stating the probability of someone aged 0–19 dying from COVID-19 was the same as being struck by lightning. After her party won the 2022 Italian general election, they pledged to review the positions taken by the Italian government during the COVID-19 pandemic and end the COVID-19 vaccine mandate in place for health care workers. During her political career, Meloni has expressed statements that generated controversy. In an interview to the French newscast Soir 3 when she was 19, she praised Italian dictator Benito Mussolini as "a good politician, in that everything he did, he did for Italy", and as the best politician of the last 50 years. In January 2020, there was some controversy after Meloni and the comune of Verona supported naming a street after Giorgio Almirante; Meloni and the comune also supported giving Liliana Segre, a Holocaust survivor and senator for life, honorary citizenship. Segre said that she and Almirante are incompatible and the comune had to make a choice. In May 2020, Meloni praised Almirante as a "great politician", as well as "a patriot". He was the co-founder of the Italian Social Movement (MSI), who had a long post-war political career until retiring in 1987. During World War II, he was a wartime collaborator as a civil minister of the Italian Social Republic (RSI), a Nazi puppet state, as well as editor-in-chief of the antisemitic and racist magazine La Difesa della Razza, which published the "Manifesto of Race" in 1938. As a minister in 2009, Meloni visited Yad Vashem in Israel, and she has also said as FdI party leader that her party "handed fascism over to history for decades now" and it "unambiguously condemns the suppression of democracy and the ignominious anti-Jewish laws". In November 2018, Meloni declared that the celebration of the Liberation Day, also known as the Anniversary of Italy's Liberation from Nazi-Fascism on 25 April, and Festa della Repubblica, which celebrates the birth of the Italian Republic on 2 June, should be substituted with the National Unity and Armed Forces Day on 4 November, which commemorates Italy's victory in World War I. She said that Liberation Day and Festa della Repubblica are "two controversial celebrations". Meloni has tried to distance herself from her close ties to Roberto Jonghi Lavarini, a far-right Milanese politician and entrepreneur known as the "Black Baron". After the formation of FdI in 2012, she decided to add the tricolour flame to the party flag, a neo-fascist symbol associated with the MSI, which derived its name and ideals from the RSI. The tricolour flame is said to represent Mussolini's remains, where a flame is always burning on his tomb in Predappio. Heading into the 2022 general election, Segre told Pagine Ebraiche that Meloni should remove the tricolour flame from the party's logo. FdI's co-founder Ignazio La Russa rejected this view, and Meloni ignored the request, keeping the tricolour flame. Observers, including historians Ruth Ben-Ghiat, David Broder, and Laurence Bertrand Dorléac, said that Meloni and FdI have been ambiguous about their fascist past, at times rejecting it and at other times minimising it, and that this has helped to rebrand both herself and her party. Responding to the 2021 Fanpage report, she minimised the investigation and refused to remove openly neo-fascist members of FdI. In December 2021, FdI's Alfredo Catapano and Luigi Rispoli were among former MSI members who did a Roman salute, which was condemned by the ANPI. Rispoli told Fanpage: "I believe in the New Right and in the efforts Giorgia Meloni is making in Brothers of Italy. It makes me wonder, frankly, this clamour." Shortly before the 2022 general election, she sacked a member that openly praised Adolf Hitler. FdI had also distanced itself from the Ascoli Piceno party section after it celebrated the anniversary of the March on Rome in 2019. On 25 October 2022, on the occasion of the vote of confidence of the Parliament at the government, Meloni in her speech before the deputies said: "Freedom and democracy are the distinctive elements of contemporary European civilization in which I have always recognized myself. And therefore, despite the instrumental argument of my opponents, I have never had sympathy for undemocratic regimes. For any regime, including fascism. Exactly as I have always considered the racial laws of 1938 the lowest point in Italian history, a shame that will mark our people forever". In 2015, Meloni began a relationship with Andrea Giambruno [it], a journalist who works for Mediaset TV channels. The couple has a daughter born in 2016. On 20 October 2023, Meloni announced her split with Giambruno, following his sexist and chauvinist off-air statements transmitted by the television program Striscia la notizia, including propositioning a female colleague for a threesome. Meloni added that "all those who hoped to weaken [her] by attacking [her] personal life should know that however much the drop may hope to dig out the stone, the stone remains stone and the drop is only water". She is a Catholic and has used her religious identity in part to help build her national brand. In a 2019 speech to a rally in Rome, she said: "I am Giorgia. I'm a woman, I'm a mother, I'm Italian, I'm Christian." Despite her Christian beliefs and championing traditional family values, Meloni defended herself not being married to her child's father. In September 2022, she reportedly continued to embrace the old Italian fascist slogan "God, fatherland and family". She has said she resents being linked to Italy's fascist past. Meloni is a fan of fantasy, particularly J. R. R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings. As a youth activist with the Italian Social Movement (MSI), she attended the Camp Hobbit festival and sang along with the far-right folk band Compagnia dell'Anello [it], named after The Fellowship of the Ring. Later, she named her political conference Atreju, after the hero of the novel The Neverending Story. Meloni told The New York Times: "I think that Tolkien could say better than we can what conservatives believe in." In November 2023, Meloni inaugurated a major exhibition on J.R.R. Tolkien at the National Gallery of Modern and Contemporary Art in Rome to mark the 50th anniversary of the author’s death. Apart from Tolkien, she is fond of British conservative philosopher Roger Scruton and has said: "If I were British I would be a Tory." In addition to her native Italian, she speaks English, French and Spanish. Forbes ranked Meloni as the seventh most powerful woman in the world in 2022, and placed her fourth in 2023. Finland: Commander Grand Cross of the Order of the White Rose of Finland (23 October 2023) Meloni has been a member of Parliament since 2006, being most recently re-elected in 2022. She was elected in a closed list proportional representation system Meloni renounced her seat to remain a member of the Chamber of Deputies Meloni won first-past-the-post elections for a parliamentary seat in both 2018 and 2022. Meloni lost the municipal election to become mayor of Rome in 2016. Meloni, Giorgia (2011). Podda, Stefano (ed.). Noi crediamo [We believe]. Saggi (in Italian). Milan: it:Sperling & Kupfer. ISBN 978-8-8200-4932-4. OCLC 898518765 – via Google Books. Meloni, Giorgia; Meluzzi, Alessandro; Mercurio, Valentina (2019). Mafia nigeriana. Origini, rituali, crimini [Nigerian mafia. Origins, rituals, crimes]. I saggi (in Italian). Mantova: Oligo Editore. ISBN 978-8-8857-2325-2. Retrieved 14 August 2022 – via Google Books. Meloni, Giorgia (2021). Io sono Giorgia, le mie radici, le mie idee [I am Giorgia, my roots, my ideas]. Saggi (in Italian). Rome: Rizzoli. ISBN 978-8-8171-5468-0 – via Google Books. Madron, Paolo; Bisignani, Luigi (2023). I potenti al tempo di Giorgia [The powerful in Giorgia's time]. Saggi (in Italian). Milan: Chiarelettere. ISBN 978-8-8329-6633-6 – via Google Books. Conservatism in Italy Far-right politics in Italy Italian prime ministers Pietromarchi, Virginia (19 September 2022). "Who is Italy's leadership hopeful Giorgia Meloni?". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 20 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. "Biografia del ministro Giorgia Meloni" [Biography of Minister Giorgia Meloni] (in Italian). Chigi Palace. November 2011. Archived from the original on 31 March 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Giorgia Meloni, il teatro nel sangue. Ecco chi erano i nonni della premier". la Repubblica. 2 December 2022. Retrieved 20 May 2023. "Meloni's mother: "I, a writer of romance novels for my daughters"". 21 October 2022. Retrieved 15 May 2023. "How Giorgia Meloni thinks". 23 September 2022. Retrieved 10 May 2023. "How 'fascist' is the party of Giorgia Meloni, Italy's PM frontrunner?". Retrieved 10 May 2023. Dell'Arti, Giorgio; Spada, Alberto (27 May 2014). "Giorgia Meloni". Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Archived from the original on 5 November 2014. Retrieved 11 August 2022. "Giorgia Meloni, il racconto della stampa spagnola sul padre (che la abbandonò da piccola): 'Fu condannato per traffico di droga'" [Giorgia Meloni, from the Spanish press about her father (who abandoned her as a child): 'He was convicted of drug trafficking']. Il Fatto Quotidiano (in Italian). 28 September 2022. Archived from the original on 1 October 2022. Retrieved 1 October 2022. Pistilli, Clemente (29 September 2022). "Il padre di Giorgia Meloni fu condannato per narcotraffico, il racconto della stampa spagnola" [Giorgia Meloni's father was convicted of drug trafficking, the story from the Spanish press]. La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 1 October 2022. Retrieved 6 October 2022. ""Non sono un'abile affarista immobiliare". Anna Paratore, la madre di Meloni, si difende". La Repubblica. 20 May 2023. Retrieved 20 September 2023. "l'inchiesta di "Domani": "Società spagnola e plusvalenza: le bugie della madre di Meloni"". nfosannio from Domani (newspaper). 19 May 2023. Retrieved 20 September 2023. "Investigation into M." 13 August 2022. Retrieved 10 May 2023. Brezar, Aleksandar (27 September 2022). "Italy election: In Rome's progressive neighbourhood, Meloni's victory causes anger and concern" (in Italian). Euronews. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 22 October 2022. Spagnoli, Sofia (27 September 2022). "Arianna Meloni: chi è la sorella di Giorgia. 'Ti accompagnerò come Sam con Frodo'" [Arianna Meloni: who is Giorgia's sister. 'I'll accompany you like Sam with Frodo']. Quotidiano Nazionale (in Italian). Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 23 October 2022. "Cos'è il Ministero della Sovranità alimentare e cosa significa" [What is the Ministry of Food Sovereignty and what it means]. QuiFinanza (in Italian). 23 October 2022. Archived from the original on 23 October 2022. Retrieved 23 October 2022. Fontana, Simone (28 July 2022). "Da dove arriva Giorgia Meloni, l'ultima fiamma della destra" [Where does Giorgia Meloni, the last flame of the right, come from]. laRegione Ticino (in Italian). Archived from the original on 7 August 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. "'Woman, mother, Christian' guides Italian far-right to brink of power". Euractiv. 10 August 2022. Archived from the original on 22 August 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. Giuffrida, Angela (17 September 2022). "God, family, fatherland – how Giorgia Meloni has taken Italy's far right to the brink of power". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 19 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. "Meloni, da barman a tata... a ministro: 'Ho fatto tutti i lavori e ne sono fiera'" [Meloni, from barman to nanny... to minister: 'I did all the jobs and I'm proud of it']. Blitz Quotidiano (in Italian). 17 April 2020 [17 January 2013]. Archived from the original on 22 April 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Guerzoni, Monica (17 January 2013). "Giorgia Meloni: 'Io militante ventenne e i Lego con la figlia di Fiorello'" [Giorgia Meloni: 'I'm a militant in my twenties and Lego with Fiorello's daughter']. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Archived from the original on 31 March 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Nuzzo, Alessandro (1 September 2022). "Che scuola ha fatto Giorgia Meloni: cosa sappiamo sul curriculum della leader di FdI" [What school did Giorgia Meloni go to: what do we know about the curriculum of the FdI leader]. Money.it (in Italian). Archived from the original on 1 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. "La Storia". L'Istituto Professionale di Stato per l'Enogastronomia e l'Ospitalità. Amerigo Vespucci (in Italian). Retrieved 24 May 2023. "Curriculum Vitae di Giorgia Meloni" [Giorgia Meloni's Curriculum Vitae] (PDF) (in Italian). Commune of Rome. 16 September 2016. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 August 2022. Retrieved 30 August 2022. "MELONI Giorgia". XVIII Legislatura – Deputati e Organi – Scheda deputato (in Italian). Chamber of Deputies (Italy). Retrieved 24 May 2023. "MELONI Giorgia". XVI Legislatura – Deputati e Organi Parlamentari – Scheda deputato. camera.it. Retrieved 24 May 2023. "MELONI Giorgia". XV legislatura – Deputati – La scheda personale. camera.it. Retrieved 24 May 2023. "Centro di Formazione Professionale "Ernesto Nathan"" ['Ernesto Nathan' Professional Training Center]. Rome City Council (in Italian). 23 May 2023. Archived from the original on 23 May 2023. Retrieved 23 May 2023. "Meloni: Italy's far-right 'Christian mother' on brink of power". France 24. Agence France-Presse. 21 September 2022. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. "Ordine dei giornalisti del Lazio" [Order of Journalists of Lazio] (in Italian). Italian Order of Journalists. 2010. Archived from the original on 3 March 2011. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Giorgia Meloni". Corsera Magazine (in Italian). 7 December 2006. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Naím, Moisés (19 September 2022). "Who is Giorgia Meloni?". El País. Archived from the original on 19 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. "Giorgia Meloni". Il Sole 24 Ore (in Italian). 8 February 2013. Archived from the original on 26 December 2017. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Giorgia Meloni a Tatanka: 'Ho chiesto un gesto, non di non gareggiare'" [Giorgia Meloni to Tatanka: 'I asked for a gesture, not not to compete']. L'Occidentale (in Italian). 6 August 2008. Archived from the original on 6 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Telese, Luca (8 February 2009). "La Meloni: 'Caro Fini, ecco perché non ti seguo'" [La Meloni: 'Dear Fini, that's why I don't follow you']. Il Giornale (in Italian). Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Diritto al futuro: 300 milioni di euro per il domani dei giovani" [Right to the future: 300 million euros for the future of young people]. Confini Online (in Italian). 3 December 2010. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Sala, Alessandro (20 November 2012). "Pdl, primarie in fumo. La rabbia dei giovani" [PDL, primary in smoke. The anger of young people]. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Archived from the original on 12 May 2014. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Crosetto e Meloni dal Pdl a 'Fratelli d'Italia': trattativa con La Russa su nome e simbolo" [Crosetto and Meloni from the PDL to 'Fratelli d'Italia': negotiation with La Russa on name and symbol]. La Repubblica (in Italian). 20 December 2012. Archived from the original on 24 September 2019. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Piccolillo, Virginia (16 December 2012). "Pdl, il giorno dei montiani. 'No a scissioni'" [PDL, the day of the Montians. 'No to splits']. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). p. 7. Archived from the original on 17 October 2015. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Guerzoni, Monica (17 December 2012). "Appello a Monti e guerra alla sinistra. Il Pdl si ricompatta" [Appeal to Monti and war on the left. The PDL regroups]. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). p. 6. Archived from the original on 1 February 2014. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Balmer, Crispian (26 September 2022). "Nationalist Meloni set to smash Italy's glass ceiling, become premier". Reuters. Archived from the original on 1 October 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2022. "Camera del 24 Febbraio 2013" [Chamber of February 24, 2013]. Eligendo Archivio (in Italian). Italian Ministry of the Interior. 24 February 2013. Archived from the original on 9 July 2015. Retrieved 5 November 2021. "E' Fabio Rampelli il nuovo Capogruppo di Fratelli d'Italia – Alleanza Nazionale" [Fabio Rampelli is the new Group Leader of Brothers of Italy – National Alliance]. Fratelli d'Italia (in Italian). 17 June 104. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Europee, Bonafè (Pd) è la più votata. Elette Mussolini, Picierno e Matera" [European, Bonafè (Pd) is the most voted. Elette Mussolini, Picierno and Matera]. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). 16 May 2014. Archived from the original on 7 June 2014. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Elezioni europee 2014, i risultati definitivi in Italia e Europa" [European elections 2014, the definitive results in Italy and Europe]. LeggiOggi (in Italian). 26 May 2014. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Europee 25/05/2014". Eligendo Archivio (in Italian). Italian Ministry of the Interior. 25 May 2014. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. De Santis, Livia (4 November 2015). "Fratelli d'Italia lancia 'Terra nostra': a fine novembre la prima assemblea" [Brothers of Italy launches 'Terra nostra': the first assembly at the end of November]. Secolo d'Italia (in Italian). Archived from the original on 12 April 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Chi siamo" [Who we are]. Comitato Terra Nostra (in Italian). November 2015. Archived from the original on 21 June 2018. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Curridori, Francesco (4 November 2015). "Nasce Terra nostra, parte il derby a destra tra Fini e Meloni" [Terra nostra is born, the derby starts on the right between Fini and Meloni]. Il Giornale (in Italian). Archived from the original on 11 May 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Giorgia Meloni mamma / È nata la figlia Ginevra: FdI saluta la nuova 'sorellina d'Italia' (oggi, 16 settembre 2016)" [Giorgia Meloni mother / Daughter Geneva is born: FdI greets the new 'little sister of Italy' (today, 16 September 2016)]. IlSussidiario.net (in Italian). 16 September 2016. Archived from the original on 7 September 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Meloni: 'Una via per Almirante'. Insorgono comunità ebraica e Anpi" [Meloni: 'A street for Almirante'. Jewish community and Anpi rise up] (in Italian). Agenzia Nazionale Stampa Associata. 24 May 2016. Archived from the original on 1 August 2016. Retrieved 6 October 2022. "Comune di Roma – Lazio – Elezioni Comunali – Risultati – Ballottaggio – 5 giugno 2016" [Municipality of Rome – Lazio – Municipal Elections – Results – Ballot – 5 June 2016]. La Repubblica (in Italian). 5 June 2016. Archived from the original on 20 June 2016. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Renzi: 'Il voto se vince il No? Lo deciderà Mattarella'" [Renzi: 'The vote if the No wins? Mattarella will decide']. Il Secolo XIX (in Italian). 23 November 2016. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. Gallori, Paolo; Rubino, Monica (12 December 2016). "Il governo Gentiloni ha giurato, ministri confermati tranne Giannini. Alfano agli Esteri. Minniti all'Interno. Boschi sottosegretario" [The Gentiloni government has sworn, ministers confirmed except Giannini. Alfano to Foreigners. Minniti inside. Boschi Undersecretary]. La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Romano, Luca (13 December 2016). "Gentiloni incassa la fiducia. Opposizioni contro il governo" [Gentiloni collects the trust. Oppositions against the government]. Il Giornale (in Italian). Archived from the original on 12 April 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Stefanoni, Franco (12 March 2017). "Fratelli d'Italia: via An e Msi dal simbolo. Entra Santanchè: 'Tornata a casa mia'" [Brothers of Italy: via An and MSI from the symbol. Santanchè enters: 'Back to my house']. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Archived from the original on 5 July 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Matteo Salvini e la nuova mappa della destra, fra Giorgia Meloni e Roberto Maroni" [Matteo Salvini and the new map of the right, between Giorgia Meloni and Roberto Maroni]. Formiche.net (in Italian). 2 March 2018. Archived from the original on 6 June 2021. Retrieved 6 June 2021. Barigazzi, Jacopo (25 February 2018). "Far-right leader rejects idea of Emma Bonino as Italy's PM". Politico Europe. Archived from the original on 17 July 2019. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Sala, Alessandro (3 April 2018). "Elezioni 2018: M5S primo partito, nel centrodestra la Lega supera FI" [Elections 2018: M5S first party, in the centre-right the League overcomes FI]. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Archived from the original on 24 November 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Nordsieck, Wolfram (5 March 2018). "Italy". Parties and Elections in Europe. Archived from the original on 19 March 2018. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Elezioni 2018 – Collegio uninominale di Latina" [Elections 2018 – Latina single-member college] (in Italian). Italian Ministry of the Interior. 4 March 2018. Archived from the original on 6 February 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Matteucci, Piera (4 March 2018). "Elezioni politiche: vincono M5s e Lega. Crollo del Partito democratico. Centrodestra prima coalizione. Il Carroccio sorpassa Forza Italia" [Political elections: M5s and Lega win. Collapse of the Democratic Party. Centre-right first coalition. The Carroccio overtakes Forza Italia]. La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 14 July 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "'Io sono Giorgia', il remix del discorso di Meloni è virale, con meme e sfide virtuali" ['I am Giorgia', the remix of Meloni's speech is viral, with memes and virtual challenges]. Sky TG24 (in Italian). 12 November 2019. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 25 October 2022. Meloni, Giorgia (2021). Io sono Giorgia [I am Giorgia] (in Italian) (E-book ed.). Rome: Rizzoli Libri. pp. 5–6. ISBN 978-8-8318-0460-8. Archived from the original on 25 October 2022. Retrieved 25 October 2022 – via Google Books. Lanzavecchia, Otto (25 July 2022). "Why Giorgia Meloni is strengthening ties with the American right". Formiche.net. Archived from the original on 15 September 2022. Retrieved 1 October 2022. Pavia, Alissa (26 September 2022). "Which Giorgia Meloni will Washington get?". Atlantic Council. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 1 October 2022. Bechis, Francesco (25 July 2022). "Meloni l'americana. Tutte le stelle e le strisce dentro FdI" [Melons the American. All the stars and stripes inside FdI]. Formiche.net (in Italian). Archived from the original on 1 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Tocchi, Alfredo (28 July 2022). "Giorgia Meloni, l'Aspen Institute e il Grande sonno dell'Occidente" [Giorgia Meloni, the Aspen Institute and the Great Sleep of the West]. Il Giornale d'Italia (in Italian). Archived from the original on 1 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Aspen Institute: cos'è? Giorgia Meloni ne entra a far parte" [Aspen Institute: what is it? Giorgia Meloni joins it]. Blogo (in Italian). 1 February 2021. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Berra, Valerio (3 February 2021). "Da Io sono Giorgia all'Aspen Institute: l'irresistibile ascesa di Meloni tra popolo, canzonette e fascino dei poteri forti" [From Io sono Giorgia to the Aspen Institute: Meloni's irresistible rise among people, songs and the fascination of strong powers]. Open (in Italian). Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Vitale, Giovanna (26 March 2022). "FdI, Giorgia l'atlantista: le metamorfosi di Meloni" [FdI, Giorgia the Atlantist: Meloni's metamorphoses]. La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "'Vacca e scrofa', docente insulta Meloni. Poi le scuse" ['Cow and sow', teacher insults Meloni. Then the apologies]. Agenzia Nazionale Stampa Associata (in Italian). 20 February 2021. Archived from the original on 7 September 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Gozzini sospeso da università Siena per insulti a Meloni" [Gozzini suspended from Siena university for insults against Meloni]. Adnkronos (in Italian). 23 February 2021. Archived from the original on 27 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "UE, Meloni a Convention Vox: Europa del dopo-Merkel sia l'Europa dei conservatori (video)" [EU, Meloni at Vox Convention: post-Merkel Europe and conservative Europe (video)]. Giorgia Meloni (in Italian). 10 October 2021. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Carta de Madrid" [Madrid Charter]. Fundación Disenso (in Spanish). 26 October 2020. Archived from the original on 25 December 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Lauria, Emanuele (10 October 2020). "FdI, Meloni a Madrid con gli ultranazionalisti di Vox: 'No a tutti i regimi'" [FdI, Meloni in Madrid with the ultranationalists of Vox: 'No to all regimes']. La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Kirby, Paul (25 September 2022). "Giorgia Meloni: Italy's far-right wins election and vows to govern for all". BBC. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 25 September 2022. Sergi, Sabrina (26 September 2022). "How a right-wing party of neo-fascist roots became poised to lead Italy". PBS. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2022. Di Caro, Paolo (26 February 2022). "Meloni ai conservatori Usa: difendiamoci dai progressisti" [Melons to US conservatives: let's defend ourselves from progressives]. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Roberts, Hannah (22 July 2022). "Berlusconi's big lunch: How Italy's right ousted Mario Draghi". Politico Europe. Archived from the original on 5 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Roberts, Hannah (29 July 2022). "Russian links to Italian right threaten Meloni's election campaign". Politico Europe. Archived from the original on 11 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Roberts, Hannah (10 August 2022). "I'm not a fascist — I like the Tories, says Italy's far-right leader". Politico Europe. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Broder, David (22 July 2022). "The Future Is Italy, and It's Bleak". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "Brothers of Italy, the far-right party on the cusp of power". France 24. Agence France-Press. 24 July 2022. Archived from the original on 24 July 2022. Retrieved 25 July 2022. Roberts, Hannah (3 August 2022). "Italy confronts its fascist past as the right prepares for power". Politico Europe. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Ghiglione, Davide; Politi, James (10 February 2018). "Meloni takes Italian far-right back to 1930s roots". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 30 September 2019. Retrieved 15 August 2022. "Liliana Segre e Pd chiedono a Meloni di togliere la fiamma tricolore dal simbolo di Fdi: 'Partiamo dai fatti, non dalle parole'" [Liliana Segre and Pd ask Meloni to remove the tricolour flame from the Fdi symbol: 'Let's start with facts, not words']. Il Fatto Quotidiano (in Italian). 12 August 2022. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Steven, Martin; Szczerbiak, Aleks (6 May 2022). "Conservatism and 'Eurorealism' in the European Parliament: the European Conservatives and Reformists under the leadership of Poland's Law and Justice" (PDF). European Politics and Society. 24 (5): 585–602. doi:10.1080/23745118.2022.2065725. ISSN 2374-5118. S2CID 248600333. "Il segnale di Meloni alla stampa estera: 'Nessuna svolta autoritaria, la destra italiana ha consegnato il fascismo alla storia da decenni'" [Meloni's signal to the foreign press: 'No authoritarian turning point, the Italian right has consigned fascism to history for decades']. Il Fatto Quotidiano (in Italian). 10 August 2022. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Giuffrida, Angela (11 August 2022). "Scepticism over Giorgia Meloni's claim 'fascism is history' in Italian far right". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 15 August 2022. "Italy elections: Far-right party sacks candidate for Hitler praise". BBC. 20 September 2022. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 20 September 2022. "Italian leadership nominee calls for blockade on Libya to stop migrants". Libya Update. 8 August 2022. Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. Retrieved 7 October 2022. Nielsen, Nikolaj (28 September 2022). "Meloni's navy-blockade plan to stop Libya migrants 'unlikely'". Euobserver. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. Riegert, Bernd (26 September 2022). "Italy election: Who is Giorgia Meloni, the star of the far right?". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "Giorgia Meloni says she will put Italy first in tackling high energy costs". The Guardian. Associated Press. 1 October 2022. Archived from the original on 1 October 2022. Retrieved 5 October 2022. Roberts, Hannah (1 October 2022). "Italy's national interests take top priority, Meloni vows in first speech since elections". Politico. Archived from the original on 5 October 2022. Retrieved 5 October 2022. "Proiezioni: FdI primo partito. Calano M5s, Lega e Forza Italia. Pd al 19%, Terzo polo al 7%" [Projections: FdI first party. Calano M5s, Lega and Forza Italia. Pd at 19%, Third pole at 7%]. RAI (in Italian). 26 September 2022. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 26 September 2022. "Speciale Elezioni 2022 di RaiNews" [RaiNews Election Special 2022]. RAI (in Italian). 25 September 2022. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 25 September 2022. Amante, Angelo; Balmer, Crispian (25 September 2022). "Italy's right wing, led by Meloni, wins election, exit polls say". Reuters. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 25 September 2022. "Italy elections: Giorgia Meloni's right-wing alliance ahead". BBC News. 26 September 2022. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 26 September 2022. Balmer, Crispian (20 September 2022). "Italy's conservative alliance in lockstep, ready to govern, says Meloni". Reuters. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 26 September 2022. D'Emilio, Frances; Winfield, Nicole; Zampano, Giada (26 September 2022). "Italy shifts to the right as voters reward Meloni's party". AP News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 27 September 2022. "Italy's far-right Meloni begins tricky government talks". France 24. Agence France-Press. 27 September 2022. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "Italy's centre-left Democratic Party concedes election defeat". Reuters. 25 September 2022. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 26 September 2022. "Political reaction to Italian election outcome". Reuters. 26 September 2022. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 26 September 2022. "Italy election: Meloni says center-right bloc has 'clear' mandate". Deutsche Welle. 26 September 2022. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 26 September 2022. "Gianfranco Fini: 'Meloni? Ho sempre creduto in lei, è antifascista'" [Gianfranco Fini: 'Meloni? I've always believed in her, she's an anti-fascist']. Sky TG24 (in Italian). 4 October 2022. Archived from the original on 4 October 2022. Retrieved 18 October 2022. De Robertis, Pierfrancesco (10 October 2020). "Fini e i fantasmi della destra di governo" [Fini and the ghosts of the right-wing government]. Quotidiano Nazionale (in Italian). Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 18 October 2022. "Meloni (Fratelli d'Italia): 'L'antifascismo l'ho visto a Livorno quando mi hanno sputato. Mi sono rotta di parlare di storia'" [Meloni (Brothers of Italy): 'I saw anti-fascism in Livorno when they spat on me. I'm tired of talking about history'] (in Italian). La7. 16 February 2018. Archived from the original on 9 August 2022. Retrieved 18 October 2022. Lavia, Mario (11 October 2021). "Lei è Giorgia | Non è fascista, la Meloni, ma nemmeno antifascista. Così le prende da tutti ed è colpa sua" [She is Giorgia | Meloni isn't a fascist, but she isn't an anti-fascist either. So she's attacked by everyone and it's her fault]. Linkiesta (in Italian). Archived from the original on 23 August 2022. Retrieved 18 October 2022. Sansonetti, Piero (12 August 2022). "Giorgia Meloni è antifascista, lo dica chiaramente!" [Giorgia Meloni is an anti-fascist, she should says it clearly]. Il Riformista (in Italian). Archived from the original on 13 August 2022. Retrieved 18 October 2022. Barry, Colleen; Cook, Lorne (26 September 2022). "Italy's EU partners vigilant as far right set to take power". AP News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 27 September 2022. Leali, Giorgio; Roberts, Hannah (25 September 2022). "Italy on track to elect most right-wing government since Mussolini". Politico. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 27 September 2022. Braithwaite, Sharon; DiDonato, Valentina; Fox, Kara; Mortensen, Antonia; Nadeau, Barbie Latza; Ruotolo, Nicola (26 September 2022). "Giorgia Meloni claims victory to become Italy's most far-right prime minister since Mussolini". CNN. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 26 September 2022. D'Emilio, Frances; Winfield, Nicole; Zampano, Giada (27 September 2022). "First female premier poised to take helm of Italy government". AP News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 8 October 2022. Retrieved 27 September 2022. Parsons, Adam (26 September 2022). "Italy will move to the right, the question is just how far". Sky News. Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. Badham, Van (27 September 2022). "The election of Italy's fascist-adjacent Giorgia Meloni is a public reminder that women can be just as awful as men". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. "Meloni's ascent to power 'a balancing exercise,' says political risk consultancy". CNBC. 26 September 2022. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. "Far-right veteran elected Italian Senate speaker". France 24. Agence France-Press. 13 October 2022. Archived from the original on 22 October 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2022. "Who is the far-right veteran elected Italian Senate speaker?". The Local. 13 October 2022. Archived from the original on 20 October 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2022. Giuffrida, Angela (13 October 2022). "Brothers of Italy politician who collects fascist relics elected senate speaker". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 October 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2022. "Berlusconi calls Meloni arrogant in written notes in Senate". Agenzia Nazionale Stampa Associata. 14 October 2022. Archived from the original on 20 October 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2022. Kington, Tom (17 October 2022). "Silvio Berlusconi undercuts Italian coalition by labelling Meloni arrogant". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Archived from the original on 20 October 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2022. Kirby, Paul (21 October 2022). "Italy Meloni: Far-right leader agrees to form government". BBC News. Archived from the original on 21 October 2022. Retrieved 21 October 2022. "Consultazioni per la formazione del nuovo governo" [Consultations for the formation of the new government]. Quirinale (in Italian). 20 October 2022. Archived from the original on 20 October 2022. Retrieved 21 October 2022. Horowitz, Jason (21 October 2022). "Giorgia Meloni Gets Go-Ahead for New Italian Government". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 21 October 2022. Retrieved 21 October 2022. "Italy Meloni: Far-right leader agrees to form government". The Local. 21 October 2022. Archived from the original on 21 October 2022. Retrieved 21 October 2022. "Il governo Meloni giura oggi al Quirinale" [The Meloni government swears today at the Quirinale] (in Italian). RAI. 21 October 2022. Archived from the original on 21 October 2022. Retrieved 21 October 2022. Updated as of 22 October 2022. "Nuovo governo, le news. Alle 10 il giuramento di Giorgia Meloni e dei ministri" [New government, the news. At 10 the oath of Giorgia Meloni and the ministers]. Sky TG24 (in Italian). 21 October 2022. Archived from the original on 21 October 2022. Retrieved 21 October 2022. Updated as of 22 October 2022. Harlan, Chico; Pitrelli, Stefano (21 October 2022). "Meloni sworn in as Italy's first female prime minister". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on 21 October 2022. Retrieved 22 October 2022. Amante, Angelo; Weir, Keith (21 October 2022). "Meloni takes charge as PM as Italy swings to the right". Reuters. Archived from the original on 21 October 2022. Retrieved 21 October 2022. "Presidential palace says Giorgia Meloni forms government, giving Italy first far-right-led coalition since World War II". ABC News. Associated Press. 21 October 2022. Archived from the original on 22 October 2022. Retrieved 21 October 2022. "Far-right Meloni set to become Italy's first woman PM". France 24. Agence France-Presse. 21 October 2022. Archived from the original on 21 October 2022. Retrieved 21 October 2022. "Governo Meloni, ecco il timing: l'incarico, il giuramento, la fiducia e la Legge di Bilancio" [Meloni government, here is the timeline: the assignment, the oath, the trust, and the Budget Law]. Il Messaggero (in Italian). 21 October 2022. Archived from the original on 21 October 2022. Retrieved 22 October 2022. Bongarrà, Francesco (21 October 2022). "Dall'incarico alla manovra, il timing" [From the task to govern to the budget law, the timeline] (in Italian). Agenzia Nazionale Stampa Associata. Archived from the original on 21 October 2022. Retrieved 22 October 2022. Jakhnagiev, Alexander (25 October 2022). "Meloni alla Camera, l'applauso al suo arrivo e l'abbraccio di Salvini" [Melons in the Chamber, the applause on her arrival and Salvini's hug]. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Archived from the original on 25 October 2022. Retrieved 25 October 2022. "Governo, da Iotti a Cristoforetti: le donne che 'hanno osato' citate da Meloni" [Government, from Iotti to Cristoforetti: the women who 'dared' cited by Meloni]. Adnkronos. 25 October 2022. Archived from the original on 25 October 2022. Retrieved 25 October 2022. De Rosa, Gianluca. "Meloni citazionista: da Steve Jobs a Giovanni Paolo II, tutti i riferimenti del suo discorso" [Meloni quotationist: from Steve Jobs to John Paul II, all the references of her speech]. Il Foglio (in Italian). Archived from the original on 25 October 2022. Retrieved 25 October 2022. Cipolla, Alessandro; Imparato, Rosaria (25 October 2022). "Meloni alla Camera, diretta video voto di fiducia al governo: cosa ha detto nella replica la presidente del Consiglio" [Meloni in the Chamber, live video vote of confidence in the government: what the prime minister said in response]. Money (in Italian). Archived from the original on 26 October 2022. Retrieved 26 October 2022. "Il Senato vota la fiducia al governo Meloni: 115 sì, 79 no e 5 astenuti" [The Senate votes for confidence in the Meloni government: 115 yes, 79 no, and 5 abstentions] (in Italian). Agenzia Nazionale Stampa Associata. 26 October 2022. Archived from the original on 26 October 2022. Retrieved 26 October 2022. "Governo Meloni, le news. Cdm dà ok a dl unico su Covid, carcere ostativo e Rave party" [Meloni government, the news. Cdm gives ok to single dl on COVID, ostativo prison and Rave party]. Sky TG24 (in Italian). 31 October 2022. Archived from the original on 1 November 2022. Retrieved 3 November 2022. "The party's over for illegal raves, Italy's new government says". Reuters. 1 November 2022. Archived from the original on 2 November 2022. Retrieved 3 November 2022. Boffa, Nadia (1 November 2022). "Meloni party. Primo colpo di democrazia illiberale" [Meloni's party. First blow of illiberal democracy]. HuffPost (in Italian). Archived from the original on 1 November 2022. Retrieved 3 November 2022. Vitalba Azzolini [@vitalbaa] (31 October 2022). "Gazzetta Ufficiale. Confermo quanto avevo scritto. Norma insidiosa, scritta male, in teoria applicabile a qualunque raduno che l'autorità pubblica reputi pericoloso a suo giudizio. Giudizio del tutto discrezionale, perché la norma non fornisce criteri per definire la pericolosità" [Official Gazette. I confirm what I wrote. Insidious, poorly written rule, theoretically applicable to any gathering that the public authority deems dangerous in its judgment. This judgment is entirely discretionary because the standard doesn't provide criteria for defining the hazard] (Tweet). Archived from the original on 4 November 2022. Retrieved 3 November 2022 – via Twitter. Olivo, Francesco (2 November 2022). "Governo, è lite sui rave party. Forza Italia vuole stoppare Meloni: 'Servono modifiche in Parlamento'" [Government, there's a dispute over rave parties. Forza Italia wants to stop Meloni: 'We need changes in Parliament']. La Stampa (in Italian). Archived from the original on 4 November 2022. Retrieved 3 November 2022. "Rave party, la mediazione di Forza Italia: 'Abbassare le pene a quattro anni'" [Rave party, Forza Italia's mediation: 'Lower the sentences to four years']. La Repubblica (in Italian). 2 November 2022. Archived from the original on 2 November 2022. Retrieved 3 November 2022. Cangemi, Annalisa (2 November 2022). "Decreto anti rave party approda in Senato: prime crepe nel governo, Forza Italia vuole cambiarlo" [Anti-rave party decree arrives in the Senate: first cracks in the government, Forza Italia wants to change it]. Fanpage.it (in Italian). Archived from the original on 4 November 2022. Retrieved 3 November 2022. Caccia, Fabrizio (1 November 2022). "Scontro sul decreto anti rave. Il Pd e i 5 Stelle: ritiratelo. Salvini: 'Indietro non si torna'" [Clash over the anti-rave decree. The PD and the 5 Stars: withdraw it. Salvini: 'We can't go back']. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Archived from the original on 1 November 2022. Retrieved 3 November 2022. "Decreto "rave party". La Meloni lo difende ma si apre a modifiche" [Decree "rave party". Meloni defends it but is open to changes]. Il Giornale (in Italian). 3 November 2022. Retrieved 10 November 2022. "Decreto anti-rave, governo e Parlamento verso modifiche" [Anti-rave decree, government and Parliament towards changes]. Sky TG24 (in Italian). Retrieved 10 November 2022. "Meloni, serve legalità, difenderemo i confini – Ultima Ora". Agenzia ANSA (in Italian). 8 November 2022. Retrieved 11 November 2022. Marro, Enrico (11 November 2022). "Decreto Aiuti quater, dal taglio delle accise alle bollette a rate: tutte le misure, in arrivo 9 miliardi" [Aid decree quater, from cutting excise duties to installment bills: all measures, 9 billion on the way]. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Retrieved 11 November 2022. Latza Nadeau, Barbie (26 February 2023). "Children and women among 43 dead as migrant boat hits rocks near Italy". CNN. Archived from the original on 26 February 2023. Retrieved 26 February 2023. D'Emilio, Frances (26 February 2023). "Migrant boat breaks apart off Italy; 43 dead, 80 survivors". AP News. Archived from the original on 26 February 2023. Retrieved 26 February 2023. "Naufragio, Schlein contro Piantedosi: "Parole indegne, si dimetta" – Politica". Agenzia ANSA (in Italian). 1 March 2023. Retrieved 26 March 2023. Povoledo, Elisabetta (17 May 2023). "'Catastrophic' Floods in Italy Leave 8 Dead and Thousands Homeless". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 May 2023. Retrieved 17 May 2023. "Severe flooding in Italy kills 2; drought persists". Associated Press. 4 May 2023. Archived from the original on 18 May 2023. Retrieved 17 May 2023. "Alluvione Emilia-Romagna: altre 5 vittime e un disperso nel Ravennate. Lugo e Cervia allagate. In Regione 34mila case senza luce". Il Fatto Quotidiano (in Italian). 18 May 2023. Archived from the original on 18 May 2023. Retrieved 18 May 2023. Robinson, James (17 May 2023). "Italy flooding: Three dead and thousands evacuated from their homes as rivers burst their banks". Sky News. Archived from the original on 17 May 2023. Retrieved 17 May 2023. "La conta dei danni. Campi, aziende, strade e turismo: 5 miliardi persi". La Repubblica (in Italian). 21 May 2023. Retrieved 22 May 2023. "Alluvione Emilia-Romagna, la Regione: "I danni ammonteranno a oltre 7 miliardi"". Il Fatto Quotidiano (in Italian). 24 May 2023. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Convocazione del Consiglio dei Ministri n. 35". www.governo.it (in Italian). 22 May 2023. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "La prima misura del governo per aiutare le zone alluvionate in Emilia-Romagna". Il Post (in Italian). 23 May 2023. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Il decreto del governo per l'Emilia Romagna. Stanziati oltre due miliardi". Agi (in Italian). 23 May 2023. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Emilia-Romagna diretta maltempo. Meloni: "Locomotiva d'Italia, non può fermarsi". Conselice evacuata per rischio sanitario". la Repubblica (in Italian). 26 May 2023. Retrieved 26 May 2023. "Non c'è ancora un commissario straordinario per l'alluvione in Romagna". Il Post (in Italian). 8 June 2023. Retrieved 8 June 2023. "Alluvione, Salvini mette il veto su Bonaccini: slitta la nomina a commissario". La Repubblica (in Italian). 23 May 2023. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Perché il governo non ha ancora nominato Stefano Bonaccini commissario per la ricostruzione in Emilia Romagna". Fanpage (in Italian). 25 May 2023. Retrieved 28 May 2023. Baroncini, Valerio (26 June 2023). "Figliuolo commissario post alluvione per 5 anni. Le reazioni, Bonaccini: "Scelta sbagliata"". Il Resto del Carlino (in Italian). Retrieved 28 June 2023. "Casellati al lavoro sul presidenzialismo, proseguono le 'consultazioni': ora tocca alle opposizioni. Obiettivo: ddl entro giugno". la Repubblica (in Italian). 13 January 2023. Retrieved 26 March 2023. Il Cdm approva il premierato. Meloni: “Madre di tutte le riforme, basta ribaltoni e governi tecnici”. la Repubblica Guy, Barbie Latza Nadeau,Jack (21 July 2023). "Italy starts removing lesbian mothers' names from children's birth certificates". CNN. Retrieved 29 December 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Il Presidente Meloni incontra a Roma il Presidente Macron" [President Meloni meets President Macron in Rome]. Governo (in Italian). 23 October 2022. Zapponini, Gianluca (3 November 2022). "Il poker di Meloni in Europa. Cronaca di una giornata a Bruxelles" [Meloni's poker in Europe. Chronicle of a day in Brussels]. Formiche.net (in Italian). Archived from the original on 4 November 2022. Retrieved 3 November 2022. "Cop27, il discorso di Meloni: "L'Italia ha triplicato gli sforzi per la lotta al cambiamento climatico" – Il video" [Cop27, Meloni's speech: "Italy has tripled its efforts to fight climate change" – The video]. Open (in Italian). 7 November 2022. "Cop27, Meloni vede Sisi: apre sul gas ma resta il nodo Regeni. Onu chiede tasse sui profitti" [Cop27, Meloni sees Sisi: opens on gas but the Regeni knot remains. UN calls for taxes on profits]. Il Sole 24 Ore (in Italian). 7 November 2022. "Bali, il Presidente Meloni al Vertice G20". Governo Italiano (in Italian). 16 November 2022. Retrieved 26 March 2023. "Vertice G20, il Presidente Meloni incontra il Presidente degli Stati Uniti Biden". Governo Italiano (in Italian). 15 November 2022. Retrieved 26 March 2023. "Italy's Meloni discusses Ukraine, China in G20 meeting with Biden". Reuters. 15 November 2022. Retrieved 26 March 2023. "Meloni in Algeria: 'Algeri fondamentale per realizzare Piano Mattei'". sky tg24 (in Italian). 23 January 2013. Retrieved 26 March 2023. "Meloni in Algeria: l'Italia può diventare un hub per la distribuzione di energia". Il Sole 24 ORE (in Italian). 23 January 2023. Retrieved 26 March 2023. Ciriaco, Tommaso (21 February 2023). "Le lacrime, il fango, i fiori. Meloni a Bucha nella 'città non sconfitta': "Con voi fino alla fine"". la Repubblica (in Italian). Retrieved 26 March 2023. "Meloni a Bucha, combatteremo per la vostra libertà – Ultima Ora". Agenzia ANSA (in Italian). 21 February 2023. Retrieved 26 March 2023. "Migrants and Ukraine: on these bases Meloni and Morawiecki are consolidating the alliance in view of the European elections". Agenzia Nova. 5 July 2023. "Il Presidente Meloni in India". Governo Italiano (in Italian). 2 March 2023. Retrieved 26 March 2023. Lauria, Emanuele (2 March 2023). "Italia-India: Meloni e il 'modello' di consenso Modi: "Il più amato del mondo. Nuova Delhi può facilitare pace giusta per Ucraina"". la Repubblica (in Italian). Retrieved 26 March 2023. "Israel ready to help Italy become energy hub, Netanyahu says". Reuters. 10 March 2023. "How Netanyahu is provoking armed Intifada in the West Bank". The Jordan Times. 30 May 2023. Cos'è il Piano Mattei di cui parla tanto Giorgia Meloni. Today Meloni in Etiopia: 'A ottobre presentiamo il piano Mattei per l'Africa'. ANSA "Meloni in Ethiopia: "Italy can be the spokesperson for the continent's needs"". Agenzia Nova. 15 April 2023. Visita del Presidente Meloni in Etiopia. www.governo.it Meloni, von der Leyen e Rutte in Tunisia. Governo Italiano "Italy's Meloni: Good China relations possible without Belt and Road". Politico. 28 May 2023. La Casa Bianca avvisa Meloni: “Sui diritti Lgbtq+ serve più attenzione”. Lei sceglie di parlare a Fox, la tv pro-Trump. la Repubblica "President Meloni visits Israel". www.governo.it. 21 October 2023. Retrieved 23 October 2023. Harlan, Chico; Pitrelli, Stefano (13 September 2022). "A far-right politician is poised to become Italy's first female leader". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on 14 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. Khrebtan-Hörhager, Julia; Pyatovskaya, Evgeniya (19 September 2022). "Giorgia Meloni – the political provocateur set to become Italy's first far-right leader since Mussolini". The Conversation. Archived from the original on 1 October 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2022. Taube, Friedel (30 August 2018). "Women increasingly drawn to right-wing populist parties, study shows". Deutsche Welle. Retrieved 3 October 2022. Farrell, Nicholas (20 July 2022). "Is Giorgia Meloni the most dangerous woman in Europe?". The Spectator. Archived from the original on 21 August 2022. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Tharoor, Ishaan (27 September 2022). "Italy's Meloni: The mainstreaming of the West's far right is complete". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2022. Farrell, Nicholas (27 September 2022). "It is absurd to call Giorgia Meloni 'far right'". The Daily Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. Horowitz, Jason (24 September 2022). "Italian Voters Appear Ready to Turn a Page for Europe". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 25 September 2022. "Italian far-right star turns against Russia". EUobserver. 30 May 2022. Archived from the original on 30 May 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. von Nahmen, Alexandra (20 September 2022). "Italy's election: Giorgia Meloni, far-right favorite for prime minister, appeals to disgruntled voters". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. Hutt, David; Schad, Verena (24 August 2022). "Ukraine war: How has Russia's invasion changed Europe?". Euronews. Archived from the original on 5 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. Amante, Angelo; Balmer, Crispian; Vagnoni, Giselda (25 August 2022). "Italy's Meloni says public finances will be safe in her hands". Reuters. Archived from the original on 19 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. Balmer, Crispian (26 September 2022). "Italy's right wing, led by Meloni, wins election, exit polls say". Reuters. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2022. "FdI, Orbán scrive a Meloni: "Collaboriamo, abbiamo una visione comune del mondo: lottiamo insieme"" [FdI, Orbán writes to Meloni: "We collaborate, we have a common vision of the world: we fight together"]. la Repubblica (in Italian). 25 February 2021. Archived from the original on 9 September 2022. Retrieved 29 September 2022. Prestigiacomo, Dario (3 February 2020). "Meloni difende Orban: 'Ue contro di lui perché si batte per la sovranità'" [Meloni defends Orban: 'EU against him because it fights for sovereignty']. Europa Today (in Italian). Archived from the original on 19 April 2021. Retrieved 29 September 2022. "Why Rishi Sunak loves Italy's Giorgia Meloni". POLITICO. 15 December 2023. Retrieved 24 December 2023. Diver, Tony (12 July 2023). "Rishi Sunak and Giorgia Meloni appear to be new best friends". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved 24 December 2023. "Ue, Meloni incontra a Madrid Santiago Abascal. 'Totale sintonia tra FdI e Vox per rafforzare Ecr'" [EU, Meloni meets Santiago Abascal in Madrid. 'Total harmony between FdI and Vox to strengthen Ecr']. Secolo d'Italia (in Italian). Archived from the original on 9 September 2022. Retrieved 29 September 2022. Roméo, Lou (24 July 2022). "Brothers of Italy, the far-right party on the cusp of power". France 24. Agence France-Presse. Archived from the original on 24 July 2022. Retrieved 20 September 2022. "Meloni da Kaczynski: 'Insieme decisivi nell'Ue'" [Meloni from Kaczynski: 'Together decisive in the EU']. Adnkronos (in Italian). 3 April 2019. Archived from the original on 25 April 2022. Retrieved 29 September 2022. "Polonia. Andrzej Duda vince le presidenziali. Gli auguri di Giorgia Meloni" [Poland. Andrzej Duda wins the presidential elections. Best wishes from Giorgia Meloni]. Agen Press (in Italian). 13 July 2020. Archived from the original on 3 June 2021. Retrieved 29 September 2022. Seminara, Giulio (31 January 2020). "Meloni andrà negli Usaper incontrare The Donald È sfida con Salvini" [Meloni will go to the USA to meet The Donald It's a challenge with Salvini]. Lumsa News (in Italian). Archived from the original on 4 February 2020. Retrieved 4 February 2020. De Robertis, Pierfrancesco (5 February 2020). "Giorgia Meloni negli Usa per l'esame di maturità" [Giorgia Meloni in the USA for the final exam]. QN Quotidiano Nazionale [it] (in Italian). Archived from the original on 5 February 2020. Retrieved 5 February 2020. "Meloni a Salvini: 'Ci sono dei patti e vanno rispettati'" [Meloni to Salvini: 'There are pacts and they must be respected']. Adnkronos (in Italian). 4 February 2020. Archived from the original on 4 February 2020. Retrieved 4 February 2020. "Italy's frontrunner party suspends candidate over Hitler praise". Reuters. 20 September 2022. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. "Italy's right-wing, led by Meloni wins election, according to exit polls". France 24. Agence France-Presse. 25 September 2022. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2022. "'I plan to leave': Foreigners in Italy fear for their futures if far right wins election". The Local (Italy edition). 14 September 2022. Archived from the original on 19 September 2022. Retrieved 20 September 2022. Torrisi, Claudia (20 September 2022). "The anti-women agenda of the woman set to be Italy's next PM". openDemocracy. Archived from the original on 20 September 2022. Retrieved 1 October 2022. Updated 26 September 2022. Claudia, Torrisi (28 September 2022). "What Meloni's far-Right government will mean for Italy". openDemocracy. Archived from the original on 30 September 2022. Retrieved 1 October 2022. Pianigiani, Gaia; Povoledo, Elisabetta (23 August 2022). "Giorgia Meloni Could Be the First Woman to Lead Italy. Not All Women Are Happy". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 23 September 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2022. "Mixed reactions abroad to Meloni winning Italian elections". France 24. Agence France-Presse. 26 September 2022. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2022. Bubola, Emma (25 August 2022). "'They are not happy with how we love each other': Gay parents fear a Meloni victory". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2022. Bollinger, Alex (26 September 2022). "Marjorie Taylor Greene loves Italy's new fascist prime minister. But she can't spell her name". LGBTQ Nation. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 8 October 2022. Cigna, Ygnazia (3 September 2022). "Meloni al ragazzo che l'ha contestata sul palco: 'Rispetto il tuo coraggio. Unioni civili? Non le toccherò'" [Meloni to the boy who challenged her on stage: 'I respect your courage. Civil unions? I won't touch them']. Open (in Italian). Archived from the original on 5 September 2022. Retrieved 7 October 2022. "Unioni civili, la Meloni: 'Se diventerò sindaco di Roma rispetterò legge'" [Civil unions, Meloni: 'If I become mayor of Rome I will respect thelaw]. La Repubblica (in Italian). 11 May 2016. Archived from the original on 12 May 2016. Retrieved 8 October 2022. "Unioni civili: Meloni, rispetterò legge" [Civil unions: Meloni, I will respect the law] (in Italian). Agenzia Nazionale Stampa Associata. 11 May 2016. Archived from the original on 12 May 2016. Retrieved 8 October 2022. "'Io sono Giorgia', il remix del discorso di Meloni è virale, con meme e sfide virtuali" ['I am Giorgia', the remix of Meloni's speech is viral, with memes and virtual challenges]. Sky TG24. 12 November 2019. Archived from the original on 27 January 2020. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Giorgia Meloni alle Iene: 'Preferirei non avere un figlio gay'" [Giorgia Meloni at Le Iene: 'I'd rather not have a gay son']. Il Secolo XIX (in Italian). 22 February 2016. Archived from the original on 4 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Carlo, Andrea (29 July 2022). "I'm Italian and I'm deeply worried about our probable next prime minister". Voices (opinion). The Independent. Archived from the original on 6 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Brezar, Aleksander (28 September 2022). "Italy election: In Rome's progressive neighbourhood, Meloni's victory causes anger and concern". Euronews. Archived from the original on 30 September 2022. Retrieved 3 October 2022. Jakhnagiev, Alexander (16 July 2020). "'Gli omosessuali in Italia? Non sono discriminati': Meloni e Salvini in piazza contro la legge sull'omofobia minimizzano le aggressioni" ['Homosexuals in Italy? They aren't discriminated against': Meloni and Salvini in the streets against the law on homophobia minimize the attacks]. Il Fatto Quotidiano (in Italian). Archived from the original on 12 April 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Maternità surrogata, ok al testo base: sì a proposta Meloni. 'Va considerata reato universale'" [Surrogate maternity, ok to the basic text: yes to Meloni's proposal. 'It must be considered a universal crime']. La Repubblica (in Italian). 21 April 2022. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 8 October 2022. "Meloni: 'Utero in affitto reato universale'" [Meloni: 'Womb for rent a universal crime']. HuffPost (in Italian). 10 August 2022. Archived from the original on 30 September 2022. Retrieved 8 October 2022. Spuntoni, Nico (5 December 2023). "Lo Zuppi che non ti aspetti: "Utero in affitto? Mercificazione della donna". E sull'eutanasia..." Il Giornale (in Italian). Horowitz, Jason (8 January 2024). "Francis Urges Ban on Surrogacy, Calling It 'Despicable'". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Lami, Paolo (10 June 2015). "Meloni, FdI: Contro l'ideologia gender presenti al raduno sulla famiglia" [Meloni, FdI: Against gender ideology present at the meeting on the family]. Secolo d'Italia (in Italian). Archived from the original on 16 June 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Crowley, Michael (27 September 2022). "Italy's Hard-Right Lurch Raises New Concerns in Washington". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 1 October 2022. "La discriminazione non si combatte con la diffusione della teoria gender nelle scuole" [Discrimination cannot be fought with the spread of gender theory in schools]. Giorgia Meloni (in Italian). 24 June 2015. Archived from the original on 24 May 2019. Retrieved 30 July 2020. "Giorgia Meloni parla di 'gender', ma poi ammette di non sapere cos'è" [Giorgia Meloni talks about 'gender', but then admits she doesn't know what it is]. NeXt Quotidiano (in Italian). 6 May 2021. Archived from the original on 6 May 2021. Retrieved 1 October 2022. "Scuola, Meloni a Giannini: Teoria del gender non è lotta alla discriminazione" [School, Meloni to Giannini: Gender theory is not a fight against discrimination]. Fratelli d'Italia (in Italian). 25 June 2022. Archived from the original on 1 March 2018. Retrieved 28 February 2018. "Meloni: 'Teorie gender attaccano l'identità delle donne e il ruolo materno'" [Meloni: 'Gender theories attack women's identity and maternal role'] (in Italian). DIRE. 13 May 2022. Archived from the original on 16 June 2022. Retrieved 1 October 2022. "Giorgia Meloni: 'In Costituzione il divieto di adozione per le coppie omosessuali'" [Giorgia Meloni: 'In the Constitution the ban on adoption for homosexual couples']. Gaypost.it (in Italian). 29 January 2018. Archived from the original on 29 July 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. De Gregorio, Antonella (3 February 2018). "Elsa di Frozen lesbica? Da Salvini a Meloni, la destra contro la Disney" [Elsa from Frozen lesbian? From Salvini to Meloni, the right against Disney]. La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Elsa di Frozen lesbica? Salvini e Meloni contro la Disney" [Elsa from Frozen lesbian? Salvini and Meloni against Disney]. Il Messagero (in Italian). 2 March 2018. Archived from the original on 5 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. De Montis, Luisa (2 March 2018). "Salvini: 'Elsa di Frozen lesbica? Il mondo al contrario...'" [Salvini: 'Elsa from Frozen lesbian? The world in reverse ... ']. Il Giornale (in Italian). Archived from the original on 8 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Arfini, Elia; Ghigi, Rossella; Magaraggia, Sveva (2019). "Can feminism be right? A content analysis of discourses about women by female Italian right-wing politicians" (PDF). Rassegna Italiana di Sociologia (4/2019): 693–719. doi:10.1423/96112. ISSN 0486-0349. S2CID 216672593. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 October 2022. Retrieved 4 October 2022 – via AIR Unimi. Roberts, Hannah (2 September 2022). "Will Italy's first female prime minister be bad for women?". Politico. Archived from the original on 30 September 2022. Retrieved 4 October 2022. Pianigini, Gaia; Povoledo, Elisabetta (23 September 2022). "Giorgia Meloni Could Be the First Woman to Lead Italy. Not All Women Are Happy". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 30 September 2022. Retrieved 4 October 2022. Giuffrida, Angela (29 September 2022). "Italy's Giorgia Meloni denies she is anti-women as credentials questioned". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 30 September 2022. Retrieved 4 October 2022. Siviero, Giulia (24 August 2022). "La vittoria di Meloni sarebbe una vittoria 'per le donne'?" [Would Meloni's victory be a win 'for women'?]. Il Post (in Italian). Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2022. Broder, David (1 September 2022). "Hillary Clinton Is Wrong: Electing a Far-Right Woman Is Not a Step Forward for Women". Jacobin. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2022. Lennard, Natasha (26 September 2022). "It's a Girl (Fascist)!". The Intercept. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2022. Ben-Ghiat, Ruth (23 September 2022). "The Return of Fascism in Italy". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 23 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "Giorgia Meloni: 'Io pronta a governare ma le femministe di casa nostra non lo tollerano'" [Giorgia Meloni: 'I'm ready to govern but our own feminists don't tolerate it']. Open (in Italian). 19 September 2022. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2022. "L'Ossessione xenofoba di Meloni: 'Il governo non si occupa dell'Italia ma favorisce i clandestini'" [Meloni's xenophobic obsession: 'The government doesn't take care of Italy but favours illegal immigrants']. Globalist (in Italian). 4 December 2020. Archived from the original on 3 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Sparks, Willis (27 May 2021). "Who's afraid of Giorgia Meloni?". GZERO Media. Archived from the original on 28 June 2022. Retrieved 6 October 2022. Farrell, Rita (3 October 2022). "Migrants in Italy face uncertainty after far-right prime minister's win". ABC News. Archived from the original on 3 October 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2022. "Elezioni, quando Meloni diceva: 'Ci servono immigrati? Prendiamoli in Venezuela, sono cristiani e di origine italiana'. Il video del 2018" [Ukraine, Meloni: 'Giving refugee status to those fleeing war, no to others']. Adnkronos (in Italian). 1 March 2022. Archived from the original on 28 August 2022. Retrieved 5 October 2022. "Italy's Giorgia Meloni criticized for posting video of woman's rape". Euronews. 22 August 2022. Archived from the original on 4 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. "La donna violentata a Piacenza: 'Riconosciuta dal video, sono disperata', 27enne si difende: 'L'ho soccorsa'" [The woman raped in Piacenza: 'Recognized by the video, I'm desperate', 27-year-old defends herself: 'I helped her'] (in Italian). 23 August 2022. Archived from the original on 24 August 2022. Retrieved 24 August 2022. Barry, Colleen (22 August 2022). "Italy's Meloni shocks opponents with alleged rape video". AP News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 23 August 2022. Retrieved 23 August 2022. Squires, Nick (22 August 2022). "Giorgia Meloni criticised for sharing video of 'attempted rape by asylum seeker'". The Daily Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 23 August 2022. Retrieved 23 August 2022. "Africa: Meloni, 'stop neocolonialismo, seguire modello Mattei per cooperazione'" [Africa: Meloni, 'stop to neocolonialism, let's follow Mattei model for cooperation']. SardiniaPost (in Italian). 3 March 2021. Archived from the original on 4 October 2022. Retrieved 4 October 2022. Torchiaro, Aldo (26 August 2022). "Meloni, la ricetta sui migranti (bianchi e cristiani) e l'attacco di Calenda: 'Sfasceranno i conti'" [Meloni, the recipe for migrants (white and Christian) and Calenda attacks: 'They will break up the budgets']. Il Riformista (in Italian). Archived from the original on 26 August 2022. Retrieved 8 October 2022. Mallamo, Anna (26 August 2022). "Quelli che 'servono' a Meloni" [Those that are 'useful' to Meloni]. HuffPost (in Italian). Archived from the original on 26 August 2022. Retrieved 8 October 2022. Bonafede, Adriano (5 October 2022). "Nell'azienda Italia della Meloni c'è poco posto per le diversità" [There is little room for diversity in Meloni's Italy company]. HuffPost (in Italian). Archived from the original on 5 October 2022. Retrieved 8 October 2022. Nocioni, Angela (1 November 2019). "Giorgia Meloni: 'Salvini ha chiuso i porti, io avrei fatto il blocco navale'" [Giorgia Meloni: 'Salvini has closed the ports, I would have made the naval blockade']. Il Riformista (in Italian). Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. "Giorgia Meloni: 'C'è un piano per destrutturare la nostra società attraverso i migranti'" [Giorgia Meloni: 'There is a plan to deconstruct our society through migrants']. Fanpage.it (in Italian). 19 June 2019. Archived from the original on 26 February 2021. Retrieved 21 September 2022. "Elezioni, Amnesty: 'Italia intrisa d'odio e razzismo. 95% delle frasi xenofobe dal centrodestra'. Salvini in vetta, Meloni 2a" [Elections, Amnesty: 'Italy steeped in hatred and racism. 95% of the xenophobic sentences from the centre-right '. Salvini on top, Meloni 2nd]. Il Fatto Quotidiano (in Italian). 22 February 2018. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Sunderland, Judith (28 February 2018). "La xenofobia nella campagna elettorale italiana" [Xenophobia in the Italian electoral campaign] (in Italian). Human Rights Watch. Archived from the original on 9 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Meloni la xenofoba: 'Non abbiamo monitorato gli immigrati, ma ora lo facciamo per Covid-19'" [Meloni the xenophobe: 'We haven't monitored immigrants, but now we do it for COVID-19']. Globalist (in Italian). 20 April 2020. Archived from the original on 13 June 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Meloni usa l'attentato di Londra per alimentare l'islamofobia sovranista" [Meloni uses the London bombing to fuel sovereignist Islamophobia]. Globalist (in Italian). 30 November 2019. Archived from the original on 13 June 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Giorgia Meloni con la scimitarra verbale: 'La conversione è uno dei metodi del terrorismo islamico'" [Giorgia Meloni with the verbal scimitar: 'Conversion is one of the methods of Islamic terrorism']. Globalist (in Italian). 10 May 2020. Archived from the original on 13 June 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Elezioni, quando Meloni diceva: 'Ci servono immigrati? Prendiamoli in Venezuela, sono cristiani e di origine italiana'. Il video del 2018" [Elections, when Meloni said: 'Do we need immigrants? Let's take them from Venezuela, they are Christian and of Italian origin'. The video from 2018]. Il Fatto Quotidiano (in Italian). 25 August 2022. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 5 October 2022. "Sui migranti Meloni rispolvera la teoria del complotto: Un disegno di Soros contro l'Europa" [On migrants, Meloni dusts off the conspiracy theory: A Soros plan against Europe]. Globalist (in Italian). 19 June 2019. Archived from the original on 13 June 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Rachman, Gideon (3 October 2022). "When conspiracy theorists run countries". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2022. Kington, Tom (27 September 2022). "Giorgia Meloni is first west European leader to believe Great Replacement conspiracy theory". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2022. Drago, Giovanni (7 October 2016). "Giorgia Meloni contro il terribile Piano Kalergi" [Giorgia Meloni against the terrible Kalergi Plan]. nextQuotidiano (in Italian). Archived from the original on 1 September 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Meloni e il piano segreto per portare immigrati in Italia: Qualcuno le racconti come stanno davvero le cose" [Meloni and the secret plan to bring immigrants to Italy: Someone should tell her how things really are]. The Post Internazionale [it] (in Italian). 19 June 2019. Archived from the original on 3 September 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Bernasconi, Francesca (19 June 2019). "Meloni: 'Soros complice di piano per destrutturare la società'" [Meloni: 'Soros complicit in his plan to deconstruct society']. Il Giornale (in Italian). Archived from the original on 26 July 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Luca, Bottura (20 August 2023). "Quel saggio di Giorgia Meloni: stereotipi razzisti, mafia nigerania tesi, complottiste e crimini dei neri" [Giorgia Meloni's essay: racist stereotypes, Nigerian mafia, conspiracy theories and crimes of black people]. Il Secolo XIX. p. 6. Pucciarelli, Matteo (19 August 2023). "Un altro libro imbarazza il governo. Quando Meloni accusava i nigeriani: "Mafiosi, giganti e pure cannibali"" [Another book embarrasses the government. When Meloni accused Nigerians: "Mafiosi, giants and even cannibals"]. la Repubblica (in Italian). Retrieved 21 August 2023. Strippoli, Sara (6 October 2021). "Torino, Alessandro Meluzzi sospeso dall'Ordine dei medici: non si è vaccinato" [Turin, Alessandro Meluzzi suspended from the Medical Association: he did not vaccinate]. la Repubblica. "In Italia è nato il partito Anti Islamizzazione" [Anti-Islamisation party born in Italy]. Agenzia Giornalistica Italia (in Italian). 4 July 2017. Retrieved 21 August 2023. Turrini, Davide (21 January 2016). "Alessandro Meluzzi, vescovo della Chiesa Ortodossa. Ma gli esponenti ufficiali: "Vicenda che ci espone al ridicolo. La sua organizzazione non è riconosciuta"" [Alessandro Meluzzi, bishop of the Orthodox Church. But the official exponents: 'This affair exposes us to ridicule. His organisation is not recognised']. il Fatto Quotidiano. "Giorgia Meloni: "L'Italia e l'Europa hanno bisogno di immigrazione"". La7. 24 July 2023. "Meloni: Europa ha bisogno di immigrazione, ma no a segnale che viene premiato chi entra illegalmente". Il Sole 24 Ore. 23 July 2023. "What's behind the surge in migrant arrivals to Italy?". AP News. 15 September 2023. Retrieved 16 September 2023. "Migrants, Meloni: "Von der Leyen come to Lampedusa. Extraordinary measures in the Council of Ministers on Monday"". Italy 24 Press News. 15 September 2023. "Giorgia Meloni continua ad attaccare la Francia, ma anche lei votò per l'intervento in Libia" [Giorgia Meloni continues to attack France, but she too voted for intervention in Libya]. Giornalettismo (in Italian). 12 April 2019. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 1 September 2022. "Giorgia Meloni: "La Francia ha bombardato la Libia quando Gheddafi progettava di uscire dal Franco africano"" [Giorgia Meloni: "France bombed Libya when Gaddafi planned to leave the African franc"]. Libero Quotidiano (in Italian). 27 January 2019. Archived from the original on 2 September 2022. Retrieved 2 September 2022. "Meloni contro Renzi: "Vergognoso spot all'Arabia Saudita, Stato che nega i diritti alle donne"". Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 1 September 2022. "Supercoppa Juventus-Milan in Arabia Saudita, Giorgia Meloni: 'Dove c'è la Sharia offende le donne'" [Juventus-Milan Super Cup in Saudi Arabia, Giorgia Meloni: 'Where there is Sharia it offends women']. Oggi Notizie (in Italian). 9 January 2019. Archived from the original on 1 September 2022. Retrieved 1 September 2022. "Meloni calls for 'firm reaction' to Qatargate – English". ANSA.it. 15 December 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2023. "Draghi 'dictator' remark 'total rudeness' says Erdogan". ANSA. 14 April 2021. "Turkey's Erdogan cosies up to Italy's far-right Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni". RFI. 3 December 2022. "Maro' | Meloni a Letta: 'Rimandiamo indietro l'Ambasciatore Indiano'" [Maro '& # 124; Meloni a Letta: 'We send back the Indian Ambassador']. Roma Daily News (in Italian). 10 July 2013. Archived from the original on 1 September 2022. Retrieved 1 September 2022. "Del Piero giocherà in India. La Meloni: 'Non andare, fallo per i marò'" [Del Piero will play in India. La Meloni: 'Don't go, do it for the marines']. Il Giornale (in Italian). 28 August 2014. Archived from the original on 1 September 2022. Retrieved 1 September 2022. "Meloni: 'L'Italia dimostri di avere a cuore Asia Bibi e le conceda asilo politico'" [Meloni: 'Italy shows that it has Asia Bibi at heart and grants her political asylum']. Tempi (in Italian). 7 November 2018. Archived from the original on 1 September 2022. Retrieved 1 September 2022. Meacci, Ludovica (27 September 2022). "Italy's Right Is Torn on Ukraine but United on China". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 30 September 2022. Retrieved 4 October 2022. "Italy's right-wing party leaders congratulate Putin on re-election". The Local. 19 March 2018. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 17 October 2022. Saviano, Roberto (24 September 2022). "Giorgia Meloni is a danger to Italy and the rest of Europe". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "Italy's Meloni: Right-wing government is 'nothing to fear'". Politico Europe. 23 July 2022. Archived from the original on 23 July 2022. Retrieved 23 July 2022. Vitale, Giovanna (25 March 2022). "FdI, Giorgia l'atlantista: le metamorfosi di Meloni" [FdI, Giorgia the Atlantist: Meloni's metamorphoses]. La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 29 May 2022. Retrieved 6 October 2022. "L'atlantismo di Giorgia Meloni è un fatto piuttosto recente" [Giorgia Meloni's Atlanticism is a rather recent fact]. Il Post (in Italian). 5 September 2022. Archived from the original on 5 September 2022. Retrieved 6 October 2022. Castaldi, Roberto (8 September 2022). "Il programma di Fratelli d'Italia: nazionalista, atlantista, contro una maggiore integrazione europea" [The Brothers of Italy programme: nationalist, Atlantist, against greater European integration]. Euractiv (in Italian). Archived from the original on 8 September 2022. Retrieved 6 October 2022. "Italy's Meloni: Russia's annexations have 'no legal, political value'". Anadolu Agency. 30 September 2022. Rankin, Jennifer (18 September 2022). "Far-right favourite to be Italy's next PM softens on EU as election looms". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 19 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. "Who is Giorgia Meloni, Italy's likely next prime minister?". The Local Italy. 24 August 2022. Archived from the original on 14 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. Carrer, Gabriele (10 October 2022). "Euro-realismo o conservatorismo? Il dilemma (esistenziale) di Giorgia Meloni" [Euro-realism or conservatism? Giorgia Meloni's (existential) dilemma]. Formiche (in Italian). Archived from the original on 10 October 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2022. "Euro-realist or conservative champion? Giorgia Meloni's dilemma". Decode39. 11 October 2022. Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2022. "Le giravolte di Meloni sull'euro e il sogno impossibile di un'altra Ue" [Meloni's twists and turns on the euro and the impossible dream of another EU]. La Stampa (in Italian). 26 July 2022. Archived from the original on 1 August 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Lamberti, Giovanni (10 August 2022). "Meloni 'rassicura' la Ue, se il centrodestra vincerà 'l'Italia non uscirà dall'euro'" [Meloni 'reassures' the EU, if the centre-right wins 'Italy will not leave the euro'] (in Italian). Agenzia Giornalistica Italia. Archived from the original on 10 August 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Sondel-Cedarmas, Joanna (2022). "Giorgia Meloni's New Europe: Europe of Sovereign Nations in the Brothers of Italy Party Manifestos". In Berti, Francesco; Sondel-Cedarmas, Joanna (eds.). The Right-Wing Critique of Europe. London: Taylor & Francis. doi:10.4324/9781003226123-8. ISBN 978-1-0005-2042-2. S2CID 246381004. "Italy's PM hopeful has concerns over China, vows closer ties with Taiwan". Focus Taiwan. 23 September 2022. Archived from the original on 24 September 2022. Retrieved 23 September 2022. Pavičić, Milan (26 September 2022). "Buduća talijanska premijerka svojata dijelove Hrvatske, bila je zgrožena našim ulaskom u EU" [The future Italian prime minister, who claims parts of Croatia, was appalled by our entry into the EU]. Telegram.hr (in Croatian). Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 26 September 2022. Bešker, Inoslav (26 September 2022). "Antipatija Meloni spram Hrvatske je poznata, ali trijumf Desnog centra nije kataklizma. Evo zašto" [Meloni's antipathy towards Croatia is well known, but the triumph of the Centre-right isn't a cataclysm. Here's why]. Jutarnji list (in Croatian). Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 27 September 2022. "Italy election winner Meloni lauded Iran, Hezbollah as protectors of Syria Christians in 2018". The New Arab. 27 September 2022. "Italy far-right leader once hailed Iran, Hezbollah as defenders of Syrian Christians". The Times of Israel. 27 September 2022. "Italy's Meloni portrays herself as strong supporter of Israel, rejects fascist past". The Times of Israel. 26 September 2022. "Salvini v Meloni: Italy's centre-right clashes over Israel's capital". Decode 39. 31 August 2022. Mhaka, Tafi (2 December 2022). "No winners in the tragicomic colonial blame game". Al Jazeera. "Giorgia Meloni's exaggerations about France's 'colonial currency'". Le Monde. 26 November 2022. "Covid, Meloni: 'Non vaccino mia figlia perché non è una religione'" [Covid, Meloni: 'I don't vaccinate my daughter because it's not a religion']. La Repubblica (in Italian). 8 February 2022. Archived from the original on 8 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Covid, Meloni: 'Non vaccino mia figlia'" [Covid, Meloni: 'I don't vaccinate my daughter']. Adnkronos (in Italian). 8 February 2022. Archived from the original on 17 June 2022. Retrieved 17 June 2022. "'Non vaccino mia figlia'. Su una cosa almeno Salvini e Meloni sono d'accordo" ['I don't vaccinate my daughter.' On one thing at least Salvini and Meloni agree]. Huffington Post (in Italian). 9 February 2022. Archived from the original on 4 September 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Meloni: 'Un ragazzo ha le stesse possibilità di morire per un fulmine che di Covid'. La replica di Burioni" [Meloni: 'A boy has the same chance of dying from lightning as from Covid'. Burioni's reply]. L'Unione Sarda (in Italian). 8 February 2022. Archived from the original on 26 March 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Fulmini e Covid-19: cosa non torna nei dati di Meloni" [Lightning and COVID-19: what doesn't add up in Meloni's data]. Pagella Politica (in Italian). 9 February 2022. Archived from the original on 1 May 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Roberts, Hannah (30 September 2022). "Brothers of Italy prepare to roll back COVID rules". Politico. Archived from the original on 1 October 2022. Retrieved 2 October 2022. Bastasin, Carlo (26 August 2022). "What happens if right-wing Giorgia Meloni wins Italy's elections?". Brookings. Archived from the original on 18 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. Branchereau, Gael; Ritchie, Alice (26 September 2022). "Italy's Giorgia Meloni: From teen activist who praised Mussolini to brink of power". Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2022. Squires, Nick (19 June 2021). "Giorgia Meloni: heiress to Italy's fascists to become the country's first female leader". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. Updated 26 September 2022 "Meloni: Italy's far-right 'Christian mother' on brink of power". Radio France Internationale. 21 September 2022. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. Serhan, Yasmeen (22 September 2022). "Italy Is Getting Its First Female Leader—A Polished Far-Right Firebrand". Time. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "Meloni a 19 anni: 'Mussolini? Un buon politico'. Il video fa il giro della rete" [Melons at 19: 'Mussolini? A good politician'. The video goes viral]. Dire (in Italian). 17 August 2022. Archived from the original on 29 August 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. "Verona, un caso la strada ad Almirante. Liliana Segre: 'Io e lui siamo incompatibili, il Comune faccia una scelta'" [Verona, a controversy on naming street after Almirante. Liliana Segre: 'Him and I aren't compatible, the Comune should make a choice']. La Repubblica (in Italian). 21 January 2020. Archived from the original on 10 May 2021. Retrieved 1 October 2022. "Verona, un caso la strada ad Almirante. Liliana Segre: 'Io e lui siamo incompatibili, il Comune faccia una scelta'" [Meloni: 'Yes to the street named after Almirante, recognized merits']. Adnkronos (in Italian). 22 January 2020. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 1 October 2022. Mari, Laura (22 May 2020). "Anniversario morte di Almirante, Meloni: 'Grande politico e patriota'. Sui social è rivolta" [Almirante's death anniversary, Meloni: 'Great politician and patriot'. On social media there is a revolt]. La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 11 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Giorgia Meloni ricorda Almirante: 'Politico e patriota stimato anche dai suoi avversari'. Polemica sui social" [Giorgia Meloni remembers Almirante: 'Politician and patriot also esteemed by his opponents'. Controversy on social media]. Open (in Italian). 22 May 2020. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Hamadi, Shady (23 May 2020). "Giorgia Meloni elogia Almirante come patriota: Le servirebbe un ripasso di storia" [Giorgia Meloni praises Almirante as a patriot: She needs a review of history]. Il Fatto Quotidiano (in Italian). Archived from the original on 22 May 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Ventura, Sofia (July 2022). "Giorgia Meloni e Fratelli d'Italia. Un partito personalizzato tra destra estrema e destra radicale" [Giorgia Meloni and Brothers of Italy. A personalized party between the far right and the radical right] (PDF) (in Italian). Friedrich Ebert Stiftung. p. 2. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 July 2022. Retrieved 1 October 2022. "Chi era Giorgio Almirante" [Who was Giorgio Almirante]. Il Post (in Italian). 22 January 2020. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 1 October 2022. "Giorgia Meloni ricorda il 'patriota' Almirante, bufera sul web: 'Collaborò coi nazisti e fu firmatario delle leggi razziali'" [Giorgia Meloni remembers the 'patriot' Almirante, storm on the web: 'He collaborated with the Nazis and was a signatory of the racial laws']. Il Riformista (in Italian). 22 May 2020. Archived from the original on 13 December 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Rubino, Monica (November 2018). "'Il 25 aprile è divisivo, il 4 novembre torni festa nazionale': Meloni lancia l'offensiva patriottica di Fdi" ['April 25 is divisive, November 4 returns a national holiday': Meloni launches Fdi's patriotic offensive]. La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 5 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Di Giuseppe, Lisa. "Meloni prova a prendere le distanze dalla lobby nera, Jonghi Lavarini dimostra che a Milano era con lui" [Meloni tries to distance himself from the black lobby, Jonghi Lavarini proves that he was with him in Milan]. Editoriale Domani (in Italian). Archived from the original on 4 September 2022. Retrieved 4 September 2022. "Roberto Jonghi Lavarini Archivi" [Roberto Jonghi Lavarini Archives]. Open (in Italian). Archived from the original on 4 September 2022. Retrieved 4 September 2022. "Roberto Jonghi Lavarini e le foto con Meloni e Salvini: 'Nessuno faccia finta di non conoscermi'" [Roberto Jonghi Lavarini and the photos with Meloni and Salvini: 'Nobody pretends not to know me']. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). 10 February 2021. Archived from the original on 4 September 2022. Retrieved 4 September 2022. Scaffidi, Giuseppe Luca (10 October 2021). "Chi è Roberto Jonghi Lavarini, il 'Barone Nero' dell'inchiesta di Fanpage" [Who is Roberto Jonghi Lavarini, the 'Black Baron' of the Fanpage investigation]. Rolling Stone Italia (in Italian). Archived from the original on 4 September 2022. Retrieved 4 September 2022. "La fiamma, dal disegno di Almirante al nuovo logo di Fratelli d'Italia" [The flame, from Almirante's design to the new Fratelli d'Italia logo]. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). 12 April 2017. Archived from the original on 10 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Curridori, Francesco (15 October 2021). "Vogliono spegnere la fiamma tricolore" [They want to put out the tricolour flame]. Il Giornale (in Italian). Archived from the original on 5 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Elezioni, finora depositati 70 simboli. Meloni tiene la fiamma in quello di Fdi, Conte va personalmente al Viminale" [Elections, 70 symbols deposited so far. Meloni holds the flame in that of Fdi, Conte personally goes to the Viminale]. Il Fatto Quotidiano (in Italian). 13 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Cheles, Luciano (24 September 2022). "'Giorgia Meloni's cleverly constructed image helps make her radical ideas more digestible'". Le Monde. Archived from the original on 24 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. Updated 27 September 2022 Bruno, Valerio Alfonso; Downes, James F.; Scopelliti, Alessio (12 November 2021). "Post-Fascism in Italy: 'So Why This Flame Mrs. Giorgia Meloni'". Cultorico. Archived from the original on 24 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. Lawler, Dave (26 September 2022). "Europe's nationalists rebrand, and win". Axios. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2022. Artiaco, Ida (18 December 2021). "Meloni sull'inchiesta Lobby Nera di Fanpage: 'Non caccio i dirigenti Fdi per un aperitivo sbagliato'" [Meloni on Fanpage's Black Lobby investigation: 'I'm not chasing Fdi executives for a wrong aperitif']. Fanpage.it (in Italian). Archived from the original on 13 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Napoli, 'dirigenti e militanti di Fratelli d'Italia in posa mentre fanno il saluto romano'. L'Anpi condanna: 'Offesa grave per la città'" [Naples, 'Brothers of Italy leaders and militants posing while making the Roman salute'. The Anpi condemns: 'Serious offense for the city']. Il Fatto Quotidiano (in Italian). 31 December 2021. Archived from the original on 13 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Berizzi, Paolo (29 October 2019). "Neofascismo, ad Ascoli Piceno Fratelli d'Italia celebra la marcia su Roma con una cena-evento" [Neofascism, in Ascoli Piceno Fratelli d'Italia celebrates the march on Rome with a dinner-event]. La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 12 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Meloni alla Camera, cosa ha detto su fascismo e leggi razziali - Video - Adnkronos.com". www.adnkronos.com. Retrieved 10 November 2022. Morosi, Silvia (25 October 2022). "Leggi razziali, totalitarismi e violenza politica: così la premier condanna gli orrori del passato". Corriere della Sera. Retrieved 10 November 2022. "Meloni: 'Mai provato simpatie per i regimi, fascismo compreso'. Poi ancora: 'Non limiteremo mai i diritti esistenti' – IL DISCORSO – Politica". Agenzia ANSA (in Italian). 25 October 2022. Retrieved 10 November 2022. Kington, Tom; Willan, Philip (20 October 2023). "Giorgia Meloni separates from partner after threesome comment". The Times. Archived from the original on 20 October 2023. "Ginevra, 'sorellina d'Italia': è nata la bambina di Giorgia Meloni" [Geneva, 'little sister of Italy': Giorgia Meloni's baby girl was born]. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). 16 September 2016. Archived from the original on 25 March 2020. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "A destra vogliono una famiglia tradizionale. Ma non per loro" [On the right they want a traditional family. But not for them]. La Repubblica (in Italian). 30 August 2022. Archived from the original on 5 September 2022. Retrieved 5 September 2022. Italian PM Giorgia Meloni splits from partner after his sexist comments. The Guardian I fuorionda di Giambruno: frasi e battute sessiste. Quotidiano Nazionale Meloni: “La mia relazione con Andrea Giambruno finisce qui”. la Repubblica Giorgia Meloni annuncia la fine della relazione con Andrea Giambruno su Instagram. Open "'Woman, mother, Christian' guides Italian far-right to brink of power". Euractiv. Associated Press. 10 August 2022. Archived from the original on 22 August 2022. Retrieved 20 September 2022. "Meloni, Salvini, Berlusconi: The key figures in Italy's likely new government". The Local. 26 September 2022. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 20 September 2022. "Politics a family affair for Italy's far-right leader Giorgia Meloni". France 24. Agence France-Press. 28 September 2022. Archived from the original on 6 October 2022. Retrieved 28 October 2022. Kirby, Paul (25 September 2022). "Italy votes as far-right Meloni looks for victory". BBC News. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 25 September 2022. Guerrin, Michel (30 September 2022). "'Pour Giorgia Meloni, 'Le Seigneur des anneaux' n'est pas juste un roman adoré mais un programme'" [For Giorgia Meloni, 'The Lord of the Rings' is not just a beloved novel but a programme]. Le Monde (in French). Archived from the original on 30 September 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2022. Horowitz, Jason (21 September 2022). "Hobbits and the Hard Right: How Fantasy Inspires Italy's Potential New Leader". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 22 September 2022. Retrieved 22 September 2022. "Inspired by Tolkien, Meloni is on a quest for Italy's 'ring of power'". France 24. Agence France-Presse. 25 September 2022. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 27 September 2022. "Giorgia Meloni discusses love of JRR Tolkien at Rome exhibition". The Telegraph. 16 November 2023. Retrieved 16 February 2024. Farrell, Nicholas (27 September 2022). "It is absurd to call Giorgia Meloni 'far-Right'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 15 October 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2022. Kington, Tom (21 September 2022). "My win can help Spanish right triumph, says Giorgia Meloni". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Archived from the original on 30 September 2022. Retrieved 3 November 2022. "Ursula von der Leyen, Giorgia Meloni, Rihanna: chi sono le 100 donne più potenti del mondo" [Ursula von der Leyen, Giorgia Meloni, Rihanna: who are the 100 most powerful women in the world]. Forbes Italia (in Italian). 6 December 2022. Retrieved 14 December 2022. "The World's Most Powerful Women 2023". Forbes. 5 December 2023. Archived from the original on 5 December 2023. @niinisto (23 October 2023). "Good to meet with Prime Minister @GiorgiaMeloni in Rome" (Tweet) – via Twitter.[better source needed][failed verification] "Giorgia Meloni fa la storia: è la prima donna alla presidenza del Consiglio" [Giorgia Meloni makes history: she's the first female prime minister]. TGcom24 (in Italian). IPA. 21 October 2022. Archived from the original on 21 October 2022. Retrieved 27 October 2022. "Elezioni Camera 4 marzo 2018 – Collegio di Latina" [4 March 2018 elections to the Chamber – Constituency of Latina]. Eligendo Archivio (in Italian). Italian Ministry of the Interior. 4 March 2018. Archived from the original on 8 January 2022. Retrieved 27 October 2022. "Elezioni 2022: Dettaglio scrutini" [2022 elections: Ballot details] (in Italian). 25 September 2022. Archived from the original on 2 October 2022. Retrieved 27 October 2022. "Comunali 2016, a Roma Virginia Raggi al ballottaggio con Giachetti. Grillo: "Risultato storico"" [Comunali 2016, in Rome Virginia Raggi in the ballot with Giachetti. Cricket: "Historic result"] (in Italian). RAI. 6 June 2016. Archived from the original on 28 January 2023. Giorgia Meloni at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Giorgia Meloni at IMDb  Appearances on C-SPAN