Fiumicino (Italian: [fjumiˈtʃiːno]) is a town and comune in the Metropolitan City of Rome, Lazio, central Italy, with a population of 80,500 (2019). It is known for being the site of Leonardo da Vinci–Fiumicino Airport, the busiest airport in Italy and the tenth-busiest in Europe, which serves Rome and much of central Italy. The name literally means little river. The town of "Fiumicino" should not be confused with like-named Fiumicino, a small river near Rimini. Fiumicino became a comune in 1992; previously it was part of the municipality of Rome, being almost totally included in the former Municipio XIV. On 24 August 2013, a small mud volcano popped up at the centre of the via Coccia di Morto roundabout. Located by the Tyrrhenian coast. Fiumicino borders the municipalities of Anguillara Sabazia, Cerveteri, Ladispoli and Rome. It is on the northern side of the mouth of the river Tiber, next to Ostia. It includes the hamlets (frazioni) of Aeroporto "Leonardo da Vinci", Ara Nova (or Aranova), Casale del Castellaccio, Castel Campanile, Focene, Fregene, Isola Sacra, Le Vignole, Maccarese, Palidoro, Parco Leonardo, Passo Oscuro (or Passoscuro), Porto, Testa di Lepre, Torre in Pietra, Tragliata and Tragliatella. Fiumicino is home to the largest airport in Italy, the Leonardo da Vinci–Fiumicino Airport, which includes the Fiumicino Aeroporto railway station. In addition, Fiumicino has a large fishing center on the Tyrrhenian Sea coast and a sea resort.[citation needed] The Istituto di Istruzione Superiore Leonardo da Vinci is in Fiumicino. Leonardo da Vinci-Fiumicino Airport, also known as "Rome–Fiumicino", lies in the north-eastern suburb of the town. It is served by the A91 motorway from Rome and by the Roman Suburban Railway line FL1. The municipality contains the railway stations of Fiumicino Aeroporto and Parco Leonardo, both on the line FL1. Airport station is also served by a non-stop train from/to Roma Termini named the Leonardo Express. The other stations within the municipality, Maccarese–Fregene and Torre in Pietra–Palidoro, are on the Rome–Pisa line. The branch line from Parco Leonardo to the town's centre, including the stations of Porto, Fiumicino and Fiumicino Porto Canale, was closed in 2000. Mauro Galvano (b. 1964), boxer Gabriele Maruotti (b. 1988), volleyball player Simone Tiribocchi (b. 1978), football player Davide Mattei (b. 2001), rapper The church of Santa Maria della Salute The harbor by the Tiber′s mouth Fiumicino Airport Portus Isola Sacra 1973 Rome airport attacks and hijacking Rome and Vienna airport attacks "Superficie di Comuni Province e Regioni italiane al 9 ottobre 2011". Italian National Institute of Statistics. Retrieved 16 March 2019. (in Italian) Source: Istat 2015 Mini volcano pops up in Rome | euronews 41575 (x a j h) Fiumicino on OpenStreetMap "Istituto di Instruzione Superiore Leonardo da Vinci Retrieved on July 24, 2015. Old website (in Italian) Decree of suppression of the line Bivio Porto-Fiumicino (Italian Ministry of Transport) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Fiumicino. (in Italian) Comune of Fiumicino (in Italian) Fiumicino on comuni-italiani.it