"Shchedryk" (Ukrainian: Щедрик, from Щедрий вечiр, lit. 'Bountiful Evening') is a Ukrainian shchedrivka, or New Year's song, known in English as "The Little Swallow". It was arranged by the Ukrainian composer Mykola Leontovych between 1901 and 1919. The song tells a story of a swallow flying into a household to sing of the wealth that will come with the following spring. "Shchedryk" was originally sung on the night of January 13, New Year's Eve in the Julian Calendar (December 31 Old Style), known in Ukraine as Malanka or Shchedry Vechir [uk] ("Generous Evening"). Early performances of the piece were made by students at Kyiv University. The song was made into a Christmas carol, "Carol of the Bells", by the American composer and educator Peter J. Wilhousky, following a performance of the original song by Alexander Koshetz's Ukrainian National Chorus at Carnegie Hall on October 5, 1922. Wilhousky copyrighted and published his own lyrics in 1936. The music has since became strongly associated with Christmas. The song is an example of a Ukrainian shchedrivka [uk], whilst the English words of "The Little Swallow" identifies it as a koliadka. Shchedryk ("Bountiful Evening") is a Ukrainian shchedrivka, or New Year's song, known in English as "The Little Swallow". It tells the story of a swallow flying into a household to proclaim the plentiful and bountiful year that the family will have. The title is derived from the Ukrainian word for "bountiful". The song is based on a traditional folk chant whose language was thought to have magical properties. The original traditional Ukrainian text used a device known as hemiola in the rhythm (alternating the accents within each measure from 3/4 to 6/8 and back again). The chant based on an ostinato four-note pattern within the range of a minor third is thought to be of prehistoric origins and was associated with the coming New Year which in Ukraine before the introduction of Christianity was originally celebrated in April. Conceptually, the Ukrainian lyrics of this song meet the definition of a shchedrivka, while the English content of "The Little Swallow" identifies it as a koliadka. With the introduction of Christianity to Ukraine, the celebration of the New Year was moved from April to January and "Shchedryk" became associated with the Feast of Epiphany also known in Ukrainian as Shchedryi vechir, January 18 in the Julian calendar. It was originally sung on the night of January 13, New Year's Eve in the Julian Calendar (December 31 Old Style), which is Shchedryi vechir. In modern Ukraine, the song is again sung on the eve of the Julian New Year (January 13). "Shchedryk" A recording of "Shchedryk", with the original words in Ukrainian, performed by the "Ukrainian National Choir" (Ukrainian Republic Capella) in New York in 1922 Problems playing this file? See media help. The four-note melody over a minor third of the chant was used by Ukrainian composer and teacher Mykola Leontovych as an ostinato theme in several arrangements he made. It is the most famous of all his songs. "Shchedryk" is generally said to have been first performed by students at Kyiv University on 25 December 1916. However, it was first performed on 29 December 1916 in the Kyiv Merchants' Assembly Hall, now part of the National Philharmonic of Ukraine. The arrangement for mixed voice choir a cappella was popularised by the Ukrainian Republic Capella directed by Oleksander Koshetz when it toured Europe in 1920/21. The first recording was made in New York in October 1922 for Brunswick Records. "Shchedryk" was later adapted as an English Christmas carol, "Carol of the Bells", by Peter J. Wilhousky of NBC Radio, following a performance of the original song by Alexander Koshetz's Ukrainian National Chorus at Carnegie Hall on October 5, 1922. Wilhousky copyrighted and published his new lyrics (which were not based on the Ukrainian lyrics) in 1936, and the song became popular in the United States and Canada, where it became strongly associated with Christmas. Although "Carol of the Bells" uses the melody from "Shchedryk", the lyrics of these two songs have nothing in common. The ostinato of the Ukrainian song suggested to Wilhousky the sound of ringing bells, so he wrote lyrics on that theme. Several other lyricists have written for the same melody, usually retaining Wilhousky's bell theme. A 1947 version, "Ring, Christmas Bells", is a Christian devotional song. There is also an English adaptation of the original Ukrainian by Stepan Pasicznyk.[citation needed] In the 2022 Ukrainian historical drama film "Carol of the Bells", in the Christmas scene, children are caroling and singing "Shchedryk", and the role of "Shchedryk" itself in the film is a symbol of peace, hope, and faith in a better future. Koleda Malanka "The cultural code of Shchedryk". leontovych. Retrieved 2023-08-03. "Ukrainian National Chorus". www.carnegiehall.org. Retrieved 2022-12-07. "UKRAINIAN LIVE CLASSIC - Leontovych Mykola". ukrainianlive.org. Retrieved 2023-08-03. Almond, B.J. (16 December 2004). "Grad student traces origin of 'super holiday hit'". Houston, Texas: Present Rice University. Archived from the original on 29 September 2008. Retrieved 5 July 2008. Wytwycky, Wasyl. "Leontovych, Mykola". Internet Encyclopaedia of Ukraine. Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies. Retrieved 2 December 2022. Vysotska 2019, p. 78. Malko 2021, p. 41. "UKRAINIAN LIVE CLASSIC - Leontovych Mykola". ukrainianlive.org. Retrieved 2023-08-03. Nobbman 2000, p. 91. "Щедрик". Ukrainian Songs. Retrieved 2 December 2022. "Стандартна українська транслітерація" [Standard Ukrainian transliteration] (in Ukrainian). Webmezha. Retrieved 2 December 2022. "Історична драма "Щедрик": чому її варто подивитися кожному українцю". www.unian.ua (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 2024-03-10. Malko, Victoria A. (2021). The Ukrainian Intelligentsia and Genocide: the struggle for history, language, and culture in the 1920s and 1930s. London: Lexington Books. ISBN 978-14985-9-679-4. Nobbman, Dale V. (2000). Christmas Music Companion Fact Book: The Chronological History of Our Most Well-Known Traditional Christmas Hymns, Carols, Songs And the Writers & Composers Who Created Them. Anaheim Hills, California: Centerstream Publishing. ISBN 1574240676. Vysotska, Kateryna (2019). Brodz, Olena; Koshelnyk, Maryna (eds.). "Микола Леонтович: музична легенда Поділля" [Mykola Leontovych: a musical legend of Podillia] (PDF). Materials of the Scientific and Practical Conference for the 140th Anniversary of the Birth of M. D. Leontovich, December 13, 2017 (in Ukrainian). Vinnytsia, Ukraine: Vinnytsia Regional Museum of Local Lore. Retrieved 17 November 2022. (English text version) McCoy, Tatiana (15 January 2022). "Сумна доля веселого "Щедрика": ім'я Леонтовича замовчується, а етика ігнорується" [The sad fate of the cheerful "Schedryk": the name of Leontovych is silenced, and ethics are ignored] (in Ukrainian). Radio Svoboda. Retrieved 2 December 2022. Media related to Shchedryk at Wikimedia Commons Shchedryk/Щедрик on YouTube