Road signs in Latvia conform to the general pattern of those used in most other European countries. They are regulated in Ceļu satiksmes noteikumi and the standards documents LVS 77–1:2016 "Ceļa zīmes. 1. daļa: Ceļa zīmes", LVS 77-2:2016 "Ceļa zīmes. 2. daļa: Uzstādīšanas noteikumi" and LVS 77-3:2016 "Ceļa zīmes. 3. daļa: Tehniskās prasības" in conformity with the 1968 Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals. Latvia acceded to the Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals on October 19, 1992. During the 1920s and 1930s, Latvia had developed various road signs but after Latvia was occupied and later annexed by the Soviet Union during the World War II, it used the Soviet road sign standard before adopting its own. In 1980, the standard for road signs GOST 10807-78 (ГОСТ 10807-78) was adopted in the Soviet Union before its dissolution in 1991. After the restoration of the independence of Latvia in 1990, it became necessary to create its own standard for road signs in Latvia. Unlike most post-Soviet states, modern road signs in Latvia look different from those used in neighbouring Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, Lithuania. Latvian road signs use the DIN 1451 typeface. The text used on signs is in the state language, Latvian. Recently, some signs have been introduced with Latvian supplemented by Livonian and Latgalian. In November 2021, the first standard-compliant road sign with Latgalian was placed on the border of Balvi Municipality, with others being gradually installed in other locations in Latgale. In January 2023, the first of 171 approved signs with Livonian text were placed on the border of Talsi Municipality, with others expected to be placed in villages along the Livonian Coast. Crossroads without priority (give way to the vehicles coming from the right) Roundabout Dangerous curve to the right Dangerous curve to the left Double curve, first to the right Double curve, first to the left Road narrows on both sides Road narrows on right side Road narrows on left side Steep descent Steep ascent Uneven road Speed bumps Changing the road surface Slippery road Loose chippings Falling stones Roadworks ahead Dangerous shoulder Pedestrian crossing Children Two-way traffic Traffic signals ahead Animals e.g for cattle Animals e.g for deer Swing bridge Unproteceted quayside or riverbank ahead Sidewinds Low-flying aircraft Cyclists Tram Crossing Level crossing ahead, with gates Level crossing ahead, without gates Level crossing (single track) Level crossing (multiple tracks) Level crossing countdown Level crossing countdown Level crossing countdown Level crossing countdown Level crossing countdown Level crossing countdown Other dangers Traffic jams Priority road End of priority road Junction with minor road Junction with minor road (from the right) Junction with minor road (from the left) Give way Stop Give priority to oncoming traffic Priority over oncoming traffic No entry Closed to all vehicles in both directions No motor vehicles except motorcycles No motorcycles No cycles No trucks No trailers No tractors No pedestrians Width limit Height limit Mass limit Mass limit per axle Length limit No right turn No left turn No U-turn Minimum separation No overtaking End of overtaking prohibition No overtaking by trucks End of overtaking prohibition by trucks Maximum speed limit End of maximum speed limit No audible warning devices No stopping or standing No parking or waiting Alternate parking on odd days Alternate parking on even days End of all prohibitions Customs Police Driving further is dangerous No vehicles carrying dangerous goods Ahead only Turn right Turn left Straight ahead or right turn permitted Straight ahead or left turn permitted Turn left or right Turn right Turn left Roundabout ahead Pass side from right Pass side from left Pass either side Cycle path End of cycle path Pedestrian path End of pedestrian path Cycle and pedestrian path End of cycle and pedestrian path Segregated cycle and pedestrian path End of segregated cycle and pedestrian path Cycle and pedestrian path End of segregated cycle and pedestrian path Minimum speed End of minimum speed Proceed straight for vehicles carrying dangerous goods Proceed right for vehicles carrying dangerous goods Proceed left for vehicles carrying dangerous goods One-way street End of one-way street One-way street to the right One-way street to the left Bus lane End of bus lane A road with a contraflow bus lane End of the road with a contraflow bus lane Exit to the road with a contraflow bus lane to the left Exit to the road with a contraflow bus lane to the right Minimum driving speed limit in lanes Maximum driving speed limit in lanes Driving directions in lanes Driving direction in the lane (proceed straight) Driving direction in the lane (turn right) Driving direction in the lane (turn left) Driving direction in the lane (proceed straight or turn right) Driving direction in the lane (proceed straight or keep left) Settlement End of settlement Settlement End of settlement No parking area Customs area End of no parking area End of customs area Speed limit zone End of speed limit zone Pedestrian zone End of pedestrian zone Parking zone End of parking zone Recommended speed zone End of recommended speed zone Home zone End of home zone Pedestrian crossing Pedestrian crossing Parking End of Parking Paid parking End of paid parking Bus stop Tram stop Taxi stop Tunnel Tunnel stop Stop line Border area End of border area Borderland End of borderland Border control point Road for motor vehicles End of road for motor vehicles Forced stop Locality End of locality Medical aid point Hospital Gas station Park and Ride facilities Maintenance point Car wash Telephone Restaurant Cafe Hotel, motel or guest house Youth tourism center Camping Caravan parking Camping and caravan parking Resting place Pedestrian route Toilet Swimming pool Tourist information Police Traffic police Mail Radio channel for providing road traffic information Airport (airfield) Bus station Railway station Sea passenger station Ferry Cargo port Information block A remarkable place Fire extinguisher Emergency phone Rural tourism seat Preliminary direction indicator Preliminary direction indicator Preliminary direction indicator Preliminary direction indicator Preliminary direction indicator Direction indicator Direction indicator Direction indicator Direction indicator Direction indicator Direction indicator Distance indicator Distance indicator River name Driving scheme Obstacle bypass direction Dead end Dead end on the right Dead end on the left Start of lane on the right Start of lane on the left End of lane on the right End of land on the left Driving directions in lanes (no trucks allowed in one lane) Driving directions in lanes Driving directions in lanes Lane adherence to base lanes Lane adherence to base lanes U-turn permitted Traffic restrictions in Latvia Recommended speed Driving direction of trucks (proceed straight) Driving direction of trucks (turn right) Driving direction of trucks (turn left) Pedestrian underpass or overpass Scheme of bypass road Direction of bypass road (proceed straight) Direction of bypass road (turn right) Direction of bypass road (turn left) End of detour Pointer to reorder Pointer to reorder Pointer to reorder Pointer to reorder Pointer to reorder Kilometer indicator European route number Motorway number Regional road number European route number and direction Motorway number and direction Regional road number and direction Road with reverse traffic End of road with reverse traffic Departure on a road with reverse traffic EU country border Name of the administrative territory Tourist sign Emergency exit Emergency exit direction Distance Stop ahead Length Coverage area Coverage area Coverage area Coverage area Coverage area Coverage area Coverage area Coverage area Coverage area Coverage area Directions of action Directions of action Directions of action Driving lane Type of vehicle (truck) Type of vehicle (truck with lane) Type of vehicle (car) Type of vehicle (bus) Type of vehicle (tractor) Type of vehicle (motorcycle) Type of vehicle (bike) Working days Weekends and holidays Validity period Validity period in working days Validity period in weekends and holidays Type of vehicle parking Type of vehicle parking Type of vehicle parking Type of vehicle parking Type of vehicle parking Type of vehicle parking Type of vehicle parking Type of vehicle parking Type of vehicle parking Type of vehicle parking Parking time Automobile viewing area Limitation of the permitted maximum mass Blind pedestrians Disabled people Wet cover Slippery cover Direction of the main road A tow truck is working Other additional information Speed bump Paid parking time Turn off the engine Photo radar Information about the bicycle path Information about the bicycle path Information about the bicycle path Bicycle route EuroVelo cycle route Supply of goods Electric cars "Ceļu satiksmes noteikumi". Likumi.lv (in Latvian). 2015-06-02. Retrieved 2022-12-30. "Ceļa zīmes no bērza saplākšņa" (PDF). Troja.lv. "United Nations Treaty Collection". treaties.un.org. Retrieved 2023-12-09. Lazdiņš, Viesturs (1982). Autopārvadājumi (PDF) (in Latvian). p. 52. "Vertikālo ceļa zīmju piegādes tehniskie noteikumi TL-VZ 2004". europa.eu (in Latvian). "Balvu novadā ceļazīmes arī latgaliešu rakstu valodā" [Balvi Municipality gets road signs with written Latgalian]. Lsm.lv (in Latvian). 2021-11-24. Retrieved 2023-07-19. "Re:voice - The First Livonian Language Road Sign Unveiled in Latvia". revoice.falmouth.ac.uk. Retrieved 2023-07-19. Ozola-Balode, Zanda (2023-01-27). "Talsu novada nosaukums tagad arī lībiešu valodā; šādi uzraksti būs vismaz 14 piekrastes ciemos" [The sign of the name of Talsi Municipality now also in Livonian; similar signs will be placed in 44 Livonian Coast villages]. Lsm.lv (in Latvian). Retrieved 2023-07-19. Comparison of European road signs Comparison of traffic signs in post-Soviet states