The 2023 IIHF World Championship Division IV was an international ice hockey tournament run by the International Ice Hockey Federation. The tournament was held in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia from 23 to 26 March 2023 after the original hosts, Kuwait, withdrew from hosting the tournament. Four nations participated in the tournament, including Mongolia, who returned to the World Championships after a ten-year absence. Indonesia and the Philippines made their debut in the World Championships. Originally, the Philippines had made its debut, but withdrew before last year's tournament began due to players, coaches and staffs being affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. The Philippines won the tournament and were promoted to Division III B. Three referees and four linesmen were selected for the tournament. Source: IIHF Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) head-to-head points; 3) head-to-head goal difference; 4) head-to-head number of goals scored; 5) result against closest best-ranked team outside tied teams; 6) result against second-best ranked team outside tied teams; 7) seeding before tournament. (H) Host All times are local (UTC+8) List shows the top skaters sorted by points, then goals. GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points; +/− = P Plus–minus; PIM = Penalties In Minutes Source: IIHF.com Only the top five goaltenders, based on save percentage, who have played at least 40% of their team's minutes, are included in this list. TOI = Time On Ice (minutes:seconds); GA = Goals against; GAA = Goals against average; Sv% = Save percentage; SO = Shutouts Source: IIHF.com Merk, Martin (30 September 2022). "Championship updates". International Ice Hockey Federation. Самбууням.М (4 January 2023). "Mongolia to Host 2023 IIHF World Championship Division IV in March". Mongolian National News Agency. Merk, Martin (27 September 2022). "New era for Mongolia". International Ice Hockey Federation. Merk, Martin (13 December 2021). "Debut for Philippines postponed". International Ice Hockey Federation. "Golden debut for the Philippines". International Ice Hockey Federation. 27 March 2023. "Competition officials" (PDF). IIHF. Retrieved 22 March 2023. "Best Players Selected by the Directorate" (PDF). IIHF. Retrieved 26 March 2023. Official website