The 79th annual Venice International Film Festival was held from 31 August to 10 September 2022. Noah Baumbach's White Noise was the festival's opening film, and Francesco Carrozzini's The Hanging Sun was the closing film. American actress Julianne Moore was the Jury President of the Main Competition. Laura Poitras' All the Beauty and the Bloodshed was the winner of the Golden Lion, making it the second documentary, following Gianfranco Rosi's Sacro GRA in 2013, to win the festival's top prize. American filmmaker Paul Schrader and French actress Catherine Deneuve were awarded the Golden Lion for Lifetime Achievement. Julianne Moore, American actress and author - Jury President Mariano Cohn, Argentine director, screenwriter and producer Leonardo Di Costanzo, Italian director and screenwriter Audrey Diwan, French director and screenwriter Leila Hatami, Iranian actress Kazuo Ishiguro, British novelist and screenwriter Rodrigo Sorogoyen, Spanish director and screenwriter Isabel Coixet, Spanish filmmaker - Jury President Laura Bispuri, Italian filmmaker Antonio Campos, American filmmaker and producer Sofia Djama, Algerian filmmaker Édouard Waintrop [fr], French Michelangelo Frammartino, Italian filmmaker - Jury President Jan P. Matuszyński, Polish filmmaker Ana Rocha de Sousa, Portuguese filmmaker and actress Tessa Thompson, American actress Rosalie Varda, French costume designer, producer, writer and actress May Abdalla - Jury President David Adler Blanca Li The following films were selected for the main international competition: Highlighted title indicates Golden Lion winner. The following films were selected to be screened out of competition: The lineup of films selected for the Horizons section is as follows: Highlighted title indicates Orizzonti award winner. Highlighted title indicates Orizzonti Extra award winner. The lineup of films selected for the Venice Immersive section is as follows: The lineup of films selected for the 37th Venice International Critics' Week is as follows: The following official awards were presented at the 79th Edition: Golden Lion: All the Beauty and the Bloodshed by Laura Poitras Grand Jury Prize: Saint Omer by Alice Diop Silver Lion: Bones and All by Luca Guadagnino Volpi Cup for Best Actress: Cate Blanchett for Tár Volpi Cup for Best Actor: Colin Farrell for The Banshees of Inisherin Golden Osella for Best Screenplay: The Banshees of Inisherin by Martin McDonagh Special Jury Prize: No Bears by Jafar Panahi Marcello Mastroianni Award: Taylor Russell for Bones and All Paul Schrader Catherine Deneuve Best Film: World War III by Houman Seyyedi Best Director: Vera by Tizza Covi and Rainer Frimmel Special Jury Prize: Bread and Salt by Damian Kocur Best Actress: Vera Gemma for Vera Best Actor: Mohsen Tanabandeh for World War III Best Screenplay: Blanquita by Fernando Guzzoni Best Short Film: Snow in September by Lkhagvadulam Purev-Ochir Audience Award: Nezouh by Soudade Kaadan Luigi De Laurentis Award for a Debut Film: Saint Omer by Alice Diop Best Experience: The Man Who Couldn't Leave by Chen Singing Grand Jury Prize: From the Main Square by Pedro Harres Special Jury Prize: Eggscape by German Heller The following collateral awards were conferred to films of the autonomous sections: Grand Prize: Eismayer by David Wagner Jury special mention: Anhell69 by Theo Montoya The Film Club Audience award: Margini by Niccolò Falsetti Verona Film Club Award: Anhell69 by Theo Montoya Mario Serandrei: Anhell69 by Theo Montoya Best Short Film: Sapling by Lorenzo Fabbro and Bronte Stahl Best Director: Albertine Where Are You? by Maria Guidone Best Technical Contribution: Reginetta by Federico Russotto Europa Cinemas Label Award: Dirty, Difficult, Dangerous by Wissam Charaf GdA Director's Award: Wolf and Dog by Cláudia Varejão People Choice's Award: Blue Jean by Georgia Oakley BNL Gruppo BNP Paribas People's Choice Award: The Maiden by Graham Foy Skin Deep by Alex Schaad Best Film of Venezia 79: Athena by Romain Gavras Best Italian Film in Venice: Monica by Andrea Pallaoro Best Directing: Dogborn by Isabella Carbonell Best Directing: Ordinary Failures by Cristina Grosan Special Mention: The Last Queen by Adila Bendimerad and Damien Ounouri Special Mention: Have You Seen This Woman? by Dušan Zorić and Matija Gluščević Special Mention: Blue Jean by Georgia Oakley Lord of the Ants by Gianni Amelio Saint Omer by Alice Diop Nuclear by Oliver Stone Golden Musa: Music for Black Pigeons by Jørgen Leth and Andreas Koefoed Golden Musa: Saint Omer by Alice Diop The Whale by Darren Aronofsky Special Mention: No Bears by Jafar Panahi Saint Omer by Alice Diop The Sitting Duck by Jean-Paul Salomé Special Mention: Princess by Roberto De Paolis (treatment of issues related to environment) Special Mention: Hanging Gardens by Ahmed Yassin Al Daradji (treatment of issues related to work) Graffetta d'Oro for Best Film: Don't Worry Darling by Olivia Wilde Nave d'Argento for Best OTP: to the characters Charles Eismayer and Mario Falak in Eismayer by David Wagner XR Fan Experience: Lustration by Ryan Griffen XR Special Mention: Fight Back by Celine Tricart Gli ultimi giorni dell'umanità by Enrico Ghezzi and Alessandro Gagliardo Special Mention for Best Film: Burning Hearts by Pippo Mezzapesa Special Mention for Best Short Film: Albertine Where Are You? by Maria Guidone Best Film (main competition): Argentina, 1985 by Santiago Mitre Best Film (other sections): Autobiography by Makbul Mubarak Dry by Paolo Virzì White Noise by Noah Baumbach Special Mention: Dry by Paolo Virzì The Whale by Darren Aronofsky Nezouh by Soudade Kaadan The Whale by Darren Aronofsky Cinema for UNICEF: Athena by Romain Gavras Chiara by Susanna Nicchiarelli Special Mention: A Guerra Finita by Simone Massi Best New Young Actor: Leonardo Maltese for Lord of the Ants Best New Young Actress: Margherita Mazzucco for Chiara Best Production Director: Barbara Busso for Lord of the Ants Best Camera Operator: Cesare Pascarella for Lord of the Ants Best Costume Tailoring: Laura Montaldi for Chiara Leonardo Maltese for Lord of the Ants Chiara by Susanna Nicchiarelli Special Mention: Argentina, 1985 by Santiago Mitre All the Beauty and the Bloodshed by Laura Poitras Best Italian Film: Chiara by Susanna Nicchiarelli Best Foreign Film: The Whale by Darren Aronofsky Best Soundtrack: Dry, soundtrack by Franco Piersanti Lifetime Achievement Award: Stefano Bollani Special Mention: Sergio Leone: The Italian Who Invented America, soundtrack by Rodrigo D'Erasmo Bardo, False Chronicle of a Handful of Truths by Alejandro González Iñárritu "Rocío Munos Morales to host the opening and closing nights of Venezia 79". 6 May 2022. Archived from the original on 11 May 2022. Retrieved 28 June 2022. "Venice film festival unveils 2022 line-up - follow live". ScreenDaily. Archived from the original on 26 July 2022. Retrieved 26 July 2022. "Venice Film Festival Unveils Competition Lineup (Updating Live)". The Hollywood Reporter. 26 July 2022. Archived from the original on 26 July 2022. Retrieved 26 July 2022. "Venice Film Festival Winners: Cate Blanchett, Colin Farrell Take Top Acting Prizes – Updating Live". Deadline Hollywood. 10 September 2022. Retrieved 10 September 2022. "Festival di Venezia: Leone d'oro alla carriera a Paul Schrader". RaiNews24 (in Italian). 4 May 2022. Archived from the original on 28 June 2022. Retrieved 28 June 2022. "Venezia, Leone d'Oro alla carriera a Catherine Deneuve". ANSA (in Italian). 4 June 2022. Archived from the original on 9 June 2022. Retrieved 28 June 2022. Vivarelli, Nick (15 July 2022). "Julianne Moore to Head Venice Jury Also Comprising Audrey Diwan, Leila Hatami, Kazuo Ishiguro". Variety. Archived from the original on 15 July 2022. Retrieved 15 July 2022. Vivarelli, Nick (20 July 2022). "Spanish Director Isabel Coixet to Head Venice Horizons Jury". Variety. Archived from the original on 20 July 2022. Retrieved 20 July 2022. "Oficial line-up of Venice Immersive 2022". La Biennale. 2 September 2022. Archived from the original on 10 August 2022. Retrieved 4 September 2022. Vivarelli, Nick; Ravindran, Manori (26 July 2022). "Venice Lines Up New Movies From Darren Aronofsky, Laura Poitras, Olivia Wilde, Alejandro G. Iñárritu, Florian Zeller – Full Lineup". Variety. Archived from the original on 26 July 2022. Retrieved 26 July 2022. Vivarelli, Nick; Ravindran, Manori (26 July 2022). "Venice Lines Up New Movies From Darren Aronofsky, Laura Poitras, Olivia Wilde, Alejandro G. Iñárritu, Florian Zeller – Full Lineup". Variety. Archived from the original on 26 July 2022. Retrieved 26 July 2022. "Biennale Cinema 2022 | Venice Immersive". La Biennale. 6 July 2022. Archived from the original on 2 September 2022. Retrieved 4 September 2022. Dalton, Ben (25 July 2022). "Venice Critics' Week to open with drag queen drama 'Three Nights A Week', unveils full selection". ScreenDaily. Archived from the original on 25 July 2022. Retrieved 25 July 2022. Vivarelli, Nick (28 July 2022). "Shia LaBeouf Resurfaces as a Saint in Abel Ferrara's 'Padre Pio,' Launching From Venice Days – Full Lineup". Variety. Archived from the original on 28 July 2022. Retrieved 28 July 2022. "COLLATERAL AWARDS OF THE 79TH VENICE FILM FESTIVAL". labiennale.org. 10 September 2022. Retrieved 10 September 2022. Official website