Christopher Maurice Brown (born May 5, 1989) is an American singer, songwriter, dancer, and actor. He is regarded as one of the most prominent artists in R&B music, being credited as an evolver of the genre, and often being referred to by contemporaries as the "King of R&B". His R&B has been characterized by several influences from other genres, mainly pop music and hip hop. His lyrics develop predominantly over emotional and hedonistic themes. Brown has had wide comparisons to Michael Jackson for his singing and dancing abilities. In 2004, Brown signed with Jive Records and released his eponymous debut studio album the following year, which was later certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). With his debut single "Run It!" (featuring Juelz Santana) peaking atop the Billboard Hot 100, Brown became the first male artist since 1995 to have his debut single top the chart. His second album, Exclusive (2007), was met with further commercial success worldwide, and spawned his second Billboard Hot 100 number one "Kiss Kiss" (featuring T-Pain). In 2009, Brown received much media attention after pleading guilty to felony assault of his then-girlfriend, singer Rihanna; he was sentenced to five years of probation and six months of community service, with his personal life and legal issues being highly publicized by media outlets in the following years. This foresaw the release of his third album, Graffiti which was considered to be a commercial failure compared to his previous works. Following Graffiti, Brown released his fourth album F.A.M.E. (2011), which became his first album to top the Billboard 200. The album contained the commercially successful singles: "Yeah 3x", "Look at Me Now" (featuring Lil Wayne and Busta Rhymes) and "Beautiful People" (featuring Benny Benassi), and earned him the Grammy Award for Best R&B Album. His fifth album, Fortune, released in 2012, also topped the Billboard 200. Following the releases of X (2014) and Royalty (2015), both peaking in the top three of the Billboard 200, his eighth album, Heartbreak on a Full Moon, a double-disc LP consisting of 45 tracks, was certified gold by the RIAA for combined sales and album-equivalent units of over 500,000 after one week, and was later certified double platinum. Brown's ninth studio album, Indigo (2019) found similar success, debuting atop the Billboard 200. It included the single "No Guidance" (featuring Drake) which broke the record for the longest-running number one on Billboard's R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay chart. Its chart success was outdone with the single "Go Crazy" (with Young Thug) released the following year, which broke Brown's own record for the longest-running number one on Billboard's R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay chart set previously by "No Guidance". In 2022, his Indigo album spawned a sleeper hit with its song "Under the Influence", which was re-released as a single. Brown has sold over 140 million records worldwide, making him one of the world's best-selling music artists. He's gained a cult following, and is one of the highest-grossing African American touring artists of all time. In terms of charts and certifications, Brown holds the record for the most Billboard Hot 100 entries of any male singer in history, the most top 40 hits of any R&B singer in history, the most RIAA gold certified singles of any male singer in history, and the most RIAA multi-platinum singles of any male singer in history. At the end of 2019, Billboard named Brown the third most successful artist of the 2010s decade in R&B and hip-hop music, behind Drake and Rihanna in first and second, respectively. Additionally, Brown has won a total of 199 awards from 513 nominations over the course of his career. Brown has also pursued an acting career. In 2007, he made his on-screen feature film debut in Stomp the Yard, and appeared as a guest on the television series The O.C. Other films Brown has appeared in include This Christmas (2007), Takers (2010), Think Like a Man (2012), Battle of the Year (2013) and She Ball (2021). Christopher Maurice Brown was born on May 5, 1989, in the small town of Tappahannock, Virginia, to Joyce Hawkins, a former day care center director, and Clinton Brown, a corrections officer at a local prison. He has an older sister, Lytrell Bundy, who works in a bank. Music was always present in Brown's life beginning in his childhood. He would listen to soul albums that his parents owned, and eventually began to show interest in the hip-hop scene. Brown taught himself to sing and dance at a young age and often cites Michael Jackson as his inspiration. He began to perform in his church choir and in several local talent shows. Brown said, during a 2023 interview with Shannon Sharpe, that he started to take in consideration music as his job after winning a talent show during a summer camp when he was 11 years old, performing Sisqó’s "Thong Song": "The camp leaders, they laughed, but everybody kinda went crazy in there and I was like 'I think I can do this'." When he mimicked an Usher performance of "My Way", his mother recognized his vocal talent, and they began to look for the opportunity of a record deal. At the same time, Brown was going through personal issues. His parents had divorced, and his mother's boyfriend terrified him by subjecting her to domestic violence. In a 2017 self-documentary, Welcome to My Life, Brown goes into detail about the abusive relationship. Brown said that when he was six, his mother's partner shot himself in the head, but did not die. The gunshot blinded him, the physical impairment only adding to his rage. His mother's partner took his anger and frustration out on Hawkins: "I had to hear my mom get beat up every night. I’d pee on myself, just scared to even walk out into the hallway, because I didn’t want to see nothing". At age 13, Brown was discovered by Hitmission Records, a local production team that visited the gas station where his father worked, while searching for new talent. Around the same time, he performed with one of his production managers’ son, named TJ, for hip hop artist Puff Daddy, but the rapper refused to sign him to his record label Bad Boy Records. Hitmission's Lamont Fleming provided voice coaching for Brown. The team helped to arrange a demo package, under the name of "C. Sizzle", and approached contacts in New York. Tina Davis, senior A&R executive at Def Jam Recordings, heard the demo package that Brown's local team had sent to Def Jam, and among the artists contained in the CD she was impressed by Brown with his track "Whose Girl Is That". Davis later had Brown auditioning in her New York office, and she immediately took him to meet the former president of the Island Def Jam Music Group, Antonio "L.A." Reid, who offered to sign him that day, but Brown refused his proposal because Reid wouldn't talk to his mother. Brown then started to sojourn in Harlem, New York, to seek a record deal. The negotiations with Def Jam continued for two months, and ended when Davis lost her job due to a corporate merger. Brown asked her to be his manager, and once Davis accepted, she promoted the singer to other labels such as Jive Records, J-Records and Warner Bros. Records. "I knew that Chris had real talent," says Davis. "I just knew I wanted to be part of it." Brown attended Essex High School in Virginia until late 2004, when he moved to New York to pursue his music career. According to Mark Pitts, in an interview with HitQuarters, Davis presented Brown with a video recording, and Pitts' reaction was: "I saw huge potential ... I didn't love all the records, but I loved his voice. It wasn't a problem because I knew that he could sing, and I knew how to make records." Brown ultimately chose Jive due to its successful work with then-young acts such as Britney Spears and Justin Timberlake. Brown stated, "I picked Jive because they had the best success with younger artists in the pop market, [...] I knew I was going to capture my African American audience, but Jive had a lot of strength in the pop area as well as longevity in careers." Brown said in a 2013 interview, that during his permanence in Harlem, when he was trying to get his music heard by major labels, his artistic intention was to both rap and sing on his records, but Jive convinced him to stick to just singing, because according to him "it wasn't acceptable yet" for an R&B singer to also rap on records. After signing to Jive Records in 2004, Brown began recording his self-titled debut studio album in February 2005. By May, there were 50 songs already recorded, 14 of which were picked to the final track listing. The singer worked with several producers and songwriters—Scott Storch, Cool & Dre, Sean Garrett and Jazze Pha among them—commenting that they "really believed in [him]". Brown co-wrote half of the tracks. "I write about the things that 16 year olds go through every day," says Brown. "Like you just got in trouble for sneaking your girl into the house, or you can't drive, so you steal a car or something." The whole album took less than eight weeks to produce. In 2023, Brown described working on his first album as a "learning experience", recalling that he felt "insecure" about releasing "Run It!" as his first single. The album's lead single, "Run It!", was a great commercial success, making Brown the first male act (since Montell Jordan in 1995) to have his debut single to reach the summit of the Billboard Hot 100—later remaining for four additional weeks. Three of the other singles—"Yo (Excuse Me Miss)", "Gimme That" and "Say Goodbye"—found similar success, peaking within the top twenty at the same chart. Released on November 29, 2005, the self-titled Chris Brown album debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 with first week sales of 154,000 copies. Decca Aitkenhead of The Guardian defined it as "a smooth slice of commercial R&B". Chris Brown sold over three million copies in the United States—where it was certified three times platinum by the RIAA—and six million copies worldwide. On June 13, 2006, Brown released a DVD entitled Chris Brown's Journey, which shows footage of him traveling through England and Japan, getting ready for his first visit to the Grammy Awards, behind the scenes of his music videos and bloopers. On August 17, 2006, to further promote the album, Brown began his major co-headlining tour, The Up Close and Personal Tour. Due to the tour, production for his next album was pushed back two months. St. Jude Children's Research Hospital received $10,000 in ticket proceeds from Brown's 2006 "Up Close & Personal" tour. Brown has made appearances on UPN's One on One and The N's Brandon T. Jackson Show on its pilot episode. In January 2007, Brown landed a small role as a band geek in the fourth season of the American television series The O.C.. Brown then made his film debut in Stomp the Yard, alongside Ne-Yo, Meagan Good and Columbus Short on January 12, 2007. In April 2007, Brown was the opening act for Beyoncé, on the Australian leg of her The Beyoncé Experience tour. On July 9, 2007, Brown was featured in an episode of MTV's My Super Sweet 16 (for the event, it was retitled: Chris Brown: My Super 18) celebrating his eighteenth birthday in New York City. Shortly after ending his summer tour with Ne-Yo, Brown quickly began production for his second studio album, Exclusive. The album's lead single, "Wall to Wall" was released, and it didn't reach the chart success of his previous singles, peaking at number 79 on US Billboard Hot 100 chart, and number 22 on the US Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, being his lowest charting single at the time. However, "Kiss Kiss", featuring and produced by T-Pain, released as the album's second single, received huge success, reaching number one on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart, and becoming Brown's second number one single following "Run It!" in 2005. "With You", produced by Stargate (duo of producers known at the time for their work with R&B singer Ne-Yo), was released as the third single from Exclusive, and had even bigger worldwide success than "Kiss Kiss", becoming one of the all-time best-selling singles, and reaching number two on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart. Exclusive was released in the United States on November 6, 2007. According to The Guardian the album demonstrated "his agility in fusing R&B with the era’s auto-tuned strain of pop-leaning hip-hop". The album debuted at number four on the US Billboard 200 chart, selling 294,000 copies in its first week, becoming a bigger commercial success than his previous outing. Exclusive was certified four times platinum by the RIAA. In November 2007, Brown starred as a video host for St. Jude Children's Research Hospital's Math-A-Thon program. He showed his support by encouraging students to use their math skills to help children with cancer and other catastrophic diseases. On November 21, 2007, Brown appeared as a leading role in This Christmas, a family drama starring Regina King. He also contributed to the soundtrack of the movie, that contains his cover versions of "Try a Little Tenderness" and "This Christmas", the latter has been certified Platinum by the RIAA. To further support the album Exclusive, Brown embarked on his The Exclusive Holiday Tour, visiting over thirty venues in United States. The tour began in Cincinnati, Ohio, on December 6, 2007, and concluded on February 9, 2008, in Honolulu, Hawaii. In March 2008, Brown was featured on Jordin Sparks' single "No Air", which received worldwide success, peaking at number three on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart. He also made a guest appearance on David Banner' single "Get Like Me" alongside Yung Joc. The song peaked at number sixteen on the Billboard Hot 100, and number two on the US Hot Rap Songs chart. In 2008, Brown did of a commercial spot for Doublemint gum, creating a jingle commissioned by an advertising company working for Wrigley. Brown first created the short version for the commercial, then extended and expanded it into a full song named "Forever" during another recording session. "Forever" was later released as a single anticipating Brown's re-issue of Exclusive. The song was noted for being Brown's first record to adventure into the dance-pop genre, becoming one of his biggest singles, reaching number two on Billboard Hot 100. Billboard wrote positively of the single, stating in its 2008 review that Brown "has proved as 2008's pop/R&B prince that he has talent and charm to command the charts for as long he chooses". The re-issue titled Exclusive: The Forever Edition was released on June 3, 2008, seven months after the original version, featuring four new tracks, and pushed the album's success further. In August 2008, Brown guest-starred on Disney's The Suite Life of Zack & Cody as himself. Towards the end of 2008, Brown was named Artist of the Year by Billboard magazine, with the songs "With You", "Forever" and "No Air" resulting three of the top 10 most sold singles in the United States of 2008. In 2008, Brown began work on his third studio album, announced to be called Graffiti, promising to experiment with a different musical direction inspired by singers Prince and Michael Jackson. He stated, "I wanted to change it up and really be different. Like my style nowadays, I don't try to be typical urban. I want to be like how Prince, Michael and Stevie Wonder were. They can cross over to any genre of music." Following the domestic violence scandal involving Brown and his then-girlfriend Rihanna on February 8, 2009, a major part of mass media took positions against the singer. The scandal also caused Brown to lose significant endorsements, including the one with Doublemint, with some music stations across the United States briefly banning Brown's songs. The singer later participated in numerous television appearances during the year to express himself publicly about it. He spoke about it to ABC News: "I never ever had problems with anger. No, no domestic violence with any of my past girlfriends or any altercations. I never was that kind of person. I look at it, and it's really, like really difficult. It's like, 'How could I be that person?'". In the 2017 self-documentary, Welcome to My Life, Brown says his reputation dropped sharply after his 2009 assault on Rihanna, "I went from being on top of the world, number one songs, being kind of like America's sweetheart, to being public enemy number one." Graffiti's lead single "I Can Transform Ya" was released on September 29, 2009. The song peaked at number 20 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart. "Crawl" was released as the album's second single on November 23, 2009. The song reached number 53 on the Billboard Hot 100. Graffiti was then released on December 8, 2009. Brown, with this album, started to take full control of his art, managing the artistic direction, and writing every song of the album (with the exception of the song "I'll Go", written and produced by Brian Kennedy and James Fauntleroy). He said that his decision to entirely direct and write his albums and songs came from the fact that he wanted to give his "own perspective of the music [he] wanted to make" and by his wanting to "verbalize whatever [he] was going through". Critics noted that with the album's sound Brown aimed to expand his music beyond the genres of his previous works. According to Mikael Wood of Los Angeles Times, the album is made of an "upbeat" part, that "can be considered the sonic sequel to "Forever"", mixed with power ballads, observed to express his remorse and feelings following the Rihanna incident. The album, compared to its two precessors, was a commercial and critical failure, debuting at number 7 on the US Billboard 200 chart, selling 102,000 copies in its first week, and receiving generally negative reviews from critics. Despite this, Graffiti was nominated for two Grammy Awards; including one for the Best Contemporary R&B Album and the other for the Best R&B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals for the track, "Take My Time" featuring Tank. As of March 23, 2011, it has sold 341,000 copies in the United States. While performing a Michael Jackson Tribute at the 2010 BET Awards, Brown started to cry and fell to his knees while singing Jackson's "Man in the Mirror". The performance and his emotional turmoil resonated with several celebrities present at the ceremony, including Trey Songz, Diddy and Taraji P. Henson. Songz said, "He left his heart on the stage. He gave genuine emotion. I was proud of him and I was happy for him for having that moment". Michael's brother, Jermaine Jackson, expressed similar sentiments stating, "it was very emotional for me, because it was an acceptance from his fans from what has happened to him and also paying tribute to my brother". Later during the award ceremony, Brown stated, "I let y'all down before, but I won't do it again...I promise", while accepting the award for the AOL Fandemonium prize. In August 2010, Brown starred alongside an ensemble cast, including Matt Dillon, Paul Walker, Idris Elba, Hayden Christensen and T.I. in the crime thriller Takers, and also served as executive producer of the film. During 2010, Brown released three free mixtapes: In My Zone (Rhythm & Streets), Fan of a Fan (collaborative mixtape with rapper Tyga), and In My Zone 2, which featured a new writing style for the singer, and a different musical style, mixing R&B with hip hop. For the mixtapes he worked with new producers, most notably Kevin McCall. The mixtapes received a great response from the artist's core audience, consolidating it. The single "Deuces", extracted from the Fan of a Fan mixtape, obtained critical and commercial success, peaking at number 1 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs. The song was later remixed by some of the biggest names in the hip-hop scene of that time, including Drake, Kanye West, André 3000, Rick Ross, Fabolous, and T.I.. He later released the solo track "No BS" as his second single from Fan of a Fan, and decided to include the two singles from the mixtape as anticipation singles for his next album. In September 2010 Brown announced his album, F.A.M.E. [backronym for "Forgiving All My Enemies"], releasing in October the first official single from the album, "Yeah 3x", a dance-pop song, different from the urban content of the previous mixtapes. The single received big international success, entering the top-ten in eleven countries, including Australia, Austria, Denmark, Ireland, Netherlands, New Zealand, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. It was succeeded by the hip-hop single "Look at Me Now", featuring rappers Lil Wayne and Busta Rhymes, that reached number one on the US Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, where it remained for eight consecutive weeks. It also reached number one on the US Hot Rap Songs chart. The single became the best-selling rap song of 2011, as well as one of all-time best-selling singles in the United States. Stereogum while critiquing Brown's public image during a review, praised his musical ability and the track, stating that "It brings me no joy to report that “Look At Me Now” is a 10". Brown's fourth studio album F.A.M.E. was first released on March 18, 2011. Defined by critics as a "musical kaleidoscope" for its versatile sound, the album debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 chart, with first-week sales of 270,000 copies, giving Brown his first number-one album in the United States. Steve Jones of USA Today said that the album showed "a more mature, confident and adventurous Brown who has emerged in the wake of all the drama, and he has delivered the strongest album of his career". The album's third single, "Beautiful People", featuring Benny Benassi, peaked at number one on the US Hot Dance Club Songs chart, and became the first number-one single on the chart for both Brown and Benassi. "She Ain't You" was released as the album's fourth US single, while "Next 2 You", featuring Canadian recording artist Justin Bieber, served as the album's fourth international single. To further promote the album, Brown embarked on his F.A.M.E. Tour in Australia and North America. Brown received six nominations at the 2011 BET Awards and ultimately won five awards, including Best Male R&B Artist, Viewers Choice Award, The Fandemonium Award, Best Collaboration and Video of the Year for "Look at Me Now". He also won three awards at the 2011 BET Hip Hop Awards, including the People's Champ Award, Reese's Perfect Combo Award and Best Hip Hop Video for "Look at Me Now". At the 2011 Soul Train Music Awards, F.A.M.E. won Album of the Year. The album has also earned Brown three Grammy Award nominations at the 54th Grammy Awards for Best R&B Album, as well as Best Rap Performance and Best Rap Song for "Look at Me Now". On February 12, 2012, Brown won his first Grammy Award, for Best R&B Album. During the ceremony, Brown performed several songs marking his first appearance at the awards show since his conviction of felony assault. Originally, Brown wanted F.A.M.E. to be a double-disc, consisting of 25–30 tracks, but the label was contrary to that. Right before the release of F.A.M.E. Brown decided to follow his intentions in an acceptable way for the label, working on a sequel of F.A.M.E. called Fortune, that would be a whole new album that contained new material and even some tracks that didn't make the cut of the previous album. On October 7, 2011, RCA Music Group announced it was disbanding Jive Records along with Arista Records and J Records. With the shutdown, Brown (and all other artists previously signed to these three labels) will release future material on the RCA Records brand. Brown's fifth studio album Fortune was anticipated with the release of "Strip", "Sweet Love", "Till I Die", and the top 10 singles "Turn Up the Music" and "Don't Wake Me Up". Fortune was released on July 3, 2012. The album's musical style was noted for mixing Brown's R&B with pop and electronic music. The album debuted atop the Billboard 200, but received negative reviews from critics. Los Angeles Times wrote that the album is "brash and commercial", stating that "Brown’s “F.A.M.E.” hit with a solid combination of freaky, heavy-duty R&B bangers and the requisite sex-in-bed seduction numbers. But “Fortune,” his fifth studio album, is the work of an artist who has gone all-in with a handful of commercial tracks designed to get Our Hero paid and back in America’s good graces". Despite the negative reception, it was nominated for Best Urban Contemporary Album at the 55th Grammy Awards. To further promote the album, Brown embarked on his Carpe Diem Tour in Europe, Africa, Asia, and Trinidad. After concluding his Carpe Diem Tour in 2012, Brown's next studio album started to develop. On February 15, 2013, the singer unofficially released the song "Home", where he expresses a reflection on the dark side of fame, and how the only moment of respite from that thought is when he returns to the neighborhood where he grew up with people who knew him from the start. On March 26, 2013, Brown announced the release of X, in various interviews and listening sessions. In an interview with Ebony, Brown spoke of taking his music in a different direction and changing his sound from the pop-infused and sexually explicit one of the previous album Fortune, to a more mature, soulful and vulnerable theme for the album. On March 29, 2013, he released the critically acclaimed "Fine China" as the lead single of X. Yahoo! lauded "Fine China" as "a soulful, 1970's-inspired track" and said that it was "Brown's most musical sound to date". Following the release of two other anticipation singles of X, "Don't Think They Know" and "Love More", on August 9, 2013, at 1:09 am PDT, Brown was reported to have suffered a seizure from Record Plant Studios in Hollywood, California as a 9-1-1 call was made. When paramedics arrived, Brown allegedly refused to receive treatment and also refused to be transported to the local hospital. (Brown has reportedly suffered from seizures since his childhood.) The next day, Brown's representative reported the seizure was caused by "intense fatigue and extreme emotional stress, both due to the continued onslaught of unfounded legal matters and the nonstop negativity." On November 20, 2013, Brown was sentenced to an anger management rehabilitation center for three months, putting the December 2013 release of X in jeopardy. To "hold [fans] over until [the X album] drops," Brown released a mixtape, titled X Files on November 19, 2013. Brown revealed in 2022, that at the time, when he was on the way to go to the counseling, he received a phone call from Prince, that told him to "don't lose focus", wanting a conversation with him about "being special". Brown described the phone call as "one of [his] most influential" moments. On February 22, 2014, it was announced that the album would be released on Brown's birthday, May 5, 2014. On April 14, 2014, Brown released a teaser of the new track "Don't Be Gone Too Long" featuring Ariana Grande. However, at his May 9, 2014, court date, Brown was ordered to serve 131 days in jail for his probation violation, and the collaboration ended up never being released, furthermore, the album was again delayed due to Brown's prison sentence. While incarcerated, the album's fourth single, "Loyal", became one of Brown's most successful songs, by selling over six million copies in the US, and peaking in the top 10 of the US Billboard Hot 100 and the UK Singles Chart. Brown said in a 2022 interview, that following his release from jail he experienced more episodes of fans explaining to him how some of his records helped them through life-changing situations, making him realize that he was making music for an "actual purpose". "New Flame" featuring Usher and Rick Ross was later released as the album's final single. The title track "X" was released as an instant-gratification track alongside the album pre-order on iTunes on August 25, 2014. Brown's sixth studio album, X was released on September 16, 2014. The album received positive reviews from critics, that considered it a big improvement compared to its critically panned predecessor Fortune. Brad Wete of Billboard reviewing X described Brown as "a talent whose skill for hit singles and agile performances is only matched by his knack for cannonballing into career-threatening pools of legal and PR problems", At the 2015 Grammy Awards, the album was nominated for the Best Urban Contemporary Album, while "New Flame" was nominated for Best R&B Performance and Best R&B Song. Commercially, the album debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 selling 146,000 copies in its first week, becoming his sixth consecutive top ten debut in the United States. X has been certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Pushing the promotion for the album further, Brown performed and appeared at several televised music events and music festivals across the United States. On February 24, 2015, Brown released his first collaborative studio album with Tyga, titled Fan of a Fan: The Album. The album was a follow-up to the pairs' 2010 mixtape Fan of a Fan, and its lead single "Ayo" received commercial success. In early 2015, Brown also embarked on his Between The Sheets Tour with Trey Songz. In April 2015 he discovered that he had a daughter and broke up with his ex-girlfriend Karrueche Tran, contemporarily starting his One Hell of a Nite Tour. In spring 2015, Brown was featured on DJ Deorro's song "Five More Hours", which received worldwide success. On June 24, Brown released "Liquor" as the first single from his seventh studio album, titled Royalty, being dedicated to his daughter. On October 16, he revealed the album cover. On October 13, 2015, Brown announced that Royalty would be released on November 27, 2015. After it was revealed that the album has been pushed back to December 18, 2015, in exchange on November 27, 2015, he released a free 34-track mixtape called Before the Party as a prelude to Royalty, which features guest appearances from Rihanna, Wiz Khalifa, Pusha T, Kelly Rowland, Wale, Tyga, French Montana and Fetty Wap. The mixtape is composed by previously unreleased tracks that Brown recorded in different studio sessions between 2012 and 2015. Royalty was released on December 18, 2015, and debuted at number 3 on the US Billboard 200, selling 184,000 units (162,000 in pure album sales) in its first week. Brown directed and released eight music videos for the songs of Royalty, serializing them to construct a linear story. According to Iyana Robertson of Vibe, Brown on the album "sticks to the absence of a sonic script", showcasing "a pure, palpable display of an “outside of the box” approach to music". Robertson said that lyrically the album "waves goodbye to amour on its way out the door", noting it to be a "a stark contrast to 2014’s X, which included professions of affection". Brown started working and recording tracks for his next album few weeks before the release of Royalty, in late 2015. From the first days of 2016, Brown started to preview on his social media accounts several unreleased songs from his recording sessions. In March 2016, he collaborated again with Italian DJ Benny Benassi, for the song "Paradise" from the latter's album Danceaholic. On May 3, he announced the single "Grass Ain't Greener", showing its cover art and announcing it as the first single from a new album titled Heartbreak on a Full Moon. The single was released on May 5, 2016. On July 7, after the 2016 shooting of Dallas police officers, Brown released on his SoundCloud page two piano ballads, "My Friend" and "A Lot of Love", saying that the songs are "released for free for anybody dealing with injustice or struggle in their lives." In 2016, the singer released two hip hop collaborative mixtapes with his OHB crew, Before the Trap: Nights in Tarzana and Attack the Block. Throughout 2016 and 2017, he continued sharing several snippets from songs that he was recording. He also built a recording studio inside of his home to work on the album. During this period he embarked two concert tours as well: the European leg of the One Hell of a Nite Tour in 2016, and The Party Tour in 2017. On December 16, 2016, he released the second official single from the album, "Party", featuring guest vocals from American R&B singer Usher and rapper Gucci Mane. Around this time, Brown decided to create Heartbreak on a Full Moon as a 40-track album. Talking about this decision, he stated in a 2017 interview that he wanted to "outdo expectations" and "push the boundaries on artistry". RCA Records, the record label of the singer, initially wasn't agreeable of satisfying Brown's intentions to make a 40-track album, thinking that it would've damaged its commercial performance, but the singer ended up convincing them. "Privacy" was later released as the album's third single. On June 7 he released Welcome to My Life, a self-documentary focused on his life and career, directed by Andrew Sandler. Numerous celebrities participated in the movie, describing Brown from a personal and professional point of view. Among them there are Jennifer Lopez, Mike Tyson, Rita Ora, Usher and Tyga. On August 4, 2017, he released the album's fourth single "Pills & Automobiles", that features guest vocals from American trap artists Yo Gotti, A Boogie Wit Da Hoodie and Kodak Black, while shortly after he released the fifth single, "Questions". On October 25, 2017, Brown organized with Tidal a free pop-up concert in New York City to perform the singles on the album and promote it. Heartbreak on a Full Moon was eventually released as a double-disc album on October 31, 2017, via digital retailers and onto CD, three days later by RCA Records. Its lyrical content is thought to have been inspired by Brown's breakup with Karrueche Tran. He explained the concept for the album in August 2017 during an interview for Complex, saying: "I thought Heartbreak on a Full Moon was a depiction of what my soul wanted to say. It's funny because we're doing a double album. I've done so many records, but all of the records, to me, are personal favorites and I feel like it gets what I want to say across". Cultural critic and media personality Joe Budden defined Heartbreak on a Full Moon as his best album. Despite being counted for only three days of sales, Heartbreak on a Full Moon debuted at number three on the US Billboard 200, becoming Brown's ninth consecutive top 10 album on the chart. One week after its release Heartbreak on a Full Moon was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America for combined sales and album-equivalent units of over 500,000 units in the United States, and Brown became the first R&B male artist that went gold in a week since Usher's Confessions in 2004. In 2019 the album has been certified Double Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). On December 13, 2017, he released a 12-track surprise deluxe edition of the album called Cuffing Season – 12 Days of Christmas. Brown eventually embarked on his US "Heartbreak on a Full Moon Tour" in June 2018 to further promote the album. The opening acts for the tour were 6lack, H.E.R., Rich the Kid, and Jacquees. On January 31, 2018, shortly after President Donald Trump's 2020 State of the Union Address, Brown released for free the track "State of the Union", a ballad where he expresses a message about social harmony. In February 2018, Brown and rapper Joyner Lucas announced an upcoming collaboration project, titled Angels & Demons, with the release of the single "Stranger Things". However, the project ended up never being released. On March 15, 2018, Brown was featured on Lil Dicky's hit single "Freaky Friday". The song became one of the most successful comedy songs in contemporary pop music, topping the charts in New Zealand and the United Kingdom, also entering the top 10 in the United States. Following the end of the "Heartbreak On A Full Moon tour", Brown started to work on his ninth album, Indigo. On January 4, 2019, Brown released "Undecided" as its lead single. "Undecided" saw Brown reunite with producer Scott Storch, who previously worked with Brown in 2005 on his breakout hit "Run It!". The single marked Brown's first release after signing an extension and a new license agreement with RCA Records, that gave him the owning of his master recordings, making him one of the youngest artists to do so at the age of 29. On April 11, he released the second single off the album titled "Back to Love". Andy Kellman of AllMusic described the song as a "career highlight", although it failed to chart in the US. The third single, "Wobble Up", was released a week later, featuring Nicki Minaj and G-Eazy, and a summer tour with Nicki Minaj was announced, but ended up never happening. On April 25, he appeared on a track with Marshmello and Tyga called "Light It Up". On May 2, Brown revealed the list of artists featured on Indigo, including Nicki Minaj, Tory Lanez, Tyga, Justin Bieber, Juicy J, Juvenile, H.E.R, Tank, Lil Jon, Lil Wayne, Joyner Lucas, Gunna and Drake. The announcement of the Drake collaboration sparked headlines, due to their public feud that lasted for several years. On May 31, he appeared on the commercially successful single "Easy", where he duetted with singer DaniLeigh. On June 8, Brown released "No Guidance" featuring Drake as a single. It debuted at number nine on the US Billboard Hot 100, making it Brown's 15th top-ten song, and later peaked at number five. The single won Best Collaboration Performance, Best Dance Performance and Song of the Year at the 2019 Soul Train Music Awards and received a nomination for Best R&B Song at the 62nd Grammy Awards. Indigo was eventually released on June 28, 2019, marking Brown's second double album. Musically, the album explored his R&B roots, and other genres such as Afrobeats, pop, dancehall and bounce music. According to A.D. Amorosi of The Inquirer, the album's themes mix spiritual awakening with sexuality. In the United States, Indigo debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 with 108,000 album-equivalent units, which included 28,000 pure album sales in its first week, making it his third number-one album in the country. Indigo was further promoted with the release of the single "Heat", which topped the Billboard Rhythmic Airplay chart, and earned Brown his 13th number one on the chart, and second during 2019. On October 4, 2019, Brown eventually released a deluxe version of Indigo entitled Indigo Extended, which included 10 additional songs, making the extended version a total of 42 songs. On June 10, 2019, Brown announced an official headlining concert tour where he performed the album throughout United States, titled "Indigoat Tour". The tour began on August 20, and ended on October 19. Jay Cridlin of Tampa Bay Times attended the Tampa concert, and reviewing it he said it was "a guilty pleasure", wondering if enjoying his stage presence should be wrong, considering the controversies surrounding his public figure, expressing "At what point do we -- can we, should we -- forget about the blowups and restraining orders, and just marvel at the way Brown splits into a backflip and kick-spins a 360 during Drunk Texting?". The "Indigoat Tour" grossed over $30,100,000 in its 37 shows, selling out most of the venues. At the end of the year, Brown was ranked third on Billboard’s "Top R&B/Hip-Hop Artists of the Decade" for the 2010s, behind Rihanna and Drake in second and first, respectively. In December 2019, Brown revealed that he started working on new material for his tenth studio album. Later, on April 29, 2020, Brown announced the release of a collaborative mixtape with Young Thug, Slime & B. The mixtape was released on May 5, 2020, and features the hit single "Go Crazy", which peaked at number 3 on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Brown's first song to spend one full year on the chart. In April 2021, "Go Crazy" broke the record for the longest running No. 1 song on R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay, a record that was previously held by Brown's 2019 hit single "No Guidance". On May 1, 2020, Brown was featured on Drake's Dark Lane Demo Tapes mixtape, on the track "Not You Too". The song earned Brown his 100th career entry on the US Billboard Hot 100, debuting at number 25. On July 9, 2020, Brown announced via Instagram that the title of his tenth album would be Breezy, a reference to his stage nickname. Also in July, Brown stated that while working on the album he wanted to make some "really endearing music" that "talk to women's soul". On August 2, 2021, he announced on his Instagram account that his Breezy album would be accompanied by a short film of the same name, however it ended up never happening. On January 14, 2022, he released the single "Iffy", which peaked to #1 of the Rhythmic Radio Chart on April 3, 2022. On April 1, 2022, Brown released the album's second single "WE (Warm Embrace)". The song was listed on the "Top 5 R&B songs of 2022" list by Vibe magazine, that stated “"We" will go down in history as one of Chris Brown’s most timeless songs”. On April 26, 2022, Brown announced his U.S. summer tour "One of Them Ones" with rapper Lil Baby. The tour included 27 stops in North America and kicked off on July 15. Brown performed at Drai's After Hours Nightclub at The Cromwell Las Vegas Hotel and Casino on June 11, 2022 in Las Vegas to mark the launch of his new multi-year residency at the venue. On June 17, 2022, one week ahead of the album release, Brown released the audio for an Afrobeats collaboration with Nigerian singer Wizkid titled "Call Me Every Day". Breezy was released on June 24, 2022, by RCA Records and CBE and debuted at number four on the Billboard 200. On July 8, an expanded version of the album with nine new songs was released. At the 65th Grammy Awards, the deluxe edition of Breezy was nominated for Best R&B Album, but lost to Robert Glasper's Black Radio III. Following Glasper's winning, Brown publicly attacked him and The Recording Academy on his social media accounts, later apologizing to the American musician, congratulating him for the accolade, stating he was not the intended target. On September 4, 2022, Brown won international artiste of the year at the 15th annual Headies awards. The category is designed for non-African artists or groups with outstanding achievements and impact on Afrobeats. In the summer of 2022, his song "Under the Influence", contained in the extended edition of his 2019 album Indigo, went viral on the TikTok platform, giving the song great commercial success globally. With "Under the Influence", Brown became the first R&B singer in history to chart over fifty top 40 hits on the Billboard Hot 100 chart. On October 14, 2022, Brown appeared as a special guest at Usher's Las Vegas Residency to perform few songs. At the end of his performance Usher told Brown: "You're a legend. We love you and we gon' continue to keep lifting you up". On November 16, 2022, Brown released two Christmas themed songs titled "No Time Like Christmas" and "It's Giving Christmas". On November 18, 2022, Brown took to his Instagram page to announce that the American Music Awards had canceled his scheduled tribute performance to Michael Jackson in celebration of the 40th anniversary of the 1982 album Thriller. Brown also shared rehearsal footage of the cancelled tribute and stated the performance was cancelled for unknown reasons. The cancelled tribute prompted backlash against the AMAs from fans and industry peers alike. Jermaine Dupri stated the decision to pull the tribute signals something grave for celebration of Black music stating that "If the American Music Awards canceled the Chris Brown performance, then that means they canceled the 40th anniversary of Thriller. Which means they canceled the Michael Jackson tribute. Black Music, we in trouble." Similarly John Branca, the co-executor of the Michael Jackson Estate stated that the AMAs should be ashamed of themselves and that the cancellation is an attack on Black Music. Following the global success of "Under the Influence", the title of the song gave its name to the European tour that Brown subsequently embarked in 2023, the "Under the Influence Tour", which registered sold out during all the 24 arena dates scheduled, with 7 additional dates being later added, also registering sold out. The tour included six nights at London's O2 Arena, three nights at Accor Arena in Paris, three nights at Ziggo Dome in Amsterdam and more. Prior to the start of the "Under The Influence tour", the original opening act Skillibeng withdrew from the tour and was replaced by South African singer Tyla. The tour marked Brown's first tour in Europe since the 2016 European leg of his One Hell of a Nite Tour. The tour also marked Brown's first concerts in the United Kingdom following the revoking of his ban from entering the country implemented in 2010. In January 2023, Brown surpassed Elvis Presley for the most RIAA gold certified singles among all male vocalists in history, after previously passing Presley for the most Billboard Hot 100 entries among all male vocalists. In March 2023, Brown became the fifth artist in Billboard's history to reach 10 No. 1s on Billboard's R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay chart with his hit record Under the Influence. Additionally, Brown earned his 18th No. 1 on the Billboard's Mainstream R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay chart with Under the Influence. Making him the artist with the third most No. 1s on the Mainstream R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay chart behind Drake and Lil Wayne in first and second, respectively. On August 4, 2023, the single "How We Roll" in collaboration with Ciara was released. On August 27, 2023, Brown headlined a one off concert from Jamaica National Stadium, titled Chris Brown and Friends Live In Jamaica, as apart his 'Under the Influence Tour'. In June 2023, Brown released "Summer Too Hot", the lead single of his eleventh album. The song was nominated at the 66th Annual Grammy Awards for Best R&B Performance. Brown announced that his next album would be titled 11:11, revealing the album's concept being connected to the homonym numerological belief. Moreover, he shared that the album will contain 11 songs, a much shorter tracklist than his previous albums Heartbreak on a Full Moon, Indigo, and Breezy. On October 20, 2023, Brown released the Afrobeats song "Sensational" featuring Nigerian artists Lojay and Davido, as 11:11's second single. On October 21, 2023, Brown clarified that the album would actually contain 22 songs as opposed to the 11 he had stated previously. On November 6, 2023, Brown confirmed that there would be 7 featured artists on the album, including Lojay, Davido, Future, Fridayy, Byron Messia and 2 other artists who were listed as hidden features prior to its release. On November 7, 2023, Brown released the single "Nightmares" featuring Byron Messia. On November 9, he announced that 11:11 would be released on November 10, a day earlier than what previously announced. A few hours before the release of 11:11, its last track was changed from the previously announced "Double Negative", which features Justin Bieber, to a track called "Views". Brown explained the last minute change on his Instagram account on the album's release day with the following statement "Double negative unfortunately did not make the deadline in time with the lawyers, so we couldn't put it on the album. Justin my little brother for life, so we will make that moment happen soon. Sorry to the fans that really wanted it to be on the album". 11:11 was released on November 10, 2023. The album marks Brown's third double album, with its two sides containing 11 tracks each. The album's musical style mixes R&B, pop music, Afrobeats and dancehall. Reviewing 11:11, Kayla Sandiford of Renowned for Sound stated that on the record "Brown does well to demonstrate his dynamic vocal quality". In the United States, 11:11 debuted at number nine on the US Billboard 200, making it his 12th consecutive top-ten album in the country. 11:11 marks the lowest debut for a Chris Brown's solo studio album on the US Billboard 200, surpassing Graffiti (2009) which debuted at number seven on the chart. Towards the end of 2023, Brown performed different concerts located in the Middle East. The singer addressed the ongoing war in Gaza at the end of a Dubai, UAE concert, saying there's ‘a lot of evil and a lot of genocide going on in the world right now’, urging his audience, particularly the younger generation, to embrace love and positivity and expressed his appreciation for the support of his fans using words in Arabic. ‘InshaAllah, mashaAllah, I love you,’ he said. Brown has cited a number of artists as his inspiration, predominantly Michael Jackson. Brown emphasizes "Michael Jackson is the reason why I do music and why I am an entertainer." In "She Ain't You", "Fine China" and "Back to Love", he exemplifies Jackson's influence both musically and visually. Ebony magazine's Britini Danielle asserted that "Fine China" was "reminiscent of Michael Jackson's Off the Wall". Choreographically, MTV noticed that it "takes distinct visual cues from classic clips like 'Smooth Criminal' and 'Beat It'", while Billboard complimented his appearance by calling it "a modern way to channel the King of Pop". Usher is also another influence who comes across as a more contemporary figure for Brown. He tells Vibe magazine "He was the one who the youngsters looked up to. I know that we, in the dancing and singing world, looked up to him", and maintains "If it wasn't for Usher, then Chris Brown couldn't exist". Other influences include Marvin Gaye, Sam Cooke, Ginuwine, Phil Collins, Bobby Brown and R. Kelly. When it comes to his rapping he cited Naughty by Nature, Tupac, Lil' Wayne and Rakim as the rappers he's inspired by. Brown's musical style typically blends the traditional sound of R&B with different influences from other genres, most importantly hip hop and pop. His pure side of R&B is densely shown throughout his discography, being exemplified by songs like "No BS", "Don't Judge Me", "Back To Sleep" and "WE (Warm Embrace)". Music critics have commended Brown's musical contribution, recognizing his versatility, and considering him an evolver of R&B music. Lyana Robertson of Vibe, talking about his introduction to the genre, said: "As traditional R&B flourished around him, the young singer began an evolution of the genre". She saw his debut single "Run It!" as a "prelude to what Brown would continue to do for the next decade: relentlessly disrupt the constructs of rhythm and blues." By his second album Exclusive, she says he was "tapping more electric up-tempos, swimming deep in hip-hop waters and annihilating the pop arena". Describing the Grammy Award winning F.A.M.E. as "his most diverse offering to date", containing songs that mixed many genres including R&B, pop, hip hop, dancehall, rock and Europop, she remarked "There was no level of musical flexibility comparable. There still isn't." F.A.M.E. is considered to be the album that defined Brown's musical style and persona. Fortune was noted for featuring a more electronic musical direction, containing genres such as house music and EDM. According to AllMusic, different tracks of the X album are "soul-driven", while on others "Brown combines memorable hooks with some stellar production work on rubbery disco-funk". Disco and funk are also showcased on singles like "Zero" and "Fine China". Royalty and Heartbreak on a Full Moon further explored alternative R&B and trap, with the latter also containing dancehall records. Throughout his career Brown has always had a strong influence from hip hop in his music, and following his 2010 mixtapes, he approached the genre differently, starting to rap frequently on mixtapes and features, adding to his albums fully hip-hop songs like "Look at Me Now", "Till I Die" and "Pills & Automobiles", or by doing performances that switch from his R&B singing to his rapping, like he did in several tracks from his album Heartbreak on a Full Moon. His dance-pop side in the single "Forever" off his second album Exclusive opened the door for other Europop songs like "Yeah 3x", "Beautiful People", "Turn Up The Music" and "Don't Wake Me Up", but started to be less present in his music from his album X. On the albums Indigo and 11:11 Brown incorporated Afrobeats in his music. Brown's lyrical production is typically considered to be "emotional" or "hedonistic". His songs mainly cover themes of sex, desire, regret, romantic love, heartbreak, recklessness and internal conflict, also having some introspections over the dark side of fame. Along with his vocal and dancing abilities, his songwriting is considered to be one of the things that distincts him for the better compared to other R&B singers of his time. American media executive and radio personality Ebro Darden stated that Brown is the "most all-around talented person in R&B. Trey Songz is talented, but he can't dance like Chris Brown. Usher is probably the only one that could come close to him, but he doesn't have the songwriting abilities that Chris Brown has". Brown said in 2013, during an interview for Rolling Stone, that his songs are always "derived from personal experiences. Then again, I always like mixing reality with art." Billboard reviewing Royalty found its content to be "an art imitating life thing". Vulture's writer Craig Jenkins, while reviewing Heartbreak on a Full Moon, noted in its "breakup tracks" a usage of "shattered, jilted reflection", while the sexual records' lyrics were described for being explicit. Brown possesses a light lyric tenor voice, which spans three and a half octaves, rising from the bass F♯ (F2) to its peak at the soprano C♯.(C♯6)[better source needed] His vocal ability was first recognized by his mother at a young age, as Brown tells People magazine "I was 11 and watching Usher perform 'My Way', and I started trying to mimic it. My mom was like, 'You can sing?' And I was like, 'Well, yeah, Mama.'" subsequently leading to the start of his career. "Take You Down" most notably earned him a Grammy award nomination for Best Male R&B Vocal Performance in 2009. Often described as a dynamic vocalist, Brown's vocal performances are characterized by harmonization, vocal runs and melisma. Stereogum stated that "Brown’s voice is an undeniably powerful instrument, one of those endlessly elastic soulful tenors, and he knows exactly how to flex it without flaunting it". While his voice on his first two albums, Chris Brown and Exclusive, was considered to be "youthful", due to his age, with subsequent projects like Graffiti and F.A.M.E. it was noted for maturing to a more distinctive voice, with Brown "coming into his own as a singer". On F.A.M.E. critics noted huge flexibility in his voice, with Steve Jones of USA Today praising the singer's ability to "give top notch vocal performances in R&B, Europop, rap, rock and acoustic records". X and Indigo were noted for displaying his timbre, exemplifying his singing performances. According to Billboard, his singles "Liquor" and "Go Crazy" are representative of Brown's harmonizing. "Lost & Found", "Time for Love", "No Guidance" and "Red", feature "energic" vocal performances, being noted for displaying a "wide emotional range" in his singing. On "Another Round", "Don't Judge Me" and "It Won't Stop", he showcases "soft vocals" through a "soothing tone". According to Slant Magazine, different tracks from his Heartbreak on a Full Moon album showcase the singer's falsetto, being "a reminder that Brown’s voice is capable of sublime beauty". Jake Indiana of Highsnobiety said that his feature on Kanye West's song "Waves" is one of his best vocal performances, and that it "sounds like ascending to heaven with a choir of angels at your back". On "Look at Me Now", "No Romeo No Juliet" and "Stranger Things" he displayed his ability of fast-rapping. Brown's dancing abilities and stage presence are widely praised, receiving broad comparisons to those of Michael Jackson. According to Brown, he taught himself how to dance by imitating Jackson's moves since childhood, then developing his own distinct style throughout his career. Brown also mentioned MC Hammer as an inspiration to his dancing style. Most of his music videos feature complex choreographies, including the "futuristic" "Turn Up the Music", the Jackson-inspired choreography of "Fine China", "Zero", where he displayed different dancing styles, including popping and his "signature spin move", "Party", where he showcased his remarked footwork, and "Heat", described by The Source as a "silky smooth choreography that shows Brown's unmatchable dancing talent". Some of his most notable dancing live performances include his "Thriller" recreation at the 2006 World Music Awards, his medley at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards, where he performed a choreography that included flying parts, and his 2015 freestyled dancing over Future's "March Madness" at the Vestival The Hague Malieveld, that included an acclaimed front-flip. In films such as Stomp the Yard and Battle of the Year, Brown displayed his ability to breakdance while in-character. Aside from his musical career, Brown was noted for markedly producing graffiti art. His visual works have been described as "manga-inspired" and "abstract". Brown said that he painted since his childhood, saying "my first approach with it was painting school walls" saying that he's always been captivated by the fact that drawing and painting "gives you the chance to express yourself in whatever way, showing to the world your own dimension". Brown has produced street art under the pseudonym Konfused, partnering with street artist Kai to produce works for the Miami Basel. The singer painted the buildings of different radio stations such as Hot 97. In 2015 he worked on some of the walls of The Grammy Museum, mixing his spray paint drawings with images of James Brown, Prince, Michael Jackson and himself. Brown has made graffiti works for different cities worldwide, including Los Angeles, London and Amsterdam. His painting and dancing abilities were shown at the same time when Brown, partnering with Spotify's Rap Caviar, painted Heartbreak on a Full Moon's album cover, mostly from dancing around the canvas. In 2020 he painted a mural in memory of Kobe Bryant, doing a portray that includes Kobe's face, a mamba, and a few pictures of Kobe dribbling and dunking a basketball. Brown has also pursued an acting career. In 2007, he made his on-screen feature film debut as a supporting role in the dance drama Stomp the Yard and took a leading role in the Christmas comedy film This Christmas (2007). He portrayed Will Tutt in three episodes on the Fox television series The O.C. in 2007. He also guest starred as himself on the children's programs Sesame Street in 2007, The Suite Life of Zach and Cody in 2008, and in the Comedy Central series Tosh.O in 2011. He has continued to act inconsistently in films such as the heist thriller, Takers (2010), which he also executive produced, the romantic comedy Think Like a Man (2012), and the dance film Battle of the Year (2013). He produced and starred in a documentary on himself entitled Welcome to My Life (2017). Reviewing the documentary, Rachel Leah of Salon talked about what the singer said on domestic violence, stating: "Chris Brown's actions are inexcusable, but what he says about male violence is vital". Brown returned to film playing a supporting role in the sports comedy film She Ball (2021). He also made a guest starring appearance as a rapper in the ABC sitcom Black-ish in the Season 3 episode entitled, "Richard Youngster". The episode received controversy and criticism for its casting of Brown with Caroline Framke of Vox writing, "Casting Brown as the linchpin of an episode all about double standards and oblivious men doing wrong by black women is astonishingly tone-deaf — and a major misstep from a show that usually makes a point of knowing better." The show's creator Kenya Barris defended Brown's casting saying, "We wanted someone to play a troubled music star, which he was... It had been 10 years since the Rihanna incident, which happened when he was a kid, basically, 19 years old, I saw him out, and he was very contrite and wanted to do something. I felt like, let’s do that." In terms of music sales and accolades, Brown is one of the most commercially successful and award-winning artists in R&B music, often being referred to by contemporaries as the "King of R&B". As of 2024, Brown has certified over 221 million units worldwide, making him one of the world's best-selling music artists. He is also one of the highest-grossing African American touring artists of all time. Brown is also one of the best selling digital artists of all time. As of 2023, Brown has certified 94.5 million digital singles in the U.S, which is the 4th most among R&B artists behind Rihanna, Beyonce and The Weeknd in 1st, 2nd and 3rd, respectively. In May 2019, Brown surpassed James Brown, for the most Billboard Hot 100 entries among R&B singers. In May 2020, Brown became the first R&B artist in history to achieve 100 entries on the Billboard Hot 100. Subsequently in July 2022, Brown made history yet again by surpassing Elvis Presley, for the most Billboard Hot 100 entries among male vocalists across all genres. Also in July 2022, Brown overtook singer The Weeknd for the most charted songs on Billboard’s nearly 10-year-old Hot R&B Songs chart. Brown also has the 3rd most top 10 entries on the Billboard Hot R&B Songs among all artists. In September 2022, Brown became the first R&B singer in history to chart over 50 top 40 hits on the Billboard Hot 100. He achieved the record by earning his 51st top 40 hit with his single "Under the Influence". As of 2023, Brown is in a 3-way tie with Rihanna, Eminem and Future for 9th most top 40 hits on the Hot 100 with 52. Moreover, Brown holds the record for the most consecutive charting weeks on the Billboard Hot 100 among all male R&B artists with a streak of 161 weeks. This streak ranks 9th overall among artists across all genres. In January 2023, Brown broke Elvis Presley's record for the most Gold certified singles by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) among all male vocalists. He did so after scoring his 56th Gold certified single with "Call Me Everyday". In February 2023, Brown became the first male vocalist in RIAA history to score 20 multi-platinum singles in America. At the time of the record, only 8 acts in history had scored 20 or more multi-platinum singles in America throughout their careers, with Brown being the only male vocalist and male R&B artist in the group. To provide an overall picture of Brown's chart success, Billboard ranked him 3rd overall in the top R&B/Hip-Hop artists of the 2010s decade. He was only surpassed on the list by Drake and Rihanna in 1st and 2nd, respectively, and held the highest rank among male R&B artists. In terms of radio success and achievements, Brown is tied with Beyoncé for the 4th most #1's on the Billboard R&B/Hip Hop Airplay chart. Moreover, Brown has 53 top 10 entries on the Billboard R&B/Hip Hop Airplay, which is the most among all R&B artists and the 2nd most among all artists, behind Drake Brown also holds the record for the two longest running #1 hits on the Billboard R&B/Hip Hop Airplay since the chart was first established in 1992. In January 2020, Brown initially set the record for longest running #1 on this chart with his single "No Guidance", which remained #1 for 27 weeks. The following year, Brown broke his own record for the longest running #1, with his new single "Go Crazy", which remained #1 for 28 weeks. Moreover, Brown has the 3rd most #1's on the Billboard Mainstream R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay chart with 18, which is the most among all R&B artists and 3rd most among all artists behind Drake and Lil Wayne in 1st and 2nd, respectively. On the Billboard Rhythmic Airplay chart, Brown is in a 4-way tie with Usher, The Weeknd and Bruno Mars for 3rd most #1 singles on the chart with 13. Brown has a total of 117 entries on the Rhythmic Airplay chart, which is the most among all R&B artists and the 2nd most among all artists, behind Drake. In terms of awards and accolades, Brown has won a total of 199 awards from 513 nominations over the course of his career. Among which include a Grammy Award, 19 BET Awards, 4 BET Hip Hop Awards, 4 Billboard Music Awards, 5 American Music Awards, 60 ASCAP Awards, 49 BMI Awards,14 Soul Train Music Awards, 3 MTV Video Music Awards, 1 MTV Australian Award, 3 iHeartRadio Music Awards, 1 iHeartRadio Titanium Award, 1 International Dance Music Award, 1 Kora Award, 2 MOBO Awards, 1 TRL Award, 4 NAACP Image Awards, 2 Nickelodean Awards, 2 People's Choice Awards, 1 Ozone Award, 7 Teen Choice Awards, 8 Urban Music Awards, 38 Vevo Certified Awards, 1 World Music Award, 1 Headies. Brown is the 2nd most decorated artist in the history of the BET Awards, behind Beyonce in 1st. Brown is also tied with Bruno Mars as the 2nd most decorated artist in the history of the Soul Train Awards, behind Beyonce in 1st. Brown is tied with Rihanna for the 7th most Vevo Certified Awards with 38 and holds the record for the most Vevo certifications among male R&B artists. Moreover, Brown was ranked 4th among the top 10 highest performing U.S. artists on Vevo of the 2010s decade, behind Taylor Swift, Eminem, and Justin Bieber in 1st, 2nd and 3rd, respectively. Lastly, Brown is the first American artist and the only R&B artist to ever win a Headies award for outstanding achievements in the Nigerian music industry. Brown won his Headies in the category of international artiste of the year, which was designed to recognize non-African artists or groups with outstanding achievements and impact on Afrobeats. From 2007 to 2009, Brown dated singer Rihanna until their highly publicized domestic violence case. In 2011, Brown briefly dated model Draya Michele. Later during the same year, Brown began dating Karrueche Tran, whom he had met while she was working as a personal assistant to a stylist. In February 2012, Rihanna and Brown released remixes to their singles "Turn Up The Music" and "Birthday Cake", leading observers to speculate about their relationship. In October 2012, Brown announced that he ended his relationship with Tran because he did not "want to see her hurt over my friendship with Rihanna." The day after the announcement, Brown released a video entitled "The Real Chris Brown", which features images of himself, Tran, and Rihanna, as Brown wonders, "Is there such thing as loving two people? I don't know if it's possible, but I feel like that." In January 2013, Rihanna confirmed that she and Brown had resumed their romantic relationship, stating, "It's different now. We don't have those types of arguments anymore. We talk about shit. We value each other. We know exactly what we have now, and we don't want to lose that." Speaking of Brown, Rihanna also said, "He's not the monster everybody thinks. He's a good person. He has a fantastic heart. He's giving and loving. And he's fun to be around. That's what I love about him – he always makes me laugh. All I want to do is laugh, really – and I do that with him". Rihanna and Brown collaborated again on a duet song off Rihanna's Unapologetic album titled "Nobody's Business". The song was noted by critics as a public response by the couple towards the public perception of their intimacy. In a May 2013 interview, Brown stated that he and Rihanna had broken up again. He subsequently reunited with Tran, but they parted ways following confirmation of Brown's first-born daughter in 2015, unwittingly conceived with another woman during a break from his releationship with Tran. Brown also welcomed a son and a second daughter in 2019 and 2022, respectively, each with a different woman. When discussing his upbringing, Brown stated: "We were used to two pairs of shoes for a school year. We used to go to church every day. I was one of those kids that had more church clothes than school clothes." He has also discussed his second work of grace, saying that "he experienced the Holy Ghost while performing 'His Eye Is on the Sparrow' in church". After being released from jail on June 2, 2014, Brown wrote that he was "Humbled and Blessed" and tweeted the words "Thank you GOD." In 2015, he said during an interview for Vibe, that God is the only thing that he's afraid of. Speaking about prayers he said "I pray everyday, I think we pray unconsciously too. Personally I don't pray for success. I pray for knowledge for understanding and peace of mind. I really try to pray for that because it's a big world, and you can get wrapped up in it trying to please every city. So I just try to get a peace of mind and me understanding that being at peace with my flaws and my talents. I'm cool with that. That's why I think once He shows me certain things, or even the choices that I make, and decisions that I make that are healthy for me. He shows me the right path. When I bless other people, He always blesses me. It's not even about a self-serving journey; it's about just learning. I want to learn people's experiences. I want to give them experiences too." Despite his commercial success and stardom, Brown has long struggled with mental health issues and addiction. In his Welcome to My Life documentary, Brown revealed that he had contemplated suicide following the Rihanna incident. The singer unveiled, during a 2013 interview with The Guardian, that he lost his virginity at the age of 8 to a girl who was 14 or 15 at the time, justifying the episode with the countryside context in which he grew up. In 2013, Brown was sentenced to 90 days in rehab by a Los Angeles Superior Court judge to fullfill the terms of his probation for the Rihanna incident. While at the rehab facility, Brown was formally diagnosed with bipolar II disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder. The rehab facility stated that Brown will require close supervision by a physician "to ensure his bipolar mental health condition remains stable. It is not uncommon for patients with post-traumatic stress disorder and bipolar II to use substances to self-medicate their biochemical mood swings and trauma triggers". The clinical team at the rehab facility also attributed Brown's aggression to his untreated mental health disorder, severe sleep deprivation, inappropriate self-medicating and untreated PTSD. In a 2014 interview with radio personality Ebro Darden, Brown revealed that prior to his 2013 incarceration, he used “the syrup, the Xanax,” and added that while marijuana offset his hyperactive tendencies, "once I started doing the lean, the other stuff … I'd be sitting in the [recording] booth sleeping." In 2017, Billboard wrote an investigative article about Brown's mental health issues and addiction. According to what ex-members of his team told Billboard, around April 2015 he had broken a 15-month stretch of sobriety, going out on Xanax and lean, spiraling into a more frequent drug use in the first months of 2016. Former members of Brown's team also told Billboard that he was using cocaine, Xanax, marijuana, molly and lean. Additionally, his former security guards revealed that certain nights they had to check Brown's pulse through the night while he slept to ensure he had not overdosed. At around 12:30 a.m. (PST) on February 8, 2009, Brown and his then-girlfriend, singer Rihanna, had an argument that escalated into physical violence, with Brown causing Rihanna visible severe facial injuries which required hospitalization. Brown turned himself in to the Los Angeles Police Department's Wilshire station at 6:30 p.m. (PST) and was booked under suspicion of making criminal threats. On June 22, 2009, Brown pleaded guilty to felony assault and accepted a plea deal of community labor, five years of probation, and domestic violence counseling. On August 25, Brown received five years of probation. He was ordered to attend one year of domestic violence counseling and undergo six months of community service; the judge retained a five-year restraining order on Brown, which required him to remain 50 yards (45.72 meters) away from Rihanna, reduced to 10 yards at public events. On September 2, 2009, Brown spoke about the domestic violence case in a prerecorded Larry King Live interview, his first public interview about the matter. He was accompanied to the interview by his mother, Joyce Hawkins, and attorney Mark Geragos, as he discussed growing up in a household with his mother being repeatedly assaulted by his stepfather. Brown said of hearing details of his assault of Rihanna, "I'm in shock, because, first of all, that's not who I am as a person, and that's not who I promise I want to be." In February 2011, at request of Brown's and Rihanna's lawyers, Mark Geragos and Donald Eltra, Judge Patricia Schnegg modified the restraining order to a "level one order", allowing both singers to appear at awards shows together in the future. While conducting his community service in Virginia, Brown was tested positive for cannabis and appeared in court on September 25, 2012, at which his hearing date was changed to November to determine whether he had violated the terms of his court order. On March 20, 2015, Brown's probation ended, formally closing the felony case emanating from the Rihanna assault that happened over six years prior. In the 2017 self-documentary, Welcome to My Life, Brown goes into detail about their relationship, saying he intended to marry Rihanna, but she lost trust in him after he lied about a prior sexual encounter with someone who worked with him. Brown also provided a detailed description on how the known fight happened. On June 14, 2012, Drake and his entourage were involved in a scuffle with Brown at a nightclub called WIP in the SoHo neighborhood of New York City. About eight people were injured during the brawl, including San Antonio Spurs star Tony Parker, who had surgery to remove a piece of glass from his eye. Drake was not arrested. Brown's attorney alleged Drake was the instigator. Brown himself tweeted about the incident and publicly criticized Drake weeks later. In January 2013, Brown was in an altercation with Frank Ocean over a parking space outside a recording studio in West Hollywood. Police officers in Los Angeles said Brown was under investigation, describing the incident as "battery" due to Brown allegedly punching Ocean. Ocean said he would not press charges. According to Jamaican singer Sean Kingston, who was present during the altercation, Ocean and his cousin instigated the fight and were at fault. In July 2013, Brown's probation was revoked after he was involved in an alleged hit and run in Los Angeles. He was released from court and scheduled to reappear in August 2013 to learn whether he would serve time in prison. The charges would later be dropped, but Brown would have 1,000 additional hours of community service added to his probation terms. In October 2013, Brown was arrested for felony assault in Washington, D.C., after refusing to take a picture with a man, and throwing a punch that broke the man's nose. The charge was reduced to a misdemeanor. Brown spent 36 hours in a Washington jail and was taken to court in shackles. He was released and ordered to report to his California probation officer within 48 hours. On October 30, 2013, Brown voluntarily entered rehab. After Brown completed his 90 days, the judge ordered him to remain a resident at the Malibu treatment facility until a hearing on April 23, 2014. The deal was if Brown left rehab, he would go to jail. On March 14, 2014, Brown was kicked out of the rehab facility and sent to Northern Neck Regional Jail for violating internal rules. He was expected to be released on April 23, 2014, but a judge denied his release request from custody either on bail or his own recognizance. At his May 9, 2014, court date, Brown was ordered to serve 131 days in jail for his probation violation. He was sentenced to serve 365 days in custody; however, the judge gave him credit for 234 days he had already spent in rehab and jail, as well as credits for good behavior while behind bars. Brown was released from jail on June 2, 2014. In June 2016, Chris Brown was sued for assault, false imprisonment and battery by Mike G, the singer's former manager, hired in 2012 to help him repair his public image. Mike G claimed that on May 10 of that year, Brown assaulted him, locked him in a room and punched him four times in the face and neck. Subsequently, Brown accused Mike G on his social media accounts of stealing money while working for him, being fired for it, an accusation that the manager later denied. In 2019, the lawsuit was settled out of court, with Brown and the manager informing courts that both parties have reconciled their differences and reached a confidential deal. The terms of the deal closed all claims against each party and granted the court jurisdiction in enforcing the deal. In 2017, Brown's ex-girlfriend Karrueche Tran was granted a 5-year restraining order against him by a judge in Santa Monica, after she shared text messages and voicemails in court where Brown threatened her and demanded she return diamond rings and other gifts given during their relationship. In 2022, Brown was served copyright infringement lawsuits on 3 of his singles: "Privacy"; "No Guidance"; and "Pills and Automobiles". The lawsuit on the single "Privacy" was filed by UK-based music firm Greensleeves, who alleged that "Privacy" lifted a line from 1997 dancehall track "Tight Up Skirt", recorded by Red Rat. Red Rat himself wasn’t involved in the lawsuit, and publicly expressed that he was agreeable of Brown's usage of his lyric. Brown eventually reached a settlement with Greensleeves for copyright infringement. The pair of songwriters who sued Brown and Drake for copyright infringement on "No Guidance" dropped the lawsuit in its entirety in September 2022. Lastly, the musician who filed the copyright infringement on "Pills and Automobiles" dropped the lawsuit in June 2023. In the early hours of August 30, 2016, a woman called the police and accused Brown of threatening her with a gun inside his house. Police were called, but Brown denied them entry without a warrant. When they returned with one, Brown refused them entry and began what news sources referred to as a "standoff" with the LAPD, including the robbery-homicide division and SWAT team. During this time, Brown was seen posting videos on Instagram, in which he rails against the police and the media coverage of the activity at his house. He denounced media reports that he was "barricaded" inside his house, complained about the helicopters flying overhead, and called the police "idiots" and "the worst gang in the world." He said that he was innocent and "What I do care about is you are defacing [sic] my name and my character and integrity". Brown was arrested and later released from jail on $250,000 bail. On September 1, 2016, Brown's lawyer, Mark Geragos, stated that there was no standoff and that, with regard to the LAPD search, "nothing was found to corroborate her statement." Charges were later dropped after prosecutors declined to arraign Brown on the felony charges. Brown later sued the accuser for defamation, prevailing in the lawsuit, after it was ruled that the defendant brought to court false and defamatory statements about Brown, through her incriminating text messages where she said that "Brown kicked [her] out of his house because [she] called his friend jewelry fake" and she was "going to set him up and call the cops and say that he tried to shoot [her]". Brown later told Good Morning America: "My character’s been defaced. I’m glad that all my real supporters know me and know the truth and they’ll see the truth." In January 2022, a woman filed a civil suit accusing Brown of raping her on a yacht in Miami in December 2020. The woman attempted to sue Brown for $20 million. Brown denied the allegations and later submitted text messages and voicemails to the Miami police department which indicated a consensual relationship with the accuser. In the text messages the woman is seen courting Brown in lewd language and bare-naked selfies almost immediately after the alleged rape took place. According to TMZ, Brown counter-sued the accuser for defamation and the accuser's lawyer withdrew from the case after she was made aware of the messages and voicemails Brown submitted to Miami police. The lawsuit against Brown was dropped in August 2022. In 2007, Brown founded the record label CBE ("Chris Brown Entertainment" or "Culture Beyond Evolution"), under Interscope Records. Brown has since signed frequent collaborator Kevin McCall, singer Sabrina Antoinette, former RichGirl member Sevyn Streeter, singer-songwriter Joelle James, and rock group U.G.L.Y. However, from 2014 the label started to sign exclusively Brown's works. In October 2009, Brown founded a lifestyle website called "Mechanical Dummy", with the purpose of curating and promoting current trends in the world of technology, music, culture, fashion, style and emerging brands. Brown served as the creative director of the site. Brown has stated in 2015 he owned fourteen Burger King restaurants, later revealing in 2022 that he sold the portfolio. In November 2012, Brown launched a nonprofit charity organization called the "Symphonic Love Foundation" to financially support arts programs for kids and to support a number of health and education programs and nonprofits, which provide education on domestic abuse, dating violence and HIV/AIDS and leadership programs to children with developmental disabilities. In May 2012, Brown partnered with famed artist Ron English to create a limited-edition toy and sculpture line, called "Dum English", which they debuted at the Toy Art Gallery in Los Angeles. In November 2013, Brown partnered with Sprayground, a New York backpack company, to launch a limited line of custom backpacks called the “Invasion Capsule Collection”. On November 11, 2021, the singer launched his own cereal, "Breezy's Cosmic Crunch", partnering with SoFlo Snacks for this limited edition of collectible breakfast cereal. In May 2022, Brown partnered with Los Angeles based clothing brand Renowned and an online media company BlackNFTArt, to launch a NFT collection titled "The Auracles" with accompanying physical streetwear pieces. In July 2022, Brown released a NFT collection titled "The Breezyverse", consisting of 10,000 3D animnated NFTs with sound and visual effects implemented on the Ehtereum blockchain. The Breezyverse NFT collection was released in conjunction with Brown's 10th studio album titled Breezy. In September 2023, Brown partnered with California based cannabis brand and dispensary Originals, to launch his own strain of recreational cannabis under his own brand name. In October 2023, Faraday Future Intelligent Electric Inc, a California-based startup focused on the development of electric vehicles, announced a partnership with Brown where he would become an ambassador and "Co-Creation Officer" of the company. In 2012, Brown launched a streetwear clothing line called Black Pyramid, in collaboration with the founders of the Pink + Dolphin clothing line. In 2016 the clothing label was set for larger release, partnering with streetwear clothing lines such as Snipes for a worldwide distribution, also being distributed through its own Black Pyramid boutiques. On December 11, 2015, the Japanese fashion brand A Bathing Ape revealed that Brown would become the face of the brand's high end range, BAPE Black Label. Which was a follow-up to the brand's inaugural celebrity partnership fronted by fellow artist Travis Scott. In 2016, Brown partnered with German streetwear company Snipes, for a summer capsule collection designed in collaboration with the singer. The same year Brown also served as a model for Philipp Plein's fall and winter campaign. In 2016, during an interview with Vanity Fair Italia, he talked about his own definition of style: «It's not the name of a designer, it's not parading as a model, it's not the money you can spend on a jacket. Style is self-awareness, self-confidence. It's feeling comfortable in what you have on and who you are. It's the ability to be an individual, to be yourself, to be free in a free world». In May 2023, Brown partnered with German 3D printed footwear company Zellerfeld, designer Nos Ailes, and streetwear and culture company The Auracles, to launch his own line of 3D printed slides titled "NAMI". Chris Brown (2005) Exclusive (2007) Graffiti (2009) F.A.M.E. (2011) Fortune (2012) X (2014) Royalty (2015) Heartbreak on a Full Moon (2017) Indigo (2019) Breezy (2022) 11:11 (2023) Fan of a Fan: The Album (with Tyga) (2015) Brown has headlined multiple arena tours in North America, Europe and World-Wide. Additionally, he has co-headlined two separate North American tours with Trey Songz and Lil Baby and served as a supporting and guest act on tours and festivals for industry peers such as Rihanna, Drake, Lil Wayne and Beyoncé. Brown is one of the highest grossing African American touring artists of all time. In February 2023, Pollstar reported that Brown had grossed $166 million from 284 shows over the course of his career. He subsequently grossed another $34 million from his Under The Influence tour in 2023. Up Close and Personal Tour (2006) The UCP Exclusive Tour (2007) Fan Appreciation Tour (2009) F.A.M.E. Tour (2011) Carpe Diem Tour (2012) One Hell of a Nite Tour (2015–2016) The Party Tour (2017) Heartbreak on a Full Moon Tour (2018) Indigoat Tour (2019) Under the Influence Tour (2023) The 11:11 Tour (2024) Between the Sheets Tour (with Trey Songz) (2015) One of Them Ones Tour (with Lil Baby) (2022) The Beyoncé Experience (Australia dates) (2007) Good Girl Gone Bad Tour (the Philippines, Oceania) (2008) Supafest (2012) Lil Weezyana Fest (2016) OVO Fest (2019) Biography portal Music portal List of artists who reached number one in the United States List of highest-certified music artists in the United States List of best-selling music artists List of Billboard Hot 100 chart achievements and milestones List of most-followed Instagram accounts Cited to multiple sources: Cited to multiple sources: Cited to multiple sources: Cited to multiple sources: "C. Sizzle Undiscovered by Chris Brown on TIDAL". Archived from the original on January 25, 2020. "Chart Check: Chris Brown Passes Elvis To Become Most-Decorated Male Singer in Hot 100 HISTORY - That Grape Juice". thatgrapejuice.net. Retrieved July 7, 2022. "Chris Brown Becomes First R&B Singer In History To Nab Over 50 Hot 100 Top 40 Hits [Chart Check] - That Grape Juice". thatgrapejuice.net. Retrieved October 6, 2022. "Chris Brown Biography, Songs, & Albums". AllMusic. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "RIAA: Chris Brown Breaks Tie with Bruno Mars To Become Second Best-Selling Male Singer of Digital Era - That Grape Juice". thatgrapejuice.net. Retrieved August 7, 2023. "Chris Brown & Young Thug's 'Go Crazy' Breaks Top 10 Longevity Record on Rhythmic Airplay Chart". Billboard. February 3, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown's 20 Biggest Billboard Hits". Billboard. September 16, 2014. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "In 10 Years, Chris Brown Single-Handedly Transformed R&B". Vibe. Retrieved May 31, 2016. "Ebro Crowns Chris Brown The "King Of R&B" Fans Troll Jacquees". Urban Islandz. December 11, 2018. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "J. Holiday Was Mistaken For A Valet While Staking His Claim As A "King Of R&B"". BET. Retrieved July 13, 2022. "Tank Shares Mock Poster For "Kings Of R&B" Tour With Chris Brown, R. Kelly, & More". HotNewHipHop. December 19, 2018. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Yute, Island (September 20, 2011). "R. Kelly Crowns Chris Brown The New R&B King". Urban Islandz. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Roth, Madeline. "Chris Brown's Emotional New Song Is For 'Anybody Dealing With Injustice'". MTV News. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Wood, Mikael. "On new albums, Chris Brown and R. Kelly have no use for filters". capitalgazette.com. Archived from the original on June 30, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Column: The worse things get for Chris Brown, the better his music becomes". Los Angeles Times. June 4, 2014. "Chris Brown's 45-song album not the skip-fest you'd expect". Associated Press. November 2017. mahadevan, tara. "50 Cent Compares Chris Brown to Michael Jackson, Says Brown Is the 'Best Sh*t We Got'". Complex. Retrieved September 24, 2023. "Akon Says Chris Brown Could Be Michael Jackson If He Had the Right Team". Rap-Up. Retrieved September 24, 2023. Abraham, Mya (June 7, 2022). "Tank Believes Chris Brown Is More Talented Than Michael Jackson". VIBE.com. Retrieved September 24, 2023. "Joe Budden claims Chris Brown is 'way more talented than Michael Jackson'". rollingout.com. June 15, 2022. Retrieved September 24, 2023. "Justin Bieber Declares Chris Brown Is the Living Combination of Michael Jackson and Tupac Shakur". Peoplemag. Retrieved September 24, 2023. "Fivio Foreign Crowns Chris Brown The New Michael Jackson". HipHopDX. May 30, 2022. Retrieved September 24, 2023. Robertson, Iyana (April 13, 2015). "Brandon Jennings Thinks Chris Brown Is 'Way More Talented' Than Michael Jackson". VIBE.com. Retrieved September 24, 2023. Kelly, Katie. "Nick Cannon Thinks "Michael Jackson + 2Pac = Chris Brown"". Complex. Retrieved September 24, 2023. mahadevan, tara. "Chris Brown Addresses People Comparing Him to Michael Jackson". Complex. Retrieved September 24, 2023. "Boosie says Chris Brown is "the closest thing to Michael Jackson"". REVOLT. Retrieved September 24, 2023. Billboard Staff (December 7, 2005). "'NOW!' Rebounds, Holds Brown From No. 1". Billboard. Retrieved May 15, 2022. "Biography", People, archived from the original on August 30, 2016, retrieved October 18, 2016 Kreps, Daniel (December 16, 2009). "On the Charts: Chris Brown's "Graffiti" Settles for Seventh as Boyle Continues Reign". Rolling Stone. Retrieved May 15, 2022. Settlement reached in Chris Brown's alleged beating of Rihanna, Los Angeles Times, June 22, 2009 Kaufman, Gil. "Susan Boyle Remains Billboard Ruler As Chris Brown Settles For #7". MTV News. Retrieved May 15, 2022. McDonnell, Evelyn (February 13, 2012). "Chris Brown rises with 'F.A.M.E.' three years after arrest". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved February 13, 2012. Caulfield, Keith (July 11, 2012). "Chris Brown's 'Fortune' Album Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200". Billboard. Retrieved May 15, 2022. Caulfield, Keith (July 8, 2019). "Chris Brown Earns Third No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart With 'Indigo'". Billboard. Retrieved July 8, 2019. "Lizzo's 'Truth Hurts' Leads Hot 100 For 5th Week, Chris Brown's 'No Guidance' Is His First Top 5 Hit Since 2008". Billboard. September 30, 2019. Retrieved November 20, 2019. Anderson, Trevor (January 28, 2020). "Chris Brown & Drake's 'No Guidance' Smashes R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay Chart Record". Billboard. Retrieved April 17, 2022. "Chris Brown Chart History (Hot 100)". Billboard. Retrieved March 2, 2021. "Olivia Rodrigo's 'Drivers License' Tops Hot 100 for 7th Week, Chris Brown & Young Thug's 'Go Crazy' Jumps to No. 3". Billboard. March 2021. Retrieved March 2, 2021. Anderson, Trevor (April 7, 2021). "Chris Brown's 'Go Crazy' Breaks 'No Guidance' No. 1 Record on R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay Chart". Billboard. Retrieved April 17, 2022. Anderson, Trevor (April 7, 2021). "Chris Brown's 'Go Crazy' Breaks 'No Guidance' No. 1 Record on R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay Chart". Billboard. Retrieved April 17, 2022. "Chris Brown to perform at Albany Civic Center". Yahoo!. June 9, 2021. Retrieved February 21, 2024. "8 Celebrities with the Biggest and Worst Cult Following". March 26, 2014. "Chris Brown: A fandom expert on how racialised loyalty helps the controversial singer retain his fans". March 8, 2023. "Most of us don't care about cancel culture, and Chris Brown's return to the UK proves it". December 9, 2022. Cunningham, Kyndall (June 24, 2021). "Will We Ever Hold Chris Brown Accountable?". The Daily Beast. "Boxoffice Insider: Top Grossing Black Touring Artists - Pollstar News". February 26, 2021. Retrieved February 8, 2023. "RIAA: Chris Brown Unseats Elvis Presley As Male Singer with Most Gold-Certified Singles - That Grape Juice". thatgrapejuice.net. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "Chris Brown Passes Elvis For Most Gold Records". Yahoo Finance. January 13, 2023. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "RIAA: Chris Brown is the First Male Singer To Have 20 Multi-Platinum Singles - That Grape Juice". thatgrapejuice.net. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "Top R&B/Hip-Hop Artists". Billboard. October 31, 2019. Retrieved January 29, 2022. Kellman, Andy. "Chris Brown Biography". Allmusic. Retrieved November 15, 2008. Aitkenhead, Decca (October 4, 2013). "Chris Brown: 'It was the biggest wake-up call'". The Guardian. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Eggar, Robin (February 12, 2006). "The new Michael Jackson". The Times. UK: Times Online. Retrieved May 28, 2009. "Chris Brown Biography". NME. UK. Retrieved January 12, 2009. "Chris Brown 1989–". Biography Today. 16 (2). Omnigraphics, Inc.: 27 2007. ISSN 1058-2347. "Biography-Chris Brown", Wire Image, archived from the original on February 18, 2007, retrieved October 18, 2016 "Chris Brown Joins Shannon Sharpe on Club Shay Shay Podcast", therewxndz.com, September 13, 2023 "VMA Showstopper Chris Brown Opens Up about His New Album, Past Pain and Looking Ahead in the September 2007 Issue of Giant Magazine". FindArticles. CBS Corporation. September 10, 2007. Archived from the original on February 4, 2009. Retrieved January 12, 2009. "Chris Brown's actions are inexcusable, but what he says about male violence is vital". Salon.com. "Celebrity Bios – Chris Brown". Us Weekly. Archived from the original on April 1, 2008. Retrieved October 11, 2008. "Chris Brown Reveals Diddy Refused To Sign Him To Bad Boy". Vibe. June 23, 2022. "Episode 319 w/ Chris Brown". Apple Music. "Chris Brown Said He Said 'No' To Def Jam Because Refused To Explain The Contract To His Mom – "The man wouldn't talk to my mama"". Apple Music. September 14, 2023. Johnson, Brian (September 2005), "Another One of Our Own Has Made it", VA Vibe, pp. 5–8 Hildebrand, Lee (October 1, 2006). "Brown runs with it". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved May 28, 2009. Biography Today – April 2007 – Vol 16 No 2: General Series, Volume 16. Omnigraphics Inc. April 2007. ISBN 9780780809703. Retrieved October 18, 2016. "Interview with Mark Pitts". HitQuarters. April 24, 2006. Archived from the original on October 24, 2012. Retrieved December 10, 2010. "FULL INTERVIEW Chris Brown on Ebro in the Morning!". Retrieved November 7, 2021 – via www.youtube.com. "At 16, Chris Brown 'runs' the charts". Microsoft Corporation. Msnbc. October 1, 2006. Retrieved December 8, 2005. Brandee J. Tecson. "Chris Brown". MTV Networks. MTV. Archived from the original on July 5, 2009. Retrieved May 30, 2009. "Artist Chart History – Chris Brown – Singles". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 5, 2008. Retrieved April 12, 2009. {{cite magazine}}: Check |url= value (help) Reid, Shaheem (October 6, 2005). "Chris Brown Dancing His 'Run It!' Straight Up The Charts". MTV News. Retrieved May 30, 2009. Hasty, Katie (December 5, 2005). "'NOW!' Rebounds, Holds Brown From No. 1". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 18, 2013. Retrieved May 30, 2009. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) Aitkenhead, Decca (October 4, 2013). "Chris Brown: 'It was the biggest wake-up call'". TheGuardian.com. Saldanha, Evita. "Feature: Chris Brown". MTV India. Archived from the original on December 19, 2008. Retrieved January 12, 2009. "Gold & Platinum". RIAA. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Brandee J. Tecson (January 7, 2006). Chris Brown Switches Over To Acting — And Can't Get A Date MTV. Retrieved October 27, 2008. Brandon T Jackson Show The New York Times. Retrieved October 27, 2008. Rodriguez, Jayson (August 31, 2006). "Chris Brown Scores Role On 'The O.C.', Ready To Be 'Geeked Out All The Way'". MTV News. Retrieved December 5, 2011. Carroll, Larry. "Ne-Yo, Chris Brown Open Up About Stepping Up For 'Stomp The Yard'". MTV News. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "My Super Sweet 16: Chris Brown Episode Summary". TV.com. Archived from the original on August 12, 2012. Retrieved December 5, 2011. "Chris Brown: The downfall of the disgraced R&B hit-maker". TheGuardian.com. May 14, 2018. "Jay-Z Leapfrogs Eagles, Britney For No. 1 Debut". Billboard. November 14, 2007. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown". Metacritic. October 7, 1986. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Grein, Paul (March 23, 2011). "Week Ending March 20, 2011: Songs: The Chris Brown Matter". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on April 30, 2011. Retrieved April 19, 2011. "Multi-talented Entertainer Chris Brown Goes 'Back to School,' Taking on a Starring Role in the St. Jude Math-A-Thon (R) Video". PR Newswire. Archived from the original on July 13, 2012. Carroll, Larry. "'Christmas' Keeps On Giving — Join Chris Brown On Holiday Flick's Set". MTV News. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Jordin Sparks Hot 100 Chart History". Billboard. Retrieved December 4, 2011. "Surprise! Your Favorite Chris Brown Song is a Gum Ad". Rolling Stone. July 28, 2008. Menachem, Michael. Single Reviews: Forever. Billboard. Retrieved August 13, 2008. Archived July 15, 2008, at the Wayback Machine "The Suite Life of Zack & Cody - Season 3, Episode 20: Doin' Time in Suite 2330 - TV.com". Archived from the original on July 12, 2012. Retrieved December 4, 2011. "Billboard dubs Chris Brown artist of the year". MSNBC. Archived from the original on June 23, 2013. "Chris Brown's close Rihanna". ITV.com. June 27, 2008. Retrieved May 27, 2009. "Chris Brown loses endorsement deal after arrest". February 11, 2009. "Chris Brown: Rihanna 'Knows How Sorry I Am'". ABC News. Hoai-Tran Bui (April 18, 2016). "Chris Brown opens up about Rihanna assault in documentary trailer". USA Today. Retrieved January 13, 2022. Kot, Greg. Review: Graffiti. Chicago Tribune. Retrieved on 2009-12-02. Wood, Mikael. Review: Graffiti. Los Angeles Times. Retrieved on 2009-12-15. "No Stopping Susan Boyle's 'Dream' On Billboard 200". Billboard. December 16, 2009. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown Cries During Michael Jackson Tribute at BET Awards". Billboard. June 28, 2010. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Thomas, Rochell (June 28, 2010). "Diddy, Trey Songz Applaud Chris Brown's Emotional BET Awards Performance". MTV News. Retrieved December 4, 2011. Kaufman, Gil. "Chris Brown's BET Awards MJ Tribute Was 'Spectacular,' Jermaine Jackson Says". MTV News. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "MTV". MTV. "R&B/Hip-Hop Songs: Week of April 2, 2011". Billboard. April 2, 2011. Retrieved July 8, 2011. Grein, Paul (May 18, 2011). "Week Ending May 15, 2011. Songs: Idol Bossts Tyler". Yahoo! Music. Yahoo! Inc. Retrieved July 8, 2011.[permanent dead link] Trust, Gary (April 13, 2011). "Katy Perry Takes Third Week Atop Hot 100 with Airplay Boost". Billboard. Retrieved July 8, 2011. "The Number Ones: Chris Brown's "Kiss Kiss (Feat. T-Pain)". April 3, 2023. "Chris Brown Nets First No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart". Billboard. March 30, 2011. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown's 'F.A.M.E.': The Reviews Are In!". MTV. "Dance Club Songs Chart". Billboard. January 2, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Winners | BET Awards 2021". www.bet.com. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Winners and Nominations | BET Hip Hop Awards 2021". www.bet.com. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Joseph, Justin (November 27, 2011). "Soul Train Award 2011 Winners". Centric. Archived from the original on November 7, 2012. Retrieved November 28, 2011. "Nominees And Winners". Grammy.com. Archived from the original on December 1, 2011. "Chris Brown Considers Releasing F.A.M.E. Double Disc". RTTNews. January 3, 2011. Retrieved March 2, 2012. "Pro Posts". "Unveiling The New Look RCA Records". FMQB. August 23, 2011. Archived from the original on November 8, 2011. Mitchell, Gail (July 13, 2012). "Chris Brown, Usher Too Pop to Stay On Top?". Billboard. Retrieved July 16, 2012. "Review: Chris Brown's 'Fortune' is brash and commercial". Los Angeles Times. July 2, 2012. Bobb, Maurice. "Chris Brown Wants To Go Back 'Home' On New Track". MTV News. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Gundersen, Edna (March 26, 2013). "He sat down with USA Today to preview five tracks from his new album". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved May 5, 2013. Danielle, Britni (March 26, 2013). "[Exclusive] Introducing the 'New' Chris Brown?". Ebony. Archived from the original on March 29, 2013. Retrieved March 26, 2013. "Chris Brown releases 'Fine China'". Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. "Chris Brown 911 Seizure Call". TMZ. Williams, Rob (August 11, 2013). "Chris Brown suffers seizure at recording studio because of 'extreme emotional stress, fatigue, legal matters and nonstop negativity'". The Independent. Retrieved July 11, 2019. Galla, Brittany (August 10, 2013). "Chris Brown Seizure Update: Rep Attributes "Intense Fatigue" – Us Weekly". Usmagazine.com. Retrieved October 28, 2013. "Chris Brown Enters Rehab for Anger Management". TMZ. October 30, 2013. Retrieved November 20, 2013. "Chris Brown Releasing 5 New Songs, Delaying 'X' Album Until 2014". Fuse. November 18, 2013. Retrieved November 20, 2013. Stutz, Colin (April 14, 2014). "Chris Brown Teases Ariana Grande Duet 'Don't Be Gone Too Long' With Dance Video". Billboard. "Chris Brown Sets 'X' Release Date". Rap-Up. February 22, 2014. Retrieved August 24, 2014. Chris Brown [@chrisbrown] (August 25, 2014). "Download X on @iTunesMusic today! #XTheAlbum 09/16/14!" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Mitchell, Gail (March 26, 2013). "Chris Brown Shares Sneak Peek of New Album: First Single 'Fine China' Bows April". Billboard. Retrieved March 27, 2013. "Chris Brown, 'X': Track-by-Track Review". Billboard. September 15, 2014. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown and Tyga Reveal 'Fan of a Fan: The Album' Release Date, Cover Art". Rap-Up. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Watch Chris Brown & Trey Songz Talk 'Between the Sheets' Tour". Billboard. November 11, 2014. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Freedom, Fatherhood & The Future: Chris Brown Is Breaking Bad". December 23, 2015. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Five More Hours - Single by Deorro & Chris Brown". March 3, 2015. Retrieved November 7, 2021 – via music.apple.com. "Chris Brown to Release New Album in Fall: Exclusive". Billboard. June 25, 2015. Retrieved June 29, 2015. "Chris Brown's Album Titled 'Royalty' — Honoring Daughter in New Music - Hollywood Life". Archived from the original on March 8, 2016. Retrieved May 3, 2016. "Chris Brown Reveals Heartwarming Title of His Next Album". Billboard. August 22, 2015. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown Reveals "Royalty" Artwork & Release Date November 27". Urbanislandz.com. October 16, 2015. Retrieved August 30, 2016. "Chris Brown Announces 'Royalty' Album Release Date". Billboard. October 14, 2015. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown: Album "Royalty" erscheint am 27. November". bigFM. October 14, 2015. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown 'Royalty' Release Date Delayed To Dec. 18 After Overlap With New Rihanna Album 'Anti' Black Friday Tidal Debut". November 26, 2015. Archived from the original on December 22, 2016. Retrieved August 30, 2016. "Chris Brown Drops Surprise Mixtape 'Before the Party'". Rap-Up. November 27, 2015. Retrieved January 31, 2016. Smith, Trevor (December 30, 2015). "Charts Don't Lie: December 30th". Hotnewhiphop.com. Retrieved January 15, 2016. Harris, Jean. "Chris Brown Album Royalty Appears On The Chart At Number 3 Behind Justin Bieber and Adele". Rap Native. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. "Chris Brown Drops Celeb-Filled 8 Part Music Video Series from Royalty Album". January 6, 2016. "Freedom, Fatherhood & the Future: Chris Brown is Breaking Bad". December 23, 2015. Riccardo Falconieri (April 13, 2016). "Chris Brown fa ascoltare inediti live, su Periscope e Instagram". rnbjunk.com. Archived from the original on May 4, 2016. Retrieved May 5, 2016. "Chris Brown Previews New Music on Periscope, Ignites Rumors of Another Surprise Mixtape Release". inquisitr.com. January 10, 2016. Retrieved May 5, 2016. "Chris Brown Announces New Single 'Grass Ain't Greener' | Rap-Up". rap-up.com. Retrieved May 5, 2016. "Paradise – Single by Benny Benassi & Chris Brown". iTunes Store (AU). March 31, 2016. Retrieved April 18, 2016. "Chris Brown Announces New Album 'Heartbreak on a Full Moon'". Rap-Up. Retrieved May 18, 2017. "Chris Brown - My Friend". HotNewHipHop. July 7, 2016. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown - A Lot Of Love". HotNewHipHop. July 8, 2016. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown To Slam Rihanna & Karrueche Tran In 'Painful' Diss Track? - Inquisitr". www.inquisitr.com. November 15, 2016. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown New Album: 'Heartbreak On A Full Moon' Arriving Before 'Party' Tour? - Inquisitr". www.inquisitr.com. February 26, 2017. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown Is Building A Home Studio". HotNewHipHop. February 8, 2017. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Chris Brown On Being Vulnerable, Falling In Love + Taking a Knee. HOT 97. October 23, 2017. Archived from the original on July 20, 2021. Retrieved October 26, 2021 – via YouTube. Schwartz, Danny (March 24, 2017). "Chris Brown – Privacy | Stream [New Song]". Hotnewhiphop.com. Retrieved March 29, 2017. "Chris Brown Unveils Lengthy Track List for 'Heartbreak on a Full Moon' Double Album". Billboard. May 2, 2017. Retrieved May 18, 2017. "Chris Brown Teases New Summer Singles". rap-up.com. "Chris Brown: Welcome to My Life". IMDb. "Chris Brown – Pills And Automobiles Feat. Kodak Black, Yo Gotti & A Boogie Wit Da Hoodie". hotnewhiphop.com. August 4, 2017. "New Music: Chris Brown – 'Questions'". rap-up.com. "Chris Brown Delivers Guest-Filled Set at TIDAL X Pop-Up Show in New York City". Billboard. October 26, 2017. "Chris Brown Brings Out Dave East, Fabolous, Yo Gotti at NYC Pop Up Show". The Source. October 26, 2017. "Stream Chris Brown's New Album 'Heartbreak on a Full Moon'". Billboard. October 31, 2017. Retrieved January 7, 2019. "Chris Brown Releases "Pills and Automobiles" Video f/ Yo Gotti, A Boogie Wit Da Hoodie, and Kodak Black". Complex. Joe Budden Apologizes to Chris Brown | Everyday Struggle. Complex. November 2, 2017. Archived from the original on October 18, 2021. Retrieved October 26, 2021 – via YouTube. "Kenny Chesney's 'Live in No Shoes Nation' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Albums Chart". Billboard. November 5, 2017. Retrieved January 7, 2019. "Chris Brown Scores His Seventh No. 1 Debut on Billboard Hip-Hop/R&B Charts With "HOAFM"". November 8, 2017. Retrieved November 3, 2018. "Chris Brown Releases Deluxe Edition Of "Heartbreak On A Full Moon" With 12 New Songs". HotNewHipHop. December 13, 2017. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown Adds 12 New Tracks to 'Heartbreak on a Full Moon' Deluxe Album". Billboard. December 13, 2017. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown Announces 'Heartbreak On A Full Moon Tour' With 6lack, H.E.R. And Rich The Kid". March 27, 2018. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown Offers His Own 'State of the Union' Message on New Song". Billboard. "Chris Brown Delivers His Personal "State of the Union"". HNHH. January 31, 2018. "Joyner Lucas and Chris Brown Announce Joint Project, Release "Stranger Things"". Complex.com. Retrieved March 3, 2018. "It's Freaky Friday! Lil Dicky & Chris Brown are Number 1". Officialcharts.com. Coleman II, C. Vernon (January 5, 2019). "Chris Brown Signs New Deal With RCA Records, Owns Masters". XXL Mag. Retrieved January 7, 2019. "Chris Brown Reunites With Scott Storch For New Single 'Undecided': Listen". Billboard. January 4, 2019. Retrieved January 7, 2019. "Chris Brown - Indigo Album Reviews, Songs & More | AllMusic". AllMusic. "Back to Love – Single by Chris Brown". Retrieved April 16, 2019 – via iTunes. "Wobble Up (feat. Nicki Minaj & G-Eazy) – Single by Chris Brown". Retrieved April 19, 2019 – via iTunes. "Light It Up – Single by Marshmello, Tyga & Chris Brown". April 25, 2019. Retrieved April 28, 2019 – via iTunes. "Chris Brown "Indigo" Features: Drake, Nicki Minaj, Tory Lanez, Justin Bieber & More". HotNewHipHop. May 2, 2019. Retrieved May 4, 2019. Mendez, Marisa (May 2, 2019). "Drake, Lil Wayne, Nicki Minaj and More to Be on New Chris Brown Album". XXL Mag. Retrieved May 4, 2019. "Chi Chi (feat. Chris Brown) – Single". February 4, 2019 – via iTunes. "Lil Nas X's 'Old Town Road' Rules Billboard Hot 100 for 18th Week, Lil Tecca's 'Ran$om' Reaches Top 10". Billboard. August 5, 2019. Retrieved August 13, 2019. "2020 GRAMMY Awards: Complete Winners & Nominations List". grammy.com. November 20, 2019. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Saponara, Michael (June 28, 2019). "Chris Brown Shares 'Indigo' Album, With Appearances From Lil Wayne, H.E.R. & Tyga: Stream it Now". Billboard magazine. Retrieved July 11, 2019. "Chris Brown 'Breezy' is a Generic, Algorithm-Pleasing Album That Further Makes Him Indistinct". HipHopDX. July 15, 2022. "Album reviews: Black Keys, Freddie Gibbs & Madlib, Chris Brown". July 3, 2019. Caulfield, Keith (July 8, 2019). "Chris Brown Earns Third No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart With 'Indigo'". Billboard magazine. Retrieved July 11, 2019. "Review: At Chris Brown's concert in Tampa, a reflection on his place in cancel culture". "POLLSTAR 2019 YEAR END SPECIAL". Pollstar. January 2, 2020. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown announces title of new album on Instagram". Capital XTRA. August 26, 2020. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown & Young Thug's Joint Mixtape Release Date Is Here". HotNewHipHop. April 29, 2020. Retrieved April 29, 2020. Anderson, Trevor (April 7, 2021). "Chris Brown's 'Go Crazy' Breaks 'No Guidance' No. 1 Record on R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay Chart". Billboard. Retrieved March 19, 2022. @billboardcharts (May 12, 2020). ".@chrisbrown earns his 100th career entry on the #Hot100 this week with "Not You Too," with @Drake (debuts at No. 25). He's the eighth artist in history to score 100+ Hot 100-charting hits" (Tweet). Retrieved May 12, 2020 – via Twitter. Zidel, Alex (July 9, 2020). "Chris Brown Announces New Album "Breezy"". HotNewHipHop. Retrieved July 10, 2020. "Ep 1: Making Beats for Chris Brown". Retrieved November 7, 2021 – via www.youtube.com. "Chris Brown Teases Short Film "Breezy"". HotNewHipHop. August 3, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown's "Iffy" Officially Ascends To #1 On Rhythmic Radio Chart". Headline Planet. April 3, 2022. Retrieved April 6, 2022. "The 25 Best R&B Songs Of 2022". Vibe.com. January 1, 2023. Retrieved May 30, 2023. Bowenbank, Starr (April 26, 2022). "Chris Brown & Lil Baby Team Up for 2022 One of Them Ones Tour: See the Dates". Billboard. Retrieved May 5, 2022. Bowenbank, Starr (April 26, 2022). "Chris Brown & Lil Baby Team Up for 2022 One of Them Ones Tour: See the Dates". Billboard. Retrieved May 5, 2022. Mitchell, Gail (May 16, 2022). "Chris Brown Set for New Multi-Year Residency at Drai's Las Vegas". Billboard. Retrieved June 16, 2022. "Chris Brown Joins Forces With Wizkid for New Single "Call Me Every Day"". Complex. Retrieved June 22, 2022. "Stream Chris Brown's New Album 'Breezy'". "Chris Brown Releases Deluxe Edition of 'Breezy' Album with 9 New Songs: Stream | HipHop-N-More". July 8, 2022. Lee, Taila (November 15, 2022). "2023 GRAMMY Nominations: See The Complete Winners & Nominees List". www.grammy.com. Retrieved February 7, 2023. "Chris Brown Taunts Robert Glasper After Losing Best R&B Album Grammy: 'Who da F— is This?'". Billboard. "Chris Brown Sends Half-Assed Apology to Robert Glasper After Grammys Lash Out". Rolling Stone. February 6, 2023. Grein, Paul (September 5, 2022). "Wizkid & Tems Are Top Winners at 2022 Headies Awards (Full Winners List)". Billboard. Retrieved September 5, 2022. "Chris Brown Becomes First R&B Singer In History To Nab Over 50 Hot 100 Top 40 Hits [Chart Check]". thatgrapejuice. Samuels, Keithan (October 17, 2022). "Usher Tells Chris Brown He's a Legend". Rated R&B. Retrieved November 13, 2022. "Chris Brown Drops Off Two New Christmas Visuals From 'BREEZY' Deluxe". HipHopDX. December 11, 2022. Retrieved January 18, 2023. Fitzgerald, Trent (November 19, 2022). "Chris Brown Claims American Music Awards Canceled His Michael Jackson Tribute Performance". XXL Mag. Retrieved January 18, 2023. "Jermaine Dupri Calls AMAs Chris Brown Cancelation Bad For Black Music". HipHopDX. November 20, 2022. Retrieved January 18, 2023. "John Branca Addresses Tribute Cancellation - Thriller 40". November 22, 2022. Retrieved January 18, 2023. "What do We Really Want from Chris Brown?". Rolling Stone. March 31, 2023. Mallick, Dani (February 11, 2023). "Skillibeng Cancels 'Under The Influence Tour' With Chris Brown". DancehallMag. Retrieved April 7, 2023. Maako, Keitumetse. "SA singer Tyla joins Chris Brown on European tour". Life. Retrieved April 7, 2023. "Review: Chris Brown at Manchester's AO Arena". March 10, 2023. "Unease as Chris Brown taps into Valentine's spirit at London after show party". February 15, 2023. "RIAA: Chris Brown Unseats Elvis Presley As Male Singer with Most Gold-Certified Singles - That Grape Juice". thatgrapejuice.net. Retrieved February 17, 2023. Anderson, Trevor (March 21, 2023). "Chris Brown's 'Under the Influence' On Top of R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay Chart". Billboard. Retrieved March 24, 2023. Rutherford, Kevin (March 10, 2023). "Chris Brown Scores 18th Mainstream R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay No. 1". Billboard. Retrieved March 24, 2023. Samuels, Keithan (August 4, 2023). "Ciara Announces New EP 'CiCi'". Rated R&B. Retrieved August 4, 2023. "Ciara, Chris Brown - How We Roll". Youtube. August 4, 2023. Retrieved August 4, 2023. PERRY, KEDIESHA (July 15, 2023). "Chris Brown's 'Influence' booked". jamaica observer. Retrieved July 29, 2023. "Chris Brown and Friends concert underway". Jamaica Observer. August 27, 2023. Retrieved August 28, 2023. "Grammy Awards 2024: The main nominees". BBC News. November 10, 2023. Retrieved November 13, 2023. "Chris Brown Unlocks '11:11' Album Cover / Announces New 22-Track Concept - That Grape Juice". thatgrapejuice.net. Retrieved October 23, 2023. "Chris Brown Unlocks '11:11' Album Tracklist / Confirms 22 Songs & Eclectic Features - That Grape Juice". thatgrapejuice.net. Retrieved November 6, 2023. Samuels, Keithan (November 6, 2023). "Chris Brown Unveils '11:11' Album Tracklist". Rated R&B. Retrieved November 6, 2023. Samuels, Keithan (November 7, 2023). "Chris Brown Shares New Song 'Nightmares' Featuring Byron Messia". Rated R&B. Retrieved November 7, 2023. "Chris Brown Surprises Fans With Early Album Release: "11:11" Coming On 11/10". www.hotnewhiphop.com. November 8, 2023. Retrieved November 13, 2023. "'Double Negative': Chris Brown Apologizes For His '11:11' Album Missing the Long-Awaited Justin Bieber Collaboration". thatgrapejuice.net. Retrieved November 13, 2023. Mamo, Heran (November 10, 2023). "Chris Brown Drops 11th Studio Album '11:11′". Billboard. Retrieved November 13, 2023. Sandiford, Kayla. "Album Review: Chris Brown – 11:11 – Renowned For Sound". Caulfield, Keith (November 19, 2023). "Stray Kids Score Fourth No. 1 on Billboard 200 With 'ROCK-STAR'". Billboard. Retrieved November 19, 2023. "November 25, 2023". Billboard. Retrieved November 19, 2023. "He Did It! Chris Brown Keeps Nearly 20-Year Billboard 200 Top 10 Streak Intact with Debut of '11:11′". thatgrapejuice.net. Retrieved November 20, 2023. "Chris Brown to perform in Riyadh in December". November 8, 2023. "Chris Brown wows fans at Abu Dhabi concert". November 25, 2023. https://www.middleeastmonitor.com/20231225-chris-brown-speaks-about-evil-and-genocide-in-palestine-whilst-on-stage-in-dubai/ "Lil Wayne, Chris Brown Mourn Michael Jackson's Death". MTV. Retrieved March 31, 2016. "Chris Brown Pays Homage to Michael Jackson in 'Back to Love' (VIDEO)". Ebony.com. April 12, 2019. Osorio, Kim (May 2, 2011). "Chris Brown Salutes M.J. in New Video". Black Entertainment Television. Retrieved May 3, 2011. "[Exclusive] Introducing the 'New' Chris Brown?". Ebony. March 26, 2013. Retrieved June 3, 2016. "Chris brown's 'fine china' video: good guy gone 'bad'". MTV. Retrieved June 3, 2016. "Chris Brown's 'Fine China' Vintage Makeover: The Singer Cleans Up Well in New Video". Billboard. Retrieved June 3, 2016. "My Way: 10 Artists Usher Has Influenced". The Bet Honours. Retrieved May 31, 2016. "Freedom, Fatherhood & The Future: Chris Brown Is Breaking Bad". Vibe. December 23, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2016. "Artist Influences for Chris Brown". MTV. Retrieved May 31, 2016. "Chris Brown Answers Fan Questions On Ask Anything Chat w/ Romeo, SNOL - AskAnythingChat". Retrieved November 7, 2021 – via www.youtube.com. "Music review: Chris Brown displays diverse talents on new album". Dowling, Marcus (September 15, 2014). "Chris Brown – X". HipHopDX. Archived from the original on April 21, 2016. Retrieved July 2, 2019. Jones, Steve (March 22, 2011). Listen Up: Chris Brown back with 'F.A.M.E.'. USA Today. Retrieved on March 22, 2011. Locker, Melissa (July 3, 2012). "Chris Brown's Fortune: A Mix of Beats and Ballads, but No Regrets". Time. Kellmam, Andy. "X – Chris Brown". AllMusic. Archived from the original on September 18, 2014. Retrieved December 23, 2013. "Royalty - Chris Brown | Songs, Reviews, Credits". AllMusic. Retrieved January 9, 2022. "Chris Brown's 'Heartbreak on a Full Moon' [Review]". The Boombox. November 9, 2017. Retrieved January 7, 2019. "Full Series - Categories". ITV Hub. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Music". Global Grind. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown's 12 Sexiest Slow Jams". Billboard. November 24, 2016. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Trzcinski, Matthew (June 25, 2020). "Why Chris Brown Gave the Song 'Disturbia' to Rihanna". Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown's Downward Spiral: Insiders Open Up About His Struggles With Addiction and Anger". Billboard. March 2, 2017. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Diehl, Matt (March 26, 2013). "Chris Brown Previews New Album 'X': 'The Negativity Is in the Past'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020. Retrieved September 26, 2020. "Chris Brown Falls Short of King on 'Royalty': Album Review". Billboard. "There's Actually a Decent Album Hidden in Chris Brown's Bewildering Heartbreak on a Full Moon". Vulture. November 3, 2017. Retrieved August 2, 2023. "The Voice". workkpopvocalanalysis. Retrieved May 31, 2016. "Grammy 2009 Winners List". MTV News. MTV. February 8, 2009. Retrieved May 31, 2016. "Chris Brown Speaks: "I Don't Just Write Love Songs... I Am Love Songs"". HotNewHipHop. June 3, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "The Week in Pop: Are You Ready for Some Chris Brown? (Or Nah?)". September 18, 2014. Hoard, Christian (November 28, 2005). "Chris Brown". Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Markman, Rob. "Chris Brown 'This Generation's Michael Jackson,' Duo Say". MTV News. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown's "X" is Bitter Progress". Complex Networks. "Chris Brown Elevates Himself To R&B King Status With "Indigo" Album - Urban Islandz". June 28, 2019. "Five Burning Questions: Chris Brown and Young Thug's 'Go Crazy' Jumps to No. 3 on the Hot 100". Billboard. March 2, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown Songs". HotNewHipHop. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Guerra, Joey (June 11, 2019). "Chris Brown brings Indigoat Tour to Houston". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Review: Chris Brown, Heartbreak on a Full Moon". Slant Magazine. October 31, 2017. Indiana, Jake (February 15, 2018). "Kanye West's 'The Life of Pablo': Every Song Ranked Worst to Best". Highsnobiety. Retrieved November 21, 2018. Pierre, Milca (September 11, 2019). "5 times Chris Brown flexed his skills as a rapper". REVOLT. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Here Are Chris Brown's 28 Best Rap Verses". XXL Mag. May 5, 2020. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "REVIEW: Chris Brown's 2019 'IndiGOAT' Tour is enthralling and eye-catching". "Review: At Chris Brown's concert in Tampa, a reflection on his place in cancel culture". Tampa Bay Times. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown Wants To Know Where The Talented Artists Went". HotNewHipHop. August 9, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Sciarretto, Amy (February 17, 2012). "Chris Brown Hits the Club in 'Turn Up the Music' Video". PopCrush. Retrieved February 18, 2012. Corner, Lewis (May 3, 2011). "Chris Brown pays tribute to Michael Jackson". Digital Spy. Hachette Filipacchi Médias. Retrieved May 4, 2011. "12 Moments That Prove Chris Brown's Dance Moves Are Out Of This World". Capital XTRA. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Rupani, Meena (February 17, 2012). "Video: Chris Brown Says 'Turn Up the Music'". DesiHits. Retrieved February 18, 2012. "Chris Brown - Party Feat. Usher & Gucci Mane". HotNewHipHop. December 16, 2016. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "The Source |Nupe Breezy! How Do The Kappas Feel About Chris Brown Jacking Their Shimmy?". October 25, 2019. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown Flexes Insane Dancing Skills During "HBOAFM Tour"". HotNewHipHop. June 25, 2018. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Ford, Rebecca (August 28, 2011). "MTV VMAs: Chris Brown Shows Off his Dance Skills With Performance (Video)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown dance-off with Omarion Vestival The Hague Malieveld 1-8-2015". Retrieved November 7, 2021 – via www.youtube.com. @WORLDSTAR (October 5, 2016). "Chris Brown front-flipping to March Madness landing on beat is still one of the greatest moments ever" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "Chris Brown Is an Amazingly Good Graffiti Artist". June 9, 2017. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown's Art Sells for $60K at Miami Auction – XXL". XXL Mag. February 22, 2015. "Chris Brown Shares Some Of His Detailed Drawings". HotNewHipHop. August 6, 2019. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown Shares New Painting, Sets His Sights On Art Exhibit". HotNewHipHop. March 21, 2018. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown: Dances with Paint". Retrieved November 7, 2021 – via www.youtube.com. "Konfuzed x Kai: Chris Brown's Art Sells For $60K At Miami Auction". Vibe.com. February 22, 2015. "Chris Brown, behind the music". miamiherald.com. "Chris Brown and Street Artist KAI Painted Graffiti This Week for an Upcoming Street Art Auction in Miami". Ca.complex.com. "Chris Brown Spray Paints For Hot 97, Talks About His Art". HotNewHipHop. December 12, 2014. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Watch as Chris Brown Paints Graffiti at Hot 97 Studios in New York City". Complex. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Robertson, Iyana (January 21, 2015). "Chris Brown 'Spices Up' The Walls Of The Grammy Museum". Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown spotted graffitiing in London's Shoreditch streets". Capital XTRA. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown painting in Amsterdam". Retrieved November 7, 2021 – via www.youtube.com. "Chris Brown Creates Painting While Dancing For Special Spotify Episode: Watch". October 27, 2017. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown pays tribute to Kobe Bryant by painting giant mural of his face". Capital XTRA. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Gunn, Tamantha (February 4, 2020). "Chris Brown paints mural of Kobe Bryant". Revolt. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Black-ish became its own worst enemy when it cast Chris Brown". Vox. April 2, 2017. Retrieved August 2, 2023. "black-ish Boss Defends Chris Brown's Controversial Season 3 Stint: 'We Are Beyond Conscious of What We Do'". TV Line. August 29, 2017. Retrieved August 2, 2023. "Gold & Platinum". RIAA. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "Chris Brown Breaks James Brown's Record For 'Most Hot 100 Hits of All Time' Among R&B Singers - That Grape Juice". thatgrapejuice.net. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "Chris Brown becomes first R&B artist to achieve 100 entries on Billboard's Hot 100 chart". REVOLT. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "Chris Brown Breaks Elvis' Record As Most Decorated Male Singer In Hot 100". Yahoo Sports. July 8, 2022. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Anderson, Trevor (July 8, 2022). "Chris Brown Breaks The Weeknd's Record for Most Hot R&B Songs Hits". Billboard. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "Drake | Biography, Music & News". Billboard. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "The Weeknd | Biography, Music & News". Billboard. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "Chris Brown | Biography, Music & News". Billboard. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "Hot R&B Songs", Wikipedia, September 20, 2023, retrieved October 12, 2023 "Chris Brown Becomes First R&B Singer In History To Nab Over 50 Hot 100 Top 40 Hits [Chart Check] - That Grape Juice". thatgrapejuice.net. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "List of Billboard Hot 100 chart achievements and milestones", Wikipedia, October 12, 2023, retrieved October 12, 2023 Anderson, Trevor (June 13, 2018). "Future Wraps Fifth-Longest Hot 100 Charting Streak After 166 Weeks". Billboard. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "List of Billboard Hot 100 chart achievements and milestones", Wikipedia, October 12, 2023, retrieved October 12, 2023 Anderson, Trevor (March 21, 2023). "Chris Brown's 'Under the Influence' On Top of R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay Chart". Billboard. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay", Wikipedia, October 11, 2023, retrieved October 12, 2023 "Chris Brown & Drake's "No Guidance" Reaches New Billboard Chart Milestone". www.hotnewhiphop.com. January 29, 2020. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Anderson, Trevor (April 7, 2021). "Chris Brown's 'Go Crazy' Breaks 'No Guidance' No. 1 Record on R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay Chart". Billboard. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Anderson, Trevor (March 11, 2021). "Chris Brown Now Has the Two Longest Running No. 1s on R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay Chart". Billboard. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Rutherford, Kevin (March 10, 2023). "Chris Brown Scores 18th Mainstream R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay No. 1". Billboard. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Anderson, Trevor (June 7, 2023). "Drake's 'Search' Seizes No. 1 Spot on Rhythmic and Rap Airplay Charts". Billboard. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "Rhythmic (chart)", Wikipedia, October 10, 2023, retrieved October 12, 2023 "BET Awards: Chris Brown Extends Record for Most Wins Among Male Acts - That Grape Juice". thatgrapejuice.net. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Lebona, Namhla (November 30, 2022). "Celebrating 35 Years of the Soul Train Awards - MEFeater". Retrieved October 12, 2023. "Soul Train Music Awards", Wikipedia, September 10, 2023, retrieved October 12, 2023 psuh (September 27, 2018). "Chris Brown Breaks Male Artist Vevo Record for Most Certified Videos". Drai's - The Best Las Vegas Nightclub. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "Vevo", Wikipedia, October 10, 2023, retrieved October 12, 2023 October 21, Sydney Bucksbaum; EDT, 2019 at 10:00 AM. "Top 10 highest performing U.S. artists of the decade on Vevo revealed". EW.com. Retrieved October 12, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Grein, Paul (September 5, 2022). "Wizkid & Tems Are Top Winners at 2022 Headies Awards (Full Winners List)". Billboard. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "Chris Brown Reacts To Winning 2022 Headies Award | SEE". NotjustOk. September 6, 2022. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "History was made the 15th Annual Headies Award held in Atlanta, first time in U.S. and Full List Of Winners". ThisisRnB.com - New R&B Music, Artists, Playlists, Lyrics. September 7, 2022. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "Chris Brown Arrested After Alleged Rihanna Assault". E! Online. February 9, 2009. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "WATCH: Draya Michelle Talks About Dating Chris Brown". HuffPost. November 2, 2011. Retrieved April 6, 2022. "Karrueche Tran on Her Restraining Order Against Chris Brown: "I Needed to Protect My Safety"". September 21, 2017. "Chris Brown, Rihanna Reunite on 'Birthday Cake,' 'Turn Up the Music' Remixes". ABC News. Retrieved April 6, 2022. "Chris Brown, Karrueche Tran Split". Us Weekly. October 4, 2012. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown Loves Both Rihanna And Karreuche Tran". MTV. October 5, 2012. Archived from the original on October 7, 2012. Retrieved October 6, 2012. "Rihanna breaks silence over Chris Brown: 'if it's a mistake, it's my mistake'". www.telegraph.co.uk. January 30, 2013. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Rihanna on Chris Brown: 'We Know Exactly What We Have Now'". Rolling Stone. January 30, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "'He's not the monster everybody thinks': Rihanna opens up on Chris Brown". The Sydney Morning Herald. January 30, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Vena, Jocelyn. "Rihanna Spells It Out: Chris Brown Duet Still 'Nobody's Business'". MTV News. Retrieved April 6, 2022. Oleniuk, Lucas (November 20, 2012). "Rihanna's Unapologetic album works, in familiar ways". Toronto Star. Retrieved September 30, 2013. "Chris Brown Confirms Rihanna Breakup: "I Can't Focus on Wife-ing" Her". May 6, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Leon, Anya (April 17, 2015). "Chris Brown Cuddles Up with His 'Twin' – Daughter Royalty". People. Retrieved May 14, 2015. Klein, Asher (May 7, 2015). "Chris Brown: "Crazy Individual" Broke Into Home, Threw out Daughter's Clothes". KNBC. Retrieved May 14, 2015. "Baby No. 2! Chris Brown's Ex Gives Birth to Baby Boy". MSN. Meara, Paul (September 25, 2019). "Chris Brown Is Reportedly Expecting A Baby Boy". BET.com. Retrieved September 30, 2019. "Chris Brown shares adorable post for daughter Lovely Symphani's first birthday". Capital XTRA. Thomasos, Christine (October 29, 2012). "Chris Brown Speaks About Humble Beginnings in Church; Experience With Holy Ghost". The Christian Post. Retrieved June 4, 2014. Saad, Nardine (June 2, 2014). "Chris Brown tweets 'Thank you GOD' after early release from jail". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved June 4, 2014. Robertson, Iyana (December 23, 2015). "Freedom, Fatherhood & The Future: Chris Brown Is Breaking Bad". Retrieved November 7, 2021. Bacher, Danielle (March 2, 2017). "Chris Brown's Downward Spiral: Insiders Open Up About His Struggles With Addiction and Anger". Billboard. Retrieved April 2, 2023. "Chris Brown -- After Rihanna, I Considered Suicide ... I Felt Like a Monster (VIDEO)". TMZ. Retrieved April 2, 2023. Rothman, Lily (October 9, 2013). "Chris Brown Was Raped. Does It Matter If He Doesn't Think So?". Time. ISSN 0040-781X. Retrieved December 21, 2023. "Chris Brown Suffers From Bipolar Disorder And PTSD, Rehab Facility Reveals". MTV. Retrieved April 2, 2023. Rutherford, Kevin (March 1, 2014). "Chris Brown Has PTSD, Bipolar Disorder, Rehab Facility Says". Billboard. Retrieved April 2, 2023. "Chris Brown Diagnosed with Bipolar Disorder and PTSD; Ordered to Stay in Rehab". Peoplemag. Retrieved April 2, 2023. Billboard, Kevin Rutherford (March 1, 2014). "Chris Brown Has PTSD, Bipolar Disorder, Rehab Says". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved April 2, 2023. "Chris Brown Sentenced To Five Years' Probation And Community Labor". Billboard. August 26, 2009. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Brown sentenced for Rihanna assault; other incidents surface". CNN. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown sentenced to community labour in Rihanna assault case". The Daily Telegraph. UK. September 25, 2009. Archived from the original on September 15, 2010. Retrieved February 22, 2012. "Chris Brown says he still loves Rihanna". CNN. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Yes, Chris Brown remembers Rihanna beating". TODAY.com. September 2009. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Kreps, Daniel (September 1, 2009). "Chris Brown Clarifies King Interview, Says He Recalls Rihanna Incident". Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "New York Daily News - New York Daily News". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on September 6, 2009. Retrieved September 4, 2009. "Chris Brown's Restraining Order Modified". MTV News. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Pop Culture: Entertainment and Celebrity News, Photos & Videos". TODAY.com. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Rihanna Wants Closer Contact with Chris Brown". TMZ. Retrieved April 6, 2022. Rocha, Veronica (March 20, 2015). "Chris Brown released from probation stemming from Rihanna assault". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (August 17, 2017). "Chris Brown discusses abuse of Rihanna: 'I felt like a monster'". The Guardian. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Coleman, Miriam (June 30, 2012). "Chris Brown Releases Drake Diss Track". Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Tony Parker now says he 'almost lost [his] eye' in Drake-Chris Brown brawl, Spurs 'very worried'". sports.yahoo.com. June 25, 2012. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Report: Drake to Be Charged in Club Fight". Rolling Stone. June 16, 2012. "News: Chris Brown Involved In Fight With Drake's Entourage [Updated] : KillerHipHop.com". Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown Fires Back At Drake On Diss Track; Meek Mill Reacts". Billboard. July 2012. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Chris Brown 'suspect' in fight over parking space retrieved February 6, 2013 Quan, Denise; Botelho, Greg (February 3, 2013). "Frank Ocean says he'll 'choose sanity,' won't press charges in Chris Brown fight". CNN. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Amderson-Niles, Amanda (September 4, 2013). "Sean Kingston Says Frank Ocean Started the Fight with Chris Brown". Urban Belle Magazine. Retrieved April 6, 2022. "Chris Brown Countersues Frank Ocean's Cousin Over Fight". Pitchfork. November 7, 2013. Retrieved April 6, 2022. "Chris Brown has probation revoked and awaits decision on jail". www.standard.co.uk. July 16, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Duke, Alan (October 28, 2013). "Assault charge against Chris Brown reduced in D.C. brawl". CNN. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown Arrested for Assault in D.C." October 27, 2013. "newsontheneck.com". Duke, Alan (March 17, 2014). "Judge orders Chris Brown to stay in jail". CNN. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown denied release from jail". April 24, 2014. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown Will Serve Additional 131 Days in Jail For Probation Violation". Complex. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Singer Chris Brown released from Los Angeles County jail". The Guardian. June 2, 2014. "Chris Brown Sued by Manager for Alleged Assault and Battery". June 23, 2016. "Chris Brown's Manager -- I Didn't Steal Your Money and Oops ...You Forgot to Fire Me!". "Chris Brown Settles Ex-Manager False Imprisonment Lawsuit". June 27, 2019. Deerwester, Jayme. "Karrueche Tran wins 5-year restraining order against ex Chris Brown". USA TODAY. Retrieved October 17, 2023. "Chris Brown, Drake Sued for Copyright Infringement Over 'No Guidance'". TMZ. Retrieved October 17, 2023. "Label Accuses Chris Brown of Copying Reggae Tune in Hit Song". news.bloomberglaw.com. Retrieved October 17, 2023. "Singer Chris Brown's Bid to Escape Infringement Case Shot Down". news.bloomberglaw.com. Retrieved October 17, 2023. "Greensleeves settles with Chris Brown over alleged song theft | Complete Music Update". Retrieved October 17, 2023. Donahue, Bill (September 8, 2022). "Chris Brown's Copyright Accusers Drop Case Over 'No Guidance'". Billboard. Retrieved October 17, 2023. "Chris Brown Finally Free of 'Pills and Automobiles' Lawsuit". news.bloomberglaw.com. Retrieved October 17, 2023. "Chris Brown bailed out of jail following hours-long police standoff that ended in his arrest - The Washington Post". The Washington Post. Puente, Maria. "Chris Brown out on bail after arrest for assault with deadly weapon". USA Today. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown Released From Jail on $250K Bail Following Arrest on Assault Charge". Billboard. August 31, 2016. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Kreps, Daniel (September 2, 2016). "Chris Brown's Lawyer: No Guns Found in House Search". Rolling Stone. Retrieved August 22, 2017. "Chris Brown -- Gun Case Falls Flat". TMZ. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Golding, Shenequa (September 1, 2016). "Chris Brown's Accuser Allegedly Sent Text Messages Trying To Frame Him". Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown Claims Defamation After Woman Accuses Him Of Pointing Gun At Her". HipHopDX. September 7, 2016. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown accused of drugging and raping woman on yacht". BBC News. January 28, 2022. Retrieved January 29, 2021. "Chris Brown accused of drugging, raping woman in Florida, lawsuit says". WFLA. January 29, 2022. Retrieved January 30, 2022. Patterson, Charmaine (January 29, 2022). "Chris Brown Accused of Raping and Drugging Woman in $20 Million Lawsuit". people.com. Retrieved January 30, 2022. "Chris Brown's Alleged Victim's Texts To Singer Leak". RadarOnline. March 8, 2022. Retrieved March 9, 2022. "Chris Brown Drops VM and Texts from Rape Accuser, Threatens to Sue Her". TMZ. Retrieved March 9, 2022. "Judge Drops Woman's Drugging, Rape Allegations Against Chris Brown". NBC Palm Springs. August 26, 2022. Retrieved January 11, 2023. "Chris Brown looks to deliver on the hype". MSNBC. 2007.[permanent dead link] Markman, Rob (April 5, 2013). "Chris Brown Reveals What His CBE Label Really Stands For". MTV. "Kevin McCall: Chris Brown & I Fell Out When "Strip" Dropped (Flashback)". Retrieved November 7, 2021 – via www.youtube.com. Dummy, Mechanical. "Mechanical Dummy™ Brand Founded By International Recording Artist Chris Brown Launches New Interactive Lifestyle Website Today". www.prnewswire.com (Press release). Retrieved October 11, 2023. Singersroom (December 10, 2010). "Chris Brown Links With Mechanical Dummy To Create Lifestyle Portal - Singersroom.com". Retrieved October 11, 2023. Michaels, Sean (September 17, 2009). "Chris Brown cleans up his act during community service". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Augustin, Camille (August 29, 2015). "Chris Brown Is The Owner Of 14 Burger King Restaurants". Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown Launches Symphonic Love Foundation". BET. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "Chris Brown Launches Charity For Children". HuffPost. November 5, 2012. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "Chris Brown Shows His Charitable Side". HuffPost. March 28, 2013. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "Chris Brown Launches Toy Line and Showcases Art Work". BET. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "Chris Brown Debuts Art, Toy Line at Los Angeles Galleries". Yahoo Entertainment. May 3, 2012. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Thomas, Asia (November 17, 2013). "Chris Brown Launches Sprayground Backpack Collection". Rated R&B. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "Chris Brown Launches Backpack Collection". Rap-Up. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "Chris Brown Announces Breezy's Cosmic Crunch Cereal". "Chris Brown Reveals Limited Edition Cereal 'Breezy's Cosmic Crunch'". Complex Networks. "Chris Brown Announces New Breakfast Cereal, "Breezy's' Cosmic Crunch"". November 10, 2021. Espinoza, Joshua. "Chris Brown and Renowned's John Dean to Launch 'The Auracles' NFT Streetwear Collection". Complex. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Brown, Preezy (April 26, 2022). "Chris Brown Partners With Renowned For NFT Streetwear Collection". VIBE.com. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Zorka, Zoe (July 5, 2022). "Chris Brown Drops "BREEZYVERSE" NFT - The Source". Retrieved October 11, 2023. "Chris Brown Lights Up the Cannabis Scene With A New Strain". 247 Live Culture Magazine. October 12, 2023. Retrieved October 14, 2023. "Chris brown Announces Official Launch Date for "BUSSIN" Strain In Partnership With OHB FARMS and ORIGINALS". hemphealsfoundation.com. Retrieved October 14, 2023. "Faraday Future Announces Global Super Star and Entrepreneur Chris Brown will Become the Next FF 91 2.0 Owner and Developer Co-Creation Officer". www.businesswire.com. October 10, 2023. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "The Rise of Chris Brown's Black Pyramid Clothing Brand". Black Pyramid Store. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Chris Brown is Releasing a Clothing Line". HNHH. January 20, 2016. "Chris Brown Just Opened a Fashion Clothing Boutique in Amsterdam". December 8, 2016. Monaé, Ashley (December 11, 2015). "Chris Brown Is The New Face Of BAPE's Black Label". VIBE.com. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "Strong Roadman Vibes with Chris Brown and SNIPES's Breezy Summer Capsule". May 18, 2016. "Chris Brown Fronts Latest Philipp Plein Ad Campaign". Forbes. "Chris Brown: "Ora che sono grande"". March 29, 2016. "Chris Brown Unveils His Brand-New "NAMI" Slides". www.hotnewhiphop.com. May 1, 2023. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Torres, Luis (September 22, 2023). "Chris Brown's The Auracles Is Releasing A New Slide". Nice Kicks. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "Chart Scene: Chris Brown Shines On APX With Euro Tour Launch - Pollstar News". February 17, 2023. Retrieved February 7, 2024. "Under the Influence Tour (2023)". Touring Data. April 16, 2023. Retrieved February 7, 2024. "Chris Brown Announces Fan Appreciation Tour". Billboard. October 20, 2009. Retrieved April 24, 2012. "Surprise guests give Lil Wayne's 2016 Lil Weezyana Fest extra jolt it needed". August 28, 2016. "Review | Drake's star-studded OVO Fest — including Chris Brown — a love letter to Toronto". The Toronto Star. August 6, 2019. Media related to Chris Brown (entertainer) at Wikimedia Commons Official website Chris Brown at IMDb  Chris Brown on YouTube Chris Brown on Instagram Chris Brown on Facebook Chris Brown on Twitter