The Wonder is a 2022 period psychological drama film directed by Sebastián Lelio. Emma Donoghue, Lelio, and Alice Birch wrote the screenplay based on the 2016 novel of the same name by Donoghue. Set shortly after the Great Famine, it follows an English nurse sent to a rural Irish village to observe a young 'fasting girl', who is seemingly able to miraculously survive without eating. Florence Pugh leads an ensemble cast that includes Tom Burke, Niamh Algar, Elaine Cassidy, Dermot Crowley, Brían F. O'Byrne, David Wilmot, Ruth Bradley, Caolán Byrne, Josie Walker, Ciarán Hinds, Toby Jones, and Kíla Lord Cassidy. The Wonder premiered at the Telluride Film Festival on 2 September 2022. It had a limited theatrical release on 2 November 2022 and streamed on Netflix on 16 November 2022. It received positive reviews from critics who praised the production design and cast performances, particularly Pugh's. In 1862, Elizabeth "Lib" Wright, an English nurse who served in the Crimean War, is sent to a rural village in Ireland where she is tasked with closely watching Anna O'Donnell, a fasting girl who, according to her family, has not eaten for four months. She is to be assisted by a nun, Sister Michael, and the two are to report their findings independently to a council of local dignitaries. The trauma of the Great Famine still looms over the community, and many locals are wary of the English nurse. Lib meets Anna's deeply religious family: her mother Rosaleen, her father Malachy and her elder sister Kitty. At dinner, Lib learns that Anna's elder brother died of an unknown illness. Anna herself appears in good health and says she has been kept alive by consuming "manna from Heaven". At her lodgings, Lib encounters William Byrne, a man who grew up locally and whose family perished in the Great Famine while he was away at boarding school. Now a journalist for the Daily Telegraph, William is reporting on the story – which he believes to be a hoax. Lib and William begin a relationship. Lib's observations initially reveal no evidence of deception. Anna prays many times a day and speaks of the fate of the damned in Hell. Lib, who is grieving the death of her only child, takes laudanum to help her sleep. Noticing that her mother kisses Anna goodnight on her mouth while cupping her face, Lib deduces that chewed food is being covertly passed to Anna. She forbids the family from touching her. Anna does not deny that this is her "manna", and she discloses to Lib the reasons for her fast: her elder brother had repeatedly raped her, and she attributes his death to God's wrath. Anna believes that by her fasting and prayers she will free her brother's soul. Separated from her family's touch, Anna's condition worsens. William files a report to his paper in which he lays the blame for Anna's expected death on her family and the community. Lib informs the council of her findings, but they refuse to believe her. Sister Michael states that she has found no evidence of Rosaleen feeding Anna. Members of the council question Anna, but she repeats that she is sustained solely by "manna from Heaven". Knowing that Anna will inevitably die unless she eats soon, Lib pleads with the family to take action, or at least for her mother to resume the kisses. Rosaleen refuses, saying that after Anna's sacred death, both her children will be in heaven. Lib persuades William to assist with a rescue plan. While the family are at mass, Lib brings Anna, now near death, to a nearby holy clootie well. She tells her that although "Anna" will die, she will be reborn as a new girl named "Nan". Anna closes her eyes and appears to die. When she revives, Lib is finally able to feed her. Lib returns to the house alone and sets it ablaze, at the same time deliberately destroying her laudanum bottle. Lib tells the council that Anna died of natural causes, and that the fire was an accident. Concerned for their own possible culpability for Anna's death, and the absence of a body within the charred remains of the house, they terminate her employment without pay. Sister Michael tells Lib that, after leaving mass early, she saw a vision of Anna and an angel leaving the area on horseback. She asks Lib to promise that Anna has gone to a better place, which Lib does. In Dublin, Lib reunites with William and Nan, who has recovered her health. The three pose as a family named Cheshire and set sail for Sydney. On board, Lib and William watch as Nan eats a full meal. Florence Pugh as Elizabeth "Lib" Wright Kíla Lord Cassidy as Anna O'Donnell / Nan Tom Burke as William Byrne Niamh Algar as Kitty O'Donnell / The Narrator Elaine Cassidy as Rosaleen O'Donnell Caolán Byrne as Malachy O'Donnell Toby Jones as Dr McBrearty Ciarán Hinds as Father Thaddeus Dermot Crowley as Sir Otway Brían F. O'Byrne as John Flynn David Wilmot as Seán Ryan Ruth Bradley as Maggie Ryan Josie Walker as Sister Michael On 28 April 2021, it was announced that Florence Pugh was set to star in Sebastián Lelio's adaptation of The Wonder. Principal photography began in Ireland on 12 August 2021. Accompanying the announcement of the start of production, it was reported that Tom Burke, Niamh Algar, Elaine Cassidy, Kíla Lord Cassidy, Toby Jones, Ciarán Hinds, Dermot Crowley, Brían F. O'Byrne and David Wilmot had joined the cast. The Wonder premiered at the Telluride Film Festival on 2 September 2022, followed by a screening at the 2022 Toronto International Film Festival on 13 September 2022. Its European premiere was at the 70th San Sebastián International Film Festival on 21 September 2022. It was released on Netflix on 16 November 2022, following a limited theatrical release on 2 November. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 85% of 171 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 7.2/10. The website's consensus reads: "The atmosphere's absorbing and the story is fascinating, but The Wonder of this period drama really lies in Florence Pugh's remarkable performance." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 71 out of 100, based on 37 critics, indicating "generally favorable" reviews. Reviewing the film following its premiere at Telluride, David Ehrlich of IndieWire called it a "sumptuous but slightly undercooked tale", praising Lelio's direction, the performances, the cinematography, and the score. Peter Bruge praised the cast performances in his review for Variety but criticized the screenplay, summarizing it as an "evenhanded but ultimately preposterous adaptation". The Hollywood Reporter’s Stephen Farber found it an "illuminating study of dark prejudices" and commended Pugh's performance, as well as Lelio's direction which he said represents perhaps his "finest achievement to date". The film has been likened to folk horror, with Meara Isenberg of CNET noting its "rural setting, religious foreboding and general sense of dread". Ed Power of the Irish Examiner described it as "Famine trauma meets folk horror", calling it a "gripping film ... full of buried secrets and festering evil". Wiseman, Andreas (12 August 2021). "'The Wonder': First Look At Florence Pugh In Netflix Period Thriller Filming In Ireland; Tom Burke, Niamh Algar, Toby Jones, More Join". Deadline. Retrieved 12 August 2021. "The Wonder". Toronto International Film Festival. Retrieved 28 July 2022. Kroll, Justin (28 April 2021). "Florence Pugh To Star In Sebastián Lelio's Adaptation of 'The Wonder'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on 28 April 2021. Retrieved 28 April 2021. "Film and TV Projects Going Into Production - The Wonder". Variety Insight. Archived from the original on 24 March 2021. Retrieved 24 March 2021. Keegan, Rebecca (1 September 2022). "Telluride Unveils Lineup of Films to "Fight About"". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 15 September 2022. Lang, Brent (28 July 2022). "Toronto Film Festival Unveils Lineup Featuring New Works From Sam Mendes, Tyler Perry, Darren Aronofsky, Sarah Polley". Variety. Retrieved 28 July 2022. Ntim, Zac (2 August 2022). "San Sebastián Film Festival Lineup: Sebastián Lelio And Hong Sang-Soo Debut New Works In Competition". Deadline Hollywood. "Florence Pugh's new movie The Wonder confirms Netflix release date". Digital Spy. 16 September 2022. Retrieved 16 September 2022. "The Wonder". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved 26 December 2022. "The Wonder". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved 18 November 2022. Ehrlich, David (3 September 2022). "'The Wonder' Review: Florence Pugh Discovers a Miracle". IndieWire. Retrieved 16 September 2022. Debruge, Peter (3 September 2022). "'The Wonder' Review: You Won't Believe Sebastián Lelio's Latest, but Not in a Good Way". Variety. Retrieved 16 September 2022. Farber, Stephen (3 September 2022). "'The Wonder' Review: Florence Pugh Dazzles in Sebastian Lelio's Mesmerizing Study of Faith and Abuse". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 16 September 2022. Isenberg, Meara (4 October 2022). "Florence Faces 'Midsommar'-Style Dread in Netflix 'The Wonder' Trailer". CNET. Power, Ed (24 October 2022). "Niamh Algar on how her turf-cutting past helped her in Netflix film, The Wonder". Irish Examiner. Ntim, Zac (4 November 2022). "British Independent Film Awards: 'Aftersun,' 'Blue Jean' & 'The Wonder' Lead Nominations". Deadline. Retrieved 4 November 2022. Ntim, Zac (18 November 2022). "British Independent Film Awards: 'Aftersun' Leads Craft Winners". Deadline. Retrieved 19 November 2022. Jones, Marcus (8 December 2022). "2022 National Board of Review Winners: 'Top Gun: Maverick' Takes Top Honor". IndieWire. Retrieved 8 December 2022. "2022 EDA AWARDS NOMINEES". Alliance of Women Film Journalists. Retrieved 23 December 2022. Pulver, Andrew (21 December 2022). "The Banshees of Inisherin leads pack as London film critics announce nominations". The Guardian. Retrieved 22 December 2022. Ntim, Zac (19 January 2023). "BAFTA Film Awards Nominations: 'All Quiet On The Western Front,' 'Banshees Of Inisherin' & 'Everything Everywhere All At Once' Lead — The Complete List". Deadline. Retrieved 19 January 2023. ""Bad Sisters" and "Banshees" lead this year's IFTA nominations". IrishCentral. 8 March 2023. Retrieved 8 March 2023. The Wonder at IMDb