The Hyundai Motor Group (HMG; IPA: [ˈhjəːndɛ]; stylized as HYUNDAI) is a South Korean chaebol (loosely similar to a multinational conglomerate but without a central holding company or ownership structure) headquartered in Seoul, South Korea. The HMG also refers to the group of affiliated companies interconnected by complex shareholding arrangements, with Hyundai Motor Company regarded as the de facto representative of the group. It is the third-largest South Korean chaebol, after Samsung Group and SK Group, related to other Hyundai-name industries following a specialized development split and restructuring which resulted in Hyundai Motor group, Hyundai Heavy Industries Group, Hyundai Development Company Group, Hyundai Department Store Group, and Hyundai Marine & Fire Insurance. The group was formed through the purchase of 51% of Kia by Hyundai Motor Company in 1998. As of 2011, Hyundai owns 33.7% of Kia Motors. On 22 May 2022, the Hyundai Motor Group announced the company would invest an additional $5 billion in the United States by the year 2025. The investment would strengthen collaboration with US firms in areas such as; urban air mobility, autonomous driving, artificial intelligence, and robotics. The investments were announced during a visit to South Korea by President Biden. The largest member of the chaebol, Hyundai Motor Company, has a controlling stake in Kia, and they are the largest and second largest car manufacturers in the country respectively. Following several years of rapid growth, the Group sold 8.01 million vehicles in 2015, falling short of its sales target. In 2017 the Group sold 7.25 million vehicles, the lowest in five years at that point. According to the Organisation Internationale des Constructeurs d'Automobiles, it was the world's third-largest vehicle manufacturer by production volume in 2017, behind Japanese Toyota and German Volkswagen Group.[needs update] In 2023, it maintained its No. 3 position in the global market while widening its gap with the fourth-ranked Renault-Nissan-Mitsubishi Alliance. Automobile Hyundai Motor Company Kia Corporation Genesis Motor Ioniq Manufacturing Hyundai Steel Hyundai Rotem Auto parts Hyundai Mobis Hyundai IHL Hyundai Wia Construction Hyundai Engineering & Construction Hyundai Engineering (HEC) Finance Hyundai Capital Hyundai Card Others Boston Dynamics Hyundai AutoEver Hyundai Glovis Hydrogen Wave global online forum was held on 7 September 2021. Hyundai Motor Group (the Group) set out the vision of the hydrogen business and the substance of hydrogen fuel cells and hydrogen mobility. In addition, the Group has set out Hydrogen Vision 2040. Vision FK, a high-performance hydrogen fuel cell vehicle, was unveiled. Vision FK does not use standard, common vehicle parts and combines Hydrogen Fuel Cell System and PE System developed under collaboration with Limak. Hydrogen Fuel Cell System is utilized as a main power source during FK's low speed driving or for the management of battery condition. Two of 2 kg hydrogen fuel tanks are located above the rear axle. Also, the 2nd generation fuel cell stacks, with the power of average 85 kW to maximum 95 kW, are located above the front axle. PE System that consists of two motor drives, decelerator, inverter, and battery, helps to exercise power during the high speed or dynamic driving. The total output of two motor drives applied to the rear-wheel is over 500 kW. In December 2021, Hyundai suspended development of its Genesis, and possibly its other, hydrogen cars. Jeonbuk Hyundai Motors FC FIFA World Cup UEFA Euro Korea Football Association International Ski Federation International Cricket Council Indian national cricket team A-League Olympique Lyonnais PFC CSKA Moscow Millonarios Fútbol Club National Football League Hyundai Motorsport ICC Champions Trophy Hyundai Tournament of Champions FIS Ski Jumping World Cup FIS Ski-Flying World Championships FIS Nordic World Ski Championships Carlton Football Club Brisbane Lions Raja Club Athletic Wydad Athletic Club Chelsea Football Club Major League Baseball Kia Tigers FIFA World Cup UEFA European Championship Copa America National Basketball Association Liga ACB FITA Archery World Cup Kia Classic (LPGA) Australian Open South Korea national speed skating team Sociedade Esportiva Palmeiras Surrey County Cricket Club Williams F1 Team Essendon Football Club Greater Western Sydney Giants Rafael Nadal Kia World Extreme Games AC Monza NBA WNBA G League Ulsan Mobis Phoebus Cheonan Hyundai Capital Skywalkers Suwon Hyundai E&C Volleyball Team Incheon Hyundai Steel Red Angels 2015 Going Home – Enabling displaced people to virtually visit their hometown by using 3D restoration technology 2017 Chatty School Bus – School bus for hearing-impaired children applied with sketchbook window technology 2018 The Quiet taxi – Taxi applied with audio-tactile conversion (ATC) system for hearing-impaired taxi driver 2020 Little Big e-Motion – Kids mobility featuring emotion recognition technology 2021 Dear My Hero - Improving sanitation workers' work environment through hydrogen garbage truck Companies portal Hyundai List of manufacturers by motor vehicle production List of Korean car makers "Corporate Performance About us Hyundai Motor Group". Retrieved 2 January 2024. Korean: 현대자동차그룹 Hyeondae Jadongcha Geurup; Hanja: 現代自動車그룹; RR: Hyeondae Jadong-cha Geurup; Pae, Peter (29 August 2019). "South Korea's Chaebol". Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved 11 August 2021. "Legal". Hyundai Motor Group. Retrieved 11 August 2021. Each company within Hyundai Motor Group is an individual, independent company. Hyundai Motor Group is not a company but refers to a gathering of independent companies that share historical homogeneity "보안상 차단된 페이지". Kmcir.com. Retrieved 24 April 2011. Hunnicutt, Trevor; Yang, Heekyong (22 May 2022). "Hyundai Motor Group to invest more than $10 billion in U.S. up to 2025". Reuters. Retrieved 22 May 2022. "Hyundai and Kia miss 2015 sales targets". BBC. 4 January 2016. Retrieved 22 January 2018. "Hyundai, Kia 2017 global sales at 7.25 million vehicles, miss target". Reuters. 2 January 2018. Retrieved 22 January 2018. "2016 World Motor Vehicle Production. OICA correspondents survey" (PDF). Retrieved 5 June 2018. "Hyundai Motor Group solidifies position as No.3 automaker in world". Korea JoongAng Daily. 2024-02-18. Retrieved 2024-02-19. "Hyundai Presents its Vision for Hydrogen-Based Mobillity". Hypebeast. Retrieved 11 September 2021. Dow, Jameson. "Hyundai pauses Genesis hydrogen fuel cell project just days after ending ICE engines", Electrek, 29 December 2021 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hyundai Motor Group. Official website