State and Main is a 2000 American comedy film written and directed by David Mamet and starring William H. Macy, Sarah Jessica Parker, Alec Baldwin, Julia Stiles, Philip Seymour Hoffman, Rebecca Pidgeon, David Paymer, Patti LuPone, Clark Gregg, and Charles Durning. Havoc is wrought on the inhabitants of a small New England town by a troubled film production. After the leading man's penchant for underage girls gets them banished from their New Hampshire location, the crew moves to the small town of Waterford, Vermont to finish shooting The Old Mill. As its title suggests, the film depends on the presence of a genuine mill, something the town is reported to possess. Unfortunately, with only days before principal photography begins, it becomes apparent that the mill in fact burned down decades ago. Unfazed, the film's director, Walt Price (William H. Macy), places his faith in the ability of first-time screenwriter Joseph Turner White (Philip Seymour Hoffman) to alter the script. What he doesn't count on is White's apparently bottomless reserve of angst-fueled writer's block. A local bookseller, Annie Black (Rebecca Pidgeon), tries to provide White with inspiration. The film's leading lady (Sarah Jessica Parker) refuses to do her contracted nude scene unless she's paid an additional $800,000, while the foreign cinematographer offends the locals by messing with a historic firehouse. Meanwhile, the leading man, Bob Barrenger (Alec Baldwin), dallies with Carla (Julia Stiles), a crafty local teen. Everything comes to a head after Barrenger and Carla are injured in a car accident, which leads White (the only witness) to another emotional quandary and into the arms of Annie. Meanwhile, a powerful movie producer (David Paymer) comes to town to help Price with the ensuing mess. William H. Macy – Walt Price Sarah Jessica Parker – Claire Wellesley Alec Baldwin – Bob Barrenger Julia Stiles – Carla Philip Seymour Hoffman – Joseph Turner White Rebecca Pidgeon – Ann David Paymer – Marty Rossen Clark Gregg – Doug Mackenzie Patti LuPone – Sherry Bailey Charles Durning – Mayor George Bailey Lionel Mark Smith – Bill Smith Ricky Jay – Jack Michael Higgins – Doc Wilson Jonathan Katz – Howie Gold Laura Silverman – Secretary Michael Bradshaw – Town Priest J. J. Johnston – Stationmaster John Krasinski – Caddy / Judge's assistant(uncredited) The plot involves the on-location production in Waterford, Vermont, of a film called The Old Mill. The actual film was shot in Massachusetts in Manchester-by-the-Sea, Beverly, Dedham and Waltham. John Krasinski was in a supporting role in his acting debut. On Rotten Tomatoes, it has a 85% approval rating based on 118 reviews, with an average score of 7.3/10. Casting Society of America Won: Artios – Best Casting for Feature Film – Comedy (Avy Kaufman) Chicago Film Critics Association Nominated: Best Screenplay (David Mamet) Florida Film Critics Circle Won: Best Ensemble Cast Won: Best Screenplay (David Mamet) Ft. Lauderdale International Film Festival Won: Jury Award – Best Film (David Mamet) Won: Best Supporting Male (William H. Macy) National Board of Review Won: Best Acting by an Ensemble Online Film Critics Society Won: Best Ensemble Cast Performance (tied with Almost Famous) Nominated: Best Screenplay (David Mamet) Satellite Awards Nominated: Best Motion Picture – Comedy or Musical Nominated: Best Performance by an Actress in a Supporting Role – Comedy or Musical (Rebecca Pidgeon) Nominated: Best Screenplay – Original (David Mamet) "State and Main (2000) – Box Office Mojo". boxofficemojo.com. Retrieved 13 April 2017. Coleman, Sandy (2005-05-12). "Historic mansion opens doors in gala celebration of 100 years". Boston Globe. Retrieved 2006-12-26. Wikiquote has quotations related to State and Main. State and Main at IMDb State and Main at Rotten Tomatoes 'Official' website of the 'Old Mill Movie' at the Wayback Machine (archived February 8, 2001)