Need for Speed: Carbon is a 2006 racing video game and the tenth installment in the Need for Speed series. Developed by EA Black Box, Rovio Mobile and published by Electronic Arts, it was released on October 31, 2006, for the PlayStation 2, PlayStation 3, Xbox, Xbox 360, GameCube, Windows, and Mac OS X, and on November 19, 2006 as a launch title for the Wii and in 2008 for arcade cabinets. The game sees players conducting illegal street races within the fictional city of Palmont City, with the game's main story taking place after the events of Need for Speed: Most Wanted and focusing on the player's character taking control of the city from various street-racing gangs. While the gameplay is similar to its predecessor, Carbon introduced a number of new features, including crews and racing wingmen, Touge-styled racing events, and greater customization options. Alongside console, home computer, and arcade versions, the game also received portable editions for the PlayStation Portable, Game Boy Advance, Nintendo DS, and Zeebo, titled Need for Speed: Carbon – Own the City. While the portable games featured similar gameplay to the console version, they included new/modified gameplay elements, a different setting and storyline, and a different selection of AI teammates. Upon the release of Carbon, the game received positive reviews from critics, though it faced some criticism over elements of its gameplay mechanics, including a lack of emphasis on police chases compared to its predecessor. A special Collector's Edition version of the title was developed for PlayStation 2, Windows and Xbox 360, and included additional content including new cars, new customization items and new events for two of its game modes. The game was later succeeded by Need for Speed: ProStreet in 2007. As of 2021, download versions of the game are no longer available for purchase in any online stores, and online play was shutdown on September 1. In the game, players take part in illegal street races that focus on different styles of races, utilizing a variety of licensed real-world cars (available at the time of the game's development and release) that can be upgraded and customized with new parts, while contending with the involvement of the police in their efforts to impede the player. Racing Events focus on competitive races with other drivers on circuits or point-to-point routes, checkpoint races, and races involving sprints or drifting (the latter being absent in its predecessor), with players able to use Nitrous Oxide and Speedbreaker whenever needed – either to help win races or get out of tight spots – both of which recharge over time. The game itself features four game modes – Career, Quick Race, Challenge Series, and Multiplayer – with the latter featuring online gameplay available in all console and PC versions of the game, except the Wii's edition. The game operates on the same gameplay mechanics used in previous entries in the series, including its predecessor Most Wanted, though Carbon introduced new elements. A new element exclusive to Carbon is Canyon events – special racing events styled after Japanese Tōge racing, in which players compete in competitive racing on canyon roads outside the game's main setting. These events consist of sprints, drifting and duel events, in which the latter two feature a majority of destructible guardrails that the player must avoid crashing through or risk losing these respective events as a result. Duel events on these circuits operate differently to events involving major rival racers in Need for Speed games, as these are conducted across two stages on a canyon circuit – in each stage, one driver acts as the chaser and pursues the other at close proximity, with the first stage seeing the player as the chaser and scoring points the closer they can tail their opponent, while in the second stage their opponent becomes the chaser and the player must keep as much distance as possible to avoid losing too many points before the stage is completed. At the end of both stages, the car who took the lead wins if their score is positive, otherwise, their opponent wins if they turned it negative. Apart from scores, an instant win is possible depending on which mode the Duel is conducted in – in Career mode, the player can win instantly if they can stay ahead of their opponent for ten seconds, but lose if they fall behind for too long; in Online Multiplayer, a player wins if their opponent crashes through a guardrail. Police pursuits, a staple of the series, function similar to Most Wanted in that police can turn up at any time during a race and attempt to impede the player during the event, except in Canyon Race events and checkpoint races; in Career mode, the police can also turn up during Free Roam, but will not act against the player unless they have a warrant (for evading a previous pursuit) or committed an offence in their sight, whereupon they focus on blocking in and arresting the player unless they can lose them and find a safe spot to hide until they lose their heat. As the player is pursued, they can either attempt to evade the cops or knock them out of action by ramming their cars or using destructible props called Pursuit Breakers to impede their pursuit, though extensive pursuits will cause the player's heat level to rise, leading to stronger pursuit tactics including spike strips, roadblocks, and the involvement of state/federal authorities. Carbon modified the pursuit function by making police less dominant in arrest tactics at higher heat levels, and reducing the chance a Pursuit Breaker blocks/destroys a pursuing vehicle. Licensed real-world cars used in the game are divided into three tiers (performance level) and three classes – Exotic, Tuner, and Muscle. For example, a Nissan 240SX is a tier 1 tuner car, while a Corvette Z06 is a tier 3 muscle car. Each car class also has advantages and disadvantages in terms of driving styles. Tuner cars have the best handling and cornering but have the lowest acceleration and top speed. Muscle cars have the best acceleration but have poor handling. Exotic cars have the highest top speed and better handling than Muscle cars but are not as agile as Tuners. Cars receive visual damage during the game, but no physical damage. Cars can be upgraded in performance through new components and fine-tuning of each component – such upgrades can help, for example, to improve speed, or improve braking. Carbon added the ability to customize visual parts via autosculpt parts, which allow adjustments of components for example, while adding flexibility with vinyls and decals by allowing them to be placed in layers over each other, with the ability to modify these in shape and size, and place them anywhere on the car. Additional cars and customization parts can be acquired through completing Reward Cards – each card consists of a set of challenges for the player to complete across the game modes, and reward the player either with a new vehicle to use or new parts for customization. The game's main mode focuses on the player competing in races against rival street racing crews, instead of individual racers like in Most Wanted and Underground 2. When starting in Career mode, players must choose a class that is not only permanent for their playthrough in this mode, but also dictates which of the initial three districts in the game's setting they begin in and which racing events are available first. Additional cars and classes become unlocked as the player progresses in this mode; any cars earned from Reward Cards for Quick Race mode are also available but without limitation. Players operate their own crew in Career mode and can recruit AI wingmen to assist them, each of whom operates under a different role – Blocker, Drafter, and Scout – and specialty – Fixer, Mechanic, and Fabricator. The type of role and specialty that each wingman operate under dictates how they assist the player – some can find shortcuts during races, while others can help to reduce police heat – with their role also dictating which car they drive in; the first two wingmen the player unlocks have their cars match the player's chosen class. During races, players may use their wingmen for a period of time, after which they must wait a while until their wingmen gauge has recharged before they can use them again, with the exception of scouts, who use their role for the entire race to find shortcuts. To win career mode, players compete in races against other crews to secure territory – each district has a number of territories, each controlled either by the district's main crew or a minor crew through a series of racing events. Winning a majority of the races in a territory converts control to the player's crew and unlocks additional races elsewhere. Races that have been won can be engaged again, but the prize money offered is reduced as a result. Taking control of all territories will unlock a duel event with the main crew's boss, in which winning the event will allow the player to unlock special rewards, in a similar manner to the rewards offered in rival events in Most Wanted. As the player accumulates territories, they can lose any earned by losing control over its racing events to minor crews, either by failing to defeat them in takeover challenges or forfeiting the right to do so. Quick Race mode allows players to create custom events for single-player or multiplayer – both splitscreen or online – making use of any circuit and cars in the game, and altering various factors such as the difficulty of opponents, track conditions and so forth; what cars and circuits can be used depends on the player's progress in Career mode, though all players can be allowed to use wingmen they have unlocked in these events, provided this option is allowed. Challenge Series consists of a series of racing events that are divided into 12 categories, each divided further into three difficulty levels. Each challenge event requires the player to complete a specific goal, depending on the type of event, using a set car on a specific course in the game. Players may choose any category to begin with, unlike in Most Wanted, but must complete in order of Easy to Hard. Completing all of the difficulty levels of a challenge unlocks either a new car or customization option for the player to use in other modes. Online Multiplayer mode includes circuit, sprint, canyon duels, and two multiplayer exclusive events – Pursuit Knockout and Pursuit Tag: In Pursuit Knockout, players compete in laps of a circuit, with each player in last place being knocked out and returning as cops to hinder the other players. The winner is the player who ends the race in first place. In Pursuit Tag, one player is a racer and must evade the others, who operate as the cops. If the player is arrested by another, they switch roles. The winner is the player who spends the most time as the racer. Carbon takes place within the fictional city of Palmont, which encompasses four boroughs linked by a highway system; Kempton, which houses the city's industrial complexes; Downtown, which houses the city's metropolitan and financial buildings; Fortuna, which houses the city's residential area; and Silverton, which houses the city's casino & resort facilities. The city is also surrounded by three canyons known as East, West, and Carbon, which feature their own layout of the route, but which are not connected to Palmont. In the game's story, which takes place during a fixed period at night, the player is not able to access Silverton until they have made progress in career mode and only can access the canyon routes during events. The player assumes the role of a street racer who, several years prior to their involvement in the events of Most Wanted, took part in a major street race around Palmont for a large cash prize against three other racers, each leader of a street racing crew: Kenji (Ken Kirby), leader of the Bushido; Angie (Danielle Kremeniuk), leader of the 21st Street; and Wolf (Shaw Madson), leader of the T.F.K. (The Fortuna Kings). However, the racers were ambushed by the Palmont Police Department (PPD), who had SWAT immobilize the player's opponents with an EMP and began arresting everyone involved. The player escaped with the help of Darius (Tahmoh Penikett), another street racer, and their former girlfriend Nikki (Emmanuelle Vaugier); before leaving she handed over the bag containing the race's prize money, which later turned out to contain paper. Following their time in Rockport, the player returns to Palmont but is pursued along a canyon route by former police sergeant Jonathan Cross, who now works as a bounty hunter and seeks revenge against them. After a long & heated canyon chase the player’s BMW M3 GTR gets totalled, and Cross attempts to arrest them for the bounty on their head but is stopped by Darius, now leading his own crew called the Stacked Deck, who pays him off. Offering to help them, Darius asks Nikki, who now dates him, to assist despite her belief that the player betrayed everyone for the prize money. With Nikki's help, the player receives two crew members to help in races and a safehouse to operate from. On Darius' advice, the player begins taking part in street races for control over territories controlled by rival crews across three of the city's main boroughs. In the process, they also engage against Kenji, Angie and Wolf, defeating them and securing a member of their crew to aid them, each of whom confides in the player that they suspect someone else set up both them and each crew member's former bosses as Yumi, Colin, and Samson were all at the race between the player, Angie, Wolf, and Kenji, and each of them saw a vital piece of evidence to confirm the race had been rigged and doomed to an ambush by the PPD all along. After securing all three boroughs, Darius calls a meeting with the player, only to reveal that he sought to use the player to take control of the city from the other crews, betraying them to Cross. After leaving, Nikki arrives to save the player after making a secret deal with Cross. She soon reveals that Darius was responsible for setting up the player for the theft of the prize money  – Darius had tipped off the police, and in the chaos that ensued, switched out the prize money while leaving the player to take the blame by helping them escape the police sting. Now aware of the truth, Nikki sides with the player to help take control of the last city borough, leading Darius to reinforce his crew with assistance from Kenji, Angie and Wolf to prevent this. The player eventually defeats Darius and his crew, gaining control of all of Palmont's territory and wins Darius's Audi Le Mans quattro in a pink slip, despite Darius warning them to enjoy their victory before someone faster than them takes over. Need for Speed: Carbon was first shown in EA's montage at Nintendo's E3 2006 conference and booth and was the cover story in the Game Informer magazine issue from July. Carbon is the first in the Need for Speed series to be released for PlayStation 3 and Wii seventh generation consoles and also the final in the series to be released for Xbox, GameCube, and Game Boy Advance. Carbon features some of cars of its predecessors, namely Need for Speed: Underground 2 and Need for Speed: Most Wanted, but also incorporates many new additions including the Audi Le Mans quattro, the Chrysler 300C SRT 8, Chevrolet's Chevelle SS, and the Alfa Romeo Brera. Carbon features the Canadian actress and model Emmanuelle Vaugier as Nikki, the player's main source of help and ally in the Career storyline. The game is available for use with Mac OS X and is the only game in the Need for Speed series available on a Macintosh computer. The minimum system requirements for Mac OS X include an Intel Core Duo processor. Need for Speed: Carbon debuted at number one on the UK All Format Gaming Chart on its first week of release, beating Konami's Pro Evolution Soccer. Carbon was also the first game in the series to feature detailed character animations for the Windows and seventh-generation releases using facial motion capture, where in-game models of characters such as Neville, Darius, Wolf, Angie and Kenji appear in real-time cutscenes taunting or remarking the player in a race or at certain points. This has however been omitted on the sixth-generation and Wii versions due to platform limitations. The Need for Speed: Carbon – Collector's Edition was released for PlayStation 2, Windows and Xbox 360. It features four exclusive cars, ten pre-tuned cars, six new races, three unique challenge events, ten unique vinyls and a Bonus DVD showing the making of Carbon and showcasing all the cars used in the game. The Collector's Edition also features alternate box art and a metallic-finish sleeve encasing the case of the game. Although the Mac edition doesn't display the Collector's Edition title, it contains all Collector's Edition features. The downloaded version of the game features the Ultimate Performance Kit, 2006 Pagani Zonda F and the 1971 Dodge Challenger R/T. An arcade version of the same name was released by EA Arcades in 2008. The arcade version was developed by Global VR. The game features a licensed soundtrack by EA Trax just like other games developed by EA. Unlike most other games, there are different songs depending on what car category you are using. For Tuners, it mostly plays electronica music performed by artists like Gary Numan, Ladytron, The Presets, as well as Melody (who is known for portraying the Bushido crew member Yumi in the game). For Muscles, they mostly play rock songs performed by artists like Eagles of Death Metal, Wolfmother and Kyuss. For Exotics, its mostly rap songs performed by Ekstrak, Pharrell, Sway, Spank Rock and Dynamite MC. These songs can only be heard during free roam or checkpoint races. The game also has a composed soundtrack performed by Trevor Morris that mostly plays during race sequences and canyon duels. Some of the pursuit chase music performed by Paul Linford that was originally featured in Need For Speed: Most Wanted also plays during pursuit chases. Reception Need for Speed: Carbon was met with generally positive reviews. IGN gave the PC version an 8.2 out of ten and the PlayStation 3 version a 7.9 out of ten. GameSpot gave praise for adding more movie clips, customization and solid gameplay, but was critical about frustrating boss battles and underutilizing police chases. Electronic Gaming Monthly gave the game an average score of eight. Hyper's Daniel Wilks commended the game for its "large gameworld", but criticized it for its easy drift course mechanics and the actors in the cutscenes. The Australian video game talk show Good Game gave the game five out of ten. Macworld editor Peter Cohen gave the Mac OS X port four out of five stars, praising the variety of different cars to choose from and engaging storyline. Mild criticism was noted relating to performance issues. The Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences nominated Need for Speed: Carbon for "Racing Game of the Year" at the 10th Annual Interactive Achievement Awards. Need for Speed: Carbon has sold 3.2 million copies in the United States. Its PlayStation 2 version received a "Double Platinum" sales award from the Entertainment and Leisure Software Publishers Association (ELSPA), indicating sales of at least 600,000 copies in the United Kingdom. Own the City features similar gameplay to the console editions, but while the Autosculpt function, Canyon Race events and drifting events are absent, the portable edition allows for free-roaming around the game's setting of Coast City, offers three new racing events, and modification to some of the gameplay mechanics. The new events consist of Escape, in which players attempt to escape from a rival crew's territory; Delivery, in which players and their crew race to a designated area with a package and attempt to beat other racers doing the same thing; and Crew Takedown, in which players to eliminate a set number of rival racers to win. During free roam, the player can explore the city and seek out crates scattered across the game's setting, in a similar manner to the hidden package system in Grand Theft Auto, which when broken unlock rewards ranging from cash to game art. Police pursuits can occur in Own the City, but only in free roam; the player is not pursued during racing events. Players can hire up to five wingmen for their racing crew, in which two members may be active for use in racing events, though like Carbon they cannot be used in the game's Lap Knockout, Escape, and Crew Takedown events. Wingmen are divided into three classes – Brawlers, Drafters, and Assassins. While the first two classes operate in a similar manner to Carbon's wingmen roles of Blockers and Drafters respectively, Assassins replace the console's role of Scouts, and can be used to take out multiple rivals with deployable spike strips. The game's main mode of gameplay requires players to take control of territory – unlike the setting of Palmont, Coast City features around 13 areas of territory across 6 districts, with each area that is conquered unlocking new items for purchase and a new wingman for the player to recruit. The player and their brother Mick compete in an illegal street race with two other racers, seeking to see who will own the whole of Coast City amongst them. However, the race ends in a terrible car crash that kills Mick and leaves the player in the hospital with amnesia. In the aftermath of Mick's death, his control over the city's territories is divided up between various street racing crews. When the player wakes up six months later, they are greeted by Mick's girlfriend Sara and his wingman Carter, both of whom help the player regain their memories of the race when visiting their brother's grave. The player sets out to find who killed Mick, forming a crew to help them race and defeat the other crews, regaining territory and asking the defeated crew bosses what they know about the race's accident. During this time, Sara disappears. Eventually, the player is informed that a young driver named Buddy caused the crash, whereupon a crew boss known as EX helps the player to locate Buddy. When they confront the driver, the player learns that Buddy was hired by someone to kill Mick, and hands them a phone. Upon completing more races, the player encounters and defeats an undercover police officer named MK, who uses his connection with the city's police to trace Buddy's employer. The player soon discovers that EX planned Mick's murder, and so pursues after and defeats him, leaving him to be apprehended by MK and the city police. Sara soon returns and instructs the player to race her, whereupon she reveals that the player arranged for EX to kill Mick. Sara reveals that the player's brother had a monstrous personality that led to her and the player being hurt, so the player arranged for Mick to be killed in an accident during a race to be rid of him, thus allowing Sara and themselves to be free. Sara soon embraces her freedom, handing over Mick's watch and stating how different the player is to him. James, Chris (October 27, 2006). "New on O2". www.pocketgamer.com. Retrieved March 29, 2023. "NFS Carbon PC demo". Eurogamer.net. October 30, 2006. Retrieved March 29, 2023. "EA peels out PC NFS Carbon demo". GameSpot. Retrieved March 29, 2023. "PS3 launch line-up finalised". Eurogamer.net. March 22, 2007. Retrieved March 29, 2023. "Sony's PS3 to hit Europe, Australia on March 23". Macworld. Retrieved March 29, 2023. "GONE IN 60 SECONDS…ALMOST!". GamesIndustry.biz. December 8, 2006. Retrieved March 29, 2023. "Hoor-EA! Mac games hit Apple store today". Engadget. July 15, 2016. Retrieved March 29, 2023. Leach, Gracie. "Need for Speed: Carbon - Macintosh Overview". AllGame. Archived from the original on November 14, 2014. Retrieved March 20, 2024. "Arcade Machines – Driving Arcade Machines – Need For Speed Carbon Twin Driving Arcade Machine". Monkey Gamesroom. Archived from the original on February 4, 2013. Retrieved March 20, 2014. "Need for Speed Carbon: Own the City Review". IGN. November 1, 2008. Retrieved June 24, 2008. Alexander, Leigh (May 27, 2009). "Zeebo Officially Launches In Brazil With FIFA, Need For Speed, Brain Challenge". Think Services. Retrieved January 18, 2010. EA_David (May 31, 2021). "An-announcement-about-some-older-NFS-titles". EA Answers HQ. Retrieved June 15, 2021. Max_Joker (May 31, 2021). "Sun is setting on some older NFS titles – it's not you, it's us". r/needforspeed. Retrieved June 10, 2021. Electronic Arts (2006). Need for Speed: Carbon (PlayStation 2). Electronic Arts. Need For Speed Carbon – various cutscenes after unlocking Sal, Colin of TFK, Yumi of Bushido, and Samson of 21st Street. Electronic Arts (2006). Need for Speed: Carbon (PlayStation 2). Electronic Arts. Need For Speed Carbon cutscene after beating the last crew. Electronic Arts (2006). Need for Speed: Carbon (PlayStation 2). Electronic Arts. Need For Speed Carbon Cutscene after unlocking Nikki. Electronic Arts (2006). Need for Speed: Carbon (PlayStation 2). Electronic Arts. Need For Speed Carbon Cutscene after beating Darius. "EA > GAMEFINDER > Need for Speed Carbon". Archived from the original on December 20, 2008. Retrieved December 30, 2008. Leach, Gracie. "Need for Speed: Carbon - Macintosh System Requirements". AllGame. Archived from the original on November 14, 2014. Retrieved March 20, 2024. "Christmas charts take shape". November 13, 2006. Archived from the original on September 26, 2007. Retrieved November 13, 2006. Orvalho, Verónica Costa; Orvalho, João (2011). "Character Animation". Character Animation: Past, Present and Future. pp. 49–64. doi:10.4018/978-1-60960-567-4.ch004. ISBN 9781609605674. {{cite book}}: |journal= ignored (help) "Need For Speed: Carbon – Standard Model". PrimeTime Amusements. Archived from the original on October 16, 2014. Retrieved March 20, 2014. "Aggregate score for PC at Metacritic". Metacritic. "Aggregate score for Xbox 360 at Metacritic". Metacritic. "Aggregate score for PlayStation 3 at Metacritic". Metacritic. "Aggregate score for GameCube at Metacritic". Metacritic. "Aggregate score for PlayStation 2 at Metacritic". Metacritic. "Aggregate score for Xbox at Metacritic". Metacritic. "Aggregate score for PlayStation Portable at Metacritic". Metacritic. "Aggregate score for Nintendo DS at Metacritic". Metacritic. "Aggregate score for Wii at Metacritic". Metacritic. "PlayStation Portable review at GameSpot". Archived from the original on July 16, 2013. "PC review at GameSpot". Archived from the original on February 29, 2012. "Xbox 360 review at GameSpot". Archived from the original on February 28, 2012. "Xbox review at GameSpot". Archived from the original on December 17, 2011. "Nintendo DS review at GameSpot". Archived from the original on December 19, 2011. "PlayStation 3 review at GameSpot". Archived from the original on July 24, 2013. "PlayStation 2 review at GameSpot". Archived from the original on July 20, 2013. "GameCube review at GameSpot". Archived from the original on July 23, 2013. "Wii review at GameSpot". Archived from the original on December 22, 2011. "Game Boy Advance review at GameSpot". Archived from the original on July 19, 2013. "PC review at IGN". November 2021. "PlayStation 3 review at IGN". November 2021. "GameCube review at IGN". November 2021. "Xbox review at IGN". November 2021. "Nintendo DS review at IGN". November 2021. "Wii review at IGN". November 2021. "PlayStation Portable review at IGN". November 2021. "Game Boy Advance review at IGN". November 2021. Cohen, Peter. "Need for Speed: Carbon - Mac Review". Macworld. Retrieved March 19, 2024. Play magazine review, issue 151, Imagine Publishing "Need for Speed Carbon Review". GameSpot. Retrieved June 24, 2022. "PC Game, Need for Speed: Carbon". Archived from the original on July 18, 2012. Wilks, Daniel (December 2006). "Need for Speed: Carbon". Hyper (158). Next Media: 72. ISSN 1320-7458. "Good Game stories – Need for Speed: Carbon". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. December 5, 2006. Cohen, Peter. "Need for Speed: Carbon - Mac Review". Macworld. Retrieved March 19, 2024. "2007 Awards Category Details Racing Game of the Year". interactive.org. Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences. Retrieved November 8, 2023. Totu, Florian (October 22, 2009). "100 million Need for Speed Games Have Been Sold to This Day". Softpedia. SoftNews NET SRL. Archived from the original on April 2, 2012. Retrieved August 22, 2015. "ELSPA Sales Awards: Double Platinum". Entertainment and Leisure Software Publishers Association. Archived from the original on May 20, 2009. Caoili, Eric (November 26, 2008). "ELSPA: Wii Fit, Mario Kart Reach Diamond Status In UK". Gamasutra. Archived from the original on September 18, 2017. Need for Speed: Carbon at MobyGames Need for Speed: Carbon – Own the City (PlayStation Portable) at MobyGames Need for Speed: Carbon – Own the City (Nintendo DS) at MobyGames Need For Speed: Carbon (2006 Video Game) at IMDb