The General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine (Ukrainian: Генеральний штаб Збройних сил України) is the military staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine. It is the central organ of the Armed Forces Administration and oversees operational management of the armed forces under the Ministry of Defence of Ukraine. The Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine is appointed by the President of Ukraine, who is the supreme commander-in-chief of the armed forces. On 28 March 2020 the position of Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Ukraine was separated from that of the Chief of the General Staff. The current Chief of the General Staff is Anatoliy Barhylevych, and the Commander-in-Chief is Oleksandr Syrskyi. The General Staff was created in 1991–92 on the basis of the Kyiv Military District headquarters of the former Soviet Armed Forces. Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of Ukraine Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine Joint Operations Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine Directorate of Legal Support Department of the Chief Directorate of Intelligence Financial Directorate Office of assistants of the Chief of the General Staff Deputies of the Chief of the General Staff Chief Directorate of personnel management, Chief Directorate of moral and psychological support Chief Directorate of personnel (J-1) Chief Directorate of operations (J-3) Chief Directorate of logistics (J-4) Chief Directorate of defense and mobilization planning of the General Staff (J-5) Chief Directorate of communication and information systems of the General Staff (J-6) Chief Directorate of Armed Forces training (J-7) Chief Military Medical Directorate (J-8) Central Directorate of military service security Chief Command Center Directorate of special operations Chief Directorate of operational support Directorate of verification Central Directorate of information security and cryptology Chief Directorate of military cooperation and peacekeeping operations Scientific Directorate of the General Staff Military Music Directorate Administration Directorate Chief Finance and Economical Directorate Assistants to the Chief of the General Staff Control and Oversight Directorate First Deputy Chief of the General Staff Deputy Chief of the General Staff Euro-Atlantic Integration Directorate Military Cooperation Directorate Garrison Service Directorate First Deputy Chief of the General Staff Deputy Chief of the General Staff Military scientific directorate Financial Directorate Main Financial-Economic Directorate (J-8) Deputy Chief of the General Staff Section for Transition to All-Volunteer Contract Service Military Symbols and Heraldry Section Main Personnel Directorate (J-1) Main Operations Directorate (J-3/7) Main Defence Planning Directorate (J-5) Legal Directorate As of February 2024: Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces: Colonel General Oleksandr Syrskyi (part of General Staff ex-officio) Deputy Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces: Lieutenant General Yevhen Moisiuk (part of General Staff ex-officio) Chief of the General Staff: Major General Anatoliy Barhylevych Commander of the Ground Forces: Lieutenant General Oleksandr Pavliuk Commandant of the Marine Corps: Lieutenant General Yuriy Sodol Commander of the Navy: Vice Admiral Oleksiy Neizhpapa Commander of the Air Force: Lieutenant General Mykola Oleshchuk Commander of the Air Assault Forces: Major General Maksym Myrhorodskyy Commander of the Special Operations Forces: Brigadier General Viktor Khorenko First Deputy Chief of the General Staff: in sede vacante Assistant Deputy Chiefs of the General Staff: Lieutenant Generals Serhiy Nayev and Radion Tymoshenko Command Sergeant Major of the Armed Forces of Ukraine and Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chief of the General Staff: Chief Master Sergeant Oleksandr Yuriyovych Kosynsky General Staff insignia Joint Operations Staff insignia Dmytro Basmat (9 February 2024). "Zelensky announces new chief of general staff". The Kyiv Independent. Retrieved 9 February 2024. ""Для забезпечення ресурсних потреб ЗС України та інших складових сил оборони створюється єдина система логістики" — заступник Міністра оборони". mil.gov.ua/. Міністерство оборони України. 2017-07-14. Retrieved 15 January 2018. "Система логістики, яка створюється у Збройних Силах України, буде повністю сумісною з відповідними системами країн НАТО". mil.gov.ua/. Міністерство оборони України. 2017-05-16. Retrieved 15 January 2018. Центральне управління безпеки військової служби Збройних Сил України набуває спроможностей Воєнно-наукове управління ГШ ЗСУ Воєнно-науковому управлінню Генерального штабу Збройних Сил України — 20 років Military scientific directorate MoD Chief Financial and Economic Directorate Legal department of the Ministry of Defence of Ukraine Authorities of Ukrainian Armed Forces, Ukrainian defense ministry "lieutenant general serhii shaptala".