NAVTEX (NAVigational TEleX), sometimes styled Navtex or NavTex, is an international automated medium frequency direct-printing service for delivery of navigational and meteorological warnings and forecasts, as well as urgent maritime safety information (MSI) to ships. NAVTEX was developed in the late 1970s in northwestern Europe to provide a low-cost, simple, and automated means of receiving this information aboard ships at sea within approximately 250 nautical miles (460 km) off-shore. There are no user fees associated with receiving NAVTEX broadcasts, as the transmissions are typically transmitted from the National Weather Authority (Italy) or Navy or Coast Guard (as in the US) or national navigation authority (Canada). Where the messages contain weather forecasts, an abbreviated format very similar to the shipping forecast is used. NAVTEX is a component of the International Maritime Organization/International Hydrographic Organization Worldwide Navigation Warning Service (WWNWS). NAVTEX is also a major element of the Global Maritime Distress Safety System (GMDSS). SOLAS Convention mandated certain classes of vessels must carry NAVTEX, beginning August 1, 1993. NAVTEX transmissions are also called narrow-band direct printing (NBDP). The transmissions are layered on top of SITOR collective B-mode. SITOR-B is a forward error correcting (FEC) broadcast that uses the CCIR 476 character set. NAVTEX messages are transmitted at 100 baud using FSK modulation with a frequency shift of 170 Hz. NAVTEX broadcasts are primarily made on the medium frequencies of 518 kHz and 490 kHz. The international NAVTEX frequency is 518 kHz, and these broadcasts should always be in English. National transmission of NAVTEX, where supported, uses 490 kHz specifically for broadcasts in local languages. NAVTEX Marine Safety Information (MSI) national transmissions also take place on HF at 4209.5 kHz using FEC mode. NAVTEX messages are transmitted using binary frequency-shift keying (BFSK) at 100 bit/s and a 170 Hz frequency shift. The characters are encoded using the 7-bit CCIR 476 character set which allows for basic error detection. Forward error correction (FEC) is achieved by repeating each character after a 3 character delay, i.e. ...ABCDE... becomes ...A.B.CADBEC.D.E.... This is the same format as the SITOR-B format. A NAVTEX message is built on SITOR collective B-mode and consists of: a phasing signal of at least ten seconds the four characters "ZCZC" that identify the end of phasing a single space four characters B1, B2, B3 and B4 (see below) a carriage return and a line feed the information the four characters "NNNN" to identify the end of information a carriage return and two line feeds either 5 or more seconds of phasing signal and another message starting with "ZCZC" or an end of emission idle signal α for at least 2 seconds. B1 is an alpha character identifying the station, and B2 is an alpha character used to identify the subject of the message. Receivers use these characters to reject messages from certain stations or if the message contains subjects of no interest to the user. B3 and B4 are two-digit numerics identifying individual messages, used by receivers to keep already received messages from being repeated. For example, a message containing B1B2B3B4 characters of 'FE01' from a U.S. NAVTEX station indicates a weather forecast message from Boston, MA. NAVTEX message example: (phasing signals >= 10 seconds) ZCZC FE01 (message text ...) NNNN (end of message phasing signals for >= 2 seconds before next message) ZCZC begins the messages. This character defines the transmitter identity and its associated coverage area. The subject indicator character is used by the receiver to identify different classes of messages below. The indicator is also used to reject messages concerning certain optional subjects which are not required by the ship (e.g. LORAN C messages might be rejected in a ship which is not fitted with a LORAN C receiver). NAVTEX broadcasts use following subject indicator characters: Note: Receivers use the B2 character to identify messages which, because of their importance, can not be rejected (designated by a 1). The subject indicator characters B, F and G are normally not used in the United States since the National Weather Service normally includes meteorological warnings in forecast messages. Meteorological warnings are broadcast using the subject indicator character E. U.S. Coast Guard District Broadcast Notices to Mariners affecting ships outside the line of demarcation, and inside the line of demarcation in areas where deep draft vessels operate, use the subject indicator character A. These two characters define the serial number of each B2 message type (class). Generally serial numbers start with the numbers '01', however in special circumstances, the numbers begin with '00'. This forces the receiver to print the message. Time of origin is in the format of "DDHHmm UTC MMM YY" where DD is the date, HH hour, mm minute and MMM three-character abbreviation of month and YY year. The time of the transmission of the message is in UTC. The full text of the message follows. The end of the message is asserted when the characters "NNNN" are received. Each station identifier has a fixed 10-minute time slot, starting with A at 0000UTC. The time slots are repeated at 4 hour intervals. Within each time slot, a mix of navigation warnings, weather forecasts, ice information and other content may be sent, and this is normally according to a structured plan for that specific station. For example, in the first and third time slot they may decide to transmit navigation warnings, and weather forecasts in the others. Normally each NAVAREA or sub-NAVAREA has only one station at each slot. Details of all transmitting stations and their schedules may be found at [1] NAVTEX receivers which are approved for GMDSS contain an internal printer and/or a scrollable display, and cost between $800–$1500. A new generation of NAVTEX receivers intended for non-GMDSS applications such as the recreational community is entering the marketplace. These receivers include features such as LCD screens and RS-232 output and have a purchase price in the $300–$500 range. In the UK they can be purchased for £115. There are also a number of NAVTEX engines available that do not have any user interface, and just output decoded data in RS-232 format, either as a simple ASCII data stream, or using the NMEA NAVTEX sentences, or their own proprietary protocol. There are also a number of software packages available, such as SeaTTY, Mscan, JNX, Fldigi or JVComm32, allowing messages to be decoded by a PC with a suitable receiver connected to the computer's soundcard. Any general communications receiver capable of audio reception at 518 kHz or 490 kHz single sideband can be used. In September 2019, the U.S. Coast Guard proposed shutting down its MF NAVTEX services and relying on satellite communications. A sample NAVTEX transmission The text "Welcome to Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia that anyone can edit." sent in NAVTEX format. Problems playing this file? See media help. List of Navtex stations Maritime safety information Radiofax The mark frequency is 517.915 kHz, and the space frequency is 518.085 kHz. "NAVTEX Maritime Safety Broadcasts". Navigation Center. US Coast Guard. Retrieved 5 February 2024. Hearsey, R.E. (January 1988). "Marine Safety Information". International Hydrographic Review. LXV (1): 81–92. Retrieved 5 February 2024. Seaton, John; Smith, Peter (1994). GMDSS for Navigators. Routledge. ISBN 9780750621779. "Free NAVTEX decoder / ナブテックスデコーダーフリーダウンロード". Operational and Technical Characteristics for an Automated Direct-Printing Telegraph System for Promulgation of Navigational and Meteorological Warnings and Urgent Information to Ships (Report). ITU. June 1990. p. 3. Retrieved 5 February 2024. Fastnet Radio GMDSS Marine Radio Decoder FMD25 Manual p. 5-3 "Proposed Termination of U.S. Coast Guard Medium Frequency (MF) Broadcast of Navigational Telex (NAVTEX) and Shift to Satellite". Notice No. 84 FR 47967 of 11 September 2019. Wikimedia Commons has media related to NAVTEX. https://www.weather.gov/marine/gmdss http://www.navcen.uscg.gov/?pageName=NAVTEX NAVTEX station lists & information http://www.ndblist.info/navtex.htm (archive) http://www.pcnavtex.com/AboutNAVTEX/NAVTEXStations/tabid/63/Default.aspx