This is a list of the presidents of Montenegro, including the heads of state of the Socialist Republic of Montenegro, a constituent country of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and heads of state of the Republic of Montenegro (1992–2006), a constituent country of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia / State Union of Serbia and Montenegro. Prior to 1974, Montenegro's head of state was the speaker of the Montenegrin parliament. The President (Predsjednik) is directly elected to a five-year term and is limited by the Constitution to a maximum of two terms. In addition to being the Commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces, the President has the procedural duty of appointing the Prime Minister with the consent of the Parliament, and has some influence on foreign policy. The President's office is located in the Blue Palace, in the former royal capital Cetinje. Parties:   Independent   Communist Party / League of Communists   Democratic Party of Socialists Status:   Denotes Acting President Parties:   Democratic Party of Socialists – Momir Bulatović   Democratic Party of Socialists of Montenegro   Social Democratic Party of Montenegro Status:   Denotes Acting President Montenegro became independent on 3 June 2006. Parties:   Democratic Party of Socialists   Europe Now!   Independent List of rulers of Montenegro List of heads of state of Montenegro, for a comprehensive list of Montenegrin heads of state since 1696 President of Montenegro President of the Parliament of Montenegro Prime Minister of Montenegro President of Serbia and Montenegro List of heads of state of Yugoslavia In 1952 Communist Party of Yugoslavia (KPJ) reformed and renamed into the League of Communists of Yugoslavia (SKJ). In June 1991 League of Communists of Montenegro reformed and renamed into the Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS). In July 1997 Bulatović left the Democratic Party of Socialists of Montenegro and founded a new party DPS — Momir Bulatović (which later was renamed into the SNP). Official Web Site of The President of Montenegro