Map all coordinates using OpenStreetMap Download coordinates as: KML GPX (all coordinates) GPX (primary coordinates) GPX (secondary coordinates) City of Vicenza and the Palladian Villas of the Veneto is a World Heritage Site in Italy, which protects buildings by the architect Andrea Palladio. UNESCO inscribed the site on the World Heritage List in 1994. At first the site was called "Vicenza, City of Palladio" and only buildings in the immediate area of Vicenza were included. Various types of buildings were represented in the original site, which included the Basilica Palladiana, Teatro Olimpico and palazzi in the city itself, along with a few villas in the vicinity. However, most of Palladio's surviving villas lay outside the site. In 1996 the site was expanded. Its present name reflects the fact that it includes all the Palladian Villas of the Veneto. City of Vicenza and the Palladian Villas of the Veneto also has some examples of ecclesiastical architecture, including the relatively small church at Maser. In total there are 47 Palladian buildings registered in the UNESCO list in the Veneto region. There is another important group of urban buildings by Palladio in Venice, a city which also has World Heritage Site status. Venice has notable examples of ecclesiastical architecture by Palladio, including the San Giorgio Maggiore (church), Venice. The World Heritage List have been registered since 1994: the historic center of Vicenza with the 23 Palladian monuments located within the ancient medieval walls of the city. Later in 1996, the site was extended by inserting another 24 Palladian villas distributed in the Veneto region Palladian architecture "UNESCO World heritage site number 712". Whc.unesco.org. 3 January 2007. Retrieved 6 May 2012. Unesco 1994 (pdf) "Year of Palladio". Archived from the original on 16 February 2011. Retrieved 29 December 2012. "Le componenti del sito - Comune di Vicenza". www.comune.vicenza.it. Archived from the original on 23 February 2018. "City of Vicenza and the Palladian Villas of the Veneto". Wikimedia Commons has media related to Andrea Palladio. Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article "Palladio, Andrea". Wikisource has the text of the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia article Andrea Palladio. Look up Palladio or Palladian in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Palladio Museum Architectural Reference drawings of The Villas of Palladio Palladio and Britain Online exhibition from the Royal Institute of British Architects (in English) Palladio and The Veneto Online exhibition from the Royal Institute of British Architects (in English) Palladio Centre and Museum in Vicenza, Italy (in English and Italian) The Center for Palladian Studies in America, Inc. Palladio's Italian Villas website which includes material by the owners of Villa Cornaro Official Website of the 500 Years Exhibition in Vicenza – Italy (2008) (in English and Italian) Quincentenary of Andrea Palladio's birth – Celebration Committee Describes a major exhibition touring venues in Italy, the United Kingdom, and the United States Year of Palladio Andrea Palladio on Empty Canon Andrea Palladio: His Life and Legacy, at the Royal Academy, review, The Telegraph, 2 February 2009 How I Spent A Few Days in Palladio's World, The Wall Street Journal, 3 March 2009 All He Surveyed, Paul Goldberger, The New Yorker, 30 March 2009 Principles of Palladio's Architecture: II, Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes, 1945 Nature and Antiquity in the Work of Andrea Palladio, Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians, September 2000 Digital images of 1721 and 1742 edition of The architecture of A. Palladio Quattro libri dell'architettura From the Rare Book and Special Collections Division at the Library of Congress Andrea Palladio Architecture on Google Maps Bertotti Scamozzi, Ottavio, "Le fabbriche e i disegni di Andrea Palladio : raccolta ed illustrati" 1776