Weno, formerly Moen, is an island municipality of Chuuk State of the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM). It is the largest town in the FSM. It has an estimated area of 20 square kilometers. The population was 13,856 at the census taken in 2010. It is located in the Chuuk Lagoon. Its villages are on the coast (Sapuk, Penia, Peniesene, Tunnuk, Mechitiw, Iras, Nantaku, Nepukos, Mwan, Neiwe, and Wichap, Epinup) and serve as the center of commerce. Weno is the state capital and the second-most populous island of the FSM (if the complex of Tol/Wonei, Polle and Patta is counted as one island), with a population of 13,856 at the 2010 census. The highest point is Mount Teroken, elevation 364 m (1,214 ft). Weno has the only airport in the state, Chuuk International Airport. The road system is not well established in some parts of the island. No public transportation exists, but visitors can use a small taxi to cruise around the island.[citation needed] There is one commercial shipyard for cargo ships and passenger voyages. The islanders use speed boats and smaller ships to commute with other lagoon islands and outreach islands.[citation needed] Tertiary College of Micronesia-FSM Public schools operated by the Chuuk Department of Education: Chuuk High School, Nepukos (Nantaku) Iras Demo Elementary, Iras Neauo Elementary School, Neauo Mwan Elementary School, Sefin Private Xavier High School, Sapuk Saramen Chuuk Academy, Nepukos Seventh-day Adventist School, Neauo Akoyikoyi School, Penia St. Cecilia School, Tunnuk The Chuuk Women's Council is based on Weno, which provides support to women's rights organizations across Chuuk State, including training in health and environment issues. Diving is the main tourist attraction on Weno, an industry which was founded in Chuuk State by Kimiuo Aisek. Chuuk State's first museum, Kimiuo Aisek Memorial Museum, was founded to honor his legacy in dive industry and the preservation of Chuuk's underwater heritage. Weno is featured on the 10th episode of season 5 of Outback Truckers, where 2 power stations and a switchboard are shipped from Adelaide to provide all-day power for the island.[citation needed] In the east of Weno, the catholic church Immaculate Heart of Mary Cathedral is worth a visit. The church was dedicated at the end of the sixties. It is the seat of the Diocese of Caroline Islands. Wiichen Men's Meetinghouse is a historic site with petroglyphs and a swimming basin in the east of Weno near the village Peniesene close to Wiichen River. "Pacific Data Archive". Archived from the original on 2015-12-08. Retrieved 2023-11-04. Bendure, G. & Friary, N. (1988) Micronesia:A travel survival kit. South Yarra, VIC: Lonely Planet. "Weatherbase: Historical Weather for Weno, Federated States of Micronesia". Weatherbase. 2011. Retrieved on November 24, 2011. "Chuuk Women's Council Announce New Website and Women's Interest Facility | Chuuk Reform Movement". 2021-10-03. Archived from the original on 2021-10-03. Retrieved 2021-10-03. Post, Dianne Strong | Special to The Guam Daily (27 January 2019). "Internationally known, Chuukese-owned dive shop going strong past 45 years". The Guam Daily Post. Retrieved 2021-05-14. "FSM National Government - Chuuk State Commemorates 75th Anniversary of Operation Hailstone". gov.fm. Retrieved 2021-05-14. National Government of the Federated States of Micronesia v t e