Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse is a 2023 American animated superhero film featuring the Marvel Comics character Miles Morales / Spider-Man, produced by Columbia Pictures and Sony Pictures Animation in association with Marvel Entertainment, and distributed by Sony Pictures Releasing. It is the sequel to Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse (2018), set in a shared multiverse of alternate universes called the Spider-Verse. The film is directed by Joaquim Dos Santos, Kemp Powers and Justin K. Thompson and written by Phil Lord, Christopher Miller, who both also produce, and David Callaham. Shameik Moore voices Miles, starring alongside Hailee Steinfeld, Brian Tyree Henry, Lauren Vélez, Jake Johnson, Jason Schwartzman, Issa Rae, Karan Soni, Shea Whigham, Greta Lee, Daniel Kaluuya, Mahershala Ali and Oscar Isaac. In the film, Miles goes on an adventure with Gwen Stacy / Spider-Woman across the Multiverse, where he meets a team of Spider-People led by Miguel O'Hara / Spider-Man 2099 known as the Spider-Society, but comes into conflict with them over handling a new threat in the form of the Spot. Sony began developing a sequel to Into the Spider-Verse prior to its 2018 release, with the writing and directing team attached. It was set to focus on the relationship between Moore's Miles and Steinfeld's Gwen. The sequel was officially announced in November 2019 and animation work began in June 2020, with a different visual style for each of the six universes visited by the characters. Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse premiered at the Regency Village Theatre in Los Angeles, California on May 30, 2023, and was theatrically released in the United States on June 2, having been delayed from its original April 2022 theatrical release date due to the COVID-19 pandemic. It was the first film from Sony Pictures Animation to be released in theaters worldwide since The Angry Birds Movie 2 in August 2019. Like to its predecessor, the film was a critical and commercial success. It set several box office records, grossing over $690 million at the worldwide box office, surpassing its predecessor and becoming the third-highest-grossing film of the year domestically in the United States and the sixth-highest-grossing film of 2023. The American Film Institute named Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse one of the top-ten films of 2023. Among its numerous accolades, it won Best Animated Feature at the Critics' Choice Movie Awards, Annie Awards and Producers Guild of America Awards and received nominations for the same category at the Golden Globe Awards, BAFTA Awards, and Academy Awards. The third and final installment in the trilogy, Spider-Man: Beyond the Spider-Verse, and a spin-off film, Spider-Woman, are both in development. On Earth-65, police captain George Stacy is unaware that his daughter Gwen Stacy is Spider-Woman, whom the police believe to be a murderer. One night, Gwen encounters a version of the Vulture from an Italian Renaissance–themed alternate universe. Miguel O'Hara and Jess Drew arrive using portal-generating watches and help Gwen neutralize the Vulture. George corners Gwen, who then reveals her identity to him; distraught, he attempts to arrest her. Miguel reluctantly grants Gwen membership into the Spider-Society, allowing her to escape with him and Jess. In Brooklyn on Earth-1610, sixteen months after the Alchemax collider's explosion, Miles Morales encounters the Spot, an Alchemax scientist whose body was infused with portals during the explosion. The Spot blames Miles for causing his condition and reveals that, while testing the collider, he had transported a spider from another dimension, Earth-42, which then bit Miles and turned him into Spider-Man. The Spot then accidentally transports himself into a void, where he learns to travel to other universes containing Alchemax colliders to empower himself further. Gwen travels to Earth-1610 and reconnects with Miles while tracking the Spot. Miles secretly follows her through a portal to Earth-50101, and they team up with local Spider-Man Pavitr Prabhakar, and later Hobie Brown, against the Spot, who absorbs the power of that world's collider. The Spot and Miles share a vision of the Spot's future attacks, which include the deaths of Police Inspector Singh (the father of Pavitr's girlfriend Gayatri) and Miles' father Jeff. The Spot departs and the collider collapses; Miles saves Singh from the ensuing destruction, but Earth-50101 begins to fall apart from its disrupted "canon event" before members of the Society arrive to contain the damage. Miles, Gwen, and Hobie are sent to the Society's headquarters on Earth-928, where hundreds of Spider-People reside in a massive complex. Miles, along with Gwen and Hobie, meets with Miguel and reunites with Peter B. Parker, who is accompanied by his infant daughter Mayday. Miguel explains to Miles that each of the Spider-People's stories throughout the multiverse contain "canon events", such as the deaths of a police captain close to Spider-Man, and that straying from these events threatens reality and may cause that universe to collapse, which in turn could collapse the entire multiverse as a consequence. Miguel reveals that he witnessed the collapse of another universe firsthand when attempting to replace a deceased version of himself from that universe. Miles realizes that the Spot murdering Jeff, who is set to be promoted to police captain in two days, is a canon event. Miguel imprisons Miles to prevent him from saving Jeff, but Hobie helps Miles break loose before quitting the Society. As Miles flees through the complex, Miguel orders the Society to capture him. Miguel corners Miles and tells him he was never supposed to be Spider-Man, Earth-42 has no Spider-Man, and that if Earth-42's spider had not bitten Miles, Earth-1610's Peter Parker would have survived, and the Spot would never have existed. Miles overpowers Miguel and flees to what he believes is his home dimension. Considering Gwen a liability, a furious Miguel ejects her from the Society and forcibly sends her back to Earth-65. Once there, Gwen reunites with George, who has resigned from his job as police captain. The two reconcile, and George gives Gwen a portal watch left by Hobie. Miles realizes that he is on Earth-42 rather than his own dimension. In this world, his uncle Aaron Davis is alive while his father is dead; because Spider-Man does not exist, New York City is riddled with unchecked crime. Aaron restrains Miles and is soon joined by Earth-42's Miles, who has become the Prowler. As the Society searches for Miles in Earth-1610, Gwen travels there and speaks with his parents, promising to find him and bring him home. The Spot begins his multiversal attack, Miles prepares to escape, and Gwen assembles a team to find Miles, consisting of Peter B., Mayday, Pavitr, Hobie, Margo Kess, Spider-Man Noir, Peni Parker, and Spider-Ham. Shameik Moore as Miles Morales / Spider-Man: A teenager of African-American and Puerto-Rican descent who took over as the Spider-Man of Earth-1610 after the death of his reality's Peter Parker. Hailee Steinfeld as Gwen Stacy / Spider-Gwen: A version of Gwen Stacy who is the Spider-Woman of Earth-65, where she is a wanted fugitive since accidentally killing her reality's Peter Parker who had turned into the Lizard. She is Miles’ love interest. Brian Tyree Henry as Jeff Morales: Miles' African-American father and a police officer, who was recently promoted to captain. The character's last name was changed from Davis in the first film to Morales in this film. Lauren Vélez as Rio Morales: Miles' Puerto Rican mother, a nurse. Vélez also plays an alternate version of Rio from Earth-42. Jake Johnson as Peter B. Parker / Spider-Man: An older Spider-Man from Earth-616B who was a mentor to Miles. He is now married to Mary Jane "MJ" Parker and has a daughter named Mayday. Jason Schwartzman as Johnathon Ohnn / The Spot: A former scientist from Alchemax-turned-supervillain after an accident, whose body is now covered by interdimensional portals that allow him to travel through space and different universes. The Spot was not originally the film's main antagonist, being dismissed at first by Phil Lord and Christopher Miller when producer Avi Arad suggested using him, but this changed after the potential of his powers was discussed. Issa Rae as Jess Drew / Spider-Woman: A pregnant African-American Spider-Woman from Earth-332 who is O'Hara's right-hand and rides a motorcycle. Unlike most Spider-People, Drew does not maintain a secret identity. Karan Soni as Pavitr Prabhakar / Spider-Man India: An Indian version of Spider-Man from Earth-50101 who uses a yo-yo as his main weapon and lives in Mumbattan (a portmanteau of Mumbai and Manhattan). Daniel Kaluuya as Hobie Brown / Spider-Punk: A Black British punk rock version of Spider-Man from Earth-138 who uses his guitar as his main weapon Oscar Isaac as Miguel O'Hara / Spider-Man 2099: A "ninja-vampire" Spider-Man of Irish and Mexican descent from Earth-928 set in the year 2099, who is the leader of the Spider-Society, a group of Spider-People from alternate universes tasked with protecting the multiverse. Isaac described Miguel as "the one Spider-Man that doesn't have a sense of humor". Additional voice cast includes: Shea Whigham as George Stacy, Gwen's father and a police captain; Jorma Taccone as Adriano Tumino / Vulture, an Italian vulture-themed supervillain from a Renaissance-inspired universe, as well as Peter Parker / Spider-Man from the 1967 animated series, which he reprises from the post-credits of Into the Spider-Verse; Greta Lee as Lyla, Miguel and the Spider Society's AI assistant; Mahershala Ali as Aaron Davis, the Earth-42 version of Miles' deceased African American uncle. Ali previously voiced the Earth-1610 version of Aaron in the first film; Jharrel Jerome as Miles G. Morales / Prowler of Earth-42. Additional iterations of Spider-Man appearing in the film as members of the Spider-Society, with speaking roles, include: Andy Samberg as Ben Reilly / Scarlet Spider; Amandla Stenberg as Margo Kess / Spider-Byte, a Spider-Woman from a virtual reality; Kimiko Glenn as Peni Parker / SP//dr, reprising her role from the first film; Taran Killam as Patrick O'Hara / Web-Slinger; Nic Novicki as Peter Parker / Lego Spider-Man, Josh Keaton as Peter Parker / Spectacular Spider-Man from the television series The Spectacular Spider-Man (2008–2009), Yuri Lowenthal as Peter Parker / Insomniac Spider-Man from the Marvel's Spider-Man video game series by Insomniac Games; Mike Rianda as Ezekiel Sims / Spider-Therapist; Sofia Barclay as Malala Windsor / Spider-UK, an original incarnation who wears a hijab; Danielle Perez as Charlotte Webber / Sun-Spider, who uses a wheelchair; and Metro Boomin, who composed music for the film, as Metro Spider-Man. Archival audio of John Mulaney as Peter Porker / Spider-Ham from the previous film is also featured; Spider-Ham later makes a non-speaking cameo, alongside Spider-Man Noir, at the end of the film. Melissa Sturm voices Mary Jane "MJ" Parker, Peter B. Parker's wife and Mayday's mother; Lorraine Vélez voices Maria Morales, Rio Morales's sister. Rachel Dratch voices C. Weber, a counselor at Miles' school; and Ziggy Marley voices Lenny, a Jamaican shop owner. Pixar animator and filmmaker Peter Sohn provides the voice for Miles' best friend and roommate Ganke Lee after his dialogue was cut from Into the Spider-Verse. Elizabeth Perkins voices the Aunt May of Gwen's Earth-65; Atsuko Okatsuka voices Yuri Watanabe, a police colleague of Captain Stacy; Ayo Edebiri, Antonia Lentini, and Nicole Delaney voice Gwen's bandmates Glory, Betty and MJ; and Jack Quaid voices the Earth-65 Peter Parker who died after transforming into the Lizard. J. K. Simmons reprises his role as J. Jonah Jameson, voicing various versions of the character on AU Earth-1610, Earth-42, and Earth-65 with archive audio from other Spider-Man media being used for the Lego version on Earth-13122. Andy Leviton voices Armadillo from Earth-1610, Typeface and Grizzly from unknown realities who were captured by the Spider-Society, and two background characters in Earth-65. Live-action roles are also featured in the film, with Donald Glover appearing as an alternate version of Aaron Davis / Prowler, reprising his role from the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) film Spider-Man: Homecoming (2017). Peggy Lu reprises her role as convenience store owner Mrs. Chen from the Sony's Spider-Man Universe (SSU), identified as Earth-688. Tobey Maguire and Andrew Garfield appear in their roles as Peter Parker / Spider-Man from previous Spider-Man films through archival footage, as well as Cliff Robertson as his version of Ben Parker, and Denis Leary as George Stacy. Archival audio of Alfred Molina's Otto Octavius / Doctor Octopus from Spider-Man: No Way Home (2021) is used for a hologram version of the character with a comic book-accurate design. By the end of November 2018, ahead of the release of Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse (2018) the following month, Sony Pictures Animation had begun developing a sequel due to the "incredible buzz" surrounding the project. The sequel was to continue the story of Miles Morales / Spider-Man, working from "seeds [that were] planted" throughout the first film. Joaquim Dos Santos and David Callaham were set to direct and write, respectively, with Amy Pascal returning from the first film as producer. The other producers of the first film—Phil Lord, Christopher Miller, Avi Arad, and Christina Steinberg—were all also expected to return in some capacities. The next month, Pascal revealed that the film would focus on Miles and Gwen Stacy / Spider-Woman, exploring a romance between the characters that was cut from the first film, and that the sequel would be a "launching pad" for a previously announced female-focused spin-off film featuring Gwen. Sony officially confirmed the sequel in November 2019, with a release date of April 8, 2022, with Lord and Miller returning as producers. In April 2020, Sony shifted the film's release to October 7, 2022, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In February 2021, Miller said that he and Lord were working on the film's screenplay with Callaham, and that Peter Ramsey would be an executive producer on the sequel after co-directing the first film. That April, Kemp Powers and Justin K. Thompson were announced as co-directors alongside Dos Santos, and that all three had worked on the project since it began. (Thompson was production designer on the first film.) Arad and Steinberg were confirmed to return as producers with Lord, Miller and Pascal, with Alonzo Ruvalcaba co-producing and Aditya Sood, Into the Spider-Verse directors Bob Persichetti and Rodney Rothman, and Rebecca Karch and Brian Michael Bendis joining Ramsey as executive producers. In December, Lord and Miller revealed that the film was being split into two parts: Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse (Part One) and (Part Two), because they had written the story they wanted to tell for the sequel and realized it was too much for one film. Work on both parts was taking place simultaneously. The sequels were renamed in April 2022, becoming Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse and Spider-Man: Beyond the Spider-Verse. Their release dates were shifted then, with Across the Spider-Verse pushed back to June 2, 2023. Lord and Miller said that they had told Sony the sequel would be the same size as Into the Spider-Verse, but it ended up having the largest crew of any animated film ever, with around 1,000 people working on it. They added that the film had 240 characters and would take place across six universes. Lord and Miller expressed interest in including Spider-Punk, Takuya Yamashiro, the "Japanese Spider-Man" from the 1978 Spider-Man series, and Italian Spiderman in the following movies. In November 2019, Lord indicated that the character Takuya Yamashiro was designed, though he didn't make an appearance in the movie. In August 2020, Jake Johnson expressed hope that he could reprise his role as Peter B. Parker from the first film in the sequel. Issa Rae was cast as Jess Drew / Spider-Woman in June 2021, Johnson confirmed that he would be returning for the sequel a month later, and Oscar Isaac was confirmed in December to be reprising his role of Miguel O'Hara / Spider-Man 2099 from the post-credits scene of Into the Spider-Verse. Also in December, Tom Holland—who plays Peter Parker / Spider-Man in the Marvel Cinematic Universe—revealed that Pascal had approached him about appearing in the Spider-Verse films during the filming of Spider-Man: No Way Home (2021). Holland and his co-stars Zendaya and Jacob Batalon all expressed interest in appearing in the upcoming films. Jeff Sneider of The Ankler claimed in February 2023 that Holland would appear in a live-action sequence and that his appearance had been the reason the movie was delayed from 2022 to 2023, though it turned out to be false. Christopher Daniel Barnes, who voiced Spider-Man in Spider-Man: The Animated Series (1994–1998), also expressed interest in returning for the film. In April 2022, Brian Tyree Henry and Luna Lauren Vélez were confirmed to be reprising their roles as Miles' parents from the first film while Rachel Dratch was revealed to be voicing the counselor at Miles' school. Lord, Miller, and the directors announced in June that Jason Schwartzman would provide the voice of the film's main antagonist Johnathon Ohnn / the Spot, which was added to the story after a suggestion from producer Avi Arad (a second antagonist was later written out of the movie). Powers noted that the Spot was one of "the deepest cuts in Spider-Man's rogue gallery" but the creative team was excited about his abilities, which allow the character to travel between universes. Shea Whigham and Jorma Taccone were also revealed to be voicing George Stacy and the Vulture, respectively. Taccone previously voiced Norman Osborn / Green Goblin and Peter Parker / Spider-Man from the 1967 TV series in Into the Spider-Verse. In November 2022, Daniel Kaluuya was confirmed to be voicing Hobart "Hobie" Brown / Spider-Punk in the film. In December 2022, with the reveal of the film's first poster, it was confirmed that the Peter Parker / Spider-Man from The Spectacular Spider-Man (2008–2009) would appear in the film. Spectacular showrunner Greg Weisman was not informed about the inclusion of his show's character and expressed doubts he would even be featured in the film itself. In January 2023, Nicolas Cage confirmed he would not be reprising his role of Spider-Man Noir for the film. In February 2023, it was revealed that Karan Soni was cast as Pavitr Prabhakar / Spider-Man India in the film. In April 2023, it was reported that Andy Samberg was playing Ben Reilly / Scarlet Spider. A report confirmed his casting in May 2023, when it was also confirmed that Amandla Stenberg would play Margo Kess / Spider-Byte. Delilah, a skilled assassin who serves as the bartender at the Bar with No Name in an alternate universe, was meant to make an appearance in the film, but her scene was cut. She would later be included in the Insomniac Games video game Spider-Man 2 (2023), whose Peter Parker / Spider-Man appears in the film. Lord revealed that design work for new characters in the film had begun by November 2019, with comic book artist Kris Anka later revealing that he was serving as a character designer on the film. On June 9, 2020, the film's lead animator Nick Kondo announced that production had started. The different universes visited in the film were designed to look like they were each drawn by a different artist. Having learned new animation tools after working on The Mitchells vs. the Machines (2021) following the first Spider-Verse film, Lord and Miller ambitiously employed them to develop six different animation styles. The intent was to amaze the audience whenever the characters cross into a new environment so the film can accurately reflect its plot and the styles can generate various emotional backdrops. Earth-65, the home of Gwen Stacy, was designed to look like "impressionistic" watercolor paintings. The animation team created a simulator to generate this style and used a visual palette that reflects Gwen's emotions like a "three dimensional mood ring". According to co-director Justin K. Thompson, the reflection of her emotions through colors is inspired by a scene in 1950's Cinderella where her dress gets torn, and the environment reacts to that trauma. This style was also intended by Miller to remind the audience about the covers of the Spider-Gwen comic books.[citation needed] One of the two alternate Earths seen in the trailer was Earth-50101, which the crew nicknamed "Mumbattan" after Mumbai and Manhattan, due to that world being based on the one from Gotham Entertainment Group's Spider-Man: India comic book series. To give the character Pavitr Prabhakar unique motion and fighting style, the creative team researched the 2000-year-old Indian martial arts, Kalaripayattu,[citation needed] from the state of Kerala. The other universe was Nueva York, the futuristic New York City from the Marvel 2099 world, was heavily influenced by Syd Mead's neo-futurist illustrations, which has an unfinished look. Also the works of artists Ron Cobb, John Bell, John Berkey, John Harris and Ralph McQuarrie were inspirations for the city's design, in addition to the architecture of Oscar Niemeyer. The city was created as a highly controlled environment reflecting Miguel's personality, and has an authoritarian, brutalist and minimalist style of design meant to represent a "clean, strong, unified, front-facing ideology". But when going underground one realizes that it's a world that can't really be controlled. While the cast and crew were being interviewed for Empire in March 2023, codirector Joaquim Dos Santos revealed that another universe would be "the punky New London, inhabited by Daniel Kaluuya's Spider-Punk", with a final dimension "being kept tightly under wraps for now", later revealed to be Earth-42, the world the spider that bit Miles came from and where he has become that world's version of the Prowler. Spider-Punk's animation style took two to three years to develop and is inspired by collage imagery of 1970s punk-rock album covers, posters, and zines emulating the look of Xerox prints, colored papers and images appropriated from magazines and newsprints, and has a general grayed-out quality due to copy machines not having toner in them. Also the animators experimented with different frame rates in order to reflect DIY punk visuals and Spider-Punk's anarchic personality and tendency of inconsistency. His body is animated on 3s or 2s (8 or 12 images), his guitar on 4s (6 images), and his outline on 2s or 1s (12 or 24 images); unlike rest of the characters that are predominantly animated on 2s. In May 2023, Jake Johnson revealed in an interview that a Lego universe would be featured in the film. The Lego sequence was done by 14-year-old Canadian animator Preston Mutanga and was added late in the movie, after the filmmakers were so impressed by his fan-made Lego recreation of the film's first teaser that they tracked him down and recruited him. Miles' design was updated for the sequel to show him having gone through a growth spurt, while Gwen was given a new haircut and an updated costume. Rick Leonardi, the co-creator of Spider-Man 2099, was brought on to adapt his own designs for the film, while comic book artist Brian Stelfreeze was chosen to shape the visual development of Jess Drew. The Spot's design, which was influenced by Austrian artist Egon Schiele, evolves throughout the film as he gains more confidence and control of his abilities, beginning with a style that looks like an "unfinished sketch [with] blue construction lines that evoke a comic book artist's rough drawing before the work goes to an inker". The Spot's portals were intended to look like "living ink that had spilled or splattered on the comic artist's drawing", which created new challenges for the animation team. The Vulture was given a Renaissance-era design inspired by the artwork of Leonardo da Vinci's workbooks. Thompson also revealed that the design of the spider in the "Go Home Machine" is influenced by the spider in the movie Krull (1983), which is also named "Ynyr" after a character from the film. Gwen Stacy's hair received a redesign in the movie, incorporating Gwenpool's pink highlights in a reference to Marvel Rising. This was credited by Across the Spider-Verse production designer Patrick O'Keefe to artist Peter Chan in January 2024 as having been based on Gurihiru's work on The Unbelievable Gwenpool: Beyond the Fourth Wall, with the design of Gwen Stacy's bedroom also taking influence from the color palette of Gwenpool's hospital gown. In May 2023, Powers revealed that the film would end on a cliffhanger and co-director Dos Santos compared it to the Star Wars original trilogy film The Empire Strikes Back (1980). Powers explained: Across The Spider-Verse is a movie on its own, but it definitely ends on a bit of a cliffhanger. I think it's a good cliffhanger. We hope that it's a satisfying tee-up for what's coming in the third film, because you want people to be excited about what's coming next. And it helps that we knew going in that this was part two of a three-part story. Since you already know that that third story is guaranteed, you can tackle it a bit differently. That being said, there's a lot of key characters in this film, and there's a story in this film that has an arc of its own that we needed to complete. In the same month, Powers also stated that the film would not be "tied" to the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). In the film, Miguel makes a direct reference to the events of Spider-Man: No Way Home, telling Gwen to not "get [him] started on Doctor Strange and that little nerd back on Earth-199999" — referring to the Doctor Strange and Spider-Man of the MCU — while attributing the events of No Way Home to the collider explosion from Into the Spider-Verse. The quote is meant as a throwaway line that Lord and Miller came up with. Additionally, Donald Glover reprises his role as an alternate version of Aaron Davis / Prowler from the MCU film Spider-Man: Homecoming (2017) in a live-action cameo, depicted as a prisoner of the Spider-Society displaced from his home reality. Production on Across the Spider-Verse was completed on May 20, 2023, 13 days before the U.S. release date. With a runtime of 140 minutes, it is the longest animated film ever produced by an American studio, surpassing Consuming Spirits (2012). On June 23, 2023, Vulture reported that four people who worked on the film alleged that production had faced difficulties due to numerous requests from Lord for changes to already finished animation, as well as the need for him to approve animation layouts early in production. Lord's directions were said to take precedence over the decisions of the film's directing team and led to numerous weeks of long overtime as the animators drastically revised portions of the film several times. They further stated that difficult working conditions caused by the constant revisions caused over 100 artists to leave the project before its completion, and that both Into the Spider-Verse and The Mitchells vs. the Machines (two earlier movies that Lord and Miller co-produced for Sony) suffered from similar production issues. One artist said that production on Beyond the Spider-Verse, the film's sequel, had not progressed, and that there was "no way that" it would be completed in time for its scheduled March 2024 release window. Sony denied the allegations concerning Across the Spider-Verse's production troubles, while declining to comment on the possibility of the sequel being delayed, and producer Amy Pascal called the process of heavy revision normal. Daniel Pemberton confirmed in December 2020 that he would return to compose the sequel's score. In December 2022, Lord and Miller confirmed that Metro Boomin would create music for its soundtrack. Several artists were featured on it, including Coi Leray, Swae Lee, Future, Don Toliver, James Blake, Offset, Wizkid, Lil Uzi Vert, 21 Savage, Lil Wayne, Nas, ASAP Rocky, Becky G, Shenseea, JID, A Boogie wit da Hoodie, and 2 Chainz. For the Japanese release, an original song, "Realize" performed by Lisa, was featured. The film was supported by another single, "Mona Lisa" by Dominic Fike, released on June 2, 2023—the day of the film's premiere. Although originally set to be released as a track on the deluxe edition of the soundtrack album, a few days after its release, the track was removed. On June 23, 2023, it was announced that the track was added into some versions of Fike's second studio album Sunburn, which was released on July 7, 2023.[better source needed] Though external to the film's score and soundtrack, Daniel Kaluuya also incorporated musical elements into his vocal performance as Spider-Punk / Hobie Brown. Kaluuya elaborated that he searched for the word "Spider-Punk" on Spotify, hoping to find fan-made playlists. He stated that after finding some he "would just listen to them, be like vibing out," helping him with the process of gauging the character's energy. Kaluuya further noted that "he wanted the character's voice to feel like a song," and that a take in which he portrayed the character as "rapping, but in a punk style" would be the one used in the film. In May 2020, Sony entered into a promotional partnership with Hyundai Motor Company to showcase their new models and technologies in the film. A prologue for the film was released at Comic Con Experience in December 2021, revealing the title and the fact that the film is a two-part sequel. Following the announcement of the new title and release date in April 2022, Lord and Miller showed 15 minutes of the film (with unfinished animation) at Sony's CinemaCon panel. Lord, Miller, and the directors showed the same footage at the Annecy International Animation Film Festival in June, with updated animation and effects. In February 2023, Funko Pops figures based on characters from the film were revealed. In April 2023, another 14-minute footage was previewed at Sony's CinemaCon panel. A second trailer was released on April 4. It gained 148.6M views within 24 hours, becoming the most-viewed second trailer for a Marvel film within that timespan and also the most-viewed superhero film trailer of the summer. Rolling Stone's Larisha Paul remarked that Miles wanted the other heroes to accept and validate him but also wanted to create his own story and not be controlled by them. Christian Holub of Entertainment Weekly felt the Spider-People were more antagonistic and that Miles' family was in more danger than in the first film. Meanwhile, Abid Rahman from The Hollywood Reporter compared Miles' introduction to the Spider-People in the trailer to the "vibe" of Citadel of Ricks and highlighted the reference to the Spider-Man pointing meme. Commentators also noted that the trailer posited that Miles could potentially have to choose between saving the multiverse or his family. On May 15, 2023; the film started the sale of different Spider-Verse themed food items for their collaboration with Burger King. The items available during the promotion included the Spider-Verse Whopper with a red bun and the Spider-Verse Sundae. On May 20, 2023, Nike released a special iteration of the Air Jordan 1 High OG inspired by the film. On May 23, 2023, Epic Games added skins of Miles Morales and Spider-Man 2099 to Fortnite based on their designs in the film. The electronics manufacturer ZOTAC also partnered with Sony Pictures to create limited-edition Spider-Man-themed RTX 4070 graphics cards. Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse premiered on May 30, 2023, at the Grand Rex in Paris, France, and at the Regency Village Theater in Los Angeles, and was theatrically released in the United States on June 2, in premium large formats and IMAX. Unlike the first film, this film was not released in 3D. It was originally set for release on April 8, 2022, but was shifted to October 7 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. It was then moved to the June 2023 date. It was the first Sony Pictures Animation film since The Angry Birds Movie 2 (2019) to receive a worldwide theatrical release after a number of the studio's animated films were assigned direct-to-streaming releases on Netflix and Amazon Prime Video in response to the closure of cinema theaters due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The film was rereleased in IMAX in limited theaters on January 19, 2024, which marked the debut of a new Columbia Pictures logo that commemorates the studio's 100th anniversary. In China, the film premiered in Beijing on May 31, and was released on June 2. The film's release initially was delayed until June 22, 2023, in the MENA region, but later withdrawn from cinemas across the region due to the film's transgender iconography. On June 9, 2023, in response to complaints of sound mixing issues from viewers in some theaters, Sony sent an updated version of the film with new audio mixing to theaters. An official source told Variety that, while the issues were only present at a "handful of theaters", all prints of the film had been updated and re-sent to cinemas. It was reported that at least two versions of the film—distinct in slight differences in dialogue and animations—exist in theaters. For example, in one version, a scene between Miguel and Lyla ends with Lyla giving a fist bump, while another ends in Lyla taking a selfie of them. The film's associate editor, Andy Leviton, confirmed the reports. Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse was released on digital download by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment on August 8, 2023, and on Ultra HD Blu-ray, Blu-ray, and DVD on September 5. The digital release of the film featured additional alterations from the initial theatrical cut, such as the removal of several lines of dialogue. This version, which was also available in some theaters, was described by Miller as "an international version" of the film created to help with the necessary translations needed and to be approved by the French censorship board. He added that the animators "cleaned up and tweaked" some of the shots that had already been submitted for the finished version, with other members of the team, such as in the sound department, also suggesting alternate ideas, stating, "Because it's a multiverse movie, it's like there's a multiverse of the movie – that was really the reasoning behind it. It was trying to make the best possible version that everyone was going to be the proudest of." Lord believed some of these changes created an improved film. Some of the alterations have been controversial with the film's fanbase. In April 2021, Sony signed deals with Netflix and Disney for the rights to their 2022 to 2026 film slate, following the films' theatrical and home media windows. Netflix signed for exclusive "pay 1 window" streaming rights, which is typically an 18-month window and included the sequels to Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse; this deal built on an existing output deal that Netflix had signed with Sony Pictures Animation in 2014. Disney signed for "pay 2 window" rights for the films, which would be streamed on Disney+ and Hulu as well as broadcast on Disney's linear television networks. Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse was released on Netflix in the United States on October 31, 2023. Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse grossed $381.5 million in the United States and Canada, and $309.3 million in other territories, for a worldwide gross of $690.9 million. The film surpassed Into the Spider-Verse's total gross of $384.5 million after 12 days of release, and overtook The Smurfs to become Sony Pictures Animation's highest-grossing film. In the United States and Canada, Across the Spider-Verse was released alongside The Boogeyman, and was initially projected to gross around $80 million from 4,313 theaters in its opening weekend, with rival studios predicting it could reach $90 million. It made $17.35 million from Thursday night previews, the third-best total for an animated film after The Lion King ($23 million in 2019) and Incredibles 2 ($18.5 million in 2018). After making $51.7 million on Friday (including previews, the best first-day of 2023 up to that point), weekend estimates were increased to $113 million. It went on to debut to $120.7 million, the second-highest opening weekend total of 2023 (behind The Super Mario Bros. Movie's $146.4 million) and the eighth-best ever for an animated film. It also surpassed Hotel Transylvania 2 ($48.4 million in 2015) to achieve the highest opening weekend for a Sony Pictures Animation film. The film made $55.5 million in its second weekend, finishing second behind newcomer Transformers: Rise of the Beasts. It then made $27.8 million in its third weekend, finishing third. The film would make $19.3 million on its fourth weekend, topping the box office once again amidst competition from No Hard Feelings, a new release, and The Flash and Elemental, both holdovers. Outside of the US and Canada, the film grossed $88.1 million from 59 markets in its opening weekend. In its second weekend, Across the Spider-Verse grossed $47 million, for a drop of 44%, while in its third weekend, it grossed $27.6 million from 60 markets, including Japan where the film made $2.8 million. As of July 9, 2023,[update] the highest grossing territories were China ($49.6 million), UK ($35 million), Mexico ($27.8 million), Australia ($20.6 million) and France ($13.4 million). On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 95% of 385 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.6/10. The website's consensus reads: "Just as visually dazzling and action-packed as its predecessor, Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse thrills from start to cliffhanger conclusion." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 86 out of 100, based on 60 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale (down from the first film's “A+”), while those polled at PostTrak gave it a 93% overall positive score, with 82% saying they would "definitely recommend" it. Brian Tallerico of RogerEbert.com gave the film 4 out of 4 stars, writing, "Like the work of a young artist who refuses to be restrained by the borders of the frame, Across the Spider-Verse is loaded with incredible imagery and fascinating ideas. It is a smart, thrilling piece of work that reminded me of other great part twos like The Dark Knight and The Empire Strikes Back." Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post gave the film 3/4 stars, calling it "an extravagant, very cool love letter to graphic design, executed with superb draftsmanship and giddy, infectious joy." Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times also gave it 3 out of 4 stars, writing, "It's a bit too much at times, but it's also pretty great, and it'll be a huge surprise if the third chapter in the trilogy isn't equally entertaining." Kevin Maher of The Times gave the film 4 out of 5 stars, writing, "It rarely draws breath between set pieces, and creates distinct and spectacular environments for each separate spider-verse." David Fear of Rolling Stone said that the film "completely recaptures the panel-to-panel thrill of discovering your respective era's teen-angsty Marvel icon. The thrill of the multiversal new is gone. Everything else, however, is extra-webbed for your pleasure." Alison Willmore of Vulture wrote, "Across the Spider-Verse looks incredible, even better than the groundbreaking first installment, but what's truly impressive about it is how willing it is to entrust its storytelling to its animation." The Atlantic's David Sims wrote that the film "avoids seeming like a physics lesson because its visuals are consistently thrilling; the most static bits of dialogue still pop because of how daring the animation is." Kyle Smith of The Wall Street Journal described the film as being "visually hypercaffeinated", but with a slow plot in the first half of the film, plotlines being a "hectic series of clashes", action sequences that were "jumpy but not especially engaging", and "too many long monologues". Jake Wilson of The Age gave the film 3 out of 5 stars, writing, "Typically for Lord and Miller, the upshot is both adventurous and conformist, an outwardly bold reimagining of the material that never stops congratulating us for our brand loyalty, and which plays it safer in plot terms than the early sequences might lead you to hope." Guillermo del Toro, the winner of 2023 Oscar for Best animated film, praised the film, saying "Spider-Verse will fulfill and heal." During a London Q&A screening, Andrew Garfield, who portrayed Peter Parker in The Amazing Spider-Man films, called the film "a masterpiece of pure cinema". Bryce Dallas Howard, who played Gwen Stacy in Spider-Man 3 (2007), expressed her and her father, Ron Howard's, love for the movie, calling it "an astonishing film on every level". Filmmakers behind Kung Fu Panda 4 cited the Spider-Verse films as inspiration for their fight scenes, incorporating an "inkbrush" style. The film briefly features a transgender flag in two scenes, including on a banner seen hanging in Gwen Stacy's bedroom with the words "Protect Trans Kids". The flag's appearance led to speculation that Gwen supports her universe's transgender rights movement or some to interpret Gwen as being transgender herself. Although she is not identified as transgender in the film, viewers and critics who supported this interpretation additionally pointed to the use of the flag's colors (light pink, light blue, and white) elsewhere in scenes involving Gwen and her universe, and the perceived parallels to coming out in her character arc within the film. However, others have noted that the blue and white colors were already used by the comics' version of Spider-Woman Gwen Stacy, and thus were not necessarily proof that the film version of the character is trans. The use of the transgender flag was reported to have led to the film being withdrawn from release in the United Arab Emirates and other MENA countries. An Internet meme involving the notion of canon events began spreading on TikTok after the film's release, which later became a trend. The meme's word "canon" elaborated its special definition as "ironic (if not actually painful)" experiences in real life. Collins Dictionary selected "canon event" as one of its ten contenders for Word of the Year in 2023, defining the term as "an event that is essential to the formation of an individual’s character or identity." At the 96th Academy Awards, Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse received a nomination for Best Animated Feature. Its other nominations include seven Annie Awards (winning all, a clean sweep), two British Academy Film Awards, three Critics' Choice Movie Awards (winning one), and three Golden Globe Awards. The American Film Institute named Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse one of the ten-best films of 2023. It also won the National Board of Review Award for Best Animated Film. IndieWire listed Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse as the 2nd greatest animated film of the 21st Century. A third film was confirmed when Lord and Miller revealed in December 2021 that Across the Spider-Verse was being split into two films. Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse (Part Two) was expected at that point to be released in 2023. In April 2022, it was retitled Spider-Man: Beyond the Spider-Verse. In response to a claim by an artist on Across the Spider-Verse, who spoke to Vulture on condition of anonymity, that it would not be possible to release Beyond the Spider-Verse as scheduled (which at the time was on March 29, 2024) due to an alleged lack of production progress, Lord and Miller stated that the production would "take the time necessary" for the film to be completed to their standards. In July 2023, the film was removed from the release schedule, reportedly due to the 2023 SAG-AFTRA strike, and its original release date was taken by Ghostbusters: Frozen Empire, as a source within Sony—a member of the AMPTP against whom SAG-AFTRA was negotiating—told Variety that the strike precluded the film's voice cast from recording their lines on schedule. Following the conclusion of the strike in November 2023, Deadline Hollywood reported that the voice recording for the film was set to resume that same month. Sony began developing a Spider-Women film in November 2018 that would focus on three generations of female, Spider-related characters. Bek Smith was writing the spin-off, and Lauren Montgomery was in talks to direct. Pascal said the film would focus on the characters Gwen Stacy / Spider-Gwen, Cindy Moon / Silk, and Jess Drew / Spider-Woman, and said Across the Spider-Verse would serve as a "launching pad" for it. In May 2023, producer Avi Arad stated that the film would be titled Spider-Woman. On May 29, 2023, it was announced that a manga spin-off titled Spider-Man: Octopus Girl written by Hideyuki Furuhashi and illustrated by Betten Court would begin serialization on June 20 on Shueisha's Shōnen Jump+ website and app. The story revolves around Doctor Octopus, who falls into a coma and has been reawakened in the body of young Japanese middle schooler named Otoha Okutamiya. In February 2024, Viz Media announced that they licensed the series for English publication in Q4 2024. As depicted in Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse (2018) This statement is referring to many cinemas/movie theaters in the MENA region who have changed the release date on their official websites, and stopped the sale of tickets. Some cinemas include: VOX Cinemas (UAE, Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Oman, Lebanon, Kuwait, Egypt, Bahrain), ROXY Cinemas (UAE), Grand Cinemas (Lebanon, Kuwait, Jordan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia). All of these theaters in the MENA region state June 22, 2023, as the release date of Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse, in all countries where they operate. "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse (PG)". British Board of Film Classification. Archived from the original on May 30, 2023. Retrieved May 28, 2023. Couch, Aaron (May 25, 2023). "The Widening Web of Phil Lord and Chris Miller". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 25, 2023. Retrieved May 25, 2023. Lee, Chris (June 23, 2023). "Spider-Verse Artists Say Working on the Sequel Was 'Death by a Thousand Paper Cuts'". Vulture. Archived from the original on June 23, 2023. Retrieved June 24, 2023. Multiple Across the Spider-Verse crew members... describe the process of making the $150 million Sony project as uniquely arduous... "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved September 13, 2023. "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse". The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Retrieved September 25, 2023. O'Rourke, Ryan (May 24, 2023). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Features Over 250 Spider-People". Collider. Archived from the original on June 29, 2023. Retrieved July 4, 2023. Drysdale, Jennifer (July 26, 2019). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Star Shameik Moore Wants Sequel to Go Live Action". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on May 20, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2023. Pulliam-Moore, Charles (May 31, 2023). "Across the Spider-Verse is an animated masterpiece that upends Marvel's Spider-canon". The Verge. Archived from the original on June 29, 2023. Retrieved July 4, 2023. Kit, Borys (June 4, 2021). "Issa Rae Joins 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Sequel (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 4, 2021. Retrieved June 4, 2021. Mendez, Megan; McCluskey (June 2, 2023). "A Handy Guide to All the Key Spider-People in Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse". Time. Archived from the original on June 29, 2023. Retrieved July 4, 2023. Donnelly, Matt; Rubin, Rebecca (April 26, 2022). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Teases Over 200 New Characters, Presents Never-Before-Seen Footage". Variety. Archived from the original on April 26, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Lanuza Sáenz, Lissete (June 12, 2023). "Luna Lauren Vélez Reflects on What Across the Spider-Verse and Transformers Have in Common". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on June 22, 2023. Retrieved July 4, 2023. Loughrey, Clarisse (June 2, 2023). "Across the Spider-Verse cliffhanger ending introduces surprise new character". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on June 29, 2023. Retrieved July 4, 2023. Anderton, Joe (July 26, 2021). "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse star confirms return for sequel". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on June 4, 2023. Retrieved July 4, 2023. Keane, Sean (December 20, 2022). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Trailer Reveals Massive Spider-Society". CNET. Archived from the original on December 17, 2022. Retrieved December 20, 2022. Croll, Ben (June 13, 2022). "Spider-Verse: Enigmatic New Villain The Spot Unveiled With First Look Image at Annecy". Variety. Archived from the original on June 13, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Jones, Tamera (May 30, 2023). "Phil Lord & Chris Miller Break Down the Making of 'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' and How It Became Two Movies". Collider. Archived from the original on May 31, 2023. Retrieved May 31, 2023. Polowy, Kevin (May 31, 2023). "Issa Rae talks Marvel's first pregnant superhero in 'Across the Spider-Verse,' reveals famed movie character who inspired her". Yahoo! Entertainment. Archived from the original on June 16, 2023. Retrieved July 4, 2023. Couch, Aaron (February 28, 2023). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Enlists 'Deadpool' Actor Karan Soni". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 28, 2023. Retrieved April 4, 2023. Kit, Borys (November 7, 2022). "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse Adds Daniel Kaluuya as Spider-Punk". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 7, 2022. Retrieved November 7, 2022. Artan, Ayan (June 6, 2023). "Across the Spider-Verse's Spider-Punk is a step forward for Black British representation". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on June 15, 2023. Retrieved July 4, 2023. Kleinman, Jake (November 28, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Post-Credits Has an Oscar Isaac Cameo". Inverse. Archived from the original on November 29, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2018. Rivera, Joshua (June 4, 2023). "What is Spider-Man 2099's problem?". Polygon. Archived from the original on June 11, 2023. Retrieved July 4, 2023. Crossan, Ash (April 26, 2022). "Oscar Isaac & May Calamawy Interview: Moon Knight". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 26, 2022. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Burlingame, Russ (June 13, 2022). "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse Casting for The Vulture, Captain Stacy Revealed". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 13, 2022. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Vejvoda, Jim (November 29, 2018). "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse Official Credits Reveal Surprise Voice Actor Cameos". IGN. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved December 2, 2018. Germain, Lussier; Pulliam-Moore, Charles (December 17, 2018). "We Answer Your Burning Questions After Spider-Man: Into the Spider Verse". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on December 17, 2018. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Korpan, Andrew (November 7, 2022). "Daniel Kaluuya Joins 'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Cast". Collider. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved July 4, 2023. Moreau, Justin (June 2, 2023). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Brings Back [SPOILERS], Plus More Cameos and Crossovers Explained". Variety. Archived from the original on June 4, 2023. Retrieved July 5, 2023. Odman, Sydney (June 10, 2023). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Co-Director Kemp Powers on Last-Minute Cameos and That Twisty Cliffhanger". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 29, 2023. Retrieved July 4, 2023. Garbutt, Emily (May 30, 2023). "Andy Samberg's Across the Spider-Verse role confirmed". GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on May 31, 2023. Retrieved July 5, 2023. Bajer, Ted (June 5, 2023). "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse: What We Want to See in the Sequel". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on June 22, 2023. Retrieved July 5, 2023. Khan, Amna (May 31, 2023). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Cast and Character Guide". Collider. Archived from the original on June 4, 2023. Retrieved July 5, 2023. Ettenhofer, Valerie (June 5, 2023). "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse Lets Lord & Miller Play In Their LEGO Universe". /Film. Archived from the original on June 22, 2023. Retrieved July 5, 2023. Gvozden, Dan (June 4, 2023). "The Definitive List of 'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Easter Eggs". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 5, 2023. Retrieved June 5, 2023. Iacobucci, Jordan (June 3, 2023). "10 Spider-Men Who Didn't Get Enough Screen Time In Across The Spider-Verse". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on June 4, 2023. Retrieved June 3, 2023. Uddin, Shaheena (June 9, 2023). "How Across the Spider-Verse blazes a trail with first hijabi Spider-Woman". Radio Times. Archived from the original on June 16, 2023. Retrieved July 5, 2023. Smart, Jack. "Brian Tyree Henry Jokes He's Jealous of His 'Spider-Verse' Character's 'Amazingly Built' Body (Exclusive)". People. Archived from the original on June 2, 2023. Retrieved July 5, 2023. Gilchrist, Todd (June 6, 2023). "Inside Metro Boomin's Big Move Into Film and the 'Spider-Verse' (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on June 13, 2023. Retrieved July 5, 2023. Luchies, Adam (June 17, 2023). "Mary Jane Watson Recreates Her First Comic Book Appearance With New Spider-Man Funko Pop". Collider. Archived from the original on June 28, 2023. Retrieved July 5, 2023. Chu, Severina (June 6, 2023). "Spider-Man Across the Spider-Verse Cast: What The Actors Look Like In Real Life". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved July 5, 2023. Vargas, Chanel (June 8, 2023). "All the Best Celebrity Cameos You Might Have Missed in "Across the Spider-Verse"". PopSugar. Archived from the original on June 9, 2023. Retrieved July 6, 2023. June 14, 2023. "Elemental Director Peter Sohn Talks Being in Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse (Exclusive)". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 15, 2023. Retrieved July 6, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Sciretta, Peter (February 26, 2019). "Pixar Director Pete Sohn Originally Voiced Ganke In 'Spider-Man: Into The Spider-Verse'". /Film. Archived from the original on May 27, 2023. Retrieved July 6, 2023. Burlingame, Russ (July 4, 2023). "Weeds Star Elizabeth Perkins Says She'd Be "On Board" For Revival". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on July 6, 2023. Admin (June 3, 2023). "Dynamic Across the Spider Verse Release Date (2023)". StreakBuzz. Archived from the original on August 22, 2023. Retrieved June 3, 2023. Fesmire, Caleb (June 10, 2023). "After 'Across the Spider-Verse,' Spider-Gwen Needs Her Own Standalone Movie". Collider. Archived from the original on June 15, 2023. Retrieved July 6, 2023. Anderton, Joe (June 7, 2023). "The Boys star Jack Quaid confirms surprise Across the Spider-Verse role". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on June 22, 2023. Retrieved July 6, 2023. Lussier, Germain (June 6, 2023). "All Our Burning Questions After Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse". Gizmodo AU. Archived from the original on June 12, 2023. Retrieved July 6, 2023. Luchies, Adam (May 24, 2023). "A Classic 'Spider-Man' Villain Appears in New 'Across the Spider-Verse' TV Spot". Collider. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved June 13, 2023. Kit, Borys (November 27, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Sequel and All-Female Spinoff in the Works From Sony (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 27, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2018. McNary, Dave (November 27, 2018). "Sony Developing 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Sequel and Spinoff". Variety. Archived from the original on November 28, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2018. Fleming, Mike Jr. (November 27, 2018). "Sony Builds Out Spider-Man Universe With A Spider-Women Film". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 27, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2018. Robinson, Joanna (December 14, 2018). "Sony Finally Untangles Its Spider Web". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on December 14, 2018. Retrieved December 15, 2018. Hipes, Patrick (November 1, 2019). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Sequel Gets Release Date". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 2, 2019. Retrieved November 1, 2019. McClintock, Pamela; Couch, Aaron (April 24, 2020). "'Spider-Man' Sequel Delays Release to November 2021 Amid Sony Date Shuffle". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 24, 2020. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Miller, Christopher [@chrizmillr] (February 25, 2021). "Actually not true. Phil and I are writing with Dave Callaham. Phil is currently working on the script this very second. Peter is an EP and is totally involved. Plus there are some other creative team announcements coming soon" (Tweet). Archived from the original on February 27, 2021. Retrieved February 25, 2021 – via Twitter. Vary, Adam B. (April 19, 2021). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Sequel Snares New Directing Trio (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on April 19, 2021. Retrieved April 24, 2021. Coggan, Devan (December 4, 2021). "Get a first look at 'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse (Part One)'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 5, 2021. Retrieved December 5, 2021. Tartaglione, Nancy; D'Alessandro, Anthony; Goldsmith, Jill (April 26, 2022). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Fresh Footage Shown At CinemaCon, Part 2's Title Revealed". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 26, 2022. Retrieved April 25, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 20, 2022). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Heads To Summer 2023; Sony Dates 'Equalizer 3' Among Other Release Changes". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Murphy, J. Kim (April 21, 2022). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Bumped to 2023, 'The Equalizer 3' Announced in Sony Release Date Shake-Up". Variety. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. O'Connell, Sean (December 17, 2018). "The Characters Phil Lord And Chris Miller Want To Use After Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on February 15, 2023. Retrieved February 15, 2023. Ross, Diandra (November 7, 2019). "Spider-Verse 2: Phil Lord Teases Japanese Spider-Man Appearance". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 8, 2019. Retrieved November 10, 2019. Fuge, Jon (August 18, 2020). "Will Peter B. Parker Return in 'Spider-Verse 2'? Jake Johnson Isn't So Sure". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on September 16, 2020. Retrieved June 6, 2021. Grebey, James (December 8, 2021). "Tom Holland and Zendaya Say They're Waiting For the Call to Enter the Spider-Verse". SyFy Wire. Archived from the original on December 8, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2021. Rangel, Felipe (February 24, 2023). "Tom Holland Rumored To Appear As Live-Action Spider-Man In Spider-Verse 2". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on February 24, 2023. Retrieved February 25, 2022. Fuge, Jonathan (June 22, 2020). "Spider-Man Voice Actor Christopher Daniel Barnes Would be Honored to Return in Spider-Verse 2". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on December 23, 2022. Retrieved December 23, 2022. Jones, Tamera (May 30, 2023). "Phil Lord & Chris Miller Break Down the Making of 'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' and How It Became Two Movies". Collider. Archived from the original on May 30, 2023. Retrieved May 30, 2023. Miller, Chris [@chrizmillr] (December 20, 2022). "Yes" (Tweet). Archived from the original on June 2, 2023. Retrieved December 21, 2022 – via Twitter. Weisman, Greg [@Greg_Weisman] (December 20, 2022). "I didn't know. I still don't know" (Tweet). Archived from the original on July 15, 2023. Retrieved December 21, 2022 – via Twitter. Tyrrell, Caitlin (January 6, 2023). "Nicolas Cage Not Returning For Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on January 6, 2023. Retrieved January 6, 2023. "Andy Samberg to Voice Scarlet Spider in 'Spider-Man: Across The Spider-Verse' (Exclusive)". One Take News. April 28, 2023. Archived from the original on April 28, 2023. Retrieved April 28, 2023. Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse [@spiderverse] (May 29, 2023). "(image that contains 'Amandla Stenberg is Spider-Byte')" (Tweet). Archived from the original on May 30, 2023. Retrieved May 29, 2023 – via Twitter. Heaney, Samuel (October 21, 2023). "The Message – Marvel's Spider-Man 2 Guide". IGN. Archived from the original on October 23, 2023. Retrieved October 24, 2023. Damore, Meagan (March 4, 2020). "Into the Spider-Verse: Kris Anka Involved in Spider-Man Sequel". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on March 5, 2020. Retrieved March 28, 2020. Anka, Kris [@kristaferanka] (August 4, 2020). "Because I'm currently working as a character designer on Spider-Verse 2 as my full time job" (Tweet). Archived from the original on August 4, 2020. Retrieved October 27, 2020 – via Twitter. Grater, Tom (June 9, 2020). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Sequel Production Underway Ahead Of 2022 Release". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 9, 2020. Retrieved June 9, 2020. Travis, Ben (November 22, 2022). "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse Will Have Six Dominant Art Styles: 'The Ambition Is To Wow You' – Exclusive Image". Empire. Archived from the original on November 22, 2022. Retrieved November 23, 2022. Zahed, Ramin (July 3, 2023). Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse: The Art of the Movie. Abrams Books. ISBN 978-1419763991. Across The Spider-Verse's Nueva York Took Cues From One Of Sci-Fi's Most Respected Artists How ‘Across the Spider-Verse’ Pays Homage to The Sex Pistols, Graphic Artist Syd Mead and Canadian Hockey Travis, Ben (March 11, 2023). "Spider-Man: Across The Spider-Verse Is Set Across Five New Universes: 'We've Essentially Made Five Films In One' – Exclusive Image". Empire. Archived from the original on March 11, 2023. Retrieved March 11, 2023. Salazar, Andrew J. (May 31, 2023). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Directors Talk Raising the Bar and Creating Spider-Punk – Exclusive Interview". DiscussingFilm. Archived from the original on June 1, 2023. Retrieved June 1, 2023. "How a unique animation trick helped make Spider-Punk in 'Across the Spider-Verse' even more anarchic". The Daily Dot. June 8, 2023. Archived from the original on June 8, 2023. Retrieved June 8, 2023. The 'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Cast on Miguel O'Hara and the Depths of the Multiverse. Fandango Media. May 8, 2023. Archived from the original on May 9, 2023. Retrieved May 9, 2023 – via YouTube. Bricken, Rob (June 5, 2023). "Teen Behind Viral Lego Spider-Verse Trailer Recruited to Help Direct Movie". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on June 5, 2023. Retrieved June 6, 2023. Zahed (2023); pp 86 – 87; 92 – 99 "How The Spot's Powers Changed for the Better in Spider-Man". August 8, 2023. Archived from the original on August 23, 2023. Retrieved August 23, 2023. "Bonus Features: Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse Digital, Blu-ray, 4K UHD Release Includes 90 Minutes of Exclusive Extras". cinemovie.tv. Archived from the original on September 15, 2023. Retrieved September 9, 2023. O'Keefe, Patrick [@okeefe_artist] (January 23, 2024). "After approving the design, Artist Peter Chan took a painting pass to explore the colour and mood of Gwen's Bedroom. We wanted to pay homage to the source material and as such our first explorations followed palettes directly from the comics themselves" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Design 2 Shepherd, Jack (May 11, 2023). "Across the Spider-Verse will have a cliffhanger ending: "This is our Empire Strikes Back"". Total Film. GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on May 11, 2023. Retrieved July 15, 2023. Scott, Ryan (May 12, 2023). "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse Is 'Not Tied Into The MCU' Despite That No Way Home Reference". /Film. Archived from the original on May 13, 2023. Retrieved May 13, 2023. Gribbin, Sean (June 4, 2023). "Across the Spider-Verse BTS Photo Showcases Donald Glover's Prowler Super Suit". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on June 4, 2023. Retrieved June 4, 2023. K Thompson, Justin [@shinypinkbottle] (May 20, 2023). "update: It. Is. Done" (Tweet). Archived from the original on May 20, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2023 – via Twitter. Dawe, Luke (May 3, 2023). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Breaks Animation Record With Hefty Runtime". Collider. Archived from the original on May 6, 2023. Retrieved May 6, 2023. Leston, Ryan (June 23, 2023). "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse: Several Animators Claim They Worked Under Unsustainable Conditions". IGN. Archived from the original on June 24, 2023. Retrieved June 24, 2023. Pulliam-Moore, Charles (June 23, 2023). "Across the Spider-Verse's animators allegedly worked under unsustainable conditions". The Verge. Archived from the original on June 23, 2023. Retrieved June 24, 2023. John-Day, Michael (June 4, 2023). "Across the Spider-Verse's Daniel Kaluuya Used Spider-Punk Fan Playlists to Prepare". CBR. Archived from the original on June 10, 2023. Retrieved June 10, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 27, 2020). "Hyundai & Sony Team For Multi-Promotional Partnership On 'Uncharted,' 'Spider-Man' Sequels & More". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 28, 2020. Retrieved May 28, 2020. Choe, Brandon (December 5, 2021). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Drops First-Look Trailer". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 5, 2021. Retrieved December 5, 2021. Anderson, Robert (February 22, 2023). "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse Funko Pop Figures Revealed, Preorders Now Live". IGN. Archived from the original on February 22, 2023. Retrieved February 22, 2023. Giardina, Carolyn (April 24, 2023). "Sony Previews 14 Minutes of 'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' at CinemaCon". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 20, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2023. Grobar, Matt (April 5, 2023). "Second 'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Trailer Comes In As Most Viewed For A Summer 2023 Superhero Pic". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved July 19, 2023. Paul, Larisha (April 4, 2023). "Miles Morales Writes His Own Story in 'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Trailer". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved July 19, 2023. Holub, Christian (April 4, 2023). "Across the Spider-Verse trailer pits Miles Morales against a multiverse of malevolent Spider-Men". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved July 19, 2023. Rahman, Abid (April 4, 2023). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Second Trailer Reveals Multitude of Spider-People". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved July 19, 2023. Madrigal-Yankowski, Nico (May 15, 2023). "Burger King alters Whopper bun for superhero collaboration". SFGATE. Archived from the original on May 16, 2023. Retrieved May 16, 2023. Furness, Joseph (May 9, 2023). "'Across the Spider-Verse' x Air Jordan 1 High 'Next Chapter': What You Need to Know". Esquire. Archived from the original on May 11, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2023. Del Rosario, Alexandra (May 23, 2023). "'Across the Spider-Verse' has arrived in 'Fortnite.' That's a victory royale for fans". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 23, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2023. Robertson, Duncan (April 20, 2023). "Spider-Man-themed RTX 4070s announced by Zotac after Palit mod goes viral". GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on May 29, 2023. Retrieved May 29, 2023. Sony Pictures France [@SonyPicturesFr] (May 30, 2023). "Ce soir c'est l'avant-première de #SpiderManAcrossTheSpiderVerse au cinéma @LeGrandRex 🔥 Rejoignez la Spider-Force 🕷️" [Tonight is the premiere of #SpiderManAcrossTheSpiderVerse at @LeGrandRex 🔥 Join the Spider-Force 🕷️] (Tweet) (in French). Archived from the original on May 31, 2023 – via Twitter. Tavares, Joanna (May 31, 2023). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' premiere in L.A." New York Daily News. Archived from the original on May 31, 2023. Retrieved May 31, 2023. McCall, Kevin (January 3, 2024). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Swings Back to IMAX Theaters This Month". Collider. Retrieved January 20, 2024. "Columbia Pictures Centennial Animated Logo To Debut On SPIDER-MAN™: ACROSS THE SPIDER-VERSE Re-Release On January 19". Sony Pictures. January 16, 2024. Retrieved February 9, 2024. As Columbia Pictures celebrates its 100-year legacy, critically acclaimed and box office smash hit film Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse will be re-released in theaters on January 19, 2024, with the Columbia Pictures animated centennial logo making its theatrical debut. Fan, Xu (June 1, 2023). "Web of intrigue and action hits screens". China Daily. Archived from the original on June 1, 2023. Retrieved June 3, 2023. White, Abbey (June 15, 2023). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Blocked From Release in UAE". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 16, 2023. Retrieved June 16, 2023. Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse has been blocked from release in the United Arab Emirates ... apparently fallen foul of the country's censorship laws due in part to the blink-and-you-miss-it protect trans lives poster featured in the background of one frame, according to a source familiar with the situation. Asmelash, Leah (June 11, 2023). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' may have a trans character. Here's why fans say it matters". CNN. Archived from the original on June 11, 2023. Retrieved June 20, 2023. Murphy, J. Kim (June 16, 2023). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Banned in United Arab Emirates, Likely Due to 'Protect Trans Lives' Poster". Variety. Archived from the original on June 16, 2023. Retrieved June 23, 2023. Shanfeld, Ethan (June 9, 2023). "Sony Sent Updated Version of 'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' to Movie Theaters After Sound Complaints". Variety. Archived from the original on June 9, 2023. Retrieved June 23, 2023. Romanchick, Shane (June 9, 2023). "Sony Fixes 'Across the Spider-Verse' Sound Issues". Collider. Archived from the original on June 9, 2023. Retrieved June 23, 2023. Ankers-Range, Adele (June 23, 2023). "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse Has at Least Two Different Versions Playing in Theaters". IGN. Archived from the original on June 23, 2023. Retrieved June 23, 2023. Arnold, Thomas K. (August 1, 2023). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Gets Home Release Dates on Digital, Disc". Media Play News. Archived from the original on August 8, 2023. Retrieved August 8, 2023. Burlingame, Russ (August 11, 2023). "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse Changes Confusing Fans After Digital Release". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 11, 2023. Retrieved August 11, 2023. Russell, Bradley (August 15, 2023). "Across the Spider-Verse producers Lord & Miller reveal why the home release is different to the one you watched in theaters". Total Film. GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on August 15, 2023. Retrieved August 15, 2023. Ankers-Range, Adele (August 11, 2023). "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse Cuts Dialogue, Leaving Fans Confused and Upset". IGN Nordic. Archived from the original on September 7, 2023. Retrieved September 7, 2023. Galuppo, Mia (April 8, 2021). "Netflix Nabs Post-PVOD Streaming Rights to Sony's Feature Films in Multiyear Deal". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 8, 2021. Retrieved April 9, 2021. Hayes, Dade (April 21, 2021). "Disney And Sony Reach Windows Deal That Can Sling 'Spider-Man' To Disney+ For First Time, Along With Reach Across Hulu, ABC, FX & More". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 21, 2021. Retrieved April 21, 2021. "Netflix and Sony Pictures Entertainment Sign Pay-One U.S. Licensing Deal for Feature Films" (Press release). California: Sony Pictures Entertainment. April 8, 2021. Archived from the original on April 8, 2021. Retrieved December 28, 2021. This new agreement builds upon Netflix's pre-existing output deal with Sony Pictures Animation films to now include all SPE film labels and genres. Couch, Aaron (April 21, 2021). "Sony Films Will Move to Disney After Netflix Window Expires". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 21, 2021. Retrieved April 21, 2021. Rubin, Rebecca (October 17, 2023). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Sets Netflix Streaming Debut". Variety. Archived from the original on November 2, 2023. Retrieved November 2, 2023. "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse". The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Retrieved September 11, 2023. Rubin, Rebecca (June 11, 2023). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Surpasses First Film's Entire Box Office Total After Just 12 Days". Variety. Archived from the original on June 11, 2023. Retrieved June 11, 2023. Perine, Aaron (June 29, 2023). "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse Now Sony Pictures Animation's Highest-Grossing Film". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 29, 2023. Retrieved June 30, 2023. Lang, Brett (May 30, 2023). "Box Office: Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse Swinging to $80 Million Opening, The Boogeyman Eyeing $15 Million Debut". Variety. Archived from the original on May 30, 2023. Retrieved May 30, 2023. Moreau, Jordan (June 2, 2023). "Box Office: Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse Webs $17.35 Million in Previews". Variety. Archived from the original on June 2, 2023. Retrieved June 2, 2023. Murphy, J. Kim (June 3, 2023). "Box Office: 'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Spots Spectacular $51.7 Million Opening Day". Variety. Archived from the original on June 3, 2023. Retrieved June 3, 2023. "Domestic 2023 Weekend 22". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on June 4, 2023. Retrieved June 4, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (June 4, 2023). "Spider-Man: Across The Spider-Verse Swings To Best Opening Of Summer YTD With $120M+ Beating Guardians – Updated Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 4, 2023. Retrieved June 4, 2023. Fuster, Jeremy (June 4, 2023). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Weaves a Big Box Office Web With $120.5 Million Opening". TheWrap. Archived from the original on June 4, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (June 11, 2023). "'Transformers: Rise of the Beasts' Conquers 'Spider-Verse' With $60M+ Opening, But Animated Pic's Second Weekend Hold Strong – Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 26, 2023. Retrieved June 11, 2023. Rubin, Rebecca (June 18, 2023). "'The Flash' Disappoints With $55 Million Debut, Pixar's 'Elemental' Flops With $29.5 Million in Battle of Box Office Lightweights". Variety. Archived from the original on June 18, 2023. Retrieved June 18, 2023. Rubin, Rebecca (June 25, 2023). "'Spider-Verse' Returns to No. 1 as 'The Flash' Collapses by 73% and Jennifer Lawrence's 'No Hard Feelings' Opens to $15 Million". Variety. Archived from the original on June 25, 2023. Retrieved June 25, 2023. Tartaglione, Nancy (June 4, 2023). "'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Snares $209M Global Bow – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 4, 2023. Retrieved June 4, 2023. Tartaglione, Nancy (June 11, 2023). "'Transformers: Rise of the Beasts' Pounces On $171M Global Bow; 'Across the Spider-Verse' Nears $400M WW – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 11, 2023. Retrieved June 11, 2023. Tartaglione, Nancy (June 18, 2023). "'The Flash' Shuffles To Sluggish $139M Global Bow, 'Elemental' Not All Wet Overseas – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 18, 2023. Retrieved June 18, 2023. Tartaglione, Nancy (July 9, 2023). "'Insidious: The Red Door' Scares Up Best Overseas Horror Bow Since 2019; 'Indiana Jones' Moves Dial To $248M Global; 'Elemental' Catching Fire Offshore; 'Fast X' Tops $700M WW – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 9, 2023. Retrieved July 9, 2023. "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved January 30, 2024. "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved June 2, 2023. Tallerico, Brian (May 31, 2023). "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse movie review and film summary". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on June 1, 2023. Retrieved June 1, 2023. Hornaday, Ann (May 31, 2023). "Spider-Man 'Spider-Verse' sequel: Overstuffed, but wow, those visuals". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 31, 2023. Retrieved June 1, 2023. Roeper, Richard (May 31, 2023). "'Across the Spider-Verse' amazes with its many, visually glorious worlds". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on June 1, 2023. Retrieved June 1, 2023. Maher, Kevin (June 1, 2023). "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse review — plenty of postmodern pizzazz". The Times. Archived from the original on June 1, 2023. Retrieved June 1, 2023. Fear, David (May 31, 2023). "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse Is Pure Superhero-Movie Bliss". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 1, 2023. Retrieved June 1, 2023. Willmore, Alison (June 2, 2023). "The Joyous Spectacle of Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse". Vulture. Archived from the original on June 3, 2023. Retrieved June 3, 2023. Sims, David (June 2, 2023). "A Spidey Sense We Haven't Seen Before". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on June 3, 2023. Retrieved June 3, 2023. Smith, Kyle (June 1, 2023). "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse Review: A Tangled Web". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on June 22, 2023. Retrieved June 3, 2023. Wilson, Jake (June 1, 2023). "The new Spider-Man is utterly bewildering – but it's all part of the plan". The Age. Archived from the original on June 3, 2023. Retrieved June 3, 2023. Reynolds, Maca (May 25, 2023). "Guillermo del Toro Joins the Critics in Praising Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse". Movieweb. Archived from the original on May 25, 2023. Retrieved December 7, 2023. Rangel, Felipe (November 7, 2023). "Andrew Garfield Praises Spider-Man: Across The Spider-Verse As "A Masterpiece Of Pure Cinema"". screen Rant. Archived from the original on December 8, 2023. Retrieved December 7, 2023. Howard, Bryce Dallas [@BryceDHoward] (June 4, 2023). "As a former Gwen Stacy, can I just say: RUN DON'T WALK to see "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse"! Bravo to the entire creative team! An astonishing film on every level. My pops and I are already itching for the next! Congrats:)⁣ @SpiderVerse @RealRonHoward" (Tweet). Archived from the original on December 7, 2023. Retrieved December 7, 2023 – via Twitter. "Kung Fu Panda 4 Takes Inspiration From the Spider-Verse Movies, New Image Released". November 5, 2024. Abad-Santos, Alex (June 7, 2023). "Why Spider-Verse fans see Gwen Stacy as a transgender allegory". Vox. Archived from the original on June 7, 2023. Retrieved June 23, 2023. Stedman, Alex (June 7, 2023). "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse Fans Are Convinced Gwen Stacy's Storyline Is a Transgender One". IGN. Archived from the original on June 7, 2023. Retrieved June 23, 2023. Kaur, Dina (June 21, 2023). "What is a canon event? The latest relatable TikTok trend explained". The Arizona Republic. Archived from the original on June 22, 2023. Retrieved October 21, 2023. Kuo, Christopher (July 11, 2023). "The Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse TikTok Trend That Almost Wasn't". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 11, 2023. Retrieved October 21, 2023. Boseley, Matilda (June 15, 2023). "'A form of acceptance': TikTok's new trend of 'canon events'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on June 15, 2023. Retrieved October 22, 2023. Outlaw, Kofi (June 22, 2023). "TikTok is Still Obsessing Over 'Canon Events' After Across the Spider-Verse". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 23, 2023. Retrieved October 22, 2023. Khomami, Nadia (December 4, 2023). "Gen Z slang for charm or attractiveness sees off 'Swiftie', 'situationship' and 'prompt' in judges' decision". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 5, 2023. Retrieved December 5, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Nordyke, Kimberly (March 10, 2024). "Oscars: Full List of Winners". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 11, 2024. Retrieved March 11, 2024. Lewis, Hilary (February 17, 2024). "Annie Awards: Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse Leads With 7 Wins, Including Best Feature". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 18, 2024. Retrieved February 18, 2024. Szalai, George (January 18, 2024). "BAFTA Awards: Oppenheimer Leads With 13 Nominations, Poor Things Earns 11". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 18, 2024. Retrieved January 23, 2024. Nordyke, Kimberly (January 14, 2024). "Critics Choice Awards: Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 15, 2024. Retrieved January 18, 2024. Nordyke, Kimberly (January 7, 2024). "Golden Globes: Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 8, 2024. Retrieved January 10, 2024. Vlessing, Etan (December 7, 2023). "Barbie, Oppenheimer Among AFI 2023 Film and TV Award Honorees". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 7, 2023. Retrieved December 7, 2023. "'Killers of the Flower Moon' Named Best Picture by National Board of Review, Lily Gladstone and Paul Giamatti Nab Top Acting Honors". Variety. December 6, 2023. "The 62 Best Animated Movies of the 21st Century, from 'Marcel the Shell' to 'The Boy and the Heron'". IndieWire. November 22, 2023. Brail, Nathaniel (June 29, 2023). "Spider-Man: Beyond the Spider-Verse Producers Address Sequel's Release Date (Exclusive)". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 30, 2023. Retrieved July 5, 2023. Donnelly, Matt (July 28, 2023). "'Beyond the Spider-Verse' Taken Off Sony Release Calendar as Strikes Delay 'Kraven' and 'Ghostbusters' Sequel to 2024". Variety. Archived from the original on July 28, 2023. Retrieved July 28, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony; Kroll, Justin (November 8, 2023). "'Deadpool 3', 'Gladiator 2', 'Beetlejuice 2', 'Juror No. 2' & 'Venom 3' Among Film Productions To Restart ASAP As Hollywood Gets Back To Work Post-Strike". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 8, 2023. Retrieved November 16, 2023. Malkin, Marc (May 31, 2023). "'Spider-Man' Producers Tease Live-Action Miles Morales Movie and Animated 'Spider-Woman' Film: 'It's All Happening'". Variety. Archived from the original on May 31, 2023. Retrieved May 31, 2023. Pineda, Rafael Antonio (May 30, 2023). "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse Film Gets Manga Spinoff About Doc Ock in Schoolgirl's Body". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on May 30, 2023. Retrieved May 30, 2023. Furuhashi, Hideyuki (w), Court, Betten (a). Spider-Man: Octopus Girl, vol. 1, no. 1 (June 20, 2023). Shōnen Jump+. Mateo, Alex (February 2, 2024). "Viz Media Licenses Trillion Game, Otaku Vampire's Love Bite, Spider-Man: Octo Girl, X-Men, More Manga for Fall 2024". Anime News Network. Retrieved February 2, 2024. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse. Wikiquote has quotations related to Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse. Official website Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse at IMDb Portals:  Film  Animation  Comics  Speculative fiction  United States