Oggy and the Cockroaches: The Movie (French: Oggy et les Cafards: Le Film) is a 2013 French animated anthology comedy film directed and written by Olivier Jean-Marie, that premiered in France on August 7, 2013, to May 20-7. The film is based on the series Oggy and the Cockroaches, a silent slapstick comedy series similar to that of Hanna-Barbera's Tom and Jerry. This is the last film Olivier Jean-Marie made before his death on May 13, 2021. The film revolves around the eponymous characters' adventures throughout four timelines, composed of self-contained stories in a chronological order. These stories also feature Jack, Bob and Olivia. The basis of the movie also became the theme of the fifth season of Oggy and the Cockroaches, which also took place in a variety of countries, like Ancient Egypt and China, within three, separately self-contained episodes. Within opening text vaguely stating an "extremely long time ago", a blue amoeba forms in the sea of a mysterious, unevolved planet. This amoeba is revealed to be Oggy, whose appearance gets made fun of by three other amoeba – Joey, Dee Dee and Marky. Distraught, Oggy chases after the pesky trio. These amoebae then slowly evolve into cats and three cockroaches, respectively, to which Oggy ends up having to chase after them on a desert island. Oggy Magnon In 120 Kya, the cats evolved into neanderthals, and live in villages . Oggy and Jack have to obtain fire for the tribe's chief, after Oggy accidentally snuffs out the fire trying to catch the cockroaches. However, it is revealed Oggy dislikes the idea, due to a bad childhood memory. They however, are made to comply. Oggy and Jack hike to the volcano, with the cockroaches causing problems for them. After scaling the volcano, Oggy descends into the volcano, and finds that the inside is lush. Oggy passes out, and is then captured by a group of hyenas. The hyenas take Oggy to their leader Bob, who decides to eat him. But, Oggy is saved by Olivia, who nurses him. Oggy bonds with Olivia, while Jack descends and meets her. The cockroaches lead Bob and his group to the trio, and Jack and Olivia are captured. Oggy makes a torch and saves the two, and trio are able to escape Bob. Upon arriving at the village, give to fire to the chief and the day is saved. In the medieval story "Prince Oggy II", Oggy and Jack work together to try and succeed at quests from Oggy's father, a noble figure and king, who also defeated the detested cockroach king. The two also discover forest-dwelling Olivia, who was to be assigned a princess, but later is kidnapped and held captive in a castle by the cockroaches. In "The Incredible Jack Holmes & Oggy Watson", based on the story Sherlock Holmes, Dee Dee and Marky steal Olivia's key to Big Ben. She thus asks the detective Jack Holmes for help, with Oggy Watson helping out on their adventure as much as he can. With London's year coming to an end, hijinx ensues. In "Oggy-Wan Kenoggy", parodying Star Wars and the film Star Wars: A New Hope, Oggy-Wan Kenoggy (with the help of Jack) traverses through space itself to hijack a ship. Tasked to stop Bob Vader from trying to destroy the world, he readies himself with his lightsaber. However, Bob has another idea; he sends out his troops, the three cockroaches. It doesn't go as they might expect. After the fourth timeline ends with a large explosion, Bob cries in frustration at the sight of his now-destroyed ship and the eponymous characters end up falling into a vast ocean. They evolve from small amoebas to a cat and a trio of cockroaches, once more. However, an offscreen incident Oggy yowls from sends the cockroaches into laughter. Some of the characters' voices were provided from audio recorded by Hugues Le Bars, who composed for the original series. Each timeline assigns them a different role. One of these characters, Olivia, only appears in three timelines. Oggy - The main protagonist of the film's segments The cockroaches - The main antagonists of the first three segments, except "Oggy-Wan Kenoggy" Joey - The leader, who doesn't plan anything only in "Oggy-Wan Kenoggy" Dee Dee - The glutton, more focused on fiendish plans Marky - Mainly assists Joey Jack - Oggy's cousin, who often aids him throughout the adventure Bob - A minor antagonist in "Oggy Magnon", "Prince Oggy II", a minor character in "Jack Holmes", and the main antagonist in "Oggy-Wan Kenoggy" Olivia - A kind-hearted cat, who is an aiding protagonist in "Oggy Magnon", "Prince Oggy II", and "Jack Holmes" The soundtrack of the film was released in August 5, 2013, composed by Vincent Artaud, who was a composer on other Xilam titles like Hubert and Takako and FloopaLoo, Where Are You?. The Paris Symphonic Orchestra helped bring the score to life, with the opening theme from Hugues Le Bars rearranged and extended by Artaud. The film was released in France on August 7, 2013. In the United Kingdom and Ireland, it was released on May 20, 2014. In India it was released on December 21, 2014, on Cartoon Network later it was also released on Sony YAY! on October 25, 2021. Oggy and the Cockroaches: The Movie was released on DVD and Blu-ray on December 7, 2013. The film was officially released onto YouTube, free to watch, on November 11, 2019. "Backup Media". "Oggy and the Cockroaches: The Movie". "Oggy and the Cockroaches". Movie Insider. June 12, 2012. "Oggy and the Cockroaches, the Movie". Xilam. Archived from the original on 2014-08-02. Retrieved 2014-04-30. "This Monday, is going to be a fun-day! Enjoy your afternoon with the Oggy and The Cockroaches Movie, 25th October 1:30PM only on Sony YAY!". Retrieved 2021-10-23. "Oggy et les cafards : Le Film: Amazon.fr: Oliver Jean-Marie: Gateway". www.amazon.fr. Retrieved 6 September 2019. "Oggy and the Cockroaches - THE MOVIE 🎬". YouTube. Oggy et les Cafards at IMDb Oggy and the Cockroaches: The Movie at Rotten Tomatoes