Fast X (also known as Fast & Furious 10) is a 2023 American action film directed by Louis Leterrier from a screenplay written by Dan Mazeau and Justin Lin, both of whom also co-wrote the story with Zach Dean. It is the sequel to F9 (2021), the tenth main installment, and the eleventh installment overall in the Fast & Furious franchise. It stars Vin Diesel as Dominic Toretto alongside an ensemble cast including Michelle Rodriguez, Tyrese Gibson, Chris "Ludacris" Bridges, John Cena, Nathalie Emmanuel, Jordana Brewster, Sung Kang, Scott Eastwood, Daniela Melchior, Alan Ritchson, Helen Mirren, Brie Larson, Rita Moreno, Jason Statham, Jason Momoa, and Charlize Theron. In the film, Toretto must protect his family from Dante Reyes (Momoa), who seeks revenge for his father's death and the loss of his family's fortunes. With a tenth film planned since 2014 and a two-part finale planned since October 2020, Lin was confirmed to return to direct with the main cast attached. The film's official title was revealed when principal photography began in April 2022. Lin left as director later that month citing creative differences, though he retained writing and producing credits. Leterrier was then hired as his replacement a week later and performed several uncredited rewrites to the screenplay. Longtime franchise composer Brian Tyler returned to score the film. With an estimated production budget of $340 million, Fast X is the eighth-most expensive film ever made. Filming lasted until that August, taking place in London, Rome, Turin, other Italian cities, Lisbon, and Los Angeles. Fast X premiered in Rome on May 12, 2023, and was released in the United States on May 19, by Universal Pictures. The film received mixed reviews from critics, with praise for its action sequences and Momoa's performance but criticism towards the writing. It grossed $714 million worldwide, becoming the fifth-highest-grossing film of 2023. A sequel that reportedly serves as the final main installment is in development and is scheduled to be released on April 4, 2025. Dominic Toretto and his team are requested by the Agency to steal a computer chip during its transit in Rome. Dom and his wife Letty Ortiz stay behind with his son Brian "Little B" Marcos, while the rest of the team, consisting of Roman Pearce, Tej Parker, Han Lue, and Ramsey, travels to Rome. A wounded Cipher arrives at Dom's home in the middle of the night and informs him and Letty that Dante Reyes, the son of drug lord Hernan Reyes, has turned her crew against her and is using them to target Dom as revenge for his father's death and the loss of his family's fortune ten years prior. The next morning, when Dom informs Little Nobody of the Rome mission, a stupefied and confused Little Nobody says that there is no Agency mission in Rome. Dom and Letty realize that Dante set them up and they go to rescue the team with Little Nobody. In Rome, Tej and Ramsey break into a truck which they believe is carrying the computer chip. However, Dante begins remotely controlling the truck, and Tej and Ramsey realize that a DM-79 sub-nautical neutron mine is in the storage. Dante activates the bomb and releases it into the streets. Dom arrives and pushes it into the Tiber River, minimizing the damage, but Letty is arrested. Agent Aimes, the Agency's de facto leader since Mr. Nobody's disappearance, believes that Dom and his team are responsible for the bombing and begins a manhunt. In Los Angeles, Dom and Mia's brother Jakob rescues Little B and Mia, his and Dom's sister, from a squad sent by Dante to kidnap Little B, and with Mia's approval, takes Little B to a secret location in Portugal, where they will await Dom. Mr. Nobody's daughter, Tess, is convinced of the team's innocence and uses God's Eye to find Dom in Naples, informing him that Dante is in Rio de Janeiro. There, Dom confronts Dante and meets Isabel Neves, the sister of Little B's late mother Elena. Dom later challenges Dante to a race, along with Isabel and his ally, Diogo. However, Dante wins while killing Diogo and injuring Isabel. Tess visits Letty at the black site and covertly wounds her to send her to the prison's treatment center, where Letty meets Cipher. They discover the black site is located in Antarctica and they must work together to escape. In London, Dom's team turns to Deckard Shaw for help, through the convincing of Han after a scuffle between himself and Deckard. Dom gets caught in Rio by Aimes but they both get intercepted by Dante on the same bridge where Luke Hobbs killed his father. Tess gets injured by a sniper and Dante steals God's Eye from Tess. While Tess is taken to the hospital, Aimes joins forces with Dom to fight Dante. Dante locates Little B in Portugal and kidnaps him. As Dom is cornered by mercenaries, Jakob sacrifices his life to take them all out, allowing Dom to rescue his son. Dante again corners Dom and his son, just as Roman, Tej, Han, and Ramsey arrive by plane to aid Dom. Realizing too late, Dom orders Roman to turn the plane around, but Aimes, revealed to be working with Dante, shoots down the plane and Dom drives off the edge of the dam they are on to avoid another trap, but Dante has the dam rigged with explosives and arms them. In Antarctica, Gisele Yashar, who was presumed dead, emerges from a submarine to rescue Letty and Cipher. In a mid-credits scene, Hobbs infiltrates an abandoned theatre with a team of agents where he is contacted by Dante, who tells him that he will be his next target for killing his father, with Hobbs replying he is not hard to find. Vin Diesel as Dominic Toretto: A former criminal and professional street racer who has retired and settled down with his wife, Letty Ortiz, and his son, Brian Marcos. In an interview, Louis Leterrier described Fast X as exploring the fallout of Dom's actions in previous installments, saying "[Dom] has fought so hard to keep faith and protect family [but] there is a price to pay. His enemies are coming after him". Michelle Rodriguez as Letty Ortiz: Dom's wife and a former criminal and professional street racer. Tyrese Gibson as Roman Pearce: An ex-habitual offender, expert street racer, and a member of Dom's team. Chris "Ludacris" Bridges as Tej Parker: A tech expert, mechanic, and a member of Dom's team. John Cena as Jakob Toretto: Dom and Mia's brother and a master thief, assassin, and high-performance driver who once worked as an agent for Mr. Nobody. He has since reformed into a kinder person, sharing a loving relationship with his nephew, Little Brian. Nathalie Emmanuel as Ramsey: A computer hacktivist and a member of Dom's team. Emmanuel said that the character would see increased involvement in Fast X compared to the previous films. Jordana Brewster as Mia Toretto: Dom and Jakob's sister and a member of Dom's team who has two children with her partner, Brian O'Conner. Sung Kang as Han Lue: An expert drifter and member of Dom's team who previously faked his death during a covert operation for Mr. Nobody. Scott Eastwood as Little Nobody: A government law enforcement agent who worked under Mr. Nobody. Daniela Melchior as Isabel Neves: A Brazilian street racer and the sister of Dom's former girlfriend and Little B's mother, Elena Neves. Alan Ritchson as Aimes: The new leader of Mr. Nobody's agency who is covertly working with Dante. In early drafts, Aimes and Dante were brothers, and Ritchson revealed the film's plot twist was filmed alongside another ending, saying, "Aimes wouldn't care [if] he's evil [if] his methods made him feel like he was a good guy". Helen Mirren as Magdalene "Queenie" Ellmanson-Shaw: The leader of a female militia and an ally of Dom, as well as the mother of his former enemies Deckard and Owen. Mirren drew inspiration for the character from her aunt (also nicknamed Queenie) and from her performance as Queen Elizabeth II in The Queen (2006). Brie Larson as Tess: Mr. Nobody's daughter and agent who allies with Dom and his crew. According to Diesel, Larson drew inspiration from his daughter, Pauline, for the character. Rita Moreno as Abuelita Toretto: Dom, Jakob, and Mia's paternal grandmother. Jason Statham as Deckard Shaw: A former opponent of Dom and his team, who became an ally and new member after saving his son. Deckard's younger brother, Owen, was hospitalized working for Cipher. Jason Momoa as Dante Reyes: The son of drug lord Hernan Reyes, seeking revenge against Dom and his crew for the death of his father and loss of his family's fortune in Fast Five (2011). Momoa described the character as Dom's foil, saying Dante is "very sadistic and androgynous and he's a bit of a peacock... He's got a lot of issues. He's definitely got some daddy issues". Momoa expressed a desire to play against type when portraying Dante, taking on a "less macho" character, and he performed his own stunts for the film. Charlize Theron as Cipher: A criminal mastermind and cyberterrorist who was previously an enemy of Dom's team. Leterrier described Cipher as the "devil", and speaking on her dynamic with Dante, Leterrier said, "They are bad news, but one is more afraid than the other. One is worse news than the other". Gal Gadot and Dwayne Johnson reprise their roles from the franchise uncredited as Gisele Yashar and Luke Hobbs during the final scene and mid-credits scene, respectively. Joaquim de Almeida reprises his role as Hernan Reyes, a ruthless drug lord and Dante's father, from Fast Five, while Leo Abelo Perry portrays Brian "Little B" Marcos, Dom's son. Luis Da Silva reprises his role from Fast Five as Diogo, a Brazilian street racer who allies with Dom and his crew. Making cameo appearances are Brazilian singer Ludmilla as a race starter in Rio de Janeiro, Pete Davidson as Bowie, a friend of Ramsey, Paul Walker's daughter Meadow as a flight attendant helping Jakob, and Debby Ryan and Josh Dun (credited as themselves) as a couple in an airport. In November 2014, Universal Pictures chairwoman Donna Langley said there would be at least three more films in the Fast & Furious franchise after Furious 7 (2015). In April 2017, producer Neal H. Moritz stated that the tenth entry would serve as the finale for the franchise with Chris Morgan attached as screenwriter. In October 2017, Justin Lin entered negotiations to direct the ninth and tenth installments after directing four films in the series. In February 2020, Vin Diesel hinted the film could be split in two, which he confirmed in an April 2021 press conference, stating, "There's so much ground to cover and so many places in so many locations that we have to visit" as the rationale behind the decision for a two-part finale. Prior to production, Diesel announced filming would take place in Italy, stating, "I was asked, 'Would there ever be a Fast where you could film in Italy?', and I [promised] we would". While Morgan ultimately did not return as screenwriter, it was confirmed he would serve as an executive producer on the film, alongside Joseph M. Caracciolo, Jr., David Cain, Amanda Lewis, and Mark Bomback. By April 2022, a new screenplay draft was written by Lin and Dan Mazeau. On June 5, 2022, Tyrese Gibson announced Fast X would see the franchise "going back to its roots", with reports indicating this to be a return to street racing elements of previous entries, although shared details the film would also continue to explore the history of the Toretto family in a "similar" vein to F9; Leterrier later revealed the film focuses on increased familial responsibilities, saying, "Dom was always a lone wolf. He was living a quarter mile at a time [but] the stakes are real now. [He is] responsible for a human being, an innocent life [he] brought into the world". Gibson also expressed a desire for the franchise to film in South Africa, stating, "me and Luda always had this idea [that] it's time for us to head to South Africa. It needs real estate in this franchise [because] it [has] a beautiful skyline with ocean. It's the Fast and Furious package". Ludacris later stated his favorite franchise filming location was his home city of Atlanta, Georgia, and revealed that he did not anticipate returning to the franchise after his initial appearance in 2 Fast 2 Furious (2003). During an August 2022 interview with ComicBook, Nathalie Emmanuel said "the stakes are higher on a more personal level in this [film]", indicating a more grounded approach compared to previous installments. In developing the character of Dante, Leterrier revealed they wanted to forge the "anti-Dom", saying, "[Dante] is the yang of [Dom's] yin, the antichrist of his Christ", and wanted to give Dante clear motivation with Dom's role in Dante's origin story, noting, "There are strong ties with [Dante and Dom] and that is what makes an amazing villain because you understand why they became this and [their motivations]". Leterrier noted Larson's character as also being influenced by "the generational legacy of the characters", saying, "Everybody [in the franchise] has a different point of view on Dom and his own influence on their lives. And that's how she [fits in]". Describing the film's retcon of Fast Five (2011), Leterrier said it was to "explore the price of justice", noting, "[We] Rashomon'ed [the fifth film] to experience it through the eyes of Reyes, with Dom and Brian the thieves. We [wanted to] guide the audience to rethink everything they've experienced in the franchise [because] a good antagonist has their own truth, [separate] from the protagonists". Leterrier noted the film touches on each previous installment, saying, "The snowball [of Dom's actions] has picked up speed and became an avalanche", and said his favorite film in the franchise is Fast Five. Leterrier later revealed he performed several uncredited rewrites to the entire screenplay on his initial travel to the set, stating he lacked sleep for the first four days he worked on the film. During the film's early promotional run, Leterrier said Fast X explores the potential breakup of family, noting "people are going to need to take sides [and] alliances will need to be made" compounded by "[the] war brewing" between the characters, saying "there will be some tremendous casualties". He later confirmed the film will end on a cliffhanger, and further hinted at character deaths, saying, "The beauty of the end of this franchise [is] understanding these characters will [not] live forever. Only in Westerns do cowboys gallop out into the sunset. This is different; the stakes even more than they've been before". This was seemingly confirmed by Michelle Rodriguez, who considered the fan reaction to the ending, saying, "You're going to feel so cheated in a way, but then so gratified and excited about what's to come. After 23 years of [making films], it's really tough at this stage to shock me, and they got me good". She reiterated this in a promotional interview with Collider for Dungeons & Dragons: Honor Among Thieves (2023), saying the ending of Fast X would "[leave] people really surprised and we're [going to] get open mouths at the end. In [the] theater, I was like, 'Oh my god. What have we done?!'". In an interview with Collider, Universal Pictures producer Kelly McCormick stated the impact of COVID-19 and the production schedules of "our interfering projects" (like Fast X and its sequel) caused delays in developing the sequel to Fast & Furious Presents: Hobbs & Shaw (2019). Filming in Turin required the Film Commission Torino Piemonte, local authorities, and city councilors to conduct a five-month planning schedule from September 2021 to January 2022, collaborating with the Departments of Culture to coordinate the city's major events, roads and transport, public, and security around filming requirements. Such planning included managing the overflight of drones and limitations on circulation made necessary for the management and safety of the set. Fast X is the first film in the series to feature electric cars, with leaked set photos featuring the 2024 Dodge Charger Daytona SRT Banshee Concept and the gull-winged DeLorean Alpha5. Other vehicles set to feature include the 2022 TorRed Dodge Charger R/T, the 2023 Dodge Charger SRT Hellcat Redeye, and the 1970 Charger R/T, the latter a franchise staple. On June 27, 2022, it was reported Fast X would include the fan favorite orange and black Veilside Mazda RX-7 FD Fortune, which first featured in The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift (2006). The inclusion of the electric Dodge Chargers in the film was confirmed upon release of the first trailer on February 9, 2023, with the "Greys of Thunder" Dodge Charger Daytona SRT also appearing in other promotional material. In an interview with Fox News, a Dodge spokesperson said the company "has a long-standing marketing partnership with Fast & Furious", which will continue with Fast X. Other vehicles expected to feature in the film include the foreign-made Lamborghini Gallardo, Alfa Romeo 159, Nissan Silvia, Porsche 911 997 GT3 RS, Pagani Huayra Tricolore, and the Datsun 240Z, as well as the U.S.-made Chevrolet Impala and El Camino, Lenco BearCat Armoured Vehicle, and the 1966 Ford Fairlane. In an interview with vehicle co-ordinator Dennis McCarthy, who worked on every Fast & Furious film since Tokyo Drift (2006), each significant car featured on screen required around seven duplicates, resulting in an estimated 200 cars built for Fast X to race-car standards required for the stunt work. In April 2023, Momoa revealed that he personally contacted Jochen Zeitz, the CEO of Harley-Davidson, to secure six motorcycles to be used in the film for his character. He is seen riding the Harley-Davidson Pan America throughout the movie, which was modified with an upgraded exhaust system and extra shielding. In June 2021, Diesel announced the film would be split in a two-part culmination to the franchise, with principal photography slated to begin in January 2022 and take place back-to-back. In December 2021, Dwayne Johnson ruled out returning for Fast X, and labeled an Instagram post by Diesel asking for his return as "manipulation", with publications indicating he was referring to a feud with Diesel stemming from Diesel's role as an executive producer on The Fate of the Furious (2017). He ultimately reprised his role as Luke Hobbs in a mid-credits scene cameo appearance. In early 2022, Jason Momoa was cast as Dante, the villain, while Daniela Melchior, Brie Larson, and Alan Ritchson joined the cast by that April. Keanu Reeves was originally approached to play Aimes, having been previously in talks to join the franchise with the role of the Eteon Director in Hobbs & Shaw, but plans shifted and Ritchson was contacted about taking over the role while filming Ordinary Angels (2024), an offer he considered and accepted once production on that film was halted because of the announcement that the biggest blizzard in Winnipeg's history was coming to the set. Larson was initially hesitant to join another franchise after the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU), saying, "I was scared of what would happen to me [by joining Fast & Furious]. But what I always come back to is, I have to live with myself in a way that nobody else has to. The choices I make, I have to live with, whether I regret them or not", but stated Fast & Furious was her "dream franchise", saying, "I've been begging to be in this for years. Being part of something you've watched your whole life and that you love is an amazing feeling". In a March 2023 interview with Total Film, Larson revealed she would portray Tess, the daughter of government agent and covert operations team leader Mr. Nobody; she described Tess as "a bridge", saying, "she doesn't go along with the Agency. She believes in the legacy her father set up, standing with Dom and the Toretto family". Describing Momoa's addition, director Louis Leterrier said Dante is "an incredible new character. It's 1,000 per cent Momoa", while Michelle Rodriguez said Dante is "malicious but he can be playful. It's like a fresh energy. There's something charming about him". She later labeled Dante as the best male villain in the franchise's history, describing him as "revenge with a smirk". After being cast, Momoa was initially apprehensive over filming conditions due to reports of conflict on set between Diesel and Lin, and said he accepted the role to play against type. In May, Rita Moreno was cast as Abuelita, the grandmother of Dom, Jakob, and Mia, with Leterrier describing her inclusion as the "guiding light that Dom is following", adding, "[Abuelita] is his conscience, [she is one] of the people that keep him grounded. When your grandmother you haven't seen for years gives you a message that becomes guiding for the second part of your life, you listen". In a February 2023 interview with Collider, Moreno's grandson said he pitched for her inclusion in Fast X after he met Diesel at the premiere for West Side Story (2021), which starred Moreno. On December 23, 2022, it was revealed that Gal Gadot, who portrayed Gisele Yashar in three previous installments, filmed a scene for Fast X; according to social media reports, she appeared in one of two versions of the film screened three days prior, with further details about the nature of her return undisclosed. Gadot's potential return was met with mixed reception by fans and critics; some criticized the franchise's history of reviving dead characters to capitalize on star power, labeling it "ineffective" fan service which negatively impacts the previous installments and the story of the franchise. Others were positive about Gadot's potential return, citing her portrayal of one of the franchise's most popular characters. In a February 2023 interview with ComicBook, Sung Kang refused to rule out Gadot's character being resurrected in Fast X. As the final cast rounded out, it sparked debate that it could create a story problem for the film; writing for Screen Rant, Ryan Northrup said, "With such a large cast, it's uncertain whether Fast X will be able to serve [every] character in a satisfying way. With many new and returning characters, [every] arc may not be as fleshed out [and if] new characters aren't given much screen time or development, [it will be] a disappointment. [It may be] up to the finale to rectify [it]". A month later, a leaked email from The Hollywood Reporter revealed some crew returned after principal photography had completed to film a "button or tag" (a mid or post-credits scene) that will feature "a guest cameo". Gadot and Johnson ultimately reprised their roles in cameo appearances. Rodriguez and Diesel later said Gadot's return had been planned for previous installments (going as far as to film unused cameos), with Diesel reasoning the decision to include Gadot in Fast X was done because it "fit the [film]". He also said, "Doing tags is tricky because you want great talent but at the same time you have to be very careful to maintain the emotional state of your audience". Several actors who were reported to be reprising their roles from previous films in Fast X did not end up doing so, including Michael Rooker as Buddy, Cardi B as Leysa, Don Omar as Rico Santos, and Tego Calderón as Tego Leo, respectively. Following the release of the film's trailer on February 9, 2023, Leterrier hinted archival footage featuring Paul Walker from previous films may be used in Fast X, saying, "Brian is very much alive in [this franchise]. This [film] jumps back and forth between the past and the present. You will see Brian in the past, you won't see Brian in the present. [His] family is part of this franchise. It has to be the right moment, the right tone [if] Brian has to re-enter the franchise. [It must be] as perfect as how he left". Regarding Walker's inclusion, Rodriguez said, "It's really hard to [make the films] without a blessing of some sort from [his] family because it's everything. Without that kind of like that love from them, we would be lost". She also revealed Furious 7 (2015) is her favorite film in the franchise, citing its emotional tribute to Walker. Diesel similarly commented on Walker's potential inclusion in the film in a March 2023 interview with Total Film, saying, "[Universal] made a bold, righteous, and daring decision to keep Brian O'Conner alive. I couldn't image this saga ending without truly saying goodbye to Brian". Principal photography began on April 21, 2022, with the film's title being revealed and Michelle Rodriguez, Tyrese Gibson, Chris "Ludacris" Bridges, Jordana Brewster, Nathalie Emmanuel, Sung Kang, and Charlize Theron confirmed to reprise their roles. According to Diesel, an earlier draft excluded Brewster's character, which he overturned. Fast X's production budget was initially reported to be $300 million in May 2022, which was revised to $340 million that November; the cast was reportedly paid $100 million for their involvement, including $20 million for Diesel. Other costs for the rising budget (which factors in tax-incentive offsets) included increases in production costs caused by global inflation and charges for pandemic testing requirements mandated by COVID-19 safety protocols. According to unnamed sources reporting to Radar, Diesel reportedly "stressed" over the increased budget and the creative decisions in Fast X; sources wrote Diesel is considered by Universal as "simultaneously the greatest star [they've] had and their biggest headache" and that "[Diesel] doesn't let anybody forget [how] the Fast & Furious franchise is important to the whole [film] industry". A week after filming commenced, Lin exited the film as director due to "creative differences", leaving primary production stalled. However, Lin remained on board as a producer. Later reports alleged that Lin clashed on set with Diesel, who purportedly arrived out of shape, was often late, and did not remember his lines. Lin was also upset with rewrites to his screenplay, as well as changing filming locations and one of the film's villains having yet to be cast; a disagreement with Diesel reportedly escalated to the point it caused Lin to shout, "This movie is not worth my mental health"; Lin reportedly forewent pay in the region of $10–20 million in his departure. Second unit production remained ongoing in the United Kingdom while the studio sought a replacement director. Universal Pictures reportedly spent $1 million a day to pause production. Former Fast & Furious directors F. Gary Gray and David Leitch, who previously directed The Fate of the Furious and Hobbs & Shaw respectively, were considered by the studio to replace Lin, however neither were likely to step in due to their commitments with Lift and The Fall Guy (both 2024), respectively. Furious 7 director James Wan, who was once considered to direct The Fate of the Furious and F9 but declined due to his straining experience on Furious 7, was also considered a "viable option" but was tied with commitments to Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom (2023), the final DC Extended Universe (DCEU) film. Variety reported hiring an "A-list" director was not probable without drastic changes to the screenplay and Universal would likely turn to a second unit director "well-versed" in big-budget action films. On May 2, 2022, Louis Leterrier was announced as Lin's replacement; he was previously shortlisted by Universal to direct The Fate of the Furious. Leterrier already had an established relationship with the studio, having previously directed the MCU film The Incredible Hulk (2008), and he was knowledgeable about the franchise; he and franchise star Jason Statham went to watch the original film in Paris in 2001 while on a break from filming The Transporter (2002). Leterrier joined filming in London after scheduling and contractual considerations were confirmed; he later revealed he initially rejected the offer to direct the film, labeling it a "massive" task, although later used elements of Lin's original contributions, such as the established crew, as well as Lin's shot lists and storyboards, to complete the film. Production in London concluded in mid-August, with scenes filmed at Warner Bros. Studios, Leavesden. Rodriguez later revealed a fight sequence between her and Theron was shot without a principal director, being done while studio negotiations with Leterrier were ongoing. Ritchson initially thought he would lose the role of Aimes upon being informed by producer Jeff Kirschenbaum about the directing change, but was quickly reassured by Kirschenbaum that he was still cast and that he would just not collaborate with Lin. Describing his style for the film, Leterrier said, "I'm more practical than other directors, and I brought [the franchise] back to earth", revealing he favored more practical stunts (including a return of racing scenes featuring a "vertical quarter mile race") enhanced with visual effects, as opposed to the extensive use of computer-generated imagery (CGI) in the recent installments. Filming took place in Genzano di Roma in mid-May. Filming took place in Rome for two weeks in mid-May, and one week in mid-July, with scenes being shot at the Via Cristoforo Colombo, Lungotevere, Via dei Fori Imperiali, Ponte Umberto I, Ponte Vittorio Emanuele II, and the area around the Castel Sant'Angelo and the Spanish Steps. Filming then took place in Turin between May 24 and June 6, with action sequences filmed at the Piazza Crimea and Corso Fiume, Murazzi del Po, Via Roma, and the Piazza IV Marzo. Momoa began shooting his scenes on May 16. Like previous installments, Diesel supervised writing and design of the film's action sequences; according to unnamed sources to The Hollywood Reporter, Diesel's creative control and frequent last-minute changes reflect "a process [which] is like a mosaic that doesn't stop moving", labeling him "demanding" and a perfectionist. On June 6, it was reported a stuntman was injured in an accident after being hit by part of a car after an explosion. On July 22, in an interview with Deadline Hollywood while at San Diego Comic-Con, Rodriguez announced she had completed filming her scenes and said "only four [or] five weeks [are] left" in production. Filming in Angelino Heights (the location of the Toretto house) faced protest from some local residents after production gave notice of the filming of a sequence which would involve "simulated emergency services activity, aerial photography, wetting down of street and atmospheric smoke". According to those residents, the protest was to raise awareness for road safety education, claiming the franchise caused their neighborhood to become a hot spot for fans to engage in street racing and other dangerous activity. Filming managed to occur following the protest on August 26, while other portions were filmed in Portugal, such as in Lisbon, Almada, Viseu, and Vila Real. In an interview with Lusa News Agency, Conceição Azevedo, the mayor of Viseu, announced filming would take place on IP5, a highway in the Vouzela municipality. Ritchson finished filming his scenes by August 16, and hinted at flying cars in the film, stating "we're going to take it to the sky". During filming, Sofia Noronha, a producer for Sagesse Productions (the company in charge of overseeing production of Fast X in Portugal) said a "brutal economic investment" will be made in the country by the film. Highlighting the weather, affordability through tax breaks, and flexibility of the production, Noronha argued "investments [from film] made in the country is almost double that tax incentive. The [producing] country always benefits". This was echoed during filming in Turin, with it reported the two-week schedule generated €3.8 million for the local economy, coming mainly from expenses related to location rent, hospitality, technical staff and local workforce employment, security and sanitation, and storage and unloading. It was also reported the film regularly brought troupes of close to 400 people (5 times above average for comparable films) and often collaborated with hundreds of local professionals on the research of locations and finalization of the working filming plan. In a statement, Beatrice Borgia, President of Film Commission Torino Piemonte, said "Fast X is a confirmation of the key role Turin and Piedmont has gained in filmmaking. [We have] proved to have all what is needed to host complex productions: skilled professionals, supportive institutions, and amazing locations". Dylan Highsmith and Kelly Matsumoto, both of whom were two of the three co-editors on F9, return as editors. Peter Chiang returns as the visual effects supervisor for the production, after doing so for F9, with DNEG and Industrial Light & Magic as the returning visual effects vendors. In a July 2022 interview with The Hollywood Reporter, Michelle Rodriguez praised the addition of Leterrier and his predominantly French-speaking creative team, labeling it "the French takeover, dude". She stated Leterrier "came with all this energy of love [from] a real fan of [the] franchise who really wants to take it places that it hasn't gone before. It reminds you [how] beautiful and magical [filmmaking] is". Several aerial shots were filmed with first-person view (FPV) drones with an attached WarpCam piloted by Johnny Schaer, similar to the filming techniques that were used for the action sequences in Michael Bay's Ambulance (2022). Schaer previously supervised the drone-led filming in Rawson Marshall Thurber's Red Notice (2021). The filmmakers researched pre-existing and unused footage of Fast Five through Universal's archival department as the film had dailies for "alternate takes and different angles". Such footage was composited to provide changes for Fast X's flashback, integrating the characters into it using motion control photography and CGI. In March 2023, the writing credits were finalized; Mazeau and Lin received screenplay credits, and both shared story credits with Zach Dean. In May 2023, despite his initial refusal to return to the franchise, it was announced that Dwayne Johnson would appear as Luke Hobbs in the movie's mid-credits scene. The first single for the film's soundtrack, "Let's Ride", was released on February 10, 2023, performed by YG, Ty Dolla Sign, and Lambo4oe. The soundtrack features hip hop, pop, reggaeton, electronic rock, and rhythmic Latin tracks. The second song from the film, "Won't Back Down", performed by YoungBoy Never Broke Again, Bailey Zimmerman, and Dermot Kennedy, was released on May 4. The soundtrack of the film was released on May 19, by Artist Partner Group. In March 2023 during post-production, Brian Tyler was returned to composed the film score after he previously scoring some of the film franchise starting with the third installment The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift (2006). The official score album was being released on June 2, 2023, by Back Lot Music. Parts of Fast X previewed at CineEurope in Barcelona in June 2022, including a first look at Jason Momoa and Brie Larson. Speaking of the film, Universal Pictures International President of Distribution, Veronika Kwan Vandenberg, stated the studio's drive was to continue to "cater to the diverse tastes" expected from the franchise. At the 2022 Grio Awards, Tyrese Gibson stated he watched the completed film on October 20, 2022, describing it as "crazy" with "just too much magic", and announced an extended version of the film's trailer would first premiere at Super Bowl LVII on February 12, 2023. This was seemingly confirmed in a December 2022 social media post by Vin Diesel, who wrote the trailer was "less than two months away", and was made it official in January 2023 post. In a January 2023 report by Collider, it was confirmed the first trailer would debut worldwide on February 10, 2023 (after being screened at a private fan event a day prior); it was three minutes long, and was followed with a Super Bowl spot alongside Dungeons & Dragons: Honor Among Thieves, Cocaine Bear, Scream VI, 65, Air, Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3 and The Flash (all 2023). Beginning February 1, to promote the release of the trailer, official recuts of the trailers of each of the previous nine films, dubbed "Legacy Trailers", were released daily in conjunction with IGN. The fan event took place at L.A. Live in downtown Los Angeles, being hosted by Maria Menounos and featuring Diesel, Rodriguez, Gibson, Ludacris, and Cody Walker, the brother of the series' longtime initial star Paul Walker. Similar fan events also took place in Mexico, France, and Japan but did not feature the cast. On February 1, the film's teaser poster was released, depicting Diesel alone in the center, bowing his head and clutching a cross between his fists on a dark to light backdrop. Writing for Collider, Safeeyah Kazi said his positioning depicts "an intense prayer" with the "small amount of light [from the cross] engulfing his fist acting as the optimism in the dark". She also said that the relative simplicity of the poster compared to the "color explosion" for F9 could indicate a grittier storyline in Fast X. Kazi wrote the film's "the end of the road begins" tagline depicted "a new level of intensity", and speculated it could refer to the end for some of the franchise's characters. In an analysis by Matt Singer of WBUF, Singer described the poster as "somber", noting it as "remarkably tense" compared to the posters for other entries in the franchise. Stills from the film detailing Momoa, Larson, and Diesel's characters were publicly released on February 9, and was followed by a teaser showcasing the main cast a day later. The official trailer then released soon after, featuring an orchestral flip of "Notorious Thugs" by The Notorious B.I.G. and Bone Thugs-n-Harmony from the former's album Life After Death (1997). The trailer was mostly positively received; writing for GQ, Grant Rindner labeled the trailer "glorious absurdity", stating it is "as glossy and over-the-top as recent features". He commended the return of racing scenes, saying it "restores the original feeling" of the films, and said the music was an "operatic nail-biter". According to data from social media analytics company RelishMix, the film's Super Bowl trailer (dubbed "The Big Game Trailer") clocked 94.1 million views across social media in the 24-hour period following the game; it was the third most viewed trailer that aired at the event, behind Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3 (134.1 million views) and The Flash (97.4 million). It was the highest-viewed trailer which did not debut at the event, but its view count was down from the 110.9 million views received by F9's Super Bowl trailer in 2020, prior to that film's eventual delay. According to unnamed sources reporting to Variety, the first trailer accumulated an estimated 295 million views globally within the first 72 hours of release; Instagram drove nearly 30% of views, followed by TikTok (25%), Facebook (22%), YouTube (18%) and Twitter (6%), with a majority of viewership coming in from international territories. Fast X also trended as the top topic on Twitter in the U.S. immediately after the trailer debut. Similar to other Fast & Furious releases, Hot Wheels announced a themed basic assortment of cars set to feature in Fast X, which is set to be released with the film. On March 14, 2023, the official theatrical poster was released; writing for Collider, Aidan King positively reviewed the poster, saying the vehicles placed around the characters are similar to a "high-octane drag race", indicating a return to the franchise's history as car-oriented films. He also noted the characters "loom above the drag [race] scene", referencing the franchise's thematic shift away from car culture. Two featurettes were released, first on March 31 and then on April 7, 2023, with the main cast giving a behind-the-scenes look (with previously unseen footage) at the production of the film. An additional featurette highlighting Diesel and Perry's characters was released on May 5, with the pair and Leterrier providing commentary. On April 19, the second full-length trailer and the film's official synopsis was released; it was generally praised by critics for its action and Momoa's presentation. On May 2, a character trailer featuring Diesel and Rodriguez, titled "Fast X: Open Road", was released; writing for /Film, Bill Bria described it as "reflective". The trailer featured elements of Max Richter's "On the Nature of Daylight" and Dinah Washington's contributions from "This Bitter Earth", which Bria said "lent even more gravitas to the Dom/Letty highlight reel". He further praised the combination, stating "visuals so nakedly frivolous and music so achingly earnest" created "an exquisite tension". Two days later, the free to play 8-bit style game Fast X: Let's Race was launched online. The game features multiple top-down race courses set in the film's locations of Los Angeles, Rio de Janeiro, and Rome. Diesel and Rodriguez then appeared in promotional spots at the 2023 Miami Grand Prix, while in the United Kingdom, the film partnered with the Capital radio network to launch a competition for a listener to win a trip to Rome. The extended four and a half-minute final trailer was released on May 15. On May 16, Philips announced a partnership with Universal Pictures in the Philippines, where one could win tickets alongside purchases of an Evnia gaming monitor. Universal also partnered with Frito-Lay's Ruffles to create limited-edition Fast X potato chips, which come with raffle tickets where fans could win a ticket; a lucky prize included the 2023 Dodge Charger R/T. Fast X premiered on May 12, 2023, at the Colosseum in Rome. It was initially scheduled for release on April 2, 2021, but was postponed to April 7, 2023, and finally May 19. These shifts were reportedly made in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which led to F9's eventual postponement to June 2021 that caused Fast X to be indefinitely delayed. It was widely released in IMAX and other premium large formats including ScreenX. The film was cleared for release in China on March 28, 2023, marking one of the first large American films released in the country in 2023; Fast & Furious films have grossed over $1.2 billion in China since the release of Fast & Furious 6 (2013), and was one of the first countries where F9 (2021) was released, being five weeks ahead of its domestic release. Fast X was released by Universal Pictures Home Entertainment on premium video on demand on June 9, 2023; on 4K Ultra HD, Blu-ray, and DVD on August 8; and on Peacock on September 15. Physical copies contain an audio commentary, behind-the-scenes featurettes, a blooper reel, and two music videos. Fast X has grossed $146.1 million in the United States and Canada, and $568.5 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $714.6 million. Prior to its release, TheWrap estimated the film would need to gross $800–850 million worldwide in order to turn a profit. Variety later reported that the film "barely crawled into the black" but would post a modest profit for the studio. In the United States and Canada, tickets went on sale at midnight on February 9, 2023, a day prior to the premiere of the trailer. According to a Fandango study, which surveyed over 6,000 ticket buyers between February and March 2023, Fast X was revealed to be the sixth-most anticipated film of the summer. In April 2023, box office projections estimated that the film would gross $65–75 million in its opening weekend. By the week of its release, estimates had been lowered to $60 million. The film made $28 million on its first day, including $7.5 million from Thursday previews. It went on to debut to $67 million from 4,046 theaters, topping the box office. Writing for TheWrap, Jeremy Fuster predicted that Fast X may be less profitable than some of its predecessors, citing the film's sudden increased overall production budget (at 70% larger than F9) and the expected large marketing budget. In its second weekend, the film made $23 million (dropping 66%), finishing second behind newcomer The Little Mermaid. In its third weekend, Fast X finished in fourth place and made $9.2 million for a drop of 61% behind The Little Mermaid, The Boogeyman and Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse. In the United Kingdom, tickets went on sale on May 5. The film was projected to gross around $280 million worldwide in its opening weekend, including about $220 million from 84 countries. Like its domestic debut, the film ended up slightly out-performing projections, making $252.7 million internationally and a total of $320 million worldwide. It was the sixth-best opening weekend for a studio film since 2019, and second-biggest non-superhero title (behind Avatar: The Way of Water). Its largest markets were China ($78 million), Mexico ($16 million), France ($9.6 million), and Brazil ($9.6 million). The film set records for the highest-opening weekend release for a foreign film in Pakistan, with 19.98 crore ($701,052). On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 56% of 310 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 5.7/10. The website's consensus reads: "As irredeemably silly as it is satisfyingly self-aware, Fast X should rev the engines of longtime fans while leaving many newcomers in neutral." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 56 out of 100, based on 59 critics, indicating "mixed or average" reviews. Audiences surveyed by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale, the same as F9 and the first film but below other installments. PostTrak reported filmgoers gave the film an 82% positive score, with 67% saying they would definitely recommend it. Momoa's performance was widely praised by critics; Eric Eisenberg of CinemaBlend said Momoa "plays Dante like [the] Fast & Furious version of The Joker", concluding it was a "delightful" portrayal of a "gleeful psychopath". Liam Crowley of Comicbook seconded this view, calling Momoa "hilarious", while Screen Rant's Joseph Deckelmeier said Momoa brings "magic" to a performance which "oozes charisma". In a mixed review, Brian Truitt of USA Today also praised Momoa's performance but criticized the screenplay, saying, "Laws of physics are pummeled at length and all logic is shot out of a cannon [with] its bizarre character choices and decisions". The Chicago Sun-Times's Richard Roeper gave the film two out of four stars and was more critical of Momoa's performance, writing, "[He] comes across as more of a preening, performance-art, sociopathic clown than a truly menacing villain". Clarisse Loughrey of The Independent said that an "arbitrary" plot serves a "biblically-scaled soap opera [that] happily rewrites the laws of gravity and physiology to put a smile on its audience's faces", and praised the cast performances, namely Momoa's. In a less positive review, Charles Pulliam-Moore of The Verge criticized the return of former characters, saying the film has "convoluted twists and turns" which contribute to making it feel "exciting, but airless". He also wrote the large cast made its characters "feel like souped-up cameos meant to remind you of the past rather than figures organically existing in the present—especially when they just pop up out of nowhere, which happens more often than you'd expect". He also criticized the screenplay, saying "[Dom and Dante's] conflict ends up feeling like something that was mapped out on paper, but was not crafted tightly enough for on-screen". This was echoed by Den of Geek's Don Kay, who lamented the lack of character beats for the supporting cast and the lack of stakes in the plot, although he praised Cena's performance, writing, "He plays to his comedic strengths and gets by on his sheer charisma". Alison Willmore of Vulture criticized Leterrier's direction, writing the film "plays like it was made by an AI versed in the existing [films] but not quite up to spitting out something coherent itself" and called its plot "deliriously unwieldy". She also criticized its cast as being bloated and its dialogue as feeling "engineered to be clipped and used without context for promotional purposes", concluding watching Fast X "feels like sustaining a head injury". Writing for Slant, Greg Nussen criticized the acting performances and cinematography, calling it "overly lit [with] ultra-saturated images" and wrote that the film was "closer to fan fiction or self-parody than the real deal". Writing for The Wall Street Journal, Kyle Smith also criticized Leterrier's direction as overzealous, saying, "Leterrier rarely misses an opportunity to shred the storyline [to] end up with confetti, serving ridiculous action scenes [that] require much narrative corner-cutting". In a scathing review, GameSpot's Phil Owen said the film possesses "blurry backgrounds and weird close-up shots", negatively comparing it to low-budget films, and called the editing "distractingly frenetic". He also said the storyline "just rehashed plot threads and set pieces from past [films]", criticized the ending, and called Diesel's performance a "full-on parody of himself: [he plays] a bland character". Kevin Maher of The Times called the film a "jaded and lackadaisical patch-up job", criticizing the cast performances, while Rolling Stone's Chris Vognar said that the cast (besides Momoa) "mailed [their] performances in" and called the film uninspiring, writing, "Fast X feels like it was written by a software program". Fast X was nominated in five categories at the 2023 Golden Trailer Awards: "Legacy Ride" (TRANSIT) for Best Action and Best Music, "Last Ride" (AV Squad) for Best Summer 2023 Blockbuster Trailer, "Clash" (TRANSIT) for Best Sound Editing in a TV Spot (for a Feature Film), and "Ensemble Shoot" (AV Squad) for Best Action/Thriller TrailerByte for a Feature Film. It won Best Action TV Spot (for a Feature Film) for "Ahead" (AV Squad). It became a runner-up for Best Supporting Actor (Momoa) and received a nomination for Best Stunts at the 6th Hollywood Critics Association Midseason Film Awards. The film garnered nominations for Best Music Supervision – Film and Best Soundtrack Album at the 14th Hollywood Music in Media Awards. At the 51st Saturn Awards, Fast X received nominations for Best Action or Adventure Film and Best Editing. It was nominated for Best Stunts at the 2nd Astra Film Creative Arts Awards. Vin Diesel received a Worst Actor nomination at the 44th Golden Raspberry Awards. Diesel claimed that Universal approached him to do two sequels to Fast X, depending on its performance. A standalone sequel to Fast X, titled Fast & Furious Presents: Hobbs & Reyes was then announced, with Dwayne Johnson and Jason Momoa set to star. Leterrier considered whether the eleventh film would be the franchise's last installment. While Fast X led to the development of an eleventh film, its budget and modest box office performance meant that the project's continuation would serve as a finale. It was reported that an eleventh film could be "a throwback to the original film", and consist of a single mission and a different antagonist instead of Dante. In February 2024, Diesel confirmed that the eleventh film would be the final installment. Justin Lin, the film's original director, left production in April 2022, after a week through principal photography, due to creative differences. Leterrier took over directing duties in May. Lin remained credited as writer and producer. As depicted in Fast Five (2011) As depicted in F9 (2021) A surveillance computer program capable of tracking people using anything connected to a digital network. Introduced in Furious 7 (2015) and later reappeared in The Fate of the Furious (2017) Elena's death is depicted in The Fate of the Furious (2017) As depicted in Fast & Furious 6 (2013) "Fast X (2023)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on April 3, 2023. Retrieved September 11, 2023. "Fast X". British Board of Film Classification. Archived from the original on May 11, 2023. Retrieved May 10, 2023. Fuster, Jeremy (November 17, 2022). "'Fast X' Budget Has Ballooned to $340 Million". TheWrap. Archived from the original on November 18, 2022. Retrieved January 15, 2023. "Fast X - Financial Information". The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Retrieved December 22, 2023. "Fast X". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved December 22, 2023. Leite, Marcelo (July 12, 2022). "Every Fast & Furious Character Confirmed To Return In Fast X". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 13, 2022. Retrieved July 17, 2022. Travis, Ben (February 9, 2023). "Jason Momoa's Fast X Villain Dante Is '1000% Momoa', Says Louis Leterrier – World-First Images". Empire. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2023. "Fast X - Official 'For Fans and Family' Featurette". IGN. March 31, 2023. Archived from the original on March 31, 2023. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Gonzalez, Umberto (March 21, 2022). "The Suicide Squad Breakout Daniela Melchior in Talks to Join Fast and Furious 10 (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on March 21, 2022. Retrieved March 21, 2022. Kroll, Justin (May 13, 2022). "Fast X: Jack Reacher Star Alan Ritchson Joins Next Installment In Fast & Furious Franchise". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 13, 2022. Retrieved May 13, 2022. Bucksbaum, Sydney (May 22, 2023). "Alan Ritchson on alternate Fast X twist and his shared Aquaman history with Jason Momoa". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 23, 2023. Retrieved May 23, 2023. Sarrubba, Stefania (July 19, 2022). "Fast X set photo confirms another Fast & Furious return". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on July 19, 2022. Retrieved August 15, 2022. "1923 star Helen Mirren on playing Cara Dutton with Harrison Ford, her role in Fast X". CBS News. March 24, 2023. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved March 26, 2023. Chitwood, Adam (April 9, 2022). "Brie Larson Joins Fast & Furious 10". TheWrap. Archived from the original on April 10, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2022. Francis, Kate (February 9, 2023). "Fast X reveals first look at Brie Larson's mysterious new character". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2023. Kurp, Josh (March 27, 2023). "Brie Larson Has Revealed Which Fast And Furious Character She's Playing The Daughter Of In Fast X". Uproxx. Archived from the original on March 27, 2023. Retrieved March 27, 2023. Kurp, Josh (March 23, 2023). "Brie Larson's Fast X Character Is Based On A Member Of Vin Diesel's Actual Family". Uproxx. Archived from the original on March 23, 2023. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Eclarinal, Aeron Mer (April 22, 2023). "Fast & Furious 10 Cast & Characters: 24 Main Actors and Who They Play". The Direct. Archived from the original on May 16, 2023. Retrieved May 16, 2023. Grobar, Matt (May 24, 2022). "Rita Moreno To Play Dominic Toretto's Grandmother In 'Fast X'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 24, 2022. Retrieved May 24, 2022. Lang, Brad (May 24, 2022). "Fast X Adds West Side Story Star Rita Moreno as Vin Diesel's Grandmother". CBR. Archived from the original on October 14, 2022. Retrieved October 14, 2022. @FastFamily (June 16, 2022). "Look who joined the party. #F10 #FAST1 #Jason Statham #Tyrese" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Kit, Borys (January 28, 2022). "Jason Momoa in Talks to Join Vin Diesel in Fast and Furious 10 (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 28, 2022. Retrieved January 28, 2022. Outlaw, Kofi (February 10, 2023). "Fast X Trailer Confirms Jason Momoa's Villain is Deeply Connected to Previous Fast Saga Movie". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on February 10, 2023. Retrieved February 20, 2023. Plant, Logan (February 28, 2023). "Fast X Director Says Jason Momoa's Villain Is 'Pure Chaos'". IGN. Archived from the original on February 28, 2023. Retrieved February 28, 2023. Murphy, J. Kim; Malkin, Marc (August 24, 2022). "Jason Momoa Teases His 'Androgynous' Fast and Furious 10 Villain: 'He's a Bit of a Peacock'". Variety. Archived from the original on November 1, 2022. Retrieved November 1, 2022. Seddon, Dan (January 28, 2023). "Vin Diesel offers new look at Jason Momoa filming Fast X". DigitalSpy. Archived from the original on January 30, 2023. Retrieved January 30, 2023. Ulatowski, Rachel (March 27, 2023). "Fast X's Jason Momoa Recalls Thrill Of Doing His Own Stunt Driving". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 29, 2023. Retrieved March 29, 2023. Chitwood, Adam (April 20, 2022). "Charlize Theron, Sung Kang to Return for 'Fast and Furious 10'". The Wrap. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Bucksbaum, Sydney (February 10, 2023). "Fast X director breaks down the first trailer for the end of the franchise". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 11, 2023. Retrieved February 10, 2023. Goffe, Nadira (May 18, 2023). "The Casual Fast and Furious Fan's Guide to the Ludicrous Twists of Fast X". Slate. Archived from the original on May 18, 2023. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Anderson, Julia (May 12, 2023). "Fast X: Dwayne Johnson Returns in Fast & Furious Shocker". CBR. Archived from the original on May 13, 2023. Retrieved May 13, 2023. Gonzalez, Umberto (May 12, 2023). "Dwayne Johnson Returns as Hobbs in Fast X". TheWrap. Archived from the original on May 12, 2023. Retrieved May 12, 2023. Shafer, Ellise (January 13, 2023). "Leo Abelo Perry Joins Cast as Vin Diesel's Son". Variety. Archived from the original on March 12, 2023. Retrieved January 15, 2023. Mehra, Vansh (May 19, 2023). "Who dies in Fast X? Every character death explained". Sportskeeda. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2023. "Ludmilla anuncia participação em Velozes e Furiosos 10: 'Atriz de Hollywood'" [Ludmilla announces participation in Fast and Furious 10: 'Hollywood Actress']. Quem (in Brazilian Portuguese). April 24, 2023. Archived from the original on April 28, 2023. Retrieved May 15, 2023. "Pete Davidson signs deal to appear in Fast & Furious 10 but 'there's kickback'". TheNews. June 10, 2022. Archived from the original on May 3, 2023. Retrieved May 3, 2023. Jackson, Angelique (May 11, 2023). "Paul Walker's Daughter Meadow Will Cameo in Fast X: 'Blessed to Honor My Father's Legacy'". Variety. Archived from the original on May 11, 2023. Retrieved May 11, 2023. Carter, Emily (May 19, 2023). "Twenty One Pilots' Josh Dun Has a Cameo In the New Fast & Furous Film". Kerrang!. Archived from the original on May 22, 2023. Retrieved May 22, 2023. McClintock, Pamela; Masters, Kim (November 13, 2014). "Executive Roundtable: 6 Studio Heads on China Plans, Superhero Overload, WB Layoffs, Fast & Furious Future". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 17, 2014. Retrieved November 25, 2020. Weintraub, Steve (April 18, 2017). "Fate of the Furious Producer Neal Moritz on Cuba Challenges and Ending the Series at Fast 10". Collider. Archived from the original on April 29, 2022. Retrieved April 29, 2022. Lawrence, Derek (October 25, 2017). "Justin Lin in 'Advanced Talks' to Return as Fast & Furious Director". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 26, 2017. Retrieved April 29, 2022. Shepherd, Jack; Farley, Jordan (February 5, 2020). "Vin Diesel Suggests Fast and Furious 10 Could Be Split into 2 Parts". GamesRadar. Archived from the original on April 29, 2022. Retrieved April 29, 2022. Russell, Bradley (April 14, 2021). "Vin Diesel says Fast X is a two-parter because "there's so much ground to cover"". GamesRadar. Archived from the original on April 14, 2021. Retrieved September 25, 2022. McGlynn, Anthony (July 19, 2022). "Fast 10 is filming in Italy, fulfilling a promise from Vin Diesel". DigitalFix. Archived from the original on July 19, 2022. Retrieved October 1, 2022. "Universal Pictures: Fast X". Universal Pictures. October 12, 2018. Archived from the original on August 10, 2022. Retrieved February 20, 2022. Pulliam-Moore, Charles (April 27, 2022). "Justin Lin Won't Be Directing Fast X After All". The Verge. Archived from the original on April 29, 2022. Retrieved April 29, 2022. Leite, Marcelo (June 5, 2022). "Fast X Returning Fast & Furious To Its Roots Is The Film's Best News Yet". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on June 14, 2022. Retrieved June 14, 2022. "Fast & Furious 10 latest updates, will Fast X focus on more personal level?". DeviDiscourse. September 27, 2022. Archived from the original on September 29, 2022. Retrieved September 29, 2022. Pringe, Matt (September 25, 2022). "Here's Everything We Know About 'Fast X'". Uproxx. Archived from the original on September 25, 2022. Retrieved September 25, 2022. Holmes, Adam (January 27, 2023). "It's Just Under 115 Days Til Fast X Finally Hits Theaters, And Ludacris Has Some Thoughts About Filming". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on January 29, 2023. Retrieved January 30, 2023. Swann, Erik (April 5, 2023). "What Vin Diesel And The Fast X Cast Have Said About The Franchise Ending". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023. Seddon, Dan (August 23, 2022). "Game of Thrones star teases "much more serious" Fast X". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on September 10, 2022. Retrieved September 10, 2022. Sharf, Zack (February 10, 2023). "'Fast X' Director Got Asked to Rewrite the Entire Third Act on the Flight to Set: 'I Was Literally on No Sleep'". Variety. Archived from the original on February 10, 2023. Retrieved February 10, 2023. Travis, Ben (February 9, 2023). "Fast X Is The Beginning Of The End For Dom Toretto's Family: 'There's A War Brewing' – World-First Image". Empire Online. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2023. Anderton, Joe (February 21, 2023). "Fast X confirmed to end on a cliffhanger". DigitalSpy. Archived from the original on February 21, 2023. Retrieved February 22, 2023. Bacon, Jess (March 28, 2023). "Vin Diesel says the Fast Saga will "truly say goodbye" to Paul Walker's Brian". DigitalSpy. Archived from the original on March 29, 2023. Retrieved March 29, 2023. Sharf, Zack (March 31, 2023). "Michelle Rodriguez: Charlize Theron and I Shot Our 'Fast X' Fight Scene 'With No Director... We Don't Need One, Let's Do This'". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on March 31, 2023. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Nemiroff, Perri (March 20, 2023). "'Fast X': Michelle Rodriguez Promises a Big Surprise at the End of the Film". Collider. Archived from the original on March 20, 2023. Retrieved March 20, 2023. Reimann, Tom (February 26, 2021). "Don't Expect a 'Hobbs & Shaw' Sequel Anytime Soon". Collider. Archived from the original on September 21, 2022. Retrieved September 21, 2022. "Fast & Furious 10: filming ended in Turin, "3.8 million euros to the territory"". Open Tapes. June 10, 2022. Archived from the original on October 2, 2022. Retrieved October 1, 2022. Panait, Mircea (September 23, 2022). "Fast X Will Feature Dodge's New Electric Muscle Car". Archived from the original on September 23, 2022. Retrieved September 23, 2022. Yeung, Jeff (June 27, 2022). "'Fast X' Reunites Han With Mazda RX-7 From 'The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift'". HypeBeast. Archived from the original on July 16, 2022. Retrieved July 16, 2022. Gastelu, Gary (February 14, 2023). "Electric Dodge muscle car spotted in 'Fast X' trailer". Fox News. Archived from the original on February 14, 2023. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Smail, Christian (February 14, 2023). "Fast X: Every Car From The Trailer Of Fast and Furious 10". Best Looking Cars. Archived from the original on March 19, 2023. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Farley, Jordan (March 27, 2023). "Fast X cast and creators on bringing back street races and pushing the action further than ever before". GamesRadar. Archived from the original on March 28, 2023. Retrieved March 29, 2023. Weiss, Josh (April 10, 2023). "Jason Momoa reached out to the Harley-Davidson CEO to secure motorcycles for his 'Fast X' villain". Yahoo. Archived from the original on April 11, 2023. Retrieved April 11, 2023. Smail, Christian (February 10, 2023). "What Motorbike Is Jason Momoa Riding In Fast X?". Best Looking Cars. Archived from the original on July 8, 2023. Retrieved June 28, 2023. "Vin Diesel Confirms Fast and Furious 10 & 11 Start Filming in January 2022". Screen Rant. June 27, 2021. Archived from the original on June 28, 2021. Retrieved June 28, 2021. Drum, Nicole (June 26, 2021). "F9 Star Vin Diesel on Major Cameos for Fast & Furious 10 and 11". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on June 26, 2021. Retrieved June 26, 2021. Hipes, Patrick (December 30, 2021). "Dwayne Johnson Slams Door On Return To Fast And Furious Franchise, Calls Vin Diesel's Social Media Ask 'Manipulation'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 7, 2022. Retrieved April 29, 2022. "The Rock & Vin Diesel's Feud – Complete Timeline Explained". ScreenRant. December 18, 2021. Archived from the original on September 21, 2022. Retrieved September 21, 2022. "Vin Diesel Stressed Out Over Massive Budget For 'Fast X': Sources". Radar. December 23, 2022. Archived from the original on December 30, 2022. Retrieved December 30, 2022. Bucksbaum, Sydney (May 22, 2023). "Alan Ritchson says he took over Fast X role from Keanu Reeves: 'Tough act to follow'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 23, 2023. Retrieved March 28, 2023. Kurp, Josh (March 23, 2023). "Brie Larson's 'Fast X' Character Is Based On A Member Of Vin Diesel's Actual Family". Uproxx. Archived from the original on March 23, 2023. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Chatterjee, Ishita (April 1, 2023). ""I've been basically begging..": After $2.7 Billion Avengers, Brie Larson's Dreams Come True With Fast X". FandomWire. Archived from the original on April 1, 2023. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Farley, Jordan (March 27, 2023). "Brie Larson confirms she's playing Mr. Nobody's daughter in Fast X". GamesRadar. Archived from the original on March 27, 2023. Retrieved March 28, 2023. Travis, Ben (February 9, 2023). "Jason Momoa's Fast X Villain Dante Is '1000% Momoa', Says Louis Leterrier – World-First Images". Empire Online. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2023. Khalifeh, Mona (February 9, 2023). "Michelle Rodriguez Teases Jason Momoa's 'Playful' Villain Role in 'Fast X' (Exclusive)". ET Online. Archived from the original on February 10, 2023. Retrieved February 10, 2023. Nemiroff, Perri (March 20, 2023). "'Fast X': Michelle Rodriguez Calls Jason Momoa the Best Male Villain of the Franchise". Collider. Archived from the original on March 20, 2023. Retrieved March 20, 2023. Murray, Alex (March 31, 2023). "Jason Momoa Expected A Lot Of On Set Drama On Fast X". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on April 1, 2023. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Seddon, Dan (January 28, 2023). "Vin Diesel offers new look at Jason Momoa filming Fast X". DigitalSpy. Archived from the original on January 30, 2023. Retrieved January 30, 2023. Peralta, Diego (February 2, 2023). "'Fast X': Rita Moreno on How She Got Her Role in Upcoming Sequel". Collider. Archived from the original on February 2, 2023. Retrieved February 2, 2023. Treese, Tyler (December 23, 2022). "Fast X: More on Gal Gadot's Surprising Return Scene". Archived from the original on December 24, 2022. Retrieved December 24, 2022. C Samal, Pallabi (December 23, 2022). "Didn't she die? Fans confused as Gal Gadot reportedly set to return to Fast X". SportsKeeda. Archived from the original on December 26, 2022. Retrieved December 25, 2022. "Fast X: Gal Gadot Touted to Return As Gisele in the 10th Installment of the Fast & Furious Franchise". Latestly. December 23, 2022. Archived from the original on December 26, 2022. Retrieved December 25, 2022. Donohoo, Timothy (December 28, 2022). "Gal Gadot's Fast X Return Would Mean the Series Has Officially Jumped the Shark". CBR. Archived from the original on December 29, 2022. Retrieved December 30, 2022. Hubbard, Christian (December 23, 2022). "Gal Gadot Will Reportedly Reprise Her 'Fast and Furious' Role For 'Fast X'". FullCircleCinema. Archived from the original on December 26, 2022. Retrieved December 25, 2022. Sarkisian, Jacob (February 13, 2023). "Fast X's Sung Kang teases return of Gal Gadot's Gisele". DigitalSpy. Archived from the original on February 14, 2023. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Northrup, Ryan (February 16, 2022). "More Fast & Furious Character Returns Teased For Fast X By Vin Diesel". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on March 17, 2023. Retrieved February 16, 2022. Sarkisian, Jacob (March 13, 2023). "Fast X adding credit scene with a mystery guest cameo star". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on March 19, 2023. Retrieved March 19, 2023. Malkin, Marc (May 22, 2023). "Vin Diesel Says 'Fast & Furious' Spinoffs Are in the Works, Including a Female-Led Movie". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 22, 2023. Retrieved May 23, 2023. Bonomolo, Cameron. "Fast X: Universal Confirms Returning Cast Members for Fast and Furious 10". Comic Book. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Bueno, Antoinette (June 21, 2021). "Vin Diesel says Cardi B will be in F10 (Exclusive)". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on June 22, 2021. Retrieved November 25, 2020. Northrup, Ryan (February 16, 2022). "More Fast & Furious Character Returns Teased For Fast X By Vin Diesel". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 17, 2023. Retrieved February 16, 2022. Louis Mantilla, Ryan (February 13, 2023). "'Fast X' Director on Incorporating Paul Walker into the Upcoming Film". Collider. Archived from the original on February 14, 2023. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Seymour, Terri (February 10, 2023). "Michelle Rodriguez on Love for Paul Walker's Daughter Meadow in 'Fast X' (Exclusive)". Extra. Archived from the original on February 14, 2023. Retrieved February 14, 2023. Kit, Borys (May 2, 2022). "Behind Justin Lin's 'Fast 10' Breaking Point". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 2, 2022. Retrieved May 3, 2022. Lang, Brent; Donnelly, Matt; Rubin, Rebecca (July 20, 2022). "Inside Movie Stars' Salaries: Joaquin Phoenix Nabs $20M for Joker 2, Tom Cruise Heads to Over $100M and More". Variety. Archived from the original on July 20, 2022. Retrieved September 6, 2022. Fuster, Jeremy (November 17, 2022). "'Fast X' Budget Has Ballooned to $340 Million – Can It Still Turn a Profit for Universal?". TheWrap. Archived from the original on November 18, 2022. Retrieved November 17, 2022. "Vin Diesel Stressed Out Over Massive Budget For 'Fast X': Sources". Radar. December 23, 2022. Archived from the original on December 30, 2022. Retrieved December 30, 2022. Kroll, Justin (April 26, 2022). "Justin Lin Exiting As Director Of Fast X, Will Remain As Producer". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 26, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Bonomolo, Cameron (May 2, 2022). "Fast X Director Justin Lin Dropped Out Over "Difficult" Vin Diesel: Report". Comic Book. Archived from the original on May 2, 2022. Retrieved May 2, 2022. Lorite, Jaime (May 15, 2022). "Vin Diesel's tensions on the 'Fast & Furious' set: can the man who launched the franchise end it?". El Pais. Archived from the original on May 17, 2022. Retrieved May 18, 2022. Bentz, Adam (March 27, 2023). "How Fast X Handled BTS Drama Explained By Vin Diesel & New Director". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 29, 2023. Retrieved March 29, 2023. Anderson, Jenna (April 27, 2022). "Fast X: Report Suggests Fast & Furious 10 Shutdown Could Cost up to $1 Million Per Day". ComicBook. Archived from the original on April 28, 2022. Retrieved April 29, 2022. Leston, Ryan (April 27, 2022). "Replacing Fast X Director Justin Lin Could Be Costing Universal As Much as $1 Million Per Day". IGN. Archived from the original on April 28, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Kit, Borys (April 26, 2022). "A Search for a New Director is Underway". Twitter. Archived from the original on April 29, 2022. Retrieved April 29, 2022. Jackson, Angelique; Vary, Adam (April 27, 2022). "Justin Lin's Fast X Exit Puts Universal in a Tricky, and Costly, Race to Replace Him". Variety. Archived from the original on April 28, 2022. Retrieved April 29, 2022. Belloni, Matthew; Masters, Kim (September 23, 2015). "Furious 8 Stuck at the Starting Line: Universal's Director Dilemma". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 29, 2022. Retrieved April 29, 2022. Vary, Adam; Jackson, Angelique (May 2, 2022). "Fast X: Louis Leterrier to Replace Justin Lin as Director". Variety. Archived from the original on May 2, 2022. Retrieved May 2, 2022. Gallagher, Brian (October 6, 2015). "Furious 8 Shortlist Includes Straight Outta Compton Director". MovieWeb. Retrieved February 13, 2024. Brown, Jodee (March 2, 2023). "How Fast X's Director Won Over Vin Diesel After Justin Lin Fallout". Comic Book. Archived from the original on March 3, 2023. Retrieved March 4, 2023. Hewitt, Chris (March 6, 2023). "With Fast X, The Fast Family Approaches The Finish Line". Empire. Archived from the original on March 8, 2023. Retrieved March 10, 2023. Kroll, Justin (May 2, 2022). "Fast X: Louis Leterrier Top Choice To Replace Justin Lin As Director On Next Fast & Furious Installment". Deadline. Archived from the original on May 2, 2022. Retrieved May 2, 2022. Kit, Borys (May 2, 2022). "Fast 10: Louis Leterrier Universal's Pick to Replace Justin Lin". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 2, 2022. Retrieved May 2, 2022. Daniels, Nia (August 19, 2022). "Fast X wraps UK shoot". KFTV. Archived from the original on September 21, 2022. Retrieved September 21, 2022. Travis, Ben (April 11, 2023). "Fast X Features 'A Vertical Quarter-Mile Race', Says Louis Leterrier – Exclusive". Empire. Archived from the original on April 13, 2023. Retrieved April 13, 2023. "Genzano, iniziate le riprese di Fast & Furious, le immagini delle prime scene nel centro storico (Foto e video Sciurba)". May 16, 2022. Archived from the original on January 10, 2023. Retrieved January 10, 2023. Swann, Erik (May 16, 2022). "Jason Momoa Wrapped Fast X In Rome, And His Adventures Included Sistine Chapel Apology, Hells Angels And More". Cinemablend. Cinema Blend. Archived from the original on May 18, 2022. Retrieved May 18, 2022. "Fast & Furious in Rome, filming of Fast X in progress in Castel Sant'Angelo". Italian Post. July 20, 2022. Archived from the original on October 2, 2022. Retrieved October 1, 2022. "Rome streets close for Fast & Furious 10 filming". Wanted in Rome. May 9, 2022. Archived from the original on October 2, 2022. Retrieved October 3, 2022. ""Fast X", the tenth chapter in the global blockbuster "Fast & Furious" franchise, filming in Turin from May 24th". Film Commission Torino Piemonte. May 17, 2022. Archived from the original on October 1, 2022. Retrieved October 1, 2022. "Turin: Stuntman injured during filming of Fast & Furious X". LaPresse. June 6, 2022. Archived from the original on October 4, 2022. Retrieved October 1, 2022. McClelland, Timothy (July 22, 2022). "Fast & Furious 10 Filming Update Given By Michelle Rodriguez". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Retrieved July 24, 2022. Jirak, Jamie (August 31, 2022). "Fast & Furious 10: Fast X Set Photo Reveals New Look at Dom's Iconic Charger". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on September 4, 2022. Retrieved September 3, 2022. Levy, Carl (August 23, 2022). "Why Fast X Is In Hot Water With LA Residents Over Car Stunts". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on September 10, 2022. Retrieved September 9, 2022. da Silva, Lurdes C. (May 26, 2022). "Fast X, the latest movie in the Fast and the Furious franchise, to be filmed in Portugal". Herald News. Archived from the original on September 15, 2022. Retrieved September 15, 2022. Sarrubba, Stefania (August 16, 2022). "Reacher star reveals he's finished Fast X filming in set video". DigitalSpy. Archived from the original on September 10, 2022. Retrieved September 10, 2022. Dumaraog, Ana (August 7, 2022). "Fast 10 Set Video Teases More Flying Cars Are In Store For Vin Diesel". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on September 21, 2022. Retrieved September 21, 2022. Gardner, Chris (July 31, 2022). "Michelle Rodriguez on Why 'Fast X' is "French 'Fast & Furious'"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 15, 2022. Retrieved September 15, 2022. Mendelovich, Yossy (June 6, 2022). "Fast X Cinematography: Be Prepared for Intensive Aerial FPV Shots". Archived from the original on September 21, 2022. Retrieved September 21, 2022. Davids, Brian (May 19, 2023). "Fast X Director Louis Leterrier Talks Those A-List Cameos and the Twisted Scene That Required Approval From the Top". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved June 14, 2023. "Fast X". Writers Guild of America West. March 31, 2023. Archived from the original on April 14, 2023. Retrieved April 17, 2023. "Fast X Soundtrack Album Details". FilmMusicReporter. May 13, 2023. Archived from the original on May 13, 2023. Retrieved May 14, 2023. "Brian Tyler Scoring Louis Leterrier's 'Fast X' | Film Music Reporter". Archived from the original on March 9, 2023. Retrieved March 9, 2023. Major, Michael. "FAST X Original Motion Picture Score Feat. Music By Brian Tyler Is Out Now". BroadwayWorld.com. Archived from the original on June 3, 2023. Retrieved June 3, 2023. Tartaglione, Nancy (June 21, 2022). "Universal Teases 'Fast & Furious X' With First Look At Jason Momoa; Touts Packed, Diverse Slate – CineEurope". Deadline. Archived from the original on July 16, 2022. Retrieved July 16, 2022. Seemayer, Zach (October 24, 2022). "Tyrese Gibson Teases What 'Magic' Fans Can Expect From 'Fast X' (Exclusive)". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on October 29, 2022. Retrieved October 29, 2022. Nash, Anthony (December 27, 2022). "Vin Diesel Shares Fast X Set Photo, Trailer Release Date Window". ComingSoon. Archived from the original on December 30, 2022. Retrieved December 30, 2022. Rowan, Iona (January 5, 2023). "Vin Diesel reveals when Fast X trailer will launch". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on January 5, 2023. Retrieved January 6, 2023. Amin, Arezou (January 11, 2023). "This Is When the 'Fast X' Trailer Will Drop [Exclusive]". Collider. Archived from the original on January 26, 2023. Retrieved January 26, 2023. Rubin, Rebecca (February 2, 2023). "Hollywood Returns (Cautiously) to Super Bowl With Spots for 'The Flash' and 'Fast X'". Variety. Archived from the original on February 2, 2023. Retrieved February 2, 2023. Bezanidis, Michael (February 1, 2023). "Vin Diesel Reveals 'Fast X' Poster Ahead Of First Trailer". Heroic Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 1, 2023. Retrieved February 1, 2023. "FAST X - The Fast and the Furious - Official Legacy Trailer". IGN. February 1, 2023. Archived from the original on February 1, 2023. Retrieved February 2, 2023. Alexander, Bryan (February 9, 2023). "Vin Diesel reveals first 'Fast X' trailer at LA bash before world release: 'Fast-10 your seatbelts!'". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 10, 2023. Retrieved February 10, 2023. Kim Murphy, Jackson (February 14, 2023). "'Fast X' Trailer Draws 295 Million Viewers in First 72 Hours (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on February 15, 2023. Retrieved February 15, 2023. Kazi, Safeeyah (January 31, 2023). "Vin Diesel's Faith is Put to the Test in New 'Fast X' Poster". Collider. Archived from the original on February 1, 2023. Retrieved February 1, 2023. Singer, Matt (January 31, 2023). "New 'Fast X' Poster Teases the End of the Saga". WBUF. Archived from the original on February 1, 2023. Retrieved February 1, 2023. Villei, Matt (February 9, 2023). "First 'Fast X' Images: Jason Momoa and Brie Larson Join the Family". Collider. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2023. Fuge, Jonathan (February 10, 2023). "Fast X Teaser Reveals Ensemble Cast, Tickets Now on Sale". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on February 10, 2023. Retrieved February 10, 2023. Villei, Matt (February 10, 2023). "First 'Fast X' Trailer: Jason Momoa Swears Revenge on Vin Diesel's Family". Collider. Archived from the original on February 10, 2023. Retrieved February 10, 2023. Howard, Jacinta (February 5, 2023). "Biggie and Bone Thugs-N-Harmony Soundtrack for the New 'Fast X' Trailer". RockTheBells. Archived from the original on February 11, 2023. Retrieved February 10, 2023. Rindner, Grant (February 10, 2023). "The Fast X Trailer Is Four Minutes of Glorious Absurdity". GQ. Archived from the original on February 11, 2023. Retrieved February 10, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (February 15, 2023). "'Guardians Of The Galaxy', 'Flash' & 'Fast X' See Super Bowl Surge On Social Media". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 16, 2023. Retrieved February 15, 2023. Miller, Robert (February 24, 2023). "Hot Wheels Releases Fast and the Furious 2023 Series With Lots Of Mopars". Archived from the original on February 25, 2023. Retrieved February 26, 2023. King, Aidan (March 14, 2023). "New 'Fast X' Poster Brings the Gang Back Together". Collider. Archived from the original on March 20, 2023. Retrieved March 20, 2023. "Fast X - Official 'For Fans and Family' Featurette". IGN. March 31, 2023. Archived from the original on March 31, 2023. Retrieved April 1, 2023. "Fast X - Official 'A Look Inside' Featurette". IGN. April 7, 2023. Archived from the original on April 11, 2023. Retrieved April 11, 2023. "Fast X - Official 'Father and Son' Featurette". IGN. May 5, 2023. Archived from the original on May 6, 2023. Retrieved May 7, 2023. White, James (April 19, 2023). "New Trailer For Fast X Screeches Online". Empire. Archived from the original on April 22, 2023. Retrieved April 22, 2023. Bria, Bill (May 2, 2023). "New Fast X Trailer: You Gotta Respect A Silly Franchise That Takes Itself So Seriously". Slash Film. Archived from the original on May 5, 2023. Retrieved May 5, 2023. Makuch, Eddie (May 4, 2023). "Fast X Gets a Fun Little 8-Bit Racing Game You Can Play Right Now for Free". GameSpot. Archived from the original on May 5, 2023. Retrieved May 5, 2023. "Vin Diesel and Michelle Rodriguez promote the tenth Fast and Furious, Fast X, at F1 Miami Grand Prix". NYBreaking. May 4, 2023. Archived from the original on May 5, 2023. Retrieved May 5, 2023. "Win A Trip To Rome Thanks To Fast X Coming To Cinemas May 19". Capital. May 4, 2023. Archived from the original on May 5, 2023. Retrieved May 5, 2023. Paur, Joey (May 16, 2023). "The Final Trailer for FAST X Is Four and a Half Minutes Long". Geek Tyrant. Archived from the original on July 14, 2023. Retrieved May 16, 2023. Suba, Bossmac (May 16, 2023). "PROMO: Get Fast X Movie Tickets with a Brand New Philips Evnia Gaming Monitor". Back2Gaming. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved May 19, 2023. "Ruffles reveals special-edition chip bags featuring racing vehicles from 'Fast X' movie". SnackandBakery.com. April 4, 2023. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Vivarelli, Nick; Moreau, Jordan (May 12, 2023). "Fast X First Reactions: 'Stupidly Entertaining' and a 'Visual Spectacle' but Some 'Clunky Elements'". Variety. Archived from the original on May 12, 2023. Retrieved September 27, 2023. Rahman, Abid (February 3, 2016). "Universal Sets Dates for Fast & Furious Parts 9 and 10". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 11, 2017. Retrieved November 25, 2020. Hipes, Patrick (December 14, 2021). "Fast & Furious 10 Release Date Shifted To May 2023". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 15, 2021. Retrieved December 15, 2021. Alexander, Julia (March 12, 2020). "Universal delays F9 to April 2021 amid coronavirus pandemic". The Verge. Archived from the original on March 30, 2021. Retrieved March 30, 2021. Rubin, Rebecca (March 4, 2021). "F9 Postponed for the Third Time, Minions Sequel Pushed to 2022". Variety. Archived from the original on March 4, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2023. Peralta, Diego (February 9, 2023). "'Fast X' Tickets on Sale Early Ahead of Trailer Debut". Collider. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2023. "Universal Pictures' FAST X Races Into 270-Degree Panoramic ScreenX Theaters". PR Newswire. May 17, 2023. Archived from the original on January 14, 2024. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Tartaglione, Nancy (March 28, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' & 'Fast X' Cleared For China Releases". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 28, 2023. Retrieved March 29, 2023. Brueggemann, Tom (June 13, 2023). "Fast X Gets Expedited Early PVOD Release and Easily Wins the Race". IndieWire. Archived from the original on June 13, 2023. Retrieved October 18, 2023. Weiss, Josh (July 25, 2023). "Fast X Cruises onto Blu-ray August 8 with a Trunk Full of Fast-Paced Bonus Features". Syfy Wire. Archived from the original on July 25, 2023. Retrieved October 18, 2023. Grobar, Matt (August 16, 2023). "Fast X Streaming Premiere Date Set At Peacock". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 16, 2023. Retrieved August 16, 2023. Fuster, Jeremy (May 17, 2023). "Fast X' – the Most Expensive Film in the Franchise – Needs to Conquer the World to Make a Profit". TheWrap. Archived from the original on May 18, 2023. Retrieved May 18, 2023. Rubin, Rebecca; Lang, Brent; Donnelly, Matt (August 15, 2023). "Big Budgets, Big Headaches: Why Indiana Jones 5 and Mission: Impossible 7 are Struggling to Make a Profit". Variety. Archived from the original on August 15, 2023. Retrieved August 15, 2023. "Box office hits $2.4 billion, nearing 2019 levels with 'Spider-Man,' 'Fast X' on tap". April 22, 2023. Archived from the original on April 22, 2023. Retrieved April 23, 2023. Robbins, Shawn (April 21, 2023). "Long Range Box Office Forecast: FAST X Trending Toward $65-70M+ Domestic Start in Early Outlook". BoxOfficePro. Archived from the original on April 22, 2023. Retrieved April 22, 2023. Rubin, Rebecca (May 17, 2023). "Box Office: 'Fast X' Targets $60 Million Debut in North America, $280 Million Globally". Variety. Archived from the original on May 21, 2023. Retrieved May 21, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 21, 2023). "'Fast X' Stays Steady Toward $67M Opening, -4% Behind 'F9' – Early Sunday AM Box Office Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 21, 2023. Retrieved May 21, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 28, 2023). "'Little Mermaid' Now Swimming To $121M+ Opening Boosted By $80M Promo Campaign, Biggest For Disney Live-Action Title – Sunday AM Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 26, 2023. Retrieved May 28, 2023. Rubin, Rebecca (June 4, 2023). "Box Office: 'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Slingshots to Huge $120.5 Million Debut". Variety. Archived from the original on June 4, 2023. Retrieved June 4, 2023. "Fast X - Book Tickets at Cineworld". Cineworld. Archived from the original on May 5, 2023. Retrieved May 5, 2023. "'Fast X' races to number at the box office with $67.5 million opening weekend". Tartaglione, Nancy (May 20, 2023). "'Fast X' Racing To $320M Global Opening – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 21, 2023. Retrieved May 21, 2023. Rubin, Rebecca (May 21, 2023). "Box Office: 'Fast X' Opens to Soft $67.5 Million Domestically, Revs to $319 Million Globally". Variety. Archived from the original on May 21, 2023. Retrieved May 21, 2023. Alam, Hanif (May 27, 2023). "Fast X Shatters Previous Records at Pakistani Box Office". Archived from the original on May 27, 2023. Retrieved May 27, 2023. "Fast X Reviews". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Archived from the original on May 22, 2023. Retrieved May 22, 2023. "Fast X critics heap praise on Jason Momoa for his 'god-level' performance in latest instalment of franchise". UNILAD. May 14, 2023. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Truitt, Brian (May 17, 2023). "Review: Vin Diesel's chaotic 'Fast X' stalls out, even with an enjoyably evil Jason Momoa". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Roeper, Richard (May 17, 2023). "'Fast X' draws out the chases, fights to the point of tedium". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Loughrey, Clarisse (May 18, 2023). "Fast X review: Jason Momoa steals the show in an insane spectacle that rewrites the laws of gravity". The Independent. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Pulliam-Moore, Charles (May 19, 2023). "Fast X's running on the highest-octane fumes you've ever huffed". The Verge. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Kay, Don (May 18, 2023). "Fast X Review: Jason Momoa Is the Only One of Us Having Any Fun". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on May 18, 2023. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Willmore, Alison (May 19, 2023). "Fast X Feels Like a Head Injury". Vulture. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Nussen, Greg (May 17, 2023). "Fast X Review: Ridiculousness by Committee". Slant Magazine. Archived from the original on May 21, 2023. Retrieved May 23, 2023. Smith, Kyle (May 18, 2023). "'Fast X' Review: Jason Momoa Joins the 'Furious' Family". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2023. Owen, Phil (May 17, 2023). "Fast X Review - One Quarter-Mile Forward, Two Quarter-Miles Back". GameSpot. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Maher, Kevin (May 17, 2023). "Fast X review — a jaded and lackadaisical patch-up job". The Times. Archived from the original on May 22, 2023. Retrieved May 23, 2023. Vognar, Chris (May 17, 2023). "'Fast X' Is So Lifeless It Feels Like It Was Written by ChatGPT". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2023. Tinoco, Armando (June 5, 2023). "Golden Trailer Awards Nominations List: Stranger Things, Black Panther: Wakanda Forever, Ted Lasso & Glass Onion: A Knives Out Mystery Among Most Nominated". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 5, 2023. Retrieved June 5, 2023. Pedersen, Erik (June 29, 2023). "Golden Trailer Awards: Cocaine Bear, Only Murders In The Building & Oppenheimer Among Top Winners – Full List". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 30, 2023. Retrieved June 30, 2023. Anderson, Erik (June 30, 2023). "Hollywood Critics Association 2023 Midseason HCA Awards: Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse, Past Lives, Air are Top Winners". AwardsWatch. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved July 3, 2023. Grein, Paul (November 16, 2023). "Billie Eilish's Barbie Song, Robbie Robertson's Scorsese Score Honored at 2023 Hollywood Music in Media Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 16, 2023. Retrieved December 3, 2023. Hipes, Patrick (December 6, 2023). "Avatar: The Way Of Water, Oppenheimer, Star Trek Series Lead Nominations For Genre-Focused Saturn Awards". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 6, 2023. Retrieved December 6, 2023. Hipes, Patrick (February 5, 2024). "Avatar: The Way Of Water, Oppenheimer, Star Trek: Picard Among Winners At Saturn Awards". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 5, 2024. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Anderson, Erik (December 7, 2023). "Barbie and Oppenheimer Lead Hollywood Creative Alliance (HCA) Astra Awards Nominations". AwardsWatch. Archived from the original on December 8, 2023. Retrieved December 21, 2023. Nordyke, Kimberly (January 22, 2024). "Razzie Awards: 'Expend4bles' Leads Nominations". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 24, 2024. Retrieved January 22, 2024. VanHoose, Benjamin (January 22, 2024). "'Expend4bles', 'Meg 2', and 'Shazam! Fury of the Gods' Among 2024 Razzie Nominations of "Worst" Movies". People. Archived from the original on January 23, 2024. Retrieved January 22, 2024. Murphy, J. Kim (January 22, 2024). "Razzie Noms 2024: Chris Evans and Jennifer Lopez Up for Worst Actors; 'Shazam 2' and 'Ant-Man 3' Tie with 4 Nods". Variety. Archived from the original on January 24, 2024. Retrieved January 22, 2024. Evans, Greg (January 22, 2024). "Razzie Awards: 'Expend4bles', 'The Exorcist: Believer', 'Winnie-the-Pooh: Blood and Honey' Race to the Bottom". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 23, 2024. Retrieved January 22, 2024. Gonzalez, Umberto (June 1, 2023). "New 'Fast & Furious' Movie Starring Dwayne Johnson in Development at Universal (Exclusive)". The Wrap. Archived from the original on June 8, 2023. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Fuge, Jonathan (June 22, 2023). "Dwayne Johnson Fast & Furious Spinoff Title Revealed". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on June 23, 2023. Retrieved June 24, 2023. Bucksbaum, Sydney (May 17, 2023). "Fast X director suggests more movies after Part 2: 'Many roads will lead us to the end'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved June 9, 2023. Chuba, Kirsten (May 21, 2023). "Vin Diesel on Bringing Back Those Stars for Fast X: 'Both of Them Clearly Make People Happy'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 21, 2023. Retrieved January 2, 2024. Bonomolo, Cameron (January 14, 2024). "Fast 11 Is Vin Diesel's Last Fast & Furious Movie, Jason Momoa May Not Return (Report)". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 15, 2024. Retrieved January 19, 2024. Bruce Haring (February 23, 2024). "Vin Disel Confirms 'Fast & Furious' Franchise Ending, Teases "Grand Finale"". Deadline. Retrieved February 24, 2024. Official website Fast X at IMDb Fast X at Rotten Tomatoes Portals:  United States  Film  Cars