Kicking & Screaming is a 2005 American sports comedy film directed by Jesse Dylan and written by Leo Benvenuti and Steve Rudnick. The film stars Will Ferrell and Robert Duvall as a father and son who exploit their own sons' soccer teams to try and beat the other. Mike Ditka, Kate Walsh, and Josh Hutcherson also star. It was released on May 13, 2005, to mixed reviews and grossed $56 million worldwide. Phil Weston is an average person who endured his father Buck Weston's over-competitiveness throughout his childhood, an upbringing which has left permanent mental scars. Now middle-aged and married, with a young son named Sam, Phil runs a small vitamin store, while Buck operates a local chain of sports stores. Buck is the coach of the Gladiators, the most successful little-league soccer team in the district. Sam is on Buck's soccer team, but Buck keeps him on the bench, a humiliation he also visited upon his son decades prior. Buck eventually transfers Sam to the Tigers, the league's worst team. At Sam's first game with his new team their coach is absent. Rather than forfeit, Phil decides to coach the team, a position he takes up permanently. However, despite Phil's best efforts the team does not seem to improve. In desperation, Phil recruits Mike Ditka, Buck's neighbor and hated enemy. Enticed by the opportunity to beat Buck, Ditka accepts the position. Despite grueling training, the team continues to lose. Ditka introduces Phil to two exceptionally talented Italian boys working in a local butcher's shop. Phil succeeds in gaining their uncle's permission for them to play for the Tigers. They have an immediate impact, scoring repeatedly. The resulting winning streak makes them serious contenders in the league. After Phil boasts about the Tigers potentially reaching the finals, he and Buck make a bet: if the Gladiators win then Phil would sell his store and work for Buck. If the Tigers win then Buck would hand over his most prized possession, 'The Pelé Ball', a soccer ball struck by the famous player which Phil caught as a child and Buck took from him. Meanwhile, Ditka also introduces Phil to coffee, which rapidly changes him from a mild-mannered caring dad to an obnoxious, egotistical, over-competitive coach, not unlike his father, abusing kids and parents alike. The team's mantra becomes "Get the ball to the Italians", which, though effective, demoralizes his team. In the ultimate over-competitive act, he benches his son for the entire semi-final game. The Tigers make it to the finals where they face off against the Gladiators. At half-time, the score is 2–1 to the Gladiators. In a heart-to-heart discussion with his son, Phil realizes the error of his ways. He tells his team to do exactly the opposite of what he taught them. Although the Gladiators score one more goal after half-time, the Tigers don't give up hope. Phil gives the goalie a vision test with glasses from the crowd. From there, Ambrose scores one goal—making the score 3–2. After another goal, the score is tied. The team rallies and produces a spectacular team performance to win 4–3, with Sam scoring the winning goal against his uncle Bucky, (Buck's child from his second wife and Phil's younger half-brother, who was born on the exact day as Sam) using a move that he practiced when his dad benched him in the semi-finals. Honoring the bet, Buck tries to give Phil the ball, but Phil refuses. Making peace with his father, they merge their businesses, realizing there is more to life than winning. The film ends with an adapted version of the "He's Got Balls" commercial originally produced by Buck. In it, the entire Tigers team appear, announcing the merger of Phil's vitamin shop—Phil's Pills—and Buck's Sporting Goods Store. The team shouts, after the "He's got balls" line, "And vitamins." Will Ferrell as Phil Weston Robert Duvall as Buck Weston Mike Ditka as himself Kate Walsh as Barbara Weston Josh Hutcherson as Bucky Weston Steven Anthony Lawrence as Mark Avery Dylan McLaughlin as Sam Weston Jeremy Bergman as Hunter Davidson Elliot Cho as Byong Sun Hogan-Jones Dallas McKinney as Connor Ryan Rachael Harris as Ann Hogan Dave Herman as Referee Musetta Vander as Janice Weston Laura Kightlinger as Donna Jones Erik Walker as Ambrose Hanna Jim Turner as Jim Davidson "The Captain" Francesco Liotti as Gian Piero Alessandro Ruggiero as Massimo Sammy Fine as Jack Watson Timmy Deters as Alex Hartley Julia Campbell as Janet Davidson Phill Lewis as John Ryan David Bowe as Forest Avery Matt Winston as Tom Hanna Joseph R. Sicari as Umberto Karly Rothenberg as Mrs. Watson, Jack's mother Timm Sharp as Butcher shop employee Jarrad Paul as a Beantown employee Robert Patrick Benedict as a Beantown employee Martin Starr as Beantown customer Lisa Lackey as Beantown customer Brian Palermo as Beantown customer Scott Adsit as Stew Peter Jason as Clark Alex Borstein as Obnoxious Hummer Lady (uncredited) On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 41% based on 139 reviews, and an average rating of 5.5/10. The web site's critical consensus reads, "The script is mediocre and fails to give Ferrell a proper comedic showcase." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 45 out of 100, based on 33 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B" on an A+ to F scale. Roger Ebert gave the film 3 out of 4 stars, saying that it was "An entertaining family movie, and may serve a useful purpose if it inspires kids to overthrow their coaches and take over their own sports." Scott Foundas of Variety called it "An immensely likable, funny comedy that finds a novel approach to that familiar combo of kids and sports." David Palmer gave the film 3.5 out of 5 stars, saying that Ferrell and the film were much funnier than "a PG-rated kids film has any right being".[citation needed] The film grossed $20.2 million in its opening weekend, finishing in 2nd place behind fellow newcomer Monster-in-Law ($23.1 million). Kicking and Screaming earned $52.8 million in the U.S. and Canada, and $3.2 million in other territories for a worldwide total $56.1 million, against a production budget of $45 million. Kicking and Screaming became the highest grossing soccer movie, beating Bend It Like Beckham which grossed $32.5 million. Will Ferrell nominated for Worst Actor (also for Bewitched) Choice Movie, Actor: Ferrell nominated for Comedy (also for Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy) Choice Movie, Hissy Fit: Ferrell 2005: Choice Movie Sleazebag: Ferrell List of association football films "Kicking and Screaming (2005)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved July 16, 2017. "Kicking & Screaming (2005)". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved July 14, 2017. "Kicking & Screaming reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved July 14, 2017. "KICKING AND SCREAMING (2005) B". CinemaScore. Archived from the original on 2018-12-20. Retrieved 2019-08-30. Ebert, Roger (May 12, 2005). "Kicking & Screaming Movie Review (2005)". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved 16 March 2019. Foundas, Scott (9 May 2005). "Kicking & Screaming". Variety. "Weekend Box Office Results for May 13-15, 2005". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved 16 March 2019. Brandon Gray (May 16, 2005). "'Monster-in-Law' Claws to the Top". Box Office Mojo. "Sports - Soccer Movies at the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Wikiquote has quotations related to Kicking & Screaming (2005 film). Kicking & Screaming Kicking & Screaming at IMDb Kicking & Screaming at AllMovie