Salsola is a genus of the subfamily Salsoloideae in the family Amaranthaceae. The genus sensu stricto is distributed in central and southwestern Asia, North Africa, and the Mediterranean. A common name of various members of this genus and related genera is saltwort, for their salt tolerance. The genus name Salsola is from the Latin salsus, meaning "salty". The species of Salsola are mostly subshrubs, shrubs, small trees, and rarely annuals. The leaves are mostly alternate, rarely opposite, simple, and entire. The bisexual flowers have five tepals and five stamens. The pistil ends in two stigmata. The fruit is spherical with a spiral embryo and no perisperm. The genus name Salsola was first published in 1753 by Linnaeus in Species Plantarum. The type species is Salsola soda L. The genus Salsola belongs to the tribe Salsoleae s.s. of the subfamily Salsoloideae in the family Amaranthaceae. The genus was recircumscribed in 2007 based on molecular phylogenetic research, greatly reducing the number of species. Synonyms of Salsola sensu stricto are: Darniella Maire & Weiller, Fadenia Aellen & Townsend, Neocaspia Tzvelev and Hypocylix Wol..[citation needed] Plants of the World Online includes: Salsola acanthoclada Botsch. Salsola africana (Brenan) Botsch. Salsola algeriensis Botsch. Salsola angusta Botsch. Salsola arbusculiformis Drobow Salsola australis R.Br. Salsola austrotibetica Sukhor. Salsola baranovii Iljin Salsola basaltica (C.Brullo, Brullo, Gaskin, Giusso, Hrusa & Salmeri) C.Brullo & Brullo Salsola brevifolia Desf. Salsola chellalensis Botsch. Salsola chinghaiensis A.J.Li Salsola collina Pall. Salsola cruciata L.Chevall. ex Batt. & Trab. Salsola divaricata Masson ex Link Salsola drummondii Ulbr. Salsola euryphylla Botsch. Salsola glomerata (Maire) Brullo Salsola × gobicola Iljin Salsola griffithii (Bunge) Freitag & Khani Salsola gymnomaschala Maire Salsola gypsacea Botsch. Salsola halimocnemis Botsch. Salsola hartmannii Sukhor. Salsola ikonnikovii Iljin Salsola intramongolica H.C.Fu & Z.Y.Chu Salsola jacquemontii Moq. Salsola junatovii Botsch. Salsola kali L. Salsola komarovii Iljin Salsola laricifolia Litv. ex Drobow Salsola mairei Botsch. Salsola masclansii G.Monts. & D.Gómez Salsola melitensis Botsch. Salsola monoptera Bunge Salsola pachyphylla Botsch. Salsola papillosa (Coss.) Willk. Salsola paulsenii Litv. Salsola pontica (Pall.) Iliin Salsola praecox (Litv.) Litv. Salsola praemontana Botsch. Salsola ryanii Hrusa & Gaskin Salsola sabrinae Mosyakin Salsola sinkiangensis A.J.Li Salsola squarrosa Steven ex Moq. Salsola strobilifera (Benth.) Mosyakin Salsola subglabra Botsch. Salsola tamamschjanae Iljin Salsola tamariscina Pall. Salsola tragus L. (sometimes placed in Kali) Salsola tunetana Brullo Salsola turcica Yıld. Salsola verticillata Schousb. Salsola webbii Moq. Salsola zaidamica Iljin Salsola zygophylla Batt. Excluded species: Many species formerly grouped in Salsola were excluded by Akhani et al. (2007). Some may now be classified in separate genera: Turania (for Salsola sect. Sogdiana) Xylosalsola (for Salsola sect. Coccosalsola subsect. Arbuscula) Caroxylon (for Salsola sect. Caroxylon) Caroxylon imbricatum (Forssk.) Moq. (Syn. Salsola imbricata Forssk.) Caroxylon vermiculatum (L.) Akhani & Roalson (Syn. Salsola vermiculata L.) Kaviria (for Salsola sect. Belanthera) The leaves and shoots of S. soda, known in Italy as barba di frate or agretti, are cooked and used as vegetables. The species is also used for the production of potash. In Namibia, where the plant is called gannabos, it is a valuable fodder plant. Wikispecies has information related to Salsola. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Salsola. Akhani, Hossein; Edwards, Gerald; Roalson, Eric H. (2007). "Diversification of the old world Salsoleae s.l. (Chenopodiaceae): molecular phylogenetic analysis of nuclear and chloroplast data sets and a revised classification". International Journal of Plant Sciences. 168 (6): 931–956. doi:10.1086/518263. JSTOR 10.1086/518263. S2CID 86789297. Mosyakin, S. L. (2004). "Salsola" (concerning the genus sensu lato). Flora of North America. 4. Zhu, Gelin; Mosyakin, Sergei L.; Clemants, Steven E. "Chenopodiaceae" (Salsola s. l. - Online, concerning the genus sensu lato). Flora of China. 5 (402). Freitag, Helmut; Hedge, Ian C.; Jafri, Saiyad Masudal Hasan; Kothe-Heinrich, Gabriele; Omer, S.; Uotila, Pertti. "Chenopodiaceae" (Salsola s. l. - Online, concerning the genus sensu lato). Flora of Pakistan. Carl von Linné (1753). "Species Plantarum" (First publication of genus). 1 (222). {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) Plants of the World Online: Salsola L. (retrieved 3 March 2024) "Salsola soda". Plants for a Future. Retrieved November 20, 2020. Rothauge, Axel (February 25, 2014). "Staying afloat during a drought". The Namibian. Archived from the original on March 2, 2014.