The Organization of Turkic States (OTS), formerly called the Turkic Council or the Cooperation Council of Turkic Speaking States, is an intergovernmental organization comprising all but one of the internationally recognized Turkic sovereign states: Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Turkey, and Uzbekistan; while Hungary and Turkmenistan are observers. Its overarching aim is promoting comprehensive cooperation among the Turkic peoples. First proposed by Kazakh president Nursultan Nazarbayev in 2006, it was founded on 3 October 2009 in Azerbaijan's Nakhchivan. The General Secretariat is located in Turkey's Istanbul. In addition to Turkmenistan, the organization has also admitted Hungary and the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus as observers, although the latter is only recognized by Turkey. During the 8th summit in Istanbul in 2021, the organization was restructured and adopted its current name. The organization was established on 3 October 2009 as the Cooperation Council of the Turkic Speaking States (Turkic Council), by the Nakhchivan Agreement signed among Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Turkey. According to Halil Akıncı, the founding Secretary-General of the organization, the Turkic Council became the first voluntary alliance of Turkic states in history. In 2012, the flag of the Turkic Council was adopted at its 2nd Summit, which took place in Bishkek on 23 August 2012 and officially raised on 12 October 2012. The flag combines the symbols of the four founding member states: the light blue color of the flag of Kazakhstan which also evokes the traditional Turkic color of turquoise, the sun of the flag of Kyrgyzstan, the star of the flag of Azerbaijan and the crescent of the Turkish flag. On 30 April 2018, it was announced that Uzbekistan would join the Cooperation Council of Turkic-Speaking States and attend the upcoming summit of the organisation in Bishkek. It formally applied for membership on 12 September 2019. Since late 2018, Hungary has been an observer and may request full membership. Turkmenistan received the observer status in 2021. In November 2021, the organization was renamed the Organization of Turkic States. Of great importance is the comprehensive structure of the Union of Municipalities of the Turkic World, in which local governments from 30 countries and regions are represented. 10 June, 2022 6th Congress of the Union of Municipalities of the Turkic World. In 2022, the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus was admitted to the organisation as an observer member. Nominally, the Preamble of the Nakhchivan Agreement reaffirms the will of Member States to adhere to the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, and defines the main objective of the Organization of Turkic States as further deepening comprehensive cooperation among Turkic Speaking States, as well as making joint contributions to peace and stability in the region and in the world. Member States have nominally confirmed their commitment to democratic values, human rights, the rule of law, and principles of good governance. The Nakhchivan Agreement sets out the main purposes and tasks of the Organization as follows: Strengthening mutual confidence and friendship among the Parties; Developing common positions on foreign policy issues; Coordinating actions to combat international terrorism, separatism, extremism and cross-border crimes; Promoting effective regional and bilateral cooperation in all areas of common interest; Creating favorable conditions for trade and investment; Aiming for comprehensive and balanced economic growth, social and cultural development; Expanding interaction in the fields of science, technology, education, health, culture, sports and tourism; Encouraging interaction of mass media and other means of communication; Strengthening cooperation and integration between member states; Promoting exchange of relevant legal information and enhancing legal cooperation. Main organs of the Organization of Turkic States include: Council of Heads of State Council of Foreign Ministers Senior Officials Committee Council of Elders (Aksakals) The Secretariat The main decision-making and governing body of the Organization of Turkic States is the Council of Heads of State, which is presided over by the President whose country holds the chairmanship. The chairmanship rotates on an annual basis. All activities of the Organization of Turkic States are coordinated and monitored by its Secretariat, which is located in Istanbul in accordance with the Nakhchivan Agreement. Presidents meet once a year in a previously determined Turkic city. Senior officials, Aksakals, as well as other Ministers and government officials, all meet on a regular basis. OTS functions as an umbrella for organization like: the Parliamentary Assembly of Turkic States (TURKPA) (administrative capital in Baku) the International Organization of Turkic Culture (TURKSOY) (administrative capital in Ankara) the Turkic Academy (administrative capital in Astana) Turkic Culture and Heritage Foundation (administrative capital in Baku) Center of Nomadic Civilizations (administrative capital in Bishkek) Turkic Business Council (administrative capital in Istanbul) OTS is an observer at the Economic Cooperation Organization and has also applied for an observer status at the UN and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation. Besides, OTS maintains close cooperative relations with the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe and the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia.[citation needed] Since its founding agreement defines comprehensive cooperation among Turkic states as the organization's main objective and raison d'être, the Organization of Turkic States is working on a variety of projects. The projects are grouped under six cooperation processes, which are: economy, culture, education, transport, customs, and diaspora. Examples of the projects include establishing the Turkic University Union and writing a common history textbook. The Organization of Turkic States also works on ways to boost economic development in underdeveloped regions of Member States. The Secretariat brings together Economy Ministers, Education Ministers, Transport Ministers, Heads of Customs Administrations, and other senior officials from different ministries and agencies in order to work on ways to promote cooperation in relevant spheres. Prior to being brought before ministers and heads of administrations, projects and issues of cooperation are elaborated by working groups. One recently launched project is the establishment of a mechanism for closer cooperation among Turkic diasporas all over the world. In November 2020, Kyrgyz Minister of Foreign Affairs Ruslan Kazakbaev pointed that Organization of Turkic States members have to strengthen their economic relations, they have to establish a joint investment fund and build its center on Kyrgyzstan on his meeting with Turkish Minister Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu. Baghdad Amreyev visited Minister of Treasury and Finance of Turkey Lütfi Elvan and sides talked about establishment of Joint Investment Fund. In September 2021, on meeting of Turkic ministers responsible for the economy, sides negotiated about a Turkic Joint Investment Fund feasibility work and agreement to establish the fund. In September 2022, on the occasion of the 90th anniversary of the Language Festival, the Organization of Turkic States decided to establish a "Common Alphabet Commission" within the body of OTS for a unified alphabet of the Turkic world. During the event, scientists from the Turkic states gave information about the alphabets and historical processes used in their own countries, and thus it was emphasized that the transition processes to the common alphabet should be accelerated, and the application should be widespread. The commission, which will hold its first meeting in Kyrgyzstan, will observe the work of the common alphabet and report to the Council of Elders. On 11 November 2022, in the city of Samarkand, the member countries of the Organization of Turkic States signed an agreement "On the establishment of simplified customs corridor". Azerbaijan was the first member country to enact the agreement, in May 2023 the Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev signed a law creating the simplified customs corridor. Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the newly independent Turkic States of Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan as well as Turkey organized Summits of the Heads of Turkic Speaking States, the first of which took place in 1992 in Ankara. With the establishment of Turkic Council, at the 10th Summit it was decided to rename the top-level meetings to Turkic Council Summits. Turkic Council Summit is the highlight of the year whereby Heads of State evaluate outcomes of the past period and set goals for the next year. The First Summit took place in Almaty, Kazakhstan, on 20–21 October 2011 and focused primarily on economic cooperation. The Second Summit was held in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan, on 22–23 August 2012 and concentrated on educational, scientific, and cultural cooperation. The Third Summit took place on 15–16 August 2013 in Qabala, Azerbaijan with a theme of transport and connectivity. On 15 October 2019, the Seventh Turkic Council Summit was organized in Baku with the participation of Presidents of member states Ilham Aliyev, Sooronbai Jeenbekov, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Shavkat Mirziyoyev, as well as Purli Agamyradov as a guest, Viktor Orban as an observer and heads of Turkic cooperation institutions. The participants celebrated the 10th anniversary of the Nakhchivan Agreement on the establishment of the Turkic Council in addition to Uzbekistan's joining the organization as a full-fledged member. The title of Honorary Chairman of the Turkic Council was given to the former President of Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbayev. In the conclusion of the Summit, the Heads of States signed Baku Declaration. Besides, the presidency in the Council officially passed to Azerbaijan. The Extraordinary Summit of the Turkic Council focused on the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic was conducted through videoconferencing by the initiative of the chairman of the organization Ilham Aliyev on 10 April 2020. The conference titled "Cooperation and solidarity in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic" was held with the participation of the Director-General of the World Health Organization, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus along with the head of states of the member countries. Participants discussed the measures taken at the national level to fight against the coronavirus epidemic, to improve multilateral cooperation in the field of healthcare, and to undertake the common challenges caused by the outbreak of COVID-19. Exchanging views on the ways of overcoming negative effects of coronavirus on the national and global economies, they touched upon trade relations and continuous transportation and they entrusted the Ministries of Commerce and Transport of the member States with reviewing the process via videoconferencing and with presenting practical solutions for the free flow of goods among Turkic Council states across the Trans-Caspian Corridor. An 18-point list of mutual priorities of all member nations was outlined in the Baku Declaration. In 2020, Ukrainian Deputy Foreign Minister Emine Ceppar, who is of Crimean Tatar descent, stated Ukraine wanted to be an observer. Crimea, currently under Russian occupation, is the homeland of the Crimean Tatars. Turkish Minister of Foreign Affairs Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu announced that Turkmenistan, currently an observer state, could become a full member during the 2022 Organization of Turkic States summit. On 3 May 2021, the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan officially applied for observer status. But with the Taliban overthrowing the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan with its Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan in August that year, the status of its application for observer status is uncertain. H Head of state or government attended. O Other officials attended.  No attendees. According to article 8 of the Nakhchivan Agreement, the state that hosts the regular summit, will assume the chairmanship until next meeting. Republic of Azerbaijan Ilham Aliyev President of Azerbaijan Republic of Kazakhstan Kassym-Jomart Tokayev President of Kazakhstan Kyrgyz Republic Sadyr Japarov President of Kyrgyzstan Republic of Turkey Recep Tayyip Erdoğan President of Turkey Republic of Uzbekistan Shavkat Mirziyoyev President of Uzbekistan Azerbaijan–Organization of Turkic States relations List of international organizations based in Istanbul World Turks Qurultai "Organization of Turkic States". "TURKSOY Official Web Site". Turkkon.org. Retrieved 7 July 2013. "Turk Dili Konusan Ulkeler Isbirligi Konseyi'nin Kurulmasina Dair Nahcivan Anlasmasi" (PDF). Turkkon.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 January 2012. Retrieved 5 March 2014. "Turkic Council reforms into Organization of Turkic States". TRTWorld. 12 November 2021. "Turkic grouping to change its name to Organization of Turkic States: Turkish FM". Hürriyet Daily News. 12 November 2021. "Turkic Council's name changed to Organization of Turkic States". Anadolu Agency. 13 November 2021. ""We are changing the name of the Turkic Council to the Organization of Turkic States"". Directorate of Communications. 12 November 2021. Akıncı, Halil (1 November 2021). "Türk Dünyasının Jeopolitiği ve Türk Dış Politikasındaki Yeri". Kriter Dergi (in Turkish). Retrieved 9 November 2022. "Uzbekistan decides to join 'Turkic alliance' during Erdogan's visit". hurriyetdailynews.com. Retrieved 30 April 2018. "Uzbekistan decides to join 'Turkic alliance' during Erdogan's visit". Hurriyet Daily News. Retrieved 1 May 2018. "Uzbekistan Officially Applies for Membership in Turkic Council". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 13 September 2019. "Hungary is now part of the assembly of "Turkic Speaking Countries"". Hungarian Free Press. 25 November 2018. Retrieved 1 June 2019. "The Turkic world is on the edge of a historic revival". TRT world. Retrieved 3 October 2019. "Revamped Turkic group 'adds to extreme uncertainty' at China's door". South China Morning Post. 26 December 2021. Retrieved 26 December 2021. "T.C.CUMHURBAŞKANLIĞI : "30 ülke ve bölgeden yerel yönetimin temsil edildiği Türk Dünyası Belediyeler Birliği'nin kuşatıcı yapısı önemlidir"". "TRNC admitted to Organisation of Turkic States as observer member". 11 November 2022. Retrieved 11 November 2022. "Nakhchivan Agreement" (PDF). 3 October 2019. Retrieved 11 November 2022. "Organization Chart Principal organs of Organization of Turkic States". Turkkon. "Turkic University Union". Turkic Council. Retrieved 14 May 2020. "Kyrgz and Turkish Ministers of Foreign Affairs meeting". Youtube - Turkic Council channel. Archived from the original on 20 December 2021. "Turkic Council official account's tweet". Twitter. "Turkic Council Ministers in charge of economy got together". TRT Avaz. Şafak, Yeni (22 October 2022). "Türk devletlerinden tarihi adım: Ortak Alfabe Komisyonu kuruldu". Yeni Şafak (in Turkish). Retrieved 24 October 2022. "Между тюркскими государствами будет создан упрощенный таможенный коридор". Vesti.az (in Russian). Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Azerbaijan approves agreement on creation of simplified customs corridor between participants of Organization of Turkic States". Azernews.Az. 2 May 2023. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Third Summit of the Turkic Council Press Release". Turkkon.org. Retrieved 5 March 2014. "Seventh Summit of Turkic Council held in Baku". Parliamentary Assembly of Turkic Speaking Countries. Archived from the original on 17 October 2019. Retrieved 17 October 2019. "Baku hosted 7th Summit of Cooperation Council of Turkic-Speaking States VIDEO". azertag.az. Retrieved 17 October 2019. "Leaders of the Turkic Council held an Extraordinary Summit on 10 April 2020 on Corona Virus Epidemy". Website of the Turkic Council. Retrieved 29 April 2020. "Extraordinary Summit of Turkic Council held through videoconferencing on the initiative of President Ilham Aliyev". Official website of President of Azerbaijan. Retrieved 29 April 2020. "BAKU DECLARATION OF THE EXTRAORDINARY SUMMIT OF THE COOPERATION COUNCIL OF TURKIC SPEAKING STATES" (PDF). Turkic Council. "World Population Prospects 2022". United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 17 July 2022. "World Population Prospects 2022: Demographic indicators by region, subregion and country, annually for 1950-2100" (XSLX) ("Total Population, as of 1 July (thousands)"). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 17 July 2022. "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects". IMF. 5 April 2022. Retrieved 14 September 2022. "Press Release of the Sixth Summit of the Turkic Council". Turkic Council. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "Organization of Turkic States pledges observer status for Turkish Cyprus - Türkiye News". Hürriyet Daily News. 11 November 2022. Retrieved 11 November 2022. "Türk Devletleri Teşkilatı Devlet Başkanları Konseyi 10. Zirvesi başladı". www.aa.com.tr. Retrieved 4 March 2024. "Dışişleri Bakan Yardımcısı açıkladı". 22 August 2020. "Bakan Çavuşoğlu: Ekonominin güç merkezi Asya olmaya başladı". www.hurriyet.com.tr (in Turkish). Retrieved 30 September 2022. Hamdullah Mohib [@hmohib] (4 May 2021). "Yesterday, Afghanistan proudly applied for observer status in the Cooperation Council of Turkic Speaking States (CCTS)..." (Tweet) – via Twitter. "Secretary General of the Turkic Council received Afghan Ambassador". Turkic Council. "From Rep. of Turkey Ministry of Foreign Affairs". Republic of Turkey Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Retrieved 25 August 2017. "From Rep. of Turkey Ministry of Foreign Affairs". Republic of Turkey Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 11 November 2014. Retrieved 25 August 2017. "From Rep. of Turkey Ministry of Foreign Affairs". Republic of Turkey Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Retrieved 25 August 2017. "Türk Dili Konuşan Ülkeler İşbirliği Konseyi". Turkkon.org. Retrieved 25 August 2017. "Presidents of the Turkic Council will hold an Extraordinary Video Summit on 10 April 2020 on Corona Virus | News". Türk Keneşi. Retrieved 10 April 2020. "Turkistan Declaration of the Informal Summit of the Cooperation Council of Turkic Speaking States". Turkic Council. 31 March 2020. "The 8th Turkic Council Summit will take place on November 12, 2021 in Istanbul". TWESCO (in Turkish). 27 July 2021. Archived from the original on 27 July 2021. Retrieved 27 July 2021. Məmmədov, Sadiq (2 August 2022). "Samarkand to host summit of Organization of Turkic States". News.az. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Uzbekistan to hold 1st Summit of Organization of Turkic States in 2022". UzReport.news (in Russian). Retrieved 16 November 2021. "Organization of Turkic States discloses date and venue of next summit". Trend.Az. 9 February 2022. Retrieved 13 February 2022. "Turkic_States". Twitter. Retrieved 7 March 2023. "Ankara Declaration of the Extraordinary Summit of the organization of Turkic States" (PDF). 16 March 2023. Retrieved 16 March 2023. "10th Summit of the Council of Heads of State of the Organization of Turkic States - Astana, Kazakhstan | Upcoming Events". Türk Devletleri Teşkilatı. Retrieved 17 October 2023. "Astana Declaration of the 10th Summit of the Organization of Turkic States" (PDF). Retrieved 3 November 2023. "OTS informal Summit meeting will be held in Shusha in July". Apa.az. Retrieved 19 February 2024. "Nakhchivan Agreement on the Establishment of the Cooperation Council of Turkic Speaking States" (PDF). Retrieved 19 March 2022. "21. asır Türk dünyasının asrı olmalı". www.aa.com.tr. Retrieved 19 March 2022. "Press Release of the Sixth Summit of the Turkic Council | News". Türk Keneşi. Retrieved 13 November 2021. The Presidents wished success to the Kyrgyz President for the assumption of the Chairmanship of the Turkic Council. "Chairman". Türk Keneşi. Retrieved 13 November 2021. During the Baku Summit held in October 2019, the Republic of Azerbaijan took over the Chairmanship from the Kyrgyz Republic until the next Summit to be held in the second half of 2020 in Turkey. "Eighth Summit of the Organization of Turkic States was held in Istanbul | News". Türk Keneşi. Retrieved 13 November 2021. At the Summit, the Chairmanship of the Organization was handed over from Azerbaijan to Turkey... "Mirziyoyev awards Erdogan and Berdimuhamedov with Highest Order of Turkic World | News". Türk Keneşi. Retrieved 11 November 2022. "10th summit of Organization of Turkic States starts in Kazakhstan". www.aa.com.tr. Retrieved 3 November 2023. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Organization of Turkic States. Official website Text of Nakhchivan Agreement