Cyborgs: Heroes Never Die (Ukrainian: Кiборги: Герої не вмирають; Romanized: Kiborhy: Heroyi ne vmyrayut) is a 2017 Ukrainian war drama film about the Cyborgs, the Ukrainian defenders in the Second Battle of Donetsk Airport during the war in Donbas. The film was written by Nataliya Vorozhbyt, directed by Akhtem Seitablayev and produced by Ivanna Diadiura. Based on a national patriotic myth and released on the second anniversary of the fall of the airport's old terminal, Cyborgs had the highest-grossing opening weekend for a Ukrainian film at that time. Funded chiefly by the Ukrainian State Film Agency and filmed with assistance from the Ukrainian Armed Forces, the film is not propaganda as it portrays the Ukrainian fighters performing both heroic and antiheroic actions. The film received six Golden Dzygas at the 2018 Ukrainian National Film Awards. The film is set during and based upon the events of the Second Battle of Donetsk Airport of the Russo-Ukrainian war. Ukrainian soldiers and volunteers had held the airport for four months since an earlier battle, while surrounded by pro-Russian forces associated with the Donetsk People's Republic (DPR). Although a ceasefire had been agreed to by the Minsk Protocol and confirmed by a memorandum (in effect 5 and 19 September 2014, respectively), minor skirmishes continued with increasing frequency that month. In late September, pro-Russian forces began a concerted effort to retake the airport, using heavy artillery, armoured warfare, and building-to-building and close-quarters combat, capturing several airport buildings until their advance was halted in early October. Repeated efforts to take the airport's terminals followed, and by the end of October the new terminal building was a charred frame, its upper four floors collapsed, with Ukrainian forces in the lower floors fighting off daily artillery bombardments, infantry attacks, and infiltrators coming through barricaded tunnels. I don’t know who is guarding the airport in Donetsk, but we haven’t been able to dislodge them for the past three months. We tried storming the complex, but every time we are . . .[pushed back] and forced to withdraw. I've no idea who is defending the airport, but they are not people. They are cyborgs. Post from a DPR fighter on Ukraine Today Pro-Russian fighters who participated in the battle posted on social media about the tireless and almost superhuman enemy they faced, calling them " cyborgs". Although intended as a slander, it went viral on social media, creating a patriotic national myth. Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko said that it "became synonymous with courage, persistence, and patriotism of the Ukrainian warrior." Cyborg was named "word of the year" by online Ukrainian dictionary MySlovo. The airport had lost much of its strategic value but remained important as a symbol for morale and to divert pro-Russian forces from other battlefronts. The Ukrainian defenders held on until mid-January 2015, when the collapse of several buildings by pro-Russian sappers and a surge of Russian-supplied military vehicles resulted in significant casualties and made continued defence of the ruins impossible. Ukrainian soldiers and volunteers transfer to an armoured convoy at Pisky, jeering at a pro-Russian newscrew which falsely reports that Donetsk airport has fallen to DPR forces. The convoy is attacked by artillery and the fighters bail out of their burning infantry fighting vehicle and take cover in a crater. They are rescued by Serpen and brought to the airport in a passenger van. Amid sporadic artillery fire, Hid takes the newcomers on a tour. They reinforce another squad who were forced out of a duty-free shop by the enemy. Hid finds and disarms an improvised explosive device and they retake the duty-free, inflicting casualties on the separatists who retreat down escalators. They resupply with the separatists' Russian-supplied ammunition and continue with a visit to the badly damaged air traffic control tower. Subota and Staryi share vodka pilfered from the duty-free. Hid reveals a freezer holding the bodies of the first enemy soldiers killed, held for an exchange which the DPR refused. Serpen is given command and asks for their motivations. Staryi explains that he can't make sense of the doublespeak covering Russian aggression, of being dominated by a "brother nation", and that he had to volunteer when his son did. Subota, a soldier, explains that he took an oath and that it is a matter of honour and duty. Mars feels hatred toward the murderous invaders and seeks to avenge the death of his best friend. Mazhor, who had impatiently left after a disagreement with Serpen, finds a Russian body in a runway crater. The dead man's cellphone blares, attracting the enemy. Mazhor is able to kill a Russian and wound a separatist, steal their car, and race back to the airport terminal under enemy fire. While Mazhor and Serpen argue over his actions, Mars walks to the captured separatist and shoots him to death. Mazhor is to be sent away for disobeying orders. Mazhor blames Serpen and his entire generation for the state of Ukraine, accusing him of intolerance and disparaging progressive European values. Mars, who had become despondent, suffers a heart attack and is loaded onto an evacuation vehicle. Mazhor gives Staryi a weapon he retrieved from a dead Russian and is permitted to stay. Serpen and Mazhor argue again, and Serpen accuses Mazhor of being a pseudo-liberal idealist who knows little of the country's history or its power dynamics, and blames his generation for Ukraine's initial defeats in the war. The squad return to the duty-free shop to watch for the separatists. Staryi begins singing, emboldening the separatists who climb the escalators. Staryi notices them and smoothly arms himself and opens fire, joined by the others. The unit descends and shoot the other separatists there. Mazhor detains a lone soldier who he suspects is a separatist. An attack on the terminal is launched and a concussive blast knocks Mazhor out, presumably killing his prisoner. Enemies advance and the squad fight while retreating into the airport terminal. Mazhor awakens alongside another wounded soldier and is told that the Ukrainians won the battle; that the separatist forces took the terminal but were then pushed back out. The rest of the squad engage in a tense prisoner exchange. Hid becomes extremely agitated on recognizing one of the enemy's prisoners. They keep this man off the record and Hid beats him in revenge as the man had tortured Hid earlier in the war. The separatist believes that they are fascists and that they've been in a civil war since the USSR was divided. Serpen lets Mazhor decide what to do with the separatist, and they release him but he is immediately shot by a Russian sniper. Intelligence has been received that DPR forces are going to burn the airport with Russian TOS-1 rocket artillery. The members of the squad are each given permission to leave. Giving humble reasons, they each decide to stay. They put their affairs in order, phoning family members. The squad is relieved to see tanks advancing upon the airport instead of the rocket systems. Furious at the broken cease fire, headquarters gives permission to "brutally punish the violators". A Ukrainian tank moves into a protected position and exchanges fire; when it is disabled, the squad rescue its crew. Subota is wounded and while treated by a battlefield medic, posts a selfie which goes viral. Serpen, after ordering Mazhor to evacuate Subota, phones his daughter. While pacing to get a better signal he comes under a sniper's crosshairs and is fatally shot. The phone rings and the commander informs Serpen's wife. The squad mourns. Mazhor evacuates Subota along with Serpen's body, and in the ruins of Pisky a chaplain makes a moving speech over Serpen. Later, the squad is reinforced and the newcomers are asked about their motivations. Among them is Mazhor. A folk song is heard as the group are taken on a tour. The Ukrainian fighters are all referred to by nicknames or call signs. Makar Tikhomirov as "Mazhor" (which can be translated as either "major scale" or "silver spoon"), an emotional and idealistic draftee who refused an opportunity to avoid the draft as a renowned musician. While naive and rebellious at the beginning of the film, he matures into a responsible leader. Andrey Isaenko as "Subota" ("Saturday"), a sensible paratrooper who uses social media to refute Russian propaganda and has a substantial following. Roman Yasinovskiy as "Hid" ("guide"), a Donbas native with local knowledge, who was in the conflict from its beginnings. Oleksandr Piskunov as "Mars" Mariia Zanyborshch as Natalka Yuriy Khvostenko as "Borshch", a cook Oleh Drach as Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine Dmytro Saranskov Oleksandr Suhak Vyacheslav Dovzhenko as "Serpen" ("August"), a history teacher and Ukrainian nationalist who volunteered and was quickly promoted for merit. Viktor Zhdanov as "Staryi" (literally "old man"), a retiree from a provincial town who, despite forgetting his weapon in the convoy, is capable in combat. Kostyantyn Temlyak as "Psykh", a physician Roman Semysal as Kombat "Redut" Oleksandr Laptii Anastasiya Karpenko as Yulya Roman Vyskrebentsev Vsevolod Shekita as captured Russian Ihor Salimonov as separatist leader Andrii Sharaskin as "Bohemia", cameo Yevhen Nyshchuk as chaplain. A politically-active actor, Nyshchuk was the Culture Minister at the time of the film's release and is known as the "voice of Maidan". Oleksandr Zahorodnyi as journalist, cameo Vladislav Zhurenko as cameraman, cameo The project was launched on 19 October 2014, when fighting at the airport was escalating. Director Akhtem Seitablayev encountered a great deal of doubt about the project from those who questioned the making of the movie while the conflict was ongoing, feeling that it was "too soon". However, he also received letters of encouragement from soldiers and their families. Screenwriter Nataliya Vorozhbyt wrote the story about a combat alert mission which began in September 2014. Vorozhbyt interviewed many of the airport's defenders and was introduced to fighters in the region by technical consultant Andriy Sharaskin. The first draft of the script was completed on 15 July 2015. The film was made primarily for a domestic audience, but also to bring awareness to the story internationally. The script was structured to be understandable to a Western audience. Two-fifths of the heroes speak Russian, reflecting that many of the airport's defenders did not speak Ukrainian. Some characters also speak a mixed Russian–Ukrainian pidgin called Surzhyk. Ukrainian cultural scholar Uilleam Blacker – who considers Vorozhbyt and Seitablayev among the best of their professions in Ukraine – notes the use of parapolemic space in Cyborgs, which focus on conversations between the many action scenes. On multiple occasions, rather than focusing on the moment of a fighter's death, attention is given to the mobile phone which survives the deceased, which according to Blacker, serves to underscore the shock of the person's death among those who knew him. Here, the person is "simultaneously lost and powerfully present" in the disbelief of traumatic events. Art historian Victor Griza (et al) holds that the goal of Cyborgs is to show the diversity of Ukraine's fighters. The protagonists in the film represent a cross-section of Ukrainian society, in their cultural and political beliefs, who might not otherwise encounter each other. Vorozhbyt uses the battle to illuminate these differences and their complexities. Each character has internal conflicts and struggles. Central are the arguments between Mazhor and Serpen, and their varied ideals for the future of Ukraine. The film was produced by Ivanna Diadiura. Half of the film's 47,000,000 Ukrainian hryvnia (US$1.8 million) budget was financed by the Ukrainian State Film Agency (Derzhkino), with additional financing by Idas Film, telecom company Kyivstar, and the Georgian company TUTA. Significant assistance was provided by the Ukrainian Ministry of Defence and the General Staff of the Ukrainian Armed Forces, including permissions and heavy military equipment for filming. Although the film was financed by the Ukrainian government and closely follows their official account of events, Seitablayev stated that Vorozhbyt was given complete freedom in writing the script and there was no state censorship. Two-thirds of the movie were shot in Kyiv Oblast. Parts of the movie were shot in the closed Chernihiv Shestovytsia Airport and the Gonchariv military training ground. Veterans of the battle were present on each day of shooting for consultation. Seitablayev stated that the film is about the "choice between the Soviet past and the European future" and that the film's creators sought to display the determination of the characters and convey the passion behind their reasons for fighting for Ukraine. About four hours of high-quality material was filmed. Seitablayev's director's cut was 140 minutes. He appealed to his mentor, Andrii Donchyk  [ uk ], who edited the film to 120 minutes. Then, together, they made the final edit of 113 minutes. Derzhkino provided ₴550,000 for the film's promotion, a then-unprecedented amount for the state agency. The film was included in the Days of Ukrainian Cinema programs held internationally. The first public screening was held on 30 November 2017 in Lviv. It was released on 7 December 2017, the second anniversary of the fall of the airport's old terminal. The film was dedicated to the defence of Ukraine, to every defender and volunteer and their family members. The production's team and the Come Back Alive Foundation («Повернись живим») organized the #ICare! (#ЯНебайдужий!) initiative, which set aside 5  hryvnias from each ticket purchased for the movie to help the families of those killed in the battle for Donetsk airport. This totalled more than a half-million hryvnias from the film's opening week. There was some controversy with theatres in Chernivtsi allegedly refusing to screen the film under various pretences. The film's creators were accused by author Serhii Loiko of plagiarism and copying storylines from his book Airport. Seitablayev refuted this with the project's timeline, noting that the first draft of the script was written almost a year before the book's publication. Mariupol, Zaporizhzhia, Dnipro, Lviv, Chernihiv and Ternopil each initially had only one theatre screening the film on opening day, but quickly expanded to multiple screens due to public demand. The movie ranked first at the (Ukrainian) box office in its opening week. The film brought in 8.2 million hryvnias at the Ukrainian box office in the first weekend, which was a record for a domestic film according to the Ukrainian State Film Agency. Christopher Miller of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty commented on the movie: "While clearly meant to drum up support for the war effort, Cyborgs isn't entirely propagandistic". He noted the variation of heroic and antiheroic actions by the Ukrainian soldiers and that dialog fluctuates between Russian and Ukrainian throughout the course of the film. Film critic Daria Badior felt that the film's narrative was weak and the film forgettable, though noted that "It's too early to respond objectively [to the war]". Cyborgs received six Golden Dzygas at the 2018 Ukrainian National Film Awards, including best film, best actor (for Vyacheslav Dovzhenko), best supporting actor ( Viktor Zhdanov), best screenplay, and two technical awards. Although Russian disinformation spread the myth that there was a "homegrown separatist movement" in Donbas, the militant units in the region in 2014 largely consisted of Russian nationals. Some of these units had nothing to do with the DPR, flew the Russian flag, and intended for Russia to annex the region as it had with Crimea. The bodies of 31 Russian mercenaries killed in the First Battle of Donetsk Airport were secretly transported across the border to a Russian military morgue, to conceal their participation in the conflict. In September 2014, the disparate groups were organized under the banner of the United Armed Forces of Novorossiya. This corresponds with the engagements of 3 October 2014, the heaviest day of fighting up to that date. A clip from this scene is used in the film's introduction, then used here in full context. Miller, Christopher (7 December 2017). "Art Of War: Ukraine Explores Donbas Conflict On Screen, In Books". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. Archived from the original on 8 March 2022. Retrieved 14 December 2017. UA TV (12 February 2017). "Story of the "cyborgs": Ukraine's Donetsk airport defenders to hit big screen |". Euromaidan Press. Archived from the original on 8 December 2017. Retrieved 20 January 2019. Grytsenko, Oksana (10 October 2014). "'Cyborgs' pledge to defend ruined Donetsk airport". Kyiv Post. Archived from the original on 31 March 2023. Retrieved 25 March 2023. Ladygina, Yuliya V. (2022). "Cyborgs vs. Vatniks: Hybridity, Weaponized Information, and Mediatized Reality in Recent Ukrainian War Films". East/West: Journal of Ukrainian Studies. 9 (1). Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies, University of Alberta: 105–138. doi:10.21226/ewjus588. ISSN 2292-7956. Archived from the original on 17 May 2022. Retrieved 31 March 2023. Prokhanov, Alexander; Strelkov, Igor (20 November 2014). ""Кто ты, "Стрелок"?"" ["Who are you, Shooter?"]. Zavtra (in Russian). Archived from the original on 22 October 2015. Retrieved 12 April 2015. Kostyuchenko, Elena (27 June 2014). "Battle for Donetsk airport: the story of one Russian fighter". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 January 2018. Retrieved 25 March 2023. "Kremlin-backed rebels form Novorossiya army". Kyiv Post. Interfax-Ukraine. 16 September 2014. "Протокол о результатах консультаций Трехсторонней контактной группы, Минск, 5 сентября 2014 г." [Protocol on the results of consultations of the Trilateral Contact Group, Minsk, September 5, 2014] (Press release) (in Russian). Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). 5 September 2014. Archived from the original on 29 December 2014. Retrieved 9 September 2014. Stern, David (20 September 2014). "Ukraine deal with pro-Russian rebels at Minsk talks". BBC News. Archived from the original on 1 September 2018. Retrieved 31 March 2023. "Donetsk airport shelling violates east Ukraine truce". BBC News. 30 September 2014. Archived from the original on 27 July 2022. Retrieved 31 March 2023. Thorp, Gene; Gamio, Lazaro (28 October 2014). "The cease-fire war in Donetsk". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 17 April 2022. Retrieved 31 March 2023. "Ukraine conflict: Heavy fighting for Donetsk airport". BBC News. 3 October 2014. Archived from the original on 15 November 2022. Retrieved 31 March 2023. Loiko, Sergei L. (28 October 2014). "Ukraine fighters, surrounded at wrecked airport, refuse to give up". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 10 February 2023. Retrieved 31 March 2023. Loiko, Sergei L. (28 January 2015). "How Ukraine's outgunned 'cyborgs' lost Donetsk airport". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 1 September 2022. Retrieved 31 March 2023. Sukhov, Oleg (22 January 2015). "Donetsk Airport overrun by rebels, say army volunteers". Kyiv Post. Blair, David (21 January 2015). "Russia sends 9,000 troops into Ukraine, says Petro Poroshenko". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 1 May 2022. Retrieved 31 March 2023. "Pro-Russia rebels attempt to seize Donetsk airport in Ukraine". The Guardian. Associated Press. 3 October 2014. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 31 March 2023. Coomarasamy, James (3 October 2014). "Ukraine conflict: Heavy fighting for Donetsk airport". BBC News. Archived from the original on 15 November 2022. Retrieved 31 March 2023. Tunik, Yuliya (15 December 2017). "Режисер Ахтем Сеітаблаєв: Так, фільм «Кіборги» - це пропаганда. Пропаганда здорового глузду і смаку" [Director Akhtem Seitablayev: Yes, the film "Cyborgs" is propaganda. Propaganda of common sense and taste]. Glavcom (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 31 March 2023. Retrieved 19 December 2017. Blacker, Uilleam (2022). "Writing around War: Parapolemics, Trauma, and Ethics in Ukrainian Representations of the War in the Donbas". East/West: Journal of Ukrainian Studies. 9 (1): 17–35. doi:10.21226/ewjus706. ISSN 2292-7956. Griza, Viktor A.; Honcharuk, Serhii M.; Mykhalov, Volodymyr Ya.; Barnych, Mykhailo M.; Balaban, Oleksandr I. (December 2023). "Changes in the representation of heroes in contemporary Ukrainian cinema". Journal of European Studies. 53 (4, Ukraine Solidarity issue). Sage Publications: 321–443. doi:10.1177/00472441231206550. ISSN 0047-2441. "Ukraine's Cyborgs about defenders of Donetsk airport wins the box office in 1st weekend (Trailer)". Ukrainian Independent Information Agency (UNIAN). 12 December 2017. Archived from the original on 31 March 2023. Retrieved 14 December 2017. Slipchenko, Kateryna (28 November 2017). "Автори фільму «Кіборги» перерахують кошти родинам загиблих в боях за Донецький аеропорт" [The creators of the film "Cyborgs" will transfer funds to the families of those killed in the battles for the Donetsk airport]. Zaxid.net (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 25 February 2023. Economou, Vassilis (25 April 2018). "Cyborgs: Heroes Never Die snags the main Golden Dzigas at the Ukrainian National Film Awards". Cineuropa. Archived from the original on 31 March 2023. Retrieved 2 March 2024. Cyborgs: Heroes Never Die at IMDb