White Ruthenia (Belarusian: Белая Русь, romanized: Biełaja Ruś; Polish: Ruś Biała; Russian: Белая Русь, romanized: Belaya Rus'; Ukrainian: Біла Русь, romanized: Bila Ruś) is one of the historical divisions of Kievan Rus' according to the color scheme, which also includes Black and Red Ruthenia. In the Late Middle Ages and Early Modern period, the name White Ruthenia was characterized by instability, designating a number of different regions on the territory of modern Belarus, Russia, and Ukraine. It is recorded mainly in Western European sources, starting from the middle of the 13th century. Vasily Tatishchev believed that for the first time the term "White Rus'" is found in the Rostov chronicles in the year 1135, where the lands of Rostov-Suzdal Principality were mentioned. Referring to the publications of the Pole Maciej Stryjkowski, Persian and other Eastern peoples who called the Russian princes "ak-padishah"(white tsar), and the state "Ak-Urus" (White Rus), the historian in his narrative extends this name to all Vladimir-Rostov princes, starting with Yuri Dolgorukiy, and Andrei Bogolyubsky. He also calls the lands controlled by them "White Rus'", and calls the princes "White Russians" or "grand dukes of White Russia".. The praiseworthy songs composed in the second half of the XIV century by the Austrian poet Peter Suchenwirt tell how in 1349, in the battle of Izborsk ("Eysenburk" in the poem), German knights faced "Weizzen Reuzzen" ("White Russians"). However, it is known that it was a squad of Pskov and Izborsk people, led by Georgy Viktorovich, voivode of the Grand Duke of Lithuania Algirdas. On the world Fra's Mauro map (1459), the territory of Novgorod-Moscow Rus' between Volga and White Sea is called White Russia (Rossia Biancha). This map gives the following explanation: This distinction, which is made between White, Black and Red Rus' has no other reason than that that part of Russia that is near the White Sea is called White; that which is near the Black River is called Black; and that which is near the Red River is called Red. (Questa distinction che si fata de rossia biancha, negra e rossa non ha altra cason cha questa, çoè quela parte de rossia che é de qua dal mar biancho se chiama biancha, quela ch'ê de là dal fiume negro se chiama negra e quela ch'ê de là dal fiume rosso se chiama rossa). Many other variations of this name appeared on ancient maps; for instance, Russia Alba, Russija Alba, Wit Rusland, Weiß Reußen (Weißreußen), White Russia, Hviterussland, Hvíta Rússland, Weiß Russland (Weißrussland), Ruthenia Alba, Ruthénie Blanche and Weiß Ruthenien (Weißruthenien). The name was also assigned to various territories, often quite distant from that of present Belarus.[clarification needed] According to Alfred Nicolas Rambaud: The name of White (Lithuanian: Balta) Russia is given to the provinces conquered from the 13th to the 14th century by the Grand Dukes of Lithuania. These were the ancient territories of the Krivitches, Polotchans, Dregovitches, Drevlians, Doulebes, now forming the governments of Vitepsk, Mohilef, and Minsk. The Lithuanian territories of Grodno, Novogrodek and Belostok were sometimes called Black Russia. An ethno-religious theory suggests that the name used to describe the part of old Ruthenian lands within the Grand Duchy of Lithuania that had been populated mostly by Slavs who had been Christianized early, as opposed to Black Ruthenia, which was predominantly inhabited by pagan Balts. On the 1712 map of French cartographer Henri Chatelain "Russie noire" (Black Ruthenia) is placed in region of Eastern Galicia (today Western Ukraine), which traditionally known as "Russie rouge" (Red Ruthenia). Vasmer's dictionary mentions the dichotomy of "white" land and "taxed" land in Domostroy and speculates that "white" Rus' may have referred to the parts of Kievan Rus' that were not conquered by Golden Horde. Another speculation in Vasmer is that the color of the clothes of the White Ruthenians (perhaps as well as the color of their hair) may have contributed to the name. Oleg Trubachyov calls both theories "complete fantasies".[citation needed] Also, the 16th century chronicler Alexander Guagnini's book Sarmatiae Europeae descriptio wrote that Rus' was divided in three parts. The first part, under the rule of the Muscovite Grand Duke, was called White Ruthenia. The second one, under the rule of Polish king, was called Black Ruthenia. And the rest was Red Ruthenia. He also said Moscow was the center of White Rus' and the Russian metropolitanate, and that the Grand Duke of Moscow was called the White Czar, especially by his subjects. According to the late 19th-century Geographical Dictionary of the Kingdom of Poland, White Ruthenia (Ruś Biała) constituted the Minsk, Mścisław, Połock, Smolensk and Witebsk voivodeships of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth (before the Partitions of Poland), or the Mogilev Governorate, eastern parts of the Minsk and Vitebsk Governorates, the western half of the Smolensk Governorate, and the northern part of the Chernihiv Governorate, i.e. the central, northern and eastern parts of modern Belarus, and the western outskirts of modern Russia with Smolensk and Starodub. The largest cities in the region so defined today are Minsk, Gomel, Vitebsk, Mogilev, Smolensk and Babruysk. Black Ruthenia Red Ruthenia Little Russia Great Russia New Russia V. N. Tatishchev, Russian History, book II, 1773, p. 476 Russian History, book I, part II, chapter 47, 1769, p. 339 Peter Suchenwirt's Werke aus dem vierzehnten Jahrhunderte. 1827, p. 46 Website of the National Library of St. Mark in Venice. Accessed: March 27, 2016. Rambaud, Alfred (1898). "2". History of Russia. Archived from the original on 2021-08-31. Retrieved 2021-08-31. Аб паходжанні назваў Белая і Чорная Русь (Eng. "About the Origins of the Names of White and Black Ruthenia"), Язэп Юхо (Joseph Juho), 1956. Słownik geograficzny Królestwa Polskiego i innych krajów słowiańskich, Tom I (in Polish). Warszawa. 1880. p. 193.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Akta Aleksandra, króla polskiego, wielkiego księcia litewskiego i t.d. (1501—1506). Wyd. F. Papee. Kraków, 1927 Alexandrowicz S. Rozwój kartografii Wielkiego Księstwa Litewskiego od XV do połowy XVIII w. Poznań, 1989 Anonymi Dvbnicensis. Liber de rebus Lvdovici R. H.. Analecta Monumentorum Hungariae historicum literarorium maximum inedita. Budapestini, 1986 I.V. Bellum Prutenum. Smereka E. Zbiór pisarzy polsko–lacińskich. Leopoli, 3, 1933 Colker M. L. America rediscovered in thirteenth century?. Speculum. A journal of medieval studies. Cambridge. Vol. 54. No. 4. October 1979 Cosmographey oder beschreibung aller Laender, Herrschaften, fürnemsten Stetten... Beschriben durch Sebastianum Münsterum... Basel, 1550; Ulrichs von Richental Chronik des Constanzer Concils 1414 bis 1418. Herausgegeben von M. R. Buck. Tübingen, 1882 Cromer M. Polonia sive de situ, populis, moribus, magistratibus et republica regni Poloni libri duo. Cracoviae, 1901. (паўтоp выданьня 1578 г.) Der Weiss Kunig. Eine Erzählung von den Thaten Kaiser Maximilian der Ersten. Wien, 1775 Guagnini, Alexander (1578). Sarmatiae Europeae descriptio. Kraków: Maciej Wirzbięta. Historica Russiae monumenta ex antiquis exterarum gentium arcivis et bibliothecis deprompta ab A. I. Turgenevio. V. I. Petropoli, 1841 (Акты исторические, относящиеся к России, извлечённые из иностранных архивов и библиотек А. И. Тургеневым) Historiae Ruthenicae Scriptores exteri saeculi XVI. V. I—II. Berolini et Petropoli, 1841—42 Kronika Jana z Czarnkowa (Joannis de Czarnkow. Chronicon Polonorum). Оprac. J. Szlachtowski. Monumenta Poloniae Historica Lwów, T. II. 1872 Nordenskiöld, Adolf Erik Facsimile-Atlas to the Early History of Cartography with Reproductions of the Most Important Maps Printed in the XV and XVI Centuries. Stockholm, 1889. Замысловский Е. Е. Геpбеpштейн и его истоpико–геогpафические известия о России. СПб., 1884 Il Mappamondo di Fra Mauro. A cura di Tullio Gasparini Leporace. Presentazione di Roberto Almagia. Venezia, 1956 Ioannes Stobnicensis. Introductio in Ptolomei Cosmographiam. Cracoviae, 1512 Ostrowski W. About the origin of the name «White Russia». London, 1975 Peter Suchenwirt’s Werke aus dem vierzehnten Jahrhundert. Hrsg. von Alois Primisser. Wien, 1827 Prisschuch Th. Des conzilis grundveste. Die historischen Volkslieder der Deutschen vom 13. bis 6. Jahrhundert. Bd. 1. Leipzig, 1865 Prochaska A. Codex epistolaris Vitoldi. Cracoviae, 1882 Rude & barbarous kingdom. Russia in the accounts of sixteenth-century English voyagers. Ed. by Lloyd E. Berry and Robert O. Crummey. Madison—London, 1968 Scriptores Rerum Hungaricarum tempore ducum regumque stirpis Arpadianae gestarum. Vol. II. Budapest, 1938 Starowolski Sz. Polska albo opisanie położenia królestwa Polskiego. Kraków, 1976 Stryikowski M. Kronika Polska, Litewska, Żmódzka i wszystkiej Rusi. T. I-II. Warszawa, 1846 Witkowska M. H. S. Vita sanctae Kyngae ducissae Cracoviensis. Roczniki Humanistyczne. T. X, z. 2. Lublin, 1961. Імя тваё «Белая Русь». Мн., 1991 Опись архива Посольского приказа 1626 г. Ч. 1. М., 1977 Порецкий Я. И. Соломон Рысинский * Solomo Pantherus Leucorussus. Мн., 1983 ПСРЛ. Т. 2. СПб., 1843; Т. 25. М.—Л., 1949 Рыбаков Б. А. Русские карты Московии XV — начала XVI в. М., 1974 Савельева Е. А. Hовгоpод и Hовгоpодская земля в западноевропейской каpтогpафии XV—XVI вв.. Геогpафия России XV—XVIII вв. (по сведениям иностpанцев). Л., 1984 Слово избpанное от святых писаний еже на латыню. Попов А. Н. Историко–литературный обзор дpевнеpусских полемических сочинений пpотив латинян. М., 1875 Why is the Russia White?