The Faculty is a 1998 American science fiction horror film directed and edited by Robert Rodriguez with a screenplay by Kevin Williamson. It stars Jordana Brewster, Clea DuVall, Laura Harris, Josh Hartnett, Shawn Hatosy, Famke Janssen, Piper Laurie, Bebe Neuwirth, Robert Patrick, Usher Raymond, Jon Stewart, and Elijah Wood. The film was theatrically released on December 25, 1998, by Miramax Films through Dimension Films. It grossed $63.2 million and has developed a cult following since its release. One evening at Herrington High School in Ohio, teachers and Principal Drake leave after discussing the school's budget. When Drake returns to retrieve her keys, she is attacked by the school's football coach, Joe Willis. Drama teacher Mrs. Olson emotionlessly stabs Drake with scissors as she flees the school. The following morning, the students arrive, including Casey Connor, the dedicated but perpetually harassed photographer for the school newspaper. Casey is the unappreciated assistant to spiteful Delilah Profitt, the paper's editor-in-chief and head cheerleader. Delilah's mistreated boyfriend Stan Rosado is contemplating quitting the football team to pursue academics. Zeke Tyler is an intelligent yet rebellious student repeating his senior year. Zeke sells, among other illegal items, a powdery ecstasy-like drug he distributes hidden in ballpoint pens. He is confronted by teacher Elizabeth Burke, who expresses concern for him over his illegal activities. Naive transfer student Marybeth Louise Hutchinson befriends self-styled outcast Stokely Mitchell, who has deliberately spread rumors that she is a lesbian though she has a crush on Stan. Marybeth develops a crush on Zeke which is reciprocated. Casey finds a strange creature on the football field and takes it to science teacher Mr. Furlong, who believes it is a new species of cephalopod-specific parasite called a mesozoan. Delilah and Casey hide in the teachers' lounge to find a story. They witness Coach Willis and Ms. Olson forcing one of the parasites into the ear of the school nurse. They also find the body of another teacher, Mrs. Brummel. Casey and Delilah flee, and Casey calls the police, but his claims are dismissed. The next day, Casey tells Delilah, Stan, and Stokely he believes the teachers are being controlled by aliens. After Zeke and Marybeth tease them about their theory, Mr. Furlong attempts to infect them. Zeke injects his homemade drugs into Furlong's eye, killing him. Zeke takes the five to his house, where he experiments on a specimen retrieved by Casey. He discovers it needs water to survive and can be killed by his "drug", revealed to actually be raw, powdered caffeine (as caffeine acts to dehydrate the user, and the aliens are hyper-sensitive to hydration of both themselves and their host). Zeke makes everyone take his drug to prove they are uninfected. Delilah is revealed as infected and she destroys Zeke's lab and most of his drug supply before escaping. Acting on Stokely's speculation that killing the alien queen will revert everyone to normal, the group returns to the school, where their football team is playing and infecting opposing players. Believing Principal Drake to be the queen, they isolate her in the gym and fatally shoot her. Stan confronts the coach and team to see if the plan worked, but becomes infected himself. Zeke and Casey retrieve more of Zeke's drugs from his car. Casey leads infected students away from Zeke, who encounters Miss Burke in the parking lot and incapacitates her. At the gym, Marybeth reveals herself to be the alien queen; earlier on, she faked taking the drug. Casey and Stokely flee to the swimming pool, where Stokely is injured and becomes infected. Zeke and Casey hide in the locker room, where Marybeth reverts to her human disguise. She explains she is taking over Earth because her planet is dying. Marybeth transforms back into her true form and hurls Zeke across the room into the lockers, knocking him out. Casey seizes the drug and traps the queen behind retracting bleachers. Just as the queen infects him, he stabs the drug into her eye, killing her and halting his infection. Casey returns to the locker room and finds Stokely and Zeke alive. One month later, everyone returned to normal. Stan and Stokely, who has shed her Goth girl image, are now dating. Zeke has taken Stan's place on the football team, while Miss Burke affectionately watches him practice. Delilah, no longer vindictive, is now dating Casey, who is considered a local hero as various news media reveal the attempted alien invasion is now public knowledge, even as the FBI denies it. Jordana Brewster as Delilah Profitt Clea DuVall as Stokely Mitchell Laura Harris as Marybeth Hutchinson Josh Hartnett as Zeke Tyler Shawn Hatosy as Stan Rosado Salma Hayek as Nurse Harper Famke Janssen as Miss Burke Piper Laurie as Mrs. Olson Christopher McDonald as Casey's dad Bebe Neuwirth as Principal Drake Robert Patrick as Coach Willis Usher Raymond as Gabe Jon Stewart as Mr. Furlong Daniel von Bargen as Mr. Tate Elijah Wood as Casey Connor Summer Phoenix as "F*%# You" girl Jon Abrahams as "F*%# You" boy In 1990, David Wechter and Bruce Kimmel wrote their first draft of the script and sent it out, but there were no buyers. It wasn't until after the success of Scream (1996) that Miramax bought the script and rushed it into production. Bob Weinstein and Harvey Weinstein brought in Kevin Williamson to do rewrites, keeping the basic story, but rewriting the dialogue and adding new characters to make it more "hip". Originally, Williamson was set to direct the film, but he chose not to so he could direct his self-penned script Teaching Mrs. Tingle (1999). The Weinsteins brought in Robert Rodriguez to direct the film instead. The Faculty takes place in the fictional town of Herrington, Ohio, but was shot in Austin, San Marcos, Dallas, and Lockhart, Texas. In a retrospective interview, Clea Duvall said the making of the film "was so much fun. It was mostly night shoots, so it was like we were in this alternate universe. Working all night long and making this fun sci-fi horror movie. I loved it." The score is composed by Marco Beltrami, who had previously scored the teen-slasher-horror film, Scream, as well as Mimic (1997). Both Beltrami's score and songs by various artists used in the film were released as albums. The "music from the motion picture" album features songs by various indie and alternative rock groups. "Another Brick in the Wall (Part 2)" – Class of '99 "The Kids Aren't Alright" – The Offspring "I'm Eighteen" – Creed "Helpless" – D Generation "School's Out" – Soul Asylum "Medication" – Garbage "Haunting Me" – Stabbing Westward "Maybe Someday" – Flick "Resuscitation" – Sheryl Crow "It's Over Now" – Neve "Changes" – Shawn Mullins "Stay Young" – Oasis "Another Brick in the Wall (Part 1)" – Class of '99 On March 7, 2023, the label Intrada released Beltrami's complete score for the movie. Several scenes involving an additional character named Venus, played by Kidada Jones, were shown in TV previews for the film, as well as in Tommy Hilfiger promotional commercials for the movie, but her scenes were cut from the final film. She is visible in a scene in the theatrical version, standing next to Gabe (Usher) in Mr. Furlong's (Jon Stewart) science class when they are looking at the "new species" in the aquarium. The Faculty was released in several countries on Blu-ray, such as Canada, on October 6, 2009, by Alliance; in Australia on September 1, 2011, by Reel; in the United Kingdom on October 3, 2011, by Lionsgate, in Germany on October 6, 2011, by Studio Canal; in France on January 10, 2012, by Studio Canal; and in the United States on July 31, 2012, by Echo Bridge Home Entertainment. Lionsgate re-issued the Blu-ray version in the United States on October 7, 2014, after Echo Bridge lost the rights to the Miramax films. Home media for The Faculty do not include traditional extras provided for other Robert Rodriguez films, such as a "10 Minute Film School" feature, audio commentary, and making-of featurettes. The Faculty was viewed on 2,365 screens on its opening weekend, debuting at No. 5 in the US and making $11,633,495. Its eventual US gross was $40.3 million. Its debut below commercial expectations has been partly credited to the studio's decision to release the movie on Christmas Day, a time when audiences are likelier to watch traditional dramas or feel-good fare. In retrospect, Jordana Brewster said: It was sort of the inverse of Fast and Furious, right? So with The Fast and Furious, I was like, "This is a small movie about cars. It's a really fun summer project." ... With The Faculty it was like, "You guys, this is gonna be huge. Look at all these successes around us," like She's All That and Scream. ... And then it turned out it wasn't so huge. We thought it was gonna be massive ... But it was a cult classic so that's really cool. On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, The Faculty holds an approval rating of 58% based on 64 reviews, with an average rating of 5.70/10. The site's critics consensus called the film a "Rip-off of other sci-fi thrillers." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 61 out of 100 based on 19 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B" on an A+ to F scale. Positive reviews at the time praised Kevin Williamson's self-aware script and trademark meta humor that included references to iconic science-fiction films. In a review for Variety, Dennis Harvey wrote, "The Faculty works hard at mixing a canny cocktail of cineastic in-jokes, affectionate teenploitation and high-octane suspense that's as enjoyable as it is impossible to take seriously." Harvey added that Williamson and Robert Rodriguez combine to "make a complete lack of socially redeeming value seem so much fun that 'The Faculty' might well become a pulp classic". Charles Taylor of Salon called the film "subversive" and said "its honest, good-natured junkiness… feels like a relief". He appreciated the film's homages to genre movies including Carrie (1976), Invasion of the Body Snatchers (1978) and Blue Velvet (1986) while also citing the character of Stokely as the standout amongst the teen archetypes. Michael Sauter of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a grade of B− and expressed a wish that the film had used the faculty characters more. In contrast, Tom Sinclair, also of EW, gave the film a C+ and said Williamson has become "too invested in the earnestness of teen angst to portray it in the scathing parodistic terms a hip horror movie demands". The New York Times gave a mostly negative review but praised the cast. The Austin Chronicle awarded the film 3.5 stars and said, "While it may suffer a bit from excess character clutter (nearly 10 major characters throughout), it's nonetheless a slam-bang, sci-fi actioner, relentlessly paced and edited, with a pounding soundtrack and some ingenious aliens courtesy of Bernie Wrightson and KNB Effects." Since its release, The Faculty has acquired a strong cult following, something acknowledged by director Robert Rodriguez in May 2023: I personally like mixed-genre movies, and I found that over time people respond to them a lot. Like I've never heard people talk so enthusiastically about The Faculty until the last couple of years. I hear about that movie so much now. Co-star Clea Duvall has also expressed a similar experience: "It was a surprisingly popular movie among people my age and a little younger. I have one friend that, every time I see her, she brings it up. And sometimes she calls me Stokely. She thinks that's funny." In subsequent years, various critics have written about The Faculty's impact. Aliya Whiteley wrote, "It's all about examining the tropes of science fiction with a smart, funny angle. Half of the fun in this film is in identifying where you first came across a certain character's name or saw a particular special effect. For instance, there's a brilliant moment with a head on legs that I defy you to watch and not think of a certain John Carpenter film." Whiteley concluded, "The Faculty is very definitely a big mess of a movie. But if you love all things sci-fi, it's a good mess." Keith Phipps described the film as "a Kevin Williamson-scripted high-school variation on Invasion Of The Body Snatchers." Haleigh Foutch considered it one of the most iconic 1990s teen horror films: "Yet another win from 90s teen screenwriter in chief Kevin Williamson, The Faculty fused Williamson's knack for snappy teen drama with Robert Rodriguez's subversive camp to fantastic results. It's smart without ever taking itself too seriously and campy without ever losing its cool, drawing proudly from the tradition of classic alien invasion movies and casting them in the 90s teen tradition." In hindsight, director Robert Rodriguez said: "Making The Faculty was just a blast. There was so much young energy and the actors were just so into it. I will say, I was worried it wouldn't do well though. I wanted them to use a different title because our target audience wasn't gonna want to see a movie about teachers. So I fought for a better title." He also added: "I think they didn't know how to sell it, which is why I think so many people discovered it later and are now coming out and being like, 'Hey, this movie is pretty good!'" Elijah Wood is also fond of the movie: "That was a really formative experience. And it was so fun getting a chance to work with Robert, who had a very different approach than any other director that I'd worked with." Clea Duvall also acknowledged the cult status of the film: "It's cool to see the legs that movie has had. I feel like that is the number one thing that people come up to me and say or recognize me from still, which is so wild. But it's cool." The film has been praised for its portrayal of teenage alienation, especially within the high school environment and its system of cliques and social roles. In particular, the alien invasion through parasitized bodies has been recognized as functioning as a metaphor for those concepts, reflecting the fear of losing one's nascent individuality to a crowd. The alien queen encapsulates this by offering the heroes a world without alienation or differences, in which "everything that is both wonderful and awful about being a teenager is done away in favor of blind allegiance". Experts also noted in The Faculty a reinvention of the fear of female sexuality often found in the horror genre. The character of Marybeth, the alien queen, is "a complex imbrication of woman, alien and power" that acts beyond the role of femme fatale. She masquerades as a virginal, unassuming girl clad in floral dresses, but at the final battle she reveals her true sexual threat, becoming nude by her alien transformation and turning confident and flirtatious. Her role as a threatening, castrating agent is underlined by the sharp teeth of her species, which evoke a vagina dentata, and their association to water, the archaic, womb-like female element. As the monstrous mother of her race, she tries to seduce the heroes by offering them a symbolic return to the womb. As Sharon Packer and Jody Pennington put it: The image on the screen is dual: we see the beautiful, young, naked Marybeth strolling around looking for Casey, and the shadow of the monstrous form in the walls. Marybeth delivers a speech which ties the elements of the movie together. It is about the "world" she came from and its promises of "paradise" for lost and lonely humans, trapped in high-school "hell". The character of Miss Burke precedes Marybeth in the same line, revealing her hidden sexuality only after being infected and turned into a monster. The scene of her detached, tentacled head in particular echoes the Freudian Medusa head. The monstrous feminine is therefore used in the film to reflect the teenage characters entering adult world, where they are forced to "come to terms with female sexuality and overcome their fear of its 'monstrous' aspects in order to become fully functioning adults". Casey, the male character closest to his softer, feminine side, is the final hero of the film. The film was nominated for a total of eight awards, including an ALMA Award for director Robert Rodriguez, 2 Saturn Awards, 2 Blockbuster Entertainment Awards and 3 Teen Choice Awards, but did not win any. "The Faculty". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved June 25, 2021. "The Faculty (1998)". JP's Box Office. Archived from the original on July 26, 2019. Retrieved November 23, 2019. Barry, Angie (13 April 2015). "Under the Radar: Genre Movies You May Have Missed — The Faculty". Criminalelement.com. Retrieved 28 August 2017. "The Faculty: 10 Reasons It's the Greatest 90's Horror Movie". Screen Rant. 7 December 2019. "The Faculty is an Overlooked '90s Horror Movie You Should See". Screen Rant. 29 November 2019. "10 Most Underrated 90s Teen Movies". 27 August 2014. "The Faculty: Revisiting the '90s Pulp-Horror Cult Classic". 9 October 2023. Goldstein, Patrick (January 1, 1999). "The Faculty". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved September 29, 2012. "The Faculty Film Locations". www.austintexas.org. Retrieved April 25, 2022. Zuckerman, Esther (August 24, 2016). "Clea DuVall on Can't Hardly Wait, Buffy, and how cramps almost cost her Carnivàle". The A.V. Club. Koran, David A. (June 23, 2001). "The Faculty (2000) Soundtrack". Soundtrack.net. Retrieved October 20, 2010. "The Faculty Score Album Announced". Filmmusicreporter.com. February 28, 2023. Retrieved September 15, 2023. "MWCB - Tommy Hilfiger 1998". Double Double Vintage. May 21, 2021. Retrieved April 25, 2022. "The Faculty Blu-ray". blu-ray.com. Retrieved April 25, 2022. Welkos, Robert W. (December 29, 1998). "'Patch Adams' Just What Holiday Ordered". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 15, 2012. Retrieved June 7, 2012. Nemiroff, Perri (June 23, 2021). "Jordana Brewster on the Sky High Expectations Scream Set for The Faculty and What Happened When the Film Didn't Meet Them". Collider. Retrieved July 13, 2021. "The Faculty (1998)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. Retrieved January 24, 2024. "The Faculty Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved April 22, 2018. "Home". Cinemascore. "The Faculty". TVGuide.com. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Harvey, Dennis (December 28, 1998). "The Faculty". Variety. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Taylor, Charles (January 15, 1999). "The Faculty". Salon.com. Archived from the original on October 8, 1999. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Sauter, Michael (June 18, 1999). "The Faculty". EW.com. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Sinclair, Tom (January 8, 1999). "The Faculty". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 17, 2017. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Van Gelder, Lawrence (December 25, 1998). "'The Faculty': No Chance of Tenure". The New York Times. Retrieved April 27, 2022. "Movie Review: The Faculty". Austin Chronicle. December 25, 1998. Retrieved April 27, 2022. "Director Robert Rodriguez on his films Hypnotic and The Faculty". Digital Trends. 2023-05-30. Retrieved 2023-12-27. "Clea DuVall on Playing American Horror Story's Closeted School Teacher". 25 October 2012. "The Faculty". Time Out. September 10, 2012. Retrieved April 27, 2022. "The Faculty". Boxoffice. August 1, 2008. Archived from the original on February 5, 2010. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Whiteley, Aliya (October 11, 2013). "Revisiting Robert Rodriguez's The Faculty". Dennis Publishing. Retrieved April 21, 2014. Phipps, Keith (February 14, 2002). "Robert Rodriguez: Interview". The A.V. Club. Retrieved April 21, 2014. "The Most Iconic 90s Teen Horror Movies, Ranked". Collider. October 20, 2019. "Director Robert Rodriguez on his films Hypnotic and the Faculty". 30 May 2023. "Role Recall: Elijah Wood on learning to curse from Jamie Lee Curtis, hanging from a cliff with Macaulay Culkin, and taking the role of a lifetime in 'The Lord of the Rings'". 7 February 2020. "Clea DuVall Went Back to 'High School' and Found Compassion for Herself". 11 October 2022. Packer & Pennington (2014), p. 175. Sherman (2014), p. 132. West (2018), pp. 111–112. West (2018), p. 111. Packer & Pennington (2014), pp. 173, 175. Ferrimond (2017). Packer & Pennington (2014), p. 178. Packer & Pennington (2014), p. 183. Packer & Pennington (2014), p. 182. Packer & Pennington (2014), pp. 179–180. Packer & Pennington (2014), pp. 178–179. Ferrimond, Katherine (2017). The Contemporary Femme Fatale: Gender, Genre and American Cinema. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 9781317208181. Packer, Sharon; Pennington, Jody (2014). A History of Evil in Popular Culture: What Hannibal Lecter, Stephen King, and Vampires Reveal About America [2 volumes]: What Hannibal Lecter, Stephen King, and Vampires Reveal about America. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 9780313397714. Sherman, Fraser A. (2014). Screen Enemies of the American Way: Political Paranoia About Nazis, Communists, Saboteurs, Terrorists and Body Snatching Aliens in Film and Television. McFarland. ISBN 9780786462254. West, Alexandra (2018). The 1990s Teen Horror Cycle: Final Girls and a New Hollywood Formula. McFarland. ISBN 9781476631288. Wikiquote has quotations related to The Faculty. The Faculty at IMDb The Faculty at AllMovie The Faculty at Box Office Mojo The Faculty at Rotten Tomatoes