Silene vulgaris, the bladder campion or maidenstears, is a plant species of the genus Silene of the family Caryophyllaceae. It is native to Europe, temperate Asia, and northern Africa. It has been widely naturalized in North America. The plant can reach 0.91 metres (3 feet) in height, with flowers about 1.5 centimetres (1⁄2 inch) wide. Similar species include S. noctiflora and S. latifolia. It is native to Europe, temperate Asia and northern Africa and has been introduced to other parts of the world, particularly North America, where it is now widespread and a common wild flower in meadows, open woods and fields. The young shoots and the leaves are sometimes used as food in some countries of the Mediterranean region. The tender leaves may be eaten raw in salads. The older leaves are usually eaten boiled or fried, sauteed with garlic or in omelettes. In Crete it is called agriopapoula (αγριοπάπουλα) and its leaves and tender shoots are eaten browned in olive oil. In Cyprus it is very widely eaten, so much so that in recent years it has once again been cultivated and sold in shops in bunches. Two of the common Cypriot names are strouthouthkia (στρουθούθκια; [stru'θuθca]) and tsakrithkia (τσακρίδκια; [t͡sa'kriðca]). In Italy the leaves of this plant may be used as an ingredient in risotto. It is commonly known as sculpit, stridolo or by the obsolete scientific name Silene inflata, as well as s-ciopetin, grixol in Veneto and nenkuz or sclopit in Friuli and cojet in Piedmont. In the La Mancha region of Spain, where Silene vulgaris leaves are valued as a green vegetable, there used to be people known as collejeros who picked and sold these plants. Leaves are small and narrow so it takes many plants to obtain a sizeable amount. In La Mancha S. vulgaris leaves, locally known as collejas, were mainly used to prepare gazpacho viudo (widower gazpacho), consisting of flatbread known as tortas de gazpacho and a stew prepared with Silene vulgaris leaves. Other dishes prepared with these leaves in Spain include potaje de garbanzos y collejas, huevos revueltos con collejas and arroz con collejas. List of leaf vegetables "Silene vulgaris (Moench) Garcke". Plants of the World Online. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. Retrieved 2023-05-06. Bladder Campion, Prov. of Ontario USDA, NRCS (n.d.). "Silene vulgaris". The PLANTS Database (plants.usda.gov). Greensboro, North Carolina: National Plant Data Team. Retrieved 15 November 2015. Audubon (2023). Wildflowers of North America. Knopf. p. 414. ISBN 978-0593319949. Bladder Campion, Prov. of Ontario Fernald, Merritt Lyndon; Alfred Charles Kinsey; Reed C. Rollins (1996). "Bladder-Campion, Maiden's Tears, Snappery, Silene Cububalis (or latifolia)". Edible Wild Plants of Eastern North America. New York City: Dover Publications. pp. 193–194. ISBN 0-486-29104-9. OCLC 33666218. Retrieved 23 February 2009. Kleonikos G. Stavridakis , Κλεόνικος Γ. Σταυριδάκης (2006). Wild edible plants of Crete - Η Άγρια βρώσιμη χλωρίδα της Κρήτης. Rethymnon Crete. ISBN 960-631-179-1. Christou, Eleni. "Στρουθούθκια". Εικονικό Μουσείο Κυπριακών Τροφίμων και Διατροφής (Cyprus Food Virtual Museum). Πανεπιστήμιο Κύπρου (University of Cyprus). Retrieved 2022-02-05. Gazpacho viudo recipe Guisado de collejas Arroz con collejas