GMA Network Inc., commonly known as GMA, is a Philippine media company based in Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines. It is primarily involved in radio and television broadcasting, with subsidiaries dealing in various media related businesses. The majority of its profits are derived from publicity and marketing incomes associated to television distribution. Founded on June 14, 1950, it currently owns and operates two national television networks (GMA Network and GTV), four digital terrestrial television channels (Heart of Asia, Hallypop, Pinoy Hits and I Heart Movies), two national radio stations (Super Radyo DZBB 594 kHz and Barangay LS 97.1), two regional radio networks (Super Radyo and Barangay FM), and one regional tv network, It also operates three international channels (GMA Pinoy TV, GMA Life TV and GMA News TV International), along with subsidiaries dealing in film production and distribution (GMA Pictures), music production and publishing (GMA Music), talent development and management (Sparkle GMA Artist Center), digital terrestrial television providers (GMA Affordabox and GMA Now) and a number of Internet and digital converging technology (GMA New Media) in the Philippines. The company is a publicly traded company on the Philippine Stock Exchange. The company's roots can be traced back to then Loreto F. de Hemedes, Inc., owned by Robert "Uncle Bob" Stewart, an American war correspondent. The company started with the launching of its first AM radio station in Manila through Radio Broadcasting Station, DZBB. It went on air on March 1, 1950, using the frequency of 580 kHz of the AM band, broadcasting from the Calvo Building in Escolta, Manila. Its early radio coverage highlights were the crash of President Ramon Magsaysay's plane in Mount Manunggal; the eruption of Mount Hibok-Hibok and various local elections in the Philippines. DZBB became the first radio station in the Philippines to use telephones for live interviews. Within years since its first broadcasts, the huge triumph of the station and its growing number of listeners made clear the move to modern facilities in EDSA, Quezon City, with the work done in 1959. On October 29, 1961, the company launched its first television station, RBS TV Channel 7 using local VHF channel 7. In 1963, DYSS Television was launched in Cebu. From Loreto F. de Hemedes, Inc., the firm was renamed Republic Broadcasting System, Inc. in 1974, when a triumvirate composed of Gilberto Duavit Sr., Menardo Jimenez and Felipe Gozon took over the corporation. In 1987, GMA became the first Philippine network to broadcast in StereoVision while opening their high-end live studio at Broadway Centrum. In 1988, the network greatly improved its signal by switching to its 777-ft transmitter known as the Tower of Power. In 1992, the Philippine Congress passed a law granting the network to operate for another 25 years. The network launched the Rainbow Satellite, making their programs available nationwide and across Southeast Asia. In 1996, the company changed its corporate identity to GMA Network Inc. On April 21, 2017, Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte signed Republic Act No. 10925, renewing GMA Network's license for another 25 years. The law granted GMA Network Inc. a franchise to construct, install, operate, and maintain radio broadcasting stations and television stations for commercial purposes, including a digital television system. This franchise encompasses the establishment of corresponding facilities such as relay stations throughout the Philippines. GMA Network, commonly known as GMA, is a major Philippine commercial television network. Launched on October 29, 1961, GMA Network is also referred to as the "Kapuso Network" in reference to the company's logo. Its headquarters can be found at the GMA Network Center in Quezon City. GTV is a Philippine general entertainment channel that aired on its flagship station, UHF channel 27 and was launched on February 22, 2021, replacing GMA News TV. The channel carries news, entertainment and sports programs and it is available in most satellite and cable TV systems. Heart of Asia is a Filipino digital television channel owned by GMA Network. The channel was initially launched on June 12, 2020, and officially launched on June 29, 2020. Hallypop is the Philippine version of the U.S.-based Asian pop culture digital channel, operating under a licensed branding agreement with Jungo TV. The joint venture between both parties was established in 2019, leading to the channel's initial launch on September 6, 2020, and its official launch on September 20, 2020. I Heart Movies is a movie television channel owned by GMA Network. The channel was initially launched on March 25, 2021, and officially launched on April 5, 2021. Pinoy Hits is a Filipino digital television channel owned by GMA Network. The channel was initially launched on January 2, 2023, and officially launched on January 16, 2023. In March 2005, GMA Network launched its first international channel, GMA Pinoy TV. The channel is targeted toward Filipino communities worldwide. Flagship programs from GMA Network are shown aside from in-house programming. It also syndicates shows. GMA Pinoy TV is available in key cities in the United States, Canada, Middle East, Australia, New Zealand and some parts of Asia and Europe. In February 2008, GMA International launched its second international channel via GMA Life TV. It carries programming from GMA Network and from its former lifestyle channel in the Philippines, Q. It also carries new programs broadcast by the news channel, GMA News TV. GMA Life TV is available through satellite and cable TV system worldwide. GMA International announced the launch of GMA News TV International in July 2011. It will be available through satellite and cable TV systems worldwide. It will be the third international channel of GMA Network Inc., together with GMA Pinoy TV and GMA Life TV. GMA News TV International is current available on a preview channel basis in Australia via UBI World TV and FetchTV, IPS/AccessTV in Japan and GUdTV in Guam. DZBB, also known as Super Radyo DZBB 594 is the AM radio station of RGMA in Metropolitan Manila, one of GMA Network's subsidiaries. Radio studios are located at 3rd floor of GMA Network Studio Annex, EDSA corner GMA Network Drive, Diliman, Quezon City while its radio transmitter is at Camia St., Brgy. Panghulo, Obando, Bulacan. The station operates 24 hours a day except every Sunday midnight. Some of the programs of GMA and GTV's Dobol B TV block are simultaneously simulcast on the station. DWLS-FM, also known as Barangay LS 97.1, is the FM radio station of RGMA in Metropolitan Manila, a subsidiary of GMA Network. Its main radio studios are located at the 3rd floor of GMA Network Studio Annex, EDSA corner GMA Network Drive, Diliman, Quezon City and its transmitter is at Tandang Sora Avenue, Barangay Culiat, Quezon City. DWLS is the assigned call letters for the radio station and it was derived from the name of Loreto Stewart, the wife of its founder, Robert La Rue "Uncle Bob" Stewart. In order to strengthen its broadcast signal in Metropolitan Manila and its suburbs, GMA Network Inc. constructed the Tower of Power in the third quarter of 1987. GMA Network, Inc. spent more than PhP168 million to the upgrade its broadcast transmitters and facilities in various key cities in the Philippines. It plans to augment its existing studio facilities in Cebu, Iloilo and Davao. It also plans to upgrade construction of its existing broadcast facilities in Dagupan to further improve its coverage in the northern part of the Philippines. These upgrades include new transmitting equipment, from transmitters to antenna systems and buildings/tower rehabilitation/construction. GMA Network Inc. expects completion of these projects by end 2009. Presented to the Philippine Stock Exchange on January 15, 2009, GMA Network, Inc. discloses that it already disbursed almost PhP1.3 billion from the proceeds of its initial public offering to support various expansion programs in key cities in the Philippines. Expansion includes construction of broadcast facility, tower and transmitter upgrade for its Naga station; broadcast facility and transmitter tower for its Legazpi station; construction of transmitter tower and upgrading its General Santos station; and upgrading broadcast facilities, equipment and transmitter tower in Davao, Cebu, Guimaras, Bacolod, Iloilo, Batangas, Dagupan, Cagayan de Oro and Benguet. GMA Network, Inc. inaugurated its state-of-the-art GMA Network Center on June 14, 2000, as part of the year-round celebration to commemorate its 50th anniversary. GMA Network Center supports GMA Network, Inc.'s thrusts towards digitization and media convergence. While the first phase of the project has already been completed with the construction of the 17-storey corporate complex, the center has an option to upgrade the older, existing facilities in the GMA compound, as originally planned. The GMA Network Studios consist of seven studios and are named Studios 1-7 (except German Moreno Studio) based on their size. Studio 1 and Studio 4 (formerly known as Studio A and Studio B, respectively) were the first two old studios of GMA Network which is located in the old compound (formerly known as the RBS compound), which is being demolished as of April 2023 to make way for the construction of a new studio building. Studio 2, 3, and 5 are located in GMA Network Center building. The German Moreno Studio (formerly Studio 6) and Studio 7, the largest studios of GMA Network, are located in the GMA Network Studio Annex. Studio 1 was the network's oldest studio which housed the programs of GMA News TV (formerly QTV, now GTV) along with Radio-Television Arts-era programs such as Student Canteen and Weekend with Velez. Studio 2 is their second smallest studio, which houses the GTV noontime newscast, Balitanghali, afternoon news and magazine show, Dapat Alam Mo!, and State of the Nation. The green screen used on weather reports of GMA News' programs is also located here. In 2022, the studio was renovated for the Eleksyon 2022, the 2022 Philippine national and local elections coverage of GMA News and Public Affairs. The newly renovated studio was designed by the Emmy award-winning US firm, FX Design Group and uses the latest technology from Vizrt and Red Spy. It features LED video walls, color-changing panels, and an open-floor space. Studio 3 houses is the third smallest studio in the complex. It is the home studio of the Philippines' longest-running morning show, Unang Hirit. In October 2, 2023, The program unveiled its renovated studio set designed by FX Design Group. The current studio set resembles to that of studios 2 and 5, as well as The Today Show's Studio 1A in Rockefeller Center in New York City. Studio 4 was the fourth largest studio in the complex. It was located in the old GMA Building and one of the oldest studios in the complex. It was occupied by the Saturday morning talk and lifestyle show, Sarap, 'Di Ba? as well as Radio-Television Arts / Rainbow Satellite-era programs GMA Supershow and Lunch Date before moving to the Broadway Centrum in 1987. The studio, along with the old GMA building and Studio 1 is being demolished as of April 2023 to make way for the construction of a new studio building. Studio 5 is the third largest studio in the complex. It is one of the most technologically advanced studio in the country. It is equipped with state-of-the-art broadcast equipment like HD video systems, audio systems, and cameras. In 2019, the studio was renovated. The renovation makes the studio equipped with augmented reality (AR) technology and immersive graphics by Vizrt. The studio has large video walls, video floors, and a lot of TV screens used by news programs. GMA's flagship newscasts, 24 Oras and its weekend edition, as well as the late night newscast, Saksi are being broadcast live in this studio. The German Moreno Studio (formerly and still known as Studio 6) has an area of 640 square meters and can accommodate 300 to 400 audiences. Its former tenants include Walang Tulugan with the Master Showman, Startalk, Showbiz Central, Pinoy Records, All-Star K!, and Wowowin (formerly aired on ALLTV). It houses the variety noontime show TiktoClock. Studio 7 houses It is used by various shows of GMA like All-Out Sundays (and its predecessors, SOP, Party Pilipinas, Sunday All Stars, and Sunday PinaSaya), The Boobay and Tekla Show, Bubble Gang, IBilib and most of the reality and game shows produced by the network. Studio 7 has an area of 1,020 square meters and can accommodate 600 to 800 audiences. GMA Network, Inc. takes a significant step in the continuous strengthening and improvement of the network's news department with a P154 million (2.9m USD) investment on a Newsroom Automation System (NAS). A signing of agreement between GMA Network and Vizrt was held on March 14, 2018, at the GMA Network Center in Quezon City. The National Telecommunications Commission (NTC) ordered all broadcasting companies in the Philippines to shut off their analog signal by 11:59 p.m. on December 31, 2015, and switch to digital broadcast. The Philippines will be using the Japanese ISDB-T to facilitate the country's transition to digital television, rather than the ATSC system implemented by North American broadcasters devised as a replacement for the NTSC system utilized by North America and the Philippines. GMA Network is presently[when?] applying for a digital television license from the NTC to install and maintain transmitting stations that will be attuned with and utilize to offer digital terrestrial television and digital mobile TV broadcast services, using channel 27 (551.143 MHz) frequency. Areas planned for a temporary digital broadcast will cover the cities of Quezon City, Makati, Pasig, Tagaytay, and Angeles City in Pampanga; and areas like Ortigas, Cavite, and Calumpit in Bulacan. GMA Network, Inc. asked the NTC to reconsider its decision to use the Japanese standard and examine the European digital broadcast system instead. In earlier decisions, the National Telecommunications Commission reaffirmed its resolutions to use ISDB-T and conduct public consultations for its implementing rules and regulations which will be ready by April 2011. On March 27, 2011, the local regulator ordered an evaluation of the standard to be used by the Philippines for digital television and reconsidering the second-generation Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB2) from Europe and replacing the Japanese Integrated Services Digital Broadcasting (ISDB) standard. In February 2013, GMA Network, Inc. was able to conduct digital test broadcast with the ISDB-T standard via its UHF channel 27's frequency. GMA Network was the first television network in the Philippines to broadcast GMA 7 and GMA News TV 11 in standard definition (SD) format with a 4:3 aspect ratio, similar to TV channels in European countries, although the content had been stretched horizontally from its original 4:3 ratio. GMA 7 was also transmitting 1seg on mobile and had no errors. However, in a statement, the network has not conceded its stand to prefer the European DVB-T2 over the Japanese ISDB-T. Established in January 2007, GMA News Online (formerly GMANews.TV) is the official site of GMA News. It features the latest news coverage, including video reports, as well as business, sports, technology, entertainment and special reports, mobile alerts, newsletters, RSS feeds and real time search. A diverse number of presenters and correspondents maintain blogs on its site and has an archiving database for its news content. A live stream of DZBB, an AM radio station of GMA Network is also available on its website. It also features YouScoop, an interactive section, wherein viewers can upload first-hand footage of news events happening in their area and visitors can also view such footage. Aside from GMA News and Public Affairs content and materials produced, GMA News Online publishes articles and features from several news organizations, including The Associated Press and Reuters wire service. In December 2010, GMANews.TV received one million page views per day. On February 7, 2011, GMANews.TV was renamed to GMA News Online and launched a new logo and slogan, “The Go-to Site For Filipinos Everywhere”; and retain its uniform resource locator, www.gmanews.tv to correspond with the launching of its all-news channel, GMA News TV. On September 12, 2008, GMA Network, Inc. launched its first video-on-demand service through myGMA Internet TV. Focusing on Filipino communities, it offers high-quality programs from GMA Network. It is an alternative to Filipino communities who does not have the access of cable TV and direct-to-home subscriptions. myGMA Internet TV competed with ABS-CBN’s TFC.tv (now iWantTFC). Currently, myGMA Internet TV is inactive. Philippine Entertainment Portal, Inc., a joint venture between GMA New Media, Inc. and Summit Media, operates Philippine Entertainment Portal (PEP) and Sports Interactive Network (SPIN). Partnerships of GMA Network Inc., the Philippine Daily Inquirer, INQ7 Interactive Inc. and New Media Inc. The Kapuso JobMarket aims to provide convenience for job seekers by creating another online service that will help them search for employment opportunities using their mobile phones. Q was a partnership between GMA Network, Inc. and ZOE Broadcasting Network Inc. The television channel previously aired foreign dramas, lifestyle shows and public affairs programming. The channel ceased commercial operation on February 20, 2011, to give way to its sister channel, GMA News TV. GMA Network Inc. partnered with the Philippine Daily Inquirer, one of Philippines' daily broadsheets to venture in an online multimedia news and information delivery company, INQ7 Interactive Inc. Its main business offers text, images, audio, video and online interactive information tools such as discussion boards, polls and searchable news archives. The partnership also paved the way the creation of a joint web site, the inq7.net and in recent reports, its ranks no. 11 in the most read online newspaper worldwide. In January 2007, GMA Network, Inc. and Philippine Daily Inquirer ended their partnership and GMA Network Inc. focused on to its owned consent site, the GMA News Online (formerly known as GMANews.TV). GMA News TV was a Philippine news and lifestyle-oriented channel that was launched on February 28, 2011, and was aired on local UHF channel 27 and formerly VHF channel 11 through its blocktime agreement with ZOE until June 2019. On February 21, 2021, GMA News TV stopped its broadcast operations to give way for GTV the following day. It was generally watched as a free-to-air news and lifestyle-oriented channel in the Philippines. In November 11, 2005, GMA Network, Inc. entered an airtime agreement with ZOE Broadcasting Network to use DZOE-TV channel 11 for its local lifestyle channel Q (formerly QTV, Quality Television). Most of Q's programming consists of foreign dramas, reality and lifestyle shows. On February 20, 2011, Q ceased commercial operation to give way to GMA News TV. On December 15, 1999, STAR TV Network leased the airtime of Citynet to launch Channel [V] Philippines through EMC (Entertainment Music Channel). Part of the strategy is to localize Channel V with programs produced locally by STAR TV Network and GMA Network Inc. In 1999, Entertainment Music Channel or EMC is the first music channel of GMA Network Inc. after its UHF station, Citynet Television was rebranded due to high programming cost and stiff competition from free-to-air UHF TV channels. The music channel only lasted months after GMA Network Inc. signed a leased broadcast agreement with STAR TV Network to transmit a localize music television station, Channel [V] Philippines. On August 27, 1995, GMA Network, Inc. inaugurate its first ultra-high-frequency channel through DWDB-TV channel 27 in Metropolitan Manila. It was the first UHF television channel operated by a major broadcast network in the Philippines. GMA Network Inc. launches its new channel under the Citynet Television brand and decided to expand its local programming business. Studios are located at the GMA Network Center in Quezon City. In April 1999, Citynet Television ceased its commercial operation and later on reformatted into a local music channel. On February 1, 1993, GMA Network, Inc. ventures into cable television via CGMA, is a 24 hour cable channel available on Home Cable, Sky Cable and Destiny Cable. It broadcast defunct and previously aired shows on GMA Network from 1980–2000. Eventually, CGMA ceased its commercial operation when Home Cable, Sky Cable and Destiny Cable on July 25, 2001, entered into a memorandum of agreement to consolidate the operation of its company with Lopez-owned Sky Cable, an ABS-CBN Corporation subsidiary, GMA Network Inc.'s main competitor.[citation needed] GMA didn't have its own cable channel until 2005 with the launch of GMA Pinoy TV, but unlike CGMA, GMA Pinoy TV (and its sister channels) only caters to international audiences. Fox Filipino was an archive entertainment cable television channel launched on March 1, 2012. It featured Filipino-produced programming from GMA Network and Filipino movies from GMA Pictures, entries from the Cinemalaya Philippine Independent Film Festival, selected Asian and Hollywood movies, and selected foreign programming dubbed in Filipino language. After 8 years of broadcasting, Fox Networks Group announced that Fox Filipino would cease broadcast on July 7, 2020, as GMA and TV5 archived content were moved to GMA's digital television channel, Heart of Asia and Cignal-run satellite channel, One Screen, respectively. Atty. Felipe L. Gozon (chairman and adviser of the board; Chairman of the Programming Committee) Gilberto Duavit Jr. (president, chief executive officer, chief operating officer; Vice Chairman of the Programming Committee) Felipe S. Yalong (chief financial officer, EVP for Corporate Services Group, corporate treasurer, director) Jose Marcelo G. Jimenez (Board Member; Chairman of the Executive Committee) Atty. Anna Theresa “Annette” M. Gozon-Valdes (Board Member, Senior Vice President for Talent Management Development, Program Management, Human Resources Department, Legal Department, Worldwide Department and other subsidiaries) Judith R. Duavit-Vasquez (Board Member) Laura J. Westfall (Board Member) Ret. Chief Justice Artemio Panganiban (Board Member and Independent Director) Lilybeth G. Rasonable (Senior Vice President for Entertainment Group) Oliver Victor B. Amoroso (Senior Vice President and Head of GMA Integrated News, Regional TV and Synergy) Nessa S. Valdellon (first vice president for Public Affairs, Senior Vice President, GMA Pictures) Ralph Jasper Jose (First Vice President for Radio Operations Group) Ayahl Ari Augusto P. Chio (vice president for investor relations and compliance) Atty. Eduardo P. Santos, CPA (Compliance Officer and Internal Auditor) Roberto O. Parel (corporate secretary) Lizelle G. Maralag (Chief Marketing Officer) Elvis B. Ancheta (Senior Vice President for Engineering) Ronaldo P. Mastrili (Senior Vice President for Finance and ICT) Regie C. Bautista (Senior Vice President for Corporate Strategic Planning and Business Development and Concurrent Chief Risk Officer and Head of Program Support) GMA Entertainment Group GMA Integrated News GMA Integrated News Digital GMA Integrated News Research GMA Integrated News Weather Center GMA News Online YouScoop GMA Regional TV 52 GMA Network stations 27 GTV stations 18 digital terrestrial television stations GMA International GMA Pinoy TV GMA Life TV GMA News TV GMA On Demand GMA Public Affairs GMA Sports Sparkle GMA Artist Center Synergy: A GMA Collaboration GMA New Media, Inc. Digify, Inc. MediaMerge Corporation GMA News Online GMA Network Portal Philippine Entertainment Portal, Inc. (50%) PEP.ph SPIN.PH (Sports Interactive Network Philippines) GMA Affordabox GMA Now GMA Network Films, Inc. (GMA Pictures) Backyard Productions GMA Productions, Inc. (GMA Music) GMA Playlist AltG Records Spotlight Music Sessions Citynet Network Marketing and Productions, Inc. Script2010, Inc. DWDB-TV GMA Worldwide (Philippines), Inc. Alta Productions Group, Inc. GMA Ventures, Inc. RGMA Network, Inc. (GMA Radio) (49%) Super Radyo DZBB 594khz Barangay LS 97.1 Super Radyo Nationwide Barangay FM Mont-Aire Realty and Development Corp. (49%) GMA Kapuso Foundation Kapwa Ko Mahal Ko Foundation "Annual Report". "GMA Network, Inc. Company Information". PSE Edge. The Philippine Stock Exchange, Inc. Retrieved January 8, 2018. GMA Network Corporate Information, GMANetwork.com GMA Gold: Fifty Years of Broadcast History, Chelo Banal Formoso (ed.), GMA Network. "GMA Network – Overview". Archived from the original on August 16, 2008. Retrieved August 16, 2008. GMA Network Inc., About "GMA Network - Management". Archived from the original on July 11, 2011. Retrieved March 1, 2011. GMA Network Inc., Management "Republic Act No. 10925". "GMA Network's 25-year franchise renewed prior to expiry". gmanetwork.com. May 7, 2020. Retrieved May 7, 2020. "GMA Network launches new digital channel 'Heart of Asia'". GMANetwork.com. GMA Network, Inc. June 26, 2020. Retrieved July 18, 2020. Olaguera, Chriselle (September 6, 2020). "GMA Network brings Hallypop to PH, to air Running Man, Music Bank, K-pop Star, JYP's Party People, and more!". Annyeong Oppa. Retrieved September 6, 2020. "Experience all the feels sa digital movie channel na 'I Heart Movies'". GMA Entertainment. Retrieved March 22, 2021. "GMA Network launches newest digital channel "I Heart Movies"". GMA Entertainment. Retrieved March 29, 2021. "Watch your favorite local, international movies for free on 'I Heart Movies' digital channel". GMA Entertainment. March 29, 2021. Retrieved March 29, 2021. "GMA launches new digital channel 'Pinoy Hits'". GMA Network. January 3, 2023. Retrieved January 4, 2023. "Business – GMA7 launches more channels in US – INQUIRER.net". Archived from the original on January 19, 2011. Retrieved March 1, 2011. Inquirer.Net, Business Stories "EARNINGS: GMA Network posts 18% growth in Q1 revenues". GMA News Online. Archived from the original on August 22, 2011. [1] GMA Pinoy TV News "GMA Network launches third international channel". GMA News Online. July 14, 2011. "gmapinoytv.com.ph". Archived from the original on July 31, 2012. "gmapinoytv.com.ph". Archived from the original on May 26, 2012. P168m for GMA-7's transmission upgrade. Manila Standard Today, October 6, 2006. GMA Network H1 profit P934M, dips a bit on high operating, expansion costs. GMANews.tv, Accessed April 30, 2007. GMA Virtual Studio Tours, retrieved April 20, 2022 Ang bagong studio ng Unang Hirit reveal! | Unang Hirit, retrieved October 4, 2023 Reyes, Mary Ann (November 11, 2006). "NTC gives TV stations 9 years to convert to digital tech". ABS-CBNNews.com. Archived from the original on December 31, 2006. Retrieved November 6, 2006. Lectura, Lenie (January 10, 2008). "Firms may test digital TV up to March—NTC". BusinessMirror. Archived from the original on June 20, 2008. Retrieved January 10, 2008. Amojelar, Darwin (November 6, 2006). "Regulator orders shift to digital television by 2015". The Manila Times. Archived from the original on October 15, 2007. Montecillo, Paolo (June 11, 2010). "NTC chooses Japan digital TV standard for RP". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Archived from the original on July 23, 2011. Lorenzo, A.B.L. (June 14, 2008). "GMA Network to push through with digital TV". BusinessWorld Online. Retrieved June 14, 2008.[dead link] Olchondra, Riza T. (October 28, 2007). "GMA Network says it's ready for mobile TV competition". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Archived from the original on October 29, 2007. Retrieved October 28, 2007. Dagcutan, Aura Marie. "European standard better, says TV exec". BusinessWorld. Archived from the original on July 18, 2017. Retrieved February 20, 2011. Montecillo, Paolo. "NTC chooses Japan digital TV standard for RP". Inquirer. Archived from the original on July 23, 2011. Retrieved February 20, 2011. "NTC orders review of digital TV standard - 3/27/11". Archived from the original on April 15, 2011. Retrieved March 29, 2011. Montecillo, Paolo (February 22, 2013). "GMA Network continues to reject Japanese digital TV standard". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Retrieved April 4, 2013. "Philippine Daily Inquirer, GMA Network launch 'new INQ7.net' – INQUIRER.net, Philippine News for Filipinos". Archived from the original on January 31, 2015. Inquirer.Net Infotech News "GMA News website gets one million page views per day". GMA News Online. December 21, 2010. Retrieved September 24, 2020. "The time has come for GMA News Online". GMA News Online. February 7, 2011. Retrieved September 24, 2020. "GMA Network subsidiary set to launch Internet TV service". GMA News Online. GMA Network, Inc. August 29, 2008. Retrieved December 26, 2020. "GMA Network launches GMA NEWS TV | Philippine Newspapers – Philippine Asian News Today". Archived from the original on July 15, 2011. Retrieved March 1, 2011. Philippine Asian News Today, Showbiz News "CBSi". FindArticles.com. Retrieved October 14, 2019. 24 Oras: Ilang Programa ng GMA Network, maipapalabas na sa Fox Filipino Channel retrieved via YouTube via gmanews user February 15, 2012 GMA Signs Deal With Fox | Manila Bulletin Archived February 2, 2012, at the Wayback Machine retrieved via mb.com.ph January 2, 2012 GMA Worldwide signs 3-year output deal with FOX International Channels Archived June 9, 2013, at the Wayback Machine retrieved via positivenewsmedia.com January 2, 2012 "FOX FILIPINO CEASE BROADCAST". mysky.com.ph. June 8, 2020. Retrieved August 8, 2020. FOX Filipino will cease broadcast effective July 7, 2020 as advised by the channel partner. "GMA Network, Inc". Retrieved June 14, 2022. Wikimedia Commons has media related to GMA Network, Inc.. Official website Media Ownership Monitor Philippines – Media Companies: A Duopoly Rules by VERA Files and Reporters Without Borders