The 2023 Georgian protests were a series of street demonstrations taking place throughout Georgia over parliamentary backing of a proposed "Law on Transparency of Foreign Influence", which requires NGOs to register as "agents of foreign influence" if the funds they receive from abroad amount to more than 20% of their total revenue. Police have been reported as using water cannons and tear gas to disperse the protests, especially in the capital Tbilisi. The parliament retracted the bill as a result of protests on 10 March 2023. As of January 2021[update], Georgia and Ukraine were preparing to formally apply for EU membership in 2024 to join the European Union in the 2030s. However, amid the 2022 escalation of the Russo-Ukrainian War, Ukraine, Georgia, and Moldova jointly applied for EU membership in February and March 2022. On 9 June 2022, the European Parliament issued a six-page resolution accusing the government of Georgia of eroding press freedom in the country. It also recommended the European Union to sanction the founder of the ruling Georgian Dream party Bidzina Ivanishvili for "his role in the deterioration of the political process in Georgia." On 23 June 2022, the European Council granted Ukraine and Moldova the status of a candidate for accession to the European Union. However, it deferred giving candidate status to Georgia until certain conditions were met. The European Council expressed readiness to grant Georgia the status of a candidate for accession to the European Union after a set of recommended reforms. On 28 June 2022, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe published a declaration, in which they have said that the imprisoned former president Mikheil Saakashvili had to be treated immediately in a special institution abroad. Saakashvili, who left Georgia in 2013 and was condemned by the Tbilisi City Court to six years in prison in absentia for abuse of power, embezzlement, and his implication in the attempted murder of an opposition MP, announced his return to Georgia on 1 October 2021, on the eve of the local elections. He was later arrested in Tbilisi. According to the investigation, Saakashvili entered the country secretly, hiding in a semi-trailer truck loaded with milk products. He illegally crossed the state border of Georgia, bypassing the customs control. He was placed in Rustavi prison and announced a hunger strike to protest his arrest. His personal doctor asked authorities to move him to a hospital as he continued with his hunger strike as his health condition had allegedly worsened since the arrest. On 14 December 2022, the European Parliament again called the European Council to sanction Ivanishvili, accusing him of deteriorating the democratic political process in Georgia, while calling the Georgian government to release Saakashvili on medical grounds to be treated abroad. On 14 February 2023, the European Parliament adopted a third non-binding resolution, accusing the Georgian government and Bidzina Ivanishvili of mistreating Mikheil Saakashvili in prison, once again calling for his release from prison and personal sanctions on Ivanishvili. The Georgian Dream party criticized the resolutions. Prime Minister Irakli Garibashvili called the resolutions "irresponsible and offensive towards our people". Georgian Dream parliamentarian Dimitri Khundadze questioned Georgia's policy of EU membership, saying, "We won't give up our dignity to get [candidate] status! [...] No one will intimidate Bidzina Ivanishvili or the Georgian state with threats of sanctions!". In June-July 2022, following the EU's refusal to grant Georgia the candidate status, a series of protests was organized by a group of Western-funded NGOs, who blamed the Georgian government for the failure to receive the status and demanded it to handle its power to an "interim technical government" composed of NGO activists, threatening more protests. On June 24, secret video recordings were released involving several NGO leaders discussing the violent overthrow of government. On 2 August 2022, Georgian MPs Sozar Subari, Mikheil Kavelashvili and Dimitri Khundadze left the ruling Georgian Dream and established the People's Power movement. According to the MPs, their goal was to speak up and expose the truth "hidden behind the scenes of Georgian politics". Members of People's Power published a number of public letters accusing the United States and European Union of trying to overthrow the Georgian government. The movement has notably criticized the United States foreign policy in Georgia. Its members have questioned US funding for Georgia, saying that it only served to strengthen American interests in Georgia at the expense of Georgia's state institutions and sovereignty. The People's Power movement has accused the United States and European Union of interfering in the country's internal affairs and undermining the Georgian judiciary. Judicial reforms were among the 12 requests made by the European Union for Georgia to get the EU candidate status, although according to People's Power, the proposal was aimed at "subjugating the Georgian judiciary to foreign control". The movement has accused a number of Georgian political parties (including the largest opposition party United National Movement, led by Mikheil Saakashvili) and NGOs of being "American agents". According to the People's Power movement, Saakashvili illegally returned to Georgia to stage a coup, and was supported in his endeavor by the United States and MEPs. The members of People's Power further elaborated that the United States Embassy in Georgia was working to drag the country into the Russo-Ukrainian War, and that the Georgian government and Ivanishvili were punished by the European Parliament for the peaceful policy and refusal to open a "second front" against Russia in Georgia. Georgian Dream disapproved of this criticism of the US involvement in Georgia, with Irakli Garibashvili saying that the United States and European Union are Georgia's "strategic partners". Meanwhile six other deputies joined the movement from the Georgian Dream, depriving it of its parliamentary majority. At the same time, the nine members of the People's Power movement in parliament decided to remain in the ruling majority, supporting the government of Irakli Garibashvili. The Georgian Dream chairperson Irakli Kobakhidze pledged to cooperate with People's Power on key issues. On 29 December, the People's Power movement has expressed its intention to draft a foreign agent law to curb the foreign influence in the country. On 15 February 2023, the draft "Law On Transparency of Foreign Influence" was submitted to Georgian Parliament. Under the bill, non-commercial legal entities (the most common form of NGO in Georgia), broadcasters, legal entities that alone or jointly own a print media outlet operating in Georgia, and legal entities that own or use, jointly or with others, an internet domain and/or internet hosting intended for the dissemination of information through the internet in the Georgian language, must register in public registry as "agents of foreign influence" and be subjected to the monitoring of the Ministry of Justice, if they receive more than 20% of their annual income from "a foreign power". The draft law requires NGOs to disclose the source of their funds but does not imposes any restriction on their activities. The Georgian Dream supported the bill, saying that it would promote the financial transparency of foreign-funded NGOs. Spokesman for the United States Department of State Ned Price criticized the bill and likened it to Hungarian and Russian foreign agent laws. Civil society organizations objected to the bill as a violation of fundamental human rights such as freedom of press. In response, the People's Power movement said that the bill was based on the "American model". Georgian Dream leader Irakli Kobakhidze criticized both the US and Russian laws. He said that the Georgian draft law was based on the US law but it was significantly softened to meet the standards of the European Court of Human Rights, adding that if the US law was transferred to the European space, it would be in conflict with the European human rights standards. Critics said that the bill represented an authoritarian shift and could have hurt Georgia's hopes of European Union membership. The US Embassy in Georgia said that the bill was Kremlin-inspired and was incompatible with the people of Georgia's clear desire for European integration and democratic development. The statement said that the law would have damaged Georgia's relations with its strategic partners. European Union foreign policy head Josep Borrell said that the draft law was a "very bad development" for the Georgia and its people. He said that the bill risked having a chilling effect on civil society and media organizations. Borrell stated that the bill could have seriously affected Georgian ties with the EU, and called for Georgia to uphold its commitment to the promotion of democracy. The US and the European Union stated that it would be hard for Georgia to join NATO or the European Union if the bill became law. International organizations voiced concerns over the bill, saying that the bill would have worked against Georgia's democratic development. Irakli Kobakhidze said that the Parliament would send the bill to the Venice Commission for recommendations and to prove that it is compatible with European standards. Responding to criticism that the draft law was based on Russian rather than American legislation, People's Power additionally registered the alternative bill, which is direct translation of the US law. The second of the two bills includes the scope of the first bill to include individuals and extends penalties to include up to five years' imprisonment. More than 60 civil society organisations and media outlets have said they will not comply with the bill if it is signed into law. On 6 March 2023, a fight broke out between parliamentary deputies of the ruling coalition and the opposition during the Legal Affairs Committee hearing on the draft laws. Deputies from the National Movement and Strategy Aghmashenebeli opposition parties were expelled from the chamber to restore the order. The protests were held in front of the Parliament building calling the deputies to vote down the bills. On 7 March 2023, the parliament adopted a proposed "Law On Transparency of Foreign Influence" in the first reading, with 76 votes to 13. The protests were organized in front of the Parliament of Georgia, which later turned violent as the protesters tried to storm the building and threw molotov cocktails at law enforcement. Police officers responded by using tear gas and water cannons to disperse the protesters and restore the order. On 8 March 2023, tens of thousands of people protested in front of the parliament building, calling the parliament to suspend further discussions on the foreign agents law. Strategy Aghmashenebeli leader Giorgi Vashadze presented an ultimatum to parliament: reject the bills and release everyone who was detained on March 7. On 9 March 2023, the ruling coalition announced that they would retract the bills. They said that more discussions with the public were required to convince the society of the importance of the legislation. The Interior Ministry announced later that day that all persons arrested on administrative charges on 7 and 8 March have been released. On 10 March 2023, one of the two bills was withdrawn by the ruling coalition, while the other was defeated in a formal second sitting vote in Parliament, with one vote in favour, 36 votes against, and 76 abstentions. The President of Georgia, Salome Zourabichvili, threw her support behind the protesters, saying "the path of European integration must be protected". She has said she would veto and repeal the bill. Georgian Prime Minister Irakli Garibashvili on 7 March reaffirmed his support for the law, saying the proposed provisions on foreign agents met "European and global standards". On March 7, Georgia's Interior Ministry asked protesters to disperse, warning that "legal measures" would be taken to restore calm. The ministry reportedly said the protest went beyond the framework of a peaceful assembly and turned into violence. The ministry also said that police were also forced to use proportional force to restore public order. Ned Price supported the protests and said that "the United States has tools to hold accountable those who contradict the will of Georgian people", hinting at potential sanctions on Georgian officials, in a question time on 7 March. Assistant Secretary of State Todd Robinson, former ambassador to Venezuela, heavily criticized the legislation from Tbilisi, where he arrived 1 day before the protests erupted for a "women in policing" event, calling it "a law based on Russia's interest, not Georgia's interest". Maria Zakharova criticized the European Union's position regarding situation in Georgia and accused Josep Borrell of "crossing the limits of decency" and "putting pressure on Georgian citizens". The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Russia, Sergey Lavrov compared the situation in Georgia to the Euromaidan in Ukraine. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation warned Georgians on consequences of such developments. Russian President Vladimir Putin's press secretary Dmitry Peskov said that Russia had nothing to do with the bill and that it was more similar to Foreign Agents Registration Act of USA. He also added that Russia was monitoring situation and that it was interested that the situation remained peaceful near its border. The Russian Ministry of Economic Development recommended Russian citizens to refrain from travelling to Georgia. Margarita Simonyan said that Russia would immediately bomb Tbilisi if Georgia was to open "second front" against Russia. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Abkhazia, Inal Ardzinba, stated that the United States was trying to carry out a coup in Georgia to destabilize the region and launch a "second front" of the Russo-Ukrainian War in the South Caucasus. Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy had stated the Georgian people and the protests that took place as a sign of "victory for democracy". As well as a statement on how the Ukrainian people hoped for success in Georgia when it occurred on March 7, just when the protests had started. Georgia (country) portal Politics portal Foreign funding of NGOs Foreign agent 2007 Georgian demonstrations 2011 Georgian protests 2019 Georgian protests 2020–2021 Georgian political crisis Ritchie, Rhea Mogul,Sophie Tanno,Niamh Kennedy,Hannah (9 March 2023). "Georgia withdraws 'foreign influence' bill but opposition vows more protests". CNN.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "UPDATE: 134 Arrested in March 7–9 Rallies Against Foreign Agents Law". Civil Georgia. 9 March 2023. Retrieved 8 March 2023. "58 law enforcers injured during transparency bill protests – Interior Ministry". Agenda.ge. 10 March 2023. Retrieved 10 March 2023. "Georgia's opposition calls fresh protests over new law after clashes". France 24. 8 March 2023. Retrieved 8 March 2023. "Law on "Transparency of Foreign Funding" Passes 76–13 in the First Reading". Civil Georgia. 7 March 2023. "Georgian police use tear gas on protests against 'foreign agents' law". Reuters. 7 March 2023 – via www.reuters.com. "Georgians protest against draft law on media, nonprofits". ABC News. Ritchie, Rhea Mogul,Sophie Tanno,Niamh Kennedy,Hannah (9 March 2023). "Georgia withdraws 'foreign influence' bill but opposition vows more protests". CNN.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "У 2024 році Україна подасть заявку на вступ до ЄС". www.ukrinform.ua. 29 January 2019. Makszimov, Vlagyiszlav (22 January 2021). "Georgian president visits Brussels in push for 2024 EU membership application". www.euractiv.com. Retrieved 24 January 2021. "Georgia-EU Relations Within Georgia's 2024 Objective to Apply for the EU Membership". GeorgianJournal (in Georgian). Retrieved 24 January 2021. "Georgia, Moldova Formally Apply For EU Membership Amid Russia's Invasion Of Ukraine". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 3 March 2022. Retrieved 11 April 2022. Barigazzi, Jacopo (7 March 2022). "EU to officially examine Ukraine, Moldova and Georgia's bids to join the bloc". Politico. Retrieved 10 April 2022. Gabritchidze, Nini (10 June 2022). "EU parliament votes to consider sanctioning Georgia's informal leader". Eurasianet. Retrieved 15 June 2022. "European Council conclusions on Ukraine, the membership applications of Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, Western Balkans and external relations, 23 June 2022" (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 23 June 2022. Свобода, Радіо (17 June 2022). "Єврокомісія: Молдові рекомендуємо статус кандидата в ЄС, Грузії – поки що відмовляємо". Радіо Свобода (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 17 June 2022. "PDF" (PDF). "Saakashvili Convicted Of Abuse Of Power, Sentenced In Absentia". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 29 June 2018. Retrieved 30 September 2022. "Georgia Arrests Ex-President Saakashvili After He Returns From Exile". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 1 October 2021. Retrieved 30 September 2022. "Georgian ex-leader detained after returning ahead of local election". Reuters. 1 October 2021. Retrieved 1 October 2021. "Ex-president Saakashvili officially charged for illegal border crossing". Agenda.ge. 20 October 2021. Retrieved 25 March 2022. "European Parliament approves resolution on implementation of Georgia-EU Association Agreement". Agenda.ge. 14 December 2022. Retrieved 14 December 2022. "European Parliament resolution calls for imposition of sanctions against Bidzina Ivanishvili". interpressnews.ge. 15 February 2023. Retrieved 5 March 2023. Gabritchidze, Nini (15 June 2022). "Georgian leaders lash out after ominous signs on EU candidacy". Eurasianet. Retrieved 15 June 2022. "Dispatch | 13–14 June: Fake Dilemmas". Civil Georgia. 14 June 2022. Retrieved 15 June 2022. Kincha, Shota (10 June 2022). "Supporters question Georgia's EU aspirations over Ivanishvili sanctions threat". OC Media. Retrieved 15 June 2022. "Georgian PM: time of Georgian authorities serving foreign interests "over"". OC Media. 7 March 2023. Retrieved 8 March 2023. "PM Garibashvili says Saakashvili Arrived to Georgia to "Stage a Coup"". Formula News. 6 October 2021. Retrieved 8 March 2023. "Georgia has a huge Western-funded NGO sector and regular outbreaks of violent protest, is there a link?". Formula News. 11 March 2023. Retrieved 11 March 2023. "რას გეგმავენ „სირცხვილია" და გიგა მაქარაშვილი 24 ივნისს – „ქრონიკის" მიერ მოპოვებული სკანდალური ვიდეომასალა" (in Georgian). 23 June 2022. Retrieved 11 March 2023. ""ხალხის ძალა" – სუბარმა, ყაველაშვილმა, ხუნდაძემ და მაჭარაშვილმა მოძრაობა დააფუძნეს". რადიო თავისუფლება (in Georgian). 2 August 2022. Retrieved 17 October 2022. Datunashvili, Irakli (3 August 2022). ""ხალხის ძალა" – ოცნებიდან წასულმა დეპუტატებმა საზოგადოებრივი მოძრაობა დააფუძნეს – JAMnews". Georgian Jamnews (in Georgian). Retrieved 17 October 2022. "Georgian society should be interested in US aid goals, People's Power says". 1tv. Retrieved 21 October 2022. "Former ruling party MPs accuse US Embassy of "attacking the Govt", interfering in judiciary". 1tv. Retrieved 21 October 2022. "People Power Says USAID-backed Rule of Law Project "Attack on Sovereignty"". Civil.ge. 24 January 2023. Retrieved 27 January 2023. "Georgia is envisioned for a certain role that we shall play under the dictation of the Embassy – new statement of the People's Power". Rustavi 2. Retrieved 21 October 2022. "Georgian PM says strengthening US, EU relations gov't task, "personal obligation"". Agenda.ge. Retrieved 18 November 2022. ""სიმართლის მთქმელი" 9 დეპუტატი და "ოცნება" უმრავლესობის გარეშე". რადიო თავისუფლება (in Georgian). 4 October 2022. Retrieved 17 October 2022. "Movement People's Power consults on enlargement". 1TV. Retrieved 17 October 2022. "Irakli Garibashvili on People's Power movement". caucasuswatch.de (in German). 12 October 2022. Retrieved 17 October 2022. "ცნობილია, რომელი დეპუტატები და ექსპერტები უერთდებიან "ოცნებიდან" წასულ "ოთხეულს"". რადიო თავისუფლება (in Georgian). 4 October 2022. Retrieved 17 October 2022. "Foreign agent law to be submitted to Georgian Parliament". OC Media. Retrieved 8 March 2022. Ritchie, Rhea Mogul,Sophie Tanno,Niamh Kennedy,Hannah (9 March 2023). "Georgia withdraws 'foreign influence' bill but opposition vows more protests". CNN.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "GD to back draft law on foreign agents". 1st channel. Retrieved 20 February 2023. "Georgians protest against draft law on media, nonprofits". ABC News. Retrieved 8 March 2023. "Georgians throw stones, petrol bombs at police in protest over new law". Reuters. 7 March 2023. Retrieved 8 March 2023. "U.S. Embassy Statement on Parliament's Rushed Advancement of Kremlin-Inspired Legislation on So-Called "Foreign Influence"". U.S. Embassy in Georgia. "EU's Borrell condemns Georgia foreign influence law". Reuters. 7 March 2023. Retrieved 8 March 2023. "Irakli Kobakhidze: It is impossible to have a negative conclusion on one, the other or both draft laws, there may be only comments or recommendations on details – the Venice Commission cannot say that the law should not be adopted". Interpressnews. 27 February 2023. Retrieved 8 March 2023. "Georgian parliament votes to reject 'foreign agents' bill in second reading". Meduza. 10 March 2023. Wikidata Q117066352. "Deputies fight in Georgian Parliament during discussion of law on foreign agents". 6 March 2023. John, Katharina Krebs,Caitlin Hu,Vasco Cotovio,Tara (7 March 2023). "Protests erupt as Georgian parliament passes draft foreign agents bill". CNN. Retrieved 8 March 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "❗️ Protesters in #Tbilisi have broken through barricades and are trying to break into the Georgian parliament building". "Thousands protest at Georgian 'foreign agent' bill". BBC News. 8 March 2023. Retrieved 8 March 2023. Presse, AFP-Agence France. "Tens Of Thousands In Georgia Rally Against Controversial Bill: AFP". www.barrons.com. Retrieved 8 March 2023. "Georgia drops bill on 'foreign agents' after two nights of violent protests". The Guardian. 9 March 2023. "UPDATE: Majority Pledges to Withdraw the "Foreign Agent" Bill, But Questions Loom". Civil Georgia. 9 March 2023. "Georgia's ruling party withdraws controversial Foreign Agents Bill and releases protesters". euronews. 8 March 2023. Retrieved 9 March 2023. "Georgians protest against draft law on media, nonprofits". ABC News. "Police use water cannon in Georgia to disperse protests at 'authoritarian' law". The Guardian. 7 March 2023. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 8 March 2023. Civil Georgia (7 March 2023). "State Department: We Hold Tools at Our Purview to Hold Anyone Accountable". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 8 March 2023. Inimicizie (24 March 2023). "L'arco del contenimento e la Georgia". Inimicizie (in Italian). Retrieved 28 March 2023. "Moscow, Sokhumi Say EU is Pressuring Georgia". Civil Georgia. 7 March 2023. Retrieved 8 March 2023. "Moscow Reacts to the Protest Rallies in Tbilisi". Civil Georgia. 10 March 2023. Retrieved 10 March 2023. The 8th of March in Tbilisi: The "Laws Story" — Opinions of Georgian NGO leaders published by Caucasian Journal, 10 March 2023.