42°39′27″N 44°38′43″E﻿ / ﻿42.65750°N 44.64528°E﻿ / 42.65750; 44.64528 Kazbegi (Georgian: ყაზბეგის მუნიციპალიტეტი) is a district of Georgia, in the region of Mtskheta-Mtianeti in east-north Georgia. The main settlement is Stepantsminda, accounting for about half of the total population. Kazbegi Municipality is situated in the upper valley of the Terek River, which goes on to traverse the Georgia–Russia border to the north and eventually drains into the Caspian Sea in Dagestan, Russian Federation. By the conventional definition of the Europe-Asia boundary as following the watershed of the Greater Caucasus, Kazbegi Municipality is geographically a European part of Georgia. Kazbegi Municipality is known for its scenic location in the Greater Caucasus mountains, and it is a center for trekkers and mountain climbing. Local attractions include the Kazbegi Museum and Ethnographic Museum in town, and the Gergeti Trinity Church outside of town, as well as Mount Kazbegi itself and the alpine meadows and forests of the surrounding Kazbegi Nature Reserve, Juta mountain, Gveleti Waterfall, Truso valley and Abudelauri blue lakes. Horse-riding Paragliding Bike-riding Gergeti Sameba Church Natural mineral waters Mount Kazbek climbing Glaciers Waterfall Gveleti Kazbegi Municipal Assembly (Georgian: ყაზბეგის საკრებულო) is a representative body in Kazbegi Municipality. currently consisting of 18 members. The council is assembles into session regularly, to consider subject matters such as code changes, utilities, taxes, city budget, oversight of city government and more. Kazbegi sakrebulo is elected every four year. The last election was held in October 2021. List of municipalities in Georgia (country) "National Democratic Movement","Georgia","Traditionalists". "Population Census 2014". www.geostat.ge. National Statistics Office of Georgia. November 2014. Retrieved 28 June 2021. Municipality of Kazbegi, north Khevsureti and Tusheti located in north of the Greater Caucasus Watershed, and this geographically in Europe, also mountains on Bezengi wall in upper Svaneti as Ushba and Tetnuldi "Country profiles". https://cesko.ge/res/docs/2021sakrebuloswevraddameradarcheulipirebi.pdf[bare URL PDF] Districts of Georgia, Statoids.com v t e