The Polish Volunteer Corps (Polish: Polski Korpus Ochotniczy; Ukrainian: Польський добровольчий корпус, romanized: Polskyi dobrovolchyi korpus, PDK/ПДК) is a volunteer group of Poles fighting on the side of Ukraine during the Russian invasion of the country. The PDK fought in the Russian invasion of Ukraine against Russia. The PDK also fought in the Belgorod incursions with the Russian Volunteer Corps and Freedom of Russia Legion. The PDK was founded in February 2023. The PDK fought against Russia during the Belgorod incursions. The PDK posted images on Twitter that showed them fighting with the Russian Volunteer Corps and the Freedom of Russia Legion in Belgorod. The PDK stated that no one had been killed during the fighting in Belgorod. The Polish government has denied any ties with the group, and inists that any action by the volunteers is not representative of the Polish government or the Polish armed forces. The PDK is a special unit for reconnaissance and sabotage, which does not belong to the Ukrainian Foreign Legions, but reports directly to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ukraine.[citation needed] "Attacks in the Belgorod region: Polish fighters on Russian territory too". eXXpress [de; uk]. Germany. 4 June 2023. "Polish mercenaries fought in the Belgorod region. "It was an honor for our branch"". Polsat News. Poland. 4 June 2023. Wyrwal, Marcin (16 February 2023). "The first Polish special unit is being established in Ukraine". Onet Wiadomości. Poland. "Польські та російські бійці України воюватимуть разом" [Polish and Russian fighters of Ukraine will fight together]. Militarnyi [et; uk] (in Ukrainian). 6 April 2023. "Polish Volunteer Corps supporting Russian guerilla raids, video report". The New Voice of Ukraine. Yahoo! News. Retrieved 25 June 2023. "Warsaw denies connection to Polish volunteer group's actions near Russia's Belgorod Oblast". The New Voice of Ukraine. Yahoo! News. Retrieved 25 June 2023. Media related to Polish Volunteer Corps at Wikimedia Commons