Twitch is an American video live-streaming service that focuses on video game live streaming, including broadcasts of esports competitions, in addition to offering music broadcasts, creative content, and "in real life" streams. Twitch is operated by Twitch Interactive, a subsidiary of Amazon.com, Inc. It was introduced in June 2011 as a spin-off of the general-interest streaming platform Justin.tv. Content on the site can be viewed either live or via video on demand. The games shown on Twitch's current[update] homepage are listed according to audience preference and include genres such as real-time strategy games (RTS), fighting games, racing games, and first-person shooters. The popularity of Twitch eclipsed that of its general-interest counterpart. In October 2013, the website had 45 million unique viewers, and by February 2014, it was considered the fourth-largest source of peak Internet traffic in the United States. At the same time, Justin.tv's parent company was re-branded as Twitch Interactive to represent the shift in focus—Justin.tv was shut down in August 2014. That month, the service was acquired by Amazon for US$970 million, which later led to the introduction of synergies with the company's subscription service Amazon Prime. By 2015, Twitch had more than 100 million viewers per month. In 2017, Twitch remained the leading live-streaming video service for video games in the US, and had an advantage over YouTube Gaming, which shut down its standalone app in May 2019. As of February 2020,[update] it had three million broadcasters monthly and 15 million daily active users, with 1.4 million average concurrent users. As of May 2018,[update] Twitch had over 27,000 partner channels. As of October 2023,[update] Twitch was the 37th-most-visited website in the world with 20.26% of its traffic coming from the United States, followed by Germany with 7.08% and South Korea with 5.49%. In late 2023, Twitch announced that they would stop operating in South Korea in 2024 because of its network fee policy, citing prohibitive costs. When Justin.tv was launched in 2007 by Justin Kan and Emmett Shear, two recent Yale graduates, the site was divided into several content categories. The gaming category grew especially fast, and became the most popular content on the site. In June 2011,: 40  the company decided to spin off the gaming content as TwitchTV, inspired by the term twitch gameplay. It launched officially in public beta on June 6, 2011. Since then, Twitch has attracted more than 35 million unique visitors a month. Twitch had about 80 employees in June 2013, which increased to 100 by December 2013. The company was headquartered in San Francisco's Financial District. Twitch has been supported by significant investments of venture capital, with US$15 million in 2012 (on top of US$7 million originally raised for Justin.tv), and US$20 million in 2013. Investors during three rounds of fund raising leading up to the end of 2013 included Draper Associates, Bessemer Venture Partners and Thrive Capital.: 40  In addition to the influx of venture funding, it was believed in 2013 that the company had become profitable.: 40  Especially since the shutdown of its direct competitor Own3d.tv in early 2013, Twitch has become the most popular e-sports streaming service by a large margin, leading some to conclude that the website has a "near monopoly on the market". Competing video services, such as YouTube and Dailymotion, began to increase the prominence of their gaming content to compete, but have had a much smaller impact so far. As of mid-2013, there were over 43 million viewers on Twitch monthly, with the average viewer watching an hour and a half a day. By February 2014, Twitch was the fourth largest source of Internet traffic during peak times in the United States, behind Netflix, Google, and Apple. Twitch made up 1.8% of total US Internet traffic during peak periods. In late 2013, particularly due to increasing viewership, Twitch had issues with lag and low frame rates in Europe. Twitch has subsequently added new servers in the region. Also in order to address these problems, Twitch implemented a new video system shown to be more efficient than the previous system. Initially, the new video system was criticized by users because it caused a significant stream delay, interfering with broadcaster–viewer interaction. Twitch staff said that the increased delay was likely temporary and at the time, was an acceptable tradeoff for the decrease in buffering. On February 10, 2014, Twitch's parent company (Justin.tv, Inc.) was renamed Twitch Interactive, reflecting the increased prominence of the service over Justin.tv as the company's main business. That same month, a stream known as Twitch Plays Pokémon, a crowdsourced attempt to play Pokémon Red using a system translating chat commands into game controls, went viral. By February 17, the channel reached over 6.5 million total views and averaged concurrent viewership between 60 and 70,000 viewers with at least 10% participating. Vice President of Marketing Matthew DiPietro praised the stream as "one more example of how video games have become a platform for entertainment and creativity that extends WAY beyond the original intent of the game creator. By merging a video game, live video and a participatory experience, the broadcaster has created an entertainment hybrid custom made for the Twitch community. This is a wonderful proof of concept that we hope to see more of in the future." Beginning with its 2014 edition, Twitch was made the official live-streaming platform of the Electronic Entertainment Expo. On May 18, 2014, Variety first reported that Google had reached a preliminary deal to acquire Twitch through its YouTube subsidiary for approximately US$1 billion. On August 5, 2014, the original Justin.tv site suddenly ceased operations, citing a need to focus resources entirely on Twitch. On August 6, 2014, Twitch introduced an updated archive system, with multi-platform access to highlights from past broadcasts by a channel, higher quality video, increased server backups, and a new Video Manager interface for managing past broadcasts and compiling "highlights" from broadcasts that can also be exported to YouTube. Due to technological limitations and resource requirements, the new system contained several regressions; the option to archive complete broadcasts on an indefinite basis ("save forever") was removed, meaning that they can only be retained for a maximum of 14 days, or 60 for partners and Turbo subscribers. While compiled highlights can be archived indefinitely, they were limited to two hours in length. In addition, Twitch introduced a copyright fingerprinting system that would mute audio in archived clips if it detected a copyrighted song in the stream. On August 25, 2014, Amazon acquired Twitch Interactive for US$970 million in an all-cash deal. Sources reported that the rumoured Google deal had fallen through and allowed Amazon to make the bid, with Forbes reporting that Google had backed out of the deal due to potential antitrust concerns surrounding it and its existing ownership of YouTube. The acquisition closed on September 25, 2014. Take-Two Interactive, which owned a 2% stake at the time of the acquisition, made a windfall of $22 million. Under Amazon, Shear continued as chief executive officer of Twitch Interactive, with Sara Clemens added to the executive team as chief operating officer in January 2018. Shear touted the Amazon Web Services platform as an "attractive" aspect of the deal, and that Amazon had "built relationships with the big players in media", which could be used to the service's advantage—particularly in the realm of content licensing. The purchase of Twitch marked the third recent video gaming–oriented acquisition by Amazon, which had previously acquired the developers Reflexive Entertainment and Double Helix Games. On December 9, 2014, Twitch announced it had acquired GoodGame Agency, an organisation that owns the esports teams Evil Geniuses and Alliance. In March 2015, Twitch reset all user passwords and disabled all connections to external Twitter and YouTube accounts after the service reported that someone had gained "unauthorised access" to the user information of some Twitch users. In June 2016, Twitch added a new feature known as "Cheering", a special form of emoticon purchased as a microtransaction using an in-site currency known as "Bits". Bits are bought using Amazon Payments, and cheers act as donations to the channel. Users also earn badges within a channel based on how much they have cheered. On August 16, 2016, Twitch acquired Curse LLC, an operator of online video gaming communities and gaming-oriented VoIP software. In December 2016, GoodGame Agency was divested by Amazon to their respective members due to conflict of interest concerns. On September 30, 2016, Twitch announced Twitch Prime, a service which provides premium features that are exclusive to users who have an active Amazon Prime subscription. This included advertising-free streaming, monthly offers of free add-on content ("Game Loot"), and game discounts. Games included with the game loot rewards were Apex Legends, Legends of Runeterra, FIFA Ultimate Team, Teamfight Tactics, Mobile Legends: Bang Bang, Doom Eternal, and more. In December 2016, Twitch announced a semi-automated chat moderation tool (AutoMod), which uses natural language processing and machine learning to set aside potentially unwanted content for human review. In February 2017, Twitch announced the Twitch Game Store, a digital distribution platform that would expose digital purchases of games within the site's browsing interface. When streaming games available on the store, partnered channels could display a referral link to purchase the game—receiving a 5% commission. Users also received a "Twitch Crate" on every purchase, which included Bits and a collection of random chat emotes. In August 2017, Twitch announced it had acquired video indexing platform ClipMine. On August 20, 2018, Twitch announced that it will no longer offer advertising-free access to the entire service to Amazon Prime subscribers, with this privilege requiring the separate "Twitch Turbo" subscription or an individual channel subscription. This privilege ended for new customers effective September 14, 2018, and for existing customers October 2018. In October 2018, Twitch announced Amazon Blacksmith, a new extension allowing broadcasters to configure displays of products associated with their streams with Amazon affiliate links. On November 27, 2018, Twitch discontinued the Game Store service, citing that it did not generate as much additional revenue for partners as they hoped, and new revenue opportunities such as Amazon Blacksmith. Users retain access to their purchased games. On December 12, 2018, Fandom, Inc. had reached an agreement to acquire Curse Media, a spin-off of Curse, from Twitch Interactive for an undisclosed amount. Curse was dissolved and its assets were moved under Twitch Interactive. Twitch acquired the Internet Games Database (IGDb), a user-driven website similar in functionality to Internet Movie Database (IMDb) to catalog details of video games in September 2019. Twitch plans to use the database service to improve its own internal search features and help users find games they are interested in. On September 26, 2019, Twitch unveiled a new logo and updated site design. The design is accompanied by a new advertising campaign, "You're already one of us", which will seek to promote the platform's community members. Twitch began signing exclusivity deals with high-profile streamers in December 2019. Twitch introduced a Safety Advisory Council in May 2020, made up from streamers, academics, and think tanks, with a goal to develop guidelines for moderation, work-life balance, and safeguarding the interests of marginalized communities for the platform. The announcement attracted controversy, and CEO Emmett Shear later clarified that the role of the council was purely advisory. On June 22, 2020, Twitch Interactive sold CurseForge to Overwolf for an undisclosed sum. In August 2020, Twitch Prime was renamed Prime Gaming, aligning it closer with the Amazon Prime family of services. In 2020, Twitch sold Union For Gamers to Magic Find. In May 2021, Twitch announced that it would introduce over 350 new tags to categorize streams, including finer tags for gender identity, sexual identity, and disabilities, as well as tags for other types of themes (such as virtual streamers). The disability and LGBT-oriented tags were developed in consultation with the video game accessibility charities AbleGamers and SpecialEffect, and the LGBT organizations GLAAD and The Trevor Project. On October 6, 2021, an anonymous hacker reportedly leaked "the entirety" of Twitch, including its source code of the Twitch client and APIs, and details of the payouts made to almost 2.4 million streamers since August 2019. The user posted a 128GB torrent link to 4chan and said that the leak, which includes source code from almost 6,000 internal Git repositories, is also "part one" of a larger release. The leak also included details of plans for a digital storefront under the codename of "Vapor" meant to be a competitor to Steam along with details on payment received by streamers for their work on Twitch. Twitch verified they had suffered a data leak which they attributed to a server misconfiguration used by a "malicious third party". While Twitch found no indication of login credentials or credit card information to have been taken in the breach, the company reset all stream keys as a precaution. On August 23, 2022, Twitch announced that it would no longer enforce its exclusivity agreement, allowing Twitch streamers to livestream on other streaming platforms. The announcement noted that simulcasting on Twitch and other "Twitch-like" streaming platforms was still prohibited; however, an exemption to the simulcasting restriction was applied to short-form streaming platforms such as Instagram and TikTok. Despite the specific mention of restrictions on simulcasting, former Twitch employees noted that Twitch would likely not enforce the restriction, as doing so would be very difficult, and they had not been enforcing it for several months prior to the announcement. After the announcement, many high-profile streamers who were limited by exclusivity, such as Ninja and Pokimane, started streaming on other platforms. On September 21, 2022, Twitch announced it would be reducing the subscription revenue earned by large streamers. Though most streamers get a 50% of revenue from subscriptions, some larger streamers have premium subscription terms, which give them 70% of subscription revenue. The new change, set to take effect on June 1, 2023, would mean premium streamers would keep 70% of the first $100,000 earned from subscriptions, after which their cut would be lowered to 50%. The announcement came after Twitch declined a popular request for all streamers to have 70% subscription revenue, which many noted is the same revenue already offered by YouTube. Twitch President Dan Clancy justified the change in a statement issued on Twitch's blog, stating it was done to cover Twitch's operating costs, noting the premium 70% split stopped being offered to new streamers over a year prior, and pointing to alternate streamer revenue sources that would not be affected by the subscription revenue reductions, such as Prime Subs or advertisement breaks. Though Clancy claimed 90% of streamers would not be affected by the revenue reduction, the change drew criticism from many streamers, who viewed it as harmful to the security of streaming careers and more beneficial to Twitch and its advertisers than their users, with several streamers expressing doubt at Clancy's claims of Twitch's high operating costs, and noting that Twitch already has alternative revenue sources that make reducing streamer revenue unnecessary. The announcement led to some streamers considering leaving Twitch or organizing boycotts. In March 2023, Clancy became CEO of Twitch, after previous CEO and Justin.tv co-founder Emmett Shear announced he would step down after 16 years at the company. Both Shear and Clancy have been described as "more product-focused than creator-focused". On March 20, Clancy announced that Twitch would be laying off 400 employees, as part of Amazon-wide layoffs affecting 9,000 workers across the company. On June 6, 2023, Twitch announced restrictions on third-party sponsor placements in streams, including restricting the size of sponsor logos, and prohibiting "burned-in" audio, video, or display advertising. The changes were met with criticism from major streamers such as Asmongold (who threatened to leave the service), Cr1TiKaL, and Zentreya due to their broad wording, concerns that it would impact streamers' existing relationships with advertisers, and their impact on charity and esports events that rely extensively on sponsorship. The service quickly retracted the new branded content policy and announced that it would be clarified, stating that it was intended to "clarify our existing ads policy that was intended to prohibit third party ad networks from selling burned in video and display ads on Twitch, which is consistent with other services", and that Twitch "[does] not intend to limit streamers' ability to enter into direct relationships with sponsors." In August 2023, Twitch began to trial a "Discovery Feed" feature in its mobile apps, populated by "featured" clips from followed users. In October 2023, Twitch began to implement stories. At TwitchCon 2023, Twitch announced upcoming updates to its Guest Star feature (concurrently renamed "Stream Together") to allow for merged chat rooms, and that streamers under an affiliation or partnership agreement with the service (unless contractually required) would be allowed to simulcast their streams on competing platforms such as YouTube, as opposed to only mobile-centric video platforms. On December 6, 2023, Twitch announced that it would exit the South Korea market effective February 27, 2024, citing the prohibitive costs of offering the service in the country. Due to demands from internet service providers that Twitch pay network access fees, Twitch restricted streams to 720p quality in September 2022, and blocked access to video-on-demand (VOD) content (including archived broadcasts and clips) in February 2023. Users in South Korea will no longer be allowed to monetize their streams, and will be offboarded from the affiliate and partnership programs. In February 2024, Twitch was additionally fined ₩435 million ($327,067) by the Korea Telecommunications Commission, deeming Twitch's degradation of service in the country to be unjustified and undermining the interests of users. In January 2024, Twitch announced another mass layoff, affecting 500 employees or 35% of total staff, after previous layoffs in early 2023. The announcement came amid ongoing struggles and ensuing layoffs across the tech and digital media sectors. Twitch is designed to be a platform for content, including esports tournaments, personal streams of individual players, and gaming-related talk shows. A number of channels do live speedrunning. The Twitch homepage currently displays games based on viewership. As of June 2018,[update] some of the most popular games streamed on Twitch are Fortnite, Grand Theft Auto V, League of Legends, Dota 2, PlayerUnknown's Battlegrounds, Hearthstone, Overwatch and Counter-Strike: Global Offensive with a combined total of over 356 million hours watched. Twitch has also made expansions into non-gaming content; such as in July 2013, the site streamed a performance of 'Fester's Feast' from San Diego Comic-Con, and on July 30, 2014, electronic dance music act Steve Aoki broadcast a live performance from a nightclub in Ibiza. In January 2015, Twitch introduced an official category for music streams, such as radio shows and music production activities, and in March 2015, announced that it would become the new official live-streaming partner of the Ultra Music Festival, an electronic music festival in Miami. On October 28, 2015, Twitch launched a second non-gaming category, "Creative", which is intended for streams showcasing the creation of artistic and creative works. To promote the launch, the service also streamed an eight-day marathon of Bob Ross' The Joy of Painting. In July 2016, Twitch launched "Social eating" as a beta; it was inspired by the Korean phenomenon of mukbang and Korean players having engaged in the practice as intermissions on their gaming streams. In March 2017, Twitch added an "IRL" category, which is designed for content within Twitch guidelines that does not fall within any of the other established categories on the site (such as lifelogs). GeekWire reported that "while gameplay still makes up the vast majority of the content broadcast via Twitch, the 'Just Chatting' category—a catch-all term that encompasses anything from candid conversation to reality programming—took the top spot by a comfortable margin overall in December [2019]. While the category has been on the rise for the last couple of months, this was the first time that it's actually achieved No. 1 overall for a tracked period on the platform". In 2020, Thrillist described Twitch as "talk radio for the extremely online". Michael Espinosa, for Business Insider in 2021, highlighted that "Twitch dominates the live content space, with 17 billion hours watched last year (per StreamElements), compared to YouTube Gaming Live's 10 billion (per the company). But the vast majority of gaming content is still consumed on-demand, where YouTube is the clear leader with over 100 billion hours watched last year". Twitch is often used for video game tutorials; the nature of Twitch allows mass numbers of learners to interact with each other and the instructor in real time. Twitch is also used for software development learning, with communities of users streaming programming projects and talking through their work. Broadcasters on Twitch often host streams promoting and raising money towards charity. By 2013, the website has hosted events which, in total, raised over US$8 million in donations for charitable causes, such as Extra Life 2013. As of 2017,[update] Twitch has raised over US$75 million in donations for charitable causes. The biggest charity event of Twitch is ZEvent, a French project created by Adrien Nougaret and Alexandre Dachary, with more than US$10 million raised for Action Contre la Faim in October 2021. ESL tournaments have aired on Justin.tv and later Twitch.tv since 2009. The platform has also been a longtime broadcaster of the Evolution Championship Series. Twitch has been the official broadcaster of the League of Legends World Championship since 2012, as well as other League of Legends tournaments organized by Riot Games. Dota 2's premier tournament The International has been livestreamed on Twitch since 2013. The platform airs Rocket League tournaments organized by Psyonix since 2016. The ELeague also broadcasts events on Twitch since 2016. Twitch and Blizzard Entertainment signed a two-year deal in June 2017 to make Twitch be the exclusive streaming broadcaster of select Blizzard esports championship events, with viewers under Twitch Prime earning special rewards in various Blizzard games. Twitch also reached a deal in 2018 to be the streaming partner of the Overwatch League, with the site also offering an "All-Access Pass" with exclusive content, emotes, and in-game items for Overwatch. Blizzard switched to rival platform YouTube in 2020. Fortnite Battle Royale competitions have aired on Twitch since its launch in 2017, including the E3 2018 Fortnite Pro-Am and the 2019 Fortnite World Cup. The NBA 2K League has been livestreamed on Twitch since its inception in 2018. As the COVID-19 pandemic suspended motorsports competitions around the world, several series launched sim racing competitions with real-life professional drivers. Some series had official broadcasts on Twitch, such as Formula One and IMSA. Many drivers also had their personal live streams on Twitch, as was the case of several eNASCAR iRacing Pro Invitational Series and INDYCAR iRacing Challenge drivers. In December 2017, the National Basketball Association announced that it would stream NBA G League games on Twitch starting on December 15; the broadcasts also include interactive statistics overlays, as well as additional streams of the games with commentary by Twitch personalities. In April 2018, it was announced that Twitch would carry eleven National Football League Thursday Night Football games from 2018 to 2021 in simulcast with Fox, as part of the league's renewed streaming deal with Amazon Prime Video. During the 2017 season, these streams had been exclusive to Amazon Prime subscribers. As part of the broadcasts, Twitch would also offer alternate broadcasts, including broadcasts hosted by Twitch personalities, and NFL Next Live—an interactive broadcast hosted by Andrew Hawkins and Cari Champion. With Thursday Night Football moving exclusively to Amazon Prime Video for the 2022 NFL season, Twitch will continue to carry simulcasts of all games, while the site will also carry alternate broadcasts (such as one featuring Dude Perfect). In January 2019, professional wrestling promotion Impact Wrestling announced that it would stream its weekly show Impact! on Twitch, in simulcast with the television airing on the US cable network Pursuit Channel (co-owned with the promotion's parent company Anthem Sports & Entertainment). On September 5, 2019, the Premier Hockey Federation announced a three-year broadcast rights deal with Twitch, covering all games and league events. The deal also contained an agreement with the Premier Hockey Federation Players' Association for revenue sharing with players, and marked the first time that the NWHL had ever received a rights fee. The National Women's Soccer League announced a three-year deal in March 2020 for Twitch to stream 24 matches per season in the United States and Canada, collaborate on original content, and serve as the rightsholder for all matches outside of the United States and Canada. On June 20, 2020, as an extension of Prime Video's local rights to the league, a plan to air all of the remaining matches of the 2019–20 season (for the resumption of play due to the COVID-19 pandemic and matches being played behind closed doors), and a plan for some of these matches to be carried free-to-air, it was announced that Twitch would stream a package of four Premier League soccer matches within the United Kingdom. On July 16, 2020, US radio broadcaster Entercom announced a partnership to stream video simulcasts of programs from some of their major-market sports talk stations on Twitch channels. On July 22, 2020, Twitch officially launched a Sports category, primarily playing host to content streamed by sports leagues and teams on the platform. The 2021 Copa América association football tournament aired in Spain on Twitch, under a partnership with Gerard Piqué's media company Kosmos and streamer Ibai Llanos. Twitch features a large number of emotes. There are emotes free for all users, emotes for Turbo users, emotes for Twitch Prime users, and emotes for users who are subscribed to Twitch partners or affiliates. As of October 2015,[update] Kappa was the most used emote on Twitch. Twitch partnered broadcasters unlock more "emote slots" as they gain more subscribers up to a maximum of 50 emotes per channel. On January 6, 2021, Twitch announced that they had removed the PogChamp emote, the third most-used emote on the platform in 2018, typically used to express excitement, joy or shock. The decision was made in response to comments from the streamer Ryan "Gootecks" Gutierrez, the face of the emote, supporting civil unrest during the 2021 storming of the United States Capitol for the death of a protestor. Twitch said it will work with the community for a suitable replacement for the emoticon. Twitch later announced that there would be a new PogChamp emote every 24 hours. On February 12, Twitch viewers elected KomodoHype as the new permanent PogChamp emote. Streamer Ninja had been among Twitch's top personalities, with over 14 million followers. In August 2019, however, Ninja announced that he would move exclusively to a Microsoft-owned competitor, Mixer. After Ninja left, the top three streamers in October 2019 based on follower count were Tfue (7.01 million followers), Shroud (6.45 million followers) and TSM Myth (5.1 million followers). Twitch began signing exclusivity deals with high-profile streamers in December 2019, starting with DrLupo, TimTheTatman, and Lirik, who had a combined 10.36 million followers at the time. Dr DisRespect signed a multi-year deal in March 2020. In May 2020, Twitch signed popular streamers Summit1g, dakotaz and JoshOG to multi-year exclusive deals. On June 26, 2020, Dr DisRespect was banned from Twitch for unexplained reasons and his channel was removed from the site. Following the discontinuation of Mixer in late-July 2020, both Ninja and Shroud (who had also defected to the service) re-signed exclusively with Twitch. As of August 2022,[update] there have been eight streamers to have reached over 100,000 concurrent subscribers. These streamers are Ninja, Shroud, Ranboo, Ludwig, Casimiro, Ironmouse, Gaules and Ibai. In April 2021, Business Insider reported that "over the past 31 days, Ahgren has streamed non-stop in an attempt to break the record of 269,154 subscribers held by gaming personality Tyler 'Ninja' Blevins. By the end of the month-long stream, Ahgren had over 282,000 subscribers on his channel. [...] At one point during his sleep cycle, his channel had the most concurrent viewers of any on the platform". In analysis of the October 2021 data leak, multiple news outlets reported that the three top-earning Twitch content creators are Critical Role ($9,626,712), xQc ($8,454,427), and Summit1g ($5,847,541). Sisi Jiang, for Kotaku, reported that "excluding streams that are run by multiple people (such as Critical Role), there are no women in the top third of top-earning Twitch content creators"; in total, there are only three women in the top 100 and only one is a woman of color. Jiang highlighted that these streamers are "Valorant streamer Pokimane at 39th place, cosplayer Amouranth at 48th, and music streamer Sintica at 71st" and commented that "in spite of the complaints about the 'hot tub meta,' 'titty streamers,' and how some male streamers perceive that female streamers are stealing views from men, the numbers show that only a small percentage of women are among the ranks of Twitch's highest-earning content creators". In August 2021, DrLupo left Twitch for an exclusivity deal with YouTube; TimTheTatman followed in September 2021, as did Ludwig Ahgren in November 2021. Nathan Grayson, for The Washington Post, commented that when streamers moved to Mixer in 2019, Twitch quickly locked down multiple streamers in exclusivity deals; however, streamers who moved to Mixer saw their audiences undergo "a marked downsizing. [...] It demonstrated that many viewers within Twitch's ecosystem, when deprived of their favorite big streamers, will just find other Twitch streamers to take their place. [...] Now Twitch is bargaining from a place of confidence. That allows it to reevaluate previous deals made when streamers had more leverage". Grayson reported that lower offers from Twitch coupled with Twitch's higher streaming hour requirement ("YouTube's contracts start at 100 hours of streaming time per month while Twitch's start at 200") has made YouTube's exclusivity deals "tantalizing" to some Twitch streamers. Grayson wrote that "Ryan Wyatt, head of YouTube Gaming, said that allowing streamers to have a better work–life balance is a big priority for him"; DrLupo cited work–life balance as part of his decision to leave Twitch. It was reported in the early 2010s that the typical Twitch viewer is male and aged between 18 and 34 years of age, although the site has also made attempts at pursuing other demographics, including women. By 2015, Twitch had more than 100 million viewers per month. In 2017, Twitch remained the leading live-streaming video service for video games in the US. GeekWire reported that "while Twitch's overall share of the streaming market has been steadily diminishing over the course of the year, from 67.1 percent in December 2018 to 61 percent at the end of the 2019, the steady growth of the overall market means that the overall amount of content watched on the service has done nothing but increase". The journal article World of Streaming. Motivation and Gratification on Twitch reported the results of a Twitch user survey in 2017. In ranking user motivations on the use of Twitch, users were motivated (in descending order) to watch Twitch: "to be entertained", "to follow gaming events", and to "have an alternative for television". Motivations classified as "socialization" and "information" ranked lower than motivations classified as "entertainment". As of February 2020,[update] it had 3 million broadcasters monthly and 15 million daily active users, with 1.4 million average concurrent users. Statista, a company specializing in market and consumer data, reported that "as of May 2020, users in their teens and twenties accounted for more than three-quarters of Twitch's active app user accounts in the United States. According to recent data users aged 20 to 29 years, accounted for 40.6 percent of the video streaming app's user base on the Android platform". They also reported that the "distribution of Twitch users in the United States as of 2nd quarter 2021" was 75% male and 25% female. Twitch allows anyone to watch a live broadcast and does not require viewers to log in. Users also have the option to follow and subscribe (also known as subbing) to streamers. Following is a free option, similar to other platforms such as Instagram and Twitter, where the user will see their followed streamers on the front page of Twitch when signed in and can receive notifications of specific broadcasts. Subscribing is a way for users to financially support streamers in exchange for exclusive benefits determined by the individual streamer. Users who link their Twitch account to their Amazon Prime account gain access to Prime Gaming which includes one complimentary Twitch subscription per month that the user can assign to the streamer of their choice. The aforementioned 2017 academic survey stated that 31.5% of users "spent money on Twitch"; of those users, 22.6% "donated to a streamer", 31.6% subscribed to a streamer and 45.8% "did both". The majority of these users stated the "main motivation is to support a streamer financially". Twitch's Terms of Service does not allow people under 13 years of age to use its services. Additionally, people who are at least 13 years old but below the age of majority in their jurisdiction (18 in most jurisdictions), may only use the services under the supervision or permission of a parent or other legal guardian who agrees to abide to the Terms of Service. In July 2011, Twitch launched its Partner Program, which reached over 11,000 members by August 2015. Similar to the Partner Program of other video sites like YouTube, the Partner Program allows popular content producers to share in the advertisement revenue generated from their streams. Additionally, Twitch users can subscribe to partnered streamers' channels for US$4.99 a month, often granting the user access to unique emoticons, live chat privileges, and other various perks. Twitch retains US$2.49 of every US$4.99 channel subscription, with the remaining US$2.50 going directly to the partnered streamer. Although exceptions were made, Twitch previously required that prospective partners have an "average concurrent viewership of 500+", as well as a consistent streaming schedule of at least three days a week. However, since the launch of the 'Achievements' feature, there is a clearer "Path to Partnership" with trackable goals for concurrent viewership, duration and frequency of streams. In April 2017, Twitch launched its "Affiliate Program" that allows smaller channels to generate revenue as well, also announcing that it would allow channels access to multi-priced subscription tiers. The participants of this program get some but not all of the benefits of the Twitch Partners. Streamers can make profit from cheering with Bits which are purchasable from Twitch directly. Affiliates are also able to access the Twitch Subscriptions feature, with all the same functionality that Partners have access to, with a maximum of five subscriber emotes. In September 2019, the service announced that Affiliates would now receive a share of ad revenue. Advertising on the site has been handled by a number of partners. In 2011, Twitch had an exclusive deal with Future US. On April 17, 2012, Twitch announced a deal to give CBS Interactive the rights to exclusively sell advertising, promotions and sponsorships for the community. On June 5, 2013, Twitch announced the formation of the Twitch Media Group, a new in-house advertisement sales team which has taken over CBS Interactive's role of selling advertisements. For users who do not have ad-free access to a channel or Twitch Turbo, pre-roll advertising, and mid-roll commercial breaks that are manually triggered by the streamer, are displayed on streams. In September 2020, Twitch announced that it would test automated mid-roll advertising on streams, which cannot be controlled by the streamer. On August 6, 2014, Twitch announced that all on-demand videos on Twitch became subject to acoustic fingerprinting using software provided by content protection company Audible Magic; if copyrighted music (particularly, songs played by users from outside of the game they are playing) is detected, the 30-minute portion of the video which contains the music will be muted. Live broadcasts were not subject to these filters. A system was available for those who believed they were inappropriately affected and had rights to the music they used to challenge the filtering. Twitch offered a selection of royalty-free music for streamers to use, which was expanded upon later in January 2015. The audio filtering system, along with the lack of communication surrounding the changes in general, proved to be controversial among users. In a Reddit AMA, co-founder Emmett Shear admitted that his staff had "screwed up" and should have provided advance warning of the changes, and promised that Twitch had "absolutely no intention" of implementing audio filtering on live broadcasts. In June 2020, Twitch received a large wave of DMCA takedown notices aimed at year-old VODs and "clips" (short segments of streams that can be captured by users) that contain copyrighted music from 2017 to 2019. Twitch complied with the takedowns and also issued a number of copyright strikes against viewers. Concerned streamers were notified that they should remove all VODs and clips if not certain they did not contain copyrighted material. This provoked major backlash, both at the loss of prior content but also based on viability concerns due to an inability to review or even rapidly delete content. There were also complaints based that strikes were being issued on viewer-created clips, even where the streamer-created content was deleted. On September 15, 2020, Twitch signed a licensing agreement with the French performance society SACEM, allowing composers and publishers to collect royalties whenever their music is streamed in France. Twitch already had licensing deals with the American societies ASCAP, BMI, SESAC and Global Music Rights. To address these issues and also build upon the growth of music-based content on Twitch, Twitch introduced an extension known as "Soundtrack" in September 2020, which plays rights-cleared music with curated genre-based playlists. It is contained within a separate stream that is not recorded with the VODs, and had agreements with 24 music distributors and independent record labels at launch. A group of US performance rights and music associations accused Twitch of designing Soundtrack in such a way as to avoid payment of mechanical and synchronization licenses—claims which Twitch has defended. In September 2021, Twitch and the National Music Publishers' Association signed a creative partnership. Twitch users are not allowed to stream any game that is rated "Adults Only" (AO) in the United States by the Entertainment Software Rating Board (ESRB), regardless of its rating in any other geographical region, and any game that contains "overtly sexual content" or "gratuitous violence", or content which violates the terms of use of third-party services. Twitch has also explicitly banned specific games from streaming, regardless of rating; this includes games such as BMX XXX, eroge visual novel games (such as Dramatical Murder), HuniePop, Rinse and Repeat, Second Life, and Yandere Simulator. The banning of Yandere Simulator was criticized by YandereDev, the developer of the game. He believed that the game was being arbitrarily singled out with no explanation, as Twitch has not banned other games with similarly excessive sexual or violent content such as Mortal Kombat X, Grand Theft Auto, or The Witcher 3. Twitch took temporary action in May 2019 after channels related to the video game Artifact began to be used for inappropriate content. Artifact, a major game by Valve, had lost most of its audience in just months from its release, and by late May 2019, several popular livestreamers commented that the total viewership for Artifact streams had dropped to near zero. In the days that followed, several streamers started to make streams purporting to be Artifact gameplay but was trolling or other off-topic content. Initially these new streams were playing with the viewers or were jokes, such as showing animal videos or League of Legends matches. After a few days, other Artifact channel streams appeared containing content that was against the terms of Twitch's use policy, including full copyrighted movies, pornography, Nazi propaganda, and at least one stream that showed the entirety of the shooter's video from the Christchurch mosque shootings. The titles of such streams were usually presented to imply they were showing other content while waiting in queue for Artifact matches as to appear legitimate. As word of these streams in the Artifact section grew, Twitch took action, deleting the account that streamed the Christchurch shooting. Twitch then took steps to temporarily ban new accounts from streaming until they can resolve the issue. By June 2019, Twitch started taking legal actions against one hundred "John Doe" streamers in a California court, accusing them of trademark infringement, breach of contract, fraud, and unlawful use of the service that was harming and scaring away users of the service. In early 2021, some streams began to use their Twitch channel to broadcast themselves from hot tubs while wearing swimsuits. Twitch considered these streams to be "not advertiser friendly", banning some of the more predominant channels that had taken this route. In May 2021, Twitch clarified in a "Pools, Hot Tubs, and Beaches" post that it was not trying to discriminate against women or others through this action, but through content that they deemed to be "sexually suggestive". In June that year, Twitch also took similar action against users that performed yoga while at the same time made autonomous sensory meridian response (ASMR) sounds via their microphones, which Twitch also stated was approaching sexual content. In December 2023, shortly after instating a new policy that allowed specific instances of adult content, Twitch reversed its decision to allow depictions of "fictionalized nudity" following backlash from users and streamers. The CEO of Twitch, Dan Clancy, acknowledged that the new policy was a step too far and that distinguishing between digital art and photography was challenging. As a result, Twitch will no longer permit depictions of real or fictional nudity, regardless of the medium. The company also removed content that violated the updated policy and issued channel enforcements. While some changes to Twitch's Sexual Content Policy remain in effect, such as allowing content that highlights certain body parts and specific dances without a label, games featuring nudity or sexual violence as a core focus are still prohibited. In February 2018, Twitch updated its acceptable content policies to direct that any content that it deemed hateful be suspended from its platform. In June 2020, a number of women stepped forward with accusations towards several streamers on Twitch and other services related to sexual misconduct and harassment claims. Twitch stated it would review all reported incidents and comply with law enforcement in any investigative efforts. However, several popular streamers on Twitch's service believed that the platform could do more to evaluate the accused individuals, prevent incidents, and protect others in the future, and used June 24, 2020, as a Twitch blackout day, not streaming any content through Twitch to show their support. By the evening of June 24, 2020, Twitch had placed several bans on the accounts of those accused after completing their investigation, and stated in a blog post they would be forwarding additional details to law enforcement. Twitch temporarily suspended an account belonging to then US President Donald Trump's campaign on June 29, 2020. Twitch stated that "hateful conduct is not allowed" as the reason for the suspension. Twitch announced a new policy towards harassment and hateful content in December 2020 that would take effect on January 22, 2021, aimed to better protect marginalized users of the service. While the new policy is more strict, Twitch said that this also includes a larger sliding scale of remedies or punishments to better deal with edge cases, such as temporarily blocking one's channel for a short time rather than a full ban. The new rules include a ban on imagery containing the Confederate Flag, and 'racist emotes', though the list of such emotes has not been clarified yet. The new policy included banning words that were considered sexual insults, such as "incel" and "virgin" when used for harassment. The banned words included "simp", which raised criticism by streamers and long-time viewers. While its slang origins have defined "simp" derogatorily as "a man who invests a lot of time and energy into women who don't want him", the term had become common on Twitch as an insult related to men being nice to women on the service or simply to refer to a person with loyalty to another. Twitch, in response, clarified that penalties for using these terms would only be enforced if they were being used in harassment of other users. On December 4, 2020, Twitch removed the "blind playthrough" tag due to concerns of ableism that it may be offensive to those who are visually impaired. Suggestions for non-offensive and more neutral labels include "first playthrough", "undiscovered," and "no spoilers." A popular feature of Twitch is the ability to "raid" another channel, where multiple users, coordinated from a different Twitch channel or another social media service, all join a target channel to provide support and encouragement. This is typically used to help boost the popularity of the target channel, particularly if the raid is organized by a popular streamer. Twitch had officially supported this type of activity since 2017 with the ability for a streamer to send all of their viewers to another channel as a raid. However, around mid-2021, new types of "hate raids" began to occur with increasing frequency on Twitch. In these cases, numerous users would flood a channel and its chat with messages of harassment and hate towards the streamer as a form of cyberbullying. Most of these users are typically from automated bots, which made it difficult for channel moderators to deal with the amount of messages. Despite warning Twitch about these hate raids, Twitch had shown little action towards stopping them, leading numerous streams to organize a "#ADayOffTwitch" on September 1, 2021, as a form of protest in anticipation that Twitch will find ways to take action against them. After acknowledging a problem with dealing with hate raids, Twitch launched a lawsuit in early September 2021 against two individuals they had determined to be responsible for managing several hate raids after permanently banning their accounts. At the end of September 2021, Twitch introduced tools for streamers to be able to limit who may participate in their chat as to prevent hate raids. These tools allow streamers to limit chat to those that have verified their phone number or email with Twitch, as well as to those that have followed their channel for a minimum amount of time. In May 2022, following the mass shooting in Buffalo, the New York state attorney general's office announced an investigation into multiple online platforms, including Twitch, to determine their part in platforming or promoting hateful content. The investigation will also focus on the platforms' moderation efforts. A spokesperson for Twitch stated that the service would comply with the investigation. In April 2021, it was reported that Twitch was providing a financial lifeline to extremists such as QAnon adherents and far-right influencers. Another report in August and September 2021, by the Institute of Strategic Dialogue also identified Twitch as a platform where far right extremists run rampant. Clips from far-right extremists, such as 'Omegle Redpilling' become quite popular before they are removed from the platform and in some cases, are not removed at all according to ISD. On September 20, 2022, Twitch announced that beginning October 18, it would prohibit the streaming of slots, roulette and dice games on gambling websites not licensed in the US or "other jurisdictions that provide sufficient consumer protection". The policy change does not affect sports betting, fantasy sports, and poker. Gambling has been extremely popular on Twitch for years, being one of the most popular types of content on the platform, with many streamers being sponsored by online gambling services; however, it has also been controversial, with prominent streamers such as Mizkif and Pokimane speaking out against the negative effects of gambling streams. The announcement came shortly after a popular streamer admitted he spent $200,000 in donations on CS:GO skin gambling. As of September 20, 2018,[update] the Twitch website is blocked and the app is blocked from the Apple App Store in China. In India, Twitch was reportedly blocked by Reliance-owned telecommunication company Jio as well as internet service providers JioFiber and Hathway in September 2020 as some users were illegally streaming Indian Premier League cricket matches on the platform. Slovakia's government reportedly blocked Twitch in June 2021 after a streamer in the country with around 35,000 followers was found streaming poker, which was in violation of local gambling laws. On July 4, 2022, the Iranian government blocked access to Twitch for Iranian Internet users. On February 23, 2024, Twitch was blocked in Turkey per a complaint by the country's lotteries commission. It was reopened 6 days later, at 29th of February. Twitch CEO Emmett Shear has stated a desire to support a wide variety of platforms, stating that they wanted to be on "every platform where people watch video". Users can watch Twitch streams via Twitch's website in a web browser and via dedicated streaming apps for mobile devices, digital media players and video game consoles. This includes: Twitch's mobile apps for Android, Fire OS, and iOS Twitch's web-based TV and game console apps for Fire TV, webOS (LG TVs), Samsung TVs (2020 and newer), Android TV, Apple TV, PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox One, Xbox Series X/S, and Nintendo Switch The Twitch web-apps for Xbox and PlayStation consoles received an update that replaced the app with the "viewer-only" web-app for TVs, removing several features, including chatting. The Twitch Desktop App for Windows and macOS is no longer supported Twitch's web-based TV and game console apps for PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, and pre-2021 (Tizen-based) Samsung TVs are no longer supported Users can broadcast to Twitch from the following platforms: Twitch's mobile apps for Android, Fire OS, and iOS OBS Open Source Broadcasting Studio Software Twitch Studio app for Windows and macOS Native integration on PlayStation 4, PlayStation 5, Xbox One, Xbox Series X/S, NVIDIA Shield TV Pro, and NVIDIA Shield tablets Prior versions of Twitch's app for Xbox One and Series X/S had broadcasting functionality before being replaced by "viewer-only" wrapped web-apps for a single codebase across TVs on November 16, 2022. Twitch said they worked with Microsoft so those consoles could still broadcast to Twitch, though not through the Twitch app, but with native integration. Twitch released a software development kit for third-party developers integrate Twitch broadcasting into their software. In-app integration in third-party apps for desktop like OBS, Streamlabs Desktop, Lightstream Studio, Melon, Split Broadcaster, Gamecaster, and NVIDIA GeForce Experience. Broadcasters can also use third party apps for mobile like Omlet Arcade and the Streamlabs App In-game integration such as Eve Online, PlanetSide 2, some Call of Duty games, Minecraft and Warthunder In-app integrations in EA's Origin and Ubisoft's Uplay are no longer supported. After acquiring Curse LLC, Twitch Interactive rebranded the Curse app as the Twitch Desktop App in March 2017. It kept features for mod installation and management for supported games via CurseForge; kept Curse Voice features such as screen sharing, text chat, voice chat, video chat and community server creation; added a dedicated browser for the Twitch website; added Twitch's friends system; and added activity sharing. This update also redesigned the application. The software also served as the client for the former Twitch Game Store. The Curse mobile app was subsequently rebranded as Twitch Messenger[citation needed] which was later shut down.[citation needed] Twitch removed the app's servers, group messaging, voice chat and video chat functionality in February 2019. On June 22, 2020, Twitch Interactive sold CurseForge to Overwolf for an undisclosed sum. On December 2, 2020, mod management functionality was removed from the Twitch Desktop App.[citation needed] The mod management functionality previously found in the Twitch app can since be found in Overwolf's CurseForge app. On March 30, 2022, Twitch announced that it would officially end support for the Twitch Desktop App on April 30, 2022, opting users of the desktop app to use a web browser to interact with Twitch on desktop platforms. TwitchCon is a biannual fan convention devoted to Twitch and the culture of video game streaming. The inaugural event was held at the Moscone Center in San Francisco from September 25 to 26, 2015. Since its inception TwitchCon has been an annual event. The second TwitchCon was held in San Diego at the San Diego Convention Center from September 30 to October 2, 2016. The third annual TwitchCon was held in Long Beach at the Long Beach Convention and Entertainment Center from October 20 to 22, 2017. The fourth annual TwitchCon was held at the San Jose McEnery Convention Center in San Jose, California, from October 26 to 28, 2018. In 2019, Twitchcon expanded overseas and hosted their first ever European event in Berlin in April 2019, alongside a North American event later in November 2019 in San Diego. TwitchCon had planned to host an event in Amsterdam in May 2020, but this was cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Another TwitchCon event was planned in San Diego in September 2020, but was also cancelled due to COVID-19. List of social networking services Peters, Jay (November 19, 2020). "Another Twitch co-founder is leaving the company, leaving only one". The Verge. Archived from the original on December 30, 2020. Retrieved January 2, 2021.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "16 Years of Twitch". "Twitch Hires YouTube Alum Laura Lee as Chief Content Officer". November 3, 2022. Wawro, Alex (August 25, 2014). "Amazon to acquire Twitch". Gamasutra. UBM plc. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 25, 2014. Alex Wilhelm (June 6, 2011). "TwitchTV: Justin.tv's killer new esports project". The Next Web. Archived from the original on June 14, 2018. Retrieved June 18, 2018. Mao, Eric (July 3, 2022). "The effectiveness of event marketing in an attention economy: Findings from Twitch live-stream esports tournament events". Journal of Media Economics. 34 (3): 194–211. doi:10.1080/08997764.2022.2115503. ISSN 0899-7764. S2CID 251830207. Archived from the original on December 1, 2022. Retrieved December 1, 2022. Ewalt, David M. (December 2, 2013). "The ESPN of Videogames". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 3, 2017. Retrieved September 17, 2017. Truong, Alice (February 10, 2014). "As Twitch Grows, Justin.tv Inc. Is Renamed Twitch Interactive". Fast Company. Archived from the original on November 3, 2018. Retrieved October 14, 2019. "A Letter from the CEO, August 25, 2014". Twitch Blog. August 25, 2014. Archived from the original on August 25, 2014. Retrieved August 25, 2014. Kim, Eugene (August 26, 2014). "Amazon Buys Twitch For $US970 Million In Cash". Business Insider Australia. Archived from the original on November 16, 2018. Retrieved November 16, 2018. Sarah Needleman (January 29, 2015). "Twitch's Viewers Reach 100 Million a Month". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on August 9, 2017. Retrieved August 4, 2017. Robertson, Adi (May 27, 2019). "The YouTube Gaming app is shutting down this week". The Verge. Archived from the original on May 30, 2019. Retrieved February 1, 2022. Gonzalez, Oscar (May 28, 2019). "Google to shut down YouTube Gaming app on May 30". CNET. Archived from the original on February 1, 2022. Retrieved February 1, 2022. Perez, Sarah (September 18, 2018). "YouTube to shut down standalone Gaming app, as gaming gets a new home on YouTube". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on February 1, 2022. Retrieved February 1, 2022. "55 Amazing Twitch Stats and Facts". DMR. June 15, 2015. Archived from the original on July 15, 2018. Retrieved July 15, 2018. Perez, Sarah (April 26, 2018). "Twitch solidifies its lead with viewership up 21% in Q1, while YouTube Gaming drops". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on September 3, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018. "Audience | Twitch Advertising". twitchadvertising.tv. Archived from the original on December 15, 2018. Retrieved December 11, 2018. "twitch.tv". similarweb. October 30, 2023. "Top Websites Ranking". Similarweb. Archived from the original on February 10, 2022. Retrieved December 1, 2021. Matthew Lynley (March 10, 2011). "Live-streaming site Justin.tv buffing up for e-sports channels". VentureBeat. Archived from the original on August 9, 2017. Retrieved September 17, 2017. Rao, Leena (August 11, 2011). "Justin.TV's Video Gaming Portal Twitch.TV Is Growing Fast". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on September 28, 2017. Retrieved June 25, 2017. Lawler, Ryan (June 5, 2013). "With 35M Unique Viewers A Month, Twitch Hires An In-House Ad Sales Team To Ramp Up Monetization". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on June 10, 2013. Retrieved June 11, 2013. Sam Thielman (June 5, 2013). "Twitch Bids Adieu to CBSi Ad Sales ESports hub sets up internal sales team led by CRO Jonathan Simpson-Bint". AdWeek. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved November 22, 2013. Dean Takahashi (September 19, 2012). "Making every gamer famous, Twitch raises $15M to expand its eSports webcasts". VentureBeat. Archived from the original on September 15, 2013. Retrieved October 1, 2013. Alexander Sliwinski (September 20, 2012). "Twitch receives $15 million investment to expand eSports broadcasts". Joystiq. Archived from the original on January 31, 2015. Retrieved October 2, 2013. Samit Sarkar (September 30, 2013). "Twitch secures $20M investment to prepare for PS4, Xbox One". Polygon. Archived from the original on September 30, 2013. Retrieved October 1, 2013. Ben Popper (September 30, 2013). "Field of streams: how Twitch made video games a spectator sport". The Verge. Archived from the original on October 1, 2013. Retrieved October 1, 2013. Patrick Howell O'Neill (January 16, 2014). "Twitch dominated streaming in 2013, and here are the numbers to prove it". TheDailyDot. Archived from the original on January 22, 2014. Retrieved January 23, 2014. Alex Wilhelm (March 30, 2013). "As DailyMotion and YouTube turn up the pressure, Twitch looks to retain livestreaming ascendance". TheNextWeb. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved January 23, 2014. Webb, Charles (May 2, 2012). "Interview: The Big Broadcast – TwitchTV, eSports, and Making it Big as an Online Gamer". MTV. Archived from the original on March 30, 2014. "Wall Street Journal chart lists Twitch.tv fourth in U.S. peak traffic". The Wall Street Journal via on Gamers. February 5, 2014. Archived from the original on February 8, 2014. Retrieved February 10, 2014. "The Daily Dot – Twitch dominated streaming in 2013, and here are the numbers to prove it". The Daily Dot. January 22, 2014. Archived from the original on January 22, 2014. Retrieved December 1, 2018. "Twitch.tv Adds New Servers and Upgrades Video System". Gameranx. December 13, 2013. Archived from the original on December 20, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013. Rory Young (December 16, 2013). "Twitch.tv update imposes delay of up to 60s in all streams, viewer interaction severely affected". Neoseeker. Archived from the original on December 20, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013. "New Video System: Update after One Week in Full Service". Twitch. December 20, 2013. Archived from the original on December 25, 2013. Retrieved December 24, 2013. "How Twitch is crowd-sourcing an amazing Pokémon multiplayer game". Polygon. February 14, 2014. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved February 18, 2014. "Twitch Plays Pokemon captivates with more than 6.5M total views". Polygon. February 17, 2014. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved February 18, 2014. "Twitch Broadcast Schedule for E3". Twitch. June 2, 2014. Archived from the original on June 3, 2014. Retrieved June 3, 2014. Spangler, Todd (May 18, 2014). "YouTube to Acquire Videogame-Streaming Service Twitch for $1 Billion: Sources". Variety. Archived from the original on July 27, 2014. Retrieved July 27, 2014. Takahashi, Dean (July 24, 2014). "Google's $1B purchase of Twitch confirmed – joins YouTube for new video empire". VentureBeat. Archived from the original on July 24, 2014. Retrieved July 24, 2014. Spangler, Todd (July 24, 2014). "Google Seals Deal to Buy Twitch for $1 Billion: Report". Variety. Archived from the original on July 27, 2014. Retrieved July 24, 2014. Mahardy, Mike (July 24, 2014). "Google buys livestreaming service Twitch". IGN. Archived from the original on December 19, 2014. Retrieved July 24, 2014. "Twitch pulls the plug on video-streaming site Justin.tv". CNET. August 5, 2014. Archived from the original on August 6, 2014. Retrieved August 6, 2014. Machovech, Sam (August 5, 2014). "Streaming video site Justin.tv announces closure effective immediately". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on August 6, 2017. Retrieved June 15, 2017. Popper, Ben (August 5, 2014). "Justin.tv, the live video pioneer that birthed Twitch, officially shuts down". The Verge. Archived from the original on August 6, 2017. Retrieved September 17, 2017. "Twitch is dropping its 'save forever' feature, but users can still archive highlight clips". Polygon. August 6, 2014. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved August 7, 2014. "Update: Changes To VODs On Twitch". Twitch official blog. Archived from the original on August 6, 2014. Retrieved August 7, 2014. "Amazon Pounces on Twitch After Google Balks Due To Antitrust Concerns". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 26, 2014. "Amazon.com SEC filing". September 25, 2014. Archived from the original on December 7, 2014. Retrieved December 9, 2014. "Take-Two made $22M on its investment in gameplay livestreaming king Twitch". October 29, 2014. Archived from the original on August 19, 2018. Retrieved August 26, 2018. "Twitch brings in a team of executives to oversee deployment of new features". January 17, 2018. Archived from the original on February 26, 2018. Retrieved February 25, 2018. "Why it makes sense for Amazon to buy Twitch". The Verge. August 25, 2014. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 26, 2014. "Twitch to Acquire GoodGame Agency". Archived from the original on January 14, 2015. Retrieved December 10, 2014. Te, Zorine (December 9, 2014). "Twitch Acquires Evil Geniuses' Agency GoodGame". GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on December 30, 2014. Retrieved December 10, 2014. "'Some' Twitch user accounts possibly accessed in hack". CNET. Archived from the original on August 8, 2017. Retrieved August 8, 2017. Partin, William Clyde (July 1, 2020). "Bit by (Twitch) Bit: "Platform Capture" and the Evolution of Digital Platforms". Social Media + Society. 6 (3): 2056305120933981. doi:10.1177/2056305120933981. ISSN 2056-3051. "Twitch Adds Microtransactions to Cheer in Chat". GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on April 20, 2017. Retrieved April 20, 2017. "Twitch to acquire Curse". Polygon. Vox Media. August 16, 2016. Archived from the original on August 17, 2016. Retrieved August 16, 2016. Wolf, Jacob (December 12, 2016). "Evil Geniuses and Alliance become player-owned organizations". ESPN. Archived from the original on December 13, 2016. Retrieved December 12, 2016. Statt, Nick (September 30, 2016). "Twitch will be ad-free for all Amazon Prime subscribers". The Verge. Archived from the original on October 1, 2016. Retrieved September 30, 2016. Cyre, Clayton (May 28, 2020). "TWITCH PRIME GETTING MORE GAMES AND LOOT IN JUNE". COGconnected. Archived from the original on June 7, 2020. Retrieved June 8, 2020. "Twitch introduces a new automated moderation tool to make chat friendlier". The Verge. Vox Media. December 12, 2016. Archived from the original on April 21, 2017. Retrieved April 20, 2017. McCormick, Rich (February 27, 2017). "Twitch will start selling games and giving its streamers a cut". The Verge. Archived from the original on February 27, 2017. Retrieved February 27, 2017. Barrett, Ben (February 27, 2017). "Twitch Commerce will sell games and DLC from streamer pages with 5% going to broadcasters". PCGamesN. Archived from the original on February 27, 2017. Retrieved February 27, 2017. Sarah Perez (March 28, 2017). "Twitch will sell video games on its site starting this spring". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on March 30, 2017. Retrieved March 29, 2017. Perez, Sarah. "Twitch acquired video indexing platform ClipMine to power new discovery features". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on September 14, 2017. Retrieved September 14, 2017. Statt, Nick (August 20, 2018). "Twitch Prime members will lose ad-free viewing next month". The Verge. Archived from the original on August 20, 2018. Retrieved August 20, 2018. "Twitch announces group streaming and a karaoke game for its 1M concurrent viewers". TechCrunch. October 26, 2018. Archived from the original on January 24, 2023. Retrieved February 14, 2019. "Twitch Game Store is Shutting Down After November 27". GameRevolution. November 16, 2018. Archived from the original on February 15, 2019. Retrieved February 14, 2019. Sinclair, Brendan (December 13, 2018). "Twitch sells Curse Media". GamesIndustry.biz. Retrieved April 29, 2023. Sutton, James (December 14, 2018). "Fandom Acquires Curse Media, Gamepedia and D&D Beyond From Twitch". GameRevolution. Retrieved April 29, 2023. Rhea, Brandon (December 12, 2018). "Fandom and Curse Media are joining forces". Fandom Community Central. Retrieved April 17, 2023. Kerr, Chris (September 18, 2019). "Twitch acquires IGDB to bolster search and discoverability capabilities". Gamasutra. Archived from the original on September 21, 2019. Retrieved September 18, 2019. Stephen, Bijan (September 26, 2019). "Eight years after its launch, Twitch is getting a slightly new look". The Verge. Archived from the original on September 26, 2019. Retrieved September 26, 2019. Stephen, Bijan (December 10, 2019). "Twitch just locked down top streamers DrLupo, TimTheTatman, and Lirik". The Verge. Archived from the original on December 11, 2019. Retrieved December 11, 2019. Shanley, Patrick (March 12, 2020). "Streamer Dr Disrespect Signs Multiyear Deal to Stay on Twitch". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 13, 2020. Retrieved March 13, 2020. Grayson, Nathan (May 14, 2020). "Twitch's New 'Safety Advisory Council' To Focus On Work-Life Balance, Protecting Marginalized Groups". Kotaku. Archived from the original on June 25, 2020. Retrieved June 24, 2020. "Twitch's Safety Advisory Council Rollout Has Been A Disaster". Kotaku. May 20, 2020. Retrieved March 17, 2023. Ashcroft, Helen (May 15, 2020). "Twitch Introduces Safety Advisory Council And No One Is Very Sure What That Even Means". TheGamer. Retrieved March 17, 2023. "A Note from Emmett about the Safety Advisory Council". Twitch Blog. Retrieved March 17, 2023. Sinclair, Brendan (June 22, 2020). "Twitch sells CurseForge to Overwolf". GamesIndustry.biz. Retrieved May 4, 2023. Peters, Jay (August 10, 2020). "Amazon rebrands Twitch Prime as Prime Gaming". The Verge. Archived from the original on August 10, 2020. Retrieved August 10, 2020. "M.O.B.A. Network enters into an agreement to acquire the company Magic Find - a leading player within gaming streaming on YouTube and owner of a number of well-known gaming communities". News Powered by Cision. May 19, 2021. Retrieved May 7, 2023. Marshall, Cass (May 27, 2021). "Twitch introduces more than 350 new streamer tags, including Vtuber, transgender, queer". Polygon. Archived from the original on September 1, 2021. Retrieved September 1, 2021. Warren, Tom (October 6, 2021). "Twitch hack". The Verge. Archived from the original on October 6, 2021. Retrieved October 6, 2021. "Twitch confirms massive data breach". BBC News. October 6, 2021. Archived from the original on October 6, 2021. Retrieved October 6, 2021. Browning, Kellen (October 6, 2021). "A 'potentially disastrous' data breach hits Twitch, the livestreaming site". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 6, 2021. Retrieved October 6, 2021. Scullion, Chris (October 6, 2021). "The entirety of Twitch has reportedly been leaked". Video Games Chronicle. Archived from the original on October 6, 2021. Retrieved October 6, 2021. Grayson, Nathan (October 6, 2021). "Massive Twitch hack reveals streamers' pay, with top stars making millions". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 6, 2021. Retrieved October 6, 2021. "Twitch hacker leaks entire source code and streamers' incomes for the past three years". MarketWatch. October 6, 2021. Archived from the original on October 6, 2021. Retrieved October 6, 2021. The leaked data does apparently reveal just how much money popular Twitch streamers are earning directly from Twitch. Some 81 have been paid more than $1 million by Twitch since August 2019, likely from subscriptions and advertising revenue, according to the leaked documents. Carpenter, Nicole (October 6, 2021). "Massive Twitch source code, creator earnings hack, explained". Polygon. Archived from the original on October 7, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Warren, Tom (October 6, 2021). "Twitch confirms major data breach after its source code and secrets leak out". The Verge. Archived from the original on October 6, 2021. Retrieved October 6, 2021. Plunkett, Luke (October 6, 2021). "Twitch Says 'Malicious Third Party' Was Behind Hack". Kotaku. Archived from the original on October 7, 2021. Retrieved October 6, 2021. Scullion, Chris (October 7, 2021). "Twitch leak: All stream keys have been reset 'out of an abundance of caution'". Video Games Chronicle. Archived from the original on October 7, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2021. "Amazon's Twitch blames configuration error for data breach". Reuters. Reuters. October 7, 2021. Archived from the original on October 8, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2021. "Twitch will now let partners stream on YouTube and Facebook". The Verge. August 23, 2022. Archived from the original on September 27, 2022. Retrieved September 27, 2022. "Twitch will allow partners to stream on other platforms now". NBC News. August 25, 2022. Archived from the original on September 27, 2022. Retrieved September 27, 2022. "Twitch Now Lets Partners Stream On Rival Platforms". GameSpot. Archived from the original on September 27, 2022. Retrieved September 27, 2022. "Twitch does away with streamer exclusivity policy it wasn't enforcing". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved September 27, 2022. "Analysis | Ninja and Pokimane, two of Twitch's biggest stars, fly the coop". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on September 15, 2022. Retrieved September 27, 2022. Metz, Cade (September 21, 2022). "Twitch Says It Will Reduce Payments for Many Popular Streamers". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on September 27, 2022. Retrieved September 27, 2022. "A Letter from Twitch President Dan Clancy on Subscription Revenue Shares". Twitch Blog. Retrieved March 17, 2023. "Twitch is cutting how much its biggest streamers earn from subscriptions". The Verge. September 21, 2022. Archived from the original on September 27, 2022. Retrieved September 27, 2022. "Twitch Is Changing Its Revenue Split For Its Biggest Streamers From 2023". GameSpot. Archived from the original on September 27, 2022. Retrieved September 27, 2022. "Twitch addresses revenue split for streamers, declining to change 50/50 split". Eurogamer.net. September 21, 2022. Archived from the original on September 27, 2022. Retrieved September 27, 2022. "A Letter from Twitch President Dan Clancy on Subscription Revenue Shares". Twitch Blog. Archived from the original on September 28, 2022. Retrieved September 27, 2022. Dinsdale, Ryan (September 21, 2022). "Twitch Removes Its Best-Paying Revenue Split for Streamers". IGN. Retrieved March 17, 2023. "How Twitch lost the battle for its soul". The Verge. September 26, 2022. Archived from the original on September 27, 2022. Retrieved September 27, 2022. "16 Years Of Twitch". Twitch Blog. Retrieved March 16, 2023. Hatmaker, Taylor (March 16, 2023). "Twitch CEO Emmett Shear is stepping down". TechCrunch. Retrieved March 16, 2023. "Twitch Creator Chief Exits With Controversy Over Streamer Pay Swirling". Bloomberg.com. September 23, 2022. Retrieved March 17, 2023. "An update about our workforce". Twitch Blog. Retrieved March 20, 2023. Palmer, Annie (March 20, 2023). "Amazon to lay off 9,000 more workers in addition to earlier cuts". CNBC. Retrieved March 20, 2023. Hatmaker, Taylor (March 20, 2023). "Twitch says it will lay off 400 employees". TechCrunch. Retrieved March 20, 2023. Alexander, Cristina (June 6, 2023). "Twitch Crackdown on Creator Ads Sparks Calls for Boycotts and Protests". IGN. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Wood, Austin; Bailey, Dustin (June 6, 2023). "Twitch streamers up in arms as new advertising rules limit sponsors and threaten to kill charity and esports events". gamesradar. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Peters, Jay (August 22, 2023). "Twitch is testing a TikTok-style feed". The Verge. Retrieved December 6, 2023. Parrish, Ash (October 16, 2023). "Twitch adds stories to its mobile app". The Verge. Retrieved December 6, 2023. Peters, Jay (October 20, 2023). "Twitch will now let streamers simultaneously stream on any service they want". The Verge. Retrieved December 6, 2023. Hyeong-woo, Kan (April 21, 2022). "[Newsmaker] YouTube threatens to cut down investments in Korea over 'network usage fee' bill". The Korea Herald. Retrieved December 6, 2023. Murray, Sean (September 29, 2022). "Twitch Responds To Korean Government Bill By Limiting Stream Quality To 720p". TheGamer. Retrieved December 6, 2023. "Twitch to be switched off in Korea for VOD from Feb. 7". Korea JoongAng Daily. January 30, 2023. Retrieved December 6, 2023. Dong-woo, Chang (December 6, 2023). "Twitch plans to shut down in S. Korea over high network costs". Yonhap News Agency. Retrieved December 6, 2023. "Impact of Twitch Shutdown in Korea on Users Outside of Korea". help.twitch.tv. Retrieved December 6, 2023. "Korea slaps $327,067 fine on Twitch for suspending service". The Korea Times. February 23, 2024. Retrieved February 25, 2024. D'Anastasio, Cecilia (January 9, 2024). "Amazon's Twitch to Cut 500 Employees, About 35% of Staff". Bloomberg. Retrieved January 10, 2024. "A Difficult Update about our Workforce". blog.twitch.tv. Retrieved January 11, 2024. Duffy, Clare (January 10, 2024). "Game streaming firm Twitch cutting 500 jobs | CNN Business". CNN. Retrieved January 10, 2024. Miller, Patrick (October 31, 2011). "Twitch.tv Releases iPhone App, Feeds Your Addiction". PC World. Archived from the original on August 20, 2012. Retrieved July 25, 2014. Sebastian Haley (February 5, 2013). "Can live speedruns compete with e-sports? (interview)". VentureBeat. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved January 23, 2014. "CBS Interactive Expands into eSports Category With Exclusive Live Gaming Video and League Partnerships". PR Newswire. April 17, 2012. Archived from the original on May 7, 2012. Retrieved May 21, 2012. "Leading gaming content on Twitch worldwide in June 2018, by number of hours viewed | Statistic". Statista. Archived from the original on March 10, 2017. Retrieved July 16, 2018. "Twitch to stream Video Games Live concert from Comic-Con". Polygon. July 15, 2013. Archived from the original on October 11, 2014. Retrieved August 8, 2014. "Twitch tries out live concerts with free house music performance tonight". The Verge. Archived from the original on August 2, 2014. Retrieved August 8, 2014. "DJ Steve Aoki to star in Twitch's first live concert tonight". CNET. Archived from the original on August 2, 2014. Retrieved August 8, 2014. "Twitch starts streaming live music today". Polygon. Archived from the original on August 3, 2014. Retrieved August 8, 2014. "Twitch adds a music section, free tracks to make up for copyright crackdown". PC World. January 15, 2015. Archived from the original on January 16, 2015. Retrieved January 15, 2015. "The Ultra Music Festival will be broadcast live on Twitch". The Verge. March 23, 2015. Archived from the original on March 25, 2015. Retrieved March 25, 2015. "Twitch launches "Creative" category, eight-day Bob Ross Painting marathon". Ars Technica. October 29, 2015. Archived from the original on October 30, 2015. Retrieved December 28, 2015. "Why eating and gaming is a thing on Twitch". Polygon. Vox Media. July 11, 2016. Archived from the original on July 14, 2016. Retrieved July 18, 2016. "Games Are Taking A Back Seat To Players On Video Game Streaming Sites". NPR. March 12, 2017. Archived from the original on August 12, 2017. Retrieved August 11, 2017. Byers, Preston (February 17, 2022). "What is Just Chatting on Twitch?". Dot Esports. Archived from the original on May 31, 2022. Retrieved March 14, 2022. "Game streaming report: 'Just Chatting' category takes over Twitch; Facebook Gaming sees growth". GeekWire. January 9, 2020. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Corrall, Cody (November 18, 2020). "The Museum of Home Video Is One of Twitch's Best-Kept, Weirdo Pop-Culture Secrets". Thrillist. Archived from the original on November 27, 2020. Retrieved November 19, 2020. Espinosa, Michael (October 6, 2021). "Why Twitch is still the top destination for livestreaming, even as YouTube Gaming poaches some big streamers". Business Insider. Archived from the original on October 8, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Payne, Katherine; Keith, Mark J.; Schuetzler, Ryan M.; Giboney, Justin Scott (December 2017). "Examining the learning effects of live streaming video game instruction over Twitch". Computers in Human Behavior. 77: 95–109. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2017.08.029. Ernie Smith (January 13, 2015). "How Gaming Gurus Reinvented Telethons for the Web". Association Now. Archived from the original on July 14, 2016. Retrieved January 19, 2016. Jeffrey Grubb (October 31, 2013). "Livestreaming community on Twitch has raised $8 million for charity; plans to raise more this weekend". VentureBeat. Archived from the original on December 28, 2013. Retrieved December 24, 2013. Schroeder, Andrew (July 20, 2017). "2017 Charity Update: Twitch community gives back at record pace!". Twitch Blog (Medium). Archived from the original on October 14, 2019. Retrieved October 14, 2019. Jonno Nicholson (April 28, 2020). "ESL and DreamHack enter three-year broadcast deal with Twitch". eSports Insider. Archived from the original on April 28, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2021. Mike Williams (June 29, 2012). "EVO tournament offering HD pay-per-view stream". Games Industry. Archived from the original on April 28, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2021. Phillip Martínez (August 2, 2019). "EVO 2019: Schedule, Start Time and How to Stream Every Tournament Online". Newsweek. Archived from the original on April 28, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2021. Dreamer IX (May 15, 2014). "The rise of Twitch.tv - How this giant came to be". MWeb Gamezone. Archived from the original on April 28, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2021. Jenna Pitcher (August 13, 2013). "The International attracts more than 1 million viewers". Polygon. Archived from the original on April 28, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2021. John Gaudiosi (March 2, 2016). "Twitch launching 'Rocket League' into eSports". Fortune. Archived from the original on April 28, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2021. "Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. and WME / IMG Form Strategic Partnership to Create Groundbreaking eSports League". Time Warner. September 24, 2015. Archived from the original on June 2, 2017. Retrieved November 20, 2015. Wynne, Jared (November 6, 2015). "Turner plans to partner with an online streaming company, expand into other esports". The Daily Dot. Archived from the original on November 10, 2016. Retrieved April 28, 2021. Bryant, Jacob (June 20, 2017). "Twitch and Blizzard Announce Two-Year Worldwide Collaboration". Variety. Archived from the original on June 20, 2017. Retrieved June 20, 2017. Arif, Shabana (April 5, 2018). "Overwatch League All-Access Pass Includes Twitch Emotes, in-Game Skins, and More for $30". IGN. Archived from the original on February 1, 2019. Retrieved February 14, 2019. "At The Last Minute, Blizzard Strikes Overwatch League Deal With Twitch". GameSpot. May 23, 2018. Archived from the original on January 10, 2018. Retrieved February 14, 2019. Todd Spangler (January 24, 2020). "YouTube Scores Exclusive Streaming for Activision Blizzard's E-Sports, Including Overwatch and Call of Duty Leagues". Variety. Archived from the original on May 26, 2020. Retrieved April 28, 2021. Davenport, James (June 13, 2018). "Fortnite Celebrity Pro-Am Twitch channel breaks 700,000 concurrent viewers". PC Gamer. Archived from the original on June 14, 2018. Retrieved June 13, 2018. Spangler, Todd (July 29, 2019). "Fortnite World Cup Finals 2019 Draws Over 2 Million Live Viewers". Variety. Archived from the original on July 29, 2019. Retrieved July 29, 2019. Andrew Hayward (April 15, 2019). "NBA 2K League Adds YouTube as Streaming Partner". eSports Observer. Archived from the original on April 28, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2021. Mike Pryson (March 21, 2020). "Virtual Racing on TV: Where to Find iRacing and eSports action for NASCAR, F1, IMSA". Autoweek. Archived from the original on April 28, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2021. Nate Ryan (April 22, 2020). "Can the Twitch phenomenon transfer to real-world NASCAR?". NBC Sports. Archived from the original on April 28, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2021. Nathan Brown (April 1, 2020). "IndyCar's first iRacing event drew more than 400,000 live viewers with online-only stream". Indianapolis Star. Archived from the original on December 3, 2020. Retrieved April 28, 2021. Wolf, Jacob (December 13, 2017). "NBA to broadcast G League games on Twitch". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on December 14, 2017. Retrieved December 13, 2017. McWhertor, Michael (April 26, 2018). "NFL games are coming to Twitch". Polygon.com. Archived from the original on April 27, 2018. Retrieved April 27, 2018. Spangler, Todd (September 27, 2018). "Amazon, Twitch Unveil Enhanced Features for NFL 'Thursday Night Football' Live-Streams". Variety. Archived from the original on August 26, 2022. Retrieved November 19, 2018. "Amazon Prime Thursday Night Football adding scout feed, Twitch stream, new talent for 2020 NFL season". Awful Announcing. October 5, 2020. Archived from the original on August 26, 2022. Retrieved October 6, 2020. Dachman, Jason (August 25, 2022). "Amazon Prime Video Kicks Off New Era of NFL Production With Exclusive Thursday Night Football Package". Sports Video Group. Archived from the original on August 26, 2022. Retrieved August 26, 2022. Staff, S. V. G. (August 3, 2022). "Prime Video Presents TNF With Dude Perfect Alternative Stream". Sports Video Group. Archived from the original on August 26, 2022. Retrieved August 26, 2022. Decker, Kyle (January 6, 2019). "Impact's weekly program will be simulcast on Twitch as it airs on the Pursuit channel". Cageside Seats. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved March 8, 2019. Clinton, Jared (September 5, 2019). "NWHL signs three-year streaming deal with Twitch, receives broadcasting rights fee". The Hockey News. Archived from the original on September 5, 2019. Retrieved September 5, 2019. Alexander, Julia (March 11, 2020). "Amazon continues push into sports with National Women's Soccer League on Twitch". The Verge. Archived from the original on March 12, 2020. Retrieved March 13, 2020. "NWSL Inks Multi-Year Deal With CBS Sports, Twitch". Sports Video Group. March 12, 2020. Archived from the original on July 29, 2020. Retrieved March 13, 2020. "Amazon's four Premier League matches to be made available free". SportsPro Media. June 3, 2020. Archived from the original on June 3, 2020. Retrieved July 13, 2020. "Amazon's Premier League games to air on Twitch for free". SportsPro Media. June 18, 2020. Archived from the original on July 10, 2020. Retrieved July 13, 2020. Spangler, Todd (July 16, 2020). "Twitch Inks Deal to Livestream Entercom's Sports Radio Talk Shows as Video Simulcasts (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on August 13, 2020. Retrieved August 9, 2020. Warren, Tom (July 22, 2020). "Twitch launches a new sports category as Amazon pushes for sports dominance". The Verge. Archived from the original on July 22, 2020. Retrieved July 22, 2020. Dixon, Ed (June 21, 2021). "Kosmos turns to Twitch for Copa America broadcasts in Spain". SportsPro. Archived from the original on June 21, 2021. Retrieved June 22, 2021. Community, The. "Twitch Emotes – Bringing a little Kappa to you everyday". twitchemotes.com. Archived from the original on October 25, 2017. Retrieved October 25, 2017. Goldenberg, David (October 21, 2015). "How Kappa Became The Face Of Twitch". FiveThirtyEight. Archived from the original on October 26, 2017. Retrieved October 25, 2017. StreamElements. "Chat stats". StreamElements. Archived from the original on April 8, 2018. Retrieved July 15, 2018. "Subscriber Emoticon Tiers". Twitch Help. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Carpenter, Nicole (December 14, 2018). "Kappa dethroned on Twitch after six years on top". Dot Esports. Gamurs. Archived from the original on January 10, 2021. Retrieved January 7, 2021. Kelly, Makena (January 6, 2021). "Twitch deletes PogChamp emote because it's now the face of 'further violence'". The Verge. Archived from the original on January 8, 2021. Retrieved January 8, 2021. Ford, Colin; Gardner, Dan; Horgan, Leah Elaine; Liu, Calvin; tsaasan, a. m.; Nardi, Bonnie; Rickman, Jordan (May 6, 2017). "Chat Speed OP PogChamp". Written at Denver, Colorado, US. Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. CHI EA '17. University of California, Irvine: Association for Computing Machinery. pp. 858–871. doi:10.1145/3027063.3052765. ISBN 978-1-4503-4656-6. S2CID 23784118. For instance, a string of PogChamp messages indicated amazement at an impressive play or situation, Davis, Paul K.; O'Mahony, Angela; Pfautz, Jonathan (April 9, 2019). Social-Behavioral Modeling for Complex Systems. John Wiley & Sons. p. 421. ISBN 978-1-119-48496-7. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved January 10, 2021. Macgregor, Jody; Wilde, Tyler (January 7, 2021). "Twitch removes PogChamp emote: 'We can't in good conscience continue to enable use of the image'". PC Gamer. Archived from the original on January 7, 2021. Retrieved January 8, 2021. @Twitch (January 7, 2021). "We've made the decision to remove the PogChamp emote following statements from the face of the emote encouraging further violence after what took place in the Capitol today" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Plunkett, Luke (January 7, 2021). "Twitch Removes "PogChamp" Emote". Kotaku. G/O Media. Archived from the original on January 7, 2021. Retrieved January 7, 2021. Hernandez, Patricia (January 6, 2021). "Twitch removes PogChamp emote after star encourages 'further violence' at Capitol Hill". Polygon. Archived from the original on January 8, 2021. Retrieved January 8, 2021. T.M. Kim, Matt (January 7, 2021). "Twitch Removes 'Pogchamp' Emote Following Tweets by Gootecks". IGN. Archived from the original on January 8, 2021. Retrieved January 7, 2021. Stephen, Bijan (January 8, 2021). "Twitch will change the face of PogChamp every 24 hours". The Verge. Archived from the original on January 11, 2021. Retrieved January 10, 2021. "Twitch Will Randomly Choose a New 'PogChamp' Emote Every 24 Hours - IGN". January 8, 2021. Archived from the original on January 10, 2021. Retrieved January 10, 2021 – via ign.com. Morton, Lauren (January 8, 2021). "Twitch are swapping in a new PogChamp emote every 24 hours". Rock, Paper, Shotgun. Archived from the original on January 11, 2021. Retrieved January 10, 2021. Grayson, Nathan (February 12, 2021). "Twitch Viewers Elect Meme Lizard As New Permanent Pogchamp". Kotaku. G/O Media. Archived from the original on February 13, 2021. Retrieved February 14, 2021. "Ninja announces he is leaving Twitch to stream exclusively on Mixer". The Verge. Archived from the original on August 14, 2019. Retrieved August 1, 2019. Alexander, Julia (August 1, 2019). "What is Mixer, Ninja's new exclusive streaming home?". The Verge. Archived from the original on August 14, 2019. Retrieved August 1, 2019. Roettgers, Janko (August 1, 2019). "Ninja Is Ditching Amazon's Twitch for Microsoft's Mixer". Variety. Archived from the original on August 14, 2019. Retrieved August 1, 2019. Webb, Kevin (October 2, 2019). "The 10 most popular channels on Twitch". Business Insider. Archived from the original on October 20, 2020. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Woo, Ginny. "Summit1G, Dakotaz And JoshOG Have Signed New Contracts With Twitch". Gamespot. Archived from the original on June 14, 2020. Retrieved May 26, 2020. Peters, Jay (May 26, 2020). "Twitch signs multiyear deals with popular streamers Summit1G, Dakotaz, and JoshOG". The Verge. Archived from the original on May 26, 2020. Retrieved May 26, 2020. Thier, Dave. "Dr. Disrespect Banned From Twitch: Doc's Statement And What We Know". Forbes. Archived from the original on November 28, 2020. Retrieved January 11, 2021. Stephen, Bijan (August 11, 2020). "Shroud returns to Twitch, exclusively". The Verge. Archived from the original on August 12, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2020. Garrett, Alexandra. "Fortnite streamer Ninja comes back to Twitch after Mixer closure". CNET. Archived from the original on September 4, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2020. Park, Gene (August 11, 2020). "Shroud is returning to Twitch". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 12, 2020. Retrieved October 7, 2021. "ALL-TIME SUBSCRIPTION RECORDS". TwitchTracker. Archived from the original on March 23, 2021. Retrieved March 23, 2021. Asarch, Steven. "A Twitch streamer ended his 31-day livestream by breaking the record for the most-subscribed-to personality on the platform". Business Insider. Archived from the original on September 15, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Jiang, Sisi (October 6, 2021). "Only Three Percent Of Twitch's Top-Earning Streamers Are Women, Apparently". Kotaku. Archived from the original on October 7, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Grayson, Nathan (August 30, 2021). "Twitch star DrLupo signs exclusive YouTube deal, now 'secure for life'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on September 20, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Grayson, Nathan (September 10, 2021). "Why top streamers are leaving Twitch". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on July 2, 2022. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Polhamus, Blaine (November 29, 2021). "Ludwig moves to YouTube Gaming". Dot Esports. Archived from the original on November 29, 2021. Retrieved November 30, 2021. Moore, Jared (November 30, 2021). "Record-Breaking Twitch Streamer Ludwig Moves Exclusively to YouTube Gaming". IGN. Archived from the original on November 30, 2021. Retrieved November 30, 2021. Perez, Sarah (October 30, 2017). "Twitch's concurrent streamers grew 67% in Q3, as YouTube Gaming declined". Archived from the original on November 8, 2017. Retrieved November 8, 2017. Coldewey, Devin (April 18, 2017). "Streamers flock to YouTube Live, but the money (and crowd) is still at Twitch". Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 27, 2017. Gros, Daniel; Wanner, Brigitta; Hackenholt, Anna; Zawadzki, Piotr; Knautz, Kathrin (2017). "World of Streaming. Motivation and Gratification on Twitch". In Meiselwitz, Gabriele (ed.). Social Computing and Social Media. Human Behavior. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol. 10282. Cham: Springer International Publishing. pp. 44–57. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-58559-8_5. ISBN 978-3-319-58559-8. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved October 7, 2021. "U.S. Twitch app users by age 2020". Statista. Archived from the original on April 8, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2021. "Twitch users by gender in the U.S. 2021". Statista. Archived from the original on October 7, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2021. "Twitch: Everything You Need to Know". Lifewire. November 10, 2020. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2021. "Twitch Subscriptions: What They Are and How They Work". Lifewire. September 11, 2020. Archived from the original on April 12, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Morris, Tee. "How to Follow and Subscribe to Twitch Channels". dummies. Archived from the original on October 7, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2021. "Where are my notifications?". Twitch Customer Support. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Delfino, Devon (May 14, 2020). "How to subscribe to a channel on Twitch to show your support and unlock exclusive features". Business Insider. Archived from the original on August 17, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Montelli, Chrissy (June 1, 2020). "'What is Twitch Prime?': The best features of Twitch's popular membership program, which comes bundled with Amazon Prime". Business Insider. Archived from the original on September 22, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2021. "Terms of Service". twitch.tv. Archived from the original on April 30, 2021. Retrieved April 30, 2021. Tassi, Paul (July 27, 2011). "JustinTV Lets Gamers Earn Cash with New Twitch Partner Service". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 25, 2017. Retrieved September 17, 2017. Grubb, Jeff (August 27, 2015). "Twitch's partner contracts will keep most livestreamers from also using YouTube Gaming". VentureBeat. Archived from the original on April 22, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. "How exactly do Twitch streamers make a living? Destiny breaks it down". Dot Esports. Archived from the original on May 8, 2018. Retrieved May 8, 2018. Twitch (2014). "Twitch Partner Signup". Twitch. Archived from the original on April 4, 2014. Twitch. "Customer Support". Twitch Help. Archived from the original on March 6, 2019. Retrieved March 6, 2019. Engadget (November 14, 2017). "Twitch shows how close you are to becoming a paid streamer". Engadget. Archived from the original on March 6, 2019. Retrieved March 6, 2019. Fontaine, Robin (April 24, 2017). "Twitch Affiliate Program launches today! First invites going out…". Twitch Blog. Archived from the original on July 28, 2019. Retrieved March 6, 2019. "Twitch's new subscription model will let fans pay streamers significantly more money". The Verge. Vox Media. April 19, 2017. Archived from the original on April 20, 2017. Retrieved April 20, 2017. "Details on joining the Affiliate program". Twitch. April 24, 2017. Archived from the original on April 27, 2017. Retrieved April 26, 2017. "Keep your eyes peeled for Sub buttons!". Twitter. June 27, 2017. Archived from the original on October 9, 2021. Retrieved July 5, 2017. "TwitchCon Day 1: All the News from the Opening Ceremony". Twitch Blog. September 27, 2019. Archived from the original on February 6, 2021. Retrieved October 31, 2019. John Gaudiosi (September 9, 2011). "StarCraft II Pro Gamer Steven "Destiny" Bonnell Explains How TwitchTV Is Changing the Game". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 5, 2013. Retrieved October 1, 2013. "CBS INTERACTIVE EXPANDS INTO ESPORTS CATEGORY WITH EXCLUSIVE LIVE GAMING VIDEO AND LEAGUE PARTNERSHIPS". Major League Gaming. April 17, 2012. Archived from the original on April 19, 2012. Retrieved April 17, 2012. Stephen, Bijan (September 15, 2020). "Twitch is testing mid-roll ads that streamers can't control". The Verge. Archived from the original on September 17, 2020. Retrieved September 17, 2020. "Twitch Mimics YouTube, Begins Automatically Muting Videos With Copyrighted Audio". GameSpot. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on August 10, 2014. Retrieved August 7, 2014. "Twitch Will Mute Copyrighted Music in On-Demand Videos". Re/code. August 6, 2014. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved August 8, 2014. "Twitch CEO apologizes for how new policies rolled out, says improvements are coming". Engadget. August 8, 2014. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved August 8, 2014. "Under Fire, Twitch CEO Says "We Screwed Up" Policy Announcement". Re/code. August 7, 2014. Archived from the original on August 10, 2014. Retrieved August 8, 2014. Murray Stassen (June 8, 2020). "TWITCH USERS FACE POTENTIAL CHANNEL BANS FOLLOWING PLATFORM'S 'SUDDEN INFLUX OF DMCA MUSIC TAKEDOWN REQUESTS'". Music Business Worldwide. Archived from the original on June 9, 2020. Retrieved June 9, 2020. Nathan Grayson (June 8, 2020). "After Massive DMCA Takedown, Twitch Streamers Are Deleting Thousands Of Clips". Kotaku. Archived from the original on June 9, 2020. Retrieved June 9, 2020. Fraser Brown (June 8, 2020). "Twitch has been hit by a wave of copyright claims over old clips". PC Gamer. Archived from the original on June 9, 2020. Retrieved June 9, 2020. "SACEM announces licensing deal with Twitch | Complete Music Update". Archived from the original on April 28, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2021. Blistein, Jon (October 1, 2020). "Twitch Licenses Music Now. But the Music Industry Says It's Skirting the Rules". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on November 13, 2020. Retrieved November 11, 2020. "Twitch, still unlicensed by majors, launches rights-cleared music via deals with indie distributors and labels". Music Business Worldwide. September 30, 2020. Archived from the original on October 3, 2020. Retrieved October 1, 2020. "Twitch launches a rights-cleared music catalog for streamers, Soundtrack by Twitch". TechCrunch. September 30, 2020. Archived from the original on January 24, 2023. Retrieved October 1, 2020. Stephen, Bijan (September 30, 2020). "Twitch's Soundtrack feature debuts today, and it will let streamers play music while they're live". The Verge. Archived from the original on September 30, 2020. Retrieved October 1, 2020. Stephen, Bijan (November 12, 2020). "In Twitch's fight with the music industry, streamers are paying the price". The Verge. Archived from the original on December 22, 2020. Retrieved December 15, 2020. Aswad, Jem (October 26, 2020). "Twitch, Amazon Slammed by RIAA and Major Industry Groups for Using Unlicensed Music; Twitch Disputes Claim". Variety. Archived from the original on October 9, 2021. Retrieved December 15, 2020. "Twitch Strikes Deal with Music Publishers". MusicBusinessWorldwide.com. September 21, 2021. Archived from the original on October 9, 2021. Retrieved September 27, 2021. "Twitch pulls the plug on CS:GO gambling broadcasts". Polygon. Vox Media. July 14, 2016. Archived from the original on July 15, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2016. "Twitch bans Adults Only-rated games from streaming". Polygon. Vox Media. May 27, 2015. Archived from the original on May 28, 2015. Retrieved May 28, 2015. "List of prohibited games". Twitch Help Center. Archived from the original on January 13, 2017. Retrieved January 12, 2017. "Yandere Simulator banned from Twitch streaming". Polygon. Vox Media. January 22, 2016. Archived from the original on January 29, 2016. Retrieved January 28, 2016. "Shower simulator Rinse and Repeat makes the Twitch shortlist for banned games". Polygon. Vox Media. Archived from the original on February 11, 2016. Retrieved January 28, 2016. "Yandere Simulator Dev Says Twitch Hasn't Told Him Why His Game Was Banned". Kotaku. January 22, 2016. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved January 28, 2016. Marshall, Cass (May 27, 2019). "Twitch's Artifact section has become a waking nightmare". Polygon. Archived from the original on May 27, 2019. Retrieved May 28, 2019. Alexander, Julia (May 28, 2019). "Twitch is temporarily suspending new creators from streaming after troll attack". The Verge. Archived from the original on May 28, 2019. Retrieved May 28, 2019. Burnson, Robert (June 15, 2019). "Twitch Sues Troll Streamers Over Violent Videos, Pornography". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on June 16, 2019. Retrieved June 15, 2019. Kim, Matt (June 19, 2019). "Twitch Lawsuit Blames Artifact Porn Streams for Permanently Pushing Users Off the Platform". USGamer. Archived from the original on June 19, 2019. Retrieved June 19, 2019. Chalk, Andy (May 21, 2021). "Twitch addresses hot tub streaming controversy by adding a hot tub category". PC Gamer. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 21, 2021. Diaz, Ana (June 21, 2021). "Twitch bans popular streamers Amouranth and Indiefoxx after yoga ASMR streams". Polygon. Archived from the original on June 21, 2021. Retrieved June 21, 2021. Spangler, Todd (December 15, 2023). "Twitch Reverses Policy Allowing 'Artistic Nudity,' Citing AI's Ability to Create Realistic Images". Retrieved December 17, 2023. LeFebvre, Rob (February 8, 2018). "Twitch updates policies on hate speech, harassment and sexual content". Engadget. Archived from the original on July 29, 2020. Retrieved June 30, 2020. Rosenblatt, Kalhan (June 23, 2020). "Video game streaming platforms investigating allegations of sexual harassment". NBC News. Archived from the original on June 23, 2020. Retrieved June 23, 2020. Beresford, Trilby (June 24, 2020). "Amid Twitch Blackout, Calls Grow for Game Industry Culture Change". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 25, 2020. Retrieved June 24, 2020. Lawler, Richard (June 24, 2020). "Twitch responds to sexual abuse accusations, bans several streamers". Engadget. Archived from the original on June 25, 2020. Retrieved June 24, 2020. Fung, Brian (June 29, 2020). "Twitch suspends Trump campaign account". CNN. Archived from the original on June 29, 2020. Retrieved June 30, 2020. Stephen, Bijan (December 9, 2020). "Twitch overhauls its rules around harassment and hateful conduct". The Verge. Archived from the original on February 17, 2021. Retrieved December 9, 2020. Kastrenakes, Jacob (December 16, 2020). "Twitch bans "simp"". The Verge. Archived from the original on March 27, 2021. Retrieved December 16, 2020. Rolli, Bryan (December 17, 2020). "Twitch won't let you call people 'simp' anymore". The Daily Dot. Archived from the original on May 14, 2021. Retrieved December 17, 2020. Chalk, Andy (December 17, 2020). "Twitch outlaws 'simp' and 'incel' as sexually disparaging insults". PC Gamer. Archived from the original on December 17, 2020. Retrieved December 17, 2020. Grayson, Nathan (December 17, 2020). "Streamers Flabbergasted After Twitch Partially Bans The Word 'Simp'". Kotaku. Archived from the original on May 14, 2021. Retrieved December 17, 2020. "Twitch Removes 'Blind Playthrough' Tag After Disability Criticism". December 4, 2020. Archived from the original on March 2, 2021. Retrieved April 30, 2021. Grubb, Jeff (October 20, 2017). "Twitch reveals official channel raids and new ways to make money". Venture Beat. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved August 24, 2021. Parrish, Ash (August 20, 2021). "How to stop a hate raid". The Verge. Archived from the original on August 22, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2021. Blake, Vikki (August 22, 2021). "Twitch streamers organise #ADayOffTwitch in protest of hate raids". Eurogamer. Archived from the original on August 22, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2021. Phillips, Tom (September 2, 2021). "Twitch streamers' big #ADayOffTwitch protest hits platform viewer totals". Eurogamer. Archived from the original on September 2, 2021. Retrieved September 2, 2021. Zheng, Jenny (September 10, 2021). "Twitch Sues Two Alleged Hate Raiders". GameSpot. Archived from the original on September 10, 2021. Retrieved September 10, 2021. Diaz, Ana (September 29, 2021). "Twitch announces new features to curb hate raids". The Verge. Archived from the original on September 29, 2021. Retrieved September 29, 2021. Roth, Emma (May 18, 2022). "NY attorney general is investigating Twitch, Discord, and 4chan over Buffalo shooting". The Verge. Archived from the original on May 20, 2022. Retrieved May 22, 2022. Browning, Kellen (April 27, 2021). "Extremists Find a Financial Lifeline on Twitch". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 11, 2022. Retrieved October 11, 2022. "Gaming and Extremism: The Extreme Right on Twitch". ISD. Archived from the original on October 11, 2022. Retrieved October 11, 2022. "How the far right took over Steam and Discord". Wired UK. ISSN 1357-0978. Archived from the original on October 11, 2022. Retrieved October 11, 2022. "Twitch announces slots and roulette gambling ban". BBC News. September 21, 2022. Archived from the original on September 27, 2022. Retrieved September 27, 2022. "Twitch cracks down on gambling, but streamers aren't sure it's enough". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved September 27, 2022. "Community Guidelines". Twitch Interactive, Inc. Retrieved April 24, 2023. "Top Twitch Streamers Like Pokimane, Mizkif Threaten Strike After $200,000 Gambling Scam". Kotaku. September 19, 2022. Archived from the original on September 27, 2022. Retrieved September 27, 2022. Twitch is now blocked in China Archived October 2, 2018, at the Wayback Machine – Shannon Liao, The Verge, September 20, 2018 "Jio Blocking Twitch Streams During IPL 2020 Cricket Matches, Users Report". NDTV. Archived from the original on November 19, 2020. Retrieved November 17, 2020. Jr, Anthony James Puleo (June 24, 2021). "Twitch Banned in An Entire Country Because of One Streamer". Game Rant. Archived from the original on January 23, 2023. Retrieved January 23, 2023. Nikolova, Milana (July 19, 2021). "Slovakia bans popular live streaming platform over e-gambling concerns". Emerging Europe. Archived from the original on January 23, 2023. Retrieved January 23, 2023. "موج جدید فیلترینگ با مسدود شدن "توییچ" و کندی "دیسکورد" در ایران" (in Persian). Ir.voanews.com. July 4, 2022. Archived from the original on July 9, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. "Turkey bans access to streaming services Twitch and Kick". Duvar English (in Turkish). February 24, 2024. Retrieved February 25, 2024. "TwitchTV Launches iPad and Android Apps; Expands Mobile Market Presence for Live Video Game Streaming Movement" (Press release). Business Wire. April 12, 2012. Archived from the original on May 2, 2012. Retrieved May 21, 2012. Khalid, Amrita (June 30, 2022). "Samsung Gaming Hub goes live today with Twitch, Xbox Game Pass and more". Engadget. Retrieved May 7, 2023. Fingas, Jon (November 16, 2022). "Samsung brings game streaming to its 2021 TVs". Engadget. Retrieved May 8, 2023. Mike Futter (November 11, 2013). "Twitch on PlayStation 4 Makes Brilliant Innovations". GameInformer. Archived from the original on January 12, 2014. Retrieved January 22, 2014. Lyles, Taylor (October 22, 2020). "Sony confirms Disney Plus, Netflix, and Twitch will be on the PS5 at launch". The Verge. Archived from the original on October 22, 2020. Retrieved October 22, 2020. "Xbox at E3 2013: everything you need to know". The Verge. June 10, 2013. Archived from the original on June 11, 2013. Retrieved June 11, 2013. Madaan, Riya (January 4, 2023). "New Twitch app update on Xbox faces backlash from several users". PiunikaWeb. Retrieved May 10, 2023. Stephanie Mlot (May 14, 2013). "Twitch TV App Launches on Xbox 360". PC Magazine. Archived from the original on January 22, 2014. Retrieved January 22, 2014. Wilhelm, Alex (August 20, 2013). "Twitch Integrates With PlayStation 4 For Streaming And Viewing Video Game Content". TechCrunch. Retrieved May 10, 2023. "NVIDIA Share". nvidia.com. Retrieved May 8, 2023. "NVIDIA Support". nvidia.custhelp.com. Retrieved May 7, 2023. "Twitch Broadcasting Comes to the NVIDIA SHIELD Tablet". blog.twitch.tv. Retrieved May 7, 2023. Summers, Nick (July 22, 2014). "NVIDIA Unveils Shield Gaming Tablet with Twitch Integration". TNW | Plugged. Retrieved May 7, 2023. Malik, Aisha (February 23, 2022). "Microsoft brings back Twitch streaming integration directly into the Xbox dashboard". TechCrunch. Retrieved May 10, 2023. "Twitch streaming has returned to the Xbox dashboard". VGC. February 23, 2022. Retrieved May 10, 2023. "Xbox Broadcasting". Twitch Customer Support. Retrieved May 10, 2023. Nelson, Mike (February 23, 2022). "Xbox Live Streaming with Twitch". Xbox Wire. Retrieved May 10, 2023. Jeffrey Grubb (June 17, 2013). "Twitch blazing a path to livestreaming ubiquity with its updated SDK (interview)". VentureBeat. Archived from the original on October 5, 2013. Retrieved October 2, 2013. "Broadcast Your Gameplay with GeForce Experience Share". nvidia.com. Retrieved May 8, 2023. Joshua Derocher (December 11, 2013). "EVE Online adds Twitch integration". Destructoid. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved January 22, 2014. Lien, Tracey (November 21, 2013). "Minecraft's Twitch integration now available". Polygon. Retrieved May 7, 2023. "War Thunder Adds Twitch Live Streaming Integration". blog.twitch.tv. Retrieved May 7, 2023. Jeffrey Grubb (November 7, 2012). "Origin gets video broadcasting in next update". VentureBeat. Archived from the original on October 5, 2013. Retrieved October 2, 2013. Brett Makedonski (September 19, 2013). "New version of Uplay features Twitch integration". Destructoid. Archived from the original on January 31, 2014. Retrieved January 22, 2014. "Twitch to relaunch Curse, acquired last year, as the more social Twitch Desktop App". TechCrunch. March 10, 2017. Archived from the original on October 9, 2021. Retrieved February 14, 2019. "Twitch rebrands Curse desktop app to compete with Discord and Steam". VentureBeat. March 10, 2017. Retrieved May 4, 2023. Petrocelli, Brian (August 10, 2017). "The new Twitch Desktop App is here". Twitch Blog. Archived from the original on October 9, 2021. Retrieved March 6, 2019. Hodges, Dan (November 16, 2018). "Twitch No Longer Selling Games As Of November 27". TechRaptor. Retrieved May 10, 2023. "Ending Support for Voice Chat, Video Chat, Group Messaging, and Servers". Twitch Help. December 17, 2018. Archived from the original on December 20, 2018. Retrieved May 3, 2023. Shieber, Jonathan (June 22, 2020). "In-game app-development platform Overwolf acquires CurseForge assets from Twitch to get into mods". TechCrunch. Verizon Media. Archived from the original on June 23, 2020. Retrieved June 22, 2020. Tov-Ly, Gil. "A new home for CurseForge". Overwolf. Archived from the original on June 22, 2020. Retrieved June 22, 2020. "Uninstalling the Twitch App". Twitch Help. Archived from the original on May 3, 2023. Retrieved April 3, 2022. Kicevski, Angel (March 30, 2022). "Twitch is shutting down its Desktop App for good". Future Game Releases. Retrieved May 4, 2023. "Twitch officially shutting down desktop app to focus on creators". Dexerto. March 31, 2022. Retrieved May 10, 2023. "TwitchCon 2015: What it is, and what to watch". Polygon. September 24, 2015. Archived from the original on March 20, 2017. Retrieved February 14, 2017. Sarkar, Samit (February 18, 2016). "TwitchCon 2016 announced, coming to San Diego this September". polygon. Archived from the original on August 10, 2017. Sarkar, Samit (January 10, 2017). "TwitchCon 2017 announced for late October". Polygon. Archived from the original on August 10, 2017. Lumb, David (February 28, 2018). "TwitchCon returns to the Bay Area on October 26th". Engadget. Archived from the original on February 28, 2018. Retrieved February 28, 2018. Crecente, Brian (November 21, 2018). "TwitchCon Expands to Europe in 2019". Variety. Archived from the original on September 28, 2019. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Vincent, Brittany (February 20, 2019). "TwitchCon 2019 Returns To San Diego Convention Center With Fifth Annual Event". Variety. Archived from the original on February 21, 2019. Retrieved January 14, 2020. Hitt, Kevin (March 6, 2020). "Twitch Cancels TwitchCon Amsterdam Event Amid Coronavirus Concerns". The Esports Observer. Archived from the original on April 8, 2020. Retrieved March 7, 2020. "Twitch announces TwitchCon 2020 dates and locations". Shacknews. September 27, 2019. Archived from the original on September 28, 2019. Retrieved January 14, 2020. Trumbore, Dave (June 19, 2020). "TwitchCon 2020 San Diego Event Officially Cancelled". Collider. Archived from the original on June 19, 2020. Retrieved June 19, 2020. Media related to Twitch at Wikimedia Commons Official website Official about page