The New York City College of Technology (City Tech) is a public college in New York City. Founded in 1946, it is the City University of New York's college of technology. City Tech was founded in 1946 as The New York State Institute of Applied Arts and Sciences. The urgent mission at the time was to provide training to GIs returning from the Second World War and to provide New York with the technically proficient workforce it would need to thrive in the emerging post-war economy. From its beginnings as an Institute—to being chartered as a community college—and subsequently transitioning to senior college status during the 1980s—it has grown from serving 246 students in 1946, to a population today of more than 30,000 degree and non-degree seeking students. City Tech has an enrollment of more than 17,000 students in over 66 baccalaureate, associate, and specialized certificate programs including several engineering technology fields as well as architecture, construction, nursing, hospitality management, entertainment technology, dental hygiene, vision care technology, technology teacher training and paralegal training. Non-degree continuing education is also offered, and serves approximately 14,000 students each year. City Tech is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education. Communication Design formerly Advertising Design & Graphic Arts Architectural Technology Computer Engineering Technology Computer Systems Technology Construction Management & Civil Engineering Technology Electrical Engineering Technology Entertainment Technology Environmental Control Technology Mechanical Engineering Technology The eleven departments housed in the school provide instruction at the associate and baccalaureate levels, leading to degrees in the areas of healthcare, business, hospitality, paralegal studies, human services and career and technology teacher education. Business Career & Technology Teacher Education Dental Hygiene Restorative Dentistry Health Services Administration Hospitality Management Human Services Nursing Law/Paralegal Studies Radiologic Technology & Medical Imaging Vision Care Technology Business Technology Biomedical Informatics The School of Arts and Sciences is home to a number of majors: Transfer degrees in Liberal Arts and Liberal Arts and Science, Associate degrees in Computer Science and Chemical Technology, Liberal Arts and Sciences (LAA), Liberal Arts and Sciences (LAS), and Baccalaureate degrees in Applied Chemistry, Applied Mathematics - Financial Science, Applied Mathematics - Information Science, Applied Mathematics - Science, Applied Computational Physics, Biomedical Informatics, Data Analytics/Economics, Health Communication, Professional and Technical Writing. In addition, faculty in the school provide all students from across the institution with courses that support a well-rounded general education, with the goal of making them effective professionals, informed citizens, and lifelong learners. African American Studies Biological Sciences Chemistry English Humanities Mathematics Physics Social Science The college hired its first library director in 1957. The current college library building went up around 1987. In 2012 the library staff adopted an open-access policy to make its members' professional research publicly accessible online. City Tech occupies nine buildings within Downtown Brooklyn's Tech Triangle, the MetroTech Business Improvement District, and DUMBO. College Administration and Offices, the Ursula C. Schwerin Library, the School of Professional Studies, and the School of Arts & Sciences are primarily based in a complex formed by the Namm, Library (formerly Atrium), General, and Pearl buildings in MetroTech (300 Jay Street). The School of Technology & Design is primarily based in Voorhees Hall in DUMBO with Graphic Arts based in the MetroTech Complex. A supertall skyscraper designed by Renzo Piano—which would have been known as City Tech Tower, with 65 floors for the college and 600 units of housing—was proposed, but scrapped. In October 2013, City Tech held a ceremonial groundbreaking for a 350,000-square-foot (33,000 m2) academic complex at the corner of Tillary and Jay Streets in Downtown Brooklyn, which opened in August 2018. The new complex occupies the site formerly occupied by the Klitgord Center. The new eight-story building, known as the Academic Complex, is home to City Tech's expanding programs in healthcare and the sciences. The departments moved into the new building include the core sciences: Physics, Chemistry and Biological Sciences (including Biomedical Informatics). It is also home to the health programs: Nursing, Radiologic Technology & Medical Imaging, Dental Hygiene, Restorative Dentistry, and Vision Care Technology. The Academic Complex includes a 1,000-seat concert hall quality auditorium, the largest of its kind in Downtown Brooklyn. A wellness center and faculty office space is also located in the Academic Complex. City Tech teams participated as a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division III. City Tech began CUNYAC competition in the community college section from the conference's inception in the 1987–88 season, later to join its senior college section in the 1999–2000 season. Men's sports included basketball, cross country, soccer, tennis and volleyball; while women's sports included basketball, cross country, softball, tennis and volleyball. City Tech's athletic program is in hiatus until new facilities are available. Eric Adams, 110th Mayor of New York City (2022–present); 18th Borough President of Brooklyn (2014–2021) Hiroaki Aoki (Restaurant Management, 1963), Olympic wrestler and founder of the Benihana chain of restaurants Charles Barron, New York City Council member representing the 42nd District of New York City; former Black Panther Moses Michael Levi Barrow (born Jamal Michael Barrow; 1978), better known by his stage name Shyne, Belizean rapper and politician Zev Brenner, an Orthodox Jewish radio host; president and founder of Talkline Communications Salvatore Cassano (Fire Protection, 1970), New York City Fire Commissioner Patrick Clark (Hotel and Restaurant Technology), chef Larry R. Felix (1980), director of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing Robert Holden, professor and New York City Council member Michael Lomonaco (Hotel and Restaurant Management, 1984), chef, restaurateur, and television personality Julian Niccolini (Hospitality Management), managing partner of The Four Seasons Restaurant Samuel E Vázquez (1991), visual artist William Yosses (Hotel Management), White House Executive Pastry Chef and coauthor of the book Desserts For Dummies' Ray Sharkey, stage, film, and TV actor (Attended for one year) Leon M. Goldstein (died 1999), President of Kingsborough Community College, and acting Chancellor of the City University of New York Frank McCourt, the Pulitzer Prize-winning author of Angela's Ashes, taught in the English department. In a 1997 New York Times Op-Ed essay, Mr. McCourt wrote about his experiences teaching immigrant mothers at New York City Technical College during the Spring 1990 semester. Rob Redding - talk host, journalist, author, and artist Norma Merrick Sklarek - first African American woman licensed to practice architecture in New York and California; Harlem-born, Columbia University graduate. Taught architecture courses in the mid-1950s. [1], U.S. News & World Report America's Best Colleges, rankingsandreviews.com "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-04-20. Retrieved 2011-05-06.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) "School of Arts & Sciences - City Tech". www.citytech.cuny.edu. Retrieved 2023-04-14. CityTech Library, "Mission & History", Citytech.cuny.edu, retrieved July 24, 2018, Ursula C. Schwerin Library "Ursula C. Schwerin Library, New York City College of Technology, CUNY". ROARMAP: Registry of Open Access Repository Mandates and Policies. UK: University of Southampton. Retrieved July 24, 2018. "Piano Plays Brooklyn With Downtown Tower". Curbed. Retrieved 2007-12-24. "City Tech Tower". Emporis.com. Retrieved 2008-03-05.[dead link] Frost, Mary (2007-12-05). "City Tech Tower Actually City Tech 'Complex'". Brooklyn Daily Eagle. Retrieved 2007-12-24. "Brooklyn". Emporis.com. Archived from the original on June 8, 2004. Retrieved 2007-12-24. "New York State Sen. Eric Adams Bio". nysenate.gov. Archived from the original on July 13, 2015. Retrieved July 13, 2015. US Fed News Service (November 19, 2007). "CULINARY EVENT WHIZ RIZZO '90, HOTEL SECURITY EXPERT CHIN TO BE HONORED". ProQuest 468776166. The program has produced some of New York City and the country's top chefs and leading restaurateurs and innkeepers, including Michael Hill (New York Helmsley Hotel), Michael Lomonaco (Porter House New York), Xavier Noel (Paris Gourmet/Patis France), Michael Romano (Union Square Cafe), Sherry Yard (Spago Beverly Hills) and the late Patrick Clark (Tavern on the Green). McCourt, Frank (11 May 1997). "Mothers Who Get By". The New York Times. Retrieved 2009-07-23. Wikimedia Commons has media related to New York City College of Technology. Official website