The National Defense University (NDU) is an institution of higher education funded by the United States Department of Defense aimed at facilitating high-level education, training, and professional development of national security leaders. As a chairman's Controlled Activity, NDU operates under the guidance of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS), with Lieutenant General Michael T. Plehn, USAF, as president. It is located on the grounds of Fort Lesley J. McNair in Washington, D.C., near the White House and the US Congress. The National Defense University includes: Colleges and schools Joint Advanced Warfighting School (JAWS) College of International Security Affairs Dwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy (The Eisenhower School), formerly the Industrial College of the Armed Forces College of Information and Cyberspace (formerly Information Resources Management College or "iCollege") Joint Forces Staff College National War College Programs CAPSTONE KEYSTONE PINNACLE Research centers Institute for National Strategic Studies Center for Strategic Research Center for the Study of Chinese Military Affairs Center for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction Program for Emerging Leaders Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction Graduate Fellowship Program NDU Press Center for Applied Strategic Learning NDU Libraries Read More Archived October 19, 2022, at the Wayback Machine Institute of National Strategic Studies; Center for Strategic Studies; Center for the Study of Military Affairs of China; Center for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction; Press of the National University of Defense (the university publishes 1,300 periodicals)[5]; Center for applied strategic training; Center for joint and strategic logistics. The university has a scientific and reference library, the funds of which are open to all students and teachers. Read More Archived October 19, 2022, at the Wayback Machine NDU Board of Visitors National Defense University Foundation United States Institute of Peace Consortium of Universities of the Washington Metropolitan Area The NDU Press supports education, research, and outreach as the university's cross-component, professional military, and academic publishing house. Publications include the journals Joint Force Quarterly (JFQ) and PRISM: The Journal of Complex Operations, books such as Strategic Assessment 2020, case studies, policy briefs, and strategic monographs. United States portal Politics portal Air University (United States Air Force), Alabama Defense Acquisition University, Fort Belvoir, Virginia National Intelligence University, Washington, D.C. NATO Defense College, Rome, Italy Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, California Naval War College, Newport, Rhode Island U.S. Army War College, Carlisle, Pennsylvania "Lieutenant General Michael T. Plehn, USAF > National Defense University > Article View". National Defense University. Retrieved October 5, 2018. "Profile. National Defense University". dnb.com. "Colleges". National Defense University. Retrieved August 3, 2018. "PRISM: The Journal of Complex Operations". National Defense University. Retrieved October 20, 2023. The United States Institute of Peace Journal, Volume 5, Issue 5. October 1992. p. 5. "Chairman Welcomes New National Defense University President". dvidshub.net. July 10, 2009. Dresbach, Jim (April 13, 2012). "Grateful Rondeau retires at NDU". U.S. Army. Retrieved May 23, 2021. "Martin Becomes 14th National Defense University President". National Defense University. "Padilla Becomes 15th President of National Defense University". National Defense University. Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Defense University. Official website National Defense University publications on the Internet Archive US National Defense University Location, History, Structure, and acceptance rate Archived October 19, 2022, at the Wayback Machine