The battle of Bakhmut was a major battle between the Russian Armed Forces and the Ukrainian Armed Forces for control of the city of Bakhmut, during the eastern Ukraine campaign, a theatre of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. It is considered the bloodiest battle of the war so far, and one of the longest. It is regarded by military analysts to be the bloodiest battle of the 21st century, with it being characterized as the "bloodiest infantry brawl since World War II". While the shelling of Bakhmut began in May 2022, and the battle being considered to have began in early July with Russian offensives on the distant approaches to the city, the main assault towards the city itself started on 1 August after Russian forces advanced from the direction of Popasna following a Ukrainian withdrawal from that front. The main assault force consisted primarily of mercenaries from the Russian paramilitary organization Wagner Group, supported by regular Russian troops and reportedly Donetsk People's Republic militia elements. In late 2022, following Ukraine's Kharkiv and Kherson counteroffensives, the Bakhmut–Soledar front became an important focus of the war, being one of the few front lines where Russia remained on the offensive. Attacks on the city intensified in November 2022, as assaulting Russian forces were reinforced by units redeployed from the Kherson front, together with newly mobilized recruits. By this time, much of the front line had descended into positional trench warfare, with both sides suffering high casualties without any significant advances. By using repeated assaults composed of former convicts, Wagner troops were able to gradually gain ground, and by February 2023, they captured territory in the north and south of Bakhmut and threatened encirclement, forcing Ukrainian forces to slowly pull out into the city, and the battle turned into fierce urban warfare. By March 2023, Russian forces captured the eastern half of the city, up to the Bakhmutka river, and continued to advance into Ukrainian-controlled parts of Bakhmut. On 20 May 2023, Bakhmut had been mostly captured by Russian forces, with the Ukrainian military claiming control of a small strip of the city proper along the T0504 highway. Nonetheless, Ukraine started counterattacks on Russia's flanks, seeking to encircle the city. Around the same time on 25 May, Wagner began withdrawing from the city to be replaced by regular Russian troops, amidst heavy internal squabbles between Wagner leadership and Russian high command. In September 2023, President Zelensky said Ukraine would continue to fight to retake Bakhmut. Although initially a target with lesser tactical importance, Bakhmut became one of the central battles of the Russo-Ukrainian War, with it gaining significant symbolic importance for both sides, as President Zelensky declared it to be the "fortress of our morale", and due to the heavy investment of manpower and resources both sides used to control the city. The battle of Bakhmut has been described as a "meat grinder" and a "vortex" for both the Ukrainian and Russian militaries. The intensity of the battle and the high number of casualties suffered by both sides during the fight, alongside the trench and urban warfare, has drawn comparisons to the Battle of Verdun in World War I, as well as to the Battle of Stalingrad in World War II. It has been called the most prominent urban battle of the war, with it being reported as the site of "some of the fiercest urban combat in Europe since World War II". Bakhmut, formerly known as Artemivsk, was the site of the 2014 Battle of Artemivsk between Ukraine and the self-declared separatist Donetsk People's Republic. Pro-Russian separatists had captured parts of the city during the 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine in April, and a Ukrainian special forces unit together with the National Guard were dispatched to expel the separatists from the city. The separatists were expelled to the city's outskirts where clashes continued until July 2014, when they finally retreated from the area. During the Russian invasion of Ukraine, a key Russian goal was to capture the Donbas region, consisting of Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts. The initial push for Bakhmut was part of an attempt to encircle the Ukrainian forces at the Sievierodonetsk-Lysychansk salient; together with another push from the Lyman direction, it would create a pocket and trap Ukrainian forces there. Starting on 17 May 2022, Russian forces began shelling Bakhmut, killing five people including a two-year-old child. After the fall of Popasna on 22 May, Ukrainian forces retreated from the city to reinforce positions at Bakhmut. Meanwhile, Russian forces managed to advance on the Bakhmut-Lysychansk highway, endangering the remaining Ukrainian troops in the Lysychansk-Sievierodonetsk area. The Russian checkpoint along the highway was later demolished, although fighting resumed on 30 May along the Kostiantynivka-Bakhmut highway, where Ukrainian forces successfully defended the highway. Shelling of Bakhmut continued throughout the rest of June and July, escalating after the battle of Siversk began on 3 July. Following the battles of Sievierodonetsk and Lysychansk in early July, Russian and separatist forces captured all of Luhansk oblast, and the battlefield shifted towards the cities of Bakhmut and Soledar. On 25 July, Ukrainian forces withdrew from the Vuhlehirska Power Station, along with the nearby town of Novoluhanske, giving Russian and separatist forces a "small tactical advantage" towards Bakhmut. Two days later on 27 July, Russian shelling of Bakhmut killed three civilians and wounded three more. Prior to the battle in Bakhmut, Ukrainian Brigadier General Oleksandr Tarnavskyi claimed that Russia held a five-to-one manpower advantage over Ukraine along the eastern front. The battle for Bakhmut is considered to have began on July 3, corresponding with the fall of Lysychansk, with Russian forces conducting offensive operations in the northeast and east of Bakhmut, with Wagner Group units seen in Klynove. Throughout the month of July, Russian forces conducted offensive operations around Bakhmut. However, it has been reported that Ukrainian and Russian forces have been fighting in the Bakhmut area since at least May. On 1 August 2022, Russian forces launched assaults on settlements southeast and northeast of Bakhmut, including Yakovlivka, Soledar, and Vershyna, which the Ukrainian General Staff said it had repelled. Pro-Russian Telegram channels claimed that Russian forces were within two kilometers of the city. The following day, Ukraine reported that Russian forces had increased airstrikes and shelling of Bakhmut, beginning a ground attack on the southeastern part of the city. On 4 August, Wagner Group mercenaries managed to break through Ukrainian defenses and reach Patrice Lumumba street on the eastern outskirts of Bakhmut. In the following days, Russian forces continued to push towards Bakhmut from the south, with the Ukrainian general staff stating on 14 August that Russian forces had achieved "partial success" near Bakhmut, but offering no specifics. Night shelling in the city center on 21 September burned the Martynov Palace of Culture, where the humanitarian headquarters worked. During the extinguishing of the fire, the local fire department was shelled, which reported that two SES staff were injured and equipment damaged. At night, a five-story building was also partially destroyed by Russian shelling. A Russian missile strike on 22 September destroyed the main bridge across the Bakhmutka river that bisects the city, disrupting both civilian travel and Ukrainian military logistics. American military correspondent David Axe reported that by 26 September, Russia's 144th Guards Motor Rifle Division, which had a prewar strength of over 12,000 troops, had been largely destroyed and rendered combat ineffective as a result of heavy casualties sustained in the fighting around Bakhmut. On 7 October, Russian forces advanced into the villages of Zaitseve and Opytne on the southern and southeastern outskirts of Bakhmut, while on 10 October, the UK Defence Ministry claimed that Russian troops advanced closer to Bakhmut. On 12 October, Russian forces claimed to have captured Opytne, located 3 km south of Bakhmut, and Ivanhrad, although these towns were still contested. Fighting within Bakhmut's urban boundaries began some time before 24 October since, by this day, Ukraine did a minor counteroffensive that pushed Russian forces from some factories on the eastern outskirts of the city, along Patrice Lumumba street. By early November, much of the fighting around Bakhmut had descended into trench warfare conditions, with neither side making any significant breakthroughs and hundreds of casualties reported daily amid fierce shelling and artillery duels. On 1 November, Ukrainian journalist Yurii Butusov [uk] described the evolving nature of the battle in an interview. Butusov noted that Russian forces had suffered "huge losses every day" assaulting Bakhmut and its outskirts since early May, but insisted that they were adapting their tactics against increasingly exhausted Ukrainian defenders. He noted that the Russians were concentrating multiple small groups of infantry to break defense lines on "narrow" sections of the front. Russian milbloggers claimed that Russian forces breached defense lines on Bakhmut's southern approach, allegedly capturing the villages of Andriivka, Ozarianivka, and Zelenopillia and making minor advances in Opytne through 28–29 November.[needs independent confirmation] Wagner fighters attacked Kurdyumivka, adjacent to Ozarianivka, with some Russian milbloggers claiming the settlement was captured. Russian forces also attacked Ukrainian positions southeast of Bakhmut. On 3 December, Serhii Cherevatyi, a spokesperson for Ukraine's Eastern Command, described the Bakhmut front as "the most bloody, cruel and brutal sector ... in the Russian-Ukrainian war so far", adding that the Russians had conducted 261 artillery attacks in the past day alone. The same day, a Georgia military volunteer told the media that a group of Georgian volunteers had been surrounded during clashes near Bakhmut. The commander was wounded and five or six volunteers, serving in Ukraine's 57th Brigade, had been killed, prompting Georgian president Salome Zourabichvili to express condolences. On 6–7 December, the Russian defense ministry claimed that their forces, including Wagner fighters, had successfully repelled Ukrainian counterattacks south of Bakhmut. The commander of the Ukraine National Guard's Svoboda Battalion, defending Bakhmut's southern flank, said they were "fighting for every bush" and predicted Russia would struggle to overcome a canal above and behind Kurdiumivka. On 9 December, President Volodymyr Zelenskyy accused Russia of "destroying" Bakhmut, calling it "another Donbas city that the Russian army turned into burnt ruins". Former soldier and eyewitness to the battle Petro Stone called the Bakhmut front a "meat grinder", saying the Russians were "covering Bakhmut with fire 24/7". Soldiers of Ukraine's 24th Mechanized Brigade recounted recent battlefield engagements to media, such as one multi-day firefight with 50 Russian troops dug into a treeline where in some places "we were only 100 metres apart". Ukrainian soldiers claimed that front line Russian troops often attacked with little tank support, with Wagner PMC fighters serving as the main assault troops and under-equipped mobiks (recently mobilized Russian recruits) holding defensive positions. One Ukrainian artillerymen alleged that "80 percent" of the remaining civilian population, surviving in basements and supplied by mobile grocery trucks that periodically enter the city, was pro-Russian. On 11 December a railway bridge over the E40 (M-03) highway north of Bakhmut was destroyed; the Russians accused the Ukrainians of demolishing it to hamper future Russian advances towards Sloviansk. On 13 December, Russian sources claimed that proper urban street fighting had begun in the eastern and southeastern sectors of Bakhmut, particularly along Pershotravnevyy avenue up to Dobroliubova street in Zabakhmutka, while also claiming that 90% of Opytne had been captured amid fierce Ukrainian resistance. The Ukrainian General Staff said they successfully repelled assaults northeast and south of Bakhmut from the Soledar and Kurdiumivka directions, respectively. On 17 December, footage emerged online of trenches in Bakhmut's city center, indicating Ukrainian defenders were preparing for urban combat. On 18–19 December, Ukrainian forces, purportedly including dismounted infantry supported by British-donated Wolfhound Tactical Supply Vehicles, counterattacked along Fyodor Maksimenko Street and pushed Wagner forces back to the eastern outskirts of the suburban area amid "grinding" street clashes. Meanwhile, Ukraine's Joint Forces Task Force reported repelling "five to seven" Russian infiltration groups near Bakhmut daily. A Ukrainian commander reported that an abundance of drone surveillance allowed for quick responses to small Russian assaults on the outskirts, while also alleging that Russia did not control Bakhmut's eastern industrial zone. The Institute for the Study of War (ISW), a Western think tank and war observer, could not independently verify the claim of Ukraine entirely controlling the outskirts at the time. On 20–21 December, President Zelenskyy made an unannounced visit to the Bakhmut front, where he met with soldiers, awarded medals and delivered speeches. Meanwhile, heavy shelling and fighting on Bakhmut's outskirts continued as Russian forces continuously attempted to break entrenched Ukrainian positions on the city's flanks. Reportedly, Wagner fighters were assaulting strongholds in Bakhmutske, Pidhorodne, and Klishciivka, located along Bakhmut's northeastern and southwestern flanks respectively, while the Ukrainians continued to hold northern Opytne, blunting Russia's advance from the south. On 26 December, Ukraine's governor of Donetsk, Pavlo Kyrylenko, said over 60 percent of Bakhmut's infrastructure was damaged or destroyed. The ISW judged that Russia's advance on Bakhmut had "culminated" by 28 December, assessing that Russian and Wagner forces had grown increasingly unable to sustain the previous scale of infantry assaults and artillery barrages. By early January 2023, the pace of fighting and rate of artillery fire in the Bakhmut sector had significantly decreased, and The Kyiv Independent remarked that the battle was "near culmination". Following a local offensive in early January 2023, Russian forces captured the nearby town of Soledar, located 20 kilometres (12 mi) north of Bakhmut, by 16 January 2023. In its 7 January assessment, the ISW considered the capture of Soledar as helping Russian forces to advance on Bakhmut from the north, although they claimed that Russian troops would need to cut off the T0513 highway between Siversk and Bakhmut to strangle Ukrainian supply lines to Bakhmut. In February, Russian forces solidified gains north of Bakhmut and began pressuring Ukrainian troops on the northern axis, making incremental gains in the towns north of the city. On 1 February, The New York Times reported that the Russians had increased the intensity of attacks on Bakhmut and its surrounding areas. Days later on 5 February, the British Ministry of Defence stated that Russian troops were able to fire upon the M03 and H32 roads north of the city, the main Ukrainian supply route for northern Bakhmut. On 11 February, Russian forces captured the village of Krasna Hora northeast of Bakhmut. Around this time, analysts suggested Russian losses had increased to 820 casualties a day between Bakhmut and the battle of Vuhledar. By 13 February, the Ukrainian government claimed their defenses in the village of Paraskoviivka were waning, with fierce battles around the clock. By 22 February, Russian forces partially encircled Bakhmut from the east, south, and north. By 3 March, Ukrainian soldiers had destroyed two key bridges, creating the possibility for a controlled fighting withdrawal. On 4 March, Bakhmut's deputy mayor told news services that there was street fighting but that Russian forces had not taken control of the city. The same day, the chief of the Wagner Group, Yevgeny Prigozhin, said that the city was encircled except for one road still controlled by the Ukrainian military, as had been the case since 22 February. On 5 March Ukrainian commander Oleksandr Syrskyi said the fighting had reached the "highest level of tension". On 7 March, Ukraine withdrew from areas of Bakhmut east of the Bakhmutka river, making the river the front line between the opposing forces. On 9 March, the MiG-17 Monument [de], which had become a symbol of Ukrainian resistance in Bakhmut during the battle, was destroyed by Russian forces. On 11 March, the United Kingdom's Ministry of Defence said that by this point in the fighting Wagner Group units were "taking the lead in fighting", and that the river had become a "killing zone" for Wagner units while at the same time Ukrainian forces were at risk of being cut off. On 22 March, the UK defence ministry observed that "There is a realistic possibility that the Russian assault on the town (Bakhmut) is losing the limited momentum it had achieved, in part because some Russian Ministry of Defense units have been redeployed to other sectors." On 26 March, Wagner forces claimed they had fully captured the strategically significant Azom factory in Bakhmut, which was later confirmed by military analysts. On 6 April, Russian forces took control of the city center. On 14 April, the British defence ministry observed that Russia had "re-energised its assault on the Donetsk Oblast town of Bakhmut as forces of the Russian MoD and Wagner Group have improved co-operation ... Ukrainian forces face significant resupply issues but have made orderly withdrawals from the positions they have been forced to concede." On 17 April, the People's House [de] of the city was destroyed by retreating Ukrainian soldiers belonging to the 77th Airmobile Brigade to prevent the building from being used as a refuge by Russian forces. On 18 April, Ukrainian General Oleksandr Syrskyi reported that Russia was "increasing the activity of heavy artillery and the number of air strikes, turning the city into ruins". On 26 April, the Ukrainian Air Force dropped four 500-pound GBU-62/B JDAM glide bombs on a high-rise building in the Russian-controlled part of Bakhmut, possibly from two MiG-29s. Both Ukrainian and Russian forces were destroying high-rise buildings in Bakhmut to prevent them from being used "as ammo dumps, fighting positions and observation posts." The Institute for the Study of War assessed that by the beginning of May 2023, Ukraine only controlled 1.89 square kilometers (4.54%) of the city. In May 2023, Russian forces claimed to have captured Bakhmut city proper, while Ukrainian forces insisted clashes continued within the city as they conducted counterattacks on the outskirts. Meanwhile, as Russian attacks culminated, Wagner Group leader Yevgeny Prigozhin sharply increased his public criticism of the Russian Ministry of Defence's management of the battle. On 1 May, Ukrainian spokesman Serhiy Cherevaty gave an estimate of the current strength of Russian forces attacking the city. He stated that "on the Bakhmut direction, 25,600 personnel, 65 tanks, 450 armored fighting vehicles, 154 guns, 56 rocket salvo systems are fighting against us". On 2 May, Yevgeny Prigozhin complained that there was a shortage of ammunition, with his forces needing 300 tonnes a day. Within a few days, Prigozhin threatened that he would withdraw all Wagner personnel from the city by 10 May, the day after Victory Day. He further denounced Sergei Shoigu and Valery Gerasimov, saying: "in the absence of ammunition [Wagner personnel are] doomed to perish senselessly." Chechen leader Ramzan Kadyrov agreed to replace Wagner forces with Chechen units in the city, according to Prigozhin. On 6 May, Ukrainian military sources reported that the Russians were shelling the city with phosphorus munitions, with several videos and photos being released that showed the effects of the bombardment. The BBC, analyzing the footage, said that while the footage definitely showed Russian forces using some sort of incendiary munitions, it was unable to verify that it was phosphorus specifically. On 7 May, Prigozhin announced that Gerasimov would resume artillery ammunition distribution to Wagner forces, that Wagner forces would remain in Bakhmut, and that Sergey Surovikin would be acting as an intermediary between Wagner and the Russian Ministry of Defence. The ISW assessed that Gerasimov likely agreed to keep Kadyrov out of the Russian High Command and that the situation showcased that the Russian Ministry of Defense was having difficulty commanding Wagner forces. Colonel General Oleksandr Syrskyi, Ukrainian Commander of Ground Forces, said that Prigozhin's claims of ammunition shortages were false, saying that the Russians were "pummeling" their positions. On 9–10 May, Ukrainian forces launched counterattacks on Bakhmut's outskirts, expelling Russian troops from the southern bank of the Berkhivka Reservoir, located about 4 kilometers northwest of Bakhmut. General Syrskyi claimed that the Russians had been forced back over 2 km (1.2 miles) in the attack, with spokesman Serhiy Cherevaty further claiming that 11 IFVs, two armored personnel carriers, a light artillery tractor, five field ammunition depots, and one Zala UAV were destroyed. The Ukrainians said their 3rd Separate Assault Brigade had cleared an area 1,730 metres wide and 700 metres deep, routing units of Russia's 72nd Separate Motorized Rifle Brigade and killing 23 soldiers and wounding over 40. One tank and four AFVs were also destroyed, with Ukrainian Border Guards also repelling Russian advances from within the city itself, destroying an 11-man assault group. The 72nd Brigade had "escaped" from the city and the remaining troops had suffered very high casualties, with the 3rd Assault Brigade claiming to have completely destroyed the 72nd's 6th and 8th Companies, and agreed with Prigozhin's claim that "500 Russian corpses" were left on the battlefield. The brigade's 3rd Separate Assault Battalion alone was reportedly responsible for 64 Russians killed, while information on another 87 "eliminated" was being "clarified" at the time. They also claimed to have taken five prisoners. Prigozhin accused the regular Russian forces of "[running] away" from their positions in response to the counterattacks, while Wagner forces were allegedly forbidden from retreating under threat of "high treason" charges. He claimed Russia's defence ministry was more focused on internal power struggles and "intrigues" than actually fighting, and also accused the ministry of only providing his troops 10% of what was promised, resulting in high Wagner casualties. He again threatened that if he did not receive ammunition, Wagner would withdraw from their positions. On 15 May, General Syrskyi stated the recent counterattacks were "the first success of offensive actions in the defence of Bakhmut." On 16 May, the Ukrainian defence ministry claimed that their forces had liberated 20 square kilometers in the north and south of the suburbs of Bakhmut, while also admitting that Russian forces were still advancing in the city itself, by using both paratroopers and artillery. On 18 May, Prigozhin said that regular Russian forces had withdrawn up to 570 meters (1,880 feet) to the north of the city, exposing Wagner's flanks, while his soldiers had advanced up to 400 meters inside the city. On 19 May, Ukrainian sources claimed Ukrainian troops had advanced a mile in some areas, or "150 to 1,700 metres". A Ukrainian commander, Petro Podaru, said that Russian artillery fire had transitioned towards preventing Ukrainian forces from "deliver(ing) more infantry, ammunition and other things" via access roads west of Bakhmut. On the same day, the Ukrainians claimed the Russians had recently deployed several thousand more troops to the Bakhmut front. On 20 May, Prigozhin proclaimed the capture of Bakhmut by Wagner forces, who were set to transfer their captured positions to regular Russian forces before withdrawing. The Russian defence ministry also subsequently stated that the city had been captured. The Ukrainians denied that the city was fully captured, with Ukrainian deputy minister of defence Hanna Maliar saying the situation was "critical" but insisted Ukrainian troops still controlled areas of the city, notably the private sector in the 'Litak' ('Samolet' in Russian) area. The ISW was unable to immediately confirm Prigozhin's statement and reiterated Ukrainian reports that fighting continued, particularly citing that the 3rd Separate Assault Brigade had recaptured a region 1,750 meters wide and 700 meters deep in the suburbs. On 21 May, the Ukrainian defence ministry claimed that its forces had "taken the city in a semi-encirclement". On the other hand, officials described their holdout around the T0504 highway as "insignificant". Based on this, the ISW assessed that Ukrainian forces had indeed withdrawn from the city, except for some fortified areas adjacent to the two highways on the city's western approach. Prigozhin again insisted the entirety of Bakhmut had been captured "right up to the last centimetre" and added that Wagner made no advances on 21 May as they were preparing to withdraw later in the week. Geolocated footage published on 21 May showed that Wagner forces had advanced towards the T0504 entrance to southwestern Bakhmut. Clashes were reportedly taking place as of 22 May in localities neighboring Bakhmut. On 23 May, the Ukrainian General Staff did not declare fighting in Bakhmut for the first time since December 2022. Ukrainian officials insisted that Ukraine held positions near the former MiG-17 monument in southwestern Bakhmut in spite of footage purportedly showing Wagner forces near the monument. Fighting in the localities outside of Bakhmut's city limits continued. On 25 May, Prigozhin promised to withdraw all Wagner forces from Bakhmut to transfer full control to Russian units by 1 June. The ISW assessed that the units supplanting Wagner forces within the city were from the DPR People's Militia. In their 26 May report, the ISW cited Russian milbloggers as reporting on successful Ukrainian counterattacks near Orikhovo-Vasylivka and Klischiivka, northwest and southwest of Bakhmut respectively. In their 27 May report, the ISW noted a substantial decrease in Russian offensive activities in and around Bakhmut. Hanna Maliar attributed this to Russian forces performing relief in place operations to cover Wagner withdrawals. They also noted failed Russian attacks against the suburbs of Khromove and Predtechyne and that there was no change to the status of the reported Ukrainian-controlled strip in the city's southwestern outskirts. The ISW further assessed that the 31st Guards Air Assault Brigade had recently been sent to Bakhmut to cover Russian flanks. The British Ministry of Defence and the ISW both assessed that the unit supplanting Wagner was the 132nd Separate Guard Motorized Rifle Brigade of the DNR's 1st Army Corps, reflecting Russia's attempts to have the city be incorporated into the DPR. The ISW also speculated that Russia would redirect their forces from Bakhmut to the Avdiivka-Donetsk front. Prigozhin said on 28 May that regular Russian forces where performing relief operations, and that the full withdrawal of Wagner forces would not take place until 5 June. The rate of Russian assaults remained low, with only two reported attacks against the suburbs of Orikhovo-Vasylivka and Ivanivske, both of which where unsuccessful. Ukrainian Colonel Serhiy Cherevaty reported one instance of fighting near Bakhmut and published geolocated footage that indicated that Russian forces had made marginal gains west of Klishchiivka. On 29 May, the ISW reported only one unsuccessful attack against Orikhovo-Vasylivka and stated that Russia's 106th Guards Airborne Division had been sent to reinforce the northern flank. Both armies were less active in offensive operations in the Bakhmut direction on 30 May. The ISW reported more unsuccessful Russian attacks against Orikhovo-Vasylivka, Bila Hora, Khromove, Ivanivske and Klishchiivka on 31 May. It also noted that the DPR's 1st "Wolves" Sabotage and Reconnaissance Brigade were active in Zaliznianske. They further assessed that Russia was cycling the DPR irregulars out of the Avdiivka-Donetsk front to be replaced by regular Russian forces in Bakhmut which, in turn, were to be sent to Avdiivka. Maliar claimed that Ukrainian forces maintained control over the southwestern outskirts and entrance to Bakhmut city. By 1 June, only 90 Wagner personnel remained within the city. Meanwhile, Russian attacks against Orikhovo-Vasylivka and Bila Hora remained unsuccessful. Ukrainian Colonel Serhiy Cherevaty claimed that Russian units did not participate in Wagner's attrition style of warfare, and instead were using defensive tactics. On 2 June, Prigozhin accused Russian forces of attempting to attack Wagner forces using anti-tank mines, adding that there were no injuries. On 3 June, the ISW and the British defence ministry stated that under-strength Russian Airborne Forces, including those of the 76th Guards Air Assault Division, 106th Guards Airborne Division, and two other unspecified brigades had deployed to the Bakhmut area. The next day, Prigozhin claimed that Ukrainian forces may have recaptured areas in the southwestern outskirts of the city, supporting the repeated Ukrainian reports of control there since 20 May. On 4 June 2023, the Ukrainian summer counteroffensive began and the Bakhmut sector was one of its three main axes. However, only small amounts of territory were recaptured, most notably Andriivka on 15 September and Klishchiivka around 17 September. By 29 November 2023, after the counteroffensive had stalled, Russian forces had regained the initiative and captured Khromove, just west of Bakhmut. They had also recaptured considerable portions of land south of the Berkhivka Reservoir lost in May. Bakhmut was the biggest city to switch hands in 2023 and the battle greatly contributed to Russia's net gain of territory in the year.[better source needed] There are few reports of the military units and strengths employed by either Russia or Ukraine during the battle. However, the Wagner Group private military contractor spearheaded Russian ground assaults during the fighting in and around Bakhmut, particularly up to May 2023. Then-Wagner Group leader Yevgeny Prigozhin reported that Wagner had employed 35,000 regular mercenary fighters. This had been supplemented by 50,000 mercenaries recruited from Russian prisons. On 10 January 2023, the number of Ukrainian defenders was reported as 30,000 troops while Prigozhin claimed on 17 April that 80,000 Ukrainian troops were defending Bakhmut. On 2 June 2023, Prigozhin reported that Wagner forces had been almost totally withdrawn from the battle. At the end of June, the Ukrainian military assessed the opposing force strength to be 50,300 and reported that no Wagner personnel remained. The battle of Bakhmut was described as one of the bloodiest battles of the 21st century, with the battlefield being described as a "meat grinder" and a "vortex" for both the Ukrainian and Russian militaries. On 11 January 2023, Ukrainian presidential adviser Mykhailo Podolyak described the fighting ongoing at Bakhmut and Soledar as the bloodiest since the start of the invasion. As early as December 2022, it was estimated that hundreds of military personnel from both sides were killed and wounded each day. Intense shelling and frontal attacks by the Russians with minimal gains have been compared to the conditions of the First World War. Russia and Ukraine have been engaged in a battle of attrition. However, Russian losses have been disproportionate by comparison. On 6 March, an assessment by NATO was that five times as many Russians were being killed, while the Ukrainian government claimed the Russians had "potentially" lost seven times as many soldiers as Ukraine. By early June, the Ukrainian military increased this claim to 7.5 times. Between 6 and 31 January 2023, the Ukrainians claimed that 17,000 Russian soldiers lost their lives in the battle, which is nearly double the monthly they had reported the previous year. On 24 February, American General Mark Milley, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, claimed that the Russians had lost between 1,100 and 1,200 soldiers killed "down around" Bakhmut the previous day alone, a death toll he compared with the battles of Iwo Jima and Shiloh. If accurate, this would make it one of the deadliest days of the war so far. Meanwhile, two days later on 26 February, former Ukrainian Defence Minister Oleksii Reznikov stated that the Russians were losing 500 men killed and another 900 wounded in action every day fighting for Bakhmut. General Milley, appearing before the US House Committee on Armed Services on 29 March, described the reportedly high Russian casualties as a "slaughter-fest". On 13 March, President Volodymyr Zelenskyy claimed that another 1,100 Russians had been killed and 1,500 wounded over the past week. Meanwhile, the Russians claimed that 220 Ukrainian soldiers were killed in the city on 13 March alone. Meanwhile, on 17 March, NATO estimated that the Russians were suffering 1,500 casualties per day, mainly from the fighting around Bakhmut. They also stated that Ukraine's losses were "an order of magnitude less" in fighting where "several thousand" shells a day had been fired by both sides. On 13 April, the Ukrainians claimed to have inflicted more than 4,500 casualties on the Russians in the previous two weeks alone. On 1 May, US National Security Council spokesman John Kirby said Russia had suffered more than 20,000 soldiers killed in combat and 80,000 wounded on the Bakhmut front since December 2022. He also said that half of these losses were from the Wagner Group. the White House compared reported Russian casualty figures to those of World War II battles, highlighting that the casualties were reportedly more than the 19,000 US troops killed and 80,000 wounded in the battle of the Bulge, and that it was about three times the 7,100 soldiers the US lost in the battle of Guadalcanal. According to Western analysts, the spike in Russian casualties around this time had led to fears that the upcoming Ukrainian counteroffensive, planned for later in the spring, may become "carnage". The US had said that such fierce fighting shows that the bloody carnage may become even worse after the start of Kyiv's counteroffensive to retake the occupied territories. Speaking at a G7 summit on 21 May, US President Joe Biden said that the "Russians have suffered over 100,000 casualties in Bakhmut." On 2 June, United States Secretary of State, Antony Blinken, reported that Russia had suffered over 100,000 casualties in Ukraine in the preceding six months (i.e. since the start of December). At the same time, the UK Ministry of Defense reported 60,000 Russian personnel killed or wounded near Bakhmut since May 2022, while the Ukrainian military would claim 100,000 personnel killed or wounded in the ten months since August 2022. On 24 May, Yevgeny Prigozhin stated that over 20,000 Wagner fighters had been killed in the Bakhmut battle, with half that number being former prisoners. He also reported that they had as many wounded as killed. However, former Russian officer and milblogger Igor Girkin, opined that Wagner has likely suffered more than 40,000 killed in action, (including 15,000 mercenaries and 25,000 prisoners), with again the same number wounded. In part, this is based on a claimed discrepancy between the number of prisoners recruited and, the number either reported killed or repatriated at the end of their service. If indeed he is correct, this would mean Prigozhin had only 5,000 of the aforementioned 85,000 he had at the beginning of the battle. Meanwhile, Ukraine claims that Wagner has suffered over 81,000 casualties during the battle with 21,000 killed. On 2 July, the Ukrainians, while maintaining the figure of 21,000 "Wagnerites" killed, increased the number of wounded to 80,000 in "the East". High losses were highlighted by Yevgeniy Prigozhin as one of the key points in his criticism of Russian Ministry of Defense which eventually culminated in him launching an armed rebellion in June 2023. On 2 June, the ISW reiterated reports by the British defence ministry that "to 48 centimeters of ground territory for each of the 60,000 personnel killed or wounded near Bakhmut since May 2022." Ian Stubbs, a British Senior Military Advisor, claimed that Russia had suffered nearly half of those casualties, almost 30,000 killed or wounded, in the last three months since March. "These staggering losses have achieved at total advance of just 29 kilometres. That is for every 48 centimetres of ground Russia gained, one of its soldiers was killed or wounded," he stressed. Mediazona open-source analysis results in Russian losses of up to 800 killed per week by public obituaries alone. Fall 2023 research suggests that recent estimates[who?] have Russian losses at 32,000–43,000 dead and 95,000 wounded.[dubious – discuss] February 2024 research by the International Institute for Strategic Studies indicated Russian forces casualties as up to 4 times more than of Ukrainian, however Ukraine was losing valuable experienced soldiers, and Russian - Wagner forces were likely 70% ex-convicts. In early December 2022, only between 7,000 and 15,000 of Bakhmut's prewar population of 80,000 remained in the city. On 31 May 2023, the city's mayor, Oleksiy Reva, reported 204 residents had been killed and 505 injured since the invasion began, with 500 residents remaining in the city. However, Bakhmut had been subject to Russian bombardment since at least May 2022. In March 2023, a 12-second video was posted of a captured Ukrainian soldier with a cigarette quietly saying "Slava Ukraini", who was then shot dead by an unseen perpetrator. Some Ukrainian media sources and bloggers suggested that the POW was Oleksandr Igorevich Matsievskyi, a soldier from Nizhyn who had been deployed to Bakhmut and gone missing in January. On 8 April 2023, a video was posted on a pro-Russian social media channel, showing a pair of decapitated corpses on the ground beside a destroyed armoured vehicle. The video's (Russian-speaking) recorder, stating how the vehicle had been destroyed by a mine, laughed that "They killed them. Someone came up to them. They came up to them and cut their heads off." According to the channel the incident occurred in Bakhmut and was done by mercenaries from the Wagner Group. Another video posted on Twitter shows a soldier with a yellow armband (a symbol of the Ukrainian military) screaming before he is beheaded by a Russian-speaking soldier with a knife. Foliage in the background suggested the video was taken during the summer. The Institute for the Study of War also reported that an image of the head of a Ukrainian soldier mounted on a spike was circulating around Russian social media. On 5 July 2023, the Ukrainians claimed that the Russians had attacked them with an arsenic based chemical weapon called lewisite in an artillery bombardment, which had previously been used during World War I. The strike reportedly left some Ukrainian soldiers with symptoms of chemical weapons exposure.[better source needed] Production of more than 100 grams of lewisite per year is banned internationally under the Chemical Weapons Convention of 1997, and its use as a chemical weapon is banned as a Schedule 1 substance. With extremely high casualties, costly ground assaults with very minimal territorial changes, and shell-pocked landscapes, volunteers, media, and government officials alike compared battlefield conditions in Bakhmut to conditions on the western front of World War I, particularly the battles of Verdun and the Somme. Furthermore, the battle was marked by some of the fiercest urban combat not seen in Europe since World War II, along with brutal hand-to-hand combat, drawing a number of comparisons to the Battle of Stalingrad. Retired US Marine Corps Colonel Andrew Milburn, the leader of a foreign volunteer group in Ukraine called the Mozart Group and an eyewitness to the battle, compared conditions in the Bakhmut countryside to Passchendaele in World War I and the city itself to Dresden in World War II. A Ukrainian soldier fighting in Bakhmut stated that the battle was "worse than Stalingrad", while another soldier described it as "real hell". It was noted that "bloody battles unprecedented in recent decades" were occurring during the urban combat phase of the battle, as reported by Serhiy Cherevatyi, the spokesperson for Ukraine's eastern military command. In December 2022, an article reported that the battle was only matched by the "siege of Mariupol in its sheer brutality and casualty count". Historian Geoffrey Roberts considered the comparisons between the battles of Bakhmut and Stalingrad as being inaccurate, arguing that in addition to Bakhmut being comparatively minuscule in size, the battle itself was not as strategically important as Stalingrad was on the future of the war. Professor Alexander Hill also commented on the similarities drawn up between Bakhmut and past battles, stating that on a basic level Bakhmut is similar in that it was a battle of attrition causing a countless number of casualties, but ultimately stating that the "fighting in and around Bakhmut won't be another Stalingrad or Verdun, because what is taking place isn't history repeating itself and nor can it be, even if we can find similarities between past and present." While Stalingrad had strategic value as an industrial city and also as a vital transportation artery for the Volga River, the city of Bakhmut has little strategic value, as analyst Dara Massicot said Bakhmut was becoming "like a Stalingrad except for without the importance of Stalingrad". On 21 May 2023, Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy compared the battle and the destruction of the city to that of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima in 1945, saying that the events "absolutely remind me of Bakhmut and other cities like it ... absolutely, nothing alive there, all buildings are destroyed, there is even no understanding where a street is and where a building is. Absolute total destruction. Nothing left, no people left." The level of destruction has also been compared to the more recent Battle of Aleppo. Russian assault forces primarily composed of Wagner Group mercenary contractors, ex-convicts, reinforcements from other front lines in Ukraine, and recently mobilized recruits. Wagner's forces reportedly consisted of a majority of recruited, under-trained ex-convicts and a minority of well-trained contractors serving as group commanders that operated efficiently and encrypted radio communications. Some observers likened Russian tactics to Soviet-style human wave attacks, with Russian troops repeatedly assaulting Ukrainian positions with waves of infantry. Some Ukrainian soldiers alleged that Wagner used its recruited ex-convicts as first wave "human bait" to reveal Ukrainian positions, with those refusing to advance being threatened with execution by firing squads or barrier troops. In late January 2023, Russia began supplanting some Wagner units with better-trained National Guard of Russia (Rosgvardia) and paratroopers, enabling them to make further advances on the front line. During the battle, Russian forces also targeted Bakhmut with Iranian-made drones after 450 of them were reportedly delivered to Russia in mid-October 2022. Ukrainian forces reportedly consisted of a "hodgepodge of units", consisting initially of the 93rd Mechanized Brigade and the 58th Motorized Brigade, who were later reinforced by many other units—including special forces and territorial defense units—in order to fill in gaps caused by heavy casualties. The Ukrainians also constantly rotated their units to replenish casualties and prevent combat fatigue. Ukrainian commanders expended significant resources in Bakhmut, with their strategy being to keep Russia preoccupied with Bakhmut in order to prevent further offensives elsewhere on the front lines. Conversely, American military analyst Michael Kofman argued that Ukraine's usage of well-trained National Guard and infantry units against poorly-trained Wagner forces was tying down Ukraine's well-trained units and preventing them from conducting offensives of their own. On 10 January 2023, Polish think tank Rochan Consulting estimated Ukraine may have had ten brigades fighting in Bakhmut at the time, or around 30,000 personnel. On 1 May 2023, US National Security Council spokesman John Kirby sought to emphasize Wagner Group's reported usage of ex-convicts as cannon fodder. On 17 May, the Ukrainian military published an interview with a captured Wagner mercenary, who was also a former Russian convict. In the video, the man claimed that he had been wounded and then abandoned to die by his comrades in a trench for four days before he was taken prisoner, indicating that Russian forces were leaving behind their wounded soldiers. He also said that Russian forces were suffering great losses, saying there is a "trench where a corpse is lying on a corpse". Wagner leader Yevgeny Prigozhin had previously suggested Wagner was deliberately turning Bakhmut into a "meat grinder" to inflict heavy attritional casualties on Ukrainian forces. One Western official gave an inverse view, saying the battle was "giving Ukraine a unique opportunity to kill a lot of Russians", due to purportedly poor Russian tactics. In their 2 June 2023 report, over a week after the capture of Bakhmut, the ISW noted claims by Ukrainian Colonel Serhiy Cherevaty that regular Russian units were not participating in the attrition-style of warfare that Wagner forces had done, and that Russian forces were by this time engaging in a defensive strategy. Military analysts characterize the battle as attritional for both sides, and "both sides thought that attrition favoured them". During the battle, the standard Russian forces managed to fortify the southern and northern fronts and train the 300,000 soldiers conscripted in the fall of 2022. After extensive attrition at Bakhmut, Russia did not perform further advances west towards Kramatorsk and Sloviansk in the months after the city's capture. Ukraine's future offensive potential was also diminished and the continued expenditure of experienced soldiers on the Bakhmut front during the Ukrainian counteroffensive hindered success in the southern front, where more experienced units performed better than those reliant on Western equipment. In May 2023, Kateryna Stepanenko, an analyst at the Institute for the Study of War, argued that the outcome of the battle was a "pyrrhic" Russian victory, whereas other sources used terms such as "hollow" to describe the Russian victory. British military analyst Ben Barry cautioned that Russia may have reserved its more elite, well-prepared units for future operations, but nevertheless considered the victory to be "pyrrhic". Other independent analysts and news organizations, nonetheless, considered the attritional battle an overall Russian victory and a strategic Ukrainian defeat. American officials repeatedly voiced concern over Ukraine's decision to keep a large presence in the Bakhmut area despite unfavorable conditions. Some observers even linked the heavy losses Ukraine suffered during the battle with the failures of the subsequent counteroffensive, given that Russian casualties in Bakhmut were mostly expendable press-ganged ex-convicts that freed up regular Russian forces to build up defenses along the Zaporizhzhia front, whereas elite Ukrainian units such as the 93rd Mechanised brigade, which had a direct overall impact to the aforementioned counteroffensive, suffered heavy attrition in Bakhmut. The overall strategic value of Bakhmut was considered dubious by many analysts, observing that the resources and lives Russia spent assaulting the city far outweighed its importance. The British defence ministry and US National Security Council both insisted capturing Bakhmut would only be a "symbolic" victory for Russia rather than a strategic one. Konrad Muzyka and expert on Russian security Mark Galeotti argued that Russia's costly assault was a matter of both preserving prestige and sunk cost fallacy—that Russian forces had already expended so much manpower in the war effort on other fronts that they "may as well do everything they can" to seize the city instead of abandoning the effort. George Barros from the Institute for the Study of War characterized Russia's costly capture of Bakhmut as "a tactical victory" but "operational failure — contributing to the continued Russian strategic failure". However other observers and sources noted that Bakhmut is a key regional logistics and transport hub where two roads, the T0504 to Kostiantynivka and T0513 to Siversk, pass through. Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy attributed both tactical and symbolic value to Bakhmut, calling it a "fortress of our morale" and refusing to order a tactical retreat from the city in March 2023, saying its capture would give Russia an "open road" to important cities in eastern Ukraine. Jon Roozenbeek, British Academy postdoctoral fellow at the University of Cambridge, likewise observed that securing Bakhmut would put the larger Donbas cities of Kramatorsk and Sloviansk within sufficient Russian artillery range. Other sources concurred with this analysis, detailing how the city's significance "cannot be overstressed" as it lay at a fork pointing toward Kostiantynivka, Kramatorsk and Sloviansk. Researchers also pointed out that Bakhmut lies on the southeast of the Yuzivska gas field, and "control over the Yuzivska field would considerably strengthen Putin's strategy of weaponizing Russia's gas exports. Even rendering Yuzivska a militarized no-man's-land or ruined waste could set Ukraine's movement toward energy sovereignty back for decades". Retired Ukrainian colonel Serhiy Hrabskyi suggested the Wagner Group was seeking glory in capturing Bakhmut, as leader Yevgeny Prigozhin was poised to reap significant monetary and political rewards if Wagner captured the city on behalf of the Russian government. On 21 May 2023, following the effective capture of Bakhmut, some Russian state media outlets compared the fall of the city to the Soviet victory in the battle of Berlin; a Russian fighter told a Channel One correspondent that he felt "probably the same emotions as our grandfathers had in Berlin". Meanwhile, other Russian ultranationalist milbloggers celebrated the capture of Bakhmut but emphasized that "Bakhmut is not Berlin" and that the capture of the city would be simply another step in ongoing difficult operations to achieve Russian objectives in Ukraine. A Channel One broadcast on 1 July 2023 compared the siege of Mariupol to the battle for Bakhmut. It claimed that the latter had not been "the most important city from the point of view of the front", and that the Wagner Group fighters destroyed and captured the city for over 7.5 months. The broadcast contrasted this to Mariupol (portrayed as "one of the most important centres of Ukrainian metallurgy"), which had been captured by the Russian Army and the National Guard of Russia after 71 days. This report was televised one week after the Wagner Group rebellion. List of military engagements during the Russian invasion of Ukraine Battle of Chasiv Yar Battle of Avdiivka (2023–2024) Battle of Marinka (2022–2023) Until the Republic's annexation on 30 September 2022 The start date is not well defined, with the main assault towards the city on 1 August, but offensives on the distant approaches to the city months prior. There is no clear consensus on the end date. Marée, Koen (7 January 2023). "Wagner-baas Prigozjin: Bachmoet veroveren vanwege 'ondergrondse steden'" [Wagner boss Prigozhin: conquering Bakhmut because of 'underground cities']. NRC (in Dutch). Archived from the original on 8 January 2023. Retrieved 8 January 2023. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, 30 June, 2023". The Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 5 July 2023. Greenall, Robert (6 March 2023). "Ukraine war: Bakhmut defenders double down – Zelensky". BBC News. Archived from the original on 3 April 2023. Retrieved 16 April 2023. Higgins, Andrew; Bigg, Matthew Mpoke (6 November 2022). "Russia Looks to Private Militia to Secure a Victory in Eastern Ukraine". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 28 November 2022. Retrieved 29 November 2022. Axe, David (25 October 2022). "A Fierce Ukrainian Mechanized Brigade Is Routing Russian Mercenaries In One Symbolic Eastern Town". Forbes. Archived from the original on 26 October 2022. Retrieved 26 October 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 20, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. 20 May 2023. Archived from the original on 29 June 2023. Retrieved 17 July 2023. Ніде на фронті не пасуємо перед ворогом, на визначених ділянках готуємо майбутні успіхи – звернення Президента України [Nowhere on the front are we grazing in front of the enemy, in certain areas we are preparing future successes – address of the President of Ukraine]. President of Ukraine. 18 November 2022. Archived from the original on 25 November 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2022. "Russia suffers 'at least 60,000 casualties' in its attempt to capture Bakhmut". Sky News. 1 June 2023. "Zelensky: Best and newest weapons sent to Bakhmut". www.ukrinform.net. 6 June 2023. "Zelenskyy on defence of Bakhmut: All latest equipment was sent there". Ukrainska Pravda. "Zelensky: Wagner lost about 100,000 soldiers killed and wounded in eastern Ukraine". www.ukrinform.net. 2 July 2023. "Ukraine war: The battle of Bakhmut is not about seizing vital ground – it is about maximising enemy casualties". Sky News. "Mayor: 204 Bakhmut residents killed, 505 injured since start of full-scale invasion". 31 May 2023. Lopez, German (30 March 2023). "The Biggest Battle in Ukraine". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 18 February 2024. Kullab, Samya (21 May 2023). "Why Ukraine is waging a brutal war of attrition against Russia over Bakhmut". PBS NewsHour. Retrieved 20 August 2023. Santora, Marc; Hicks, Tyler (14 May 2023). "As Ukraine Makes Inroads in Bakhmut, Devastation Still Reigns". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 20 August 2023. "The battle for Ukraine's Bakhmut: A timeline". www.aljazeera.com. 20 May 2024. Retrieved 20 August 2023. "Russia Claims Control of Bakhmut: The Bloodiest Battle of the Ukraine War". WSJ. 23 May 2023. Retrieved 20 February 2024. Baker, Sinéad (23 December 2023). "Bakhmut, Ukraine: Why battle looked like scene from World War I". Business Insider. Retrieved 20 February 2024. Zafra, Mariano; McClure, Jon (21 December 2023). "Uncovering the extensive destruction of Bakhmut in a new detailed analysis". Reuters. Retrieved 20 February 2024. "The Battle For Bakhmut: The Bloodiest Infantry Brawl Since World War II". www.rferl.org. 6 April 2023. Retrieved 21 February 2024. Stepanenko, Kateryna; Bailey, Riley; Barros, George; Wolkov, Nicole; Philipson, Layne; Kagan, Frederick W. (30 March 2023). "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, March 30, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 23 March 2024. since the Battle of Bakhmut began in July 2022. Farrell, Francis; Storozhenko, Stanislav (21 May 2023). "Russia takes Bakhmut: Taking stock of the war's bloodiest battle so far". The Kyiv Independent. Retrieved 24 March 2024. Russia's slow advance on Bakhmut began back in July 2022, after the fall of nearby Lysychansk in Luhansk Oblast. Донбас.Реалії. "Битва за Бахмут. Хроніка оборони міста-фортеці (оновлюється)". Радіо Свобода (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 24 March 2024. Росія активно штурмує Бахмут та населені пункти на підступах до нього з липня 2022 року (Russia has been actively storming Bakhmut and the settlements on the approaches to it since July 2022). RUSSIAN OFFENSIVE CAMPAIGN ASSESSMENT, MAY 22, ISW, archived from the original on 23 May 2022, retrieved 27 May 2022 Landry, Carole (28 November 2022). "Russia's Battle for Bakhmut". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2 December 2022. Retrieved 2 December 2022. Brown, Chris (1 December 2022). "Why the battle for the small city of Bakhmut is so important to both Russia and Ukraine". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 2 December 2022. Retrieved 3 December 2022. Gibbons-Neff, Thomas; Yermak, Natalia; Hicks, Tyler (27 November 2022). "In Ukraine, Bakhmut Becomes a Bloody Vortex for 2 Militaries". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 28 November 2022. Retrieved 29 November 2022. Vasilyeva, Nataliya (17 November 2022). "Heavy fighting in eastern Ukraine raises fears Moscow is reinforcing new epicentre of war". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 18 November 2022. Retrieved 18 November 2022. "Fighting in Ukraine descends into trench warfare as Russia looks to break through". The Guardian. 28 November 2022. Archived from the original on 29 November 2022. Retrieved 29 November 2022. Ukrainian Troops Say Russian 'Zombies' Repeatedly Attack Lines Around Bakhmut, 21 December 2022, archived from the original on 22 December 2022, retrieved 22 December 2022 "In the 'Bakhmut meat grinder', deadlocked enemy forces slog it out". The Guardian. 10 December 2022. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 10 December 2022. "Fierce fighting in north of Ukraine's Bakhmut, says Russian head of Wagner militia". Reuters. 5 February 2023. Archived from the original on 19 March 2023. Retrieved 20 March 2023. "Institute for the Study of War". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 25 March 2022. Retrieved 4 March 2023. Arhirova, Hanna. "Russian forces claim progress in Bakhmut but no end in sight". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 11 March 2023. Retrieved 9 March 2023. Hird, Karolina; Mappe, Grace; Wolkov, Nicole; Barros, George; Clark, Mason. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, March 7, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 8 March 2023. Retrieved 9 March 2023. "Kyiv says Bakhmut situation 'critical' as Wagner claims control". www.aljazeera.com. Retrieved 20 May 2023. "Ukraine war: Kyiv rejects Wagner claim over Bakhmut". BBC News. 20 May 2023. Retrieved 20 May 2023. "Ukraine: Bakhmut captured, Russian Defense Ministry says". DW. 20 May 2023. "Zaporizhzhya Nuclear Plant Cut Off From Grid; Fighting Continues In Bakhmut". Radio Free Europe. 22 May 2023. Bailey, Riley; Wolkov, Nicole; Stepanenko, Kateryna; Barros, George; Kagan, Fredrick W.; Mappes, Grace. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, June 4, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 5 June 2023. Picheta, Rob (22 May 2023). "Russia has claimed to control Bakhmut, but Ukraine says it's still fighting. Here's what we know". CNN. Retrieved 3 June 2023. "Ukraine aims to encircle Bakhmut as Russia says it captures city". Reuters. 21 May 2023. Retrieved 22 May 2023. "Our forces have taken the city in a semi-encirclement, which gives us the opportunity to destroy the enemy ... the enemy has to defend himself in the part of the city he controls," Maliar said on Telegram. Nechepurenko, Ivan (25 May 2023). "Wagner's Withdrawal From Bakhmut Would Present Test to Russian Army". The New York Times. Retrieved 26 May 2023. Dixon, Robyn; Ables, Kelsey; Bisset, Victoria; Stern, David. "Ukraine live briefing: Head of Russia's Wagner mercenaries lashes out at Moscow, threatens Bakhmut pullout". The Washington Post. Retrieved 5 May 2023. "Russia-Ukraine War: Russian Mercenary Leader Says His Forces Are Starting to Leave Bakhmut". The New York Times. 25 May 2023. Archived from the original on 25 May 2023. Sherman, Jake (22 October 2023), "What Zelensky told us", Punchbowl News Axe, David. "Russia Is Wasting Its Last Good Troops In A Pointless Attack On A Worthless Town". Forbes. Archived from the original on 21 December 2022. Retrieved 21 December 2022. "Ukraine war: Heavy losses reported as battle for Bakhmut rages". BBC News. 13 March 2023. Archived from the original on 13 March 2023. Retrieved 13 March 2023. "War of attrition: Russia's stubborn fight for Ukraine's Bakhmut". France24. 9 December 2022. Archived from the original on 11 December 2022. Retrieved 12 December 2022. Landale, James (9 March 2023). "Ukraine war: Why Bakhmut matters for Russia and Ukraine". BBC News. Archived from the original on 10 March 2023. Retrieved 10 March 2023. Gibbons-Neff, Thomas; Yermak, Natalia; Hicks, Tyler (27 November 2022). "In Ukraine, Bakhmut Becomes a Bloody Vortex for 2 Militaries". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 28 November 2022. Retrieved 2 December 2022. "Maria Senovilla: 'Bakhmut is the blackest point of the Ukrainian war. Up to 400 Ukrainian soldiers a day are being killed'". Atalayar. 12 December 2022. Archived from the original on 12 December 2022. Retrieved 12 December 2022. "'It's like Verdun': The grinding battle for Ukraine's Bakhmut". France 24. 13 February 2023. Retrieved 20 May 2023. "Bakhmut and the spirit of Verdun". The Economist. 1 June 2023. ISSN 0013-0613. Retrieved 15 March 2024. Epstein, Jake (12 April 2023). "Ukrainian troops blew up a building to trap Russian forces: report". Business Insider. Retrieved 15 March 2024. Dearnley, Francis (30 May 2023). "Bakhmut and the echoes of Stalingrad". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved 1 August 2023. Spencer, John [@SpencerGuard] (7 June 2023). "Underground warfare and urban warfare often go hand & hand for many reason. Stalingrad was called the rat war. Bakhmut is the Stalingrad of the Ukraine war (yes many differences, but it shows the intense challenges when fighting occurs on a certain type of urban terrain)" (Tweet). Retrieved 15 March 2024 – via Twitter. Milevski, Lukas (3 November 2023). "The Urban Warfare Debate, the Russian Invasion of Ukraine, and the Bakhmut Conundrum". Wavell Room. Retrieved 21 February 2024. Kramer, Andrew E.; Lima, Mauricio (12 April 2023). "The Final Blocks: Inside Ukraine's Bloody Stand for Bakhmut". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 12 August 2023. "In Ukraine's Bakhmut, war is never far away". France24. 12 July 2022. Archived from the original on 15 August 2022. Retrieved 23 August 2022. "7 лет свободы Бахмута. В этой интерактивной хронике все, что пережил город во время оккупации". Свої.City (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 6 November 2022. Retrieved 21 December 2022. "Від Вугледара до Бахмута. Росія сьогодні масовано обстрілює Донецьку область" [From Vugledar to Bakhmut. Today, Russia is massively shelling the Donetsk region]. РБК-Україна. 17 May 2022. Archived from the original on 17 May 2022. Retrieved 27 May 2022. "Кількість жертв обстрілу будинку у Бахмуті зросла до п'яти, серед них дворічна дитина" [The number of victims of the shelling of a house in Bakhmut has increased to five, including a two-year-old child]. Укрінформ. 18 May 2022. Archived from the original on 19 May 2022. Retrieved 27 May 2022. "Траса Бахмут-Лисичанськ опинилася під обстрілом ворога" [The Bakhmut-Lysychansk route came under enemy fire]. Мілітарний. 24 May 2022. Archived from the original on 24 May 2022. Retrieved 27 May 2022. "Окупанти прорвали українську оборону в районі Попасної" [The occupiers broke through Ukrainian defenses in the Popasnaya area]. Ukrainian Military Pages. 25 May 2022. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. Retrieved 27 May 2022. "Ukrajinske trupe brane vitalni put na istoku" [Ukrainian troops are defending a vital road in the east] (in Bosnian). Free Europe. 30 May 2022. Archived from the original on 2 October 2022. Retrieved 17 June 2022. "ЗСУ ліквідували ворожий блокпост на трасі з Бахмута до Лисичанська" [The Armed Forces eliminated the enemy checkpoint on the road from Bakhmut to Lysychansk]. Букви. 26 May 2022. Archived from the original on 2 October 2022. Retrieved 27 May 2022. "Russians trying to improve tactical position in Bakhmut direction". Ukrinform. 16 June 2022. Archived from the original on 2 October 2022. Retrieved 17 June 2022. "Russians prepare offensive on Siversk, Soledar – General Staff". 26 July 2022. Archived from the original on 2 October 2022. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "July 27, 2022 Russia-Ukraine news". 28 July 2022. Archived from the original on 3 August 2022. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "The Fight to Survive Russia's Onslaught in Eastern Ukraine". The New Yorker. 7 June 2022. Archived from the original on 2 October 2022. Retrieved 16 August 2022. "Ukraine Invasion Updates July 2022". Critical Threats. 31 July 2022. Retrieved 24 March 2024. Serhan, Yasmeen; Law, Tara (7 February 2023). "Why Russia Is So Determined To Capture Bakhmut". TIME. Retrieved 24 March 2024. Ukrainian and Russian forces have been fighting in the Bakhmut area since at least May. Stepanenko, Kateryna (24 May 2023). "The Kremlin's Pyrrhic Victory in Bakhmut: A Retrospective on the Battle for Bakhmut". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 23 March 2024. Russian forces . . . began launching localized attacks southeast and east of Bakhmut in May 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, August 1". Critical threats. 1 August 2022. Archived from the original on 22 August 2022. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "August 1, 2022 Russia-Ukraine news". CNN. 2 August 2022. Archived from the original on 4 August 2022. Retrieved 4 August 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, August 2". Critical threats. 2 August 2022. Archived from the original on 2 October 2022. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "The Wagner PMC, supported by Russian artillery, was able to break through to Patrice Lumumba Street in Bakhmut from the eastern side. Insider reports that an AFU roadblock was destroyed in the – XUA-фото войны". 4 August 2022. Archived from the original on 4 August 2022. Retrieved 4 August 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, August 14". The Institute for the Study of War. 14 August 2022. Archived from the original on 25 August 2022. Retrieved 15 August 2022. "В Бахмуті палає найстаріший палац культури, пошкоджена будівля ДСНС та немає води. Наслідки обстрілів на 8 вересня (ФОТО, ВІДЕО)" [In Bakhmut, the oldest palace of culture is on fire, the building of the State Emergency Service is damaged and there is no water. Consequences of shelling on 8 September (PHOTOS, VIDEO)]. Vilne Radio. 8 September 2022. Archived from the original on 21 September 2022. Retrieved 18 September 2022. "У Бахмуті під завалами будинку знайшли тіло загиблого" [In Bakhmut, the body of the deceased was found under the rubble of a house]. Українська правда (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 20 September 2022. Retrieved 18 September 2022. Суспільне (15 September 2022). "З-під завалів зруйнованого будинку в Бахмуті рятувальники витягнули чоловіка. Рятувальні роботи продовжуються" [Rescuers pulled a man out from under the rubble of a destroyed house in Bakhmut. Rescue operations continue]. Суспільне | Новини. Суспільне. Archived from the original on 20 September 2022. Retrieved 18 September 2022. "Russian occupiers destroy bridge that bisects Bakhmut". Ukrainske Pravda. 22 September 2022. Archived from the original on 27 December 2022. Retrieved 27 December 2022. "The Ukrainian Army Reportedly Destroyed Another Russian Division". Forbes. Archived from the original on 26 April 2023. Retrieved 26 April 2023. "Ukraine battles Russian advance in key town of Bakhmut". Archived from the original on 13 October 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022. "Russian troops moving closer to the eastern Ukrainian town of Bakhmut, UK says". Reuters. 10 October 2022. Archived from the original on 13 October 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022. "Fighter of 128th brigade Mykhailo Pokydchenko killed in Opytne area. PHOTO". Censor.NET. 6 December 2016. Archived from the original on 15 April 2019. Retrieved 14 January 2019. "A Fierce Ukrainian Mechanized Brigade Is Routing Russian Mercenaries In One Symbolic Eastern Town". Forbes. 25 October 2022. Archived from the original on 26 October 2022. Retrieved 26 October 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, October 24". "WWI near Bakhmut, Ukraine waits for long-range shells, new Russian strikes expected. What happened on the front line on November 28?". The Insider. 29 November 2022. Archived from the original on 1 December 2022. Retrieved 1 December 2022. "Journalist Yuriy Butusov tells Radio NV about Russian gains and losses at Bakhmut". Radio NV. 2 December 2022. Archived from the original on 3 December 2022. Retrieved 4 December 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, November 29". ISW. Archived from the original on 30 November 2022. Retrieved 30 November 2022. Russian milbloggers reiterated claims that Russian forces advanced southwest of Bakhmut, taking Andriivka, Ozarianivka, and Zelenopillia (13km south of Bakhmut) "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, November 29". ISW. Archived from the original on 30 November 2022. Retrieved 30 November 2022. A Russian milblogger also claimed that Russian forces made progress in Opytne (4km south of Bakhmut) and began a ground attack on Klishchiivka (7km southwest of Bakhmut) on November 29 "Institute for the Study of War". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 25 March 2022. Retrieved 4 May 2023. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, November 29". ISW. Archived from the original on 30 November 2022. Retrieved 30 November 2022. Russian forces continued to make limited gains around Bakhmut amid reports of heavy fighting in the area on November 29. Geolocated footage posted on November 29 shows that Russian forces advanced on the southeastern outskirts of Bakhmut. "Bakhmut 'has reputation as most bloody, cruel and brutal part of front'". Yahoo News. 3 December 2022. Archived from the original on 3 December 2022. Retrieved 4 December 2022. "Five Georgian military volunteers killed in Ukraine: encircled near Bakhmut, Donetsk Oblast". Yahoo News. 4 December 2022. Archived from the original on 4 December 2022. Retrieved 4 December 2022. Kaonga, Gerrard (8 December 2022). "Wagner Group repels fresh Ukrainian advances in battle for Bakhmut—Report". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 9 December 2022. "Invincibility centre Bakhmut. What is happening at the most difficult axis of the front". Pravda. 8 December 2022. Archived from the original on 27 December 2022. Retrieved 27 December 2022. "Russia Has 'Destroyed' Bakhmut; Donbas Front Lines 'Difficult': Zelensky". Newsweek. 9 December 2022. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 10 December 2022. "'Only 100 metres apart': Ukrainians and Russians face off in Donetsk". The Guardian. 9 December 2022. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 10 December 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, December 12". The Institute for the Study of War. 12 December 2022. Archived from the original on 13 December 2022. Retrieved 13 December 2022. "Undermining the railway bridge near Bakhmut". TPYXA. 12 December 2022. Archived from the original on 13 December 2022. Retrieved 13 December 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, December 13". The Institute for the Study of War. 13 December 2022. Archived from the original on 14 December 2022. Retrieved 14 December 2022. Brugen, Isabel van (14 December 2022). "Wagner Group breach Ukrainian lines to take control of eastern Bakhmut—ISW". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 15 December 2022. Retrieved 15 December 2022. "Ice cold test of resolve in Ukraine's 'meat grinder'". The Times. 16 December 2022. Archived from the original on 27 December 2022. Retrieved 27 December 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, December 17". The Institute for the Study of War. 17 December 2022. Archived from the original on 25 January 2023. Retrieved 18 December 2022. "Ukrainian Drone Captures Horrors of Bakhmut Battle as Fighting Rages—Video". Newsweek. 20 December 2022. Archived from the original on 22 December 2022. Retrieved 22 December 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, December 19". The Institute for the Study of War. 19 December 2022. Archived from the original on 21 December 2022. Retrieved 22 December 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, December 21". The Institute for the Study of War. 21 December 2022. Archived from the original on 22 December 2022. Retrieved 22 December 2022. "Ukraine war: Volodymyr Zelensky visits front-line city of Bakhmut". BBC News. 20 December 2022. Archived from the original on 20 December 2022. Retrieved 21 December 2022. "'Explosions Every Minute:' Inside Bakhmut As Fighting Rages". RFE/RFL. 19 December 2022. Archived from the original on 22 December 2022. Retrieved 22 December 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, December 20". The Institute for the Study of War. 20 December 2022. Archived from the original on 21 December 2022. Retrieved 22 December 2022. "Governor: Over 60% of infrastructure in Bakhmut damaged or destroyed". Yahoo News. 26 December 2022. Archived from the original on 26 December 2022. Retrieved 27 December 2022. "Institute for the Study of War". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 25 March 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2022. Ponomarenko, Illia (4 January 2023). "As Battle of Bakhmut nears culmination, Ukraine's artillery gasps for more ammo". The Kyiv Independent. Archived from the original on 6 January 2023. Retrieved 6 January 2023. "Ukrainian military source: Russia controls administrative territory of Soledar". The Kyiv Independent. 15 January 2023. Archived from the original on 16 February 2023. Retrieved 19 January 2023. Hird, Karolina; Bailey, Riley; Philipson, Layne; Williams, Madison; Kagan, Frederick W. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, January 7, 2023". Archived from the original on 20 January 2023. Retrieved 20 January 2023. "Russia Pours Fighters Into Battle for Bakhmut". The New York Times. 1 February 2023. Archived from the original on 1 February 2023. Oliphant, Roland; Kilner, James (5 February 2023). "Russia 'within firing distance' of last few roads out of 'Fortress Bakhmut'". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 19 March 2023. Retrieved 20 March 2023. "Russian forces take Ukraine village Krasna Hora, north of Bakhmut: Wagner chief". Al Arabiya English. 12 February 2023. Archived from the original on 21 March 2023. Retrieved 20 March 2023. Service, RFE/RL's Ukrainian. "Wagner Claims To Occupy Ukrainian Village Near Bakhmut Amid Reports Of Massive Russian Casualties". RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty. Archived from the original on 19 March 2023. Retrieved 20 March 2023. "Ukraine Reports 'Difficult' Situation Near Bakhmut". VOA. 13 February 2023. Archived from the original on 19 March 2023. Retrieved 20 March 2023. Kullab, Samya; Press, YURAS KARMANAU Associated (13 February 2023). "Russia pushes advance on Bakhmut as Ukrainian soldiers begin Leopard tank training". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 18 March 2023. Retrieved 20 March 2023. "Rusové obklíčili Bachmut z další strany, naznačil ukrajinský štáb". iDNES.cz (in Czech). 22 February 2023. Archived from the original on 19 March 2023. Retrieved 22 February 2023. "Bakhmut: Fighting in the street but Russia not in control – deputy mayor". BBC News. 4 March 2023. Archived from the original on 23 March 2023. Retrieved 4 March 2023. Badshah, Nadeem; Clinton, Jane; Gerts, Mark (4 March 2023). "As it happened: street fighting in Bakhmut as battle rages for control of the city". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 24 March 2023. Retrieved 4 March 2023. "Wagner chief calls on Zelenskiy to abandon 'encircled' Bakhmut – video". The Guardian. 4 March 2023. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 14 March 2023. Retrieved 4 March 2023. Walker, Marcus (8 March 2023). "Russia's Wagner Heralds Advance in Bakhmut as Battle Grinds On in Eastern Ukraine". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 8 March 2023. Retrieved 9 March 2023. Sforza, Lauren (8 March 2023). "Russia says it controls eastern Bakhmut". The Hill. Archived from the original on 8 March 2023. Retrieved 9 March 2023. "Ukraine war: Russia's Wagner Group claims full control of eastern Bakhmut districts". Euronews. 8 March 2023. Archived from the original on 9 March 2023. Retrieved 9 March 2023. "Ukraine, Russia say hundreds of enemy troops killed in battle for Bakhmut". Reuters. 11 March 2023. Archived from the original on 12 March 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2023. "Russische Truppen posieren mitten in Bakhmut – und sprengen MiG-17-Denkmal". Exxpress (in German). 11 March 2023. Barbara O'Sullivan (22 March 2023). "United Kingdom speaks of a realistic possibilit' that Russian offensive in Bakhmut is losing momentum". MSN. Archived from the original on 23 March 2023. Retrieved 23 March 2023. Pennington, Josh (26 March 2023). "Wagner in 'full control' of AZOM plant in Bakhmut, reports Russian state media". CNN. Archived from the original on 2 April 2023. Retrieved 9 April 2023. "Wagner claims 'legal' control of Ukraine's Bakhmut". www.aljazeera.com. Archived from the original on 10 April 2023. Retrieved 9 April 2023. Psaropoulos, John. "Wagner advances in Bakhmut as Ukraine gears up for counterattack". www.aljazeera.com. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Retrieved 9 April 2023. Psaropoulos, John. "Ukrainians said to pull back in Bakhmut as Moscow launches new push". Reuters. Archived from the original on 14 April 2023. Retrieved 14 April 2023. Vakulenko, Yevhen (18 April 2023). "В Бахмуті пролунав вибух, який бачили у сусідніх містах: знищили Народний дім на "Алеї троянд"" (in Ukrainian). Vilne Radio. Kononenko, Oleh (18 April 2023). "Соцсети: ВСУ подорвали Дом культуры в Бахмуте. Появилось зрелищное видео" (in Ukrainian). The New Voice of Ukraine. "Putin visits occupied Ukraine: 'Important to hear your opinion'". www.aljazeera.com. 18 April 2023. Archived from the original on 18 April 2023. Retrieved 18 April 2023. David Axe (26 April 2023). "A Symphony Of Bomb Blasts: One After Another, Four Ukrainian JDAMs Apparently Strike Russian Positions In Bakhmut". Forbes. Archived from the original on 27 April 2023. Retrieved 27 April 2023. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 3, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 4 May 2023. Retrieved 4 May 2023. "На Бахмутському напрямку росія тримає 25,6 тисячі військових – Череватий". www.ukrinform.ua (in Ukrainian). May 2023. Archived from the original on 1 May 2023. Retrieved 2 May 2023. Peleschuk, Dan (1 May 2023). "Ukrainian defenders oust Russian forces from some positions in Bakhmut -Ukraine general". Reuters. Archived from the original on 2 May 2023. Retrieved 2 May 2023. Light, Felix; Davis, Caleb (5 May 2023). "Russia's Prigozhin says Wagner fighters will quit Bakhmut to 'lick our wounds'". Reuters. Archived from the original on 5 May 2023. Retrieved 5 May 2023. Taylor, Harry; Belam, Martin; Ratcliffe, Rebecca (5 May 2023). "Prigozhin says Wagner forces will leave Bakhmut next week". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 5 May 2023. Retrieved 5 May 2023. Kirby, Paul (5 May 2023). "Yevgeny Prigozhin: Wagner Group boss says he will pull troops out of Bakhmut". BBC News. Archived from the original on 5 May 2023. Retrieved 5 May 2023. "Mercenary boss: Chechen troops to replace Wagner Group in Bakhmut on May 10". Yahoo News. 6 May 2023. Archived from the original on 6 May 2023. "Bakhmut on fire: Russia uses phosphorus bombs en masse – SOF | Ukrainska Pravda". 6 May 2023. Archived from the original on 6 May 2023. Murphy, Matt (6 May 2023). "Ukraine war: Russia accused of using phosphorus bombs in Bakhmut". BBC News. Archived from the original on 17 May 2023. Retrieved 12 May 2023. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 7, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 8 May 2023. Retrieved 8 May 2023. "Cherevaty calls 'ammo shortage' of Russians in Bakhmut a fake as 524 strikes launched in past day". 10 May 2023. Archived from the original on 10 May 2023. Retrieved 10 May 2023. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 12, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 13 May 2023. "Syrskyi on Bakhmut: Russians retreat up to 2 km in some areas". 10 May 2023. Archived from the original on 10 May 2023. Retrieved 10 May 2023. "Ukraine unit says Russian brigade flees outskirts of Bakhmut". Reuters. 10 May 2023. Archived from the original on 10 May 2023. Retrieved 10 May 2023. "Ukraine pushes Russia "another 700 meters" back near Bakhmut – Ground Forces". www.ukrinform.net. 21 May 2023. "Four Russian AFVs, one tank destroyed in Bakhmut direction". www.ukrinform.net. 21 May 2023. "Border guards neutralize Russian assault group in Bakhmut". www.ukrinform.net. 21 May 2023. "Russian army brigade flees Bakhmut". Archived from the original on 10 May 2023. Retrieved 10 May 2023. "Ukraine's defenders defeat 72nd Russian brigade near Bakhmut, liberate territory and capture prisoners". Archived from the original on 10 May 2023. Retrieved 10 May 2023. "Wagner Group leader gives Russian Defenсe Minister an ultimatum, says Russian army is fleeing". Archived from the original on 9 May 2023. Retrieved 9 May 2023. Peleschuk, Dan (15 May 2023). "Ukraine hails its first offensive success in defence of Bakhmut". Reuters. Retrieved 15 May 2023. "Ukraine's forces retake about 20 square kilometers of land near Bakhmut – defense official". www.ukrinform.net. 16 May 2023. "Bakhmut battle rages as Ukraine claims advances, Russian retreat". Aljazeera. 19 May 2023. 18 May 2023, The New York Times, by Marc Santora, "Small advance Kindles Hopes for Kyiv Forces". Page 1. Ivan Lyubysh-Kirdey (19 May 2023). "Russian forces in retreat near Bakhmut, Ukraine and Wagner say". Reuters. Retrieved 19 May 2023. "Russians deploy few thousand more occupiers near Bakhmut, heavy fighting ongoing – Deputy Defence Minister". Ukrainska Pravda. "Putin congratulates Russia troops, Wagner for 'capturing Bakhmut'". Al Jazeera. 20 May 2023. Retrieved 21 May 2023. Trevelyan, Mark (20 May 2023). "Russia's Prigozhin claims capture of Bakhmut, Ukraine says fighting goes on". Reuters. Russian mercenary chief Yevgeny Prigozhin said on Saturday his Wagner fighters had completed the capture of Bakhmut, but Ukraine rejected the claim and said fighting was still going on. Maliar, Hanna (20 May 2023). "Telegram: Contact @annamaliar". t.me (Telegram) (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 20 May 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2024. Heavy fighting in Bakhmut. The situation is critical. At the same time, our troops maintain defense in the "Litak" area. As of now, our defenders control certain industrial and infrastructure facilities of this area and the private sector. "ВСУ: Бахмут не оставлен полностью, при этом он наполовину окружен с флангов" [Ukrainian Armed Forces: Bakhmut has not been completely abandoned, while it is half surrounded from the flanks]. BBC News Russian (in Russian). 21 May 2023. Archived from the original on 22 May 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2024. Samolet [Litak] area "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 20, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 21 May 2023. ISW has not observed geolocated footage confirming Prigozhin's claims as of this publication. Ukrainian officials reported that Ukrainian forces are still fighting in a small section of southwest Bakhmut as of May 20. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 21, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 22 May 2023. Ukrainian military officials reported that Ukrainian forces control an "insignificant" part of southwestern Bakhmut City around the T0504 highway — a tacit acknowledgement that Russian forces have secured the rest of western and northwestern Bakhmut, if not all of it. These officials' statements indicate that Ukrainian forces withdrew from the remaining areas in Bakhmut except those adjacent to the two highways into the city. "Russia's Prigozhin says Bakhmut territories captured as promised, will leave zone". Reuters. 21 May 2023. Retrieved 23 May 2023. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 22, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 24 May 2023. Geolocated footage published on May 21 shows that Wagner forces advanced towards the T0504 entrance to southwestern Bakhmut. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 23, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 24 May 2023. The Ukrainian General Staff did not report fighting in Bakhmut City in its 1800 situational report for the first time since December 2022 [...] Ukrainian Deputy Defense Minister Hanna Malyar stated that combat operations have decreased in and around Bakhmut and reiterated that Ukrainian forces maintain positions in a fortified area near the MiG-17 monument in western Bakhmut. A milblogger amplified video footage purportedly showing Wagner forces near the MiG-17 monument and claimed that there are no Ukrainian forces in the area, however. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 25, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 26 May 2023. Retrieved 25 May 2023. Wright, George (25 May 2023). "Ukraine war: Wagner says Bakhmut transfer to Russian army under way". BBC. Archived from the original on 25 May 2023. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 26, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 27 May 2023. Retrieved 27 May 2023. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 27, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 28, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 29 May 2023. Retrieved 29 May 2023. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 29, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 30 May 2023. Retrieved 30 May 2023. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 30, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 31 May 2023. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 31, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 1 June 2023. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, June 1, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 2 June 2023. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, June 2, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 3 June 2023. "Russian forces tried to blow up my men, says mercenary boss Prigozhin". Reuters. 3 June 2023. Retrieved 3 June 2023. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, June 3, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 4 June 2023. Hird, Karolina; Barros, George; Mappes, Grace; Wolkov, Nicole; Clark, Mason; Kagan, Fredrick W. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, June 8, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 9 June 2023. Baker, Sinéad; Jankowicz, Mia (22 December 2023). "The Unyielding City - How Ukraine lost Bakhmut and Russia won a hollow victory". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 22 December 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2024. Kullab, Samya (15 September 2023). "Ukrainian troops reclaim a village near Bakhmut. It's a small win in a churning counteroffensive". AP News. Archived from the original on 14 December 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2024. "Ukraine's forces recapture Klishchiivka". The Telegraph. 22 September 2023. Archived from the original on 8 December 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2024. Bailey, Riley; Hird, Karolina; Wolkov, Nicole; Evans, Angelica; Barros, George; Kagan, Frederick W. (29 November 2023). "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, November 29, 2023". Critical Threats. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2024. Wolkov, Nicole; Harward, Christina; Stepanenko, Kateryna; Bailey, Riley; Kagan, Frederick W. (30 December 2023). "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, December 30, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 31 December 2023. Retrieved 31 December 2023. Holder, Josh (28 September 2023). "Who's Gaining Ground in Ukraine? This Year, No One". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 September 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2024. "Пригожин: в боях за Бахмут погибли 20 тыс. бойцов ЧВК "Вагнер"". Kommersant (in Russian). 24 May 2023. Retrieved 24 May 2023. "Евгений Пригожин назвал потери ЧВК "Вагнер" в Артемовске". RBK Group (in Russian). 24 May 2023. Retrieved 25 May 2023. "Russian forces may have scored rare success in battle near Bakhmut". Financial Times. 10 January 2023. Archived from the original on 10 January 2023. Retrieved 10 January 2023. "Russia diverting troops to Bakhmut from other Donetsk battles -UK intel". The Jerusalem Post | JPost.com. 18 April 2023. Archived from the original on 24 April 2023. Retrieved 24 April 2023. "Fighting for Soledar and Bakhmut is the 'Bloodiest' of the War". Kyiv Post. 11 January 2023. Archived from the original on 16 February 2023. Retrieved 11 January 2023. Yau, Justin; Farmer, Ben (9 December 2022). "Inside Bakhmut: The strange and senseless death trap draining Ukraine's tired army". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 15 December 2022. Retrieved 15 December 2022. Joshua Zitser (7 March 2023). "Spike in Russian combat deaths fuels fears of worse carnage to come". Business Insider. Retrieved 21 May 2023. Segura, Cristian (1 February 2023). "Battle for Bakhmut turns into a 'meat grinder' for Russian and Ukrainian armies". EL PAÍS English. "'Something Was Badly Wrong': When Washington Realized Russia Was Actually Invading Ukraine". Politico. 24 February 2023. Archived from the original on 10 April 2023. Retrieved 8 April 2023. "Did the Ukrainian Army Kill 1,100 Russians in a Single Day? It's Certainly Possible". Forbes. Archived from the original on 31 March 2023. Retrieved 8 April 2023. "Russia loses 500 soldiers a day in Bakhmut offensive alone – Ukraine's Defense Minister". 26 February 2023. Archived from the original on 2 April 2023. Retrieved 8 April 2023. Britzky, Haley (29 March 2023). "Battle for Bakhmut has turned into a "slaughter-fest for the Russians," top US general says". CNN. Retrieved 11 April 2023., and Russia is 'getting hammered': Top US general on Bakhmut battle, CNN, 30 March 2023 (accessed 11 April 2023). "Up to 30,000 Russian casualties claimed in Bakhmut". BBC News. 7 March 2023. Archived from the original on 5 May 2023. "NATO assesses Russia's daily war casualties at 1,500". Archived from the original on 2 April 2023. Retrieved 8 April 2023. "General Staff: Russians trying to surround Bakhmut from north and south". 13 April 2023. Archived from the original on 13 April 2023. Retrieved 13 April 2023. Holland, Steve; Jackson, Katharine (2 May 2023). "US believes Russians in Ukraine have suffered 100,000 casualties in 5 months". Reuters. Archived from the original on 1 May 2023. Retrieved 1 May 2023. "U.S.: Russia has suffered 100K casualties in Bakhmut since December". ny1.com. Lamothe, Dan; Khurshudyan, Isabelle (2 May 2023). "Spike in Russian combat deaths fuels fears of worse carnage to come". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 3 May 2023. Retrieved 11 July 2023. "US fears Ukrainian counteroffensive will become carnage – WP". Ukrainska Pravda. Archived from the original on 4 May 2023. Retrieved 4 May 2023. "Ukraine live briefing: Russia has suffered 100,000 casualties since December, US says". Washington Post. 1 May 2023. Archived from the original on 5 May 2023. Retrieved 4 May 2023. "President Biden Reveals Massive Number of Russian Casualties in Bakhmut". Kyiv Post. 21 May 2023. Retrieved 22 May 2023. Susie Blann (24 May 2023). "Russia's Wagner boss says more than 20,000 of his troops died in Bakhmut battle". APNews. Retrieved 24 May 2023. "Wagner Says 20,000 of Its Troops Have Died Taking Ukraine's Bakhmut". The Wall Street Journal. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 24, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 25 May 2023. Frontline report: Prigozhin's video exposes high losses and failure of Wagner Group in battle for Bakhmut "Russia investigates Wagner chief for 'armed mutiny' after call for attack on military". the Guardian. 23 June 2023. Retrieved 3 July 2023. "«Мясорубка хуже бахмутской». Скольких жизней и военной техники стоил России захват Авдеевки". The Insider (in Russian). Retrieved 13 March 2024. Merkx, Gilbert W. (2023). "Russia's War in Ukraine: Two Decisive Factors". Journal of Advanced Military Studies. 14 (2): 13–33. doi:10.21140/mcuj.20231402001. ISSN 2770-260X. "Making Attrition Work: A Viable Theory of Victory for Ukraine". IISS. Retrieved 13 February 2024. "'Hell. Just hell': Ukraine and Russia's war of attrition over Bakhmut". Financial Times. 9 December 2022. Archived from the original on 15 December 2022. Retrieved 15 December 2022. "Bakhmut 'Totally Destroyed' as Russia Feeds Waves of Cannon Fodder into 'Meat Grinder'". Kyiv Post. 10 December 2022. Archived from the original on 15 December 2022. Retrieved 15 December 2022. "Mayor: 204 Bakhmut residents killed, 505 injured since start of full-scale invasion". The Kyiv Independent. 31 May 2023. Retrieved 31 May 2023. "One adult killed, child injured in Russian bombing of Donetsk regional town of Bakhmut". Kyiv Post. 17 May 2022. Retrieved 10 June 2023. "Ukraine names soldier appearing to be executed in viral video". NBC News. 7 March 2023. Archived from the original on 13 April 2023. Retrieved 13 April 2023. Tondo, Lorenzo; Sauer, Pjotr (7 March 2023). "Zelenskiy vows to 'find the murderers' of PoW allegedly shot dead by Russians". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 11 April 2023. Retrieved 13 April 2023. Vasco Kesaieva; Andrew Cotovio; Josh Carey; Yulia Pennington (12 April 2023). "Zelensky slams 'beasts' who purportedly beheaded Ukrainian soldiers after video emerges". CNN. Archived from the original on 14 April 2023. Retrieved 13 April 2023. "Ukraine's outrage grows over video seeming to show beheading". CTVNews. 12 April 2023. Archived from the original on 13 April 2023. Retrieved 13 April 2023. ToI Staff; AP. "Israel condemns 'horrifying' acts after video of beheading of Ukraine soldier". www.timesofisrael.com. Archived from the original on 13 April 2023. Retrieved 13 April 2023. "Russia Using Chemical Weapon During Bakhmut Artillery Bombardments, Ukrainian Official Claims". Kyiv Post. 5 July 2023. Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (30 November 2016). "Annex 3". Report of the OPCW on the Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction in 2015 (Report). p. 42. Retrieved 8 March 2017. Altman, Howard (29 November 2022). "Ukraine Situation Report: The Bloody Battle For Bakhmut". The Drive. Archived from the original on 2 December 2022. Retrieved 2 December 2022. Ellyatt, Holly (30 November 2022). "Trenches, mud and death: One Ukrainian battlefield looks like something out of World War I". CNBC. Archived from the original on 2 December 2022. Retrieved 2 December 2022. Bouissou, Julien (14 January 2023). "War in Ukraine: 'We're seeing the 21st-century version of the battle of Verdun'". Le Monde.fr. Retrieved 4 August 2023. Rossi, Alex (19 May 2023). "Inside Bakhmut's blackened nightmare Ukrainians are terrified – but Russia's domination could be a pyrrhic victory". Sky News. Retrieved 12 August 2023. Haltiwanger, John (7 March 2023). "The battle for Bakhmut is getting so close that 'fistfights have been happening,' Ukrainian soldier says". Business Insider. Retrieved 24 March 2024. Peck, Michael (8 March 2023). "Russia and Ukraine's deadliest battle is starting to look like Stalingrad 'without the importance,' expert says". Business Insider. Retrieved 6 August 2023. "Notorious Wagner Group Targeting Volunteers in Ukraine, US Trainer Says". Newsweek. 7 December 2022. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 10 December 2022. Kilner, James (12 March 2023). "'Worse than Stalingrad': Ukraine troops battle Wagner fighters in Bakhmut metal works". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved 18 February 2024. "'Real hell': the battle for Bakhmut is muddy, bloody and cold". South China Morning Post. 10 March 2023. Retrieved 15 March 2024. "Ukraine reports 'unprecedented bloody battles' in Bakhmut". Al Jazeera. 16 April 2023. Retrieved 21 February 2024. "The Battle of Bakhmut". Georgia Today. 1 December 2022. Retrieved 24 March 2024. Roberts, Geoffrey (14 March 2023). "Whose 'Stalingrad' will Bakhmut be?". Responsible Statecraft. Retrieved 1 August 2023. Hill, Alexander (20 March 2023). "Bakhmut and the limits of historical parallels". canadiandimension.com. Retrieved 6 August 2023. Peck, Michael (8 March 2023). "Russia and Ukraine's Bakhmut battle looks like Stalingrad, expert says". Business Insider. Retrieved 20 February 2024. Sackur, Leila (21 May 2023). "Bakhmut echoes Hiroshima, Zelenskyy says as he thanks G7 for F-16 fighters". www.nbcnews.com. Epstein, Jake (22 May 2023). "Drone footage shows Russian way of war in Syria and Ukraine is similar". Business Insider. Retrieved 21 February 2024. Engelbrecht, Cora (25 May 2023). "What Does Russia's Success in Bakhmut Mean for the War in Ukraine?". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 21 February 2024. "Russia's 'disposable soldiers' fighting for Bakhmut". The Times of India. AFP. 2 November 2022. Archived from the original on 15 December 2022. Retrieved 15 December 2022. Capurro, Daniel (27 October 2022). "Moscow's reliance on human wave tactics is a catastrophe for Russia's working-age men". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 15 December 2022. Retrieved 15 December 2022. "Потери штурмовых групп РФ в Бахмуте составляют 80%, раненых бросают умирать – нацгвардеец" [Losses of Russian assault groups in Bakhmut amount to 80%, the wounded are left to die – National Guardsman]. www.unian.net (in Russian). Archived from the original on 4 January 2023. Retrieved 4 January 2023. "Institute for the Study of War". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 25 March 2022. Retrieved 1 February 2023. "Iran is preparing to send additional weapons including ballistic missiles to Russia to use in Ukraine, western officials say". CNN. November 2022. Archived from the original on 16 November 2022. Retrieved 4 November 2022. "У ЗСУ пояснили, чи дійсно 93-тя бригада виходить з Бахмута". ТСН.ua (in Ukrainian). 12 December 2022. Archived from the original on 24 December 2022. Retrieved 23 December 2022. "Ukraine war: Heavy losses reported as battle for Bakhmut rages". BBC News. 13 March 2023. Archived from the original on 13 March 2023. Retrieved 13 March 2023. Bigg, Matthew Mpoke; Gibbons-Neff, Thomas (1 February 2023). "Seeing a Prize, Russia Inundates a Ukraine City With Troops". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 1 February 2023. Retrieved 1 February 2023. "Russian forces may have scored rare success in battle near Bakhmut". Financial Times. 10 January 2023. Archived from the original on 10 January 2023. Retrieved 10 January 2023. "Ukraine's Ground Forces Commander posts video of captured Wagner mercenary: he talks about losses in Bakhmut and how wounded are abandoned". Ukrainska Pravda. "Every half meter of ground around Bakhmut cost Russia one of its soldiers killed or wounded – Britain in OSCE". www.ukrinform.net. 7 June 2023. Horncastle, James (13 April 2023). "Bakhmut is increasingly a quagmire that works to Russia's advantage". The Conversation. Archived from the original on 13 April 2023. Retrieved 13 February 2024. "Strategic Digest" (PDF). Strategic Digest. 5 (11). Manohar Parrikar Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses. 1 June 2023. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 October 2023. Retrieved 14 February 2024 – via EBSCO. Coles, Isabel; MacDonald, Alistair; Sivorka, Ievgeniia (17 February 2024). "Ukraine Withdraws From Besieged City as Russia Advances". WSJ. Archived from the original on 17 February 2024. Retrieved 17 February 2024. Stepanenko, Kateryna (24 May 2023). "The Kremlin's Pyrrhic Victory in Bakhmut: A Retrospective on the Battle for Bakhmut". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 24 May 2023. Retrieved 13 February 2024. Schwirtz, Michael; Santora, Marc (22 May 2023). "Russia Claims Bakhmut, but Some See a 'Pyrrhic Victory'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 22 May 2023. Retrieved 13 February 2024. "Look up 'Pyrrhic victory,'" said Ben Barry, a senior fellow at the International Institute for Strategic Studies, a research group based in London. "A victory which imposes such casualties on the side that supposedly wins the battle that it actually doesn't help them achieve their strategic ends." This is most likely what Russia has achieved in Bakhmut, Mr. Barry said, though he cautioned that there were many unknowns, including the possibility that Russia had reserved its more elite, well-prepared units for additional offensive operations along the sprawling eastern front. Ultimately, though, few significant changes on the battlefield should be expected immediately, Mr. Barry and other experts said. Blackburn, Matthew (21 November 2023). "Ukraine War: Selling Stalemate and Prolonging Pain". The National Interest. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 13 February 2024. Milevski, Lukas (3 November 2023). "The Urban Warfare Debate, the Russian Invasion of Ukraine, and the Bakhmut Conundrum". Wavell Room. Archived from the original on 2 December 2023. Retrieved 13 February 2024. McDowall, Angus (24 August 2023). Williams, Alison; Heinrich, Mark (eds.). "Wagner's global operations: War, oil and gold". Reuters. Archived from the original on 24 August 2023. Retrieved 13 February 2024. Bommakanti, Kartik (10 October 2023). "Ukraine-Russia and Hamas-Israel wars: Adaptation is key". Observer Research Foundation. Archived from the original on 29 December 2023. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "Miscalculations, divisions marked offensive planning by U.S., Ukraine". Washington Post. 4 December 2023. Archived from the original on 4 December 2023. Retrieved 17 February 2024. Oliphant, Roland (23 August 2023). "Ukraine's dreams of counter-offensive triumph have hit a hard reality". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 23 August 2023. Retrieved 17 February 2024. Horncastle, James (13 April 2023). "Bakhmut is increasingly a quagmire that works to Russia's advantage". Politico. Retrieved 18 February 2024. "Explainer: Why is Russia Trying So Hard to Capture the Small Ukrainian City of Bakhmut?". The Moscow Times. 12 December 2022. Archived from the original on 12 December 2022. Retrieved 12 December 2022. "Russia's Costly Bakhmut Offensive Has Limited Tactical Value: U.K." Newsweek. 3 December 2022. Archived from the original on 14 December 2022. Retrieved 15 December 2022. "Russia says its forces capture Soledar in east Ukraine". Reuters. Archived from the original on 16 February 2023. Retrieved 13 January 2023. Shoaib, Alia. "More Russian soldiers have likely died seizing Avdiivka than in the entire Soviet-Afghan war, ISW says". Business Insider. Retrieved 5 March 2024. "Ukraine Situation Report: Strategic City Of Melitopol Could Be Kyiv's Next Target". The Drive. 23 December 2022. Archived from the original on 24 December 2022. Retrieved 25 December 2022. "Zelensky warns of 'open road' through Ukraine's east". CNN. Archived from the original on 7 March 2023. Retrieved 7 March 2023. "Why Russia Is Obsessed With Capturing Bakhmut". Newsweek. 27 October 2022. Archived from the original on 21 December 2022. Retrieved 22 December 2022. "Ukraine war: Why is Bakhmut so important to Russia and a 'thorn in the side of Putin'?". Sky News. Archived from the original on 2 February 2023. Retrieved 2 February 2023. Sebastian Harlow; Shukla,Frederik; Pleitgen,Rich (19 October 2022). "Devastation on Ukraine's eastern front, where the notorious Wagner group is making gains". CNN. Retrieved 28 May 2023. Bouzarovski, Stefan; Bichsel, Christine; Boyer, Dominic; Ferenčuhová, Slavomíra; Gentile, Michael; Mykhnenko, Vlad; Oguz, Zeynep; Tysiachniouk, Maria (5 September 2023). "Forum: Russia, Europe and the colonial present: the power of everyday geopolitics". Geographica Helvetica. 78 (3): 429–451. doi:10.5194/gh-78-429-2023. ISSN 0016-7312. Litvinova, Dasha; Kullab, Samya (22 May 2023). "Russia TV celebrates as it reports the capture of Bakhmut, comparing it to Berlin in 1945". AP News. Retrieved 27 May 2023. "RUSSIAN OFFENSIVE CAMPAIGN ASSESSMENT, MAY 21, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. "Russian propaganda launches discrediting campaign against Wagner mercenaries". Ukrayinska Pravda. 1 July 2023. Retrieved 4 July 2023.