Jessica Pegula (born February 24, 1994) is an American professional tennis player. She has career-high WTA rankings of world No. 3 in singles, achieved on 24 October 2022, and world No. 1 in doubles, achieved on 11 September 2023. Pegula has won four singles titles and seven doubles titles on the WTA Tour, including two WTA 1000 titles in each discipline. Pegula is a six-time major quarterfinalist in singles, having reached this stage at all four Grand Slam tournaments; thrice at the Australian Open (2021–2023), and once at the French Open (2022), US Open (2022), and Wimbledon (2023). She has also reached the singles final at the 2023 WTA Finals. In doubles, Pegula reached the final of the 2022 French Open, partnering with Coco Gauff, and the mixed doubles final of the 2023 US Open with Austin Krajicek. Pegula was born in Buffalo, New York to Terry and Kim Pegula, the owners of the Buffalo Bills of the National Football League and the Buffalo Sabres of the National Hockey League. She is of Korean descent, as her mother was born in Seoul. Pegula has four siblings, two of whom are from her father's first marriage.[citation needed] On August 30, 2011, Pegula was granted a wildcard into the main draw of the US Open doubles tournament where she was paired with Taylor Townsend. They eventually lost in the third round to the third-seeded team of Vania King and Yaroslava Shvedova. In March 2012, Pegula was handed a wildcard to the qualifying draw in Indian Wells, and surprised higher ranked players Bojana Jovanovski and Paula Ormaechea to qualify for the main draw where she lost to Magdaléna Rybáriková in three sets. Pegula made her major singles debut at the US Open as a qualifier. She defeated Shuko Aoyama, Margarita Gasparyan and Melanie Oudin to reach the main draw where she beat Alison Van Uytvanck in the first round. In the second, Pegula was defeated by Dominika Cibulková in three sets. In 2018, Pegula reached her first WTA singles final at the Tournoi de Québec in September as a qualifier. She beat Kristýna Plíšková, Ons Jabeur, second seed Petra Martić and fifth seed Sofia Kenin en route to the final, where she lost to eighth seed Pauline Parmentier in straight sets. This brought her ranking back inside the top 200 and helped her finish the year inside the top 125. Pegula began the year primarily playing on the ITF Circuit, before cracking inside the top 100 in February for the first time in her career. This allowed her to enter several larger WTA Tour events, including in Indian Wells and Miami. Her best result during the early clay court season came in Charleston, where she upset world No. 12, Anastasija Sevastova, en-route to the third round. This helped her break inside the top 75 for the first time. She also competed in the main draw of a Grand Slam tournament other than the US Open for the first time. She was defeated in the first round of the French Open by eventual champion Ashleigh Barty before falling in the same stage at Wimbledon to Mihaela Buzărnescu. Pegula achieved the best result of her career at the start of the North American hardcourt season when she won her first WTA career singles title at the Washington Open, defeating Camila Giorgi in the final. This took her to a new career-high ranking of world no. 55. Despite failing to win another main draw match the rest of the season, Pegula finished the year ranked inside the top 100 for the first time, at No. 76. Pegula started her 2020 tennis season at the Auckland Open where she defeated CiCi Bellis in the first round. She followed this up with two more straight set victories over Tamara Zidanšek and Alizé Cornet to reach the semifinals. There she beat Caroline Wozniacki in three sets to advance to her third career WTA singles final. Facing off against 23-time Grand Slam singles winner Serena Williams for the first time, Pegula lost in straight sets. She then competed at the Australian Open for the first time, where she was defeated by another American, Taylor Townsend, in straight sets in the first round. Pegula's next big triumph came at the Cincinnati Open, a Premier 5 tournament. Having already beaten two Russians to qualify for the main draw, she opened her campaign with a straight sets win over American Jennifer Brady followed by a win over another countrywoman, 2019 French Open semifinalist Amanda Anisimova. She then caused a huge upset by defeating fifth seed and world No. 11, Aryna Sabalenka, in the third round, thus advancing to her first quarterfinal at any WTA Premier level event. Her run came to an end with a straight-sets loss to 14th seed Elise Mertens. This took her ranking back inside the top 65. At the US Open, Pegula recovered from a set down to record her first Grand Slam main-draw win since the 2015 US Open, defeating Marie Bouzková in a third-set tiebreak. She then beat Kirsten Flipkens to advance to the third round of a Grand Slam event for the first time, where she lost to sixth seed and former world No. 2, Petra Kvitová. Pegula attained success at the Australian Open, defeating former Australian Open champion and 12th seed Victoria Azarenka, Kristina Mladenovic, former US Open champion Samantha Stosur and fifth seed Elina Svitolina to reach her first major quarterfinal where she lost to eventual runner-up, Jennifer Brady, despite winning the first set. This strong showing allowed Pegula to enter top 50 for the first time, and took her to a new career-high ranking of world No. 43. Later in April, she achieved another career-high of world No. 32, after reaching the semifinals at the Qatar Open as a qualifier where she lost to the eventual champion, Petra Kvitová, and a fourth-round run as a seeded player at the Miami Open, losing to Maria Sakkari in a tight three-set match. Her third-round win over Karolína Plíšková in Miami was the third win in a row in three tournaments over the same player. In May, at the Italian Open, where she participated for the first time, she recorded the biggest victory of her career over world No. 2, Naomi Osaka, in the second round. This was her fifth top-ten win in 2021 and in her career. She next prevailed over Ekaterina Alexandrova to set up a quarterfinal with Petra Martić. Thanks to this great showing at her second WTA 1000 quarterfinal in 2021, after the one at Dubai, she entered top 30 for the first time. At the French Open, she reached the third round for the first time in her career where she lost to fourth seed Sofia Kenin. At the German Open in Berlin, Pegula reached the quarterfinals defeating for the fourth time Karolína Plíšková in their fourth in a row meeting in 2021. As a result, she entered the top 25 on June 21. She reached her third WTA 1000 quarterfinal of 2021 at the Canadian Open edition in Montreal, defeating compatriot Danielle Collins in a close three set match needing six match points to win in a thrilling finish. She then made her first WTA 1000 semifinal and second semifinal for the season, defeating 13th seed Ons Jabeur in 88 minutes. At the US Open, she finished in round three for a second consecutive year. At Indian Wells, she reached her fourth WTA 1000 quarterfinal, defeating world No. 7 (her 7th top-ten win for the season) and fourth seed, Elina Svitolina, before she lost to former two-time champion Victoria Azarenka. Pegula started her season in Melbourne, where she lost to Irina-Camelia Begu in the first round of the singles tournament but won her first career WTA doubles title with Asia Muhammad, beating former doubles world No. 1, Sara Errani, and Jasmine Paolini in the final. In Sydney, she lost to Caroline Garcia in the first round. At the Australian Open, she defeated Anhelina Kalinina, Bernarda Pera, Nuria Párrizas Díaz and fifth seed Maria Sakkari to book her second consecutive quarterfinal at this major. She lost the quarterfinal match to world No. 1 and eventual champion, Ashleigh Barty, but moved to highest rankings in singles (No. 16) and doubles (No. 41) on 31 January 2022. In Doha, she won her second doubles title (and first at the WTA 1000 level) with Coco Gauff, defeating third seeds Elise Mertens and Veronika Kudermetova in the final. As a result, she set No. 29 in doubles on 28 February 2022. At the Miami Open, she reached her second WTA 1000 semifinal of her career after two back-to-back retirements, Kalinina in round of 16 and Paula Badosa in the first set of the quarterfinal. In the semifinals, she lost to the eventual champion and upcoming No. 1, Iga Świątek, in straight sets. Her seventh WTA 1000 quarterfinal came at the Madrid Open by defeating Bianca Andreescu in straight sets. She reached her third semifinal at the WTA 1000-level and second straight for the season defeating first time Madrid quarterfinalist Sara Sorribes Tormo. Next, she defeated Jil Teichmann for her first WTA 1000 final and become the third American to do so, after Venus Williams (2010) and Serena Williams (2012 and 2013) in Madrid, where she lost to Ons Jabeur in three sets. As a result, she improved her career-high to world No. 11 on 9 May 2022. Pegula reached the third round of the Italian Open as well, but lost to Aryna Sabalenka in straight sets. Seeded 11th at the French Open, Pegula advanced to the quarterfinals for the first time at this major, defeating former world No. 12, Wang Qiang, Anhelina Kalinina, 2021 French Open semifinalist and 24th seed Tamara Zidanšek, and Irina-Camelia Begu. She lost to top seed and eventual champion Iga Świątek in the quarterfinals. As a result, she broke into the top 10 in the singles rankings for the first time, at world No. 8, on 6 June 2022. She also entered her first major final in doubles, partnering with Gauff. As a result, she reached the top 15 in the doubles rankings. Seeded eighth at Wimbledon, she advanced to the third round for the first time, before losing to Petra Martić in straight sets. Following Wimbledon, she set a new career-high of world No. 7 on 18 July 2022, becoming the American number-one-player, one spot ahead of Danielle Collins. As a top-seeded pair, partnering Erin Routliffe, she won her third doubles title at the Washington Open defeating fourth seeds Caty McNally and Anna Kalinskaya. Seeded seventh at the Canadian Open, she reached back-to-back semifinals in singles, for the fourth time at the WTA 1000-level in her career and third for the season, defeating defending champion Camila Giorgi and Yulia Putintseva, before losing to Simona Halep. Seeded third in doubles at the same tournament, she also reached the semifinals with Gauff defeating fifth seeds Desirae Krawczyk and Demi Schuurs. Next they defeated Madison Keys / Sania Mirza in the semifinals and Nicole Melichar / Ellen Perez in the final to win their second WTA 1000 title together. As a result, Pegula reached top 10 in the doubles rankings, at world No. 8. At the Cincinnati Open, she reached back-to-back quarterfinals defeating tenth seed Emma Raducanu, her fourth WTA 1000 quarterfinal of the season. Seeded eighth at the US Open, she reached the fourth round, defeating Viktorija Golubic, Aliaksandra Sasnovich, and qualifier Yue Yuan. Next she defeated 21st seed Petra Kvitová to reach her first quarterfinal at her home Grand Slam championship and the third major quarterfinal of the season, where she lost to world No. 1 Świątek for the third time this year. Despite the result, she moved to world No. 5, on 12 September 2022. On 13 and 14 October 2022, she qualified for the 2022 WTA Finals in singles and doubles with Gauff, respectively, becoming the first American to qualify for the WTA Finals since Sloane Stephens in 2018 and the first American to qualify in both singles in doubles since Serena and Venus Williams in 2009. At the San Diego Open, Pegula lost to Świątek in a US Open rematch in the semifinals, but won the doubles title with Gauff, their third title of the season together and Pegula's fifth doubles title overall. As a result, she reached a new career-high doubles ranking of world No. 4, on 17 October 2022. At the Guadalajara Open, she reached her second final at the WTA 1000 level defeating four former Grand Slam champions Elena Rybakina, Bianca Andreescu, and Sloane Stephens in the quarterfinals, and Victoria Azarenka in the semifinals. She defeated fourth seed Maria Sakkari in straight sets to win the second and biggest singles title of her career, becoming the first American woman to win a WTA 1000 title since Madison Keys in 2019. At the same tournament, she also reached the quarterfinals in doubles with Gauff. As a result, she achieved new career-high rankings of world No. 3, in singles and in doubles, on 24 October 2022. On her debut at the WTA Finals, Pegula lost all her matches of the group stage, winning only one set in three matches. At the same tournament, she and partner Gauff surprisingly failed to win a single match and also finished last in the round-robin stage of doubles. Nonetheless, she finished her best season to date ranked No. 3 in singles and No. 6 in doubles, one of only three women (along with Gauff and Kudermetova) to finish inside the top 10 in both disciplines. Pegula began her season playing at the inaugural edition of the United Cup. After dropping her opening match in Group C to Petra Kvitová, she bounced back to defeat Laura Siegemund. She then beat Harriet Dart in the first knockout stage before scoring the biggest win of her career with a straight sets victory over Iga Świątek, her first win over a current world No. 1 and first against the Pole since the 2019 Washington Open. In the finals, she beat 2022 French Open semifinalist Martina Trevisan to help the United States win the first ever United Cup title. Coming off the heels of her win over Świątek and consistency throughout the 2022 season, Pegula was considered one of the favorites for the Australian Open title. She breezed through her first three matches with straight set wins over Jaqueline Cristian, Aliaksandra Sasnovich, and Marta Kostyuk. In the fourth round, Pegula faced off against 2021 French Open champion Barbora Krejčíková for the first time, defeating the 20th seed in straight sets to advance to her third consecutive Australian Open quarterfinal. However, she was unable to advance past that stage once more, being defeated by former champion Victoria Azarenka in straight sets. Pegula also played doubles with Coco Gauff; seeded second, the pairing dropped only one set en route to the semifinals before falling to the tenth seeds, Shuko Aoyama and Ena Shibahara. In February, Pegula reached the finals of the Qatar Open in both singles and doubles. It was Pegula's first WTA 500 singles final. She defeated former French Open champion Jelena Ostapenko and world No. 2, Petra Kvitova en-route, before losing to top-ranked Iga Świątek, in straight sets. In doubles, she and Gauff defended their doubles title, defeating second seeds Lyudmyla Kichenok and Jelena Ostapenko in a three sets. Pegula earned 305 singles and 470 doubles ranking points. In Dubai, she reached her first WTA 1000 semifinal for the season defeating Viktoriya Tomova, Ana Bogdan and Karolína Muchová by walkover, before losing to eventual champion Krejčíková. At the Indian Wells Open, she reached the fourth round defeating 27th seed Anastasia Potapova coming from a set down. She repeated the feat at Miami where again she came back from a set down and won against 26th seed Potapova, saving two match points, to reach this time the semifinals, after several match postponements due to a four hours rain delay. She became the first American woman to reach back to back semifinals in Miami since Serena Williams in 2014 and 2015. In doubles at the same tournament, she won her fifth overall and third WTA 1000 team title with her partner, Coco Gauff. They became the first all-American duo to win the Miami Open doubles title in 22 years, defeating Leylah Fernandez and Taylor Townsend in the final. At the WTA 1000 Madrid Open, Pegula and Gauff reached again the final in doubles. They lost to Azarenka and Beatriz Haddad Maia in a final that was followed by controversy as none of the participating players were allowed to make a speech on the podium during the awards ceremony. The organizers subsequently apologized for the mistake. At the next WTA 1000 in Rome, the pair played their third consecutive final. As a result, Pegula reached a new career-high ranking of world No. 2 in doubles. Afflicted by a bout of food poisoning just days before the French Open, Pegula was upset by the 28th seed Elise Mertens in the third round in Paris, but reached the semifinals in doubles with Gauff, before falling to the tenth seeds Leylah Fernandez and Taylor Townsend. At Wimbledon, she reached the quarterfinals and became just the fifth American to do so at all four majors in the last 25 years, after notching a straight-sets fourth-round win over Ukrainian Lesia Tsurenko. In the quarterfinals, Pegula lost to the eventual champion, Markéta Vondroušová, despite leading 4–1 in the third set. At Montreal, she was seeded fourth and reached her third consecutive Canadian Open semifinal by beating Yulia Putintseva, Jasmine Paolini and seventh seed Coco Gauff. Then she beat world No. 1, Iga Świątek, for the second time this year, in three sets, to enter her third WTA 1000 final in which she thrashed 15th seed Liudmila Samsonova 6–1, 6–0 to win her second WTA 1000 title and third WTA Tour singles title. Following the US Open where she reached the fourth round in singles (losing to close friend Madison Keys) and the quarterfinals in doubles for the first time (falling to the reigning French Open champions Hsieh Su-wei and Wang Xinyu), she became the world No. 1 in doubles for the first time. At the same tournament, she also reached the mixed-doubles final with ATP doubles world No. 1, Austin Krajicek, which they lost to Anna Danilina and Harri Heliövaara, in straight sets. At the beginning of the Asian swing, she reached the final of the WTA 500 Japan Open defeating Maria Sakkari, before losing to Veronika Kudermetova. She won her second singles title of the season and fourth overall at the 2023 Korea Open. Jessica and Coco returned to the world No. 1 doubles ranking on 23 October 2023 after qualifying for the 2023 WTA Finals as a pair and also individually, becoming the first players to qualify in both disciplines in back-to-back years since Sara Errani in 2012-13. At the WTA Finals, where she qualified for a second year in a row, she recorded her first win ever at this tournament, and her 40th singles hard court win over Elena Rybakina in straight sets, the most of anyone in the season. It was a fourth straight win over a top 10 player extending her personal best. In her second match, she defeated the world No. 1 player Aryna Sabalenka also in straight sets, her third win against a No. 1 player in the season and in her career. It was her 43rd season win with 5+ break point conversions, the most of anyone, and her fifth straight top 10 win, the first American on record since Sloane Stephens in 2018. She also became the first American to claim three wins in a season against the WTA’s No. 1 since Serena Williams in 2012. Since 2000, Pegula was fourth to achieve the feat after Williams, Lindsay Davenport, and Jennifer Capriati. As a result, she qualified for the semifinals. Next, she defeated Maria Sakkari, her sixth straight top-10 win, in straight sets in her third match in a row with this result, improving to 50-0 in 2023 after winning the opening set, becoming the third player to finish a season with 50+-0, excluding retirements, after Lindsay Davenport and Viktoria Azarenka. In the semifinals, she defeated compatriot Coco Gauff in one hour in straight sets, her seventh straight top-10 win, and reached the biggest final of her career. She became the first player in the Open Era to play the No. 1, No. 2 , No. 3 and No. 4 player in the same tournament. In the final, she lost to world No. 2, Iga Świątek, in 59 minutes. In January, following the Australian Open where she exited in the second round, she split with her coach David Witt, with whom she began working in 2019. She withdrew from the Middle East swing in February, due to a neck injury. She returned to the WTA Tour at the San Diego Open with a new coaching team and reached the semifinals. In doubles at the same tournament with Desirae Krawczyk, they reached the final, which they lost to the duo Nicole Melichar-Martinez / Ellen Perez in straight sets. In Indian Wells, she lost her debut match to Anna Blinkova in a three-set match. In the doubles of the same tournament, with her usual partner Coco Gauff, they reached the quarterfinals. In 2021, Pegula married Taylor Gahagen, a corporate executive for Pegula Sports and Entertainment and an animal philanthropist. In 2016, Pegula and her sister Kelly opened a quick-serve restaurant called Healthy Scratch in LECOM Harborcenter, an ice hockey-themed mixed-use development owned by her parents in Buffalo, New York. A Healthy Scratch food truck followed, in 2017. Multiple locations opened in 2018 and 2019, but then began closing after the start of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020. The last two locations closed in May 2022. In 2017, Pegula introduced her own skin-care line called Ready 24. (W) winner; (F) finalist; (SF) semifinalist; (QF) quarterfinalist; (#R) rounds 4, 3, 2, 1; (RR) round-robin stage; (Q#) qualification round; (P#) preliminary round; (DNQ) did not qualify; (A) absent; (Z#) Davis/Fed Cup Zonal Group (with number indication) or (PO) play-off; (G) gold, (S) silver or (B) bronze Olympic/Paralympic medal; (NMS) not a Masters tournament; (NTI) not a Tier I tournament; (P) postponed; (NH) not held; (SR) strike rate (events won / competed); (W–L) win–loss record. To avoid confusion and double counting, these charts are updated at the conclusion of a tournament or when the player's participation has ended. Pegula made her World TeamTennis debut in 2020 joining the Orlando Storm at the start of the season, which was played at The Greenbrier. Pegula emerged as one of the top players in the WTT 2020 season. After the dismissal of Danielle Collins, Pegula went on to play women's singles, women's doubles with Darija Jurak, and mixed doubles with Ken Skupski and Tennys Sandgren. She posted a strong 9–2 record in singles to help the Storm earn a No. 3 seed in the WTT Playoffs. The Storm would ultimately fall to the Chicago Smash in the semifinals. "At height of her tennis career, Jessica Pegula balances big matches, personal challenges". The Buffalo News. September 6, 2022. Retrieved September 6, 2022. "Jessica Pegula explains coaching shake-up". "Jessica Pegula | Rankings History | WTA Tour | Tennis". WTA Tour. WTA Tour, Inc. Retrieved June 12, 2023. WTA Staff (September 15, 2018). "Pegula rallies past Kenin to reach first career final". WTA Tennis. Retrieved December 24, 2020. Stephanie Livaudais (April 3, 2019). "The 100 Club: Jessica Pegula rises through adversity in Charleston". WTA Tennis. Retrieved December 24, 2020. Juzwiak, Jason (August 4, 2019). "'This is what you work for': Pegula romps to first WTA singles title at Citi Open". WTA Tennis. Retrieved August 5, 2019. Stephanie Livaudais (January 12, 2020). "Serena ends trophy wait in Auckland, fights past Pegula in final". WTA Tennis. Retrieved December 24, 2020. "Pegula sinks Sabalenka to seal Cincy quarterfinals". WTA Tennis. August 25, 2020. Retrieved December 24, 2020. Alex Macpherson (August 26, 2020). "Mertens speeds past Pegula to make Cincinnati semis". WTA Tennis. Retrieved December 24, 2020. WTA Staff (September 5, 2020). "Kvitova powers past Pegula into US Open round of 16". WTA Tennis. Retrieved December 24, 2020. "Elina Svitolina Stunned as Jessica Pegula Reaches Last Eight with Upset Win". Eurosport. February 14, 2021. Retrieved February 15, 2021. "Who is Jessica Pegula, the Surprise Australian Open Quarterfinalist". February 16, 2021. "WTA roundup: Jessica Pegula reaches Qatar semis with upset". Reuters. March 4, 2021. "Qatar TotalEnergies Open 2022 Draws | WTA Official". Women's Tennis Association. "Pegula scores hat trick over Pliskova, Sorribes Tormo outlasts Rybakina in Miami". "Pegula shocks Osaka; Barty, Pliskova book round-of-16 slots in Rome". "Jessica Pegula's run at French Open ends to fourth-seeded Sofia Kenin". Buffalo News. Associated Press. June 5, 2021. "Jabeur dethrones Andreescu in Montreal third round; Pegula ends Collins' streak". "Giorgi ousts Gauff; Pegula upends Jabeur to reach Montreal semis". "Azarenka storms past Pegula, becomes first player into Indian Wells semis". "Gauff, Pegula charge to doubles title in Doha". "Pegula needs only 5½ sets to reach Miami semis". March 30, 2022. "Swiatek holds off Pegula to win 16th straight match and make Miami final". @WTA_insider (May 3, 2022). "Jessica Pegula is into her 7th WTA 1000 quarterfinal, 2nd of the season (Miami SF), and 2nd on clay (2021 Rome).D…" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "Sorribes Tormo battles past Kasatkina into Madrid quarters, Pegula takes out Andreescu". "Pegula, Teichmann set semifinal showdown in Madrid". "Pegula makes first WTA 1000 final after ousting Teichmann in Madrid". "Pegula, Swiatek reach French quarters; Keys falls". May 30, 2022. "Make it 33: Swiatek beats Pegula in French Open quarterfinals". "Doubles Take: Roland Garros draws winding down". "Gauff, Pegula to meet Garcia, Mladenovic in French Open doubles final". "Nadal, Fritz, Goffin, Badosa advance; Pegula's run ends". sports.yahoo.com. Retrieved July 3, 2022. "Ranking Reaction: Cerundolo, Cressy break into Top 30, Top 40 after capturing first ATP titles". "Samsonova triumphs in Washington for second career title". "Pegula saves match point, ousts defending champ Giorgi in Toronto". "By the numbers: Halep stays perfect vs. Gauff to reach Toronto semifinals". "Halep beats Pegula to make Toronto final, will return to Top 10". "Three takeaways: Pegula stops Raducanu to make Cincinnati quarterfinals". "How Pegula, Swiatek can keep the momentum going at the US Open". "Pegula qualifies for WTA Finals; two doubles teams secure their places". "'It's a huge achievement': Pegula to pull double duty at the WTA Finals". "Opportunity knocks for Jessica Pegula in Guadalajara final". "By the Numbers: Pegula bests Azarenka to reach Guadalajara final". "Pegula wins Guadalajara for first WTA 1000 title of career". "Jessica Pegula's struggles at the WTA Finals should take nothing away from her career year". "Iga Swiatek breezes to first title of 2023, blitzes Jessica Pegula in Doha final". Tennis.com. Retrieved February 18, 2023. "Gauff, Pegula successfully defend Doha doubles title". Retrieved February 18, 2023. "Pegula rallies to beat Potapova at Indian Wells". "Pegula saves two match points to win late-night thriller in Miami". "Miami Open 2022: Draws, prize money and everything you need to know". "Gauff, Pegula win Miami Open doubles; fifth team title". "Azarenka, Haddad Maia stymie top seeds Gauff, Pegula to win Madrid". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved June 2, 2023. "Madrid Open sorry for 'unacceptable' speech decision". BBC Sport. Retrieved June 2, 2023. "Madrid Open apologizes for silencing women's doubles finalists". AP NEWS. May 11, 2023. Retrieved June 2, 2023. "No.1 seeds Gauff and Pegula battle into Rome doubles final". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved June 2, 2023. "Rankings Watch: Rybakina hits Top 5 for first time; Zheng makes Top 20 debut". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved June 2, 2023. "Pegula produces dazzling display to reach first Wimbledon quarters". Reuters. July 9, 2023. Archived from the original on July 15, 2023. "Vondrousova holds off Pegula to reach Wimbledon semifinals". WTA Tennis. July 11, 2023. Retrieved August 10, 2023. "Gauff and Pegula capture World No.1 doubles ranking". Women's Tennis Association. September 8, 2023. Retrieved November 6, 2023. "Pegula books clash with Kudermetova in Tokyo final". Reuters. September 30, 2023. Retrieved November 6, 2023. "Kudermetova wins Toray Pan Pacific Open for second career title". AP News. October 1, 2023. Retrieved November 6, 2023. "Pegula wins Seoul to capture second title of the season". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved November 6, 2023. "Road to the WTA Finals: Gauff and Pegula". Women's Tennis Association. Retrieved November 6, 2023. "Pegula tops Rybakina to secure opening win at WTA Finals". Women's Tennis Association. October 29, 2023. Retrieved November 6, 2023. "Jessica Pegula rallies to win opening match of WTA Finals in Cancun against Elena Rybakina". Tennis.com. October 29, 2023. Retrieved November 6, 2023. "Pegula handles top-ranked Sabalenka; advances to semifinals in Cancun". Women's Tennis Association. October 31, 2023. Retrieved November 6, 2023. Grez, Matias (November 1, 2023). "WTA Finals: US star Jessica Pegula defeats world No. 1 Aryna Sabalenka to reach semifinals". CNN. Retrieved November 6, 2023. @OptaAce (November 3, 2023). "50 - Jessica Pegula is 50-0 after winning the opening set in 2023. Since 2000, only two have finished a season 50+-0 after taking the first set, excluding retirements – Lindsay Davenport (2001) and Victoria Azarenka (2012). Frontrunner" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Berkok, John (November 5, 2023). "Jessica Pegula defeats Coco Gauff to reach biggest final of career at WTA Finals in Cancun". Tennis.com. Retrieved November 6, 2023. "Pegula secures spot in Cancun final with decisive win against Gauff". Women's Tennis Association. November 5, 2023. Retrieved November 6, 2023. "Swiatek tops Pegula for WTA Finals title, regains No.1 ranking". "Jessica Pegula ends coaching relationship with David Witt". "Pegula withdraws from Middle East swing". "Jessica Pegula knew first match since Aussie Open would feel "weird", rolls in San Diego". "Top seed Pegula returns to San Diego semifinals; Navarro to face Boulter". WTA. March 1, 2024. Retrieved March 31, 2024. "Jessica Pegula ties the knot with longtime partner Taylor Gahagen". Majumdar, Aayush (June 2022). "Who is Jessica Pegula's husband? Meet Taylor Gahagen, who tied the knot with the tennis star last year". www.sportskeeda.com. Retrieved June 28, 2022. Fink, James (August 11, 2016). "Pegula daughters to open Healthy Scratch in HarborCenter". Buffalo Business First. The Business Journals. Retrieved August 5, 2019. "Pegula-owned Healthy Scratch closing remaining two sites this spring". wgrz.com. May 10, 2022. Retrieved July 24, 2023. Watson, Stephen T. (March 20, 2020). "Pegula Sports closes Harborcenter, most hospitality operations". Buffalo News. Retrieved July 24, 2023. Clair Maciel (September 2, 2020). "Getting to Know: Jessica Pegula". US Open. Retrieved December 25, 2020. "World TeamTennis Adds Stars Tiafoe, Puig, Roanic, Bouchard, & Sock As Rosters Set For 2020". WTT.com. June 16, 2020. Jessica Pegula at the Women's Tennis Association Jessica Pegula at the International Tennis Federation