The Little Mermaid is a 2023 American musical romantic fantasy film directed by Rob Marshall from a screenplay by David Magee. Co-produced by Walt Disney Pictures, DeLuca Marshall, and Marc Platt Productions, it is a live-action adaptation of Disney's 1989 animated film of the same name, which itself is loosely based on Hans Christian Andersen's 1837 fairy tale. The film stars Halle Bailey as the title character, with Jonah Hauer-King, Daveed Diggs, Awkwafina, Jacob Tremblay, Noma Dumezweni, Art Malik, Javier Bardem, and Melissa McCarthy in supporting roles. The plot follows the mermaid princess Ariel, who is fascinated with the human world; after saving Prince Eric from a shipwreck, she makes a deal with the sea witch Ursula to walk on land. Plans for a remake of 1989's The Little Mermaid were confirmed in May 2016. In December 2017, Disney announced Marshall was being courted to direct the film. Bailey, Hauer-King, McCarthy, Bardem, Diggs, Tremblay, Awkwafina, and the rest of the cast joined between July and November 2019. Production was expected to begin in London between late March and early April 2020 but was delayed by the COVID-19 pandemic, before ultimately took place from January to July 2021, primarily at Pinewood Studios in England and on the island of Sardinia, Italy. Composer Alan Menken returned to augment the score and write new songs alongside Lin-Manuel Miranda, who serves as a producer with Platt, John DeLuca, and Marshall. The film is dedicated to the late Howard Ashman, who co-produced and co-wrote the songs from the original film. The film is Disney's second-most-expensive to date. The Little Mermaid premiered at the Dolby Theatre in Los Angeles on May 8, 2023, and was released in the United States on May 26. It received mixed reviews from critics and grossed over $569 million worldwide, $298 million of which was earned in the United States and Canada, making it the tenth-highest-grossing film of 2023 and the seventh-highest-grossing amongst Disney's live-action adaptations. Ariel is a mermaid princess and the youngest daughter of King Triton, ruler of the merpeople of Atlantica. She is fascinated with the human world despite never having seen it, as Triton forbids all merfolk from surfacing there after Ariel's mother was killed by a human. One night, Ariel sees fireworks above the ocean and surfaces to see them better. They come from the ship of Eric, the prince of a nearby island. When a storm arrives, the ship crashes against rocks, forcing all to go for the lifeboats. Ariel rescues Eric, brings him to shore, and sings with her siren voice to help save his life. She flees before he can regain full consciousness. Noticing Ariel's absent-minded behavior, Triton questions his advisor Sebastian the crab, who reveals that she saved a human. Outraged, Triton travels to Ariel's grotto to confront her; when she refuses to swear to never return to the surface, he destroys her collection of human objects. Ariel is later approached by two moray eels sent by the sea witch Ursula, Triton's estranged sister and Ariel's aunt who was banished from Atlantica 15 years prior. At Ursula's lair, Ariel is presented with a deal: she will turn into a human for three days, during which she must receive a "true love's kiss" to remain human permanently. If Ariel fails, she will transform back into a mermaid and Ursula will claim her. To become human, Ariel must give up her tail, the ability to breathe underwater, and her siren voice, the last of which Ursula will keep in a nautilus shell. Ariel accepts the deal. After receiving human legs, she is taken to the surface by Sergeant Major Flounder, her best friend, and Sebastian. In the human world, she is rescued and taken to Eric's castle. Eric, who has been searching for the woman who saved his life, rushes to meet Ariel. However, her lack of voice has him immediately turning away. While exploring the castle, Ariel finds Eric's collection of items he accumulated over his travels. Eric spends time with her poring over his collection. The next day, Eric takes Ariel sightseeing around the kingdom. Sebastian, who has followed Ariel, realizes that Ursula has put a cheat in the spell that is causing Ariel to forget that she needs to kiss Eric. Along with Scuttle, a northern gannet, and Flounder, Sebastian takes it upon himself to get the pair to kiss. They are almost successful but are thwarted by Ursula's eels. Enraged by the close call, Ursula turns into a human and uses Ariel's siren voice to hypnotize Eric. Back at Atlantica, Triton has the kingdom search for Ariel and begins to regret the way he treated her. The next morning, Ariel and her friends discover that Eric will be announcing his engagement to "Vanessa" (Ursula's alter ego) later that day. Ariel rushes to the engagement party, confronts Ursula, and breaks the shell. She gains back her voice, and the enchantment on Eric is broken. However, before they can kiss, the sun sets and Ariel transforms back into a mermaid. Reverting to her original form, Ursula drags Ariel back into the ocean. Wanting to save Ariel, Triton confronts Ursula. However, the deal that she made with Ariel is unbreakable. Triton trades himself for Ariel and is turned to dust by the eels, much to her horror. Ursula claims Triton's trident when Eric arrives; in the ensuing melee, Ursula accidentally kills her eels. Enraged, she uses the trident to grow in size and summons a storm to threaten Ariel and Eric. As Eric distracts Ursula, Ariel gets on a surfaced ship and impales Ursula with its splintered bowsprit. Once Ursula dies, Triton comes back to life; he and Ariel recognize the other's sacrifice for them. Ariel returns home, where she is unhappy without Eric. On Sebastian's advice, Triton transforms Ariel into a human permanently, and she reunites with Eric. The pair decide to travel together, with the blessing of both their parents and the support of people from both their worlds. Halle Bailey as Ariel, a curious, adventurous, and headstrong mermaid princess and King Triton's youngest daughter who is fascinated with the human world. Jonah Hauer-King as Eric, an adventurer and free-spirited human prince whom Ariel falls in love with after saving him from drowning. Hauer-King described his character as "restless and inquisitive about where he is in the world, like Ariel... He's quite isolated and sensitive." Melissa McCarthy as Ursula, a treacherous and conniving sea witch and King Triton's estranged sister, with whom Ariel makes a deal to become a human, which is secretly part of Ursula's plan to conquer Atlantica. McCarthy described her character as "so funny. There's wit, there's manipulation. She's a great broad and at the same time, I have to think about what armor does she put in? And I don't think her mental health is great." Jessica Alexander as Vanessa, Ursula's human alter ego, which she uses to sabotage her deal with Ariel. Alexander described her character as "a seductress, a temptress, the definition of a femme fatale and a sexy female villain." Javier Bardem as King Triton, Ariel's strict and overprotective father and the ruler of Atlantica who is prejudiced against humans due to the death of his wife at the hands of one of them. Bardem described his character as "a little bit less grumpy than the original because we were intending to bring more conflict to his behavior, like his fear and insecurity as a father. Being scared of letting his last daughter leave home ends up translating into being angry or too controlling." Noma Dumezweni as Queen Selina, Eric's adoptive mother and the ruler of a Caribbean island kingdom. She is a new character for the film. Dumezweni described her character as a "loving queen and a mother queen and a parent and a land lover learning about herself through letting go of her children." Art Malik as Sir Grimsby, the prime minister of Selina's kingdom and Eric's loyal confidant who acts as a father figure to him. Daveed Diggs as Sebastian, a loyal fiddler crab and King Triton's majordomo who watches over Ariel. Jacob Tremblay as Flounder, an anxious yet noble sergeant major who is Ariel's best friend. Awkwafina as Scuttle, a dimwitted northern gannet and a friend of Ariel's to whom she provides inaccurate descriptions of any human/surface world object Ariel finds. The character is portrayed as a female diving bird instead of a male seagull as in the original to feature the character in underwater scenes. Additionally, Martina Laird appears as Lashana, one of the maids in Eric's castle, who is based on Carlotta from the animated film; Emily Coates appears as Rosa, a young girl who works as a maid in Eric's castle; Christopher Fairbank and John Dagleish appear as Hawkins and Mulligan, two of Eric's shipmates; Jude Akuwudike appears as Joshua, a fisherman who discovers Ariel in her human form; and Russell Balogh and Adrian Christopher appear as two of King Triton's guards. Also appearing as the daughters of Triton and Ariel's sisters (renamed for the film) are Lorena Andrea as Perla, Simone Ashley as Indira, Karolina Conchet as Mala, Sienna King as Tamika, Kajsa Mohammar as Karina, and Nathalie Sorrell as Caspia. Flotsam and Jetsam, Ursula's green moray eel minions appear. Jodi Benson, the original voice of Ariel in the animated film, cameos as a market vendor who hands Ariel a fork during her tour of the kingdom. Eric's Old English Sheepdog Max appears, portrayed by Gary and Edna respectively, with the latter being uncredited. In May 2016, Walt Disney Pictures began developing a live-action adaptation of Hans Christian Andersen's fairy tale "The Little Mermaid". Three months later, Lin-Manuel Miranda and Marc Platt signed on to produce the film, which was confirmed to be a remake of the Disney's 1989 animated film of the same name. On December 6, 2017, it was reported that Rob Marshall was being courted by the Walt Disney Company to direct the film, while Jane Goldman would serve as screenwriter. On December 5, 2018, Marshall revealed that he, along with John DeLuca and Marc Platt were hired to begin developing the project for film adaptation, and said that "John and [Marshall] have begun our work trying to explore it and figure it out", as he felt that "it's a very complicated movie to take from animation to live-action. Live-action's a whole other world so you have to be very careful about how that's done, but so we're starting the exploration phase". Later in December, Marshall was officially hired as director for the film. During an interview on December 21, 2018, Marshall revealed that the film is in very early stages of development, stating that the studio is trying to explore ways to translate the original film's story into live-action. On July 3, 2019, David Magee, who previously wrote the screenplay for Marshall's Mary Poppins Returns, was revealed to have written the script with Goldman. Magee would receive sole credit for the screenplay. On February 10, 2020, Miranda revealed that rehearsals for the film had already begun. In the early stages of the film's development, Lindsay Lohan expressed interest in playing the role of Ariel. Zendaya was reported to have been offered the part in August 2018, but she herself eventually stated that this was "just a rumor". Halle Bailey was the first to audition for the role after Rob Marshall saw her perform Donny Hathaway's 1972 single "Where Is the Love" at the 61st Annual Grammy Awards. According to Marshall, hundreds of other girls also tried out for the part, but she "set the bar so high that nobody surpassed it." Hundreds of candidates auditioned for the role of Eric, including actors Asher Angel, Gavin Leatherwood, Christian Navarro, Jack Whitehall, and Cameron Cuffe, with the latter, along with Jonah Hauer-King, doing a screen test alongside Bailey. Harry Styles was in early negotiations to play the part, but ultimately turned it down in favor of doing a concert tour. Marshall later elaborated that Styles also refused because he wanted to do darker, non-musical roles. By March 2021, Jessica Alexander was cast in undisclosed role, which was eventually revealed to be Vanessa. Of her casting, director Rob Marshall stated it was a conscious decision to cast a relatively unknown actress as Vanessa since McCarthy was already portraying Ursula. He also said: "She's just a beautiful, beautiful actress, and she went there. It's sort of rare for someone that beautiful and charismatic to be able to then turn into the sea witch literally in front of you and just lose it. It was exciting to see that change." Alexander enjoyed playing the role, commenting that she "love[s] being demonic, and just going crazy on screen, so this was a perfect opportunity for that". Kacey Musgraves was also considered for the role. Filming was originally scheduled to begin in London between late March and early April 2020; however, it was delayed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Set photos at Pinewood Studios in London, England leaked a few weeks after the production was shut down, it showed aerial images featuring Prince Eric's ship as well as indoor images of what seemed to be his castle. On July 29, 2020, based on a social media post, Jacob Tremblay began recording his lines for the film. Filming was scheduled to re-commence on August 10, 2020. By November 2020, Disney's new CEO Bob Chapek announced that filming on all films that had been postponed during pandemic shutdowns had resumed filming, and in some cases completed principal photography. In December 2020, McCarthy stated that she would hopefully begin filming in January 2021. The following month, Diggs discussed the large amount of work he had to do when it came to preparing for and recording dialogue for the role of Sebastian. Principal photography officially began at Pinewood Studios in Iver, England on January 30, 2021. Filming for McCarthy's scenes eventually began in April 2021. On April 6, it was announced that additional filming would be happening in summer in Sardinia, Italy, for a total of "roughly three months". In June 2021, production was temporarily halted due to multiple crew members of the film contracting COVID-19. Filming resumed about a week later and officially wrapped on July 11, 2021. On December 30, 2021, Bailey shared some new behind-the-scenes photos of the set, including a glimpse of her portrayal of Ariel. The actress took to Instagram to wrap up her year and shared photos of moments of shooting the film. The first photo showed the film's script, which was blurred to avoid spoilers, but still showed her character name "Ariel" in bold print. One photo showed her swimming in Sardinia's waters, while another showed the process of film-making using CGI. In February 2023, Marshall revealed that he hopes post-production work on the film will be completed by March, saying: "I'm very proud of the film. It's the most challenging film I've ever done, for sure. No question ... Using complicated, cutting-edge techniques to make this work. I don't think anybody's ever done an underwater musical before. I have to say every single moment of the film had to be choreographed in advance so that we could have a flow to the whole piece. It's crazy the apparatuses we worked with from wires to things called tuning forks to teeter-totters. Thank God we had the rehearsal time. You always need it on a musical anyway." — Rob Marshall On March 22, 2023, Bailey revealed that she had to spend 13 hours underwater during certain days of filming and that practical water tanks and CGI were used to create the underwater environments, saying "I pushed myself as far as I've ever pushed myself in life ... And I feel like the message from [Ariel] was to know that you've always had it in you." She also revealed that the film's themes were updated so that it is not put at the forefront that Ariel "leaves the ocean for a boy" in response to recent criticism surrounding the portrayal of that desire in the original film. On that, she added "I'm really excited for my version of the film because we've definitely changed that perspective ... It's way bigger than that. It's about herself, her purpose, her freedom, her life and what she wants. As women we are amazing, we are independent, we are modern, we are everything and above, and I'm glad that Disney is updating some of those themes." Visual effects were provided by Industrial Light & Magic, Wētā FX, Moving Picture Company and Framestore. DNEG also provided the stereo conversion. For the "Under the Sea" sequence, Marshall called it a "big, massive musical number" and said that creating the underwater environments involved "a lot of work in advance with John DeLuca and myself creating these musical sequences, to prep it in advance from storyboards to something called pre-visualization, which is almost like a little mini-animated film, so we know how it flowed and how it worked ... You are creating a world, you're creating creatures, but it's very important to me that it feels real – you have to believe, you have to care about them, you have to follow their journey." On May 19, 2023, Marshall revealed that his work on Disney's Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides (which featured a mermaid character named Tamara) helped influence his work on The Little Mermaid, using similar live-action and CGI techniques to bring Ariel, her sisters and King Triton to life. He called it "a great launching point for us" and showed his work on Pirates to the crew and visual effects team to break down the process. The colorful tails of the merpeople characters were designed by Marshall's frequent costume designer Colleen Atwood, who used real fish as references to make each of the tails of Ariel and her sisters look more distinct from one another, and also designed the costumes for the human characters. In August 2023, special effects artist Christine Overs filed a lawsuit against the film's producers over an accident that occurred on the film set that resulted in a broken wrist. In the lawsuit, Christine seeks compensation of 150,000 euros (US$190,000). Sandcastle Pictures, the Disney-owned production company responsible for filming, has admitted responsibility for the accident but disputes the amount Overs is seeking. On March 17, 2017, it was announced that Alan Menken, who previously scored and co-wrote songs for the original film, would return as the film's composer and to write new songs alongside producer Lin-Manuel Miranda. Three months later, Menken stated that his work on the film's music had been put on hold due to Miranda and Marc Platt's schedules with Mary Poppins Returns. On May 20, 2019, Menken stated that The Little Mermaid would be his next project, following the release of the live-action adaptation of Aladdin, and on July 9, he and Miranda started working on new songs for the film. On replacing the original film's lyricist, the late Howard Ashman, Miranda felt that "[he] will definitely fall short" to Ashman's work, arguing that "no one can write like him". On January 16, 2020, Halle Bailey confirmed that the song "Part of Your World", from the original film, will appear in the remake. On February 10, 2020, Miranda revealed that he and Menken wrote four new songs for the film. On February 19, 2021, Menken said that the new songs would be a "blend" of his and Miranda's styles. He elaborated that the songs would feature "some rapping" in the vein of Miranda's previous works, as well as a closer style to his usual work. Menken also stated that he updated the lyrics to "Kiss the Girl" and "Poor Unfortunate Souls" to reflect modern times. On September 22, 2021, Menken sat down with Disney's For Scores podcast and confirmed that the film will feature four new songs. He also recalled that Miranda was "daunted" by the prospect of following on in the footsteps of the late Howard Ashman, the lyricist who worked with Menken to write the original film's songs. On November 24, 2021, in an interview with Collider, Miranda talked about his admiration for The Little Mermaid and how Ashman and Menken helped shape his childhood. He said: "Oh, man. So much of my work on The Little Mermaid was that wish fulfillment. I actually didn't write any new songs for Sebastian the Crab because I love his songs so much. I was like, 'I can't. Nope, not me. I can't do it.' I did get to write for some of the other characters in that movie. Every song you love in The Little Mermaid is still in The Little Mermaid, we just found some new moments to musicalise. That's really tricky." — Lin-Manuel Miranda On January 20, 2022, Bailey spoke with Stylecater, saying that she was so emotional while filming "Part of Your World". She said: "It was really surreal to film. It was really emotional for me. It was three days of intense being all over the place. I was crying the whole time because I was just like, 'What the heck?' We're all connected to that song and it means a lot to each of us." — Halle Bailey On February 17, 2022, during a podcast interview with Variety, Miranda revealed that one of the new songs for the live-action film, "For the First Time", will take place when Ariel is on land in her human form. He also revealed that star Daveed Diggs might rap in the film. This was confirmed later on March 31, 2023, by Menken, revealing the title of the new rap song as "The Scuttlebutt". He described it as a "harebrained" song for Scuttle and Sebastian "...trying to figure out what's going on because they hear rumors that the prince has decided to marry. They think it must be Ariel but of course it's Ursula in the form of Vanessa. It's all this delicious imagination. Lin's lyrics are to die for." Menken then provided more details on the new songs, revealing that the first of the four that was written during the film's development was a solo for Prince Eric, "Wild Unchartered Waters", resulting from Marshall wanting "...a new song for this moment of waves and all the wildness of what's out there in the ocean...[Ariel] represented that to [Prince Eric]; she being the girl who saved his life. Live action films are really a director's medium." He then revealed that the fourth song did not make the final cut and was supposed to be a new song for King Triton entitled "Impossible Child", as he and the filmmakers felt that it "dramaturgically" was not needed, but did say that the song would be released to the public at a later date, possibly on the film's home media release. The song was featured as an additional track on a physical version of the soundtrack released as a HSN exclusive. Some of the lyrics for "Poor Unfortunate Souls" and "Kiss the Girl" were updated as well, with Menken explaining that for "Kiss the Girl", it was because "people have gotten very sensitive about the idea that [Prince Eric] would, in any way, force himself on [Ariel]," while that for "Poor Unfortunate Souls", it was because of "...lines that might make young girls somehow feel that they shouldn't speak out of turn, even though Ursula is clearly manipulating Ariel to give up her voice." Two songs from the original film were cut: "Daughters of Triton", sung by Ariel's sisters and "Les Poissons", sung by the character of Eric's French cook Chef Louis, who also was cut from the film. Menken explained the reasons for cutting the former, saying that it felt "not needed" given the new approach the filmmakers gave to the sisters, and that they wanted the film to begin "with a much more of a live-action feel of the ocean and meeting Ariel, and then we wait a little bit, make you wait until we get to 'Part of Your World.' And I think that was, you know, it was an amazing choice because it just builds the power and anticipation." On cutting the latter, Marshall explained "It's literally a Saturday morning cartoon section. If we had filmed it – I don't know how we would've filmed it –- it never would have played. It's also a vacation from the story and has nothing to do with the story, so you can't do that in a live-action film." The soundtrack album was made available to pre-save and pre-order on March 13, 2023, and was released digitally on May 19, and on CD and vinyl on May 26, 2023, by Walt Disney Records. Bailey's version of "Part of Your World" was released as a digital download single on April 26, 2023, one month before the film's release, as well as the Korean version by Danielle Marsh of NewJeans. An outtake of "Impossible Child", an unused song performed by Javier Bardem, was released as a digital single on September 8, 2023. In June 2023, the soundtrack reached number 1 on the Billboard Top Soundtracks chart, and number 21 on the Billboard 200. The Little Mermaid held its world premiere at the Dolby Theatre in Los Angeles on May 8, 2023, followed by the London premiere at the Odeon Luxe Leicester Square on May 15. It was released theatrically on May 26, 2023, in the United States by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures. A sing-along edition of the film was released in theaters on August 25, 2023. On September 9, 2022, Rob Marshall and Halle Bailey appeared at the 2022 D23 Expo to introduce an exclusive presentation of the film's "Part of Your World" sequence, which received a positive response from the attendees, who praised Bailey's vocal performance. The film's teaser trailer was released to the public the same day. On October 13, 2022, the first poster was released to the public, which Bailey synchronously captioned on Twitter: "Words can't describe how immensely honored I feel to play the mermaid of my dreams." In an interview with Entertainment Weekly, Marshall says that this new take on Ariel spotlights a "modern woman". He says that the character goes back to Hans Christian Andersen from another century, but at the same time in 1989, that it felt in some ways like a very modern woman, someone who sees Ariel's life differently than anyone around her, and goes to find that dream. On January 21, 2023, Disney Live Entertainment announced a casting call for character look-alike actresses to portray Bailey's version of Ariel as a character meet-and-greet at Disneyland in Anaheim, California near the "It's a Small World" attraction, Disney's Hollywood Studios at Walt Disney World in Orlando, Florida and the Walt Disney Studios park at Disneyland Paris in Paris, France, as part of the film's promotional campaign. It was later confirmed by Disney Parks that these meet-and-greets would run for a limited engagement throughout the summer, with the original, classic Ariel being reinstated afterward. On March 12, 2023, the official trailer was shown during the 95th Academy Awards, introduced on stage by Bailey and McCarthy, and then released online alongside a new poster. Disney spent an estimated $140 million promoting The Little Mermaid. The film had the biggest global promotional campaign for a Disney branded live-action title at $80 million in value, with partner deals with the likes of McDonald's, Booking.com, and Kellogg's. Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released The Little Mermaid for digital download on July 25, 2023, and on Ultra HD Blu-ray, Blu-ray and DVD on September 19, 2023. The film was released on Disney+ on September 6, 2023. The film debuted atop the chart of the ten most popular films on Fandango’s transactional digital service Vudu during the week of July 30, 2023. It topped the VOD charts on iTunes and Google Play the same week. Disney announced that The Little Mermaid had 16 million views in the five days following its release on Disney+, becoming the most watched film on the platform during the week of its premiere since Hocus Pocus 2 (2022); Disney defined views as total stream time divided by runtime. The film topped Official Charts Company's Official Film Chart in the United Kingdom during the week of August 2, 2023, and during the week of August 9, 2023. According to Whip Media's TV Time, The Little Mermaid was the most streamed film across all platforms in the United States during the week of September 8 to September 10, 2023. Variety reported that the official teaser trailer of The Little Mermaid garnered more than 104 million global views during the first weekend following its release. It surpassed recent Disney live-action releases including Beauty and the Beast with 94 million, Aladdin with 74 million and Cruella with 68 million. After the release of the trailer in September 2022, videos of Black girls positively reacting to it went viral. In December 2022, the film ranked number three as the "Most Anticipated Family Film" of 2023 in a poll conducted by Fandango Media while Halle Bailey and Melissa McCarthy ranked number one as the "Most Anticipated New Performance on the Big Screen" and "Most Anticipated Villain", respectively. Following its premiere at the 95th Academy Awards on March 12, 2023, the official trailer reportedly generated over 108 million global views within its first 24 hours. It is now among the most watched trailers for any reimagined title in Disney's growing stable of live-action adaptations, and the biggest for a Disney live-action title since the 2019 remake of The Lion King. An early private test screening of the film's final cut took place on April 30, 2023, at The Whitby Hotel in New York City. The event, hosted by Marshall and DeLuca, was attended by 80 celebrities and industry professionals. The Little Mermaid grossed $298.2 million in the United States and Canada, and $271.4 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $569.6 million. Disney received a total of £46.6 million ($56.8 million) in COVID-19 insurance payouts related to the film from the UK government. In the United States and Canada, The Little Mermaid—released alongside The Machine, Kandahar, About My Father, and You Hurt My Feelings—was projected to gross $120–125 million from 4,320 theaters over its four-day Memorial Day opening weekend. The film made $38 million on its first day, including $10.3 million from Thursday night previews. It went on to debut to $95.6 million in the traditional three-day weekend, and $118.8 million over the four-day frame, topping the box office and making it the fifth highest Memorial Day opening in history (20th after inflation adjustment). In its second weekend, the film declined 57% to $41.4 million while finishing in second place to newcomer Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse. The film then made $23.2 million in its third weekend, finishing third behind newcomer Transformers: Rise of the Beasts and Across the Spider-Verse. It remained in the top ten for five more weeks. Outside of the U.S. and Canada, the opening weekend box office results fell short of expectations, grossing just $68.3 million. A financial insider described the film's opening weekend to Deadline as "not a huge disappointment, but a disappointment, nonetheless." The film's biggest markets were Mexico ($8.5 million), the United Kingdom ($6.3 million), Italy ($4.7 million), Brazil and Australia (both around $4 million). The film also grossed $415,672 in India and $184,214 in South Africa during its opening weekend. The film's biggest markets in gross value were the United Kingdom ($34.1 million), Japan ($23.9 million), Mexico ($20.9 million), Brazil (17.3 million) and Australia ($15 million). In the Philippines, the film earned more than The Super Mario Bros. Movie and Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3 at the box office. Its performance in China and South Korea was considered disappointing; it grossed only $3.6 million in China, and $4.4 million in South Korea in first 10 days. In contrast, The Hollywood Reporter reported that the film had achieved success in Japan after it had earned $10.3 million in its first two weeks of release. The film received mixed reviews from critics. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 67% of 346 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 6.3/10. The website's consensus reads: "With Halle Bailey making a major splash in the title role, Disney's live-action Little Mermaid ranks among the studio's most enjoyable reimaginings." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 59 out of 100, based on 54 critics, indicating "mixed or average" reviews. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, while those polled by PostTrak gave it an overall 91% positive score, with 76% saying they would definitely recommend it. Brian Lowry of CNN wrote that the film "holds up nicely under the weight of those expectations, preserving the original's essence while updating undernourished aspects of it and riding a warm, hard-to-resist wave of nostalgia." Ross Bonaime of Collider wrote that it "might not match the greatness of the original, but it's the rare remake that feels worthy of being part of our world." Lex Briscuso of TheWrap called it "a fresh take on a beloved classic that isn't afraid to take a fairy tale and make it as real as it can, inviting its audience to dive into uncharted waters alongside its engaging and charming central characters." Pete Hammond of Deadline Hollywood wrote that "Marshall has made a movie with all the magic required to pull it off and, if not replace the original in our hearts, at least has made a movie that can stand next to that one to also become a memorable part of our cinematic world." Vanessa Armstrong of /Film called it a live-action remake "done well" that "improves on the original" and had no doubt that "it will become an indelible part of many a young person's childhood, and I can't wait to watch it with my daughter." Zoë Rose Bryant of Next Best Picture praised its sense of nostalgia and called Bailey and Hauer-King the "stars of the show". She did, however, criticize the visual effects, but said that they were "far better than the oft-maligned trailers would lead you to believe." Molly Edwards of Total Film gave it four stars out of five and called it "A sparkling, enchanting new spin that out-swims the original, with a pitch-perfect performance from Halle Bailey." Brian Truitt of USA Today wrote that "While not everything goes swimmingly, Halle Bailey splendidly buoys this "Mermaid" as the naive underwater youngster with dreams of exploring the surface." Maureen Lee Lenker of Entertainment Weekly praised the performances of Bailey, Hauer-King and McCarthy, and named the "Under the Sea" sequence as the film's best musical highlight. Peter Debruge of Variety lauded the film, saying that "Halle Bailey is all the reason that any audience should need to justify Disney revisiting this classic." Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post called it an "on-the-other-fin mixed bag of a movie that honors its source material with a big, color-saturated production, while never precisely proving that it ever needed to exist." Rachel LaBonte of Screen Rant felt mixed, saying that the film is "bolstered by deeper characterization and a grand scope, even as it grapples with flaws." Helen O'Hara of Empire called it "Another 'live-action' remake that's darker and less compelling than the animated original, but it's saved by Bailey's charming performance, McCarthy's sass and the story's own eternal magic." Moira MacDonald of The Seattle Times praised Bailey's performance, saying that "her singing voice has both sweetness and power, and her smile is the sort on which dreams dance." On the critical side, Angelica Jade Bastién of Vulture panned the film, writing that with this film, "Disney betrays its own lack of imagination and an essential misreading of what made its original children's fare such a joy to audiences in the first place." Hillary Busis of Vanity Fair criticized the runtime and called it an "uneasy mix of carbon copy and superfluous added material, presented in "live-action" that looks and feels (and is) as artificial as Lightning McQueen." Johnny Oleksinski of New York Post wrote that "Despite real actors, CGI and brand new material, 'Mermaid' is the studio's latest flesh-and-blood cash grab that's more lifeless than far better two-dimensional painted drawings." Justin Chang of Los Angeles Times wrote that "What's on-screen too often feels like wan, second-rate imitation, and the few differences seem motivated less by a spirit of imagination than one of joyless anxiety." Kat Rosenfield, writing for UnHerd, panned the film for being "propaganda" and for paling in comparison to the original, writing that "This is perhaps the worst thing about Disney's contemporary remakes: not that they are blatant cash grabs, but that they are infantilizing. The original Little Mermaid placed infinitely more trust in its intended audience of children than the new version places in those same children, now that they're grown up." Kelly Lawler, writing for USA Today, panned the film and noted that the story does not translate well to live-action as it did in animation and was particularly critical of the uncanny valley CGI and murky lighting, writing that "Every change − to aesthetics, to story, to soundtracks, to length − that is required to make these films 'live action' chips away at the magic of the originals. This relentless pursuit of realism doesn't make a good kids' movie: It may be dark underwater in the real ocean, but we want to see Ariel dance properly lit on the screen. The new films are too long, too monotone, too bland and full of photorealistic talking animals that range from boring to horrifying." Lindsey Bahr of Associated Press wrote that "For all its pizazz, everything about this Little Mermaid is just more muted. Miranda's new songs are odd, too, and don't seem to fit." "The Scuttlebutt" musical number was widely criticized by critics and audiences for Awkwafina's vocal performance, Lin-Manuel Miranda's lyrics (particularly the line "Remember the swamp? Remember my song in the swamp? When I was like 'Womp, chicka womp-womp, chicka womp-woooomp'") and its rap style not fitting in with the musical style of the other songs. Raven Brunner of Decider called the number "awkward" and that it felt "forced". A. Felicia Wade of DiscussingFilm wrote that "Considering the setting, it's really out of place for the film in general." After the announcement of Bailey's involvement in July 2019 and the release of first teaser in September 2022, the film gained mixed responses from the public for casting an African-American actress as Ariel, who was originally Caucasian with red hair in the 1989 animated film. Arguments for the negative response have included the fact that a black mermaid does not adhere to the original story (Hans Christian Andersen's description of the mermaid is that "her skin was as clear and delicate as a rose-leaf, and her eyes as blue as the deepest sea"), the claim that the adaptation should be as close to the original as possible, and the idea that mermaids should be pale, not black, as they are underwater creatures. Criticism of the casting after the teaser trailer release became viral and elicited the hashtag #NotMyAriel. Many media outlets as well as Lin-Manuel Miranda, the film's producer and lyricist, criticized the negative response and described it as being racist. Stuart Heritage of The Guardian argued, "The boring spat over the Disney trailer makes idiots of us all – whether Ariel is Black or White, it is clearly a film that should rightfully be ignored then forgotten forever", suggesting instead that there should be a "grotesque scaly mutant as the lead". During an interview in August 2019, Bailey said that "[she doesn't] pay attention to the negativity", while Auliʻi Cravalho, who played Ariel in a musical presentation as a part of The Wonderful World of Disney, expressed excitement at watching Bailey's portrayal of the character. Jodi Benson, the voice actress for Ariel in the 1989 film, praised Bailey, stating, "I think that the spirit of a character is what really matters". Brandy Norwood, the first woman of color to play Cinderella in the 1997 Disney television film of the same, and Anika Noni Rose, the voice of Tiana (Disney's first official African-American Princess), also both praised the casting of Bailey as Ariel. Rachel Zegler, who played Maria in Steven Spielberg's 2021 film version of West Side Story and will play the titular role in Disney's 2025 live-action remake of Snow White, also voiced her support for Bailey. In February 2023, Bailey said that she was trying to ignore the criticisms leveled by racist trolls on social media and focus on the anticipation for the film's release. In a cover story for The Face, Bailey further added "I know people are like: 'It's not about race.' But now that I'm her... People don't understand that when you're Black there's this whole other community... It's so important for us to see ourselves." In April 2023, Forbes reported that the visuals and CGI of the film, which it described as "an easy target for criticism", sparked viral discussions, criticism and memes on social media. In May 2023, an editorial from Chinese state-run tabloid Global Times accused Disney of "forced inclusion of minorities" and "lazy and irresponsible storytelling", echoing the views of some social media users in China, Japan, and South Korea. The Global Times similarly attributed the film's poor performance in China to "Disney turning classic tales into 'sacrificial lambs' for political correctness." Deadline Hollywood reported that the film was suffering from review bombing online, and that sites such as IMDb in the United States, Canada, United Kingdom, Brazil, and Mexico, and AlloCiné in France had added warnings to the rating pages for the film about "unusual" activity. IMDb's warning read, "Our rating mechanism has detected unusual voting activity on this title. To preserve the reliability of our rating system, an alternate weighting calculation has been applied." Deadline Hollywood cited these low user ratings as well as "backlash... over the casting of star Halle Bailey in the title role" in countries such as Korea, China, France, and Germany as contributing factors in the disappointing overseas box office. A series of books based on the film were released on April 11, 2023, by Disney Press. It includes an illustrated picture book titled The Little Mermaid: Make a Splash by Ashley Franklin and Paul Kellam. The guidebook The Little Mermaid: Guide to Merfolk detailing the depictions of Ariel, her sisters, and universe from the film by Eric Geron. The novelization of the film titled The Little Mermaid: The Novelization by Faith Noelle. The Little Mermaid: This is Ariel by Colin Hosten. And the young adult novel The Little Mermaid: Against the Tide by American author J. Elle. The novel serves as a prequel. It featured on The New York Times Best Seller list, where it spent several weeks in the top ten and reached the fifth spot in the category "Young Adult Hardcover Books." In June 2023, a CGI-animated series entitled Ariel inspired by the film was announced for Disney Junior. The series is set to be released in 2024. In October 2022, after the positive repercussions of black children watching the trailer, rumors emerged that Disney had contacted Halle Bailey to negotiate a possible sequel. In April 2023, Marshall hinted at the potential for sequels if the film is successful: "It's a classic story that has a lot of characters and a lot of interesting stories. I do think it's right for certain things. But you have to see how a movie plays, and how it does... I think there's always opportunity to find stories within stories. That's always a wonderful thing." The following month, Bailey and Jonah Hauer-King spoke about the animated sequel The Little Mermaid II: Return to the Sea, saying that they liked it and they would agree to reprise their roles if it were adapted into live action. "The Little Mermaid (PG)". British Board of Film Classification. May 10, 2023. Archived from the original on May 11, 2023. Retrieved May 10, 2023. Reid, Caroline (October 2, 2023). "Disney Sinks $300 Million Into 'Over Budget' 'Little Mermaid' Movie". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 7, 2023. Retrieved October 7, 2023. Its financial statements reveal that a total of $297 million (£243.5 million) had been spent on the movie by August 31, 2022 and then comes the cash reimbursement… The Little Mermaid received $56.8 million (£46.6 million) from the UK government bringing its net spending down to $240.2 million. "The Little Mermaid (2023)". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved September 16, 2023. "The Little Mermaid (2023)". The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Retrieved September 16, 2023. "The Little Mermaid Premiere, la". Archived from the original on May 7, 2023. Retrieved May 7, 2023. Kroll, Justin (July 3, 2019). "Disney's Live-Action 'Little Mermaid' Casts Halle Bailey as Ariel". Variety. Archived from the original on July 3, 2019. Retrieved July 3, 2019. "'Little Mermaid' Live-Action Remake Finds Its Prince Eric in Jonah Hauer-King". The Hollywood Reporter. November 12, 2019. Archived from the original on October 1, 2023. Retrieved February 27, 2024. Greenwood, Douglas (May 22, 2023). "Jonah Hauer-King, Bashful Disney Prince". The Cut. Archived from the original on May 27, 2023. Retrieved May 27, 2023. Kroll, Justin (June 28, 2019). "Melissa McCarthy in Talks to Play Ursula in Live-Action 'Little Mermaid' (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on June 29, 2019. Retrieved June 28, 2019. Decklemeier, Joe (May 12, 2023). "Melissa McCarthy & Javier Bardem Interview: The Little Mermaid". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on May 28, 2023. Retrieved May 28, 2023. Russell, Shania (May 27, 2023). "Who plays Ursula's alter-ego Vanessa in The Little Mermaid? Director Rob Marshall on casting Jessica Alexander". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 3, 2023. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Wickes, Jade (May 30, 2023). "Jess Alexander is The Little Mermaid's shining femme fatale". The Face. Archived from the original on June 1, 2023. Retrieved June 1, 2023. N'Duka, Amanda (July 17, 2019). "Javier Bardem In Talks For Disney's 'The Little Mermaid' Remake". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 17, 2019. Retrieved July 17, 2019. Ford, Lucy (May 26, 2023). "Javier Bardem on playing a sexy King Triton in The Little Mermaid". GQ. Archived from the original on May 26, 2023. Retrieved May 27, 2023. Kroll, Justin (January 5, 2021). "'The Undoing's Noma Dumezweni Joins Disney's Live-Action 'Little Mermaid' In Brand New Role". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 5, 2021. Retrieved May 27, 2023. Romano, Nick (April 4, 2023). "Making a splash: A deep dive into the live-action Little Mermaid with a new generation's Ariel". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved April 4, 2023. Roy, Priyanka (May 23, 2023). "Actor Noma Dumezweni chats with The Telegraph on the enduring and magical appeal of The Little Mermaid". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on May 27, 2023. Retrieved May 27, 2023. Eddy, Cheryl (September 10, 2022). "Disney's Live-Action Little Mermaid Shares Its First Teaser". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on September 12, 2022. Retrieved September 10, 2022. Kit, Borys (October 8, 2019). "Daveed Diggs in Talks to Play Sebastian in Disney's Live-Action 'Little Mermaid'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 8, 2019. Retrieved October 8, 2019. Ong-Pizarro, Abigail (August 29, 2021). "Little Mermaid Has The Craziest Filmmaking Sebastian Actor Has Ever Seen". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 12, 2022. Retrieved September 11, 2021. Kit, Borys (July 1, 2019). "Jacob Tremblay, Awkwafina in Talks for Disney's Live-Action 'Little Mermaid'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 1, 2019. Retrieved July 1, 2019. Kroll, Justin (July 1, 2019). "Awkwafina, Jacob Tremblay Join 'The Little Mermaid' Live-Action Adaptation". Variety. Archived from the original on July 4, 2019. Retrieved July 20, 2022. Edwards, Molly (March 2, 2021). "The Little Mermaid adds to its cast, and makes a huge change to Ursula". MSN. Archived from the original on April 27, 2021. Retrieved June 26, 2021. Ferraro, Pietro (July 13, 2021). "La sirenetta: il remake live-action di Disney ha concluso le riprese". Cineblog (in Italian). Archived from the original on September 12, 2022. Retrieved July 20, 2021. "Before Halle Bailey's Little Mermaid, Read the New Novel Inspired by the Film". Teen Vogue. February 1, 2023. Archived from the original on February 3, 2023. Retrieved February 3, 2023. Major, Michael (January 10, 2023). "THE LITTLE MERMAID Books Give New Look at Upcoming Live Action Remake". BroadwayWorld. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved February 3, 2023. Porter, Lana (May 9, 2023). "Jodi Benson Cameo CONFIRMED & Other Highlights From 'Little Mermaid' World Premiere". Disney Dining. Archived from the original on May 9, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2023. Sharf, Zack (May 12, 2023). "When Ariel Met Ariel: Halle Bailey Got Jodi Benson's 'Stamp of Approval' on 'Little Mermaid' Set and Was Told to 'Just Go for It'". Variety. Archived from the original on May 12, 2023. Retrieved May 12, 2023. Lee, Ashley (May 12, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid left Halle Bailey 'tired' and 'isolated.' And she thanked God for it". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 12, 2023. Retrieved May 12, 2023. https://portugal./movies/367773/%E2%80%98The-Little-Mermaid%E2%80%99-actor-is-allergic-to-dogs-and-lied-to-get-the-role-of-Eric-%E2%80%93-PiT.html#google_vignette Jaafar, Ali (May 25, 2016). "Disney Mulling Live-Action Version Of 'The Little Mermaid'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 22, 2017. Retrieved March 4, 2017. Snetiker, Marc (August 16, 2016). "Lin-Manuel Miranda, Alan Menken team up for live-action Little Mermaid". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 13, 2017. Retrieved March 4, 2017. Fleming, Mike Jr. (December 6, 2017). "Rob Marshall Top Choice To Helm Disney's Live Action 'The Little Mermaid'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 6, 2017. Retrieved December 6, 2017. Jaafer, Ali (December 5, 2018). "FOR DIRECTOR ROB MARSHALL, MARY POPPINS RETURNS IS A VERY PERSONAL PROJECT". SyFy Wire. Archived from the original on December 6, 2018. Retrieved December 6, 2018. "'Little Mermaid' Live-Action Director Rob Marshall Shares Production Update (Exclusive)". Entertainment Tonight. January 3, 2018. Archived from the original on September 7, 2020. Retrieved July 3, 2019. Weintraub, Steve (December 21, 2018). "Rob Marshall on Why He Signed an Overall Deal at Walt Disney Studios". Collider. Archived from the original on June 28, 2019. Retrieved July 3, 2019. Geisinger, Gabriella (July 2, 2019). "The Little Mermaid cast: These stars in talks for the Disney remake – who will be in it?". Express.co.uk. Archived from the original on July 3, 2019. Retrieved July 3, 2019. "Lin Manuel Miranda spills details on 'The Little Mermaid' remake on Oscar's red carpet". Archived from the original on February 14, 2020. Retrieved February 14, 2020. Nolfi, Joey (February 19, 2017). "Lindsay Lohan wants Bill Condon to direct her in The Little Mermaid musical". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 8, 2017. Retrieved May 24, 2017. Bailey, Alyssa (August 23, 2018). "Zendaya Rumored to Be Offered Ariel Role in Disney's Live-Action 'The Little Mermaid'". Elle. Archived from the original on March 9, 2023. Retrieved May 27, 2023. Fernández, Alexia; McNiece, Mia (September 21, 2018). "Zendaya Addresses Rumors She Will Play Ariel in a Live-Action Film of 'The Little Mermaid'". People. Archived from the original on May 17, 2019. Retrieved May 27, 2023. Richardson, Kalia (May 24, 2023). "Halle Bailey: 'The Little Mermaid' Star Connects With Her Inner Ariel". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 26, 2023. Retrieved May 27, 2023. Nicholson, Rebecca (May 20, 2023). "The Little Mermaid's Halle Bailey: 'As a child, seeing a black Ariel would have changed my life'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on May 26, 2023. Retrieved May 27, 2023. Wang, Jen (April 24, 2023). "Making Waves: Halle Bailey On Reinventing The Disney Princess In The Little Mermaid". Vogue. Archived from the original on May 25, 2023. Retrieved May 27, 2023. Fleming, Mike Jr. (May 17, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' Director Rob Marshall On Turning Animated Classic Into Live-Action Summer Disney Musical: Q&A". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 27, 2023. Calvario, Liz (July 18, 2019). "Asher Angel Says He Auditioned for Role of Prince Eric In 'The Little Mermaid' Live-Action Film (Exclusive)". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on May 21, 2022. Retrieved May 27, 2023. Delgado, Sara (September 19, 2019). "Chilling Adventures of Sabrina Star Gavin Leatherwood Hinted He Also Auditioned for The Little Mermaid". Teen Vogue. Archived from the original on March 29, 2023. Retrieved May 27, 2023. Highfill, Samantha (September 3, 2019). "13 Reasons Why star auditioning for Prince Eric in live-action The Little Mermaid". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 8, 2019. Retrieved May 27, 2017. Malkin, Marc (July 28, 2021). "Wilmer Valderrama Says Father's Battle With COVID Inspired New Podcast About Essential and Frontline Workers". Variety. Archived from the original on May 12, 2023. Retrieved May 27, 2023. Hipes, Patrick; D'Alessandro, Anthony (September 24, 2019). "'The Little Mermaid': 'Krypton's Cameron Cuffe, Jonah Hauer-King Testing For Prince Eric Role". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 26, 2019. Retrieved September 28, 2019. Kit, Borys (July 16, 2019). "Harry Styles in Talks to Play Prince Eric in Disney's Live-Action 'Little Mermaid'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 16, 2019. Retrieved July 16, 2019. Gonzales, Umberto (August 13, 2019). "Harry Styles Turns Down Role of Prince Eric in 'Little Mermaid' (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on August 14, 2019. Retrieved August 14, 2019. Harrison, Ellie (November 4, 2019). "Harry Styles reveals why he turned down role of Prince Eric in Little Mermaid". The Independent. Archived from the original on August 20, 2022. Retrieved May 27, 2023. Kroll, Justin (March 1, 2021). "Jessica Alexander Joins Disney's Live-Action 'Little Mermaid' Pic". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 13, 2023. Retrieved May 27, 2023. Koh, Reena (June 1, 2023). "Scenes of Jessica Alexander Playing Ursula's Human alter-ego in The Little Mermaid Are Going Viral on TikTok. The Actress Loves 'Being Demonic, and Just Going Crazy on Screen.'". Insider. Archived from the original on September 12, 2023. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Fuge, Jonathan (July 24, 2020). "Disney's The Little Mermaid Remake Goes After Grammy Winner Kacey Musgraves". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on December 14, 2021. Retrieved May 27, 2023. Kit, Borys; Couch, Aaron. "Disney Suspends Film Production Amid Coronavirus Concerns". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 14, 2020. Retrieved March 13, 2020. Kay, Jeremy (March 13, 2020). "London shoot on 'The Little Mermaid', other Disney live-action productions on hold". Screen International. Archived from the original on March 14, 2020. Retrieved March 13, 2020. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 13, 2020). "Disney Pausing Production On Features 'Little Mermaid', 'Home Alone', 'Nightmare Alley' & More Until Coronavirus Calms Down". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 13, 2020. Retrieved March 13, 2020. "The Little Mermaid". Production List. Film & Television Industry Alliance. November 10, 2019. Archived from the original on February 7, 2023. Retrieved November 10, 2019. Yep, Kristin (July 30, 2020). "Voice Work Begins for Live-Action 'The Little Mermaid'". Inside the Magic. Archived from the original on September 7, 2020. Retrieved July 31, 2020. Jirak, Jamie (May 31, 2020). "Fantastic Beasts Sequel and The Little Mermaid Can Restart Production Thanks to New UK Bill". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on June 9, 2020. Retrieved May 31, 2020. Jones, Mike (November 13, 2020). "Disney Confirms ALL Movies Shut Down For COVID Have Restarted Or Completed Filming". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 11, 2021. Retrieved November 13, 2020. Harmata, Claudia (December 2, 2020). "Melissa McCarthy Gives Update on Playing Ursula in Live-Action Little Mermaid: 'It's Just So Fun'". People.com. Archived from the original on December 2, 2020. Retrieved December 3, 2020. Chitwood, Adam (January 26, 2021). "'The Little Mermaid' Star Daveed Diggs Says He Did More Research for Sebastian Than for Any Other Role in His Career". Collider.com. Archived from the original on June 23, 2021. Retrieved February 11, 2021. Natalie Paris (June 1, 2023). "The surprising Italian filming location". Telegraph. Archived from the original on June 2, 2023. Retrieved June 8, 2023. Dick, Jeremy (January 31, 2021). "Disney's The Little Mermaid Remake Has Officially Started Filming". Movieweb.com. Archived from the original on May 17, 2021. Retrieved February 11, 2021. Tube, Stage (March 29, 2021). "VIDEO: Melissa McCarthy Teases Her Upcoming Role As Ursula in THE LITTLE MERMAID". Broadwayworld.com. Archived from the original on April 9, 2021. Retrieved March 29, 2021. Vivarelli, Nick (April 6, 2021). "Disney's Live Action 'Little Mermaid' Set to Shoot in Sardinia". Variety. Archived from the original on June 13, 2021. Retrieved April 6, 2021. Swenson, Krysten (June 16, 2021). "COVID Outbreak On 'The Little Mermaid' Set Forces Shutdown". Inside the Magic. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 16, 2021. Hemmert, Kylie (July 12, 2021). "Little Mermaid: Halle Bailey Announces Filming Has Wrapped on Live-Action Movie". Comingsoon.net. Archived from the original on July 28, 2021. Retrieved July 12, 2021. Bonomolo, Cameron (July 12, 2021). "The Little Mermaid's Halle Bailey Reveals First Look at Live-Action Ariel as Filming Wraps". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on July 12, 2021. Retrieved July 12, 2021. Ong-Pizarro, Abigail (December 30, 2021). "Live-Action Little Mermaid BTS Images Give New Look At Halle Bailey's Ariel". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on December 31, 2021. Retrieved December 30, 2021. Villei, Matt (February 8, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' Live-Action Adaptation Will Be Finished in March". Collider. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2023. Taylor, Drew (February 9, 2023). "The Little Mermaid Remake Director Teases "Massive" Under the Sea Number". The Wrap. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2023. Sharf, Zack (March 22, 2023). "Halle Bailey Spent 13 Hours a Day in Water Filming Parts of 'Little Mermaid,' Praises Disney for Story Update: Ariel Doesn't 'Leave the Ocean for a Boy'". Variety. Archived from the original on March 22, 2023. Retrieved March 22, 2023. "Filmography". MPC Film. Archived from the original on May 16, 2022. Retrieved June 15, 2022. "The Little Mermaid". DNEG. Archived from the original on August 1, 2022. Retrieved August 10, 2022. "The Little Mermaid Remake Director Teases "Massive" Under the Sea Number". Thewrap. February 9, 2023. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved February 9, 2023. May 19, Nick Romano; EDT, 2023 at 11:34 am. "How 'Pirates of the Caribbean 4' influenced 'The Little Mermaid'". EW.com. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved May 22, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "'The Little Mermaid' Producers Sued Over Special Effects Artist's On-Set Injury". Variety. August 18, 2023. Archived from the original on September 4, 2023. Retrieved September 4, 2023. Applefeld Olson, Cathy (June 12, 2017). "Alan Menken Talks Working With Guy Ritchie on Live-Action 'Aladdin,' Progress of 'Little Mermaid'". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 13, 2017. Retrieved June 13, 2017. April May, Rebecca (May 20, 2019). "Disney legend Alan Menken talks about updating Aladdin and the movie he thinks won't get remade". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on May 27, 2019. Retrieved June 12, 2019. Criscitiello, Alexa (July 9, 2019). "Photo: Lin-Manuel Miranda & Alan Menken Get To Work On A New Song For THE LITTLE MERMAID". Broadway World. Archived from the original on September 7, 2020. Retrieved September 20, 2019. "Lin-Manuel Miranda on Writing Lyrics for New 'The Little Mermaid': 'I Will Definitely Fall Short'". Billboard. July 25, 2019. Archived from the original on November 1, 2019. Retrieved September 20, 2019. "Halle Bailey Reveals the 1 Thing She Hopes to Bring to Her 'Little Mermaid' Character". January 16, 2020. Archived from the original on January 24, 2020. Retrieved January 24, 2020. "LISTEN: Alan Menken Talks THE LITTLE MERMAID, NIGHT AT THE MUSEUM Musical, New Upcoming Animated Film, and More!". Broadway World. February 19, 2021. Archived from the original on February 19, 2021. Retrieved February 24, 2021. VanHoose, Benjamin (May 19, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' Soundtrack Is Here! Listen to New Songs Featuring Halle Bailey, Awkwafina and More". People. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2023. Tangcay, Jazz (September 23, 2021). "'The Little Mermaid' Live-Action Film Will Feature Four New Songs, Alan Menken Reveals on 'For Scores' Podcast". Variety. Archived from the original on September 26, 2021. Retrieved September 26, 2021. Radish, Christina (November 24, 2021). "Lin-Manuel Miranda on Writing the Songs in 'Encanto' and Working With One of His Musical Heroes on 'The Little Mermaid'". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on December 1, 2021. Retrieved November 30, 2021. Pham, Jason (January 20, 2022). "Halle Bailey Cried the 'Whole Time' Filming This 'Surreal' Song For 'The Little Mermaid'". StyleCaster. Archived from the original on January 23, 2022. Retrieved January 22, 2022. Davis, Clayton (February 17, 2022). "Lin-Manuel Miranda Defends Not Submitting 'Bruno' for Oscars, Teases New 'Little Mermaid' Songs". Variety. Archived from the original on February 18, 2022. Retrieved February 18, 2022. Labonte, Rachel (February 18, 2022). "Sebastian Might Rap In Disney's Little Mermaid Live-Action Movie". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on February 18, 2022. Retrieved February 18, 2022. "'The Little Mermaid's New Original Song Will Celebrate Ariel's First Time on Land". Collider. March 13, 2023. Archived from the original on March 14, 2023. Retrieved March 14, 2023. Scheps, Leigh (March 31, 2023). "How Alan Menken, Disney's Most Prolific Composer, Inspired a Generation of Songwriters". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on March 31, 2023. Retrieved April 2, 2023. "Disney's The Little Mermaid CD Exclusive Bonus Track with Poster". HSN. Archived from the original on June 15, 2023. Retrieved June 16, 2023. Major, Michael (March 31, 2023). "Alan Menken Reveals Details on New LITTLE MERMAID Songs Written With Lin-Manuel Miranda". BroadwayWorld.com. Archived from the original on April 2, 2023. Retrieved April 2, 2023. Perine, Aaron (May 13, 2023). "The Little Mermaid: Alan Menken Explains Why "Daughters of Triton" Song Was Cut (Exclusive)". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on May 14, 2023. Retrieved May 14, 2023. Davids, Brian (May 24, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' Filmmakers Talk the Sea Creature Designs, Bypassing "Les Poissons" and Cutting Javier Bardem's New Song". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2023. "'The Little Mermaid' Soundtrack Gets an Official Release Date". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 14, 2023. Retrieved March 14, 2023. Major, Michael (March 13, 2023). "THE LITTLE MERMAID Soundtrack to Be Released in May Featuring New Songs By Lin-Manuel Miranda & Alan Menken". BroadwayWorld.com. Archived from the original on April 2, 2023. Retrieved April 2, 2023. Blistein, Jon (April 26, 2023). "Halle Bailey Dreams Whozits and Whatzits Galore on New Version of 'Part of Your World'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 30, 2023. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Bowenbank, Starr (May 19, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' Live Action Soundtrack Has Arrived". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2023. "Unused Song 'Impossible Child' from Rob Marshall's 'The Little Mermaid' Released". Film Music Reporter. September 8, 2023. Archived from the original on September 8, 2023. Retrieved September 8, 2023. Caulfield, Keith (June 8, 2023). "'Little Mermaid' Tops Soundtracks Chart, Swims Past Peak of Original Album on Billboard 200". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 14, 2023. Retrieved June 12, 2023. Kit, Borys (September 10, 2021). "Disney's Live-Action 'The Little Mermaid' to Open on Memorial Day Weekend in 2023". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 10, 2021. Retrieved September 10, 2021. Griffin, Caitlin (May 16, 2023). "The Little Mermaid UK Premiere: All the pictures from the Red Carpet". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2023. McPherson, Chris (August 21, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' Returning to Theaters for Singalong Version". Collider. Archived from the original on August 21, 2023. Retrieved August 22, 2023. Chapman, Wilson (September 9, 2022). "'The Little Mermaid' First Look: Halle Bailey Debuts Her Version of 'Part of Your World' to an Enchanted D23 Crowd". Variety. Archived from the original on September 12, 2022. Retrieved September 10, 2022. White, James (October 13, 2022). "'New Poster For The Little Mermaid Has Halle Bailey's Ariel Pondering The World Above'". Empire. Archived from the original on October 13, 2022. Retrieved October 13, 2022. Bailey, Halle [@HalleBailey] (October 13, 2022). "Words can't describe how immensely honored I feel to play the mermaid of my dreams, Ariel in Disney's The Little Mermaid. Come under the sea with me, in theaters May 26, 2023" (Tweet). Retrieved October 13, 2022 – via Twitter. Romano, Nick (December 20, 2022). "'Little Mermaid' director says his new take on Ariel spotlights a 'modern woman'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 20, 2022. Retrieved December 20, 2022. Michaelsen, Shannen (January 21, 2023). "Walt Disney World Hiring Ariel Character Look-Alikes to Portray Halle Bailey's Live Action 'The Little Mermaid' – WDW News Today". WDW News Today. Archived from the original on January 22, 2023. Retrieved January 21, 2023. Aguila, Ed (February 2, 2023). "Disney Parks Seeking to Replace Classic Ariel Meet and Greets With Live-Action Version". Inside the Magic. Archived from the original on February 12, 2023. Retrieved February 12, 2023. Michaelsen, Shannen (April 27, 2023). "CONFIRMED: Live-Action Ariel Character Meet & Greet Coming to Disneyland, Disney's Hollywood Studios, and Disneyland Paris This Summer". WDW News Today. Archived from the original on April 30, 2023. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Tapp, Tom (March 12, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' Oscar Trailer Offers Best Look Yet At Melissa McCarthy's Cackling Ursula". Deadline. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved March 12, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 31, 2023). "'Little Mermaid's Loss Of Scales At Overseas Box Office Leaves Break-even In Question". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 31, 2023. Retrieved May 31, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 28, 2023). "'Little Mermaid' Now Swimming To $121M+ Opening Boosted By $80M Promo Campaign, Biggest For Disney Live-Action Title – Sunday AM Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 26, 2023. Retrieved May 28, 2023. Sim, Jonathan (July 6, 2023). "The Little Mermaid Live-Action Remake Blu-ray & Digital Release Date Set". Comingsoon.net. Archived from the original on July 6, 2023. Retrieved July 6, 2023. Prange, Stephanie (July 6, 2023). "Disney's Live-Action 'Little Mermaid' Headed to Digital July 25, Disc Sept. 19". Media Play News. Archived from the original on July 7, 2023. Retrieved July 6, 2023. Legacy, Spencer (August 7, 2023). "The Little Mermaid Disney+ Release Date Set for Live-Action Remake". Comingsoon.net. Archived from the original on August 7, 2023. Retrieved August 7, 2023. Brueggemann, Tom (July 31, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' Is a Big Hit on VOD". IndieWire. Archived from the original on August 7, 2023. Retrieved September 8, 2023. Prange, Stephanie (July 31, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' Swims to Top of Weekly Vudu Chart". Media Play News. Archived from the original on August 3, 2023. Retrieved September 8, 2023. Dick, Jeremy (August 1, 2023). "The Little Mermaid Swims to the Top of VOD Charts". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on September 7, 2023. Retrieved September 8, 2023. Brown, Jodee (August 1, 2023). "Disney's Live-Action Little Mermaid Makes a Splash on VOD Charts". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on September 7, 2023. Retrieved September 8, 2023. Campione, Katie (September 11, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' Among Most-Viewed Film Premieres Ever On Disney+". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 12, 2023. Retrieved September 12, 2023. Ainsley, Helen (August 2, 2023). "The Little Mermaid makes a splash as it debuts at Number 1 on the Official Film Chart". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on August 2, 2023. Retrieved September 15, 2023. Gruenwedel, Erik (August 2, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' Floats to Top of U.K. Weekly Home Entertainment Sales Chart". Media Play News. Archived from the original on August 3, 2023. Retrieved September 15, 2023. Ainsley, Helen (August 9, 2023). "The Little Mermaid soaks in a second week at Number 1 on the Official Film Chart". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on September 24, 2023. Retrieved September 15, 2023. Gruenwedel, Erik (August 9, 2023). "Disney's 'The Little Mermaid' Tops U.K. Home Entertainment Sales Chart for Second Week". Media Play News. Archived from the original on September 24, 2023. Retrieved September 15, 2023. Suleiman, Nadine (September 12, 2023). "Movie Ranker - United States, September 8-10". Whip Media. Archived from the original on August 17, 2023. Retrieved September 15, 2023. Prange, Stephanie (September 12, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid,' 'Ahsoka' Top Weekly Whip U.S. Streaming Charts". Media Play News. Archived from the original on September 15, 2023. Retrieved September 15, 2023. Shanfeld, Ethan (September 12, 2022). "'The Little Mermaid' Teaser With Halle Bailey Scores Over 104 Million Views (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on September 13, 2022. Retrieved September 13, 2022. "Videos of young Black girls reacting to 'Little Mermaid' trailer go viral". CNN News. September 13, 2022. Archived from the original on September 13, 2022. Retrieved September 14, 2022. Sung, Morgan (September 13, 2022). "'She's brown like me!': Girls react to seeing a Black Ariel". www.nbcnews.com. Archived from the original on September 13, 2022. Retrieved September 14, 2022. "The backlash against Halle Bailey's Little Mermaid is as silly as it is predictable". The Independent. September 14, 2022. Archived from the original on September 14, 2022. Retrieved September 14, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 20, 2022). "2023's Most Anticipated Movies: 'Guardians Of The Galaxy Vol. 3' Leads Fandango Survey". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 29, 2022. Retrieved December 29, 2022. McClintock, Pamela (March 17, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' Trailer Earns Most Disney Live-Action Views Since 'The Lion King' (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 18, 2023. Retrieved March 18, 2023. McClintock, Pamela (March 17, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' Trailer Earns Most Disney Live-Action Views Since 'The Lion King' (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 18, 2023. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Malkin, Marc (May 2, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid': Inside Rob Marshall's Private Screening With Matt Damon, Emily Blunt and John Krasinski (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on May 4, 2023. Retrieved May 4, 2023. Rubin, Rebecca (May 24, 2023). "Box Office: 'The Little Mermaid' Swimming to $120 Million-Plus Over Memorial Day Weekend". Variety. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2023. Moreau, Jordan (May 26, 2023). "Box Office: 'The Little Mermaid' Makes $10.3 Million in Previews". Variety. Archived from the original on May 26, 2023. Retrieved May 26, 2023. Lang, Brent (May 28, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' Dominates Memorial Day Box Office With $118 Million Debut". Variety. Archived from the original on May 28, 2023. Retrieved May 28, 2023. "Domestic 2023 Weekend 21 May 26–29, 2023 – Memorial Day weekend (US)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on June 1, 2023. Retrieved May 31, 2023. "Memorial Day (All Movies, 4-Day, Fri-Mon, Inflation Adjusted)". Archived from the original on July 18, 2023. Retrieved July 19, 2023. Rubin, Rebecca (June 4, 2023). "Box Office: 'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Slingshots to Huge $120.5 Million Debut". Variety. Archived from the original on June 4, 2023. Retrieved June 4, 2023. "Domestic 2023 Weekend 22". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on June 4, 2023. Retrieved June 4, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (June 11, 2023). "'Transformers: Rise Of The Beasts' Conquers 'Spider-Verse' With $60M+ Opening, But Animated Pic's Second Weekend Hold Strong – Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 11, 2023. Retrieved June 11, 2023. "Domestic 2023 Weekend 23". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on June 11, 2023. Retrieved June 12, 2023. "The Little Mermaid Domestic Weekend". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on July 23, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Remley, Hilary (May 28, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' Global Box Office Swims Against the Current". Collider. Archived from the original on May 29, 2023. Retrieved May 29, 2023. Brzeski, Patrick (June 22, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' Becomes a Blockbuster in the Philippines Amid Racist Backlash Elsewhere in Asia". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 22, 2023. Retrieved June 22, 2023. "'The Little Mermaid' Tanks In China and South Korea Box Office Amid Racist Backlash | THR News". Yahoo Life. June 6, 2023. Archived from the original on June 8, 2023. Retrieved June 8, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 31, 2023). "'Little Mermaid' Swimming Against Strong Tides At Overseas Box Office, Leaving Break-Even In Question". Deadline. Archived from the original on May 31, 2023. Retrieved June 8, 2023. Campbell, Tina (May 9, 2023). "Disney's Little Mermaid remake gets mixed reviews". Evening Standard. Retrieved March 26, 2024. Mayer, Grace. "'The Little Mermaid' defied backlash and review-bombing by opening at No. 1". Business Insider. Retrieved March 26, 2024. "The Little Mermaid". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved September 15, 2023. "The Little Mermaid". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved September 4, 2023. Lowry, Brian (May 22, 2023). "The Little Mermaid' shines, thanks to Halle Bailey and a warm wave of nostalgia". CNN. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2023. "'The Little Mermaid' Review: A Rare Disney Live-Action Remake That Captures the Magic of the Original". Collider. May 22, 2023. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2023. "Little Mermaid 2023 Review: Halle Bailey Shines in Disney Remake". May 22, 2023. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2023. Hammond, Pete (May 22, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' Review: Rob Marshall's Live Action Take On Disney Animated Classic Is A Winner Both Above And Under The Sea". Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 23, 2023. "The Little Mermaid Review: A Riveting Live-Action Tale That Improves On The Original". /Film. May 22, 2023. Archived from the original on May 23, 2023. Retrieved May 23, 2023. Bryant, Zoe Rose (May 22, 2023). ""THE LITTLE MERMAID" – Review". Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 23, 2023. Edwards, Molly (May 22, 2023). "The Little Mermaid review: "A fun, fresh reimagining"". Total Film. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 23, 2023. "Review: Halle Bailey keeps Disney's live-action 'Little Mermaid' remake from being all wet". USA TODAY. Archived from the original on May 23, 2023. Retrieved May 23, 2023. May 22, Maureen Lee Lenker; EDT, 2023 at 09:00 am. "Halle Bailey sings her way to stardom in 'The Little Mermaid'". EW.com. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 23, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Debruge, Peter (May 22, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' Review: Halle Bailey and Melissa McCarthy Erase Any Doubts About This Remake's See-Worthiness". Archived from the original on May 23, 2023. Retrieved May 23, 2023. Hornaday, Ann (May 24, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid': An Ariel for a new generation". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 29, 2023. Retrieved May 25, 2023. "The Little Mermaid Review: Halle Bailey Is The Perfect Ariel In Disney's Remake". ScreenRant. May 22, 2023. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 23, 2023. "The Little Mermaid". Empire. May 24, 2023. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2023. "Review: Everything is bigger in the new 'Little Mermaid' — but is it worth watching?". The Seattle Times. May 22, 2023. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2023. Bastién, Angelica Jade (May 22, 2023). "What Happened to the Frothy Pleasures of The Little Mermaid?". Vulture. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 23, 2023. "'The Little Mermaid' Review: Disney's Remake Neither Sinks Nor Swims". Vanity Fair. May 22, 2023. Archived from the original on May 22, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2023. "Review: Halle Bailey makes a lovely 'Little Mermaid,' but this remake is less than shipshape". Los Angeles Times. May 22, 2023. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2023. Rosenfield, Kat (June 4, 2023). "The Little Mermaid is Disney propaganda". UnHerd. Archived from the original on June 6, 2023. Retrieved June 6, 2023. "'The Little Mermaid': Why live-action Disney remakes never live up to the animated movies". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 23, 2024. Retrieved February 23, 2024. "Movie Review: Disenchantment under the sea in live-action 'The Little Mermaid'". AP NEWS. May 22, 2023. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2023. Brunner, Raven (May 23, 2023). "Awkwafina's Awkward 'Little Mermaid' Rap "The Scuttlebutt" Shows She's Learned Nothing From "Blaccent" Backlash". Decider. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2023. Wade, A. Felicia (May 22, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' Review – Halle Bailey Carries Disney Remake Out of Murky Waters". DiscussingFilm. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2023. ""Are we paying too much attention to diversity?" Uncomfortable reactions to the live-action version of "The Little Mermaid"" 「多様性に配慮しすぎ？」実写版『リトル・マーメイド』の反応に抱く違和感「多様性は配慮するものではなく、すでに社会にあるもの」. Yahoo! Japan (in Japanese). June 10, 2023. Archived from the original on June 18, 2023. Retrieved June 18, 2023. Dickson, E. J. (September 14, 2022). "Racists Are Worried About the Historical Accuracy of Mermaids". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 16, 2022. Retrieved September 16, 2022. Romano, Aja (September 17, 2022). "The racist backlash to The Little Mermaid and Lord of The Rings is exhausting and extremely predictable". Vox. Archived from the original on September 19, 2022. Retrieved September 19, 2022. "'The Little Mermaid' – tình yêu của nàng tiên cá da màu" [Review – 'The Little Mermaid' – the love of a colored mermaid]. VnExpress (in Vietnamese). May 28, 2023. Archived from the original on June 19, 2023. Retrieved June 19, 2023. Willingham, AJ (September 17, 2022). "Analysis: A definitive rebuttal to every racist 'Little Mermaid' argument". CNN. Archived from the original on September 19, 2022. Retrieved September 19, 2022. "Halle Bailey, Auli'i Cravalho respond to #NotMyAriel backlash from "The Little Mermaid" casting". Inside the Magic. August 12, 2019. Archived from the original on August 14, 2019. Retrieved September 18, 2019. Gajewski, Ryan (September 16, 2022). "Trevor Noah Rips Racist 'Little Mermaid' Criticism: "We're Doing This Again?"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 16, 2022. Retrieved September 16, 2022. "The Little Mermaid and the big casting controversy". The A.V. Club. September 14, 2022. Archived from the original on September 15, 2022. Retrieved September 16, 2022. Malkin, Marc (September 28, 2022). "Lin-Manuel Miranda Blasts Racist 'Little Mermaid' Trolls: 'Halle Bailey Is Perfect for the Part'". Variety. Archived from the original on October 8, 2022. Retrieved October 8, 2022. Heritage, Stuart (September 15, 2022). "We are all losers in the 'woke v racist' Little Mermaid culture war". The Guardian. Archived from the original on September 25, 2022. Retrieved September 25, 2022. "Original Ariel Jodi Benson: Halle Bailey 'absolutely amazing' in 'The Little Mermaid'". Los Angeles Times. September 12, 2022. Archived from the original on September 19, 2022. Retrieved September 19, 2022. Mamo, Heran (July 30, 2020). "Why Brandy 'Was a Little Hesitant' to Release Her New Album 'B7'". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 13, 2021. Retrieved September 25, 2022. Muscaro, TJ (November 18, 2020). "'Princess and the Frog' Actress Praises Halle Bailey, Yara Shahidi on Disney Roles". Inside the Magic. Archived from the original on September 25, 2022. Retrieved September 25, 2022. Conlin, Danl (November 13, 2022). "West Side Story's Rachel Zegler Offers Support for Halle Bailey's Little Mermaid". Gamerant. Archived from the original on January 22, 2023. Retrieved January 22, 2023. Sharf, Zack (February 23, 2023). "Halle Bailey Ignores Racist 'The Little Mermaid' Trolls: 'As a Black Person You Expect It' and 'It's Not a Shock Anymore'". Variety. Archived from the original on February 24, 2023. Retrieved February 23, 2023. Pometsey, Olive (February 23, 2023). "Halle Bailey is ready to stand". The Face. Archived from the original on June 15, 2023. Retrieved June 16, 2023. Murray, Conor. "'The Little Mermaid' Draws Criticism For Flounder's Uncomfortably Lifelike Design—The Latest Controversy For The Film". Forbes. Retrieved March 26, 2024. Hawkins, Amy (June 9, 2023). "Disney's Little Mermaid flops in China amid racist backlash over casting". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on June 10, 2023. Retrieved June 10, 2023. Michelle Toh, Candice Zhu and Gawon Bae (June 6, 2023). "'The Little Mermaid' tanks in China and South Korea amid racist backlash from some viewers". CNN. Archived from the original on June 18, 2023. Retrieved June 18, 2023. Hale, Erin. "China's backlash against Little Mermaid exposes Hollywood bind". www.aljazeera.com. Archived from the original on June 8, 2023. Retrieved June 8, 2023. Tartaglione, Nancy (May 28, 2023). "The Little Mermaid Splashes To $164M Global Bow, But There's Something Fishy Overseas As Disney Pic Beset By Review-Bombing". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 29, 2023. Retrieved May 29, 2023. "Next Big Thing award winners in the 2023 Queerties". Queerty. Archived from the original on May 16, 2023. Retrieved May 16, 2023. Tinoco, Armando (June 5, 2023). "Golden Trailer Awards Nominations List: Stranger Things, Black Panther: Wakanda Forever, Ted Lasso & Glass Onion: A Knives Out Mystery Among Most Nominated". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 5, 2023. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Pedersen, Erik (June 29, 2023). "Golden Trailer Awards: Cocaine Bear, Only Murders In The Building & Oppenheimer Among Top Winners – Full List". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 30, 2023. Retrieved June 30, 2023. Grein, Paul (November 2, 2023). "Songs From 'Barbie' Pace 2023 Hollywood Music in Media Awards Nominations (Full List)". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 3, 2023. Retrieved November 7, 2023. "2023 HMMA WINNERS AND NOMINEES". Hollywood Music In Media Awards. Archived from the original on November 20, 2023. Retrieved November 16, 2023. "AwardsWatch - North Texas Film Critics Association (NTFCA) Nominations: 'Saltburn,' 'The Holdovers' Score Big". AwardsWatch. December 12, 2023. Archived from the original on December 18, 2023. Retrieved December 16, 2023. "The 2023 North Texas Film Critics Association (NTFCA) Winners". NextBestPicture. December 18, 2023. Archived from the original on December 19, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "AwardsWatch - Black Reel Awards (BRA) Nominations: 'The Color Purple' Leads with 19, 'Rustin', with 10". AwardsWatch. December 15, 2023. Archived from the original on December 16, 2023. Retrieved December 16, 2023. Hipes, Patrick (December 6, 2023). "'Avatar: The Way Of Water', 'Oppenheimer', 'Star Trek' Series Lead Nominations For Genre-Focused Saturn Awards". Deadline. Archived from the original on December 6, 2023. Retrieved December 16, 2023. Flores, Terry (January 11, 2024). "'Nimona' Leads Annie Awards Animated Feature Competition' 'Wish' Snubbed". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 12, 2024. Retrieved January 11, 2024. Malik, Brett (January 11, 2024). "2024 People's Choice Awards: Complete List of Nominees". E! News. Archived from the original on January 11, 2024. Retrieved January 11, 2024. Malik, Brett (January 11, 2024). "2024 People's Choice Awards: Complete List of Nominees". E! News. Archived from the original on January 11, 2024. Retrieved January 11, 2024. Major, Michael (January 10, 2023). "Photos: THE LITTLE MERMAID Books Give New Look at Upcoming Live Action Remake". BroadwayWorld. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved April 17, 2023. Reynolds, Robin (January 14, 2023). "Disney's The Little Mermaid: Will There Be Halle Bailey Merchandise?". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on July 2, 2023. Retrieved July 2, 2023. "The Little Mermaid: Make A Splash". Disney Publishing Worldwide. Archived from the original on July 2, 2023. Retrieved July 2, 2023. Lee, Tiffany (May 26, 2023). "Meet the author behind the newest book for Disney's 'The Little Mermaid'". KFSM-TV. Archived from the original on July 2, 2023. Retrieved July 2, 2023. "The Little Mermaid: Guide to Merfolk". Disney Publishing Worldwide. Archived from the original on July 2, 2023. Retrieved July 2, 2023. "The Little Mermaid Live Action Novelization". Disney Publishing Worldwide. Archived from the original on April 17, 2023. Retrieved July 2, 2023. "The Little Mermaid: This is Ariel". Disney Publishing Worldwide. Archived from the original on July 2, 2023. Retrieved July 2, 2023. Louis, Brandon (January 13, 2023). "Halle Bailey's Ariel Gets Gorgeous Art On New Little Mermaid Books". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved July 1, 2023. "The Little Mermaid: Against the Tide". Disney Publishing Worldwide. Archived from the original on April 13, 2023. Retrieved April 13, 2023. Jones, Iyana (April 27, 2023). "Under the Sea: 2023 Children's Books Featuring Mermaids". Publishers Weekly. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved July 1, 2023. Major, Michael (January 10, 2023). "Photos: THE LITTLE MERMAID Books Give New Look at Upcoming Live Action Remake". BroadwayWorld. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved July 1, 2023. Mabee, Megan (June 13, 2023). "Mermaid Tails: 9 Enchanting Books Like The Little Mermaid". BookRiot.com. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved July 1, 2023. Shotwell, Alyssa (October 3, 2022). "Live-Action 'Little Mermaid' Novel Tie-Ins Have Intriguing Clues About Ariel's Family". The Mary Sue. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved July 1, 2023. Bond, Emily (May 22, 2023). "14 'Little Mermaid'-Inspired Books That Should Be Part Of Your World". HuffPost. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved July 1, 2023. Muhammad, Latifah (May 24, 2023). "Under the Sea: All the Best 'Little Mermaid' Merch to Buy Online". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved July 1, 2023. "Young Adult Hardcover Books – Best Sellers – Books – The New York Times". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 8, 2020. Retrieved July 1, 2023. "For young readers: a new 'Little Mermaid' book and more on the New York Times bestsellers list". The Virginian-Pilot. May 1, 2023. Archived from the original on July 2, 2023. Retrieved July 1, 2023. Bałaga, Marta (June 13, 2023). "Disney Unveils Animated Series at Annecy, Teases 'Magicampers' and 'The Sunnyridge 3' (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on June 13, 2023. Retrieved June 13, 2023. "Halle Bailey 'already wanted' for another The Little Mermaid sequel after trailer response: 'The viral trend gave Disney no choice'". Metro. October 31, 2022. Archived from the original on December 28, 2022. Retrieved September 21, 2023. Maytum, Matt (May 2023). "Shore Thing". Total Film. Bath: Future plc. p. 53. "The Little Mermaid Stars Address Possible Sequel". Movie Web. May 29, 2023. Archived from the original on August 29, 2023. Retrieved August 29, 2023. Disney portal Film portal United States portal Official website The Little Mermaid at IMDb The Little Mermaid at Rotten Tomatoes