Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny is a 2023 American action adventure film directed by James Mangold, who co-wrote it with David Koepp and the writing team of Jez and John-Henry Butterworth. It is the fifth and final installment in the Indiana Jones film series and the sequel to Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull (2008). It stars Harrison Ford, John Rhys-Davies, and Karen Allen reprising their roles as Indiana Jones, Sallah, and Marion Ravenwood, respectively, while new cast members include Phoebe Waller-Bridge, Antonio Banderas, Toby Jones, Boyd Holbrook, Ethann Isidore, and Mads Mikkelsen. Set in 1969, the film follows Indy and his estranged goddaughter, Helena, who are trying to locate a powerful artifact before Jürgen Voller, a Nazi-turned-NASA scientist, who plans to use it to alter the outcome of World War II. Dial of Destiny is the only film in the series that is neither directed by Steven Spielberg nor conceived by George Lucas, with them both serving as executive producers instead. It is also the first film in the series not to be distributed by Paramount Pictures, following the Walt Disney Studios' acquisition of Lucasfilm and film rights for future sequels. Paramount retains the distribution rights to the first four films and a residual associate credit. Plans for a fifth Indiana Jones film date back to the late 1970s, when a deal was made with Paramount to produce four sequels to Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981). Lucas began researching potential plot devices for a fifth film in 2008, and Koepp was eventually hired to write the film in 2016. A release date was set for 2019, which was then delayed several times due to rewrites and the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2018, Jonathan Kasdan replaced Koepp and eventually left the project. Spielberg was originally set to direct but stepped down in 2020, with Mangold taking his place. Filming began in June 2021 in various locations including the United Kingdom, Italy, and Morocco, wrapping in February 2022. Longtime franchise composer John Williams returned to compose and conduct the film's score, for which he was nominated for Best Original Score at the 96th Academy Awards and Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media at the 66th Annual Grammy Awards, with Williams winning a Grammy for Best Instrumental Composition for Helena's Theme. Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny premiered out of competition at the 76th Cannes Film Festival on May 18, 2023, and was theatrically released in the United States on June 30, by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures. Critics praised the film for Ford's performance, noting that it helped bring the film some final bits of "cinematic treasure" but criticized the film for not being as thrilling as earlier installments. It grossed $384 million worldwide, becoming a box office bomb due to a lack of wide audience appeal and an expensive overall budget, with projections of $134.2 million loss for Disney. In 1944, Nazis capture Indiana Jones and Oxford archeologist Basil Shaw as they attempt to retrieve the Lance of Longinus from a castle in the French Alps. Astrophysicist Jürgen Voller informs his superiors the Lance is fake, but he has found half of Archimedes' Dial, an Antikythera mechanism built by the ancient Syracusan mathematician Archimedes which reveals time fissures, allowing for possible time travel. Indy escapes onto a Berlin-bound train filled with looted antiquities and frees Basil. He obtains the Dial piece, and the two escape the train just before Allied forces derail it. In 1969, Indy is retiring from Hunter College in New York City. Marion has recently left him and filed for legal separation due to Indy's depression after their son Mutt was killed in the Vietnam War. Indy's goddaughter, archaeologist Helena Shaw, unexpectedly visits and wants to research the Dial. Indy warns that her late father, Basil, became obsessed studying the Dial before relinquishing it to Indy to destroy, which he never did. As Indy and Helena retrieve the Dial half from the college archives, Voller's accomplices attack them. The CIA assists Voller, now working for NASA as "Dr. Schmidt". Helena, revealed as an antiquities smuggler, absconds with the Dial to auction it on the black market. Indy is framed for two colleagues' murders, forcing him to escape through the Apollo 11 moon landing parade, then an anti-war protest. He seeks out his old friend Sallah, now a New York cab driver. Sallah surmises Helena will likely auction the Dial in Tangier, then helps Indy flee the country. At a Tangier hotel, Indy disrupts Helena's illegal private auction, but Voller and his henchmen arrive and steal the artifact. Indy, Helena, and her teen sidekick Teddy Kumar chase them through the streets in a tuk-tuk. The CIA intercepts Voller after the U.S. government disavows him for going rogue, but his cohorts murder the agents and steal their helicopter. The three trail Voller to Greece and team up with Indy's old friend Renaldo, a professional sea diver. Guided by Basil's research, they dive to an ancient Aegean Sea shipwreck and retrieve a "graphikos" tablet containing directions to the Dial's other half. Voller arrives and murders Renaldo. Indy's group escapes and heads to Sicily, pursued by Voller. Inside the Ear of Dionysius cavern, Indy and Helena find Archimedes' tomb, the Dial's second half, and a 20th century wristwatch on Archimedes' skeletal arm. Voller appears and captures Indy, wounding him. Helena and Teddy escape and chase Voller. After reassembling the Dial, Voller reveals his plans to time travel back to 1939 to assassinate Adolf Hitler and help lead Germany to victory in World War II. At an airfield, Voller activates the Dial and locates a time fissure in the sky. Indy is held captive on Voller's stolen plane while Helena stows away through its landing gear. Teddy follows them in another plane. While approaching the fissure, Indy realizes that continental drift could have altered the timeline coordinates. Rather than 1939, the group arrives at the Siege of Syracuse in 212 BC. The warring armies shoot down Voller's plane, believing it is a dragon. Indy and Helena parachute out just before the plane crashes, killing everyone aboard, while Teddy lands safely. Archimedes finds Voller's body and wristwatch in the wreckage. He gives Indy the Dial but keeps the watch. Indy and Helena learn that Archimedes created the Dial to bring users from the future through fissures that lead only to 212 BC. As the fissure begins to collapse, Indy wants to remain behind, feeling he has nothing to return to. Helena, fearing a time paradox and unwilling to give up on him, knocks Indy unconscious. Back in the present, a recovering Indy awakens in his apartment. Helena, Teddy, Sallah, and Marion are there as well. Marion and Indy reunite. Harrison Ford as Dr. Henry "Indiana" Jones, Jr., a world-renowned globe-trotting archaeologist and college professor. Anthony Ingruber as young Indiana Jones (1944). Ingruber had portrayed a younger version of Ford's character William Jones in The Age of Adaline (2015), serving as the on-set body double before Ford's de-aged likeness and voice was inserted over Ingruber's using CGI for brief parts of the 1944 scenes of Dial of Destiny. Ingruber also portrays a hotel guest attending Helena's auction. Phoebe Waller-Bridge as Helena Shaw, Indy's goddaughter. The filmmakers described the character as "slippery, charming, the girl next door, a grifter," a "pioneer in ethical accounting" and similar to comedic characters with "machine-gun" dialogue akin to those of Ben Hecht's plays. She is the daughter of Indy's old friend and colleague, Basil Shaw. Holly Lawton portrays a young Helena. Mads Mikkelsen as Jürgen Voller, a German scientist, astrophysicist and former Nazi during World War II who has been hired by NASA under the name "Dr. Schmidt" to run the Apollo Moon landing program, while using CIA assets for his own gain. Mikkelsen felt that Voller is a man who would like to "correct" some mistakes of the past with the film's MacGuffin to make the world "a much better place to live in," matching wits against Indy in a race to retrieve the artifact. Antonio Banderas as Renaldo, an old friend of Indy who operates as an expert frogman. Banderas claimed that his character is a rogue who is "a good guy who dies for Indiana Jones". He enjoyed working with Ford, Mangold and Steven Spielberg, who co-produced The Mask of Zorro (1998), one of his previous films. Banderas also pointed out that his role as Renaldo veers more into a cameo appearance. John Rhys-Davies as Sallah, Indy's old friend who aided in finding the Ark of the Covenant in 1936 and the Holy Grail in 1938. Sallah and his family have since immigrated to New York City with Indy's assistance. He now works as a cab driver. Toby Jones as Basil Shaw, an Oxford professor of archaeology, ally of Indy from his days in World War II, and Helena's father, who was obsessed with the Dial. Boyd Holbrook as Klaber, Voller's nefarious and trigger-happy right-hand man in 1969. Holbrook described Klaber as Voller's lapdog, "and a very crazy one at that." Ethann Isidore as Teddy Kumar, Helena's young Moroccan sidekick in Tangier. Karen Allen as Marion Ravenwood, Indy's estranged wife, who aided in finding the Ark of the Covenant in 1936 and the Crystal Skull of Akator in 1957. Shaunette Renée Wilson as Agent Mason, a CIA agent assigned to work for Voller. Thomas Kretschmann as Colonel Weber, a Nazi for whom Voller works in 1944. Olivier Richters as Hauke, a henchman of Voller. Richters takes on the role of a heavybuilt henchman that opposes Indiana, a role that was preceded by Pat Roach in the first two films, and Igor Jijikine in Kingdom of the Crystal Skull. Mark Killeen as Pontimus, a soldier from 212 BC during the Siege of Syracuse. Nasser Memarzia as Archimedes, a brilliant scientist from 212 BC Syracuse and inventor of the Antikythera ("Dial of Destiny"). Martin McDougall as Durkin, a CIA agent working with Voller. Alaa Safi as Aziz Rahim, the son of a Moroccan mobster, who was previously engaged to Helena Shaw. Anna Francolini as Mandy, one of Indiana Jones' colleagues at Hunter College. Photographs of Sean Connery and Shia LaBeouf are used to represent their respective Last Crusade and Kingdom of the Crystal Skull characters: Henry Jones Sr. and Mutt Williams (Henry Jones III). In 1979, George Lucas and Steven Spielberg made a deal with Paramount Pictures for five Indiana Jones films. In April 2008, Harrison Ford said he would return as Indiana Jones for a fifth film if it does not take another twenty years to develop, referring to the long development of Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull (2008), which was released a month later. The film introduced the character Mutt Williams, played by Shia LaBeouf. Writer/producer Lucas suggested an idea to make Williams the lead character in a fifth film, but later decided against this. Lucas said that Ford's age would not be an issue in making another film, saying, "it's not like he's an old man. He's incredibly agile; he looks even better than he did 20 years ago." Lucas began researching potential plot devices for another film in 2008, and stated that Spielberg was open to directing it, as he had done for the previous films. Explaining the process for each film, Ford said, "We come to some basic agreement and then George goes away for a long time and works on it. Then Steven and I get it in some form, some embryonic form. Then if we like it we start working with George on it and at some point down the line it's ready and we do it." Lucas stressed the importance of having a MacGuffin that is supernatural but still grounded in reality with an archaeological or historical background, saying, "you can't just make something up, like a time machine." Speaking about the previous film and the franchise's future, Lucas said, "we still have the issues about the direction we'd like to take. I'm in the future; Steven's in the past. He's trying to drag it back to the way they were, I'm trying to push it to a whole different place. So, still we have a sort of tension." Later in 2008, Ford stated that Lucas's concept for the fifth film was "crazy but great". In November 2010, Ford said that Lucas was still working on the project. In July 2012, producer Frank Marshall stated that the project had no writer and said about its progress, "I don't know if it's definitely not happening, but it's not up and running." In October 2012, The Walt Disney Company acquired Lucasfilm, giving Disney ownership rights to the Indiana Jones intellectual property. In December 2013, The Walt Disney Studios purchased the distribution and marketing rights to future Indiana Jones films from Paramount, with the latter studio retaining the distribution rights to the first four films and receiving "financial participation" for any additional films as well as an "in association with" credit in the film's billing. The fifth film would become the first in the series to be co-produced by Walt Disney Pictures and Lucasfilm. With the 2012 acquisition, Lucas passed Indiana Jones 5 to new Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy. Lucasfilm planned to focus on the Star Wars franchise before working on a fifth Indiana Jones film. In May 2015, Kennedy confirmed that Lucasfilm would eventually make another Indiana Jones film. Kingdom of the Crystal Skull ended positively for Indiana Jones, with his marriage to Marion Ravenwood. However, Ford did not necessarily view the film as a definitive ending for Jones, wishing to make one more film that could expand the character and conclude his journey. Ford felt that Crystal Skull "ended in kind of a suspended animation. There was not a real strong feeling of the conclusion or the closure that I always hoped for." According to Kennedy, "we all felt that if we could conclude the series with one more movie, given the fact that Harrison was so excited to try to do another one, we should do it." Kennedy, Spielberg and Ford had discussed a couple of story ideas by the end of 2015. In March 2016, Disney announced that the fifth film would be released on July 19, 2019, with Ford reprising his role. Spielberg would direct the film, with Kennedy and Marshall as producers. In April 2016, Marshall said the film was in early pre-production. A MacGuffin had been chosen for the film, and work on the script began a few months later, with David Koepp as the screenwriter. The story was conceived by Koepp and Spielberg. Koepp had previously written several other Spielberg films, including Kingdom of the Crystal Skull. It was initially reported that Lucas would not be involved in the project, although Spielberg later said that Lucas would serve as an executive producer: "Of course I would never make an Indiana Jones film without George Lucas. That would be insane." Later in 2016, it was announced that Lucas would have no involvement, with Marshall stating two years later that "life changes and we're moving on. He moved on." In 2017, the film's release date was pushed back to 2020, as Spielberg was busy working on Ready Player One (2018) and The Post (2017). Koepp said "we've got a script we're mostly happy with." Spielberg set Indiana Jones 5 as his next film, with production set to begin in the UK in April 2019. However, filming was pushed back as a final script had yet to be approved. In early 2018, Lucasfilm met with screenwriters Scott Beck and Bryan Woods for an "open canvas talk" including the Indiana Jones and Star Wars franchises. Beck stated that they had considered writing the next Indiana Jones installment, but that ultimately he and Woods were more interested in establishing an original franchise. Marshall said that a lot of people had pitched ideas for the film. Jonathan Kasdan was eventually hired to replace Koepp in mid-2018, and a new release date was set for 2021. Kasdan had departed the project by May 2019, and it was rumored that writer Dan Fogelman would take over. In September 2019, Koepp announced that he had re-joined the production as writer, stating that the filmmakers had "a good idea this time." Koepp ultimately wrote two versions of the film, but neither were approved. He said that efforts to produce the film had failed because of disagreement between Spielberg, Ford, and Disney regarding the script. In February 2020, Spielberg stepped down as director, as he wanted to pass the film series to a new filmmaker for a fresh perspective. Kennedy later said that Spielberg "was kind of off and on" about directing the project, although he did remain as a hands-on producer. James Mangold was confirmed as director in May 2020, when he began work on a new script. He had previously offered Ford a role in his film Ford v Ferrari (2019) and the two also worked together on The Call of the Wild (2020), which Mangold produced. As a result of this relationship, Ford suggested that Spielberg and Kennedy hire Mangold as director. He is the first person besides Spielberg to direct a film in the series. Koepp departed the project again after Spielberg stepped down, saying it "seemed like the right time to let Jim have his own take on it and have his own person or himself write it." Mangold had considered turning down the director position, as Lucasfilm wanted filming to begin in about six months to meet the 2021 release date. However, Mangold wanted more time so he could refine the script. He eventually signed on to the project after the COVID-19 pandemic pushed back the release date, giving him the time he wanted. The pandemic had also shut down pre-production on Mangold's film about singer Bob Dylan. Mangold wrote the new screenplay with Jez and John-Henry Butterworth, who worked with him previously on Ford v Ferrari, over the course of six to eight months. Mangold said, "I wanted to really retool the existing script pretty aggressively, almost entirely." Koepp received credit alongside Mangold and the Butterworths for his earlier work. Among the previous films in the series, Mangold cited the first entry, Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981), as his biggest inspiration while making Dial of Destiny. He considered Raiders his favorite film in the series, and said "you go to the original because that's where the standard was set." Mangold conceived the film's time-travel element and its use of the Antikythera mechanism as the MacGuffin. To suit the story, artistic liberty was taken with the film's dial, giving it the ability to detect time fissures. Mangold considered time travel on par with the previous films: "It's no more of a wild swing in my mind than ghouls flying out of a box and melting people's heads through the sheer power of dark angels, or a 700-year-old knight existing in a cave for perpetuity. These are all beyond the scope of all physical belief." According to Mangold, the earlier draft by Koepp featured a MacGuffin that was "just another relic with power, similar to the relics we had seen," with no emotional connection to Jones. Multiple versions of the film's dial would be created by the prop department for different scenes. Although Greek inventor Archimedes is presented in the film as the Antikythera's creator, it is unclear whether that is true in reality. Earlier films had featured Nazis as the antagonists, and Mangold and the Butterworths were inspired by Operation Paperclip as a way of reincorporating them for Dial of Destiny. Mangold considered Nazi Germany for the film's time-traveling final act, with Jones attempting to stop Voller's plan. However, as this idea was developed further, Mangold considered it too predictable. He also found that it lacked emotional resonance for Jones and played out like a spy film, prompting him to choose the Siege of Syracuse instead. The Butterworths suggested the idea to end the film with Jones and Marion discussing their emotional pain, a callback to a similar conversation in Raiders. Mangold consulted with Lucas and Spielberg, who served as executive producers. As the script was being written, Mangold would send pages to the duo for input. Recalling advice that Spielberg offered, Mangold said, "It's a movie that's a trailer from beginning to end — always be moving." Despite Ford's age, Marshall and Spielberg ruled out the possibility of recasting his character. Ford said, "I'm Indiana Jones. When I'm gone, he's gone." Spielberg also said Jones would not be killed off during the events of the film. Likewise, Mangold never considered killing off the character. Ford was paid $10–12 million for his involvement. In April 2021, Phoebe Waller-Bridge, Mads Mikkelsen and Thomas Kretschmann were cast in undisclosed roles. Boyd Holbrook and Shaunette Renée Wilson were added the next month. Holbrook previously co-starred in Mangold's film Logan (2017), in which he also portrayed a second-in-command villain; this made him initially hesitant to accept the similar role of Klaber. Wilson was cast without auditioning, after a meeting with Mangold. She felt that her character's government connections fit into the story in a similar way to how the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the CIA recruited black agents to infiltrate the Black Panther Party in the 1960s. In July 2021, Antonio Banderas was cast in the film, portraying an ally to Indiana Jones. Ethann Isidore was cast as Teddy Kumar, marking his film debut. Waller-Bridge described her character as "a mystery and a wonder", and Mangold referred the actress to Barbara Stanwyck's performance as Jean Harrington in The Lady Eve (1941) as a key reference point. Mangold and the Butterworths wrote the role specifically for Waller-Bridge, inspired by Karen Allen's performance as Marion Ravenwood in Raiders of the Lost Ark. Waller-Bridge performed many of her own stunts. Mikkelsen said the script was "everything I wished it to be". His character was partly inspired by the Nazi scientists involved in the NASA, including Wernher von Braun. Like most villainous characters he has played throughout his career, Mikkelsen described Voller as a "misunderstood person". He also described his character as restrained: "We tried to avoid the cliché of the German or the Nazi with the extreme accent and the extreme madness. We wanted him to be a man who kind of blended in once he moved to America because he's predominantly a scientist". John Rhys-Davies reprised his role of Sallah for the first time since Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade (1989). Allen also expressed interest in reprising her role as Marion, noting in 2011 that she and Jones were married in the previous film "so it would be difficult, I think, to move forward without her". Allen's return was kept a secret in the years leading up to the film's premiere; she said "whenever anyone asked me if I was in the film or not, I had to come up with something to say, like, 'I could tell you, but then I'd have to kill you.'" Her scene was shot in a day and a half, with the use of a grey wig. Allen was happy to reprise the character, although she wished she could have had a larger role as part of the film's adventure. Spielberg's version of the film would have featured Marion in more scenes with Jones. Jim Broadbent expressed a willingness to reprise his role as Charles Stanforth from Kingdom of the Crystal Skull, but ultimately did not return. Following the release of Crystal Skull, LaBeouf criticized the film and Spielberg, although Mangold said this did not factor into Mutt's absence in Dial of Destiny, saying "there's only so many people you can edge into a picture". He further said about Mutt, "I didn't think his whole thing worked that well in the previous film." As in the earlier films, Mangold wanted to instead capture "that wonderful energy between Indy and an intrepid female character". Mangold kept his options open about Mutt still being alive and simply off-screen, although he said "the reality is you want the story to focus on the characters that are in the picture. And so saying someone's out wandering off in the periphery seems sadder purgatory than actually making them a story point in the film and using their character's existence as a tremendous source of drama for some of our lead characters." Mutt was also absent from Koepp's original draft. Although Crystal Skull was largely shot in the U.S., Marshall said that the fifth film would return to a global range of filming locations like the earlier films. Mangold was opposed to using the StageCraft virtual production technology developed by Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) for Lucasfilm's The Mandalorian (2019–present), wanting to rely mainly on practical effects. Because of pandemic quarantines, a remote location scouting system was used in some instances, in which scouters were sent to prospective areas with a camera to broadcast the sites to Mangold and production designer Adam Stockhausen. Principal photography began in England on June 4, 2021. Sound stage filming took place at Pinewood Studios, and on-site filming locations included Bamburgh Castle and the North Yorkshire Moors Railway near Grosmont. The latter locations were used for the opening sequence, including a train chase and a motorcycle scene involving Ford's stunt double. Ford himself was spotted in Grosmont on June 7, 2021. The railway bridge scenes were filmed in mid-June 2021, at Leaderfoot Viaduct near Melrose in the Scottish Borders. The train's interior design was inspired by Hitler's personal train, the Führersonderzug, and the interior scenes were filmed on a set at Pinewood Studios. A motorcycle chase was shot in the Scottish village of Glencoe, and other Scottish locations included Biggar, South Lanarkshire. Later in June, location shooting moved to London, where a street in Hackney was lined with vintage cars. Filming also took place inside a private residence that was reportedly chosen for its period-style interior. Ford preferred to do his own stunts. On June 23, it was announced that he had injured his shoulder during the rehearsal of a fight scene and that the production crew would shoot around his recovery. Ford's injury occurred while rehearsing a punch against Mikkelsen's character for the train sequence. In July 2021, shooting moved to Glasgow's city centre, which was transformed to resemble New York City in 1969. Meticulous detail went into efforts to recreate the location and time period. A chase sequence, shot along St. Vincent Street and other areas, re-creates a ticker tape parade celebrating the return of the Apollo 11 astronauts. A stunt double, Mike Massa, performed in place of Ford throughout the Glasgow shoot, with motion capture markers applied to his face. Holbrook and Waller-Bridge were on set as well. The sequence also featured 1,000 background actors as parade-goers and Vietnam War protestors. Filming in Glasgow lasted two weeks. Ford resumed filming in September 2021, and some shooting took place in the Hatton Garden area of London, which also doubled as New York City. In addition, a replica of a New York City Subway station was built at Pinewood's 007 Stage. In October 2021, production moved to Sicily, Italy, after the ending between Ford and Allen was shot. The Italian shoot included nearly 600 crew members, and took place throughout Sicily, which stood in for itself and Greece. Filming began in the city of Syracuse. Other shooting locations included the city of Cefalù, often standing in for Syracuse, and the Province of Trapani. Filming in Trapani included the towns of Marsala and Castellammare del Golfo, the latter serving as the harbor where Renaldo meets with Jones. Mangold wanted to include an underwater treasure-hunting sequence, a first for the film series. The diving scenes were filmed on-location in the Mediterranean Sea and in a tank at Pinewood, the latter done with stunt performers. The sequence involving Archimedes' tomb was filmed at Pinewood. The scenes leading up to the tomb sequence were shot at the Temple of Segesta in Trapani, as well as the Neapolis archaeological park in Syracuse. Filming at the latter location included the Ear of Dionysius cave, and the Grotta Dei Cordari cave. Scenes depicting the Roman siege were shot in Sicily as well, including Castello Maniace in Syracuse. Filming began in Morocco on October 17, 2021, taking place in the cities of Fez and Oujda. The Morocco segment was originally set to film in India – specifically the cities of Jaisalmer and Jaipur in the state of Rajasthan – until the COVID-19 levels there increased. Kathmandu in Nepal was then considered, until an outbreak occurred there as well. The Moroccan shoot consisted of exterior filming, while the interiors of the Hotel L'Atlantique were recreated at Pinewood. The Tangier chase sequence required the use of a dozen tuk-tuks, and was shot in Fez primarily by a second unit crew, while the actors filmed their portions of the sequence later on at Pinewood, with the use of a blue screen. On November 4, a camera operator named Nic Cupac was found dead in his Morocco hotel room; Disney stated that his death was not production related. After Morocco, the remainder of filming took place at Pinewood, eventually wrapping on February 26, 2022. Post-production began nine days later, although some film editing had already taken place while shooting. Michael McCusker, Andrew Buckland and Dirk Westervelt served as the film editors, replacing Michael Kahn, who had edited the previous four films. Phedon Papamichael served as cinematographer, marking his sixth film with Mangold. Papamichael sought advice from Spielberg's longtime cinematographer Janusz Kamiński, who worked on Crystal Skull. Spielberg offered his advice on the script, watched dailies, and later visited the editing room a number of times. He praised the finished film. As with the previous films, visual effects were handled by Industrial Light & Magic (ILM), a division of Lucasfilm. Dial of Destiny has a total of 2,350 effects shots, including many that occur during the Syracuse siege sequence. The time fissure, depicted as a stormy cloud portal, was made entirely through computer-generated imagery (CGI) and was among the final effects created for the film. The fissure design was based on research conducted into real cloud formations, as Mangold wanted it to look natural. In addition to ILM, several other visual effects companies also worked on the film and spent more than a year in post-production. After ILM, Rising Sun Pictures was the second-largest contributor of visual effects; it handled 301 shots, most of them during the parade sequence. Important Looking Pirates worked on 250 shots, mostly for the underwater sequence. Soho VFX contributed 235 shots, most of them for the tuk-tuk chase sequence. The Hotel L'Atlantique exterior was also created by Soho through CGI. Spielberg used motion capture for his animated film The Adventures of Tintin (2011), although he rejected the idea of using this method to digitally de-age Ford, saying in 2012 that he wanted the actor's age to be acknowledged in the film. By mid-2019, Spielberg and Koepp had devised a five-minute World War II opening sequence that would feature a de-aged Ford. Upon taking over the project, Mangold expanded the sequence to roughly 25 minutes. More than 100 ILM artists worked on the opening sequence over a three-year period, using various methods. Ford was de-aged to depict his appearance during the first three Indiana Jones films. This was partly achieved using new artificial intelligence software from ILM, which looked through archived footage of a younger Ford in his previous work for Lucasfilm, including the original Star Wars films. Ford's head was also scanned to create a younger version using CGI. Lighting techniques were emphasized on-set and included the use of Flux, a light-based capture system previously used for de-aging scenes in The Irishman (2019). In addition to effects, a mask of Ford's younger face was also made for use by a stuntman during a motorcycle chase. After filming, the de-aging footage was modified shot-by-shot using a variety of techniques. ILM artists had particular difficulty getting Ford's eyes to look right. According to visual effects supervisor Robert Weaver, "Many times, we weren't quite getting the right balance of the eye-opening and the shape of the overall eyes, and were continually having to reference both older footage and what was shot in camera." Ford was somewhat "spooked" by the de-aging process, but was nonetheless impressed. Mikkelsen was also de-aged for the opening sequence. In June 2016, Spielberg confirmed that John Williams, who scored the previous films in the Indiana Jones franchise, would return to compose the music for the fifth film. In 2022, Williams stated that it would be his final film score, following plans for a retirement, though he later backtracked on this decision. Williams premiered one of his compositions, "Helena's Theme", at the Hollywood Bowl on September 2, 2022, at Mangold's request. Walt Disney Records released the soundtrack album digitally on June 29, 2023, and was released through CD and vinyl LP formats on August 9, 2023. Ford and Mangold both felt that Crystal Skull did not do enough to highlight Jones' age and the new era in which he lives. Speaking about Dial of Destiny as a finale to the franchise, Mangold said, "It became really important to me to figure out how to make this a movie about a hero at sunset". He said that Jones's age would be a major part of the film, something that was touched upon only briefly in the earlier drafts: "The issues I brought up about Indy's age were not things I thought were being addressed in the material being developed at the time. There were 'old' jokes, but the material itself wasn't about it. To me, whatever your greatest liability, you should fly straight towards that. If you try to pretend it's not there, you end up getting slings and arrows the whole way". According to Mangold and Ford, Dial of Destiny is about age, time and family relationships. Mangold said the film "is not about aging per se, but time — the way time travels for all of us, the way we all get older as the world changes around us". Mangold said of the film's cinematic style that the opening sequence, set in 1944, is meant to contrast with the main plot, which takes place in 1969, allowing the film to start with a blast of classic Indiana Jones action reminiscent of the first three films (1981–1989). The transition from the pulpy cinematic language of 1940s films brings the characters from an "older world" into the "modern" 1960s, a present strongly influenced by the Cold War, nuclear power, space travel, intrigue and the lack of black-and-white morality. Mangold sought to portray "an accurate and realistic appraisal of where this character would be at this time in his life", describing Jones as "a hero who is used to a black and white world" when it comes to villains, who now finds himself in a gray world with a lack of "clear good guys and bad guys". Jez Butterworth noted the presence of ex-Nazis involved in the U.S. government's Moon-landing program. This makes Jones grow distrustful of his country, feeling like a man out of time in an era in which idealism is gone. It was Ford's idea to start the 1969 storyline with Jones at a low point in his life, and then gradually "rebuild him from the ground up" as the film progresses. Mangold compared Dial of Destiny to his final X-Men film Logan, enjoying the notion of what a hero can do for the world when it no longer has a place for him, allowing classical heroes to be seen through the "prism" of today's "jaundiced contemporary attitudes". However, Dial of Destiny would lack the seriousness of Logan, with the latter being regarded as a "purposefully and intentionally" grim adventure. During Star Wars Celebration in May 2022, Ford debuted the first official image from the film, showing Jones silhouetted in a cave. Exclusive footage was shown to attendees at the D23 Expo in September 2022. The footage included shots of a de-aged Ford and multiple action sequences, and confirmed the return of Rhys-Davies. The film's title, Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny, was revealed on December 1, 2022, alongside the first trailer for the film. Alex Billington of FirstShowing said that the film looked "phenomenal," adding that he felt more positive about it after the trailer than he did Crystal Skull. The Escapist's John Friscia found the trailer's nod to Raiders of the Lost Ark amusing but hoped that the film wouldn't rely on nostalgia. A TV spot for the film aired during Super Bowl LVII on February 12, 2023. A new trailer and poster debuted at the 2023 Star Wars Celebration on April 7, 2023. Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny had its world premiere at the 76th Cannes Film Festival, screening out-of-competition, on May 18, 2023, exactly fifteen years after the Cannes premiere of The Kingdom of the Crystal Skull. The film received a "lukewarm" five-minute standing ovation and received a divisive reaction from attending critics. It was theatrically released in the United States on June 30, 2023, by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures in IMAX, Dolby Cinema, 4DX, ScreenX, and other premium formats. It was initially set for release on July 19, 2019, taking off the then-planned release date for the Marvel Cinematic Universe unproduced Inhumans film by Marvel Studios, but was delayed in April 2017 to July 10, 2020, with The Lion King (2019) taking its former spot. It then shifted to July 9, 2021, and was further delayed to July 29, 2022, following the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the film industry. Its current release date was announced in October 2021. Internationally, the film was released on dates ranging from June 28 to 30. Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny was released on digital formats on August 29, 2023. The film achieved first place on VOD charts, topping iTunes, Google Play, and Vudu. Dial of Destiny was released on Disney+ on December 1, 2023 and was released on DVD, Blu-ray, and 4K by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on December 5, 2023. Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny grossed $174.5 million in the United States and Canada, and $209.5 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $384 million. With an estimated production budget of $294.7 million, not including marketing costs, it is the most expensive film in the Indiana Jones franchise, as well as one of the most expensive films ever made. Due to its expensive production cost and marketing budget, the film was deemed a box-office bomb. Collider estimated the film would need to make around $600 million to break-even, and $800 million to be considered a success. In August 2023, Variety reported the film was on-pace to lose Disney $100 million, making it one of Disney's largest financial film failures since John Carter (2012). In the United States and Canada, Dial of Destiny was released alongside Ruby Gillman, Teenage Kraken, and was projected to gross domestically $60–65 million from 4,600 theaters in its opening weekend. It was also expected to gross around $80 million from international territories, for a worldwide debut of around $140 million. TheWrap claimed that Americans under the age of 30 had a "much lower presence in ticket presales compared to the average summer tentpole" and that the film's tracking was also underperforming in Asian markets. The film made $24 million on its first day, including $7.2 million from Thursday night previews. It went on to debut to $60.4 million over the three-day weekend, the second-best total of the franchise (not adjusted for inflation), behind its predecessor Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull (2008), and a total of $83.9 million over the five-day Independence Day holiday, finishing first at the box office; Deadline Hollywood noted that a majority of the opening weekend audience (58%) was over the age of 35. The film made $26.5 million in its second weekend, finishing in second behind newcomer Insidious: The Red Door; the 56.1% drop was the largest of the franchise. The film made $12 million in its third weekend and $6.7 million in its fourth, finishing in fourth and fifth place, respectively. Overseas, the film made $69.6 million from 52 countries in its opening weekend. The largest markets were the United Kingdom ($8.9 million), France ($5.9 million), Japan ($4.7 million), Korea ($4.1 million), Germany ($4.1 million), Spain ($4 million), Australia ($3.8 million), Italy ($2.7 million), China ($2.3 million), and Mexico ($2.3 million). Variety said that the lukewarm critical and audience response to the film was in-part to blame for the "weak opening", and noted its global debut of $130 million was less than The Flash's $139 million opening two weeks prior. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 70% of 419 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 6.4/10. The website's consensus reads: "It isn't as thrilling as earlier adventures, but the nostalgic rush of seeing Harrison Ford back in action helps Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny find a few final bits of cinematic treasure." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 58 out of 100, based on 65 critics, indicating "mixed or average" reviews. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale, slightly above the previous film's B score, while PostTrak reported a 79% positive score from filmgoers, with 59% saying they would definitely recommend the film. John Nugent of Empire gave the film four out of five stars, complimenting Ford's performance, and noted Mangold's camerawork "moves confidently through action set-piece after action set-piece, keeping up a frantic pace." Bilge Ebiri, reviewing for Vulture, called the film "fun" but acknowledged comparisons to the previous installments were "warranted. But it's also too entertaining to dismiss. You may not lose yourself in this one the way so many of us once did with the earlier Indiana Jones movies, but you'll certainly have a good time." The Guardian's Peter Bradshaw felt Dial of Destiny "has quite a bit of zip and fun and narrative ingenuity with all its MacGuffiny silliness that the last one really didn't." Germain Lussier, reviewing the film for io9, praised the film for having "a great premise, exciting action, wonderful banter, and some fantastic twists and turns." In Uproxx, Mike Ryan wrote: "This is a very fun movie but Indy's arc is poignant and also sad. It's kept in the background, but it's there." He found the ending more satisfying than the ending of The Kingdom of the Crystal Skull. Owen Gleiberman of Variety described the film as a "dutifully eager but ultimately rather joyless piece of nostalgic hokum minus the thrill... Though it has its quota of 'relentless' action, it rarely tries to match (let alone top) the ingeniously staged kinetic bravura of Raiders of the Lost Ark ... time travel, in Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny, is really an unconscious metaphor, since it's the movie that wants to go back in time, completing our love affair with the defining action-movie-star role of Harrison Ford. In the abstract, at least, it accomplishes that, right down to the emotional diagram of a touching finale, but only by reminding you that even if you re-stage the action ethos of the past, recapturing the thrill is much harder." David Rooney for The Hollywood Reporter criticized the film, writing "it's a big, bombastic movie that goes through the motions but never finds much joy in the process, despite John Williams's hard-working score continuously pushing our nostalgia buttons and trying to convince us we're on a wild ride." The Telegraph's Robbie Collin praised Ford's performance, but felt the film's action sequences were "loaded with mayhem but painfully short on spark and bravado: there's no shot here, nor twist of choreography, that makes you marvel at the filmmaking mind that conceived it." Richard Lawson of Vanity Fair wrote: "Dial of Destiny certainly tries hard to do right by its pedigree. The basic component parts are there: an object quest rooted in history, a tingle of the supernatural, easily rooted-against fascist villains. But something in the calculations is off ...In [the film], one can feel the four credited screenwriters grasping at inspiration and coming up short. What they did manage to make would be perfectly fine as a standalone adventure film starring some other character, but it's not worthy of the whip." The trailer for Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny was nominated in three categories at the 2023 Golden Trailer Awards: Best Summer 2023 Blockbuster Trailer, and Best Teaser; and "Hero" (Wild Card) for Best Fantasy Adventure TV Spot (for a Feature Film) and Best Music TV Spot (for a Feature Film). It won Best Fantasy Adventure for "New Day" (Wild Card) and Best Fantasy Adventure TV Spot (for a Feature Film) for "Hero" (Wild Card). At the 48th Saturn Awards, Dial of Destiny was nominated for nine awards, including Best Fantasy Film, Best Actor (Ford), Best Supporting Actress (Waller-Bridge), Best Supporting Actor (Mikkelsen), Best Director (Mangold), Best Music (Williams), and Best Special Effects. The film was nominated for two awards at the 22nd Visual Effects Society Awards, Outstanding Visual Effects in a Photoreal Feature and Outstanding Created Environment in a Photoreal Feature. At the 44th Golden Raspberry Awards, the film was nominated for Worst Prequel, Remake, Rip-off or Sequel (as "Indiana Jones and the Dial of...Still Beating a Dead Horse") and Worst Screenplay (as "Indiana Jones and the Dial of...Can I go home now?"). For the 96th Academy Awards, John Williams' score received a Best Original Score nomination, marking his fourth nomination within the series. At age 91, this nomination also extended his record for the most Oscar nominations (54) for any living person. The score was also nominated, alongside Williams' work on The Fabelmans (2022), for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media at the 66th Grammy Awards. Williams won a Grammy for Best Instrumental Composition for "Helena's Theme", making it Williams' 26th Grammy Award. Disney CEO Bob Iger said in 2016 that the future of the franchise with Ford was unknown, but that the fifth film would not be the final installment in the franchise. In 2022, Kennedy reaffirmed earlier comments that Ford's role as Indiana Jones would not be recast, while Ford confirmed that the fifth film would be his last in the series. That November, Disney considered multiple options to continue the franchise, including additional films or a television series for Disney+. By March 2023, Lucasfilm was reported to have canceled Indiana Jones movies and television series because they want to focus on the Star Wars franchise; it would have been the second prequel series following The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles. Disney confirmed the following month that the film would indeed be the last in the franchise. Apollo 11 in popular culture As part of the 2013 deal transferring the distribution rights of future Indiana Jones films from Paramount Pictures to the Walt Disney Studios, Paramount retained the distribution rights to the first four films, and a residual associate credit ("in association with Paramount Pictures") in the film's credits and promotional materials, as well as "financial participation" from the film. Paramount's logo also appears in the films' opening titles. While Disney officially reported spending $294.7 million producing the film, other figures, including $295 million and "$300 million+," have been reported. This article is partially from the site of Indiana Jones Wiki, the text has been placed by the author or person responsible for publication under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License or a compatible license. (See the list of authors.) Kroll, Justin (December 6, 2013). "Disney Acquires Rights to Future 'Indiana Jones' Movies". Variety. Archived from the original on March 19, 2016. Retrieved March 15, 2016. Ford, Rebecca (December 6, 2013). "Disney Takes Control of 'Indiana Jones' Franchise for Future Films". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 7, 2013. Retrieved December 7, 2013. "Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny (12A)". BBFC. June 18, 2023. Archived from the original on June 18, 2023. Retrieved June 18, 2023. Reid, Caroline (February 8, 2023). "Disney's $300 Million Bet To Tempt Back Cinemagoers". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 4, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2023. Ahead of its first quarter earnings release today, Disney has revealed that it has shelled out $294.7 million (£244.1 million) on making the latest instalment in the Indiana Jones series in a bid to tempt movie fans back to cinemas this year. Rubin, Rebecca (July 2, 2023). "Box Office: 'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' Stumbles With $60 Million Debut, 'Ruby Gillman, Teenage Kraken' Flops". Variety. Archived from the original on July 2, 2023. Retrieved July 2, 2023. ...critics were lukewarm on 'Dial of Destiny'... D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 2, 2023). "'Indiana Jones' & The Box Office Of Doom: Why 'Dial Of Destiny' At $60M Opening Isn't Setting Records For Franchise Finale – Updated Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved July 2, 2023. "Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny". "Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny (2023) - Financial Information". NPR Staff. "Here are the 2024 Grammy Award winners". NPR. Retrieved February 6, 2024. Huff, Lauren (December 19, 2022). "Director James Mangold teases a 'hero at sunset' in Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 19, 2022. Retrieved December 19, 2022. "What was Harrison Ford's age in each of Indiana Jones movies? Find out". The Economic Times. June 27, 2023. Retrieved October 1, 2023. Romanchick, Shane (January 11, 2023). "'Indiana Jones' Adventure Series Toys Tease 'Dial of Destiny'". Collider. Archived from the original on January 12, 2023. Retrieved January 12, 2023. Travis, Ben (November 24, 2022). "Epic 2023 Preview!". Empire. Archived from the original on November 29, 2022. Retrieved December 3, 2022. Gonzalez, Sandra (December 1, 2022). "Harrison Ford cracks the whip in teaser trailer for 'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny'". CNN. Archived from the original on December 1, 2022. Retrieved December 2, 2022. "Mads Mikkelsen's Indiana Jones Villain Is Based On Real Nazi & NASA Scientist". Screen Rant. July 2, 2023. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved July 11, 2023. Rooney, David (May 19, 2023). "'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' Review: Harrison Ford Cracks the Whip One Last Time in a Final Chapter Short on Both Thrills and Fun". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Bennett, Tara (December 23, 2022). "Antonio Banderas balanced 'Puss in Boots: The Last Wish,' 'Indiana Jones 5,' and Sondheim". Syfy Wire. Archived from the original on January 12, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2023. Vito Oddo, Marco (November 30, 2022). "Antonio Banderas Reveals New Details About His 'Indiana Jones 5' Character". Collider. Archived from the original on December 4, 2022. Retrieved December 4, 2022. "Banderas: 'I play a good guy who dies for Indiana Jones'". EFE. October 7, 2021. Archived from the original on October 7, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2021. Sarrubba, Stefania (November 28, 2022). "First look at Indiana Jones 5 full cast revealed". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on November 29, 2022. Retrieved November 29, 2022. Travis, Ben (November 21, 2022). "Indiana Jones 5 Will Pit Indy Against Nazis Again, In 1969". Empire. Archived from the original on December 9, 2022. Retrieved November 19, 2022. Bradshaw, Peter (May 18, 2023). "Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny review – Harrison Ford cracks the whip in taut sequel". The Guardian. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved May 18, 2023. "Production notes" (PDF). Walt Disney Studios. pp. 5, 7–10, 12–14. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 31, 2023. Retrieved June 1, 2023. Kasraoui, Safaa (November 9, 2021). "Dutch Bodybuilder, Actor Olivier Richters Enjoyed Moroccans' Warm Welcome in Fez". Morocco World News. Archived from the original on November 27, 2021. Retrieved November 27, 2021. Gleiberman, Owen (May 18, 2023). "'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' Review: Harrison Ford Plays the Aging Indy in a Sequel That Serves Up Nostalgic Hokum Minus the Thrill". Variety. Archived from the original on May 18, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2023. Rinzler, J.W.; Bouzereau, Laurent (May 20, 2008). The Complete Making of Indiana Jones, Chapter 1: "The Name is Indiana: 1968 to February 1980", p. 36. New York City, United States of America: Penguin Random House. p. 36. ISBN 978-0-345-50129-5. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved December 7, 2022. Breznican, Anthony (April 16, 2008). "Harrison Ford is a portrait of rugged individualism". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 2, 2012. Retrieved April 15, 2008. Friedman, Roger (May 16, 2008). "Lucas: 'Indy 5' a Possibility". Fox News. Archived from the original on May 17, 2008. Retrieved May 16, 2008. Adler, Shawn (August 5, 2008). "'Indiana Jones 5' Won't Center on Shia LaBeouf, Insists George Lucas". MTV Movies Blog. Archived from the original on August 28, 2008. Retrieved August 5, 2008. Breznican, Anthony (May 26, 2008). "Will 'Crystal Skull' be the next-to-last crusade?". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 13, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Lee, Patrick (August 5, 2008). "Lucas: Indy V Research In Works". Syfy Wire. Archived from the original on August 5, 2008. Retrieved August 5, 2008. Izundu, Chi Chi (February 24, 2010). "'Germ of an idea' for fifth Indiana Jones film". BBC. Archived from the original on June 10, 2010. Retrieved June 3, 2021. "TF Interview: George Lucas". Total Film. United Kingdom. May 2008. Stephenson, Hunter (July 28, 2008). "George Lucas Talks Indiana Jones 5, Spielberg's "Nostalgia," Compares Fans to "Holy Ghost"". /Film. Archived from the original on June 4, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Thomson, Katherine (November 3, 2008). "Harrison Ford says George Lucas in 'think mode' on another 'Indiana Jones' film". HuffPost. Archived from the original on July 15, 2021. Retrieved July 15, 2021. Ditzian, Eric; Horowitz, Josh (November 8, 2010). "Harrison Ford Is 'Looking Forward' To 'Indiana Jones 5'". MTV News. Archived from the original on April 15, 2016. Retrieved March 15, 2016. Ghahremani, Tanya (July 31, 2012). "'Indiana Jones 5' May Not Happen, but 'Jurassic Park 4' Still Might". Complex.com. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved March 15, 2016. Shaw, Lucas (October 30, 2012). "Disney to Buy Lucasfilm for $4.05B, Plans New 'Star Wars' Films". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on July 7, 2021. Retrieved November 1, 2012. Verrier, Richard; Fritz, Ben; Flint, Joe (October 31, 2012). "Disney would acquire a visual effects firm with Lucasfilm deal". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 9, 2020. Retrieved November 4, 2012. Mazique, Brian (April 8, 2023). "The Indiana Jones And The Dial Of Destiny Trailer Is Viral". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 9, 2023. Retrieved April 8, 2023. Weintraub, Steve (August 7, 2012). "Frank Marshall Talks The Bourne Legacy, The Goonies 2, Who Framed Roger Rabbit Sequel, Indiana Jones 5, and Leaving Back to the Future as a Trilogy". Collider. Archived from the original on June 6, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Boorstin, Julia (June 13, 2013). "Steven Spielberg: Film Industry Implosion Lies Ahead". CNBC. Archived from the original on June 4, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Wigler, Josh (November 13, 2012). "'Star Wars' Director Search Down To 'A Couple Of Candidates'". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 17, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Vieira, Anthony (December 15, 2014). "Disney CEO Talks 'Pacing Themselves' with 'Indiana Jones 5'". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 16, 2016. Retrieved March 15, 2016. Graser, Marc (December 13, 2013). "Don't Expect a New Indiana Jones Movie for at Least Two to Three Years". Variety. Archived from the original on December 14, 2013. Retrieved December 14, 2013. Robinson, Joanna (May 5, 2015). "Lucasfilm President Finally Confirms Indiana Jones Sequel Is on the Horizon". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on March 14, 2016. Retrieved March 15, 2016. Travis, Ben (November 19, 2022). "Indiana Jones Is Back! 'It's Full Of Adventure, Laughs, And Real Emotion,' Says Harrison Ford – World-Exclusive Image". Empire. Archived from the original on November 19, 2022. Retrieved November 19, 2022. Sharf, Zack (June 22, 2023). "Harrison Ford Refuses to Retire From Acting as He Turns 81, Says 'Indiana Jones' Exit Is Not Bittersweet: 'It's Time For Me to Grow Up'". Variety. Archived from the original on June 22, 2023. Retrieved June 22, 2023. Weiss, Josh (November 27, 2022). "Here's the biggest piece of advice Steven Spielberg gave James Mangold for 'Indiana Jones 5'". Yahoo! Entertainment. Archived from the original on December 19, 2022. Retrieved December 19, 2022. Masters, Kim (December 9, 2015). "Lucasfilm's Kathleen Kennedy on What George Lucas Thinks of 'Force Awakens,' Plans for 'Indiana Jones'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 15, 2016). "Steven Spielberg & Harrison Ford Team Up For 'Indiana Jones 5', Disney Sets July 2019 Release". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 23, 2016. Retrieved March 15, 2016. Franich, Darren (April 12, 2016). "Harrison Ford is the only Indiana Jones, says 'Indy 5' producer". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 4, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Ian, Freer (August 1, 2016). "The BFG". Empire. Archived from the original on June 4, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Giardina, Carolyn (April 11, 2016). "CinemaCon: Frank Marshall Open to $50 Home Movies; Won't Replace Harrison Ford as Indiana Jones". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 20, 2020. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Breznican, Anthony (June 24, 2016). "Steven Spielberg: Director's video tour of Universal backlot". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 22, 2017. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Weintraub, Steve (July 29, 2016). "'Jason Bourne' Producer Frank Marshall on the Sequel's Uniqueness, 'Sully', 'Jurassic World 2' and More". Collider. Archived from the original on June 4, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Chitwood, Adam (October 24, 2016). "Indiana Jones 5: George Lucas Not Involved in the Story". Collider. Archived from the original on October 26, 2016. Retrieved October 25, 2016. Spry, Jeff (June 22, 2016). "Steven Spielberg confirms George Lucas' involvement in Indiana Jones 5". Syfy Wire. Archived from the original on May 12, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Sciretta, Peter (October 24, 2016). "Thank The Maker! George Lucas Not Involved With 'Indiana Jones 5' Story". /Film. Archived from the original on January 15, 2023. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Evry, Max (October 1, 2018). "Exclusive: Indiana Jones 5 Will Return to Global Scope". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on June 4, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Lang, Brent; Khatchatourian, Maane (April 25, 2017). "Disney Dates 'Lion King' and 'Frozen 2,' Pushes Fifth 'Indiana Jones' Film to 2020". Variety. Archived from the original on April 26, 2017. Retrieved July 23, 2017. Nolfi, Joey (September 4, 2017). "'Indiana Jones 5' Won't Feature Shia LaBeouf's Character, Writer Says". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 4, 2017. Retrieved September 4, 2017. Travis, Ben (March 19, 2018). "Steven Spielberg Confirms April 2019 UK Shoot for Indiana Jones 5". Empire. Archived from the original on June 4, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Lang, Brent (June 29, 2018). "'Indiana Jones 5' Will Miss 2020 Release Date (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on August 13, 2019. Retrieved June 29, 2018. Scott, Ryan (September 9, 2019). "A Quiet Place Writers Met with Lucasfilm About Star Wars & Indiana Jones [Exclusive]". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on September 21, 2019. Retrieved September 21, 2019. Sneider, Jeff (June 28, 2018). "Exclusive: 'Solo' Scribe Jonathan Kasdan Writing 'Indiana Jones 5' for Steven Spielberg". Collider. Archived from the original on June 29, 2018. Retrieved June 29, 2018. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 10, 2018). "'Indiana Jones 5' Shifts To 2021, 'Mary Poppins Returns' Moves Up A Week & More Disney Release-Date Moves". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 3, 2019. Retrieved July 10, 2018. Pearson, Ben (May 1, 2019). "Rumor: 'Indiana Jones 5' Now Being Written By 'This Is Us' Creator; Learn Plot Details of Jon Kasdan's Abandoned Draft [Updated]". /Film. Archived from the original on June 9, 2019. Retrieved May 6, 2019. "Jurassic Park screenwriter David Koepp on Indiana Jones 5, Spider-Man and his debut novel". Den of Geek. September 19, 2019. Archived from the original on September 21, 2019. Retrieved September 21, 2019. Davids, Brian (June 19, 2020). "David Koepp on 'You Should Have Left' and Leaving 'Indiana Jones 5' Behind". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 4, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Stolworthy, Jacob (October 1, 2020). "Indiana Jones 5 writer says Steven Spielberg quit as director because his ideas 'didn't work'". The Independent. Archived from the original on October 20, 2020. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Adler, Matthew (September 27, 2020). "Spielberg's Indiana Jones 5 Fell Apart Because No One Could Agree on the Script". IGN. Archived from the original on June 4, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Vary, Adam B.; Kroll, Justin; Lang, Brent (February 26, 2020). "Steven Spielberg Won't Direct 'Indiana Jones 5,' James Mangold in Talks to Replace (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on February 26, 2020. Retrieved February 26, 2020. Lawrence, Gregory (May 25, 2020). "'Indiana Jones 5': Frank Marshall Updates Us on Script, Praises New Director James Mangold". Collider. Archived from the original on May 27, 2020. Retrieved April 16, 2021. Kaye, Don (December 8, 2020). "Indiana Jones 5 Producer Promises Harrison Ford is the Only Indy". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on April 16, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. Vary, Adam B. (June 21, 2023). "'Indiana Jones 5' Director James Mangold on 'Pinch-Hitting' for Spielberg and Refusing Fan Service: Franchises Have Become 'Large-Scale Advertising'". Variety. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved June 22, 2023. Bankhurst, Adam; Stedman, Alex (April 10, 2023). "Interview: James Mangold Explains Why Indiana Jones is Still Fighting Nazis in Dial of Destiny". IGN. Archived from the original on May 22, 2023. Retrieved May 22, 2023. Taylor, Drew (June 14, 2020). "'Indiana Jones 5': David Koepp on Why He's No Longer Writing the Script". Collider. Archived from the original on June 17, 2020. Retrieved June 21, 2020. Crow, David (May 25, 2023). "How Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny Channels Raiders of the Lost Ark". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on May 27, 2023. Retrieved May 27, 2023. "James Mangold Believes in Indiana Jones, but His Real Hero Is Steven Spielberg". IndieWire. June 27, 2023. Archived from the original on June 28, 2023. Mangold, James [@mang0ld] (April 10, 2021). "The official press release mentioned writers but I guess it gets left out on recaps... Current writers are Jez and John-Henry Butterworth (who worked with me on FvF) and myself!" (Tweet). Retrieved April 10, 2021 – via Twitter. Coyle, Jake (May 21, 2023). "Stepping into Spielberg's shoes, James Mangold takes Indiana Jones on one last adventure". ABC News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on May 22, 2023. Retrieved May 22, 2023. "Indiana Jones 5". Writers Guild of America West. February 10, 2023. Archived from the original on March 20, 2023. Retrieved March 19, 2023. Mangold, James [@mang0ld] (December 13, 2022). "Raiders" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Huff, Lauren (June 27, 2023). "Turning back the Dial: Harrison Ford examines the legacy of Indiana Jones as he caps a historic run". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved June 27, 2023. Davids, Brian (July 3, 2023). "'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' Director James Mangold Breaks Down His Ambitious and Emotional Ending". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 11, 2023. Retrieved July 12, 2023. Vary, Adam B. (July 1, 2023). "'Indiana Jones 5' Director James Mangold Explains the Fate of Shia LaBeouf's Character and the 'Wild Swing' Ending". Variety. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved July 1, 2023. "They Belong in a Museum: Prop Master Ben Wilkinson on the Treasures and Artifacts of Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny". Lucasfilm. July 7, 2023. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved July 12, 2023. Solly, Meilan (June 28, 2023). "The Real History Behind the Archimedes Dial in 'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny'". Smithsonian Magazine. Archived from the original on June 28, 2023. Retrieved June 29, 2023. Alexander, Bryan (July 2, 2023). "Fact-checking 'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny': Is the Antikythera mechanism real?". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 2, 2023. Retrieved July 2, 2023. Deckelmeier, Joe (June 14, 2023). "James Mangold On Taking Over For Steven Spielberg In Indiana Jones And The Dial Of Destiny". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on June 22, 2023. Retrieved June 22, 2023. Edwards, Molly (June 30, 2023). "James Mangold breaks down the wild Indiana Jones 5 final act". GamesRadar. Archived from the original on June 30, 2023. Retrieved June 30, 2023. Colburn, Randall (September 10, 2022). "Harrison Ford confirms he's done with Indy after Indiana Jones 5: 'I'm not falling down for you again'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 13, 2022. Retrieved September 13, 2022. Leane, Rob (October 26, 2015). "Indiana Jones 5: Recasting Indy ruled out". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on April 15, 2016. Rosser, Michael (December 4, 2015). "Steven Spielberg talks 'Bridge Of Spies' and future projects". Screen Daily. Archived from the original on February 6, 2016. Retrieved September 28, 2021. Rainey, James (April 11, 2016). "Frank Marshall: Harrison Ford Is One and Only 'Indiana Jones,' 'Not Going to Do the Bond Thing'". Variety. Archived from the original on April 12, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2016. Gajanan, Mahita (May 24, 2019). "Harrison Ford Says He's the Only One Who Gets to Play Indiana Jones: 'When I'm Gone, He's Gone'". Time. Archived from the original on September 28, 2021. Retrieved September 28, 2021. Bradley, Laura (June 15, 2016). "Steven Spielberg Promises He Won't Kill Harrison Ford in New Indiana Jones". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on November 1, 2016. Huff, Lauren (July 2, 2023). "Dial of Destiny director James Mangold didn't want to be the one to kill Harrison Ford's Indiana Jones". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved July 2, 2023. Lang, Brent (May 8, 2018). "Leonardo DiCaprio, Jennifer Lawrence and Other Star Salaries Revealed". Variety. Archived from the original on June 18, 2018. Retrieved February 26, 2023. Kroll, Justin (April 9, 2021). "'Indiana Jones 5': Phoebe Waller-Bridge Lands Female Lead In Next Installment Opposite Harrison Ford". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 30, 2021. Retrieved April 9, 2021. Kroll, Justin (April 15, 2021). "'Indiana Jones 5': Mads Mikkelsen Joins Harrison Ford and Phoebe Waller-Bridge in Sequel". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 18, 2021. Retrieved April 15, 2021. Gonzalez, Umberto (April 22, 2021). "Thomas Kretschmann Joins Cast of 'Indiana Jones 5' in Undisclosed Role (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on April 22, 2021. Retrieved May 14, 2021. Kroll, Justin (May 14, 2021). "'Indiana Jones 5': Boyd Holbrook and Shaunette Renée Wilson Join Harrison Ford In Next Installment". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 30, 2021. Retrieved May 14, 2021. Sneider, Jeff (May 14, 2021). "'Indiana Jones 5': James Mangold Casts His 'Logan' Star Boyd Holbrook Alongside Harrison Ford". Collider. Archived from the original on November 22, 2022. Retrieved November 22, 2022. Davids, Brian (July 20, 2023). "Boyd Holbrook Breaks Down His 'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' and 'Justified: City Primeval' Baddies". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 1, 2023. Wagmeister, Elizabeth (July 1, 2023). "'Indiana Jones 5' Star Shaunette Renée Wilson Asked for Script Changes Over an 'Offensive and a Bit Problematic' Scene". Variety. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved July 2, 2023. Kroll, Justin (July 15, 2021). "'Indiana Jones 5': Antonio Banderas Latest Addition To Next Installment In Franchise". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 17, 2021. Retrieved July 15, 2021. Ritman, Alex (June 30, 2023). "'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' Teenage Breakout Ethann Isidore on Battling Nazis By Day, School Homework by Night". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 30, 2023. Retrieved June 30, 2023. Travis, Ben (November 21, 2022). "Phoebe Waller-Bridge Is Indy's Goddaughter Helena In Indiana Jones 5: 'She's A Mystery And A Wonder' – Exclusive Image". Empire. Archived from the original on November 21, 2022. Retrieved November 21, 2022. Huff, Lauren. "Phoebe Waller-Bridge on getting to punch Indiana Jones in Dial of Destiny: 'It was glorious'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved June 29, 2023. Chitwood, Adam (May 5, 2021). "Mads Mikkelsen on the 'Indiana Jones 5' Script: 'It Was Everything I Wished It to Be'". Collider. Archived from the original on May 7, 2021. Retrieved May 7, 2021. Huff, Lauren (May 12, 2023). "Meet Voller: Mads Mikkelsen on what to expect from the Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny villain". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved June 1, 2023. Zemler, Emily (May 13, 2021). "Mads Mikkelsen Wants to Put His Characters' Flaws on the Big Screen". The Observer. Archived from the original on May 13, 2021. Retrieved May 13, 2021. Waddington, Liam (January 6, 2021). "'Indiana Jones 5': John Rhys-Davies is interested in returning as Sallah in Indiana Jones 5". Flickering Myth. Archived from the original on January 15, 2023. Retrieved April 12, 2021. Carroll, Jordan (July 4, 2014). "John Rhys-Davies talks 'Indiana Jones,' 'The Lord of the Rings' with Utahns". Daily Herald. Archived from the original on October 30, 2015. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Busch, Jenna (September 10, 2022). "Indiana Jones Footage Description: Old Friends, New Threats, And One Last Ride [D23]". /Film. Archived from the original on September 10, 2022. Retrieved September 10, 2022. Gallagher, Brian (March 25, 2011). "Karen Allen Talks 'White Irish Drinkers' [Exclusive]". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on October 8, 2013. Retrieved June 3, 2021. McNamara, Mary (June 30, 2023). "Karen Allen kept her 'Indiana Jones' cameo a secret for years, 'which was torture'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 30, 2023. Retrieved June 30, 2023. Vary, Adam B. (June 30, 2023). "Inside the 'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' Surprise Cameo: 'I Was Profoundly Happy'". Variety. Archived from the original on June 30, 2023. Retrieved July 1, 2023. Huff, Lauren (June 30, 2023). "Karen Allen on saying goodbye to Indy and Marion in Dial of Destiny: 'It feels complete to me'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved July 1, 2023. Whitney, E. Oliver (March 7, 2017). "Jim Broadbent Looks Back On His Quirky Roles, 'Harry Potter,' and Whether He'd Return for 'Indiana Jones 5'". ScreenCrush. Archived from the original on January 15, 2023. Retrieved November 3, 2022. Crosbie, Eve (June 15, 2023). "'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' director explains why Shia LaBeouf isn't in the movie: 'There's only so many people you can edge into a picture'". Insider. Archived from the original on June 15, 2023. Retrieved June 29, 2023. Ryan, Mike (June 22, 2023). "James Mangold On 'Indiana Jones And The Dial Of Destiny' And Why He Could Use A Glass Of Scotch Right Now". Uproxx. Archived from the original on June 29, 2023. Retrieved June 29, 2023. Dinsdale, Ryan (November 24, 2022). "Indiana Jones 5 Prioritised Practical Effects While Filming". IGN. Archived from the original on January 15, 2023. Retrieved November 27, 2022. James, Daron (July 3, 2023). "'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' Production Designer Adam Stockhausen on That Thrilling Opening Sequence". Motion Picture Association. Retrieved October 1, 2023. "Caves, Castles, and Tuna Factories: Inside the Locations of Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny". Lucasfilm. July 14, 2023. Retrieved October 1, 2023. Lund, Anthony (June 7, 2021). "'Indiana Jones 5' Set Photos Reveal Motorcycle Stunt, Nazi Train and a Creepy Harrison Ford Mask". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on June 21, 2021. Retrieved June 8, 2021. Wiseman, Andreas (June 2, 2021). "'Indiana Jones 5' To Begin Filming In The UK Next Week". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 2, 2021. Retrieved June 2, 2021. Lund, Anthony (February 21, 2022). "Indiana Jones 5 Producer Says Filming Is Now in the 'Home Stretch'". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on May 22, 2023. Retrieved May 22, 2023. Seddon, Gem (June 3, 2021). "Indiana Jones 5 could potentially use a scrapped Last Crusade storyline". TheFilm. GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on June 14, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Newton, Grace (June 4, 2021). "Stars of Indiana Jones franchise including Harrison Ford descend on North Yorkshire Moors Railway to film fifth movie". The Yorkshire Post. Archived from the original on June 17, 2021. Retrieved June 5, 2021. Reid, Caroline (February 8, 2023). "Disney's $300 Million Bet To Tempt Back Cinemagoers". Forbes. Archived from the original on February 11, 2023. Retrieved May 22, 2023. Dela Paz, Maggie (June 7, 2021). "Indiana Jones 5 Set Photos Reveal Stuntman in a Harrison Ford Mask". ComingSoon. Archived from the original on June 20, 2021. Retrieved June 8, 2021. Lewis, Isobel (June 8, 2021). "Harrison Ford: Indiana Jones fans delight as actor is pictured in costume on set of fifth film". The Independent. Archived from the original on June 8, 2021. Retrieved June 8, 2021. Agar, Chris (June 7, 2021). "Indiana Jones 5 Set Photos: Harrison Ford Is Back In OG Costume". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on June 8, 2021. Retrieved June 8, 2021. "Buzz in the Borders over Indiana Jones filming". BBC News. June 11, 2021. Archived from the original on June 12, 2021. Retrieved June 12, 2021. Moon, Ra. "Where was Indiana Jones filmed? The Dial of Destiny Filming Locations". Atlas of Wonders. Archived from the original on July 2, 2023. Retrieved July 2, 2023. Penketh-King, Charlotte (June 15, 2021). "Indiana Jones 5: Pictures show movie crew filming high-speed motorbike chase through Highland village for latest Indiana Jones movie". The Scotsman. Archived from the original on June 15, 2021. Retrieved June 16, 2021. Ward, Sarah; McStay, Kirsten (June 17, 2021). "Nazi flags appear in South Lanarkshire as Indiana Jones 5 filming continues". Daily Record. Archived from the original on January 15, 2023. Retrieved June 23, 2021. Tinnin, Drew (February 17, 2023). "Harrison Ford Wasn't Afraid To Get Physical For Indiana Jones: Dial Of Destiny". /Film. Archived from the original on May 22, 2023. Retrieved May 22, 2023. Fleming, Mike Jr. (June 23, 2021). "Harrison Ford Injures Shoulder Rehearsing 'Indiana Jones 5' Fight Scene; Production To Shoot Around Recovery". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 23, 2021. Retrieved June 23, 2021. D'Agostino, Ryan (May 31, 2023). "Harrison Ford Has Stories to Tell". Esquire. Archived from the original on June 1, 2023. Retrieved June 1, 2023. Something must have weakened his shoulder, because when he held his hat in the face of actor Mads Mikkelsen and pulled his hand back to demonstrate the punch—someone was in the way and he had to adjust mid-strike—Ford pulled the subscapularis muscle off his right shoulder. Gilmour, Lauren (July 13, 2021). "Vintage motors spotted for Indiana Jones 5 set in Glasgow close to Ibrox stadium". Glasgow Times. Archived from the original on November 18, 2021. Retrieved July 17, 2021. Flockhart, Gary (July 6, 2021). "In pictures: 12 amazing images as Glasgow city centre gets US makeover ahead of filming new Indiana Jones movie". The Scotsman. Archived from the original on October 23, 2021. Retrieved July 7, 2021. Morrison, Hamish (July 14, 2021). "'Harrison Ford' spotted in Glasgow on set of new Indiana Jones film". Herald Scotland. Archived from the original on December 5, 2021. Retrieved July 17, 2021. O'Rourke, Ryan (August 24, 2023). "See How 'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny's Parade Scene Came Together in New Featurette". Collider. Retrieved October 1, 2023. Desowitz, Bill (July 5, 2023). "How 'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' Put Indy Into the Apollo 11 Ticker-Tape Parade". IndieWire. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved July 12, 2023. Paton, Craig (July 17, 2021). "In pictures: Indiana Jones filming continues in Glasgow city centre". Yahoo! Movies. Archived from the original on December 5, 2021. Retrieved July 17, 2021. Morrison, Hamish (July 8, 2021). "Key Indiana Jones plot point revealed in world exclusive pictures from Glasgow set". Glasgow Times. Archived from the original on December 5, 2021. Retrieved July 9, 2021. Lyons, Bev (July 24, 2021). "Indiana Jones and Narcos actor Boyd Holbrook 'avoided' haggis but wants to return to Scotland". Daily Record. Archived from the original on December 5, 2021. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Morrison, Hamish (July 16, 2021). "Harrison Ford's stunt double for new Indiana Jones film looks nothing like Harrison Ford". Glasgow Times. Archived from the original on December 5, 2021. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Pearson, Ben (July 15, 2021). "'Indiana Jones 5' Set Images Reveal a Possible Moon Landing Subplot and One Stylish Phoebe Waller-Bridge". /Film. Archived from the original on July 26, 2021. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Barrie, Douglas (July 14, 2021). "Indiana Jones stars Phoebe Waller-Bridge and Boyd Holbrook on set in Glasgow". Irish Independent. Archived from the original on October 6, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2021. @mang0ld (July 25, 2021). "I would love to come back to shoot again. Glasgow is a beautiful city and we had the bonus of remarkable weather! Two weeks of exterior shooting and no rain! Take care, Dror!" (Tweet). Retrieved August 29, 2021 – via Twitter. Brooking, Wendy (July 23, 2021). "Indiana Jones 5 filming in Glasgow comes to a close". Glasgow Times. Archived from the original on October 27, 2021. Retrieved September 28, 2021. "Harrison Ford resumes filming for Indiana Jones 5". Tulsa World. September 8, 2021. Archived from the original on March 7, 2022. Retrieved September 28, 2021. "Antonio Banderas da los detalles de su papel en Indiana Jones 5" [Antonio Banderas gives the details of his role in Indiana Jones 5]. Antena 3 (in Spanish). August 9, 2021. Archived from the original on December 5, 2021. Retrieved September 28, 2021. Mocciaro, Ivan (September 7, 2021). "Ciak, si gira 'Indiana Jones': a Cefalù è corsa per fare la comparsa" [Ciak, 'Indiana Jones' is filmed: she ran to Cefalù to appear as an extra]. la Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on December 5, 2021. Retrieved September 28, 2021. Catania, Gianni (October 5, 2021). "Indiana Jones, le riprese a Siracusa: dopo la Neapolis, pronto il set del Maniace (anche in mare)" [Indiana Jones, filming in Syracuse: after the Neapolis, the Maniace set is ready (even at sea)]. SiracusaOggi.it (in Italian). Archived from the original on October 5, 2021. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Davids, Brian (July 5, 2023). "'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' Star Karen Allen on the Bittersweet Conclusion of Indy and Marion's Love Story". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved July 12, 2023. Carmina, Irene (September 30, 2021). "Ciak, si gira 'Indiana Jones': Siracusa e Cefalù diventano set" [Ciak, 'Indiana Jones' is filmed: Syracuse and Cefalù become sets]. la Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on October 24, 2021. Retrieved October 5, 2021. "Set cinematografico, Indiana Jones arriva in motoscafo" [Movie set, Indiana Jones arrives by motorboat]. Ragusa News (in Italian). October 4, 2021. Archived from the original on November 12, 2021. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Lo Porto, Giada (October 5, 2021). "Arriva 'Indiana Jones' e Cefalù si gode il business" ['Indiana Jones' arrives and Cefalù enjoys the business]. la Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on October 5, 2021. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Tomasina, Chiara Dalla (October 4, 2021). "Indiana Jones 5, alcune scene del film con Harrison Ford saranno girate in Sicilia" [Indiana Jones 5, some scenes of the film with Harrison Ford will be shot in Sicily]. iO Donna (in Italian). Archived from the original on February 1, 2022. Retrieved October 5, 2021. "Indiana Jones gira per la Sicilia: il set da Siracusa a Marsala e Cefalù" [Indiana Jones travels around Sicily: the set from Syracuse to Marsala and Cefalù]. Giornale di Sicilia (in Italian). October 4, 2021. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2021. "A Castellammare del Golfo arriva Indiana Jones: i set in corso diventano tre" [Indiana Jones arrives in Castellammare del Golfo: the sets in progress become three]. Giornale di Sicilia (in Italian). October 12, 2021. Archived from the original on October 22, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2021. Newsom, Sean (July 11, 2023). "Behind the Sicilian scenes of the latest Indiana Jones film". The Times. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved July 12, 2023. Lussier, Germain (August 23, 2023). "Watch Behind the Scenes of an Indiana Jones First". Gizmodo. Retrieved October 1, 2023. Giardina, Carolyn (July 10, 2023). "'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny': VFX Team on Creating a Young Harrison Ford and How Mads Mikkelsen's Villain Survived That Train Fall". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved July 12, 2023. Cost, Ben (October 19, 2021). "Harrison Ford back on 'Indiana Jones' set — and appears to be doing OK". New York Post. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2021. Carmina, Irene; di Bartolo, Isabella (October 3, 2021). "Indiana Jones sbarca in Sicilia e l'Orecchio di Dionisio diventa una miniera" [Indiana Jones lands in Sicily and the Ear of Dionysius becomes a mine]. la Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on October 6, 2021. Retrieved October 5, 2021. "Indiana Jones, primo ciak a Siracusa" [Indiana Jones, first take in Syracuse]. Rai News (in Italian). October 4, 2021. Archived from the original on October 5, 2021. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Di Bartolo, Isabella (October 6, 2021). "Indiana Jones a Siracusa prova l'eco dell'Orecchio di Dionisio" [Indiana Jones in Syracuse tries the echo of the Ear of Dionysius]. la Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on January 6, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2021. Evangelista, Chris (October 15, 2021). "The Indiana Jones 5 Set Has Roman Soldiers On It, For Some Reason". /Film. Archived from the original on October 22, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2021. Seddon, Dan (October 18, 2021). "Indiana Jones 5 time travel twist teased in set photo". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on December 3, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2021. Stolworthy, Jacob (October 19, 2021). "Indiana Jones 5 set photos appear to confirm time travel theory is true". The Independent. Archived from the original on October 26, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2021. Di Bartolo, Isabella (October 6, 2021). "Siracusa, Indiana Jones va indietro nel tempo al castello Maniace" [Syracuse, Indiana Jones goes back in time to the Maniace castle]. la Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on October 26, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2021. "Coup d'envoi du tournage d'Indiana Jones à Fès" [Indiana Jones filming kicks off in Fez]. L'Économiste (in French). October 17, 2021. Archived from the original on October 26, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2021. Attaq, Amal El (October 21, 2021). "Filming Starts in Fez for 5th Indiana Jones Movie". Morocco World News. Archived from the original on October 22, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2021. Solzman, Danielle (September 5, 2023). "Indiana Jones & The Dial of Destiny DP Phedon Papamichael on The Challenges of 180 Shooting Days". Below the Line. Retrieved October 1, 2023. Jirak, Jamie (June 16, 2023). "Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny Director Explains the Difficulties of Filming During COVID (Exclusive)". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 16, 2023. Retrieved June 16, 2023. McPherson, Christopher (May 15, 2023). "'Indiana Jones' Writers on Filming 'Dial of Destiny's Tuk-Tuk Chase Sequence". Collider. Archived from the original on May 22, 2023. Retrieved May 22, 2023. Hogg, Trevor (October 3, 2023). "Soho VFX Heads to Fez for 'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' Visual Effects". Animation World Network. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Court, Andrew (November 4, 2021). "'Indiana Jones 5' crew member found dead on location of troubled production". New York Post. Archived from the original on November 4, 2021. Retrieved November 4, 2021. Lovett, Jamie (February 27, 2022). "Indiana Jones 5 Wraps Filming". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on February 27, 2022. Retrieved February 27, 2022. Mangold, James [@mang0ld] (February 27, 2022). "And so begins the first day after the storm." (Tweet). Retrieved February 27, 2022 – via Twitter. Ashton, Will (March 7, 2022). "'Indiana Jones 5': Director James Mangold Has Begun Editing Indy's Next Adventure". Collider. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Whitaker, Richard (June 30, 2023). "Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny". Austin Chronicle. Archived from the original on July 3, 2023. Retrieved July 3, 2023. Somehow the editing team of Michael McCusker, and Andrew Buckland, and Dirk Westervelt studied everything from Michael Kahn (who cut all four earlier adventures) except how to retain any sense of breathless energy. MacNab, Geoffrey (March 16, 2021). "Qumra 2021: Phedon Papamichael looks forward to shooting 'Indiana Jones 5' at the UK's Pinewood Studios". Screen Daily. Archived from the original on April 22, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. Weiss, Josh (July 4, 2023). "'Dial Of Destiny' Cinematographer Phedon Papamichael Unpacks Visual Secrets Of 'Indiana Jones 5'". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved July 12, 2023. Mottram, James (June 22, 2023). "Harrison Ford, Mads Mikkelsen, and more talk the final Indiana Jones adventure". GamesRadar. Archived from the original on June 22, 2023. Retrieved June 22, 2023. Fuge, Johnathan (April 26, 2023). "Steven Spielberg Heaps Praise on Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny: 'It's Really, Really a Good Indiana Jones Film'". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on June 29, 2023. Retrieved June 29, 2023. Hogg, Trevor (July 17, 2023). "'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' Digitally De-Ages a Beloved Hollywood Hero". Animation Magazine. Retrieved October 1, 2023. Hogg, Trevor (October 5, 2023). "Rising Sun Pictures and Important Looking Pirates Tackle 'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' VFX". Animation World Network. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Sacks, Ethan (July 3, 2012). "Steven Spielberg rejects 'Tintin' style performance-capture technology for an 'Indiana Jones V'". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on December 5, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Tangcay, Jazz (July 7, 2023). "'Indiana Jones 5': It Took 100+ VFX Industrial Light and Magic Artists to De-Age Harrison Ford". Variety. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved July 12, 2023. Travis, Ben (November 21, 2022). "'Indiana Jones 5's Opening Sequence De-Ages Harrison Ford To Original Trilogy Indy – Exclusive". Empire. Archived from the original on November 21, 2022. Retrieved November 21, 2022. Peralta, Diego (February 2, 2023). "Harrison Ford Talks Being Digitally De-Aged in 'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny'". Collider. Archived from the original on May 22, 2023. Retrieved May 22, 2023. Desowitz, Bill (July 7, 2023). "No, De-Aged Harrison Ford Wasn't All A.I. in 'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny'". IndieWire. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved July 12, 2023. Ankers-Range, Adele (July 4, 2023). "Dial of Destiny Team Spent Three Years on What Fans Now Call the 'AI Sequence at the Beginning of Indiana Jones'". IGN. Retrieved July 12, 2023. Bedingfield, Will (July 7, 2023). "How Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny De-Aged Harrison Ford". Wired. Retrieved July 12, 2023. Tinoco, Armando (May 21, 2023). "Harrison Ford Talks Seeing De-Aged Self In 'Indiana Jones & The Dial Of Destiny': 'That's What I Looked Like 35 Years Ago'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 22, 2023. Retrieved May 22, 2023. Ford, Rebecca (May 21, 2023). "Mads Mikkelsen on His Indiana Jones De-Aging: 'I Sense a Smell of Plastic'". Vanity Fair. Retrieved May 22, 2023. Evry, Max (June 10, 2016). "John Williams Will Score Indiana Jones 5 & Star Wars: Episode VIII". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on June 11, 2016. Retrieved June 11, 2016. Coyle, Jake (June 22, 2022). "John Williams, 90, steps away from film, but not music". Associated Press. Archived from the original on September 24, 2022. Retrieved June 24, 2022. Jirak, Jamie (January 13, 2023). "John Williams Walks Back Retirement Claims". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on January 14, 2023. Retrieved January 14, 2023. "John Williams / Indiana Jones And The Dial Of Destiny [2-LP Set]". Disney Music Emporium. Archived from the original on June 17, 2023. Retrieved June 28, 2023. "John Williams / Indiana Jones And The Dial Of Destiny [CD]". Disney Music Emporium. Archived from the original on June 28, 2023. Retrieved June 28, 2023. Edwards, Molly (June 28, 2023). "Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny cast and director reflect on time and family in Indy's swan song". GamesRadar. Archived from the original on June 29, 2023. Retrieved June 29, 2023. Nash, Anthony (June 1, 2023). "Indiana Jones Shirtless Scene in Dial of Destiny Was Harrison Ford's Idea". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on June 1, 2023. Retrieved June 1, 2023. Bankhurst, Adam (May 26, 2022). "Indiana Jones 5 First Image Revealed at Star Wars Celebration". IGN. Archived from the original on September 13, 2022. Retrieved September 13, 2022. Ross, Dalton; Coggan, Devan (May 26, 2022). "Harrison Ford crashes Star Wars Celebration with a surprise Indiana Jones message". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 15, 2023. Retrieved September 13, 2022. Couch, Aaron; Odman, Sydney; Kit, Borys (September 10, 2022). "Emotional Harrison Ford Brings 'Indiana Jones 5' First-Look to D23". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 12, 2022. Retrieved September 13, 2022. Billington, Alex (December 1, 2022). "First Look Trailer for Mangold's 'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny'". FirstShowing. Archived from the original on April 8, 2023. Retrieved April 8, 2023. Friscia, John (December 1, 2022). "Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny Trailer Delivers a Classic Adventure". The Escapist. Archived from the original on April 8, 2023. Retrieved April 8, 2023. Bisset, Jennifer (February 12, 2023). "'Indiana Jones 5' Super Bowl Trailer Gets Nostalgic". CNET. Archived from the original on February 15, 2023. Retrieved February 15, 2023. Couch, Aaron; Ritman, Alex (April 7, 2023). "'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' Trailer Puts Harrison Ford Back in Action". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 7, 2023. Retrieved April 7, 2023. "Disney unveils the 'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' trailer". WDWMagic. April 7, 2023. Archived from the original on April 7, 2023. Retrieved April 7, 2023. @indianajones (April 7, 2023). "Just released at #StarWarsCelebration: Check out the new poster for #IndianaJones and the Dial of Destiny, in theaters on June 30". Archived from the original on April 7, 2023 – via Instagram. Tartaglione, Nancy; D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 18, 2023). "'Indiana Jones And The Dial Of Destiny' Gets Five-Minute Standing Ovation In Cannes, Leaves Harrison Ford And James Mangold Emotional". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 18, 2023. Retrieved May 18, 2023. Sharf, Zack; Setoodeh, Ramin (May 18, 2023). "Indiana Jones 5 Gets Lukewarm Five-Minute Cannes Ovation as Harrison Ford Says an Emotional Goodbye". Variety. Archived from the original on May 20, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2023. "INDIANA JONES & THE DIAL OF DESTINY First Reactions Land Following Cannes Premiere". SFFGazette.com. May 19, 2023. Archived from the original on July 7, 2023. Retrieved July 10, 2023. Har-Even, Benny. "Which Film Format Is Best To See Indiana Jones And Dial Of Destiny". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 7, 2023. Retrieved July 7, 2023. Lesnick, Silas (April 25, 2017). "Disney Movie Release Schedule Gets a Major Update". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on April 26, 2017. Retrieved April 25, 2017. Foutch, Haleigh (April 22, 2016). "'Inhumans' Movie Officially Pulled from Marvel Schedule". Collider. Archived from the original on April 24, 2016. Retrieved February 6, 2023. McClintock, Pamela (April 3, 2020). "'Black Widow,' 'Mulan' Land New 2020 Release Dates, 'Jungle Cruise' Delayed a Year". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 4, 2020. Retrieved April 3, 2020. Rubin, Rebecca (October 18, 2021). "Disney Delays 'Doctor Strange,' 'Thor 4,' 'Black Panther' Sequel and 'Indiana Jones 5'". Variety. Archived from the original on October 18, 2021. Retrieved October 18, 2021. "Indiana Jones 5 lands an earlier UK release date". Digital Spy. April 18, 2023. Archived from the original on July 8, 2023. Retrieved June 28, 2023. "Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny: How and where to watch Harrison Ford's last film of the series online". The Economic Times. June 27, 2023. Archived from the original on June 29, 2023. Retrieved June 29, 2023. "Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny: Australian trailer and release date". Flicks.com.au. Archived from the original on July 8, 2023. Retrieved June 28, 2023. Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny Prime (4K Ultra HD), archived from the original on August 17, 2023, retrieved August 17, 2023 'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' Is the Unanimous #1 on VOD Charts, archived from the original on August 17, 2023, retrieved September 6, 2023 Peralta, Diego (October 10, 2023). "'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' Gets Collector's Edition 4K UHD Releases". Collider. Retrieved October 12, 2023. "Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny (2023)". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved September 25, 2023. "Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny (2023) – Financial Information". The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Retrieved September 25, 2023. Lund, Anthony (February 10, 2023). "Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny Has One of the Highest Budgets of All-Time". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved May 22, 2023. Gilbey, Ryan (July 6, 2023). "Summer flopbusters: why were Indiana Jones and The Flash box office bombs? | Film industry". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 7, 2023. Retrieved July 7, 2023. "10 Reasons Indiana Jones & The Dial Of Destiny Bombed At The Box Office: Breaking Down Disney's $295m Flop". Screen Rant. July 4, 2023. Archived from the original on July 7, 2023. Retrieved July 7, 2023. Leonte, Tudor (July 6, 2023). "Why 'Kathleen Kennedy Fired' Is Trending After Indiana Jones 5". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on July 7, 2023. Retrieved July 7, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 4, 2023). "'Indiana Jones & The Dial Of Destiny's $82 Million+ 5-Day Total Not Far From July 4th Disaster 'Superman Returns' – Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 7, 2023. Retrieved July 7, 2023. Sandwell, Ian (July 10, 2023). "Why Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny has been a box-office flop". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on July 11, 2023. Retrieved July 11, 2023. "The reasons Indiana Jones 5 has been a box-office flop". Digital Spy. July 10, 2023. Archived from the original on July 11, 2023. Retrieved July 11, 2023. "What 'Dial of Destiny's Box Office Flop Means for Franchise Blockbusters". Collider. July 10, 2023. Archived from the original on July 11, 2023. Retrieved July 11, 2023. Hetzner, Christiaan (July 19, 2023). "Disney's Indiana Jones 5 took in $300 million at the box office so far—a disaster for CEO Bob Iger and Lucasfilm". Fortune. Archived from the original on July 27, 2023. Retrieved July 27, 2023. Kelley, Aidan (July 12, 2023). "'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' Budget Breakdown: Has Indy's Swan Song Officially Flopped?". Collider. Archived from the original on July 30, 2023. Retrieved July 29, 2023. Rubin, Rebecca; Lang, Brent; Donnelly, Matt (August 15, 2023). "Big Budgets, Big Headaches: Why Indiana Jones 5 and Mission: Impossible 7 are Struggling to Make a Profit". Variety. Archived from the original on August 15, 2023. Retrieved August 15, 2023. "Indy 5's poor box office haul a disaster for Disney CEO Bob Iger". Fortune. Retrieved September 1, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony; Tartaglione, Nancy (June 27, 2023). "'Indiana Jones And The Dial Of Destiny' To Whip Up $140M+ Global Opening – Box Office Preview". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 11, 2023. Retrieved June 27, 2023. Fuster, Jeremy (June 27, 2023). "'Indiana Jones 5' Won't Reverse Disney's Recent Box Office Woes". TheWrap. Archived from the original on June 28, 2023. Retrieved June 28, 2023. Murphy, J. Kim (July 1, 2023). "Box Office: 'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' Whips Up $24 Million Opening Day". Variety. Archived from the original on July 2, 2023. Retrieved July 3, 2023. "Indiana Jones 5 Plunges Into the Box Office Abyss". August 24, 2023. "Indiana Jones movie had a middling holiday". "Domestic 2023 Weekend 26". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on July 2, 2023. Retrieved July 2, 2023. "Domestic 2023 Weekend 26 June 30-July 4, 2023 - July 4th long weekend (US)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on July 7, 2023. Retrieved July 6, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 9, 2023). "'Insidious: The Red Door' Slams On 'Indiana Jones' With $32M+ Opening – Sunday AM Box Office Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 8, 2023. Retrieved July 9, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 16, 2023). "'Mission: Impossible – Dead Reckoning Part One' Sets Franchise 5-Day U.S. Opening Record With $80M – Sunday AM Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 16, 2023. Retrieved July 16, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 23, 2023). "'Barbie' Still Gorgeous With Best YTD $155M Opening; 'Oppenheimer' Ticking To $80M+ In Incredible $300M+ U.S. Box Office Weekend – Sunday AM Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 21, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Tartaglione, Nancy (July 2, 2023). "'Indiana Jones And The Dial Of Destiny' Clocks Soft $130M Global Bow – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 3, 2023. Retrieved July 3, 2023. "Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny (2023)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved November 11, 2023. "Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved July 10, 2023. Nugent, John (May 18, 2023). "Indiana Jones And The Dial Of Destiny Review". Empire. Archived from the original on May 18, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2023. Ebiri, Bilge (May 19, 2023). "Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny Is Too Entertaining to Dismiss". Vulture. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2023. Bradshaw, Peter (May 18, 2023). "Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny review - Harrison Ford cracks the whip in taut sequel". The Guardian. Archived from the original on May 18, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2023. Lussier, Germaine (June 8, 2023). "Indiana Jones 5 Review: Dial of Destiny Delivers Adventure & Heart". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on June 8, 2023. Ryan, Mike (June 8, 2023). "'Indiana Jones And The Dial Of Destiny' Is An Audacious Blast". Archived from the original on June 8, 2023. Rooney, David (May 18, 2023). "'Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny' Review: Harrison Ford Cracks the Whip One Last Time in a Final Chapter Short on Both Thrills and Fun". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2023. Collin, Robbie (May 19, 2023). "Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny, Cannes, review: A shabby counterfeit of priceless treasure". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on May 18, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2023. Lawson, Richard (May 18, 2023). "Hunting Treasures, Punching Nazis: Indiana Jones Is Back in The Dial of Destiny". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2023. Tinoco, Armando (June 5, 2023). "Golden Trailer Awards Nominations List: Stranger Things, Black Panther: Wakanda Forever, Ted Lasso & Glass Onion: A Knives Out Mystery Among Most Nominated". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 5, 2023. Retrieved June 9, 2023. Pedersen, Erik (June 29, 2023). "Golden Trailer Awards: Cocaine Bear, Only Murders In The Building & Oppenheimer Among Top Winners – Full List". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 30, 2023. Retrieved June 30, 2023. Giardina, Carolyn (January 16, 2024). "'The Creator' Leads Visual Effects Society Feature Competition With 7 Nominations". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 16, 2024. "Razzie Noms 2024: Chris Evans and Jennifer Lopez Up for Worst Actors; 'Shazam 2' and 'Ant-Man 3' Tie With 4 Nods". Variety. January 22, 2024. Retrieved January 22, 2024. France, Lisa Respers (January 23, 2024). "Martin Scorsese and John Williams just made Oscars history". CNN. Retrieved January 24, 2024. "'Barbie' Scores 11 Grammy Noms, Including Record of Year & Two for Song of Year". November 10, 2023. NPR Staff. "Here are the 2024 Grammy Award winners". NPR. Retrieved February 6, 2024. Pedersen, Erik (June 29, 2023). "Golden Trailer Awards: Cocaine Bear, Only Murders In The Building & Oppenheimer Among Top Winners – Full List". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 30, 2023. Retrieved June 30, 2023. Coates, Tyler (January 17, 2024). "AARP Movies for Grownups Awards: 'Killers of the Flower Moon' Named Best Picture". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 26, 2024. Willman, Chris (November 10, 2023). "2024 Grammys Nominations Full List: SZA Leads With 9 Noms, Phoebe Bridgers Follows With 7". Variety. Retrieved November 12, 2023. Hipes, Patrick (December 6, 2023). "'Avatar: The Way of Water', 'Oppenheimer', 'Star Trek' Series Lead Nominations for Genre-Focused Saturn Awards". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved December 8, 2023. "Winners & Nominees". Anderson, Erik (February 13, 2024). "Set Decorators Society Of America (SDSA) Awards: 'Saltburn,' 'Poor Things,' 'Barbie' Win". AwardsWatch. Retrieved February 26, 2024. Hailu, Selome; Lang, Brent (February 24, 2024). "SAG Awards 2024: 'Oppenheimer' Dominates as 'Succession' and 'The Bear' Win Top TV Prizes". Variety. Retrieved February 24, 2024. "Razzie Noms 2024: Chris Evans and Jennifer Lopez Up for Worst Actors; 'Shazam 2' and 'Ant-Man 3' Tie With 4 Nods". Variety. January 22, 2024. Retrieved January 22, 2024. Wickline, Dan (June 22, 2016). "Bob Iger Has Trouble Describing Where Disney Is Taking Indiana Jones". Bleeding Cool. Archived from the original on September 13, 2022. Retrieved September 13, 2022. Freitag, Lee (May 20, 2022). "Harrison Ford Will Never be Replaced as Indiana Jones, Says Lucasfilm Boss". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on June 26, 2022. Retrieved December 1, 2022. Otterson, Joe (November 8, 2022). "Indiana Jones TV Series Eyed for Disney+ (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on January 15, 2023. Retrieved November 27, 2022. Bonomolo, Cameron (March 23, 2023). "Lucasfilm Reportedly Cancels Indiana Jones Spinoff Series for Disney+". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on March 29, 2023. Retrieved March 29, 2023. Bentz, Adam (April 6, 2023). "Disney Confirms Indiana Jones 5 Will End Harrison Ford Led Franchise for Good". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 10, 2023. Retrieved April 12, 2023. "Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny". Indiana Jones Wiki. Official Disney website Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny at IMDb Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny at AllMovie Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny at Box Office Mojo Indiana Jones and the Dial of Destiny at Rotten Tomatoes Portals:  United States  Film  1960s