Ukraine's easternmost oblasts, Donetsk, Luhansk, and Kharkiv, are the site of a theatre of operation in the ongoing Russian invasion of Ukraine. The battle of Donbas was a major offensive in the eastern theatre that took place in mid-2022. By the culmination of the offensive in July 2022, Russian forces and their separatist allies had captured the cities of Sievierodonetsk, Lysychansk, Rubizhne and Izium. However, in early September, Ukraine launched a major counteroffensive in the east, which recaptured the cities of Izium, Balakliia, Kupiansk, Sviatohirsk and the strategic city of Lyman. The counteroffensive stalled east of the Oskil river, and a campaign in eastern Kharkiv Oblast and western Luhansk Oblast has continued since. In the winter of 2022–2023, Russia focused on capturing the city of Bakhmut, largely destroying the city in the bloodiest battle of the war. Russia claimed to have fully captured Bakhmut in May 2023, despite ongoing Ukrainian counterattacks on the city's outskirts. In June 2023, Ukraine launched another major counteroffensive across the entire frontline, capturing Russian positions along Bakhmut's outskirts and in southwestern Donetsk Oblast. However, by November 2023, the counteroffensive had largely stalled in the east and Russia began counterattacking to recapture territory, gaining control of Avdiivka and Marinka in Donetsk Oblast by February 2024. Sporadic fighting had been taking place since 2014 between Ukrainian forces and Russian-backed separatists from the Donetsk People's Republic during the war in Donbas.[citation needed] On 24 February, after Russian President Vladimir Putin announced a "special military operation" in Ukraine, Russian forces crossed the Russia-Ukraine border and began advancing towards Kharkiv. Ukrainian soldiers were deployed to positions along key routes into the city, and residents began volunteering for military service within hours of the invasion. A Russian missile struck the Chuhuiv air base, which housed Bayraktar TB2 drones. According to open-source intelligence, the attack left damage to fuel storage areas and infrastructure. Also on 24 February, Russian forces and their separatist allies launched an offensive along the lines of contact in the Donbas.[failed verification] On the morning of 25 February, Russian forces, along with allied separatists, advanced from territory controlled by the Donetsk People's Republic (DPR) towards Mariupol, encountering Ukrainian forces in Pavlopil. The Ukrainians were victorious, destroying at least 20 Russian tanks. In the evening, the Russian Navy began an amphibious assault 70 kilometers (43 miles) from Mariupol, along the coast of the Sea of Azov. In Starobilsk, Ukrainian forces reportedly destroyed a group of Russian soldiers preparing to cross the Aidar river, forcing them to withdraw. Later that day, shelling in Starobilsk destroyed several buildings. Russian forces bombarded Mariupol throughout 26 February; the city's mayor Vadym Boychenko claimed that schools and apartment buildings had been struck. On 25 February, fierce fighting continued in the northern outskirts of Kharkiv, especially in the village of Tsyrkuny. On 26 February, the governor of Kharkiv Oblast, Oleh Syniehubov, stated that the city of Kharkiv was still under Ukrainian control, and announced a curfew for the city. In the early morning of 27 February, a gas pipeline in Kharkiv was destroyed by Russian forces. Russian light vehicles broke into the city, with half of them reportedly destroyed by Ukrainian forces in ensuing fighting. By the afternoon, Ukrainian officials stated that Kharkiv was still under Ukrainian control despite the overnight attack by Russian forces. Meanwhile, Hennadiy Matsegora, the mayor of Kupiansk, agreed to hand over control of the city to Russian forces and accused Ukrainian forces of abandoning it when the invasion began. He was later accused of treason by the Ukrainian Prosecutor General Iryna Venediktova. On the morning of 27 February, it was reported that a Russian tank column was quickly advancing towards Mariupol from DPR-held territory, but the attack was prevented by Ukrainian forces. Six Russian soldiers were captured. Luhansk Oblast governor Serhiy Haidai stated that Stanytsia Luhanska and Shchastia were captured by Russian forces, who practically destroyed the settlements with shelling. Donetsk Oblast governor Pavlo Kyrylenko also accused them of destroying Volnovakha. On 1 March, Ukrainian forces began a counteroffensive toward Horlivka, which had been controlled by the DPR since 2014. On 2 March, forces of the Luhansk People's Republic and Russian troops captured Novoaidar, taking over a base of Ukraine's 79th Brigade. Further north, a Russian convoy of 60 vehicles entered Starobilsk, where it was confronted by protesting locals waving Ukrainian flags and singing the Ukrainian national anthem. The Verkhovna Rada meanwhile stated that Russian shelling on Izium killed eight people. Russian forces entered the town of Balakliia during the day. Separatist-held Donetsk had been under shelling for several days. Some neighborhoods had no electricity supply and there were burnt cars on the streets. On 2 March, Russian paratroopers landed in Kharkiv during the early morning and started clashing with Ukrainian forces. Clashes also took place near a military hospital of the city as Russian paratroopers descended on it. Kharkiv Oblast's Police Chief Volodymyr Tymoshko later stated that the situation was under control. Ukrainian official Oleksiy Arestovych stated that the Ukrainian forces went on the offensive for the first time during the war, advancing towards Horlivka. Ihor Zhdanov later claimed that "there were reports" that a part of the city had been captured by Ukrainian forces. According to Ukrainian reports, Ukraine's 95th Air Assault Brigade had begun attacking the city the previous day. Ukrainian authorities stated on 3 March that 34 civilians had been killed in Russian shelling in Mariupol in the previous 24 hours. Civilians carrying Ukrainian flags protested against Russian troops in Svatove. After talks with locals, the soldiers withdrew from the town. On 4 March, Ukrainian forces launched a counterattack in Kharkiv Oblast, reportedly pushing the Russian forces towards the Sumy Oblast, and reaching part of the Russia-Ukraine border. By 7 March, Ukraine claimed to have retaken Chuhuiv near Kharkiv in a counter-attack overnight and reportedly killed two Russian commanders: Dmitry Safronov, commander of the 61st Naval Infantry Brigade, and Lt. Col. Denis Glebov, deputy commander of the 11th Guards Air Assault Brigade. During the day, Ukraine also claimed to have killed Russian Maj. Gen. Vitaly Gerasimov, while also killing and wounding other senior Russian Army officers during a battle near Kharkiv. On 8 March, Ukraine stated that it had repelled an attack by Russian forces on Izium. On 5 March, a ceasefire was declared in Volnovakha to allow civilians to evacuate, but was later scuttled with Ukrainian officials blaming Russian shelling continuing during the evacuation process. They added that about 400 civilians were still able to leave the city. Russian President Vladimir Putin however blamed Ukrainian forces for the breakdown of the ceasefire agreement.[failed verification] On 6 March, both sides blamed each other for the failure of a second attempt to evacuate civilians from Mariupol. Haidai stated that fighting was taking place on the outskirts of Lysychansk, Sievierodonetsk and Rubizhne, while Popasna and Hirske were being continuously shelled. He added that Ukrainian forces had lost control of Svatove, Starobilsk and Novopskov, though Russian forces were not deployed in the city in large numbers. On 8 March, Ukrainian officials stated that ten civilians had been killed and eight wounded in shelling on Severodonetsk during the day. The next day, 9 March, a building acting as a maternity ward and children's hospital in Mariupol was bombed by the Russian Air Force at around 17:00, killing five civilians and injuring 17. On 11 March, the Russian Defence Ministry stated that the forces of the DPR had captured Volnovakha. It also claimed that they had advanced 6 kilometres (3.7 mi) and had further tightened the siege of Mariupol. Videos later posted on social media showed Russian forces in many neighborhoods of Volnovakha. Haidai, meanwhile, stated that Russian forces had occupied 70 percent of Luhansk Oblast. On 12 March, the Associated Press independently confirmed that Volnovakha had been captured by pro-Russian separatists and much of it had been destroyed in the fighting. On the same day, Ukrainian forces confirmed the death of Colonel Valery Hudz, the commander of the Ukrainian 24th Mechanized Brigade while fighting on the Luhansk frontline. Pavlo Kyrylenko, the governor of Donetsk Oblast, stated that while the settlements of Nikolske, Manhush and Urzuf had been occupied by Russian troops, they had yet to capture any key cities, with the exception of Volnovakha. Meanwhile, Ukrainian officials accused Russia of using white phosphorus munitions on the town of Popasna, located in the Luhansk Oblast, during the night. In the northern Donetsk Oblast, the Sviatohirsk Lavra monastery was bombed around 22:00, wounding 30 people and damaging the monastery. The Russian Defence Ministry stated on 13 March that Russian forces had captured the settlements of Nikolske, Blahodatne, Volodymyrivka and Pavlivka in Donetsk Oblast, in an attempt to reach Velyka Novosilka. The Ukrainian military stated that Russian forces had captured the settlements of Staromlynivka, Yevhenivka, Pavlivka and Yehorivka during the day. On 14 March, Donetsk was hit by a missile attack. Denis Pushilin, the head of the Donetsk People's Republic, stated that they had shot down a Ukrainian Tochka-U missile fired on the city of Donetsk, but parts of the missile fell into the city centre, killing multiple civilians. The Russian Defense Ministry stated that 23 civilians were killed and 28 more wounded. However, the Ukrainian military denied conducting the attack and stated that it was "unmistakably a Russian rocket or another munition,", which was supported by an assessment of the Conflict Intelligence Team, an investigative journalism group. Ukrainian forces later said that Russian troops of the 336th Guards Naval Infantry Brigade and the 11th Guards Air Assault Brigade had tried to advance in the Donetsk Oblast at 17:00, but were repulsed with up to 100 soldiers killed and six of their vehicles being destroyed. On 15 March, Haidai stated that four civilians were killed due to Russian shelling of a hospital, a care facility for children with visual impairments, and three schools in Rubizhne. On 20 March, Russian officials confirmed that Andrey Paliy, a deputy commander of the Black Sea Fleet, had been killed in Mariupol. On 22 March, the head of the LPR, Leonid Pasechnik, claimed that "almost 80% of the territory" of the Luhansk region was under separatist control, with Popasna, Lysychansk, Rubizhne, Severodonetsk and Kreminna remaining Ukrainian-held. He noted that the situation in the battlefield was "stably tense" and that units of the People's Militia of the LPR were striving to capture Popasna and Rubizhne. On 25 March, the Russian defence ministry stated that Russia was prepared to begin a second phase of military operations with the aim of to occupy major Ukrainian cities in eastern Ukraine. According to the ministry, Russian-backed separatists were in control of 93% of Luhansk Oblast and 54% of Donetsk Oblast. After Russia abandoned its offensive to capture Kyiv, it shifted its attention to eastern and southern Ukraine. The Russian military began redeploying units from northern Ukraine to the east, but many of these troops appeared to be nearly combat-ineffective due to heavy losses. However, Russia still amassed tens of thousands of troops, declaring its aim to fully capture the Donetsk and Luhansk Oblasts. It managed to secure Izium on 1 April, although heavy fighting continued around the settlement over the next few days. According to local authorities 80% of Izium's residential buildings were destroyed in the battle. On 3 April, according to the Ukrainian government, two Russian soldiers died and 28 others were hospitalized after Ukrainian civilians handed out poisoned cakes to soldiers of the Russian 3rd Motor Rifle Division in Izium. Russia and the pro-Russian separatists continued to besiege Mariupol, where they made little progress. However, Russian troops managed to divide the Ukrainian holdouts in Mariupol into two or three pockets on 10 April. At the same time, Russia made concentrated efforts to conquer the strategically important cities of Sievierodonetsk, Popasna, and Rubizhne. It launched repeated attacks on these locations from 10 April. Russia made little progress in these attacks, and Ukraine claimed that it had inflicted a heavy defeat on the Russian 60th Independent Motorized Infantry Brigade [ru; uk] on 11 April. To support the operations aimed at Sievierodonetsk, Popasna, and Rubizhne, Russia made a push south of Izium toward Barvinkove and Sloviansk. Ukraine responded by shifting more units to hold off the Russians at Izium. At the same time, Russia attacked around Kharkiv to pin down local Ukrainian forces. Russia had made only limited gains at Izium by 12 April, but more Russian forces continued to arrive, to reinforce the offensive. On 13 April, it was reported that Russia was attempting to assemble a force large enough to outnumber the Ukrainian soldiers in eastern Ukraine by five times, in an attempt to finally win a decisive victory in the Donbas. On 16 April, Russia warned the remaining defenders of Mariupol to surrender; the Ukrainians ignored the demand. On 18 April, Ukraine launched counter-attacks, and retook several small towns and villages near Kharkiv and Izium. Also on 18 April, Zelenskyy announced that the "battle for Donbas" had begun, as Russian forces launched an offensive across a 300-mile front. According to Russian officials, 1,260 military targets were hit by rockets and artillery. The initial Russian bombardment focused on Rubizhne, Popasna, and Marinka. On the same day, it was reported that Russian and LNR troops had entered the city of Kreminna, capturing it after a few hours of clashes with the Ukrainian Army. LNR commander Mikhail Kishchik was killed in this battle. Over the next days, Russia gained little territory despite attacks all across the frontline. Facing heavy Ukrainian resistance, the Russian and separatist forces were able to advance into parts of Rubizhne, Popasna, and Sievierodonetsk. Some reports also suggested that fighting in Kreminna was still ongoing. On 21 April, the Russians claimed to have killed over 4,000 Ukrainian troops in Mariupol, and to have captured a further 1,478. By 23 April, Ukrainian counter-attacks had reportedly further stalled the Russian advance. In the following days, Russia continued its attempts to break through the Ukrainian defenses, possibly in an aim to encircle the Izium-Donetsk City salient. Fighting was concentrated at Sievierodonetsk, Rubizhne, Popasna, Marinka, Kharkiv, and Izium. Russia, the LPR, and the DPR made limited gains, capturing a number of villages and the towns of Popivka, Pischane, Zhytlivka, and Kreminna. However, their overall advance was slow, and stalled in most areas of the frontline. Ukraine also mounted a growing number of counter-attacks at Izium and Kharkiv, gradually expelling Russian forces from a number of settlements. On 30 April, Ukraine launched a large-scale counter-offensive at Kharkiv, retaking the city's suburbs and several more towns over the following days. By 4 May, Russian forces had been pushed back to such a distance that most of their artillery could no longer strike Kharkiv. Meanwhile, Russian and DPR/LPR separatist forces continued to attempt to break through Ukrainian defenses at Izium and the Donetsk-Luhansk frontline. On 6 May, the ISW described a Ukrainian counteroffensive "along a broad arc" near Kharkiv, reporting that Ukraine had recaptured "several villages," including Tsyrkuny, Peremoha and part of Cherkaski Tyshky. The ISW also reported that Ukraine "may successfully push Russian forces out of artillery range in Kharkiv in the coming days." On 7 May, Russian forces destroyed several bridges in an attempt to slow down the Ukrainian counter-offensive at Kharkiv. On the same day, Russia and separatist troops also captured Popasna. Following the capture of Popasna, Russia began attempting to encircle Sievierodonetsk. On 7 May, it was reported that Ukrainian forces had successfully pushed back Russian forces stationed around Kharkiv, with the city getting further out of range for Russian forces. The same day, Ukrainian forces also reported retaking five villages northeast of Kharkiv. Quoting a Ukrainian official, The New York Times said that the battle for Kharkiv was not over, but that at the moment, Ukraine was dominating, and that Russian troops were destroying bridges as they were retreating. On 11 May, Ukrainian forces claimed to have recaptured four settlements. The counteroffensive had the potential to bring Ukrainian forces within several kilometers of the Russian border. On 10 May, Ukraine made further gains on the Kharkiv front, forcing Russia to redeploy forces from the Izium front to the north. In addition, Ukrainian artillery destroyed an entire Russian battalion tactical group attempting a river crossing in the battle of the Siverskyi Donets. Meanwhile, Russia and the DPR attempted to cement their occupation in eastern Ukraine through political and economic means, likely in an attempt to integrate these areas into the existing separatist republics or establish new ones. On the other side, Ukrainian civilians began organizing resistance movements. As Ukrainian forces retook territory around Kharkiv, local civilian collaborators fled to Russia. On 12 May, Russian forces seized Rubizhne and the nearby town of Voevodivka. Heavy fighting subsequently took place at the village of Dovhenke south of Izium. On 13 May, it was reported that Russia had decided to withdraw its forces from Kharkiv Oblast. On 14 May, the ISW reported that "Ukraine thus appears to have won the battle of Kharkiv." The Mayor of Kharkiv said to the BBC: "There was no shelling in the city for the last five days. There was only one attempt from Russians to hit the city with a missile rocket near Kharkiv airport, but the missile was eliminated by Ukrainian Air Defence." Russia continued its attempts to encircle Sievierodonetsk and began to focus on cutting the highway at Bakhmut. By 14 May, the Ukrainians claimed to have killed over 6,000 Russian soldiers in Mariupol. They also claimed to have destroyed 78 tanks and 100 other armored vehicles. On 15 May, Ukrainian forces reached the border near Kharkiv, while continuing to push back Russian and LPR units. On the following day, the siege of Mariupol was formally concluded as the Ukrainian military personnel in the city's Azovstal agreed to gradually evacuate and surrender to the Russian forces. Four days later, the Russians announced that they had taken an additional 2,439 Ukrainians prisoners in Mariupol, bringing the total number captured during the siege to 3,917. In addition, it was reported that unrest – including public protests – was growing among pro-Russian collaborators and separatists in eastern Ukraine, as they accused Russian forces of corruption, incompetence, and forced mobilizations. Over the following days, Russia made little to no progress at the Izium frontline, but captured some territory around Popasna and Sievierodonetsk, increasingly threatening Sievierodonetsk and Lysychansk with encirclement. Russia also intensified air and artillery strikes targeting Ukrainian positions around Izium, possibly to prepare for renewed attacks. At the northern front,[where?] Russia and separatist forces retook a few villages and fortified their positions to stall the Ukrainian counter-offensive. After the Ukrainian counteroffensive, Russian forces were driven back to defensive positions, some of which were within miles of the Russia-Ukraine international border. Despite this, they continued to shell various Kharkiv suburbs, as well as the city proper, killing numerous civilians and wounding dozens more. Skirmishes along the Russia–Ukraine border in the area of northeastern Ukraine continued between Russian and Ukrainian forces beyond 14 May. On 20 May, Russian forces again shelled several villages in the Kharkiv district, including the city of Kharkiv itself, using BM-21 Grad, BM-27 Uragan and BM-30 Smerch multiple rocket launchers. On 21 May, the Ukrainian police confirmed the recovery of the bodies of six military officials, including a Russian colonel, in the settlement of Zolochiv. On 22 May, the Russian forces made minimal progress in eastern Ukraine. New reports confirmed that Russian troops had occupied Rubizhne in the northern Kharkiv Oblast on May 19. In northern Kharkiv, Russian forces brought in reinforcements to maintain their positions on the west bank of the Seversky Donets River, instead of retreating across the river to use it as a defensive position, to prevent further Ukrainian advances north or east that could jeopardize Russian communication lines along the Izium axis. On 24 May, Russian forces attempted to retake Ternova in northern Kharkiv Oblast. On 23 May, Russian forces took control of Lyman and attacked Avdiivka. On 24 May, Russian forces attacked from Popasna with the aim of cutting off Bakhmut, Lysychansk and Sievierodonetsk, gaining some ground. Ukrainian forces made a controlled withdrawal southwest of Popasna to strengthen their defensive position at Bakhmut. Russia subsequently captured Svitlodarsk. Around this time, Ukrainian defence adviser Yuriy Sak publicly demanded more multiple launch rocket systems to reinforce Ukrainian artillery capabilities. On 31 May, the United States announced a military aid package that included precision rocket systems with a range of 80 km. After a fierce month-long battle that ruined much of the city, Russian and LPR forces captured Sievierodonetsk along the Siverskyi Donets river on 25 June. On the same day, the battle of Lysychansk began, which also saw a Russian victory on 2 July. The following day Russian and LPR forces declared full control of the entire Luhansk region. On 4 July, The Guardian reported that after the capture of the Luhansk oblast, that Russian invasion troops would continue their invasion into the adjacent Donetsk oblast to attack the cities of Sloviansk and Bakhmut. The Russian military declared an "operational pause" to rest and replenish front line forces in Luhansk. On 9 July, a Russian rocket attack on two residential buildings in Chasiv Yar killed at least 48 people. On 25–26 July, after Russia's operational pause concluded, Russian sources reported that the towns of Berestove, Novoluhanske, and the nearby Vuhlehirska Power Station had been captured. The Institute for the Study of War (ISW) suggested Ukrainian defenders likely conducted a deliberate withdrawal from the area. On 13 August, the Russian defence ministry said its forces had captured the village of Udy, northwest of Kharkiv. They attempted to push further, and fierce battles occurred in Zolochiv on August 19 and 20, with Ukrainian forces repulsing the attack.[failed verification] The Deputy Chief of the Main Operational Directorate of Ukraine's General Staff, Oleksiy Hromov, alleged on 1 September that Russian president Vladimir Putin had ordered Russian forces to capture the entirety of Donetsk Oblast by 15 September via a renewed offensive. Hromov further alleged that Russia was going to rotate its recently established 3rd Army Corps to the Donetsk front. A senior U.S. defense official dismissed the purported deployment of the "older, unfit, and ill-trained" 3rd Army Corps personnel as being unable to increase Russia's overall combat power in Ukraine. On 6 September 2022, Ukrainian forces began a surprise counter-offensive on the Kharkiv front that resulted in Russian forces retreating over 1,000 square kilometres (390 sq mi) east. On 4 September, Zelenskyy announced the liberation of a village in Donetsk Oblast. Ukrainian authorities released a video of their forces entering Ozerne. On 8 September, Ukrainian forces recaptured more than 20 settlements in Kharkiv Oblast, including the towns of Balakliia and Shevchenkove and 'penetrated Russian defense positions up to 50 km' according to the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine. On the same day, a representative of the Russian occupation authorities announced that the 'defense of Kupiansk had begun' and that additional Russian forces were on their way to support the effort, suggesting that Ukrainian elements were close to the town. On 9 September, Ukrainian forces reached the outskirts of Kupiansk and destroyed the main bridge over the Oskil river in the city center, limiting the ability of the Russian Army to retreat or to bring in reinforcements. In the morning of 10 September, Ukrainian soldiers posted pictures of the Ukrainian flag being raised in front of the town hall. Also on 10 September, Izium, a central command post of the Russians in the region, fell to Ukrainian forces, "with thousands of Russian soldiers abandoning ammunition stockpiles and equipment as they fled." On 11 September, it was reported that the Ukrainians had retaken Velykyi Burluk in Kharkiv Oblast, just 15 miles (24 km) from the border with Russia. Russia responded with missile strikes on civilian areas and on non-military infrastructure facilities like power stations. The Russian Ministry of Defense then formally announced Russian forces' withdrawal from the majority of Kharkiv Oblast on September 11, with Russia only controlling parts of the region on the east bank of the Oskil River. By October 2022, Ukrainian forces had retaken several villages and towns in northern Luhansk and northern Donetsk, including Yatskivka, Novoliubivka, Nevske, Hrekivka, Novoiehorivka, Nadiya, Andriivka, and Stelmakhivka, among others. On 1 October, Ukrainian forces entered Lyman after a short siege. Russian forces had fallen back to the P-66 highway near the Kharkiv-Luhansk Oblast border, anchored by the settlements of Svatove and Kreminna, the first city to be taken during the battle of Donbas. On 2–3 October, Ukrainian forces began attacking towards Kreminna and Svatove in an attempt to break the Russian front line along the P-66 in northern Luhansk.[citation needed] Russian forces launched a renewed offensive in southern and northern Donetsk Oblast in early November, with Russian troops intensifying their attempts to break through Ukrainian defensive lines in Bakhmut, Soledar, Pavlivka, and Vuhledar. On 11 November, DPR forces were reported to have entered Pavlivka. Russian forces, including Wagner Group PMC fighters, overran defensive lines south of Bakhmut in late November, claiming to capture the settlements of Kurdiumivka, Ozarianivka, Zelenopillia, and Andriivka by 30 November, while clashes in Opytne continued. By December 2022, the Donbas was the site of the fiercest fighting in Ukraine. Russian and Ukrainian forces funneled reinforcements from other fronts to the Bakhmut–Soledar axis while Ukraine's eastern counteroffensive largely stalled along the Lyman–Kreminna–Svatove axis. Russia spent much of the month consolidating defense lines along the Kreminna–Svatove front, seeking to prevent a Ukrainian breakthrough to the P-66 highway; the Ukrainians, including the 92nd Mechanized Brigade, attempted intermittent local counterattacks across the line of contact while repelling many local Russian assaults. The Kreminna–Svatove line became a defensive flashpoint for Russia, which reportedly reinforced the area with two battalions of T-90 tanks and a few BMPT armored fighting vehicles, and reportedly mobilized elements of the 144th Guards Motor Rifle Division and 8th Guards Combined Arms Army. Both the Russians and Ukrainians claimed to be conducting offensive operations along this front line and repelling local enemy assaults; on 10 December, the Russian defense ministry said it was making new advances east of Lyman while the Institute for the Study of War assessed that Ukraine "likely" controlled the contested front line settlement of Chervonopopivka as of 22 December. Meanwhile, multiple Russian sources reported that Wagner fighters had captured and were clearing Yakovlivka, located along Soledar's northeastern flank, by 7 December. The Russians also claimed to have shot down a Ukrainian Mi-8 helicopter in Yakovlivka on 8 December. Ukraine was reportedly rotating in fresh units in the Donbas by mid–December, particularly from the Kherson front. The 57th Motorized Brigade, 36th Marine Brigade, and the 46th Airmobile Brigade reinforced the Bakhmut front alongside the 24th Mechanized Brigade, relieving the 93rd, which had defended Bakhmut and Soledar for months. The 28th Brigade reportedly rotated to Kostiantynivka and the 18th Marine Infantry Battalion, 35th Marine Brigade reinforced Nevelske and Pervomaiske.[better source needed] Heavy clashes along the Bakhmut–Soledar axis continued by 10 December, typified by grueling trench warfare, drone warfare, artillery duels, and minor ground assaults amid freezing temperatures. Zelenskyy accused Russia of having "destroyed" Bakhmut, saying there was "no residential space that hasn't been damaged by shelling for a long time." On 10 December, the Ukrainian General Staff said more than 20 settlements were bombarded in fighting in the Bakhmut area alone. Ukrainian paratroopers of the 71st Separate Huntsman Brigade reported repelling a Russian "sabotage and reconnaissance group" with mortar fire near Bakhmut, "eliminating" at least two attackers. On 16 December, Wagner PMC forces reportedly finished clearing Yakovlivka, further threatening Soledar's northeastern flank. In southern and western Donetsk Oblast, the battle of Marinka continued, with DPR president Denis Pushilin claiming on 15 December that 80 percent of the city had been captured amid ongoing heavy urban combat. Russia also continued demolition and reconstruction projects in Mariupol, reportedly seeking to turn the ruined city into a garrison city. Observers accused Russia of using the rebuilding efforts to cover up and destroy evidence of war crimes in Mariupol, particularly the March 2022 Mariupol theatre airstrike. Russian regular, separatist, and Wagner PMC forces continued attempts to break defense lines on Bakhmut's southern and eastern flanks via small probing attacks; Wagner fighters spearheaded ground assaults into the city and its satellite suburbs, each of which Ukraine had turned into a stronghold. Media, government officials, and eyewitnesses described the fighting in Bakhmut as a "meat grinder" as both Ukrainian and Russian troops reportedly suffered heavy casualties daily with negligible changes on the front line. The ISW assessed that the pace of Russia's Donbas advances in November and December was roughly equivalent to the pace in October. According to the ISW, Russian forces gained a total of 192 sq km in the Bakhmut sector between 1 October and 20 December. Footage posted online by a Russian journalist confirmed Russian forces had captured Andriivka, 10 km south of Bakhmut, by 22 December. The journalist claimed that Wagner fighters were fighting near Klishchiivka, where Ukraine reportedly had established strong defensive positions. Meanwhile, Ukraine continued to hold the northern half of Opytne and the western half of Marinka. On 26 December, Zelenskyy referred to Ukraine's situation in the Donbas as "difficult," saying the Russians were "using all the resources available to them ... to squeeze out at least some advance." Ukraine's Eastern Military Command reported that the Bakhmut area was shelled 225 times on 26 December alone. Russian forces intensified their encirclement attempts of Bakhmut in the winter, as Wagner broke through Ukrainian defense lines in the salt-mining town of Soledar on 27 December, capturing Bakhmutske. Soledar itself was taken by 16 January 2023, degrading Bakhmut's northeastern defensive flanks. The recapture of Soledar allowed Russian forces, spearheaded by Wagner fighters, to further flank Bakhmut from the northeastern direction and assert control over a portion of the T0513 highway towards Siversk. Defences along Bakhmut's northern flank collapsed as the Ukrainians withdrew from Krasna Hora on 11 February. Wagner advanced 2-3 kilometers to the west of Blahodatne, capturing the area near the main M-03 highway leading into Bakhmut. Both the UK Defence Ministry and Ukraine's governor of Donetsk Pavlo Kyrylenko said the Russians were attempting a pincer movement of Bakhmut, enveloping the city from multiple directions and establishing fire control over most Ukrainian supply routes into it. In mid-January, a battle took place in Vodiane. On January 15, around 9-10 in the morning, elements of the DPR's 1st Slovyanska Separate Mechanized Brigade attacked eastern Vodiane from a frozen-over flooded area west of Opytne. These elements were not supported by artillery. At 12pm, a convoy of eight to nine Russian BMP-2s heading towards Ukrainian-controlled west Vodiane was hit by Ukrainian fire, injuring 70% of the soldiers involved, according to the Russian commander of the attack. Two T-72Bs then approached the town, but were destroyed. A third and final attack took place in the afternoon, when some BMPs attempted to drive close to the bridge between Vodiane and Opytne (which had been destroyed during the fighting), but were also destroyed by artillery. There were also attacks on Sieverne, west of Avdiivka. On 10 February 2023, Russian fighters in Vodiane claimed that there is "not a single living creature in the town" from the destruction. A group of Russian soldiers from the "Storm" detachment from Kaliningrad released a video in March 2023, claiming they were suffering large losses while fighting in Vodiane. By 22 February, Russian units had crossed the M-03 and began assaulting Yahidne and Berkhivka, northwest of Bakhmut, with the Ukrainians claiming to have repelled the assaults amid heavy fighting. Wagner claimed to have captured both villages by 26 February, however Ukraine's general staff said Russian assaults remained "unsuccessful" amid heavy shelling. Geolocated footage on 4 March showed Russian troops were advancing along both banks of the Berkhivka reservoir located about 4 kilometers northwest of Bakhmut, on the approaches to Khromove and Dubovo-Vasylivka villages, respectively. On 7 March, Ukraine ceded eastern Bakhmut to Russian forces, retreating west of the Bakhmutka river. Wagner claimed to have advanced along the M-03 and expanded the buffer zone north and west of Bakhmut, capturing the villages of Dubovo-Vasylivka and Zaliznianske by 16 March, however Ukrainian defenders stalled the advance along this axis by 19 March, repelling assaults on Orikhovo-Vasylivka, Bohdanivka, and Khromove villages. In early March 2023, Zelenskyy referred to the ongoing fighting in the Donbas as "painful and difficult".Clashes around Avdiivka escalated in February and March, as the Ukrainians claimed Russian forces had begun an attempted encirclement effort of the city. Russian forces increased the amount of airstrikes in the area as ground units advanced towards Avdiivka's outskirts from the north and northeast, capturing Krasnohorivka (9 km north of Avdiivka) and Vesele (7 km north of Avdiivka) by 21 March. Further to the south, the grinding battle for Marinka had reduced the city to "post-apocalyptic" ruins as Russian ground units made minimal gains amid fierce urban combat with Ukrainian defenders. DPR leader Denis Pushilin claimed Ukraine was continuously transferring reserves to Marinka. Fighting inside Bakhmut continued into April and May 2023. Russian forces controlled 95 percent of the city by 18 May, having corralled Ukrainian defenders into a southwestern neighborhood of multi-story residential buildings the Russians referred to as the "nest", where Ukraine had purportedly concentrated a large number of defending units. As Wagner fighters made gradual gains inside Bakhmut, Ukraine launched counterattacks on the southern and northwestern flanks of the city beginning around 10 May, resulting in Russian units abandoning positions near the Berkhivka reservoir and south of Ivanivske, on the approach to Klishchiivka. Ukraine's 3rd Assault Brigade reportedly partook in the recapture of 2 km of territory, in what Ukrainian commander Oleksandr Syrskyi called "the first successful offensive operation in the city's defense". Despite the Ukrainian counterattacks threatening their flanks, Wagner continued to advance inside the city and claimed to have fully captured it on 20 May, adding that they planned to withdraw from the front line and be replaced by regular Russian troops after finishing clearing operations. Ukraine, however, denied that Bakhmut had fallen and claimed their forces were in the process of partially "encircling" the city via their multiple "localized" gains on the environs. By 21 May, Wagner forces had consolidated control over Bakhmut proper and halted their advance, with Ukrainian forces still operating in neighboring localities west and south of the city. The ISW assessed that Ukrainian forces had withdrawn from the city itself but were still counterattacking on the outskirts. In early June 2023, Ukraine launched a large counteroffensive across the frontlines, including on the flanks of Bakhmut. These attacks focused around areas such as Andriivka, Klishchiivka, and Berkhivka, where Ukrainian forces made "marginal" gains. Ukraine's progress was notably hindered by dense Russian minefields, with the Russians reportedly using rocket systems to deploy mines in areas that Ukrainian troops had previously recaptured and cleared. By July 2023, Russian forces were largely maintaining a defensive posture along the vast majority of the frontline, with the Luhansk front being one of the few places where they reportedly remained on the offensive. Meanwhile, internal tensions between the Russian defence ministry and the Wagner Group boiled over when the latter launched a one-day rebellion against the Russian government on 23 June, which was concluded with mediation by Belarus. Wagner leader Yevgeny Prigozhin later announced on 19 July that the PMC would no longer fight in Ukraine. Russia reportedly increased its oversight over Wagner forces after Prigozhin and two other Wagner commanders died in a plane crash on 23 August. Russian war blog Rybar reported Wagner fighters would return to the Bakhmut axis to help recapture lost positions. On 27 September, the Ukrainian military stated that "a maximum of several hundred" Wagner fighters had returned to Ukraine but dismissed their impact on the battlefield as negligible, describing them as a "remnant" force no longer fighting as a single unit—being instead dispersed throughout regular Russian units. Later, on 27 November, a Ukrainian Ground Forces spokesman said that "former Wagner Group members" were spotted fighting on the Lyman-Kupiansk front alongside Storm-Z units. By October 2023, Ukraine was waging an "active defense" on the Bakhmut axis after recapturing Andriivka and Klishchiivka, holding the line while conducting offensive operations to improve tactical positions when possible. However, Ukrainian assaults began slowly culminating on this front by the end of the month. The ISW reported on 27 October that Russian forces were conducting successful counterattacks on Bakhmut's flanks, recapturing positions south of the Berkhivka reservoir that they lost months prior, along with making marginal gains west of Kurdyumivka, located 13 km southwest of Bakhmut. In turn, Ukrainian troops reportedly pushed the Russians out of several positions east of the Bakhmut-Horlivka railway line in the area of Andriivka. In early October 2023, as Ukraine's larger counteroffensive nominally continued on other fronts, Russian forces began a localized offensive against Avdiivka, attempting to encircle the fortified city. On 30 October 2023, Ukrainian general Oleksandr Syrskyi stated Russian forces were transferring reserves and "significantly" strengthening its grouping on the Bakhmut front in preparation of a renewed offensive to recapture lost positions along Bakhmut's flanks. Ukrainian military spokesperson Volodymyr Fityo, citing intelligence reports, stated the Russians were preparing since early October 2023 and that Ukrainian troops had been strengthening "defensive positions, engineering fortifications and pulling up reserves" in response. Russian sources, including the Russian defence ministry, said that elements of the 331st Guards Airborne Regiment, 98th and 106th Guards Airborne Division, 200th Separate Motor Rifle Brigade, "Viking" spetsnaz detachment, and the "Alexander Nevsky" Assault Brigade, were among the personnel operating on the Bakhmut front around this time. In early November, positional battles south of Bakhmut continued along the Klishchiivka-Andriivka-Kurdiumivka railway line, while Russian sources claimed increased offensive operations on the Berkhivka Reservoir axis further northwest of Bakhmut. On 6 November, Ukrainian and Russian sources reported that Russian troops had made a "marginal" advance south of the Berkhivka Reservoir, though it was unclear at the time if they recaptured the entire reservoir or just the southern shore. On 10 November, Russian sources reported Russian troops had regained lost positions in forestry north of Klishchiivka and a tree line north of Andriivka, pushing Ukrainian forces away from the railway line and the T0513 highway, however Ukrainian mines, drones, and artillery were complicating the advance. In turn, the Ukrainian General Staff reported repelling assaults near Bohdanivka, Ivanivske, Klishchiivka, and Andriivka. In mid-November, General Syrskyi confirmed Russian forces had intensified their assaults north and south of Bakhmut in an attempt to regain the initiative and retake lost positions. On 13–14 November, Russian troops—including elements of the 98th Guards Airborne Division's "Storm" Division—advanced west of Yahidne, advancing along a tree line southwest of Orikhovo-Vasylivka towards Bohdanivka and securing new positions near the Berkhivka Reservoir in the process. Russian troops reportedly crossed the railway north of Klishchiivka and were consolidating positions, though Ukraine's 93rd Mechanized Brigade claimed artillery had pushed them back across the railway. Yuri Fedorenko, the commander of the drone specialist "Achilles" Company, confirmed the situation in the Bakhmut direction was becoming complicated, crediting Russian troops' constantly shifting tactics and heavy usage of battlefield drones. Meanwhile, the Ukrainian General Staff reported repelling numerous assaults north and south of Bakhmut in its daily reports, including towards Bohdanivka, Ivanivske, Andriivka, Klishchiivka, and west of Dubovo-Vasylivka. On 16 November, Maksym Zhorin, the deputy commander of the 3rd Assault Brigade, accused Russian troops of deploying chemical weapons during clashes near Bakhmut. By 19 November, the Russians were continuing assaults towards Khromove village, Bohdanivka, and against Klishchiivka, where the Ukrainians continued to hold the tactical heights west of the village. On 29 November, Russia said its forces had taken control of Khromove. By November 2023, both the Russians and Ukrainians were reportedly using cluster munitions on the eastern front, with the Russian cluster munitions being air-launched and Ukrainian cluster munitions, supplied by the United States, being fired via artillery. Around 20 November, video emerged online of Russian forces reportedly targeting Ukrainian positions near Staromaiorske with RBK-500 cluster munitions fitted with UMPK glide bomb guidance kits. According to The War Zone online magazine, the UMPK-fitted RBK-500s are considered highly effective against personnel and soft targets, making them a logical weapon of choice for Russia in eastern Ukraine, where fighting is dominated by trench warfare amid treelines and open terrain. According to a Ukrainian platoon commander on the Bakhmut front, their cluster munitions were becoming increasingly ineffective as the Russians adapted; Russian troops began assaulting positions in smaller units and were digging their trenches deeper and making them harder to strike. Between 8–9 December, on the Bakhmut-Soledar front, Russian troops reportedly advanced 1.5 kilometers and 3.5 kilometers total in an apparent attempt to encircle Vesele, located 20 kilometers northeast of Bakhmut. Over a month later, on 18 January 2024, the Russian defence ministry claimed Russian troops had captured Vesele. Though located near Soledar, it marked the first settlement captured on the southern approach to the Siversk-Bilohorivka axis, a section of the eastern front that remained mostly stagnant throughout 2023. The Russian claims of advances were not independently verified at the time. Russian forces captured Marinka on 25 December. According to The New York Times, the capture of the ruined city was further evidence that Russian forces had seized the initiative in the war after Ukraine's largely unsuccessful summer counteroffensive. The stalled Ukrainian offensive and renewed Russian assaults resulted in Russian forces ultimately seizing more territory in 2023 than they lost. The Russian offensive on the Bakhmut front continued into January 2024, slowly pushing west towards Chasiv Yar, with ongoing clashes in and near Bohdanivka, and along the Ivanivske-Andriivka-Klishchiivka axis. General Oleksandr Syrskyi said Russian forces were using kamikaze drones and electronic warfare alongside assault groups supported by artillery to break through Ukrainian defenses on the Bakhmut front. On 20 January 2024, Ukrainian spokesperson Colonel Oleksandr Shtupun stated that Russia was focusing its assault operations in Donetsk on Avdiivka and Novomykhailivka, adding that Russian ground assaults were mostly composed of infantry, with very limited armored vehicle support. Russian forces had conducted 592 artillery strikes and launched three missile strikes on the Donetsk front in the past 24 hours, according to Shtupun. In late January–early February 2024, Russian forces broke through Ukrainian defences in Avdiivka and began flanking and encircling troops of the embattled 110th Mechanized Brigade, prompting a Ukrainian retreat and resulting in Russian forces capturing the fortified city after months of deadly fighting. The Russians continued to advance west of Avdiivka, reportedly capturing Lastochkyne, Stepove and Sieverne by 27 February and, by 1 March, had a foothold on the eastern outskirts of Berdychi, had entered central Orlivka, and were threatening the northern and eastern flanks of Tonenke. The Russians later claimed to have captured Orlivka on 19 March and Tonenke on 21 March. Clashes also continued for Novomykhailivka, with Russia claiming to have captured Pobieda on 22 February, further threatening Novomykhailivka's northern flank and expanding the buffer zone south of Marinka. Concurrent with the offensive actions on the Avdiivka and Marinka axes, Russian forces were still focusing their efforts on the Bohdanivka-Chasiv Yar direction along the O0506 highway and through Bohdanivka, north and northeast of Ivanivske, and around Klishchiivka to bypass the heights north and northwest of the settlement, according to Ukrainian military observer Kostyantyn Mashovets. On 21–23 February, Russian sources claimed that Russian troops, including elements of the 98th Guards Airborne Division, had entered the eastern outskirts of Ivanivske and advanced to Sadova Street amid fierce clashes. By 3 March, Russian troops had reached central Ivanivske. Ukraine's Tavria operational-strategic group said defenders were managing to build isolated ramparts, bunkers and anti-tank ditches amid the fighting. On 12 March, the Russian defence ministry claimed the capture of Nevelske, a village located on the southern flank of Pervomaiske and less than 15 kilometers (9.3 miles) north of Krasnohorivka, with both respective settlements also being assaulted by Russian forces. After weeks of fighting, the Russian defence ministry claimed the capture of Ivanivske on 23 March, continuing their advance towards Chasiv Yar.  Russian Armed Forces  Russian Ground Forces 1st Guards Tank Army 4th Guards Tank Division 423rd Motor Rifle Regiment 13th Tank Regiment 144th Guards Motor Rifle Division 2nd CAA 30th Separate Motorized Infantry Brigade 5th CAA 150th Rifle Division 68th Tank Regiment 6th CAA 138th Separate Mechanized Brigade 8th CAA 150th Rifle Division 20th CAA 3rd Motor Rifle Division 35th CAA 1st Guards Tank Army (elements) 68th Army Corps 64th Guards Motor Rifle Brigade 41st CAA 74th Separate Guards Motor Rifle Brigade 45th Engineer Regiment 58th CAA 90th Guards Tank Division 232nd Rocket Artillery Brigade 4th Tank Division 71st Motor Rifle Regiment Central Grouping of Forces 1st Army Corps (People's Militia of the Donetsk People's Republic) Republican Guard Pyatnashka Brigade Sparta Battalion Somalia Battalion Vostok Battalion 2nd Army Corps (People's Militia of the Luhansk People's Republic) Prizrak Brigade Cossack battalions  Russian Air Force Russian Airborne Forces 76th Guards Air Assault Division 106th Airborne Division  Russian Navy Russian Naval Infantry 810th Guards Naval Infantry Brigade Black Sea Fleet Baltic Fleet 11th Army Corps Northern Fleet Pacific Fleet Logistical Support of the Russian Armed Forces Russian Railway Troops 29th Separate Railway Brigade GRU Spetsnaz GRU 3rd Guards Spetsnaz Brigade National Guard of Russia 141st Special Motorized Regiment North Battalion Wagner Group DShRG Rusich Black Russians  Ukrainian Armed Forces  Ukrainian Ground Forces 3rd Assault Brigade 4th Tank Brigade 10th Mountain Assault Brigade 17th Tank Brigade 43rd Heavy Artillery Brigade 53rd Mechanized Brigade 56th Motorized Brigade 58th Motorized Brigade 60th Separate Infantry Brigade 93rd Mechanized Brigade 128th Mountain Assault Brigade Georgian Legion Ukrainian Volunteer Corps 2nd Separate Battalion Ukrainian Air Assault Forces 46th Airmobile Brigade 71st Jaeger Brigade 80th Air Assault Brigade 81st Airmobile Brigade  Ukrainian Navy Ukrainian Naval Infantry 36th Separate Marine Brigade Ukrainian Air Force Territorial Defense Forces 227th Kharkiv Territorial Defense Battalion International Legion of Territorial Defense of Ukraine Kastuś Kalinoŭski Battalion (Belarusian contingent) Freedom of Russia Legion Armed Forces of the Chechen Republic of Ichkeria-in-exile Sheikh Mansur Battalion Dzhokhar Dudayev Battalion Separate Special-Purpose battalion (including Ajnad al-Kavkaz) Ukrainian Ministry of Internal Affairs National Guard of Ukraine 12th Operational Brigade [ru; uk] 23rd Separate Protection of Public Order Brigade [ru; uk] 4th Rapid Reaction Brigade Azov Special Operations Detachment Donbas Battalion Special Tasks Patrol Police Sich Battalion National Police of Ukraine Ukrainian Border Guard Irregular civilian volunteers (militia) Ukrainian guerrillas According to Ukrainian sources, more than 500 wounded Russian soldiers, most of them recently mobilized, were hospitalized in the occupied city of Horlivka between 10 and 16 November 2022. On 1 October 2023, a Ukrainian sniper team of 20 men called the "Ghosts of Bakhmut", claimed that they had killed 558 Russians during the battle so far, with their leader (callsign "Ghost") reportedly being responsible for 113 of them. They also claimed that only two of them had been wounded, with Ghost again being one of them. As of January 2024, Ukrainian obituaries recorded the names of 7,644 Ukrainian servicemen killed during the battle of Bakhmut. According to Lyudmyla Denisova, the Commissioner for Human Rights in Ukraine, four civilians were killed when a shell hit their home during the night of 9 March in the village of Slobozhanske, located in Izium Raion. Russian shelling on Derhachi on 11 March reportedly killed three civilians. On 14 March, two civilians were reportedly killed in Russian shelling on houses in Kharkiv, and a child was killed after Russian shelling hit a kindergarten in Chuhuiv. On 17 March, at least 21 people were reportedly killed following Russian shelling in Merefa. Ukraine portal Russia portal Northern Ukraine campaign Southern Ukraine campaign Initially participated in the battle of Mariupol but eventually left to fight in the battle of Kyiv. It later returned to fight in the Battle of Bakhmut. . 20 September 2022 https://storymaps.arcgis.com/stories/36a7f6a6f5a9448496de641cf64bd375. Retrieved 21 September 2022. {{cite web}}: Missing or empty |title= (help) John Bacon; Tom Vanden Brook; Jorge L. Ortiz; Celina Tebor (12 April 2022). "As Russia gears up for bloodier phase of war, reports indicate a chemical weapon was used in Mariupol: Live Ukraine updates". USA Today. Archived from the original on 12 April 2022. Retrieved 12 April 2022. "Kyiv warns Russia planning large assault in eastern Ukraine". Al-Jazeera News. 11 April 2022. Archived from the original on 12 April 2022. Retrieved 12 April 2022. "Hundreds of thousands face catastrophe in Mariupol". The Economist. 21 March 2022. Archived from the original on 24 March 2022. Retrieved 21 March 2022. Ukrainian forces in Mariupol are vastly outnumbered, with 3,500 soldiers facing 14,000 invaders, around a tenth of the total estimated Russian force in the country. "Russia has begun 'Battle for Donbas' in Ukraine's east: Zelenskyy". Al Jazeera. 19 April 2022. Archived from the original on 19 April 2022. Retrieved 20 April 2022. "Russia deploys up to 20,000 mercenaries in battle for Ukraine's Donbas region". The Guardian. 19 April 2022. Archived from the original on 19 April 2022. Retrieved 20 April 2022. "Russia is deploying up to 20,000 Syrian, Libyan, and Wagner Group mercenaries in the Donbas, European official says". Insider. 19 April 2022. Archived from the original on 20 April 2022. Retrieved 21 April 2022. Adam Schrek (19 April 2022). "Russia pours in more troops and presses attack in the east". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 19 April 2022. Retrieved 21 April 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, April 20". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 20 April 2022. Archived from the original on 20 April 2022. Retrieved 22 April 2022. Alexei Muraviev (21 January 2022). "2022 is not 2014: What holds back Russia from Ukraine". Lowly Institute. The Interpreter. Archived from the original on 21 January 2022. Retrieved 12 April 2022. "Ukraine war: Russia bombards cities as eastern offensive begins". BBC News. 19 April 2022. Archived from the original on 19 April 2022. Retrieved 20 April 2022. "Ukraine conflict: Russia begins Donbas offensive". Janes.com. Archived from the original on 24 April 2022. Retrieved 29 April 2022. "Ukraine war: Kyiv orders forces to withdraw from Severodonetsk". BBC News. 24 June 2022. Stepanenko, Kateryna; Hird, Karolina; Kagan, Frederick W. (2 July 2022). "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, July 2". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 2 July 2022. "Ukrainian forces lose foothold in eastern town". CNN. 13 May 2022. Archived from the original on 13 May 2022. Retrieved 17 May 2022. "Росіяни контролюють Ізюм – Генштаб ЗСУ". "Ukraine takes control of entire Kharkiv region and towns seized at onset of Russian invasion". the Guardian. 14 September 2022. Retrieved 28 November 2022. "Recaptured Ukrainian city Lyman 'completely destroyed', say officials". euronews. 8 October 2022. Retrieved 28 November 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, October 27, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. 27 October 2023. Retrieved 17 November 2023. "Ukraine's commander-in-chief on the breakthrough he needs to beat Russia". The Economist. 1 November 2023. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 2 November 2023. Jack Losh (25 February 2022). "Kharkiv's Resistance to Russia's War Has Already Begun". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 25 February 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. "Ukraine: Video appears to show aftermath of missile strike on air base in Chuhuiv". Sky News. 24 February 2022. Archived from the original on 7 March 2022. Retrieved 8 March 2022. Sheetz, Michael (24 February 2022). "Satellite imagery shows Russian attack on Ukraine from space". CNBC. Archived from the original on 7 March 2022. Retrieved 8 March 2022. "Conflict in Ukraine's Donbas: A Visual Explainer". Crisis Group. 29 June 2021. Archived from the original on 18 May 2022. Retrieved 18 May 2022. "russian-invasion". UaWarExplained.com. 29 March 2022. Archived from the original on 1 June 2022. Retrieved 29 March 2022. "Battle ongoing near Mariupol – mayor". Ukrinform. Archived from the original on 25 February 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. Richárd, Jabronka (25 February 2022). "Így áll most a háború Ukrajnában: több nagyvárosban harcok dúlnak, megtámadtak egy orosz repülőteret". Ellenszél (in Hungarian). Archived from the original on 26 February 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. Sangal, Aditi; Vogt, Adrienne; Woodyatt, Amy; Picheta, Rob; Upright, Ed; Yeung, Jessie; Renton, Adam; Macaya, Melissa; Wagner, Meg (25 February 2022). ""Amphibious assault" underway west of Mariupol on the Sea of Azov, senior US defense official says". CNN. Archived from the original on 25 February 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. "Russian Navy Carries Out Amphibious Assault Near Mariupol". The Maritime Executive. Archived from the original on 25 February 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. "Війна в Україні: біля Старобільська українські військові розбили колону ворожої техніки | Новини на Gazeta.ua". 25 February 2022. Archived from the original on 25 February 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. SERVICE, STATE EMERGENCY. "A view shows destroyed buildings after shelling in the town of Starobilsk in the Luhansk region". Denver Gazette. Archived from the original on 28 February 2022. Retrieved 3 March 2022. "Russia orders troops to hasten their advance as Mariupol remains under heavy shelling". ABC News. 26 February 2022. Archived from the original on 27 February 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. Schwirtz, Michael (25 February 2022). "Scenes from Kharkiv: Battle wreckage, the boom of artillery, and people sheltering in the subway". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 25 February 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. "Комендантська година у Харкові: тих, кого неідентифікують як військового, ліквідовуватимуть" (in Ukrainian). Hromadske Radio. 26 February 2022. Retrieved 15 March 2022. "Ukraine says Russian troops blow up gas pipeline in Kharkiv". Reuters. 27 February 2022. Archived from the original on 27 February 2022. Retrieved 28 February 2022. "Russian troops enter Ukraine's Kharkiv -Ukrainian official". Reuters. Archived from the original on 27 February 2022. Retrieved 15 March 2022. "Ukrainian army destroys half of Russian transport in Kharkiv: Top adviser". Daily Sabah. Associated Press. 27 February 2022. Archived from the original on 27 February 2022. Retrieved 28 February 2022. Sullivan, Becky (27 February 2022). "After a night of heavy fighting, Ukrainian officials say they still control Kharkiv". NPR. Archived from the original on 27 February 2022. Retrieved 28 February 2022. "Ukraine has restored full control of Kharkiv: Governor". Daily Sabah. Reuters. 27 February 2022. Archived from the original on 27 February 2022. Retrieved 28 February 2022. "In Kharkiv region, mayor admits to handing over city to occupiers". Ukrayinska Pravda. 27 February 2022. Archived from the original on 28 February 2022. Retrieved 28 February 2022. "Acusan de traición al alcalde de Kupyansk, ciudad del noreste de Ucrania" (in Spanish). Agencia de Periodismo Investigativo. Archived from the original on 28 February 2022. Retrieved 28 February 2022. "Russian invasion update: Ukraine repels tank attack, captures six Russians in Mariupol". Ukrinform. Archived from the original on 27 February 2022. Retrieved 28 February 2022. "Станиця Луганська, Щастя і Волноваха опинилися на межі гуманітарної катастрофи". RBC Ukraine (in Ukrainian). 27 February 2022. Archived from the original on 27 February 2022. Retrieved 28 February 2022. "First in 7 days of war Ukrainian units go on offensive advancing to Horlivka – Arestovych". Interfax Ukraine. 2 March 2022. Archived from the original on 2 March 2022. Retrieved 2 March 2022. "Ukrainian Military Begin To Seize Initiative From Russian Invaders – General Staff". Ukranews_Com. 2 March 2022. Archived from the original on 3 March 2022. Retrieved 2 March 2022. "Войските на ВСУ изоставят техниката: Руските сили превзеха Новоайдар ВИДЕО". Blitz (in Bulgarian). 3 March 2022. Archived from the original on 3 March 2022. Retrieved 12 March 2022. Суспільне (2 March 2022). "Російські танки зайшли у Старобільськ, їх зупиняють місцеві жителі". Суспільне | Новини (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 2 March 2022. Retrieved 3 March 2022. "Russian troops enter strategic Ukrainian port of Kherson". Reuters. 2 March 2022. Archived from the original on 3 March 2022. Retrieved 3 March 2022. Tony Tumanova. "Балаклія: на територію громади зайшли російські війська – міський голова". Ukrainian National News (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 8 March 2022. Retrieved 2 March 2022. "Донецк после обстрела". BBC. Archived from the original on 4 April 2022. Retrieved 4 April 2022. Zoe Zaczek (2 March 2022). "Russian paratroopers launch fresh attack on embattled Kharkiv with battle underway at military hospital". Sky News. Archived from the original on 10 March 2022. Retrieved 2 March 2022. "First in 7 days of war Ukrainian units go on offensive advancing to Horlivka – Arestovych". Interfax Ukraine. 2 March 2022. Archived from the original on 2 March 2022. Retrieved 2 March 2022. "Ukrainian Military Begin To Seize Initiative From Russian Invaders – General Staff". ukranews_com. 2 March 2022. Archived from the original on 3 March 2022. Retrieved 2 March 2022. "Ukrainian authorities have no data on the participation of Belarusian troops in the fighting against Ukraine". belsat.eu. Archived from the original on 4 March 2022. Retrieved 3 March 2022. "Military and Political Situation in Ukraine. Morning of March 2nd, 2022 – Ihor Zhdanov". Interfax-Ukraine. Archived from the original on 6 March 2022. Retrieved 2 March 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, March 2". Critical Threats. Archived from the original on 6 March 2022. Retrieved 3 March 2022. "Ukraine says 34 civilians killed in Kharkiv region, no water or power in Mariupol city". Reuters. 3 March 2022. Archived from the original on 3 March 2022. Retrieved 3 March 2022. "СВАТОВЕ – ЦЕ УКРАЇНА: МІСЦЕВІ ЖИТЕЛІ НА ЛУГАНЩИНІ ПРОГНАЛИ РОСІЙСЬКИХ ОКУПАНТІВ (ВІДЕО)". TSN (in Ukrainian). 3 March 2022. Archived from the original on 8 March 2022. Retrieved 8 March 2022. "Civiles ucranianos impidieron el avance de tanques rusos". MinutoUno.com (in Spanish). 3 March 2022. Archived from the original on 8 March 2022. Retrieved 8 March 2022. Denys Karlovskyy (4 March 2022). "Ukrainian forces launch counterattack against Russian forces near Kharkiv". Ukrayinska Pravda. Archived from the original on 6 March 2022. Retrieved 6 March 2022. "Ukraine Recaptures City of Chuhuiv, Kills Top Russian Commanders: Officials". Newsweek. 7 March 2022. Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 7 March 2022. Graeme Massie (7 March 2022). "Ukraine claims it has killed another Russian general during fighting in Kharkiv". The Independent. Archived from the original on 8 March 2022. Retrieved 7 March 2022. "Russia to open Ukraine 'humanitarian routes', but fears persist". France 24. Agence France-Presse. 8 March 2022. Archived from the original on 8 March 2022. Retrieved 8 March 2022. Yaroslav Trofimov; Alan Cullison (6 March 2022). "Ukraine Resumes Evacuation Attempts as Russia Presses Offensive". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 8 March 2022. Retrieved 6 March 2022. "Ukraine invasion: Mariupol evacuation halted again as Russia 'regroups forces'". Sky News. 6 March 2022. Archived from the original on 7 March 2022. Retrieved 6 March 2022. Ivan Boyko (6 March 2022). "Бої біля трьох міст: стало відомо, де на Луганщині дуже "гаряче"". Ukrainian Independent Information Agency (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 6 March 2022. Retrieved 8 March 2022. Alan Cullison (9 March 2022). "Russian Airstrike Hits Maternity Hospital in Ukrainian City of Mariupol". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 9 March 2022. "Russian-backed separatists capture Ukraine's Volnovakha – RIA". Reuters. 11 March 2022. Archived from the original on 11 March 2022. Retrieved 11 March 2022. Tim Lister (11 March 2022). "Evidence indicates Volnovakha in eastern Ukraine has fallen to Russian-backed forces". CNN. Archived from the original on 14 March 2022. Retrieved 11 March 2022. Denys Karlovskyy (11 March 2022). "Russian troops occupied 70% of the territory of Luhansk region – Head of Luhansk Oblast". Ukrayinska Pravda. Archived from the original on 15 March 2022. Retrieved 15 March 2022. "Heavy fighting leaves much of Volnovakha in ruins". Euronews. Associated Press. 12 March 2022. Archived from the original on 13 March 2022. Retrieved 13 March 2022. "На Луганщині загинув полковник ЗСУ Валерій Гудзь" (in Ukrainian). Hromadske Radio. 13 March 2022. Archived from the original on 13 March 2022. Retrieved 14 March 2022. Lilia Olenuk (12 March 2012). "Ворог через фейки провокує паніку". 0342.ua. Archived from the original on 15 March 2022. Retrieved 15 March 2022. "Strike in Donbas Wounds 30, Russia Accused of Chemical Attacks". Agence France-Presse. The Moscow Times. 13 March 2022. Archived from the original on 13 March 2022. Retrieved 13 March 2022. Alex Stambaugh; Lizzy Yee (13 March 2022). "Russian airstrike damages historic Ukrainian monastery". CNN. Archived from the original on 13 March 2022. Retrieved 14 March 2022. "Минобороны сообщило об освобождении заложников в монастыре под Мариуполем". RBC Group (in Russian). 14 March 2022. Archived from the original on 14 March 2022. Retrieved 15 March 2022. Aaron Reich (14 March 2022). "Ukraine accuses Russia of using phosphorus bombs – ombudsman". The Jerusalem Post. Reuters. Archived from the original on 15 March 2022. Retrieved 15 March 2022. "Ворог окупував Старомлинівку, Євгенівку, Павлівку та Єгорівку, – Генштаб". Channel 24 (in Ukrainian). 13 March 2022. Archived from the original on 16 March 2022. Retrieved 16 March 2022. "Russia claims 23 dead in missile attack on Donetsk, S Jaishankar to give statement on war in Parliament today". DNA India. 15 March 2022. Archived from the original on 15 March 2022. Retrieved 4 April 2022. "Росія заради фейку про обстріл Донецька вбила десятки людей" (in Ukrainian). 14 March 2022. Archived from the original on 14 March 2022. Retrieved 4 April 2022. "Russia says 23 dead in missile attack on Donetsk". Al Jazeera. 14 March 2022. Archived from the original on 14 March 2022. Retrieved 14 March 2022. Karlovsky, Denys (15 March 2022). "The missile strike on the centre of Donetsk was carried out from the territory of the Russian Federation – Conflict Intelligence Team". Ukrayinska Pravda. Archived from the original on 18 March 2022. Retrieved 18 March 2022. Katerina Tischenko (14 March 2022). "На Донецькому напрямку ЗСУ відбили наступ: знищено до сотні окупантів". Ukrayinska Pravda (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 14 March 2022. Retrieved 14 March 2022. Balachuk, Iryna (15 March 2022). "Russia's shelling of hospital, residential care facility, and 3 schools in Rubizhne: 4 killed". Ukrayinska Pravda. Archived from the original on 15 March 2022. Retrieved 15 March 2022. "Russia confirms senior naval officer killed in Mariupol". BBC News. 20 March 2022. Archived from the original on 20 March 2022. Retrieved 20 March 2022. "Глава ЛНР заявил об освобождении от украинских военных порядка 80% территории республики". TASS. Archived from the original on 24 March 2022. Retrieved 23 March 2022. "Russia says first phase of Ukraine operation mostly complete, focus now on Donbass". Reuters via Yahoo Finance. 25 March 2022. Archived from the original on 25 March 2022. Retrieved 25 March 2022. Mason Clark; Karolina Hird; George Barros (11 April 2022). "RUSSIAN OFFENSIVE CAMPAIGN ASSESSMENT, APRIL 11". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 12 April 2022. Retrieved 12 April 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, April 12". Institute for the Study of War. 12 April 2022. Archived from the original on 13 April 2022. Retrieved 13 April 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, April 1". Institute for the Study of War. 1 April 2022. Archived from the original on 16 May 2022. Retrieved 13 April 2022. Izyum city government: Izyum 80% destroyed, Ukrayinska Pravda (3 April 2022) "Two Russian soldiers killed, 28 in hospital after being poisoned by Ukrainian civilians: Officials". 3 April 2022. Cook, Pip (4 April 2022). "Putin's army mocked after Ukrainian pie poisoning of Russian soldiers". Express. Retrieved 15 April 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, April 10". Institute for the Study of War. 10 April 2022. Archived from the original on 17 May 2022. Retrieved 13 April 2022. Larisa Brown (13 April 2022). "Putin bids to outnumber Ukrainian troops five to one in the Donbas region". The Times. Archived from the original on 14 April 2022. Retrieved 18 April 2022. "Russia offers Mariupol defence a surrender window". BBC. 16 April 2022. Archived from the original on 17 April 2022. Retrieved 17 April 2022. "Russia-Ukraine war: Russian deadline for Mariupol defenders to 'surrender or die' passes". The Guardian. 17 April 2022. Archived from the original on 17 April 2022. Retrieved 17 April 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, April 18". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 18 April 2022. Archived from the original on 18 April 2022. Retrieved 22 April 2022. "'Battle for Donbas begins' with explosions along all front lines". www.aljazeera.com. Archived from the original on 19 April 2022. Retrieved 29 April 2022. "Russia-Ukraine war live updates: Russia begins new offensive in Donbas region". NBC News. 18 April 2022. Archived from the original on 18 April 2022. Retrieved 18 April 2022. "Russia-Ukraine live news: Russia's eastern offensive has begun". Al Jazeera. 18 April 2022. Archived from the original on 18 April 2022. Retrieved 18 April 2022. "Ukraine says it sees signs Russia is starting new eastern offensive". Reuters. 18 April 2022. Archived from the original on 18 April 2022. Retrieved 18 April 2022. "Russian invaders take control of Kreminna in Luhansk region – Haidai". ukrinform.net. 18 April 2022. Archived from the original on 18 April 2022. Retrieved 19 April 2022. "Russian forces seize Kreminna in eastern Ukraine, says governor". Aljazeera. 19 April 2022. Archived from the original on 26 April 2022. Retrieved 19 April 2022. "На Луганщині ЗСУ ліквідували відомого ватажка "ЛНР"". Ukrayinska Pravda. 19 April 2022. Archived from the original on 19 April 2022. Retrieved 20 April 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, April 19". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 19 April 2022. Archived from the original on 26 April 2022. Retrieved 22 April 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, April 21". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 21 April 2022. Archived from the original on 25 April 2022. Retrieved 22 April 2022. "Russia claims capture of Mariupol, fighting rages in eastern Ukraine". "Ukrainian counterattacks slowing Russian offensive in east". Associated Press. 23 April 2022. Archived from the original on 27 April 2022. Retrieved 23 April 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, April 23". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 23 April 2022. Archived from the original on 23 April 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, April 24". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 24 April 2022. Archived from the original on 24 April 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, April 26". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 26 April 2022. Archived from the original on 27 April 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, April 29". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 29 April 2022. Archived from the original on 3 May 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, April 25". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 25 April 2022. Archived from the original on 6 May 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, April 30". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 30 April 2022. Archived from the original on 2 May 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2022. Yaroslav Trofimov (4 May 2022). "Ukraine Retakes Villages Near Kharkiv, Easing Pressure on Battered City". WSJ. Archived from the original on 8 May 2022. Retrieved 9 May 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 3". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 3 May 2022. Retrieved 9 May 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 5". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 5 May 2022. Archived from the original on 8 May 2022. Retrieved 9 May 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 2". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 2 May 2022. Archived from the original on 6 May 2022. Retrieved 9 May 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 1". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 1 May 2022. Archived from the original on 4 May 2022. Retrieved 9 May 2022. Clark, Mason; Barros, George (6 May 2022). "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 6". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 6 May 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 7". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 7 May 2022. Archived from the original on 8 May 2022. Retrieved 9 May 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 8". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 8 May 2022. Archived from the original on 11 May 2022. Retrieved 11 May 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 9". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 9 May 2022. Archived from the original on 10 May 2022. Retrieved 11 May 2022. Kilner, James; Bowman, Verity (7 May 2022). "Ukrainian counterattacks are pushing Russian artillery out of range of Kharkiv". Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 7 May 2022. Williams, Sophie (7 May 2022). "Ukraine: Intense shelling as troops battle to regain Kharkiv region". BBC News. Retrieved 7 May 2022. Schwirtz, Michael; Engelbrecht, Cora; Specia, Megan (7 May 2022). "Russian Pullback Seen Near Kharkiv, Despite Victory Day Push for Gains". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 9 May 2022. Landay, Jonathan (11 May 2022). "Ukraine pushes back Russian troops in counter-offensive near Kharkiv". Reuters. Retrieved 11 May 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 10". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 10 May 2022. Archived from the original on 11 May 2022. Retrieved 11 May 2022. Troianovski, Anton; Santora, Marc (15 May 2022). "Growing evidence of a military disaster on the Donets pierces a pro-Russian bubble". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 16 May 2022. Retrieved 16 May 2022. "Ukraine Invasion Update 25". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 5 May 2022. Archived from the original on 8 May 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2022. "Ukrainian forces lose foothold in eastern town". CNN. 13 May 2022. Archived from the original on 13 May 2022. Retrieved 17 May 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 12". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 12 May 2022. Archived from the original on 13 May 2022. Retrieved 19 May 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 15". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 15 May 2022. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 19 May 2022. Norman, Greg (12 May 2022). "Russia withdrawing troops after 'heavy losses', proving 'inability to capture key Ukrainian cities,' UK says". Retrieved 14 May 2022. "Ukraine has won the battle of Kharkiv, analysts say, as Kyiv warns of 'long phase of war'". TheGuardian.com. 14 May 2022. "Russian forces withdraw far from Kharkiv, mayor tells BBC". 14 May 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 16". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 16 May 2022. Archived from the original on 21 May 2022. Retrieved 19 May 2022. "Azov officer: Russian forces lost about 6,000 troops in Mariupol". 14 May 2022. Hopkins, Valerie; Nechepurenko, Ivan; Santora, Marc (16 May 2022). "The Ukrainian authorities declare an end to the combat mission in Mariupol after weeks of Russian siege". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 16 May 2022. Retrieved 17 May 2022. "Explainer: Who Were Mariupol's Last Defenders?". "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 19". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 19 May 2022. Archived from the original on 21 May 2022. Retrieved 20 May 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 23". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 23 May 2022. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 25 May 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 22". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 22 May 2022. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 25 May 2022. Strozewski, Zoe (16 May 2022). "Russian sneak attack on Sumy area fails, Putin forces lose Ukrainian ground". Newsweek. "Borders of Sumy region shelled from Russian territory". news.yahoo.com. 21 May 2022. "Sumy Oblast missile strike: Woman wounded, church and kindergarten damaged". 28 May 2022. "The Russians shelled Kharkiv again, trying to carry out counterattack". pravda.com.ua. 20 May 2022. "Russians attempt counterattacks in Kharkiv Oblast to regain lost ground — General Staff". Voitovych, Olga (21 May 2022). "Ukraine recovers bodies, including a senior Russian officer, from graves dug by locals in Kharkiv region". CNN. Retrieved 27 May 2022. Voitovych, Olga (22 May 2022). "RUSSIAN OFFENSIVE CAMPAIGN ASSESSMENT, MAY 22". ISW. Voitovych, Olga (22 May 2022). "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 24". ISW. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 24". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 24 May 2022. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 25 May 2022. Kuczyński, Grzegorz (24 May 2022). "Russian Troops Want To Cut Off Ukrainians By Donets River". Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 24 May 2022. "Heavy weapons would be game changer – Ukraine adviser". BBC. 30 May 2022. Archived from the original on 30 May 2022. Retrieved 30 May 2022. Mason, Jeff; Holland, Steve (1 June 2022). "Biden agrees to provide Ukraine with longer range missiles". Reuters. Retrieved 1 June 2022. "Российские военные заявили о полном контроле над Северодонецком". Radio Free Europe (in Russian). 26 June 2022. The summary of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine on the evening of June 25 says, among other things, that after the withdrawal of Ukrainian units, Russian troops are fixed in the areas of the settlements of Severodonetsk, Sirotino, Voronovo and Borovskoye. "Russia claims control of pivotal eastern Ukrainian province". Daily Independent. 3 July 2022. Archived from the original on 10 July 2022. Retrieved 4 July 2022. "Putin declares victory in Luhansk after fall of Lysychansk". the Guardian. 4 July 2022. Retrieved 8 July 2022. Voitenko, Anna (10 July 2022). "Russian rockets hit apartment block, killing at least 15". Reuters. Archived from the original on 10 July 2022. Retrieved 10 July 2022. "Russian forces take Vuhlehirska power station under total control". english.pravda.ru. 26 July 2022. "RUSSIAN OFFENSIVE CAMPAIGN ASSESSMENT, JULY 25". Institute for the Study of War. 25 July 2022. Retrieved 26 July 2022. "RUSSIAN OFFENSIVE CAMPAIGN ASSESSMENT, JULY 26". Institute for the Study of War. 26 July 2022. Retrieved 27 July 2022. "Rusia dice que tomó control de aldea de Udy, en la región ucraniana de Járkov". Swiss Info. 14 August 2022. Stepanenko, Kateryna; Mappes, Grace; Howard, Angela; Philipson, Layne; Kagan, Frederick W. (29 August 2022). "RUSSIAN OFFENSIVE CAMPAIGN ASSESSMENT, AUGUST 29". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 11 September 2022. "Revealed: Putin's New Deadline for a Major Victory in Ukraine". The Daily Beast. 1 September 2022. Retrieved 2 September 2022. "Ukraine launches surprise counterattack in Kharkiv region". the Guardian. 8 September 2022. Retrieved 6 October 2022. Asami, Terajima (4 September 2022). "Ukraine war latest: Ukraine liberates villages in south and east". The Kyiv Independent. Archived from the original on 4 September 2022. Retrieved 5 September 2022. "Representative of General staff of Armed forces of Ukraine says over 20 settlements were liberated in Kharkiv region, in some areas penetration in Russian defense positions up to 50 kms Kharkiv - Ukraine Interactive map - Ukraine Latest news on live map - liveuamap.com". Ukraine Interactive map - Ukraine Latest news on live map - liveuamap.com. Retrieved 10 September 2022. "Ukrainian military liberated Balakliia from Russian occupation Balakliia - Ukraine Interactive map - Ukraine Latest news on live map - liveuamap.com". Ukraine Interactive map - Ukraine Latest news on live map - liveuamap.com. Retrieved 10 September 2022. "Ukrainian flag raised in Shevchenkove Kharkiv - Ukraine Interactive map - Ukraine Latest news on live map - liveuamap.com". Ukraine Interactive map - Ukraine Latest news on live map - liveuamap.com. Retrieved 10 September 2022. "Ukrainian military reached Kupiansk Kharkiv - Ukraine Interactive map - Ukraine Latest news on live map - liveuamap.com". Ukraine Interactive map - Ukraine Latest news on live map - liveuamap.com. Retrieved 10 September 2022. "Russian war correspondent Evegeny Poddubny says that Ukraine has damaged the bridge in Kupyansk, potentially limiting the ability of Russian reinforcements to arrive in the city or for its forces to retreat Kupyansk, Kharkiv - Ukraine Interactive map - Ukraine Latest news on live map - liveuamap.com". Ukraine Interactive map - Ukraine Latest news on live map - liveuamap.com. Retrieved 10 September 2022. Hunder, Max; Hnidyi, Vitalii (10 September 2022). "Russian grip on northeast Ukraine collapses after Kyiv severs supply line". Reuters. "Ukraine map reveals how invasion is being rolled back 200 days in". Newsweek. 11 September 2022. "'You can't scare us', Zelenkiy tells Russia, after missile attacks on Kharkiv – as it happened". TheGuardian.com. 12 September 2022. "Russian defense ministry shows retreat from most of Kharkiv region". Meduza. 11 September 2022. Retrieved 14 September 2022. Harding, Luke; Sabbagh, Dan (14 September 2022). "Ukraine takes control of entire Kharkiv region and towns seized at onset of Russian invasion". the Guardian. Retrieved 14 September 2022. Yang, Maya; Chaofong, Leonie; Belam, Martin; McClure, Tess (24 September 2022). "Russia-Ukraine war latest: what we know on day 213 of the invasion". www.theguardian.com. Guardian News and Media Ltd. Retrieved 24 September 2022. "The Ukrainian military liberated the Stelmakhivka village in the Luhansk region – Haidai". Khrebet, Alexander (24 October 2022). "Ukraine war latest: Armed Forces liberate 4 settlements in Donbas". kyivindependent.com. The Kyiv Independent. Retrieved 24 October 2022. "Russian forces retreat from strategic Donetsk city a day after Moscow's annexation of the region". CNN. 1 October 2022. "Russians going on offensive in three directions of Donetsk region". www.ukrinform.net. 13 November 2022. Retrieved 14 November 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, November 13". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 14 November 2022. "The overview of the current social and humanitarian situation in the territory of the Donetsk People's Republic as a result of hostilities in the period 04 and 11 November 2022". "RUSSIAN OFFENSIVE CAMPAIGN ASSESSMENT, NOVEMBER 29". ISW. Russian milbloggers reiterated claims that Russian forces advanced southwest of Bakhmut, taking Andriivka, Ozarianivka, and Zelenopillia (13km south of Bakhmut) "Institute for the Study of War". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 25 March 2022. Retrieved 18 January 2023. "Russia Has Turned Eastern Ukraine Into a Giant Minefield". Wired. 21 December 2022. Retrieved 24 December 2022. "The Russian Army Is Crowding Its Best Tanks In One Sector Of Eastern Ukraine". Forbes. 21 December 2022. Retrieved 24 December 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, December 26". The Institute for the Study of War. 26 December 2022. Retrieved 27 December 2022. "Russia grinds on in eastern Ukraine; Bakhmut 'destroyed'". Associated Press. 10 December 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, December 22". The Institute for the study of War. 22 December 2022. Retrieved 23 December 2022. "Wagner Group Repels Fresh Ukrainian Advances in Battle for Bakhmut—Report". Newsweek. 8 December 2022. "Ukrainian Mi-8 shot down over Yakovlivka (8/12)". Russian Ministry of Defense. 8 December 2022. Retrieved 11 December 2022. "Ukrainian reinforcements heading to Donbas". Military Land. 11 December 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2022. "Donbas Fighting Heavy Overnight As West Says Moscow Turning To 'Sanctioned States' For Weaponry". RFE/RFL. 10 December 2022. "Ukrainian Paratroopers Eliminate Enemy Sabotage And Reconnaissance Group Near Bakhmut". Ukranews. 11 December 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, December 16". The Institute for the Study of War. 17 December 2022. "Russia warns of 'consequences' if U.S. sends Patriot missiles sent to Ukraine". PBS. 15 December 2022. "Russia begins demolition of bombed Mariupol theatre". Reuters. 24 December 2022. "In occupied Mariupol, Russia's rebuild is erasing Ukrainian identity and any evidence of war crimes". Euronews. 22 December 2022. Retrieved 24 December 2022. "Russian attacks grind on in eastern Ukraine as Bakhmut is 'destroyed'". CNBC. 10 December 2022. Retrieved 24 December 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, December 20". The Institute for the Study of War. 20 December 2022. Retrieved 22 December 2022. "Donbas Situation Is 'Difficult, Acute' for Ukraine: Zelensky". Newsweek. 26 December 2022. Retrieved 27 December 2022. "Governor: Over 60% of infrastructure in Bakhmut damaged or destroyed". Yahoo News. 26 December 2022. Retrieved 27 December 2022. "RUSSIAN OFFENSIVE CAMPAIGN ASSESSMENT, DECEMBER 27". The Institute for the Study of War. 27 December 2022. Retrieved 5 January 2023. "Ukrainian military source: Russia controls administrative territory of Soledar". The Kyiv Independent. 15 January 2023. Retrieved 16 January 2023. Wallace (16 January 2023). "Bachmut's next target? – Ukraine admits loss of Soledar". Today Times Live. Retrieved 16 January 2023. "With the loss of Soledar, Ukrainian positions in Bakhmut jeopardized". Kyiv Independent. 22 January 2023. Retrieved 25 March 2023. "Wagner founder Prigozhin says Russian forces take Ukraine village Krasna Hora, north of Bakhmut". Reuters. 12 February 2023. Retrieved 25 March 2023. "Ukraine denies Russian capture of Krasna Hora near Bakhmut". The New Voice of Ukraine. 13 February 2023. Retrieved 25 March 2023. "Different scenarios for Bakhmut possible, including capture by enemy, says Donetsk regional governor". The New Voice of Ukraine. 7 February 2023. Retrieved 25 March 2023. "UK: Russian advance in Bakhmut could come with heavy losses". Associated Press. 11 March 2023. Retrieved 3 April 2023. Miller, Sergio; Steve (20 February 2023). "May the farce be with you: the assault on Vodyane village »". Wavell Room. Archived from the original on 23 March 2023. Retrieved 5 April 2023. "Обзор социально-гуманитарной ситуации, сложившейся на территории Донецкой Народной Республики вследствие военных действий в период с 07 по 13 мая 2022 г. — Уполномоченный по правам человека в ДНР". ombudsman-dnr.ru. Retrieved 13 May 2022. ""Все завалено трупами, нас не випускають з позицій": Залишки загону РФ "Шторм" благають Путіна про допомогу". Патріоти України (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 5 April 2023. Retrieved 5 April 2023. "Latest Developments in Ukraine: Feb. 22". VOA News. 22 February 2023. Retrieved 27 March 2023. "UPDATE 2-Russia's Prigozhin, Ukraine give varying accounts on fighting near Bakhmut". Reuters. 25 February 2023. Retrieved 27 March 2023. "Ukraine Situation Report: Tensions Build In Moldova". The Drive. 27 February 2023. Retrieved 27 March 2023. "Russo-Ukrainian War. Day 370: Russia changes tactics of missile attacks". Euromaidan Press. 28 February 2023. Retrieved 27 March 2023. "Ukraine update: Russia claims to be sending their own 'super tank' to Ukraine". Daily Kos. 4 March 2023. Retrieved 27 March 2023. Arhirova, Hanna. "Russian forces claim progress in Bakhmut but no end in sight". The Washington Post. Retrieved 9 March 2023. Sforza, Lauren (8 March 2023). "Russia says it controls eastern Bakhmut". The Hill. Retrieved 9 March 2023. "Ukraine war: Russia's Wagner Group claims full control of eastern Bakhmut districts". Euronews. 8 March 2023. Retrieved 9 March 2023. "Russian Wagner troops have likely captured a village 6km northwest of Ukraine's Bakhmut on 9 March". Euromaidan Press. 10 March 2023. Retrieved 3 April 2023. "Ukraine war latest: As Wagner's offensive in Bakhmut likely 'nears culmination,' Kyiv set to receive first MiG-29 jets". The Kyiv Independent. 16 March 2023. Retrieved 3 April 2023. "To Keep Open Its Supply Line Into Bakhmut, The Ukrainian Army Rolled In One Of Its Armored Bridgelayers". Forbes. 10 March 2023. Retrieved 3 April 2023. "Ukraine repels over 100 attacks in past day as Russia continues offensive". The New Voice of Ukraine. 14 March 2023. Retrieved 3 April 2023. "Russia Launches More Attacks On Bakhmut, 'Regardless Of Losses,' As U.S. Warns Of 'Tough Fight' Ahead". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 16 March 2023. Retrieved 3 April 2023. "Russians tactically cannot complete operation to capture Bakhmut – Cherevatyi". Ukrinform. 19 March 2023. Retrieved 3 April 2023. "Battle for Ukraine's Donbas 'painful and difficult': Zelensky". Business Recorder. 6 March 2023. Retrieved 4 May 2023. "Ukraine says eastern town of Avdiivka could become 'second Bakhmut'". Reuters. 20 March 2023. "Russo-Ukrainian War. Day 380: Russian largest missile strike of 2023". Euromaidan Press. 10 March 2023. Retrieved 4 May 2023. "Russia likely tries to make gains in Donbas before losing initiative in Ukraine – ISW". Euromaidan Press. 21 March 2023. Retrieved 4 May 2023. "Close Combat Marks 'Hellish' Battle at Ukraine's Marinka". The Defense Post. 24 January 2023. Retrieved 4 May 2023. "Before-and-after photos show how Russia's invasion reduced a Ukrainian city to a post-apocalyptic wasteland". Business Insider. 7 March 2023. Retrieved 4 May 2023. "Pushilin: In Marinka, until the complete liberation of the city, there was only one section in the western part". Eastern Herald. 24 March 2023. Retrieved 4 May 2023. "Wagner still holds significant territory in Bakhmut, U.S. officials say". Politico. 10 May 2023. Retrieved 21 May 2023. "Ukraine strikes back around Bakhmut as Wagner reaches last streets in the city". Kyiv Independent. 19 May 2023. Retrieved 21 May 2023. "The Kremlin's Pyrrhic Victory in Bakhmut: A Retrospective on the Battle for Bakhmut". ISW. 24 May 2023. Retrieved 14 June 2023. "Ukraine unit says Russian brigade flees outskirts of Bakhmut". Reuters. 10 May 2023. Retrieved 21 May 2023. "Advance in Bakhmut is first success, city's defense continues: Ukraine top commander". Al Arabiya. 15 May 2023. Retrieved 21 May 2023. "Russia admits its forces have fallen back near Bakhmut – as Ukraine gains ground". The Independent. 12 May 2023. Retrieved 21 May 2023. "Putin congratulates Russia troops, Wagner for 'capturing Bakhmut'". Al Jazeera. 20 May 2023. Retrieved 21 May 2023. "Head of Russia's Wagner says all of Bakhmut captured as promised, will leave May 25". Al Arabiya. 21 May 2023. Hird, Karolina; Mappes, Grace; Wolkov, Nicole; Philipson, Layne; Kagan, Frederick W. (12 May 2023). "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 12, 2023". ISW. Archived from the original on 1 June 2023. Retrieved 11 June 2023. "Bakhmut battle rages as Ukraine claims advances, Russian retreat". Al Jazeera. 19 May 2023. Archived from the original on 8 June 2023. Retrieved 11 June 2023. "Russia-Ukraine live: Zelenskyy says 'nothing left' in Bakhmut / Ukraine says its troops have 'semi-circled' Bakhmut". Aljazeera. 21 May 2023. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 22, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 24 May 2023. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 23, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 24 May 2023. "Russia's missile strike wipes out Ukrainian army's ammo train in Dnepropetrovsk area". TASS. 17 August 2023. Retrieved 19 January 2024. Hird, Karolina; Barros, George; Mappes, Grace; Wolkov, Nicole; Clark, Mason; Kagan, Fredrick W. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, June 8, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 9 June 2023. Retrieved 9 June 2023. Balmforth, Tom. "Ukraine says it retakes village in 'first results' of counterattack". Reuters. Archived from the original on 11 June 2023. Retrieved 12 June 2023. Bailey, Riley; Mappes, Grace; Hird, Karolina; Clark, Mason. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, June 10, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 11 June 2023. Retrieved 11 June 2023. Harding, Andrew; Walker, Marcus; Luxmoore, Matthew (3 July 2023). "Ukraine war: The lethal minefields holding up Kyiv's counter-offensive". BBC. Santora, Marc; O'Reilly, Finbarr (26 July 2023). "'They Shoot Without Stopping': Where Russia Is on the Attack in Ukraine". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 30 July 2023. Ebel, Francesca; Hrabchuk, Kamila (27 June 2023). "On this part of the eastern front, Russia is still on the attack". Washington Post. Retrieved 30 July 2023. "Wagner is not fighting in Ukraine at present, says White House's Sullivan". Reuters. 21 July 2023 – via www.reuters.com. "Explainer: Wagner group - Is it back? Who controls it?". Reuters. 29 September 2023. Retrieved 17 November 2023. "Several hundred Wagner fighters return to Ukraine, impact limited, Kyiv says". Reuters. 27 July 2023. Retrieved 17 November 2023. "Former Wagner mercenaries spotted at Lyman-Kupiansk contact line". Yahoo! News. 27 November 2023. Retrieved 28 November 2023. "Ukrainian activity on the Dnieper's left bank. Day 607 of the war". OSW. 24 October 2023. Retrieved 17 November 2023. NOVIKOV, ILLIA (16 October 2023). "Russia's assault on a key eastern Ukraine city reported to be weakening. The war marks 600 days". Associated Press. Retrieved 16 October 2023. "Ukraine says it is ready to repel Russia's offensive actions in Bakhmut". Reuters. 30 October 2023. Retrieved 5 January 2023. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, November 4, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. 4 November 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2024. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, November 10, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. 10 November 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2024. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, November 13, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. 13 November 2023. Retrieved 8 January 2024. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, November 14, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. 14 November 2023. Retrieved 8 January 2024. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, November 17, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. 17 November 2023. Retrieved 8 January 2024. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, November 1, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. 1 November 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2024. "'Soldiers Repelled Orc Attack' – Ukraine Counteroffensive Update for Nov 7 (Europe Edition)". Kyiv Post. 7 November 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2023. "Ukraine war latest: Russia intensifies assaults near Bakhmut". Kyiv Independent. 13 November 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2024. "Russia ramps up attacks on key cities in eastern Ukraine". Politico. 12 November 2023. Retrieved 8 January 2024. "Russia steps up assaults around Bakhmut, Ukrainian military says". Yahoo! News. 14 November 2023. Retrieved 8 January 2024. "Ukraine's 'Hellish Assault' near Bakhmut Viewed 500K Times". Newsweek. 17 November 2023. Retrieved 8 January 2024. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, November 19, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. 19 November 2023. Retrieved 8 January 2024. "Russia says it has taken control of village on outskirts of Ukraine's Bakhmut". Reuters. 29 November 2023. Retrieved 29 November 2023. "Ukrainian Artillery Batteries Have Turned The Battle Of Avdiivka Into A Game: Who Can Kill More Russians?". Forbes. 20 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Russian Glide Bomb Kits Now Adapted For Cluster Munitions: Reports". The Drive. 20 November 2023. Retrieved 23 November 2023. "Russia's Devastating New Weapon Hits Enemy Positions in War's First: Video". Newsweek. 20 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Russia Regains Upper Hand in Ukraine's East as Kyiv's Troops Struggle". New York Times. 13 January 2024. Archived from the original on 13 January 2024. Retrieved 3 February 2024. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, December 9, 2023". The Institute for the Study of War. 9 December 2023. Retrieved 10 December 2023. "Russian military says it took control of village in eastern Ukraine". Reuters. 18 January 2024. Retrieved 19 January 2024. "Russia Claims Capture of Small Village in Eastern Ukraine". Kyiv Post. 18 January 2024. Retrieved 19 January 2024. AFP, Staff Writer With (18 January 2024). "Russia Says Captured Small Village of Vesele in East Ukraine". The Defense Post. Retrieved 19 January 2024. "A Trophy in Ruins: Evidence Grows That Russia Controls Marinka". The New York Times. 4 January 2024. Retrieved 7 January 2024. "Russia Storming Avdiivka with 'Very Large Forces'". Kyiv Post. 8 February 2024. "Russian infantry attacking Avdiivka, Novomykhailivka without armored cover". Ukrinform. 20 January 2024. "Russia claims full control of Avdiivka, says Ukrainian troops still in town". Al Jazeera. 18 February 2024. Archived from the original on 18 February 2024. Retrieved 18 February 2024. "Russians occupy Lastochkyne near Avdiivka". Ukrainska Pravda. 24 February 2024. "Russian troops capture two more villages west of Avdiivka". Ukrainska Pravda. 27 February 2024. "Russia takes more ground in east Ukraine but loses another ship at sea". Al Jazeera. 6 March 2024. Retrieved 14 March 2024. "Russia says it has captured frontline village of Orlivka in eastern Ukraine". France24. 19 March 2024. "Russia says it has captured the village of Tonenke in eastern Ukraine". Jerusalem Post. 21 March 2024. "Russia says it has taken Pobieda village in Donetsk region, Ukraine reports fighting". Reuters. 22 February 2024. Retrieved 23 February 2024. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, February 21, 2024". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 23 February 2024. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, February 22, 2024". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 23 February 2024. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, February 23, 2024". Institute for the Study of War. "Russia claims it has taken control of Nevelske in Donetsk Oblast". Kyiv Independent. 12 March 2024. "Russia says it captured Ukrainian frontline village west of Bakhmut". France24. 23 March 2024. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, April 9". Institute for the Study of War. 9 April 2022. Archived from the original on 10 April 2022. Retrieved 10 April 2022. "Fourth Russian general killed in fighting, Ukraine says". Associated Press. 15 March 2022. Archived from the original on 16 March 2022. Retrieved 16 March 2022 – via The Washington Times. "Assessed control of terrain in Ukraine and main Russian maneuver axes as of March 23, 2022, 3:00 pm ET". Archived from the original on 23 March 2022. "Russia deploys its only Terminator company to Sievierodonetsk – British intelligence". Ukrinform. 22 May 2022. Archived from the original on 28 May 2022. Retrieved 28 May 2022. "Volunteers from South Ossetia and Abkhazia perish in Donbass". 6 April 2022. Retrieved 6 April 2022. "Leader of so-called "Donetsk People's Republic" killed in action near Volnovakha". Ukrayinska Pravda. 5 March 2022. Archived from the original on 6 March 2022. Retrieved 6 March 2022. Matthew Loh (6 April 2022). "A soldier wearing Nazi imagery was given a medal by a Russia-backed separatist republic for killing Ukrainian 'nationalists'". Yahoo. Archived from the original on 11 April 2022. Retrieved 11 April 2022. Steshin, Dmitry (15 March 2022). "Александр Ходаковский: Мы в Мариуполь две недели вгрызаемся. А тут приехали чеченцы – красивые, бородатые — чуть колонной на город не пошли". Komsomolskaya Pravda (in Russian). Archived from the original on 14 April 2022. Retrieved 21 April 2022. "Italian killed fighting for pro-Russia militia in Donbass". ANSA. 1 April 2022. Archived from the original on 1 April 2022. Retrieved 13 April 2022. Clark, Mason; Barros, George; Stepanenko, Kateryna (16 March 2022). "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, March 16". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 23 March 2022. Retrieved 19 March 2022. "Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 27". Institute for the Study of Warfare. 27 May 2022. Archived from the original on 28 May 2022. Retrieved 28 May 2022. Grylls, George. "A dozen elite Russian soldiers have been killed by Ukrainians in fight for Mariupol". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Archived from the original on 29 March 2022. Retrieved 11 May 2022. "Russian Invasion Of Ukraine: The Battle Of Mariupol, Or A Ukrainian Stalingrad". Warsaw Institute. 15 March 2022. Archived from the original on 17 March 2022. Retrieved 7 May 2022. Mendick, Robert (28 March 2022). "Devastated Mariupol teeters on the brink, but Ukrainian troops refuse to abandon the fallen". Yahoo News. Archived from the original on 28 March 2022. Retrieved 19 April 2022. Ball, Tom. "Rusich's neo-Nazi mercenaries head for Kharkiv". Archived from the original on 13 May 2022. Retrieved 13 May 2022. Russia’s Secret Recruits Allegedly Abandoned, Starving, and Missing in Action, 27 November 2022 Harding, Andrew; Walker, Marcus; Luxmoore, Matthew (3 July 2023). "Ukraine war: The lethal minefields holding up Kyiv's counter-offensive". BBC. David Axe (20 April 2022). "T-72s To The Rescue? Ukraine's 5th Tank Brigade Could Roll Into Battle Any Day Now". Forbes. Archived from the original on 22 April 2022. Retrieved 22 April 2022. "Russian invasion update: Ukraine repels tank attack, captures six Russians in Mariupol". www.ukrinform.net. 27 February 2022. Archived from the original on 27 February 2022. Retrieved 28 February 2022. "Battle For Bakhmut: Ukrainian City Endures Freezing Temperatures As Shelling And Fighting Rages". RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty. Retrieved 8 December 2022. "43rd Heavy Artillery Brigade on the battlefield, in Bakhmut". The Gazette. 26 December 2022. Retrieved 27 December 2022. "Russian Soldier Down After Ukrainian Fire Hits Troop on Video". Newsweek. 28 April 2022. Archived from the original on 11 May 2022. Retrieved 10 May 2022. "Бои за Бахмут – 53-я бригада ВСУ просит о помощи" [Battles for Bakhmut – 53rd brigade of the Armed Forces of Ukraine asks for help]. ВЕСТИ (in Russian). 26 November 2022. Retrieved 3 December 2022. "In Mariupol, a war of images to prove who controls the city". The Observers – France 24. 30 March 2022. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 22 April 2022. Kramer, Andrew E. (11 August 2022). "Rhythm of War: A Thunderous Blast, and Then a Coffee Break". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 30 November 2022. "Bakhmut Is 'Soaked In Blood' As Eight Of Ukraine's Best Brigades Battle 40,000 Former Russian Prisoners". Forbes. 22 December 2022. Retrieved 27 December 2022. David Axe (25 October 2022). "A Fierce Ukrainian Mechanized Brigade Is Routing Russian Mercenaries In One Symbolic Eastern Town". Forbes. "Ukrainian army forces enemy to retreat from Kreminna in Luhansk region". www.ukrinform.net. 7 April 2022. Archived from the original on 7 April 2022. Retrieved 8 April 2022. "Texas paratrooper and Iraq veteran reveals his reasons for protecting Ukraine". NV. 18 April 2022. Archived from the original on 18 April 2022. Retrieved 22 April 2022. "Ukraine buries its war dead". Reuters. 20 April 2022. Archived from the original on 20 April 2022. Retrieved 23 April 2022. Некрасов, Артем (15 December 2022). "Українські десантники вибили ворога з кварталів Бахмута: подробиці". StopCor (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 20 December 2022. "Із 35-ти вижили двоє. Йдуть уперед по трупах своїх солдат. Десантники про наступ росіян на Бахмут". НТА (in Ukrainian). 20 October 2022. Retrieved 21 December 2022. Carbonaro, Giulia (12 May 2022). "Ukrainian soldier reveals how he secretly blew up Russian bridge". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 30 May 2022. Retrieved 17 May 2022. "Exhausted Ukrainian soldiers return from eastern front". France 24. 1 May 2022. Archived from the original on 1 May 2022. Retrieved 11 May 2022. "Exhausted Ukrainian soldiers return from eastern front". France 24. 1 May 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2022. Henley, Jon (13 April 2022). "More than 1,000 Ukraine marines have surrendered in Mariupol, says Russia". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 22 April 2022. Retrieved 7 May 2022. Adler, Nils; King, Laura (28 January 2022). "'Everything that needs to be done': Ukraine citizen soldiers prepare for Russia threat". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 23 March 2022. Retrieved 21 March 2022. Its defenders — both the regular Ukraine army and the irregular forces mustering for battle David Axe (18 April 2022). "Hundreds of volunteers from Belarus fight in Ukraine against Russia". NHK World-Japan. Archived from the original on 17 April 2022. Retrieved 22 April 2022. "Russische Soldaten gegen Putin: im Donbass kämpfen, in Moskau Feuer legen". Berliner Zeitung. 4 May 2022. Archived from the original on 30 May 2022. Retrieved 30 May 2022. "Chechen Volunteers Destroy russian Invaders in Bakhmut". Defence Intelligence of the Ministry of Defence of Ukraine. 7 January 2023. Retrieved 8 January 2023. Joseph Campbell; Dan Peleschuk (23 November 2022). "Chechens fighting for Ukraine see chance to 'free' their homeland". Reuters. Retrieved 8 January 2023. Krikunenko, Iryna (7 April 2022). "Брат по зброї. Командир чеченських добровольців, який воює за Україну, розповідає про свої три війни з Росією". NV (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 8 May 2022. Retrieved 14 May 2022. Gribchatov, Evgeny (26 April 2022). "Кадыров объявил награду 1 млн долларов за информацию о чеченских боевиках в Мариуполе". Moskovskij Komsomolets (in Russian). Archived from the original on 8 May 2022. Retrieved 14 May 2022. Dominic Waghorn (23 December 2022). "The Chechen fighters taking on Putin's 'empire of evil' in Ukraine who say Russian troops are like 'cattle for slaughter'". Sky News. Retrieved 8 January 2023. "Окупанти показали відео з "кадирівцями" в Бахмуті. Насправді на кадрах — чеченські добровольці ЗСУ (ВІДЕО, ФОТО)" [The occupiers showed a video with "Kadyrivets" in Bakhmut. In fact, Chechen volunteers of the Armed Forces of Ukraine are on the footage (VIDEO, PHOTOS)]. Вільне радіо. 1 December 2022. Retrieved 8 December 2022. "Meet the Chechens fighting Russia in Ukraine". Kyivindependent. 25 November 2022. Retrieved 1 December 2022. "Chechen Fighters in Ukraine Set Sights on Homeland". Jamestown. Retrieved 25 September 2022. Tom Bateman (13 April 2022). "Ukraine: The critical fight for 'heart of this war' Mariupol". BBC News. Archived from the original on 13 April 2022. Retrieved 27 April 2022. I want to separately address those heroes who are having a very hard time. Those who defend Mariupol. A marine battalion of the 36th marine brigade, Azov special operations detachment, 12th operational brigade of the National Guard of Ukraine. Subdivisions of the State Border Guard Service. Volunteers of the "Right Sector". The 555th military hospital and National Police employees. Kovalenko, Serhiy (2 April 2022). "Дмитро Апухтін героїчно загинув, обороняючи Маріуполь". ArmyInform (in Ukrainian). "Watch Video: Ukrainian tank hits Russian armoured vehicle from long-range, destroys it completely". Free Press Journal. Retrieved 25 July 2022. Goncharenko, Roman (16 March 2022). "The Azov Battalion: Extremists defending Mariupol". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 23 March 2022. Retrieved 19 March 2022. The city of Mariupol, which has a population of 500,000, is primarily being defended by the Azov Battalion. Scott Peterson (4 May 2022). "Russian war's 'Phase 2': How Ukraine troops adapt, giving little ground". CS Monitor. Archived from the original on 20 May 2022. Retrieved 20 May 2022. Daria Shulzhenko (2 May 2022). "Families mourn fallen defenders of Ukraine". Kyiv Independent. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 20 May 2022. Alexander J. Motyl (12 April 2022). "Russians Likely to Encounter Growing Guerrilla Warfare in Ukraine". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 1 April 2022. Retrieved 13 April 2022. "General Staff: About 500 wounded Russian soldiers were brought to Horlivka hospitals". 19 November 2022. A Ukrainian sniper called the Ghost of Bakhmut says he's personally killed 113 Russians. He explains how his elite unit hunts the enemy. Ukraine war: 'People call us the Ghosts of Bakhmut' "Ukraine's losses in the war | Battle of Bakhmut". "71 children killed in Ukraine so far". New Straits Times. Agence France-Presse. 10 March 2022. Archived from the original on 10 March 2022. Retrieved 11 March 2022. "Из-за обстрелов российских оккупантов Дергачи остались без газа и электроэнергии". Kharkiv Today (in Ukrainian). 11 March 2022. Archived from the original on 17 March 2022. Retrieved 15 March 2022. "Two Killed In Kharkiv Bombardment: Prosecutor". Agence France-Presse. 14 March 2022. Archived from the original on 14 March 2022. Retrieved 14 March 2022 – via Barron's. "At Least 21 Dead After Russian Shelling of East Ukraine Town – Local Officials". The Moscow Times. 17 March 2022. Archived from the original on 1 April 2022. Retrieved 18 March 2022.