The Costa Rica women's national football team (Spanish: Selección femenina de fútbol de Costa Rica) represents Costa Rica in women's international football. The national team is controlled by the governing body Costa Rican Football Federation. They are one of the top women's national football teams in the Central American region along with Guatemala and Panama. Since 2010s, Costa Rica has emerged in women's football, and akin to their men's counterparts, its women's side is also visibly recognised as a stern and competitive opponent despite relative recent entrance to the big stage. In Costa Rica's first World Cup in 2015, despite being rated the weakest team in the group, Costa Rica shocked the tournament with two points by drawing against strong Spain and South Korea sides, and was only eliminated by a late goal from Brazil. The Costa Rican team just started to play an international match in 1990, when Central America was on struggle about developing women's football. The success of men's team helped the FCF to believe on the women's team. Their first tournament, was the 1991 CONCACAF Women's Championship when Costa Rica finished third and was out from the group stage. Despite this, Costa Rica started gaining success in the 1998 CONCACAF Women's Championship and 1999 Pan American Games when Costa Rica won bronze both. But later, Costa Rica did not gain much successful achievement, as the national team was still on struggle under the shadow of men's team. At the 2014 CONCACAF Women's Championship, Costa Rica surprisingly won silver, after losing 0–6 to the USA in the final. Their second-place finish secured them a spot in the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup. This marked the first time Costa Rica would play in a FIFA Women's World Cup. Costa Rica was drawn into a group with Brazil, South Korea and Spain for the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup. Costa Rica secured two shocking draws over Spain (1–1) and South Korea (2–2), but then lost 1–0 to Brazil and were eliminated in the group stage. At the 2018 CONCACAF Women's Championship, Costa Rica was hoping to once again qualify for the FIFA Women's World Cup. They won their first group match 8–0 over Cuba. However they lost their second match 1–0 to Jamaica in which they controversially had a goal disallowed in the second half. Costa Rica would lose their final group match to Canada 3–1, elimating their chances of qualifying for the 2019 FIFA Women's World Cup. Costa Rica has done much better in the 2022 CONCACAF W Championship, taking second place after wins over Panama and Trinidad and Tobago. Though unable to repeat the 2014 feat, only finished fourth in process, the win allowed Costa Rica to return to the Women's World Cup in 2023. The Costa Rica women's national football team has been known or nicknamed as "La Sele (The Selection)" or "La Tricolor (The Tricolor)". Costa Rica plays their home matches on the Estadio Nacional de Costa Rica. The following is a list of match results in the last 12 months, as well as any future matches that have been scheduled. Legend   Win   Draw   Loss   Fixture Poland  v  Costa Rica Scotland  v  Costa Rica Costa Rica  v  Venezuela Centro Caribe Sports v  Costa Rica Costa Rica  v  Haiti South Africa  v  Costa Rica Spain  v  Costa Rica Japan  v  Costa Rica Costa Rica  v  Zambia Haiti  v  Costa Rica Costa Rica  v  Saint Kitts and Nevis Costa Rica  v  Argentina United States  v  Costa Rica Costa Rica  v  Bolivia Paraguay  v  Costa Rica Costa Rica  v  Haiti Saint Kitts and Nevis  v  Costa Rica Costa Rica  v  Paraguay El Salvador  v  Costa Rica Canada  v  Costa Rica Canada  v  Costa Rica Costa Rica  v  Peru Costa Rica  v  Peru See Also Costa Rica Results and Fixtures – Soccerway.com Costa Rica Results and Fixtures – FIFA.com - Up-to-date caps, goals, and statistics are not publicly available; therefore, caps and goals listed may be incorrect. The following players were named for two Friendly game against  Peru on 6 and 9 April 2024 . Caps, goals, and players' numbers accurate as of 4 December 2023 after match vs.  Saint Kitts and Nevis. The following players have been called up to a Costa Rica squad in the past 12 months. Notes: PRE: Preliminary roster As of 21 February 2021 Players in bold are still active, at least at club level. *Draws include knockout matches decided on penalty kicks. *Draws include knockout matches decided on penalty kicks. *Draws include knockout matches decided on penalty kicks. *Draws include knockout matches decided on penalty kicks. *Draws include knockout matches decided on penalty kicks. *Draws include knockout matches decided on penalty kicks. *Draws include knockout matches decided on penalty kicks. Last update was on June 25, 2021 Source:   Best Ranking    Worst Ranking    Best Mover    Worst Mover   Costa Rica portal Sports portal Association football portal Women's association football portal Sport in Costa Rica Football in Costa Rica Women's football in Costa Rica Costa Rica women's national football team Costa Rica women's national football team results List of Costa Rica women's international footballers Costa Rica women's national under-20 football team Costa Rica women's national under-17 football team Costa Rica men's national football team Due to the suspension of the Guatemalan Olympic Committee in 2022, Guatemala is competing at the 2023 Central American and Caribbean Games under the Centro Caribe Sports flag. "The FIFA/Coca-Cola Women's World Ranking". FIFA. 15 March 2024. Retrieved 15 March 2024. "Costa Rica draws with Spain 1–1 at FIFA Women's World Cup opening match in Canada". 10 June 2015. "FIFA Women's World Cup: Costa Rica ties 2–2 with South Korea, makes it to second place in its group". 14 June 2015. "Brazil eliminates Costa Rica in Women's World Cup". USA Today. "COSTA RICA". Retrieved 13 October 2018. "Jamaica stuns Costa Rica, controversially, to set up dramatic Group B finale". 8 October 2018. Retrieved 13 October 2018. "Jamaica advance to face USWNT, Canada eliminates Costa Rica". 11 October 2018. Retrieved 13 October 2018. Jensen Toussaint (18 October 2022). "Guatemala gets suspended by International Olympic Committee". Al Dia. Retrieved 3 July 2023. Viana, Diego (20 June 2023). "Atletas de Guatemala no podrán representar a su país en Juegos San Salvador 2023". La Prensa (in Spanish). Retrieved 22 June 2023. "Español Beni Rubido es el nuevo Director Técnico de la Selección Mayor Femenina - Federación Costarricense de Fútbol". "Avedissian leaves Costa Rica women's post". concacaf.com. 5 January 2015. Archived from the original on 3 October 2015. "Tricolor Femenina enfrentará fogueos ante Perú con 26 jugadoras". www.fcrf.cr (in Spanish). Retrieved 29 March 2024. "Costa Rica in the FIFA World Ranking". Retrieved 26 July 2021. Official website (in Spanish) Costa Rica profile at FIFA.com