Copycat is a 1995 American psychological thriller film directed by Jon Amiel and starring Sigourney Weaver, Holly Hunter, and Dermot Mulroney. The score was composed by Christopher Young. The film follows a criminal psychologist and a homicide detective who must work together to find a serial killer who is committing copycat crimes modeled after notorious murderers. Principal photography began on October 3, 1994 in the San Francisco Bay Area. The film was theatrically released by Warner Bros. on October 27, 1995. It was a moderate box office success and received positive reviews for the performances of its leads, writing, and direction. After giving a guest lecture on criminal psychology at a local university, Dr. Helen Hudson, a respected field expert on serial killers, is cornered in the lecture hall's restroom by one of her previous subjects, Daryll Lee Cullum, who has escaped from prison. He kills a police officer and brutally attacks Helen. Another cop subdues Cullum, and he is returned to prison. After the attack, Hudson becomes severely agoraphobic, sealing herself inside an expensive hi-tech apartment, conducting her entire life from behind a computer screen, and assisted by her friend, Andy. When a wave of murders spreads fear and panic across San Francisco, homicide detective M.J. Monahan and her partner, Reuben Goetz, solicit Helen's expertise. Initially reluctant, Helen soon finds herself drawn into the warped perpetrator's game of wits. As the murders continue, Helen realizes that the elusive assailant draws inspiration from notorious serial killers, including Albert DeSalvo, The Hillside Strangler, David Berkowitz, Jeffrey Dahmer, and Ted Bundy. When the murderer begins contacting and even stalking Helen, she and M.J. realize that he is after them; they then enlist aid from Cullum, who says he knows about the killer. Helen soon realizes that the copycat killer has been following the list of serial killers in the same order that she presented them in her university lecture the night she was attacked. The two work to figure out where and when he will strike next. At the police station, Inspector Nicolette places his gun in his desk drawer but forgets to lock it, allowing a suspect to grab it and take Reuben hostage. The suspect attempts to leave but is shot by M.J. in the brachial nerve, only to get back up, shooting and killing Reuben. M.J. is left to continue searching for the serial killer alone. After Andy is killed in a manner reminiscent of Jeffrey Dahmer, M.J. deduces that the killer is a man named Peter Foley, who has been corresponding with Cullum. After a failed attempt to capture him at his house, M.J. reaches Helen's residence. M.J. discovers Peter has kidnapped Helen and left a video asking M.J. to guess where he has taken Helen. M.J. returns to where Cullum previously attempted to kill her – the lecture hall restroom. Upon arriving, M.J. finds Helen bound, hanged, and gagged in the same manner Cullum previously did. Foley ambushes M.J., rendering her unconscious. As Foley prepares to kill M.J., Helen desperately attempts to save her by sabotaging Foley's carefully replicated crime scene the only way she can: by attempting to hang herself. Foley panics and cuts Helen down, which allows her to escape to the building's roof. Her agoraphobia overtakes her, and Helen finds herself cornered. Accepting her fate, she turns to face Foley. However, just as he is about to kill her, M.J. shoots him in the brachial nerve, giving him one last chance to surrender. When he pulls his gun on her, however, she shoots until she finally kills him with a headshot. Some time later, Cullum writes to another serial killer, instructing him on how to kill Helen, and revealing that he had been aiding Foley all along. Cullum wishes, "happy hunting, partner" to his new proxy in the mission to kill Helen in the story. Sigourney Weaver as Dr. Helen Hudson Holly Hunter as Inspector Mary Jane "M.J." Monahan Dermot Mulroney as Inspector Reuben Goetz Harry Connick Jr. as Daryll Lee Cullum William McNamara as Peter Foley John Charles Morris as Young Peter Foley (scenes cut) J.E. Freeman as Lieutenant Thomas Quinn Will Patton as Inspector Nicoletti John Rothman as Andy Shannon O'Hurley as Susan Schiffer Bob Greene as Pachulski Tony Haney as Kerby Nick Scoggin as Conrad Kenny Kwong as Chinese Kid Rebecca Klinger as Peter's Wife Keith Phillips as Felix Mendoza Kelvin Han Yee as Chinese Inspector Russ Christoff as Commissioner Petrillo Thomas Fieweger as Officer Bodger Early versions of the screenplay had the character of M.J. Monahan written as a man, and included a romantic plot line between Monahan and Helen Hudson. Director Jon Amiel reconfigured the script to center on two women instead, commenting, "I just stumbled onto the notion of making the cop a woman. We already had a great female character in the psychologist. So I thought, 'Why not have two females in the lead, and just get rid of the love story altogether?' With two women, we could put an entirely different perspective on the violence and make it a movie about women dealing with violence against women rather than a movie exploiting violence against women. And then I stumbled onto a second realization--that I'd never seen a full-on suspense drama before with two women in the lead". Jay Presson Allen was brought on for uncredited script rewrites. Sigourney Weaver prepared for her role by consulting with forensic psychiatrist Park Dietz. Amiel chose to set Copycat in San Francisco because he liked "the idea of contrasting a physically beautiful city with horrendously cruel human events". Filming locations included Potrero Hill, Twin Peaks, Pacific Heights, and Fort Mason. Interior shots were filmed on sound stages constructed in an old warehouse on Treasure Island. The film had a troubled post-production process involving multiple edits in response to test screenings. Alan Heim, the film's original editor, was fired and replaced with Jim Clark after the film struggled in its first round of audience previews. Clark's recuts were met with increasingly weaker audience scores, with the main sticking point being the original ending, which showed the killer kidnapping Monahan instead of Hudson. Frank Darabont was brought in to script new scenes and reshoots took place in June of 1995. The subsequent cut was successful enough for Warner Bros. to give the film a theatrical release. All tracks composed by Christopher Young, unless otherwise noted. "Get Up to This" by New World Beat "Carabu Party" by Steven Ray "Techno Boy" by Silkski (Jerome Evans) "Main Title from Copycat" "Stick Him or Shoot Him" "Housebound" "Silent Screams" "Murder's an Art" "In Darkness" "Take a Life" "Next to the Devil" "Pastoral Horror" "Silhouette" "Gallows" "Butchers and Bakers" "Panic" "Who's Afraid" "Lay Me Down" "The Barber of Seville: Largo al factotum" by Roberto Servile/Failoni Chamber Orchestra/Will Humburg "Tosca: Vissi D'arte" by Gabriela Beňačková/The Czech Philharmonic Orchestra/Bohumil Gregor "Requiem (Fauré): In Paradisum, Requiem Op. 48" (choral work) The film received positive reviews from critics. It holds an approval rating of 75% on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 57 reviews, with an average rating of 6.5/10. The consensus summarizes: "Copycat's outstanding cast helps this often unpleasant thriller transcend the less palatable elements of its standard-issue story." Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A−" on an A+ to F scale. Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times awarded it three and a half stars out of four, and a "thumbs up" on Siskel & Ebert, citing Holly Hunter's character as "one of the most intriguing and three-dimensional characters of the year". Multiple reviews praised both Weaver and Hunter's performances, with Ebert commenting that "the relationship between M. J., so small and forcible, and Hudson, so large and timid...creates the center of the movie". Writing for the San Francisco Chronicle, Peter Stack said "Weaver's bravura performance as an accomplished professional reduced to a trembling wreck is her most memorable, complex work to date." Many critics noted that while the film arrived on the heels of critical and commercial success Seven, Copycat manages to retain its own share of thrills and suspense. The Washington Post's Rita Kempley commented that because Copycat "depicts the victimization of women through the eyes of its female protagonists, the film really has more in common with The Silence of the Lambs". The film's use of two female leads was also praised by critics as a welcome change from male buddy cop films. The New York Times' Janet Maslin wrote that the film "can recall unsettling aspects of other thrillers -- 'Vertigo,' 'Wait Until Dark,' 'The Silence of the Lambs', [and] 'Dirty Harry'...but [it] has a personality of its own". David Ansen of Newsweek commended Amiel on the use of computers to genuinely chilling effect. More critical reviews focused on the contrivances and implausibilities of the script, with some calling the ending predictable. In a negative review, Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times commented on the larger trend of serial killer films, expressing "'Copycat' seems pornographically intent on pushing the envelope of what is acceptable for thrillers on screen. If the trend continues it is not at all pleasant to contemplate where everything will end." Writing on the film's 20th anniversary for The A.V. Club, Alex McLevy said the film "is the work of a talented director, cinematographer, and actors all elevating an oft-clumsy script into a smart and gripping yarn", adding it "sneaks some interesting and subtle themes about gender and interpersonal relationships into its cat-and-mouse games". In 2020, Sara Century of SYFY said the film "has only become more relevant as serial killer idolization continues in full force and victims struggle to receive any fraction of the attention that the perpetrators get from police, press, artists, and society at large. There is more of a conversation around this today, but Copycat successfully trains the focus on Hudson and her experience rather than lingering on its killers". In 2023, critic Dennis Schwartz described Copycat as "one of the better thrillers of the 1990s". The film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists: 2001: AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills – Nominated The film grossed $32 million in the United States and Canada and $79 million worldwide. A 2019 New Yorker article noted that A. J. Finn's bestselling debut novel The Woman in the Window (2018) has the same setup, without attribution, as Copycat. When notified of this, director Jon Amiel said, "Wow. [It's probably] not actionable, but certainly worth noting, and one would have hoped that the author might have noted it himself." Copycat crime Stack, Peter (October 26, 1995). "Amiel's Idea For 'Copycat' Was Original / Director cut out love story, changed lead to a woman". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved December 23, 2023. "Planet Hollywood". Screen International. August 30, 1996. pp. 14–15. Tornquist, Cynthia (October 25, 1995). "Catching the 'Copycat' killer". CNN. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Clark 2010. Brew, Simon (February 7, 2023). "1995's Copycat, and a glimpse into post-test screening movie editing". Film Stories. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Clark 2010, p. 236. Clark 2010, pp. 240-242. Clark 2010, p. 243. "Copycat". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved September 1, 2022. "CinemaScore". cinemascore.com. Ebert, Roger (October 27, 1995). "Copycat". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on October 4, 2012. Retrieved April 28, 2022. "Copycat". At the Movies. Season 10. Episode 8. Buena Vista Television. October 28, 1995. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Schulgasser, Barbara (October 27, 1995). "Serial thriller has snap, crackle". San Francisco Examiner. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Tucker, Ken (November 3, 1995). "Copycat". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Berardinelli, James. "Copycat". ReelViews. Archived from the original on February 20, 2007. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Stack, Peter (October 27, 1995). "'Copycat' Is Razor Sharp / Serial murderer stalks S.F. in smart thriller". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved December 27, 2023. McCarthy, Todd (October 16, 1995). "Dogged Weaver, Smart 'Copycat'". Variety. Retrieved December 23, 2023. Ansen, David (November 5, 1995). "Imitation of Death". Newsweek. Retrieved December 23, 2023. Persall, Steve (October 27, 1995). "'Copycat' isn't the same old thing". Tampa Bay Times. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Kempley, Rita (October 27, 1995). "'Copycat'". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 23, 2023. Hicks, Chris (October 30, 1995). "Film review: Copycat". Deseret News. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Maslin, Janet (October 27, 1995). "FILM REVIEW;A Fiend as Deadly as He Is Derivative". The New York Times. Retrieved December 23, 2023. von Busack, Richard (October 26, 1995). "'Copycat' beats the odds against serial killer movies". Metro Silicon Valley. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Turan, Kenneth (October 27, 1995). "MOVIE REVIEWS : The Dark Big Picture : 'Copycat' Is a Troubling Reflection of Cinema". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved December 23, 2023. McLevy, Alex (June 11, 2015). "Sigourney Weaver stars in a serial killer thriller with sly gender politics". The A.V. Club. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Century, Sara (October 12, 2020). "Deep Cuts: Copycat [1995]". SYFY. Retrieved December 23, 2023. Schwartz, Dennis (September 12, 2023). "Copycat". Dennis Schwartz Movie Reviews. Retrieved December 23, 2023. "AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills Nominees" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on March 13, 2011. Retrieved August 20, 2016. "Copycat". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved December 23, 2023. Parker, Ian (February 11, 2019). "A Suspense Novelist's Trail of Deceptions". New Yorker. Condé Nast. Archived from the original on February 4, 2019. Retrieved July 2, 2021. Clark, Jim (2010). Dream Repairman: Adventures in Film Editing. Crockett, Texas: LandMarc Press. pp. 235–243. ISBN 978-0979718496. Copycat at IMDb Copycat at Box Office Mojo Copycat at Rotten Tomatoes