The Haiti women's national football team participates in several competitions including the CONCACAF Women's Championship. The team also participates in qualification for the FIFA Women's World Cup and Summer Olympics, and qualified for their first World Cup at the 2023 edition. The team is controlled by the Fédération Haïtienne de Football. They are one of the top women's national football teams in the Caribbean region along with Jamaica and Trinidad & Tobago. The team is currently coached by Nicolas Delépine. The Haiti women's national team play their home matches on the Stade Sylvio Cator. The following is a list of match results in the last 12 months, as well as any future matches that have been scheduled.   Win   Draw   Lose   Fixture Chile  v  Haiti Nigeria  v  Haiti Moldova  v  Haiti Malta  v  Haiti Venezuela  v  Haiti Costa Rica  v  Haiti South Korea  v  Haiti England  v  Haiti China  v  Haiti Haiti  v  Denmark Haiti  v  Costa Rica Saint Kitts and Nevis  v  Haiti Haiti  v  Saint Kitts and Nevis Costa Rica  v  Haiti Haiti  v  Puerto Rico Haiti Results and Fixtures – Soccerway.com The following players were named to the squad to play the 2024 CONCACAF W Gold Cup qualification games against Puerto Rico on 17 February 2024. Caps and goals are updated as of 3 July 2023 after the match against Costa Rica. The following players have been called up to a Haiti squad in the past 12 months. *Draws include knockout matches decided on penalty kicks. *Draws include knockout matches decided on penalty kicks. *Draws include knockout matches decided on penalty kicks. *Draws include knockout matches decided on penalty kicks. *Draws include knockout matches decided on penalty kicks. *Draws include knockout matches decided on penalty kicks. Haiti portal Sports portal Association football portal Women's association football portal Sport in Haiti Football in Haiti Women's football in Haiti Haiti women's national under-20 football team Haiti women's national under-17 football team Haiti men's national football team "The FIFA/Coca-Cola Women's World Ranking". FIFA. 15 March 2024. Retrieved 15 March 2024. Nowakowski, Wojciech (8 August 2023). "Morocco, Ireland, Portugal: All 8 Women's World Cup debutants and how far they made it". Her Football Hub. Retrieved 24 October 2023. "Road to Gold Cup W. Présentation officielle du nouveau sélectionneur de l'équipe féminine d' Haïti , Frédéric Gonçalves, 41 ans !". www.facebook.com. Retrieved 8 August 2023. Play-offs 2024 CONCACAF W Gold Cup qualification squad Official website FIFA profile Haiti women’s national football team picture