Kutsevol Anatolii (Ukrainian: Анатолій Куцевол) is a Ukrainian politician, diplomat, Ambassador of Ukraine to the Republic of Latvia from December 2022. Anatolii Kutsevol was born in Kyiv. In 2007, Anatolii Kutsevol graduated from the Kyiv National Taras Shevchenko University, where he received Master of Philology (Language Interpretation and Translation). Later, in 2009, he received a Specialist degree in Finance. In 2013, Anatolii Kutsevol received a Master of Public Administration (MPA) at the National Academy for Public Administration under the President of Ukraine. In 2021, he received a PhD in public administration. Holds a Ph.D. in Public Administration (2021). Anatolii Kutsevol started his career as a public servant in 2007 at the Department for International Technical Assistance and Cooperation with the International Financial Institutions at the Ministry of Economy of Ukraine. where he has been responsible for the US and Canadian development assistance projects as well as for Ukraine cooperation with the OECD. Mr. Kutsevol is a supporter of the European integration of Ukraine and for this reason in 2008-2011, he served in the Bureau of European Integration at the Secretariat of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine. There he was responsible for cooperation with the EU on the economic issues and statistics, justice, freedom, and security reforms, technical assistance, the negotiation process with the European Commission on development, implementation of the Ukraine-EU Agenda and association agreement, general political issues of cooperation between Ukraine and the EU. While working at the Bureau in 2010 he participated in the Program of Retraining of Young Ukrainian Managers in the Offices of the Federal Chancellor and the Federal President of Germany. In 2011 Anatolii Kutsevol worked in the Office of the President of Ukraine. where his area of responsibility was focused on the foreign economic policy of Ukraine, customs legislation reform and Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area between Ukraine and the EU, Ukraine's cooperation with international financial organizations, in particular, the World Bank Group, EBRD, EIB, and development partners on technical assistance. Right after the Revolution of Dignity in Ukraine Mr. Kutsevol became the deputy director of the Government Office for Coordination of the European Integration (2014-2016) where he was responsible for forming Ukraine's European integration policy, upholding the political dialogue with the EU, coordinating the EU-Ukraine association bodies. Since the European integration of Ukraine became the main driver for comprehensive reforms and changes in Ukraine in 2016-219 Mr. Kutsevol actively promoted environmental agenda while working as the Director of the Reform Support Team at the Ministry of Environment of Ukraine. He was personally involved in drafting of the EU approximized new legislation on waste management, environmental monitoring, control and liability, an integrated permit for large enterprises, which are the largest polluters. In 2020, Anatolii Kutsevol served as a Strategic Adviser to the Deputy Prime Minister on European and Euro-Atlantic Integration of Ukraine and to the Prime Minister of Ukraine advising on the EU and SDG agenda. On October 12, 2020, the Government of Ukraine appointed Mr. Kutsevol the Deputy State Secretary of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine dealing with EU, NATO, international relations, technical and financial assistance, sanctions. On December 23, 2022, the President of Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, appointed Anatolii Kutsevol as the Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of Ukraine to the Republic of Latvia. On April 17, 2023, he began his diplomatic mission in Latvia. Civil servant of the 2nd rank. Holds the diplomatic rank of Counselor of the First class. Awarded the Certificates of the Prime Minister of Ukraine (2021), the Head of the State Border Guard Service of Ukraine (2021), the Head of the State Customs Service of Ukraine (2022), International Trade Council Go Global Awards 2022 for Leadership in Economic Doplomacy. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Anatolii Kutsevol. "President of Ukraine". Dissertation abstract "Kutsevol Anatolii". Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine. "Center for Prospective Initiatives and Research, postgraduate". Archived from the original on 2020-11-27. Retrieved 2022-08-05. Kutsevol, Anatolii. "Анатолій Куцевол – європейська інтеграція – це робочі будні для всіх". Fit for Partnership with Germany. Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Climate Action of Germany. Delegation of Ukraine to participate in negotiations Government Office for Coordination on European and Euro-Atlantic Integration European and Euro-Atlantic integration is the basis of Ukraine's external vector