Oppenheimer is a 2023 epic biographical thriller film written, directed, and produced by Christopher Nolan. It follows the life of J. Robert Oppenheimer, the American theoretical physicist who helped develop the first nuclear weapons during World War II. Based on the 2005 biography American Prometheus by Kai Bird and Martin J. Sherwin, the film chronicles Oppenheimer's studies, his direction of the Los Alamos Laboratory, and his fall from grace after his 1954 security hearing. Cillian Murphy stars as Oppenheimer, alongside Robert Downey Jr. as the United States Atomic Energy Commission member Lewis Strauss. The ensemble supporting cast includes Emily Blunt, Matt Damon, Florence Pugh, Josh Hartnett, Casey Affleck, Rami Malek, and Kenneth Branagh. Oppenheimer was announced in September 2021. It is Nolan's first film not distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures since Memento (2000), due to his conflicts regarding the studio's simultaneous theatrical and HBO Max release schedule. Murphy was the first cast member to sign on the following month, with the rest joining between November 2021 and April 2022. Pre-production began by January 2022, and filming took place from February to May. The cinematographer, Hoyte van Hoytema, used a combination of IMAX 65 mm and 65 mm large-format film, including, for the first time, scenes in IMAX black-and-white film photography. As with many of his previous films, Nolan used extensive practical effects, with minimal compositing. Oppenheimer premiered at Le Grand Rex in Paris on July 11, 2023, and was theatrically released in the US and the UK ten days later by Universal. Its concurrent release with Warner Bros.'s Barbie was the catalyst of the "Barbenheimer" phenomenon, encouraging audiences to see both films as a double feature. Oppenheimer grossed $967 million worldwide, becoming the third-highest-grossing film of 2023, the highest-grossing World War II-related film, the highest-grossing biographical film, and the second-highest-grossing R-rated film. Among its many accolades, Oppenheimer won seven Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor for Murphy, and Best Supporting Actor for Downey. It also won five Golden Globe Awards (including Best Motion Picture – Drama) and seven British Academy Film Awards (including Best Film), and was named one of the top ten films of 2023 by the National Board of Review and the American Film Institute. In 1926, the 22-year-old doctoral student J. Robert Oppenheimer grapples with anxiety and homesickness while studying experimental quantum physics under Patrick Blackett at the Cavendish Laboratory in the University of Cambridge. Upset with Blackett's attitude, Oppenheimer leaves him an apple poisoned with cyanide but later retrieves it. The visiting scientist Niels Bohr advises Oppenheimer to study theoretical physics at the University of Göttingen instead. Oppenheimer completes his PhD and meets the scientist Isidor Isaac Rabi. They later meet the theoretical physicist Werner Heisenberg in Switzerland. Wanting to expand quantum physics research in the US, Oppenheimer begins teaching at the University of California, Berkeley and the California Institute of Technology. He marries Katherine "Kitty" Puening, a biologist and ex-communist, and has an intermittent affair with Jean Tatlock, a troubled communist psychiatrist who later dies by suicide. When nuclear fission is discovered in 1938 after the Germans succeed in splitting the atom, Oppenheimer realizes it could be weaponized. In 1942, during World War II, US Army Colonel Leslie Groves, the director of the Manhattan Project, recruits Oppenheimer as the director of the Los Alamos Laboratory to develop an atomic bomb. Oppenheimer fears the German nuclear research program, led by Heisenberg, might yield a fission bomb for the Nazis. Oppenheimer assembles a team consisting of Rabi, Hans Bethe, and Edward Teller, and collaborates with the scientists Enrico Fermi, Leo Szilard, and David L. Hill at the University of Chicago. Teller's calculations reveal an atomic detonation could trigger a catastrophic chain reaction that would ignite the atmosphere and destroy the world. After consulting with Albert Einstein, Oppenheimer concludes the chances are acceptably low. Teller attempts to leave the project after his proposal to construct a hydrogen bomb is rejected, but Oppenheimer convinces him to stay. After Germany's surrender in 1945, some scientists question the bomb's relevance. Oppenheimer believes it would end the ongoing Pacific War and save Allied lives. The Trinity test is successful, and President Harry S. Truman orders the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, resulting in Japan's surrender. Though publicly praised, Oppenheimer is guilt-ridden and haunted by the destruction and mass fatalities. After Oppenheimer expresses his guilt to Truman, the president berates him and dismisses his plea to cease further atomic development. As an advisor to the United States Atomic Energy Commission (AEC), Oppenheimer's stance generates controversy, while Teller's hydrogen bomb receives renewed interest amidst the burgeoning Cold War. AEC Chairman Lewis Strauss resents Oppenheimer for publicly dismissing Strauss's concerns about exporting radioisotopes and for recommending negotiations with the Soviet Union after the Soviets successfully detonated their own bomb. Strauss also believes that Oppenheimer denigrated him during a conversation Oppenheimer had with Einstein in 1947. In 1954, wanting to eliminate Oppenheimer's political influence, Strauss secretly orchestrates a private security hearing before a Personnel Security Board concerning Oppenheimer's Q clearance during which his loyalty to America is questioned. However, the hearing is a show trial. Oppenheimer's past communist ties are exploited, and his associates' testimony is twisted against him, with Teller's being the most damaging. After Kitty delivers impassioned testimony in defense of herself and her husband, the board no longer suspects Oppenheimer of disloyalty but revokes his clearance, thereby damaging his public image and limiting his influence on American nuclear policy. In 1959, during Strauss's Senate confirmation hearing for Secretary of Commerce, Hill testifies about Strauss's personal motives for engineering Oppenheimer's downfall. Strauss's nomination is voted down. In 1963, President Lyndon B. Johnson presents Oppenheimer with the Enrico Fermi Award as a gesture of political rehabilitation. A flashback reveals that Oppenheimer and Einstein's 1947 conversation never mentioned Strauss. Instead, the two discussed Oppenheimer’s legacy, and Oppenheimer expressed his fear that they had indeed started a chain reaction that will destroy the world. Cillian Murphy as J. Robert Oppenheimer, a theoretical physicist and director of the Los Alamos Laboratory. Emily Blunt as Katherine "Kitty" Oppenheimer, Robert Oppenheimer's wife and a former Communist Party USA member. Matt Damon as Gen. Leslie Groves, a United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) officer and director of the Manhattan Project. Robert Downey Jr. as Rear Admiral Lewis Strauss, a retired Naval Reserve officer and high-ranking member of the US Atomic Energy Commission (AEC). Florence Pugh as Jean Tatlock, a psychiatrist, Communist Party USA member, and Robert Oppenheimer's romantic interest. Josh Hartnett as Ernest Lawrence, a Nobel-winning nuclear physicist who worked with Oppenheimer at the University of California, Berkeley. Casey Affleck as Boris Pash, a US Army military intelligence officer and commander of the Alsos Mission. Rami Malek as David L. Hill, a nuclear physicist at the Metallurgical Laboratory, who helped to create the Chicago Pile. Kenneth Branagh as Niels Bohr, a Nobel-winning Danish physicist, philosopher and Oppenheimer's personal idol. Benny Safdie as Edward Teller, a Hungarian theoretical physicist known for being the "father of the hydrogen bomb". Jason Clarke as Roger Robb, an attorney and future US circuit judge who served as special counsel to the AEC at Oppenheimer's security hearing. Dylan Arnold as Frank Oppenheimer, Robert's younger brother and a particle physicist who worked on the Manhattan Project. Tom Conti as Albert Einstein, Nobel-winning German theoretical physicist known for developing the theory of relativity. James D'Arcy as Patrick Blackett, Oppenheimer's college professor and Nobel-winning physicist at Cambridge University. David Dastmalchian as William L. Borden, a lawyer and executive director of the United States Congressional Joint Committee on Atomic Energy (JCAE). Dane DeHaan as Maj Gen. Kenneth Nichols, a US Army officer and the deputy district engineer of the Manhattan Project. Alden Ehrenreich as a Senate aide to Lewis Strauss during Strauss's nomination for United States Secretary of Commerce. Tony Goldwyn as Gordon Gray, a government official and chairman of the committee deciding the revoking of Oppenheimer security clearance. Jefferson Hall as Haakon Chevalier ("Hoke"), a Berkeley professor who became friends with Oppenheimer at university. David Krumholtz as Isidor Isaac Rabi, a Nobel Prize-winning physicist who worked as a consultant on the Manhattan Project. Matthew Modine as Vannevar Bush, head of the Office of Scientific Research and Development. Scott Grimes as Counsel to Lewis Strauss Kurt Koehler as Thomas A. Morgan, an industrialist and former chairman of the board of the Sperry Corporation who was one of the panel members at Oppenheimer's security clearance hearing. John Gowans as Ward V. Evans, a chemist and academic who served as one of the panel members at Oppenheimer's security clearance hearing. Macon Blair as Lloyd K. Garrison, a lawyer who helped to represent Oppenheimer at his security clearance hearing. Gregory Jbara as Sen. Warren Magnuson, Chairman of Senate Commerce Committee. Harry Groener as Sen. Gale W. McGee Tim DeKay as Sen. John Pastore Matthias Schweighöfer as Werner Heisenberg, a German Nobel Prize-winning physicist who worked in Germany's nuclear weapons program during World War II. Alex Wolff as Luis Walter Alvarez, a Nobel-winning physicist who worked on the Manhattan Project. Josh Zuckerman as Giovanni Rossi Lomanitz, a physicist who became Oppenheimer's protégé at Berkeley. Rory Keane as Hartland Snyder, a physicist, who collaborated with Oppenheimer to calculate the gravitational collapse of a dust particle sphere. Michael Angarano as Robert Serber, a physicist who worked on the Manhattan Project. Emma Dumont as Jackie Oppenheimer, Frank's wife and Robert's sister-in-law. Guy Burnet as George C. Eltenton, a chemical engineer in the US with ties to the Soviet Union. Louise Lombard as Ruth Tolman, a psychologist close to Oppenheimer during the development of the atomic bomb. Tom Jenkins as Richard C. Tolman, Ruth's husband and General Groves' chief scientific adviser on the Manhattan Project. Olli Haaskivi as Edward Condon, a nuclear physicist who helped with the development of radar and briefly took part in the Manhattan Project. David Rysdahl as Donald Hornig, a chemist who worked on the firing unit at Los Alamos. Josh Peck as Kenneth Bainbridge, a physicist who was the director of the Manhattan Project's Trinity nuclear test. Jack Quaid as Richard Feynman, an American Nobel-winning theoretical physicist who worked in the Theoretical Division at Los Alamos. Gustaf Skarsgård as Hans Bethe, a German-American Nobel-winning theoretical physicist and the head of the Theoretical Division at Los Alamos. James Urbaniak as Kurt Gödel, an Austrian logician and mathematician known for his theorems that revolutionized mathematics and had far-reaching implications for philosophy and computer science. Trond Fausa as George Kistiakowsky, a Harvard professor who took part in the Manhattan Project. Devon Bostick as Seth Neddermeyer, a physicist who discovered the muon and advocated for the implosion-type nuclear weapon used in the Trinity Test. Danny Deferrari as Enrico Fermi, an Italian Nobel-winning physicist and creator of the Chicago Pile. Christopher Denham as Klaus Fuchs, a German-born physicist who worked on the Manhattan Project and spied for the Soviet Union. Jessica Erin Martin as Charlotte Serber, head technical librarian at Los Alamos. Ronald Auguste as J. Ernest Wilkins Jr., an African American nuclear scientist, mechanical engineer and mathematician who worked with Oppenheimer on the Manhattan Project. Máté Haumann [hu] as Leo Szilard, a Hungarian physicist who conceived the idea of nuclear chain reaction in 1933, and later in July 1945 at the Chicago branch of the Manhattan Project circulated the petition to President Truman against unannounced use of atomic weapons on Japan. Olivia Thirlby as Lilli Hornig, a Czech-American scientist who worked on the Manhattan Project. Jack Cutmore-Scott as Lyall Johnson, a security officer at Berkeley who worked at the Manhattan Project. Harrison Gilbertson as Philip Morrison, a physics professor who worked on the Manhattan Project. James Remar as Henry L. Stimson, Secretary of War under President Truman. Will Roberts as George C. Marshall, the United States Army Chief of Staff from 1939 to 1945. Pat Skipper as James F. Byrnes, US Secretary of State and future Governor of South Carolina. Gary Oldman as Harry S. Truman, the 33rd President of the United States who made the decision to drop the two atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945. Hap Lawrence as Lyndon B. Johnson, the 36th President of the United States. Troy Bronson as Joseph W. Kennedy, a chemist instrumental on the discovery of plutonium, and head of the Chemistry Department at Los Alamos. The director Sam Mendes was interested in adapting the 2005 Oppenheimer biography American Prometheus (2005) by Kai Bird and Martin J. Sherwin. After that project failed to materialize, the book was optioned by various filmmakers over the next fifteen years. The authors became pessimistic about a film adaptation. Oliver Stone declined an opportunity to direct, saying he "couldn't find my way to its essence". In 2015, J. David Wargo optioned the book, then commissioned and rejected several scripts. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Wargo flew to Hollywood to meet with actor James Woods, who set up a meeting with Charles Roven, a producer for various Christopher Nolan films, and in turn, Roven gave a copy of the book to Nolan. Both Wargo and Woods are executive producers of the film. Nolan had long desired to make a film about Oppenheimer, even prior to reading American Prometheus. In 2019, towards the end of production on Nolan's science-fiction film Tenet (2020), star Robert Pattinson gave him a book of Oppenheimer's speeches. According to Nolan, the speeches showed Oppenheimer "wrestling with the implications ... of what's happened and what [he's] done". Nolan wanted to depict "what it would have been like to be Oppenheimer in those moments", in contrast to Tenet, which employs time travel to curb a potential weapon of mass destruction. In December 2020, Warner Bros. Pictures announced plans to give its 2021 films simultaneous releases in theaters and on HBO Max, citing the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the film industry. Nolan, who had partnered with Warner Bros. on each of his films since Insomnia (2002), was outraged, as he was a staunch supporter of traditional film exhibition. In January 2021, media reports mentioned the possibility that Nolan's next film could be the first not to be financed or distributed by Warner Bros. By mid-2021, Nolan had left Warner Bros. and was meeting with other studios to develop his new project. Nolan had previously supported Warner's decision to give Wonder Woman 1984 (2020) a simultaneous release, saying he felt that situation had been handled properly, but said he had been excluded from any discussions regarding the postponed release of Tenet. In September 2021, it was announced that Nolan would write and direct a biographical film about Oppenheimer and his contributions to the Manhattan Project, with Cillian Murphy in negotiations to star. Due to his strained relationship with Warner Bros., Nolan approached multiple studios, including Sony, Universal, Paramount, and Apple. According to insiders, Paramount was ruled out early in the process due to the replacement of the CEO and chairman, Jim Gianopulos, with Brian Robbins, an advocate for increased streaming-service releases. Nolan signed with Universal because he had previously worked with Donna Langley, chairwoman and chief content officer of the NBCUniversal studio group, on an unsuccessful attempt to make a film version of the UK television series The Prisoner. Langley agreed with Nolan's stance on traditional film exhibition and Universal agreed to finance and distribute Oppenheimer, with production set to begin in the first quarter of 2022. Universal also agreed to Nolan's terms, which included a production budget of $100 million, an equal marketing budget, an exclusive theatrical window ranging from 90 to 120 days, 20 percent of the film's first-dollar gross, and a three-week period both before and after the opening, in which Universal could not release another new film. Nolan became aware of Oppenheimer as a youth, after hearing the lyric "How can I save my little boy from Oppenheimer's deadly toy?" in the Sting song "Russians" (1985). He was also inspired by his fears of nuclear holocaust throughout childhood, as he lived during the era of Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND) and the anti-nuclear protests in RAF Greenham Common. He felt that "while our relationship with that [nuclear] fear has ebbed and flowed with time, the threat itself never actually went away", and felt the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine had caused a resurgence of nuclear anxiety. Nolan had also penned a script for a biopic of Howard Hughes approximately during the time of production of Martin Scorsese's The Aviator (2004), which had given him insight on how to write a script regarding a person's life. Emily Blunt described the Oppenheimer script as "emotional" and resembling that of a thriller, while also remarking that Nolan had "Trojan-Horsed a biopic into a thriller". By September 2021, both Roven and Nolan had begun contacting Bird and Sherwin to discuss the script. During Bird's first meeting with Nolan, he had already written a spec script while they discussed the script's content, although Nolan did not disclose the script to them yet. Oppenheimer is the first screenplay written by Nolan in the first person, as he wanted the narrative to be conveyed from Oppenheimer's perspective. He described the "texture" of the film being "how the personal interacts with the historic and the geopolitical" with the intention of making it a cautionary tale. He began developing the script after he completed Tenet and wrote it in only a few months; he had already been thinking about making a film about Oppenheimer for over 20 years. A major plot element is Oppenheimer's response to the long-term consequences of his actions. Nolan wished to explore the phenomenon of delayed reactions, as he felt people are not "necessarily confronted with the strongest or worst elements of [their actions] in the moment". He also chose to alternate between scenes in color and black-and-white to convey the story from both subjective and objective perspectives, respectively, with most of Oppenheimer's view shown via the former, while the latter depicts a "more objective view of his story from a different character's point of view". Wanting to make the film as subjective as possible, the production team decided to include visions of Oppenheimer's conceptions of the quantum world and waves of energy. Nolan noted that while Oppenheimer never publicly apologized for his role in the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, he still believed Oppenheimer had felt genuine guilt for his actions and thus portrayed him as exhibiting those feelings. I think of any character I've dealt with, Oppenheimer is by far the most ambiguous and paradoxical. Which, given that I've made three Batman films, is saying a lot. — Christopher Nolan, Total Film Nolan began by trying to find the "thread that connected the quantum realm, the vibration of energy, and Oppenheimer's own personal journey" and sought to portray the difficulties in his life, particularly regarding his sex life. As such, Nolan wanted to candidly portray his affair with Jean Tatlock. He also wanted to explore Tatlock's influence on Oppenheimer's life, since she was a Communist, which had "enormous ramifications for [Oppenheimer's] later life and his ultimate fate". Nolan also sought to explore the relationship between Oppenheimer and Admiral Lewis Strauss, former chair of the US Atomic Energy Commission, having been inspired by the relationship between Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart and Antonio Salieri as depicted in Amadeus (1984). Another critical moment of the film was the meeting in which President Harry S. Truman called Oppenheimer a "crybaby". Nolan wanted to convey the scene from Oppenheimer's perspective and felt it was a "massive moment of disillusion, a huge turning point [for Oppenheimer] in his approach to trying to deal with the consequences of what he'd been involved with", while also underscoring that it is a "huge shift in perception about the reality of Oppenheimer's perception". He wanted to execute a quick tonal shift after the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, desiring to go from the "highest triumphalism, the highest high, to the lowest low in the shortest amount of screen time possible". For the ending, Nolan chose to make it intentionally vague to be open to interpretation and refrained from being didactic or conveying specific messages in his work. However, he did have the intention to present a "strong set of troubling reverberations at the end". Oppenheimer marks the sixth collaboration between Nolan and Murphy, and the first starring Murphy as the lead. To prepare for the role, Murphy read extensively on Oppenheimer's life and was inspired by David Bowie's appearance in the 1970s. Nolan called Murphy one day to ask him to play the part, and Murphy enthusiastically accepted and was excited to play a lead role in a Nolan film. Afterward, Nolan flew to Dublin to meet with Murphy, who read the script in Nolan's hotel room. Murphy lost an undisclosed amount of weight for the role in order to better match the real-life Oppenheimer's gaunt appearance. Nolan also set up a phone call between Murphy and Nobel laureate Kip Thorne, who had previously worked with Nolan on Interstellar (2014). As a graduate student, Thorne had attended some of Oppenheimer's seminars, and explained to Murphy his experience with Oppenheimer's gift for facilitating group discussions of difficult scientific concepts. The casting process was so secretive that some cast members did not know which role they would be playing until they signed on. Robert Downey Jr., Matt Damon, and Emily Blunt took pay cuts to work on the film, with each earning $4 million in lieu of their usual $10–20 million upfront salary. Downey went to Nolan's house to read the script, which was printed in black on red paper. Downey would later describe Oppenheimer as "the best film" in which he has appeared to date. Blunt met Nolan in Los Angeles and, when she was offered the role of Katherine "Kitty" Oppenheimer, she enthusiastically accepted; she also contacted Murphy to get an expectation of what working with Nolan would be like. Asked to play the part of Leslie Groves, Damon—who had appeared in Nolan's Interstellar—was taking a break from acting as a result of negotiations with his wife in couples therapy, but signed on to Oppenheimer as he had reserved one exception: if Nolan offered him a role in a film. Nolan cast writer-director Benny Safdie as physicist Edward Teller after asking director Paul Thomas Anderson about his experience directing Safdie in Licorice Pizza (2021). Safdie had worked alongside a nuclear physicist at Columbia University while in high school. It is Nolan's first film since Insomnia (2002) to not feature Michael Caine. Pre-production had begun by January 2022 in New Mexico, where a two-day casting call took place in Santa Fe and Los Alamos for people to audition to play local residents, military personnel, and scientists. Another casting call was held in February. Principal photography began on February 28, 2022, at Ghost Ranch in New Mexico, and lasted for 57 days with Hoyte van Hoytema serving as cinematographer. The original shooting schedule had set aside approximately 85 days for filming. However, during pre-production, it had become clear that principal photography could not be completed within $100 million over that many days on location all over the United States. To efficiently use the budget for location shooting in California and New Jersey and constructing high-quality historically accurate sets in New Mexico, Nolan compressed the shooting schedule from 85 to 57 days. Murphy, who appears in nearly every scene, described the pace as "insane". Gary Oldman said he would be on set for a day in May for "one scene, a page and a half". The original choice for Oval Office location in the Nixon Presidential Library fell through a week before filming, and since Oldman's dates were unmovable, the production design team redressed the Oval Office set from Veep, which according to Ruth De Jong had fallen into "nightmarish" disrepair. Nolan filmed his eldest child, his daughter Flora, in a scene in which she played a young woman disintegrated in a nuclear explosion. It appears in the film as one of Oppenheimer's visions, in which Nolan intended to show "that if you create the ultimate destructive power, it will also destroy those who are near and dear to you". The film used a combination of IMAX 65 mm and 65 mm large-format film. It is also the first film to shoot sections on IMAX black-and-white photographic film, which Kodak created and FotoKem developed specifically for the film. Van Hoytema used 50 mm and 80 mm Hasselblad lenses when filming on the IMAX MKIV or IMAX MSM 9802 cameras, while scenes shot on the Panavision Panaflex System 65 Studio cameras were shot using Panavision Sphero 65 and Panavision System 65 lenses. Additionally, the production had Panavision construct a custom probe lens to allow the filmmakers to use IMAX cameras for macro photography and microphotography to record the miniature effects. In the second week of April, filming took place on location at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey. Filming also occurred in California, primarily around the campus of the University of California, Berkeley. Scenes set in the city of Berkeley itself were filmed in Pasadena. During a 2021 research trip, Nolan discovered that Los Alamos had drastically changed from its 1940s appearance and could not be used for exterior shots of the town; for example, the town's equivalent of a Main Street has a Starbucks. Instead, the production team constructed a version of 1940s-era Los Alamos on top of a similar plateau at Ghost Ranch. It took three months to build the set, which was used for only six shooting days. The general plan was to shoot only exterior shots on the set at Ghost Ranch, then shoot interior shots on location inside various historic buildings in the real town of Los Alamos. Interior shooting in Los Alamos began on March 8, 2022. Many scenes in the film take place in academic lecture halls; to save time and money, the production team decided against attempting to reconstruct those halls as sets at Ghost Ranch, and shot them inside a historic Women's Army Corps dormitory in Los Alamos. Scenes were also filmed in Oppenheimer's original cabin in Los Alamos, which had been restored. Kai Bird visited the set and was impressed by Murphy's performance. The New York hotel scenes were shot in Albuquerque's Old Post Office building, while the Washington, D.C. scenes were shot in state government buildings in the state capital of Santa Fe. Filming involved the use of real explosives to recreate the Trinity nuclear test, forgoing the use of computer-generated graphics. When this news first broke online, many fans (aware of Nolan's famous preference for in-camera practical effects) thought it meant he had set off a real atomic bomb. Nolan later remarked that it was both "flattering" and "scary" that his fans would think that of him. The production team was able to obtain government permission to film at White Sands Missile Range, but only at highly inconvenient hours, and therefore chose to film the scene elsewhere in the New Mexico desert. The production filmed the Trinity test scenes in Belen, New Mexico, with Murphy climbing a 100-foot steel tower, a replica of the original site used in the Manhattan Project, in rough weather. A special set was built in which gasoline, propane, aluminum powder, and magnesium were used to create the explosive effect. Although they used miniatures for the practical effect, the special effects supervisor, Scott R. Fisher, referred to them as "big-atures", since the special effects team had tried to build the models as physically large as possible. To make the models look closer to their intended real-life size, the team used forced perspective. Visualizations of the interactions between atoms, molecules and energy waves, as well as the depiction of stars, black holes and supernovas, were also achieved through practical methods. Nolan claimed the film contains no computer-generated effects, and used practical effects to achieve "real-world imagery". Filming wrapped in May 2022. Editing was completed by Jennifer Lame, who had previously edited Tenet. While inspecting the footage during editing, Nolan and Lame performed "character passes" to ensure all the characters were properly displayed on screen, due to the film having a faster pace than most traditional blockbusters. Visual effects were handled by DNEG, which produced more than 100 VFX shots from more than 400 practically shot elements, marking their eighth collaboration with Nolan. Andrew Jackson was the visual effects supervisor, who stated that the film used mostly "invisible" visual effects through "'in-camera' special effects created on set". Digital compositing was used for the Trinity scene to add multi-layers to the explosion which was shot in a multifaceted viewpoint. Steven Spielberg was the first person to see the final cut, in a private screening of its first 70mm print. Nolan said: "He said some very kind things, but really just to watch him watch ... I wasn't even supposed to watch it with him, but seeing the great master watching? It was sort of irresistible." Ludwig Göransson composed the score for the film, after doing so for Nolan's previous film, Tenet. Göransson's score was featured in a trailer for the film on May 8, 2023. It was also featured in the Universal Pictures exclusive five-minute Opening Look on July 13. Nolan had advised him to use the violin for Oppenheimer's central theme in the film, with Göransson remarking that he had felt that it could go from "the most romantic, beautiful tone in a split second to neurotic and heart wrenching, horror sounds". Oppenheimer's teaser trailer was released on July 28, 2022, featuring a live countdown to 5:29 a.m. (MDT) on July 16, 2023, the 78th anniversary of the first detonation of an atomic weapon; it premiered in screenings of Nope before being posted online on Universal's social media profiles. Empire commented that it is exemplary of Nolan's style: "heady, brooding stuff with a real sense of weight". In December 2022, two trailers premiered in front of Avatar: The Way of Water, with one being exclusive to IMAX theaters and the other being shown in all other formats. The latter was eventually released online. In May 2023, an official main trailer debuted during preview screenings of Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 3. It was subsequently released to the public on May 8, 2023, alongside a theatrical release poster. Oppenheimer had its world premiere at Le Grand Rex in Paris on July 11, 2023, followed by the British premiere at Odeon Luxe Leicester Square in London on July 13, and the American premiere at AMC Lincoln Square 13 in New York City on July 17. Both the London and the New York premieres were affected by the SAG-AFTRA strike, as some actors left the London premiere early, and Universal Pictures canceled the red carpet event for the New York premiere. SAG-AFTRA President Fran Drescher later claimed the studios "duped" the guild into accepting a twelve-day-extension for negotiations to continue promoting summer films like Oppenheimer. Oppenheimer was released theatrically on July 21, 2023, by Universal Pictures. In addition to standard digital cinemas, it was also released in various film formats including IMAX 70 mm (30 prints), standard 70 mm (113 prints) and 35 mm (around 80 prints). The film was released on the same day as Barbie, a fantasy comedy film directed by Greta Gerwig based on Mattel's Barbie fashion dolls and media franchise, and distributed by Warner Bros. Many speculated that the decision by Warner Bros. to release Barbie on the same day as Oppenheimer was made in order to deplete ticket sales of Oppenheimer as retaliation for Nolan releasing the film with Universal. Due to the tonal and genre dissonance between the two films, many social media users created memes about how the two films appealed to different audiences, and how they should be viewed as a double feature. The trend was dubbed "Barbenheimer", and was described as counterprogramming during a summer of "entertainment industry meltdown". Cillian Murphy had endorsed the phenomenon, saying "My advice would be for people to go see both, on the same day. If they are good films, then that's cinema's gain." In March 2022, Universal Pictures halted the release of its titles in Russia, joining other major American film distributors in the boycott against the country following its invasion of Ukraine in February 2022. Oppenheimer had also been banned by Russia's Ministry of Culture, which had refused to license screenings of the film, stating that it did not meet their goals of "preserving and strengthening traditional Russian spiritual values". The film was not released in Japan until eight months after its initial global release. Variety noted the controversial reputation in Japan due to the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. A Universal spokesperson said that "plans have not been finalized in all markets". American films are often released in Japan a few months after the initial theatrical release. In December 2023, the independent Japanese film distributor Bitters End announced that it would theatrically release the film in 2024, as Universal's distributor in Japan Toho-Towa opted not to release it. The film was later released by Bitters End in Japan on March 29. In the United States, the film received an R-rating from the Motion Picture Association for "some sexuality, nudity, and language". It is Nolan's first film to receive that rating since Insomnia (2002). In Australia, the film received an MA 15+ rating from the Australian Classification Board board for "strong sex and a suicide scene". In the United Kingdom, the film received a 15 certificate from the British Board of Film Classification for "strong language and sex", meaning anyone under the age of 15 cannot be admitted to view the film. In some countries, including those in the Middle East, South Asia and Southeast Asia, Universal distributed a version of the film with Florence Pugh's nude body covered by a computer-generated black dress. In India, Oppenheimer was released with all scenes depicting nudity, sex and cigarette smoking being censored, earning the U/A certificate from the Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) while retaining the running time. The audio of the scene in which Tatlock directs Oppenheimer to read a verse from the Hindu scripture Bhagavad Gita, "I am become Death, destroyer of worlds", remained intact. As NDTV reported, the Minister for Information and Broadcasting Anurag Thakur questioned how the CBFC certified the film with the verse heard during such circumstance in the first place, and asked the scene to be deleted. Hindu nationalists were angered by the scene and demanded its removal. Among them was journalist Uday Mahurkar, who wrote an open letter to Nolan calling the scene a "direct assault on religious beliefs of a billion tolerant Hindus", and demanded its removal from all releases of Oppenheimer across the world. On the other hand, actor Nitish Bharadwaj told The Times of India that "The use of this verse in the film should also be understood from Oppenheimer's emotional state of mind. A scientist thinks of his creation 24x7x365 days, irrespective of what he is doing. His mind space is consumed fully of his creation & the physical act is just a natural mechanical act." Oppenheimer was released on Ultra HD Blu-ray, regular Blu-ray and DVD formats including digital on November 21, 2023. As the former two releases sold out days after release, Universal worked on restocking before the holiday season. Nolan was vocal during the home release campaign of the film about the importance of physical media libraries, stating that letting films only exist digitally or on streaming services allows companies to have too much control and creates a danger for film preservation. The film was released for streaming in the US exclusively on Peacock and in Canada on Amazon Prime Video on February 16, 2024. Additionally, it began streaming on Jio Cinema in India from March 21, 2024. As of March 31, 2024[update], Oppenheimer has grossed $329.9 million in the United States and Canada and $637.2 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $967.1 million. It is the second-highest-grossing R-rated film of all-time behind Joker (2019). In September 2023, Oppenheimer became the highest-grossing biographical film of all time, surpassing Bohemian Rhapsody (2018). By August 2023, Oppenheimer had become the highest-grossing film ever to not reach the top spot at the domestic box office, although in its sixth weekend it topped the worldwide box office with a total of $38.12 million, surpassing Barbie for the first time. It is also the highest grossing World War II-related film, surpassing Dunkirk (2017), also a Nolan film. Additionally, Oppenheimer became one of the top five highest-grossing IMAX releases, earning $183 million (approximately 20% of its total gross), over $17 million of which was earned from the 30 screens showing IMAX 70 mm prints. The film was booked to be rereleased in IMAX theaters on November 3, including six IMAX 70 mm prints, as these theaters reported selling out during the initial release. In the United States and Canada, Oppenheimer was released alongside Barbie, in what became known as 'Barbenheimer'. The week of their releases, AMC Theatres announced that over 40,000 AMC Stubs members had already pre-booked tickets to both films on the same day. After grossing $33 million on its first day (including $10.5 million from Thursday night previews), it went on to debut to $82.5 million, finishing second behind Barbie and marking one of the best opening weekends ever for an R-rated drama. 64% of the audience was male, with 33% being 18–34 years old. The Barbenheimer phenomenon was credited with boosting interest in the film, with a total of 79% of tickets sold over the weekend being for the two films (27% for Oppenheimer), a combined total of 18.5 million people. The opening weekend was Nolan's best for an original film, being the highest of his filmography outside of the latter two films from The Dark Knight trilogy. It achieved the third-highest opening weekend for a biopic film, behind The Passion of the Christ (2004) and American Sniper (2014). Oppenheimer made $46.2 million in its second weekend (a drop of 44%), remaining in second behind Barbie. The film made $28.7 million in its third weekend, finishing third behind Barbie and newcomer Meg 2: The Trench. On August 16, Oppenheimer surpassed Sing (2016) to become the highest-grossing film to never reach the number one spot at the box office. During its fourth weekend, the film made $18.8 million (a drop of 35%) rising back up to second place. In its fifth and sixth weekends, the film grossed $10.7 million and $9 million (a drop of 43% and 16% respectively), finishing in third and fourth place at the box office and passing $300 million domestically in its sixth weekend. Following its 13 Oscar nominations, the film expanded from 1,008 theaters to 2,262 in its 28th week of release and made $1 million, an increase of 284% from the previous weekend. Outside the United States and Canada, Oppenheimer grossed $98 million in its opening weekend. The following weekend, it earned $77.1 million, dropping by 21% to become Nolan's highest-grossing film in 30 countries, including India, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates and Turkey. In its third weekend, Oppenheimer grossed $52.8 million (a drop of 31%) and $32 million in its fourth weekend. It held well in the following weeks, making $32 million and $29.1 million in its fifth and sixth weekends. As of September 10, 2023, the highest-grossing territories were the UK ($75 million), China ($61.6 million), Germany ($51.9 million), France ($43.1 million) and Australia ($25.9 million). In Japan, Oppenheimer was released on March 29, 2024. It attracted controversy in Japan, and Warner Bros. issued an apology following criticism of the "Barbenheimer" phenomenon as insensitive. The film received critical acclaim. Critics praised Oppenheimer primarily for its screenplay, cast performances, and cinematography. It was frequently ranked as one of Nolan's best films, and one of the best of 2023. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 93% of 502 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.6/10. The website's consensus reads: "Oppenheimer marks another engrossing achievement from Christopher Nolan that benefits from Murphy's tour-de-force performance and stunning visuals." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 90 out of 100, based on 69 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale, while those polled by PostTrak gave it a 93% overall positive score, with 74% saying they would definitely recommend the film. Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times gave Oppenheimer a perfect four out of four, describing it as "magnificent" and "one of the best films of the 21st century". The A.V. Club's Matthew Jackson deemed it a "masterpiece", adding that "it's Christopher Nolan's best film so far, a step up to a new level for one of our finest filmmakers and a movie that burns itself into your brain". Empire's Dan Jolin labeled it a "masterfully constructed character study", taking particular note of Murphy's performance and van Hoytema's IMAX cinematography. Peter Suderman writing for Reason magazine said that the film leaves the viewer with a sense of "fear and foreboding about the horror of full-on nuclear conflict in the wake of the nuclear bomb. Humanity is both great and terrible. Oppenheimer isn't just a movie—it's a warning." Matt Zoller Seitz, writing for RogerEbert.com awarded Oppenheimer a full four out of four rating. He lauded Nolan's storytelling, exploration of Oppenheimer's character and its technical achievements, concluding: "As a physical experience, Oppenheimer is something else entirely—it's hard to say exactly what and that's what's so fascinating about it". Peter Travers described the film as a "monumental achievement" and "one of the best films you'll see anywhere". Caryn James of BBC Culture similarly termed it "boldly imaginative and [Nolan's] most mature work yet", adding that it combined the "explosive, commercially-enticing action of The Dark Knight trilogy" with the "cerebral underpinnings" of Memento, Inception and Tenet. IGN critic Siddhant Adlakha ranked Oppenheimer 10/10, describing it as "a three-hour biopic that plays like a jolting thriller" and Nolan's most "abstract" work yet. Saibal Chatterjee from NDTV rated the film four and a half out of five and stated: "Oppenheimer, a cinematic achievement of blinding brilliance, achieves a sublime combination of visual grandeur, technical flair, emotional intimacy and an examination of the limits of human endeavor and ambition". In August 2023, it ranked number three on Collider's list of "The 20 Best Drama Movies of the 2020s So Far," writing that Nolan "explores the world's obsession with destructive nuclear weapons from the perspective of their creator; using the Greek myth of Dante [sic] as an inspiration, Oppenheimer makes it clear that once this type of power is unleashed, it is bound to be used again." Despite praising the film's themes and performances, CNN's Brian Lowry believed that "Nolan juggles a lot, in a way that somewhat works to the movie's detriment". While praising how the film acknowledges the contribution of "American scientists and American enterprise", Brett Mason complained that it omits the crucial contributions of non-Americans who ensured the work was able to commence as early as December 1941: "Nolan completely ignores the crucial role that British science and Australian physicist Mark Oliphant played in jump-starting the quest." Writing for the Los Angeles Times, Justin Chang defended Nolan's accurate depiction of how Oppenheimer could not see the true victims of his work. Chang wrote that instead of satisfying "representational completists" by detouring to Hiroshima and Nagasaki, "Nolan treats them instead as a profound absence, an indictment by silence". According to Richard Brody, the movie-listings editor at The New Yorker who described the film "History Channel movie with fancy editing", "I was tempted to call it a movie-length Wikipedia article. But after a look online, I realized I was giving Wikipedia too little credit—or Christopher Nolan, the movie's writer and director, too much". For IndieWire's annual critics poll, in which 158 critics and journalists from around the world voted, Oppenheimer was placed second in their Best Film list, with 69 overall mentions and 17 first-place votes. Nolan was also ranked second on the Best Director list, while his screenplay was placed eighth. Murphy was the highest-placed actor on the Best Performance list (fourth overall) while Van Hoytema's work topped the Best Cinematography list. Oppenheimer also appeared in over 410 critics' lists of the best films released in 2023, and was ranked first in 99 of them. Oliver Stone deemed the film "a classic, which I never believed could be made in this climate". Paul Schrader called Oppenheimer, "the best, most important film of this century", while Denis Villeneuve called it "a masterpiece". Steven Soderbergh said of the film, "Oppenheimer is a real accomplishment. I read somewhere that Chris [Nolan] implied that this is the movie he's been building toward, and I think he's right. And I'm thrilled that it's a massive hit." While Japanese director Takashi Yamazaki said, “As a person of Japanese ancestry and descent, my response to ‘Oppenheimer’ [is that] I would like to dedicate a different film to that when that day comes.” The film was noted for its accuracy, with some scenes being taken word-for-word out of the book or real life events. Many of the changes are small embellishments or changes from real life. For example, Oppenheimer was not as excited about his discovery of black holes as shown in the film since he did not know how significant it would become. The study was indeed released on the same day Germany invaded Poland, as shown in the film. During the Trinity test, Donald Hornig had his hand on the kill switch for a faster reaction time not near it as depicted in the film. Truman did call Oppenheimer a "crybaby" but in a letter to Dean Acheson one year later, not immediately after meeting Oppenheimer. It was also pointed out that the incorrect American flag was used. In the film, the current 50-star flag is shown. This version was not adopted until 1960. During the war, the American flag had only 48 stars as Hawaii and Alaska had yet to become states. The scene where Oppenheimer poisons his professor's apple is based on accounts that Oppenheimer gave of the incident, but it is unclear whether it occurred in real life. Oppenheimer is depicted as putting potassium cyanide in the apple before having a change of heart the next day and narrowly preventing it from being eaten. There is no evidence that Niels Bohr nearly ate the apple or had any involvement in the incident. Oppenheimer and Einstein were friends, but the specific conversations which the film revolves around never happened. Oppenheimer took his concerns about an unstoppable chain reaction to physicist Arthur Compton at the Metallurgical Laboratory, not Einstein. Compton was also the first to appoint Oppenheimer to take over the research into the bomb-design part of the Manhattan Project. In addition to their interpersonal conflicts, Strauss had another reason to undermine Oppenheimer's credibility by revoking his security clearance: Oppenheimer was opposed to further development of the hydrogen bomb by the United States. Scott Sagan describes the loss of Oppenheimer's influence as a possible constraint upon the nuclear arms race between the US and USSR as a "broader tragedy" less clearly depicted in the film than the scientist's personal tragedy but he called the production "highly accurate" otherwise for a Hollywood film. Many efforts undertaken at other Manhattan Project sites like Hanford, Washington and Oak Ridge, Tennessee were not shown. Most of them, overseen by General Leslie Groves, focused on producing the radioactive material that powered the nuclear explosions. In addition to the team at Los Alamos, those working at other Project sites, particularly the University of Chicago's Metallurgical Laboratory, also expressed concerns about using the atomic bomb against Japan. According to Kate Gardner, The one glaring omission from the film is in fact 19,000 omissions – the number of people, mostly Indigenous, who lived near the Trinity test site in New Mexico. Oppenheimer implies the area was empty, side-stepping the thorny truth that local residents were not warned about the test at all – not even given a false story to prevent them from drinking the toxic rainwater that fell for the next few days. The renewed attention to the site and associated nuclear testing encouraged the United States Congress to revise the Radiation Exposure Compensation Act (1990), which provided compensation programs for people affected by radiation and nuclear testing during the Cold War, known as "Downwinders" and primarily consisting of the Navajo Nation. The United States Senate approved amendments to accommodate additional services to people in New Mexico, but it has not passed through Congress as the House of Representatives had not yet debated its inclusion as part of the national defense bill for the 2024 fiscal year. Oppenheimer earned a leading 13 nominations at the 96th Academy Awards, becoming Nolan's most Oscar-nominated film. At the ceremony, the film won Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor for Murphy, Best Supporting Actor for Downey, Best Cinematography, Best Film Editing and Best Original Score. Besides composer Göransson, all recipients were first-time Oscar winners, including Nolan, Thomas, Roven, Downey and van Hoytema, who had each earned previous Academy Award nominations. Oppenheimer became the highest-grossing Best Picture winner since 2003's The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King. The film was also nominated for Best Supporting Actress for Blunt, Best Adapted Screenplay, Best Sound, Best Production Design, Best Costume Design, and Best Makeup and Hairstyling. The film won numerous other accolades. It won a leading five Golden Globe Awards, receiving Best Motion Picture – Drama, Best Director for Nolan, Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama for Murphy, Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture for Downey, and Best Original Score for Göransson at the 81st ceremony. The National Board of Review and the American Film Institute named Oppenheimer one of the top-ten films of 2023. Oppenheimer received nominations for 13 Critics' Choice Movie Awards (winning eight), 13 British Academy Film Awards (winning seven), 14 Saturn Awards (winning four), and four Screen Actors Guild Awards (winning three), while its score earned three nominations at the 66th Annual Grammy Awards (winning one). List of films about nuclear issues List of World War II films since 1990 Oppenheimer, a 1980 TV series about Oppenheimer, portrayed by Sam Waterston Fat Man and Little Boy, also known as Shadow Makers, 1989 film about the Manhattan Project Doctor Atomic, a 2005 opera about Oppenheimer, composed by John Adams Primary genres attributed to the following sources: Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: "Oppenheimer (15)". British Board of Film Classification. July 6, 2023. Archived from the original on July 6, 2023. Retrieved July 6, 2023. Keegan, Rebecca (July 14, 2023). "'This Can't Be Safe. It's Got to Have Bite': Christopher Nolan and Cast Unleash Oppenheimer". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 20, 2023. Retrieved July 15, 2023. "Oppenheimer". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved March 31, 2024. "Oppenheimer". The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Retrieved March 31, 2024. Tuccillo, Andrea; Thompson, Mary Pat (July 20, 2023). "'Oppenheimer' cast on Christopher Nolan's very epic, unconventional atomic bomb biopic". Archived from the original on August 25, 2023. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Nicholson, Tom (August 25, 2023). "Are We Entering a New Golden Age of Historical Epics?". Esquire. Archived from the original on August 26, 2023. Retrieved January 18, 2024. Mondello, Bob (July 20, 2023). "Nolan's thriller 'Oppenheimer' is a monument to science and the arrogance of genius". NPR. Archived from the original on July 21, 2023. Retrieved February 17, 2024. Scott, A. O. (October 21, 2023). "Are Fears of A.I. and Nuclear Apocalypse Keeping You Up? Blame Prometheus. - How an ancient Greek myth explains our terrifying modern reality". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 21, 2023. Retrieved October 21, 2023. Fleming, Mike (September 14, 2021). "Christopher Nolan Chooses Universal Pictures For His Film About J. Robert Oppenheimer & The A-Bomb". Deadline. Archived from the original on January 19, 2024. Retrieved January 19, 2024. Kroll, Justin (October 8, 2021). "Cillian Murphy Confirmed to Star As J. Robert Oppenheimer In Christopher Nolan's Next Film At Universal, Film Will Bow in July 2023". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 8, 2021. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Kroll, Justin (October 20, 2021). "Emily Blunt In Talks To Join Christopher Nolan's Next Film Oppenheimer At Universal". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2021. Kroll, Justin (November 2, 2021). "Robert Downey Jr. And Matt Damon Latest Stars To Join Christopher Nolan's Oppenheimer". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved November 2, 2021. Kit, Borys (December 9, 2021). "Florence Pugh, Rami Malek, Benny Safdie Join Christopher Nolan's Oppenheimer (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 10, 2021. Retrieved December 9, 2021. Lang, Brent (February 22, 2022). "Christopher Nolan's Oppenheimer Releases Moody First Look, Kenneth Branagh Joins Cast". Variety. Archived from the original on February 22, 2022. Retrieved February 22, 2022. Kroll, Justin (January 4, 2022). "Josh Hartnett Joins Christopher Nolan's Next Film Oppenheimer". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 4, 2022. Retrieved January 4, 2022. Francis-Crow, Alana (April 23, 2022). "Oppenheimer Set Photos Reveal Casey Affleck Is Cast In New Nolan Movie". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 24, 2022. Retrieved April 23, 2022. Grobar, Matt (February 22, 2022). "Christopher Nolan's Oppenheimer Gets First-Look Photo As Kenneth Branagh Joins Cast". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 22, 2022. Retrieved February 22, 2022. Kroll, Justin (March 1, 2022). "Oppenheimer: Jason Clarke Joins Christopher Nolan's Next Tentpole At Universal". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 1, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Kit, Borys (February 16, 2022). "Christopher Nolan's Oppenheimer Adds Halloween Kills, Manifest Actors (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 16, 2022. Retrieved February 16, 2022. Reul, Katie (May 8, 2023). "New 'Oppenheimer' Trailer Reveals a Sad Albert Einstein, Florence Pugh, Robert Downey Jr. and More in Christopher Nolan's Star-Studded Movie". Variety. Archived from the original on May 8, 2023. Retrieved May 8, 2023. Grobar, Matt (March 2, 2022). "Christopher Nolan's Oppenheimer Adds James D'Arcy & Michael Angarano". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 3, 2022. Retrieved March 2, 2022. Couch, Aaron (February 25, 2022). "David Dastmalchian Reuniting With Christopher Nolan for Oppenheimer (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 25, 2022. Retrieved February 25, 2022. Kit, Borys (February 7, 2022). "Dane DeHaan Joins Christopher Nolan's Oppenheimer (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 7, 2022. Retrieved February 7, 2022. Kit, Borys (February 22, 2022). "Oppenheimer: Alden Ehrenreich, David Krumholtz Join Christopher Nolan Drama (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 22, 2022. Retrieved February 22, 2022. Remley, Hilary (February 22, 2022). "Ironheart Adds Alden Ehrenreich to Marvel Disney+ Series". Collider. Archived from the original on July 21, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2022. Couch, Aaron (March 23, 2022). "Oppenheimer Enlists Tony Goldwyn (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved March 23, 2022. "Oppenheimer Production Information Approved" (Press release). Universal Pictures Publicity. June 21, 2023. Archived from the original on July 10, 2023. Retrieved July 10, 2023. Vivarelli, Nick (June 20, 2023). "House of the Dragon Star Jefferson Hall Set for Emirati Director Nayla Al Khaja's Debut Three – Global Bulletin". Variety. Archived from the original on June 29, 2023. Retrieved July 10, 2023. Grobar, Matt (February 16, 2022). "Oppenheimer: Matthew Modine Joins Christopher Nolan's Film For Universal". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 16, 2022. Retrieved February 16, 2022. White, James (March 1, 2022). "Oppenheimer Adds Jason Clarke And Louise Lombard". Empire. Archived from the original on March 2, 2022. Retrieved March 2, 2022. Jannat, Zarghona (May 8, 2023). "Star-studded cast shines in new Oppenheimer trailer". The Markhor Times. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved July 13, 2023. Jones, Nate (July 12, 2023). "Which Supporting Characters in Oppenheimer Will Die of Radiation Poisoning?". Vulture. Archived from the original on July 20, 2023. Retrieved July 13, 2023. Thompson, David (July 22, 2023). "Oppenheimer Cast: Every Celebrity & Actor In the Movie". The Direct. Archived from the original on July 26, 2023. Retrieved July 26, 2023. Jones, Nate (July 12, 2023). "Which Supporting Characters in Oppenheimer Will Die of Radiation Poisoning?". Vulture. Archived from the original on July 20, 2023. Retrieved July 17, 2023. Kroll, Justin (March 11, 2022). "Army Of The Dead Breakout Matthias Schweighöfer Joins Christopher Nolan's Oppenheimer". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 9, 2022. Retrieved March 11, 2022. "Schweighöfers nächste große Rolle" [Schweighöfer's next big role]. Der Spiegel (in German). November 2, 2022. Archived from the original on February 12, 2023. Retrieved February 12, 2023. Kit, Borys (March 22, 2022). "Oppenheimer: Alex Wolff Joins All-Star Cast of Christopher Nolan Drama (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 27, 2022. Retrieved March 22, 2022. Grobar, Matt (April 4, 2022). "Christopher Denham & Josh Zuckerman Join Oppenheimer; Shane Dax Taylor's Indie Best Man Adds Andrey Ivchenko". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 31, 2022. Retrieved April 4, 2022. Grobar, Matt (March 10, 2022). "Oppenheimer: Harrison Gilbertson & Emma Dumont Board Christopher Nolan's Thriller For Universal". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 10, 2022. Retrieved March 10, 2022. Grobar, Matt (March 7, 2022). "Christopher Nolan's Oppenheimer Adds Guy Burnet & Danny Deferrari". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 22, 2022. Retrieved March 7, 2022. Grobar, Matt (March 1, 2022). "Louise Lombard Joins Oppenheimer; Harold And The Purple Crayon Adds Camille Guaty". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 22, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Here's How Close 'Oppenheimer' Sticks to J. Robert Oppenheimer's Life". Time. July 21, 2023. Archived from the original on August 11, 2023. Retrieved October 30, 2023. Grobar, Matt (March 4, 2022). "Christopher Nolan's Oppenheimer Casts No Exit Star David Rysdahl (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 17, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Rubin, Rebecca (March 9, 2022). "Drake and Josh Star Josh Peck Joins Christopher Nolan's Oppenheimer (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on June 9, 2022. Retrieved March 9, 2022. "The Cast of 'Oppenheimer' and the Real People They Play". Vanity Fair. July 20, 2023. Archived from the original on July 26, 2023. Retrieved July 26, 2023. Couch, Aaron (March 15, 2022). "Oppenheimer Enlists Vikings Actor Gustaf Skarsgard (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 4, 2022. Retrieved March 15, 2022. Grobar, Matt (March 29, 2022). "Billy Slaughter Joins Amazon's The Burial; Oppenheimer Adds Trond Fausa". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 4, 2022. Retrieved March 29, 2022. Grobar, Matt (March 16, 2022). "Devon Bostick Joins Universal's Oppenheimer; Sony's George Foreman Biopic Adds Deion Smith". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Retrieved March 16, 2022. "Oppenheimer Cast: Every Celebrity & Actor in the Movie". The Direct. August 2023. Archived from the original on July 26, 2023. Retrieved July 30, 2023. "Egy magyar szerepre magyar színész is jutott az Oppenheimerben – Haumann Máté alakítja Szilárd Leót". July 14, 2023. Archived from the original on July 14, 2023. Retrieved July 30, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 15, 2022). "Christopher Nolan's Oppenheimer Adds Olivia Thirlby". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 4, 2022. Retrieved April 15, 2022. Grater, Tom (April 1, 2022). "Gary Oldman Says He Is Appearing In One Scene In Christopher Nolan's Oppenheimer". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved April 1, 2022. Burnett | @BrynnaLynne24, Aminah Syed | @aminahsyed_ & Brynna (January 12, 2024). "Q&A: How actor Troy Bronson portrayed KU alumnus Joseph W. Kennedy in 'Oppenheimer'". The University Daily Kansan. Archived from the original on February 26, 2024. Retrieved March 12, 2024.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Ntim, Zac (August 1, 2023). "Oliver Stone Says He Once Turned Down An Oppenheimer Film Project & Calls Christopher Nolan's Film A "Classic"". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 31, 2023. Retrieved August 31, 2023. Amsden, David (July 18, 2023). "Oppenheimer's big screen odyssey: The man, the book and the film's 50-year journey". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 20, 2023. Retrieved July 19, 2023. Overbye, Dennis (July 20, 2023). "Christopher Nolan and the Contradictions of J. Robert Oppenheimer". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 20, 2023. Retrieved July 20, 2023. Collin, Robbie (July 14, 2023). "Oppenheimer director Christopher Nolan: 'Not worried about a nuclear holocaust? You should be'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on July 14, 2023. Retrieved July 14, 2023. Boone, John (December 7, 2020). "Christopher Nolan Reflects on Tenet Release, Reacts to Warner Bros./HBO Max Deal (Exclusive)". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on October 9, 2021. Retrieved October 9, 2021. Watson, R.T. (January 21, 2021). "Want to Be a Hollywood Player? Covid and Streaming Have Changed All the Rules". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on October 9, 2021. Retrieved October 9, 2021. Rubin, Rebecca (December 10, 2020). "After Christopher Nolan's explosive remarks, could Warner Bros. lose its superstar director?". Variety. Archived from the original on December 10, 2020. Retrieved May 4, 2021. Katz, Brandon (February 3, 2021). "Where will Christopher Nolan go after his war with Warner?". The New York Observer. Archived from the original on February 3, 2021. Retrieved May 4, 2021. Fleming, Mike Jr. (September 9, 2021). "Christopher Nolan Bombshell: Director Talking To Multiple Studios On Film He'll Direct About J. Robert Oppenheimer & Development Of The A-Bomb In WWII". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 10, 2021. Retrieved September 10, 2021. Keegan, Rebecca (July 14, 2023). ""This Can't Be Safe. It's Got to Have Bite": Christopher Nolan and Cast Unleash 'Oppenheimer'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 20, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. Kit, Borys (September 9, 2021). "Sony, Universal Among Studios Vying for New Christopher Nolan Movie". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 11, 2021. Retrieved September 10, 2021. Kit, Borys (September 15, 2021). "Inside the Studios' (And Apple's) Frenzy to Get Christopher Nolan's Next Film". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 15, 2021. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Lang, Brent (November 8, 2023). "Christopher Nolan on Turning 'Oppenheimer' Into a Near-$1 Billion Hit — And What's Next". Variety. Archived from the original on November 11, 2023. Retrieved November 12, 2023. Fleming, Mike Jr. (September 14, 2021). "Christopher Nolan Chooses Universal Pictures For His Film About J. Robert Oppenheimer & The A-Bomb". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 14, 2021. Retrieved September 14, 2021. Siegel, Tatiana (March 12, 2024). "Christopher Nolan's Final 'Oppenheimer' Payday Close to $100 Million (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on March 12, 2024. Retrieved March 13, 2024. Ebiri, Bilge (July 17, 2023). "An Action Movie About Scientists Talking". Vulture. Archived from the original on July 21, 2023. Retrieved July 20, 2023. Maytum, Matt (May 26, 2023). "Christopher Nolan confirms Oppenheimer is his longest film yet". Total Film. GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on May 20, 2023. Retrieved July 12, 2023. Bird, Kai (February 18, 2024). "Guest Essay: J. Robert Oppenheimer Biographer on the Nearly Impossible Adaptation". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 18, 2024. Retrieved February 18, 2024. Collis, Clark (July 11, 2023). "Why Christopher Nolan wrote Oppenheimer script in the first person". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved July 12, 2023. Grimes, Christopher (July 21, 2023). "Director Christopher Nolan: 'Oppenheimer is absolutely a cautionary tale'". Financial Times. Archived from the original on July 21, 2023. Retrieved July 21, 2023. Maytum, Matt (May 19, 2023). "Christopher Nolan explains why Oppenheimer switches between black-and-white and color". Total Film. GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on May 19, 2023. Retrieved July 12, 2023. Bahr, Lindsey (June 1, 2023). "Christopher Nolan breaks down the best ways to watch a movie, ahead of his 'Oppenheimer' release". Associated Press. Archived from the original on June 1, 2023. Retrieved July 19, 2023. Butcher, Sophie (May 6, 2023). "Christopher Nolan On Visualising Physics In Oppenheimer's Head: 'We've Gotta See The Atoms Moving' – Exclusive". Empire. Archived from the original on June 20, 2023. Retrieved June 20, 2023. Ebiri, Bilge (July 21, 2023). "The 'Troubling Reverberations' at the End of Oppenheimer, Explained". Vulture. Archived from the original on July 21, 2023. Retrieved July 21, 2023. Guerrasio, Jason (July 18, 2023). "Christopher Nolan feels brand new". Insider. Archived from the original on July 18, 2023. Retrieved July 19, 2023. Cumming, Ed (February 20, 2022). "'It's the end of a big adventure': Cillian Murphy bids farewell to Peaky Blinders". The Guardian. Archived from the original on February 20, 2022. Retrieved February 21, 2022. Bahr, Lindsey (May 3, 2023). "In 'Oppenheimer,' Cillian Murphy leads a Nolan epic". Associated Press. Archived from the original on May 6, 2023. Retrieved July 12, 2023. Sharf, Zack (July 24, 2023). "'Oppenheimer': Robert Downey Jr. Says Cillian Murphy Made the Greatest 'Sacrifice by a Lead Actor' He's Ever Seen in His 53-Year Career". Variety. Archived from the original on July 24, 2023. Retrieved July 26, 2023. Lang, Brent (July 20, 2022). "Inside Movie Stars' Salaries: Joaquin Phoenix Nabs $20M for Joker 2, Tom Cruise Heads to Over $100M and More". Variety. Archived from the original on July 20, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2022. Collis, Clark (July 19, 2023). "Yes, Christopher Nolan really prints his scripts on red paper — just ask Robert Downey Jr". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 20, 2023. Retrieved July 21, 2023. "Robert Downey Jr hails Oppenheimer as his "best film"". Digital Spy. July 17, 2023. Archived from the original on July 20, 2023. Retrieved July 20, 2023. Collis, Clark (July 17, 2023). "Matt Damon told his wife he would take a break — unless Christopher Nolan called". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 21, 2023. Retrieved July 21, 2023. Paiella, Gabriella (July 18, 2023). "Benny Safdie Steps into the Spotlight with 'Oppenheimer'". GQ. Archived from the original on July 20, 2023. Retrieved July 18, 2023. O'Connell, Sean (July 24, 2023). "What Christopher Nolan Has to Say About Michael Caine's Involvement in Oppenheimer". Cinemablend. Archived from the original on July 28, 2023. Retrieved July 28, 2023. Gomez, Adrian (January 29, 2022). "Oppenheimer to film in New Mexico this year". Albuquerque Journal. Archived from the original on January 26, 2022. Retrieved January 30, 2022. Tashji, Michael (January 30, 2022). "Hundreds turn out for Oppenheimer casting call". The Santa Fe New Mexican. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved February 14, 2022. Vitu, Teya (February 3, 2022). "Two more movie shoots come to New Mexico; Oppenheimer calls for more extras". The Santa Fe New Mexican. Archived from the original on February 4, 2022. Retrieved February 4, 2022. Yuan, Jada (July 19, 2023). "Inside Christopher Nolan's 57-day race to shoot 'Oppenheimer'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 20, 2023. Retrieved August 1, 2023. Sharf, Zack (August 29, 2023). "Christopher Nolan Cut 30 'Oppenheimer' Filming Days in Order to Free Up Money for Sets, Production Designer Calls It 'The Most Incredible Thing". Variety. Archived from the original on August 29, 2023. Retrieved August 30, 2023. Tinoco, Armando (August 30, 2023). "Christopher Nolan Cut 'Oppenheimer' Filming To 57 Days To Recreate Los Alamos". Deadline. Archived from the original on September 13, 2023. Retrieved March 13, 2024. Dixon, Marcus. "'Oppenheimer' prod. designers Ruth De Jong, Claire Kaufman: Christopher Nolan on other stratosphere". Gold Derby. Archived from the original on March 11, 2024. Retrieved March 10, 2024. Bergeson, Samantha (February 22, 2022). "Oppenheimer First Look: Cillian Murphy Smolders in Christopher Nolan's Atomic Bomb Drama". IndieWire. Archived from the original on February 22, 2022. Retrieved February 22, 2022. Bahr, Lindsey (June 4, 2023). "Christopher Nolan breaks down the best ways to watch a movie, ahead of his 'Oppenheimer' release – AP News". Associated Press. Archived from the original on June 1, 2023. Retrieved July 20, 2023. "Cinematographer Hoyte van Hoytema NSC FSF ASC gets up-close & personal using Kodak 65MM large-format film on Christopher Nolan's 'Oppenheimer'". Kodak. July 20, 2023. Archived from the original on August 25, 2023. Retrieved August 27, 2023. "Oppenheimer: Panavision Invented a New IMAX Lens for Christopher Nolan's Historical Epic". Comic Book Resources. August 2, 2023. Archived from the original on September 1, 2023. Retrieved September 1, 2023. Salvadore, Sarah (April 12, 2022). "Christopher Nolan, Cillian Murphy Film In Princeton For Oppenheimer?". Patch. Archived from the original on April 12, 2022. Retrieved April 12, 2022. Wendorf, Frances (May 2, 2022). "Florence Pugh Walks With Cillian Murphy In Oppenheimer Set Photo". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on May 2, 2022. Retrieved May 2, 2022. Gomez, Adrian (July 20, 2023). "Production designer Ruth De Jong transported New Mexico back to the 1940s in 'Oppenheimer'". Albuquerque Journal. Archived from the original on October 22, 2023. Retrieved October 22, 2023. Kifer, Andy (July 10, 2023). "Behind 'Oppenheimer,' a Prizewinning Biography 25 Years in the Making". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 10, 2023. Retrieved July 19, 2023. Maytum, Matt (December 12, 2022). "Christopher Nolan: 'Oppenheimer is one of the most challenging projects I've ever taken on in terms of scale'". Total Film. GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on December 13, 2022. Retrieved December 13, 2022. Seibold, Witney (May 23, 2023). "How Christopher Nolan's Oppenheimer Recreated A Nuclear Explosion Without Using CGI". /Film. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved July 14, 2023. Weiss, Josh (May 26, 2023). "How Exactly Did Oppenheimer's Special Effects Team Recreate an Atomic Blast Without CGI?". syfy.com. Archived from the original on July 22, 2023. Retrieved July 21, 2023. Massoto, Erick (July 10, 2023). "Christopher Nolan Explains Why There's No CGI in 'Oppenheimer'". Collider. Archived from the original on July 22, 2023. Retrieved July 22, 2023. Jones, Tamera (July 10, 2023). "With 'Oppenheimer,' Christopher Nolan Fought for "Bite of Real-World Imagery," and Won". Collider. Archived from the original on September 12, 2023. Retrieved September 29, 2023. Ruimy, Jordan (June 6, 2022). "Christopher Nolan's Oppenheimer Wraps Shooting". World of Reel. Archived from the original on June 6, 2022. Retrieved June 7, 2022. "Oppenheimer Contains Only 100 VFX Shots – YMCinema". July 31, 2023. Archived from the original on August 4, 2023. Retrieved August 4, 2023. Tangcay, Jazz (July 21, 2022). "Christopher Nolan Reunites With VFX Studio DNEG for Oppenheimer, Their Eighth Movie Together". Variety. Archived from the original on July 20, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2022. Giardina, Carolyn (August 23, 2023). "No VFX in 'Oppenheimer'? "Clearly Not True" Says Film's Oscar-Winning VFX Supervisor". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 26, 2023. Retrieved September 27, 2023. Ganesh, Bala (July 6, 2023). "How Christopher Nolan Recreated Oppenheimer's Nuclear Bomb Explosion Without CGI". Movieweb. Archived from the original on July 22, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. "Q&A: Nolan and Villeneuve on 'Tenet' returning to theaters and why 'Dune 2' will be shown on film | AP News". Associated Press News. February 6, 2024. Archived from the original on February 7, 2024. Retrieved February 9, 2024. "Christopher Nolan Showed First Oppenheimer 70MM Print to Spielberg". February 8, 2024. Archived from the original on February 9, 2024. Retrieved February 9, 2024. Reul, Katie (May 8, 2023). "New 'Oppenheimer' Trailer Reveals a Sad Albert Einstein, Florence Pugh, Robert Downey Jr. and More in Christopher Nolan's Star-Studded Movie". Variety. Archived from the original on May 8, 2023. Retrieved May 8, 2023. Remley, Hilary (July 13, 2023). "'Oppenheimer': 5-Minute Video Highlights the IMAX-Shot Epic & Ludwig Göransson's Score". Collider. Archived from the original on July 20, 2023. Retrieved July 14, 2023. @OppenheimerFilm (July 13, 2023). "The exclusive five-minute Opening Look, edited by the film's editor Jennifer Lame, reveals new scenes, images and sounds from the IMAX®-shot epic thriller and features the film's breathtaking score by Academy Award® winner Ludwig Göransson" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Parham, Lee (July 28, 2022). "Link Tank: First Oppenheimer Trailer is a Countdown Clock". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on August 18, 2022. Retrieved August 17, 2022. "Christopher Nolan's Oppenheimer Teaser Trailer Debuts Online". Empire. July 28, 2022. Archived from the original on May 9, 2023. Retrieved May 9, 2023. "Nolan to debut 'Oppenheimer' IMAX trailer with 'Avatar 2'". The Washington Post. December 13, 2022. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved July 28, 2023. Reul, Katie (December 19, 2022). "'Oppenheimer' Trailer Unveils Christopher Nolan's Atomic Bomb Thriller". Variety. Archived from the original on March 23, 2023. Retrieved July 28, 2023. Leston, Ryan (May 8, 2023). "Christopher Nolan's Oppenheimer Gets Lengthy New Trailer". IGN. Archived from the original on May 9, 2023. Retrieved May 9, 2023. Lang, Robert (July 11, 2023). "'Oppenheimer' Red Carpet Photos: Cillian Murphy, Emily Blunt, Robert Downey Jr & Christopher Nolan At Paris Premiere". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 20, 2023. Retrieved July 11, 2023. "Oppenheimer: Cillian Murphy, Matt Damon and Emily Blunt at London movie premiere". BBC News. July 13, 2023. Archived from the original on July 20, 2023. Retrieved July 15, 2023. Sharf, Zack (July 14, 2023). "'Oppenheimer' U.S. Premiere Cancels Red Carpet Amid SAG-AFTRA Strike, but the Film Will Still Screen". Variety. Archived from the original on July 18, 2023. Retrieved July 15, 2023. White, Peter (July 14, 2023). "Fran Drescher Mobbed On SAG-AFTRA Picket Lines, Says Studios Are "Doing Bad Things To Good People"". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 15, 2023. Retrieved July 22, 2023. Lawrence, Gregory (October 8, 2021). "Christopher Nolan's New Movie Oppenheimer Sets 2023 Release Date". Collider. Archived from the original on October 8, 2021. Retrieved October 9, 2021. "Where to see "Oppenheimer" in the Splendour of Glorious 7OMM". in70mm.com. Archived from the original on June 3, 2023. Retrieved June 3, 2023. "This is the ideal viewing order for the 'Barbenheimer' double feature". NPR. Archived from the original on July 22, 2023. Retrieved July 31, 2023. Frank, Jason P. (June 29, 2023). "Barbenheimer Memes Are Blowing Up". Vulture. Archived from the original on July 3, 2023. Retrieved August 11, 2023. Ankers-Range, Adele (June 30, 2023). "The Internet Embraces 'Barbenheimer' With Memes, Mashups, and More". IGN. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved August 11, 2023.. Moses, Claire (June 28, 2023). "Mark Your Calendars: 'Barbenheimer' Is Coming". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 30, 2023. Retrieved July 2, 2023. Gleiberman, Owen (July 23, 2023). "The Real Meaning of 'Barbenheimer': If You Build Exciting Movies, They Will Come". Variety. Archived from the original on July 24, 2023. Retrieved September 26, 2023. Rodríguez, Rafael (July 9, 2023). "Cillian Murphy, 'Oppenheimer' contra 'Barbie': "Ni héroes ni villanos; me interesan las sombras"". La Vanguardia. La Vanguardia Ediciones. Archived from the original on July 10, 2023. Retrieved July 14, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 1, 2022). "Universal Pauses Theatrical Releases In Russia". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 3, 2022. Retrieved August 8, 2023. McCurdy, Will (September 27, 2023). "'They see Hollywood movies as a right': the Russians breaking the law to watch Barbie". The Guardian. Archived from the original on September 27, 2023. Retrieved November 10, 2023. Rubin, Rebecca (June 29, 2023). "Will Christoper Nolan's 'Oppenheimer' Get a Theatrical Release in Japan?". Variety. Archived from the original on June 29, 2023. Retrieved August 9, 2023. Tartaglione, Nancy (December 6, 2023). "'Oppenheimer' Confirmed For Theatrical Release In Japan". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 7, 2023. Retrieved December 7, 2023. Frater, Patrick (December 7, 2023). "'Oppenheimer' to Release in Japan Through Indie Distributor Bitters End". Variety. Archived from the original on December 7, 2023. Retrieved December 7, 2023. "第96回アカデミー賞最多13部門ノミネート「オッペンハイマー」3月29日公開決定 クリストファー・ノーラン監督作 : 映画ニュース". Eiga.com (in Japanese). January 24, 2024. Archived from the original on January 27, 2024. Retrieved January 24, 2024. Sharf, Zack (June 1, 2023). "Oppenheimer Earns R Rating, Imax Film Prints Are 11 Miles Long and Weigh 600 Pounds". Variety. Archived from the original on June 1, 2023. Retrieved June 2, 2023. "Oppenheimer". Australian Classification Board. Archived from the original on July 31, 2023. Retrieved July 31, 2023. "Oppenheimer". British Board of Film Classification. Archived from the original on July 6, 2023. Retrieved August 28, 2023. Rubin, Rebecca (July 24, 2023). "Florence Pugh's Nude Scene in 'Oppenheimer' Covered Up by CGI Black Dress in India and Middle East". Variety. Archived from the original on July 26, 2023. Retrieved July 26, 2023. Ritman, Alex (July 25, 2023). "Topless Florence Pugh Scene in 'Oppenheimer' Digitally Censored (With a CGI Black Dress) in Middle East, India". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 26, 2023. Retrieved July 26, 2023. Smith, Ryan (July 24, 2023). "Florence Pugh 'Oppenheimer' nude scenes censored in absolutely bizarre way". Newsweek. Archived from the original on July 25, 2023. Retrieved July 25, 2023. Mathur, Moulik (July 21, 2023). "Oppenheimer Opted for Self-Censorship in India but Runtime Remains the Same". IGN. Archived from the original on July 24, 2023. Retrieved July 24, 2023. Ramachandran, Naman (July 23, 2023). "'Oppenheimer' Sacred Text Reading Sex Scene Raises Hackles in India: 'This is a Direct Assault on Religious Beliefs of a Billion Tolerant Hindus'". Variety. Archived from the original on July 24, 2023. Retrieved July 24, 2023. Sharma, Akhilesh (July 24, 2023). Kumar, Akhil (ed.). "Upset At Bhagavad Gita Mention In 'Oppenheimer' Sex Scene, Minister Demand Cuts". NDTV. Archived from the original on July 24, 2023. Retrieved July 25, 2023. Mogul, Rhea (July 24, 2023). "Sex scene with Cillian Murphy and Florence Pugh in 'Oppenheimer' becomes latest target of India's Hindu nationalists". CNN. Archived from the original on July 24, 2023. Retrieved July 24, 2023. "Nitish Bharadwaj reacts to the 'Oppenheimer' Bhagwad Gita controversy, says 'it should also be understood from Oppenheimer's emotional state of mind'". The Times of India. July 28, 2023. Archived from the original on August 10, 2023. Retrieved August 10, 2023. Moreau, Jordan (October 17, 2023). "'Oppenheimer' Sets Digital Release, 4K Blu-Ray With Over 3 Hours of Special Features". Variety. Archived from the original on October 17, 2023. Retrieved October 17, 2023. Hayes, Dade (November 28, 2023). "Universal "Working To Replenish" Sold-Out Stock Of 'Oppenheimer' 4K Discs In Time For Holidays". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 29, 2023. Retrieved November 29, 2023. Sharf, Zack (November 14, 2023). "Christopher Nolan Says Buy 'Oppenheimer' on Blu-ray 'So No Evil Streaming Service Can Come Steal It From You': 'We Put a Lot of Care' Into Home Release". Variety. Archived from the original on November 27, 2023. Retrieved November 29, 2023. McCormack, Olivia (November 17, 2023). "Christopher Nolan talks streaming, actors and "Oppenheimer"". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on November 20, 2023. Retrieved November 29, 2023. Weprin, Alex (January 12, 2024). "Oppenheimer Gets Peacock Release Date as Streamer Licenses Other Christopher Nolan Films". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 13, 2024. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Staff (January 10, 2024). "'Oppenheimer' streaming on Prime Video Canada in February". Home with Brian. Archived from the original on January 19, 2024. Retrieved January 19, 2024. "Oppenheimer's OTT release: When and where to watch 2023's most celebrated movie". The Economic Times. March 16, 2024. Archived from the original on March 16, 2024. Retrieved March 16, 2024. "Top 2023 Movies at the Worldwide Box Office". The Numbers. Retrieved August 6, 2023. "'Oppenheimer' Passes 'Deadpool 2' to Become Second-Biggest R-Rated Movie in Global Box Office History". Collider. September 2, 2023. Archived from the original on September 7, 2023. Retrieved September 11, 2023. Pulver, Andrew (September 18, 2023). "Oppenheimer overtakes Bohemian Rhapsody to become biggest biopic of all time". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on September 18, 2023. Retrieved September 19, 2023. McPherson, Chris (September 16, 2023). "'Oppenheimer' Will Surpass 'Bohemian Rhapsody' to Become Highest-Grossing Biopic Ever". Collider. Archived from the original on September 17, 2023. Retrieved September 17, 2023. Starkey, Adam (August 30, 2023). "'Oppenheimer' beats 'Barbie' at global box office for first time". NME. Archived from the original on August 30, 2023. Retrieved August 30, 2023. Hirwani, Peony (August 8, 2023). "Oppenheimer becomes highest-grossing WWII film of all time". The Independent. Archived from the original on August 11, 2023. Retrieved August 10, 2023. "'Oppenheimer' sets unique box office record". NME. August 18, 2023. Archived from the original on August 27, 2023. Retrieved August 27, 2023. "Christopher Nolan's 'Oppenheimer' Sets Imax Re-Release After Huge $183 Million Summer Run". Variety. October 31, 2023. Archived from the original on October 31, 2023. Retrieved November 1, 2023. "Christopher Nolan's Oppenheimer becomes top 5 IMAX movie of all time, joins Avengers Endgame, Avatar". WION. August 22, 2023. Archived from the original on September 3, 2023. Retrieved August 27, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 18, 2023). "'Barbie' & 'Oppenheimer' To Rattle The Globe With Combined $260M+ Opening – Box Office Preview". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 18, 2023. Retrieved July 18, 2023. Fuster, Jeremy (July 17, 2023). "AMC Says 'Barbie,' 'Oppenheimer' Double-Feature Ticket Sales Have Doubled in Past Week". Archived from the original on July 20, 2023. Retrieved July 17, 2023. Klein, Brennan (July 29, 2023). "Oppenheimer Box Office Overtakes More Christopher Nolan Movies In Just 10 Days". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 29, 2023. Retrieved July 29, 2023. Whitten, Sarah (July 23, 2023). "'Barbenheimer' tops $235 million in domestic debut, eyes second-highest box office weekend ever". CNBC. Archived from the original on December 12, 2023. Retrieved March 13, 2024. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 23, 2023). "'Barbie' Still Gorgeous With Best YTD $155M Opening; 'Oppenheimer' Ticking To $80M+ In Incredible $300M+ U.S. Box Office Weekend – Sunday AM Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 21, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. "Oppenheimer Box Office Opening Is Bigger Than Inception, Interstellar, & All But 3 Nolan Movies". ScreenRant. July 23, 2023. Archived from the original on July 23, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 23, 2023). "'Barbie' & 'Oppenheimer': A Rundown Of All The Box Office Records Broken". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 23, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 30, 2023). "'Barbie', 'Oppenheimer' & 'Haunted Mansion' Fuel Record Final Weekend In July With $217M+: How Long Does This Box Office Boom Last As Strikes Continue? – Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 29, 2023. Retrieved July 30, 2023. Rubin, Rebecca (July 30, 2023). "Box Office: 'Barbie' Scores Massive $93 Million, 'Oppenheimer' Adds Huge $46 Million in Second Weekends". Variety. Archived from the original on July 30, 2023. Retrieved July 30, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 6, 2023). "2023 Domestic Box Office Surges Past $6 Billion This Weekend Due To 'Barbie', 'Oppenheimer', 'Turtles' & 'Meg 2' As Strikes Continue – Sunday Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 5, 2023. Retrieved August 6, 2023. McPherson, Chris (August 16, 2023). "'Oppenheimer' Poised to Become Highest-Grossing Movie in Domestic History To Never Top Box Office". Collider. Archived from the original on August 16, 2023. Retrieved August 17, 2023. Anderson, Jenna (August 16, 2023). "Oppenheimer Set to Break a Unique Box Office Record". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on August 17, 2023. Retrieved August 17, 2023. "Oppenheimer (2023) – Financial Information". The Numbers. Archived from the original on August 30, 2023. Retrieved August 30, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (January 28, 2024). "'The Beekeeper' Looks To Sting 'Mean Girls' During Woeful Weekend Without Wide Releases; How 'Barbenheimer' & Oscar Best Pic Noms Fared – Sunday Box Office Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 27, 2024. Retrieved January 28, 2024. "Cillian Murphy wins best actor as Oppenheimer sweeps awards". BBC News. March 10, 2024. Archived from the original on March 12, 2024. Retrieved March 13, 2024. Tartaglione, Nancy (July 24, 2023). "'Barbie' An Even Bigger Knockout With $356M+ Global Bow, 'Oppenheimer' Increases Genius To $180M+ WW Launch – International Box Office Actuals Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 26, 2023. Retrieved July 24, 2023. Tartaglione, Nancy. "'Barbie' Pirouettes To Powerhouse $775M Global; 'Oppenheimer' A Phenom At $400M WW – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 31, 2023. Retrieved July 30, 2023. Tartaglione, Nancy (August 7, 2023). "'Barbie' & 'Oppenheimer' Reach Major Milestones, 'Meg 2' Chomps On $142M Global Debut; Disney Tops $4B WW For The Year So Far – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 12, 2023. Retrieved August 7, 2023. Tartaglione, Nancy. "'Barbie' Sails Past $1.18B Global, 'Oppenheimer' Closing In On $650M, 'Meg 2' Tops $250M & 'Gran Turismo' Starts Early Overseas Engines – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 31, 2023. Retrieved August 13, 2023. Tartaglione, Nancy (August 20, 2023). "'Oppenheimer' Rises To $718M Global, 'Barbie' Basks In $1.28B, 'Meg 2' Chomps Past $300M; 'Blue Beetle' Scurries To $18M Overseas Start – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 20, 2023. Retrieved August 20, 2023. Tartaglione, Nancy (August 27, 2023). "'Barbie' Reaches $1.34B, Will Become WB's Biggest Movie Ever Worldwide On Monday; 'Oppenheimer' Nears $800M Global – International Box Office". Deadline. Archived from the original on August 28, 2023. Retrieved August 28, 2023. Tartaglione, Nancy (September 3, 2023). "'Equalizer 3' Clocks Franchise-Best WW Debut; 'Oppenheimer' Reaches $851M Global With Strong China Start, 'Barbie' Dances To $1.38B+ – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 4, 2023. Retrieved September 3, 2023. "Hiroshima residents hope Oppenheimer Oscars draw attention to A-bomb reality". The Straits Times. March 11, 2024. ISSN 0585-3923. Archived from the original on March 12, 2024. Retrieved March 12, 2024. "'Oppenheimer' to show in Japan in 2024 after months of controversy". The Washington Post. Cain, Sian; Holmes, Oliver (August 1, 2023). "Barbenheimer backlash: Warner Bros apologises after its Japan arm complains". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved March 31, 2024. Chang, Justin (August 11, 2023). "'Oppenheimer' doesn't show us Hiroshima and Nagasaki. That's an act of rigor not erasure". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 23, 2023. Retrieved August 23, 2023. "'Barbenheimer' box office shows audiences want more movies without a Jedi or superhero". Fortune. July 25, 2023. Archived from the original on August 2, 2023. Retrieved October 15, 2023. "Barbie vs Oppenheimer at Box Office: Who won at the preview and what else now?". The Economic Times. July 22, 2023. ISSN 0013-0389. Archived from the original on October 16, 2023. Retrieved October 15, 2023. "Oppenheimer sets another box office record". Digital Spy. August 6, 2023. Archived from the original on August 19, 2023. Retrieved October 15, 2023. McPherson, Chris (July 28, 2023). "'Barbenheimer' Set for Biggest Second Weekend Presales of All Time". Collider. Archived from the original on July 31, 2023. Retrieved October 15, 2023. "Why Christopher Nolan is "Especially Honored" By Oppenheimer's Latest Award Win". Syfy. October 11, 2023. Archived from the original on October 16, 2023. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Dubey, Nivedita (July 20, 2023). "Oppenheimer's Rotten Tomatoes Score Is Christopher Nolan's Best". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on September 24, 2023. Retrieved September 27, 2023. Atinon, Amery. "OPPENHEIMER is a Chilling, Brilliant Character Study that Lands Among Nolan's Best". University of Melbourne Student Union. Archived from the original on October 16, 2023. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Fuge, Jonathan (July 20, 2023). "Christopher Nolan Says It Would Be a 'Privilege' to Direct a James Bond Movie". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on July 24, 2023. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Bentz, Adam (September 19, 2023). "Oppenheimer's Box Office Success Hailed By Denis Villeneuve & Paul Thomas Anderson". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 29, 2023. Retrieved October 15, 2023. "Oppenheimer First Reviews: Breathtaking, Ballsy and One of the Best Biopics Ever Made". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on July 19, 2023. Retrieved July 20, 2023. Couch, Aaron (July 11, 2023). "'Oppenheimer': First Reactions After Paris Premiere". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 22, 2023. Retrieved July 23, 2023. McPherson, Chris (August 8, 2023). "Christopher Nolan's 'Oppenheimer' Screenplay Is Selling Out". Collider. Archived from the original on August 29, 2023. Retrieved September 27, 2023. Wilkes, Emma (July 24, 2023). "The battle of Barbenheimer – which film came out on top?". Rolling Stone UK. Archived from the original on August 5, 2023. Retrieved September 27, 2023. Lee, Benjamin (July 12, 2023). "'A spectacular achievement':first reactions praise Oppenheimer". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved September 27, 2023. ""Oppenheimer" Review Round-Up: One of the Best Biopics Ever Made". Motion Picture Association. July 20, 2023. Archived from the original on September 27, 2023. Retrieved September 27, 2023. "10 Reasons why Christopher Nolan's 'Oppenheimer' is touted as the best film of the century". Hindustan Times. July 19, 2023. Archived from the original on August 18, 2023. Retrieved September 11, 2023. "Oppenheimer". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved March 27, 2024. "Oppenheimer". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved August 26, 2023. Roeper, Richard (July 19, 2023). "'Oppenheimer' a momentous achievement, at times pensive, at times explosive". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on July 20, 2023. Retrieved July 20, 2023. Jackson, Matthew (July 19, 2023). "Oppenheimer review: Christopher Nolan delivers his masterpiece". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on July 20, 2023. Retrieved July 20, 2023. Jolin, Dan (July 19, 2023). "Oppenheimer Review". Empire. Archived from the original on July 21, 2023. Retrieved July 20, 2023. Suderman, Peter (July 21, 2023). "Christopher Nolan's 'Oppenheimer' is an intimate epic about the man who built the bomb". Reason. Archived from the original on July 25, 2023. Retrieved July 26, 2023. Zoller Seitz, Matt. "Oppenheimer movie review & film summary". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on July 20, 2023. Retrieved July 21, 2023. Travers, Peter (July 21, 2023). "Review: 'Oppenheimer' emerges as a monumental achievement on the march into screen history". Good Morning America. Archived from the original on July 21, 2023. Retrieved July 21, 2023. James, Caryn (July 19, 2023). "Oppenheimer review: A "magnificent" story of a tragic American genius". BBC Culture. Archived from the original on July 19, 2023. Retrieved July 21, 2023. Adlakha, Siddhant (July 19, 2023). "Oppenheimer Review". IGN. Archived from the original on July 28, 2023. Retrieved July 29, 2023. "Oppenheimer Review: A Cinematic Achievement Of Blinding Brilliance". NDTV.com. Archived from the original on July 21, 2023. Retrieved July 21, 2023. "The 10 Best Drama Movies of the 2020s So Far, Ranked". Collider. August 24, 2023. Archived from the original on August 24, 2023. Retrieved August 24, 2023. Lowry, Brian (July 20, 2023). "'Oppenheimer' unleashes Christopher Nolan on the 'father' of the atomic bomb". CNN. Archived from the original on July 21, 2023. Retrieved July 21, 2023. "Analysis: Women in physics often go unrepresented in popular media. Here's why that's a detriment to the field". pbs.org. July 16, 2023. Archived from the original on July 19, 2023. Mason, Brett (July 28, 2023). "Americans had shelved the A-bomb until an Australian broke ranks". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on July 29, 2023. Retrieved July 30, 2023. Brody, Richard (July 26, 2023). "'Oppenheimer' Is Ultimately a History Channel Movie with Fancy Editing". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on August 4, 2023. Retrieved February 20, 2024. Blauvelt, Christian (December 11, 2023). "2023 Critics Poll: The Best Films and Performances, According to 158 Critics from Around the World". IndieWire. Archived from the original on December 11, 2023. Retrieved December 12, 2023. "Best Movies of 2023". CriticsTop10. Archived from the original on December 18, 2023. Retrieved December 28, 2023. Sharf, Zack (August 1, 2023). "Oliver Stone Turned Down an Oppenheimer Movie, Calls Christopher Nolan's Film a 'Classic' He 'Never Believed Could Be Made in This Climate'". Variety. Archived from the original on January 17, 2024. Retrieved January 17, 2024. Sharf, Zack (July 18, 2023). "'Oppenheimer' Is the 'Best' and 'Most Important Film of This Century,' Raves Paul Schrader: 'This One Blows the Door Off the Hinges'". Variety. Archived from the original on January 18, 2024. Retrieved January 17, 2024. Bahr, Lindsay (September 19, 2023). "For filmmakers, 'Oppenheimer's' $900M-plus haul is an important moment for Hollywood and theaters". Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 19, 2024. Retrieved January 18, 2024. Stern, Marlow (August 7, 2023). "Steven Soderbergh Talks Helping Christopher Nolan and Eating the Rich". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 7, 2023. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "'Godzilla Minus One' director responds to 'Oppenheimer' plot as a 'person of Japanese ancestry'". NBC News. March 11, 2024. "Oscar Ivanissevich and President Truman View Painting of General San Martin, a Gift from Argentina". Harry S. Truman Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on August 14, 2023. Retrieved December 8, 2023. Wille, Germán (July 24, 2023). "¿Error de fechas? La historia detrás del prócer argentino que aparece en la película Oppenheimer" [Date error? The story behind the Argentine hero who appears in the film Oppenheimer]. La Nación (in Spanish). Archived from the original on December 2, 2023. Retrieved December 8, 2023. Jones, Nate (July 25, 2023). "What's Fact and What's Fiction in Oppenheimer?". Vulture. Archived from the original on August 7, 2023. Retrieved August 17, 2023. Diaz-Maurin, François (July 28, 2023). "A Manhattan Project historian comments on 'Oppenheimer'". Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. Archived from the original on August 6, 2023. Retrieved August 19, 2023. McArdle, Tommy (July 25, 2023). "Eagle-Eyed Historians Spot Mistake in 'Oppenheimer' Involving the American Flag". People. Archived from the original on September 4, 2023. Retrieved March 11, 2024. Chilton, Louis (July 28, 2023). "'A serious accusation': Did Oppenheimer's apple-poisoning incident really happen? It's complicated". The Independent. Archived from the original on August 26, 2023. Retrieved August 26, 2023. Schweber, Silvan S. (2008). Einstein and Oppenheimer: The Meaning of Genius. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. pp. 265–274. ISBN 978-0-674-04335-0. Archived from the original on September 10, 2023. Retrieved September 7, 2023. "J. Robert Oppenheimer's Interview". Atomic Heritage Foundation - Nuclear Museum. Archived from the original on January 4, 2024. Retrieved March 14, 2024. De Witte, Melissa (July 26, 2023). "Oppenheimer and the pursuit of nuclear disarmament". Stanford News. Archived from the original on September 13, 2023. Retrieved September 16, 2023. Gilinsky, Victor (July 28, 2023). "Thought-provoked by 'Oppenheimer'". Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. Archived from the original on August 6, 2023. Retrieved September 23, 2023. Goldston, Robert J. (August 17, 2023). "Widening the field of view on 'Oppenheimer'". Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists. Archived from the original on September 27, 2023. Retrieved September 27, 2023. Gardner, Kate (August 3, 2023). "Oppenheimer the movie: Physics World writers give their verdict". physicsworld.com. Archived from the original on February 20, 2024. Retrieved February 20, 2024. Rushton, Griffin (July 30, 2023). "Senate approves New Mexico Downwinders' inclusion in RECA amendment". KOB. Archived from the original on July 31, 2023. Retrieved July 30, 2023. "2024 | Oscars.org | Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences". www.oscars.org. Archived from the original on January 23, 2024. Retrieved January 23, 2024. "SAG Awards 2024: See the Complete List of Winners". Archived from the original on February 27, 2024. Retrieved March 1, 2024. Couch, Aaron (January 23, 2024). "'Oppenheimer': Big Oscar Noms Mark a First for Christopher Nolan". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 1, 2024. Retrieved March 5, 2024. Lang, Brent; Moreau, Jordan (March 10, 2024). "'Oppenheimer' Reigns at Oscars With Seven Wins, Including Best Picture and Director: Full Winners List". Variety. Archived from the original on March 11, 2024. Retrieved March 10, 2024. Ortiz, Andi; A. Lincoln, Ross (March 11, 2024). "All 32 First-Time Winners at the 2024 Oscars". TheWrap. Archived from the original on March 12, 2024. Retrieved March 12, 2024. Blauvelt, Christian (March 10, 2024). "'Oppenheimer' Wins Best Picture Oscar". IndieWire. Archived from the original on March 11, 2024. Retrieved March 12, 2024. Warner, Kara (January 8, 2023). "Where to Watch Every Golden Globes 2024 Winner". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on January 8, 2024. Retrieved January 9, 2023. Shoard, Catherine (December 11, 2023). "Golden Globes nominations 2024: Barbie leads the pack with Oppenheimer hot on heels". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on December 12, 2023. Retrieved December 12, 2023. Pedersen, Erik (January 7, 2024). "'Oppenheimer' & 'Poor Things' Win Top Movie Prizes At Golden Globes – Complete Winners List". Deadline. Archived from the original on January 7, 2024. Retrieved January 7, 2024. Lewis, Hilary (December 6, 2023). "National Board of Review Names 'Killers of the Flower Moon' Best Film of 2023". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 7, 2023. Retrieved December 6, 2023. Bergeson, Samantha (December 7, 2023). "AFI Names 10 Best Films and TV Series of 2023: 'Barbie,' 'Past Lives,' 'Oppenheimer,' 'Succession,' 'Beef,' and More". IndieWire. Archived from the original on December 8, 2023. Retrieved December 9, 2023. Shanfeld, Ethan (January 15, 2024). "'Oppenheimer' Leads Critics Choice Awards With 8 Wins, 'Barbie' Scores 6 — Full Winners List". Variety. Archived from the original on January 15, 2024. Retrieved January 15, 2024. Lawless, Jill (January 18, 2024). "Oppenheimer and Poor Things lead otherwise surprising set of Bafta nominations". The Independent. Archived from the original on January 18, 2024. Retrieved January 18, 2024. Hipes, Patrick (February 5, 2024). "Avatar: The Way Of Water, Oppenheimer, Star Trek: Picard Among Winners At Saturn Awards". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved February 6, 2024. del Barco, Mandalit (November 10, 2023). "2024 Grammy nominations led by SZA, Billie Eilish and Phoebe Bridgers". NPR Music. Archived from the original on November 28, 2023. Retrieved December 7, 2023. Vanhoose, Benjamin (February 5, 2024). "Barbenheimer at the Grammys! Barbie and Oppenheimer Both Win at 2024 Grammy Awards Ahead of Oscars". People. Archived from the original on February 19, 2024. Retrieved March 6, 2024. Haage, Anthony (March 5, 2024). "Oppenheimer's Best Picture Odds Say It's a 2024 Oscars Winner – Here's Why It's Not". Gambling Sites. Retrieved March 6, 2024. Johnson-Roehr, S. N. (March 7, 2024). "The Annotated Oppenheimer". JSTOR Daily. Retrieved March 8, 2024. Official website Oppenheimer at IMDb Oppenheimer at AllMovie Portals:  Film  United States  United Kingdom  Biographies  Science