The Translators (French: Les Traducteurs) is a 2019 French mystery thriller film directed by Régis Roinsard [fr]. The publication of the last part of the globally successful book trilogy Dedalus is imminent. In order to ensure a smooth start without data leaks or spoilers, the translation of the book is to be carried out in complete isolation and under strict security precautions. The nine translators are therefore taken to a bunker to translate the book into their respective languages. Since the identity of the successful author Oscar Brach himself is unknown, the translation project is managed and carried out by his publisher Éric Angstrom. The translators receive only small sections of the secret book each day, which are to be translated gradually. After just a few days, however, the first ten pages are published on the Internet by an unknown person. In addition, Angstrom receives a ransom note with a demand for several million euros in order to prevent the publication of further pages. As a result, Angstrom continues to put pressure on the translators and terrorize them in the hope of identifying the blackmailer. This leads to growing mistrust within the group and finally to the suicide of the Danish translator Tuxen. Meanwhile, through flashbacks, the viewer learns of the English translator Alex Goodman's plan to steal the manuscript. To do this, he teams up with some of his fellow translators and seems to have stolen and copied the book from Angstrom even before the start of the translation project. As more and more pages of the book are published, the situation in the bunker escalates more and more, and when Angstrom shoots Goodman and the Russian translator, the previously loyal security forces also turn against the publisher, who is then arrested. Goodman visits the prisoner some time later and reveals to him his identity as Oscar Brach. In protest against Angstrom's methods and greed, the successful author has himself mingled with the translators in order to expose Angstrom. During this conversation, Angstrom accidentally reveals that he killed Goodman's father. Due to the confession and other events, Angstrom remains in prison. Goodman's true identity is thus secured and the murder of his father is avenged. Lambert Wilson: Éric Angstrom, the publisher Alex Lawther: Alex Goodman, the English translator Olga Kurylenko: Katerina Anisinova, the Russian translator Riccardo Scamarcio: Dario Farelli, the Italian translator Sidse Babett Knudsen: Helene Tuxen, the Danish translator Eduardo Noriega: Javier Casal, the Spanish translator Anna Maria Sturm [de]: Ingrid Korbel, the German translator Frédéric Chau: Chen Yao, the Chinese translator Maria Leite: Telma Alves, the Portuguese translator Manolis Mavromatakis: Konstantinos Kedrinos, the Greek translator Sara Giraudeau: Rose-Marie Houeix, Éric Angstrom's assistant Patrick Bauchau: Georges Fontaine, the bookseller Sergueï Nesterenko: Marat Ilya Nikitenko: Ivan Miglen Mirtchev: Sergei Michel Bompoil: Robert Monteil Nicolas Koretzky: Philippe Arthur Vinciane Millereau: Carole Bauer Jade Phan-Gia: Lucie Smadja Marc Arnaud: Paul Sierra Irina Muluile: Inspector Camara Stéphane Pézerat: Inspector Pulaski Kester Lovelace: British inspector Jacob Hauberg Lohmann: Helene Tuxen's husband Alasdair Noble: young Alex Goodman Suzana Joaquim Mausdlay: Lisbon Airport attendant This movie was inspired by the unique translation operation of Dan Brown's Inferno in 2013, which was conceived to prevent leaking and "guarantee the simultaneous publication of the novel worldwide". The translators were divided into two groups and worked from Milan and London respectively. In 2017, the same operation was repeated for the translation of Origin, the fifth book in the Robert Langdon series, with 26 translators working together in Barcelona. https://www.jpbox-office.com/fichfilm.php?id=19830 https://www.boxofficemojo.com/title/tt6270534/?ref_=bo_se_r_1 "The Translators". Les Arcs Film Festival. 6 November 2018. Retrieved 31 March 2020. Mintzer, Jordan (30 January 2020). "'The Translators' ('Les Traducteurs'): Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 31 March 2020. Ayuso, Julia Webster (30 April 2020). "Literary lockdown: how translating a Dan Brown novel made for a thriller plot". the Guardian. Retrieved 16 January 2022. The Translators at IMDb v t e