The Metropolitan City of Palermo (Italian: città metropolitana di Palermo; Sicilian: citati metrupulitana di Palermu) is a metropolitan city in Sicily, Italy. Its capital is the city of Palermo. It replaced the province of Palermo and comprises the city of Palermo and other 82 comuni (sg.: comune). It was first created by the reform of local authorities (Law 142/1990) and then established by regional law on 15 August 2015. The Metropolitan City faces the Tyrrhenian Sea on the north, while on the west it is bordered by the province of Trapani, on the south by the province of Agrigento and by that of Caltanissetta, to the east by the Metropolitan City of Messina and the province of Enna. The island of Ustica is also included in the metropolitan territory. The Metropolitan City includes 82 comuni (sg.: comune): Alia Alimena Aliminusa Altavilla Milicia Altofonte Bagheria Balestrate Baucina Belmonte Mezzagno Blufi Bisacquino Bolognetta Bompietro Borgetto Caccamo Caltavuturo Campofelice Di Fitalia Campofelice Di Roccella Campofiorito Camporeale Capaci Carini Castelbuono Casteldaccia Castellana Sicula Castronovo di Sicilia Cefalà Diana Cefalù Cerda Chiusa Sclafani Ciminna Cinisi Collesano Contessa Entellina Corleone Ficarazzi Gangi Geraci Siculo Giardinello Giuliana Godrano Gratteri Isnello Isola delle Femmine Lascari Lercara Friddi Marineo Mezzojuso Misilmeri Monreale Montelepre Montemaggiore Belsito Palazzo Adriano Palermo Partinico Petralia Soprana Petralia Sottana Piana degli Albanesi Polizzi Generosa Pollina Prizzi Roccamena Roccapalumba San Cipirello San Giuseppe Jato San Mauro Castelverde Santa Cristina Gela Santa Flavia Sciara Scillato Sclafani Bagni Termini Imerese Terrasini Torretta Trabia Trappeto Ustica Valledolmo Ventimiglia di Sicilia Vicari Villabate Villafrati The Metropolitan City is served by three motorways, two of which start in Palermo: A19 to Catania and Termini Imerese; A20, departing from the former and leading to Messina; and A29, to Mazara del Vallo and Trapani. Railroads include the Palermo-Messina and the Palermo-Catania. There are two airports: Palermo–Boccadifalco and Palermo Punta Raisi. Province of Palermo Regions and Cities > Regional Statistics > Regional Economy > Regional Gross Domestic Product (Small regions TL3), OECD.Stats. Accessed on 16 November 2018. "Codici delle città metropolitane al 1° gennaio 2017". www.istat.it (in Italian). 23 December 2016. "Città metropolitane-legge 4 agosto 2015 n 15" (PDF) (in Italian). Wikimedia Commons has media related to Metropolitan city of Palermo. (in Italian) Metropolitan City of Palermo official website