The Metropolitan City of Catania (Italian: città metropolitana di Catania) is a metropolitan city in Sicily, southern Italy. Its capital is the city of Catania. It replaced the province of Catania and comprises the city of Catania and other 57 comuni (sg.: comune). It was first created by the reform of local authorities (Law 142/1990) and then established by the regional law 15 August 2015. The metropolitan city borders with the Metropolitan City of Messina (the former Province of Messina), the Province of Enna, the Province of Syracuse, the Province of Ragusa and the Province of Caltanissetta. Part of its territory includes the Metropolitan area of Catania. The Metropolitan City faces the Ionian Sea to the east, the Metropolitan City of Messina to the north, the Province of Enna and the Province of Caltanissetta to the west, the Province of Siracusa and the Province of Ragusa to the south. Mount Etna, Europe's largest active volcano, is located in the province. Aci Bonaccorsi Aci Castello Aci Catena Aci Sant'Antonio Acireale Adrano Belpasso Biancavilla Bronte Calatabiano Caltagirone Camporotondo Etneo Castel di Iudica Castiglione di Sicilia Catania Fiumefreddo di Sicilia Giarre Grammichele Gravina di Catania Licodia Eubea Linguaglossa Maletto Maniace Mascali Mascalucia Mazzarrone Militello in Val di Catania Milo Mineo Mirabella Imbaccari Misterbianco Motta Sant'Anastasia Nicolosi Palagonia Paternò Pedara Piedimonte Etneo Raddusa Ragalna Ramacca Randazzo Riposto San Cono San Giovanni la Punta San Gregorio di Catania San Michele di Ganzaria San Pietro Clarenza Sant'Agata li Battiati Sant'Alfio Santa Maria di Licodia Santa Venerina Scordia Trecastagni Tremestieri Etneo Valverde Viagrande Vizzini Zafferana Etnea There are many major roads that cross the territory of the province. The S.S 114 (Messina-Catania-Siracusa) links many of the coastal towns from Messina to Siracusa, the S.S 121 (Catania-Caltanissetta-Palermo), which links the east coast to Palermo through the major towns of Misterbianco, Paternò and Adrano. The S.S 417 (Catania-Gela) links Catania to the towns of Gela and Caltagirone. There are also the A18 Messina-Catania and A19 Catania-Palermo motorways that pass through the province. The S.S 114 and S.S 192 (Catania-Enna) start from the Catania by pass whilst the SS.514 runs through the southern part of the province and connects to Ragusa. The main railroad is that connecting Messina to Syracuse. Ferries are active from the port of Catania to Livorno, Malta and Naples. Province of Catania Regions and Cities > Regional Statistics > Regional Economy > Regional Gross Domestic Product (Small regions TL3), OECD.Stats. Accessed on 16 November 2018. "Codici delle città metropolitane al 1° gennaio 2017". www.istat.it (in Italian). 23 December 2016. "Città metropolitane-legge 4 agosto 2015 n 15" (PDF) (in Italian). Official website (in Italian)