German studies is the field of humanities that researches, documents and disseminates German language and literature in both its historic and present forms. Academic departments of German studies often include classes on German culture, German history, and German politics in addition to the language and literature component. Common German names for the field are Germanistik, Deutsche Philologie, and Deutsche Sprachwissenschaft und Literaturwissenschaft. In English, the terms Germanistics or Germanics are sometimes used (mostly by Germans), but the subject is more often referred to as German studies, German language and literature, or German philology. Modern German studies is usually seen as a combination of two sub-disciplines: German linguistics and Germanophone literature studies. German linguistics is traditionally called philology in Germany, as there is something of a difference between philologists and linguists.[vague] It is roughly divided as follows: Old High German (Althochdeutsch) 8th–11th centuries Middle High German (Mittelhochdeutsch) 11th–14th centuries Early New High German (Frühneuhochdeutsch) 14th–17th centuries Modern German (Standard German, German dialectology) 18th–21st centuries In addition, the discipline examines German under various aspects: the way it is spoken and written, i.e., spelling; declination; vocabulary; sentence structure; texts; etc. It compares the various manifestations such as social groupings (slang, written texts, etc.) and geographical groupings (dialects, etc.). The study of German literature is divided into two parts:[citation needed] Ältere Deutsche Literaturwissenschaft deals with the period from the beginnings of German in the early Middle Ages up to post-Medieval times around AD 1750, while the modern era is covered by Neuere Deutsche Literaturwissenschaft. The field systematically examines German literature in terms of genre, form, content, and motifs as well as looking at it historically by author and epoch. Important areas include edition philology, history of literature, and textual interpretation. The relationships of German literature to the literatures of other languages (e.g. reception and mutual influences) and historical contexts are also important areas of concentration. The Penguin Dictionary of Literary Terms and Literary Theory: Fourth Edition (ISBN 0-14-051363-9) is printed in English but contains many German-language literary terms that apply cross-culturally in the field of literary criticism; quite a few of the in terms in the book originated in German but have since been adopted by English-language critics and scholars. At least in Germany and Austria, German studies in academia play a central role in the education of German school teachers. Their courses usually cover four fields: Linguistics of German (Sprachwissenschaft) German language and literature of up to about 1750 (Ältere Sprache und Literatur) German language and literature since approximately 1750 (Neuere Literaturwissenschaft) Specifics of the didactics of teaching German (Fachdidaktik) Several universities offer specialized curricula for school teachers, usually called "Deutsch (Lehramt)". In Germany, they are leading to a two step exam and certificate by the federated states of Germany cultural authorities, called the Staatsexamen ("state exam"). As an unsystematic field of interest for individual scholars, German studies can be traced back to Tacitus' Germania. The publication and study of legal and historical source material, such as Medieval Bible translations, were all undertaken during the German Renaissance of the sixteenth century, truly initiating the field of German studies. As an independent university subject, German studies was introduced at the beginning of the nineteenth century by Georg Friedrich Benecke, the Brothers Grimm, and Karl Lachmann. Austria Institute for German Studies (Institut für Germanistik), University of Vienna Bénin Département d'Etudes Germanique (DEG), Université d'Abomey-Calavi Botswana Department of Education and Language Skills, Botho University Canada Department of German Language and Literature, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario Department of Germanic Languages and Literatures, University of Toronto China Department of German, Beijing Foreign Studies University, Haidian District, Beijing Institute of German and European Studies, Tongji University, Yangpu District, Shanghai Czech Republic Department of German and Austrian Studies, Charles University in Prague Department of German Studies, Palacký University in Olomouc India Jawaharlal Nehru University India Ireland Department of Germanic Studies, Trinity College, The University of Dublin, Ireland Department of German, National University of Ireland – University College Cork, Cork, Ireland Israel Bucerius Institute for Research of Contemporary German History and Society – University of Haifa Haifa Center for German and European Studies – University of Haifa Germany "German studies" is taught at many German universities. Some examples are: Germanistisches Seminar der Universität Bonn, Institut für Germanistik, vergleichende Literatur- und Kulturwissenschaft, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn Institut für deutsche Sprache und Literatur I & II, Albertus-Magnus-Universität zu Köln Institut für Germanistik I & II, Hamburg University Germanistisches Seminar, Heidelberg University Faculty of Modern Languages Institut für deutsche Philologie, Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich Germanistisches Institut, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster Deutsches Seminar, Tübingen University Faculty of Modern Languages Greece Faculty of German Language and Literature, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens School of German Language and Literature, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki Russia Department of Area Studies, Moscow State University South Africa School of Languages and Literatures, University of Cape Town Department of Afrikaans and Dutch, German and French, University of the Free State School of Languages, North-West University Ancient Modern Languages Cultures, University of Pretoria School of Languages and Literatures, Rhodes University Department of Modern Foreign Languages, University of Stellenbosch Department of Foreign Languages, University of the Western Cape Department of Literature, Language and Media, University of the Witwatersrand Spain Área de Filología Alemana, University of Salamanca Uganda Department of European and Oriental Languages, German Studies, Makerere University United Kingdom (UK) Department of German, University of Oxford Department of German, University of Cambridge Department of German, University of Manchester Department of German Studies, University of Warwick United States of America (USA) Department of German Studies, University of Arizona, Tucson German Program of the Department of World Languages & Literatures, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville Department of German Studies, Brown University Department of German, University of California, Berkeley Department of Germanic Languages, University of California, Los Angeles Department of German Studies, University of Cincinnati Department of Germanic and Slavic Languages and Literatures, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO Department of Germanic Languages, Columbia University Department of German Studies, Cornell University Department of German Studies, Dartmouth College Department of German, Duke University Department of German, Georgetown University Department of Germanic Languages and Literatures, Harvard University Department of Germanic Studies, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL Department of Germanic Languages and Literatures, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Department of Germanic Studies, Indiana University German and Scandinavian Studies, University of Massachusetts Amherst Department of Germanic Languages and Literatures, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI Department of German, Scandinavian, and Dutch, University of Minnesota Department of German, New York University Department of Germanic and Slavic Languages and Literatures, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Department of German, Northwestern University Department of Germanic Languages and Literatures, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio Department of Germanic Languages and Literatures, University of Pennsylvania Department of Germanic and Slavic Languages, Pennsylvania State University, Pennsylvania Department of Germanic Languages and Literature, University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania Department of German, Princeton University Department of Germanic Studies, University of Texas at Austin Department of Classical & Modern Languages, Truman State University, Kirksville, Missouri Department of Germanic and Slavic Languages, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee Department of Germanic and Russian, University of Vermont, Burlington, Vermont Department of Germanic Languages and Literatures, University of Virginia Department of Germanics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington Department of Germanic Languages and Literatures, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri Department of German, Nordic, and Slavic, University of Wisconsin – Madison Department of German, Yale University Department of Linguistics & Germanic, Slavic, Asian and African Languages, Michigan State University Zimbabwe Department of Languages, Literature and Culture University of Zimbabwe Area studies German National Honor Society (Delta Epsilon Phi) in the US German Studies Association Germanic philology Germanisches Nationalmuseum New Objectivity Sturm und Drang Atlas Deutsche Sprache [CD-ROM]. Berlin: Directmedia Publishing. 2004. Die Deutschen Klassiker (CD-ROM). Berman, Antoine: L'épreuve de l'étranger. Culture et traduction dans l'Allemagne romantique: Herder, Goethe, Schlegel, Novalis, Humboldt, Schleiermacher, Hölderlin. Paris: Gallimard, 1984. ISBN 978-2-07-070076-9. Beutin, Wolfgang. Deutsche Literaturgeschichte. Von den Anfängen bis zur Gegenwart. Stuttgart: J. B. Metzler, 1992. Bogdal, Klaus-Michael, Kai Kauffmann, & Georg Mein. BA-Studium Germanistik. Ein Lehrbuch. In collaboration with Meinolf Schumacher and Johannes Volmert. Reinbek bei Hamburg: Rowohlt, 2008. ISBN 978-3-499-55682-1 Burger, Harald. Sprache der Massenmedien. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1984. Ernst, Peter. Germanistische Sprachwissenschaft. Vienna: WUV, 2004. Fohrmann, Jürgen & Wilhelm Voßkamp, eds. Wissenschaftsgeschichte der Germanistik im 19. Jahrhundert. Stuttgart: J. B. Metzler, 1994. Hartweg, Frédéric G. Frühneuhochdeutsch. Eine Einführung in die deutsche Sprache des Spätmittelalters und der frühen Neuzeit. Tübingen: Niemeyer, 2005. Hermand, Jost. Geschichte der Germanistik. Reinbek bei Hamburg: Rowohlt, 1994. ISBN 978-3-499-55534-3 Hickethier, Knut. Film- und Fernsehanalyse. Stuttgart: J. B. Metzler, 1993. Hickethier, Knut, ed. Aspekte der Fernsehanalyse. Methoden und Modelle. Hamburg: Lit, 1994. Hohendahl, Peter Uwe. German Studies in the United States: A Historical Handbook. New York: Modern Language Association of America, 2003. Kanzog, Klaus. Einführung in die Filmphilologie. Munich: Schaudig, Bauer, Ledig, 1991. Muckenhaupt, Manfred: Text und Bild. Grundfragen der Beschreibung von Text-Bild-Kommunikation aus sprachwissenschaftlicher Sicht. Tübingen: Gunter Narr, 1986. Prokop, Dieter: Medienprodukte. Zugänge – Verfahren – Kritik. Tübingen: Gunter Narr, 1981. Schneider, Jost, ed. Methodengeschichte der Germanistik. Berlin: De Gruyter, 2009. Schumacher, Meinolf. Einführung in die deutsche Literatur des Mittelalters. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 2010. ISBN 978-3-534-19603-6 Shitanda, So. "Zur Vorgeschichte und Entstehung der deutschen Philologie im 19. Jh.: Karl Lachmann und die Brüder Grimm", in Literarische Problematisierung der Moderne. Medienprodukte : Zugänge-- Verfahren-- Kritik, ed. by Teruaki Takahashi. Munich: Iudicium, 1992. Van Cleve, John W. and A. Leslie Willson. Remarks on the Needed Reform of German Studies in the United States. Columbia, SC: Camden House, 1993. Acta Germanica Arbitrium German Life and Letters German Studies Review The Germanic Review Germanistik Germanistik in Ireland The German Quarterly Goethe Yearbook Journal of Austrian Studies The Journal of English and Germanic Philology Journal of Germanic Linguistics Lessing Yearbook Modern Language Notes (German Issue) Monatshefte Michigan Germanic Studies New German Critique Oxford German Studies Publications of the English Goethe Society Seminar Teaching German (Unterrichtspraxis) Text+Kritik Transit Zeitschrift für interkulturelle Germanistik Zeitschrift für Germanistik See e.g. the left navigation at the web page of one of the Cologne University German studies institutes at http://idsl1.phil-fak.uni-koeln.de/ "Deutschabteilung Benin". 16 May 2023. "Department of German Language & Literature". 9 February 2006. Archived from the original on 9 February 2006. "Germanic Languages and Literatures, University of Toronto". "Katedra německých a rakouských st. | IMS - Institut mezinárodních studií". ims.fsv.cuni.cz (in Czech). Retrieved 21 February 2021. "Katedra germanistiky". Katedra germanistiky (in Czech). Retrieved 21 February 2021. "Centre of German Studies". 4 April 2006. Archived from the original on 4 April 2006. "German - Trinity College Dublin". university. "German - University College Cork". University College Cork. "אוניברסיטת חיפה - הפקולטה למדעי הרוח I המרכז ללימודי גרמניה ואירופה - Home". hcges.haifa.ac.il. Retrieved 21 February 2021. "Germanistik Bonn". germanistik.uni-bonn.de. "Institut für deutsche Sprache & Literatur". idsl1.phil-fak.uni-koeln.de. Retrieved 21 February 2021. "German Language and Literature". 10 December 2005. Archived from the original on 10 December 2005. "Institut für Deutsche Philologie - LMU München". germanistik.uni-muenchen.de. Institut, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Germanistisches. "Germanistik - Germanistisches Institut". uni-muenster.de.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Welcome Page". www.gs.uoa.gr. Archived from the original on 2 September 2010. Retrieved 14 January 2022. "Αρχική σελίδα". del.auth.gr. http://www.ffl.msu.ru/en/about/structure "German Language and Literature at UCT". 16 May 2023. "Division German". 16 May 2023. "NWU German". 16 May 2023. "UP German". 17 May 2023. "German Studies - What, why how?". 16 May 2023. "Stellenbosch German Studies Programme". 16 May 2023. "UWC German". 16 May 2023. "Wits, Why study German?". 16 May 2023. http://www.usal.es/aleman[permanent dead link] "German Courses @ MAK". 16 May 2023. "Department of German Studies - University of Arizona". Department of German Studies - University of Arizona. "German at the UofA - University of Arkansas". german.uark.edu. "Department of German Studies - German Studies". brown.edu. "German Department, University of California, Berkeley". 8 February 2006. Archived from the original on 8 February 2006. "Home - Germanic Languages - UCLA". Germanic Languages - UCLA. "Germanic & Slavic Languages & Literatures". Germanic & Slavic Languages & Literatures. "Department of Germanic Languages". germanic.columbia.edu. Retrieved 21 February 2021. "German Studies | German Studies Cornell Arts & Sciences". german.cornell.edu. Retrieved 21 February 2021. "Home Page". Department of German. Retrieved 7 February 2024. "DEPARTMENT OF GERMANIC LANGUAGES & LITERATURES". fas.harvard.edu. "Germanic Studies - University of Illinois at Chicago - UIC". lcsl.las.uic.edu. ATLAS - University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. "Home « Department of Germanic Languages and Literatures, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign". www.germanic.illinois.edu. "German & Scandinavian Studies - LLC - UMass Amherst". umass.edu. "Germanic Languages and Literatures - U-M LSA Germanic Languages and Literatures". lsa.umich.edu. "German, Scandinavian & Dutch Department". German, Nordic, Slavic & Dutch | College of Liberal Arts. Retrieved 21 February 2021. "Department of German". New York University. "Department of Germanic & Slavic Languages and Literatures". Retrieved 21 February 2021. "Department of German - Northwestern University". german.northwestern.edu. "Department of Germanic Languages and Literatures". Department of Germanic Languages and Literatures. "Germanic Languages and Literatures". ccat.sas.upenn.edu. "Welcome! Willkommen! Добро пожаловать! Вітаємо! Witamy! — German". german.la.psu.edu. "University of Pittsburgh: Department of Germanic Languages and Literatures". 10 February 2008. Archived from the original on 10 February 2008. "Department of German". german.princeton.edu. "Germanic Studie Website Redirect". Archived from the original on 14 January 2015. Retrieved 17 March 2006. "Modern Language Major". Truman State University. Retrieved 15 July 2020. "Home". Department of German, Russian and East European Studies. Retrieved 21 February 2021. "Department of German and Russian". www.uvm.edu. Retrieved 21 February 2021. "german.virginia.edu -". virginia.edu. "Department of Germanics - University of Washington". depts.washington.edu. "Department of Germanic Languages and Literatures - Washington University in St. Louis". german.wustl.edu. "Welcome". Department of Germanic Languages and Literatures. Yale University. "German". Linguistics & Germanic, Slavic, Asian and African Languages. Retrieved 12 November 2020. "German Programs". "Arbitrium". De Gruyter. Retrieved 6 September 2022. "German Life and Letters". Wiley Online Library. Retrieved 6 September 2022. "Journal overview". The Germanic Review: Literature, Culture and Theory. Retrieved 3 September 2022. "Germanistik". De Gruyter. Retrieved 6 September 2022. "GOETHE YEARBOOK". Goethe Society of North America. Retrieved 3 September 2022. "Journal of Austrian Studies". Project Muse. Retrieved 6 September 2022. "Lessing Yearbook/Jahrbuch". Lessing Society. "Home: Monatshefte". UW Press Journals Division. Retrieved 3 September 2022. "Oxford German Studies". Taylor & Francis. Retrieved 6 September 2022. "Publications of the English Goethe Society". English Goethe Society. Retrieved 6 September 2022. "Seminar". Project Muse. Retrieved 6 September 2022. "Teaching German (Unterrichtspraxis)". Wiley Online Journal. Retrieved 6 September 2022. "Transit". Berkeley. "About this journal". De Gruyter. Retrieved 3 September 2022. "Zeitschrift für Germanistik". Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin. Retrieved 3 September 2022. BUBL Link (UK-based) Catalogue of Internet Resources Concerning the German Language: https://web.archive.org/web/20060218094937/http://bubl.ac.uk/link/g/germanlanguage.htm (well organized; covers many aspects of the language and the study of it) https://web.archive.org/web/20050718171402/http://www.library.adelaide.edu.au/guide/hum/german/german_net.html (University of Adelaide's categorized guide to German Area Studies online)[dead link] http://www.dartmouth.edu/~wess/wesslit.html Archived 18 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine (Dartmouth's German-Studies Web links, annotated and arranged by topic) https://web.archive.org/web/20051104142631/http://libadm87.rice.edu/ref/german.cfm (Rice University's guide to German studies, including printed literature and links to German newspapers and magazines)[dead link] http://www.germanistik.net/ germanistik.net (tries to get the user straight to the best sources of help; in German) Germanistik im Netz – Erlanger Liste (The 'Erlanger Liste' is currently[as of?] the largest collection of links to the various aspects of G***, including such archives, publishers, etc.; in German) Literaturwissenschaft online ("Literaturwissenschaft online" Kiel University's e-learning site with live and archived lectures; free of charge; in German.) Bibliographie der Deutschen Sprach- und Literaturwissenschaft ("BDSL Online" is the electronic version of the largest bibliography in the field of German language and literature studies. Access to report years 1985–1995 is free of charge.) https://web.archive.org/web/20060418211215/http://www.doaj.org/ljbs?cpid=8 (DOAJ Directory of Open Access Journals, Literature and Languages) https://web.archive.org/web/20060411030830/http://www.sign-lang.uni-hamburg.de/Medienprojekt/Literatur/9.med.analy.html (University of Hamburg site with media studies bibliography) Categorical list of German Departments around the world Archived 26 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine Departmental Ratings (USA) Directory of some German resources in libraries and research centers throughout California American Library Association German Studies Web Library guides University of Leeds German, Russian and Slavonic Studies University of Wisconsin-Madison German-language Humanities