HSBC Holdings plc (Chinese: 滙豐), acronym from its founding member The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, is a British universal bank and financial services group headquartered in London, England, with historical and business links to East Asia and a multinational footprint. It is the largest Europe-based bank by total assets, ahead of BNP Paribas, with US$2.953 trillion as of December 2021. In 2021, HSBC had $10.8 trillion in assets under custody (AUC) and $4.9 trillion in assets under administration (AUA). HSBC traces its origin to a hong trading house in British Hong Kong. The bank was established in 1865 in Hong Kong and opened branches in Shanghai in the same year. It was first formally incorporated in 1866. In 1991, the present parent legal entity, HSBC Holdings plc, was established in London and the historic Hong-Kong-based bank from whose initials the group took its name became that entity's fully-owned subsidiary. The next year (1992), HSBC took over Midland Bank and thus became one of the largest domestic banks in the United Kingdom. HSBC has offices, branches and subsidiaries in 62 countries and territories across Africa, Asia, Oceania, Europe, North America, and South America, serving around 39 million customers. As of 2023, it was ranked no. 20 in the world in the Forbes rankings of large companies ranked by sales, profits, assets, and market value. HSBC has a dual primary listing on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange and London Stock Exchange and is a constituent of the Hang Seng Index and the FTSE 100 Index. It has secondary listings on the New York Stock Exchange, and the Bermuda Stock Exchange. HSBC has been implicated in a number of controversies and the bank has been repeatedly fined for money laundering (sometimes in relation to major criminal organizations such as the Sinaloa cartel) or setting up large scale tax avoidance schemes. After the British established Hong Kong as a crown colony in the aftermath of the First Opium War, merchants from other parts of the British Empire, now in Hong Kong, felt the need for a bank to finance the growing trade, through Hong Kong and sometimes also through Shanghai, between China and India, the rest of the British Empire and Europe, of goods, produces and merchandises of all kinds, but especially opium, cultivated in or transited (re-exported) through the Raj. The founder, Thomas Sutherland of the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company, wanted a bank operating on "sound Scottish banking principles." Still, the original location of the bank was considered crucial and the founders chose Wardley House in Hong Kong since the construction was based on some of the best feng shui in colonial Hong Kong. After raising a capital stock of HK$5 million, the bank commenced operations on 3 March 1865. It opened a branch in Shanghai in April of that year and started issuing locally denominated banknotes in both the Crown Colony and Shanghai soon afterwards. The bank was incorporated in Hong Kong as The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation by the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank Ordinance (Numbers 2 and 5 of 1866), and a branch in Japan was also established in Yokohama in 1866. Shares of the bank were one of 13 securities initially traded on the Shanghai Stock Exchange, and were traded on that exchange until the Japanese closed the exchange in 1941. Sir Thomas Jackson became chief manager in 1876. During his twenty-six-year tenure, the bank became a leader in Asia. A period of expansion followed, with new buildings constructed in Bangkok (1921), Manila (1922) and Shanghai (1923), and a new head office building in Hong Kong in 1935. Bank note issuance displaced other forms of the era and of the region, such as silver taels, due to political and economic instability. HSBC gained significant influence as a result. Michael Turner became chief manager in 1953 and set about diversifying the business. His tenure came to an end in 1962 having established The Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corporation of California 1955 and having acquired The British Bank of the Middle East and the Mercantile Bank (based in India) in Aug 1959. Turner was succeeded in 1962 by Jake Saunders. In 1964 the Chief Managership was superseded as the top executive role in the bank by an Executive Chairmanship. During the Konfrontasi period in the 1960s, a group of Indonesian forces bombed the MacDonald House building in Singapore (at the time used by HSBC) just a few months after Singapore was granted its independence from Malaysia. Three people were killed, 33 injured, and the two Indonesian military officers responsible for the bombing were tried and executed. The present building in Hong Kong was designed by Sir Norman Foster and was held as one of the most expensive and technologically advanced buildings in the world in 1986, costing HK$5.3 billion. On 6 October 1989, it was registered as a regulated bank with the Banking Commissioner of the Government of Hong Kong. HSBC Holdings plc, originally incorporated in England and Wales, was a non-trading, dormant shelf company when it completed its transformation on 25 March 1991 into the parent holding company to the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation Limited now as a subsidiary, in preparation for its purchase of the UK-based Midland Bank and the impending transfer of sovereignty of Hong Kong to China. HSBC Holdings' acquisition of Midland Bank was completed in 1992 and gave HSBC a substantial market presence in the United Kingdom. As part of the takeover conditions for the acquisition, HSBC Holdings plc was required to relocate its world headquarters from Hong Kong to London in 1993. Major acquisitions in South America started with the purchase of the Banco Bamerindus of Brazil for $1 billion in March 1997 and the acquisition of Roberts SA de Inversiones of Argentina for $600 million in May 1997. In May 1999, HSBC expanded its presence in the United States with the purchase of Republic National Bank of New York for $10.3 billion. Expansion into Continental Europe took place in April 2000 with the acquisition of Crédit Commercial de France, a large French bank, for £6.6 billion. In July 2001 HSBC bought Demirbank, an insolvent Turkish bank. In July 2002, Arthur Andersen announced that HSBC USA, Inc., through a new subsidiary, Wealth and Tax Advisory Services USA Inc. (WTAS), would purchase a portion of Andersen's tax practice. The new HSBC Private Client Services Group would serve the wealth and tax advisory needs of high-net-worth individuals. Then in August 2002 HSBC acquired Grupo Financiero Bital, SA de CV, Mexico's third largest retail bank for $1.1 billion. In November 2002, HSBC expanded further in the United States. Under the chairmanship of John Bond, it spent £9 billion (US$15.5 billion) to acquire Household Finance Corporation (HFC), a US credit card issuer and subprime lender. In a 2003 cover story, The Banker noted "when banking historians look back, they may conclude that [it] was the deal of the first decade of the 21st century". Under the new name of HSBC Finance, the division was the second largest subprime lender in the United States. The new headquarters of HSBC Holdings at 8 Canada Square, London officially opened in April 2003. In July 2003, HSBC announced that it had agreed to acquire 82.19% of the Korean fund administrator, Asset Management Technology (AM TeK), for $12.47 million in cash; it was the largest fund administrator in South Korea, with $24 billion of assets under administration. In September 2003 HSBC bought Polski Kredyt Bank SA of Poland for $7.8 million. In June 2004 HSBC expanded into China buying 19.9% of the Bank of Communications of Shanghai. In the United Kingdom HSBC acquired Marks & Spencer Retail Financial Services Holdings Ltd for £763 million in December 2004. Acquisitions in 2005 included Metris Inc, a US credit card issuer for $1.6 billion in August and 70.1% of Dar es Salaam Investment Bank of Iraq in October. In April 2006, HSBC bought the 90 branches in Argentina of Banca Nazionale del Lavoro for $155 million. In December 2007 HSBC acquired the Chinese Bank in Taiwan. In May 2008, HSBC acquired IL&FS Investment, an Indian retail broking firm. In 2005, Bloomberg Markets magazine accused HSBC of money laundering for drug dealers and state sponsors of terrorism. Then-CEO Stephen Green said that "This was a singular and wholly irresponsible attack on the bank's international compliance procedures", but subsequent investigation indicated that it was accurate and proved that the bank was involved in money laundering for the Sinaloa Cartel and throughout Mexico. In July 2006, HSBC announced that it would acquire Westpac's sub-custody operations in Australia and New Zealand for $112.5 million, making HSBC the leading sub-custody and clearing player in Australia and New Zealand. In 2007, HSBC wrote down its holdings of subprime-related mortgage securities by $10.5 billion, becoming the first major bank to report its losses due to the unfolding subprime mortgage crisis. According to Bloomberg, "HSBC is one of world's strongest banks by some measures". When HM Treasury required all UK banks to increase their capital in October 2007, the group transferred £750 million to London within hours, and announced that it had just lent £4 billion to other UK banks. In March 2009, HSBC announced that it would shut down the branch network of its HSBC Finance arm in the United States, leading to nearly 6,000 job losses and leaving only the credit card business to continue operating. Chairman Stephen Green stated, "HSBC has a reputation for telling it as it is. With the benefit of hindsight, this is an acquisition we wish we had not undertaken." According to analyst Colin Morton, "the takeover was an absolute disaster". In March 2009, it announced that it had made US$9.3 billion of profit in 2008 and announced a £12.5 billion (US$17.7 billion; HK$138 billion) rights issue to enable it to buy other banks that were struggling to survive. However, uncertainty over the rights issue's implications for institutional investors caused volatility in the Hong Kong stock market: on 9 March 2009 HSBC's share price fell 24.14%, with 12 million shares sold in the last few seconds of trading. On 25 April 2011, HSBC decided to shut down its retail banking business in Russia and reduce its private banking presence to a representative office. On 11 May 2013, the new chief executive Stuart Gulliver announced that HSBC would refocus its business strategy and that a large-scale retrenchment of operations, particularly in respect of the retail sector, was planned. HSBC would no longer seek to be 'the world's local bank', as costs associated with this were spiraling and US$3.5 billion needed to be saved by 2013, with the aim of bringing overheads down from 55% of revenues to 48%. In 2010, then-chairman Stephen Green planned to depart HSBC to accept a government appointment in the Trade Ministry. Group Chief Executive Michael Geoghegan was expected to become the next chairman. However, while many current and former senior employees supported the tradition of promoting the chief executive to chairman, many shareholders instead pushed for an external candidate. HSBC's board of directors had reportedly been split over the succession planning and investors were alarmed that the row would damage the company. On 23 September 2010, Geoghegan announced he would step down as chief executive of HSBC. He was succeeded as chief executive by Stuart Gulliver, while Green was succeeded as chairman by Douglas Flint; Flint was serving as HSBC's finance director (chief financial officer). August 2011: Further to CEO Stuart Gulliver's plan to cut $3.5 billion in costs over the next two years, HSBC announced that it will cut 25,000 jobs and exit from 20 countries by 2013 in addition to 5,000 job cuts announced earlier in the year. The consumer banking division of HSBC will focus on the UK, Hong Kong, high-growth markets such as Mexico, Singapore, Turkey, and Brazil, and smaller countries where it has a leading market share. According to Reuters, Chief Executive Stuart Gulliver told the media, "There will be further job cuts. There will be something like 25,000 roles eliminated between now and the end of 2013." In August 2011 "to align our U.S. business with our global network and meet the local and international needs of domestic and overseas clients", HSBC agreed to sell 195 branches in New York and Connecticut to First Niagara Financial Group Inc, and divestures to KeyCorp, Community Bank, N.A. and Five Star Bank for around $1 billion, and announced the closure of 13 branches in Connecticut and New Jersey. The rest of HSBC's U.S. network will only be about half from a total 470 branches before divestments. On 9 August 2011, Capital One Financial Corp. agreed to acquire HSBC's U.S. credit card business for $2.6 billion, netting HSBC Holdings an estimated after-tax profit of $2.4 billion. In September it was announced that HSBC sought to sell its general insurance business for around $1 billion. In 2012, HSBC was the subject of hearings of the U.S. Senate permanent subcommittee for investigations for severe deficiencies in its anti-money laundering practices (see Controversies). On 16 July the committee presented its findings. Among other things, it concluded that HSBC had been transferring $7 billion in banknotes from its Mexican to its US subsidiary (much of it related to drug dealing), was disregarding terrorist financing links and was actively circumventing US safeguards to block transactions involving terrorists, drug lords and rogue regimes, including hiding $19.4 billion in transactions with Iran. This investigation followed on from a probe by the US Federal Reserve and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency found that there was "significant potential for unreported money laundering or terrorist financing". On 11 December 2012, HSBC agreed to pay a record $1.92 billion fine in this money laundering case. "Bank officials repeatedly ignored internal warnings that HSBC's monitoring systems were inadequate, the Justice Department said. In 2008, for example, the CEO of HSBC Mexico was told that Mexican law enforcement had a recording of a Mexican drug lord saying that HSBC Mexico was the place to launder money." The United States Department of Justice, however, decided not to pursue criminal penalties, a decision which the New York Times labelled a "dark day for the rule of law." HSBC chief executive Stuart Gulliver said: "We accept responsibility for our past mistakes. We have said we are profoundly sorry for them, and we do so again." In July 2013, Alan Keir was appointed chief executive of HSBC Bank plc after Brian Robertson's resignation. Keir's duties include overseeing the firm's UK, European, Middle Eastern, and African divisions. In June 2014, an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary HSBC Life (UK) Limited agreed to sell its £4.2 billion UK pensions business to Swiss Re. In February 2015 the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists released information about the business conduct of HSBC under the title Swiss Leaks based on the 2007 hacked HSBC account records from whistle-blower Hervé Falciani. The ICIJ alleges that the bank profited from doing business with corrupt politicians, dictators, tax evaders, dealers of blood diamonds, arms dealers and other clients. US Senate investigators in 2012 had sought the hacked HSBC account records from Falciani and French authorities, but never received the data. HSBC announced in August 2015 that it would be selling its Brazilian unit to Banco Bradesco for $5.2 billion following years of disappointing performance. In 2015, HSBC was recognised as the most trusted foreign bank in India by The Brand Trust Report 2015. In 2016, the bank was mentioned numerous times in connection with the Panama Papers investigation. Many Syrians were angered when their accounts were judged high-risk and closed, despite the bank reportedly telling Mossack Fonseca it was "comfortable" with Rami Makhlouf as a customer, even though US Treasury sanctions against him were in effect at the time. On 20 March 2017, the British newspaper The Guardian reported that hundreds of banks had helped launder KGB-related funds out of Russia, as uncovered by an investigation named Global Laundromat. HSBC was listed among the 17 banks in the UK that were "facing questions over what they knew about the international scheme and why they did not turn away suspicious money transfers," as HSBC "processed $545.3m in Laundromat cash, mostly routed through its Hong Kong branch." Other banks facing scrutiny under the investigation included the Royal Bank of Scotland, NatWest, Lloyds, Barclays and Coutts. In response, HSBC stated that it was against financial crime, and that the case "highlights the need for greater information sharing between the public and private sectors." On 1 October 2017, Mark Tucker succeeded Douglas Flint as group chairman of HSBC, the first non-executive and outside chairman appointed by the group. Also in October 2017, HSBC announced that John Flint, chief executive of Retail Banking and Wealth Management, would succeed Stuart Gulliver as Group Chief Executive on 21 February 2018. It was further announced on 5 August 2019 that Flint was leaving and his role would be filled on a temporary basis by Noel Quinn, head of HSBC's global commercial bank. Noel Quinn was subsequently appointed to the role on a permanent basis in March 2020. In February 2020, HSBC announced it would cut 35,000 jobs worldwide after it was announced corporate profits decreased by 33% in 2019. In October 2020, HSBC committed to achieve zero-emission by 2050, e.g., by this year it would not only become carbon neutral by itself but also will work only with carbon-neutral clients. It also committed to providing 750–1,000 billion dollars to help clients make the transition. It also pledged to achieve carbon neutrality in his own operations by 2030. In January 2021, HSBC announced that it would be closing 82 branches in Britain. In May 2021, HSBC announced the exit of US retail banking business by selling 10 California branches to Cathay Bank and 80 branches to Citizens Financial Group and closing the remaining branches. The bank said it intends to focus on the banking and wealth management needs of globally connected affluent and high net worth clients. In May 2021, HSBC committed to end the financing of the coal industry, with a commitment to publish a new coal policy and provide further detail on its climate strategy by the end of 2021. The organisation's "Thermal Coal Phase-Out Policy" was published in December 2021. In August 2021, HSBC announced the acquisition of AXA Singapore. HSBC Insurance (Asia-Pacific) Holdings Ltd, an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of HSBC would acquire 100% of the issued share capital of AXA Singapore for $575m. In December 2021, HSBC Asset Management (India) Private Ltd, an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of HSBC announced it would acquire L&T Investment Management for $425 million from L&T Finance Holdings. In June 2022, HSBC announced its intention to sell its business in Russia. This requires approval from the Russian government, and the deal is expected to close in the first half of 2024. The projected loss is $300 million. A possible buyer is the Russian Expobank. In February 2024, the President of Russia allowed HSBC and Expobank to carry out this transaction. In July 2022, HSBC became the first foreign lender to open a Chinese Communist Party (CCP) committee in its Chinese investment banking subsidiary. The subsidiary, HSBC Qianhai Securities, is a 90% HSBC-owned joint venture. In November 2022, HSBC announced the exit of Canadian market. Royal Bank of Canada will acquire 100% of the common shares of HSBC Canada for an all-cash purchase price of $13.5 billion, which is a multiple of 9.4 times HSBC Canada's estimated 2024 earnings. Completion of the transaction is expected by late 2023, subject to regulatory approvals. HSBC has been under pressure to cut costs and divest non-Asian businesses. In February 2023, HSBC announced that its profits for the last quarter of 2022 has almost doubled when compared to the same time of year before. However, its pre-tax profit actually fell because it absorbed the cost of selling its French retail banking operations. The bank also announced that they were closing 114 branches in the United Kingdom. The move came as more people were using online banking since the pandemic, reducing the need for physical branches. The move has been criticized by Unite. As interest rates increased globally in May 2023, HSBC Holdings reported a 212% increase in quarterly profit. In May 2023, HSBC defeated a proposal, backed by its largest stakeholder Chinese insurer Ping An, to consider spinning off its Asia business into a Hong Kong-listed entity. In December 2023, HSBC Asset Management announced they would be acquiring the Singapore Based Investment manager, Silkroad Property Partners. The proposed acquisition includes Singapore-based SilkRoad Property Partners Pte Ltd, along with its subsidiaries in Hong Kong, Shanghai and Tokyo, and the five general partner entities associated with its active funds. Terms of the agreement were not disclosed. The deal would expand HSBC’s real estate fund management capabilities in the region by bringing on board a business with an estimated $2 billion in assets under management, primarily in value-add strategies, as well as a senior team with experience executing deals in the region’s major cities. In 2024, HSBC, as part of the Hong Kong Association of Banks, began developing a roadmap to phase out checks in the city and switch to electronic payments. According to Hong Kong Interbank Clearing, check transactions in Hong Kong fell to HK$488.6 billion (US$62.5 billion) in December, down 13 percent year-on-year. In 2024, HSBC announced an international payments app, a competitor to Revolut and Wise apps. It will also focus on retail customers and low-cost currency exchange. In 2024, HSBC Philippines launched "Omni Collect" to allow companies to connect to HSBC’s single API to offer and manage payments across multiple channels. "It supports multiple online and offline payment options for customers and delivers transaction data through HSBC’s global digital platform, HSBCnet," the bank Head Art Tanseco said. HSBC has its world headquarters at 8 Canada Square in Canary Wharf, London. In June 2023, the bank announced its intentions to exit this building when its lease expires in 2027, stating their intention to move to a building in the City of London near St Paul's Cathedral. As of 2014, according to Relsbank, HSBC was the fourth-largest bank in the world by assets (with $2,670.00  billion), the second largest in terms of revenues (with $146.50 billion) and the largest in terms of market value (with $180.81 billion). It was also the most profitable bank in the world with $19.13 billion in net income in 2007 (compared to Citigroup's $3.62 billion and Bank of America's $14.98 billion in the same period). In June 2006, The Economist stated that since the end of 2005 HSBC has been rated the largest banking group in the world by Tier 1 capital. In June 2014 The Banker ranked HSBC first in Western Europe and 5th in the world for Tier 1 capital. In February 2008, HSBC was named the world's most valuable banking brand by The Banker magazine. HSBC has been audited by PwC, one of the Big Four auditors since 2015. Despite being domiciled in the UK, HSBC generates around two-thirds of its profits in Asia, with China contributing 44% of the bank's profit in 2022. These are HSBC's subsidiaries worldwide: Asia-Pacific HSBC Armenia (wholly-owned subsidiary of HSBC Europe B.V.) The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation Hang Seng Bank Hang Seng Bank (China) HSBC Bank Australia HSBC Bangladesh HSBC China HSBC Bank India HSBC Bank Indonesia HSBC Korea (Only commercial banking) (HSBC Korea withdrew consumer retail banking from South Korea in 2013) HSBC Bank Philippines HSBC Bank Malaysia HSBC New Zealand HSBC Bank Singapore HSBC Sri Lanka HSBC Taiwan HSBC Bank Vietnam HSBC ceased retail banking operations in Thailand and Japan in 2012. HSBC entered Brunei in 1947 but commenced winding down its operations in April 2016 citing the bank's optimisation of its global network and reduced complexity. As of 2019,[update] HSBC stopped offering Amanah (a retail banking product and service in compliance with the Islamic Shari'ah laws) in Bahrain, Bangladesh, Indonesia, Singapore and the UAE following a strategic review of its global Islamic Finance businesses, while the bank continues on offering the same Shari'ah compliant products and services in Malaysia and in Saudi Arabia. Europe HSBC Bank (Europe) HSBC France HSBC Greece HSBC Trinkaus und Burkhardt AG HSBC Bank Malta HSBC Private Bank (Suisse) SA HSBC UK Bank plc Further, HSBC Private Bank is a name for UK-based private banking division. HSBC Expat is the offshore banking division of the HSBC Group based in St Helier, Jersey that focuses on providing finance and cross border services to expatriates and migrants. The Americas HSBC Bank Argentina HSBC Bank Bermuda HSBC Bank Canada HSBC Bank USA HSBC Finance Corporation HSBC México HSBC Securities (USA) Inc. Middle East and North Africa (MENA) HSBC Bank Egypt HSBC Bank Jordan HSBC Bank Middle East HSBC Bank (Turkey) The Saudi British Bank HSBC Saudi Arabia HSBC organises its customer-facing activities within three business groups: Commercial Banking (CMB); Global Banking and Markets (GBM); Wealth and Personal Banking (WPB). HSBC provides financial services to small, medium-sized and middle-market enterprises. The group has more than 2 million such customers, including sole proprietors, partnerships, clubs and associations, incorporated businesses and publicly quoted companies. In December 2015, HSBC announced that Noel Quinn will succeed Simon Cooper as the chief executive officer of Commercial Banking. Simon Cooper has decided to leave the bank to pursue other opportunities. Global Banking and Markets is the investment banking arm of HSBC. For Global Banking, it provides investment banking and financing products for corporate and institutional clients, including corporate banking, investment banking, capital markets, trade services, payments and cash management, and leveraged acquisition finance. For Markets and Securities Services, it provides services in equities, credit and rates, foreign exchange, money markets and securities services. Global Banking and Markets has offices in more than 60 countries and territories worldwide, and positions itself as "emerging markets-led and financing-focused". Wealth and Personal Banking helps customers to take care of their day-to-day finances and to manage, protect and grow their wealth. HSBC provides more than 54 million customers worldwide with a full range of personal financial services, including current and savings accounts, mortgage loans, car financing, insurance, credit cards, loans, pensions and investments. Retail Banking and Wealth Management (also known as RBWM) was previously referred to as Personal Financial Services (PFS). This rename was announced during HSBC's 2011 Investor Day. In 2020, HSBC announced merging two of its business lines: Retail Banking and Wealth Management & Global Private Banking to form a new business unit as Wealth and Personal Banking. As a cost-saving measure HSBC is offshoring processing work to lower-cost economies to reduce the cost of providing services in developed countries. These locations take on work such as data processing and customer service, but also internal software engineering at Pune (India), Gurgaon (India), Bangalore (India), Chennai (India), Hyderabad (India), Vishakhapatnam (India), Kolkata (India), Colombo (Sri Lanka), Guangzhou (China), Kraków (Poland), Curitiba (Brazil) and Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia). chief operating officer Alan Jebson said in March 2005 that he would be very surprised if fewer than 25,000 people were working in the centers over the next three years: "I don't have a precise target but I would be surprised if we had less than 15 (global service centers) in three years' time." He went on to say that each centre cost the bank from $20m to $30m to set up, but that for every job moved the bank saves about $20,000 (£10,400). Trades unions, particularly in the UK and US, blame these centers for job losses and also for the effective imposition of wage caps on their members. HSBC Direct is a telephone/online direct banking operation which attracts customers through mortgages, accounts and savings. It was first launched in the USA in November 2005 and is based on HSBC's 'First Direct' subsidiary in Britain which was launched in the 1980s. The service is now also available in Canada, Taiwan, South Korea, Australia, France. Poland is launching business direct in September 2009. In the US, HSBC Direct is now part of HSBC Advance. HSBCnet provides access to transaction banking functionality – ranging from payments and cash management to trade services features – as well as to research and analytical content from HSBC. It also includes foreign exchange and money markets trading functionality. The system is used widely by HSBC's high-end corporate and institutional clients served variously by the bank's global banking and markets, commercial banking, and global transaction banking divisions. HSBCnet is also the brand under which HSBC markets its global e-commerce proposition to its corporate and institutional clients. HSBC Advance is the group's product aimed at working professionals. The exact benefits and qualifications vary depending on country, but typically require a monthly direct deposit or maintain US$5,000 of deposit/investments or residential mortgage. Business owners may use commercial relationship to qualify. Advantages may vary depending on country, such as day-to-day banking services including but not limited to a Platinum Credit Card, Advance ATM Card, Current Account and Savings Account. Protection plans and Financial Planning Services. A HSBC Advance customer enables the customer to open accounts in another country and transfer their credit history. HSBC Premier is the group's premium financial services product. It has its own portfolio of credit cards around the world. The exact benefits and qualification criteria vary depending on the country. Customers have a dedicated premier relationship manager, global 24-hour access to call centres, free banking services, and preferential rates. A HSBC Premier customer receives the HSBC Premier services in all countries that offer HSBC Premier, without having to meet that country's qualifying criteria ("Premier in One, Premier in All"). HSBC Jade is an invite-only financial services product aimed at individuals with net worths typically between $1 million and $5 million in investible assets held with HSBC. Before invitation, members must be HSBC Premier members for a designated period of time. In addition to HSBC Premier benefits, HSBC Jade have select concierge services, estate planning services, and access to Jade Centres around the globe. In both 2003 and 2010, U.S. regulators ordered HSBC to strengthen its anti-money laundering practices. In October 2010, the United States OCC issued a Cease and Desist Order requiring HSBC to strengthen multiple aspects of its Anti-Money Laundering (AML) program. The identified problems included a once massive backlog of over 17,000 alerts identifying suspicious activity, failure to file timely suspicious activity reports with U.S. law enforcement, failure to conduct any due diligence to assess risks to HSBC affiliates before opening correspondent accounts for them, a three-year failure by HBUS from mid-2006 to mid-2009 to conduct any AML of $15 billion in bulk cash transactions from those same HSBC affiliates, failure to monitor $60 trillion in annual wire transfers by customers in countries rated lower risk by HBUS, and inadequate and unqualified AML staffing, resources, and leadership. It was noted that HSBC fully cooperated with the Senate investigation. In 2012, HSBC was fined by $14 million by Argentina for failure to report suspicious transactions in the country in 2008. On 19 July 2012, India investigated alleged violation of safety compliance, in which Indian employees were believed to be involved. On 9 November 2012, Indian activist and politician Arvind Kejriwal said he had details of 700 Indian bank accounts hiding black money with a total value of ₹60 billion (US$750 million) with HSBC in Geneva. In June 2013, a media outlet in India did an undercover expose where HSBC officers were caught on camera agreeing to launder "black money." HSBC placed these employees on leave pending their own internal investigation. In November 2012, it was reported that HSBC had set up offshore accounts in Jersey for suspected drug-dealers and other criminals, and that HM Revenue and Customs had launched an investigation following a whistle blower leaking details of £700 million allegedly held in HSBC accounts in the Crown dependency. Following search warrants and raids beginning in January 2013, in mid-March 2013 Argentina's main taxing authority accused HSBC of using fake receipts and dummy accounts to facilitate money laundering and tax evasion. In early February 2013, appearing before UK's Parliamentary Banking Standards Commission, CEO Stuart Gulliver acknowledged that the structure of the bank had been "not fit for purpose." He also stated, "Matters that should have been shared and escalated were not shared and escalated." HSBC has also been accused of laundering money for terrorist groups. In June 2015, HSBC was fined by the Geneva authorities after an investigation into money laundering within its Swiss subsidiary. The fine was 40 million Swiss Francs. In 2018, HSBC was fined 15 million rand by South Africa's central bank for weaknesses in its processes meant to detect money laundering and terrorism financing, though it also added that HSBC was not found to have facilitated any transactions involving money laundering or the financing of terrorism in South Africa. In 2020, HSBC told AUSTRAC that it may have broken Australia's anti money laundering and counter-terrorism laws after allegedly failing to report thousands of transactions to AUSTRAC. In July 2021, HSBC disclosed that in 2016 it discovered a suspected money laundering network that received $4.2 billion worth of payments which has raised questions over whether it disclosed this appropriately to US monitors as the bank was still under probation by U.S. authorities over anti-money laundering concerns. In December 2021, HSBC was fined 64 million pounds ($85 million) by British regulators for failings in its anti-money laundering processes spanning eight years. In July 2012, a US Senate committee issued a report which stated that HSBC had been in breach of money-laundering rules, and had assisted Iran and North Korea to circumvent US nuclear-weapons sanctions. In December 2012, Assistant U.S. Attorney General Lanny Breuer suggested that the U.S. government might resist criminal prosecution of HSBC which could lead to the loss of the bank's U.S. charter. He stated, "Our goal here is not to bring HSBC down, it's not to cause a systemic effect on the economy, it's not for people to lose thousands of jobs." In December 2012, HSBC was penalised $1.9 billion (US), the largest fine under the Bank Secrecy Act, for violating four U.S. laws designed to protect the U.S. financial system. HSBC had allegedly laundered at least $881 million in drugs proceeds through the U.S. financial system for international cartels, as well as processing an additional $660 million for banks in US sanctioned countries. According to the report, "The U.S. bank subsidiary [also] failed to monitor more than $670 billion in wire transfers and more than $9.4 billion in purchases of physical dollars from its Mexico unit." As part of the agreement deferring its prosecution, HSBC acknowledged that for years it had ignored warning signs that drug cartels in Mexico were using its branches to launder millions of dollars, and also acknowledged that HSBC's international staff had stripped identifying information on transactions made through the United States from countries facing economic sanctions such as Iran and Sudan. A December 2012 CNNMoney article compared the 1.9 billion dollar fine to HSBC's profit "last year" (2011) of 16.8 billion. In 2016, HSBC was sued by American families involved in deaths by organized-crime gangs for processing funds ("money laundering") for the Sinaloa cartel. The FinCEN Files showed that HSBC continued to serve alleged criminals and corporations involved in government corruption, including $292 million for the Waked Family company Viva Panama between 2010 and 2016 before the United States Department of the Treasury declared it a drug money-laundering organization. HSBC's activities took place while the bank was under probation from the U.S. government; six former HSBC employees reported to the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists that the deferred prosecution agreement for HSBC marked a "cultural shift" in the organization toward profit-making motives. Employees working in compliance at HSBC also expressed concern to Buzzfeed about what they felt were inadequate efforts to combat money laundering, including hasty investigations and unachievable internal investigation quotas. In response to the report HSBC said it is "continually seeking ways to improve" its financial crime compliance regime. The bank was fined US$275m by the US CFTC in 2014 for taking part in the Forex scandal. The bank also settled for US$18m in the related Libor scandal and EUR 33m for the Euribor rate scandal (relative to other banks a small amount). In October 2020 HSBC was fined about $2.2 million over the Euribor rate scandal in Switzerland. In November 2014, HSBC was accused of tax fraud and money laundering by Belgian Prosecutors for helping hundreds of clients move money into offshore tax havens. In August 2019, HSBC agreed to pay $336 million to settle the case. In February 2015, the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists released information about the bank's business conduct under the title Swiss Leaks. The ICIJ alleges that the bank profited from doing business with tax evaders and other clients. The BBC reported that the bank had put pressure on media not to report about the controversy, with British newspaper The Guardian claiming bank advertising had been put "on pause" after The Guardian's coverage of the matter. Peter Oborne, chief political commentator at The Daily Telegraph, resigned from the paper and in an open letter claimed the newspaper suppressed negative stories and dropped investigations into HSBC because of the bank's advertising. In November 2017, HSBC agreed to pay $352 million to settle a French investigation into the case. In August 2019, the former head of HSBC Swiss from 2000 to 2008, Peter Braunwalder pleaded guilty in a French court for helping wealthy clients hide $1.8 billion. He was fined $560,000 and received a one-year suspended jail sentence. In December 2019, HSBC Swiss agreed to pay a $192 million United States fine for the case. In July 2016, the United States Department of Justice charged two executives from HSBC Bank over an alleged $3.5 billion currency scheme which defrauded HSBC clients and "manipulated the foreign exchange market to benefit themselves and their bank". "Mark Johnson and Stuart Scott, both British citizens, are being accused". "Johnson was arrested late Tuesday [19 July 2016] at JFK International Airport in New York City." "Stuart Scott, who was HSBC's European head of foreign exchange trading in London until December 2014, is accused of the same crimes. A warrant was issued for Scott's arrest, but he fled to Britain. In July 2018 the High Court of Justice ruled against extraditing him to the United States since most of the alleged crimes took place in Britain and because Scott has no significant connection to the United States. Mark Johnson was later convicted of nine counts of wire fraud and conspiracy to defraud related to front running the currency trades of HSBC clients and sentenced to two years in federal prison. He was released after serving three months in prison and was allowed to return home to the U.K. while he pursued an appeal. November 2020 the U.S. Supreme Court declined to hear an appeal of his 2017 conviction, which was previously upheld by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. It meant he would have to return to the U.S. to serve his sentence. In February 2021 a judge ruled that Johnson would not need to report to prison until he is vaccinated against COVID-19. In January 2018 HSBC agreed to pay a $101.5 million fine over the case. In December 2018, The Jerusalem Post reported that HSBC confirmed that the bank would divest from Elbit Systems Ltd., Israel's largest non-government-owned military contractor, active in numerous defence-related industries. HSBC justified its decision by claiming it "strongly supports observance of international human rights principles as they apply to business." In response, the group Palestine Solidarity Campaign (PSC) released a press release in which it "declared a victory" and quoted PSC director Ben Jamal saying the decision demonstrates "the effectiveness of Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions as a tactic." JewishPress.com reported that multiple sources claimed HSBC's decision was not influenced by the BDS movement but was an "investment decision." In an editorial titled "Bad Banking", The Jerusalem Post wrote, "HSBC, if this is your final decision, you will go down on the wrong side of history. Do you understand that Israel is using Elbit technology to protect itself against Palestinian terror, and not to undermine the rights of the Palestinian people? If you are really concerned about human rights, perhaps you might consider using some of your own income to invest in the Palestinian economy, and boost cooperation between Israeli and Palestinian institutions." In 2018, HSBC agreed to pay a $765 million fine to settle claims it mis-sold Residential mortgage-backed securities between 2005 and 2007. Forbes noted the settlement was the lowest of 11 banks that settled with the Department of Justice. HSBC has said in statement that it has been improving relevant control mechanisms since the financial crisis. In June 2020, on the eve of the anniversary of the Tiananmen Square protests, HSBC took the rare step of wading into political issues by publicly backing Beijing's controversial new national security law for Hong Kong. The chief executive for HSBC's Asia-Pacific division, Peter Wong, signed a petition supporting the law and stated in a post on Chinese social media that HSBC "respects and supports all laws that stabilise Hong Kong's social order." Though HSBC moved its headquarters to London in 1993, Hong Kong remains its largest market accounting for 54% of its profit, a third of its global revenue, and 50,000 local staff. In response, Joshua Wong, a top Hong Kong pro-democracy activist decried the bank's position stating that HSBC's stance demonstrates "how China will use the national security law as new leverage for more political influence over foreign business community in this global city." Alistair Carmichael, the U.K. chairman of the All Parliamentary Group on Hong Kong, said HSBC made a serious error by bending to China's will regarding the security law, calling it "a colossal misjudgment" since it would be seen as a large British corporation advocating for "a fairly flagrant breach of international law" when banks rely on a rules-based system. Human Rights Watch alleged that "the new national security law will deal the most severe blow to the rights of people in Hong Kong since the territory's transfer to China in 1997." British Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab also commented on HSBC's stance, saying "Businesses will make their own judgment calls, but let me just put it this way – we will not sacrifice the people of Hong Kong over the altar of banker bonuses". Since August 2020, HSBC has frozen the accounts of numerous pro-democratic organizations and activists, and their families, including Jimmy Lai, Ted Hui and the Good Neighbour North District Church. In January 2021, the CEO of HSBC defended its relationship with Chinese authorities in Hong Kong and freezing of Ted Hui's account to the United Kingdom's parliamentary foreign affairs committee. In February 2021, more than 50 members of the Inter-Parliamentary Alliance on China called for the immediate unfreezing of funds belonging to Ted Hui and his family, In 2023 an All-party parliamentary group released a report regarding the actions of the bank's operations in Hong Kong. The report found that HSBC was complicit in human rights abuses by bank's cutting off the pension plan after the Hong Kong authority cut off pension funding for those that fled the anti-democratic crackdown on the region. The group was chaired by Alistair Carmichael who stated that the bank has been "complicit in the repression of the human rights of innocent Hong Kongers". EU antitrust regulators fined HSBC 174.3 million euros for foreign exchange market rigging by exchanging sensitive information and trading plans through an online chat room dubbed "Sterling Lads". In 2008, HSBC issued a statement confirming it had lost a disc containing details of 370,000 customers of its life insurance business. HSBC said the disc had failed to arrive in the post between offices and it was not encrypted. The bank was later fined over £3 million by the Financial Services Authority for failing to exercise reasonable care with regards to data protection in connection with this and other lost customer information. From 2009 to 2014, in breach of United States sanctions on Iran, the bank facilitated money transfers in Iran on behalf of the Chinese company Huawei. According to Global Witness and cited by BBC, "billions of dollars of assets" were held by the bank for the Libyan Investment Authority, controlled by Colonel Muammar Gaddafi. Following Gaddafi's overthrow the bank declined to reveal information about the funds citing customer confidentiality. In the report titled "In the Future There Will Be No Forests Left" produced by Global Witness, the bank was accused of supporting the seven largest Malaysian timber conglomerates, which are responsible for deforestation in the Malaysian state of Sarawak. The bank declined to divulge its clients, citing client confidentiality, but maintains that the accusations are not accurate. The environmentalist group Greenpeace has also alleged that the bank is contributing to the deforestation in Indonesia and subsequent hazardous impacts in the region by providing funds to palm oil producers for new plantations. The bank has denied these claims, citing its sustainability policy that prohibits the bank from financing projects that "damage high conservation value forest." The bank was reported to have refused large cash withdrawals for customers without a third-party letter confirming what the money would be used for. Douglas Carswell, the Conservative MP for Clacton, was alarmed by the policy: "All these regulations which have been imposed on banks allow enormous interpretation. It basically infantilises the customer. In a sense, your money becomes pocket money and the bank becomes your parent." In August 2015, the bank failed to process BACS payments resulting in thousands of salaries not paid, house purchase and payment for essential home care failures. In January 2020, HSBC agreed to pay a $2.4 million settlement for a lawsuit filed in 2015 by customers who stated they received spam phone calls from the company. HSBC banker Ian Clarke alleged a failure of HSBC to retain or promote black and other ethnic minority staff, a lack of such people in senior positions, and insufficient policies to address these problems. HSBC did not address the specifics of Clarke's assertions and he resigned shortly thereafter. Stuart Kirk, the bank's global head of responsible investing, was suspended in May due to his speech in which he said "There's always some nut job telling me about the end of the world." He quit his position in July, criticising the "cancel culture" in his Linkedin post, and blaming it for his suspension and resignation. In October, the company had its two advertisements banned due to being misleading about the company's activities for reducing the effects of climate change. The Advertising Standards Authority (ASA), who was behind the ban, stated that the posters omitted material information about how HSBC planned to tackle the climate change and reduce its impact. The group announced in November 1998 that the HSBC brand and the hexagon symbol would be adopted as the unified brand in all the markets where HSBC operates, with the aim of enhancing recognition of the group and its values by customers, shareholders and staff throughout the world. The hexagon symbol was originally adopted by the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation as its logo in 1983. It was developed from the bank's house flag, a white rectangle divided diagonally to produce a red hourglass shape. Like many other Hong Kong company flags that originated in the 19th century, and because of its founder's nationality, the design was based on the cross of Saint Andrew. The logo was designed by Austrian graphic artist Henry Steiner. In 2018, HSBC made minor changes to their logo. The wordmark was repositioned from left to the right, resized to be smaller, and was switched from Serif to a licensed custom font called Univers Next for HSBC. The logo red was made slightly darker red. Having sponsored the Jaguar Racing Formula One team since the days of Stewart Grand Prix, HSBC ended its relationship with motorsport after seven years when Red Bull purchased Jaguar Racing from Ford. In the mid-2000s, HSBC switched its focus to golf, taking title sponsorship of several events such as the HSBC World Match Play Championship, HSBC Women's World Match Play Championship (now defunct), WGC-HSBC Champions, Abu Dhabi HSBC Golf Championship, HSBC Women's Champions, HSBC Golf Business Forum and HSBC Golf Roots (a youth development programme). HSBC was named the 'Official Banking Partner' of the Open Championship, in a five-year deal announced in 2010. In October 2010, the International Rugby Board announced that they had concluded a 5-year deal with HSBC which granted them status as the first-ever title sponsor of the World Sevens Series. Through the accord, HSBC is paying more than $100 million for the title naming rights to all the tournaments. HSBC opted to sub-license the naming rights to all but one of the individual tournaments while retaining its name sponsorship of the overall series and the Hong Kong Sevens. The company also sponsors the Hong Kong Rugby Union and the New South Wales Waratahs team in Super Rugby. It sponsored British & Irish Lions during their 2009 tour to South Africa and 2013 tour to Australia. HSBC is the official banking partner of the Wimbledon Championships tennis tournament, providing banking facilities on site and renaming the junior event as the HSBC Road to Wimbledon National 14 and Under Challenge. HSBC's other sponsorships are mainly in the area of education, health and the environment. In November 2006, HSBC announced a $5 million partnership with SOS Children as part of Future First. Around 44% of HSBC shares are held by the general public and around 56% are held by institutions. The largest shareholders in early 2024 were: BlackRock (8.9%) Ping An Asset Management (8.82%) The Vanguard Group (4.75%) Norges Bank (2.87%) Legal & General (1.89%) State Street Global Advisors (1.66%) HSBC Asset Management (1.12%) UBS Asset Management AG (1.05%) HSBC Holdings General Employee Benefit Trust (0.9%) Schroder Investment Management (0.71%) Northern Trust Global Investments (0.68%) Aviva Investors (0.64%) Royal London Asset Management (0.61%) Amundi (0.54%) Abrdn Plc (0.53%) Group Chairman: Mark Tucker (October 2017 to present) Group Chief Executive: Noel Quinn (March 2020 to present) The position of Group Chairman was formed in 1991; the preceding position, Chairman of The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, has remained a separate position. Sir William Purves (1991–1998); concurrently Group Chief Executive from 1991 to 1993 Sir John Bond (1998–2006) The Lord Green (2006–2010) Sir Douglas Flint (2010–2017) The position of Group Chief Executive was formed in 1991; the preceding position, chief executive of The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation, has remained a separate position. William Purves (1991–1993) John Bond (1993–1998) Keith Whitson (1998–2003) Stephen Green (2003–2006) Michael Geoghegan (2007–2010) Stuart Gulliver (2011–2018) John Flint (2018–2019) Banks portal London portal Companies portal HSBC lions List of banks in the United Kingdom List of buildings and structures in Hong Kong List of investors in Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities Peking University HSBC Business School Primary dealer Too big to fail "HSBC's history". HSBC Holdings plc. Archived from the original on 31 January 2013. Retrieved 4 September 2010. "The Hongkong and Shanghai Bank Ordinance (Numbers 2 and 5 of 1866)". Legislative Council of Hong Kong (digitalised by the University of Hong Kong (Hongkong University Libraries)). Retrieved 21 June 2015. "Consent to Variation of Class Rights, signed, JM Gray, for and on behalf of HSBC Holdings Besloten Vennootschap [of the Netherlands], reproduced as part of Exhibit Number One in Form 20-F filed by HSBC Holdings PLC with the Securities and Exchanges Commission of the United States of America, dated March 20, 2006". HSBC Holdings PLC. Archived from the original on 22 June 2015. Retrieved 21 June 2015. "Annual Report 2023" (PDF). HSBC. Retrieved 21 February 2024. "Careers". HSBC. Retrieved 21 February 2024. UK Ring Fencing | HSBC UK Archived 24 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine Accessed on 11 December 2017 "The world's 100 largest banks, 2022". S&P Global Market Intelligence. Naidu, Richa (9 December 2013). "HSBC considering listing UK banking arm – FT". Reuters. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 9 March 2014. "Company History of HSBC Holdings plc in Fundinguniverse.com". Fundinguniverse.com. Retrieved 20 January 2012. "HSBC Group Structure" (PDF). HSBC Holdings plc. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 July 2012. Retrieved 20 January 2012. "Group history 1980–1999". HSBC Holdings plc. Archived from the original on 15 August 2010. Retrieved 4 September 2010. "HSBC Website About us". HSBC Holdings plc. Retrieved 7 September 2023. "Global 2000". Forbes. Retrieved 12 June 2023. HSBC Holdings plc – Share information. Hsbc.com. Retrieved on 6 December 2013. Gangster Bankers: Too Big to Jail, How HSBC hooked up with drug traffickers and terrorists. And got away with it Archived 16 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine, Rolling Stone magazine, Matt Taibbi, 14 February 2013. Profile: HSBC Holdings plc, Hoovers "Latest Formula 1 Breaking News - Grandprix.com". www.grandprix.com. Lim, Patricia (2002), Discovering Hong Hong's Cultural Heritage, Hong Kong: Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-592723-0. Hoare, Jim. Pares, Susan. A Political And Economic Dictionary of East Asia. UK Routledge Publishing (London), 2005. ISBN 978-1-85743-258-9 "About HSBC (HSBC in Japan)". The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation Limited of Hong Kong, Japan Branch (Tokyo). Retrieved 22 June 2015. "Shanghai Stock Exchange Project". Yale School of Management. 30 July 2013. Retrieved 1 July 2018. "Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Co". Claxity. 15 February 2021. Horesh, Niv (2009). Shanghai's Bund and beyond : British banks, banknote Issuance, and monetary policy in China, 1842-1937. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-14362-1. OCLC 587626534. Collis, Maurice (1965). Wayfoong: The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation. London: Faber and Faber. p. 251. OCLC 2865302. "MacDonald House attack still strikes home in S'pore". The Jakarta Post. Ben Laurance and Michael Gillard (13 April 2012). "HSBC loses £22.6m on HQ sale". Evening Standard. "The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation Limited Ordinance (Number 6 of 1929) (Chapter 70, 1950)), amended by L.N. 333 of 1989" (PDF). Legislative Council of Hong Kong (reproduced and digitalised by the Department of Justice, Government of Hongkong Special Administrative Region. Retrieved 21 June 2015. "Memorandum of Association of HSBC Holdings PLC dated the 18th. January 1956 and received on the 1st. January 1959 (as amended by Special Resolutions passed on the 20th. July 1981 and on the 18th. December 1990), Re-registration of Memorandum and Articles, dated the 24. December 1990, and stamped by Companies House on the 21st. December 1998, page 1, note 1". HSBC Holdings PLC (reproduced and digitalised by Companies House). Retrieved 21 June 2015.[dead link] "Hong Kong has probably lost HSBC's headquarters for good—and Beijing is to blame". 15 February 2016. Retrieved 14 April 2017. "HSBC Buys Bamerindus, Brazil Bank, For Billion". The New York Times. 28 March 1997. "HSBC". UK Business Park. Archived from the original on 20 December 2013. Retrieved 18 April 2011. "Bank Group to Buy Republic New York". The New York Times. 11 May 1999. Garfield, Andrew (3 April 2000). "HSBC leads the way into euro zone with £6.6bn French bank takeover". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 31 October 2009. "HSBC buys insolvent Turkish bank". BBC News. 20 July 2001. "HSBC buys Mexico's biggest retail bank". BBC News. 21 August 2002. "HSBC pays £9bn for credit card group". BBC News. 14 November 2002. "Sir John Bond lays bare HSBC's strategy for gaining ground". Thebanker.com. 14 April 2011. Retrieved 18 April 2011. "HSBC hates subprime". ft.com. "HSBC HQ, Canary Wharf" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 May 2013. Retrieved 18 April 2011. "HSBC acquires Korea fund administrator". Asian Investor. Retrieved 2 July 2003. Timmons, Heather (12 September 2003). "HSBC Gets Approval To Acquire Polish Bank". The New York Times. "HSBC 'buys stake in Chinese bank'". BBC News. 24 June 2004. "M&S faces OFT inquiry into HSBC deal". The Independent. London. 12 September 2004. Dash, Eric (5 August 2005). "HSBC to Acquire Metris for $1.59 Billion in Cash". The New York Times. Retrieved 24 March 2012. "HSBC closes in on Iraqi bank deal". BBC News. 2 October 2005. "HSBC acquires Banca Nazionale del Lavoro SA from BNP Paribas SA". Alacrastore.com. 28 April 2006. Archived from the original on 27 February 2021. Retrieved 18 April 2011. Treanor, Jill (15 December 2007). "Taiwan gives HSBC £750m to take on Chinese bank". The Guardian. London. "HSBC buys majority stake in IL&FS arm". The Hindu. 18 May 2008. Retrieved 14 April 2017. Elyssa Pachico. "Sinaloa Cartel Bought Narco Plane Via HSBC Bank". insightcrime.org. Retrieved 15 March 2015. "HSBC became bank to drug cartels, pays big for lapses". reuters.com. 12 December 2012. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 15 March 2015. Mazur, Robert (2 January 2013). "How Bankers Help Drug Traffickers and Terrorists". The New York Times. Christie Smythe (3 July 2013). "HSBC Judge Approves $1.9B Drug-Money Laundering Accord". Bloomberg.com. Retrieved 15 March 2015. Hamilton, Jesse. "HSBC Executive Resigns at Senate Money-Laundering Hearing". Bloomberg. Retrieved 19 January 2013. "HSBC To Pay Up To US$112.5 Million For Westpac Sub-Custody Operations In Australia And New Zealand". Global Custodian. Retrieved 27 July 2006. Kennedy, Simon (8 February 2007). "Sub-prime gloom picks up after HSBC warning". MarketWatch. Retrieved 7 November 2018. "Business | Timeline: Sub-prime losses". BBC News. 19 May 2008. Retrieved 7 November 2018. Jon Menon 'HSBC to Raise $17.7 Billion as Subprime Cuts Profit', Bloomberg L.P., 2 March 2009 Seib, Christine (10 October 2008). "HSBC quick to comply with refinancing demands". The Times. London. HSBC bank closes its operations in the U.S.[dead link] Jon Menon, HSBC Rues Household Deal, Halts U.S. Subprime Lending, Bloomberg L.P. 2 March 2009. Neil Hume, Quote du jour – Stephen Green, FT Alphaville, 2 March 2009: "HSBC has a reputation for telling it as it is. With the benefit of hindsight, this is an acquisition we wish we had not undertaken." HSBC bank closes its operations in the U.S.[dead link] Benjamin Scent HSBC seeking to build `war chest', The Standard, 4 March 2009. Benjamin Scent 'Plunge probe' The Standard, 10 March 2009. "HSBC to close retail banking business in Russia". 25 April 2011. Wilson, Harry; Farrell, Sean; Aldrick, Philip (22 September 2010). "HSBC investors against Michael Geoghegan becoming chairman". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. "HSBC chief Michael Geoghegan 'to quit' after failing to get top job". NewsCore. 24 September 2010. Archived from the original on 4 December 2013. Retrieved 28 May 2011. Wilson, Harry (23 September 2010). "Douglas Flint to be HSBC chairman, Michael Geoghegan to leave in radical reshuffle". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. "Great HSBC reshuffle". 23 September 2010.Euromoney "HSBC significantly cutting staff and operations to save money". Story.sierraleonetimes.com. 1 August 2011. Archived from the original on 28 March 2012. Retrieved 21 January 2012. "HSBC sheds 30,000 jobs, posts surprise profit rise". Reuters. 1 August 2011. "HSBC to Sell 195 Branches to First Niagara for $1 Billion". Businessweek. 1 August 2011. Archived from the original on 2 November 2012. Retrieved 21 January 2012. Capital One to Buy HSBC Card Unit for $2.6 Billion Premium HSBC provided a credit line used by Best Buy to lend consumers credit on purchases.[dead link] "HSBC to Reap $2.4 Billion Gain From Sale of U.S. Card Division". "HSBC in insurance sell-off". Insurance Age. 13 September 2011. Retrieved 14 April 2017. "HSBC money laundering report: Key findings". BBC News. 11 December 2012. "HSBC Exposed U.S. Financial System to Money Laundering, Drug, Terrorist Financing Risks". United States Senate, The Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. 17 July 2012. Retrieved 23 December 2012. "HSBC Exposed U.S. Financial System to Money Laundering, Drug, Terrorist Financing Risks (press release)". United States Senate, The Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. 16 July 2012. Archived from the original on 16 August 2019. Retrieved 22 December 2012. Mollenkamp, Carrick (12 December 2012). "HSBC became bank to drug cartels, pays big for lapses". Reuters. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 14 July 2013. Rushe, Dominic (11 July 2012). "HSBC chief admits bank failed to control money laundering" – via www.theguardian.com. "HSBC to pay $1.9 billion U.S. fine in money-laundering case". Reuters. 11 December 2012. Archived from the original on 12 February 2015. Retrieved 11 December 2012. "Too Big to Indict". The New York Times. 11 December 2012. Retrieved 12 December 2012. Finch, Gavin (8 July 2013). "HSBC Names Keir Head of HSBC U.K. Bank Unit, Replacing Robertson". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 21 October 2016. Retrieved 12 July 2013. "Swiss Re unit acquiring UK pension business of HSBC Life". London Mercury. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 12 June 2014. "Swiss Leaks: Murky Cash Sheltered by Bank Secrecy". International Consortium of Investigative Journalists. 8 February 2015. Gerard Ryle; Will Fitzgibbon; Mar Cabra; Rigoberto Carvajal; Marina Walker Guevara; Martha M. Hamilton; Tom Stites (8 February 2015). "Banking Giant HSBC Sheltered Murky Cash Linked to Dictators and Arms Dealers". "HSBC selling unprofitable Brazil unit to Bradesco for $5.2 billion". Reuters. 3 August 2015. Archived from the original on 4 August 2015. Retrieved 1 July 2017. Chandramouli (2015). The Brand Trust Report India Study 2015. TRA. p. 108. ISBN 978-81-920823-8-7. Tom Rollins (7 April 2016). "HSBC shuts accounts of Syrians in UK after 'lobbying' for Assad's cousin: #PanamaPapers: Panama Papers show HSBC had links with Rami Makhlouf as Syrian war raged, but then began to close ordinary civilian accounts as 'risks'". Middle East Eye. Retrieved 15 May 2016. British banks handled vast sums of laundered Russian money in The Guardian by Luke Harding, Nick Hopkins and Caelainn Barr on 20 March 2017 Global banks handled laundered Russian cash worth hundreds of millions in CNN by Ivana Kottasova on 24 March 2017 Lockett, Hudson (12 March 2017). "Mark Tucker wastes no time choosing next HSBC chief". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 15 October 2017. "HSBC appoints John Flint to succeed Stuart Gulliver as Group Chief Executive" (PDF). HSBC. 12 October 2017. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 October 2017. Retrieved 14 October 2017. Makortoff, Kalyeena (5 August 2019). "HSBC boss John Flint resigns 'by mutual agreement'". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 20 August 2019. "HSBC appoints Noel Quinn permanent chief executive". Financial Times. 17 March 2020. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 14 June 2020. Makortoff, Kalyeena (18 February 2020). "HSBC to cut 35,000 jobs worldwide as profits plunge". The Guardian. Retrieved 18 February 2020. White, Lawrence; Cruise, Sinead; Jessop, Simon (9 October 2020). "CORRECTED-EXCLUSIVE-HSBC targets net-zero emissions by 2050, earmarks $1 trln green financing". Reuters. Retrieved 12 October 2020. White, Iain Withers, Lawrence (20 January 2021). "HSBC to axe up to 340 management jobs in UK branch shake-up - source". Reuters. Retrieved 20 January 2021.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) HSBC to Exit Most U.S. Retail Banking Wall Street Journal 27 May 2021 "HSBC shifts focus from west to east as profits dive". BBC News. 23 February 2021. Retrieved 24 February 2021. ShareAction, HSBC sends shockwaves as it commits to end coal financing, published 11 March 2021, accessed 22 July 2021 HSBC, HSBC Thermal Coal Phase-Out Policy, accessed 28 December 2021 "HSBC buys AXA Singapore for $575 million to grow in asia wealth". Bloomberg.com. Bloomberg. 16 August 2021. Retrieved 30 January 2022. "HSBC to buy India's L&T Investment Management for $425-million". Bloomberg. Retrieved 30 January 2022. "Британский HSBC сообщил, когда планирует окончательно уйти с российского рынка". Banki.ru (in Russian). 30 October 2023. "Putin grants HSBC approval to sell Russian unit to Expobank". Reuters. 19 February 2024. "HSBC installs Communist party committee in Chinese investment bank". Financial Times. 21 July 2022. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 22 July 2022. Canada, Royal Bank of. "RBC to strengthen premium Canadian business with agreement to acquire HSBC Canada". www.newswire.ca. Retrieved 29 November 2022. Li, Selena (4 November 2022). "HSBC top shareholder Ping An urges aggressive cost cuts, renews spin-off push". Reuters. Retrieved 29 November 2022. "Banking giant HSBC sees quarterly profit almost double". BBC News. Retrieved 21 February 2023. "HSBC to close 114 UK branches as more people bank online". BBC News. 30 November 2022. Retrieved 21 February 2023. "HSBC profit triples on higher rates, beats expectations". 2 May 2023. "HSBC Investors Reject Special Resolutions on Dividends, Strategy". Bloomberg.com. 5 May 2023. Retrieved 5 May 2023. "HSBC AM Buying Singapore's Silkroad to build real estate deal team". 12 December 2023. "HSBC looks to mergers to expand footprint, serve wealthy customers in Asia, bank chief says". 13 December 2023. "The cheque's end is nigh: Hong Kong's banks set road map to phase out paper payment in their embrace of e-payments". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 7 February 2024. Retrieved 7 February 2024. "HSBC takes on Revolut, Wise with new forex app for non-customers". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 1 February 2024. Retrieved 7 February 2024. "HSBC rolls out payment solution in Philippines". Businessworld. 5 March 2024. Retrieved 7 March 2024. "Contact us." HSBC. Retrieved on 12 September 2011. "Global HSBC Group Head OfficeHSBC Group Head Office – London Address: HSBC Holdings plc 8 Canada Square London E14 5HQ" Withers, Iain (26 June 2023). "HSBC to ditch Canary Wharf tower in favour of central London -memo". Reuters. Retrieved 26 June 2023. Relsbank "The Global 2000" Forbes, 2 April 2008 "The world's biggest banks". The Economist. 6 July 2006. Retrieved 18 April 2011. "Top 1000 World Banks 2014 – Western European banks mount a comeback". The Banker. 30 June 2014. Archived from the original on 20 March 2016. Retrieved 29 November 2022. "Hot Brands" The Banker, 4 March 2008 Fast Facts Archived 3 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine HSBC Website, 4 April 2008 Goodway, Nick (3 August 2013). "HSBC awards market's top audit to PricewaterhouseCoopers;". The Independent. London. "Why Chinese insurer Ping An is calling for a break-up of HSBC". Financial Times. 4 May 2022. Retrieved 16 May 2023. Standard, The. "HSBC reaches deal to buy out China fund partner: sources ". The Standard. Retrieved 16 May 2023. "Simplified Structure Chart: Principal entities as of 1 July 2018" (PDF). 1 July 2018. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 July 2018. Retrieved 30 July 2018. https://www.ardshinbank.am/en/news/ardshinbank-announces-agreement-acquire-hsbc-armenia https://www.azatutyun.am/amp/32809440.html Davies, Paul J (13 March 2012). "HSBC to scale back Asian operations". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 22 September 2019. Financial Times, Thursday 21 April 2016, p. 17. "HSBC to wind down its operations in Brunei". 5 April 2016. Archived from the original on 10 April 2016. "HSBC Group has taken the decision to restructure its global Islamic banking business and will no longer offer Shari'ah compliant products and services". HSBC Bank Bangladesh - Islamic Banking. HSBC Bank Bangladesh, a wholly owned subsidiary of HSBC Group. Retrieved 1 December 2019. "HSBC Group has announced that it will focus its Islamic Finance offering on customers in Malaysia and Saudi Arabia". HSBC Bank Bangladesh - Amanah Retail Banking. HSBC. Retrieved 1 December 2019. "HSBC Bank International Limited". Archived from the original on 27 November 2011. Retrieved 18 April 2011. "About HSBC". HSBC Holdings plc. Archived from the original on 9 March 2011. Retrieved 7 March 2011. "Commercial Banking". HSBC. Retrieved 14 April 2017. "Appointment of Noel Quinn as CEO of Global Commercial Banking". HSBC Press Release. 17 December 2015. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 1 March 2019. "About Global Banking and Markets". Hsbcnet.com. Archived from the original on 11 October 2011. Retrieved 18 April 2011. "HSBC Annual Review 2012" (PDF). Retrieved 3 April 2013. "Strategy Day" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 May 2012. Retrieved 21 January 2012. "Restructuring HSBC merges WM clients". 2 March 2020. Retrieved 2 March 2020. "HSBC bank 'to offshore more jobs'". BBC News. 16 March 2005. "Hsbc Usa". Hsbcdirect.com. 25 January 2010. Retrieved 18 April 2011. "HSBC Canada". Hsbcdirect.com. 25 January 2010. Retrieved 18 April 2011. "HSBC Taiwan". Hsbcdirect.com. 25 January 2010. Retrieved 18 April 2011. "HSBC South Korea". Hsbcdirect.com. 25 January 2010. Retrieved 18 April 2011. "Small Business Banking. HSBC DIRECT for business, small | HSBC Bank India". Hsbc.co.in. Retrieved 19 January 2013. "HSBC South Korea". Hsbcdirect.com. 25 January 2010. Retrieved 18 April 2011. "HSBCnet". HSBCnet. Retrieved 18 April 2011. "HSBC Advance". us.hsbc.com. Retrieved 9 March 2021. "HSBC Premier". HSBC Premier. Retrieved 21 January 2012. "Worldwide Assistance and Online Premier Banking". HSBC.co.jp. Retrieved 10 August 2013. "Jade membership". HSBC. Retrieved 15 December 2018. HSBC: Too big to jail?, CNNMoney, James O'Toole, 12 December 2012. U.S. Vulnerabilities to Money Laundering, Drugs, and Terrorist Financing: HSBC Case History [PDF file], Carl Levin, Chair, Tom Coburn, Ranking Minority, 17 July 2012 Hearing. See especially page 3 [8 in PDF]. "British Bank Fined for Money Laundering in Argentina". www.occrp.org. Retrieved 3 October 2021. "Will get to bottom of HSBC staff violating safety norms: Govt on money laundering allegations". The Times of India. 19 July 2012. Archived from the original on 26 January 2013. Sanyal, Prasad (9 November 2012). "Arvind Kejriwal targets HSBC, Mukesh Ambani over black money". NDTV. Retrieved 9 November 2012. Standard Chartered, HSBC officials caught on camera offering to launder money, CNN-IBN & Cobrapost, Syed Masroor Hasan, Rohit Khanna, updated 18 June 2013. Bowers, Simon (9 November 2012). "HSBC Jersey accounts investigated by UK tax authorities". Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 26 September 2014. Retrieved 24 February 2020. AFIP denounces HSBC with money-laundering, tax evasion, Buenos Aires Herald, 18 March 2013. HSBC faces new money laundering claims in Argentina, BBC, 18 March 2013. Argentina: HSBC helped launder money, evade taxes, CBS News, Associated Press (New York), 18 March 2013. Terrorists and drug lords targeted HSBC, bosses admit, The Independent [UK], Simon English, 6 February 2013. HSBC Hires Tax, Anti-Terror Chiefs for Controls Panel, Bloomberg, Howard Mustoe, 30 January 2013. "HSBC pays out £28m over money-laundering claims". The Guardian. 4 June 2015. Retrieved 14 April 2017. "South African central bank fines HSBC for lax money laundering controls". Reuters. 9 November 2018. Retrieved 3 October 2021. Ryan, Peter (8 April 2020). "HSBC flags potential anti-money laundering law breaches". ABC News. Retrieved 3 October 2021. "HSBC reports potential money laundering breaches in Australia". Reuters. 8 April 2020. Retrieved 3 October 2021. "HSBC faces questions over disclosure of alleged money laundering to monitors". the Guardian. 28 July 2021. Retrieved 3 October 2021. "Money-laundering ring pushed $4billion through HSBC". The Bureau of Investigative Journalism (en-GB). Retrieved 3 October 2021. Withers, Iain (17 December 2021). "HSBC fined $85 mln for UK anti-money laundering failings". Reuters – via www.reuters.com. U.S. Vulnerabilities to Money Laundering, Drugs, and Terrorist Financing: HSBC Case History (Report). United States Senate. 17 July 2012. pp. 113–188. Retrieved 7 February 2016. Hamilton, Jesse; Voreacos, David (23 July 2012). "HSBC Executive Resigns at Senate Money-Laundering Hearing". Bloomberg Business. Retrieved 7 February 2016. An outside audit by Deloitte LLP showed that 25,000 transactions totaling more than $19.4 billion involved Iran, according to the report. Of those, as many as 90 percent passed through the bank's U.S. accounts with no disclosure of ties to Iran, the report shows. Senate investigators documented similar transactions from a list of other prohibited jurisdictions including North Korea, Cuba, Sudan and Burma. Peston, Robert (11 December 2012). "HSBC to pay $1.9bn in US money laundering penalties". BBC News (Business). Retrieved 7 February 2016. The Senate report also said HSBC regularly circumvented restrictions on dealings with Iran, North Korea, and other states subject to US sanctions. Mollenkamp, Carrick; Wolf, Brett (11 December 2012). "HSBC to pay record $1.9-billion fine in U.S. money-laundering case". The Globe and Mail. Toronto. Retrieved 14 July 2013. Dart, Tom (11 February 2016). "The Guardian – Families of Americans killed by Mexican cartels sue HSBC for laundering billions". Retrieved 5 June 2016. "The Untold Story Of What Really Happened After HSBC, El Chapo's Bank, Promised To Get Clean". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "HSBC moved vast sums of dirty money after paying record laundering fine". ICIJ. 21 September 2020. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "Here Is How Banks Have Responded To The FinCEN Files Investigation". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "CFTC Orders Five Banks to Pay over $1.4 Billion in Penalties for Attempted Manipulation of Foreign Exchange Benchmark Rates". Commodities Futures trading Commission. 12 November 2014. Retrieved 13 November 2014. "HSBC, JP Morgan and Crédit Agricole fined €485m by EU". The Guardian. 7 December 2016. Retrieved 23 September 2017. "Barclays, UBS, HSBC Agree To $36M Settlement In Libor Suit". Law 360. 7 June 2017. Retrieved 23 September 2017. "Switzerland Fines Credit Agricole, HSBC $7.2M Over Euribor". Competition Policy International. 27 October 2020. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "HSBC faces charges of fraud and money laundering from Belgian state". the Guardian. 17 November 2014. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "HSBC's private banking arm accused of tax fraud by Belgium". BBC News. 17 November 2014. Retrieved 24 February 2021. Guarascio, Francesco (6 August 2019). "HSBC agrees to 300 mln euro settlement of Belgian tax fraud case: prosecutors". Reuters. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "HSBC to repay Belgium $336m for lost tax revenue". www.aljazeera.com. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "Daily Telegraph's Peter Oborne urges HSBC coverage review". BBC News. 18 February 2015. Retrieved 18 February 2015. Oborne, Peter (17 February 2015). "Why I have resigned from the Telegraph". Retrieved 17 February 2015. "HSBC pays 300 million euros to settle investigation of Swiss bank". Reuters. 14 November 2017. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "Ex-HSBC Swiss Banker Pleads Guilty in $1.8 Billion French Tax Case". ICIJ. 7 August 2019. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "HSBC To Pay $192m Penalty For Helping Americans Evade Taxes". ICIJ. 11 December 2019. Retrieved 24 February 2021. Miller, John (11 December 2019). "HSBC Swiss unit to pay $192 million in latest U.S. tax evasion deal". Reuters. Retrieved 24 February 2021. Neate, Rupert; Treanor, Jill (20 July 2016). "FBI arrests senior HSBC banker accused of rigging multibillion-dollar deal". the Guardian. Retrieved 21 July 2016. Mali, Meghashyam (20 July 2016). "Feds charge HSBC bankers in currency scheme". Retrieved 21 July 2016. Pierson, Brendan (13 September 2019). "U.S. court upholds ex-HSBC executive's conviction for foreign-exchange scheme". Reuters. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "Former HSBC Executive Convicted of Fraud for Front-Running". Wall Street Journal. 23 October 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2017. Hurtado, Patricia; Nguyen, Lananh (26 April 2018). "Ex-HSBC FX Trader Sentenced to 2 Years, Sent Directly to Prison". Bloomberg News. "Ex-HSBC Trader Denied Supreme Court Appeal of Fraud Conviction". Bloomberg.com. 2 November 2020. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "Ex-HSBC Banker Can't Skip Prison, But Wins Vaccine Delay - Law360". www.law360.com. Retrieved 24 February 2021. S, Jonathan Stempel, Sangameswaran (18 January 2018). "HSBC to pay $100 million to settle U.S. probe into currency rigging". Reuters. Retrieved 24 February 2021.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "HSBC Holdings Plc Agrees to Pay More Than $100 Million to Resolve Fraud Charges". www.justice.gov. 18 January 2018. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "Elbit - Investor Relations - FAQ". phx.corporate-ir.net. Retrieved 31 December 2018. "Citing human rights, HSBC to divest from Israeli arms developer Elbit - Arab-Israeli Conflict - Jerusalem Post". www.jpost.com. Retrieved 31 December 2018. "PRESS RELEASE: Banking giant HSBC divests from Israeli arms manufacturer following pressure from human rights campaigners". Palestine Solidarity Campaign. 27 December 2018. Retrieved 31 December 2018. Julian, Hana Levi. "Not So Fast: HSBC Bank May Not Be Boycotting Israel After All". The Jewish Press. Retrieved 31 December 2018. "Bad banking - Opinion - Jerusalem Post". www.jpost.com. Retrieved 1 January 2019. "HSBC Agrees To Pay $765 Million In Connection With Its Sale Of Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities". www.justice.gov. 9 October 2018. Retrieved 24 February 2021. Maidenberg, Micah (10 October 2018). "HSBC to Pay $765 Million to Settle Mortgage-Backed Securities Probe". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 24 February 2021. Team, Trefis. "DoJ Lets HSBC Off The Hook With $765 Million Settlement Of Legacy Mortgage Issue". Forbes. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "HSBC to pay $765 million to settle U.S. mortgage securities mis-selling claim". Reuters. 9 October 2018. Retrieved 24 February 2021. Wilson, Harry (3 June 2020). "HSBC, StanChart Defy U.K. to Endorse Hong Kong Security Law". Bloomberg. Retrieved 4 June 2020. Chatterjee, Sumeet (3 June 2020). "HSBC and Standard Chartered back China's imposition of security law on Hong Kong". The Globe and Mail. Toronto. Retrieved 4 June 2020. McGregor, Grady (3 June 2020). "How HSBC got stuck between Beijing's new Hong Kong law and a hard place". Fortune. Retrieved 4 June 2020. "HSBC and StanChart back China security laws for HK". BBC News. 4 June 2020. Retrieved 4 June 2020. Gopalan, Nisha (4 June 2020). "HSBC Is Navigating Dangerous Waters on Hong Kong". Bloomberg. Retrieved 4 June 2020. "Raab hits out at HSBC over its support for Hong Kong security laws". CityAM. 15 June 2020. Retrieved 15 June 2020. "Hong Kong police raid church hours after pastor said HSBC froze accounts". the Guardian. 8 December 2020. Retrieved 8 December 2020. Roantree, Susan Heavey, Lawrence White, Anne Marie (26 August 2020). "U.S. slams HSBC over treatment of Hong Kong customers, says China 'bullying' UK". Reuters. Retrieved 8 December 2020.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "HSBC boss defends decision to freeze accounts of fugitive ex-lawmaker Ted Hui". South China Morning Post. 27 January 2021. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "HSBC CEO defends working with Chinese authorities in Hong Kong". POLITICO. 26 January 2021. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "Lawmakers challenge HSBC on Hong Kong activist's accounts". Reuters. 8 February 2021. Retrieved 16 February 2021. "HSBC urged to unfreeze accounts of Hong Kong activist". the Guardian. 8 February 2021. Retrieved 16 February 2021. "Banking Report". APPG Inquiry. Retrieved 8 February 2023. Makortoff, Kalyeena; correspondent, Kalyeena Makortoff Banking (8 February 2023). "UK MPs and peers find HSBC complicit in Hong Kong human rights abuses". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 8 February 2023. Chee, Foo Yun (2 December 2021). "EU fines HSBC, Credit Suisse, others over 'Sterling Lads' forex cartel". Reuters – via www.reuters.com. Kowsmann, Patricia (2 December 2021). "HSBC, Credit Suisse, Others Fined for 'Sterling Lads' Currency Cartel". Wall Street Journal – via www.wsj.com. Bowers, Simon (8 April 2008). "HSBC loses disk with policy details of 370,000 customers". The Guardian. London. "HSBC fined £3m for 'careless' handling of customer details". The Guardian. 22 July 2009. Retrieved 15 June 2020. "How a National Security Investigation of Huawei Set Off an International Incident". The New York Times. 14 December 2018. Retrieved 14 December 2018. "HSBC and Goldman Sachs held $335m of Libyan state oil money". Global Witness. Revealed: Where Libya invests ,3bn. BBC News (25 May 2011). Retrieved on 6 December 2013. New leaked document reveals HSBC held $1.4bn of Libyan funds. Global Witness. Retrieved on 6 December 2013. "In the Future There Will Be No Forests Left" (PDF). Global Witness. 2 November 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 September 2020. Retrieved 12 November 2012. "Log tale – A new investigation accuses HSBC of ignoring its own sustainability policies". The Economist. 3 November 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. "HSBC funding destruction of vast areas of Indonesian rainforest, new report claims". The Independent. Retrieved 4 October 2018. "HSBC imposes restrictions on large cash withdrawals". BBC News. 24 January 2014. Retrieved 9 March 2014. "HSBC glitch payments 'all processed'". BBC News. 29 August 2015. "HSBC Bank pays $2.4 million to settle class-action over spam calls". www.consumeraffairs.com. 6 January 2020. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "EXCLUSIVE Banker behind report alleging HSBC racism resigns over lack of support". Reuters. 9 August 2021. "HSBC banker who quit over racism report says efforts to hire more Black leaders failing". Reuters. 18 August 2021. "HSBC banker quits after 'nut job' climate speech". BBC News. 7 July 2022. Retrieved 8 July 2022. "HSBC climate change adverts banned by UK watchdog". BBC News. 19 October 2022. Retrieved 19 October 2022. "HSBC Logo". FamousLogos.net. Archived from the original on 6 February 2022. Retrieved 24 January 2012. "We've changed our look | HSBC". HSBC. Archived from the original on 2 September 2018. Retrieved 2 September 2018. "Jaguar and HSBC strike up a new deal". Crash. 10 July 2001. Retrieved 14 April 2017. "HSBC Named 'Official Banking Partner' of the Open". SponsorPitch. 15 October 2010. Retrieved 12 November 2010. "Who we are | HSBC Holdings plc". HSBC. "2013 British Lions Shirt Launched". 29 October 2012. Archived from the original on 1 November 2012. Retrieved 29 October 2012. "Official Suppliers". wimbledon.org. Retrieved 12 November 2010. "HSBC and SOS Children's Villages partnership". Soschildrensvillages.org.uk. 8 October 2005. Retrieved 18 April 2011. "HSBC Holdings plc Insider Trading & Ownership Structure". Simply Wall St. Retrieved 9 March 2024. HSBC Leadership (Board of Directors)"hsbc.com". Retrieved 7 December 2016. Patrick, Simon Clark and Margot (17 March 2020). "HSBC Appoints Noel Quinn as Permanent CEO". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 22 September 2020. Lan, Rixu (2015). Transformation of China's Modern Banking System. Enrich Professional Publishing. ISBN 978-1-62320-080-0. "Sir William Purves - If I had to start again". Management Today. 1 December 2003. Retrieved 7 November 2022. "Sir John leaves HSBC after 45 years". The Guardian. 27 May 2006. Retrieved 7 November 2022. "HSBC chairman Stephen Green to be trade minister". The Guardian. 7 September 2010. Retrieved 7 November 2022. "HSBC chairman Douglas Flint recalls the good, the bad and the scandalous". 5 May 2017. Retrieved 7 November 2022. "HSBC chairman returns from exile to offer some home truths". Herald Scotland. 4 November 1993. Retrieved 7 November 2022. "Sir John Bond". Loughborough University. 2000. Retrieved 7 November 2022. "Former HSBC chief Sir Keith Whitson joins hiring row". The Telegraph. 12 September 2010. Retrieved 10 September 2016. "HSBC chief Mike Geoghegan ousted after brutal boardroom battle". The Guardian. 23 September 2010. Retrieved 7 November 2022. "Breakingviews - Gulliver exits HSBC with nearly full scorecard". Reuters. 20 February 2018. Retrieved 7 November 2022. "HSBC boss John Flint resigns 'by mutual agreement'". The Guardian. 5 August 2019. Retrieved 7 November 2022. Wikimedia Commons has media related to HSBC. Official website Business data for HSBC Holdings plc: SEC filings HSBC companies grouped at OpenCorporates