Eagle is the common name for the golden eagle, bald eagle, and other birds of prey in the family Accipitridae. Eagles belong to several groups of genera, some of which are closely related. True eagles comprise the genus Aquila. Most of the 68 species of eagles are from Eurasia and Africa. Outside this area, just 14 species can be found—two in North America, nine in Central and South America, and three in Australia. Eagles are not a natural group but denote essentially any kind of bird of prey large enough to hunt sizeable (about 50 cm long or more overall) vertebrates. Eagles are large, powerfully-built birds of prey, with heavy heads and beaks. Even the smallest eagles, such as the booted eagle (Hieraaetus pennatus), which is comparable in size to a common buzzard (Buteo buteo) or red-tailed hawk (B. jamaicensis), have relatively longer and more evenly broad wings, and more direct, faster flight – despite the reduced size of aerodynamic feathers. Most eagles are larger than any other raptors apart from some vultures. The smallest species of eagle is the South Nicobar serpent eagle (Spilornis klossi), at 450 g (1 lb) and 40 cm (16 in). The largest species are discussed below. Like all birds of prey, eagles have very large hooked beaks for ripping flesh from their prey, strong, muscular legs, and powerful talons. The beak is typically heavier than that of most other birds of prey. Eagles' eyes are extremely powerful. It is estimated that the wedge-tailed eagle has a visual acuity twice that of a typical human. This acuity enables eagles to spot potential prey from a very long distance. This keen eyesight is primarily attributed to their extremely large pupils which ensure minimal diffraction (scattering) of the incoming light. Like most diurnal raptors, eagles have little ability to see ultraviolet light. The female of all known species of eagles is larger than the male. Eagles normally build their nests, called eyries, in tall trees or on high cliffs. Many species lay two eggs, but the older, larger chick frequently kills its younger sibling once it has hatched. The parents take no action to stop the killing. It is said that eagles fly above clouds but this is not true. Eagles fly during storms and glide from the wind's pressure. This saves the bird's energy. Due to the size and power of many eagle species, they are ranked at the top of the food chain as apex predators in the avian world. The type of prey varies by genus. The Haliaeetus and Icthyophaga eagles prefer to capture fish, though the species in the former often capture various animals, especially other water birds, and are powerful kleptoparasites of other birds. The snake and serpent eagles of the genera Circaetus, Terathopius, and Spilornis predominantly prey on the great diversity of snakes found in the tropics of Africa and Asia. The eagles of the genus Aquila are often the top birds of prey in open habitats, taking almost any medium-sized vertebrate they can catch. Where Aquila eagles are absent, other eagles, such as the buteonine black-chested buzzard-eagle of South America, may assume the position of top raptorial predator in open areas. Many other eagles, including the species-rich genus Spizaetus, live predominantly in woodlands and forests. These eagles often target various arboreal or ground-dwelling mammals and birds, which are often unsuspectingly ambushed in such dense, knotty environments. Hunting techniques differ among the species and genera, with some individual eagles having engaged in quite varied techniques based on their environment and prey at any given time. Most eagles grab prey without landing and take flight with it, so the prey can be carried to a perch and torn apart. The bald eagle is noted for having flown with the heaviest load verified to be carried by any flying bird, since one eagle flew with a 6.8 kg (15 lb) mule deer fawn. However, a few eagles may target prey considerably heavier than themselves; such prey is too heavy to fly with, thus it is either eaten at the site of the kill or taken in pieces back to a perch or nest. Golden and crowned eagles have killed ungulates weighing up to 30 kg (66 lb) and a martial eagle even killed a 37 kg (82 lb) duiker, 7–8 times heavier than the preying eagle. Authors on birds David Allen Sibley, Pete Dunne, and Clay Sutton described the behavioral difference between hunting eagles and other birds of prey thus (in this case the bald and golden eagles as compared to other North American raptors): They have at least one singular characteristic. It has been observed that most birds of prey look back over their shoulders before striking prey (or shortly thereafter); predation is after all a two-edged sword. All hawks seem to have this habit, from the smallest kestrel to the largest Ferruginous – but not the Eagles. Among the eagles are some of the largest birds of prey: only the condors and some of the Old World vultures are markedly larger. It is regularly debated which should be considered the largest species of eagle. They could be measured variously in total length, body mass, or wingspan. Different lifestyle needs among various eagles result in variable measurements from species to species. For example, many forest-dwelling eagles, including the very large harpy eagle, have relatively short wingspans, a feature necessary for being able to maneuver in quick, short bursts through densely forested habitats. Eagles in the genus Aquila, found almost exclusively in open country, are noted for their ability to soar, and have relatively long wings for their size. These lists of the top five eagles are based on weight, length, and wingspan, respectively. Unless otherwise noted by reference, the figures listed are the median reported for each measurement in the guide Raptors of the World in which only measurements that could be personally verified by the authors were listed. The eagles are generally distributed in all types of habitats and nearly all parts of the world. The birds can be found in northern tundra to tropical rainforests and deserts. In North America, bald eagles and golden eagles are very common. Australasian Australia: wedge-tailed eagle (range extends into southern New Guinea), white-bellied sea-eagle (range extends into Asia), little eagle. New Guinea: Papuan eagle, white-bellied sea-eagle, pygmy eagle. Nearctic (USA and Canada): golden eagle (also found in Palearctic), bald eagle. Neotropical (Central and South America): Spizaetus (four species), solitary eagles (two spp.), harpy eagle, crested eagle, black-chested buzzard-eagle. Palearctic (Europe, Northern Africa, Asia without South Asia and Southeast Asia) Eurasia: Golden eagle, White-tailed eagle. Subsaharan Africa: African fish eagle, Martial Eagle, Crowned eagle, Verreaux's eagle, Tawny eagle, Long-crested eagle Eagles are often informally divided into four groups. The snake eagles are placed in the subfamily Circaetinae. The fish eagles, booted eagles, and harpy eagles have traditionally been placed in the subfamily Buteoninae together with the buzzard-hawks (buteonine hawks) and harriers. Some authors may treat these groups as tribes of the Buteoninae; Lerner & Mindell proposed separating the eagle groups into their own subfamilies of Accipitridae. Sea eagles or fish eagles take fish as a large part of their diets, either fresh or as carrion. Proposed subfamily Haliaeetinae. Genera: Haliaeetus, Icthyophaga. Some authors include Gypohierax angolensis, the "vulturine fish eagle" (also called the palm-nut vulture) in this group. However, genetic analyses indicate it is related to a grouping of Neophron–Gypaetus–Eutriorchis (Egyptian vulture, bearded vulture (lammergeier), and Madagascar serpent eagle). The fish eagles have a close genetic relationship with Haliastur and Milvus; the whole group is only distantly related to the Buteo group. Fish eagles exist in every continent throughout the world, except for South America. Booted eagles or "true eagles" have feathered tarsi (lower legs). Tribe Aquililae or proposed subfamily Aquilinae. Genera: Aquila, Hieraaetus; Spizaetus, Oroaetus, Spizastur; Nisaetus; Ictinaetus, Lophoaetus; Polemaetus; and Stephanoaetus. See comments under eagle species for changes to the composition of these genera. Most snake or serpent eagles, as the name suggests, primarily prey on snakes. Subfamily Circaetinae. Genera: Circaetus, Spilornis, Dryotriorchis, Terathopius. Eutriorchis (subfamily Gypaetinae or Circaetinae). Despite filling the niche of a snake eagle, genetic studies suggest that the Madagascar serpent eagle (Eutriorchis) is not related to them. Harpy eagles or "giant forest eagles" are large eagles that inhabit tropical forests. The group contains two to six species, depending on the author. Although these birds occupy similar niches and have traditionally been grouped, they are not all related: the solitary eagles are related to the black hawks and the Philippine eagle to the snake eagles. Harpy eagles (proposed subfamily Harpiinae) Harpia harpyja, harpy eagle ― Central and South America. Morphnus guianensis, crested eagle ― Central and South America. Harpyopsis novaeguineae, Papuan eagle ― New Guinea. Philippine eagle Pithecophaga jefferyi, Philippine eagle ― Philippines. Solitary eagles Chaco eagle or crowned solitary eagle, Buteogallus (formerly Harpyhaliaetus) coronatus ― South America. Solitary eagle or montane solitary eagle, Buteogallus (formerly Harpyhaliaetus) solitarius ― South America. Major new research into eagle taxonomy suggests that the important genera Aquila and Hieraaetus are not composed of nearest relatives, and it is likely that a reclassification of these genera will soon take place, with some species being moved to Lophaetus or Ictinaetus. Bonelli's eagle and the African hawk-eagle have been moved from Hieraaetus to Aquila. Either the greater spotted eagle and lesser spotted eagle should move from Aquila to join the long-crested eagle in Lophaetus, or, perhaps better, all three of these species should move to Ictinaetus with the black eagle. The steppe eagle and tawny eagle, once thought to be conspecific, are not even each other's nearest relatives. Family Accipitridae Subfamily Buteoninae – hawks (buzzards), true eagles and seaeagles Genus Geranoaetus Black-chested buzzard-eagle, Geranoaetus melanoleucus Genus Harpyhaliaetus Chaco eagle, Buteogallus coronatus Solitary eagle, H. solitarius Genus Morphnus Crested eagle, Morphnus guianensis Genus Harpia Harpy eagle, Harpia harpyja Genus Pithecophaga Philippine eagle, Pithecophaga jefferyi Genus Harpyopsis Papuan eagle, Harpyopsis novaeguineae Genus Spizaetus Black hawk-eagle, S. tyrannus Ornate hawk-eagle, S. ornatus Black-and-white hawk-eagle, S. melanoleucus – formerly Spizastur Black-and-chestnut eagle, S. isidori – formerly Oroaetus Genus Nisaetus – previously included in Spizaetus Changeable hawk-eagle, N. cirrhatus Flores hawk-eagle N. floris – earlier a subspecies, S. c. floris Sulawesi hawk-eagle, N. lanceolatus Mountain hawk-eagle, N. nipalensis Legge's hawk-eagle, Nisaetus kelaarti – previously a race of S. nipalensis Blyth's hawk-eagle, N. alboniger Javan hawk-eagle, N. bartelsi (Northern) Philippine hawk-eagle, N. philippensis Pinsker's hawk-eagle (Southern Philippine hawk-eagle), Nisaetus pinskeri – earlier S. philippensis pinskeri Wallace's hawk-eagle, N. nanus Genus Lophaetus Long-crested eagle, Lophaetus occipitalis – possibly belongs in Ictinaetus Genus Stephanoaetus Crowned eagle, Stephanoaetus coronatus Malagasy crowned eagle, †Stephanoaetus mahery Genus Polemaetus Martial eagle, Polemaetus bellicosus Genus Hieraaetus Ayres's hawk-eagle, H. ayresii Little eagle, H. morphnoides Pygmy eagle, H. weiskei – previously subspecies H. m. weiskei Booted eagle, H. pennatus Haast's eagle, †H. moorei Genus Lophotriorchis Rufous-bellied eagle, L. kienerii Genus Aquila Bonelli's eagle, Aquila fasciata – formerly Hieraaetus fasciatus African hawk-eagle, A. spilogaster – formerly in Hieraaetus Cassin's hawk-eagle, A. africana – formerly in Hieraaetus or Spizaetus genera Golden eagle, A. chrysaetos Eastern imperial eagle, A. heliaca Spanish imperial eagle A. adalberti Steppe eagle, A. nipalensis Tawny eagle, A. rapax Greater spotted eagle, A. clanga – to be moved to Lophaetus or Ictinaetus Lesser spotted eagle, A. pomarina – to be moved to Lophaetus or Ictinaetus Indian spotted eagle, A. hastata – to be moved to Lophaetus or Ictinaetus Verreaux's eagle, A. verreauxii Gurney's eagle, A. gurneyi Wahlberg's eagle, A. wahlbergi – to be moved to Hieraaetus Wedge-tailed eagle, A. audax Genus Ictinaetus Black eagle, Ictinaetus malaiensis Genus Haliaeetus White-tailed eagle, Haliaeetus albicilla Bald eagle, H. leucocephalus Steller's sea eagle, H. pelagicus Pallas' sea eagle, H. leucoryphus Genus Icthyophaga Lesser fish eagle, Icthyophaga humilis Grey-headed fish eagle, I. ichthyaetus African fish eagle, I. vocifer White-bellied sea eagle, I. leucogaster Sanford's sea eagle, I. sanfordi Madagascar fish eagle, I. vociferoides Subfamily Circaetinae: snake-eagles Genus Terathopius Bateleur, Terathopius ecaudatus Genus Circaetus Short-toed snake eagle, Circaetus gallicus Beaudouin's snake eagle, Circaetus beaudouini Black-chested snake eagle, C. pectoralis Brown snake eagle, C. cinereus Fasciated snake eagle, C. fasciolatus Western banded snake eagle, C. cinerascens Genus Dryotriorchis Congo serpent eagle, D. spectabilis Genus Spilornis Crested serpent eagle, Spilornis cheela Central Nicobar serpent eagle, S. minimus (subspecies or species) Great Nicobar serpent eagle, S. klossi Mountain serpent eagle, S. kinabaluensis Sulawesi serpent eagle, S. rufipectus Philippine serpent eagle, S. holospilus Andaman serpent eagle, S. elgini Genus Eutriorchis Madagascar serpent eagle, Eutriorchis astur The modern English term for the bird is derived from Latin: aquila by way of French: aigle. The origin of aquila is unknown, but it is believed to possibly derive from aquilus (meaning dark-colored, swarthy, or blackish) as a reference to the plumage of eagles. Old English used the term earn, related to Scandinavia's ørn/örn. It is similar to other Indo-European terms for "bird" or "eagle", including Greek: ὄρνις (ornís), Russian: орёл (orël), and Welsh: eryr. In the southern part of Finland, near the Gulf of Finland, is the town of Kotka, which literally means "eagle", while the town of L'Aquila in the central part of Italy literally means "the eagle". In Britain before 1678, eagle referred specifically to the golden eagle, with the other native species, the white-tailed eagle, being known as erne. The modern name "golden eagle" for aquila chrysaetos was introduced by the naturalist John Ray. The village of Eagle in Lincolnshire, England, has nothing to do with the bird; its name is derived from the Old English words for "oak" and "wood" (compare Oakley). In the ancient Sumerian mythology, the mythical king Etana was said to have been carried into heaven by an eagle. Classical writers such as Lucan and Pliny the Elder claimed that the eagle was able to look directly at the sun, and that they forced their fledglings to do the same. Those that blinked would be cast from the nest. This belief persisted until the Medieval era. The eagle is the patron animal of the ancient Greek god Zeus. In particular, Zeus was said to have taken the form of an eagle in order to abduct Ganymede, and there are numerous artistic depictions of the eagle Zeus bearing Ganymede aloft, from Classical times up to the present (see illustrations in the Ganymede (mythology) page.) Eagles appear metaphorically in many translations of the Old Testament. God is spoken of as carrying Israel on "eagles' wings" in Exodus 19:4, Isaiah 40:31 compares those who wait on the Lord to flying eagles, and Psalm 103 mentions renewing one's youth "as the eagle". In explaining this rejuvenation, Augustine of Hippo says in his commentary on the Psalms that eagles' beaks overgrow as they age and that they break them against rocks to restore them. The translation, however, is uncertain: the word in the Hebrew, נשר, can also be translated vulture, and is listed alongside specific kinds of vulture in Leviticus' discussion of unclean animals. The eagle is also often used in Christian iconography to represent the Gospel of John, and eagle-shaped lecterns are common in Anglican and some Roman Catholic churches. The eagle was believed to be able to look directly into the sun in the same way that the Gospel of John looks directly at Jesus' divinity, and the great distances the eagle flies represent the spread of the gospel to the ends of the earth. The United States eagle feather law stipulates that only individuals of certifiable Native American ancestry enrolled in a federally recognized tribe are legally authorized to obtain eagle feathers for religious or spiritual reasons. In Canada, the poaching of eagle feathers for the booming U.S. market has sometimes resulted in the arrests of First Nations person for the crime. The Moche people of ancient Peru worshiped the eagle and often depicted eagles in their art. Eagles are an exceptionally common symbol in heraldry, being considered the "King of Birds" in contrast to the lion, the "King of Beasts". Whereas the lion (e.g. England) usually represents authority, the eagle is the symbol of power. They are particularly popular in Germanic countries such as Austria, due to their association with the Holy Roman Empire. The eagle of the Holy Roman Empire was two-headed, supposedly representing the two divisions, East and West, of the old Roman Empire. This motif, derived from the Byzantine (Eastern Roman) Empire was also adopted by the Russian Empire and is still featured in the Flag of Albania. The Roman eagle was preceded by the eagle of Ptolemaic Egypt and the Achaemenid Empire. In the coat of arms of Kotka, Finland, the eagle is depicted carrying an anchor and the caduceus on its feet. Heraldic eagles are most often found displayed, i.e. with their wings and legs extended. They can also occur close, i.e. with their wings folded, or rising, i.e. about to take flight. The heads, wings, and legs of eagles can also be found independently. "There are four major groups of eagles: fish eagles, booted eagles, snake eagles and giant forest eagles." del Hoyo, J.; Elliot, A. & Sargatal, J. (editors). (1994). Handbook of the Birds of the World Volume 2: New World Vultures to Guineafowl. Lynx Edicions. ISBN 84-87334-15-6 Mitkus, Mindaugas; Potier, Simon; Martin, Graham R.; Duriez, Olivier; Kelber, Almut (26 April 2018), "Raptor Vision", Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Neuroscience, doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780190264086.013.232, ISBN 978-0-19-026408-6, retrieved 12 June 2023 Martin, Graham R. (January 1986). "Vision: Shortcomings of an eagle's eye". Nature. 319 (6052): 357. Bibcode:1986Natur.319..357M. doi:10.1038/319357a0. ISSN 1476-4687. PMID 3945316. S2CID 4233018. Reymond, L. (1985). "Spatial visual acuity of the eagle Aquila audax: a behavioural, optical and anatomical investigation". Vision Research. 25 (10): 1477–1491. doi:10.1016/0042-6989(85)90226-3. ISSN 0042-6989. PMID 4090282. S2CID 20680520. Mitkus, Mindaugas; Potier, Simon; Martin, Graham R.; Duriez, Olivier; Kelber, Almut (26 April 2018), "Raptor Vision", Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Neuroscience, doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780190264086.013.232, ISBN 978-0-19-026408-6, retrieved 12 June 2023 Leclerc, Georges (2010). The Natural History of Birds: From the French of the Count de Buffon; Illustrated with Engravings, and a Preface, Notes, and Additions, by the Translator. Cambridge University Press. pp. 60–. ISBN 978-1-108-02298-9. Archived from the original on 29 April 2016. Grambo, Rebecca L. (2003). Eagles. Voyageur Press. ISBN 978-0-89658-363-4. Archived from the original on 30 April 2016. Grambo, Rebecca L (2003). Eagles. Voyageur Press. p. 32. ISBN 978-0-89658-363-4. Stinson, Christopher H (1979). "On the Selective Advantage of Fratricide in Raptors". Evolution. 33 (4): 1219–1225. doi:10.2307/2407480. JSTOR 2407480. PMID 28563923. Ferguson-Lees, J.; Christie, D. (2001). Raptors of the World. London: Christopher Helm. ISBN 0-7136-8026-1. "Amazing Bird Records". Trails.com. Archived from the original on 20 June 2017. Retrieved 20 July 2012. "Deer dropped by eagle knocks out power in Montana". Reuters. 18 June 2011. Retrieved 11 July 2023. Watson, Jeff (2011). The Golden Eagle (Second ed.). Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-30017-019-1. Sutton, C.; Dunne, P.; Sibley, D. (1989). Hawks in Flight: The Flight Identification of North American Migrant Raptors. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 0-3955-1022-8. Ferguson-Lees, et al. del Hoyo, J; Elliot, A; Sargatal, J (1996). Handbook of the Birds of the World. Vol. 3. Barcelona: Lynx Edicions. ISBN 84-87334-20-2. Gamauf, A.; Preleuthner, M. & Winkler, H. (1998). "Philippine Birds of Prey: Interrelations among habitat, morphology and behavior" (PDF). The Auk. 115 (3): 713–726. doi:10.2307/4089419. JSTOR 4089419. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 August 2014. Morgan, A.M. "The spread and weight of the Wedge-tailed Eagle" (PDF). South Australian Ornithologist. 11: 156–157. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 April 2013. Wood, Gerald (1983). The Guinness Book of Animal Facts and Feats. Guinness Superlatives. ISBN 978-0-85112-235-9. "European Raptors: Golden Eagle". www.europeanraptors.org (in German). Archived from the original on 7 May 2017. Retrieved 11 September 2017. Stalcup, Carolyn. "All About Eagles". The American Eagle Foundation. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 25 May 2014. Rutledge, Hope. "Eagles of the World". American Bald Eagle Information. Archived from the original on 28 May 2014. Retrieved 11 June 2014. from Grambo, Rebecca L. (1999). Eagles. Voyageur Press, Inc. ISBN 9780896583634. Lerner, H. R. L.; Mindell, D. P. (2005). "Phylogeny of eagles, Old World vultures, and other Accipitridae based on nuclear and mitochondrial DNA". Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution. 37 (2): 327–346. doi:10.1016/j.ympev.2005.04.010. PMID 15925523. Lerner, Heather R. L.; Mindell, David P. (9 May 2006). "Accipitridae". The Tree of Life Web Project. Archived from the original on 23 December 2014. "Sea Eagles, Fish Eagles and Fishing Eagles". www.oiseaux-birds.com. Retrieved 15 February 2024. Bouglouan, Nicole. "The booted eagles throughout the world: introduction". Oiseaux-birds. Archived from the original on 17 May 2014. Retrieved 11 June 2014. "TrekNature | Whitehead eagle Photo". www.treknature.com. Retrieved 25 March 2022. Reaney, P.H. The Origin of English Place Names (1964 ed.). Routledge and Kegan Paul. p. 166. Horowitz, Wayne (1998). Mesopotamian Cosmic Geography. Winona Lake, Indiana: Eisenbrauns. pp. 43–59. ISBN 0-931464-99-4. Archived from the original on 6 December 2017. Badke, David. The Medieval Bestiary Archived 22 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine Hutchinson, John (1749). Philosophical and Theological Works of the Late Truly Learned John Hutchinson. London, UK: James Hedges. p. 402. Archived from the original on 25 April 2016. Psalm 103 Archived 8 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine in Augustine's commentary. "Lexicon: Strong's H5404 - nešer". Blue Letter Bible. 11 June 2023. Fonck, L. (1910). St. John the Evangelist. In The Catholic Encyclopedia (New York: Robert Appleton Company). Retrieved 14 August 2017 from New Advent. Delderfield, Eric R. (1966). A Guide to Church Furniture. Newton Abbot: David & Charles. Office of Law Enforcement. "National Eagle Repository". Mountain-Prairie Region. United States Fish and Wildlife Service. Archived from the original on 10 October 2007. Retrieved 20 November 2007. Sin, Lena (30 April 2006). "Charges laid in eagle-poaching case". The Province. CanWest MediaWorks Publications Inc. Archived from the original on 31 May 2009. Retrieved 20 November 2007. Larco Herrera, Rafael, and Berrin, Kathleen (1997) The Spirit of Ancient Peru Thames and Hudson, New York, ISBN 0500018022 Look up eagle in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikiquote has quotations related to Eagles. Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article "Eagle". Wikimedia Commons has media related to Eagles. PBS Nature: Eagles Eagle photos Archived 6 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine on Oriental Bird Images Eagle videos on the Internet Bird Collection Web of the Conservation Biology Team-Bonelli's Eagle, of the University of Barcelona Decorah Eagles: 24/7 Live Webcam from The Raptor Resource Project Archived 1 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine EagleCAM: White-bellied Sea Eagles Live Webcam at Discovery Centre in Sydney, Australia "Eagle" . New International Encyclopedia. 1905.