Viesīte (Lithuanian: Viesytė; German: Eckengrafen) is a town in the western part of Jēkabpils Municipality in the Selonia region of Latvia. The population in 2020 was 1,500. Viesīte is a typical Selonia town located in the hills in the centre of the district. Selonia is cultural and historical district, bordering on Latgale, Zemgale (Semigalia), Vidzeme and Lithuania. Viesīte town (previously called Eckengraf, Eķengrāve, Azu village) is situated on the crossroads of important trunk roads: Jēkabpils-Nereta, Akniste-Riga. The distance to Jēkabpils is 32 km, to Riga 130 km, and to the Lithuanian border 31 km. The coat of Arms of Viesīte town depicts five golden acorns on a purple background, symbolising power. On the flag of Viesīte are the colours of Selonia district flag - green, white and red - with the coat of arms of Viesīte in the middle of it. Viesīte Town and Rural territory Council consists of 9 deputies. The Council Chairman is Janis Dimitrijevs. There are four permanent committees working in the municipality: Finance committee, Social, educational and culture affairs committee, Territorial development and business facilitation committee, Agriculture and land affairs committee. The council deputies together with municipality people have organised several committees for problem solving and implementation of separate functions of the council. The most interesting objects in Viesite are: the little engine, ViesIte Culture Castle, Memorial room and places of Professor Pauls Stradiņš, memorial room of writer Anna Brodele, Viesīte Brīvibas (Freedom) Church, Viesīte museum of local history "Selonia". Viesīte is twinned with: Czeladź, Poland Pastavy District, Belarus Rokiškis, Lithuania Zhydachiv, Ukraine Viesīte town hall Viesīte cemetery gates Pauls Stradiņš (1896-1958), doctor List of cities in Latvia "Reģionu, novadu, pilsētu un pagastu kopējā un sauszemes platība gada sākumā". Central Statistical Bureau of Latvia. Retrieved 18 January 2023. "Iedzīvotāju skaits pēc tautības reģionos, pilsētās, novados, pagastos, apkaimēs un blīvi apdzīvotās teritorijās gada sākumā (pēc administratīvi teritoriālās reformas 2021. gadā) 2021 - 2022". Central Statistical Bureau of Latvia. Retrieved 21 September 2023. "ISG020. Population number and its change by statistical region, city, town, 21 development centres and county". Central Statistical Bureau of Latvia. 2020-01-01. Retrieved 2021-02-12. "Starptautiskā sadarbība". viesite.lv (in Latvian). Viesīte. Retrieved 2019-09-01. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Viesīte.