The Pelagie Islands (Italian: Isole Pelagie; Sicilian: Ìsuli Pilaggî), from the Greek πέλαγος, pélagos meaning "open sea", are the three small islands of Lampedusa, Lampione, and Linosa, located in the Mediterranean Sea between Malta and Tunisia, south of Sicily. To the northwest lie the island of Pantelleria and the Strait of Sicily. All three islands are part of the comune of Lampedusa. Geologically, part of the archipelago (Lampedusa and Lampione) belongs to the African continent; politically and administratively the islands fall within the Sicilian province of Agrigento and represent the southernmost part of Italy. Despite pockets of agriculture, the islands are unnaturally barren due to wanton deforestation and the disappearance of the native olive groves, juniper and carob plantations. Fifty years ago[when?] much of the landscape was farmland bounded by dry stone walls but today, the local economy is based on sponge fishing and canning, supplemented by tourism in Lampedusa. The Pelagie Islands have been recognised as an Important Bird Area (IBA) by BirdLife International because they support breeding populations of Scopoli's shearwaters and European shags. Of particular ecological concern in the islands is the protection of the loggerhead sea turtle (Caretta caretta) which is endangered throughout the Mediterranean as a result of its nesting sites being taken over by tourism. In Italy the beaches of Pozzolana di Ponente on Linosa and Isola dei conigli on Lampedusa are two of the last remaining sites where the turtle regularly lays its eggs, the others (larger) being in southern Calabria (close to Reggio Calabria). The Area Marina Protetta Isole Pelagie nature reserve, covering all three islands, was instituted in 2002. List of islands of Italy Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Pelagie Islands. "Pelagie". Treccani.it. 2010. Retrieved 22 December 2011. "Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Tunisia and the Government of the Italian Republic concerning the Delimitation of the Continental Shelf between the two Countries 20 August 1971" (PDF). www.un.org. United Nations. 1971. Retrieved 26 February 2022. "Isole Pelagie". BirdLife Data Zone. BirdLife International. 2022. Retrieved 11 December 2022. Portals:  Geography  Islands  Italy v t e