UTC−04:00 is an identifier for a time offset from UTC of −04:00. It is observed in the Eastern Time Zone (e.g., in Canada and the United States) during the warm months of daylight saving time, as Eastern Daylight Time. The Atlantic Time Zone observes it during standard time (cold months). It is observed all year in the Eastern Caribbean and several South American countries. Principal cities: Halifax, St John, Frederickton, Hamilton Canada – Atlantic Time Zone New Brunswick Newfoundland and Labrador Labrador Except the area between L'Anse-au-Clair and Norman Bay Nova Scotia Prince Edward Island Denmark Greenland Pituffik (Thule) (former settlement), Qaanaaq (present settlement) United Kingdom Bermuda Principal cities: New York, Washington, Philadelphia, Boston, Atlanta, Miami, Detroit, Baltimore, Cleveland, Pittsburg, Indianapolis, Orlando, Charlotte, Charleston, Wilmington, Key West, Toronto, Montreal, Ottawa, Quebec City, Iqaluit, Nassau, Havana, Kingston, Port-au-Prince, Cockburn Town, Providenciales Canada (Eastern Time Zone) Nunavut Qikiqtaaluk Region except Resolute Ontario East of 90° West longitude Quebec Most of province except easternmost part of Côte-Nord United States (Eastern Time Zone) Delaware District of Columbia Florida Entire state except the counties of Bay, Calhoun, Escambia, Holmes, Jackson, Okaloosa, Santa Rosa, Walton, and Washington, and northern Gulf county (panhandle) Georgia Indiana Except the northwestern counties of Jasper, Lake, LaPorte, Newton, Porter and Starke, and the southwestern counties of Gibson, Perry, Posey, Spencer, Vanderburgh and Warrick Kentucky Counties to the east of the counties of Breckinridge, Grayson, Hart, Green, Adair, Russell and Clinton Maryland Michigan Except the western counties of Dickinson, Gogebic, Iron and Menominee New England (states of Connecticut, Massachusetts, Maine, New Hampshire, Rhode Island and Vermont) New Jersey New York North Carolina Ohio Pennsylvania South Carolina Tennessee The counties of Scott, Morgan, Roane, Rhea, Meigs and Bradley, and all counties to the east of these Virginia West Virginia Bahamas Cuba Haiti United Kingdom Turks and Caicos Islands Principal cities: Caracas, Manaus, Santo Domingo, La Paz, Georgetown, Santa Cruz de la Sierra, St. John's, Bridgetown, Roseau, Santo Domingo, Gustavia, St. George's, The Bottom, Oranjestad, Philipsburg, Lower Prince's Quarter, Basseterre, Castries, Kingstown, Port of Spain, San Fernando, The Valley, Road Town, Plymouth, Brades, Little Bay, San Juan, Charlotte Amalie, Oranjestad, Kralendijk, Willemstad, Pointe-à-Pitre, Les Abymes, Fort-de-France, Maracaibo, Blanc-Sablon, Harrington Harbour Bolivia Brazil The states of Amazonas (except westernmost municipalities), Mato Grosso, Mato Grosso do Sul, Rondônia and Roraima Guyana Venezuela Antigua and Barbuda Barbados Dominica Dominican Republic France Guadeloupe Basse-Terre Grande-Terre Les Saintes Marie-Galante La Désirade Martinique Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Grenada Carriacou and Petite Martinique Netherlands Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Kitts Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Saint Vincent The Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago Tobago Trinidad United Kingdom Anguilla British Virgin Islands Tortola Virgin Gorda Anegada Jost Van Dyke Montserrat United States Puerto Rico Spanish Virgin Islands United States Virgin Islands Saint Croix Saint Thomas Saint John Water Island Netherlands Aruba Bonaire Curaçao Canada – Atlantic Time Zone Quebec East of the 63°W longitude (Le Golfe-du-Saint-Laurent Regional County Municipality) Some bases in Antarctica. See also Time in Antarctica Brazil Comandante Ferraz Antarctic Station Russia Bellingshausen Station Principal cities: Santiago, Asunción Chile (except Easter Island and Magallanes/Antarctic) Paraguay Some bases in Antarctica. See also Time in Antarctica UTC−05:00 UTC−03:00 Time in Argentina Time in Brazil Time in Canada Time in Chile Time in Denmark Time in Paraguay Time in the United States Time in Trinidad and Tobago Time in Uruguay Time in Venezuela "Newfoundland-Labrador Time Zone – Newfoundland-Labrador Current Local Time – Daylight Saving Time". TimeTemperature.com. Retrieved 2012-10-26. "How far is it from Qaanaaq to locations worldwide". timeanddate.com. Retrieved 2014-04-24. "Ontario Time Zone – Ontario Current Local Time – Daylight Saving Time". TimeTemperature.com. Retrieved 2015-02-01. "Time Zones of the United States". Statoids. Retrieved 25 August 2012. "Time zone map (spring)" (PDF). Indiana State. 13 March 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 May 2012. Retrieved 14 July 2012. "Kentucky County Map". Kentucky Map Collection. Geology.com. Retrieved 6 October 2012. "Michigan Time Zone – Michigan Current Local Time – Daylight Saving Time". TimeTemperature.com. Retrieved 25 August 2012. "Tennessee County Map". Tennessee Map Collection. Geology.com. Retrieved 2012-10-06. "Venezuela Time Zone". Venezuela Changes Time Zone To Save Electricity. Sky News. 2016-04-16. Archived from the original on 2016-04-18. Retrieved 2016-04-16. "South America Time Zone Map". TimeTemperature. Retrieved 4 February 2018. "Official Time". Chilean Navy Hydrographic and Oceanographic Service. Archived from the original on 20 April 2019. Retrieved 17 June 2019. Media related to UTC−04:00 at Wikimedia Commons