On the Silver Globe (Polish: Na srebrnym globie) is a 1988 Polish epic science fiction film directed and written by Andrzej Żuławski, adapted from The Lunar Trilogy by his grand uncle, Jerzy Żuławski. Starring Andrzej Seweryn, Jerzy Trela, Iwona Bielska, Jan Frycz, Henryk Bista, Grażyna Deląg and Krystyna Janda, the plot follows a team of astronauts who land on an uninhabited planet and form a society. Many years later, a single astronaut is sent to the planet and becomes a messiah. Production took place from 1976 to 1977, but was interrupted by the Polish authorities. The film's budget is estimated to be at least PLN 58 million. Many years later, Żuławski was able to finish his film, although not in the format originally intended. On the Silver Globe premiered at the 1988 Cannes Film Festival, and has received critical acclaim. In the far future, a group of dissident astronauts crash land on an unnamed Earth-like planet after escaping from a degraded and vaguely dystopian Earth. One succumbs to his injuries shortly after. As a result of the accident, only three astronauts remain, a woman named Marta and two men, Piotr and Jerzy. Communication with Earth is lost and the survivors decide to settle on the seashore and give rise to a new human race. After the birth of their first son, Marta notices that the child is growing much faster than on Earth. Later, an unseen enemy kills Piotr and Marta dies in childbirth. Decades later, when Jerzy is in his old age, the new humanity is a tribe of several dozen people with whom he can no longer make contact, they are partially feral and view Jerzy as a demigod. Before he dies, he sends a video diary to Earth containing recordings from handheld video cameras. A planetary scientist named Marek receives the recordings and travels to the planet. When he arrives, the priests in power declare Marek to be the messiah who, according to prophecy, must free humans from the power of telepathic bird-like humanoids called "Sherns", the planet's native inhabitants. Marek accepts this role and leads a military campaign against the Sherns. Back on Earth, we learn that the reason Marek was sent to this planet was because his actress girlfriend was sleeping with a fellow officer and they wanted to get rid of him to continue their affair. At first, the humans succeed and capture the Shern leader Avius, but the subsequent landing in the Shern city ends in disaster. Meanwhile, the priests start to believe that Marek was an outcast from the Earth, rather than a messiah who came to fulfill the religious prophecy. Marek is stoned and then crucified. Andrzej Seweryn as Marek Jerzy Trela as Jerzy / The Old Man Grazyna Dyląg as Ihezal Waldemar Kownacki as Jacek Iwona Bielska as Marta Jerzy Gralek as Piotr Elzbieta Karkoszka as Ada, daughter of Marta Krystyna Janda as Aza Maciej Góraj as Jeret, a warrior Henryk Talar as Mark's guide Leszek Dlugosz as Tomasz Jan Frycz (credited as Andrzej Frycz) as Tomasz II, son of Marta and Tomasz Henryk Bista as High Priest Malahuda Wiesław Komasa as Actor Jerzy Goliński as astronaut Andrzej Lubicz-Piotrowski as Awij Jerzy Żuławski wrote the novel on which the film is based, On the Silver Globe, around 1900 as part of The Lunar Trilogy. Żuławski was the granduncle of Andrzej Żuławski. Andrzej Żuławski left his native Poland for France in 1972 to avoid Polish government censorship. After Żuławski's critical success with the 1975 film L'important c'est d'aimer, the Polish authorities in charge of cultural affairs reevaluated their assessment of him. They invited him to return to Poland and produce a project of his own choice. Żuławski, who had always wanted to make a film of his grand uncle's novel, saw the offer as a unique opportunity to achieve this aim. Principal photography started on June 20, 1976 in Jastrzębia Góra. Until September 29, scenes for the film were filmed on the Polish coast and in the Gobi Desert in Mongolia. Subsequently, the work was stopped on charges of "extremely low labor efficiency and overprices". Żuławski undertook to speed up the work. Until May 1977, further filming was carried out in Police, in Lower Silesia, in the Wieliczka salt mine, in Krakow, again on the coast and in the mountains of the Caucasus. On June 1, 1977, work on the film was stopped by Janusz Wilhelmi, vice-minister of cultural affairs. Wilhelmi shut down the film project, which was eighty percent complete, and ordered all materials destroyed. The reels of the unfinished film were however preserved, along with costumes and props, by the film studio and by members of the cast and crew. At the end of 1985, Żuławski agreed to complete the film. In 1986, shots were shot from the streets of contemporary Poland, to which the director added the missing scenes. The acting team and cast members abroad were dubbed. On July 10, 1987, the film passed inspection. In May 1988, a version of the film, consisting of the preserved footage plus a commentary to fill in the narrative gaps, premiered at the 1988 Cannes Film Festival. On the Silver Globe has an approval rating of 100% on review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, based on six reviews, and an average rating of 8.2/10. Metacritic assigned the film a weighted average score of 72 out of 100, based on four critics, indicating "generally favourable reviews". In 2021, Kuba Mikurda released Escape to the Silver Globe, a documentary film about the production of On the Silver Globe. Bałaga, Marta (5 September 2021). "Polish Doc 'Escape to the Silver Globe' Explores the Greatest Science Fiction Movie That Never Was". Variety. Retrieved 25 October 2023. "HISTORIA POLSKIEGO FILMU - ARTYKUŁY - AKADEMIA POLSKIEGO FILMU". akademiapolskiegofilmu.pl. Retrieved 2023-04-06. "FilmPolski.pl". FilmPolski (in Polish). Retrieved 2021-11-28. Żuławski, Andrzej. "Na Srebrnym Globie (1987)". Archived from the original on 2008-02-21. Retrieved 2008-04-02. "Festival de Cannes: On the Silver Globe". festival-cannes.com. Retrieved 2009-07-30. https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/on_the_silver_globe https://www.metacritic.com/movie/on-the-silver-globe-1988?ftag=MCD-06-10aaa1c Na srebrnym globie - IMDb, retrieved 2021-11-28 Na srebrnym globie at IMDb Na srebrnym globie on the Official Homepage of Andrzej Żuławski Comprehensive website on On the Silver Globe (in Polish)