BP p.l.c. (formerly The British Petroleum Company p.l.c. and BP Amoco p.l.c.; stylised bp) is a British multinational oil and gas company headquartered in London, England. It is one of the oil and gas "supermajors" and one of the world's largest companies measured by revenues and profits. It is a vertically integrated company operating in all areas of the oil and gas industry, including exploration and extraction, refining, distribution and marketing, power generation, and trading. BP's origins date back to the founding of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company in 1909, established as a subsidiary of Burmah Oil Company to exploit oil discoveries in Iran. In 1935, it became the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company and in 1954, adopted the name British Petroleum. In 1959, the company expanded beyond the Middle East to Alaska. British Petroleum acquired majority control of Standard Oil of Ohio in 1978. Formerly majority state-owned, the British government privatised the company in stages between 1979 and 1987. British Petroleum merged with Amoco in 1998, becoming BP Amoco p.l.c., and acquired ARCO and Burmah Castrol in 2000 and Aral AG in 2002. The company's name was shortened to BP p.l.c. in 2001. From 2003 to 2013, BP was a partner in the TNK-BP joint venture in Russia, and as of December 2022 holds a nearly 20% stake in Rosneft – accounting for a third of BP's total production. BP had earlier promised to divest the Rosneft holdings but was unable to find a buyer; instead BP wrote the assets off their books in a $25 billion non-cash charge. As of 31 December 2018[update], BP had operations in nearly 80 countries, produced around 3.7 million barrels per day (590,000 m3/d) of oil equivalent, and had total proven reserves of 19.945 billion barrels (3.1710×109 m3) of oil equivalent. The company has around 18,700 service stations worldwide, which it operates under the BP brand (worldwide) and under the Amoco brand (in the United States) and the Aral brand (in Germany). Its largest division is BP America in the United States. BP is the fourth-largest investor-owned oil company in the world by 2021 revenues (after ExxonMobil, Shell, and TotalEnergies). BP had a market capitalisation of US$98.36 billion as of 15 September 2022, placing it 122nd in the world, and its Fortune Global 500 rank was 35th in 2022 with revenues of US$164.2 billion. In Forbes Global 2000 2023 BP ranked 28th. The company's primary stock listing in on the London Stock Exchange, where it is a member of the FTSE 100 Index. From 1988 to 2015, BP was responsible for 1.53% of global industrial greenhouse gas emissions and has been directly involved in several major environmental and safety incidents. Among them were the 2005 Texas City refinery explosion, which caused the death of 15 workers and which resulted in a record-setting OSHA fine; Britain's largest oil spill, the wreck of Torrey Canyon in 1967; and the 2006 Prudhoe Bay oil spill, the largest oil spill on Alaska's North Slope, which resulted in a US$25 million civil penalty, the largest per-barrel penalty at that time for an oil spill. BP's worst environmental catastrophe was the 2010 Deepwater Horizon oil spill, the largest accidental release of oil into marine waters in history, which leaked about 4.9 million barrels (210 million US gal; 780,000 m3) of oil, causing severe environmental, human health, and economic consequences and serious legal and public relations repercussions for BP, costing more than $4.5 billion in fines and penalties, and an additional $18.7 billion in Clean Water Act-related penalties and other claims, the largest criminal resolution in US history. Altogether, the oil spill cost the company more than $65 billion. In May 1908, a group of British geologists discovered a large amount of oil at Masjed Soleyman located in the Khuzestan Province in the southwest of Persia (Iran). It was the first commercially significant find of oil in the Middle East. William Knox D'Arcy, by contract with Ali-Qoli Khan Bakhtiari, obtained permission to explore for oil for the first time in the Middle East, an event which changed the history of the entire region. The oil discovery led to petrochemical industry development and also the establishment of industries that strongly depended on oil. On 14 April 1909, the Anglo-Persian Oil Company (APOC) was incorporated as a subsidiary of Burmah Oil Company. Some of the shares were sold to the public. The first chairman and minority shareholder of the company became Lord Strathcona. Immediately after establishing the company, the British government asked Percy Cox, British resident to Bushehr, to negotiate an agreement with Sheikh Khaz'al Ibn Jabir of Arabistan for APOC to obtain a site on Abadan Island for a refinery, depot, storage tanks, and other operations. The refinery was built and began operating in 1912. In 1914, the British government acquired a controlling interest (50.0025%) in the company, at the urging of Winston Churchill, the then First Lord of the Admiralty, and the British navy quickly switched from coal to oil for the majority of their war ships. APOC also signed a 30-year contract with the British Admiralty for supplying oil for the Royal Navy at the fixed price. In 1915, APOC established its shipping subsidiary the British Tanker Company and in 1916, it acquired the British Petroleum Company which was a marketing arm of the German Europäische Petroleum Union in Britain. In 1919, the company became a shale-oil producer by establishing a subsidiary named Scottish Oils which merged remaining Scottish oil-shale industries. After World War I, APOC started marketing its products in Continental Europe and acquired stakes in the local marketing companies in several European countries. Refineries were built in Llandarcy in Wales (the first refinery in the United Kingdom) and Grangemouth in Scotland. It also acquired the controlling stake in the Courchelettes refinery in France and formed, in conjunction with the Government of Australia, a partnership named Commonwealth Oil Refineries, which built the Australian's first refinery in Laverton, Victoria. In 1923, Burmah employed Winston Churchill as a paid consultant to lobby the British government to allow APOC have exclusive rights to Persian oil resources, which were subsequently granted by the Iranian monarchy. APOC and the Armenian businessman Calouste Gulbenkian were the driving forces behind the creation of Turkish Petroleum Company (TPC) in 1912, to explore oil in Mesopotamia (now Iraq); and by 1914, APOC held 50% of TPC shares. In 1925, TPC received concession in the Mesopotamian oil resources from the Iraqi government under British mandate. TPC finally struck oil in Iraq on 14 October 1927. By 1928, the APOC's shareholding in TPC, which by now was named Iraq Petroleum Company (IPC), was reduced to 23.75%; as the result of the changing geopolitics post Ottoman empire break-up, and the Red Line Agreement. Relations were generally cordial between the pro-west Hashemite Monarchy (1932–58) in Iraq and IPC, in spite of disputes centred on Iraq's wish for greater involvement and more royalties. During the 1928–68 time period, IPC monopolised oil exploration inside the Red Line; excluding Saudi Arabia and Bahrain. In 1927, Burmah Oil and Royal Dutch Shell formed the joint marketing company Burmah-Shell. In 1928, APOC and Shell formed the Consolidated Petroleum Company for sale and marketing in Cyprus, South Africa and Ceylon, which in 1932 followed by a joint marketing company Shell-Mex and BP in the United Kingdom. In 1937, AIOC and Shell formed the Shell/D'Arcy Exploration Partners partnership to explore for oil in Nigeria. The partnership was equally owned but operated by Shell. It was later replaced by Shell-D'Arcy Petroleum Development Company and Shell-BP Petroleum Development Company (now Shell Petroleum Development Company). In 1934, APOC and Gulf Oil founded the Kuwait Oil Company as an equally owned partnership. The oil concession rights were awarded to the company on 23 December 1934 and the company started drilling operations in 1936. In 1935, Rezā Shāh requested the international community to refer to Persia as 'Iran', which was reflected in the name change of APOC to the Anglo-Iranian Oil Company (AIOC). In 1937, Iraq Petroleum Company, 23.75% owned by BP, signed an oil concession agreement with the Sultan of Muscat that covers the entire region of the Sultanate, which was in fact limited to the coastal area of present-day Oman. After several years of failure to discover oil in the Sultanate's region, IPC presumed that oil was more likely to be found in the interior region of Oman, which was part of the Imamate of Oman. IPC offered financial support to raise an armed force that would assist the Sultanate in occupying the interior region of Oman. Later, in 1954, the Sultan of Muscat, backed by the British government and the financial aid he received from IPC, started occupying regions within the interior of Oman, which led to the outbreak of Jebel Akhdar War that lasted for more than 5 years. In 1947, British Petroleum Chemicals was incorporated as a joint venture of AIOC and The Distillers Company. In 1956, the company was renamed British Hydrocarbon Chemicals. Following World War II, nationalistic sentiments were on the rise in the Middle East; most notable being Iranian nationalism, and Arab Nationalism. In Iran, the AIOC and the pro-western Iranian government led by Prime Minister Ali Razmara resisted nationalist calls to revise AIOC's concession terms in Iran's favour. In March 1951, Razmara was assassinated and Mohammed Mossadeq, a nationalist, was elected as the new prime minister by the Majlis of Iran (parliament). In April 1951, the Iranian government nationalised the Iranian oil industry by unanimous vote, and the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) was formed, displacing the AIOC. The AIOC withdrew its management from Iran, and Britain organised an effective worldwide embargo of Iranian oil. The British government, which owned the AIOC, contested the nationalisation at the International Court of Justice at The Hague, but its complaint was dismissed. Prime Minister Churchill asked President Eisenhower for help in overthrowing Mossadeq. The anti-Mossadeq plan was orchestrated under the code-name 'Operation Ajax' by CIA, and 'Operation Boot' by SIS (MI6). The CIA and the British helped stage a coup in August 1953, the 1953 Iranian coup d'état, which established pro-Western general Fazlollah Zahedi as the new PM, and greatly strengthened the political power of Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi. The AIOC was able to return to Iran. In 1954, the AIOC became the British Petroleum Company. After the 1953 Iranian coup d'état, Iranian Oil Participants Ltd (IOP), a holding company, was founded in October 1954, in London to bring Iranian oil back to the international market. British Petroleum was a founding member of this company with 40% stake. IOP operated and managed oil facilities in Iran on behalf of NIOC. Similar to the Saudi-Aramco "50/50" agreement of 1950, the consortium agreed to share profits on a 50–50 basis with Iran, "but not to open its books to Iranian auditors or to allow Iranians onto its board of directors." In 1953, British Petroleum entered the Canadian market through the purchase of a minority stake in Calgary-based Triad Oil Company, and expanded further to Alaska in 1959, resulting discovery of oil at Prudhoe Bay in 1969. In 1956, its subsidiary D'Arcy Exploration Co. (Africa) Ltd. has been granted four oil concessions in Libya. In 1962, Scottish Oils ceased oil-shale operations. In 1965, it was the first company to strike oil in the North Sea. In 1969, BP entered the United States by acquiring the East Coast refining and marketing assets of Sinclair Oil Corporation. The Canadian holding company of British Petroleum was renamed BP Canada in 1969; and in 1971, it acquired 97.8% stake of Supertest Petroleum. By the 1960s, British Petroleum had developed a reputation for taking on the riskiest ventures. It earned the company massive profits; it also earned them the worst safety record in the industry. In 1967, the giant oil tanker Torrey Canyon foundered off the English coast. Over 32 million US gallons (760,000 bbl; 120,000 m3) of crude oil was spilled into the Atlantic and onto the beaches of Cornwall and Brittany, causing Britain's worst-ever oil spill. The ship was owned by the Bahamas-based Barracuda Tanker Corporation and was flying the flag of Liberia, a well-known flag of convenience, but was being chartered by British Petroleum. The ship was bombed by RAF jet bombers in an effort to break up the ship and burn off the leaking oil, but this failed to destroy the oil slick. In 1967, BP acquired chemical and plastics assets of The Distillers Company which were merged with British Hydrocarbon Chemicals to form BP Chemicals. The company's oil assets were nationalised in Libya in 1971, in Kuwait in 1975, and in Nigeria in 1979. In Iraq, IPC ceased its operations after it was nationalised by the Ba'athist Iraqi government in June 1972, although legally Iraq Petroleum Company still remains in existence but as a dormant company, and one of its associated companies —Abu Dhabi Petroleum Company (ADPC), formerly Petroleum Development (Trucial Coast) Ltd – also continues with the original shareholding intact. The intensified power struggle between oil companies and host governments in Middle East, along with the oil price shocks that followed the 1973 oil crisis meant British Petroleum lost most of its direct access to crude oil supplies produced in countries that belonged to the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), and prompted it to diversify its operations beyond the heavily Middle East dependent oil production. In 1976, BP and Shell de-merged their marketing operations in the United Kingdom by dividing Shell-Mex and BP. In 1978, the company acquired a controlling interest in Standard Oil of Ohio (Sohio). In Iran, British Petroleum continued to operate until the Islamic Revolution in 1979. The new regime of Ayatollah Khomeini nationalised all of the company's assets in Iran without compensation: as a result, BP lost 40% of its global crude oil supplies. In 1970–1980s, BP diversified into coal, minerals and nutrition businesses which all were divested later. The British government sold 80 million shares of BP at $7.58 in 1979, as part of Thatcher-era privatisation. This sale represented slightly more than 5% of BP's total shares and reduced the government's ownership of the company to 46%. On 19 October 1987, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher authorised the sale of an additional GBP7.5 billion ($12.2 billion) of BP shares at 333 pence, representing the government's remaining 31% stake in the company. In November 1987, the Kuwait Investment Office purchased a 10.06% interest in BP, becoming the largest institutional shareholder. The following May, the KIO purchased additional shares, bringing their ownership to 21.6%. This raised concerns within BP that operations in the United States, BP's primary country of operations, would suffer. In October 1988, the British Department of Trade and Industry required the KIO to reduce its shares to 9.6% within 12 months. Peter Walters was the company chairman from 1981 to 1990. During his period as chairman he reduced the company's refining capacity in Europe. In 1982, the downstream assets of BP Canada were sold to Petro Canada. In 1984, Standard Oil of California was renamed the Chevron Corporation; it bought Gulf Oil—the largest merger in history at that time. To meet anti-trust regulations, Chevron divested many of Gulf's operating subsidiaries, and sold some Gulf stations and a refinery in the eastern United States to British Petroleum and Cumberland Farms in 1985. In 1987, British Petroleum negotiated the acquisition of Britoil and the remaining publicly traded shares of Standard Oil of Ohio. At the same year it was listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange where its share were traded until delisting in 2008. Walters was replaced by Robert Horton in 1990. Horton carried out a major corporate downsizing exercise, removing various tiers of management at the head office. In 1992, British Petroleum sold off its 57% stake in BP Canada (upstream operations), which was renamed as Talisman Energy. John Browne, who had joined BP in 1966 and rose through the ranks to join the board as managing director in 1991, was appointed group chief executive in 1995. In 1981, British Petroleum entered into the solar technology sector by acquiring 50% of Lucas Energy Systems, a company which became Lucas BP Solar Systems, and later BP Solar. The company was a manufacturer and installer of photovoltaic solar cells. It became wholly owned by British Petroleum in the mid-1980s. British Petroleum entered the Russian market in 1990 and opened its first service station in Moscow in 1996. In 1997, it acquired a 10% stake for $571 million in the Russian oil company Sidanco, which later became a part of TNK-BP. Sidanco was run by Russian oligarch Vladimir Potanin who obtained Sidanco through the controversial loans-for-shares privatization scheme. In 2003, BP invested $8 billion into a joint venture with Russian oligarch Mikhail Fridman's TNK. In 1992, the company entered the Azerbaijani market. In 1994, it signed the production sharing agreement for the Azeri–Chirag–Guneshli oil project and in 1995 for the Shah Deniz gas field development. Under John Browne, British Petroleum acquired other oil companies, transforming BP into the third largest oil company in the world. British Petroleum merged with Amoco (formerly Standard Oil of Indiana) in December 1998, becoming BP Amoco plc. Most Amoco stations in the United States were converted to BP's brand and corporate identity. In 2000, BP Amoco acquired Atlantic Richfield Co. (ARCO) and Burmah Castrol. Together with the acquisition of ARCO in 2000, BP became owner of a 33.5% stake in the Olympic Pipeline. Later that year, BP became an operator of the pipeline and increased its stake up to 62.5%. As part of the merger's brand awareness, the company helped the Tate Modern gallery of British Art launch RePresenting Britain 1500–2000. In 2001, in response to negative press on British Petroleum's poor safety standards, the company adopted a green sunburst logo and rebranded itself as BP ("Beyond Petroleum") plc. In the beginning of the 2000s, BP became the leading partner (and later operator) of the Baku–Tbilisi–Ceyhan pipeline project which opened a new oil transportation route from the Caspian region. In 2002, BP acquired the majority of Veba Öl AG, a subsidiary of VEBA AG, and subsequently rebranded its existing stations in Germany to the Aral name. As part of the deal, BP acquired also the Veba Öl's stake in Ruhr Öl joint venture. Ruhr Öl was dissolved in 2016. On 1 September 2003, BP and a group of Russian billionaires, known as AAR (Alfa–Access–Renova), announced the creation of a strategic partnership to jointly hold their oil assets in Russia and Ukraine. As a result, TNK-ВР was created. In 2004, BP's olefins and derivatives business was moved into a separate entity which was sold to Ineos in 2005. In 2007, BP sold its corporate-owned convenience stores, typically known as "BP Connect", to local franchisees and jobbers. On 23 March 2005, 15 workers were killed and more than 170 injured in the Texas City refinery explosion. To save money, major upgrades to the 1934 refinery had been postponed. Browne pledged to prevent another catastrophe. Three months later, 'Thunder Horse PDQ', BP's giant new production platform in the Gulf of Mexico, nearly sank during a hurricane. In their rush to finish the $1 billion platform, workers had installed a valve backwards, allowing the ballast tanks to flood. Inspections revealed other shoddy work. Repairs costing hundreds of millions would keep Thunder Horse out of commission for three years. Lord Browne resigned from BP on 1 May 2007. The head of exploration and production Tony Hayward became the new chief executive. In 2009, Hayward shifted emphasis from Lord Browne's focus on alternative energy, announcing that safety would henceforth be the company's "number one priority". In 2007, BP formed with AB Sugar and DuPont a joint venture Vivergo Fuels which opened a bioethanol plant in Saltend near Hull, United Kingdom in December 2012. Together with DuPont, BP formed a biobutanol joint venture Butamax by acquiring biobutan technology company Biobutanol LLC in 2009. In 2009, BP obtained a production contract to develop the supergiant Rumaila field with joint venture partner CNPC. In January 2010, Carl-Henric Svanberg became chairman of BP board of directors. On 20 April 2010, the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, a major industrial accident, happened. Consequently, Bob Dudley replaced Tony Hayward as the company's CEO, serving from October 2010 to February 2020. BP announced a divestment program to sell about $38 billion worth of non-core assets to compensate its liabilities related to the accident. In July 2010, BP sold its natural gas activities in Alberta and British Columbia, Canada, to Apache Corporation. It sold its stake in the Petroperijá and Boquerón fields in Venezuela and in the Lan Tay and Lan Do fields, the Nam Con Son pipeline and terminal, and the Phu My 3 power plant in Vietnam to TNK-BP, forecourts and supply businesses in Namibia, Botswana, Zambia, Tanzania and Malawi to Puma Energy, the Wytch Farm onshore oilfield in Dorset and a package of North Sea gas assets to Perenco, natural-gas liquids business in Canada to Plains All American Pipeline LP, natural gas assets in Kansas to Linn Energy, Carson Refinery in Southern California and its ARCO retail network to Tesoro, Sunray and Hemphill gas processing plants in Texas, together with their associated gas gathering system, to Eagle Rock Energy Partners, the Texas City Refinery and associated assets to Marathon Petroleum, the Gulf of Mexico located Marlin, Dorado, King, Horn Mountain, and Holstein fields as also its stake in non-operated Diana Hoover and Ram Powell fields to Plains Exploration & Production, non-operating stake in the Draugen oil field to Norske Shell, and the UK's liquefied petroleum gas distribution business to DCC. In November 2012, the U.S. Government temporarily banned BP from bidding any new federal contracts. The ban was conditionally lifted in March 2014. In February 2011, BP formed a partnership with Reliance Industries, taking a 30% stake in a new Indian joint-venture for an initial payment of $7.2 billion. In September 2012, BP sold its subsidiary BP Chemicals (Malaysia) Sdn. Bhd., an operator of the Kuantan purified terephthalic acid (PTA) plant in Malaysia, to Reliance Industries for $230 million. In October 2012, BP sold its stake in TNK-BP to Rosneft for $12.3 billion in cash and 18.5% of Rosneft's stock. The deal was completed on 21 March 2013. In 2012, BP acquired an acreage in the Utica Shale but these developments plans were cancelled in 2014. In 2011–2015, BP cut down its alternative energy business. The company announced its departure from the solar energy market in December 2011 by closing its solar power business, BP Solar. In 2012, BP shut down the BP Biofuels Highlands project which was developed since 2008 to make cellulosic ethanol from emerging energy crops like switchgrass and from biomass. In 2015, BP decided to exit from other lignocellulosic ethanol businesses. It sold its stake in Vivergo to Associated British Foods. BP and DuPont also mothballed their joint biobutanol pilot plant in Saltend. In June 2014, BP agreed to a deal worth around $20 billion to supply CNOOC with liquefied natural gas. In 2014, Statoil Fuel & Retail sold its aviation fuel business to BP. To ensure the approval of competition authorities, BP agreed to sell the former Statoil aviation fuel businesses in Copenhagen, Stockholm, Gothenburg and Malmö airports to World Fuel Services in 2015. In 2016, BP sold its Decatur, Alabama, plant to Indorama Ventures, of Thailand. At the same year, its Norwegian daughter company BP Norge merged with Det Norske Oljeselskap to form Aker BP. In April 2017, the company reached an agreement to sell its Forties pipeline system in the North Sea to Ineos for $250 million. The sale included terminals at Dalmeny and Kinneil, a site in Aberdeen, and the Forties Unity Platform. In 2017, the company floated its subsidiary BP Midstream Partners LP, a pipeline operator in the United States, at the New York Stock Exchange. In Argentina, BP and Bridas Corporation agreed to merge their interests in Pan American Energy and Axion Energy to form a jointly owned Pan American Energy Group. In 2017, BP invested $200 million to acquire a 43% stake in the solar energy developer Lightsource Renewable Energy, a company which was renamed Lightsource BP. In March 2017, the company acquired Clean Energy's biomethane business and assets, including its production sites and existing supply contracts. In April 2017, its subsidiary Butamax bought an isobutanol production company Nesika Energy. In 2018, the company purchased BHP's shale assets in Texas and Louisiana, including Petrohawk Energy, for $10.5 billion, which were integrated with its subsidiary BPX Energy. Also in 2018, BP bought a 16.5% interest in the Clair field in the UK from ConocoPhillips, increasing its share to 45.1%. BP paid £1.3 billion and gave to ConocoPhillips its 39.2% non-operated stake in the Kuparuk River Oil Field and satellite oil fields in Alaska. In December 2018, BP sold its wind assets in Texas. In 2018, BP acquired Chargemaster, which operated the UK's largest electric vehicle charging network. In 2019, BP and Didi Chuxing formed a joint venture to build out electric vehicle charging infrastructure in China. In September 2020, BP announced it will build out a rapid charging network in London for Uber. In January 2019, BP discovered 1 billion barrels (160×10^6 m3) oil at its Thunder Horse location in the Gulf of Mexico. The company also announced plans to spend $1.3 billion on a third phase of its Atlantis field near New Orleans. Helge Lund succeeded Carl-Henric Svanberg on 1 January 2019 as chairman of BP Plc board of directors, and Bernard Looney succeeded Bob Dudley on 5 February 2020 as chief executive. Amidst the COVID-19 pandemic, BP claimed that it would "accelerate the transition to a lower carbon economy and energy system" after announcing that the company had to write down $17.5 billion for the second quarter of 2020. On 29 June 2020, BP sold its petrochemicals unit to Ineos for $5 billion. The business was focused on aromatics and acetyls. It had interests in 14 plants in Asia, Europe and the U.S., and achieved production of 9.7 million metric tons in 2019. On 30 June 2020, BP sold all its Alaska upstream operations and interests, including interests in Prudhoe Bay Oil Field, to Hilcorp for $5.6 billion. On 14 December 2020, it sold its 49% stake in the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System to Harvest Alaska. In September 2020, BP formed a partnership with Equinor to develop offshore wind and announced it will acquire 50% non-operating stake in the Empire Wind off New York and Beacon Wind off Massachusetts offshore wind farms. The deal is expected to be completed at the first half of 2021. In December 2020, BP acquired a majority stake in Finite Carbon, the largest forest carbon offsets developer in the United States. In response to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, BP announced that it would sell its 19.75% stake in Rosneft, although no timeline was announced. At the time of BP's decision, Rosneft's activities accounted for around half of BP's oil and gas reserves and a third of its production. BP's decision came after the British government expressed concern about BP's involvement in Russia. However, BP remained a Rosneft shareholder throughout the whole 2022 year, which caused some criticism from the Ukrainian president's office. In October 2022, BP announced that it would be acquiring Archaea Energy Inc., a renewable natural gas producer, for $4.1 billion. In December 2022, it was announced BP had completed the acquisition of Archaea Energy Inc. for $3.3 billion. In November 2022, the company announced a large increase in profit for the period from July to September due to the high fuel prices caused by the Russian invasion of Ukraine. In February 2023, BP reported record annual profits, on a replacement cost basis, for the year 2022. On that basis, 2022 profits were more than double than in 2021, and they were also the biggest profits in the whole 114-year long history of BP. After 10 years of force majeure, BP, Eni and Sonatrach resumed exploration in their blocks in the Ghadames Basin (A-B) and offshore Block C in August 2023, continuing their contract obligations. BP increased its dividend by 10% year-on-year in early 2024 and accelerated share buybacks. It has already announced $1.75 billion before reporting first quarter results and intends to announce a $3.5 billion share buyback in the first half of the year. 1920 1930 1947 1961 1989 2001 As of 31 December 2018[update], BP had operations in 78 countries worldwide with the global headquarters in London, United Kingdom. BP operations are organized into three business segments, Upstream, Downstream, and renewables. Since 1951, BP has annually published its Statistical Review of World Energy, which is considered an energy industry benchmark. BP has a major corporate campus in Sunbury-on-Thames which is home to around 3,500 employees and over 50 business units. Its North Sea operations are headquartered in Aberdeen, Scotland. BP's trading functions are based at 20 Canada Square in Canary Wharf, London. BP has three major research and development centres in the UK. As of 2020, and following the sale of its Andrew and Shearwater interests, BP's operations were focussed in the Clair, Quad 204 and ETAP hubs. In 2011, the company announced that it is focusing its investment in the UK North Sea into four development projects including the Clair, Devenick, Schiehallion and Loyal, and Kinnoull oilfields. BP is the operator of the Clair oilfield, which has been appraised as the largest hydrocarbon resource in the UK. There are 1,200 BP service stations in the UK. Since 2018 BP operates the UK's largest electric vehicle charging network through its subsidiary BP Pulse (formerly Chargemaster). In February 2020, BP announced a Joint Venture with EnBW to develop and operate 3GW off Offshore Wind capacity in the Crown Estate Leasing Round 4. This is BP's first move into Britain's Offshore wind market, however, BP currently provides a range of services to the Offshore Wind sector in the UK through its subsidiary ONYX InSight who provide a range of Predictive Maintenance and Engineering Consultancy services to the sector. In February 2022, BP announced it acquired a 30% stake in the London-based company, Green Biofuels Ltd, a producer of renewable hydrogenated vegetable oil fuels that can be used as a direct replacement for diesel. The United States operations comprise nearly one-third of BP's operations. BP employs approximately 14,000 people in the United States. In 2018, BP's total production in the United States included 385,000 barrels per day (61,200 m3/d) of oil and 1.9 billion cubic feet per day (54 million cubic metres per day) of natural gas, and its refinery throughput was 703,000 barrels per day (111,800 m3/d). BP's major subsidiary in the United States is BP America, Inc. (formerly: Standard Oil Company (Ohio) and Sohio) based in Houston, Texas. BP Exploration & Production Inc., a 1996 established Houston-based subsidiary, is dealing with oil exploration and production. BP Corporation North America, Inc., provides petroleum refining services as also transportation fuel, heat and light energy. BP Products North America, Inc., a 1954 established Houston-based subsidiary, is engaged in the exploration, development, production, refining, and marketing of oil and natural gas. BP America Production Company, a New Mexico-based subsidiary, engages in oil and gas exploration and development. BP Energy Company, a Houston-based subsidiary, is a provider of natural gas, power, and risk management services to the industrial and utility sectors and a retail electric provider in Texas. BP's upstream activities in the Lower 48 states are conducted through Denver-based BPX Energy. It has a 7.5 billion barrels (1.19 billion cubic metres) resource base on 5.7 million acres (23,000 km2). It has shale positions in the Woodford, Oklahoma, Haynesville, Texas, and Eagle Ford, Texas shales. It has unconventional gas (shale gas or tight gas) stakes also in Colorado, New Mexico and Wyoming, primarily in the San Juan Basin. As of 2019[update], BP produced about 300,000 barrels per day (48,000 m3/d) of oil equivalent in the Gulf of Mexico. BP operates the Atlantis, Mad Dog, Na Kika, and Thunder Horse production platforms while holding interest in hubs operated by other companies. In April 2023, BP launched a new oil rig, the Argos, in the Gulf. BP operates Whiting Refinery in Indiana and Cherry Point Refinery in Washington. It formerly co-owned and operated a refinery in Toledo, Ohio, with Husky Energy, but sold its stake in the refinery in February 2023 to Cenovus Energy. BP operates nine onshore wind farms in six states, and held an interest in another in Hawaii with a net generating capacity of 1,679 MW. These wind farms include the Cedar Creek 2, Titan 1, Goshen North, Flat Ridge 1 and 2, Mehoopany, Fowler Ridge 1, 2 and 3 and Auwahi wind farms. It is also in process to acquire 50% non-operating stake in the Empire Wind off New York and Beacon Wind off Massachusetts offshore wind farms. In Egypt, BP produces approximately 15% of the country's total oil production and 40% of its domestic gas. The company also has offshore gas developments in the East Nile Delta Mediterranean, and in the West Nile Delta, where the company has a joint investment of US$9 billion with Wintershall Dea to develop North Alexandria and West Mediterranean concessions offshore gas fields. BP is active in offshore oil development in Angola, where it holds an interest in a total of nine oil exploration and production blocks covering more than 30,000 square kilometres (12,000 sq mi). This includes four blocks it acquired in December 2011 and an additional block that is operated by Brazilian national oil company, Petrobras, in which it holds a 40% stake. BP has a stake in exploration of two blocks of offshore deepwater assets in the South China Sea. In India, BP owns a 30% share of oil and gas assets operated by Reliance Industries, including exploration and production rights in more than 20 offshore oil and gas blocks, representing an investment of more than US$7 billion into oil and gas exploration in the country. BP has major liquefied natural gas activities in Indonesia, where it operates the Tangguh LNG project, which began production in 2009 and has a capacity of 7.6 million tonnes of liquid natural gas per year. Also in that country, the company has invested in the exploration and development of coalbed methane. BP operates in Iraq as part of the joint venture Rumaila Operating Organization in the Rumaila oil field, the world's fourth largest oilfield, where it produced over 1 million barrels per day (160×10^3 m3/d) of oil equivalent in 2011. A BBC investigation found in 2022 that waste-gas was being burned as close as 350 meters from people's homes. A leaked report from Ministry of Health (Iraq) blamed air pollution for 20% rise in cancer in Basra between 2015 and 2018. The Iraqi Ministry of Health has banned its employees from speaking about the health damage. Iraqi Environment Minister Jassem al-Falahi later admitted that "pollution from oil production is the main reason for increases in local cancer rates." In Oman, BP currently has a 60% participation interest in Block 61. Block 61 is one of Oman's largest gas blocks with a daily production capacity of 1.5 billion cubic feet of gas and more than 65,000 barrels of condensate. It covers around 3,950 km in central Oman and contains the largest tight gas development in the Middle East. On 1 February 2021, BP inked a deal to sell 20% participating interest in Block 61 to Thailand's PTT Exploration and Production Public Company Ltd. (PTTEP) for a total of $2.6 billion. Upon closure of the sale, the BP will remain the block's operator with a 40% interest. BP operates the Kwinana refinery in Western Australia, which can process up to 146,000 barrels per day (23,200 m3/d) of crude oil and is the country's largest refinery, supplying fuel to 80% of Western Australia. BP is a non-operating joint venture partner in the North West Shelf, which produces LNG, pipeline gas, condensate and oil. The NWS venture is Australia's largest resource development and accounts for around one third of Australia's oil and gas production. BP operates the two largest oil and gas production projects in the Azerbaijan's sector of the Caspian Sea, the Azeri–Chirag–Guneshli offshore oil fields, which supplies 80% of the country's oil production, and the Shah Deniz gas field. It also and develops the Shafag-Asiman complex of offshore geological structures. In addition, it operates the Sangachal terminal and the Azerbaijan's major export pipelines through Georgia such as Baku–Tbilisi–Ceyhan, Baku–Supsa and South Caucasus pipelines. BP's refining operations in continental Europe include Europe's second-largest oil refinery, located in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, which can process up to 377,000 barrels (59,900 m3) of crude oil per day. Other facilities are located in Ingolstadt, Gelsenkirchen and Lingen, in Germany, as well as one in Castellón, Spain. In addition to its offshore operations in the British zone of North Sea, BP has interests in the Norwegian section of the sea through its stake in Aker BP. As of December 2018[update], BP holds a 19.75% stake in Russia's state-controlled oil company Rosneft. Retail operations of motor vehicle fuels in Europe are present in the United Kingdom, France, Germany (through the Aral brand), the Netherlands, Switzerland, Italy, Austria, Poland, Greece and Turkey. BP's Canadian operations are headquartered in Calgary and the company operates primarily in Newfoundland. It purchases crude oil for the company's refineries in the United States, and has a 35 per cent stake in the undeveloped Bay du Nord project and three offshore exploration block in Newfoundland. BP is the largest oil and gas producer in Trinidad and Tobago, where it holds more than 1,350 square kilometres (520 sq mi) of offshore assets and is the largest shareholder in Atlantic LNG, one of the largest LNG plants in Western Hemisphere. In Brazil, BP holds stakes in offshore oil and gas exploration in the Barreirinhas, Ceará and Campos basins, in addition to onshore processing facilities. BP also operates biofuel production facilities in Brazil, including three cane sugar mills for ethanol production. BP operated in Singapore until 2004 when it sold its retail network of 28 stations and LPG business to Singapore Petroleum Company (SPC). It also sold its 50% in SPC. BP's Türkiye Operator was Petrol Ofisi. (Vitol) (Agreement in place expected 2024.) BP Upstream's activities include exploring for new oil and natural gas resources, developing access to such resources, and producing, transporting, storing and processing oil and natural gas. The activities in this area of operations take place in 25 countries worldwide. In 2018, BP produced around 3.7 million barrels per day (590×10^3 m3/d) of oil equivalent, of which 2.191 million barrels per day (348.3×10^3 m3/d) were liquids and 8.659 billion cubic feet per day (245.2 million cubic metres per day) was natural gas, and had total proved reserves of 19,945 million barrels (3,171.0×10^6 m3) of oil equivalent, of which liquids accounted 11,456 million barrels (1,821.4×10^6 m3) barrels and natural gas 49.239 trillion cubic feet (1.3943 trillion cubic metres). In addition to the conventional oil exploration and production, BP has a stake in the three oil sands projects in Canada. BP expects its oil and gas production to fall by at least one million barrels a day by 2030, a 40% reduction on 2019 levels. The reduction excludes non-operated production and BP's stake in Rosneft. BP downstream's activities include the refining, marketing, manufacturing, transportation, trading and supply of crude oil and petroleum products. Downstream is responsible for BP's fuels and lubricants businesses, and has major operations located in Europe, North America and Asia. As of 2018, BP owned or had a share in 11 refineries. BP, which employs about 1,800 people in oil trading and trades over 5 million barrels per day (790×10^3 m3/d) of oil and refined products, is the world's third-biggest oil trader after Royal Dutch Shell and Vitol. The operation is estimated to be able to generate over $1 billion trading profits in a good year. Air BP is the aviation division of BP, providing aviation fuel, lubricants & services. It has operations in over 50 countries worldwide. BP Shipping provides the logistics to move BP's oil and gas cargoes to market, as well as marine structural assurance. It manages a large fleet of vessels most of which are held on long-term operating leases. BP Shipping's chartering teams based in London, Singapore, and Chicago also charter third party vessels on both time charter and voyage charter basis. The BP-managed fleet consists of Very Large Crude Carriers (VLCCs), one North Sea shuttle tanker, medium size crude and product carriers, liquefied natural gas (LNG) carriers, liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) carriers, and coasters. All of these ships are double-hulled. BP has around 18,700 service stations worldwide. Its flagship retail brand is BP Connect, a chain of service stations combined with a convenience store, although in the US it is gradually being transitioned to the ampm format. BP also owns half of Kentucky-based convenience store company Thorntons LLC with ArcLight Capital Partners (who own the Gulf brand in the United States) since 2019. On 13 July 2021, BP announced it will take acquire ArcLight Capital Partners' share of Thorntons, and thus fully own the convenience store company. The deal is expected to close later in the year. In Germany and Luxembourg, BP operates service stations under the Aral brand. On the US West Coast, in the states of California, Oregon, Washington, Nevada, Idaho, Arizona, and Utah, BP primarily operates service stations under the ARCO brand. In Australia BP operates a number of BP Travel Centres, large-scale destination sites located which, in addition to the usual facilities in a BP Connect site, also feature food-retail tenants such as McDonald's, KFC and Nando's and facilities for long-haul truck drivers. Castrol is BP's main brand for industrial and automotive lubricants and is applied to a large range of BP oils, greases and similar products for most lubrication applications. BP's public rhetoric and pledges emphasise that the company is shifting towards climate-friendly, low-carbon and transition strategies. However, a 2022 study found that the company's spending on clean energy was insignificant and opaque, with little to suggest that the company's discourse matched its actions. BP was the first of supermajors to say that it would focus on energy sources other than fossil fuels. It established an alternative and low carbon energy business in 2005. According to the company, it spent a total of $8.3 billion in renewable energy projects including solar, wind, and biofuels, and non-renewable projects including natural gas and hydrogen power, through completion in 2013. The relatively small size of BP's alternative energy operations has led to allegations of greenwashing by Greenpeace, Mother Jones, and energy analyst and activist Antonia Juhasz, among others. In 2018, the CEO Bob Dudley said that out of the company's total spending of $15 to $17 billion per year, about $500 million will be invested in low-carbon energy and technology. In August 2020, BP promised to increase its annual low carbon investments to $5 billion by 2030. The company announced plans to transform into an integrated energy company, with a renewed focus on investing away from oil and into low-carbon technologies. It has set targets to have a renewables portfolio of 20 GW by 2025, and 50 GW by 2030. BP operates nine wind farms in seven states of the U.S., and held an interest in another in Hawaii with a net generating capacity of 1,679 MW. It is also in process to acquire 50% non-operating stake in the Empire Wind off New York and Beacon Wind off Massachusetts offshore wind farms. BP and Tesla, Inc. are cooperating for testing the energy storage by battery at the Titan 1 wind farm. BP Launchpad has also invested in ONYX InSight, one of the leading providers of predictive analytic solutions serving the wind industry. In Brazil, BP owns two ethanol producers—Companhia Nacional de Açúcar e Álcool andTropical BioEnergia—with three ethanol mills. These mills produce around 800,000 cubic metres per annum (5,000,000 bbl/a) of ethanol equivalent. BP has invested in an agricultural biotechnology company Chromatin, a company developing crops that can grow on marginal land and that are optimized to be used as feedstock for biofuel. Its joint venture with DuPont called Butamax, which has developed the patented bio-butanol-producing technology, and owns an isobutanol plant in Scandia, Kansas, United States. In addition BP owns biomethane production facilities in Canton, Michigan, and North Shelby, Tennessee, as well as share of facilities under construction in Oklahoma City and Atlanta. BP's subsidiary Air BP supplies aviation biofuel at Oslo, Halmstad, and Bergen airports. BP owns a 43% stake in Lightsource BP, a company which focuses on the managing and maintaining solar farms. As of 2017[update], Lightsource has commissioned 1.3 GW of solar capacity and manages about 2 GW of solar capacity. It plans to increase the capacity up to 8 GW through projects in the United States, India, Europe and the Middle East. BP has invested $20 million in Israeli quick-charging battery firm StoreDot Ltd. It operates electric vehicle charging networks in the UK under its subsidiary BP Chargemaster, and in China via a joint venture with Didi Chuxing. In partnership with Ørsted A/S, BP plans a 50 MV electrolyser at the Lingen refinery to produce hydrogen using North Sea wind power. Production is expected to begin in 2024. BP is a majority shareholder in carbon offset developer Finite Carbon, and acquired 9 GW of US solar projects in 2021. In 2023, following the announcement of record profits, the company scaled back their emissions targets. Originally, the company promised a 35-40% cut of emissions by the end of the decade. On 7 February, BP revised the target to a 20-30% cut in emissions, stating that it needed to keep up with the current demands for oil and gas. As of October 2023, the following individuals serve on the board: Helge Lund (chairman) Murray Auchincloss (acting chief executive officer) Paula Rosput Reynolds (senior independent director) Amanda Blanc (independent non-executive director) Pamela Daley (independent non-executive director) Melody Meyer (independent non-executive director) Tushar Morzaria (independent non-executive director) Hina Nagarajan (independent non-executive director) Satish Pai (independent non-executive director) Karen Richardson (independent non-executive director) Sir John Sawers (independent non-executive director) Johannes Teyssen (independent non-executive director) Ben Mathews (company secretary) Past chairmen have included: The Lord Strathalmond, 1954–1956 Basil Jackson, 1956–1957 Sir Neville Gass, 1957–1960 Sir Maurice Bridgeman, 1960–1969 Sir Eric Drake, 1969–1975 Sir David Steel, 1975–1981 Sir Peter Walters, 1981–1990 Sir Robert Horton, 1990–1992 The Lord Ashburton, 1992–1995 The Lord Simon of Highbury, 1995–1997 Peter Sutherland, 1997–2009 Carl-Henric Svanberg, 2010–2018 Helge Lund, 2019– The company's shares are primarily traded on the London Stock Exchange, but also listed on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange in Germany. In the United States shares are traded in US$ on the New York Stock Exchange in the form of American depository shares (ADS). One ADS represents six ordinary shares. Following the United States Federal Trade Commission's approval of the BP-Amoco merger in 1998, Amoco's stock was removed from the S&P 500 and was merged with BP shares on the London Stock Exchange. In the first quarter of 2001 the company adopted the marketing name of BP, and replaced its "Green Shield" logo with the "Helios" symbol, a green and yellow sunflower logo named after the Greek sun god and designed to represent energy in its many forms. BP introduced a new corporate slogan – "Beyond Petroleum" along with a $200M advertising and marketing campaign. According to the company, the new slogan represented their focus on meeting the growing demand for fossil fuels, manufacturing and delivering more advanced products, and to enable transitioning to a lower carbon footprint. By 2008, BP's branding campaign had succeeded with the culmination of a 2007 Effie Award from the American Marketing Association, and consumers had the impression that BP was one of the greenest petroleum companies in the world. BP was criticised by environmentalists and marketing experts, who stated that the company's alternative energy activities were only a fraction of the company's business at the time. According to Democracy Now, BP's marketing campaign amounted to a deceptive greenwashing public-relations spin campaign given that BP's 2008 budget included more than $20 billion for fossil fuel investment and less than $1.5 billion for all alternative forms of energy. Oil and energy analyst Antonia Juhasz notes BP's investment in green technologies peaked at 4% of its exploratory budget prior to cutbacks, including the discontinuation of BP Solar and the closure of its alternative energy headquarters in London. According to Juhasz, "four percent...hardly qualifies the company to be Beyond Petroleum", citing BP's "aggressive modes of production, whether it's the tar sands [or] offshore". BP attained a negative public image from the series of industrial accidents that occurred through the 2000s, and its public image was severely damaged after the Deepwater Horizon explosion and Gulf Oil spill. In the immediate aftermath of the spill, BP initially downplayed the severity of the incident, and made many of the same PR errors that Exxon had made after the Exxon Valdez disaster. CEO Tony Hayward was criticised for his statements and had committed several gaffes, including stating that he "wanted his life back." Some in the media commended BP for some of its social media efforts, such as the use of Twitter and Facebook as well as a section of the company's website where it communicated its efforts to clean up the spill. In February 2012 BP North America launched a $500 million branding campaign to rebuild its brand. The company's advertising budget was about $5 million per week during the four-month spill in the Gulf of Mexico, totalling nearly $100 million. In May 2012, BP tasked a press office staff member to openly join discussions on the Wikipedia article's talk page and suggest content to be posted by other editors. Controversy emerged in 2013 over the amount of content from BP that had entered this article. Wikipedia co-founder Jimmy Wales stated that, by identifying himself as a BP staff member, the contributor in question had complied with site policy regarding conflicts of interest. Investigative journalism by BBC Panorama and Africa Eye aired in June 2019 criticising BP for the way in which it had obtained the development rights of Cayar Offshore Profond and St. Louis Offshore Profond blocks, off the coast of Senegal in 2017. In 2012, a Frank Timiș company, Petro-Tim, though previously unknown to the oil industry, was awarded a license to explore the blocks despite having no known record in the industry. Soon after, Aliou Sall, brother of Senegal's president, Macky Sall, was hired at the company, implying a conflict of interest, causing public outrage in Senegal. The 2019 program by BBC Panorama and Africa Eye accuses BP of a failure in due diligence when it agreed on a deal with Timis Corporation in 2017. The deal by BP is expected to provide substantial royalties to Frank Timiș despite accusations of initially obtaining the exploration rights through corruption. Kosmos Energy was also implicated. BP refutes any implications of improper conduct. Regarding the acquisition of Timis Corporation interests in Senegal in April 2017, BP states that it "paid what it considered a fair market value for the interests at this stage of exploration/development". However, BP has not made public what was the basis of the valuation, and states that "the details of the deal are confidential". BP argues that "the amount which would be paid separately by BP to Timis Corporation would be less than one percent of what the Republic of Senegal would receive". Senegal's justice ministry has called an inquiry into the energy contracts. In 2014, BP backed a global study researching challenges for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender employees and for ways that companies can be a "force for change" for LGBT workers around the world. In 2015, Reuters wrote that BP is "known for their more liberal policies for gay and transgender workers". A 2016 article in the Houston Chronicle said BP was "among the first major companies in the United States to offer LGBT workers equal protection and benefits roughly 20 years ago". BP scored a 100% on the 2018 Human Rights Campaign's Corporate Equality Index, which was released in 2017, although this was the most common score. Also in 2017, BP added gender reassignment surgery to its list of benefits for U.S. employees. According to the Human Rights Campaign, BP is one of only a few oil and gas companies offering transgender benefits to its employees. BP ranked No. 51 on the list of Top 100 employers for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender staff on the 2017 Stonewall Workplace Equality Index. Also in 2017, John Mingé, chairman and president of BP America, signed a letter alongside other Houston oil executives denouncing the proposed "bathroom bill" in Texas. Prior to 1997, BP was a member of the Global Climate Coalition, an industry organisation established to promote global warming scepticism, but withdrew in 1997, saying "the time to consider the policy dimensions of climate change is not when the link between greenhouse gases and climate change is conclusively proven, but when the possibility cannot be discounted and is taken seriously by the society of which we are part. We in BP have reached that point.". BP was distinguished as the first multinational outside of the reinsurance industry to publicly support the scientific consensus on climate change, which Pew Center on Global Climate Change president Eileen Claussen then described as a transformative moment on the issue. In March 2002, Lord John Browne, the group chief executive of BP that time, declared in a speech that global warming was real and that urgent action was needed. Notwithstanding this, from 1988 to 2015 BP was responsible for 1.53% of global industrial greenhouse gas emissions. In 2015, BP was listed by the UK-based non-profit organisation Influence Map as the fiercest opponent of action on climate change in Europe. In 2018, BP was the largest contributor to the campaign opposing carbon fee initiative 1631 in Washington State. Robert Allendorfer, manager of BP's Cherry Point refinery, wrote the following in a letter to state lawmakers: "[Initiative 1631] would exempt six of the ten largest stationary source emitters in the state, including a coal-fired power plant, an aluminum smelter, and a number of pulp and paper plants." According to a 2019 Guardian ranking, BP was the 6th largest emitter of greenhouse gases in the world. In February 2020, BP set a goal to cut its greenhouse gas emissions to net-zero by 2050. BP is seeking net-zero carbon emissions across its operations and the fuels the company sells, including emissions from cars, homes, and factories. Details on the scope of this and how this will be achieved are publicly limited. BP said that it is restructuring its operations into four business groups to meet these goals: production and operations; customers and products; gas and low carbon; and innovation and engineering. The company discontinued involvement with American Fuel and Petrochemical Manufacturers, Western States Petroleum Association, and Western Energy Alliance, involved in lobbying government within the United States, because of differences of position on the issue of methane and carbon policies, as a development of this new commitment. However, an investigation conducted by Unearthed, an investigations unit of Greenpeace UK, and HuffPost unveiled eight anti-climate trade associations BP failed to disclose, including Alliance of Western Energy Consumers, Texas Oil and Gas Association, Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association, and the Business Council of Australia, among others. In August 2020, BP America's chairman David Lawler criticised elimination of federal requirements to install equipment to detect and fix methane leaks by saying that "direct federal regulation of methane emissions is essential to preventing leaks throughout the industry and protecting the environment." In BP's Energy Outlook 2020, BP stated that the changing energy landscape coupled with the economic toll of the COVID-19 pandemic means that the global crude demand will never again surpass 2019's average. All three scenarios in the outlook see the consumption of coal, oil, and natural gas dropping while the role of renewable energy will soar. BP is also attempting to move from being an international oil company into becoming an integrated energy company that will focus on low-carbon technologies while also setting a target to reduce its overall oil and gas production by 40% by 2030. In 2021, BP was ranked as the 5th most environmentally responsible company out of 120 oil, gas, and mining companies involved in resource extraction north of the Arctic Circle in the Arctic Environmental Responsibility Index (AERI). In December 2022, U.S. House Oversight and Reform Committee Chair Carolyn Maloney and U.S. House Oversight Environment Subcommittee Chair Ro Khanna sent a memorandum to all House Oversight and Reform Committee members summarizing additional findings from the Committee's investigation into the fossil fuel industry disinformation campaign to obscure the role of fossil fuels in causing global warming, and that upon reviewing internal company documents, accused BP along with ExxonMobil, Chevron, and Shell of greenwashing their Paris Agreement carbon neutrality pledges while continuing long-term investment in fossil fuel production and sales, for engaging in a campaign to promote the use of natural gas as a clean energy source and bridge fuel to renewable energy, and of intimidating journalists reporting about the companies' climate actions and of obstructing the Committee's investigation. After initially pledging to reduce its emissions by 35% by 2030, BP stated in 2023 that it would aim for a 20-30% reduction instead. In a 2016 study, conducted by Indra Øverland of Norwegian Institute of International Affairs BP was ranked 15th out of 18 levels (in total 37th out of 92 oil, gas and mining companies) on indigenous rights and resource extraction in the Arctic. The ranking of companies took into account 20 criteria, such as the companies' commitments to international standards, the presence of organisational units dedicated to handling indigenous rights, competent staffing, track records on indigenous issues, transparency, and procedures for consulting with indigenous peoples, but the actual performance of companies on indigenous rights was not assessed. In September 1999, one of BP's US subsidiaries, BP Exploration Alaska (BPXA), pleaded guilty to criminal charges stemming from its illegally dumping of hazardous wastes on the Alaska North Slope, paying fines and penalties totalling $22 million. BP paid the maximum $500,000 in criminal fines, $6.5 million in civil penalties, and established a $15 million environmental management system at all of BP facilities in the US and Gulf of Mexico that are engaged in oil exploration, drilling or production. The charges stemmed from the 1993 to 1995 dumping of hazardous wastes on Endicott Island, Alaska by BP's contractor Doyon Drilling. The firm illegally discharged waste oil, paint thinner and other toxic and hazardous substances by injecting them down the outer rim, or annuli, of the oil wells. BPXA failed to report the illegal injections when it learned of the conduct, in violation of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act. In 2000, BP Amoco acquired ARCO, a Los Angeles-based oil group. In 2003, California's South Coast Air Quality Management District (AQMD) filed a complaint against BP/ARCO, seeking $319 million in penalties for thousands of air pollution violations over an 8-year period. In January 2005, the agency filed a second suit against BP based on violations between August 2002 and October 2004. The suit alleged that BP illegally released air pollutants by failing to adequately inspect, maintain, repair and properly operate thousands of pieces of equipment across the refinery as required by AQMD regulations. It was alleged that in some cases the violations were due to negligence, while in others the violations were knowingly and willfully committed by refinery officials. In 2005, a settlement was reached under which BP agreed to pay $25 million in cash penalties and $6 million in past emissions fees, while spending $20 million on environmental improvements at the refinery and $30 million on community programs focused on asthma diagnosis and treatment. In 2013, a total of 474 Galveston County residents living near the BP Texas City Refinery filed a $1 billion lawsuit against BP, accusing the company of "intentionally misleading the public about the seriousness" of a two-week release of toxic fumes which began on 10 November 2011. "BP reportedly released Sulfur Dioxide, Methyl Carpaptan, Dimethyl Disulfide and other toxic chemicals into the atmosphere" reads the report. The lawsuit further claims Galveston county has the worst air quality in the United States due to BP's violations of air pollution laws. BP had no comment and said it would address the suit in the court system. In 2006, a group of Colombian farmers reached a multimillion-dollar out-of-court settlement with BP for alleged environmental damage caused by the Ocensa pipeline. The company was accused of benefiting from a regime of terror carried out by Colombian government paramilitaries to protect the 450-mile (720 km) Ocensa pipeline; BP said throughout that it has acted responsibly and that landowners were fairly compensated. In 2009, another group of 95 Colombian farmers filed a suit against BP, saying the company's Ocensa pipeline caused landslides and damage to soil and groundwater, affecting crops, livestock, and contaminating water supplies, making fish ponds unsustainable. Most of the land traversed by the pipeline was owned by peasant farmers who were illiterate and unable to read the environmental impact assessment conducted by BP prior to construction, which acknowledged significant and widespread risks of damage to the land. The Supreme Court of Justice of Colombia handed down a judgement rejecting the case in August 2016. Since 2007, BP has been involved in oil sands projects, which Greenpeace has called a climate crime. Members of Canada's First Nations have criticised BP's involvement for the impacts oil sands extraction has on the environment. In 2010, BP pledged to use only in-situ technologies instead of open-pit mining. It uses steam-assisted gravity drainage in-situ technology to extract bitumen. According to Greenpeace it is even more damaging to climate because while according to the Pembina Institute in-situ techniques result in lower nitrogen oxide emissions, and are less damaging to the landscape and rivers, they cause more greenhouse gas and sulphur dioxide emissions than mining. In 2010, activist shareholders asked BP for a full investigation of the Sunrise oil sands project, but were defeated. In 2013, shareholders criticised the project for being carbon-intensive. Citing conditions similar to those that resulted in the 2005 Texas City refinery explosion, on 25 April 2006, the U.S. Department of Labor's Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) fined BP more than $2.4 million for unsafe operations at the company's Oregon, Ohio refinery. An OSHA inspection resulted in 32 per-instance wilful citations including locating people in vulnerable buildings among the processing units, failing to correct depressurisation deficiencies and deficiencies with gas monitors, and failing to prevent the use of non-approved electrical equipment in locations in which hazardous concentrations of flammable gases or vapours may exist. BP was further fined for neglecting to develop shutdown procedures and designate responsibilities and to establish a system to promptly address and resolve recommendations made after an incident when a large feed pump failed three years prior to 2006. Penalties were also issued for five serious violations, including failure to develop operating procedures for a unit that removes sulphur compound; failure to ensure that operating procedures reflect current operating practice in the Isocracker Unit; failure to resolve process hazard analysis recommendations; failure to resolve process safety management compliance audit items in a timely manner; and failure to periodically inspect pressure piping systems. In 2008, BP and several other major oil refiners agreed to pay $422 million to settle a class-action lawsuit stemming from water contamination tied to the gasoline additive MTBE, a chemical that was once a key gasoline ingredient. Leaked from storage tanks, MTBE has been found in several water systems across the United States. The plaintiffs maintain that the industry knew about the environmental dangers but that they used it instead of other possible alternatives because it was less expensive. The companies will also be required to pay 70% of cleanup costs for any wells newly affected at any time over the next 30 years. BP has one of the worst safety records of any major oil company that operates in the United States. Between 2007 and 2010, BP refineries in Ohio and Texas accounted for 97% of "egregious, willful" violations handed out by the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). BP had 760 "egregious, willful" violations during that period, while Sunoco and Conoco-Phillips each had eight, Citgo two and Exxon had one. The deputy assistant secretary of labour at OSHA, said "The only thing you can conclude is that BP has a serious, systemic safety problem in their company." A report in ProPublica, published in The Washington Post'' in 2010, found that over a decade of internal investigations of BP's Alaska operations during the 2000s warned senior BP managers that the company repeatedly disregarded safety and environmental rules and risked a serious accident if it did not change its ways. ProPublica found that "Taken together, these documents portray a company that systemically ignored its own safety policies across its North American operations – from Alaska to the Gulf of Mexico to California and Texas. Executives were not held accountable for the failures, and some were promoted despite them." The Project On Government Oversight, an independent non-profit organisation in the United States which investigates and seeks to expose corruption and other misconduct, lists BP as number one on their listing of the 100 worst corporations based on instances of misconduct. In December 1965, Britain's first oil rig, Sea Gem, capsized when two of the legs collapsed during an operation to move it to a new location. The oil rig had been hastily converted in an effort to quickly start drilling operations after the North Sea was opened for exploration. Thirteen crew members were killed. No hydrocarbons were released in the accident. The former Amoco oil refinery at Texas City, Texas, was beset by environmental issues, including chemical leaks and a 2005 explosion that killed 15 people and injured hundreds. Bloomberg News described the incident, which led to a guilty plea by BP to a felony Clean Air Act charge, as "one of the deadliest U.S. industrial accidents in 20 years." The refinery was sold to Marathon Petroleum in October 2012. In March 2005, the Texas City refinery, one of the largest refineries owned then by BP, exploded causing 15 deaths, injuring 180 people and forcing thousands of nearby residents to remain sheltered in their homes. A 20-foot (6.1 m) column filled with hydrocarbon overflowed to form a vapour cloud, which ignited. The explosion caused all the casualties and substantial damage to the rest of the plant. The incident came as the culmination of a series of less serious accidents at the refinery, and the engineering problems were not addressed by the management. Maintenance and safety at the plant had been cut as a cost-saving measure, the responsibility ultimately resting with executives in London. The fallout from the accident clouded BP's corporate image because of the mismanagement at the plant. There had been several investigations of the disaster, the most recent being that from the US Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board which "offered a scathing assessment of the company." OSHA found "organizational and safety deficiencies at all levels of the BP Corporation" and said management failures could be traced from Texas to London. The company pleaded guilty to a felony violation of the Clean Air Act, was fined $50 million, the largest ever assessed under the Clean Air Act, and sentenced to three years probation. On 30 October 2009, the US Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) fined BP an additional $87 million, the largest fine in OSHA history, for failing to correct safety hazards documented in the 2005 explosion. Inspectors found 270 safety violations that had been cited but not fixed and 439 new violations. BP appealed the fine. In July 2012, the company agreed to pay $13 million to settle the new violations. At that time OSHA found "no imminent dangers" at the Texas plant. Thirty violations remained under discussion. In March 2012, US Department of Justice officials said the company had met all of its obligations and subsequently ended the probationary period. In November 2011, BP agreed to pay the state of Texas $50 million for violating state emissions standards at its Texas City refinery during and after the 2005 explosion at the refinery. The state Attorney General said BP was responsible for 72 separate pollutant emissions that have been occurring every few months since March 2005. It was the largest fine ever imposed under the Texas Clean Air Act. In 2007, 143 workers at the Texas City refinery claimed that they were injured when a toxic substance was released at the plant. In December 2009, after a three-week trial, a federal jury in Galveston awarded ten of those workers $10 million each in punitive damages, in addition to smaller damages for medical expenses and pain and suffering. The plant had a history of chemical releases. In March 2010, the federal judge hearing the case reduced the jury's award to less than $500,000. U.S. District Judge Kenneth M. Hoyt said the plaintiffs failed to prove BP was grossly negligent. In August 2010, the Texas Attorney General charged BP with illegally emitting harmful air pollutants from its Texas City refinery for more than a month. BP has admitted that malfunctioning equipment led to the release of over 530,000 pounds (240,000 kg) of chemicals into the air of Texas City and surrounding areas from 6 April to 16 May 2010. The leak included 17,000 pounds (7,700 kg) of benzene, 37,000 pounds (17,000 kg) of nitrogen oxides, and 186,000 pounds (84,000 kg) of carbon monoxide. The State's investigation showed that BP's failure to properly maintain its equipment caused the malfunction. When the equipment malfunctioned and caught fire, BP workers shut it down and routed escaping gases to flares. Rather than shut down associated units while compressor repairs were made, BP chose to keep operating those other units, which led to unlawful release of contaminants for almost 40 days. The Attorney General is seeking civil penalties of no less than $50 nor greater than $25,000 per day of each violation of state air quality laws, as well as attorneys' fees and investigative costs. In June 2012, over 50,000 Texas City residents joined a class-action suit against BP, alleging they became sick in 2010 as a result of the emissions release from the refinery. BP said the release harmed no one. In October 2013, a trial designed as a test for a larger suit that includes 45,000 people found that BP was negligent in the case, but due to the lack of substantial evidence linking illness to the emissions, decided the company would be absolved of any wrongdoing. In March 2006, corrosion of a BP Exploration Alaska (BPXA) oil transit pipeline in Prudhoe Bay transporting oil to the Trans-Alaska Pipeline led to a five-day leak and the largest oil spill on Alaska's North Slope. According to the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation (ADEC), a total of 212,252 US gallons (5,053.6 bbl; 803.46 m3) of oil was spilled, covering 2 acres (0.81 ha) of the North Slope. BP admitted that cost-cutting measures had resulted in a lapse in monitoring and maintenance of the pipeline and the consequent leak. At the moment of the leak, pipeline inspection gauges (known as "pigs") had not been run through the pipeline since 1998. BP completed the clean-up of the spill by May 2006, including removal of contaminated gravel and vegetation, which was replaced with new material from the Arctic tundra. Following the spill, the company was ordered by regulators to inspect the 35 kilometres (22 mi) of pipelines in Prudhoe Bay using "smart pigs". In late July 2006, the "smart pigs" monitoring the pipelines found 16 places where corrosion had thinned pipeline walls. A BP crew sent to inspect the pipe in early August discovered a leak and small spill, following which, BP announced that the eastern portion of the Alaskan field would be shut down for repairs on the pipeline, with approval from the Department of Transportation. The shutdown resulted in a reduction of 200,000 barrels per day (32,000 m3/d) until work began to bring the eastern field to full production on 2 October 2006. In total, 23 barrels (3.7 m3) of oil were spilled and 176 barrels (28.0 m3) were "contained and recovered", according to ADEC. The spill was cleaned up and there was no impact upon wildlife. After the shutdown, BP pledged to replace 26 kilometres (16 mi) of its Alaskan oil transit pipelines and the company completed work on the 16 miles (26 km) of new pipeline by the end of 2008. In November 2007, BP Exploration, Alaska pleaded guilty to negligent discharge of oil, a misdemeanour under the federal Clean Water Act and was fined US$20 million. There was no charge brought for the smaller spill in August 2006 due to BP's quick response and clean-up. On 16 October 2007, ADEC officials reported a "toxic spill" from a BP pipeline in Prudhoe Bay comprising 2,000 US gallons (7,600 L; 1,700 imp gal) of primarily methanol (methyl alcohol) mixed with crude oil and water, which spilled onto a gravel pad and frozen tundra pond. In the settlement of a civil suit, in July 2011 investigators from the U.S. Department of Transportation's Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration determined that the 2006 spills were a result of BPXA's failure to properly inspect and maintain the pipeline to prevent corrosion. The government issued a Corrective Action Order to BP XA that addressed the pipeline's risks and ordered pipeline repair or replacement. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency had investigated the extent of the oil spills and oversaw BPXA's cleanup. When BP XA did not fully comply with the terms of the corrective action, a complaint was filed in March 2009 alleging violations of the Clean Water Act, the Clean Air Act and the Pipeline Safety Act. In July 2011, the U.S. District Court for the District of Alaska entered a consent decree between the United States and BPXA resolving the government's claims. Under the consent decree, BPXA paid a $25 million civil penalty, the largest per-barrel penalty at that time for an oil spill, and agreed to take measures to significantly improve inspection and maintenance of its pipeline infrastructure on the North Slope to reduce the threat of additional oil spills. On 17 September 2008, a small gas leak was discovered and one gas-injection well broached to surface in the area of the Central Azeri platform at the Azeri oilfield, a part of the Azeri–Chirag–Guneshli (ACG) project, in the Azerbaijan sector of Caspian Sea. The platform was shut down and the staff was evacuated. As the West Azeri Platform was being powered by a cable from the Central Azeri Platform, it was also shut down. Production at the West Azeri Platform resumed on 9 October 2008 and at the Central Azeri Platform in December 2008. According to leaked US Embassy cables, BP had been "exceptionally circumspect in disseminating information" and showed that BP thought the cause for the blowout was a bad cement job. The cables further said that some of BP's ACG partners complained that the company was so secretive that it was withholding information even from them. Santa Barbara County District Attorney sued BP West Coast Products LLC, BP Products North America, Inc., and Atlantic Richfield Company over allegations that the companies violated state laws regarding operating and maintaining motor vehicle fuel underground storage tank laws. BP settled a lawsuit for $14 million. The complaint alleged that BP failed to properly inspect and maintain underground tanks used to store gasoline for retail sale at approximately 780 gas stations in California over a period of ten years and violated other hazardous material and hazardous waste laws. The case settled in November 2016 and was the result of collaboration among the California Attorney General's Office and several district attorney's offices across the state. The Deepwater Horizon oil spill was a major industrial accident on the Gulf of Mexico, which killed 11 people and injured 16 others, leaked about 4.9 million barrels (210 million US gal; 780,000 m3) of oil with plus or minus 10% uncertainty, which makes it the largest accidental marine oil spill in the history of the petroleum industry, and cost to the company more than $65 billion of cleanup costs, charges and penalties. On 20 April 2010, the semi-submersible exploratory offshore drilling rig Deepwater Horizon located in the Macondo Prospect in the Gulf of Mexico exploded after a blowout. After burning for two days, the rig sank. The well was finally capped on 15 July 2010. Of 4.9 million barrels (210 million US gal; 780,000 m3) of leaked oil 810,000 barrels (34 million US gal; 129,000 m3) was collected or burned while 4.1 million barrels (170 million US gal; 650,000 m3) entered the Gulf waters. 1.8 million US gallons (6,800 m3) of Corexit dispersant was applied. The spill had a strong economic impact on the Gulf Coast's economy sectors such as fishing and tourism. Oil spill caused damages across a range of species and habitats in the Gulf. Researchers say the oil and dispersant mixture, including PAHs, permeated the food chain through zooplankton. Toxicological effects have been documented in benthic and pelagic fish, estuarine communities, mammals, birds and turtles, deep-water corals, plankton, foraminifera, and microbial communities. Effects on different populations consist of increased mortality or as sub-lethal impairment on the organisms' ability to forage, reproduce and avoid predators. In 2013, it was reported that dolphins and other marine life continued to die in record numbers with infant dolphins dying at six times the normal rate, and half the dolphins examined in a December 2013 study were seriously ill or dying. BP said the report was "inconclusive as to any causation associated with the spill." Studies in 2013 suggested that as much as one-third of the released oil remains in the gulf. Further research suggested that the oil on the bottom of the seafloor was not degrading. Oil in affected coastal areas increased erosion due to the death of mangrove trees and marsh grass. Researchers looking at sediment, seawater, biota, and seafood found toxic compounds in high concentrations that they said was due to the added oil and dispersants. Although Gulf fisheries recovered in 2011, a 2014 study of the effects of the oil spill on bluefin tuna by researchers at Stanford University and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, published in the journal Science, found that toxins released by the oil spill sent fish into cardiac arrest. The study found that even very low concentrations of crude oil can slow the pace of fish heartbeats. BP disputed the study, which was conducted as part of the federal Natural Resource Damage Assessment process required by the Oil Pollution Act. The study also found that oil already broken down by wave action and chemical dispersants was more toxic than fresh oil. Another peer-reviewed study, released in March 2014 and conducted by 17 scientists from the United States and Australia and published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, found that tuna and amberjack that were exposed to oil from the spill developed deformities of the heart and other organs. BP responded that the concentrations of oil in the study were a level rarely seen in the Gulf, but The New York Times reported that the BP statement was contradicted by the study. Research discussed at a 2013 conference included preliminary results of an ongoing study being done by the National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences indicating that oil spill cleanup workers carry biomarkers of chemicals contained in the spilled oil and the dispersants used. A separate study is following the health issues of women and children affected by the spill. Several studies found that a "significant percentage" of Gulf residents reported mental health problems such as anxiety, depression and PTSD. According to a Columbia University study investigating the health effects among children living less than 10 miles from the coast, more than a third of the parents report physical or mental health symptoms among their children. Australia's 60 Minutes reported that people living along the gulf coast were becoming sick from the mixture of Corexit and oil. Susan Shaw, of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill Strategic Sciences Working Group, says "BP told the public that Corexit was 'as harmless as Dawn dishwashing liquid'...But BP and the EPA clearly knew about the toxicity of the Corexit long before this spill." According to Shaw, BP's own safety sheet on Corexit says that there are "high and immediate human health hazards". Cleanup workers were not provided safety equipment by the company, and the safety manuals were "rarely if ever" followed, or distributed to workers, according to a Newsweek investigation. The safety manuals read: "Avoid breathing vapor" and "Wear suitable protective clothing." Oil clean up workers reported that they were not allowed to use respirators, and that their jobs were threatened if they did. A peer-reviewed study published in The American Journal of Medicine reported significantly altered blood profiles of individuals exposed to the spilled oil and dispersants that put them at increased risk of developing liver cancer, leukemia and other disorders. BP disputed its methodology and said other studies supported its position that dispersants did not create a danger to health. In 2014, a study was published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences which found heart deformities in fish exposed to oil from the spill. The researchers said that their results probably apply to humans as well as fish. On 15 December 2010, the Department of Justice filed a civil and criminal suit against BP and other defendants for violations under the Clean Water Act in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Louisiana.: 70  The case was consolidated with about 200 others, including those brought by state governments, individuals, and companies under Multi-District Litigation docket MDL No. 2179, before U.S. District Judge Carl Barbier. In November 2012, BP and the Department of Justice reached a $4 billion settlement of all federal criminal charges related to the explosion and spill. Under the settlement, BP agreed to plead guilty to 11 felony counts of manslaughter, two misdemeanors, and a felony count of lying to Congress and agreed to four years of government monitoring of its safety practices and ethics. BP also paid $525 million to settle civil charges by the Securities and Exchange Commission that it misled investors about the flow rate of oil from the well. At the same time, the US government filed criminal charges against three BP employees; two site managers were charged with manslaughter and negligence, and one former vice president with obstruction. Judge Barbier ruled in the first phase of the case that BP had committed gross negligence and that "its employees took risks that led to the largest environmental disaster in U.S. history." He apportioned fault at 67% for BP, 30% for Transocean and 3% for Halliburton. Barbier ruled that BP was "reckless" and had acted with "conscious disregard of known risks." In June 2010, after a meeting in the White House between President Barack Obama and BP executives, the president announced that BP would pay $20 billion into a trust fund that will be used to compensate victims of the oil spill. BP also set aside $100 million to compensate oil workers who lost their jobs because of the spill. On 2 March 2012, BP and businesses and residents affected by the spill reached a settlement of roughly 100,000 suits claiming economic losses. BP estimated that the settlement cost more than $9.2 billion. In 2015, BP and five states agreed to an $18.5 billion settlement to be used for Clean Water Act penalties and various claims. On 20 September 2022, a fire at BP's Husky Toledo refinery caused the death of two workers there. The fire was put out that day, but the refinery remained shut down. The refinery's shutdown was expected to increase American petrol prices. BP lobbied the British government to conclude a prisoner-transfer agreement which the Libyan government had wanted to secure the release of Abdelbaset al-Megrahi, the only person convicted for the 1988 Lockerbie bombing over Scotland, which killed 270 people. BP stated that it pressed for the conclusion of prisoner transfer agreement amid fears that delays would damage its "commercial interests" and disrupt its £900 million offshore drilling operations in the region, but it said that it had not been involved in negotiations concerning the release of Megrahi. In February 2002, BP's then-chief executive, Lord Browne of Madingley, renounced the practice of corporate campaign contributions, saying: "That's why we've decided, as a global policy, that from now on we will make no political contributions from corporate funds anywhere in the world." When the Washington Post reported in June 2010 that BP North America "donated at least $4.8 million in corporate contributions in the past seven years to political groups, partisan organizations and campaigns engaged in federal and state elections", mostly to oppose ballot measures in two states aiming to raise taxes on the oil industry, the company said that the commitment had only applied to contributions to individual candidates. During the 2008 U.S. election cycle, BP employees contributed to various candidates, with Barack Obama receiving the largest amount of money, broadly in line with contributions from Shell and Chevron, but significantly less than those of Exxon Mobil. In 2009, BP spent nearly $16 million lobbying the U.S. Congress. In 2011, BP spent a total of $8,430,000 on lobbying and had 47 registered lobbyists. In 1937, Iraq Petroleum Company (IPC), 23.75% owned by BP, signed an oil concession agreement with the Sultan of Muscat. In 1952, IPC offered financial support to raise an armed force that would assist the Sultan in occupying the interior region of Oman, an area that geologists believed to be rich in oil. This led to the 1954 outbreak of Jebel Akhdar War in Oman that lasted for more than five years. The US Justice Department and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission filed charges against BP Products North America Inc. (subsidiary of BP plc) and several BP traders, alleging they conspired to raise the price of propane by seeking to corner the propane market in 2004. In 2006, one former trader pleaded guilty. In 2007, BP paid $303 million in restitution and fines as part of an agreement to defer prosecution. BP was charged with cornering and manipulating the price of TET propane in 2003 and 2004. BP paid a $125 million civil monetary penalty to the CFTC, established a compliance and ethics program, and installed a monitor to oversee BP's trading activities in the commodities markets. BP also paid $53 million into a restitution fund for victims, a $100 million criminal penalty, plus $25 million into a consumer fraud fund, as well as other payments. Also in 2007, four other former traders were charged. These charges were dismissed by a US District Court in 2009 on the grounds that the transactions were exempt under the Commodities Exchange Act because they didn't occur in a marketplace but were negotiated contracts among sophisticated companies. The dismissal was upheld by the Court of Appeals for the 5th Circuit in 2011. In November 2010, US regulators FERC and CFTC began an investigation of BP for allegedly manipulating the gas market. The investigation relates to trading activity that occurred in October and November 2008. At that time, CFTC Enforcement staff provided BP with a notice of intent to recommend charges of attempted market manipulation in violation of the Commodity Exchange Act. BP denied that it engaged in "any inappropriate or unlawful activity." In July 2011, the FERC staff issued a "Notice of Alleged Violations" saying it had preliminarily determined that several BP entities fraudulently traded physical natural gas in the Houston Ship Channel and Katy markets and trading points to increase the value of their financial swing spread positions. In May 2013, the European Commission started an investigation into allegations the companies reported distorted prices to the price reporting agency Platts, in order to "manipulate the published prices" for several oil and biofuel products. The investigation was dropped in December 2015 due to lack of evidence. A dataset of gasoline prices of BP, Caltex, Woolworths, Coles, and Gull from Perth gathered in the years 2001 to 2015 was used to show by statistical analysis the tacit collusion between these retailers. Documents from a 2016 bid to drill in the Great Australian Bight revealed claims by BP that a large-scale cleanup operation following a massive oil spill would bring a "welcome boost to local economies." In the same bid BP also stated that a diesel spill would be "socially acceptable" due to a lack of "unresolved stakeholder concerns." An internal email from mid 2017, was leaked in April 2018 in New Zealand. The email laid out that pricing was to be raised at certain sites in a region around Otaki in order to regain volume lost at that branch. This led to the Government asking the Commerce Commission to investigate regional prices: initial indications were that motorists were paying too much across most of the country. List of companies based in London Data is based on the 2022 Fortune 500. BP (2019), pp. 2–3 "Annual Results 2023" (PDF). BP. Retrieved 11 February 2024. "Front-End-Loading Project Manager (m/w/d) in fulltime". BP. Retrieved 11 February 2024. Bergin, Tom (1 August 2008). "Oil majors' output growth hinges on strategy shift". Reuters. Retrieved 15 March 2012. "BP.com: History of BP – Post war". Archived from the original on 3 July 2010. Retrieved 3 July 2010. In 1954, the board changed the company's name to The British Petroleum Company Tharoor, Ishaan (2 June 2010). "A Brief History of BP". Time. Archived from the original on 10 July 2010. Retrieved 3 July 2010. In 1954, in an attempt perhaps to move beyond its image as a quasi-colonial enterprise, the company rebranded itself the British Petroleum Company Bousso, Ron (2 December 2022). "BP quits Russia in up to $25 billion hit after Ukraine invasion". Reuters. Retrieved 15 September 2023. "bp to exit Rosneft shareholding | News and insights | Home". bp global. Retrieved 15 September 2022. "Our brands". BP. Retrieved 10 October 2022. "Global 500". Fortune. Retrieved 15 September 2022. "Companies ranked by Market Cap - page 2". companiesmarketcap.com. Retrieved 15 September 2022. "BP Market Cap". ycharts.com. Retrieved 15 September 2022. "BP | 2022 Global 500". Fortune. Retrieved 15 September 2022. "The Global 2000 2023". Forbes. Archived from the original on 29 January 2024. Retrieved 7 February 2024. Riley, Tess (10 July 2017). "Top 100 producers and their cumulative greenhouse gas emissions from 1988-2015". The Guardian. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Roach, John (20 March 2006). "Alaska Oil Spill Fuels Concerns Over Arctic Wildlife, Future Drilling". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 12 April 2006. Retrieved 5 June 2010. On Scene Coordinator Report on Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill (PDF) (Report). September 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 September 2012. Retrieved 10 August 2018. Robertson, Campbell; Krauss, Clifford (2 August 2010). "Gulf Spill Is the Largest of Its Kind, Scientists Say". The New York Times. Retrieved 17 November 2012. Goldenberg, Suzanne; Rushe, Dominic (15 November 2012). "BP to pay $4.5bn penalty over Deepwater Horizon disaster". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 17 November 2012. Krauss, Clifford; Schwartz, John (15 November 2012). "BP Will Plead Guilty and Pay Over $4 Billion". The New York Times. Retrieved 17 November 2012. Muskal, Michael; White, Ronald D. (15 November 2012). "BP fined, charged in oil spill that showed 'profit over prudence'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 11 December 2012. McGill, Kevin (2 July 2015). "Gulf States Reach $18.7B Settlement With BP Over Oil Spill". The Washington Times. Associated Press. Retrieved 2 July 2015. Bousso, Ron (16 January 2018). "BP Deepwater Horizon costs balloon to $65 billion". Reuters. Archived from the original on 16 January 2018. Retrieved 31 May 2018. Ward, Andrew (1 May 2018). "BP hints at future dividend increases". Financial Times. Retrieved 31 May 2018. Vassiliou, M. S (2009). Historical Dictionary of the Petroleum Industry. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow. Michael Gasson (Former Group Archivist, BP Archive). "Home: The BP Archive". Business History Links: Business Archives. Association of Business Historians. Archived from the original on 10 February 2007. Retrieved 9 June 2007. Bamberg (1994), pp. 3–7 "From Anglo-Persian Oil to BP Amoco". BBC News. 11 August 1998. Retrieved 31 March 2013. Beale (2012), pp. 52–55 Atabaki(2018), p. 196 Bamberg (1994), p. 177 Marwick (1964), p. 175 "Scottish Oils". Uphall on the Web. Archived from the original on 22 July 2013. Retrieved 8 June 2013. "A Brief History of the Scottish Shale Oil Industry". Museum of the Scottish Shale Oil Industry. Archived from the original on 25 September 2019. Retrieved 8 June 2013. Myers, Kevin (3 September 2009). "The greatest 20th century beneficiary of popular mythology has been the cad Churchill". Irish Independent. Retrieved 9 September 2012. Metz, Helen Chapin, ed. (1988). "The Turkish Petroleum Company". Iraq: A Country Study. Retrieved 28 June 2008. "Milestones: 1921–1936, The 1928 Red Line Agreemen". United States Department of State. Archived from the original on 29 July 2012. Retrieved 18 August 2012. Longrigg, Stephen Hemsley (1961). Oil in the Middle East. New York: Oxford University Press. OCLC 237163. Yergin, Daniel (1991). The Prize. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-50248-5. 0671502484. Ferrier (1982), p. 463 Bamberg (2000), pp. 109–110 Brune (2003), p. 499 Alsharhan (1997), p. 471 "D'Arcy, William Knox (1849–1917)". Australian Dictionary of Biography. Adb.online.anu.edu.au. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "Milestones: 1921–1936 – Office of the Historian". history.state.gov. Peterson, J. E. (2013). Oman's Insurgencies: The Sultanate's Struggle for Supremacy. Saqi. p. 43. ISBN 978-0-86356-702-5. Bamberg (2000), pp. 350–352 Bayne Fisher, ed. al. (1991), p. 665. Risen, James (18 June 2000). "The C.I.A. in Iran: Britain Fights Oil Nationalism". The New York Times. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "BP: History at Funding Universe". Fundinguniverse.com. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Sztucki (1984), p. 43 Bryne, Malcolm (18 August 2013). "CIA Admits It Was Behind Iran's Coup". Foreign Policy. Vassiliou (2009), p. 269 Lauterpacht (1973), p. 375. Boscheck (2008), p. 235 Kinzer (2003), pp. 195–196 "Natural Gas and Alaska's Future" (PDF). p. 22. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 March 2012. Retrieved 12 February 2013. "British Petroleum in Libya". The Wall Street Journal. 23 February 1956. Archived from the original on 30 June 2013. Retrieved 24 April 2013. "BP dossier". Sea-us.org.au. 21 November 1999. Archived from the original on 18 June 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Bamberg (2000), p. 273 "Supertest History". Retrieved 13 September 2015. Barkham, Patrick (24 June 2010). "Oil spills: Legacy of the Torrey Canyon". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 30 June 2013. "1967: Bombs rain down on Torrey Canyon". BBC News. 29 March 1967. Retrieved 30 June 2013. Bamberg (2000), pp. 385–389 "International Oil Transportation". Dr. Jean-Paul Rodrigue. Archived from the original on 8 March 2016. Retrieved 1 September 2012. Company Check. "Iraq Petroleum Company Ltd". Retrieved 27 January 2023. "The shareholders of ADPC info from ExxonMobil history". Archived from the original on 7 March 2013. Retrieved 18 August 2012. "Company Overview of Abu Dhabi Petroleum Co Ltd". Bloomberg. Retrieved 18 August 2012. "COMPANY NEWS; B.P. Now Holding 95% of Standard". The New York Times. 14 May 1987. Retrieved 29 October 2014. Hershey jr., Robert D. (29 March 1979). "B.P. Finds Success Without Iranian Oil". The New York Times. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Britons rush to buy oil company shares". The Globe and Mail (Canada). 10 November 1979. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2012. "Large Offering Is Set by B.P". The New York Times. 10 October 1987. Retrieved 9 October 2013. Lohr, Steve (30 October 1987). "B.P. Issue to Proceed; Safeguard Put on Price". The New York Times. Retrieved 13 April 2014. "Kuwait buys 10 per cent stake in oil giant British Petroleum". Toronto Star. 19 November 1987. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2012. Lohr, Steve (19 November 1987). "Kuwait has 10% of B.P.; price put at $900 million". The New York Times. Retrieved 11 June 2010. O'Connor, Robert (9 October 1988). "Order to Kuwait to reduce BP holdings eases strain in U.S." The San Diego Union-Tribune. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2012. "British Petroleum Chairman Sir Peter Walters to Quit". Los Angeles Times. 8 September 1989. Retrieved 8 June 2013. "Funding Universe – History of Chevron Corporation". Retrieved 1 September 2012. "Company Profile". chevron.com. Archived from the original on 12 April 2010. Retrieved 5 May 2010. "Britain drops a barrier to BP bid". The New York Times. Associated Press. 5 February 1988. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Yumiko Nishitani (24 June 2008). "Boeing, BP to delist shares from Tokyo bourse". Reuters. Retrieved 15 May 2013. Roberts, John (February 2005). "Organizing for Performance: How BP Did It". Stanford Business. Gsb.stanford.edu. Archived from the original on 14 January 2012. Retrieved 12 February 2013. "Funding Universe – History of Talisman Energy Inc". Retrieved 1 September 2012. "Royal Academy of Engineering". Raeng.org.uk. Archived from the original on 22 January 2021. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "BP and Lucas form solar company". Electronics and Power. 27: 204. March 1981. doi:10.1049/ep.1981.0091. Wilson, Tom (24 March 2022). "Oligarchs, power and profits: the history of BP in Russia". Financial Times. Retrieved 25 March 2022. Berdy, Michele A. (29 February 2012). "Lessons Learned From BP's 'Bold Move'". The Moscow Times. Archived from the original on 19 March 2012. Retrieved 16 May 2013. "BP in Azerbaijan. Our history". BP. Retrieved 2 March 2018. "BP and Amoco in oil mega-merger". BBC News. 11 August 1998. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "BP Parent Company Name Change Following AGM Approval" (Press release). BP. 1 May 2001. Archived from the original on 6 August 2011. Retrieved 11 June 2010. Brierley, David (4 April 1999). "BP strikes it rich in America". The Independent. London. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "BP Amoco Agrees Recommended Cash Offer To Buy Burmah Castrol For £3 ($4.7) Billion" (Press release). BP. 14 March 2000. Archived from the original on 11 January 2012. Retrieved 11 June 2010. Brierley, David (4 April 1999). "BP strikes it rich in America". The Independent. Retrieved 28 August 2012. "Green light for BP–Arco merger". BBC News. 14 April 2000. Retrieved 28 August 2012. "Olympic to restart Washington state line". Oil & Gas Journal. 7 February 2001. Retrieved 25 October 2020. "Olympic Pipe Line pleads innocent to charges from explosion". Kitsap Sun. The Associated Press. 28 September 2001. Retrieved 25 October 2020. Life: The Observer Magazine – A celebration of 500 years of British Art – 19 March 2000 Boland, Vincent (26 May 2005). "BTC pipeline the 'new Silk Road'". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 7 June 2008. Retrieved 9 September 2012. "History of Aral". BP. Archived from the original on 17 April 2016. Retrieved 17 September 2010. "Rosneft, BP finalize dissolution of German refining JV". Oil & Gas Journal. 23 January 2017. Retrieved 25 February 2018. "BP, TNK sign $6bn Russia deal". CNN. 26 June 2003. Retrieved 9 September 2012. "BP sells chemical unit for £5bn". BBC News. 7 October 2005. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "BP Sale of Innovene to Ineos Completed" (Press release). BP. 15 December 2005. Archived from the original on 4 July 2013. Retrieved 7 July 2012. "BP to Sell Most Company-Owned, Company-Operated Convenience Stores to Franchisees" (Press release). BP. 15 November 2007. Archived from the original on 25 June 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "BP: 'An accident waiting to happen'". Fortune. 24 January 2011. Retrieved 13 April 2014. Cobain, Ian; Dyer, Clare (2 May 2007). "BP's Browne quits over lie to court about private life". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 29 May 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Barley, Shanta (11 May 2009). "Science & Environment | BP brings 'green era' to a close". BBC News. Retrieved 26 April 2013. Hunt, Nigel (6 December 2012). "Vivergo UK biorefinery starts operations". Reuters. Retrieved 16 September 2017. "EU clears BP, DuPont to take over biobutanol firm". Reuters. 8 July 2009. Retrieved 16 September 2017. "Iraq – Rumaila Oil Field (HVO IRQ-10)". ukti.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 21 May 2013. Retrieved 22 August 2012. Ajrash, Kadhim; Razzouk, Nayla (4 October 2010). "Iraq Lifts Oil Reserves Estimate to 143 Billion Barrels, Overtakes Iran". Bloomberg. Retrieved 22 August 2012. Kent, Sarah (19 October 2017). "BP Chairman Carl-Henric Svanberg to Retire". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 19 July 2019. Young, Sarah; Falloon, Matt (30 September 2010). "New BP CEO says hopes to restore dividend in 2011". Reuters. Retrieved 30 January 2011. Reed, Stanley (4 October 2019). "BP Chief Executive Bob Dudley Is to Retire". The New York Times. Retrieved 28 February 2020. Das, Anupreeta; Dezember, Ryan; Flynn, Alexis (9 September 2012). "BP in Deal to Sell Some Gulf Fields". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 10 September 2012. "BP Close to GoM Assets Sale – Analyst Blog". Zacks Equity Research. NASDAQ. 9 September 2012. Retrieved 10 September 2012. Cattaneo, Claudia (30 July 2012). "BP back in growth mode, eyes oil sands". Financial Post. Retrieved 19 September 2012. Parraga, Marianna; Wallis, Daniel (27 October 2010). "Venezuela says BP's asset sale valued at $800 mln". Reuters. Retrieved 10 September 2012. Bierman, Stephen; Swint, Brian (27 October 2010). "BP Sells Venezuela, Vietnam Assets to TNK-BP for $1.8 Billion". Bloomberg. Retrieved 10 September 2012. Bergin, Tom; Farge, Emma (15 November 2010). "BP sells Southern Africa fuel retail units". Reuters. Retrieved 10 September 2012. Flynn, Alexis (27 March 2012). "BP sells UK gas assets to Perenco for $399.253 million". MarketWatch. Retrieved 10 September 2012. Lee, Mike; Swint, Brian (1 December 2012). "Plains Buys $1.67 Billion BP Unit to Expand Liquids Position". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 2 May 2013. Retrieved 10 September 2012. McCoy, Daniel (28 February 2012). "BP sell Kansas natural gas assets to Linn Energy for $1.2 billion". Wichita Business Journal. Retrieved 10 September 2012. Chazan, Guy; Sakoui, Anousha (18 September 2012). "BP in talks to sell Texas City refinery". Financial Times. Retrieved 21 September 2012. "BP Agrees to Sell Carson Refinery and ARCO Retail Network in US Southwest to Tesoro for $2.5 Billion" (Press release). BP. 13 August 2012. Archived from the original on 15 August 2012. Retrieved 17 August 2012. "BP To Sell Texas Midstream Gas Assets" (Press release). BP. 10 August 2012. Archived from the original on 15 August 2012. Retrieved 10 September 2012. Hays, Kristen (8 October 2012). "Marathon to buy BP Texas City refinery for up to $2.5 billion". Reuters. Retrieved 22 October 2012. Pulsinelli, Olivia (1 February 2013). "BP completes Texas City refinery sale to Marathon Petroleum". Houston Business Journal. Retrieved 1 February 2013. "BP to sell interest in Draugen field to Shell for $240 mln". Reuters. 13 September 2012. Retrieved 22 October 2012. "BP sells UK LPG distribution business to DCC". Reuters. 8 August 2012. Retrieved 16 September 2017. Krauss, Clifford (14 March 2014). "U.S. Agrees to Allow BP Back into Gulf Waters to Seek Oil". The New York Times. Retrieved 14 March 2014. "BP announces $7.2B partnership with India's Reliance". New York Post. 21 February 2011. Retrieved 9 September 2012. "Reliance Global to buy BP's Malaysian petrochem unit for $230 mn". Business Line. 29 September 2012. Retrieved 22 October 2012. Overland, Indra; Godzimirski, Jakub; Lunden, Lars Petter; Fjaertoft, Daniel (2013). "Rosneft's offshore partnerships: the re-opening of the Russian petroleum frontier?". Polar Record. 49 (2): 140–153. Bibcode:2013PoRec..49..140O. doi:10.1017/S0032247412000137. hdl:11250/2442558. ISSN 0032-2474. Korsunskaya, Darya; Callus, Andrew (22 October 2012). "Rosneft beefs up with TNK-BP purchase". Reuters. Retrieved 22 October 2012. Soldatkin, Vladimir; Callus, Andrew (22 March 2013). "Rosneft pays out in historic TNK-BP deal completion". Reuters. Retrieved 25 March 2013. Perkins, Robert (29 April 2014). "BP takes $520 mil writedown after ditching plan to develop US Utica shale". Platts. Retrieved 22 June 2016. Bergin, Tom; Young, Sarah (21 December 2011). "BP turns out lights at solar business". Reuters. Retrieved 21 December 2011. Peltier, Michael (26 October 2012). "BP Changes Ethanol Plans in Florida". Sunshine State News. Retrieved 3 November 2012. Lane, Jim (26 October 2012). "The October Surprise: BP Cancels Plans for US Cellulosic Ethanol Plant". Biofuels Digest. Retrieved 17 September 2017. Lane, Jim (18 January 2015). "BP's exit from cellulosic ethanol: the assets, the auction, the process, the timing, the skinny". Biofuels Digest. Retrieved 16 September 2017. Horne, Suzie (8 May 2015). "BP sells its Vivergo Fuels stake to ABF". Farmers Weekly. Retrieved 16 September 2017. Sapp, Meghan (17 December 2015). "BP and Dupont to mothball UK biobutanol R&D facility by mid-2016". Biofuels Digest. Retrieved 16 September 2017. Soldatkin, Vladimir; Vukmanovic, Oleg; Chestney, Nina (17 June 2014). "BP to sign $20 billion LNG supply deal with China's CNOOC". Reuters. Retrieved 2 April 2016. Lynch, Kerry (19 August 2015). "BP to sign $20 billion LNG supply deal with China's CNOOC". AIN Online. Retrieved 2 April 2016. Blum, Jordan (6 January 2016). "BP sells Alabama petrochemical complex to Thai company". Fuel Fix. Archived from the original on 29 January 2021. Retrieved 26 April 2016. "Det Norske Completes Merger with BP Norge, Creates Aker BP". Rigzone. 30 September 2016. Retrieved 10 June 2017. "BP sells Forties North Sea pipeline to Ineos". BBC News. 3 April 2017. Retrieved 3 April 2017. "BP in South American venture with Argentina's Bridas". Reuters. 11 September 2017. Retrieved 26 December 2017. Herron, James; Shankleman, Jess (15 December 2017). "BP Re-Enters Solar Power Market With $200 Million U.K. Deal". Bloomberg. Retrieved 19 December 2017. Bousso, Ron; Twidale, Susanna (15 December 2017). "BP returns to solar with investment in Lightsource". Reuters. Retrieved 15 February 2019. Lyons Hardcastle, Jessica (1 March 2017). "BP Buys Clean Energy's Renewable Natural Gas Facilities for $155 Million". Environmental Leader. Retrieved 25 April 2018. "BP, DuPont bio-isobutanol JV purchases Kansas ethanol plant". Biomass Magazine. 3 April 2017. Retrieved 16 September 2017. Avery, Greg (4 February 2020). "BPX Energy on track to hit $1 billion in cash for energy giant BP". Denver Business Journal. Retrieved 9 November 2020. Thomas, Allister (30 April 2018). "BP reveals £1.3bn payment for Conoco stake in Clair field". Energy Voice. Retrieved 15 July 2019. "BP Wind sells 430-MW Texas portfolio to Ares". Renewable Now. 26 December 2018. Retrieved 15 July 2019. Manthey, Nora (20 March 2019). "UK: BP Chargemaster open large rapid-charge hub". Electrive.com. Retrieved 15 July 2019. Chang, Joseph (14 October 2020). "Total, BP lead charge in green strategic shift among global oil majors". ICIS. Retrieved 15 October 2020. DiChristopher, Tom (8 January 2019). "BP just discovered a billion barrels of oil in Gulf of Mexico". www.cnbc.com. Retrieved 8 January 2019. "Helge Lund to succeed Carl-Henric Svanberg as BP chairman" (Press release). BP. 28 April 2018. Retrieved 21 March 2019. Raval, Anjli (12 February 2020). "New BP boss Bernard Looney pledges net-zero emissions by 2050". Financial Times. Retrieved 12 February 2020. Keown, Callum. "BP Takes Up To $17.5 Billion Writedown and Lowers 30-Year Oil Price Forecast. Here's What It Means". www.barrons.com. "BP sells petrochemicals unit to INEOS for $5B". Retrieved 29 June 2020. Bousso, Ron; Nadkar, Tanishaa (27 August 2019). "BP to quit Alaska after 60 years with $5.6 billion sale to Hilcorp". Reuters. Retrieved 15 October 2020. DeMarban, Alex (30 June 2020). "In initial step, Alaska approves chunk of BP's $5.6 billion deal with Hilcorp". Anchorage Daily News. Retrieved 15 October 2020. Pulsinelli, Olivia (18 December 2020). "BP completes Alaska midstream sale to Harvest as part of $5.6B deal". Houston Business Journal. Retrieved 26 December 2020. Veazey, Matthew V. (23 December 2020). "BP Divests Stake in Alaska Pipeline". Rigzone. Retrieved 26 December 2020. Adomaitis, Nerijus; Bousso, Ron (10 September 2020). "BP enters offshore wind with $1.1 billion Equinor deal". Reuters. Retrieved 15 October 2020. "BP takes majority stake in U.S. carbon offset firm Finite Carbon". Reuters. 16 December 2020. Retrieved 26 December 2020. "BP to offload stake in Rosneft amid Ukraine conflict". BBC News. 27 February 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. Bousso, Ron; Zhdannikov, Dmitry (27 February 2022). "BP retreats from Russia's Rosneft at cost of $25 bln over Ukraine invasion". Reuters. Retrieved 27 February 2022. Strasburg, Max Colchester and Jenny (25 February 2022). "BP Faces Pressure From U.K. Government Over Stake in Russia's Rosneft". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 27 February 2022. "BP's ties to Russia draw UK government 'concern'". The Guardian. 25 February 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. "BP 'stands to receive blood money' from Ukraine war". BBC News. 2 December 2022. Retrieved 2 December 2022. Bousso, Ron; Soni, Ruhi (17 October 2022). "BP to buy U.S. biogas producer Archaea for $4.1 bln". Reuters. Retrieved 17 October 2022. "TOP NEWS: BP completes USD3.3 billion acquisition of Archaea Energy | Financial News". www.lse.co.uk. Retrieved 29 December 2022. "BP sees huge profit due to high oil and gas prices". BBC News. November 2022. Retrieved 1 November 2022. "BP sees biggest profit in 114-year history after oil and gas prices soar". BBC News. 7 February 2023. Retrieved 7 February 2023. "BP, Sonatrach and ENI resume operations in Libya". The Africa Report.com. Retrieved 24 October 2023. "Libya's NOC says ENI, BP, Sonatarch to lift force majeure and resume activities". Reuters. 3 August 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2023. "Oil major BP accelerates pace of share buybacks even as full-year profit slides over 50%". CNBC. 6 February 2024. Archived from the original on 6 February 2024. Retrieved 8 February 2024. BP (2019), p. 4 Lawler, Alex; Zhdannikov, Dmitry (12 June 2013). "BP cuts global gas reserves estimate, mostly for Russia". Reuters. Retrieved 17 June 2013. "ICBT Sunbury". BP. Retrieved 9 August 2017. "BP's evidence to the UK Parliament Commons Committee on Science and Technology". UK Parliament. February 2012. Retrieved 12 June 2013. "BP reshapes its UK North Sea portfolio with $625 million asset sale". World Oil. 1 July 2020. Retrieved 27 December 2020. "BP cleared to develop £4.5bn North Sea oilfield". The Telegraph. 13 October 2011. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 17 September 2017. Tom Bawden (14 October 2011). "BP to pump £4.5bn into North Sea projects". The Independent. London. Retrieved 10 July 2012. Gosden, Emily (26 December 2016). "BP in talks with grocery store partners to boost global forecourt sales". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 9 August 2017. "Who we are". BP. Retrieved 9 August 2017. Twidale, Susanna (8 February 2021). "RWE, Total, BP among winners in UK offshore wind farm auction". Reuters. Retrieved 18 February 2021. "BP's unicorn seeker not afraid to back the occasional wrong horse - News for the Oil and Gas Sector". Energy Voice. 23 January 2020. Retrieved 18 February 2021. "BP acquires 30% stake in UK producer of hydrogenated vegetable oil". Autocar. Retrieved 3 February 2022. Fitzsimmons, Emma G. (2 May 2012). "BP Plc". The New York Times. Retrieved 7 June 2012. BP (2019), p. 63 BP (2019), p. 235 BP (2019), p. 31 Pulsinelli, Olivia (3 May 2013). "BP to pay $18M for early restoration projects in Texas". Houston Business Journal. Retrieved 13 May 2013. "Company Overview of BP Exploration & Production Inc". Bloomberg. Retrieved 3 November 2012. "Company Overview of BP Corporation North America, Inc". Bloomberg. Retrieved 3 November 2012. "Company Overview of BP Products North America, Inc". Bloomberg. Retrieved 3 November 2012. "Company Overview of BP America Production Company". Bloomberg. Retrieved 3 November 2012. "Company Overview of BP Energy Company". Bloomberg. Retrieved 3 November 2012. "BP's US Lower 48 unit buys Devon's New Mexico assets". Oil & Gas Journal. 18 December 2015. Retrieved 5 April 2016. Olivia Pulsinelli (4 March 2014). "BP to create new Houston-based business to manage onshore U.S. assets". Houston Business Journal. Retrieved 10 April 2014. Rouan, Rick (27 March 2012). "BP joins Ohio's shale drilling fray with deal for 84K acres". Columbus Business First. Retrieved 25 July 2012. Hasterok, Pamela (26 June 2012). "BP investigates fatal Colorado natgas blast". Reuters. Retrieved 25 July 2012. "BP to Sell Wyoming Assets". Zacks Equity Research. 26 June 2012. Retrieved 31 July 2012. "United States: Exploration and production". BP. 2012. Archived from the original on 8 May 2013. Retrieved 25 July 2012. Resnick-Ault, Jessica (6 May 2019). "BP to boost Gulf of Mexico spending as shale-focused rivals pull back". Reuters. Retrieved 3 July 2019. Ambrose, Jillian (23 January 2017). "BP starts up new $1bn Gulf of Mexico project almost one year early". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 25 May 2018. "Gulf of Mexico". BP. Retrieved 25 May 2018. Drane, Amanda (13 April 2023). "BP's Argos platform begins producing oil in the Gulf of Mexico". Houston Chronicle. Retrieved 7 June 2023. "United States: Refining". BP. Retrieved 17 September 2017. Skebba, Jay (8 August 2022). "BP sells remaining 50% stake in Toledo refinery to Cenovus for $300M". WTOL. Retrieved 7 June 2023. Krishna, Rithika (8 August 2022). "Cenovus to buy remaining 50% stake in Toledo refinery from BP". Reuters. Retrieved 7 June 2023. "Company acquires full ownership of former bp-Husky Toledo Refinery". WTVG. 28 February 2023. Retrieved 7 June 2023. "Wind energy". BP. Retrieved 13 July 2019. "Wind Energy sites". BP. Retrieved 21 July 2019. Petzet, Alan (28 June 2012). "BP Starts Nile Delta Seth field gas production". Oil & Gas Journal. Pennwell Corporation. Retrieved 9 October 2012. "BP's Seth Yields Gas Before Plan". Zacks Equity Research. 29 June 2012. Retrieved 1 October 2012. Hromadko, Jan (19 July 2010). "RWE, BP to Jointly Invest $9B in Offshore Egypt Blocks". Rigzone. Retrieved 10 October 2012. "BP Signs Agreement with the Egyptian Ministry of Petroleum and the Egyptian General Petroleum Corporation to Amend the North Alexandria and West Mediterranean Deepwater Concessions" (Press release). BP. 19 July 2010. Retrieved 10 October 2012. "BP Grows Deepwater Exploration Portfolio with Major Win of Angola Acreage" (Press release). BP. 20 December 2011. Retrieved 1 October 2012. "BP gets OK for deepwater gas exploration". China.org.cn. 15 February 2012. Retrieved 21 June 2012. Wan Xu; Wills, Ken (15 February 2012). "BP hopes to drill new S.China Sea gas block this yr". Reuters. Retrieved 30 July 2012. Sharma, Amol; Cauchi, Marietta (21 February 2011). "BP to Make Big India Investment". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 21 June 2012. Grieder, Tom (3 February 2009). "Indonesia's Tangguh LNG Project Begins Commissioning". Global Insight. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 30 July 2012. Suhana, Agus; Rusmana, Yoga (27 May 2011). "BP Plans To Invest $10 Billion in Indonesia in Next 10 Years". Bloomberg. Retrieved 21 June 2012. "Iraq signs deal with BP, CNPC for Rumaila field". Reuters. 8 October 2009. Retrieved 1 October 2012. "BP reaches production milestone in Iraq". UPI. 12 January 2011. Retrieved 21 June 2012. BP in oil field where 'cancer is rife', by Jess Kelly, Owen Pinnell & Esme Stallard, 30 September, BBC "Iraqi minister admits gas flaring cancer link - BBC News". BBC News. 17 October 2022. Retrieved 2 December 2022. "BP sells minority shares in Oman's Block 61 for $2.6 billion". WAF. 1 February 2021. Retrieved 1 February 2021. "BP sells 20% stake in Oman gas development to Thailand's PTTEP". Reuters. 1 February 2021. Retrieved 1 February 2021. Denton, Vicky (6 May 2015). "BP Australia to invest A$450 million to expand and upgrade retail network". F+L Daily. Retrieved 18 August 2017. McKnight, Gareth (16 May 2017). "$80m overhaul at BP". The West Australian. Retrieved 18 August 2017. Chambers, Matt (18 May 2016). "BP job cuts go deeper as focus turns to fuel retailing". The Australian. Retrieved 18 August 2017. Lanis, Roman; Govendir, Brett; McClure, Ross (25 April 2017). "Counting the missing billions: How Australia is losing out to oil and gas giants". The Guardian. Retrieved 18 August 2017. Daiss, Tim (15 January 2016). "Woodside hedges bet with extra $2B North West Shelf investment". Rigzone. Retrieved 18 August 2017. Neff, Andrew (7 July 2010). "BP Chief Reassures Azerbaijan on U.K. Firm's Commitment amid Talk of Asset Sales". Global Insight. Retrieved 30 July 2012. Yevgrashina, Lada (1 March 2012). "BP to boost investment in Azeri projects in 2012". Reuters. Retrieved 21 June 2012. "SOCAR and BP sign agreement on development project of oil and gas structures in Azerbaijan". Today.az. 6 July 2010. Retrieved 6 July 2010. Yumich, Seth (12 January 2013). "BP-Georgia General Director – Mr. Neil Dunn". The American Times. Retrieved 27 May 2013. Lananh Nguyen (18 September 2012). "Vitol Sells Diesel; BP Plans Rotterdam Unit Halt: Oil Products". Bloomberg. Retrieved 1 October 2012. "Refineries and petrochemicals plants". BP. Archived from the original on 8 June 2019. Retrieved 8 June 2019. BP (2019), p. 34 "The countries". BP. Retrieved 8 June 2019. "BP's impact on the EU27 economies in 2016". BP. Retrieved 8 June 2019. "All petrol stations BP, Greece". Fuelo.net. Retrieved 9 June 2019. "BP exits oilsands to focus on offshore; will sell Sunrise stake to Cenovus". Global News. 13 June 2022. Retrieved 4 April 2023. Wiffen, Glen (13 January 2023). "Industry abuzz about BP well being drilled off Newfoundland this summer". The Telegram. Retrieved 4 April 2023. "BP eyes new work in Trinidad and Tobago". UPI. 15 May 2011. Retrieved 21 June 2012. Flynn, Alexis (6 March 2012). "BP Expands Brazil Exploration Footprint". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 19 June 2012. Fick, Jeff; Flynn, Alexis (14 March 2011). "BP Expands Biofuels Business in Brazil". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 19 June 2012. "BP expands Brazil ethanol operations". Reuters. 14 September 2011. Retrieved 27 April 2013. "History & Milestones". SPC. Retrieved 19 November 2022. "Vitol on LinkedIn: Today, Vitol-owned Petrol Ofisi announced it has agreed to buy bp's shares…". www.linkedin.com. Retrieved 16 November 2023. "BP". Forbes. Retrieved 18 June 2012. "BP PLC Company Description". CNN. 1 April 2011. Retrieved 7 June 2012. BP (2019), p. 21 Bousso, Ron; Nasralla, Shadia (24 June 2020). "BP's stranded Canadian, Angolan assets expose wider industry risks". Reuters. Retrieved 9 November 2020. Ziady, Hanna (4 August 2020). "BP will slash oil production by 40% and pour billions into green energy". CNN. Retrieved 26 December 2020. Hurst, Laura (23 December 2020). "BP Shareholder Files Climate Resolution With Firm's Input". Bloomberg. Retrieved 27 December 2020. "Profile: BP PLC (BP)". Reuters. Archived from the original on 10 February 2010. Retrieved 7 June 2012. Bousso, Ron; Zhdannikov, Dmitry (29 March 2017). "BP sees trading benefits from oil boom in the Americas". Reuters. Retrieved 29 March 2017. "Marine Assurance". BP. 1 January 2008. Archived from the original on 19 July 2010. Retrieved 17 July 2010. "Our fleet". BP. Retrieved 17 July 2010. "Service stations and shops". BP. Archived from the original on 19 April 2013. Retrieved 4 April 2013. "bp to grow mobility and convenience presence in America, integrating convenience leader Thorntons | News | Home". United States. "History of ARCO/ampm". BP. Archived from the original on 17 April 2016. Retrieved 17 September 2010. "BP Truck Stop Network". BP. Retrieved 17 September 2010. "Castrol". BP. Archived from the original on 12 June 2013. Retrieved 17 September 2010. Li, Mei; Trencher, Gregory; Asuka, Jusen (16 February 2022). "The clean energy claims of BP, Chevron, ExxonMobil and Shell: A mismatch between discourse, actions and investments". PLOS ONE. 17 (2): e0263596. Bibcode:2022PLoSO..1763596L. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0263596. ISSN 1932-6203. PMC 8849545. PMID 35171938. Schiller, Meghan (11 July 2012). "BP eyes wind, biofuels in alternative energy". MarketWatch. Retrieved 27 April 2013. Wells, Ken (10 May 2012). "Big Oil's Big in Biofuels". Bloomberg. Retrieved 24 September 2012. Sieber, Tom (15 December 2017). "Is BP looking Beyond Petroleum again?". Shares. Retrieved 14 October 2020. Walker, Haley (21 May 2010). "Recapping on BP's long history of greenwashing". Greenpeace. Retrieved 13 April 2014. Ridgeway, James (4 May 2010). "BP's Slick Greenwashing". Mother Jones. Retrieved 15 March 2015. "Big Oil and Energy Traders Manipulating Consumers". Institute for Public Accuracy. 21 August 2012. Retrieved 15 March 2015. Pearce, Fred (20 November 2008). "Greenwash: BP and the myth of a world 'Beyond Petroleum'". The Guardian. Retrieved 26 December 2020. Bousso, Ron; Zhdannikov, Dmitry (21 May 2018). "Exclusive: BP back on its feet but CEO senses no respite". Reuters. Retrieved 27 May 2018. "BP to become integrated energy company as it moves away from oil and gas". Business Live. 20 September 2020. Retrieved 26 December 2020. Parnell, John (1 December 2020). "How Lightsource Inspired BP's Low-Carbon Pivot". Greentech Media. Retrieved 26 December 2020. BP (2019), p. 39 Lammey, Mark (23 January 2020). "BP's unicorn seeker not afraid to back the occasional wrong horse". Energy Voice. Retrieved 26 December 2020. Zipp, Kathie (20 December 2017). "BP is back in the solar game, teaming up with Lightsource". Solar Power World. Retrieved 26 December 2017. Herndon, Andrew (25 October 2011). "Chromatin Raises $10 Million as BP and Unilever Become Investors". Bloomberg. Retrieved 4 October 2012. Baker, Karl (28 August 2015). "DuPont bets on billion-dollar ethanol industry". Delaware online. Retrieved 16 September 2017. "Air BP Announces Third Biojet-Supplied Location at Bergen Airport" (Press release). Air BP. 21 August 2017. Retrieved 17 September 2017. Arnold, Michael; Benmeleh, Yaacov (24 May 2018). "BP Makes First Foray into Israel With Battery Startup Deal". Bloomberg. Retrieved 27 May 2018. Raval, Anjli (10 November 2020). "BP and Orsted plan green hydrogen project". Financial Times. Retrieved 26 December 2020. "BP acquires 9GW solar pipeline in US in biggest green power deal". RenewEconomy. 2 June 2021. "BP scales back climate targets as profits hit record". BBC News. 7 February 2023. Retrieved 7 February 2023. "Fortune 500". Fortune. Retrieved 17 November 2022. "Marathon Petroleum". Marathon Petroleum Corporation . Retrieved 26 October 2023. "The board". bp. Retrieved 14 July 2023. "Post-war – 1946-1970 | Who we are | Home". bp global. Retrieved 16 February 2023. "Late century – 1971-1999 | Who we are | Home". bp global. Retrieved 16 February 2023. "The new millennium – 2000-2012 | Who we are | Home". bp global. Retrieved 16 February 2023. "Share capital". BP. 2012. Archived from the original on 15 August 2012. Retrieved 11 September 2012. "Business: The Company File Green light for BP Amoco". BBC News. 30 December 1998. Retrieved 28 August 2012. Laura Ries for Ries Pieces. May 2010. BP has a Brand Problem Anne Landman PR Watch. 3 May 2010 BP's "Beyond Petroleum" Campaign Losing its Sheen Kennedy, D. (2010). "Beyond petroleum". Science. 329 (5993). BP: 727. Bibcode:2010Sci...329..727K. doi:10.1126/science.1194561. PMID 20705817. S2CID 206528572. Gregory Solman for Adweek 21 January 2008 Coloring Public Opinion? Stephen A. Greyser for the Harvard Business Review Magazine. 9 June 2010 The BP Brand's Avoidable Fall Interviewer: Amy Goodman, Guest: Antonia Juhasz (5 May 2010). "BP Funnels Millions into Lobbying to Influence Regulation and Rebrand Image". Amy Goodman's Weekly Column. Democracy Now. Carbon Scam: Noel Kempff Climate Action Project and the Push for Sub-national Forest Offsets Sub-prime carbon brought to you by AEP, BP, and Pacificorp, Greenpeace 10/2009 pages 4–5 Archived 28 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine Ann C Mulkern for The New York Times. 10 June 2010 BP's PR Blunders Mirror Exxon's, Appear Destined for Record Book Van Buskirk, Eliot (9 June 2010). "BP's Social Media Campaign Going About as Well as Capping That Well". Wired. Retrieved 2 April 2013. Suzanne Vranica for the Wall Street Journal. 29 December 2010 Public Relations Learned the Hard Way Christopher Beam for Slate. 5 May 2010 Oil Slick: How BP is handling its P.R. disaster Elizabeth Shogren for NPR. 21 April 2011 BP: A Textbook Example Of How Not To Handle PR Ian Smith for Intelegia. 24 January 2011. Good Content Strategy or Public Relations Archived 17 June 2013 at the Wayback Machine Jonathan Morris for Wall St. Cheat Sheet. 3 February 2012 BP To Spend $500M to Restore Its Brand Visser, Nick (16 April 2013). "WATCH: A History of BP's Ads Since The Gulf Spill". HuffPost. Shelley DuBois (1 September 2010). "BP's advertising budget during the spill neared $100 million – Sep. 1, 2010". CNN. Retrieved 26 April 2013. Brian Merchant for Motherboard. 2 April 2013. Meet the PR Guru Who Wants to Help Corporations Write Wikipedia Archived 3 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine Violet Blue, "Big Oil's Wikipedia cleanup: A brand management experiment out of control", ZDNet, 27 March 2013. Retrieved 28 March 2013 Natasha Lennard Salon, 21 March 2013. Retrieved 28 March 2013 "Senegal justice ministry calls for inquiry into energy contracts". Reuters. 10 June 2019. Retrieved 16 June 2019. "Response to BBC Panorama". Kosmos Energy | Deepwater Exploration and Production. 6 June 2019. Retrieved 16 June 2019. "BP Response to BBC Panorama Programme" (PDF). BP Press Release. 6 June 2019. Retrieved 16 June 2019. "BP backs global discrimination research". Financial Times. 10 February 2014. Retrieved 7 November 2017. Driver, Anna (30 January 2015). "Exxon adds discrimination protections in U.S. for LGBT workers". Reuters. Retrieved 7 November 2017. Blum, Jordan (16 January 2016). "In energy sector, coming out 'can put you at risk'". Houston Chronicle. Retrieved 7 November 2017. "Corporate Equality Index 2018" (PDF). Human Rights Campaign. Retrieved 17 November 2017. Hunn, David (26 May 2017). "BP boosts benefits, includes gender reassignment surgery". Houston Chronicle. Retrieved 7 November 2017. "Stonewall Workplace Equality Index" (PDF). Stonewall. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 February 2018. Retrieved 7 November 2017. Andrews, Travis M. (1 August 2017). "Houston oil executives join Dallas business leaders in denouncing Texas 'bathroom bill'". The Washington Post. Retrieved 7 November 2017. "Climate Change Speech By John Browne, Group Chief Executive, British Petroleum (BP America) Stanford University, 19 May 1997". From Capitalism To Democracy. Archived from the original on 31 October 2020. Retrieved 28 October 2013. "Breaking Ranks". Stanford Graduate School of Business. Archived from the original on 6 October 2012. Retrieved 12 February 2013. Cornelissen, Joep (2004). Corporate Communications: Theory and Practice. SAGE. p. 51. ISBN 978-0761944362. Frey, Darcy (8 December 2002). "How green is BP?". The New York Times. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Neslen, Arthur (21 September 2015). "BP tops the list of firms obstructing climate action in Europe". The Guardian. Retrieved 25 October 2020. Times, Seattle. "Carbon-fee opponents raise record $25.8M to defeat I-1631". Retrieved 23 October 2018. "E&E News". Retrieved 23 October 2018. Taylor, Matthew; Watts, Jonathan (9 October 2019). "Revealed: the 20 firms behind a third of all carbon emissions". The Guardian. Retrieved 14 June 2020. Crowley, Kevin (12 February 2020). "All eyes on Exxon and Chevron after BP pledges to go carbon neutral". Bloomberg. Retrieved 14 February 2020 – via Los Angeles Times. Watts, Jonathan (12 February 2020). "BP's statement on reaching net zero by 2050 – what it says and what it means". The Guardian. Retrieved 25 October 2020. Marchese, David Hodari and Adriano (12 February 2020). "BP Wants to Become Carbon Neutral by 2050, but Doesn't Say How". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 20 February 2020. Ford Rojas, John-Paul (26 February 2020). "BP quits US lobby groups over climate change differences". Sky News. Retrieved 26 February 2020. Herron, James; Hurst, Laura (26 February 2020). "BP Quits Three Oil Lobby Groups on Differing Climate Policyl". Bloomberg. Retrieved 26 February 2020. Boren, Zach; Kaufman, Alexander C.; Carter, Lawrence (28 September 2020). "Revealed: BP And Shell Back Anti-Climate Lobby Groups Despite Pledges". HuffPost. Retrieved 25 October 2020. Frazin, Rachel (14 August 2020). "Major oil companies oppose EPA methane rollback". The Hill. Retrieved 18 April 2021. BP's Energy Outlook Foresees Big Shift For Oil Demand Journal of Petroleum Technology, 14 September 2020 Overland, I.; Bourmistrov, A.; Dale, B.; Irlbacher-Fox, S.; Juraev, J.; Podgaiskii, E; Stammler, F.; Tsani, S.; Vakulchuk, R.; Wilson, E.C. (2021). "The Arctic Environmental Responsibility Index: A method to rank heterogenous extractive industry companies for governance purposes. Business Strategy and the Environment. 30". Business Strategy and the Environment. 30 (4): 1623–1643. doi:10.1002/bse.2698. hdl:11250/2833568. S2CID 233618866. Clifford, Catherine (9 December 2022). "Democratic lawmakers accuse big oil companies of 'greenwashing'". CNBC. Retrieved 10 December 2022. Maloney, Carolyn; Khanna, Ro (9 December 2022). MEMORANDUM – Re: Investigation of Fossil Fuel Industry Disinformation (PDF) (Report). U.S. House Oversight and Reform Committee. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 December 2022. Retrieved 10 December 2022. "The Power of Big Oil". FRONTLINE. Season 40. Episode 10–12. PBS. WGBH. Retrieved 8 July 2022. Noor, Dharna (16 July 2023). "Big oil quietly walks back on climate pledges as global heat records tumble". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Øverland, Indra (December 2016). "Ranking Oil, Gas and Mining Companies on Indigenous Rights in the Arctic". Árran. Retrieved 2 August 2018. "BP Exploration [Alaska] Pleads Guilty To Hazardous Substance Crime Will Pay $22 Million, Establish Nationwide Environmental Management System". United States Environmental Protection Agency. 23 September 1999. Archived from the original on 5 July 2010. Retrieved 11 June 2010. "AQMD Seeks $319 Million Fine from BP for Air Pollution Violations". Aqmd.gov. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 26 April 2013. "AQMD Files $183 Million Lawsuit Against BP for Air Pollution Violations". Aqmd.gov. 20 January 2005. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 26 April 2013. "AQMD and BP Settle Refinery Emission Violations". Aqmd.gov. 17 March 2005. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 26 April 2013. Langford, Cameron (15 April 2013). "Texas Refinery Neighbors Sue BP for Billions". Courthouse News Service. Archived from the original on 19 April 2013. Retrieved 19 April 2013. "BP sued for gas release at its former Texas City plant". Fuel Fix. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 15 March 2015. Rice, Harvey (16 April 2013). "BP sued again for gas release". Houston Chronicle. Retrieved 16 April 2013. ABC News. "U.S. News – National News". ABC News. Retrieved 15 March 2015. Verkaik, Robert (22 July 2006). "BP pays out millions to Colombian farmers – Americas – World". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 16 December 2008. Retrieved 26 April 2013. Verkaik, Robert (22 July 2006). "BP pays out millions to Colombian farmers". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 17 June 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Diane Taylor (11 November 2009). "BP faces damages claim over pipeline through Colombian farmland". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 26 April 2013. "Judgment handed down in long-running class action regarding the Ocensa pipeline in Colombia". Herbert Smith Freehills. 11 August 2016. Retrieved 26 December 2020. Milner, Mark (6 December 2007). "BP to pump billions into oil sands despite green worries and high costs". The Guardian. Retrieved 9 November 2020. Macallister, Terry (7 December 2007). "Greenpeace calls BP's oil sands plan an environmental crime". The Guardian. Retrieved 9 November 2020. Macalister, Terry (23 August 2009). "Cree aboriginal group to join London climate camp protest over tar sands". The Guardian. Retrieved 25 September 2012. Stevens, John; Webb, Tim (15 April 2015). "BP pledges not to use open-pit mining at Canadian oil sands sites". The Guardian. Retrieved 9 November 2020. Jones, Jeffrey (20 January 2010). "Factbox: Money flows again in Canada's oil sands industry". Reuters. Retrieved 9 November 2020. Herron, James (15 April 2010). "BP Defeats Oil Sands Critics, But Controversy Won't Die". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 26 April 2013. Macallister, Terry (10 April 2013). "BP faces pay row at AGM". The Guardian. Retrieved 9 November 2020. "2006 – 04/25/2006 – OSHA Fines BP $2.4 Million for Safety and Health Violations". osha.gov. Archived from the original on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 15 March 2015. "BP fined $2.4M for refinery safety problems". CNN. 25 April 2006. Retrieved 16 April 2013. Gelsi, Steve (8 May 2008). "Refiners to pay $422 million settlement on MTBE". MarketWatch. Archived from the original on 2 May 2013. Retrieved 26 April 2013. "Oil companies settle MTBE lawsuits – US news – Environment". NBC News. Retrieved 26 April 2013. Thomas, Pierre (27 May 2010). "BP's Dismal Safety Record". ABC News. Retrieved 17 April 2013. J. Morris & M.B. Pell (16 May 2010). "Renegade Refiner: OSHA Says BP Has "Systemic Safety Problem"". The Center for Public Integrity. Archived from the original on 19 August 2012. Retrieved 11 June 2010. Lustgarten, Abraham (8 June 2010). "Reports at BP over years find history of problems". ProPublica. Retrieved 17 April 2013. "Federal Contractor Misconduct Database". POGO's FCMD. Gribben, Roland (3 May 2010). "BP chief Tony Hayward fights to limit the damage after Gulf of Mexico rig disaster". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 26 April 2013. "The Story of the Sea Gem, the first rig to discover North Sea Gas in the UK sector". Dukes Wood Oil Museum. Archived from the original on 2 June 2009. Retrieved 13 June 2010. Olson, Bradley (8 October 2012). "BP Sells Texas Refinery to Marathon for $598 Million". Bloomberg. Retrieved 6 March 2020. ""Gulf oil spill: BP has a long record of legal, ethical violations" 8 May 2010 by McClatchy Washington Bureau". Mcclatchydc.com. Archived from the original on 5 June 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Lyall, Sarah (12 July 2010). "In BP's Record, a History of Boldness and Costly Blunders". The New York Times. "Baker Panel Report" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 May 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "U.S. Chemical Safety And Hazard Investigation Board Investigation Report on the BP Refinery Explosion and Fire of 23 March 2005 and BP's Safety Culture" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 May 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2010. "#07-850: 10-25-07 British Petroleum to Pay More Than $370 Million in Environmental Crimes, Fraud Cases". Justice.gov. Retrieved 26 April 2013. Associated Press, "BP fined record $87 million for safety breaches", 31 October 2009. Seba, Erwin (12 July 2012). "BP pays $13 mln to settle Texas refinery safety probe". Reuters. Retrieved 1 February 2013. "BP fatal blasts were 7 years ago today". galvestondailynews.com. Archived from the original on 5 August 2012. Retrieved 15 March 2015. Martin, Florian (11 November 2011). "BP fined $50 million for violating Texas Clean Air Act". The Bay Area Citizen. Retrieved 19 April 2013. Tresaugue, Matthew (3 November 2011). "BP to pay $50 million to settle state blast claims". Houston Chronicle. Retrieved 19 April 2013. "Jury Awards BP Workers $100 Million in Toxic Substance Case". The New York Times. Associated Press. 18 December 2009. Retrieved 19 March 2015. Clanton, Brett (16 March 2010). "BP wins $99 million reduction in Texas City fumes case". Houston Chronicle. Retrieved 19 March 2015. "BP Texas Refinery Had Huge Toxic Release Just Before Gulf Blowout". ProPublica. Archived from the original on 15 July 2010. Retrieved 17 July 2010. "Attorney General Abbott Charges BP With Additional Violations at Texas City Refinery". The state of Texas. 9 August 2010. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020. Retrieved 19 March 2015. "More than 50,000 Texas City residents sue BP". ABC13 Houston. Archived from the original on 30 June 2017. Retrieved 15 March 2015. "Jury finds BP negligent in Texas emissions event". WFAA. 11 October 2013. Archived from the original on 17 October 2013. Retrieved 15 March 2015. "Jury absolves BP in gas leak trial". Houston Chronicle. 11 October 2013. Retrieved 15 March 2015. "GC-2 Oil Transit Line Release Situation Report" (PDF). dec.state.ak.us. Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation. 28 March 2008. Retrieved 21 January 2013. Rosen, Yereth (29 November 2007). "BP set to plead in Prudhoe Bay pipeline case". Reuters. Retrieved 21 January 2013. Baltimore, Chris; Campbell, Robert (16 May 2007). "BP admits budget a factor in Alaska spill". Reuters. Retrieved 21 January 2013. Andrew Clark in New York (1 May 2007). "BP accused of 'draconian' cost cuts prior to Alaskan pipeline spill". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Schwartz, Nelson D. (31 October 2006). "Can BP bounce back? A disastrous leak. A deadly explosion. CEO John Browne must turn his troubled oil giant around, but time is running out". Fortune. CNN. Retrieved 17 March 2013. Andrea Lyn Van Benschoten (22 May 2006). "BP Prudhoe Bay Oil Leak Cleanup Completed". Manufacturing.net. Retrieved 22 January 2013. Kurt Kleiner (9 August 2006). "Bacteria may have eaten through Alaskan oil pipe". New Scientist. Retrieved 20 January 2013. Chris Isidore (8 August 2006). "New worry for drivers: BP shuts oilfield". CNN. Retrieved 21 January 2013. Alan Zibel (22 May 2007). "BP shuts 100,000 barrels of Alaska oil". USA Today. Retrieved 21 January 2013. "Alaska Update". BP. 2 October 2006. (subscription required). "Flow Station 2 Transit Oil Line Release Situation Report" (PDF). dec.state.ak.us. Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation. 14 August 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 August 2020. Retrieved 21 January 2013. Kristen Nelson (18 February 2007). "BP replacing entire transit system". Petroleum News. Retrieved 22 January 2013. "BP to start replacing Alaska pipelines". Calgary Herald. 1 March 2008. Archived from the original on 21 May 2013. Retrieved 22 January 2013. "Greater Prudhoe Bay" (PDF). BP. 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 December 2010. Retrieved 22 January 2013. "BP fined $20 million for pipeline corrosion", Anchorage Daily News, 26 October 2007. Retrieved 11 November 2007. "Methanol and crude spill from Prudhoe Bay pipeline". 2 News KTUU.com. Associated Press. 16 October 2007. Archived from the original on 13 November 2007. Retrieved 11 June 2010. "USDOJ: Environment and Natural Resources Division : U.S. v. BP Exploration & Production, Inc. (D. La.)". justice.gov. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 15 March 2015. "BP agrees to $25M penalty for 2006 Alaska spills". The Washington Examiner. 3 May 2011. Retrieved 17 September 2017. Yevgrashina, Lada (17 September 2008). "BP halves Azeri oil production after gas leak". Reuters. Retrieved 1 July 2012. Walt, Vivienne (1 July 2010). "WikiLeaks: BP's 'Other' Offshore Drilling Disaster". Time. Archived from the original on 19 December 2010. Retrieved 1 July 2012. US Embassy in Azerbaijan (8 October 2008). US embassy cables: BP may never know cause of gas leak, US told [Original title: Azerbaijan seeks to develop ACG deep gas, can supply Georgia with winter gas]. The Guardian (Report). Retrieved 1 July 2012. Yevgrashina, Lada (10 October 2008). "BP resumes oil output at one Azeri platform". Reuters. Retrieved 1 July 2012. Yevgrashina, Lada (23 December 2008). "BP partially resumes production at Azeri platform". Reuters. Retrieved 1 July 2012. Tim Webb (16 December 2010). "WikiLeaks cables: BP suffered blowout on Azerbaijan gas platform". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on 16 December 2010. Retrieved 16 December 2010. US Embassy in Azerbaijan (15 January 2009). US embassy cables: BP blames gas leak on 'bad cement job' [Original title: Azerbaijan: BP downbeat on 2009 Shah Deniz phase two progress]. The Guardian (Report). Retrieved 1 July 2012. "Edhat | Local News From Your Community". www.edhat.com. "Frontline: The Spill". Frontline on PBS. 26 October 2010. Retrieved 27 March 2013. Deepwater Horizon Marine Casualty Investigation Report (PDF) (Report). Office of the Maritime Administrator. 17 August 2011. Retrieved 25 February 2013. Hays, Kristen; Reddall, Braden (22 February 2013). "U.S. Gulf Coast oil spillers about to face day in court". Reuters. Retrieved 7 June 2013. Weber, Harry R. (27 April 2013). "BP seeks to spread blame as first phase of spill trial ends". Houston Chronicle. Retrieved 7 June 2013. Stempel, Jonathan (11 April 2012). "US to give BP evidence on size of Gulf oil spill". Reuters. Retrieved 17 November 2012. Biello, David (25 April 2011). "One Year After BP Oil Spill, At Least 1.1 Million Barrels Still Missing". Scientific American. Archived from the original on 14 November 2012. Retrieved 17 November 2012. Swint, Brian (7 March 2013). "BP CEO Dudley Denied 2012 Share Bonus on 8% Stock Price Drop". Bloomberg. Retrieved 6 March 2020. Ainsworth, Cameron H. (25 January 2018). "Impacts of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill evaluated using an end-to-end ecosystem model". PLOS ONE. 13 (1): e0190840. Bibcode:2018PLoSO..1390840A. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0190840. PMC 5784916. PMID 29370187. Schneyer, Joshua (27 September 2010). "U.S. oil spill waters contain carcinogens: report". Reuters. Retrieved 1 October 2010. Ortmann, Alice C.; Anders, Jennifer; Shelton, Naomi; Gong, Limin; Moss, Anthony G.; Condon, Robert H. (July 2012). "Dispersed Oil Disrupts Microbial Pathways in Pelagic Food Webs". PLOS One. 7 (7): e42548. Bibcode:2012PLoSO...742548O. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0042548. PMC 3409195. PMID 22860136. e42548. Mitra, Siddhartha; Kimmel, David G.; Snyder, Jessica; Scalise, Kimberly; McGlaughon, Benjamin D.; Roman, Michael R.; Jahn, Ginger L.; Pierson, James J.; Brandt, Stephen B.; Montoya, Joseph P.; Rosenbauer, Robert J.; Lorenson, Thomas D.; Wong, Florence L.; Campbell, Pamela L. (20 March 2012). "Oil from Deepwater Horizon disaster entered food chain in the Gulf of Mexico". Geophysical Research Letters. 39 (1). Sciencedaily.com: n/a. Bibcode:2012GeoRL..39.1605M. doi:10.1029/2011GL049505. hdl:10342/4283. S2CID 46759667. Retrieved 1 June 2012. "Record Dolphin, Sea Turtle Deaths Since Gulf Spill". DNews. Retrieved 15 March 2015. "BP Oil Spill: Dolphins Plagued By Death, Disease Years After Rig Explosion". HuffPost. 12 February 2014. Retrieved 17 February 2014. Gander, Kashmira (17 February 2014). "Dolphins 'suffering miscarriage, lung disease, losing teeth after BP oil spill' researchers claim". The Independent. London. Retrieved 17 February 2014. "Study: "Dirty bathtub" buried oil from BP spill". cbsnews.com. 29 January 2013. Retrieved 15 March 2015. Megan Boehnke. "UT experts: BP oil spill gone from deep ocean, but remains in marshes". KNS. Archived from the original on 28 February 2014. Retrieved 15 March 2015. Dermansky, Julie (20 April 2013). "Three Years After the BP Spill, Tar Balls and Oil Sheen Blight Gulf Coast". The Atlantic. Retrieved 29 April 2013. Silliman, B. R.; Van De Koppel, J.; McCoy, M. W.; Diller, J.; Kasozi, G. N.; Earl, K.; Adams, P. N.; Zimmerman, A. R. (2012). "Degradation and resilience in Louisiana salt marshes after the BP–Deepwater Horizon oil spill". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 109 (28): 11234–11239. Bibcode:2012PNAS..10911234S. doi:10.1073/pnas.1204922109. PMC 3396483. PMID 22733752.[dead link] Sammarco, Paul W.; Kolian, Steve R.; Warby, Richard A.F.; Bouldin, Jennifer L.; Subra, Wilma A.; Porter, Scott A. (2013). "Distribution and concentrations of petroleum hydrocarbons associated with the BP/Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill, Gulf of Mexico". Marine Pollution Bulletin. 73 (1): 129–143. Bibcode:2013MarPB..73..129S. doi:10.1016/j.marpolbul.2013.05.029. PMID 23831318. "U.S. seafood landings reach 14-year high in 2011". U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 5 October 2012. Retrieved 17 February 2014. Sahagun, Louis (13 February 2014). "Toxins released by oil spills send fish hearts into cardiac arrest". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 11 November 2021. Retrieved 15 February 2022. Schleifstein, Mark (13 February 2014). "BP Deepwater Horizon spill oil causes heart damage that can kill tuna, new study finds". The Times-Picayune, New Orleans. Retrieved 17 February 2014. "Tuna study reveals how pollution causes heart problems". The Australian. 14 February 2014. Retrieved 18 February 2014. Wines, Michael (24 March 2014). "Fish Embryos Exposed to Oil From BP Spill Develop Deformities, a Study Finds". The New York Times. Retrieved 25 March 2014. "BP Deepwater Horizon spill: Scientists say seafood safe, but health effects being measured". NOLA.com. Retrieved 15 March 2015. "Crude Solution". sixtyminutes. Archived from the original on 30 October 2013. Retrieved 15 March 2015. Dahr Jamail. "BP's 'widespread human health crisis'". aljazeera.com. Retrieved 15 March 2015. Mark Hertsgaard (22 April 2013). "What BP Doesn't Want You to Know About the 2010 Gulf Spill". Newsweek. "Coast Guard Grounds Ships Involved in Spill Cleanup After 7 Fall Ill; BP Reportedly Preventing Fishermen from Wearing Respirators". Democracy Now!. Retrieved 15 March 2015. Vanhemert, Kyle (8 July 2010). "BP Reportedly Preventing Clean-Up Workers From Wearing Respirators". Gizmodo. Retrieved 5 March 2014. Cohen, Elizabeth (31 May 2010). "Fisherman files restraining order against BP". CNN. Retrieved 5 March 2014. Schor, Elana (9 July 2010). "Petition Urges Obama Admin to Protect Gulf Spill Cleanup Workers". The New York Times. Retrieved 5 March 2014. "Study Reveals Link Between Oil Spill Exposure and Hematologic and Hepatic Toxicity". elsevier.com. Retrieved 15 March 2015. "The Facts About Dispersants, November 13, 2013". The State of the Gulf: BP Sets the Record Straight. BP. Archived from the original on 12 December 2013. Retrieved 5 December 2013. US Department of Justice United States of America v. BP Exploration & Production Inc. et al., Civ. Action No. 2:10-cv-04536 John Wyeth Griggs. (2011) BP Gulf of Mexico Spill Archived 1 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine Energy Law Journal. Vol. 32:57–79 Staff, Environmental Law Institute. Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill Litigation Database "U.S. District Court – Eastern District of Louisiana". uscourts.gov. Retrieved 15 March 2015. Staff, Environmental Law Institute. February 2013. BP Criminal Plea Agreement Fact Sheet Fisk, Margaret Cronin; Calkins, Lauren Brubaker; Feeley, Jef (4 September 2014). "'Worst Case' BP Ruling on Gulf Spill Means Billions More in Penalties". Bloomberg. Retrieved 5 September 2014. Robertson, Campbell; Krauss, Clifford (4 September 2014). "BP May Be Fined Up to $18 Billion for Spill in Gulf". The New York Times. Retrieved 6 September 2014. "White House: BP Will Pay $20B into Gulf Spill Fund". NPR. 16 June 2010. Retrieved 17 February 2014. Weisman, Jonathan & Chazan, Guy (17 June 2010). "BP Agrees to $20 Billion Fund". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 17 February 2014. "BP appeal to stop 'fictitious' U.S. oil spill claims fails". Reuters. 11 January 2014. Retrieved 18 January 2014. Fahey, Jonathan; Kahn, Chris (3 March 2012). "BP begins to put spill behind it with settlement". Boston Globe. Associated Press. Retrieved 18 January 2014. "BP refinery fire in Ohio kills 2 workers". Financial Times. 21 September 2022. Retrieved 22 September 2022. "BP admits 'lobbying UK over Libya prisoner transfer scheme but not Lockerbie bomber'". The Telegraph. 15 July 2010. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 15 March 2015. "BP's admits role in Lockerbie bomber's release". SFGate. 16 July 2010. Retrieved 15 March 2015. Terry Macalister & Michael White (16 April 2002). "BP stops paying political parties". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 16 December 2008. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Leonnig, Carol D. (29 June 2010). "Despite BP corporate code, firm has made political contributions". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 23 March 2013. "Obama was top recipient of BP-related dollars in 2008". CNN. 5 May 2010. Retrieved 23 March 2013. "Exxon, Chevron, BP Greased Obama's Campaign". Retrieved 23 March 2013. Juhasz, Antonia (2 May 2010). "BP spends millions lobbying as it drills ever deeper and the environment pays". The Observer. UK. Archived from the original on 5 May 2010. Retrieved 6 May 2010. "BP". opensecrets.org. Retrieved 15 March 2015. "Complaint for Injunctive and Other Equitable Relief and Civil Monetary Penalties Under the Commodities Exchange Act" (PDF). Commodity Futures Trading Commission. 28 June 2008. Retrieved 9 September 2012. "BP unit accused of price manipulation". NBC News. Associated Press. 29 June 2006. Retrieved 7 September 2012. Fowler, Tom (29 January 2011). "Appeals court sides with BP propane traders". Houston Chronicle. Retrieved 7 September 2012. Pelofsky, Jeremy (20 April 2012). "Oil price manipulation seldom prosecuted under Obama". Reuters. Retrieved 7 September 2012. "BP Agrees to Pay a Total of $303 Million in Sanctions to Settle Charges of Manipulation and Attempted Manipulation in the Propane Market, Oct. 25, 2007". Commodity Futures Trading Commission. Retrieved 29 April 2013. Webb, Tim (2 February 2011). "BP faces investigation for allegedly manipulating gas market". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 15 September 2012. McAllister, Edward; Silha, Joe; Bergin, Tom (2 February 2011). "U.S. probes BP for gas market manipulation". Reuters. Retrieved 15 September 2012. "FERC: BP Gamed Market at Houston Ship Channel". Natural Gas Intelligence. Intelligence Press Inc. 1 August 2011. Retrieved 24 May 2014. James, William; Zhdannikov, Dmitry (15 May 2013). "Oil pricing probe widens, Britain pledges tough action". Reuters. Retrieved 15 May 2013. "Antitrust: Commission confirms unannounced inspections in oil and biofuels sectors" (Press release). European Commission. 14 May 2013. Retrieved 15 May 2013. White, Aoife; Bodoni, Stephanie; Levring, Peter; Sebag, Gaspard (7 December 2015). "Big Oil Let Off Hook Days After EU Drops Wall Street Probe". Bloomberg. Retrieved 18 December 2015. Byrne, David P.; de Roos, Nicolas (23 July 2018). "Learning to Coordinate: A Study in Retail Gasoline". Social Science Research Network. SSRN 2570637. Retrieved 25 March 2021. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) David Brennan (6 April 2018). "Massive Oil Spill 'Welcome Boost' To Economy, Says BP". Newsweek. Retrieved 10 April 2018. "Behind the pricing: Internal email lifts veil on BP's petrol prices". Stuff. 30 April 2018. Retrieved 24 May 2018. "Petrol prices: Motorists pay too much at pump says Commerce Commission". NZ Herald. 20 August 2019. Retrieved 20 August 2019. (In chronological order) Ferrier, R.W. (1982). The History of the British Petroleum Company: The Developing Years 1901–1932. Vol. I. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521246477. Bamberg, James H (1994). The History of the British Petroleum Company: The Anglo-Iranian Years, 1928–1954. Vol. II. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521259507. Bamberg, James H (2000). The History of the British Petroleum Company: British Petroleum and Global Oil, 1950–1975: The Challenge of Nationalism. Vol. III. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9780521785150. BP. Annual Report and Form 20-F 2018 (PDF). Alsharhan, A. S.; Nairn, A. E. M. (1997). Sedimentary basins and petroleum geology of the Middle East (2 ed.). Elsevier. ISBN 978-0-444-82465-3. Atabaki, Touraj; Bini, Elisabetta; Ehsani, Kaveh, eds. (2018). Working for Oil: Comparative Social Histories of Labor in the Global Oil Industry. Springer. ISBN 9783319564456. Bailey, Martin (1978). Shell and BP in South Africa (2nd ed.). Birmingham: Haslemere Group/Anti-Apartheid. ISBN 0905094026. Bayne Fisher, W. William; Avery, P.; Hambly, G. R. G.; Melville, C. (1991). The Cambridge History of Iran, Volume 7. Cambridge University Press. p. 1096. ISBN 9780521200950. Beale, Nicholas (2012). Constructive Engagement: Directors and Investors in Action. Gower Publishing. ISBN 9781409457824. Black, Edwin (2011). British Petroleum and the Redline Agreement The West's Secret Pact to Get Mideast Oil. Washington, DC: Dialog Press. ISBN 9780914153153. Boscheck, Ralf (2008). Strategies, Markets and Governance: Exploring Commercial and Regulatory Agendas. Cambridge University Press. p. 360. ISBN 9780521868457. Brune, Lester H. (2003). Burns, Richard Dean (ed.). Chronological History of U.S. Foreign Relations: 1932–1988 (2 ed.). Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-93916-4. Kinzer, Stephen (2003). All the Shah's Men: An American Coup and the Roots of Middle East Terror. Wiley. p. 272. ISBN 9780471265177. Lauterpacht, E. (1973). International Law Reports. Cambridge University Press. p. 560. ISBN 9780521463911. Louis, Wm. Roger (2007). Ends of British Imperialism: The Scramble for Empire, Suez, and Decolonization. I.B.Tauris. p. 1082. ISBN 9781845113476. Marwick, William Hutton (1964). Scotland in Modern Times: An Outline of Economic and Social Development Since the Union Of 1707. Frank Cass and Company Limited. p. 175. ISBN 9780714613420. Meyer, Karl E; Brysac, Shareen (2008). Kingmakers: The Invention of the Modern Middle East. New York: W.W. Norton. ISBN 9780393061994. Ritchie, Berry (1995). Portrait in Oil: An Illustrated History of BP. London: James & James. ISBN 090738367X. Safina, Carl (2011). A Sea in Flames:The Deepwater Horizon Oil Blowout. Crown Publishers. ISBN 9780307887351. Sampson, Anthony (1975). The Seven Sisters: The Great Oil Companies And The World They Shaped. New York: Viking Press. ISBN 067063591X. (Also 4th, revised, edition (1991). The Seven Sisters: The 100-year battle for the world's oil supply. New York: Bantam Books. ISBN 0553242377.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link)) Sztucki, Jerzy (1984). Interim measures in the Hague Court. Brill Archive. ISBN 9789065440938. Vassiliou, M. S. (2009). Historical Dictionary of the Petroleum Industry : Volume 3. Scarecrow Press. p. 662. ISBN 9780810859937. Yergin, Daniel (1991). The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money, and Power. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0671502484. ——————— (2011). The Quest: Energy, Security, and the Remaking of the Modern World. New York: Penguin Press. ISBN 9781594202834. Wikimedia Commons has media related to BP. Official website Business data for BP plc: Bloomberg Google SEC filings Yahoo! BP companies grouped at OpenCorporates