An armed conflict between Israel and Hamas-led Palestinian militant groups has been taking place chiefly in and around the Gaza Strip since 7 October 2023. It began when Hamas launched a surprise attack on southern Israel from the Gaza Strip. After clearing the invading militants from its territory, the Israeli military embarked on an extensive aerial bombardment of the Gaza Strip followed by a large-scale ground invasion beginning on 27 October. Clashes have also occurred in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and with Hezbollah along the Israel–Lebanon border. The fifth war of the Gaza–Israel conflict since 2008, it is part of the broader Israeli–Palestinian conflict, and the most significant military escalation in the region since the Yom Kippur War 50 years earlier. The Hamas-led attack on 7 October involved a barrage of rockets directed at Israel concurrent to an estimated 3,000 militants breaching the Gaza–Israel barrier and attacking Israeli military bases and civilian communities. During this attack, 1,139 Israelis and foreign nationals including 766 civilians and 373 security personnel were killed, while 253 Israelis and foreigners were taken captive to the Gaza Strip. The attack has been described as a major Israeli intelligence failure. Hamas said its attack was in response to the continued Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories, the blockade of the Gaza Strip, the expansion of illegal Israeli settlements, threats to the status of the Al-Aqsa Mosque and the plight of Palestinian refugees and prisoners. In response, Israel declared a state of war, tightened its blockade and launched one of the most severe bombing campaigns in modern history, before commencing the ground invasion on 27 October with the stated objective of destroying Hamas and controlling the Gaza Strip. Since the start of the Israeli operation, more than 32,000 Palestinians in Gaza have been killed, including over 13,000 children and 9,000 women. Several thousand more are missing and presumed trapped under rubble. Nearly all of the strip's 2.3 million population has been internally displaced. Israel's tightened blockade and attacks on infrastructure have led to a humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip, including a collapse of the healthcare system and an ongoing famine. By early 2024, Israeli forces had destroyed more than half of Gaza's houses, hundreds of cultural landmarks, and dozens of cemeteries. Israel's ground invasion started on 27 October, focusing initially on northern Gaza, including Gaza City. After the expiration of a seven-day truce which involved the release of dozens of Israeli hostages for Palestinian prisoners, Israel moved south to attack Khan Yunis on 3 December. By January 2024, Israel reoccupied most of northern Gaza. Israel's next stated objective is a major offensive in Rafah, despite objections from the international community. Israeli forces killed an estimated 9,000 Palestinian militants during the conflict while the latter killed over 250 Israeli soldiers. The war has had significant international repercussions. Large protests have occurred across the world, primarily pro-Palestinian ones calling for a ceasefire and an end to the Israeli occupation. Israel's actions have been denounced in the Islamic world and much of the Global South. South Africa launched proceedings at the International Court of Justice alleging that Israel is committing genocide in Gaza. Israel has received significant support from its traditional Western allies, most notably the United States, which has provided Israel extensive military aid throughout the war and has vetoed multiple UN Security Council resolutions calling for an immediate ceasefire, although this support has weakened as the humanitarian situation in Gaza continues to deteriorate. In response, Iran-backed militias have attacked American military bases in the Middle East, while the Yemeni Houthi movement attacked commercial ships they alleged were linked to Israel in a stated effort to end the war, incurring a military response from a number of countries led by the United States. In 1967, following the Six-Day War fought between Israel and a coalition of Arab states (primarily Egypt, Syria, and Jordan), Israel occupied the Palestinian territories, including the Gaza Strip which had formerly been occupied by Egypt. In 1987, the First Intifada, a popular uprising by the Palestinians against the Israeli occupation, began. The conflict lasted five years and ended with the Oslo Accords, creating the Palestinian National Authority and dividing the West Bank into three administrative areas. Following the failure of the subsequent peace talks at the Camp David Summits in 2000, violence once again escalated during the Second Intifada, which ended with the Sharm el-Sheikh Summit and Israel's military withdrawal from Gaza in 2005 and subsequent blockade. Hamas, an Islamist militant group, won the 2006 Palestinian legislative election and a subsequent battle in the Gaza Strip between it and Fatah, which led to Hamas taking over governance of Gaza, and further escalating tensions with Israel. Israel, along with Egypt, imposed a blockade that significantly damaged Gaza's economy, citing security concerns as the justification. International rights groups have characterized the blockade as a form of collective punishment, while Israel defended it as necessary to prevent weapons and dual-use goods from entering the territory. The Palestinian Authority has not held national elections since 2006. Since the imposition of the blockade, Israel has been involved in numerous military confrontations with Hamas and other Palestinian militant groups in Gaza. There have been four previous major hostilities between Israel and Hamas: in 2008–2009, 2012, 2014, and 2021. Hamas's tactics included tunnel warfare and firing rockets into Israeli territory, whereas Israel generally conducted airstrikes in Gaza aiming to minimize the militant threat. Israel also conducted ground invasions of Gaza in the 2008–2009 and 2014 wars. In 2018–2019, there were weekly organized protests near the Gaza-Israel border involving thousands of Gazan participants. Surveys in 2023 of Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank before the war indicated that a majority supported the use of "armed struggle", the creation of "militant groups", and an intifada ("uprising") against the Israeli occupation. The Gaza Strip's economy declined greatly due to the blockade, with a 30% drop in real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) within a year. By 2015, the unemployment rate had risen to 45% (compared to the pre-blockade level of 10%). In 2023, UNRWA statistics for Gaza reported 81% of people living below the poverty level, and 63% being food insecure and dependent on international assistance. According to an analysis in The Independent, the Gaza blockade created hopelessness among Palestinians, which was exploited by Hamas, convincing young Palestinian men that violence was their only solution. Daoud Kuttab wrote that Palestinian attempts to solve the conflict via negotiations or non-violent boycotts have been fruitless. Hamas is designated as a terrorist organization by a number of states and regional blocs, including the United States, the United Kingdom, Japan, Australia and the European Union. Other UNSC permanent members including China and Russia do not regard Hamas as a terrorist organization. A 2018 attempt to condemn Hamas for "acts of terror" at the United Nations failed to achieve the two-thirds majority requirement set in place for the vote, with 87 votes in favor, 58 votes against, 32 abstentions and 16 non-votes. In February–March 2021, Fatah and Hamas reached agreement to jointly conduct elections for a new Palestinian legislative assembly, in accordance with the Oslo Accords. Hamas committed to upholding international law, transferring control of Gaza to the Palestinian Authority and to allowing it to negotiate with Israel to establish a Palestinian state along the 1967 ceasefire lines, with East Jerusalem as its capital. According to Menachem Klein, Israeli Arabist and political scientist at Bar-Ilan University, Mahmoud Abbas subsequently cancelled the elections under pressure from Israel and the United States. Soon after the 2021 Israel–Palestine crisis exploded, the Al-Qassam Brigades started planning the 7 October 2023 operation. Hamas officials said shortly following the attack that it was a response to the Israeli occupation, blockade of the Gaza Strip, Israeli settler violence against Palestinians, restrictions on the movement of Palestinians, and imprisonment of thousands of Palestinians. Mohammad Deif, the head of Hamas's military wing, the Qassam Brigades, said in a recorded message on 7 October that it was in response to what he called the "desecration" of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, and Israel killing and wounding hundreds of Palestinians in 2023. He called on Palestinians and Arab Israelis to "expel the occupiers and demolish the walls". Deif also called on "Muslims everywhere to launch an attack." He said, "in light of the continuing crimes against our people, in light of the orgy of occupation and its denial of international laws and resolutions, and in light of American and western [sic] support, we've decided to put an end to all this, so that the enemy understands that he can no longer revel without being held to account." The long-term goals of Hamas are disputed. Hamas has repeatedly called for the destruction of Israel, notably in its 1988 charter. Some commentators have argued that Hamas is antisemitic and "genocidal". In 2017, Hamas replaced its old charter with a new one that removed antisemitic language and stated that its struggle was with Zionists, not Jews. The 2017 charter accepts the idea of a Palestinian state based on the 1967 borders. However, the new charter indicates that Hamas will accept the peace agreements only provisionally, without relinquishing a claim to the entirety of Palestine nor recognizing Israel. The attack was also seen as a resolution of internal tensions within Hamas as to whether the group's main goal is governing the Gaza Strip or fighting against Israel. Experts consider the disruption of Israel-Arab diplomacy and the desire to assert its presence as a significant security and political force likely motives. In addition, internal strife in Israeli society caused by protests against the judicial reform encouraged Hamas to go ahead with its attack. On 21 January 2024, Hamas released an 18-page English-language document reiterating its previously stated rationales and framing the attack in a wider context as a struggle against colonialism, describing its actions as "a necessary step and a normal response to confront all Israeli conspiracies against the Palestinian people". It said that "maybe some faults happened" during the attacks "due to the rapid collapse of the Israeli security and military system, and the chaos caused along the border areas with Gaza" and that "[if] there was any case of targeting civilians it happened accidentally". The timing of the release raised questions; sources in Gaza, including those aligned with Hamas, told Haaretz that the document was designed to contend with criticism of the heavy price Gazans have paid for the attacks on Israel. Benjamin Netanyahu has been Israel's prime minister for nearly the entire 15 year period preceding the war, with the exception of the 18 months from June 2021 to January 2023 when Naftali Bennett and later Yair Lapid took office. Throughout this time, the Israeli government has been criticized for having championed a policy of empowering the Hamas government in Gaza by, for instance, granting work permits to Gazan residents, facilitating the transfer of funds to Hamas and maintaining relative calm. By the conclusion of Netanyahu's fifth government in 2021, the issuance of work permits to Gazans reached approximately 2,000–3,000. Later, under the Bennett-Lapid government, this number significantly increased to 10,000, and since Netanyahu's return to power in 2023 the number rose again to 20,000. These workers were accused of spying on Israel and being complicit in the October 7 attack. After the attack, the Israeli war cabinet granted additional 8,000 work permits to West Bank residents, despite concerns about their vetting and potential security risks. In addition to granting workers permits, millions of dollars from Qatar have been transported into Gaza, escorted by Mossad, Israel's intelligence agency, intended for Gaza's power plant, infrastructure projects and monthly stipends for impoverished Palestinian families, while Israeli officials were aware that Hamas might divert the funds to acquire weapons and rockets. These strategies towards Hamas have been criticized as having backfired in light of the attacks on 7 October 2023. Critics, including human-rights activists and aid organizations, cautioned that such policies may have strengthened Hamas's power in Gaza while weakening Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority in the West Bank, thus sabotaging a two-state solution. This criticism has been echoed by several Israeli officials, including former prime minister Ehud Barak and former head of the Shin Bet internal security service Yuval Diskin. The Palestinian Authority and Saudi Arabia were also critical of Netanyahu's government allowing Qatar to deliver suitcases of money to Hamas in exchange for maintaining the ceasefire. Netanyahu's strategy towards the Palestinian issue has been described as that of "divide-and-conquer". A Times of Israel op-ed argued after the Hamas attack that Netanyahu's policy to treat the Palestinian Authority as a burden and Hamas as an asset had "blown up in our faces". Netanyahu himself has criticized opinions on his responsibility for the 7 October attacks, stating "Did people ask Franklin Roosevelt, after Pearl Harbor, that question? Did people ask George Bush after the surprise attack of November [sic] 11?" referring to the 11 September 2001 terror attacks. Numerous commentators have identified the broader context of Israeli occupation as a cause of the war. The Associated Press wrote that Palestinians are "in despair over a never-ending occupation in the West Bank and suffocating blockade of Gaza". Several human rights organizations, including Amnesty International, B'Tselem and Human Rights Watch have likened the Israeli occupation to apartheid, although supporters of Israel dispute this characterization. The UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) reported roughly 6,400 Palestinians and 300 Israelis were killed in the wider Israeli–Palestinian conflict from 2008 through September 2023 before the start of this war. Over the course of 2023, before the October 7 attack, 32 Israelis and two foreign nationals had been killed in Palestinian attacks, while at least 247 Palestinians had been killed by Israeli forces. Increases in settler attacks had displaced hundreds of Palestinians, and there were clashes around the Al-Aqsa Mosque which sits on the Temple Mount, a contested holy site in Jerusalem. In August 2023, 1,264 Palestinians were held in administrative detention in Israel, without charge or trial, the highest number in three decades. Israel says this tactic is necessary to contain dangerous militants. Tensions between Israel and Hamas rose in September 2023, and the Washington Post described the two "on the brink of war". Israel found explosives hidden in a shipment of jeans and halted all exports from Gaza. In response, Hamas put its forces on high alert, and conducted military exercises with other groups, including openly practicing storming Israeli settlements. Hamas also allowed Palestinians to resume protests at the Gaza–Israel barrier. On 13 September, five Palestinians were killed at the border. According to the Washington Post, the Palestinians were attempting to detonate an explosive device. Al-Jazeera reported that a Palestinian Explosives Engineering Unit was working to deactivate the device. On 29 September, Qatar, the UN, and Egypt mediated an agreement between Israel and Hamas officials in the Gaza Strip to reopen closed crossing points and deescalate tensions. Simon Tisdall argues that an uptick in Israeli–Palestinian violence in the West Bank in the first half of 2023 had portended war, and stated that Netanyahu's "refusal to contemplate any type of peace process" added "fuel to the smouldering fire" in the context of "the relentless expansion of illegal Israeli settlements". Prior to the attack, Saudi Arabia warned Israel of an "explosion" as a result of the continued occupation, Egypt had warned of a catastrophe unless there was political progress, and similar warnings were given by Palestinian Authority officials. Two months before the attacks, King Abdullah II of Jordan commented that Palestinians have "no civil rights; no freedom of mobility". Israeli intelligence officials initially stated that they had no warnings or indications of the 7 October attack by Hamas, despite Israel exercising extensive monitoring over Gaza. Furthermore, the United States warned the Israeli government of the possibility of a surprise attack from Hamas a few days before the incident. Egypt said it warned Israel days before the attack, "an explosion of the situation is coming, and very soon, and it would be big". Israel denied receiving such a warning, but the Egyptian statement was corroborated by Michael McCaul, Chairman of the US House Foreign Relations Committee, who said warnings were made three days before the attack. According to the New York Times, Israeli officials had obtained detailed attack plans more than a year prior to the actual attack. The document described operational plans and targets, including the size and location of Israeli forces, and raised questions in Israel as to how Hamas was able to learn these details. The document provided a plan that included a large scale rocket assault prior to an invasion, drones to knock out the surveillance cameras and gun turrets that Israel has deployed along the border, and gunmen invading Israel, including with paragliders. The Times reported that "Hamas followed the blueprint with shocking precision". According to the Times, the document was circulating among the Israeli military and intelligence leadership, who largely dismissed the plan as being beyond Hamas's capabilities, though it was unclear if the political leadership was informed. In July 2023, a member of the Israeli signals intelligence unit alerted her superiors that Hamas was conducting preparations for the assault, saying that "I utterly refute that the scenario is imaginary". An Israeli colonel ignored her concerns. According to the Financial Times, alerts from the signals unit were ignored because they came from lower-ranking soldiers, contradicted the belief that Hamas was contained by Israel's blockade of the Gaza Strip, bombing, and placation via aid, and the belief that Hamas was seeking to avoid a full war. At the time of the attack, Israel and Saudi Arabia were conducting negotiations to normalize relations. Saudi Arabian crown prince Mohammed bin Salman said normalization was "for the first time real". According to US President Joe Biden and Secretary of State Antony Blinken, the aim of the 7 October attacks was to disrupt the normalization talks. According to Menachem Klein, Israeli normalization with other Middle Eastern states, including Saudi Arabia, threatened to leave the Palestinians "isolated and weak". As of 7 February 2024, Saudi Arabia confirmed that diplomatic relations with Israel requires an independent Palestinian state on 1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its capital. The attack took place during the Jewish holidays of Simchat Torah and Shemini Atzeret on Shabbat, and one day after the 50th anniversary of the start of the Yom Kippur War, which also began with a surprise attack. At around 6:30 a.m. IDT (UTC+3) on 7 October 2023, Hamas announced the start of what it called "Operation Al-Aqsa Flood", stating it had fired over 5,000 rockets from the Gaza Strip into Israel within a span of 20 minutes. Israeli sources reported that at least 3,000 projectiles had been launched from Gaza. At least five people were killed by the rocket attacks. Explosions were reported in areas surrounding the strip and in cities in the Sharon Plain including Gedera, Herzliyya, Tel Aviv, and Ashkelon. Air raid sirens were activated in Beer Sheva, Jerusalem, Rehovot, Rishon Lezion, and Palmachim Airbase. Hamas issued a call to arms, with commander Mohammad Deif calling on "Muslims everywhere to launch an attack" and to "kill them [the enemy] wherever you may find them". Hamas employed tactics such as using aerial drones to disable Israeli observation posts, paragliders for infiltration into Israel, and motorcycles, which was unusual for Hamas. Palestinian militants opened fire on Israeli boats, while clashes broke out between Palestinians and the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) along the Gaza perimeter fence. In the evening, Hamas launched another barrage of 150 rockets towards Israel, with explosions reported in Yavne, Givatayim, Bat Yam, Beit Dagan, Tel Aviv, and Rishon Lezion. Simultaneously, around 3,000 Hamas militants infiltrated Israel from Gaza using trucks, pickup trucks, motorcycles, bulldozers, speedboats, and paragliders. They took over checkpoints at Kerem Shalom and Erez, and created openings in the border fence in five other places. Images and videos showed armed and masked militants, riding pickup trucks and opening fire in Sderot. Other videos display Israelis taken prisoner, a burning Israeli tank, and militants driving IDF vehicles. Hamas has also stated that its attack was in response to the blockade of the Gaza Strip, the expansion of illegal Israeli settlements, rising Israeli settler violence and recent escalations at Al-Aqsa. Intelligence and security officials from multiple Western countries say that Hamas initiated the war to create a "permanent" state of war and to revive interest in the Palestinian cause. Hamas militants carried out an amphibious landing in Zikim. A military base near Nahal Oz was also taken by the militants, leaving at least two Israeli soldiers dead and six others captured. The IDF said it killed two attackers on the beach and destroyed four vessels, including two rubber boats. Fighting was reported at Re'im military base, headquarters of Israel's Gaza Division. It was later reported that Hamas took control of the base and took several Israeli soldiers captive, before the IDF regained control later in the day. The police station of Sderot came under Hamas control, with militants killing 30 Israelis, including policemen and civilians. At least six IDF bases near the Gaza border were attacked. Militants killed civilians at Nir Oz, Be'eri, and Netiv HaAsara, and other agricultural communities, where they took hostages and set fire to homes. This resulted in widespread fires and smoke across the region. 52 civilians were killed in the Kfar Aza massacre, 108 in the Be'eri massacre (a loss of 10% of the kibbutz's population) and 15 in the Netiv HaAsara massacre, in what has been described as the bloodiest day in Israel's history and the worst single-day massacre of Jews since the Holocaust. In Sderot, gunmen targeted civilians and set houses ablaze. In Ofakim, hostages were taken during Hamas's deepest incursion. Hamas said it took prisoners to force Israel to release Palestinian prisoners. In Be'eri, Hamas militants took up to 50 people hostage. Videos showed hostages being led barefoot across a street in the town. At least 325 people were killed and more injured at an outdoor music festival near Re'im and Hamas took at least 37 attendees hostage. Witnesses recounted militants on motorcycles opening fire on participants who were already fleeing due to rocket fire. Graeme Wood reported that the video footage retrieved from the body cameras of Hamas militants displayed several victims "in the beginning of the footage they are alive, by the end they're dead. Sometimes, in fact frequently, after their death their bodies are still being desecrated". Israeli authorities screened bodycam footage of Hamas atrocities for journalists, which included an attempt to decapitate someone and a still image of a decapitated IDF soldier. Around 240 people were taken hostage during the attacks, mostly civilians. Captives in Gaza include children, festivalgoers, peace activists, caregivers, elderly people, and soldiers. An Israeli spokesman said militants had entered Israel through at least seven locations from both land and sea, and invaded four small rural Israeli communities, the border city of Sderot, and two military bases. Israeli media reported that seven communities came under Hamas control, including Nahal Oz, Kfar Aza, Magen, Be'eri, and Sufa, and there were 21 active high-confrontation locations in southern Israel. Hamas and the Palestinian Authority denied the massacre, stating that Israeli helicopters and fighter jets were behind the high number of casualties. An Israeli Police investigation stated that the first helicopters at the scene arrived hours after the massacre began, and that they were likely responsible for only a few friendly fire casualties. In Be'eri, an Israeli tank fired on a house known to contain around 40 Hamas fighters and 14 hostages, among them two children; only one of the hostages in the house survived. The families of those killed demanded an investigation. A Ynet article stated that there was an "immense and complex quantity" of friendly-fire incidents during the 7 October attack that "it would not be morally sound to investigate" given their number and the challenges soldiers were facing at the time. In January 2024, an investigation by Israeli newspaper Yedioth Ahronoth concluded that the IDF had in practice applied the Hannibal Directive, ordering all combat units to stop "at all costs" any attempt by Hamas terrorists to return to Gaza, even if there were hostages with them. It is unclear how many hostages were killed by friendly fire as a result of the order. After the initial breach of the Gaza perimeter by Palestinian militants, it took hours for the IDF to start its counter-attack. The first helicopters sent to support the military were launched from the north of Israel, and arrived at the Gaza Strip an hour after fighting began. They immediately encountered difficulty in determining which outposts and communities were occupied, and distinguishing between Palestinian militants and the soldiers and civilians on the ground. The helicopter crews initially sustained a high rate of fire, attacking approximately 300 targets in 4 hours. Later on the crews began to slow down the attacks and carefully select targets. According to Haaretz's journalist Josh Breiner, a police source said that a police investigation indicated an IDF helicopter which had fired on Hamas militants "apparently also hit some festival participants" in Re'im music festival massacre. The Israeli police denied the Haaretz report. A subsequent Israeli investigation claimed that militants had been instructed not to run so that the air force would think they were Israelis. This deception worked for some time, but pilots began to realize the problem and ignore their restrictions. By around 9:00 am, amid the chaos and confusion, some helicopters started laying down fire without prior authorization. The attack appeared to have been a complete surprise to the Israelis. Prime Minister Netanyahu convened an emergency gathering of security authorities, and the IDF launched Operation Swords of Iron in the Gaza Strip. In a televised broadcast, Netanyahu said, "We are at war". He threatened to "turn all the places where Hamas is organized and hiding into cities of ruins", called Gaza "the city of evil", and urged its residents to leave. Netanyahu and Defense Minister Yoav Gallant conducted security assessments at IDF headquarters in Tel Aviv. Overnight, Israel's Security Cabinet voted to act to bring about the "destruction of the military and governmental capabilities of Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad". The Israel Electric Corporation, which supplies 80% of the Gaza Strip's electricity, cut off power to the area. This reduced Gaza's power supply from 120 MW to 20 MW, provided by power plants paid for by the Palestinian Authority. The IDF declared a "state of readiness for war", mobilized tens of thousands of army reservists, and declared a state of emergency for areas within 80 kilometers (50 mi) of Gaza. The Yamam counterterrorism unit was deployed, along with four new divisions, augmenting 31 existing battalions. Reservists were reported deployed in Gaza, in the West Bank, and along borders with Lebanon and Syria. Residents near Gaza were asked to stay inside, while civilians in southern and central Israel were "required to stay next to shelters". The southern region of Israel was closed to civilian movement, and roads were closed around Gaza and Tel Aviv. While Ben Gurion Airport and Ramon Airport remained operational, multiple airlines cancelled flights to and from Israel. Israel Railways suspended service in parts of the country and replaced some routes with temporary bus routes, while cruise ships removed the ports of Ashdod and Haifa from their itineraries. Following the surprise attack, the Israeli Air Force conducted airstrikes that they said targeted Hamas compounds, command centers, tunnels, and other targets. Israel employed its artificial intelligence Habsora ("The Gospel") software with a new and superior capacity to automatically generate targets to be attacked. Two days after the surprise attack, Israel said that 426 Hamas targets had been hit, including destroying Beit Hanoun, homes of Hamas officials, a mosque, and an internet hub. Israel also rescued two hostages before declaring a state of war for the first time since the 1973 Yom Kippur War. Defense Minister Gallant announced a "total" blockade of the Gaza Strip, cutting off electricity and blocking the entry of food and fuel, adding "We are fighting human animals and we are acting accordingly". This drew criticism from Human Rights Watch who described the order as "abhorrent" and as a "call to commit a war crime". The first aid convoy after the start of the war entered Gaza on 21 October 2023, while fuel entered Gaza only in November. The IDF later deployed C-130 and C-130J transport aircraft to retrieve off-duty personnel from abroad. As a part of a bombing run targeting Hamas command centers and weapon caches, the IDF stated that it had bombed the Nukhba forces—a Hamas special forces unit that is thought to have led the attack on Israel. Human Rights Watch accused Israel of using white phosphorus munitions over Gaza on 10 and 11 October, stating that it violated international law. Israel denied the allegations. Almost a week after the initial attack on Israel, on 13 October, the IDF issued an evacuation warning for communities north of the Wadi Gaza. All Palestinians in that region, including those in Gaza City, were given 24 hours to evacuate to the south. The Hamas Authority for Refugee Affairs responded by telling residents in northern Gaza to "remain steadfast in your homes and stand firm in the face of this disgusting psychological war waged by the occupation". The statement by Israel faced widespread backlash; with numerous agencies, such as Doctors Without Borders, the World Health Organization, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, among others, condemning the order as "outrageous" and "impossible" while calling for an immediate reversal of the order. As a part of the order, the IDF announced a six-hour window from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. local time on 13 October, for refugees to flee south along specified routes within the Gaza Strip. An explosion at 5:30 p.m. along one of the safe routes killed 70 people. Some sources attributed it to an IDF airstrike, while CNN said the cause was unclear. The Jerusalem Post said open-source analysts believed the explosion originated from a car on the ground, but the cause was unclear. The Financial Times carried out an investigation, concluding "analysis of the video footage rules out most explanations aside from an Israeli strike", although it was "difficult to conclusively prove whether these blasts came from an IDF strike, a potential Palestinian rocket misfire or even a car bomb". The IDF stated Hamas set up roadblocks to keep Gaza residents from evacuating south and caused traffic jams. Israeli officials stated this was done to use civilians as "human shields", which Hamas denied. A number of countries and international organizations condemned what they called Hamas's use of hospitals and civilians as human shields. According to an unnamed Israeli official, Hamas leader Yahya Sinwar left Gaza City using a vehicle associated with a humanitarian relief mission. On 17 October, Israel bombed in areas of southern Gaza. Ministry of Health officials in Gaza reported heavy overnight bombing killing over 70 people, including families who had evacuated from Gaza City in the north. One of the airstrikes killed a senior Hamas military commander Ayman Nofal. In the afternoon, an Israeli strike hit a UNRWA school in the Al-Maghazi refugee camp, killing six and injuring 12. Late in the evening, an explosion occurred in the parking lot of the Al-Ahli Arabi Baptist Hospital in the center of Gaza City, killing hundreds. The cause of the explosion was disputed by Hamas and the IDF, and the ongoing conflict prevented independent on-site analysis. Palestinian statements that it was an Israeli airstrike were denied by the IDF, which stated that the explosion resulted from a failed rocket launch by Palestinian Islamic Jihad. The PIJ denied any involvement. An independent analysis by Human Rights Watch indicated that the evidence pointed to a misfired Palestinian rocket as the cause, but stated that further investigation was required. On 18 October, President Biden said the Pentagon had independently concluded that the explosion was not caused by Israel, but by "the other team", based on data from the Defense Department. Over the next few days, Canadian, British, and French officials announced that their respective intelligence agencies concluded the cause to be a failed Palestinian rocket and not an Israeli airstrike. In its article dated 2 November, CNN stated that multiple experts said "they believe this to be the most likely scenario – although they caution the absence of munition remnants or shrapnel from the scene made it difficult to be sure. All agreed that the available images of evidence of the damage at the site was not consistent with an Israeli airstrike." On 27 October, the IDF launched a large-scale, multi-pronged ground incursion into parts northern Gaza. The IDF was building up a force of over 100,000 soldiers in the cities of Ashkelon, Sderot and Kiryat Gat. Clashes between Hamas and the IDF were reported near Beit Hanoun and Bureij. The Israeli invasion of Gaza was confirmed after Israel said its units were still in Gaza the next day. Hamas leader Ali Baraka said the invading Israeli forces suffered heavy casualties and loss of equipment due to an ambush. Two days later, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the head of the World Health Organization (WHO), described as "deeply concerning" reports from the Palestinian Red Crescent that the al-Quds hospital had received an urgent evacuation warning. He reiterated that it was "impossible to evacuate hospitals full of patients without endangering their lives". Israeli airstrikes targeted the area around the hospital, filling parts of the building with smoke and dust, prompting staff to give breathing masks to some patients. Around 14,000 civilians were believed to be sheltering in or near the hospital. Associated Press reported that Israeli airstrikes also destroyed roads leading to the Al-Shifa hospital, making it increasingly difficult to reach. Three days following the beginning of ground operations, a video showed an Israeli tank firing on a taxi with a white flag on its roof that had attempted to turn around. An IDF spokesperson said they were "not shown any proof" that the vehicle was civilian, adding, "terrorists use civilian infrastructure like cars". The following day, the IDF struck at densely-populated Jabalia refugee camp, killing 50 and wounding 150 Palestinians according to the Gaza Health Ministry. According to Israel, a senior Hamas commander and dozens of militants in a vast underground tunnel complex were among those killed. Hamas denied the presence of a senior commander on the scene. According to the IDF, the destruction of the tunnels caused the collapse of the foundations of several nearby buildings, leading to their collapse. Eyewitnesses interviewed by CNN and Der Spiegel spoke of "apocalyptic" scenes, with dozens of collapsed buildings, children carrying other injured children, and bodies lying in the rubble. The nearby Indonesian Hospital's surgical director said they had received 120 dead bodies and treated 280 wounded, the majority of them women and children. The attack resulted in several ambassador recalls (see § Ambassador recalls). Josep Borrell, the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, wrote on the social media platform X that he was "appalled by the high number of casualties" from the bombing. According to The New York Times at least two 2,000-pound bombs, the second largest type in Israel's arsenal, were used. On 1 November, the first group of evacuees left Gaza for Egypt. 500 evacuees, comprising critically wounded and foreign nationals, would be evacuated over the course of several days, with 200 evacuees already waiting at the border crossing. On the same day, the Jabalia refugee camp was bombed for a second time; the UN Human Rights Office expressed "serious concerns" that these were "disproportionate attacks that could amount to war crimes". The IDF released what it stated was an intercepted call between Hamas operatives and the head of the Indonesia Hospital, where they discuss diverting some of the hospital's fuel supply to Hamas. Two days later, the Gaza health ministry stated that Israel struck an ambulance convoy directly in front of Al-Shifa Hospital, killing at least 15 people and injuring 60 more. The IDF acknowledged having launched an airstrike at "an ambulance that was identified by forces as being used by a Hamas terrorist cell in close proximity to their position in the battle zone", adding that a "number of Hamas terrorist operatives were killed in the strike". The IDF did not provide evidence that the ambulances were being used by Hamas combatants but said that additional information would be released. A Hamas official described the Israeli statement as "baseless". The Palestinian Red Crescent Society (PRCS) said one of its ambulances was struck "by a missile fired by the Israeli forces" about two metres from the entrance to al-Shifa hospital. The PRCS said another ambulance was fired on about a kilometre from the hospital. WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said on X that he was "utterly shocked by reports of attacks on ambulances evacuating patients", adding that patients, health workers and medical facilities must always be protected. On 4 November a UNRWA spokeswoman confirmed reports that Israel had conducted an airstrike against a UN-run school in the Jabalia refugee camp. According to the Gaza health ministry, the attack killed 15 and wounded dozens more. Abu Ubaida, the spokesperson for the Izz el-Deen al-Qassam Brigades, reported that due to Israeli air strikes, the bodies of 23 missing Israeli hostages were buried under the rubble. Fighting continued through the middle of November and on 18 November Israeli strikes killed more than 80 people in Jabalia refugee camp. On 22 November, Israel and Hamas reached a temporary ceasefire agreement, providing for a four-day "pause" or "lull" in hostilities, to allow for the release of 50 hostages held in Gaza. The deal also provided for the release of approximately 150 Palestinian women and children incarcerated by Israel. The agreement was approved by the Israeli cabinet in the early hours of the day; in a statement, the Israeli Prime Minister's Office stated Israel's intention to continue the war. Following the introduction of a Qatari-brokered truce on 24 November, starting at 7:00 am Israel time, active fighting in the Gaza Strip ceased and some of the Israeli and foreign hostages were released by Hamas in exchange for the release of some of the Palestinian political prisoners held by Israel. The truce was announced for a period of four days, but was extended for a longer period. From 24 to 30 November, Hamas released hostages and Israel released prisoners. On 27 November, Qatar announced that an agreement between Israel and Hamas to extend the truce by two days had been reached. Both Israel and Hamas accused each other of violating the truce on 28 November. On 30 November, Hamas released two more hostages as the truce, which was supposed to end minutes later, was extended by another day. The truce expired in the morning on 1 December, as both Israel and Hamas blamed the other side for failing to agree on an extension. According to the New York Times, the disagreement centered on "how to define soldiers versus civilians and how many Palestinian prisoners Israel would release for its hostages". The remaining hostages include a year old baby, his 4 year old brother and their mother, an additional 13 women aged 18–39, and 85 men, some of whom are over the age of 70 and 80. A Hamas official said that after the exchange, the only remaining hostages were "soldiers and civilian men who served in the occupation army", and refused to exchange them until "all our prisoners are freed and a ceasefire takes hold". US National Security Advisor John Kirby said that "Hamas agreed to allow the Red Cross access to these hostages while the pause was in place", which "didn't happen and is still not happening". Israel adopted a grid system to order precise evacuations within Gaza, released a map online, and dropped leaflets with a QR code for the link. The maps were criticized for being hard to access due to the lack of electricity and internet connectivity, and for causing confusion or panic. Some evacuation instructions have been vague or contradictory, and Israel still operated in areas it had told people to evacuate to and that were safe for civilians. Two law experts said they had not seen significant changes in previous days of how Israel waged the war, due to its warnings to civilians appearing ineffective and it being unclear if anywhere in Gaza is truly safe. Agnes Callamard, Secretary General of Amnesty International, said in a press release that "US-made weapons facilitated the mass killings of extended families". Amnesty found no evidence of military targets at the sites of the strikes, or any indication that the occupants of the homes were affiliated with Hamas, prompting the group to request that the airstrikes be investigated as possible war crimes. Several decomposed babies were found in the ICU of Al-Nasr Children's Hospital in northern Gaza, two weeks after its forced evacuation. US Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin warned against replacing "a tactical victory with a strategic defeat" if Israel does not work towards protecting Palestinian civilians. The US State Department said it was too early to definitively assess whether Israel was heeding US calls to protect civilians. The IDF reported that its troops had reached the centers of Khan Younis, Jabalia, and Shejaiya reporting the most "intense fighting" since the ground invasion of Gaza began. Intensified bombing pushed Palestinian civilians further south to Rafah. On 7 December, Israel detained 150 men in the Gaza Strip, with dozens more detained on 10 December. According to Israel, the detentions followed a mass surrender of Hamas militants. The New York Times reported that the statement about Hamas fighters surrendering was made after video and photographs of "men stripped to their underwear, sitting or kneeling on the ground, with some bound and blindfolded" were seen on social media.The Guardian reported that among the people seen in the images were people identified as civilians, among them a journalist. The ICRC said it was concerned by the images and that it strongly emphasized "the importance of treating all those detained with humanity and dignity, in accordance with international humanitarian law". The BBC reported that a video of the apparent surrender of weapons is unclear whether a man is "surrendering" weapons or just moving them as instructed, suggested the event was performed for the camera, rather than as an act of authentic surrender, and that it not known whether the individuals shown have any involvement with Hamas or the 7 October attack. Haaretz reported that Israeli security officials believed that approximately 10–15% of the people shown in the video were actually affiliated with Hamas, and that despite the public statements by Israel that this was not a "massive surrender" by Hamas units. Amnesty International described the treatment of those detained on 7 December as a violation of international law. On 8 and 9 December, the IDF released footage of what it said was its soldiers engaging combatants near and inside two schools in Shejaiya. According to the IDF, fighters also discovered a tunnel leading from one of the schools to a nearby mosque. It also released footage of armament that it stated was found on the campus of Al-Azhar University, along with a tunnel shaft leading to a school 1 km away. The IDF said that, since it designated a humanitarian zone for civilians in the Gaza Strip on 18 October, 116 rockets had been fired from there toward Israel, including 38 falling inside Gaza. The Pentagon announced on 9 December that the Biden administration had authorized the sale of around 14,000 rounds of tank ammunition to Israel without congressional authorization by using emergency powers. On 29 December, it did so again to supply Israel with $147.5 million worth of artillery shells and related items. On 15 December, the IDF released a statement announcing that they had killed three of their own hostages by friendly fire. According to the IDF, they "mistakenly identified three Israeli hostages as a threat" during operations in Shuja'iyya and subsequently fired at them, killing them. According to an IDF official on 16 December, the three hostages were shirtless and were carrying "a stick with a white cloth on it" when an Israeli soldier, who declared them to be "terrorists" after feeling "threatened", opened fire, killing two hostages and injuring the third, who was killed by Israeli reinforcements. In an interview to the Wall Street Journal on 25 December, Netanyahu said that Israel's objectives were to "destroy Hamas, demilitarize Gaza and deradicalize the whole of Palestinian society". On 29 December, South Africa filed a case against Israel at the International Court of Justice, alleging that Israel's conduct amounted to genocide. South Africa asked the ICJ to issue provisional measures, including ordering Israel to halt its military campaign in Gaza. South Africa was one of five countries making a referral of the war to the ICC in November 2023. The rocket attacks on Israeli cities by Hamas decreased in frequency during this period with notable attacks on the New Year's Eve and on 29 January 2024. On 1 January 2024, Israeli forces withdrew from neighbourhoods in North Gaza, including Sheikh Radwan, al-Mina district and parts of Tel al-Hawa. On 6 January, the Israeli government said that Hamas control over the northern part of the Gaza Strip had been dismantled without providing evidence. On 7 January the IDF conducted a targeted missile strike on a car carrying Al Jazeera journalists Hamza Dadouh and Mustafa Thuraya. Dadouh, Thuraya, and their driver were killed. On 15 January, Israeli Defense Minister Yoav Gallant stated that the most intense fighting in the northern part of the Gaza Strip had ended, and a new phase of low intensity fighting was about to begin. By 18 January, the IDF stated that Hamas had begun to rebuild its armies in the occupied parts of Northern Gaza. The IDF had previously stated these armies were stripped of military capabilities but by 18 January the fighting strength of many battalions had been significantly restored without providing any evidence. On 22 January, 24 IDF soldiers died in what was the deadliest day for the IDF since the ground invasion began. Of these, 21 died in a single incident where Palestinian militants fired an RPG at a tank as well as at adjacent buildings soldiers were rigging to demolish which thus caused the buildings to collapse. The IDF soldiers brought landmines into the empty building for the demolition process. It is unclear whether the collapse of the buildings was principally due to the primary RPG explosion or the secondary landmine explosions. Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, Defense Minister Yoav Gallant and President Isaac Herzog publicly mourned the loss. In February, the Israeli government stated on several occasions its next objective would be the capture of Rafah. On 12 February, Israel started the bombing campaign on Rafah. On February 15, The Wall Street Journal and The New York Times reported that Egypt was building a refugee camp for over 100,000 people south of Rafah, surrounded by five-meter-high concrete walls. However, the governor of North Sinai Governorate, Mohamed Abdel-Fadil Shousha, denied these rumors in a statement published by Al-Arabiya. On 18 February, Israeli war cabinet member Benny Gantz warned that a ground offensive will be launched in Rafah on 10 March unless Hamas has freed all hostages by then. Gantz added Israel would act in "a co-ordinated manner, facilitating the evacuation of civilians in dialogue with our American and Egyptian partners to minimise civilian casualties". On 29 February, more than 100 Palestinians were killed and 750 were wounded during the flour massacre when Israeli forces opened fire on Palestinians waiting for food aid southwest of Gaza City, with many victims run over by trucks according to some accounts. Survivors described it as an ambush, stating that Israeli forces opened fire as people approached the aid trucks, resulting in a rush away from the gunfire that added to the death toll. On 1 March, the United States announced they would begin an operation airdropping food aid into Gaza. Some experts called the US airdrops performative and claimed they would do little to alleviate the food situation in Gaza. During his State of the Union Address, President Biden announced a new initiative for providing food and medications to Gaza by sea, setting up a temporary port on Gaza's coast to enable aid delivery. By 6 March, Israel had completed the construction of a new road in Gaza running across the full width of the Gaza Strip from east to west. The IDF reported that the road was an "active logistical route, constantly maintained during the war", It was intended to be used for the mobilization of troops and supplies, to connect and defend IDF positions on al-Rashid and Salah al-Din streets, and to prevent people in the southern Gaza Strip from returning to the north. On 18 March, Israeli forces raided al-Shifa hospital again, stating that Hamas fighters had regrouped there. Israeli forces killed Faiq al-Mabhouh, who they said was the head of the operations directorate of Hamas' internal security service. Hamas said al-Mabhouh was in charge of civil law enforcement and had been engaged in "purely civil and humanitarian activity," coordinating aid deliveries to northern Gaza. Multiple news agencies reported that the IDF assaulted and detained al-Jazeera correspondent Ismail al-Ghoul and more than 80 other people, including medical staff and other journalists, and confiscated and destroyed media equipment. Al-Ghoul was released the following day, but could not verify the whereabouts of his colleagues. The Committee to Protect Journalists said it was "deeply alarmed and outraged by reports of the assault on Al-Jazeera reporter Ismail Al-Ghoul from Al-Shifa hospital and other journalists while doing their jobs reporting on the Israeli offensive on the hospital". A deputy military commander of Hamas Marwan Issa was reportedly killed in an airstrike in mid-March. On 23 March, at least 19 Palestinians were killed by the IDF while waiting for humanitarian aid at the Kuwait roundabout in Gaza City. On 25 March, the UN Security Council passed a resolution calling for an immediate ceasefire in Gaza, which would last for the remainder of the month of Ramadan. The US delegate abstained, and all other delegates voted in favor of the resolution. Israeli military activities in the Gaza Strip remained unchanged following the adoption of the resolution. On 28 March, the IDF shot and killed two unarmed men near Al Rasheed Street in central Gaza before burying their bodies in the sand with bulldozers. The Council on American-Islamic Relations called for a UN investigation into the "heinous war crime." The Iranian-backed Hezbollah in southern Lebanon and Houthi militias in Yemen have launched attacks on a limited scale against Israel, raising fears of a wider regional military conflict. Iranian-backed militias in Iraq and Syria have also traded attacks with the US and IDF. Over 100 Palestinians have been killed in confrontations with Israeli soldiers and settlers in the West Bank since 7 October. Settler violence has been heavily criticized by the IDF. Amnesty International released a report on 5 February 2024 stating that Israel is carrying out unlawful killings in the West Bank and displaying "a chilling disregard for Palestinian lives" and that Israeli forces are carrying out numerous illegal acts of violence that constitute clear violations of international law. Even before the war, 2023 was the deadliest year for Palestinians in the Israeli-occupied West Bank in 20 years. From 7 to 31 October, B'Tselem said that Israeli forces had killed more than 100 Palestinians while Israeli settlers had killed at least seven, leading to fears that the situation would escalate out of control. About 1,000 Palestinians have been forcibly displaced by settlers since 7 October and almost half of clashes have included "Israeli forces accompanying or actively supporting Israeli settlers while carrying out the attacks" according to a U.N. report. According to the West Bank Protection Consortium, which is funded by the European Union, since the 7 October attacks six Palestinian communities have been abandoned due to the violence. By 10 October, confrontations between Palestinians and Israeli forces had left 15 Palestinians dead, including two in East Jerusalem. On 11 October, Israeli settlers attacked the village of Qusra, killing four Palestinians. A 16-year-old child was fatally shot by the IDF in Bani Naim, while another person was shot dead by the IDF near Bethlehem. On 12 October, two Palestinians were killed after Israeli settlers interrupted a funeral procession for Palestinians killed in prior settler attacks and opened fire. On 18 October, protests broke out over the al-Ahli Arab Hospital explosion, with clashes reported in Ramallah. In Jenin, a 12-year-old girl was shot dead by crossfire from Palestinian Authority security forces, and another youth was injured by PA forces in Tubas. One Palestinian was killed in confrontations with Israeli forces in Nabi Saleh, and 30 others were injured across the West Bank. On 19 October, more than 60 Hamas members were arrested and 12 people were killed in overnight Israeli raids across the West Bank. Those arrested included the movement's spokesperson in the West Bank, Hassan Yousef. On 22 October, Israel struck the al-Ansar Mosque in the Jenin refugee camp, saying that it had killed several "terror operatives" from Hamas and Islamic Jihad who were planning attacks inside without providing evidence. Within a few days Ayser Mohammad Al-Amer, a senior commander of the Palestinian Islamic Jihad was killed during a clash with IDF in the Jenin refugee camp. On 31 October, the IDF engaged Hamas around Shuweika. On 1 November, Issa Amro stated the situation in the West Bank had become "very hard", noting "All the checkpoints are closed. Israeli settlers and soldiers are acting violently with the Palestinians." The UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs warned Israeli settler violence against Palestinians was on the rise. On 30 November, two Palestinian gunmen killed three and wounded eleven Israelis at a bus stop on the Givat Shaul Interchange in Jerusalem. Hamas claimed responsibility. On 16 February 2024, a Palestinian gunman shot and killed two Israelis and injured four others in Kiryat Malakhi, Israel. The shooter was killed by an off-duty IDF reservist at the scene. A series of border clashes occurred along the Israel–Lebanon border. On 8 October, Hezbollah launched an artillery attack on Israeli positions in Shebaa Farms; this was met with immediate retaliation. Skirmishes have occurred every day since, spilling over to the occupied Golan Heights. The clashes resulted in the deaths of 259 Lebanese militants and 14 Israeli soldiers, as well as over 50 Lebanese civilians and six Israeli civilians, one Lebanese Army soldier, and the displacement of 55,000 people in Lebanon and tens of thousands more in Israel. Several strikes against Israel and commercial ships in the Red Sea are thought to have launched by Iran-backed Houthi militants in Yemen. On 19 October, the United States Navy destroyer USS Carney shot down several missiles that were traveling north over the Red Sea towards Israel. On 31 October, Houthi military spokesperson Yahya Saree said that the group had launched ballistic missiles and drones towards Israel, and that they would continue to do so "to help the Palestinians to victory" in an event that has been misrepresented in some news sites as a declaration of war by Yemen. On 19 November, tensions increased when the Galaxy Leader, a cargo ship chartered by a Japanese logistics company with 25 individuals on board, was hijacked by the Houthis using a Mil Mi-17 helicopter. On 3 December, the Houthis stated that they had attacked two ships, the Unity Explorer and Number 9, allegedly linked to Israel, in order "to prevent Israeli ships from navigating the Red Sea". Any ship destined for Israel, according to the group, was a "legitimate target". Saree announced in a post on X that the "horrific massacres" against the Palestinians in Gaza was the reason for this decision and that they will not stop until the Gaza Strip is supplied with food and medicine. Israeli National Security Adviser Tzachi Hanegbi called this development a "global issue" and that Israel is "giving the world some time to organize in order to prevent this" otherwise, the country "would will act in order to remove this naval siege". Since November 2023, the Islamic Resistance in Iraq has claimed responsibility for drone and missile attacks against targets within Israel in retaliation for Israeli attacks on Palestinian civilians in Gaza. The group stated it would continue to "strike enemy strongholds." Strikes were recorded in Eilat, the Dead Sea coastline, the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights, the Karish rig, Haifa Bay, Ashdod, Kiryat Shmona and in Tel Aviv. On 24 November, 2023, a suspected Iranian drone attacked the CMA CGM Symi owned by Israeli billionaire Idan Ofer in the Indian Ocean according to a US defense official. An anonymous source said the drone was suspected to have been a Shahed-136 drone. The attack caused damage to the ship but did not injure any of the crew. In December, the US military was reportedly looking to build a maritime task force to protect trade against Iranian harassment. On 23 December, a suspected Iranian drone attacked the Israel-affiliated oil tanker MV Chem Pluto in the Indian Ocean, off the coast of Gujarat. The attack did not harm any of its 20 crew members but caused a fire that was put out. The vessel was reportedly carrying Saudi oil to Mangalore, India. In December, Iranian proxy militias escalated their attacks against the US military following the assassination of one of its generals in Syria in a targeted Israeli attack. In January 2024, four members of the Iranian Qods Force in Syria were killed by a suspected Israeli airstrike in Damascus. A similar attack occurred on April 1, Iranian Islamic Republic Day, killing several in an airstrike on Iran's consulate in Damascus. The humanitarian situation in Gaza has been termed a "crisis" and a "catastrophe". More than 23,000 have been killed. As a result of Israel's blockade, Gaza faces shortages of fuel, food, medication, water, and medical supplies. The blockade resulted in a 90% drop in electricity availability, impacting hospital power supplies, sewage plants, and shutting down desalination plants that provide drinking water. According to WHO, 27 out of 35 hospitals in Gaza were shut down by 23 November 2023. On 13 October, UNRWA commissioner Philippe Lazzarini said, "The scale and speed of the unfolding humanitarian crisis is bone-chilling". As of 5 March 2024, over 31,000 people (30,228 Palestinian and 1,410 Israeli) have been reported as killed in the Israel–Hamas war, including 94 journalists (89 Palestinian, 2 Israeli and 3 Lebanese) and over 136 UNRWA aid workers. On 7 October 2023, 1,139 Israelis and foreign nationals, including 764 civilians, were killed, and 248 persons taken hostage during the initial attack on Israel from the Gaza Strip. Since then, over 30,228 Palestinians (the majority of whom were women and children) in the Gaza Strip have been killed according to the Gaza Health Ministry. The total death toll in Gaza is presumed to be higher than reported, with thousands remaining unaccounted for, including those trapped under rubble. The Gaza Health Ministry does not distinguish between combatant and civilian casualties in its reports. Hamas themselves have said they believe they have lost 6,000 fighters in the war, while the IDF claims up to 12,000 Hamas combatants were killed in Gaza as of 19 February 2024. A further 382 Palestinians were killed in the West Bank by Israel military and settlers. Casualties have also occurred in other parts of Israel, as well as in southern Lebanon, and Syria. Monitoring group Action on Armed Violence said that each Israeli airstrike caused an average of 10.1 civilian deaths and that the figure suggested a notable change in Israel's targeting approach. The previous Israeli campaigns in Gaza produced the averages of 1.3–1.7, while in the sieges of Mosul, Aleppo the ratio exceeded 20 civilian casualties per airstrike. Israel uses an AI system known as Gospel for its targeting process and experts are sceptical that such a system reduces civilian harm. The rate of killing exceeds that of US-led attacks in Iraq, Syria and Afghanistan, which were widely criticized by rights groups. The first month of the war has been the deadliest conflict for children this century. Multiple generations of families have been killed in Israeli attacks. As of 31 October, Amnesty International has documented five cases of entire families being killed in Israeli airstrikes. The Associated Press reported that the killing of entire families in single airstrikes by Israel has "raised troubling questions about Israeli military tactics". As of 15 October 47 families had been completely wiped away from the population registry, according to the Palestinian Ministry of Health. The Financial Times reported how Palestinian families could have multiple generations living in a single multistory building has had the effect of those families being nearly completely wiped out by airstrikes. As of 23 November, according to Gazan health officials, 312 families had suffered the loss of more than 10 members. This had also led to children being left without any surviving family, with the acronym "WCNSF" for "wounded child, no surviving family" being increasingly used. Hospitals faced a lack of fuel and relied on backup generators for the first two weeks of the war. By 23 October, however, the Indonesia Hospital ran out of fuel and completely shut down. Hospitals around Gaza also warned they would soon lose power completely, which would lead to the death of 140 premature babies in NICUs. The Gaza Health Ministry said that more than 192 medical staffers had been killed by Israeli airstrikes, as well as ambulances, health institutions, its headquarters, the Rimal Clinic, and the International Eye Center. The Médecins Sans Frontières said it had counted 18 ambulances destroyed and eight medical facilities destroyed or damaged. On 24 October, a Health Ministry spokesman announced the healthcare system had "totally collapsed". On 16 October, doctors warned of disease outbreaks due to hospital overcrowding and unburied bodies. The World Health Organization stated the situation was "spiralling out of control". The Palestinian Red Crescent reported that it had lost contact with its headquarters on 27 October, disrupting Gazans' ability to contact emergency services. On 14 November, Reuters reported that Israel was coordinating the transfer of medical incubators to Al-Shifa Hospital to assist in the evacuation of newborn babies and that the IDF stated that three battery powered incubators were on standby outside Gaza. The director of Al-Shifa stated Israel's statement about providing incubators to premature babies was false. According to the World Food Program, as of 9 December more than half of the population of Gaza was "starving"; more than nine in ten were not eating everyday and 48% suffering from "extreme hunger". One of the few bakeries still standing in the Gaza Strip was destroyed in an Israeli airstrike in Deir al-Balah, and Gazans were reported to be searching through the rubble of bombed bakeries attempting to find bags of flour. The United Nations warned that a collapse of social order could result from the intense hunger among Palestinians. The Associated Press reported that rare instances of public dissent against Hamas were taking place, with reports of angry chants against Hamas by hundreds of people taking refuge in a UN shelter. Palestinian Foreign Minister Riyad al-Maliki, who is part of the Palestinian Authority, said Israel was using starvation as a weapon, saying "they are starving because of Israel's deliberate use of starvation as a weapon of war against the people it occupied". An Israeli official responded that the charge was "blood-libellous" and "delusional". Human Rights Watch similarly found that Israel was using starvation as a weapon of war by deliberately denying access to food and water. On 16 January 2024, UN experts accused Israel of "destroying Gaza's food system and using food as a weapon against the Palestinian people". Michael Fakhri, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food, said that Israel was intentionally starving Palestinians, stating "Intentionally depriving people of food is clearly a war crime" and that Israel was intending to "destroy the Palestinian people, in whole or in part, simply for being Palestinian." On 3 March 2024, Fakhri stated that "famine may very well be already occurring". On 29 February, civilians attempting to get aid from food trucks were shot at by IDF soldiers, with at least 118 being killed. The event was labelled a massacre by some sources and referred to as the "flour massacre". The UN called for an investigation, stating it had "recorded at least 14 incidents involving shooting and shelling of people gathered to receive desperately needed supplies". In February 2024, the UN said 576,000 people were "facing catastrophic levels of deprivation and starvation". As of 22 February, the entire population in the Gaza Strip was classified in Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) Phase 3 – Crisis, or above. 50% of the population was in IPC Phase 4 – Emergency, and 25% is in IPC Phase 5 – Catastrophe. The IPC said the risk of famine was increasing every day. An updated report released on 18 March said that food insecurity had deepened and widened, with a doubling of people projected to experience catastrophic levels of hunger and starvation by July. Oxfam said in a report issued the same day that Israel was "deliberately" using bureaucracy to hinder the supply of aid. Fewer aid trucks entered Gaza in February compared with January. On 6 March 2024, South Africa again asked the ICJ to act on an emergency basis asserting that the threat of starvation had materialized, pointing to the flour massacre and Israeli attempts to discredit UNRWA. The scale, extent, and pace of destruction of buildings in the Gaza Strip ranks among the most severe in modern history. The 29,000 munitions -shells and bombs- Israel has dropped on Gaza in 3 months greatly exceed those (3,678) dropped by the United States between 2004 and 2010 during its Invasion of Iraq. The estimated extent of the destruction ranges from 35% of all buildings (March 2024, UNITAR) to 70% (December 2023, The Wall Street Journal), with a higher level of destruction in northern Gaza. The damage to buildings in northern Gaza reportedly exceeds that in Bakhmut and Mariupol in the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Aleppo in the Battle of Aleppo, and Mosul and Raqqa in the War against the Islamic State; by 5 December 2023, the percentage of buildings damaged or destroyed in Gaza exceeded Dresden and Cologne during World War II and approached the level of destruction seen in Hamburg. Bombing has destroyed or damaged apartment buildings, hospitals, schools, religious sites, factories, and shopping centers. The Guardian reported that the scale of destruction has led international legal experts to raise the concept of domicide, which it describes as "the mass destruction of dwellings to make [a] territory uninhabitable". Definitively assessing the extent of destruction in Gaza has been complicated by difficulties in accessing up-to-date satellite imagery. An analysis by The Washington Post found "apparent craters within 180 meters of 17 of the 28 hospitals in northern Gaza", although this represents "a conservative undercount of the actual bombs dropped near Gaza's hospitals". This analysis focused on bombs weighing 2,000 pounds or more, which could irreparably damage a building 180 meters away. Israel has employed unguided munitions, which are particularly destructive, and has used artificial intelligence to quickly identify targets for bombing. On 20 October, Doctors Without Borders stated it was "deeply concerned for the fate of everyone in Gaza right now". On 21 October, a joint statement by UNICEF, WHO, UNDP, UNFPA, and WFP stated, "the world must do more" for Gaza. On 26 October, the World Health Organization stated Gaza's humanitarian and health crisis had "reached catastrophic proportions". On 28 October, the Red Cross president Mirjana Spoljaric Egger stated she was "shocked by the intolerable level of human suffering". During the course of the first month of the war, the Gaza Ministry of Health recorded more than 4,000 children killed in Gaza. UN Secretary-General António Guterres said on 6 November that Gaza is "fast becoming a graveyard for children". Israeli UN Ambassador Gilad Erdan responded directly to Guterres, stating "Shame on [Guterres]... More than 30 minors – among them a 9-month-old baby as well as toddlers and children who witnessed their parents being murdered in cold blood – are being held against their will in the Gaza Strip. Hamas is the problem in Gaza, not Israel's actions to eliminate this terrorist organization." On 8 November, UN Human Rights chief Volker Turk described the Rafah Crossing as "gates to a living nightmare". On 10 November, spokesman for the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) Jens Laerke stated, "if there is a hell on earth, it is the north of Gaza". Retired Israeli major general Giora Eiland compared Israel's situation to that of the United States after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941. He argued that if Israel wanted to disarm Hamas, it had "no choice" but to make Gaza a place "that is temporarily or permanently impossible to live in". This, he stated, was not a "program for revenge", but a way to get the hostages back. On 18 October, the United States UN representative Linda Thomas-Greenfield vetoed a UN Security Council resolution condemning all violence against civilians and urging humanitarian aid to Gaza. She said the council must instead support direct diplomacy. On 27 October, the UN General Assembly voted overwhelmingly for a resolution on immediate humanitarian truce in Gaza and aid access. The resolution attracted 121 votes in favor and 44 abstentions; 14 countries voted against, namely Israel, the United States, Austria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Fiji, Guatemala, Hungary, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Nauru, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay and Tonga. On 9 November, Israel agreed to daily four-hour "humanitarian pauses" to allow civilians to obtain food and medicine, as well as evacuate to the south. Evacuees described the evacuation path as full of death and horror. Jan Egeland, the Secretary General of the Norwegian Refugee Council, said on 5 December that "The pulverising of Gaza now ranks amongst the worst assaults on any civilian population in our time and age. Each day we see more dead children and new depths of suffering for the innocent people enduring this hell". On 12 December, the UN General Assembly once again voted overwhelmingly for a resolution on immediate humanitarian truce in Gaza and aid access. The resolution attracted 153 votes in favor and 23 abstentions; 10 countries voted against, namely Israel, the United States, Austria, the Czech Republic, Guatemala, Liberia, Micronesia, Nauru, Papua New Guinea and Paraguay. Due to an agreement reportedly brokered by Qatar and France between Israel and Hamas, medicine was scheduled to leave Doha via two military aircraft and be delivered to the Gaza Strip on 17 January 2024 to aid hostages. The medicine was successfully delivered. Both Hamas and the IDF have been accused of attempted or imminent genocide, and several other war crimes. Several experts in international law and genocide studies characterized Hamas's assault as genocide. Legal and genocide experts have condemned the attack, during which 1,139 people were killed, including 695 Israeli civilians. They argue that these actions by Hamas constitute a significant violation of international law and were carried out with the intent to destroy the Israeli national group. Some commentators highlight Hamas's founding charter, which calls for the destruction of Israel; this has led to suggestions that its intent is genocidal and that the attacks on 7 October were an attempt to fulfill this agenda. In a 12 October preliminary legal assessment condemning Hamas's attacks in Israel, international humanitarian law scholar and Dean of Cornell Law School Jens David Ohlin said the evidence suggested Hamas's "killings and kidnappings" potentially violated Articles 6–8 of the Rome Statute as well as the Genocide Convention and were "crimes against humanity"; over a hundred international scholars expressed support for this position. During the 7 October attacks by Hamas on Israeli communities, Israeli women and girls were reportedly raped, assaulted, and mutilated by Hamas militants, an allegation that Hamas denies. Israeli police said dozens of women and some men were raped. The New York Times and the BBC reported that "videos of naked and bloodied women filmed by Hamas on the day of the attack, and photographs of bodies taken at the sites afterwards, suggest that women were sexually targeted by their attackers". Although not investigative in nature, a United Nations team concluded in March 2024 that there was "clear and convincing information" of Israeli hostages in Gaza experiencing "sexual violence, including rape, sexualized torture, and cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment", and there was also "reasonable grounds to believe that conflict-related sexual violence occurred during the 7 October attacks in multiple locations across Gaza periphery, including rape and gang-rape, in at least three locations": the Nova music festival and its vicinities of Road 232 and kibbutz Re'im. Witnesses described the perpetrators using shovels, beheading victims, engaged in rapes, and even playing with severed body parts, although a number of testimonies were subsequently discredited. These acts were denounced as gender-based violence, war crimes, and crimes against humanity, aligning with the International Criminal Court's recognition of sexual violence as such. Some of the released hostages also shared testimonies of sexual violence during their time in Gaza. A New York Times investigation by Jeffrey Gettleman, Anat Schwartz, and Adam Sella, released in late December 2023, found at least seven locations where sexual assaults and mutilations of Israeli women and girls were carried out. It concluded that these were not isolated events but part of a broader pattern of gender-based violence during the 7 October massacres. The newspaper's probe concluded that Hamas "weaponized sexual violence" during the attacks. Nevertheless, the Schwartz later revealed that she did not find any victim or complaint of sexual assault when she contacted every rape crisis clinic in Israel. The Intercept and Mondoweiss both concluded that the mass rape allegations advanced by the New York Times were unfounded. Israel accused international women's rights and human rights groups of downplaying the assaults. Hamas denied that it committed any sexual assaults, and has called for an impartial international investigation into the accusations. On January 2024, UN experts Alice Jill Edwards and Morris Tidball-Binz [de] said in a statement that the sexual violence acts amounted to war crimes which "may also qualify as crimes against humanity". Human Rights Watch has stated that "Hamas and Islamic Jihad are committing war crimes by holding scores of Israelis and others as hostages in Gaza". They also added that "Civilians, including children, people with disabilities, and older people, should never be treated as bargaining chips", and "The armed groups should immediately and safely release all civilians detained". The secretary-general of Amnesty International urged the immediate release of "all civilians who were abducted, including children", and supported an investigation into these incidents "as part of the International Criminal Court's ongoing investigation into crimes committed by all parties in the current conflict". Looting took place in several kibbutzim and at Nova festival. According to the videos published by the Times of Israel the looting in kibbutz Be'eri was done by Palestinian civilians who arrived to the kibbutz after Hamas militants stealing agricultural equipment, motorbikes, and televisions. Israel has been accused of committing genocide against Palestinians in Gaza during the war. On 15 October, Third World approaches to international law published a statement signed by over 800 legal scholars expressing "alarm about the possibility of the crime of genocide being perpetrated by Israeli forces against Palestinians in the Gaza Strip". On 17 October, Genocide Watch declared a "Genocide Emergency Alert" for the conflict in Gaza. Several scholars have cited numerous Israeli statements which they argue constitute an "intent to destroy" the population of Gaza, a necessary condition for the legal threshold of genocide to be met. On 16 November, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) experts said that Israel's violations "point to a genocide in the making". Several world leaders have accused Israel of genocide, including Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva of Brazil and Gustavo Petro of Colombia. President Hage Geingob of Namibia called the actions of the Israeli government "genocidal and gruesome." On 29 December, South Africa submitted a case to the International Court of Justice (ICJ) alleging that Israel was committing genocide in Gaza and requested provisional measures for Israel to suspend its military campaign in Gaza. In its filing, South Africa alleged that Israel's actions were "intended to bring about the destruction of a substantial part of the Palestinian national, racial and ethnical group". South Africa's case was backed by Belgium, Ireland and Spain in Europe, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, as well as the Arab League. Malaysia, Namibia and Pakistan independently backed the case. On 2 January 2024, Israel decided to appear before the ICJ in response to the case made by South Africa. The Court issued an Order in relation to the provisional measures request on 26 January 2024 in which it ordered Israel to take all measures to prevent any acts that could be considered genocidal but stopped short of calling for a ceasefire. It determined that it was "plausible" that some of Israel's actions may violate the Genocide Convention. The final ruling is expected to take years. Some researchers in the fields of urban planning and architecture have alleged that the destruction in Gaza, particularly the destruction of historic buildings and essential infrastructure such as hospitals and universities, amounts to domicide, or urbicide. Israel imposed a "complete siege" on Gaza in the first ten days of the war, due to alleged security concerns that weapons, fuel and armaments would be transferred to Hamas in the guise of humanitarian aid. Israel later allowed the delivery of limited humanitarian aid following security checks. Israel's restriction of the flow of food, fuel, water and other humanitarian aid was criticized as a war crime by human rights organizations. Tom Dannenbaum, co-director of the Center for International Law & Governance at the Fletcher School at Tufts University, wrote that the order "commands the starvation of civilians as a method of warfare, which is a violation of international humanitarian law and a war crime". Oxfam issued a statement that accused Israel of using starvation as a weapon of war, saying "International Humanitarian Law (IHL) strictly prohibits the use of starvation as a method of warfare and as the occupying power in Gaza, Israel is bound by IHL obligations to provide for the needs and protection of the population of Gaza". Geoffrey S. Corn, Chair of Criminal Law and Director of the Center for Military Law and Policy at Texas Tech University School of Law, and Sean Watts, professor in the Department of Law at the United States Military Academy at West Point, write that sieges are subject to the same laws of war as other military tactics such as distinction and proportionality. Watts previously wrote that Article 23 of the Fourth Geneva Convention "requires that parties to a conflict allow passage of a limited class of relief supplies for civilians...only if the parties are satisfied no advantage will result 'to the military efforts or economy of the enemy'", but that if the law is interpreted to allow "incidental" starvation of civilians proportional to anticipated military advantage, it "reduces the rule's humanitarian effect, perhaps to the vanishing point". Amnesty International called for an urgent investigation into Israel's mass detentions and the enforced disappearance of Palestinians in Gaza, noting that the disappearances and treatment of captives could amount to war crimes or crimes against humanity. A report co-authored by Francesca Albanese and Reem Alsalem, United Nations Special Rapporteurs, urged an inquiry into allegations of serious human rights violations against Palestinian women and girls in Gaza and the West Bank by Israeli forces. The allegations involve rape and sexual violence. The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights issued a press release on 19 February, citing those claims and referring to photos allegedly taken by Israeli troops showing female detainees in degrading circumstances posted online. In an interview, Alsalem described the allegations as based on "reasonably credible information" and cited Euro-Med Monitor as their source. The Jerusalem Post described the shock of retired brigadier general Amir Avivi when a senior US State Department official asserted that the UN had provided the Israeli government with evidence that the IDF "systematically" sexually abused Palestinian women. Avivi described himself as shaken that a US official would make a statement so "absolutely disconnected from reality". Subsequent allegations of Palestinian women raped by IDF troops in Al-Shifa hospital, which were published by Al-Jazeera and went viral on social media, were soon after revealed to be false, having been fabricated by a Palestinian woman who hoped to increase anger and fervor amongst her fellow Gazans. Al Jazeera removed the claims from parts of their website but it remains available on their liveblog.[undue weight? – discuss] Israel's adherence to the principles of discrimination and proportionality as required by the laws of war has been debated. Human Rights Watch has stated that the overall civilian death toll, and Israel's use of powerful weapons in Gaza's densely-populated neighbourhoods, raised "serious questions" about the legality of Israel's conduct. Human Rights Watch further argued that a higher proportion of casualties among women and children is indicative of a lack of proportionality, demonstrating what they describe as "a disregard toward Palestinian lives". Amnesty International accused Israel of war crimes in a report where it analyzed five incidents between 7 October and 12 October where the IDF targeted residential areas in Gaza. It found that in several cases the IDF struck targets with no evidence of military activity and that these attacks were "indiscriminate" in nature. Anonymous IDF officials cited in a report by +972 Magazine indicated a "loosening of constraints" in the rules of engagement, and that in numerous cases the IDF struck targets despite no evidence of military activity. The report claims that the rationale behind such attacks was "to harm Palestinian civil society" and, according to one source cited by the report, to "lead civilians to put pressure on Hamas". Experts cited by The Washington Post argue that certain Israeli airstrikes show that Israel has a tolerance for civilian casualties "orders of magnitude greater" than that of the US in its war against ISIS. United Nations officials and human rights groups have argued that Israel has not done enough to protect civilians. In March 2024, the United Nations said that more children were killed in Gaza in four months than in four years of worldwide wars. Philippe Lazzarini, head of the UN’s agency for Palestinian refugees, declared: "This war is a war on children". Emanuela-Chiara Gillard, an associate fellow at Chatham House, argued that, given the size and nature of the 7 October attacks, Israel has a right of self-defence that could include its stated military aim of destroying Hamas, which has threatened to repeat its assault and eradicate the state of Israel. According to The Economist, the law of armed conflict (LOAC) and international humanitarian law (IHL) grant Israel flexibility when it comes to taking military action against Hamas, but in its view, Israel's "definition of military targets is being stretched to breaking-point". Amichai Cohen, an Israeli lawyer, alleges that Israel does not deliberately target civilians but that Hamas's tactics make it hard to take action without affecting civilians. Jill Goldenziel, a professor at the United States National Defense University and Marine Corps University, states that if Israel conducted every strike legally and with utmost precision, civilian casualties in war would still remain, and the goal of a proportionality analysis is to decide whether they are excessive. Israeli security officials state that their proportionality criteria in this conflict are unchanged and that they receive legal advice in relation to strikes. Other Israeli officials, speaking anonymously, acknowledged that Israel has struck "private residences and public structures, like the Gaza Parliament and the Islamic University", which would not previously have been considered valuable enough to justify the risk to civilian life. Independent United Nations experts condemned the IDF's actions in Gaza, saying Israel had resorted to "indiscriminate military attacks" and "collective punishment". Israeli authorities said that the airstrikes are intended to degrade the military infrastructure that is frequently constructed in close proximity to residential areas and civilian establishments. They also denounced the "deliberate and widespread killing and hostage-taking of innocent civilians" by Hamas, calling them "heinous violations of international law and international crimes". Israel's forced evacuation of northern Gaza also drew international condemnation. On 13 October, Paula Gaviria Betancur, UN Special Rapporteur on the human rights of internally displaced persons, called it a "crime against humanity". On 14 October, Francesca Albanese, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the occupied Palestinian territories, characterized it as a "repeat of the 1948 Nakba", noting Israeli public officials' open advocacy for another Nakba. On 16 November, UN experts reported that "grave violations" committed by Israeli forces against the Palestinians of Gaza "point to a genocide in the making" and called on the international community to prevent this unfolding genocide. The OHCHR expressed concern regarding reports of "mass detentions, ill-treatment and enforced disappearances of possibly thousands of Palestinians" in the north of Gaza. On 23 February, the OHCHR stated that any transfer of weapons to Israel must be halted immediately as their use in Gaza is "likely to violate international humanitarian law". On 27 March, Albanese stated that there are "reasonable grounds" to believe that Israel is committing genocide in Gaza through the use of unlawful weaponry, the destruction of civilian infrastructure and man made starvation, which has been accompanied by "a pervasive anti-Palestinian narrative and dehumanization emanating from the uppermost tiers of Israeli society." According to UNRWA, its staff faced "torture, ill-treatment, abuse, and sexual exploitation" at the hands of Israeli authorities. The organization also accused Israel of extracting forced confessions from its staff of being involved with Hamas through torture. Over 100 landmarks have been destroyed or damaged by Israeli attacks in the Gaza Strip according to a report by Heritage for Peace group. The Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict, which was agreed to by both Palestinians and Israelis, protects sites of cultural heritage. The Great Mosque of Gaza was left with only the minaret standing while sites that have been damaged or destroyed include Rafah Museum, Al Qarara Cultural Museum, Rashad Shawa Cultural Center, Hamam al-Sammara, and Tell el-Ajjul. The Church of Saint Porphyrius, the third oldest church in the world, was damaged in an airstrike, as has the Saint Hilarion Monastery. The Byzantine Church of Jabalia, dating from the 5th century and restored in 2022, was destroyed. The destruction of Gaza City's public library and central archives have been compared to the 1992 attacks on the National and University Library of Bosnia and Herzegovina. All universities in the Gaza Strip were bombed by Israeli forces, including the destruction of Al-Israa University and its museum containing several thousand rare artefacts. By 20 January 2024, Israeli forces had desecrated at least sixteen cemeteries and had turned some into military outposts. Forensic Architecture noted that Israel had destroyed one of Gaza's most important archaeological sites, located near al-Shati refugee camp. Subsequent of destruction of a cemetery in Khan Unis, Israel said Hamas uses cemeteries to hide tunnels and that "digging up the tunnels involves unavoidable collateral damage to sacrosanct spaces". Israel also said it had damaged a cemetery in southern Gaza in a search for the bodies of hostages. Israeli soldiers posted videos of their looting Palestinian property on social media, with soldiers reporting that the practice was widespread and that commanders on the ground were largely allowing it to happen. The Military Advocate General wrote in a letter to IDF commanders that several incidents were under investigation, with some of the incidents potentially meriting criminal charges. On 24 October, UN Secretary-General António Guterres called for a ceasefire. This was followed by a United Nations General Assembly vote for a resolution calling for an immediate truce. It received 121 votes in favor and 44 abstentions; 14 countries voted no. On 24 October, US President Joe Biden stated, "We should have those hostages released and then we can talk", and said that a ceasefire would allow Hamas to attack Israel again. On 2 November 2023, Hamas chairman Ismail Haniyeh stated that if Israel agreed to a ceasefire and the opening of humanitarian corridors to bring more aid into Gaza, Hamas is "ready for political negotiations for a two-state solution with Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine". This followed the 1 November statement by Hamas official Ghazi Hamad that Hamas would repeat the 7 October attack time and again until Israel is annihilated. On 3 November, Benjamin Netanyahu stated Israel would not agree to a ceasefire unless Hamas releases all hostages. On 6 November, both Israel and Hamas rejected calls for a ceasefire. On 15 November, Hamas official Izzat al-Risheq stated Israel was "stalling to continue its aggression and war against defenceless civilians". A truce was in place between 24 November and 1 December 2023, during which Hamas released hostages and Israel released prisoners. By 13 December 2023, Israel and the United States were becoming increasingly isolated amid growing global calls for a ceasefire. In December, new negotiations mediated by Egypt led to proposals of a multi-phase plan that would see the release of hostages, withdrawal of Israeli forces from Gaza and creation of a technocratic Palestinian government. Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad rejected a permanent ceasefire offer which would have Hamas and the PIJ relinquish their control over Gaza and hold democratic elections. The ceasefire talks continued in Cairo in February and March 2024. The Israeli delegation said that the key issue was Hamas's refusal to hand over the list of hostages that are alive. The talks between Israel and Hamas on the release of hostages started almost immediately after the start of the war with Qatar and Egypt serving as mediators. The hostage negotiations were linked to ceasefire negotiations, with different factions in the Israeli government holding different positions. The Abducted and Missing Families Forum, an Israeli group representing the families of those taken hostage in Gaza, said that they supported a blanket release of all Palestinian prisoners in exchange for the return of all Israeli hostages held in Gaza. The leader of Hamas in the Gaza Strip, Yahya Sinwar, said the group was prepared to release all Israeli hostages in return for the release of all Palestinian prisoners. The IDF spokesman dismissed the report as "psychological terror cynically used by Hamas to create pressure". During the November 2023 prisoner exchange Israel released 240 Palestinian prisoners and Hamas released 105 civilians. On 8 October 2023, the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) held a closed-door meeting on the conflict, which concluded without a joint statement being agreed. The Council passed a resolution calling for a humanitarian pause on 15 November. Israel's ambassador to the UN called the resolution "disconnected from reality" and said Israel would "continue acting according to [international] law while the Hamas terrorists will not even read the resolution ... let alone abide by it". On 6 December, UN secretary-general António Guterres invoked Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations for the first time, which allows him to address matters that threaten "international peace and security" before the UN Security Council. Diplomats, concerned that Israel had no post-war plan and looking to limit the humanitarian crisis as well as any regional expansion of the war, urged delay of a full-scale land invasion of Gaza. Russia requested a UNSC vote on 15 October on a draft resolution calling for a humanitarian ceasefire. The Russian draft was rejected while negotiations continued on a Brazilian draft. On 18 October 2023, the US vetoed a UNSC resolution drafted by Brazil that "condemned the Hamas attack on Israel, called for humanitarian pauses in all attacks to allow the delivery of lifesaving aid to civilians, and called for Israel to withdraw its directive for civilians to evacuate the northern part of the Gaza Strip". The draft was supported by 12 of the 15 Council members; the UK and Russia abstained. Louis Charbonneau at Human Rights Watch said the US had again "cynically used their veto to prevent the UNSC from acting on Israel and Palestine at a time of unprecedented carnage". The US Ambassador to the UN, Linda Thomas-Greenfield, explained that the US wanted more time to let American on-the-ground diplomacy "play out", and criticized the text for failing to mention Israel's right to self-defense, in line with the UN Charter – a point echoed by UK Ambassador to the UN Barbara Woodward. Subsequently, on 25 October, China and Russia vetoed a US-drafted resolution, and a Russian drafted resolution was vetoed by the UK and US. Hamas issued a statement praising Russia and China's position and thanking all the countries who demanded an end to Israel's attacks on Gaza. On 15 November 2023, the UNSC passed a resolution focusing on the humanitarian situation, calling for the immediate release of all hostages held by Hamas and for humanitarian corridors to save and protect civilian lives. Malta drafted the resolution; twelve members voted in favor, none against and three abstained. The UK and US abstained; while they supported the emphasis on humanitarian relief, the resolution contained no explicit criticism of Hamas. Russia abstained because it did not call for an immediate ceasefire. The resolution followed a United Nations General Assembly Resolution calling for a cessation of hostilities on 27 October. On 8 December 2023, world leaders, Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch and UN officials criticized the US for its veto of another UNSC resolution calling for an immediate humanitarian ceasefire. The UK abstained, while the other 13 council members voted in favor. In response to the US veto, Egypt invoked Resolution 377A, which allows the UN General Assembly to address an issue threatening global security neglected by the UNSC. On 20 February 2024, the United States vetoed a UNSC resolution proposed by Algeria demanding "an immediate humanitarian ceasefire in Gaza", "immediate and unconditional release of all hostages" and "unhindered humanitarian access", supported by 13 council members including permanent members France, China, and Russia; the UK abstained. The US representative said, “Sometimes hard diplomacy takes more time ... [it is] the only path available towards a longer durable peace”; the Algerian representative emphasized that "silence is not a viable option". On 22 March 2024, the United States put forward a draft resolution which stated the "imperative" for "an immediate and sustained ceasefire", facilitating aid delivery and supporting ongoing talks between Israel and Hamas, linked to the release of hostages. It was vetoed by Russia and China with Algeria also voting against. The resolution was supported by 11 other council members; Guyana abstained. A key point of criticism was the draft's unusual language – Russia and China said it was not a straightforward "call" or "demand" to halt hostilities, and implied the ceasefire would be conditional on a release of all hostages. Critics argued this would leave innocent civilians exposed to continued Israeli attacks until such time as Hamas and Israel agreed a hostage deal. Another point of criticism was that the final draft no longer contained clear opposition to a ground offensive in Rafah. While the original draft said Israel's offensive in Rafah "should not proceed under current circumstances", the version presented for the vote only expressed concern that a ground offensive into Rafah "would result in further harm to civilians and their further displacement, potentially into neighboring countries, and would have serious implications for regional peace and security." China criticised this backtracking, saying it "would send an utterly wrong signal and lead to severe consequences." On 25 March 2024, UNSC resolution 2728 sponsored by Algeria passed demanding an immediate ceasefire and the unconditional release of hostages for the month of Ramadan. The resolution passed with 14 votes in favor and the United States abstaining. US ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield stated that the US abstained from the vote since “We did not agree with everything with the resolution ... Certain key edits were ignored, including our request to add a condemnation of Hamas” and stated that the release of captives will lead to the increase in humanitarian aid. Amar Bendjama, the representative of Algeria was quoted saying “Finally, the Security Council is shouldering its responsibility ... The bloodbath has continued for far too long.” On the afternoon of Israel's 31 October airstrike on the Jabalia refugee camp, Bolivia severed all diplomatic ties with Israel, with ambassador recalls by Chile, Colombia, Jordan, Bahrain, Honduras, Turkey, Chad, South Africa, and Belize following over the next two weeks. Bolivia's minister of the presidency demanded an end to the attacks on Gaza, Chilean President Gabriel Boric cited Israel's "collective punishment of the Palestinian civilian population", and Colombian President Gustavo Petro cited the "massacre of the Palestinian people". Jordan's Foreign Minister cited an "unprecedented humanitarian catastrophe" and condemned the "Israeli war that is killing innocent people in Gaza". Bahrain's National Assembly additionally cut off all economic relations, citing a "solid and historical stance that supports the Palestinian cause and the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people". This decision does not appear to have been implemented. Honduras' Minister of Foreign Affairs cited Israel's violations of international humanitarian law. Turkey cited "the unfolding humanitarian tragedy in Gaza caused by the continuing attacks by Israel against civilians, and Israel's refusal (to accept) a ceasefire". Turkey was criticized for still maintaining economic and military relations with Israel. Chad cited the "unprecedented tide of deadly violence". South Africa recalled its entire diplomatic mission and criticized Israel's ambassador for disparaging those "opposing the atrocities and genocide of the Israeli government". Belize suspended diplomatic relations with Israel, citing the "unceasing, indiscriminate bombing in Gaza" and its violations of international humanitarian law. Both Jordan and Egypt have rejected the idea of hosting Palestinian refugees fleeing from Gaza, with King Abdullah II of Jordan warning against pushing Palestinians to seek refuge in Jordan, and emphasizing the need to address the humanitarian situation within Gaza and the West Bank. Both countries have expressed serious concern that Israel may seek to permanently expel Palestinians, a statement that Israel disputes. On 2 November, however, Egypt said it will help around 7,000 foreigners and Palestinians with dual-nationalities through the Rafah Border Crossing. Scotland's First Minister Humza Yousaf who has family in Gaza, urged the international community to establish a refugee program for those fleeing violence in Gaza and said that Scotland was ready to offer sanctuary to refugees arriving in the UK. European countries are wary of a refugee influx due to recent pro-Palestinian protests. In the United States, Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez suggested that the problem of refugees be solved by "the region's partners", but emphasized the "historical role" of the US in accepting refugees, while Representative Jamaal Bowman said that the US should welcome refugees who are not affiliated with Hamas. Both former president Donald Trump and Florida governor Ron DeSantis voiced their opposition to accepting any Palestinian refugees. Significant geopolitical divisions emerged. Much of the Western world provided "strong" support to Israel militarily and diplomatically, including the United States, United Kingdom, and Germany although the strong support is "at odds with the attitudes of Western publics which continue to shift away from Israel", according to Hugh Lovatt, a senior policy fellow with the Middle East and North Africa Programme at the European Council on Foreign Relations. Lovatt says that during the Cold War, Israel sided with the West against the Arab countries supported by the Soviets, and western leaders generally see Israel "as a fellow member of the liberal democratic club" and that this partially "explains the continued strong Western support for Israel – which has now largely become reflexive". In contrast, the Islamic world and much of the Global South denounced the actions of Israel and its allies, criticizing the "moral authority of the West" and alleging that it holds double standards surrounding human rights. The double standards, in their view, is condemning an illegal occupation in Ukraine while standing firmly behind Israel that has occupied Palestinian lands. The United States, United Kingdom, and Germany have supplied Israel with substantial military and medical aid. A public opinion poll conducted on 23–28 October by the polling company iPanel in collaboration with Tel Aviv University found that 57.5% of Israeli Jews believed the IDF was using "too little" firepower in Gaza, while 36.6% thought the amount of firepower was "appropriate", 4.2% were not sure, and only 1.8% thought the IDF was using "too much" firepower. In contrast, 50.5% of Israeli Arabs believed that the IDF was using "too much" firepower in Gaza. According to a survey by the Israel Democracy Institute, only 10% of Israeli Jews would support a pause in the war in Gaza to allow an exchange of Israeli hostages. A public opinion poll conducted in December 2023 by the Israel Democracy Institute found that 87% of Jewish Israelis supported the war in Gaza. 75% of Jewish Israelis rejected the Biden administration's calls to change the IDF's strategy to one that "reduces the heavy bombing of densely populated areas." According to a survey carried out by the Hebrew University on 7–9 December on the post-war handling of Gaza, 56% of Israelis opposed the annexation of Gaza with 33% in favor. When questioned on who should administer Gaza in the immediate post-war period, 23% supported a coalition of moderate Arab states, 22% Israeli military rule, 18% an international force, 18% Israeli annexation and 11% the Palestinian Authority. The Direct Polls survey found that 83% of Israelis supported encouraging the voluntary emigration of residents of the Gaza Strip. According to a poll published by the Israel Democracy Institute, 91% of Israeli Jews and 24% of Israeli Arabs believe that the IDF is making an effort to follow international law. Around 170 Palestinian citizens of Israel were arrested for posts supporting Palestinians in Gaza, which featured quoting Quran verses, "prayers for the people of Gaza, and political analysis of Israeli military operations". Between 1 October and 1 November, the number of Palestinians held in administrative detention, without charge or trial, rose from 1,319 to 2,070. Prisoners have been subject to torture and at least four prisoners have died in Israeli custody. The ethics panel of the Knesset voted to suspend politician Ofer Cassif for 45 days over anti-Israel statements in interviews he made after the war broke out. Following a rally in support of Gaza in Haifa, police commissioner Kobi Shabtai threatened to send antiwar protesters to the Gaza Strip. As of 18 October 63 people have been arrested in Israel on suspicion of supporting or inciting "terror" since the start of the conflict, according to Israeli police. Amidst the escalating violence, Magen David Adom initiated a blood donation drive and the Education Ministry closed schools on 7 October, transitioning to online learning from 15 October. Various events and performances were cancelled or postponed including the Haifa International Film Festival, a Bruno Mars concert, and football matches scheduled by UEFA. The Israeli energy ministry ordered Chevron to temporarily shut down the offshore Tamar gas field. Following a significant drop in the value of the New Israeli Shekel, the Bank of Israel announced that it would sell up to $30 billion in foreign reserves in its first ever sale of foreign exchange. On 11 October, an emergency unity government was formally announced between Likud and National Unity following a joint statement from the latter party, with Benny Gantz, a former defence minister and military chief of staff, joining a war cabinet also consisting of Netanyahu as Prime Minister and Yoav Gallant as Defence Minister. The statement said the unity government would not promote any policy or laws except those related to the ongoing fighting with Hamas. It significantly reduces the influence of Netanyahu's previous far-right coalition partners over the conduct of the war, which was one of Gantz's demands. Haaretz reported that former IDF chief of staff Gadi Eizenkot and Strategic Affairs Minister Ron Dermer would join the war cabinet as observers. On 29 October, Netanyahu blamed security chiefs for Hamas's attack in a post on X (formerly Twitter); this was later deleted following criticism. Prior to the war, Hamas was deeply unpopular in Gaza, with 52 percent of Palestinians stating they had no trust at all in the organization. Hamas was even more unpopular in the West Bank, with only around twelve percent support. During the war and Israel's bombardment of Gaza, Hamas's popularity among Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank increased, while Palestinian support for peaceful coexistence with Israel declined significantly. According to a survey of 668 respondents carried out by Palestinian research firm AWRAD in the beginning of November 2023, 47 percent of Gazans strongly supported the 7 October attack. The overwhelming majority of Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank said they would never forget or forgive Israel's behavior in Gaza during the war. Another survey released on 13 December found that 57% of respondents in the Gaza Strip and 82% in the West Bank believed Hamas was correct in launching the 7 October attack, while only 10% said they believed Hamas committed war crimes during the conflict. The survey also found that nearly 60% of respondents in the Palestinian territories agreed with the dissolution of the Palestinian Authority, while 88% supported the resignation of president Mahmoud Abbas. In response to a critical social media video, Hamas issued a public statement warning against the publication of "any pictures, videos or materials that are offensive to the image of the steadfastness and unity of our people in Gaza". Among Gaza residents to criticize Hamas' actions and their outcome, journalist Muhammad Mansour said: "May Allah curse you, Hamas leadership. Sinwar, you are the offspring of a despicable creature. Allah will avenge the destruction you have inflicted upon us". In early November, hundreds of people at a UN shelter in Gaza city shouted insults against Hamas and cried out that they wanted the war to end, in reaction to Hamas rocket launches at Israel. A spokesman for a Hamas ministry was interrupted during a televised speech by a man with a wounded hand shouting: "May God hold you to account, Hamas!" On Al Jazeera, an elderly woman complained that "aid does not reach the nation and the entire people; Everything goes to their houses; they take it, they will even shoot me and do whatever they want to me." The Wall Street Journal reported on 21 December that since 7 October, "quiet criticism has begun spreading" against Hamas, with Gazans "blaming the militants for having provoked Israel's wrath and for their inability to shield the population from a devastating war and a humanitarian crisis that deepens by the day". The Journal said that such opposition was unlikely to break out into the open, but that the "simmering opposition raises questions about the group's long-term hold over the strip". Reactions in Gaza ranged from anger at the international community's response to fear. The territory faced numerous major crises. The Israeli blockade caused significant difficulties, including a lack of food, medicine, and water. A pediatrics doctor at Kamal Edwan Hospital described the situation in Gaza as "really dangerous", stating that, as a result of Israel's denial of clean water, babies in his ward were experiencing vomiting, diarrhea, and fever. Schools in the Gaza Strip were closed until further notice. Yahya al-Sarraj, the mayor of Gaza City, commented that the Israeli siege was a violation of international law and urged the international community to "support the victims". Initially, Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas asserted the Palestinians' right to self-defense against the "terror of settlers and occupation troops" and condemned the orders by Israel for residents to evacuate north Gaza, labeling it a "second Nakba". Later, Abbas rejected the killing of civilians on both sides, and said that the Palestinian Liberation Organization was the sole representative of the Palestinians. Following the attack, celebrations occurred in Nablus. France 24 reported "Hamas called on "resistance fighters in the West Bank" to join the battle. Neighborhood watches were established in 50 locations amid fears of reprisals by Israeli settlers, while a general strike was called for 8 October. Seven Palestinians were killed in clashes with Israeli forces on 7 October, while 126 others were injured. As of 19 October, Al Jazeera reported that 76 Palestinians were killed in the West Bank and Jerusalem, eight of them by armed Israeli settlers; the Palestinian Health Ministry said that 61 people have been killed and 1,250 injured in the West Bank. The Palestinian Prisoners Club said that 850 Palestinians, including lawmakers, prominent figures, journalists, and former detainees have been arrested by Israeli authorities since the start of the war. In contrast to previous Palestinian–Israeli wars, as many Arab governments such as Egypt and Jordan had strongly negative views on Hamas, they restrained their official reactions to neutral press statements. Public reaction in the Arab world was much more positive towards Hamas, being strongly influenced by Hamas-produced social media videos that were viewed millions of times. The Al-Ahli Arab Hospital explosion, originally blamed on an Israeli airstrike, further damaged diplomatic relations between Israel and Arab states keen to avoid antagonizing their public. Whereas Al Jazeera, owned by the government of Qatar, gave airtime to Hamas officials, news channels in the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia, such as Al Arabiya and Sky News Arabia, interviewed mainly Arabic-speaking Jews. News anchors in these countries did not refer to the IDF as an "occupation army", and referred to Palestinian casualties as "victims" rather than "martyrs"; however, as the war progressed, these channels increasingly adopted an anti-Israel and pro-Hamas stance. Many in Lebanon, Syria and Egypt also fear that they may unwillingly be drawn into the conflict through the actions of Hezbollah and Iran. In Egypt, populist pro-government talk show hosts opined against Hamas, asking why Egyptians should suffer to help Palestinians. Egypt, despite having being pressed by the United States, refused to accept refugees from Gaza. A joint Islamic-Arab summit in Riyadh on 11 November 2023 called for the International Criminal Court to investigate "war crimes and crimes against humanity that Israel is committing" in the Palestinian territories and for an immediate end to the fighting in Gaza. The summit was attended by dozens of leaders including Iranian President Ebrahim Raisi, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Qatar's Emir Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani and Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, who had been welcomed back into the Arab League earlier in 2023. Prince Mohammed bin Salman expressed "condemnation and categorical rejection of this barbaric war against our brothers in Palestine". Many across the Middle East, particularly among the younger population, have been boycotting US brands for perceived complicity in the destruction in Gaza since the start of the war. Hezbollah denied knowledge of the attacks and warned the United States not to invade Lebanon, saying that they were prepared to face the US military. In a speech on 3 November, Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah said Americans had threatened to bomb Iran, and emphasized that Hezbollah had entered the war the day after Hamas's attack and that it would not stop its ongoing skirmishes with Israel. He stated that the United States was fully responsible for the current war against Gaza and its people, and that Israel was merely the "instrument of execution". He also said that anyone who wants to prevent a regional war must immediately stop the aggression against Gaza. Iran has praised the attack while being cautious to distance itself from its planning and execution. Hamas spokesman Ghazi Hamad told the BBC that Hamas had direct backing for the attack from Iran; European, Iranian and Syrian officers corroborated Iran's involvement, while senior Hamas official Mahmoud Mirdawi said the group planned the attacks on its own. The Israeli army and the United States say that there is no evidence that Iran is connected with the attack by Hamas. American intelligence appeared to show that Hamas's attack on Israel caught Iranian authorities by surprise. According to a report by Al-Monitor, since the start of the war between Israel and the Gaza militias, Iran has tried to show a face of disinterest in the spillover of the conflict, and on the other hand, it has pursued an active diplomatic campaign to isolate Israel. Supporting the cause of Palestine has been one of the ideological principles of Iran's Shia Islamic theocracy after the 1979 revolution, with Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the first supreme leader of Iran, announcing the last Friday of every Ramadan as "Quds Day" and inviting all the Muslims of the world to express solidarity with the legitimate rights of the Palestinian Muslim people. The Iranian government opened an account for people to deliver charitable aid. It also opened a website and reported that more than six million volunteered to fight. Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei threatened that Islamic resistance was going to become unstoppable should the war continue. His spokesperson later said that the 2015 Iran nuclear deal would have delayed it but Israel would have collapsed within five years. Khamenei pointed to foreign visits to Israel and said that the fall of Israel was imminent. On 1 November, the Iranian government criminalized expressions of support for Israel and making contact with its people. That same day, Khamenei called on Muslim states to impose a food and fuel blockade on Israel. Khamenei however conveyed to Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh that Iran would not directly intervene in the conflict with Israel, citing lack of prior warning about the 7 October attack. Despite this, Iran pledged to continue providing political and moral support to Hamas, urging restraint against calls for direct involvement by Iran and its ally Hezbollah. The IRGC's Quds Force promised it would continue supporting Hamas, while the IRGC's commander General Hossein Salami said that the war would bring about a political and economic decline of the US. Polling has indicated a divide between government policy on the Israel–Hamas war and the views of the general public. A November 2023 poll had 68% of Americans agreeing with a statement that "Israel should call a ceasefire and try to negotiate". 43% opposed military aid to Israel and 39% said that the U.S. should be a neutral mediator. A February 2024 Associated Press poll found that 44% saw Israel as "a partner that the U.S. should cooperate with, but doesn't share its interests and values", while 35% saw Israel "as an ally that shares U.S. interests and values". 50% of Americans believed Israel had "gone too far" in its response, 31% thought Israel had "been about right" and 15% thought Israel had "not gone far enough". Young Americans have been significantly less supportive of Israel than older generations. On 25 February 2024, Aaron Bushnell, a 25-year-old serviceman of the United States Air Force, fatally self-immolated outside the front gate of the Embassy of Israel in Washington, D.C. in protest of the ongoing US support of the war. Hours after Hamas's attack, US President Biden promised "rock-solid and unwavering" support to Israel and called Hamas's attack "unadulterated evil", comparing the group to ISIS. Biden said the attack on Israel was intended in part to scuttle an Israel-Saudi Arabia normalization agreement. To replenish Israel's stockpiles, the US said it would send Iron Dome missiles, small bombs, and JDAM conversion kits, in addition to fulfilling previous contracts to deliver F-35 fighter jets, CH-53 helicopters, and KC-46 air refueling tankers. Biden also called on Congress to pass $14.3 billion in emergency military aid to Israel. Details of weapons sent to Israel, which have been arriving daily, have been kept secret. Leaked details have shown that the US has sent laser-guided missiles, 155mm shells, new army vehicles, among others, at Israel's request. Early in the war, the Pentagon said it would impose no limits on Israel's use of American weapons. A United States Navy carrier strike group, including the aircraft carriers USS Gerald R. Ford and USS Dwight D. Eisenhower, deployed to the Eastern Mediterranean after the Hamas attack, reportedly to deter other actors from entering the conflict. In mid-October, 2,000 US troops were also prepared for possible deployment to Israel. US officials said the Biden administration advised Israel to delay its October ground invasion of the Gaza Strip to allow more time for hostage negotiations. Foreign Policy reported on a "groundswell of opposition" among US diplomats and national security officials, against what they saw as Biden's "blank check" for the Israeli counterattack. In early November, "more than 630 employees" of the US Agency for International Development signed a letter calling for an "immediate ceasefire". The House of Representatives on 5 December passed a resolution that included language that said the House "clearly and firmly states that anti-Zionism is antisemitism" and which condemned the slogan "From the river to the sea". As the war went on, the US government became more critical of Israel and their relations became strained. US Vice-President Kamala Harris said on 2 December that "too many innocent Palestinians have been killed" and that "international humanitarian law must be respected". She said that at the end of the conflict there must be "No forcible displacement, no reoccupation, no siege or blockade, no reduction in territory, and no use of Gaza as a platform for terrorism". Ten days later, US President Biden warned that Israel was losing international support because of its "indiscriminate bombing" of Gaza. Biden criticized Israel's war cabinet and called on Netanyahu to replace it. In February 2024, Biden called Israel's actions in Gaza "over the top", and issued a national security directive requiring written assurances from Israel (and other countries) that it was using US-supplied weapons in line with international law. On 4 March, US Vice-President Harris called for "an immediate ceasefire" because of "the immense scale of suffering in Gaza". She said Israel must let more aid into Gaza and was imposing "unnecessary restrictions". In a speech on 14 March, the US Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer, berated Israeli PM Netanyahu as an "obstacle to peace". He said that Netanyahu "has been too willing to tolerate the civilian toll in Gaza" and that "Israel cannot survive if it becomes a pariah". Schumer called for new Israeli elections. President Biden praised the speech and said Schumer's "serious concerns" are shared by many Americans. Mounting criticism of Israel's actions has not led to a change in US policy regarding the sale of weapons to Israel. As of March 2024, Washington has approved more than 100 military sales to Israel. The Biden administration has bypassed congressional and public scrutiny by separating arms transfers into sales below the dollar amount where an official public notification is required. On 29 March the Washington Post reported that the US approved billions of dollars in additional weapons transfers. On 25 October, UN Secretary-General António Guterres called for a ceasefire, during a speech in which he stated that the attacks by Hamas "did not happen in a vacuum" and needed to be understood in the context of 56 years of Israel's "suffocating occupation" of Palestinians, further stating, "the grievances of the Palestinian people cannot justify the appalling attacks by Hamas. And those appalling attacks cannot justify the collective punishment of the Palestinian people." Israel responded by saying it would ban UN representatives from Israel to "teach them a lesson", and called for the Secretary-General's resignation. The Secretary-General rejected the Israeli accusations. On 27 October, the United Nations General Assembly passed Resolution ES-10/21 calling for an immediate and sustained humanitarian truce and cessation of hostilities and condemned "all acts of violence against Palestinian and Israeli civilians, including all acts of terror and indiscriminate attacks", adopted by a vote of 121 states to 14, with 44 abstentions. In remarks to the Security Council, UN Secretary-General Guterres expressed deep concern at "clear violations of international humanitarian law" in Gaza and also said, "It is important to also recognise the attacks by Hamas did not happen in a vacuum. The Palestinian people have been subjected to 56 years of suffocating occupation", leading the Israeli ambassador Gilad Erdan to call for Guterres's resignation. Following this, Guterres said that he was "shocked by the misrepresentations" of his statement, pointing out he had also said "... the grievances of the Palestinian people cannot justify the appalling attacks by Hamas". On 12 December, the UN General Assembly voted to demand "immediate humanitarian ceasefire". The resolution passed overwhelmingly with 153 votes for, 23 neutral and 10 against. On 26 March, the UN Security council adopted a resolution demanding a ceasefire between Israel and Hamas and the release of hostages. Under Chapter V, Article 25, of the UN Charter, the resolution is binding, however, UN spokesperson Farhan Haq stated that "Ultimately, implementation is a question of international will." International leaders from Argentina, India, Philippines, the United States, and European countries condemned the attacks by Hamas. They expressed solidarity with Israel, affirmed Israel's right to defend itself from armed attacks, and described Hamas's tactics as terrorism. South Korea condemned Hamas and called the attack "indiscriminate", expressing worries that despite missile interceptor defense systems it would remain vulnerable if North Korea attempted a similar attack on South Korea. Most Latin American governments condemned Hamas's attacks in Israel, while some, such as Colombia, also expressed solidarity with Palestinians. The European Union announced it would review aid to Palestinian authorities to ensure the aid was not funding terrorism, and subsequently announced that immediate humanitarian aid to Gaza would be tripled. Austria, Germany, and Sweden suspended development aid to Palestine in response to Hamas's attack and said that they would review other projects and aid given. Germany sent two Heron TP drones to Israel. On 8 November 2023, the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs announced that the German government had authorized a tenfold increase in arms exports to Israel; the export of military equipment to Israel would be treated and approved as a priority. Exports worth around 32 million euros in all of 2022 rose to almost 303 million euros in 2023, most of which was authorized after the start of the war. Heads of the World Uyghur Congress and the Uyghur Human Rights Project condemned Hamas while East Turkistan Government-in-Exile minister Salih Hudayar declared support for Israel. Croatia's president Zoran Milanović publicly stated that Israel had lost his sympathy due to its humanitarian crimes and "reprisal actions" in Gaza. Colombian president Gustavo Petro likened IDF attacks against Palestinians to Nazis and asked the Israeli ambassador to "apologize and leave the country". Spain's deputy prime minister Yolanda Díaz called on the international community to put pressure on Israel to stop what she called a massacre in Gaza. On multiple occasions, Pope Francis referred to Israel's actions in Gaza as "terror" and "terrorism". Responses from African governments varied, showing division about the source of the conflict and who is to blame. However, most expressed grief and deep concerns about the outbreak of violence, with condemnations of attacks against civilians and calls for restraint and de-escalation to prevent further loss of Israeli and Palestinian lives. As many as 20,000 Thai workers (around half of Israel's migrant work force) live all over Israel, including areas close to Gaza. Thailand's Ministry of Foreign Affairs said their stance towards "the deadly Hamas-led attack against Israel is one of neutrality, and the Kingdom promotes a solution that would allow Palestine and Israel to coexist". Queen Rania of Jordan said leaders of Western countries had double standards and were "complicit" in civilian suffering in Gaza. A summit in Amman hosted by King Abdullah II that was also to be attended by leaders of the Palestinian Authority, US and Egypt was cancelled by Jordan on 18 October, in response to the Al-Ahli Arab Hospital explosion. On the same day, China said Palestinians had been forced to move south because of Israel's evacuation order "only to suffer from air strikes in the south as well" and called the hospital explosion a "heinous attack" while Russia labeled the explosion as a war crime, saying that the US was ultimately responsible. On 31 October, Bolivia severed diplomatic relations with Israel due to what the deputy foreign minister called "the aggressive and disproportionate Israeli military offensive". Several other countries followed suit in severing relations with Israel. South Africa, Bangladesh, Bolivia, Comoros and Djibouti submitted a referral to the International Criminal Court asking for an investigation into possible war crimes by Israel in the Palestinian territories. Brazil announced a rescue operation of nationals using an air force transport aircraft. Poland announced that it would deploy two C-130 transport planes to evacuate 200 of its nationals from Ben-Gurion airport. Hungary evacuated 215 of its nationals from Israel using two aircraft on 9 October, while Romania evacuated 245 of its citizens, including two pilgrimage groups, on two TAROM planes and two private aircraft on the same day. Australia also announced repatriation flights. 300 Nigerian pilgrims in Israel fled to Jordan before being airlifted home. On 12 October, the United Kingdom arranged flights for its citizens in Israel; the first plane departed Ben Gurion Airport that day. The government had said before that it would not be evacuating its nationals due to available commercial flights. However, most commercial were suspended. Nepal arranged a flight to evacuate at least 254 of its citizens who were studying in Israel. India launched Operation Ajay to evacuate its citizens from Israel. Ukraine has facilitated the evacuation of around 450 of its citizens from Israel as of 18 October, with additional evacuation flights in the planning for the near future. According to Daniel Byman and Alexander Palmer, the attack showcased the decline of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and the rise of Hamas as a power center in Palestinian politics. They predicted the PLO's further decline if the status quo held. Laith Alajlouni wrote that the immediate effect of the Hamas offensive was to unite Hamas and PLO. However it may soon lead to conflict between them, possibly leading the PLO losing control of the security situation in the West Bank, if more militant groups there begin to launch their own independent attacks. Political journalist Peter Beaumont described the attack as "an intelligence failure for the ages" on the part of the Israeli government. The Jewish News Syndicate deemed it a "failure of imagination". A BBC report on the intelligence failure commented that "it must have taken extraordinary levels of operational security by Hamas". US officials expressed shock at how Israeli intelligence appeared to be unaware of any preparations by Hamas. Israeli officials later anonymously reported to Axios that the IDF and Shin Bet had detected abnormal movements by Hamas the day before the attack, but decided to wait for additional intelligence before raising the military's alert level. They also did not inform political leaders of the intelligence reports. Amit Segal, chief political commentator for Israel's Channel 12, said that the conflict would test Benjamin Netanyahu's survival as prime minister, noting that past wars had toppled the governments of several of his predecessors such as that of Golda Meir following the 1973 Yom Kippur War, Menachem Begin following the 1982 Lebanon War, and Ehud Olmert following the 2006 Lebanon War. Prior to the formation of an emergency unity government on 11 October, Politico described the then-potential move as Netanyahu's opportunity to correct his course and save his political legacy. Citing the Israeli intelligence failure, which some observers attributed to the incumbent government focusing more on internal dissent, the judicial reform, and efforts to deepen Israel's occupation of the Palestinian territories, some commentators criticized Netanyahu for putting aside the PLO and propping up Hamas, and described him as a liability. In an analysis by The Times of Israel, the newspaper wrote, "Hamas has violently shifted the world's eyes back to the Palestinians and dealt a severe blow to the momentum for securing a landmark US-brokered deal between Israel and Saudi Arabia." Andreas Kluth wrote in his Bloomberg News column that Hamas "torched Biden's deal to remake the Middle East", arguing that the deal that was being discussed between Saudi Arabia, Israel and the United States would have left Palestinians in the cold, so the group decided to "blow the whole thing up". He added that, viewed from Gaza, things were only going to get worse, considering that Netanyahu's coalition partners opposed a two-state solution for the conflict. He suggested they would prefer to annex the entirety of the West Bank, even at the expense of turning Israel into an apartheid state. On 9 November, the Bank of Israel reported that the drop in labor supply caused by the war was costing the Israeli economy $600 million a week, or 6% of weekly GDP. The bank also stated that the estimate does not reflect total damage and did not include damages caused by the absence of Palestinian and foreign workers. In the final quarter of 2023, the Israeli economy shrank by 5.2% quarter-to-quarter due to labour shortages in construction and from the mobilization of 300,000 reservists. While Israel did still see economic growth of 2%, this was down from 6.5% growth in the year before the war. Further consequences of the war were that consumer spending declined 27%, imports declined by 42% and exports were reported to decline by 18%. Israel's high-tech factories reported on 25 December that they had been having trouble with electronic imports from China due to recent bureaucratic obstacles, leading to higher import costs and delayed delivery times. Israeli officials also reported that China had refused to send workers to their country during the war against the backdrop of a worker shortage in Israel's construction and farming sectors. China's actions were described as a de facto sanction. The Water Transport Workers Federation of India, a trade union representing 11 major Indian ports and 3,500 workers, said it would refuse to operate shipments carrying weapons to Israel. The declaration came a few months after one Indian company halted production of Israeli police uniforms due to the war in Gaza. Over 750 journalists signed an open letter condemning "Israel's killing of reporters in Gaza and criticizing Western media's coverage of the war". The letter said newsrooms are "accountable for dehumanizing rhetoric that has served to justify ethnic cleansing of Palestinians". Signers of the letter were criticized for potentially impeding their organizations' ability to gather news, and could face management backlash, Semafor reported that Los Angeles Times journalists who signed the letter were barred from covering the Gaza war "in any way" for at least three months. On 13 November 11 international news organizations sent a letter to Israel and Egypt, asking for access to the Gaza Strip to cover the war. CBS reported on 14 December a statement of the International Federation of Journalists noting that "the number of journalists killed in the past two months in the war in Gaza has surpassed the amount killed in the Vietnam War, which lasted two decades". More than 50 Palestinian journalists lost their lives. Various dangerous facts such as airstrikes, but also starvation due to lack of food, risks linking for having no clean water available and shelter made that "Palestine is one of the most dangerous places for a journalist to do their job". Reporters Without Borders filed a complaint with the International Criminal Court, under section 8.2.b of the Rome Statute accusing Israel of committing war crimes against 8 journalists. It also lodged a complaint against Hamas, under section 8.2.a of the Rome Statute for the killing of a reporter covering the 7 October attack. The Committee to Protect Journalists has accused Israel of targeting journalists reporting from Gaza and their families, saying that in at least two cases, "journalists reported receiving threats from Israeli officials and Israel Defense Forces officers before their family members were killed". In the aftermath of the initial Hamas assault, witnesses from the IDF and the Israeli organization ZAKA reported on various media outlets that they had seen bodies of beheaded infants and children at the site of the Kfar Aza massacre. This claim was repeated by the US President Biden and by Secretary of State Blinken with the White House subsequently saying that the President was referring to the reports of beheadings. However, these stories were later found to be untrue or unverified. In reality, only two babies were known to have died on 7 October, one from a bullet and the other due to complications after birth. Foreign media such as CNN, ABC, NBC, The New York Times, and Fox News, have limited access to Gaza only in the presence of Israeli soldiers. Vox reported that the news organizations "have to submit all materials and footage to the IDF for review before publication". On 20 December, Human Rights Watch issued a 51-page report documenting Meta's pattern of removal and suppression of speech on Facebook and Instagram including peaceful expression in support of Palestine and public debate about Palestinian human rights. 2020s in military history Iron Sword War Memorial Day List of modern conflicts in the Middle East List of engagements during the Israel–Hamas war List of wars involving Israel List of wars involving the State of Palestine List of wars: 2003–present Outline of the Israel–Hamas war Timeline of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict in 2023 Timeline of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict in 2024 In the Gaza Strip, smaller Palestinian groups fighting in the war include: Palestinian Freedom Movement (Al-Ansar Brigades), Palestinian Mujahideen Movement Jaysh al-Ummah, and various minor al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades splinter groups (several of which possibly rejoined the al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades just before the war). Furthermore, a number of Palestinian militant groups in the West Bank have involved themselves in the conflict, including: Lions' Den, and various al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades sub-groups such as Hornets' Nest, Jenin Battalion, Qalqilya Battalion, etc. Including 169,500 active personnel and 360,000 reservists Per the UN Per Gaza Health Ministry, the total number of deaths are 32,845 including: 13,790+ children 9,100+ women 1,049 elderly 364 paramedics and medical staff 152 UN staff 200+ journalists Per Israel: 13,000–19,500 civilians (as of 10 March 2024) 13,000+ Hamas fighters (as of 29 February 2024) Per US intelligence: 5,000-9,000 militants (as of 21 January 2024) Per Hamas: ~6,000 Hamas fighters (as of 19 February 2024) 75% women and children 70% women and children Per Israel Per Palestinian Authority Including: 115 children Per Hezbollah, Lebanon and Israel Including a Canadian, Australian and Syrian national Including: 213 Hezbollah fighters (including 2 Saraya personnel) 32 Palestinian fighters 3 Islamic Azz Brigade fighters 6 Amal Movement fighters 3 Islamic Group fighters 1 Eagles of the Whirlwind fighters 1 Lebanese Army soldier 63 civilians Per Syrian Observatory for Human Rights Including: 75 Iran-backed militiamen 52 Syrian soldiers 41 Hezbollah fighters 27 IRGC soldiers 6 unidentified fighters 2 Palestinian Islamic Jihad fighters 15 civilians Including: 695 Israelis, 4 Gazans and 71 foreign citizens on October 7 32 hostages in Gaza 8 on the Lebanese border 4 in Jerusalem 2 near Kiryat Malakhi 2 in Eli 1 in Ra'anana 1 in Ma'ale Adumim Including: 600 soldiers 62 Israel Police officers 10 Shin Bet personnel Including: <133 soldiers 120+ civilians 32 children 52 foreign or dual nationals 112 released or rescued 44 subsequently killed 11 bodies recovered 70 killed by Israeli airstrikes according to Hamas 101 living captives and hostages and 33 dead bodies still held 4 held prior to October 7: Mengistu, Al-Sayed, Shaul and Goldin Per the UN Including Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, and the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine. It is unclear how many of them were killed by friendly fire or as a result of the Hannibal Directive. Per Israeli sources cited by Israeli website Ynet, there was an "immense and complex quantity" of friendly-fire incidents during the 7 October attack. These casualty numbers exclude the invading Palestinian militants who died in the subsequent fighting with Israeli armed personnel. Sources that say Hamas calls for Israel's destruction cite the 1988 Hamas charter, while sources that say Hamas has accepted the 1967 borders cite the 2017 Hamas charter, 2005 Palestinian Cairo Declaration and 2006 Palestinian Prisoners' Document. At the same time the vote was being held at the United Nations headquarters in New York, Israeli airstrikes killed dozens of Palestinians in Gaza. Francesca Albanese, Pedro Arrojo-Agudo, Balakrishnan Rajagopal [de], Aua Baldé, Gabriella Citroni, Angkhana Neelapaijit, Grażyna Baranowska, Ana Lorena Delgadillo Pérez, Reem Alsalem, Mama Fatima Singhateh, Morris Tidball-Binz [de], Ian Fry [de], Javaid Rehman, Siobhán Mullally [de], Ashwini K. P. [de], Tomoya Obokata, Fernand de Varennes [de], Michael Fakhri, Irene Khan, Mary Lawlor, Dorothy Estrada-Tanck [de], Ivana Radačić [hr], Elizabeth Broderick, Meskerem Geset Techane, Melissa Upreti, Farida Shaheed, Mohamed Abdelsalam Babiker [de], Clément Nyaletsossi Voule, Attiya Waris, Vitit Muntarbhorn, Barbara G. Reynolds [de], Bina D'Costa, Catherine S. Namakula, Dominique Day, Miriam Ekiudoko, Isha Dyfan, Alexandra Xanthaki [de], José Francisco Calí Tzay, Richard Bennett [de], Obiora C. Okafor, David Richard Boyd, Livingstone Sewanyana, Alice Jill Edwards, Muluka-Anne Miti-Drummond [de], Ravindran Daniel, Sorcha MacLeod, Chris Kwaja, Carlos Salazar Couto, and Surya Deva [de]. East Jerusalem is considered Israeli-occupied Palestinian territory under international law. "UNRWA Situation Report #1 on the Situation in the Gaza Strip"] (Situation Report)". United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East. United Nations. 7 October 2023. Archived from the original on 16 October 2023. Retrieved 16 October 2023. At 06:30 on the morning of 7 October 2023, Hamas launched more than 5,000 rockets reportedly fired towards Israel from multiple locations in Gaza, as well as ground operation into Israel. Fabian, Emanuel (9 October 2023). "Officer, 2 soldiers killed in clash with terrorists on Lebanon border; mortars fired". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 11 October 2023. "Who are Hamas's allies in Gaza? From Islamic Jihad to Marxist militants". The National. 15 November 2023. Retrieved 19 November 2023. Abdelali Ragad; Richard Irvine-Brown; Benedict Garman; Sean Seddon (24 November 2023). "How Hamas built a force to attack Israel on 7 October". BBC. Retrieved 28 December 2023. Fabian, Emanuel (19 October 2023). "IDF says it killed head of military wing of Gaza's Popular Resistance Committees". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 19 October 2023. Retrieved 19 October 2023. Guy Van Vlierden (14 October 2023). "HLN Onderzoek. Van jihadisten tot communisten: zeker 10 groeperingen deden mee met actie Palestijnse terroristen (HLN Research. From jihadists to communists: at least 10 groups participated in Palestinian terrorist action)". Het Laatste Nieuws. Archived from the original on 14 October 2023. Smyth, Phillip (December 2023). "The Path to October 7: How Iran Built Up and Managed a Palestinian 'Axis of Resistance'". CTC Sentinel. 16 (11). Combating Terrorism Center. Joe Truzman (19 December 2023). "Al Qaeda-aligned Jaysh al-Ummah says it is fighting Israeli troops in Gaza". FDD's Long War Journal. Retrieved 28 December 2023. Burke, Jason (26 November 2023). "Disappointed, disenchanted, defiant: inside the world of the West Bank's angry armed youths". The Observer. Retrieved 22 December 2023. "Iran Update, December 23, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. "Iran Update, December 20, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. "Israel Army Fires Artillery at Lebanon as Hezbollah Claims Attack". Asharq Al-Awsat. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. Nada Homsi (31 October 2023). "'We're with the resistance': Hezbollah allies the Fajr Forces join Lebanon-Israel front". The National. Retrieved 12 November 2023. "الوكالة الوطنية للإعلام - القومي أعلن استشهاد أحد مقاتليه وسام محمد سليم" [The National News Agency announced the martyrdom of one of its fighters, Wissam Muhammad Salim.]. nna-leb.gov.lb (in Arabic). 15 December 2023. Dahan, Maha El (31 October 2023). "Yemen's Houthis enter Mideast fray, hardening spillover fears". Reuters. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 31 October 2023. Ben-Ari, Lior; Zitun, Yoav (22 December 2023). "Iran-backed militias in Iraq claim struck Israel's Karish natural gas rig in Mediterranean". Ynetnews. Retrieved 22 December 2023. "Palestinian Al Quds Brigades claim responsibility for attack at Lebanon-Israel border". Al Arabiya. 9 October 2023. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023. "Two Resistance Brigades members killed by Israeli shelling". Naharnet. 23 October 2023. Archived from the original on 13 November 2023. Retrieved 8 November 2023. Antonios, Zeina (November 2023). "Here's what we know about Hezbollah's elite al-Radwan unit". today.lorientlejour.com. Archived from the original on 20 November 2023. Retrieved 18 November 2023. ""الحزب السوري القومي الاجتماعي" نعى عنصرًا له أثناء "قيامه بواجبه القوميّ على طريق فلسطين"" [The "Syrian Social Nationalist Party" mourned a member while "carrying out his national duty on the road to Palestine"]. الخليج 365 (in Arabic). 15 December 2023. "Iran Update, October 14, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Archived from the original on 28 December 2023. Fabian, Emanuel. "Authorities name 594 soldiers, 61 police officers killed in Gaza war". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 19 March 2024. "IDF arrests Hamas terrorists, confiscates weapons in West Bank raid". The Jerusalem Post. 4 November 2023. Archived from the original on 4 November 2023. Retrieved 4 November 2023. "'Nili': Is a secret Israeli unit hunting Hamas militants behind the October 7 attack?". France 24. 29 October 2023. Archived from the original on 4 November 2023. Retrieved 4 November 2023. Tzuri, Matan (30 October 2023). "Abducted soldier freed by IDF troops in Gaza". ynet. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 30 October 2023. "A Future Look Back at Israel's War on Hamas". Foreign Policy. 26 December 2023. Retrieved 30 December 2023. "How Hamas secretly built a 'mini-army' to fight Israel". Reuters. 13 October 2023. Archived from the original on 13 October 2023. Retrieved 13 October 2023. International Institute for Strategic Studies (25 February 2021). The Military Balance 2021. London: Routledge. p. 344. ISBN 978-1-03-201227-8. Archived from the original on 21 January 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2023. "Israel's massive mobilization of 360,000 reservists upends lives". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 13 October 2023. "Health Ministry In Hamas-run Gaza Says War Death Toll At 32,845". Barron's. 1 March 2024. Retrieved 1 March 2024. "The government media in Gaza calls on the world to intervene to stop the humanitarian catastrophe in Gaza" (in Arabic). The Palestinian Information Center. 8 January 2024. Retrieved 19 March 2024. "محرقة غزة: 11078 شهيدا منهم 4506 طفلا و3027 سيدة اقرأ المزيد عبر المركز الفلسطيني للإعلام" [Gaza Holocaust: 11,078 martyrs, including 4,506 children and 3,027 women.]. palinfo.com (in Arabic). The Palestinian Information Center. 10 November 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. "133 UN agency staffers killed due to Israeli airstrikes on Gaza Strip". www.aa.com.tr. Retrieved 10 December 2023. Ronzheimer, Paul; Martuscelli, Carlo (10 March 2023). "Netanyahu vows to defy Biden's 'red line' on Rafah". Politico. Retrieved 13 March 2024. "IDF: 450 Hamas terrorists killed in last few days, over 13,000 in total". Agence France-Presse. Barron's. 29 February 2024. Retrieved 4 March 2024. "Hamas Toll Thus Far Falls Short of Israel's War Aims, U.S. Says". Washington Post. 21 January 2024. Nakhoul, Samia; Saul, Jonathan; Pamuk, Humeyra (19 February 2024). "Israel's six-week drive to hit Hamas in Rafah and scale back war". Reuters. Retrieved 19 February 2024. "اقرأ المزيد عبر المركز الفلسطيني للإعلام" [Government media: 1,248 martyrs in 77 massacres committed by the occupation after it abolished the humanitarian truce in Gaza.] (in Arabic). The Palestinian Information Center. 5 December 2023. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "PCBS - Martyrs". Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original on 8 February 2024. Retrieved 19 March 2024. הבקשה של פיקוד הדרום בלילה שלפני הטבח - והסירוב | פרסום ראשון Fabian, Emanuel; Pacchiani, Gianluca (1 November 2023). "IDF estimates 3,000 Hamas terrorists invaded Israel in Oct. 7 onslaught". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Alsaafin, Linah; Osgood, Brian. "Israel-Gaza war in maps and charts: Live tracker". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 15 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "Le navire Rubymar, exploité par le Liban, a coulé en mer Rouge, déclarent les officiels du Yémen - Jour 148 de la guerre de Gaza". Le Monde. 1 March 2024. Retrieved 2 March 2024. Archive, View Author; feed, Get author RSS (13 March 2024). "Hamas terrorist Hadi Ali Mustafa killed by IDF". Retrieved 13 March 2024. {{cite web}}: |first= has generic name (help) Presse, AFP-Agence France. "Israel Firing In South Lebanon Kills 200 Since Start Of Gaza War". www.barrons.com. Archived from the original on 22 January 2024. Retrieved 27 February 2024. "Israel intensifies attacks on southern Lebanon". Arab News. 12 February 2024. Retrieved 13 February 2024. "Institute for the Study of War". Archived from the original on 15 January 2024. Retrieved 16 January 2024. "بالأسماء... شهداء حركة أمل!". Archived from the original on 5 February 2024. Retrieved 7 February 2024. "'الجماعة الإسلامية' في لبنان تنعى 3 شهداء". MTV Lebanon (in Arabic). Retrieved 10 March 2024. "3 Hezbollah fighters killed in Lebanon-Israel border confrontations". Archived from the original on 8 January 2024. Retrieved 9 January 2024. "Lebanon army says one soldier killed in Israeli shelling on border post". Al-Jazeera. 5 December 2023. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Global Affairs confirms 8th Canadian death since start of Israel-Hamas war". CBC News. 3 December 2023. Archived from the original on 12 December 2023. Retrieved 8 December 2023. "3 killed in confrontations on Lebanon-Israel borders". english.news.cn. Xinhua News Agency. 2 January 2024. "Three civilians killed in Israel strike on Lebanon". Arab News. 5 March 2024. Retrieved 5 March 2024. "5 killed, 6 injured by Israeli airstrikes on S. Lebanon-Xinhua". english.news.cn. Archived from the original on 14 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "Since the Israeli war on Gaza, Israel has carried out 14 assassinations, during which it killed 72 members of Hezbollah and Iranian groups of Syrian and non-Syrian nationalities" (in Arabic). Syrian Observatory for Human Right. 20 January 2024. Archived from the original on 20 January 2024. Retrieved 20 January 2024. "Leaders of the "Resistance Axis" in Syria, Lebanon and Palestine are the most prominent dead in the Israeli targeting of the Iranian embassy in Damascus" (in Arabic). Syrian Observatory for Human Rights. 1 April 2024. Retrieved 1 April 2024. "Israel social security data reveals true picture of Oct 7 deaths". Agence France-Presse. 15 December 2023. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 24 December 2023. "14 kids under 10, 25 people over 80: Up-to-date breakdown of Oct 7 victims we know about". Times of Israel. 4 December 2023. Retrieved 24 December 2023. Abraham, Yuval (6 November 2023). "A Gazan worked in Israeli kibbutzim for decades. Then came Oct. 7". +972 magazine. Archived from the original on 7 November 2023. "רשימת שמות החטופים לעזה". The list of names of those abducted to Gaza (in Hebrew). Israeli Public Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 21 February 2023. Berman, Lazar; Fabian, Emanuel (6 February 2024). "At least 32 of the 136 hostages held in Gaza killed, 20 others feared dead – NYT". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 6 February 2024. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Fabian, Emanuel; Horovitz, Michael. "Israeli civilian killed by anti-tank missile in north as Hezbollah attacks continue". Times of Israel. No. 7 December 2023. Retrieved 24 December 2023. Fabian, Emanuel (14 January 2024). "Israeli man killed in Hezbollah anti-tank missile attack in Kfar Yuval, northern Israel". Times of Israel. Retrieved 14 January 2024. Abu Mayzer, Sinan. "Palestinian gunmen shoot dead West Bank motorist, two assailants killed - police". Reuters. No. 22 February 2024. Retrieved 6 March 2024. Ghert-Zand, Renee (17 December 2023). "War caught Israeli rehab hospitals unprepared to handle number of wounded". The Times of Israel. Retrieved 31 January 2024. Boxerman, Aaron (10 November 2023). "Israel-Hamas War: Israel Lowers Oct. 7 Death Toll Estimate to 1,200". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 November 2023. Retrieved 11 November 2023. "IDF soldier rescued from Gaza in first public message: 'Happy I got my life back'". Times of Israel. Retrieved 27 November 2023. Fabian, Emanuel (4 January 2024). "IDF says 3 Israelis missing since October 7 are among Gaza hostages; 1 of them is dead". Times of Israel. Retrieved 5 January 2024. "Bodies of several Israelis retrieved in Gaza raids – IDF". The Guardian. 14 October 2023. Archived from the original on 14 October 2023. Retrieved 14 October 2023. Israel's military said earlier this morning that it has confirmed that more than 120 civilians are being held hostage in Gaza by Hamas. "A Week Into War, Gazans Flee Homes As Israeli Ground Offensive Looms". Barron's. Agence France-Presse. 14 October 2023. Archived from the original on 14 October 2023. Retrieved 14 October 2023. Israel's army has confirmed contacting the families of 120 civilian hostages so far. "The mothers whose children are held hostage by Hamas: 'I heard him crying, begging them not to take him'". The Guardian. 9 November 2023. Archived from the original on 13 November 2023. Retrieved 14 November 2023. "IDF safely rescues 2 hostages from Rafah in special operation". Times of Israel. 12 February 2024. Archived from the original on 12 February 2024. Retrieved 12 February 2024. "Hamas armed wing says seven hostages killed in Gaza". Reuters. 1 March 2024. Retrieved 1 March 2024. Tal, Amir; Lister, Tim; Greene, Richard Allen (5 January 2024). "25 Israeli hostages have died since October 7, prime minister's office says in an update". CNN. Retrieved 5 January 2024. "One person remains missing from Oct. 7. Her family has accepted she's gone". Times of Israel. 25 February 2024. Retrieved 6 March 2024. "ההזיות של סינוואר: הרגנו 1,600 חיילים ישראלים" (in Hebrew). Srugim. 25 December 2023. Archived from the original on 25 December 2023. Retrieved 25 December 2023. Tétrault-Farber, Gabrielle (6 December 2023). "UN rights chief warns of heightened risk of 'atrocity crimes' in Gaza". Reuters. Retrieved 6 December 2023. "Around Half A Million Israelis Displaced Inside Israel: Military". Barron's. 16 October 2023. Retrieved 18 November 2023. "Israel sharpens warning to Lebanon as cross-border hostilities spike". Reuters. 13 November 2023. Archived from the original on 13 November 2023. Retrieved 30 January 2024. YAGMUR, Esra. "Israel border fighting displaces 76,000 in Lebanon: IOM". TRT World. "At least seven injured as Israeli tank 'accidentally' hits Egyptian border". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 23 November 2023. "Blasts hit two Egyptian Red Sea towns near Israel border, six injured". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 7 November 2023. Retrieved 11 November 2023. El Deeb, Sarah (9 October 2023). "What is Hamas? The group that rules the Gaza Strip has fought several rounds of war with Israel". AP News. Archived from the original on 23 October 2023. Retrieved 5 December 2023. Zitun, Yoav (12 December 2023). "One-fifth of troop fatalities in Gaza due to friendly fire or accidents, IDF reports". Ynetnews. Archived from the original on 14 December 2023. Retrieved 15 December 2023. Casualties fell as a result of friendly fire on October 7, but the IDF believes that beyond the operational investigations of the events, it would not be morally sound to investigate these incidents due to the immense and complex quantity of them that took place in the kibbutzim and southern Israeli communities due to the challenging situations the soldiers were in at the time. Cook, Jonathan (15 December 2023). "Why is western media ignoring evidence of Israel's own actions on 7 October?". Middle East Eye. Archived from the original on 15 December 2023. Retrieved 15 December 2023. Bergman, Ronen; Zitun, Yoav (12 January 2024). "השעות הראשונות של השבת השחורה" [The first hours of Black Saturday]. Yedioth Ahronoth (in Hebrew). Archived from the original on 18 January 2024. Retrieved 19 January 2024. Bergman, Ronen; Zitun, Yoav (10 January 2024). "ההוראה: למנוע ממחבלים לחזור לעזה 'בכל מחיר', גם אם יש איתם חטופים" [The instructions: prevent terrorists from returning to Gaza "at all costs" even if there are hostages with them]. Ynet (in Hebrew). Archived from the original on 11 January 2024. Retrieved 12 January 2024. Bergman, Ronen; Goldman, Adam (1 December 2023). "Israel Knew Hamas's Attack Plan Over a Year Ago". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 6 December 2023. Retrieved 1 December 2023. "Fears of a ground invasion of Gaza grow as Israel vows 'mighty vengeance'". Al Jazeera. 7 October 2023. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. McKernan, Bethan; Michaelson, Ruth; Graham-Harrison, Emma; Kierszenbaum, Quique; Balousha, Hazem; Taha, Sufian; Sherwood, Harriet; Beaumont, Peter (14 October 2023). "Seven days of terror that shook the world and changed the Middle East". The Observer. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Pacchiani, Luca (7 October 2023). "Hamas deputy chief anticipates hostages will be swapped for Palestinian prisoners". The Times of Israel. Retrieved 25 October 2023. "Text of the speech by Ismail Haniyeh, on the first day of Operation Al-Aqsa Flood". Crescent International. 9 October 2023. Retrieved 1 January 2024. Khoury, Jack (21 January 2024). "Hamas Releases Memo Explaining Why It Waged War on Israel; Gazans Question Timing, Cite Criticism of Hamas". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 7 February 2024. Retrieved 23 January 2024. "Netanyahu says IDF will control Gaza after war, rejects notion of international force". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 12 November 2023. Retrieved 13 November 2023. Batrawy, Aya (29 February 2024). "Gaza's death toll now exceeds 30,000. Here's why it's an incomplete count". NPR. Archived from the original on 5 March 2024. Retrieved 29 February 2024. Abu Shahma, Mohammad; Asrar, Shakeeb; Antonopoulos, Konstantinos. "Under the rubble: The missing in Gaza". aljazeera.com. Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 6 March 2024. Retrieved 5 March 2024. "Israel Widens Attack on Hamas; Palestinians Pour Into Southern Gaza". Voice of America. 29 December 2023. Palumbo, Daniele; Abutaleb, Abdelrahman; Cusiac, Paul; Rivault, Erwan (30 January 2024). "At least half of Gaza's buildings damaged or destroyed, new analysis shows". BBC News. Archived from the original on 31 January 2024. Retrieved 1 February 2024. "Report on the Impact of the Recent War in 2023 on the Cultural Heritage in Gaza Strip – Palestine" (PDF). Heritage for Peace. Retrieved 8 December 2023. Diamond, Jeremy (20 January 2024). "At least 16 cemeteries in Gaza have been desecrated by Israeli forces, satellite imagery and videos reveal". CNN. Retrieved 20 January 2024. Jhaveri, Ashka; Soltani, Amin; Moore, Johanna; Tyson, Kathryn; Braverman, Alexandra; Carl, Nicholas (7 January 2024). "Iran Update, January 7, 2024". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 22 March 2024. Clarke, Colin P. (5 February 2024). "The Counterinsurgency Trap in Gaza". Foreign Affairs. 103 (2). Council on Foreign Relations. ISSN 2327-7793. OCLC 863038729. Retrieved 22 March 2024. Rasgon, Adam; Boxerman, Aaron (23 February 2024). "As Gaza War Grinds On, Israel Prepares for a Prolonged Conflict". The New York Times. Retrieved 22 March 2024. Kubovich, Yaniv (31 March 2024). "Israel Created 'Kill Zones' in Gaza. Anyone Who Crosses Into Them Is Shot". Haaretz. Retrieved 1 April 2024. "Swords of Iron: IDF Casualties". Gov.il. 3 November 2023. Archived from the original on 31 January 2024. Retrieved 19 March 2024. "Germany, a Loyal Israel Ally, Begins to Shift Tone as Gaza Toll Mounts". NYT. 29 March 2024. "Yemen's Houthis 'will not stop' Red Sea attacks until Israel ends Gaza war". Al Jazeera. 19 December 2023. Archived from the original on 8 February 2024. Retrieved 9 February 2024. The Houthis would only halt their attacks if Israel's "crimes in Gaza stop and food, medicines and fuel are allowed to reach its besieged population", al-Bukhaiti said. Michaelis, Tamar (10 December 2023). "Israel ready to act against Houthi rebels if international community fails to, national security adviser says". CNN. Archived from the original on 22 December 2023. Retrieved 10 January 2024. A spokesperson for the Houthi forces, Yahya Saree, wrote in a post on X that this decision was due to the "horrific massacres" against Palestinians in Gaza and said they would continue to act until food and medicine was made available for the Gaza Strip. Pinfold, Rob Geist (2023). "Security, Terrorism, and Territorial Withdrawal: Critically Reassessing the Lessons of Israel's "Unilateral Disengagement" from the Gaza Strip". International Studies Perspectives. 24 (1). King's College London, UK and Charles University, Czech Republic: 67–87. doi:10.1093/isp/ekac013. Archived from the original on 17 October 2023. Retrieved 16 October 2023. "Data on casualties". United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs – occupied Palestinian territory (OCHAoPt). Archived from the original on 12 October 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2023. Alfonseca, Kiara (11 October 2023). "Palestinian civilians suffer in Israel-Gaza crossfire as death toll rises". ABC News. Archived from the original on 12 October 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2023. "Intifada". Encyclopedia Britannica. 23 October 2023. Archived from the original on 14 November 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2023. "What are areas A, B, and C of the occupied West Bank?". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 26 April 2020. Retrieved 18 November 2023. "Timeline: How the Israeli-Palestinian Peace Process Fell Apart in the Three Decades After the 1993 Oslo Accord". FRONTLINE. PBS. Archived from the original on 13 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Frequently asked questions on ICRC's work in Israel and the occupied territories". International Committee of the Red Cross. 13 October 2023. Archived from the original on 29 October 2023. Retrieved 30 October 2023. "Gaza Strip explained: Who controls it and what to know". NBC News. 9 October 2023. Archived from the original on 31 October 2023. Retrieved 30 October 2023. Perry, Tom; McDowall, Angus (7 October 2023). Harvey, Jan (ed.). "Timeline of conflict between Israel and Palestinians in Gaza". Reuters. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Kane, Alex; Cohen, Mari; Shamir, Jonathan; Scher, Isaac (10 October 2023). "The Hamas Attacks and Israeli Response: An Explainer". Jewish Currents. Archived from the original on 14 October 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2023. Meakem, Allison (10 October 2023). "The Geopolitics of Palestine, Explained". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 15 October 2023. Retrieved 16 October 2023. * Nebehay, Stephanie (13 September 2011). Graff, Peter (ed.). "U.N. experts say Israel's blockade of Gaza illegal". Reuters. Archived from the original on 15 June 2017. Retrieved 15 October 2023. A panel of five independent U.N. rights experts [said] the blockade had subjected Gazans to collective punishment in 'flagrant contravention of international human rights and humanitarian law.' "Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territories". Amnesty International Report 2022/23: The State of the World's Human Rights. London: Amnesty International. 2023. pp. 206–211. ISBN 978-0-86210-502-0. Archived from the original on 16 October 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2023. This compounded the impact of a 15-year ongoing Israeli blockade that amounts to illegal collective punishment "Deprived and Endangered: Humanitarian Crisis in the Gaza Strip". Human Rights Watch. 13 January 2009. Archived from the original on 4 April 2015. Retrieved 15 October 2023. The blockade is a form of collective punishment in violation of international law. "Hamas hardliner Yahya Sinwar elected as Gaza leader". BBC News. 13 February 2017. Archived from the original on 22 October 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2023. Israel and Egypt maintain a blockade around Gaza aimed at preventing attacks by militants there, though the measure has been condemned by rights groups as a form of collective punishment. Ackerman, Seth (4 January 2024). "There was an Iron Wall in Gaza". Jacobin. Archived from the original on 5 January 2024. Retrieved 8 January 2024. The unemployment rate soared to "probably the highest in the world", four-fifths of the population were forced to rely on humanitarian assistance, three-quarters became dependent on food aid, more than half faced "acute food insecurity", one in ten children were stunted by malnutrition, and over 96 percent of potable water became unsafe for human consumption. Abdulrahim, Raja (7 October 2023). "Gaza Has Suffered Under 16-Year Blockade". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 24 October 2023. Retrieved 16 October 2023. Benhorin, Yitzhak (20 June 2010). "Cabinet: All non-military items can enter Gaza freely". Ynet. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 23 June 2010. Retrieved 21 June 2010. Kingsley, Patrick (15 July 2022). "A New Palestinian Leader Rises in the West Bank. He's Very Unpopular". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 18 July 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2023. Kane, Alex; Cohen, Mari; Shamir, Jonathan; Scher, Isaac (10 October 2023). "The Hamas Attacks and Israeli Response: An Explainer". Jewish Currents. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 14 October 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2023. Since Israel's disengagement from Gaza in 2006... Hamas has sometimes used rocket fire to exact concessions from Israel... Israel has frequently reacted to Hamas rocket attacks with bombing campaigns, an approach Israeli strategists have referred to as 'mowing the grass'... Beauchamp, Zack (7 October 2023). "Why did Hamas invade Israel?". Vox. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 6 November 2023. "These six charts show the scale of human loss in the Israel-Gaza war". ABC News. 19 November 2023. Archived from the original on 2 February 2024. Retrieved 2 February 2024 – via www.abc.net.au. Tan, Joanna (12 November 2023). "Charts show a stark difference in the human cost of Israeli-Palestinian conflicts over the years". CNBC. Archived from the original on 14 January 2024. Retrieved 7 March 2024. Narea, Nicole (19 October 2023). "A timeline of Israel and Palestine's complicated history". vox.com. Vox. Archived from the original on 8 March 2024. Retrieved 5 March 2024. "Two Years On: People Injured and Traumatized During the "Great March of Return" are Still Struggling". un.org. United Nations. Archived from the original on 4 March 2024. Retrieved 5 March 2024. Fayyad, Huthifa. "Gaza's Great March of Return protests explained". aljazeera.com. Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 17 February 2024. Retrieved 5 March 2024. Muaddi, Qassam (19 June 2023). "Most Palestinians 'back armed resistance' as Israeli occupation intensifies". The New Arab. Archived from the original on 20 September 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. Baniya, Sudesh (16 November 2023). "Two-state solution losing grounds in Israel and Palestine even before terror attacks, surveys show". Euronews. Archived from the original on 29 October 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2023. "Economic Recovery in the Gaza Strip". Oxfam Library. 27 October 2016. Archived from the original on 16 November 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2023. "The Gaza Strip: The humanitarian impact of 15 years of blockade". UNICEF. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2023. Hall, Richard. "The US has ignored the hopelessness of the Israel-Palestine conflict for too long". Voices. The Independent. Archived from the original on 10 October 2023. Retrieved 11 October 2023. "The lesson from the Hamas attack: The U.S. should recognize a Palestinian state". Opinion. The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 10 October 2023. Bigg, Matthew. "What We Know About the War Between Israel and Hamas". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 4 November 2023. "Who are the Hamas leaders behind the attacks on Israel?". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 28 October 2023. Messier, Ashlyn (12 October 2023). "Israel, Australia, Japan, UK, US, others have officially designated Hamas a terrorist organization". Fox News. Retrieved 1 January 2024. Whittaker, David J., ed. (2012) [2001]. The Terrorism Reader. Routledge. p. 84. ISBN 978-0-415-68731-7. Archived from the original on 16 November 2023. Retrieved 4 November 2023. Freedman, Robert O. (2013). "Russia". In Peters, Joel; Newman, David (eds.). The Routledge Handbook on the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict. Routledge. pp. 325–333 [331]. ISBN 9780415778626. Archived from the original on 16 November 2023. Dixon, Hugo (30 October 2023). "Israel war tests US appeal to global swing states". Reuters. Archived from the original on 4 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. Waldo, Cleary; Epstein, Gabriel; Hilbush, Sydney (11 October 2023). "International Reactions to the Hamas Attack on Israel". PolicyWatch 3793. The Washington Institute. Archived from the original on 16 October 2023. Retrieved 13 October 2023. "UN rejects US motion to condemn Hamas". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 23 October 2023. Retrieved 4 November 2023. Klein, Menachem (28 November 2023). "Israeli arrogance thwarted a Palestinian political path. October 7 revealed the cost". +972 magazine. Archived from the original on 29 November 2023. "Hamas Says Its Attack on Israel Was Planned for Two Years". The Wall Street Journal. 14 October 2023. Archived from the original on 13 November 2023. Retrieved 4 December 2023. Pacchiani, Gianluca (7 October 2023). "Hamas commander says attacks are in defense of Al-Aqsa, claims 5,000 missiles fired". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "What We Know About the Hamas Attack and Israel's Response". The New York Times. 7 October 2023. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. McKernan, Bethan (7 October 2023). "Hamas launches surprise attack on Israel as Palestinian gunmen reported in south". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Nakhoul, Samia; Bassam, Laila (11 October 2023). "How a secretive Hamas commander masterminded the attack on Israel". Reuters. Archived from the original on 17 October 2023. Retrieved 11 October 2023. "'The Guest': the Palestinian mastermind behind deadly Israel incursion". Financial Times. 7 October 2023. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Sources that say Hamas has called for Israel's destruction: * May, Tiffany (8 October 2023). "A Quick Look at Hamas". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 14 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. * "Two-state solution: Israeli-Palestinian history". Encyclopædia Britannica. 9 October 2023. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. * Edwards, Christian (16 November 2023). "Have war crimes been committed in Israel and Gaza and what laws govern the conflict?". CNN. Archived from the original on 16 November 2023. Retrieved 18 November 2023. Hoffman, Bruce (10 October 2023). "Understanding Hamas's Genocidal Ideology". The Atlantic. Retrieved 10 October 2023. Seurat, Leila (2019). The Foreign Policy of Hamas. Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 17. ISBN 9781838607449. Hamed, Qossay (2023). Hamas in Power: The Question of Transformation. IGI Global. p. 161. Spitka, Timea (2023). National and International Civilian Protection Strategies in the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict. Springer International Publishing. pp. 88–89. "Khaled Meshaal: Struggle is against Israel, not Jews". Al-Jazeera. 6 May 2017. Archived from the original on 19 November 2023. Retrieved 19 November 2023. Wintour, Patrick (May 2017). "Hamas presents new charter accepting a Palestine based on 1967 borders". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 April 2019. Retrieved 16 February 2024. "Doctrine of Hamas". Wilson Center. 20 October 2023. Archived from the original on 14 November 2023. "Behind Hamas's Bloody Gambit to Create a 'Permanent' State of War". The New York Times. 8 November 2023. Archived from the original on 11 November 2023. Retrieved 4 December 2023. "Why did Hamas attack Israel, and why now?". CBS News. 25 October 2023. Retrieved 12 January 2024. "In rare apology, Israeli minister says she 'sinned' for her role in reforms that tore country apart". Associated Press. 31 December 2023. Archived from the original on 14 February 2024. Retrieved 14 February 2024. "Hamas carried out years-long campaign to fool Israel before attack, source says". Times of Israel. 9 October 2023. Archived from the original on 14 February 2024. Retrieved 14 February 2024. "Hamas says October 7 attacks 'necessary step' but admits to 'faults'". Le Monde.fr. 21 January 2024. Archived from the original on 21 January 2024. Retrieved 21 January 2024. Hamas Media Office (21 January 2024). "Our Narrative ... Operation Al-Aqsa Flood" (PDF). lbcgroup.tv. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 January 2024. Retrieved 22 January 2024. "Hamas says its October 7 assault on Israel was a 'normal response' to Israeli 'conspiracies'". The Times of Israel. 21 January 2024. Archived from the original on 21 January 2024. Retrieved 21 January 2024. Khoury, Jack. "Hamas Releases Memo Explaining Why It Waged War on Israel; Gazans Question Timing, Cite Criticism of Hamas". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 7 February 2024. Retrieved 22 January 2024. Silkoff, Shira. "Against all evidence, Hamas says it morally, religiously opposes harming women, kids". timesofisrael.com. Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 7 February 2024. Retrieved 22 January 2024. "Israel's Yair Lapid and Benny Gantz: Dynamic duo or natural rivals?". The Jerusalem Post. 12 August 2022. Retrieved 31 December 2023. "For years, Netanyahu propped up Hamas. Now it's blown up in our faces". The Times of Israel. 8 October 2023. Archived from the original on 10 October 2023. Retrieved 28 October 2023. "Israel's Big New Shift in Hamas Policy". Foreign Policy. 15 June 2021. Archived from the original on 27 October 2023. Retrieved 28 October 2023. "How Years of Israeli Failures on Hamas Led to a Devastating Attack". The New York Times. 30 October 2023. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 30 October 2023. Pipes, Daniel (17 November 2023). "Appeasement not victory: Israel has quickly reverted to its bad policies". The Washington Times. Retrieved 31 December 2023. "How Hamas duped Israel as it planned devastating attack". Reuters. 10 October 2023. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 7 November 2023. "What went wrong? Questions emerge over Israel's intelligence prowess after Hamas attack". AP News. Archived from the original on 7 November 2023. Retrieved 7 November 2023. Schneider, Tal (8 October 2023). "For years, Netanyahu propped up Hamas. Now it's blown up in our faces". The Times of Israel. Retrieved 10 October 2023. "How Netanyahu's Hamas policy came back to haunt him — and Israel". CBC News. 28 October 2023. Archived from the original on 28 October 2023. Retrieved 28 October 2023. Heer, Jeet (11 December 2023). "Why Netanyahu Bolstered Hamas". thenation.com. The Nation. Retrieved 14 March 2024. Raz, Adam (20 October 2023). "A Brief History of the Netanyahu-Hamas Alliance". Haaretz. Retrieved 14 March 2024. Keller-Lynn, Carrie (12 November 2023). "Netanyahu on responsibility for Oct. 7: Did people ask the same about Pearl Harbor, 9/11?". The Times of Israel. Retrieved 31 December 2023. Matar, Haggai (7 October 2023). "Gaza's shock attack has terrified Israelis. It should also unveil the context". +972 Magazine. +972 Magazine. Archived from the original on 31 December 2023. Retrieved 31 December 2023. Sforza, Lauren (9 October 2023). "Tlaib, Bush criticized by Democrats over statements calling for end to Israel support". The Hill. Retrieved 31 December 2023. "John Mearsheimer: Israel is choosing 'apartheid' or 'ethnic cleansing'". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 31 December 2023. Schenker, Hillel (12 October 2023). "The Catastrophe of October 7. Why Did It Happen?". The Nation. Archived from the original on 31 December 2023. Retrieved 31 December 2023. Barghouti, Mariam. "On October 7, Gaza broke out of prison". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 31 December 2023. Federman, Josef; Adwan, Issam (7 October 2023). "Hamas surprise attack out of Gaza stuns Israel and leaves hundreds dead in fighting, retaliation". AP News. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 4 December 2023. Israel's Apartheid Against Palestinians: Cruel System of Domination and Crime Against Humanity (PDF) (Report). Amnesty International. January 2022. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 February 2022. Retrieved 6 November 2023. "A regime of Jewish supremacy from the Jordan River to the Mediterranean Sea: This is apartheid". B'Tselem. 12 January 2021. Archived from the original on 8 May 2021. Retrieved 6 November 2023. A regime that uses laws, practices and organized violence to cement the supremacy of one group over another is an apartheid regime. Israeli apartheid, which promotes the supremacy of Jews over Palestinians, was not born in one day or of a single speech. It is a process that has gradually grown more institutionalized and explicit, with mechanisms introduced over time in law and practice to promote Jewish supremacy. These accumulated measures, their pervasiveness in legislation and political practice, and the public and judicial support they receive – all form the basis for our conclusion that the bar for labeling the Israeli regime as apartheid has been met. Holmes, Oliver (27 April 2021). "Israel is committing the crime of apartheid, rights group says". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2 February 2022. Retrieved 6 November 2023. Le Figaro with AFP (4 May 2023). "Israël : l'Assemblée nationale rejette une résolution communiste dénonçant un "régime d'apartheid"" [Israel: National Assembly rejects communist resolution denouncing 'apartheid regime']. Le Figaro (in French). Archived from the original on 14 June 2023. Retrieved 8 December 2023. Hutzler, Alexandra; Peller, Lauren. "House passes resolution saying Israel isn't a 'racist or apartheid state'". ABC News. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Where We Work. Gaza Strip". United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA). Archived from the original on 12 October 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2023. "Israel retaliation kills 230 Palestinians after Hamas operation". Al Jazeera. 7 October 2023. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023. "Israel declares war, goes after Hamas fighters and bombards Gaza". AP News. 7 October 2023. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Frankel, Julia (1 August 2023). "Israel holds over 1,200 detainees without charge. That's the most in 3 decades, a rights group says". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. Shefaz, Hagar (3 August 2023). "A Quarter of Palestinians Jailed in Israel Are Imprisoned Without Charges or Trial". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 5 August 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. Murphy, Brian; Taylor, Adam; Westfall, Sammy; Pietsch, Bryan; Hendrix, Steve (9 October 2023). "What's behind the violence in Israel and Gaza? Here's what to know". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023. "Explosion kills five at Gaza rally marking 2005 Israel pullout". Al Jazeera. 13 October 2023. Archived from the original on 17 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023. "Qatar mediates opening of Gaza-Israel crossing as protests end". Al Jazeera. 29 September 2023. Archived from the original on 10 October 2023. Retrieved 10 October 2023. Al-Mughrabi, Nidal (28 September 2023). "Israel reopens Gaza crossings, lets Palestinians back to work after two weeks". Reuters. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 10 October 2023. Tisdall, Simon (9 October 2023). "In the midst of war, Benjamin Netanyahu is a liability who can only make things worse. He must go". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 10 October 2023. Retrieved 10 October 2023. Wong, Edward; Nereim, Vivian (7 October 2023). "The war could upend Biden's diplomacy on Saudi-Israel normalization". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. "Hamas Attack Raises Questions Over an Israeli Intelligence Failure". The New York Times. 8 October 2023. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "US intelligence warned of the potential for violence days before Hamas attack". CNN. Washington. 13 October 2023. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 27 November 2023. "Egypt intelligence official says Israel ignored repeated warnings of 'something big'". The Times of Israel. Associated Press. 9 October 2023. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. Lis, Jonathan (13 October 2023). "'Utterly Fake': Israel's National Security Adviser Denies Receiving Egyptian Warning of Hamas Attack". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 13 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023. "Senior US lawmaker says Egypt warned Israel 3 days before onslaught". The Times of Israel. Agence France-Presse. 11 October 2023. Archived from the original on 11 October 2023. Retrieved 11 October 2023. Srivastava, Mehul (23 November 2023). "Israeli intelligence 'dismissed' detailed warning of Hamas raid". The Financial Times. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. Dettmer, Jamie (21 November 2023). "Our warnings on Hamas were ignored, Israel's women border troops say". Politico. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. Kingsley, Patrick; Kershner, Isabel (7 October 2023). "Israel-Gaza Conflict: Gaza and Israel on War Footing After Militants Launch Surprise Assaults". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Hamas attack aimed to disrupt Saudi-Israel normalization, Biden says". Reuters. 21 October 2023. Retrieved 15 January 2024. "Saudi Arabia: no Israel ties without recognition of Palestinian state | Reuters". Reuters. Archived from the original on 7 February 2024. Retrieved 7 February 2024. Estrin, Daniel (7 October 2023). "In surprise deadly attacks, Israel says Palestinian militants infiltrated from Gaza". NPR. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Federman, Josef; Adwan, Issam (7 October 2023). "Hamas militant group has started a war that 'Israel will win,' defense minister says". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Around 1,000 dead in Israel-Hamas war, as Lebanon's Hezbollah also launches strikes". South China Morning Post. 8 October 2023. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. "Israel-Palestine escalation live news: Hamas starts Operation Al-Aqsa Flood". Al Jazeera. 7 October 2023. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. McKernan, Bethan (7 October 2023). "Hamas launches surprise attack on Israel as Palestinian gunmen reported in south". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Netanyahu: 'We are at war'". Ynetnews. 7 October 2023. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Gritten, David (7 October 2023). "Strikes on Gaza after Palestinian militants enter Israel". BBC News. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Israeli army declares 'state of readiness' for war". Anadolu Agency. 7 October 2023. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Lee, Lloyd. "Mastermind of Hamas terror attacks is so secretive that one of the few images linked to him only shows his shadow". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 26 October 2023. Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Hamas Fighters Trained in Iran Before Oct. 7 Attacks". The Wall Street Journal. 25 October 2023. Archived from the original on 27 October 2023. Retrieved 27 October 2023. Fabian, Emanuel; Pacchiani, Gianluca (1 November 2023). "IDF estimates 3,000 Hamas terrorists invaded Israel in Oct. 7 onslaught". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Beaule, Victoria (12 October 2023). "A detailed look at how Hamas secretly crossed into Israel". ABC News. Archived from the original on 15 October 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2023. "Netanyahu says Israel is 'at war' after Hamas launches surprise air and ground attack from Gaza". CNN. 7 October 2023. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Federman, Josef; Adwan, Issam (7 October 2023). "Hamas militant group launches unprecedented operation against Israel with rockets and infiltration". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 10 October 2023. Hubbard, Ben; Abi-Habib, Maria (8 November 2023). "Behind Hamas's Bloody Gambit to Create a 'Permanent' State of War". The New York Times. Retrieved 10 November 2023. Rubin, Shira; Warrick, Joby (13 November 2023). "Hamas envisioned deeper attacks, aiming to provoke an Israeli war". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 13 November 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2023. "This is How Al-Qassam's Naval Units Stormed Zakim's Fortified Military Base – Video". Palestine Chronicle. 9 October 2023. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. "Videos show new details on how Hamas launched surprise assault on Israel". CNN. 8 October 2023. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. "At least 7 Nepali injured, 17 held captive by Hamas in Israel: Nepal's envoy". Asian News International. 7 October 2023. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Fabian, Emanuel (7 October 2023). "IDF regains control of Re'im military base from Hamas terrorists in southern Israel". Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Margulies, Joanie (8 October 2023). "IDF regains control over Sderot police station". Jerusalem Post. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. "Israel-Hamas war: Images reveal the strategy behind the militant group's attack". Le Monde. 14 October 2023. Archived from the original on 8 November 2023. Retrieved 8 November 2023. "Militants infiltrate Israel from Gaza as Hamas claims major rocket attack". CNN. 7 October 2023. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Border town identifies at least 15 of its residents killed in Hamas attack". The Times of Israel. 7 October 2023. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. "10 Percent of Kibbutz Population Found Dead After Hamas Massacre in Southern Israel". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 11 October 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2023. "Hamas's attack was the bloodiest in Israel's history". The Economist. Archived from the original on 14 October 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2023. "In pictures: Scenes of war and chaos after Hamas launch surprise attack on Israel". France 24. 7 October 2023. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Hamas says it has enough Israeli captives to free all Palestinian prisoners". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Vinograd, Cassandra; Kershner, Isabel (9 October 2023). "Hamas Took Scores of Hostages From Israel. Here's What We Know About Them". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. Davies, Alys (8 October 2023). "What we know about Israeli hostages taken by Hamas". BBC News. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. Breiner, Josh (18 November 2023). "Israeli Security Establishment: Hamas Likely Didn't Have Advance Knowledge of Nova Festival". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 19 November 2023. Retrieved 19 November 2023. According to a police source, the investigation also indicates that an IDF combat helicopter that arrived to the scene and fired at terrorists there apparently also hit some festival participants. Zitun, Yoav (15 October 2023). הטעיה של חמאס למסוקי צה"ל והכוונת טייסים בוואטסאפ [Hamas deception of IDF helicopters]. Ynet (in Hebrew). Archived from the original on 13 November 2023. Retrieved 13 November 2023. "Israel's Dead: The Names of Those Killed in Hamas Attacks, Massacres and the Israel-Hamas War". Haaretz. 19 October 2023. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Hostages Held by Hamas: The Names of Those Abducted From Israel". Haaretz. 22 October 2023. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Israeli music festival: 260 bodies recovered from site where people fled in hail of bullets". BBC News. 8 October 2023. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2023. "How the Supernova massacre unfolded, according to analysis of eyewitness and terrorist video". NBC News. 16 October 2023. Archived from the original on 20 October 2023. Retrieved 21 October 2023. "Journalist describes footage of Hamas atrocities compiled by the IDF". CBC News. 25 October 2023. Archived from the original on 26 October 2023. Retrieved 26 October 2023. Gunter, Joel (23 October 2023). "Israel shows Hamas bodycam attack footage to journalists". BBC News. Retrieved 26 October 2023. Carroll, Rory (23 October 2023). "Israel shows footage of Hamas killings 'to counter denial of atrocities'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 October 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2023. "Images of the Mass Kidnapping of Israelis by Hamas". The Atlantic. 9 October 2023. Archived from the original on 10 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023. Jones, Sam; Fidler, Matt (18 October 2023). "Who are the hostages taken by Hamas from southern Israel?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 18 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. Bayer, Lili; Ho, Vivian; Fulton, Adam; Yang, Maya (7 October 2023). "Israel declares state of war after Hamas fires thousands of rockets and 'militants cross border' – live". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Missiles strike southern & central Israel; police declare state of war". Jordan News. 7 October 2023. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023. Halabi, Einav (19 November 2023). "Palestinian Authority denies Hamas music festival massacre". Ynetnews. Archived from the original on 20 November 2023. Retrieved 20 November 2023. "Palestinian Authority claims Israel, not Hamas, committed Re'im massacre". Jerusalem Post. 19 November 2023. Archived from the original on 19 November 2023. Retrieved 20 November 2023. Limone, Noa (13 December 2023). "If Israel Used a Controversial Procedure Against Its Citizens, We Need to Talk About It Now". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 14 December 2023. Retrieved 15 December 2023. Boxerman, Aaron; Odenheimer, Natan; Bergman, Ronen (27 December 2023). "A General's Account of Oct. 7 Battle for Be'eri Stirs Debate in Israel". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 4 January 2024. Retrieved 6 January 2024. ... the Israeli commander who led the fight detailed how he had authorized tank fire to end what was already an hourslong standoff — 'even at the cost of civilian casualties.' Those remarks have been picked up by the Israeli news media and prompted some public debate about the conduct of the commander, Brig. Gen. Barak Hiram. Only two out of the 14 hostages in the house survived that day; it was not clear how many died by tank fire. Frankel, Julia; Bernstein, Alon (11 January 2024). "Friendly fire may have killed their relatives on Oct. 7. These Israeli families want answers now". AP News. Archived from the original on 12 January 2024. Retrieved 12 January 2024. Efrati, Ido (1 November 2023). "Direct Rocket Hits, Partial Protection: How a Hospital Operates in Israel's Most Bombarded City". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 10 December 2023. "Many Israelis accuse government's of inept, chaotic response to October 7 massacre". Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 13 November 2023. Retrieved 13 November 2023. "Israel Police slams 'Haaretz' claim IDF helicopter may have harmed civilians on Oct. 7". The Times of Israel. 19 November 2023. Archived from the original on 19 November 2023. Retrieved 19 November 2023. "Barrages of rockets fired from Gaza as Hamas launches unprecedented operation against Israel". France 24. 7 October 2023. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Hamas-Israel War – Real Time Updates". Israel Defence Forces. Archived from the original on 13 October 2023. "Netanyahu: We will turn places where Hamas is hiding into 'cities of ruins'". Ynetnews. 7 October 2023. Archived from the original on 15 October 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2023. "Security cabinet says Israel will destroy military, governmental abilities of Hamas, Islamic Jihad". The Times of Israel. 7 October 2023. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Israeli strikes flatten buildings, mosques in Gaza". Al Jazeera. 8 October 2023. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 10 October 2023. "Army says it is fighting Gaza militants who entered Israel by land, sea and air". Al Arabiya. 7 October 2023. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Ben Gurion airport stays open as foreign airlines cancel flights". Globes. 10 August 2023. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 11 October 2023. "Page Capture" עדכונים ושינויים בתנועת הרכבות, עד להודעה חדשה [Updates and changes in train traffic until further notice]. רַכֶּבֶת יִשְׂרָאֵל [Israel Railways] (in Hebrew). Archived from the original on 12 October 2023. Retrieved 11 October 2023. Goldberg, Jeremaya (10 October 2023). "War with Gaza cuts train services in Israel". International Railway Journal. Archived from the original on 11 October 2023. Retrieved 11 October 2023. Saunders, Aaron (10 October 2023). "Cruise Lines Change, Cancel Itineraries Following Israel Attack". Cruise Critic. Archived from the original on 10 October 2023. Retrieved 11 October 2023. Knell, Yolande; Abu Alouf, Rushi; Gritten, David (8 October 2023). "Israeli forces fight to drive out Hamas militants and free hostages". BBC News. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 17 October 2023. Davies, Harry; McKernan, Bethan; Sabbagh, Dan (1 December 2023). "'The Gospel': how Israel uses AI to select bombing targets in Gaza". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2 December 2023. Retrieved 3 December 2023. Abraham, Yuval (30 November 2023). "'A mass assassination factory': Inside Israel's calculated bombing of Gaza". +972 magazine. Archived from the original on 3 December 2023. Retrieved 5 December 2023. Federman, Josef; Adwan, Issam (9 October 2023). "Israel strikes and seals off Gaza after incursion by Hamas, which vows to execute hostages". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 17 October 2023. Abu Alouf, Rushdi (8 October 2023). "Gaza: Fear and chaos for Palestinians as Israel strikes back". BBC News. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. Rahhou, Jihane (8 October 2023). "Israeli Strike Destroys Al-Amin Muhammad Mosque in Gaza". Morocco World News. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023. Goldenberg, Tia; Shurafa, Wafaa (8 October 2023). "Hamas fighters storm Israeli towns in surprise attack; Israel responds with deadly strikes on Gaza". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. "Israel officially declares war for 1st time since 1973 as death toll mounts to 600". The Times of India. 8 October 2023. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023. Fabian, Emanuel (9 October 2023). "Defense minister announces 'complete siege' of Gaza: No power, food or fuel". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. "Israel-Hamas war live updates: 9 Americans killed; Gaza Strip faces full siege". The Washington Post. 9 October 2023. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. "In pictures: Trucks carry aid into Gaza for the first time since the outbreak of the Israel-Hamas war". CNBC. 21 October 2023. Retrieved 30 December 2023. "1st fuel truck enters Gaza". ABC. 15 November 2023. Retrieved 30 December 2023. "IAF flies hundreds of off-duty troops back to Israel from Europe". The Times of Israel. 10 October 2023. Archived from the original on 11 October 2023. Retrieved 11 October 2023. Cook, Ellie (12 October 2023). ""Elite" Hamas unit behind Saturday massacre targeted in Israel air strikes". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 13 October 2023. Retrieved 3 November 2023. "Israel: White Phosphorus Used in Gaza, Lebanon". Human Rights Watch. Beirut. 12 October 2023. Archived from the original on 12 October 2023. Retrieved 27 November 2023. Wintour, Patrick (13 October 2023). "Israel denies using white phosphorus munitions in Gaza". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 October 2023. Retrieved 27 November 2023. Debre, Isabel; Lederer, Edith M.; Shurafa, Wafaa (13 October 2023). "Israel's military orders civilians to evacuate Gaza City, ahead of a feared ground offensive". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 13 October 2023. Retrieved 13 October 2023. Khraiche, Dana (13 October 2023). "UN Calls Israel Order to Evacuate 1.1 Million in Gaza Impossible". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 13 October 2023. Retrieved 13 October 2023. "MSF: Israeli order to evacuate northern Gaza 'outrageous'". Doctors Without Borders. 13 October 2023. Archived from the original on 13 October 2023. Retrieved 14 October 2023. "Israel must rescind evacuation order for northern Gaza and comply with international law: UN expert". OHCHR. 13 October 2023. Archived from the original on 14 October 2023. Retrieved 13 October 2023. "WHO pleads for immediate reversal of Gaza evacuation order to protect health and reduce suffering". WHO. Archived from the original on 13 October 2023. Retrieved 14 October 2023. "Israel announces 6-hour window for Gazans fleeing south, as troops gather near border". CNN. 14 October 2023. Archived from the original on 14 October 2023. Retrieved 14 October 2023. McKernan, Bethan; Taha, Sufian (15 October 2023). "Gaza civilians afraid to leave home after bombing of 'safe routes'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 October 2023. Retrieved 20 October 2023. El Damanhoury, Kareem; Mezzofiore, Gianluca; Murphy, Paul (14 October 2023). "CNN authenticates video that show explosions along Gaza evacuation routes". CNN. Archived from the original on 14 October 2023. Retrieved 14 October 2023. It's unclear what caused the widespread devastation "Hamas seen blocking evacuation routes in Gaza – IDF". The Jerusalem Post. 15 October 2023. Archived from the original on 15 October 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2023. Srivastava, Mehul; Joiner, Sam; Andringa, Peter (15 October 2023). "Did Israel bomb a civilian evacuation route in Gaza?". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 18 October 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2023. Fabian, Emanuel (14 October 2023). "IDF says it's completing preparations to strike Gaza 'from air, sea and land'". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 14 October 2023. Retrieved 15 October 2023. Al-Mughrabi, Nidal; Al-Mughrabi, Nidal (15 October 2023). "Palestinians fleeing to the south find no escape from danger". Reuters. Archived from the original on 13 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. Guterres, António (6 November 2023). "Secretary-General's press conference on the Middle East". United Nations. Archived from the original on 8 November 2023. Retrieved 14 November 2023. "EU nations condemn Hamas for what they describe as use of hospitals, civilians as 'human shields'". AP News. 13 November 2023. Archived from the original on 13 November 2023. Retrieved 14 November 2023. "Hamas are notorious for using civilians as 'human shields'". news.com.au. 1 November 2023. רויטרס (14 November 2023). הבית הלבן: יש מידע שחמאס משתמש בבתי החולים בעזה, גם להחזקת חטופים [The White House: There is information that Hamas uses the hospitals in Gaza, also to hold hostages]. Ynet (in Hebrew). Archived from the original on 14 November 2023. Retrieved 14 November 2023. שרון, רועי (9 December 2023). "עזב בשיירה הומניטרית: יחיא סינוואר נמצא בחאן יונס" [Left in a humanitarian convoy: Yahya Sinwar is in Khan Yunis]. KAN 11 (in Hebrew). Archived from the original on 10 December 2023. Retrieved 10 December 2023. Jobain, Najib; Kullab, Samya; Nessman, Ravi (17 October 2023). "Israel bombs Gaza region where civilians were told to seek refuge, as mediators try to unlock aid". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 17 October 2023. Retrieved 17 October 2023. "Israel bombs homes in southern Gaza, kills more than 70 people". Al Jazeera. 17 October 2023. Archived from the original on 24 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023. Brennan, David (17 October 2023). "Top Hamas commander killed in Israeli strike". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 17 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023. Magid, Jacob (17 October 2023). "'They had nowhere else to go': UN says Israeli strike on school in Gaza kills 6". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 17 October 2023. Retrieved 17 October 2023. "Gaza hospital blast: What does new analysis tell us?". BBC News. 26 October 2023. Archived from the original on 26 October 2023. Retrieved 3 November 2023. Fabian, Emanuel; Bachner, Michael (18 October 2023). "IDF presents evidence misfired Gazan rocket caused hospital blast, slams Hamas 'lies'". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 18 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023. "Israel and Palestinian militants blame each other after hospital blast kills hundreds in Gaza". ABC News. 17 October 2023. Archived from the original on 24 October 2023. Retrieved 17 October 2023. Said, Summer; Faucon, Benoit; Kalin, Stephen (8 October 2023). "Iran Helped Plot Attack on Israel Over Several Weeks". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 11 October 2023. "Human Rights Watch says rocket misfire likely cause of deadly Gaza hospital blast". Reuters. 26 November 2023. Archived from the original on 26 November 2023. Retrieved 27 November 2023. Watson, Kathryn (18 October 2023). "In Israel, Biden says it appears "the other team" is to blame for Gaza hospital explosion". CBS News. Archived from the original on 18 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023. "Canada says it is confident Israel not behind deadly blast at Gaza hospital". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 10 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "French intel says Palestinian rocket likely cause of Gaza hospital blast". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 3 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. Walker, Peter; Walker, Peter (23 October 2023). "Gaza hospital blast caused by militants' rocket, UK agencies believe". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 3 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Revisiting a key video used to assess the Gaza hospital blast". CNN. Archived from the original on 5 November 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2023. Ravid, Barak (28 October 2023). "Israeli military launches major ground incursion in Gaza". Axios. Archived from the original on 28 October 2023. Retrieved 28 October 2023. Mackenzie, James (28 October 2023). "Hamas vows 'full force'; Israel says troops still on the ground in Gaza". Reuters. Archived from the original on 27 October 2023. Retrieved 28 October 2023. "Israel suffered heavy losses in last night's attack: Hamas leader Ali Baraka". Türkiye. 28 October 2023. Archived from the original on 3 November 2023. Retrieved 28 October 2023. Lowe, Yohannes; Hall, Rachel; Ratcliffe, Rebecca (29 October 2023). "Israel-Hamas war live: WHO 'deeply concerned' by report of evacuation warning to Gaza's al-Quds hospital". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 October 2023. Retrieved 29 October 2023. Jackson, Patrick. "Israel Gaza live news: Doctors in Gaza say Israel has told them to evacuate a key hospital in Gaza City". BBC News. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 29 October 2023. Lowe, Yohannes; Hall, Rachel; Ratcliffe, Rebecca (29 October 2023). "Israel-Hamas war live: WHO 'deeply concerned' by report of evacuation warning to Gaza's al-Quds hospital". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 November 2023. Retrieved 29 October 2023. "Witness Describes Seeing Israeli Tank Fire on Taxi Southeast of Gaza City". The Wall Street Journal. 30 October 2023. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 30 October 2023. "Dozens reported killed in Gaza refugee camp blast". BBC News. 30 October 2023. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Al-Mughrabi, Nidal; Rose, Emily; Al-Mughrabi, Nidal (31 October 2023). "Israel strikes dense Gaza camp, says it kills Hamas commander". Reuters. Archived from the original on 3 November 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. "Photos: Dozens killed in Israeli air attack on Jabalia refugee camp in Gaza". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 31 October 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Fabian, Emanuel. "IDF says Jabaliya strike killed top Hamas commander, collapsed terror tunnels". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 31 October 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Raine, Andrew (31 October 2023). "'Children were carrying other injured children.' Witness describes aftermath of Israeli strike on Gaza refugee camp". CNN. Archived from the original on 31 October 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. "Israelische Armee bestätigt Beschuss von Flüchtlingslager Dschabalia" [Israeli army confirms shelling of Jabalia refugee camp]. Der Spiegel (in German). 31 October 2023. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Willis, Haley; Koettl, Christoph; Erden, Bora (31 October 2023). "Videos show a densely populated area of Gaza decimated by Israel's airstrike". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. "Jabalia: Israel air strike reportedly kills dozens at Gaza refugee camp". BBC News. 31 October 2023. Archived from the original on 4 November 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Pacchiani, Gianluca. "Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Qatar condemn Israeli strikes in Gaza's Jabaliya". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 31 October 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Ramos, Daniel (1 November 2023). "Bolivia severs ties with Israel, others recall envoys over Gaza". Reuters. Archived from the original on 31 October 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. "Israel-Gaza war live updates: Injured Gazans enter Egypt; new strike on Jabalya camp, hospital says". The Washington Post. 1 November 2023. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. "'Inhumane': World reacts to Israeli attacks on Jabalia refugee camp". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Koettl, Christoph; Tiefenthäler, Ainara; Willis, Haley; Cardia, Alexander (3 November 2023). "Israel Used 2,000-Pound Bombs in Strike on Jabaliya, Analysis Shows". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 4 November 2023. Al-Mughrabi, Nidal; Williams, Dan (1 November 2023). "First evacuees leave Gaza after another night of Israeli bombardments". Reuters. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. "Israel's strikes on Gaza refugee camp could be war crimes, UN says". South China Morning Post. 2 November 2023. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 2 November 2023. "Nasrallah says Oct. 7 assault '100% Palestinian,' Hezbollah knew nothing about it". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 3 November 2023. Retrieved 3 November 2023. "Hamas siphons fuel from hospitals, IDF reveals in intercepted call". Ynetnews. 1 November 2023. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Israel strikes ambulance near Gaza hospital, 15 reported killed". Reuters. Archived from the original on 3 November 2023. Retrieved 4 November 2023. "Palestinian Red Crescent condemns deadly strike on Gaza ambulance". The Guardian. 4 November 2023. Archived from the original on 4 November 2023. Retrieved 4 November 2023. @DrTedros (3 November 2023). "Utterly shocked by reports of attacks on ambulances evacuating patients close to Al-Shifa hospital in #Gaza, leading to deaths, injuries and damage. We reiterate: patients, health workers, facilities, and ambulances must be protected at all times. Always. Ceasefire NOW. #NotATarget" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Al-Mughrabi, Nidal; Lewis, Simon; Al-Khalidi, Suleiman (4 November 2023). "Palestinians say Israeli strike hits U.N.-run school as Blinken meets Arab leaders". Reuters. Archived from the original on 5 November 2023. Retrieved 4 November 2023. "Hamas armed wing: More than 60 hostages are missing due to Israeli airstrikes". Reuters. Archived from the original on 9 November 2023. Retrieved 7 November 2023. "Protests in Israel target Netanyahu over release of captives". Al Jazeera. 4 November 2023. Archived from the original on 7 November 2023. Retrieved 8 November 2023. Browne, Malachy; Collier, Neil (14 November 2023). "Evidence Points to Israeli Shells in Strikes on Gaza's Largest Hospital". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Israeli airstrikes kill 80 in Palestinian refugee camp". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 November 2023. Retrieved 20 November 2023. "Israel agrees to ceasefire deal, paving way for some captives' release". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 29 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. Burke, Jason; Michaelson, Ruth; Borger, Julian (22 November 2023). "Israel and Hamas agree deal for release of some hostages and four-day ceasefire". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 29 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Israel, Hamas agree to ceasefire deal that also sees captives exchanged". CBC News. 21 November 2023. Archived from the original on 4 December 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Israel-Hamas truce extends by two days, Qatar says: Live updates". CNN. Archived from the original on 27 November 2023. Retrieved 27 November 2023. "Israel-Hamas war live updates: Gaza cease-fire extended a day; Jerusalem shooting kills 3". NBC News. 30 November 2023. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 30 November 2023. Kingsley, Patrick; Hubbard, Ben; Fuller, Thomas (1 December 2023). "Israel Resumes Offensive in Gaza Strip After Truce With Hamas Ends". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 7 December 2023. Retrieved 7 December 2023. "Who are the remaining Gaza hostages?". France24. 12 February 2024. Archived from the original on 22 February 2024. Retrieved 22 February 2024. Pietromarchi, Usaid; Siddiqui, Virginia (2 December 2023). "Israel-Gaza war updates: 'No negotiations now on truce', says Hamas". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 4 December 2023. Retrieved 4 December 2023. "White House says Israel 'making effort' to better protect Gaza civilians". Times of Israel. 3 December 2023. Archived from the original on 13 December 2023. Retrieved 4 December 2023. Graham-Harrison, Emma; Burke, Jason (2 December 2023). "Israel has started using its new grid system for evacuation warnings". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 16 December 2023. Retrieved 6 December 2023. "Israel-Gaza live news: IDF resumes strikes as ceasefire with Hamas ends". BBC News. Archived from the original on 1 December 2023. Retrieved 1 December 2023. Smith, Alexander; Talmazan, Yuliya (5 December 2023). "Israel's new grid maps add to confusion and anger in Gaza". NBC News. Archived from the original on 7 December 2023. Retrieved 7 December 2023. Hendrix, Steve; Berger, Miriam (6 December 2023). "Israel touts civilian warning system, but for Gazans, nowhere is safe". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 25 December 2023. Retrieved 8 December 2023. Barbakh, Arafat; Salem, Mohammed (4 December 2023). "Israel presses ground offensive in southern Gaza, air strikes intensify". Reuters. Archived from the original on 8 December 2023. Retrieved 8 December 2023. Hubbard, Ben (5 December 2023). "Israel-Hamas War: New Phase of Israel's Military Campaign Remains Deadly for Gazans". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 5 December 2023. Retrieved 5 December 2023. Hammer, Mathias (5 December 2023). "U.S. Military Equipment Traced to Possible War Crimes in Gaza, Report Finds". Time. Archived from the original on 12 December 2023. Retrieved 6 December 2023. Salam, Yasmine; Abdelkader, Rima; Mulligan, Matthew. "Abandoned babies found decomposing in Gaza hospital weeks after it was evacuated". NBC News. Archived from the original on 4 December 2023. Retrieved 6 December 2023. "Israel risks 'strategic defeat' if civilians aren't protected, Pentagon chief says". The Hill. 2 December 2023. Archived from the original on 16 December 2023. Retrieved 6 December 2023. Lewis, Simon; Pamuk, Humeyra; Mason, Jeff; Pamuk, Humeyra; Mason, Jeff (4 December 2023). "Too early to assess if Israel heeding US calls to protect civilians -US spokesperson". Reuters. Archived from the original on 11 December 2023. Retrieved 4 December 2023. "IDF: Troops fighting in the heart of Khan Younis in most intensive battles since ground op began". The Times of Israel. 5 December 2023. Archived from the original on 12 December 2023. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Israeli army surrounds Khan Younis as southern Gaza attacks intensify". Al Jazeera. 5 December 2023. Archived from the original on 5 December 2023. Retrieved 5 December 2023. היום ה-65 של המלחמה | עדכונים שוטפים [The 65th day of the war | Regular updates]. Ynet (in Hebrew). Archived from the original on 10 December 2023. Retrieved 10 December 2023. "Over 150 Hamas terrorists surrender to IDF forces in Khan Yunis". i24news. 7 December 2023. Archived from the original on 9 December 2023. Retrieved 10 December 2023. Kershner, Isabel (7 December 2023). "Israel Says It Detained Hundreds of Terrorism Suspects in Gaza". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2023. Retrieved 10 December 2023. Beaumont, Peter (8 December 2023). "Footage shows IDF parading scores of Palestinian men around in underwear". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 9 December 2023. Retrieved 10 December 2023. "Israel-Gaza war: Video shows Gaza detainees allegedly 'surrendering guns' – what we know". BBC News. 10 December 2023. Archived from the original on 16 December 2023. Retrieved 11 December 2023. "Israel-Hamas War Day 65: Israeli Army Kills Hamas Commander in Gaza; Syria: Israel Struck Near Damascus". Haaretz. 10 December 2023. Archived from the original on 12 December 2023. Retrieved 11 December 2023. "Urgently investigate inhumane treatment and enforced disappearance of Palestinians detainees from Gaza". Amnesty International. 20 December 2023. Archived from the original on 22 December 2023. Retrieved 22 December 2023. Fabian, Emanuel (8 December 2023). "Watch: Dramatic footage shows IDF troops battling Hamas operatives in Gaza City school". Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 9 December 2023. Retrieved 9 December 2023. Halabi, Einav (9 December 2023). "Israel-Hamas war: IDF finds elevator in Gaza tunnel, weapons in school". The Jerusalem Post. Archived from the original on 9 December 2023. Retrieved 9 December 2023. Fabian, Emanuel (8 December 2023). "IDF says it destroyed buildings containing Hamas infrastructure at Gaza City's Al-Azhar University". Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 10 December 2023. Retrieved 10 December 2023. "Israel suffers heaviest combat losses since October, diplomatic isolation". Reuters. 13 December 2023. Archived from the original on 13 December 2023. Retrieved 14 December 2023. "Biden bypasses Congress to sell tank shells to Israel amid further fighting in Khan Younis". The Guardian. 10 December 2023. Archived from the original on 13 December 2023. Retrieved 10 December 2023. "US govt. again skips Congress for emergency weapons sale to Israel". NHK World. 30 December 2023. Tabachnick, Cara (15 December 2023). "3 hostages in Gaza were killed by friendly fire, Israeli military says". CBS News. Archived from the original on 15 December 2023. Retrieved 15 December 2023. "Israel-Hamas war live updates: IDF says it mistakenly killed 3 Israeli hostages during fighting". NBC News. 15 December 2023. Archived from the original on 15 December 2023. Retrieved 15 December 2023. Fabian, Emanuel (15 December 2023). "IDF troops mistakenly open fire and kill 3 hostages in northern Gaza battlefield". Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 16 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Lubell, Maayan (16 December 2023). "Israeli hostages killed in Gaza were holding white flag, official says". Reuters. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Netanyahu, Benjamin (25 December 2023). "Benjamin Netanyahu: Our Three Prerequisites for Peace". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 26 December 2023. Roelf, Wendell; Sterling, Toby (29 December 2023). "South Africa files genocide case against Israel at World Court". Reuters. Retrieved 29 December 2023. "South Africa launches case at top UN court accusing Israel of genocide in Gaza". AP News. Associated Press. Retrieved 29 December 2023. "South Africa files ICJ case accusing Israel of 'genocidal acts' in Gaza". France 24. 29 December 2023. "Hamas fires barrage of rockets just as Israel ushers in the new year". The Times of Israel. 1 January 2024. Archived from the original on 30 January 2024. Retrieved 30 January 2024. "Rocket fire on Tel Aviv for 1st time in over a month". Ynet. 29 January 2024. Archived from the original on 29 January 2024. Retrieved 30 January 2024. Bassam, Laila; Al-Mughrabi, Nidal; Barbakh, Arafat (3 January 2024). "Israeli drone kills Hamas deputy leader in Beirut -Lebanese, Palestinian sources". Reuters. "Israel army says Hamas command structure 'dismantled' in north Gaza". South China Morning Post. 7 January 2024. "Drone footage raises questions about Israeli justification for deadly strike on Gaza journalists". Washington Post. 19 March 2024. Retrieved 21 March 2024. "Israeli Military Near End of Most Intense Phase of Gaza Fighting, Defense Minister Says". Wall Street Journal. 15 January 2024. Archived from the original on 19 January 2024. Retrieved 17 January 2024. Kubovich, Yaniv (18 January 2024). "Hamas Begins Rehabilitating Militant Units in Northern Gaza the Israeli Army Declared Dismantled". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 18 January 2024. Retrieved 19 January 2024. Kubovich, Yaniv. "IDF spokesperson: 21 soldiers killed from building collapsing due to RPG fire by Hamas in southern Gaza". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 23 January 2024. Retrieved 23 January 2024. "Hamas causes buildings to collapse – 21 IDF soldiers dead, several injured". The Jerusalem Post. 23 January 2024. Archived from the original on 23 January 2024. Retrieved 23 January 2024. Kingsley, Patrick; Bergman, Ronen; Odenheimer, Natan (23 January 2024). "The Israeli military says 21 of the soldiers were killed in a single explosion". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 23 January 2024. Retrieved 23 January 2024. Sokol, Sam. "PM mourns deaths of soldiers in Gaza: 'We must learn the necessary lessons'". timesofisrael.com. Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 23 January 2024. Retrieved 23 January 2024. "Herzog: 'The names of more of the best of our sons are added to the headstones of heroes'". Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 23 January 2024. Retrieved 23 January 2024. "Gallant after 21 soldiers killed in central Gaza incident: 'Deaths compel us to achieve war's goals'". Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 23 January 2024. Retrieved 23 January 2024. "Israeli strikes hit Rafah after Biden warns Netanyahu to have 'credible' plan to protect civilians". ap.com. Associated Press. 11 February 2024. Archived from the original on 19 February 2024. Retrieved 12 February 2024. Jared Malsin; Summer Said. "WSJ News Exclusive: Egypt Builds Walled Enclosure on Border as Israeli Offensive Looms". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 23 February 2024. Retrieved 19 February 2024. Rashwan, Nada; Triebert, Christiaan (15 February 2024). "Egypt Is Building a Wall Near Gaza Border but Won't Say Why". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 16 February 2024. Retrieved 21 February 2024. "North Sinai Governor denies rumors of 'constructing displacement camps' for Gazans in Egyptian Rafah". Ahram Online. 15 February 2024. Archived from the original on 23 February 2024. Retrieved 22 February 2024. "Israel indicates March deadline for Gaza ground offensive in Rafah". BBC News. 19 February 2024. Archived from the original on 23 February 2024. Retrieved 19 February 2024. Salman, Abeer; Diamond, Jeremy (29 February 2024). "More than 100 killed as Israeli forces open fire in chaos at Gaza food lines, Palestinian health ministry says". CNN. Retrieved 29 February 2024. "Flour massacre: How Gaza food killings unfolded, and Israel's story changed". Al Jazeera. 1 March 2024. Retrieved 3 March 2024. "'Massacre': Dozens killed by Israeli fire in Gaza while collecting food aid". Al Jazeera. 29 February 2024. Retrieved 29 February 2024. "Biden says US military to airdrop food and supplies into Gaza". Reuters. 1 March 2024. Retrieved 2 March 2024. "U.S. Begins Airdrops of Humanitarian Aid in Gaza". New York Times. 2 March 2024. Retrieved 3 March 2024. "US to set up temporary port on Gaza coast for aid delivery". BBC. 8 March 2024. Retrieved 14 March 2024. Beaule, Victoria; Savir, Dana (11 March 2024). "Israel extends road to now traverse Gaza, satellite imagery shows". ABC News. "إسرائيل تغتال فائق المبحوح في غزة.. ما أبرز مهامه؟". التلفزيون العربي (in Arabic). 18 March 2024. Retrieved 19 March 2024. Gunter, Joel; Gritten, David (18 March 2024). "Israeli forces raid Gaza City's al-Shifa hospital". Retrieved 19 March 2024. Berger, Miriam; Loveluck, Louisa (19 March 2024). "Israeli forces raid Gaza City hospital; U.S. confirms death of top Hamas leader". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 20 March 2024. "US says seeking information on reports of detained Al Jazeera reporter in Gaza". Reuters. 18 March 2024. "Israeli forces storm Gaza's al-Shifa Hospital". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 19 March 2024. "Al Jazeera journalist freed after 12-hour arrest by Israeli forces in Gaza". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 19 March 2024. "Witnesses: IDF assaulted, detained Al-Jazeera journalist in hospital raid". Committee to Protect Journalists. 18 March 2024. Retrieved 19 March 2024. "Israel Gaza: US reports death of senior Hamas military leader Marwan Issa". BBC. 19 March 2024. Retrieved 19 March 2024. Kent, Lauren; Al-Za’anoun, Khader; Khadder, Kareem (23 March 2024). "At least 19 Palestinians killed by Israeli military while waiting for aid in Gaza – Gazan authorities". CNN. Retrieved 24 March 2024. "UN Security Council adopts resolution demanding immediate Gaza ceasefire". Al Jazeera. 25 March 2024. Retrieved 25 March 2024. Vogt, Adrienne; B. Powell, Tori; Berlinger, Joshua; Lau, Chris (30 March 2024). "Israel admits killing 2 Palestinians and then burying them with a bulldozer after shocking video surfaces". CNN. Retrieved 31 March 2024. "Israeli soldiers shoot and kill two unarmed Palestinians in Gaza: Video". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 31 March 2024. Fassihi, Farnaz (1 November 2023). "After Years of Vowing to Destroy Israel, Iran Faces a Dilemma". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 9 November 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. Tharoor, Ishaan (31 October 2023). "As Israel pummels Gaza, the crisis in the West Bank comes into focus". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 29 November 2023. שלום, עודד; לשבת", "מוסף (9 November 2023). "האלימות של המתנחלים ביו"ש מפריעה לצה"ל. חייבים להבין, זה עלול להביא להסלמה שתוביל לפתיחת עוד זירה" ["The violence of the settlers in Yosh disturbs the IDF. We must understand, this may lead to an escalation that will lead to the opening of another arena"]. ynet (in Hebrew). Retrieved 14 November 2023. "Spike in Israeli lethal force against Palestinians in Occupied West Bank". Amnesty International. 5 February 2024. Archived from the original on 5 February 2024. Retrieved 5 February 2024. "Israel's 'chilling disregard' for life in occupied West Bank: Amnesty". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 5 February 2024. Retrieved 5 February 2024. Rasgon, Adam (6 February 2024). "Mideast Crisis: In Gaza's Crowded South, Many Fear a New Israeli Ground Push". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 6 February 2024. Retrieved 6 February 2024 – via NYTimes.com. Abi-Habib, Maria; Nazzal, Rami (30 October 2023). "Settler Violence Against Palestinians in the West Bank Is Rising". The New York Times. Loveluck, Louisa (9 November 2023). "Settler violence is erasing Palestinian communities in the West Bank". The Washington Post. Retrieved 10 November 2023. Federman, Josef; Adwan, Issam (11 October 2023). "Palestinians scramble for safety as Israel pounds sealed-off Gaza Strip to punish Hamas". Associated Press. Retrieved 11 October 2023. "Four Palestinians killed in Israeli settler attack: ministry". France 24. 11 October 2023. "aistishhad 'ab wanajlih birasas almustawtinin janub nabulus" استشهاد أب ونجله برصاص المستوطنين جنوب نابلس [Father and son killed by settlers' gunfire south of Nablus]. Al Quds (in Arabic). 12 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023. "2 Palestinians killed after settlers said to ambush funeral in West Bank". The Times of Israel. 12 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023. "Palestinians rush to buy food and struggle under strikes as Israel readies possible ground operation". Associated Press. 12 October 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2023. Al Amir, Khitam (18 October 2023). "Jordan cancels US President Biden's visit to Amman, quartet summit". Gulf News. Retrieved 18 October 2023. Al Tahhan, Zena (18 October 2023). "Palestinian Authority cracks down on protests over Israel Gaza attacks". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 18 October 2023. "Hamas spokesman reportedly among scores arrested in occupied West Bank". CNN. 19 October 2023. Retrieved 19 October 2023. "Israel strikes mosque in occupied West Bank refugee camp". Al Jazeera. 22 October 2023. Retrieved 22 October 2023. Fabian, Emanuel (27 October 2023). "IDF confirms deadly clashes with gunmen in West Bank raids; 36 arrested". The Times of Israel. Retrieved 31 October 2023. Jhaveri, Ashka; Moore, Johanna; Tyson, Kathryn; Carter, Brian; Ganzeveld, Annika; Carl, Nicholas (31 October 2023). "Iran Update, October 31, 2023". Institute for the Study of War. Retrieved 1 November 2023. The al Quds Brigades and the Tulkarm Battalion of the al Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades conducted a combined small arms attack on Israeli forces in Shuweika near Tulkarm, indicating growing coordination between the two groups. This was the first combined attack between the al Quds Brigades and al Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades in the West Bank since October 19. Siddiqui, Usaid. "Situation in occupied West Bank 'very hard': Hebron-based activist". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 1 November 2023. "Settler violence against Palestinians in West Bank on the rise, OCHA says". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Halabi, Liran Tamari Einav; Zitun, Yoav (30 November 2023). "3 killed, at least 11 injured in shooting attack near entrance to Jerusalem". Ynet. Retrieved 30 November 2023. Fabian, Emanuel (16 February 2024). "Two killed, 4 hurt in terror attack at Re'em Junction in south Israel; gunman dead". The Times of Israel. Archived from the original on 19 February 2024. Retrieved 16 February 2024. "Israel, Hezbollah exchange fire raising regional tensions". Al Jazeera. 8 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. Fabian, Emanuel (8 October 2023). "IDF artillery strikes targets in Lebanon as mortar shells fired toward Israel". The Times of Israel. Retrieved 8 October 2023. "Israeli strike in southern Lebanon kills civilians, including children; intense bombardment of Gaza City commences: Hamas-Israel war, day 30". L'Orient Today. Fabian, Emanuel. "Authorities name 347 soldiers, 58 police officers killed in Gaza war". The Times of Israel. Retrieved 5 November 2023. Six soldiers have also been killed in attacks claimed by the Palestinian Islamic Jihad and the Hezbollah terror group on the border with Lebanon since the fighting started. One soldier was killed in a West Bank terror attack. The military's list also includes a soldier killed by friendly fire in the West Bank, a soldier killed due to malfunctioning ammunition on the Lebanon border, and two soldiers killed in a tank accident in northern Israel. "A woman and 3 children are killed by an Israeli airstrike in south Lebanon, local officials say". ABC News. 2 November 2023. Retrieved 2 November 2023. "Lebanon says Israeli strike kills reporter's 4 relatives". France 24. 5 November 2023. Retrieved 5 November 2023. "Lebanon army says one soldier killed in Israeli shelling on border post". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 6 December 2023. "Tensions high in south Lebanon in anticipation of Hezbollah's next move". Arab News. Retrieved 6 December 2023. Zilber, Neri (16 November 2023). "Israel's dilemma in confronting the threat from Hezbollah". Christian Science Monitor. ISSN 0882-7729. Retrieved 19 November 2023. "US warship intercepts missiles fired from Yemen 'potentially towards Israel'". BBC News. 20 October 2023. Retrieved 31 October 2023. "US warship in Red Sea intercepts 3 missiles fired from Yemen, possibly at Israel". The Times of Israel. Retrieved 31 October 2023. "Yemen seen as source of fire on Eilat". Times of Israel. Retrieved 31 October 2023. "US Navy destroyer in Red Sea shoots down cruise missiles potentially headed toward Israel: Pentagon". ABC News. Retrieved 12 November 2023. Dahan, Maha El (31 October 2023). "Yemen's Houthis enter Mideast fray, hardening spillover fears". Reuters. "Yemen hasn't declared war on Israel, contrary to online claims. Houthi rebels have launched missiles". AP News. 1 November 2023. Retrieved 4 November 2023. Gambrell, Jon (22 November 2023). "Yemen rebels' helicopter-borne attack on ship raises risks in Red Sea". Associated Press. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "US destroyer shoots down drones after Houthi attack on ships in Red Sea". France 24. 4 December 2023. "Yemen's Houthis say they targeted two Israeli ships in Red Sea: Report". Al Jazeera. 3 December 2023. Retrieved 3 December 2023. Michaelis, Tamar (10 December 2023). "Israel ready to act against Houthi rebels if international community fails to, national security adviser says". CNN. "Army says building damaged in Eilat drone attack, apparently launched from Iraq". The Times of Israel. 1 April 2024. "Iran-Backed 'Islamic Resistance In Iraq' Claims Attack Against Israeli Target On Dead Sea Coastline". MEMRI. Retrieved 25 November 2023. "Iraqi militia attempts Eilat drone attack, was intercepted over Jordan". The Jerusalem Post. 22 December 2023. Retrieved 27 December 2023. "Suspected explosive-laden drone crashes in Golan; Iraqi militia claims responsibility". The Times of Israel. 28 December 2023. Retrieved 28 December 2023. "Iran-backed militias in Iraq claim to have targeted Israeli gas rig in Mediterranean". The Times of Israel. 22 December 2023. Retrieved 22 December 2023. "Iraqi Shiite factions attack Haifa with a strategic missile". Shafaq News. Retrieved 8 January 2024. Monks, Kieron (25 January 2024). "Iraqi militias claim drone strike on Israel's biggest port as attacks ramp up". inews.co.uk. Retrieved 22 February 2024. "Iraqi Islamic resistance attack on Kiryat Shmona airport". webangah. 6 March 2024. Retrieved 7 March 2024. "Chaos in Tel Aviv: Iraqi resistance strikes Israel's main airport with drone". The Times of India. Retrieved 13 March 2024. "Iraqi terror group claims to target Ben-Gurion Airport in alleged drone strike". I24news. 12 March 2024. Retrieved 13 March 2024. "An Israeli-owned ship was targeted in suspected Iranian attack in Indian Ocean, US official tells AP". AP News. 25 November 2023. Retrieved 25 November 2023. Epstein, Jake (14 December 2023). "Exploding Iranian drones cause chaos, no match for US Navy warships". Business Insider. "India drone strike: Cargo ship attacked off Gujarat coast". BBC News. 23 December 2023. Retrieved 23 December 2023. "Khamenei Attends Funeral, Hails Slain General's 'Indefatigable Jihad'". Iran International. 28 December 2023. "Top IRGC officer killed in Syria strike identified as Gen. Sadegh Omidzadeh". Times of Israel. Associated Press. 20 January 2024. Archived from the original on 20 January 2024. Retrieved 20 January 2024. Bowen, Jeremy; Gritten, David (1 April 2024). "Israel accused of deadly strike on Iranian consulate in Syria". BBC News. Retrieved 1 April 2024.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: url-status (link) "Iran says Israel bombed its embassy in Syria, killing a top commander". Reuters. 1 April 2024.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: url-status (link) Ioanes, Ellen (14 October 2023). "Gaza's spiraling humanitarian crisis, explained". Vox. Retrieved 16 October 2023. Marsi, Federica (14 October 2023). "Gaza doctors warn of a humanitarian catastrophe after Israeli attacks". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 25 October 2023. Gottbrath, Laurin-Whitney. "Gaza "fast becoming hell hole" on "brink of collapse" amid Israel strikes: UN". Axios. Retrieved 16 October 2023. Mellen, Ruby; Chen, Szu Yu (26 October 2023). "See how Israel's siege has plunged Gaza into darkness and isolation". The Washington Post. Retrieved 27 October 2023. "Gaza has become a moonscape in war. When the battles stop, many fear it will remain uninhabitable". Politico. Associated Press. 23 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. Reed, John; Mehul, Srivastava (13 October 2023). "Residents flee Gaza City as Israel tells 1.1mn to leave". Financial Times. Retrieved 13 October 2023. "Hostilities in the Gaza Strip and Israel - reported impact | Day 146". UN OCHA. Retrieved 4 March 2024. "Israel social security data reveals true picture of Oct 7 deaths". France 24. Agence France-Presse. 15 December 2023. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 24 December 2023. "14 kids under 10, 25 people over 80: Up-to-date breakdown of Oct 7 victims we know about". Times of Israel. 4 December 2023. Retrieved 24 December 2023. Abraham, Yuval (6 November 2023). "A Gazan worked in Israeli kibbutzim for decades. Then came Oct. 7". +972 magazine. Archived from the original on 7 November 2023. "רשימת שמות החטופים לעזה" [The list of names of those abducted to Gaza]. The list of names of those abducted to Gaza (in Hebrew). Israeli Public Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 27 December 2023. Emanuel, Fabian; Horovitz, Michael. "Israeli civilian killed by anti-tank missile in north as Hezbollah attacks continue". Times of Israel. No. 7 December 2023. Retrieved 24 December 2023. Fabian, Emanuel (14 January 2024). "Israeli man killed in Hezbollah anti-tank missile attack in Kfar Yuval, northern Israel". Times of Israel. Retrieved 14 January 2024. Fabian, Emanuel. "Authorities name 347 soldiers, 58 police officers killed in Gaza war". The Times of Israel. Retrieved 5 November 2023. Six soldiers have also been killed in attacks claimed by the Palestinian Islamic Jihad and the Hezbollah terror group on the border with Lebanon since the fighting started. One soldier was killed in a West Bank terror attack. The military's list also includes a soldier killed by friendly fire in the West Bank, a soldier killed due to malfunctioning ammunition on the Lebanon border, and two soldiers killed in a tank accident in northern Israel. Including: 810 civilians 695 Israelis, 5 Gazans and 71 foreign citizens on October 7 29 hostages in Gaza 5 on the Lebanese border 4 in Jerusalem 1 in Ra'anana 600 service members 529 soldiers 61 Israel Police officers 10 Shin Bet personnel "Israeli strikes kill UN staff, more than 70 of his extended family in Gaza". Al Jazeera. 24 December 2023. Retrieved 5 January 2024. "Journalist casualties in the Israel-Gaza war". Committee to Protect Journalists. 5 March 2024. Retrieved 5 March 2024. Vinograd, Cassandra; Kershner, Isabel (2 November 2023). "Israel's Attackers Took About 240 Hostages. Here's What to Know About Them". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 7 November 2023. Retrieved 7 November 2023. "Images of the Mass Kidnapping of Israelis by Hamas". The Atlantic. 9 October 2023. Archived from the original on 10 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023. "Huge Gaza death toll is likely to be even higher than reported - occupied Palestinian territory". reliefweb.int. OCHA. 20 December 2023. Retrieved 21 March 2024. Salama, Vivian. "State Department Says Gaza Death Toll Could Be Higher Than Reported". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 21 March 2024. Batrawy, Aya (29 February 2024). "Gaza's death toll now exceeds 30,000. Here's why it's an incomplete count". NPR. Retrieved 29 February 2024. Abu Shahma, Mohammad; Asrar, Shakeeb; Antonopoulos, Konstantinos. "Under the rubble: The missing in Gaza". aljazeera.com. Al Jazeera. Retrieved 5 March 2024. "Hamas official says over 6,000 fighters have been killed so far in Gaza war". 19 February 2024. Retrieved 18 March 2024. Nakhoul, Samia; Saul, Jonathan; Humeyra, Pamuk (19 February 2024). "Rafah attack: How Israel plans to hit Hamas and scale back war". Reuters. Retrieved 24 February 2024. Youssef, Nancy A.; Malsin, Jared; Keller-Lynn, Carrie (21 January 2024). "Hamas Toll Thus Far Falls Short of Israel's War Aims, U.S. Says". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 31 January 2024. "Israeli raids kill five as lethal operations persist in occupied West Bank". Al Jazeera. 2 January 2024. Retrieved 3 January 2024. Shurafa, Wafaa; Mroue, Bassem (11 November 2023). "Fighting intensifies at Gaza's largest hospital. Its director says patients have died because the power is out". AP News. Retrieved 11 November 2023. Sabbagh, Dan (10 November 2023). "Civilian death rate in Israeli airstrikes higher than in past conflicts, study finds". The Guardian. "As Gaza death toll soars, secrecy shrouds Israel's targeting process". The Washington Post. 5 November 2023. "Numbers of civilian deaths per airstrike in 2023 Gaza far higher than previous Israeli bombings, but half that of Russian/Syrian attacks in Mosul and Aleppo. Under-reporting of the dead or less lethal tactics?". ReliefWeb. 8 November 2023. Retrieved 11 December 2023. Davies, Harry; McKernan, Bethan; Sabbagh, Dan (1 December 2023). "'The Gospel': how Israel uses AI to select bombing targets in Gaza". The Guardian. Leatherby, Lauren (25 November 2023). "Gaza Civilians, Under Israeli Barrage, Are Being Killed at Historic Pace". The New York Times. "'A lot of dreams are being lost': 5,000 Gazan children feared killed since conflict began". ITV. 12 November 2023. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Israeli attacks wipe out entire families in Gaza". Amnesty International. 20 October 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Kullab, Samya; Jobain, Najib (16 November 2023). "Their families wiped out, grieving Palestinians in Gaza ask why". AP News. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Rajvanshi, Astha (31 October 2023). "Israeli Airstrikes Have 'Wiped Out Entire Families'". TIME. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 17 December 2023. "How the loss of entire families is ravaging the social fabric of Gaza". Financial Times. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Gaza: Krankenschwester aus den USA berichtet von »massiven Verbrennungen« bei Kindern" [Gaza: Nurse from the USA reports "massive burns" among children]. Der Spiegel (in German). 8 November 2023. ISSN 2195-1349. Retrieved 10 November 2023. "Why an American nurse who got out of Gaza says she would go back". CNN. 8 November 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. Kao, Josie (20 March 2024). "Doctors who visited Gaza speak of 'atrocities,' collapsing healthcare". Reuters. Retrieved 20 March 2024. Browne, Grace (24 October 2023). "'The whole health system is collapsing around us.' Doctors say Gaza is on the brink". Wired. Archived from the original on 27 October 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2023. "Gaza hospital generators to run out of fuel in 48 hours: Health Ministry". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 24 October 2023. Magdy, Samy; Shurafa, Wafaa; Kullab, Samya. "Dwindling fuel supplies for Gaza's hospital generators put premature babies in incubators at risk". ABC News. Retrieved 24 October 2023. "Hostilities in the Gaza Strip and Israel: Flash Update #35". United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. 10 November 2023. Retrieved 13 November 2023. "Gaza medics say Israel targeting ambulances, health facilities". Al Jazeera. 12 October 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2023. "Healthcare system in Gaza has 'totally collapsed'". The Peninsula Qatar. 24 October 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2023. "Israel-Hamas war live: Biden in Israel, anger over Gaza hospital attack". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 18 October 2023. Kingsley, Patrick; Bergman, Ronen; Yazbek, Hiba (27 October 2023). "Israel Says It Is Expanding Operations as It Steps Up Gaza Bombardment". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 27 October 2023. Retrieved 27 October 2023. Al-Mughrabi, Nidal; Williams, Dan; Al-Mughrabi, Nidal (14 November 2023). "Israeli forces outside main Gaza hospital, offer to send in incubators". Reuters. Retrieved 14 November 2023. The Israeli military said it was coordinating the transfer of incubators into Gaza, in a possible measure to enable the evacuation of newborn babies from the hospital. "Israel-Hamas war: Fighting continues around hospitals as IDF pledges incubators for sick babies". Sky News. Retrieved 14 November 2023. Al-Mughrabi, Nidal; Williams, Dan; Al-Mughrabi, Nidal (14 November 2023). "Lives of 36 babies in Gaza hospital at risk despite Israeli incubator offer". Reuters. Retrieved 29 November 2023. "Israel's claims of providing incubators 'false', says al-Shifa director". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 18 November 2023. Retrieved 17 November 2023. Singh, Namita (10 December 2023). "UN says half of Gaza's population is now starving". The Independent. Retrieved 13 December 2023. Siddiqui, Usaid; Pietromarchi, Virginia; Quillen, Stephen (10 December 2023). "Israel-Hamas war updates: Fierce battles rage in southern and northern Gaza". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 13 December 2023. Ebrahim, Nadeen (5 December 2023). "'It's chaos': Starving Gazans dig for food, supplies under the rubble". CNN. Retrieved 13 December 2023. "Fights in bread lines, despair in shelters: War threatens to unravel Gaza's close-knit society". AP News. 9 November 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. "Airdropping aid is inefficient — so why is the U.S. doing it in Gaza anyway?". NPR. 6 March 2024. "Palestinian minister accuses Israel of starving Gazans; Israel says charge 'obscene'". Reuters. 13 December 2023. Retrieved 13 December 2023. "Israel: Starvation Used as Weapon of War in Gaza". Human Rights Watch. 18 December 2023. Retrieved 1 January 2024. "Over one hundred days into the war, Israel destroying Gaza's food system and weaponizing food, say UN human rights experts". OHCHR. United Nations. 16 January 2024. Archived from the original on 26 February 2024. Retrieved 26 January 2024. Lakhani, Nina. "Israel is deliberately starving Palestinians, UN rights expert says". The Guardian. "UN expert calls for sanctions against Israel as 'famine' may 'be already occurring' in Gaza". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 6 March 2024. *"Dozens killed as chaos hits Gaza food convoy and Israeli troops open fire". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 29 February 2024. Retrieved 1 March 2024. "Many of those killed or wounded in Gaza stampede for aid were shot by Israel's army, EU arm says". AP News. 2 March 2024. Archived from the original on 3 March 2024. *Champion, Mark (1 March 2024). "Gaza's Aid Convoy 'Massacre' Shows How Desperately We Need a Cease-Fire". Bloomberg.com. Archived from the original on 2 March 2024. Retrieved 1 March 2024. Khaled, Fatma; Le Masurier, Jessica (1 March 2024). "'Flour massacre': Aid delivery turns deadly in Gaza as UN warns famine 'almost inevitable'". France 24. Archived from the original on 1 March 2024. Retrieved 1 March 2024. Grim, Ryan (2 March 2024). "WCNSF: The Most Haunting Acronym the World Has Produced". The Intercept. Archived from the original on 2 March 2024. Retrieved 2 March 2024. Assi, Seraj (1 March 2024). "Israel's Flour Massacre in Gaza Is a Horrific War Crime". Jacobin. Archived from the original on 1 March 2024. Retrieved 1 March 2024. "UN Human Rights Office strongly deplores killing of at least 112 Palestinians during food aid distribution in Gaza City". ReliefWeb. OHCHR. March 2024. Retrieved 4 March 2024. "Deeply Shocked': India on Palestinians Killed During Delivery of Humanitarian Aid". The Wire. 1 March 2024. Retrieved 3 March 2024. "Gaza Strip: Hostilities leave the entire population highly food insecure and at risk of Famine". www.ipcinfo.org. Retrieved 22 February 2024. https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2024/03/18/gaza-famine-report-ipc/ "Oxfam accuses Israel of 'deliberately' blocking aid to famine-stalked Gaza". Al Jazeera. "Gaza Aid Declined Significantly in February". The New York Times. "Application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide in the Gaza Strip (South Africa v. Israel) - The Republic of South Africa submits an urgent request for the indication of additional provisional measures and the modification of the Court's prior provisional measures Order and decision - ICJ - Press Release and Application". Kim, Victoria (7 March 2024). "Middle East Crisis: South Africa Asks U.N. Court to Act as Hunger Worsens in Gaza". The New York Times – via NYTimes.com. "South Africa asks ICJ for more measures against Israel over Gaza 'famine'". Al Jazeera. "Israel has waged one of this century's most destructive wars in Gaza". The Washington Post. 23 December 2023. Archived from the original on 27 December 2023. Retrieved 31 December 2023. Malsin, Jared; Shah, Saeed (30 December 2023). "The Ruined Landscape of Gaza After Nearly Three Months of Bombing". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 31 December 2023. Wintour, Patrick (7 December 2023). "Widespread destruction in Gaza puts concept of 'domicide' in focus". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 31 December 2023. Dyer, Evan (30 December 2023). "Israel's Gaza bombing campaign is the most destructive of this century, analysts say". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 3 January 2024. Retrieved 31 December 2023. "Military briefing: Israel's devastating bombing campaign in Gaza". Financial Times. Retrieved 31 December 2023. Kristof, Nicholas (13 January 2024). "The Things We Disagree On About Gaza". The New York Times. "Satellite images show 35% of buildings in Gaza have been damaged or destroyed, UN says". CNN. 21 March 2024. Retrieved 25 March 2024. "35% of Buildings Affected in Gaza Strip". UNITAR. Retrieved 25 March 2024. "Over 50% of Gaza buildings damaged or destroyed in Israel's bombardment". Axios. 5 January 2024. Archived from the original on 5 February 2024. Retrieved 18 January 2024. "The numbers that reveal the extent of the destruction in Gaza". The Guardian. 8 January 2024. Archived from the original on 20 February 2024. Retrieved 18 January 2024. "Military briefing: the Israeli bombs raining on Gaza". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 27 December 2023. Retrieved 31 December 2023. Leffer, Lauren (1 December 2023). "Inside the Satellite Tech Revealing Gaza's Destruction". Scientific American. Archived from the original on 31 December 2023. Retrieved 31 December 2023. Doctors w/o Borders [@MSF_USA] (20 October 2023). "You need that fuel to run generators for life saving medical equipment.' There is a lack of painkillers. Access to supplies means life or death at this point. We're deeply concerned for the fate of everyone in Gaza right now" (Tweet). Retrieved 20 October 2023 – via Twitter. "'The world must do more' for Gaza, 5 UN agencies say". UN News. 21 October 2023. Retrieved 22 October 2023. WHO Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean [@WHOEMRO] (26 October 2023). "'The humanitarian and health crisis in Gaza has reached catastrophic proportions. It is our moral duty, an imperative that transcends political boundaries, to demand unobstructed access for delivering life-saving aid.' – Dr Ahmed Al-Mandhari, @WHOEMRO Regional Director" (Tweet). Retrieved 26 October 2023 – via Twitter. "Red Cross president says 'shocked by the intolerable level of human suffering'". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 28 October 2023. Al-Mughrabi, Nidal (6 November 2023). "Gaza death toll tops 10,000; UN calls it a children's graveyard". Reuters. Retrieved 8 November 2023. "UN chief: Gaza has become 'graveyard for kids'; Israeli envoy calls for him to resign". The Times of Israel. Retrieved 8 November 2023. Nichols, Michelle. "UN chief says Gaza becoming a 'graveyard for children'". Reuters. Retrieved 6 November 2023. "'We have fallen off a precipice', UN human rights chief says". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 8 November 2023. "Tens of thousands flee on foot as UN says north of Gaza is 'hell on earth'". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 14 November 2023. איילנד, גיורא (10 October 2023). "זו לא נקמה. זה או אנחנו או הם". Ynet (in Hebrew). Retrieved 3 November 2023. Khalidi, Rashid (15 October 2023). "The U.S. Should Think Twice About Israel's Plans for Gaza". The New York Times. Retrieved 26 October 2023. Whitman, Ariel (10 August 2023). "Giora Eiland outlines plan to get hostages back alive". Globes. Retrieved 3 November 2023. Lederer, Edith (18 October 2023). "US vetoes UN resolution condemning Hamas's attacks on Israel and all violence against civilians". Associated Press. Retrieved 18 October 2023. Fulton, Adam; Chao-Fong, Léonie; Kassam, Ashifa; Sullivan, Helen (28 October 2023). "Israel-Hamas war live: Gaza phone and internet cut off as Israel intensifies attacks". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 October 2023. Retrieved 27 October 2023. "UNGA urges humanitarian truce in Gaza: How did your country vote?". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 28 October 2023. Retrieved 28 October 2023. Nichols, Michelle (28 October 2023). "UN overwhelmingly calls for aid truce between Israel and Hamas". Reuters. Archived from the original on 28 October 2023. Retrieved 29 October 2023. "Israel agrees to daily 4-hour humanitarian pauses in northern Gaza fighting". CBS News. 9 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. Abu Riash, Abdelhakim. "In Pictures: 'Saw death in every colour': Palestinians fleeing north Gaza recount horror". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 19 November 2023. Mousa, Aseel (26 November 2023). "'Soldiers started shooting at my feet': Palestinians describe fleeing northern Gaza". The Guardian. Retrieved 27 November 2023. "Civilian deaths in Gaza are a stain on Israel and its allies". Norwegian Refugee Council. Retrieved 9 December 2023. "UN General Assembly votes overwhelmingly in favour of Gaza ceasefire". Al Jazeera. 12 December 2023. El Atti, Basma; Husseini, Ibrahim (12 December 2023). "Israeli strikes kill dozens in Gaza amid UN vote". The New Arab. Retrieved 14 December 2023. Banner, Alexandra (17 January 2024). "5 things to know for Jan. 17: 2024 race, Government shutdown, Gaza hostages, Cigarettes, Unruly passengers". CNN. Archived from the original on 17 January 2024. Retrieved 17 January 2024. "Israel-Hamas war live updates: Medicine for hostages to be delivered in Gaza aid deal". NBC News. 17 January 2024. Archived from the original on 17 January 2024. Retrieved 17 January 2024. "Qatar says it's brokered deal to allow medicine, aid into Gaza". ABC News. 16 January 2024. Archived from the original on 17 January 2024. Retrieved 17 January 2024. Hauser, Jennifer (17 January 2024). "Medicine and aid for Palestinians and hostages arrives in Gaza, Qatar foreign ministry says". CNN. Archived from the original on 17 January 2024. Retrieved 17 January 2024. "Genocide Emergency Alert: Israel and Gaza". Genocide Watch. 19 October 2023. Retrieved 7 December 2023. Winer, Stuart (15 October 2023). "Hamas actions are war crimes, could constitute genocide – international law experts". Times of Israel. "Deadly Hamas Rampage Constitutes 'International Crime of Genocide,' Hundreds of Legal Experts Say". Haaretz. Retrieved 7 December 2023. "How the term "genocide" is misused in the Israel-Hamas war". The Economist. ISSN 0013-0613. Retrieved 7 December 2023. Winer, Stuart. "Hamas actions are war crimes, could constitute genocide – international law experts". The Times of Israel. Retrieved 4 November 2023. Ohlin, Jens David (12 October 2023). "International Criminal Law Analysis of the Situation in Israel". Opinio Juris. Retrieved 15 October 2023. "Investigating Sexual and Gender-Based Violence in Conflict". Human Rights Watch. 12 December 2023. Archived from the original on 29 January 2024. Retrieved 29 January 2024. "Biden calls reports of Hamas raping Israeli hostages 'appalling,' says world can't look away". Associated Press. 6 December 2023. "Sexual Violence Evidence Against Hamas Is Mounting, but the Road to Court Is Still Long". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 23 November 2023. Retrieved 29 November 2023. Gettleman, Jeffrey; Sella, Adam; Schwartz, Anat (4 December 2023). "What We Know About Sexual Violence During the Oct. 7 Attacks on Israel". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 7 December 2023. Cite error: The named reference BBC News-2023 was invoked but never defined (see the help page). "Israel investigates an elusive, horrific enemy: Rape as a weapon of war". The Washington Post. 25 November 2023. Retrieved 7 December 2023. "Reasonable Grounds to Believe Conflict-Related Sexual Violence Occurred in Israel During 7 October Attacks, Senior UN Official Tells Security Council | Meetings Coverage and Press Releases". press.un.org. Retrieved 13 March 2024. Lederer, Edith M. (4 March 2024). "A UN envoy says there are 'reasonable grounds' to believe Hamas committed sexual violence on Oct. 7". AP News. Retrieved 13 March 2024. Lamb, Christina (3 December 2023). "First Hamas fighters raped her. Then they shot her in the head". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Retrieved 3 December 2023. Grim, Ryan; Boguslaw, Daniel; Scahill, Jeremy (29 February 2024). "Between the Hammer and the Anvil: The Story Behind the New York Times October 7 Exposé". theintercept.com. The Intercept. Retrieved 1 April 2024. Rabinowitz, Aaron (31 January 2024). "Death and Donations: Did the Israeli Volunteer Group Handling the Dead of October 7 Exploit Its Role?". Haaretz. Retrieved 1 April 2024. Gupta, Arun (27 February 2024). "American Media Keep Citing Zaka — Though Its October 7 Atrocity Stories are Discredited in Israel". theintercept.com. The Intercept. Retrieved 1 April 2024. "Women in War Under International Law". en.idi.org.il. 2023. Retrieved 29 November 2023. Lawless, Jill (5 November 2023). "How international law applies to war, and why Hamas and Israel are both alleged to have broken it". Los Angeles Times. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 28 November 2023. Retrieved 29 November 2023. Kottasová, Ivana (6 December 2023). "What we know about rape and sexual violence inflicted by Hamas during its terror attack on Israel". CNN International. Archived from the original on 30 January 2024. Retrieved 29 January 2024. Since then, dozens of hostages have been released from Gaza as part of a truce between Israel and Hamas and some have also mentioned sexual abuse during their testimonies. Gettleman, Jeffrey; Schwartz, Anat; Sella, Adam; Shaar-Yashuv, Avishag (28 December 2023). "'Screams Without Words': How Hamas Weaponized Sexual Violence on Oct. 7". The New York Times. Retrieved 29 December 2023. Scahill, Jeremy; Grim, Ryan; Boguslaw, Daniel. "The Story Behind the New York Times October 7 Exposé". The Intercept. North, James (25 February 2024). "Extraordinary charges of bias emerge against NYTimes reporter Anat Schwartz". Mondoweiss. Retrieved 25 February 2024. Mednick, Sam (5 December 2023). "New signs emerge of 'widespread' sexual crimes by Hamas, as Netanyahu alleges global indifference". AP News. Lubell, Mayan (5 December 2023). "Israeli accounts of sexual violence by Hamas rise but justice is remote". Reuters. Retrieved 14 December 2023. Fossum, Jack; Fossum, Sam (10 December 2023). "Blinken calls sexual violence inflicted by Hamas 'beyond anything I've seen'". CNN. Retrieved 14 December 2023. "UN experts demand accountability for sexual torture during Hamas attacks". Reuters. 8 January 2024. Archived from the original on 28 January 2024. "Hamas, Islamic Jihad: Holding Hostages is a War Crime". Human Rights Watch. 19 October 2023. Archived from the original on 20 October 2023. Retrieved 21 January 2024. "Israel: Palestinian armed groups must be held accountable for deliberate civilian killings, abductions and indiscriminate attacks". Amnesty International. 12 October 2023. Archived from the original on 22 October 2023. Retrieved 21 January 2024. "More than 100 bodies found in Israeli kibbutz Be'eri after Hamas attack". CNN. 10 October 2023. Retrieved 10 March 2024. "Hamas attack thrusts kibbutzniks into strange and terrible twilight". The Washington Post. 18 November 2023. Retrieved 10 March 2024. "New footage shows dozens of Hamas terrorists entering Kibbutz Be'eri". The Times of Israel. 16 October 2023. Retrieved 10 March 2024. "Public Statement: Scholars Warn of Potential Genocide in Gaza". Third World Approaches to International Law Review. 17 October 2023. Komnenic, Ana. "Experts, advocates deeply divided on question of 'genocide' in Gaza". CBC. Retrieved 31 December 2023. "Gaza: UN experts call on international community to prevent genocide against the Palestinian people". OHCHR. 16 November 2023. Archived from the original on 24 December 2023. Retrieved 22 December 2023. Grave violations committed by Israel against Palestinians in the aftermath of 7 October, particularly in Gaza, point to a genocide in the making, UN experts said today. They illustrated evidence of increasing genocidal incitement, overt intent to "destroy the Palestinian people under occupation", loud calls for a 'second Nakba' in Gaza and the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory, and the use of powerful weaponry with inherently indiscriminate impacts, resulting in a colossal death toll and destruction of life-sustaining infrastructure. "Brazil's Lula doubles down on claim Israel committing genocide in Gaza". Times of Israel. 24 February 2024. "'Genocide', Colombia says as Latin American states condemn Israel over Gaza". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 17 March 2024. "Namibia: Germany 'unable to draw lessons from history' – DW – 01/24/2024". dw.com. Retrieved 1 April 2024. Sterling, Toby; Roelf, Wendell. "South Africa files genocide case against Israel at World Court". reuters.com. Reuters. Retrieved 27 January 2024. "South Africa files case at ICJ accusing Israel of 'genocidal acts' in Gaza". aljazeera.com. Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 8 January 2024. Retrieved 27 January 2024. "Application instituting proceedings and request for the indication of provisional measures" (PDF). International Court of Justice. 29 December 2023. Paragraph 1. Retrieved 31 December 2023. Jones, Mared Gwyn (12 January 2024). "Why is the EU mostly silent on South Africa's genocide case against Israel?". Euronews.com. Retrieved 18 March 2024. "Genocide case against Israel: Where does the rest of the world stand on the momentous allegations?". AP News. 13 January 2024. Retrieved 17 March 2024. "Israel to contest genocide case filed by South Africa at International Court of Justice". www.aa.com.tr. "Order respecting South Africa's request for provisional measures" (PDF). International Court of Justice. 26 January 2024. Al-Kassab, Fatima. "A top U.N. court says Gaza genocide is 'plausible' but does not order cease-fire". National Public Radio. Archived from the original on 26 January 2024. Retrieved 27 January 2024. Heathcote, Edwin (7 March 2024). ""There can be no doubt that this is urbicide"". Dezeen. Retrieved 24 March 2024. Al-Daffaie, Yousif (20 February 2024). "The destruction of Gazaʼs historic buildings is an act of 'urbicide'". The Conversation. Retrieved 24 March 2024. Wagner, Kate (24 January 2024). "What Israel's Destruction of the Great Omari Mosque Means". ISSN 0027-8378. Retrieved 24 March 2024. Sullivan, Becky (9 February 2024). "What is 'domicide,' and why has war in Gaza brought new attention to the term?". NPR. Archived from the original on 9 February 2024. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Wintour, Patrick (7 December 2023). "Widespread destruction in Gaza puts concept of 'domicide' in focus". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 December 2023. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "Israel denies humanitarian aid wasn't checked for weapons before entering Gaza". Times of Israel. 22 October 2023. Baruch, Pnina Sharvit; Caner, Tammy (26 October 2023). "What are Israel's humanitarian obligations toward the civilians in Gaza?". The Institute for National Security Studies. Retrieved 14 November 2023. "Live Updates: Current US assessment is Israel 'not responsible' for Gaza hospital blast, White House says". AP News. Retrieved 14 November 2023. "Human Rights Watch: Gaza siege is a 'clear-cut war crime'". The Irish Times. 15 October 2023. Retrieved 22 October 2023. Dannenbaum, Tom (11 October 2023). "The Siege of Gaza and the Starvation War Crime". Just Security. Retrieved 22 October 2023. "Starvation used as a 'weapon of war' in Gaza amid Israeli siege: Oxfam". Al Jazeera. 25 October 2023. Retrieved 27 October 2023. Corn, Geoff; Watts, Sean (13 October 2023). "Israel – Hamas 2023 Symposium – Siege Law and Military Necessity". Articles of War. United States Military Academy at West Point. Retrieved 7 November 2023. Watts, Sean (4 March 2022). "Siege Law". Articles of War. United States Military Academy at West Point. Retrieved 5 January 2024. Greyman-Kennard, Danielle; Joffre, Tzvi (6 March 2024). "UN Special Rapporteur 'unaware' of rocket attacks on Israel". The Jerusalem Post. Retrieved 28 March 2024. "UN experts demand investigation into claims Israeli forces killed, raped and sexually assaulted Palestinian women and girls". CNN. 20 February 2024. Archived from the original on 20 February 2024. Retrieved 20 February 2024. "US official accused IDF of sexually abusing Palestinian women, general says". The Jerusalem Post. 24 March 2024. Retrieved 25 March 2024. Merlin, Ohad (25 March 2024). "Hamas, Al Jazeera admit: Story of IDF rapes in Gaza hospital fabricated". The Jerusalem Post. Retrieved 28 March 2024. https://www.timesofisrael.com/al-jazeera-report-alleging-idf-rapes-in-shifa-hospital-retracted/amp/. Retrieved 1 April 2024. {{cite news}}: Missing or empty |title= (help) "Is Israel acting within the laws of war?". The Economist. 14 October 2023. Retrieved 2 January 2024. Erlanger, Steven (13 December 2023). "Under Rules of War, 'Proportionality' in Gaza Is Not About Evening the Score". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2 January 2024. "As Gaza death toll soars, secrecy shrouds Israel's targeting process". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 26 December 2023. Retrieved 17 February 2024. Vasilyeva, Nataliya (13 March 2024). "More children killed in Gaza in four months than in four years of worldwide wars, says UN". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 17 March 2024. Retrieved 17 March 2024. {{cite web}}: |archive-date= / |archive-url= timestamp mismatch; 13 March 2024 suggested (help) Goldenziel, Jill. "Proportionality Doesn't Mean What You Think It Means In Gaza". Forbes. Retrieved 2 January 2024. "Israel/occupied Palestinian territory: UN experts deplore attacks on civilians, call for truce and urge international community to address root causes of violence". Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. 12 October 2023. "UN experts say Israel's strikes on Gaza amount to 'collective punishment'". Reuters. 12 October 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2023. "Israel's Strikes on Gaza Are Some of the Most Intense This Century". The New York Times. 25 October 2023. "UN expert warns of new instance of mass ethnic cleansing of Palestinians, calls for immediate ceasefire". Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. 14 October 2013. Retrieved 15 October 2023. "Gaza: UN experts call on international community to prevent genocide against the Palestinian people". OHCHR. 16 November 2023. Archived from the original on 24 December 2023. Retrieved 22 December 2023. Grave violations committed by Israel against Palestinians in the aftermath of 7 October, particularly in Gaza, point to a genocide in the making, UN experts said today. They illustrated evidence of increasing genocidal incitement, overt intent to "destroy the Palestinian people under occupation", loud calls for a 'second Nakba' in Gaza and the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory, and the use of powerful weaponry with inherently indiscriminate impacts, resulting in a colossal death toll and destruction of life-sustaining infrastructure. "UN Human Rights Office – OPT: Disturbing reports from the north of Gaza of mass detentions, ill-treatment and enforced disappearances of possibly thousands of Palestinians – occupied Palestinian territory". ReliefWeb. 16 December 2023. Retrieved 22 December 2023. "Arms exports to Israel must stop immediately: UN experts". OHCHR. 23 February 2024. Archived from the original on 25 February 2024. Retrieved 25 February 2024. Mian, Louis (27 March 2024). "'Reasonable grounds' to believe Israel is committing genocide in Gaza, UN rights expert says". CNN. Retrieved 28 March 2024. Massoud, Adla (4 March 2024). "Israel accuses UNRWA of hiring hundreds of 'terrorists' as agency claims torture of staff". The National. Retrieved 9 March 2024. "UNRWA report says Israel coerced some agency employees to falsely admit Hamas links". Reuters. 9 March 2024. Retrieved 9 March 2023. "Israel abused Gaza war detainees, UN report alleges". BBC News. 8 March 2024. Retrieved 9 March 2024. Veltman, Chloe (3 December 2023). "More than 100 Gaza heritage sites have been damaged or destroyed by Israeli attacks". NPR. "Outrage after Israel destroys Gaza's largest, oldest mosque". The New Arab. 8 December 2023. Saber, Indlieb Farazi (14 January 2024). "A 'cultural genocide': Which of Gaza's heritage sites have been destroyed?". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 14 January 2024. Osman, Nadda (7 December 2023). "Israel-Palestine war: Israeli forces destroy central archive of Gaza city". Middle East Eye. Retrieved 8 December 2023. "Israeli Airstrikes Destroys Ancient Mosque in Gaza City". Palestine Chronicle. 7 December 2023. "Israel/OPT: 'Nowhere safe in Gaza': Unlawful Israeli strikes illustrate callous disregard for Palestinian lives". Amnesty International. 20 November 2023. Retrieved 8 December 2023. Pollock, Laura (18 January 2024). "Israel destroys last university in Gaza as strikes continue". The National Scotland. Retrieved 20 January 2024. "Important Gaza archaeological site mostly destroyed: Research group". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "Israel military operation destroys a Gaza cemetery. Israel says Hamas used the site to hide a tunnel". AP News. 29 January 2024. Archived from the original on 1 February 2024. Retrieved 3 February 2024. "Israel says troops searched a Gaza cemetery for dead hostages". NBC News. 19 January 2024. Archived from the original on 2 February 2024. Retrieved 3 February 2024. Reiff, Ben (20 February 2024). "Israeli soldiers are looting Gaza homes en masse". +972 Magazine. Archived from the original on 22 February 2024. Retrieved 23 February 2024. Cloud, David S., "Israel Military Investigates Soldiers for Criminal Offenses in Gaza War", WSJ, archived from the original on 23 February 2024, retrieved 23 February 2024 Kubovich, Yaniv (21 February 2024). "Top IDF Lawyer: Some Soldiers' Behavior in Gaza Has 'Crossed the Criminal Threshold'". Haaretz.com. Archived from the original on 21 February 2024. Retrieved 23 February 2024. "Israel's top military lawyer warns troops in Gaza about 'improper conduct'". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 23 February 2024. Retrieved 23 February 2024. "UN chief urges ceasefire to end Gaza's 'godawful nightmare'". France 24. 21 October 2023. Retrieved 25 October 2023. Fassihi, Farnaz (24 October 2023). "Cease-fire Calls Dominate Fiery U.N. Security Council Session". The New York Times. Retrieved 26 October 2023. While condemning Hamas's "appalling" attacks, he emphasized that these actions could not "justify the collective punishment of the Palestinian people" and acknowledged the historical grievances of Palestinians. Israeli officials criticized Guterres, with Israeli foreign minister Eli Cohen canceling a meeting and demanding Guterres's resignation. Naar, Ismaeel (28 October 2023). "Iraq blames 'technical fault' for Gaza ceasefire vote mix-up at UN General Assembly". The National. Abu Dhabi. Retrieved 29 October 2023. Magid, Jacob (23 October 2023). "As EU weighs ceasefire call, US rejects any such push, says it only benefits Hamas". Times of Israel. Retrieved 25 October 2023. Borger, Julian (16 November 2023). "Joe Biden issues strident defence of refusal to call for ceasefire in Gaza". The Guardian. Retrieved 16 November 2023. Pacchiani, Gianluca. "As IDF advances in Gaza, Hamas chief Haniyeh statements about seeking 'political negotiations'". Times of Israel. Retrieved 4 November 2023. "The Illegality of the Israeli Occupation of the Palestinian West Bank (including East Jerusalem) and Gaza: What the International Court of Justice Will Have to Determine in its Advisory Opinion for the United Nations General Assembly". Opinio Juris. 23 December 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2023. "East Jerusalem – OCHA" (PDF). United Nations Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. December 2018. "We will repeat the October 7 attack time and again until Israel is annihilated, says Hamas official Ghazi Hamad". LBC. Retrieved 20 November 2023. "Netanyahu says Israel opposes temporary ceasefire unless all hostages are freed". CNN. 3 November 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. Al-Mughrabi, Nidal; Al-Mughrabi, Nidal (6 November 2023). "Gaza death toll tops 10,000; UN calls it a children's graveyard". Reuters. "Israel 'continues to evade, procrastinate' on truce: Hamas". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Israel and U.S. Face Growing Isolation as Deadly War in Gaza Continues With No End in Sight". Time. 12 December 2023. Archived from the original on 16 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Israel and the United States were increasingly isolated as they faced global calls for a cease-fire in Gaza, including a non-binding vote expected to pass at the United Nations later on Tuesday. Israel has pressed ahead with an offensive against Gaza's Hamas rulers that it says could go on for weeks or months. "Israel and US show sharp divisions over mounting casualties and future of war against Hamas". AP News. 13 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Israel and the United States on Tuesday showed their sharpest public disagreement yet over the conduct and future of the war against Hamas as the two allies became increasingly isolated by global calls for a cease-fire. "US increasingly alone in Israel support as 153 countries vote for ceasefire at UN". The Guardian. 12 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. The United States was looking increasingly isolated on the world stage on Tuesday after a resounding vote at the UN general assembly calling for an immediate humanitarian ceasefire in Gaza. "U.S. and Israel increasingly isolated amid growing calls for a cease-fire". NBC News. 13 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. As the Israeli military expands its military operations in Gaza, NBC News' Hala Gorani reports on the Israel Defense Forces latest offensive against Hamas and how the U.S. and Israel are becoming increasingly isolated internationally amid growing calls for a cease-fire. "Egypt submits proposal to free hostages, end war, form PA-Hamas government in Gaza". Retrieved 25 December 2023. "Egypt: Hamas, Islamic Jihad reject giving up power in return for permanent ceasefire". Firstpost. 25 December 2023. Retrieved 25 December 2023. "Hamas, Islamic Jihad reject Gaza gov. overhaul for permanent ceasefire, Egyptian sources say". Reuters. Retrieved 25 December 2023. "Israel skips key ceasefire meeting with Hamas over unanswered hostage questions, official says". CBCA. The Associated Press. 3 March 2024. Retrieved 7 March 2024. Mills, Andrew; Al-Mughrabi, Nidal (9 October 2023). "Qatar in talks with Hamas, Israel to swap hostages for prisoners". Reuters. Retrieved 18 October 2023. "Israel battles Hamas militants as country's death toll from mass incursion reaches 600". Associated Press. 8 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. Said, Summer; Malsin, Jared. "Push to Free Israeli Hostages in Gaza Hindered by Mistrust, Anger, Confusion". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 11 November 2023. Michaelson, Ruth; Borger, Julian; Sinmaz, Emine (9 November 2023). "Netanyahu rejected ceasefire-for-hostages deal in Gaza, sources say". The Guardian. Retrieved 10 November 2023. "Hostages' Families Tell Netanyahu Releasing Palestinian Prisoners Is Only Option". Haaretz. 28 October 2023. Archived from the original on 29 October 2023. Retrieved 30 October 2023. Halabi, Einav; Eichner, Itamar; Turgeman, Meir (28 October 2023). "Hamas chief: all Israeli hostages for all Palestinian prisoners". Ynetnews. Archived from the original on 29 October 2023. Retrieved 30 October 2023. "8 Israeli hostages freed from Gaza at end of seventh day of truce". The Times of Israel. 30 November 2023. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "UN Security Council meets on Gaza-Israel, but fails to agree on statement". Al Jazeera. 9 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. Lederer, Edith (15 November 2023). "UN Security Council adopts resolution calling for urgent humanitarian pauses and corridors in Gaza". AP News. Retrieved 16 November 2023. Starcevic, Seb (16 November 2023). "UN Security Council adopts resolution for 'humanitarian pauses' in Gaza". POLITICO. Archived from the original on 16 November 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2023. Nichols, Michelle. "UN chief rings alarm bell on global security threat from Gaza war". Reuters. Retrieved 6 December 2023. Nazarro, Miranda (6 December 2023). "UN chief Guterres invokes Article 99 of charter over Gaza crisis". The Hill. Retrieved 6 December 2023. Abboud, Leila; Foy, Henry; England, Andrew (15 October 2023). "Western capitals urge restraint in private discussions with Israel". Financial Times. "Russia asks UN Security Council to vote Monday on Israel, Gaza". Reuters. 14 October 2023. Retrieved 17 October 2023. Lederer, Edith (16 October 2023). "UN Security Council rejects Russia's resolution on Gaza that fails to mention Hamas". Associated Press. Retrieved 18 October 2023. "Updating Live: Israel-Gaza crisis; US vetoes Security Council resolution". UN News. 18 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023. "U.S. says Israel 'not responsible' for hospital blast; Biden says Sisi will allow aid into Gaza". The Washington Post. 19 October 2023. Chao-Fong, Léonie; Belam, Martin; Sullivan, Helen (18 October 2023). "Israel-Hamas war live: Netanyahu promises limited aid for Gaza via Egypt; US vetoes UN resolution on humanitarian pause to fighting". The Guardian. Retrieved 18 October 2023. "UNSC fails to adopt resolution on Israel-Palestine conflict after veto by U.S." The Hindu. 18 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023. "US vetoes Security Council call for 'humanitarian pause' in Israel-Hamas war". CNN. 18 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023. Nichols, Michelle (26 October 2023). "Russia, China veto US push for UN action on Israel, Gaza". Reuters. MEMANAS! Rusia dan China KEROYOK AS, Pentagon Dinilai Dukung Pembunuhan oleh Zionis di Gaza (in Indonesian), Tribunnews.com, 26 October 2023, archived from the original on 24 February 2024, retrieved 24 February 2024 – via Youtube, Kepala biro politik gerakan perlawanan Islam Hamas, Ismail Haniyeh memuji posisi Rusia dan Cina. Ia mengapresiasi dan berterima kasih kepada seluruh negara anggota dan non-anggota Dewan Keamanan PBB yang menuntut segera dihentikannya serangan dan kejahatan rezim Zionis terhadap masyarakat Gaza. "Haniyeh praises position of Russia, China in Security Council". Saba News Agency. 26 October 2023. Archived from the original on 24 February 2024. Retrieved 24 February 2024. "Israel-Palestine crisis: Security Council calls for urgent, extended humanitarian pauses in Gaza". UN News. United Nations. 15 November 2023. Retrieved 19 November 2023. Ables, Kelsey (16 November 2023). "U.N. Security Council calls for humanitarian pauses in Israel-Gaza war". The Washington Post. Retrieved 20 November 2023. Wintour, Patrick (15 November 2023). "UN security council backs resolution calling for humanitarian pause in Gaza". The Guardian. Retrieved 20 November 2023. "'Double standards': World reacts to US veto on Gaza truce resolution at UN". Al Jazeera. Ho, Vivian; Ratcliffe, Rebecca (9 December 2023). "Israel-Gaza war live: US criticised for veto on UN ceasefire resolution". The Guardian – via www.theguardian.com. Chen, Heather; Tanno, Sophie; Vogt, Adrienne; Powell, Tori B.; Hammond, Elise (8 December 2023). "Palestinian officials condemn US veto of Gaza ceasefire draft resolution". CNN. Freedman, Rosa. "Why UN Israel-Gaza vote will not overrule US veto". University of Reading. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "Security Council Again Fails to Adopt Resolution Demanding Immediate Humanitarian Ceasefire in Gaza on Account of Veto by United States". United Nations. 20 February 2024. Archived from the original on 21 March 2024. "US vetoes Algerian resolution demanding immediate ceasefire in Gaza". United Nations. 20 February 2024. Archived from the original on 21 March 2024. "UPDATING LIVE: Russia and China veto US resolution stating imperative of 'immediate and sustained ceasefire' in Gaza". news.un.org. 22 March 2024. Retrieved 22 March 2024. Wintour, Patrick (22 March 2024). "What did US Gaza ceasefire resolution say and why did Russia and China veto it?". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 24 March 2024. Lederer, Edith M. (22 March 2024). "Russia and China veto US resolution calling for immediate ceasefire in Gaza". AP News. Retrieved 24 March 2024. "U.S. Gaza ceasefire resolution vetoed by China, Russia at UN Security Council". axios.com. 22 March 2024. Retrieved 22 March 2024. "UN Security Council adopts resolution demanding immediate Gaza ceasefire". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 25 March 2024. "Security Council passes resolution demanding 'an immediate ceasefire' during Ramadan". news.un.org. United Nations. 25 March 2024. Retrieved 25 March 2024. Phillips, Tom (1 November 2023). "South American countries recall ambassadors and cut ties with Israel over war with Hamas". The Guardian. Retrieved 5 November 2023. Flores, Paola; Politi, Daniel. "Bolivia severs diplomatic ties with Israel as Chile and Colombia recall their ambassadors". ABC News. Retrieved 1 November 2023. "Jordan recalls ambassador to Israel to protest Gaza 'catastrophe'". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 1 November 2023. "Bahrain summons envoy to Israel, suspends economic relations". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 2 November 2023. "Bahrain expels Israel ambassador and cuts economic ties". Arab News. 2 November 2023. "Bahrain recalls ambassador from Israel, cuts economic ties over Gaza war: Parliament". gulfnews.com. 2 November 2023. Hamad, Mohammed (2 November 2023). "Bahrain parliament says envoy to Israel returned home, Israel says ties stable". Reuters. "Honduras latest Latin American country to recall ambassador to Israel". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 3 November 2023. "Turkey recalls envoy to Israel, 'writes off' Netanyahu". France 24. 4 November 2023. Archived from the original on 4 November 2023. Retrieved 4 November 2023. "Turkey recalls ambassador to Israel". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 4 November 2023. Özdemir, Ronî (14 November 2023). "Erdoğan's 'Solidarity' With Palestine Is Just a Vehicle for His Own Nationalism". Novara Media. Archived from the original on 6 February 2024. Retrieved 6 February 2024. What's more, while Turkey has joined other nations such as Bolivia and South Africa in severing diplomatic ties with Israel, this is yet to be met with a commitment to economic and military divestment. Despite calls from Iran's Ayatollah Khamenei for a total boycott of oil exports to Israel, Turkey has continued to allow oil exports from its close ally, Azerbaijan – which provides around 40% of Israel's oil – to pass through the port of Ceyhan, where it is then shipped to Israel's Eilat Port. "Bayik: The real solution to problems in Middle East lies in policy of the democratic nation". Firat News Agency. 24 November 2023. Archived from the original on 6 February 2024. Retrieved 6 February 2024. When the attacks on Gaza began, Tayyip Erdoğan said, "I was going to go to Israel, but now I have given up on this plan." However, there are military, commercial and economic agreements worth billions of dollars between Turkey and Israel and these agreements continue as they are. Simardone, Aidan (1 January 2024). "Erdoğan Is No Friend of Palestine". Jacobin. Archived from the original on 6 February 2024. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Said, Summer. "Chad Recalls Its Ambassador From Israel". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 5 November 2023. Magome, Mogomotsi (6 November 2023). "South Africa recalls ambassador and diplomatic mission to Israel and accuses it of genocide in Gaza". Times Union. Associated Press. Retrieved 6 November 2023. "Belize effectively suspends diplomatic relations with Israel". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "King Abdullah on Gaza: 'No refugees in Jordan, no refugees in Egypt'". Reuters. 17 October 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. "Scotland's first minister says country willing to take Gaza refugees". The Hill. Retrieved 27 October 2023. "King of Jordan on Palestine: 'No Refugees in Jordan, No Refugees in Egypt'". Morocco World News. Retrieved 27 October 2023. "Why Egypt and other Arab countries are unwilling to take in Palestinian refugees from Gaza". AP News. 18 October 2023. Carroll, Rory (2 November 2023). "Egypt says it will help evacuate about 7,000 foreign passport holders from Gaza". The Guardian. Retrieved 2 November 2023. Murphy, Neil (17 October 2023). "Scotland's First Minister Humza Yousaf says UK should offer sanctuary for Gaza refugees". The National. Retrieved 27 October 2023. "'Willing to be a place of sanctuary': Scotland First Minister says ready to welcome Gaza refugees". BI. Retrieved 27 October 2023. Busari, Stephanie; Ebrahim, Nadeen; Al Lawati, Abbas (19 January 2024). "Israel's war in Gaza has exposed a deepening global divide". CNN. Archived from the original on 11 February 2024. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Beyond the courtroom drama, experts say divisions over the war in Gaza symbolize a widening gap between Israel and its traditional Western allies, notably the United States and Europe, and a group of nations known as the Global South — countries located primarily in the southern hemisphere, often characterized by lower income levels and developing economies... Israel sided with the West against Soviet-backed Arab regimes during the Cold War, and Western countries largely view it "as a fellow member of the liberal democratic club", he added. "Some of this explains the continued strong Western support for Israel – which has now largely become reflexive." "Biden condemns Hamas actions, says US is sending Israel military aid". NBC News. 11 October 2023. Retrieved 11 October 2023. Chuter, Andrew (13 October 2023). "Britain sends spy planes, ships to Mediterranean amid Israel-Hamas war". Defense News. Archived from the original on 26 February 2024. Retrieved 12 February 2024. Radice, Orlando (9 October 2023). "Girls 'raped next to their dead friends' at rave massacre". The Jewish Chronicle. Retrieved 10 March 2024. Stuenkel, Oliver (2 November 2023). "Why the Global South Is Accusing America of Hypocrisy". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 25 February 2024. Retrieved 25 February 2024. "Germany stands firmly alongside Israel". Bundesregierung. 22 December 2023. Archived from the original on 15 February 2024. Retrieved 12 February 2024. The Federal Government is also supporting Israel by providing military and medical equipment. "The US will send a carrier strike group to the Eastern Mediterranean in support of Israel". Associated Press. 8 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. "What Israelis Think of the War With Hamas". Time. 10 November 2023. Archived from the original on 7 December 2023. Retrieved 8 December 2023. "As death toll mounts in Gaza, veterans of past negotiations weigh in on possibilities for peace". NBC News. 31 December 2023. "Most Israelis oppose US demand to weaken Gaza fight". Jewish News Syndicate. 2 January 2024. "Majority of Israelis oppose annexation, resettlement of Gaza – poll". Retrieved 18 December 2023. "Poll: 83% of Israelis Support Voluntary Emigration from Gaza". The Jewish Press. 24 December 2023. "Gazans' well-being is secondary to Israel's war plans, Israeli Jews believe – poll". Haaretz. 19 December 2023. Rosenfeld, Arno (18 October 2023). "Dozens of Israelis arrested for social media posts defending Gaza, advocates say". The Forward. Retrieved 20 October 2023. Sawafta, Ali; Chacar, Henriette (18 November 2023). "West Bank Palestinians report Israeli beatings, mistreatment". Reuters. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Israel/OPT: Horrifying cases of torture and degrading treatment of Palestinian detainees amid spike in arbitrary arrests". Amnesty International. 8 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. Tahhan, Zena Al (21 October 2023). "Israel doubles number of Palestinian prisoners to 10,000 in two weeks". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 22 November 2023. Butt, Maira (22 November 2023). "Thousands of Gazans missing in Israel as workers 'rounded up and blindfolded'". The Independent. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Israel police boss threatens to send anti-war protesters to Gaza 'on buses'". Al Jazeera. 19 October 2023. "Israeli schools, already shuttered, to shift to remote learning on Sunday". Reuters. 11 October 2023. Retrieved 17 October 2023. "Israel: Matches postponed by Uefa over security situation". BBC Sport. 8 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. Bousso, Ron; Rabinovitch, Ari (9 October 2023). "Israel shuts down major offshore gas field amid violence". Reuters. Retrieved 18 October 2023. Scheer, Steven; Rabinovitch, Ari (9 October 2023). "Bank of Israel to Sell $30b of Foreign Currency to Stabilize Shekel Amid Gaza War". Reuters. Retrieved 18 October 2023. "Israeli PM Netanyahu, opposition leader Gantz to form emergency unity gov't". Al Jazeera. 11 October 2023. Retrieved 11 October 2023. Michaelson, Ruth; Sherwood, Harriet (11 October 2023). "Netanyahu sets up emergency Israeli unity government and war cabinet". The Guardian. Sharon, Jeremy. "Gantz's entry into government sidelines far right, with judicial overhaul's future dim". Times of Israel. Retrieved 13 October 2023. "Israeli PM, opposition leader agree to form "emergency unity gov't"-Xinhua". english.news.cn. Kershner, Isabel (29 October 2023). "Netanyahu Apologizes After Blaming Security Chiefs for Failure in Hamas Attack". The New York Times. Retrieved 29 October 2023. Jamal, Amaney (25 October 2023). "What Palestinians Really Think of Hamas: Before the War, Gaza's Leaders Were Deeply Unpopular—but an Israeli Crackdown Could Change That". Foreign Affairs. Retrieved 10 December 2023. Adami, Chelcey (5 December 2023). "Survey sheds light on Palestinian views ahead of Hamas attack on Israel". Stanford Report. Stanford University. Retrieved 10 December 2023. Kaplan, Fred (15 December 2023). "Is Israel's War in Gaza Strengthening Hamas?". Slate. Retrieved 18 December 2023. "Israel's Assault on Gaza Is Making Hamas More Popular and Destroying Hope for a Future Peace". The Daily Beast. 21 November 2023. "With all eyes on Gaza, Hamas might send the West Bank up in flames". The Times of Israel. 3 December 2023. "Wartime Poll: Results of an Opinion Poll Among Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip" (PDF). Awrad. Retrieved 27 November 2023. "Palestinian poll shows a rise in Hamas support and close to 90% wanting US-backed Abbas to resign". AP News. Retrieved 17 December 2023. Stancati, Margherita; Ayyoub, Abeer (21 December 2023). "Gazans Are Starting to Blame Hamas for Wartime Suffering". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 21 December 2023. Retrieved 21 December 2023. Alster, Guy (10 December 2023). "Gaza in chaos as Palestinian anger against Hamas grows". Jerusalem Post. Walla. Retrieved 17 December 2023. "In Gaza, growing signs of anger at Hamas as residents fight for food, battle diseases". Times of Israel. 12 November 2023. Retrieved 17 December 2023. 'The world has turned its back on Palestinians'. Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 20 October 2023. Retrieved 21 October 2023 – via YouTube. Alfonseca, Kiara; Malekian, Somayeh. "'Scary as hell': Gazan describes fearful nights amid Israeli airstrikes". ABC News. Retrieved 21 October 2023. "Unlawful Gaza Blockade Deadly for Children". Human Rights Watch. 18 October 2023. Retrieved 21 October 2023. "Entire Families Wiped Out As Israel Continues Heaviest-Ever Airstrikes On Gaza". NDTV. Retrieved 21 October 2023. Talwar Badam, Ramola (19 October 2023). "Doctors warn of 'catastrophic' conditions in Gaza hospitals as medical supplies dwindle". The National. Retrieved 19 October 2023. Exclusive Interview with Gaza Mayor. Archived from the original on 13 October 2023. Retrieved 13 October 2023 – via YouTube. "Mahmoud Abbas: Palestinians have right to defend themselves against 'terror'". Al Arabiya. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "'We reject the forced displacement' in Gaza: Abbas tells Blinken in Jordan". Al Jazeera. 13 October 2023. "President Abbas says Hamas' actions do not represent Palestinians". Reuters. 16 October 2023. Event occurs at 12:06 am GMT+3. Ashtiyeh, Jaafar (7 October 2023), Palestinians celebrate in Nablus after fighters infiltrated Israel, Philippine Daily Inquirer, archived from the original on 8 December 2023, retrieved 8 December 2023 – via YouTube "Almost 1,000 killed in Israel war with Hamas". France 24. 8 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. Hamas called on "resistance fighters in the West Bank" and "Arab and Islamic nations" to join the battle Al Tahhan, Zena. "Israel's war on Gaza: Is the West Bank under increased attack too?". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 20 October 2023. Saifi, Zeena; Anderson, Becky; Khadder, Kareem (19 October 2023). "Gaza conflict spills into the West Bank as settler attacks and clashes leave dozens of Palestinians dead". CNN. Retrieved 19 October 2023. Tianshe CHEN (2010) Support or Hostility: the Relationship between Arab Countries and Hamas, Journal of Middle Eastern and Islamic Studies (in Asia), 4:2, 100–120, DOI: 10.1080/19370679.2010.12023158 Kirkpatrick, David; Rasgon, Adam (30 October 2023). "The Hamas Propaganda War". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. "Only America can stop the Israel-Gaza war from becoming a bigger catastrophe". The Economist. Retrieved 19 October 2023. "The Arab world thinks differently about this war". The Economist. Retrieved 18 October 2023. "As war looms Israel calls for 1.1m people to evacuate northern Gaza". The Economist. 13 October 2023. Yaakoubi, Aziz El; Abdallah, Nayera (12 November 2023). "Arab and Muslim leaders demand immediate end to Gaza war". Reuters. Retrieved 19 November 2023. Allam, Hannah; Chamaa, Mohamad El (23 November 2023). "Many in Middle East blame United States for devastation in Gaza". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "US fully responsible for events in Gaza: Nasrallah". Mehr News. 3 November 2023. "Al-Aqsa Storm Operation 100 Percent Palestinian, Says Hezbollah Chief – World news". Tasnim News Agency. "حسن نصرالله: آمریکا پیام داده اگر به عملیات ادامه دهیم، ایران را بمباران خواهد کرد" [Hassan Nasrallah: America has sent a message that if we continue the operation, it will bomb Iran] (in Persian). 3 November 2023. "Hezbollah's Hassan Nasrallah speech on Israel-Hamas war: Key takeaways". Al Jazeera. "Hezbollah chief warns Israel-Hamas war could become regional conflict". France 24. 11 March 2023. "After Nasrallah speech, US warns Hezbollah not to 'take advantage' of Israel-Hamas war". The Times of Israel. 3 November 2023. Ewing, Giselle Ruhiyyih (7 October 2023). "Iran praises Hamas as attack reverberates around Middle East". The Politico. Retrieved 14 October 2023. top military adviser to Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Major General Yahya Rahim Safavi, pledged Iranian support to the Hamas operation against Israel Kirby, Paul (8 October 2023). "Israel faces 'long, difficult war' after Hamas attack from Gaza". BBC News. Retrieved 11 October 2023. Ghazi Hamad, a Hamas spokesman, meanwhile told the BBC that the group had direct backing for the attack from Iran Tan, Clement (9 October 2023). "Middle East risks prospect of fresh regional war after Hamas stealth attack on Israel". CNBC. Retrieved 11 October 2023. Said, Summer; Faucon, Benoit; Kalin, Stephen (8 October 2023). "Iran Helped Plot Attack on Israel Over Several Weeks". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 12 October 2023. Iranian security officials helped plan Hamas's Saturday surprise attack on Israel and gave the green light for the assault at a meeting in Beirut last Monday, according to senior members of Hamas and Hezbollah [...] Details of the operation were refined during several meetings in Beirut attended by IRGC officers [...] A European official and an adviser to the Syrian government, however, gave the same account of Iran's involvement in the lead-up to the attack as the senior Hamas and Hezbollah members Fassihi, Farnaz; Bergman, Ronen (13 October 2023). "Hamas Attack on Israel Brings New Scrutiny of Group's Ties to Iran". The New York Times. Retrieved 17 October 2023. leaders from Iran, Hezbollah and Hamas helped plan the attack starting over a year ago, trained militants and had advanced knowledge of it. That account is based on interviews with three Iranians affiliated with the Revolutionary Guards, one Iranian connected to senior leadership and a Syrian affiliated with Hezbollah Wintour, Patrick (9 October 2023). "No evidence yet of Iran link to Hamas attack, says Israeli military". theguardian. De Luce, Dan; Dilanian, Ken (11 October 2023). "U.S. intelligence indicates Iranian leaders were surprised by Hamas attack". NBC News. "How might Iran respond to an Israeli ground incursion into Gaza?". Al-Monitor. 21 October 2023. Reiter, Yitzhak (2008). Jerusalem and Its Role in Islamic Solidarity. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 88. ISBN 978-0-230-60782-8. "Qudsday". Archived from the original on 28 October 2003. چگونه می‌توانیم به غزه کمک کنیم [How can we help Gaza?]. IRNA (in Persian). Retrieved 22 October 2023. طوفان الاقصی [Al-Aqsa flood]. Al-Aqsa Storm (in Arabic). Archived from the original on 23 October 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "خامنه‌ای درباره تداوم حملات اسرائیل به حماس در غزه هشدار داد" [Khamenei warned about the continuation of Israel's attacks on Hamas in Gaza]. Radio Farda (in Persian). "رئیس دفتر رهبری: آیت الله خامنه ای وقایع را پیش بینی می کنند/برخی از مسؤولین نظامی اظهار داشته اند که نابودی اسرائیل در ۵ سال آینده شدنی است" [The head of the leadership office: Ayatollah Khamenei is predicting events/some military officials have stated that the destruction of Israel is possible in the next 5 years.]. دیدبان ایران (in Arabic). 24 October 2023. "Western leaders flocking to Israel indicative of regime collapse: Leader". Tehran Times. 25 October 2023. "ایران حمایت از اسرائیل در فضای مجازی را "جرم" دانست" [Iran considered supporting Israel in cyberspace as a "crime".] (in Persian). "روابط ایرانیان و اسرائیلی‌‌‌‌ها در فضای مجازی "جرم" اعلام شد – Dw – ۱۴۰۲/۸/۹" [The relations between Iranians and Israelis in cyber space was declared a "crime" – Dw – 8/9/1402] (in Persian). "Iran's Khamenei calls for boycott of Israel amid Gaza bombardment". Al Jazeera. "Iran tells Hamas it will not enter the war with Israel". The Daily Telegraph. 15 November 2023. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved 17 November 2023. Hafezi, Parisa; Bassam, Laila; Mohammed, Arshad (15 November 2023). "Insight: Iran's 'Axis of Resistance' against Israel faces trial by fire". Reuters. Retrieved 17 November 2023. "Iran will do 'whatever it takes' to help Hamas in war with Israel: Quds Force chief". Al Arabiya. 16 November 2023. "تمام اندوخته‌ غرب با طوفان‌الاقصی بر باد رفت/ مدافعان حرم یک ملت را از تحقیر نجات دادند" [All the reserves of the West were blown away by the Al-Aqsa storm/ The defenders of the shrine saved a nation from humiliation]. www.irna.ir (in Persian). Retrieved 2 December 2023. "فرمانده کل سپاه پاسداران:‌ اقتصاد آمریکا تحت تاثیر جنگ غزه افول خواهد کرد" [Commander-in-Chief of the IRGC: The American economy will decline under the influence of the Gaza war]. ایران اینترنشنال (in Persian). 19 November 2023. Lange, Jason; Spetalnick, Matt (15 November 2023). "US public support for Israel drops; majority backs a ceasefire, Reuters/Ipsos shows". Reuters. Retrieved 17 November 2023. "Half of US adults say Israel has gone too far in war in Gaza, AP-NORC poll shows". Yahoo! News. The Hill. 2 February 2024. Retrieved 2 March 2024. "Biden threatened by generation gap on Israel among Democrats, Yahoo News/YouGov poll finds". Yahoo! News. 21 December 2023. Retrieved 2 March 2024. Jennings, Rebecca (13 December 2023). "TikTok isn't creating false support for Palestine. It's just reflecting what's already there". Vox. Retrieved 1 March 2024. Kavi, Aishvarya (25 February 2024). "A man set himself on fire outside the Israeli Embassy in Washington, the police said". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 25 February 2024. Retrieved 26 February 2024. Guzman, Chad de (25 February 2024). "U.S. Air Force Member Sets Self on Fire Outside Israel's Embassy in D.C. to Protest War in Gaza". Time. Archived from the original on 26 February 2024. Retrieved 26 February 2024. Ewing, Giselle Ruhiyyih (21 October 2023). "Hamas attacks aimed to halt Israel-Saudi Arabia agreement". Politico. Retrieved 25 October 2023. Hammer, Mathias (3 November 2023). "What to Know About U.S. Military Support to Israel". Time. Archived from the original on 4 November 2023. Retrieved 4 November 2023. Shear, Michael D.; Demirjian, Karoun (20 October 2023). "Biden Requests $105 Billion Aid Package for Israel, Ukraine and Other Crises". The New York Times. Retrieved 4 November 2023. Capaccio, Anthony (14 November 2023). "US Is Quietly Sending Israel More Ammunition, Missiles". Bloomberg News. Retrieved 15 November 2023. Raddatz, Martha; Martinez, Luis (15 October 2023). "Exclusive: US to send 2nd aircraft carrier to eastern Mediterranean". ABC News. Retrieved 17 October 2023. Mitchell, Ellen (10 October 2023). "US Strike Group arrives in Eastern Mediterranean as 'strong signal of deterrence'". The Hill. Retrieved 12 October 2023. Bertrand, Natasha (16 October 2023). "US Marine rapid response force moving toward Israel as Pentagon strengthens military posture in region". CNN. Marquardt, Alex (22 October 2023). "US seeks delay of Israeli ground incursion for more time for hostage talks". CNN. Gramer, Robbie (1 November 2023). "The Storm of Dissent Brewing in the State Department". Foreign Policy. Retrieved 4 November 2023. Salcedo, Andrea; Hudson, John (4 November 2023). "USAID staffers urge Biden to push Israel toward 'immediate cease-fire'". The Washington Post. Retrieved 4 November 2023. Harb, Ali (6 December 2023). "'Anti-Zionism is antisemitism,' US House asserts in 'dangerous' resolution". Al-Jazeera. "Biden and Netanyahu's deepening rift on public display". BBC News. 12 March 2024. "US-Israel relations tested as gap between President Biden, Netanyahu widens - analysis". The Jerusalem Post. 20 March 2024. "VP Harris calls on Israel to respect international law, stop killing innocent Palestinians". USA Today. 2 December 2023. "Biden takes a tougher stance on Israel's 'indiscriminate bombing' of Gaza". Associated Press. 12 December 2023. "Isolated Internationally on Gaza, Biden Delivers Rebuke to Netanyahu". Voice of America. 12 December 2023. Abutaleb, Yasmeen (8 February 2024). "Biden says Israel's military conduct in Gaza has been 'over the top'". The Washington Post. Retrieved 11 February 2024. Abutaleb, Yasmeen (8 February 2024). "Biden says countries receiving U.S. weapons must adhere to international law". The Washington Post. Retrieved 11 February 2024. "US VP Harris calls for 'immediate' Gaza truce in rare rebuke of Israel". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 4 March 2024. "Biden praises Schumer's "good speech" criticizing Netanyahu". CBS News. 15 March 2024. "Top Democrat Chuck Schumer calls for new Israel election". BBC News. 14 March 2024. Retrieved 14 March 2024. John, Hudson (6 March 2024). "U.S. floods arms into Israel despite mounting alarm over war's conduct". The Washington Post. John, Hudson (29 March 2024). "U.S. signs off on more bombs, warplanes for Israel". The Washington Post. Carroll, Rory (25 October 2023). "UN's António Guterres calls for immediate ceasefire to end 'epic suffering' in Gaza". The Guardian. Retrieved 25 October 2023. Hülsemann, Laura (24 October 2023). "Israel slams UN chief for saying Hamas attack 'did not happen in a vacuum,' calls for his resignation". Politico. Retrieved 26 October 2023. Wintour, Patrick (25 October 2023). "Israel says it will ban UN staff after secretary general's comments". The Guardian. Retrieved 25 October 2023. Gritten, David (25 October 2023). "Israel demands UN chief resign over Hamas attack comments". BBC News. Retrieved 25 October 2023. Nichols, Michelle (25 October 2023). "UN chief rejects Israel accusations he justified Hamas attacks". Reuters – via www.reuters.com. "General Assembly Adopts Resolution Calling for Immediate, Sustained Humanitarian Truce Leading to Cessation of Hostilities between Israel, Hamas". United Nations. 27 October 2023. GA/12548. Retrieved 29 October 2023. Guterres, António (24 October 2023). "Secretary-General's remarks to the Security Council – on the Middle East". United Nations. Archived from the original on 25 October 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2023. "UN chief warns that the risk of the Gaza war spreading is growing as situation becomes more dire". The Washington Post. 24 October 2023. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2023. Wintour, Patrick; Pilkington, Ed (25 October 2023). "UN chief 'shocked' by 'misrepresentation' of comments in row with Israel". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 October 2023. Retrieved 26 October 2023. Gritten, David (25 October 2023). "Israel demands UN chief resign over Hamas attack comments". BBC News. Archived from the original on 26 October 2023. Retrieved 26 October 2023. "UN General Assembly votes by large majority for immediate humanitarian ceasefire during emergency session". UN News. 12 December 2023. Nichols, Michelle. "The UN Security Council demanded a Gaza ceasefire - what happens now?". Reuters. Retrieved 27 March 2024. "El Gobierno deploró el ataque a Israel y reforzó la seguridad" [The Government deplored the attack on Israel and reinforced security]. Télam (in Spanish). 8 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. "India sides with West, condemns 'terrorist attacks in Israel' by Palestine's Hamas group". The Telegraph. Retrieved 8 October 2023. Lazaro, Jacob (1 November 2023). "Israel 'appreciates' PH abstention from UN's Gaza ceasefire resolution". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Retrieved 4 November 2023. "World reaction to surprise attack by Palestinian Hamas on Israel". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 8 October 2023. "3 Palestinian journalists killed, 1 injured, 2 missing, in Gaza-Israel conflict". Committee to Protect Journalists. 10 October 2023. Retrieved 13 October 2023. "South Korea condemns Hamas, worries about North Korean rockets". Asia News. Retrieved 18 November 2023. Gonzalez Zorrilla, Gabriel (11 October 2023). "Latin America reacts to Hamas attacks on Israel". DW. Retrieved 14 October 2023. "EU triples immediate humanitarian aid for Gaza". Reuters. 14 October 2023. Retrieved 25 October 2023. Foy, Henry; Dunai, Marton (11 October 2023). "EU commissioner reiterates claim that Palestine aid is suspended". Financial Times. Retrieved 12 October 2023. "Germany 'Temporarily Suspends' Palestinian Development Aid: Ministry". Barron's. 9 October 2023. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. "Austria Suspends Aid For Palestinians After Hamas Attack". Barron's. 9 October 2023. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. Palmström, Ola (10 October 2023). "Utvecklingsbiståndet till palestinska myndigheter pausas" [Development aid to the Palestinian Authority is paused]. SVT Nyheter (in Swedish). Retrieved 10 October 2023. Al Jazeera [@AJABreaking] (12 October 2023). عاجل د.ب.أ عن الدفاع الألمانية: وافقنا على طلب إسرائيلي باستخدام اثنتين من طائراتنا المسيرة في القتال ضد حماس [Urgent DPA on German Defense: We agreed to an Israeli request to use two of our drones in the fight against Hamas] (Tweet) (in Arabic). Retrieved 12 October 2023 – via Twitter. "Germany clears Israel's use of two Heron TP combat drones, source says". Reuters. Retrieved 12 October 2023. "Deutsche Rüstungsexporte nach Israel fast verzehnfacht" [German arms exports to Israel increased almost tenfold]. tagesschau.de. 8 November 2023. Archived from the original on 8 November 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. "Statement: WUC condemns Hamas attacks on civilians and stands with all those suffering from violence". World Uyghur Congress. 9 October 2023. "Filistin meselesi Uygurları ikiye böldü" [The Palestinian issue has divided the Uyghurs]. Cumhuriyet (in Turkish). 24 October 2023. Archived from the original on 2 November 2023. Starcevic, Seb (13 October 2023). "Israel has lost my sympathy, says Croatia's president". Politico. Retrieved 13 October 2023. "Colombia tells Israel envoy to leave as diplomatic feud over Gaza war deepens". The Times of Israel. Mcmurtry, Alyssa. "Spain's deputy PM urges Europe to help stop 'massacre' in Gaza". AA. Retrieved 16 October 2023. Faiola, Anthony. "In undisclosed call, Pope Francis warned Israel against committing 'terror'". The Washington Post. Retrieved 1 December 2023. Ogao, Emma (13 October 2023). "African leaders react as Israel declares war on Hamas". ABC News. Retrieved 14 October 2023. Chen, Heather; Olarn, Kocha (13 October 2023). "Thai deaths in Hamas massacre spotlight poor agricultural workers from Asia who toil in Israel's fields". CNN. Retrieved 14 October 2023. Kurlantzick, Joshua (9 October 2023). "How Southeast Asian States Are Responding to the Growing Middle East Conflict". Council on Foreign Relations. Retrieved 14 October 2023. Haq, Sana Noor; Calzonetti, Claire (25 October 2023). "Queen Rania of Jordan accuses West of 'glaring double standard' as the death toll rises in besieged Gaza". CNN. Retrieved 25 October 2023. Al-Khalidi, Suleiman (18 October 2023). "Jordan cancels summit with Biden, Sisi and Abbas in Amman". Reuters. Retrieved 19 October 2023. Cyril Ip (19 October 2023). "Israel-Gaza war: China condemns 'heinous attack' on hospital and urges ceasefire as priority at UN Security Council". Yahoo! Finance. South China Morning Post. Retrieved 13 January 2024. Faruk Zorlu (18 October 2023). "Russia calls Gaza hospital attack war crime, says US ultimately responsible". Anadolu Agency. Phillips, Tom (31 October 2023). "Bolivia becomes first country to sever ties with Israel over war with Hamas". The Guardian. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Hellyer, H.A. (3 November 2023). "The West Is Losing the Global South Over Gaza". Time. Archived from the original on 21 January 2024. Retrieved 17 November 2023. Rios, Michael (17 November 2023). "Five countries ask International Criminal Court to investigate the situation in Palestinian territories". CNN. Retrieved 20 November 2023. Mazui, Guilherme; Rodrigues, Mateus (8 October 2023). "Governo prepara seis aviões para resgatar brasileiros na zona de conflito entre Israel e Hamas" [Government prepares six planes to rescue Brazilians in the conflict zone between Israel and Hamas]. G1 (in Portuguese). Retrieved 8 October 2023. "Live: More than 600 Israelis killed, more than 100 held 'prisoner' in war with Hamas". France 24. 8 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. "Romania, Hungary Evacuate Citizens From Israel By Air". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 8 October 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2023. Hurst, Daniel (11 October 2023). "Qantas to help repatriate Australians from Israel starting Friday". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 October 2023. "Israel-Palestine: death toll rises sharply, as African nationals evacuated". Africanews. 11 October 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2023. Seddon, Sean (12 October 2023). "UK arranges flights for Britons stranded in Israel". BBC News. "Nepal: First batch of 254 students, stranded amid Israel-Hamas war, land in Kathmandu". The Economic Times. 13 October 2023. Retrieved 14 October 2023. Bose, Saikat Kumar (12 October 2023). "Operation Ajay: First Flight To Evacuate Indians From Israel Tonight". NDTV. Fornusek, Martin (20 October 2023). "Update: Ukrainian woman killed in Gaza, 18 citizens confirmed killed in Israel". The Kyiv Independent. Byman, Alexander; Palmer, Daniel (7 October 2023). "What You Need to Know About the Israel-Hamas Violence". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. "IISS experts assess the Hamas–Israel war and its international implications". International Institute for Strategic Studies. Retrieved 12 October 2023. Beaumont, Peter (7 October 2023). "Hamas's stealth attack will be remembered as Israeli intelligence failure for the ages". The Guardian. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Limor, Yoav (7 October 2023). "Israel's failure of imagination on Hamas" Archived 8 October 2023 at the Wayback Machine. Jewish News Syndicate. Retrieved 8 October 2023. Frank Gardner (7 October 2023). "How did Israeli intelligence fail to stop major attack from Gaza?". BBC. Archived from the original on 7 October 2023. Retrieved 10 March 2024. "US officials raise concerns over Israeli intelligence after Hamas attacks". CNN. 8 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. Ravid, Barak (12 October 2023). "Israel had intel on Hamas activity but didn't put Gaza border on high alert". Axios. Retrieved 13 October 2023. Gotkine, Elliott (11 October 2023). "Israel's history suggests the clock is ticking for Netanyahu after Hamas attack failures". CNN. Retrieved 11 October 2023. Aronson, Cole S. (8 October 2023). "Bibi's Big Chance". Politico. Retrieved 11 October 2023. Beauchamp, Zack (9 October 2023). "Benjamin Netanyahu failed Israel". Vox. Retrieved 10 October 2023. "Most Israelis think Netanyahu responsible for failing to prevent Hamas attack, poll shows". Reuters. 20 October 2023. "Saudi-Israeli normalization effort takes a violent detour after Hamas attack". The Times of Israel. 8 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. Kluth, Andreas (8 October 2023). "Hamas Just Torched Biden's Deal to Remake the Middle East". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. Wrobel, Sharon (9 November 2023). "War is costing economy some $600m a week due to work absence — Bank of Israel". The Times of Israel. "Israel's economy shrank at 20% rate after outbreak of war". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 19 February 2024. Retrieved 19 February 2024. Zomer, Navit (25 December 2023). "Israeli high-tech factories have difficulties importing components from China". Ynetnews. Archived from the original on 18 January 2024. Retrieved 18 January 2024. The Chinese are imposing a kind of sanction on us. They don't officially declare it, but they are delaying shipments to Israel," a senior figure in one of the factories told Ynet. "They have various excuses and pretexts, such as requiring suppliers from China to obtain export licenses to Israel that did not exist before. Additionally, they demand that we fill out numerous forms, causing significant delays. This has never happened to us before. "Hebrew Newspaper: China imposes sanctions on "Israel" against the backdrop of the war in Gaza". Al-Quds. 25 December 2023. Archived from the original on 26 February 2024. Retrieved 18 January 2024. "China delays shipments to Israel amid Gaza genocide; over 20,000 Palestinians killed so far". Free Press Kashmir. 25 December 2023. Archived from the original on 26 February 2024. Retrieved 18 January 2024. Chinese actions are seen as a de facto sanction, as shipments are delayed under various pretexts, such as new export licenses and extensive paperwork demands, impacting the timely production of electronic products. "Indian port workers refuse to handle Israel weapon shipments". The Independent. 19 February 2024. Archived from the original on 19 February 2024. Retrieved 19 February 2024. "Indian firm refuses orders for Israeli army uniforms over civilian killings in Gaza". The Independent. 29 November 2023. Archived from the original on 19 February 2024. Retrieved 19 February 2024. "Hundreds of journalists sign letter protesting coverage of Israel". The Washington Post. 9 November 2023. Tani, Max (16 November 2023). "LA Times blocks reporters who signed open letter criticizing Israel from covering Gaza". Semafor. Retrieved 18 November 2023. "Live updates: Israel-Hamas war, Gaza evacuations, Al-Shifa Hospital". CNN. 13 November 2023. Price, Mikayla (14 December 2023). "Chicago journalists hold vigil for colleagues killed in Gaza and Israel". CBS. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "RSF files complaint with ICC for war crimes against journalists in Palestine and Israel". rsf.org. 1 November 2023. Retrieved 27 December 2023. Narea, Nicole (8 December 2023). "Israel's wartime assault on the free press". Vox.com. Retrieved 25 December 2023. McGreal, Chris (21 December 2023). "Israeli military accused of targeting journalists and their families in Gaza". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 1 February 2024. Retrieved 1 February 2024. Zedeck, Nicole (10 October 2023). "'It smells of death here': Surveying the scenes of atrocities in Kfar Aza". I24news. Retrieved 11 October 2023. Tuquero, Loreben (13 October 2023). "Reports of 260 Israeli music fest deaths aren't unsubstantiated". PolitiFact. Retrieved 19 October 2023. Williams, Holly; Lyall, Erin (11 October 2023). "Israel kibbutz the scene of a Hamas "massacre", first responders say: "The depravity of it is haunting"". CBS News. Retrieved 11 October 2023. Norman, Greg (12 October 2023). "Israeli PM's office releases graphic photos purporting to show Hamas 'murdered and burned' babies". Fox News. Retrieved 18 March 2024. Tenbarge, Kat; Chan, Melissa (12 October 2023). "Unverified reports of '40 babies beheaded' in Israel-Hamas war inflame social media". NBC News. Archived from the original on 12 October 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2023. "Hamas Committed Documented Atrocities. But a Few False Stories Feed the Deniers". Haaretz. 4 December 2023. Archived from the original on 20 December 2023. Retrieved 4 December 2023. Chance, Matthew; Greene, Richard Allen; Berlinger, Joshua (12 October 2023). "Israeli official says government cannot confirm babies were beheaded in Hamas attack". CNN. Retrieved 12 October 2023. "Meta: Systemic Censorship of Palestine Content". Human Rights Watch. 20 December 2023. Archived from the original on 3 January 2024. Israel–Hamas war at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Data from Wikidata Hostilities in Gaza and Israel, Flash Updates, OCHA. Monthly Bulletin (Action by UN System and IGOs Relevant to Question of Palestine), UNRWA Portals:  Modern history  Current events  Israel  Lebanon  Modern history  Palestine  Iran  Politics