Rundēni parish (Latvian: Rundēnu pagasts) is located in southwest Ludza District in Latvia. It borders on the Pildas, Nirza, Lauderu and Istras parishes of the Ludza District; the Škaunes and Ezernieku parishes of the Krāslava District; and the Kaunatas parish of Rezekne District. It is a distance of 33 km from the village of Rundēni at the parish centre up to District centre - Ludza. Up to Riga, the capital city of Latvia, it is 315 km. In the Census of 2000, from a population of 800, there were 231 residents of Latvian nationality, 522 Russians, and 23 Belarusians. Rundēni parish is located on the height of Latgale. Most of the parish is covered by the hills of Razna, and in the south-east by hills of Dagda. The highest part of Rundēni parish is the northern part, which forms a watershed between the rivers Daugava and Velikaya (basin of Lake Pskov). The western part of the parish is close to the massif of Lielais Liepukalns. The highest hills are Pentjušu Hill, and hills to the north at Kovaļiški, Sūnupļava and Rudzīši. The biggest lake is Lake Bižas. Smaller lakes include Bezersļesjes, Aunejas, Testečkovas, Kazeņa and Rudzīšu. The Saryanka River, a tributary of the Daugava, flows through the parish. Other small rivers of the parish are the Kazeņa, Siņica, Volčica, Vonogupīte. The centre of the parish is the village of Rundēni. Other populated places include: Adelinova Barsuki Bezlesje Bļižņeva Bori Bojari Briževa Bubinova Čuhnova Dvorišče Devjatņiki Drozdovka Dzenegaļi Gorodoks Greidani Griņkova Homutova Kabilovka Kazeņa Kazici Kannova Kļeščeva Klumstova Kovaļiški Ksaverina Labunščina Lielā Maļinovka Lisova Loborži Losiški Mazkrinica Maļinovka Mačuļi Mežavēpri Nalogi Noviņi Noviydvors Opši Osova Ostrova Pakalni Pentjuši Pereļji Pešleva Posiški Punculova Pušča Rocova Rudzīši Ruleva Rusecki Sarja Savina Stankeviči Strukaļi Sūnupļava Tarčilova Tartaks Tereneva Testečkova Škorlupova Yačmenišče Vertulova Zamostje Zarečje Zirgi Zubova Žubuļi Early in its history, the parish included the manors Rundēni, Viktorinavas un Bišu and smaller half-manors Zuranpole, Čuhnova, and Lielā Kriņņica un Zaķu. During an agrarian reform, the manors were divided into land lots. The Pakalnu manor house is a private property, its architectural style is [[neo-romanticism]] and park of Rundēni manor. Until 1938 there were schools: in Ruleva, Drozdovka, Rudzīši, Pakalni, Vertulova and Rundēni. In 1939, the Rundēni secondary school was constructed. In 1920-1930, a rural community, some companies are formed: agricultural, credit-savings and cattle breeding. There were two flour mills, a dairy, twelve grocery shops, two bakeries, shop of wine and vodka, and also a shop and manufacturer and leather products. During the Soviet era, the state farm at Rundēni was the largest in Ludza District. The Roman Catholic Church of Christ's Ascension in Rundēni The Orthodox Church of Birth of Our Lady in Vertulova The Orthodox Old Believers’ Church Chapels: Bližņeva and Bori. The Bull-stone in Kazici is a big, ancient cult stone of the Baltic tribes. 5.3 m (17 ft) long, 3.5 m (11 ft) wide and 1.8 m (5.9 ft) tall. The Bull-stone may have served to designate an ancient border. According to local legends, when the stone is touched it will take away ailments and give energy. Rundēni Devil’s Pits is a natural monument covering 3 hectares (7.4 acres) at Height of Latgale, 3–4 km (1.9–2.5 miles) north-east of Rundēni near the Rundēni-Lauderi road. Since 1997, the Devil's Pits are a protected geomorphological object and are unique in the Baltic states. There are five pits of an unknown origin; one is filled with water and the others with raspberry bushes. The pits may have been caused by a meteorite or may be karstic formations. The Hill of Crosses Memorial complex in Sūnupļava The memorial ensemble was created in memory of eleven heroes of different nationalities from World War II, on Height of Sūnupļava (Height 144). It is on the side of the Rundēni-Lauderi road. The memorial ensemble is created from greater boulders (author A. Dripe). "Reģionu, novadu, pilsētu un pagastu kopējā un sauszemes platība gada sākumā". Central Statistical Bureau of Latvia. Retrieved 18 January 2023. "Iedzīvotāju skaits pēc tautības reģionos, pilsētās, novados, pagastos, apkaimēs un blīvi apdzīvotās teritorijās gada sākumā (pēc administratīvi teritoriālās reformas 2021. gadā) 2021 - 2022". Central Statistical Bureau of Latvia. Retrieved 3 October 2023. "Rundēnu pagasts". Ludzas novads (in Latvian). Ludzas novada pašvaldība. Retrieved 17 August 2020. "Ludzas novads". Ludzas novads (in Latvian). Ludzas novada pašvaldība. Retrieved 17 August 2020. The Roman Catholic Church of Christ's Ascension in Rundēni, part 3.2 Hill of Crosses, part 3.1