Oriental Mindoro (Tagalog: Silangang Mindoro), officially the Province of Oriental Mindoro (Tagalog: Lalawigan ng Silangang Mindoro (Oriental Mindoro)), is a province in the Philippines located on the island of Mindoro under Mimaropa region in Luzon, about 140 kilometres (87 mi) southwest of Manila. The province is bordered by the Verde Island Passage and the rest of Batangas to the north, by Marinduque, Maestre de Campo (or known as Sibale but official name is Concepcion) Island, Tablas Strait and the rest of Romblon to the east, by Semirara and the rest of Caluya Islands, Antique to the south, and by Occidental Mindoro to the west. Calapan, the only city in the island, is the provincial capital and Mimaropa's regional center. Oriental Mindoro is touted as the country's emerging eco-tourism destination. In 2005, the Philippines was found to be the center of marine fish biodiversity and the home of the most diverse marine ecosystem in the world, by American biologists Kent Carpenter and Victor Springer. Most of the endemic species in the Philippines are found in the Verde Island Passage between Mindoro island and the main island of Luzon. The passage houses 2,983 individual species of algae, corals, crustaceans, mollusks, fishes, marine reptiles, and marine mammals, based on a study conducted by Carpenter and Springer in 2005. UNESCO declared Puerto Galera a biosphere reserve under its Man and the Biosphere Programme in the 1970s. The Verde Island Passage is at the apex of the so-called Coral Triangle – the Philippines, Indonesia, and Malaysia – which has the distinction of being the "center of the center of the world's marine biodiversity" and the "center of the center of marine shorefish biodiversity". A Japanese force landed on northeastern Mindoro in the Philippine Islands on 27 February 1942. Almost three years later, after the invasion of Mindoro by Allied forces, they proceeded to land to Bongabong and heading to and capturing Calapan, the capital of the united Mindoro Province at the time on 24 January 1945. After World War II, reconstruction and rehabilitation of infrastructure and economy took place on the island, which then constituted a single province. This was partitioned on 13 June 1950 into Oriental Mindoro and Occidental Mindoro by virtue of Republic Act No. 505. In the decades after the War, Mindoro attracted settlers from overpopulated provinces in the Philippines. Apart from the hope to become landowners or to have better tenancy conditions, the Hukbalahap Rebellion in Central Luzon was an important factor for migration. Under the settlement program of the National Resettlement and Rehabilitation Administration (NARRA) founded in 1954, families from Central Luzon were settled in the Bongabong-Pinamalayan area. This project ended in 1956 after 606 families (3,636 people) were settled on 8,600 hectares (21,000 acres) of public land. Since then, new settlers continue to migrate to Mindoro until today. On November 15, 1994, a magnitude 7.1 earthquake struck the Verde Island Passage located north of Oriental Mindoro, killing 69 people in the province, with most casualties due to the tsunami caused by the earthquake. Within a year after the calamity, however, the provincial government under Governor Rodolfo G. Valencia was able to successfully rehabilitate the province in a brisk manner, and was thus conferred the Disaster Management Award by the National Disaster Coordinating Council in July 1995. The island currently sees an ongoing conflict between the Armed Forces of the Philippines and insurgents. On March 6, 2010, eleven soldiers were killed and seven were hurt in a gun battle with the New People's Army in Mansalay, Oriental Mindoro. Oriental Mindoro covers a total area of 4,238.38 square kilometres (1,636.45 sq mi) occupying the eastern section of Mindoro island in Mimaropa region. The province is bordered by the Verde Island Passage to the north, by Marinduque, Maestre de Campo, Tablas Strait and the rest of Romblon to the east, by Semirara and the rest of Caluya Islands, Antique to the south, and by Occidental Mindoro to the west. The western portion of the province is mountainous or rugged, while the east has hills and flood plains. Mount Halcon, standing 2,582 metres (8,471 ft) above sea level, is the 18th highest mountain in the country and is the province's and island's highest peak. Lake Naujan, the fifth largest lake in the country with an area of approximately 8,125 hectares (20,080 acres) of open water, is located at the northeastern part of the island and the province. Oriental Mindoro comprises 14 municipalities, with one city, Calapan serving as the provincial capital.  †  Provincial capital and component city   Municipality Oriental Mindoro has no distinct wet or dry season. Average temperature ranges from 28 to 32 °C (82 to 90 °F). The province experiences maximum rainfall during the months of June to September. Relative humidity is registered at 87%. The population of Oriental Mindoro in the 2020 census was 908,339 people, with a density of 210 inhabitants per square kilometre or 540 inhabitants per square mile. The province is largely rural, with 70% of the population engaged in agriculture and fishing and with only 30% living in urban centers. Tagalog and English are widely spoken in the province. Tagalog is usually spoken with Batangas dialect both due to its geographical contact with Batangas and Batangueño residents in the province, although it has been greatly influenced by the native Mangyan and Visayan languages. Other languages spoken are Ilocano, Bicolano, Kapampangan, Maranao, Maguindanaon, Tausug and Cebuano, to varying degrees by their respective communities within the province. Dialects of the Mangyan language are Arayan, Alagnan, Buhid, Hanunoo, and Tadyawan. Because of the RORO trips coming from Caticlan, a few people from the southern part facing Panay can understand Hiligaynon. A very large portion of the population are of Roman Catholic conviction (81%). Other Christian and Islamic beliefs constitute most of the remaining religious affiliation in the province. Other populations practice indigenous Philippine folk religions, animism, or atheism. The indigenous people of Oriental Mindoro are the Mangyans (Manguianes in Spanish, Mañguianes in Old Tagalog), consisting of seven distinct tribes. They occupy the interior, specially the highlands. Mangyans have inhabited the island since pre-history. They are believed to have originally traveled from Indonesia and settled down for good in the island. Poverty Incidence of Oriental Mindoro Source: Philippine Statistics Authority Oriental Mindoro's rich and arable land is suitable for agriculture. It produces large quantities of rice, corn, coconut, vegetables and fruits like calamansi, banana, rambutan, marang or uloy, lanzones and durian. For that, Oriental Mindoro is also known as the Rice Granary and Fruit Basket of Southern Tagalog. It still is the Banana King and Calamansi King of the region. Its total agricultural area is 169,603.34 hectares (419,099.0 acres). Based on agricultural statistics, 85,244 hectares (210,640 acres) are devoted to palay production while 21,671 hectares (53,550 acres)s to coconut plantation. For 2019, the province has been one of the top producers of rice becoming a source of rice for the National Food Authority's rice procurement target. Access from Luzon via the Batangas ports mostly goes through the Verde Island Passage to reach Puerto Galera, the key entry point to Oriental Mindoro. In November 2004, Puerto Galera was voted a member of the UNESCO-affiliated ‘The Club of the Most Beautiful Bays in the World. Puerto Galera features a natural harbor which also protects ships, yachts and bancas from strong typhoons sweeping in from the Pacific. Puerto Galera, known for white sand beaches and the accompanying honky tonk bar scene on some key beaches, is known for its dive sites with a biodiversity of marine life in and around the coral reefs. Underwater rock formations and coral gardens are home to a variety of marine life, which include numerous species of nudibranch, mantis shrimp, sea anemone, moray and sea fan sea horses. The seas off the coast are host to passing dolphin pods and even the rarer whale shark, and are part of the migratory small whale route from the Visayas. Towering 8,488 feet (2,587 m) above sea level, Mount Halcon in Baco, is a popular mountain climbing destination. Local and migratory birds allow birdwatching activities. The province is home to endemic wildlife like the tamaraw, a straight-horned water buffalo. Other tourist destinations include: The attraction consists of a natural spring with a swimming pool and picnic cottages. It is located in Baco, and can be reached in 45 minutes by taking a jeepney bound for the Calapan market. The island measures 5 ha and is noted for its white sand. The place serves as the breeding place of seagulls and turtles. Corals and oysters can be found all around the area. The island is also called "Target Island" because Americans used the island for bombing practice in 1946. It is located in Baco, and can be reached in an hour through a motorized banca from the market square. It is a rocky island, except for the area facing Buyayao Peninsula. Big snakes called "sobre kama" are found in the mountains. The water around the island is suitable for deep-sea fishing. It is located off the coast of Mansalay, and can be reached in 30 minutes by motorized banca from Mansalay market. This is a public beach with cottages and other facilities. It is a favorite place for the local people, especially during the summer. It is located in Suqui, Calapan, and can be reached in 15 minutes by taking a tricycle from the town proper. The place is a good spot for picnicking and swimming, especially during the summer. It is located in Pili, Pinamalayan, and can be reached by taking a jeepney to the port of Barangay Wawa, then an hour's ride by motorized banca to the beach. It is a secluded beach, with a 2-kilometre (1.2 mi) white sand beach. It is located in Bongol, Pinamalayan, and can be reached in two hours by boarding a Bongol-bound jeepney from the town proper of Pinamalayan and then a tricycle to the beach area. The 423-foot (129 m) waterfalls, situated alongside the road, is actually a series of asymmetrical falls, leading to the grand one, dropping to a frothy waterbed below. The cascading waterfalls are a great attraction to passers-by. Tamaraw Falls is located in Barangay Villaflor, Puerto Galera. It can be reached in two hours by taking a jeepney bound for Barangay Villaflor from Puerto Galera, or Calapan. An ideal place for swimming, snorkeling, and scuba diving. There are a number of resorts that offer accommodation and other travel and aqua sports facilities to both domestic and international tourists. It is located in La Laguna, Puerto Galera, and can be reached in 30 minutes from the town proper of Puerto Galera by taking a jeepney bound for La Laguna. This area is ideal for swimming, snorkeling, and scuba diving. A cluster of nightspots abound in this area, which makes it popular for evening socials. Cottages with entertainment facilities stand close to each other. Low-budget accommodations are available. It is located east of Puerto Galera, and can be reached in 15 minutes from the Puerto Galera pier by taking a jeepney or an outrigger banca. Contrary to its name, Small La Laguna is bigger than La Laguna, and has more facilities. It has coral reefs, and its water is ideal for snorkeling and scuba diving. There are diving equipment for rent at nearby dive shops. It is located beside Sabang Beach, and can be reached in 20 minutes from the pier by taking a jeepney bound for Sabang. This area is not as busy as the other beaches in Puerto Galera. Thus, it is an ideal site for private swimming. It is located in Puerto Galera, and can be reached in 40 minutes by taking a jeepney or an outrigger boat from the town pier. The white sandy strips of this beach offer excellent opportunities for swimming. Resorts in this area provide entertainment facilities for tourists' greater amusement and leisure. It is located in Barangay San Isidro, Puerto Galera, and is accessible in 30 minutes from the town proper by a jeepney or a boat. This beach is far from the busy areas of Puerto Galera; thus, it is ideal for those who seek privacy and retreat. It is located in Puerto Galera, Oriental Mindoro, and can be reached by taking a 10-minute jeepney ride from the town proper, to about one kilometer on the beach mark. The remaining distance is covered on foot. It is a beige-colored sandy beach with cottages for rent. It is located in Roxas, Oriental Mindoro, and can be reached in 10 minutes by a banca from the pier. Higher education institutions in the province: Abada College ACMCL College AMA CLC College of Calapan (ACLC College) Baco Community College Clarendon College CLCC Institute of Computer, Arts & Technology Dalubhasaan ng Lungsod ng Calapan (City College of Calapan) Divine Word College of Calapan Eastern Mindoro College Eastern Mindoro Institute of Technology and Sciences Erhard Science and Technological Institute - Oriental Mindoro Inc. Archived 13 January 2014 at the Wayback Machine Filipino Academy of Scientific Trades Grace Mission College Innovative College Of Science in Information Technology IATEC Computer College Institute of Business Science and Medical Arts John Paul College Luna Goco Colleges Mindoro State University Mindoro Bible College Paradigm College of Science and Technology Pinamalayan Maritime Foundation and Technological College, Inc. Polytechnic University of the Philippines - Bansud Prince of Peace College Colegio De Puerto Galera Southwestern Institute of Business and Technology Southwestern Maritime Institute Foundation Saint Augustine Seminary Simeon Suan Vocational and Technical college St. Anthony College Calapan "FIXING THE DATE OF EFFECTIVITY OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 505 ENTITLED "AN ACT TO CREATE THE PROVINCES OF ORIENTAL MINDORO AND OCCIDENTAL MINDORO."". Official Gazzette of the Republic of the Philippines | The Official Gazzette is the official journal of the Republic of the Philippines. Edited at the Office of the President of the Philippines Under Commonweath Act No. 638. 13 June 1950. Retrieved 14 May 2021. "List of Provinces". PSGC Interactive. Makati City, Philippines: National Statistical Coordination Board. Archived from the original on 11 January 2013. Retrieved 29 October 2012. Census of Population (2020). Table B - Population and Annual Growth Rates by Province, City, and Municipality - By Region. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved 8 July 2021. "Carpenter, Kent; Springer, Victor, "The center of the center of marine shore fish biodiversity: the Philippine Islands", Environmental Biology of Fishes, Volume 72, Number 4, April 2005, pp. 467-480(14)". "Puerto Galera Biosphere Reserve". "Republic Act No. 505 - An Act to Create the Provinces of Oriental Mindoro and Occidental Mindoro". Chan Robles Virtual Law Library. 13 June 1950. Retrieved 16 April 2016. Maragay, Fel V.; Macaspac, Joem; Evangelista, Romie; Villanueva, Marichu (18 November 1994). "Quake toll rises to 78". Manila Standard. Kamahalan Publishing Corp. p. 3. Retrieved 5 February 2022. "Ramos lauds Mindoro for fast recovery". Manila Standard. Kamahalan Publishing Corp. 17 November 1995. p. 16. Retrieved 5 February 2022. Calonzo, Andreo (6 March 2010). "11 soldiers killed, 7 others hurt in NPA ambush in Oriental Mindoro". GMA News Online. "Province: Oriental Mindoro". PSGC Interactive. Quezon City, Philippines: Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved 8 January 2016. Census of Population (2015). Highlights of the Philippine Population 2015 Census of Population. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "Climate & Weather Averages in Province of Mindoro Oriental, Philippines". www.timeanddate.com. Retrieved 29 July 2019. Census of Population and Housing (2010). Population and Annual Growth Rates for The Philippines and Its Regions, Provinces, and Highly Urbanized Cities (PDF). National Statistics Office. Retrieved 29 June 2016. Census of Population and Housing (2010). "Region IV-B (Mimaropa)" (PDF). Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. National Statistics Office. Retrieved 29 June 2016. "Census 2000; Population and Housing; Region V" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority (Philippine Statistics Authority - Region V). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 29 June 2016. "Mangyan". "Oriental Mindoro Statistical Tables". Philippine Statistics Authority. 2015. Archived from the original (XLS) on 29 July 2019. Retrieved 29 July 2019. "Poverty incidence (PI):". Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved 28 December 2020. "Estimation of Local Poverty in the Philippines" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. 29 November 2005. "2009 Official Poverty Statistics of the Philippines" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. 8 February 2011. "Annual Per Capita Poverty Threshold, Poverty Incidence and Magnitude of Poor Population, by Region and Province: 1991, 2006, 2009, 2012 and 2015". Philippine Statistics Authority. 27 August 2016. "Annual Per Capita Poverty Threshold, Poverty Incidence and Magnitude of Poor Population, by Region and Province: 1991, 2006, 2009, 2012 and 2015". Philippine Statistics Authority. 27 August 2016. "Annual Per Capita Poverty Threshold, Poverty Incidence and Magnitude of Poor Population, by Region and Province: 1991, 2006, 2009, 2012 and 2015". Philippine Statistics Authority. 27 August 2016. "Updated Annual Per Capita Poverty Threshold, Poverty Incidence and Magnitude of Poor Population with Measures of Precision, by Region and Province: 2015 and 2018". Philippine Statistics Authority. 4 June 2020. "NFA SURPASSES TARGET, TOPS 5M MARK IN PALAY PROCUREMENT - National Food Authority". National Food Authority. 29 July 2019. Archived from the original on 29 July 2019. Retrieved 29 July 2019. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 25 December 2013. Retrieved 19 March 2013.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) Map all coordinates using OpenStreetMap Download coordinates as: KML GPX (all coordinates) GPX (primary coordinates) GPX (secondary coordinates) Media related to Oriental Mindoro at Wikimedia Commons Geographic data related to Oriental Mindoro at OpenStreetMap Local Governance Performance Management System Bird Watching Philippines