A heating system is a mechanism for maintaining temperatures at an acceptable level; by using thermal energy within a home, office, or other dwelling. Typically, these systems are a crucial part of an HVAC (Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning) system. A heating system can be categorized into central heating system or distributed systems, depending on their design and method of heat distribution. Central Heating Systems: These systems produce heat in one central location and distribute it throughout the building. This category includes furnaces, boilers, and heat pumps. Distributed Heating Systems: These systems generate heat in the space they are to heat, without extensive duct systems. Examples include electric space heaters, fireplaces, and solar heating. Heat Pumps: They can be used for heating and cooling, transferring heat using refrigerant and electricity, making them more efficient than other heating systems. The efficiency of a heating system is typically measured by its AFUE (Annual Fuel Utilization Efficiency) rating. Higher AFUE ratings indicate a more efficient furnace. Environmental impacts are a concern with heating systems, especially those that burn fossil fuels. The use of sustainable energy sources and energy-efficient systems is encouraged to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Advancements in heating technology focus on increasing energy efficiency and reducing environmental impact. Trends include the integration of smart home technology for better system control and the use of renewable energy sources like geothermal heating. Central heating HVAC Boiler Radiator Solar energy Heating plant "Central Heappting System - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics". www.sciencedirect.com. Retrieved 2023-12-28. "Types of Heating Systems | Smarter House". smarterhouse.org. Retrieved 2023-12-28. Cielo (2020-10-21). "12 Types of Heating Systems to Keep You Warm". Cielo WiGle. Retrieved 2023-12-28. "What is HVAC? - The Complete Breakdown". 2023-12-21. Retrieved 2023-12-30. "Furnaces and Boilers". Energy.gov. Retrieved 2023-12-28. "Integrating Energy-Efficient HVAC Systems with Home Automation". Utilities One. Retrieved 2023-12-28. v t e