The 48th annual Toronto International Film Festival was held from September 7 to 17, 2023. The most noted change from past years was that the Contemporary World Cinema stream was renamed Centrepiece. The festival also announced some changes to its programming team for the 2023 festival, following the retirement of Steve Gravestock at the end of 2022 and the death of Ravi Srinivasan in early 2023. Noted changes included Norman Wilner taking over Gravestock's role as programmer of Canadian films, and June Kim succeeding Srinivasan as programmer for South Asian films. The festival indicated that with the 2022 Toronto International Film Festival having returned to more normal attendance figures, the event would take place exclusively in-person, ending the online platform that had been offered since the 2020 Toronto International Film Festival. An additional change from past years was that the film market screenings for industry professionals began on September 6, one day earlier than the festival's official opening to the public. Festival organizers acknowledged that the 2023 SAG-AFTRA strike was likely to impact the festival if not resolved in time, in particular because the strike prevented actors from taking part in promotional appearances to support their films, but indicated that the festival would still proceed even if fewer celebrities than usual were in attendance. The rule did not necessarily bar all American actors from attending the event, however; for instance, as Atom Egoyan's Seven Veils was a Canadian production shot under ACTRA rather than SAG-AFTRA contracts, lead actress Amanda Seyfried remained able to attend the premiere, though she ultimately chose not to attend. As well, several films in the 2023 program were directed by notable movie stars, who were able to attend the premieres in their capacity as directors. The festival indicated that overall, 70 per cent of its planned program for 2023 came from independent and/or international producers, and would not be affected by the strike. The first film, Taika Waititi's Next Goal Wins, was announced on June 28. Ladj Ly's Les Indésirables and Atom Egoyan's Seven Veils were announced in July, prior to the announcement of the full Gala and Special Presentations programs on July 24. The TIFF Docs lineup followed on July 26. The festival's opener was the Japanese animated film The Boy and the Heron by Hayao Miyazaki, which marked the first time in history that an animated film opened the festival. It concluded with Sly, Thom Zimny's documentary film about actor Sylvester Stallone; Stallone also participated in an In Conversation event in conjunction with the film. In Conversation events were held with film director Pedro Almodóvar and actors Lee Byung-hun, Park Seo-jun and Andy Lau. Lee and Park costarred in the TIFF premiere Concrete Utopia, Lau starred in the TIFF premiere The Movie Emperor, and Almodóvar's talk was paired with the North American premiere of his short film Strange Way of Life (Extraña forma de vida). Punjab '95, by Indian director Honey Trahan, was originally announced in the "Gala Presentations" section, but was pulled out from the festival. TIFF clarified that the film was pulled by its Indian distributor, with sources telling Variety that political pressure was being applied to the distributor due to the film's "potentially incendiary" content. The festival also staged a special 40th anniversary screening of a new 4K restoration of the classic concert film Stop Making Sense. The festival's annual "Rising Stars" program, a networking and development program for emerging actors in festival films, spotlighted Adwa Bader (NAGA), Almudena González (The Ravaging Wind), Amrit Kaur (The Queen of My Dreams), Aria Mia Loberti (All the Light We Cannot See), Cody Lightning (Hey, Viktor!), Kudakwashe Rutendo (Backspot), Léah Aubert (Sisterhood), Mark Clennon (I Don't Know Who You Are) and Tioreore Ngatai-Melbourne (The Convert). The TIFF Tribute Awards, the festival's program of honouring film personnel for their overall achievements in cinema, were presented early during the festival run. Spike Lee was announced as the recipient of the Ebert Director Award, and Pedro Almodóvar was announced as the recipient of the Jeffrey Skoll Award in Impact Media. Shawn Levy was announced as the recipient of the inaugural Norman Jewison Award for career achievement. Performer awards were presented to Colman Domingo and Vicky Krieps; Patricia Arquette was the recipient of the Share Her Journey Groundbreaker Award. Polish cinematographer Łukasz Żal was the recipient of the Variety Artisan Award, Brazilian film director Carolina Markowicz was presented with the Emerging Talent Award, and Hong Kong actor and singer Andy Lau received a Special Tribute award. The following films were selected to the Gala Presentations section: The following films were selected to the Special Presentations section: The following films were selected to the TIFF Docs section: The Platform Prize jury consisted of Barry Jenkins, Nadine Labaki and Anthony Shim. Films that were screened for film buyers and all industry professionals at the festival, but not open to the general public: Older films, usually with some sort of connection to a film screening as part of the main program, shown at David Pecaut Square as part of TIFF's Festival Street event. TIFF's annual Canada's Top Ten list of the ten best Canadian feature and short films of the year was released on December 6, 2023. BlackBerry — Matt Johnson Hey, Viktor! — Cody Lightning Humanist Vampire Seeking Consenting Suicidal Person (Vampire humaniste cherche suicidaire consentant) — Ariane Louis-Seize Kanaval — Henri Pardo The Queen of My Dreams — Fawzia Mirza Seagrass — Meredith Hama-Brown Seven Veils — Atom Egoyan Solo — Sophie Dupuis Someone Lives Here — Zack Russell Tautuktavuk (What We See) — Carol Kunnuk, Lucy Tulugarjuk Gaby's Hills (Gaby les collines) — Zoé Pelchat I Used to Live There — Ryan McKenna Katshinau — Julien G. Marcotte, Jani Bellefleur-Kaltush Lake Baikal (Baigal Nuur) — Alisi Telengut Madeleine — Raquel Sancinetti Making Babies (Faire un enfant) — Éric K. Boulianne Motherland — Jasmin Mozaffari Mothers and Monsters — Édith Jorisch Sawo Matang — Andrea Nirmala Widjajanto Thriving: A Dissociated Reverie — Nicole Bazuin Victoria Ahearn, "TIFF reveals new programmers and other 2023 festival details". Playback, April 20, 2023. Jeremy Kay, "TIFF renames Contemporary World Cinema as Centrepiece ahead of 2023 edition". Screen Daily, April 20, 2023. Tom Tapp, "Steve Gravestock Stepping Down As Toronto International Film Festival Senior Programmer After 25 Years". Deadline Hollywood, June 6, 2022. Naman Ramachandran, "Ravi Srinivasan, Toronto Film Festival Programmer, Dies at 37". Variety, January 16, 2023. Jeremy Kay, "Taika Waititi’s ‘Next Goal Wins’ to world premiere at Toronto 2023". Screen Daily, June 28, 2023. Etan Vlessing, "Toronto Film Festival Unveils Industry Programming Amid Hollywood Strikes". The Hollywood Reporter, July 19, 2023. Noel Ransome, "A starless red carpet? TIFF attendees say festival enthusiasm waning due to strikes". Toronto Star, July 18, 2023. Etan Vlessing, "Amanda Seyfried’s ‘Seven Veils’ to World Premiere at Toronto Film Festival". The Hollywood Reporter, July 19, 2023. Thomas, Carly (September 2, 2023). "Amanda Seyfried Says She Will Not Attend 'Seven Veils' Premiere at Toronto Film Fest: "It Doesn't Feel Right"". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 5, 2023. Jenna Benchetrit, "Canadian films to take the spotlight during 2023 Toronto International Film Festival". CBC News, August 17, 2023. Jeremy Kay, "TIFF “continuing to plan” upcoming edition amid double strike". Screen Daily, July 19, 2023. "TIFF’s first 2023 lineup announcement: Taika Waititi’s soccer romp ‘Next Goal Wins’". Global News, June 28, 2023. Michael Rosser, "Ladj Ly’s ‘Les Indésirables’ to world premiere at Toronto 2023". Screen Daily, July 5, 2023. Jeremy Kay, "Atom Egoyan’s ‘Seven Veils’ to world premiere at TIFF". Screen Daily, July 19, 2023. Anthony D'Alessandro, "TIFF Lineup Unveiled Amid Strikes: Awards Contenders ‘Dumb Money’, ‘The Holdovers’, ‘Rustin’; Starry Pics For Sale With Scarlett Johansson, Kate Winslet, Michael Keaton, Viggo Mortensen & More". Deadline Hollywood, July 24, 2023. Leonard Pearce, "TIFF 2023 Adds Documentaries by Frederick Wiseman, Errol Morris, Raoul Peck, Roger Ross Williams & More". The Film Stage, July 26, 2023. "Animation master Hayao Miyazaki’s ‘The Boy and the Heron’ to open TIFF this year". Toronto Star, July 27, 2023. Rebecca Ford, "Hayao Miyazaki’s The Boy and the Heron Will Open the Toronto Film Festival". Vanity Fair, July 27, 2023. "Netflix’s Sylvester Stallone documentary Sly to close TIFF". The Globe and Mail, August 8, 2023. Melanie Goodfellow, "Sylvester Stallone To Talk Career At Toronto ‘In Conversation With…’ Event". Deadline Hollywood, August 21, 2023. Jeremy Kay, "TIFF books Pedro Almodóvar, Lee Byung-hun, Park Seo-jun, Andy Lau for In Conversation With… series". Screen Daily, August 11, 2023. "Indian activist drama ‘Punjab ’95’ pulled from Toronto film festival". Screen Daily, August 11, 2023. Peter Howell, "‘Potentially incendiary’ Punjab ‘95 withdrawn from TIFF gala". Toronto Star, August 14, 2023. Naman Ramachandran, "‘Punjab ’95’ Based on Indian Human Rights Activist Jaswant Singh Khalra Removed From Toronto Lineup". Variety, August 11, 2023. Jeremy Kay, "TIFF, Spike Lee, Talking Heads unite for 40th anniversary screening of ‘Stop Making Sense’". Screen Daily, August 16, 2023. Taimur Sikander Mirza, "TIFF announces Filmmaker Lab, Series Accelerator participants". Playback, August 31, 2023. "Spike Lee and Pedro Almodóvar to receive TIFF Tribute Awards, while ‘Dicks: The Musical’ to open Midnight Madness". Toronto Star, August 3, 2023. Jeremy Kay, "Shawn Levy to receive inaugural TIFF Norman Jewison Career Achievement Award". Screen Daily, August 16, 2023. Jeremy Kay, "TIFF to present ‘Sing Sing’ star Colman Domingo with Tribute Performer Award". Screen Daily, August 28, 2023. Jeremy Kay, "Vicky Krieps to receive TIFF Tribute Performer Award". Screen Daily, September 5, 2023. Jeremy Kay, "Patricia Arquette to receive TIFF Share Her Journey Groundbreaker Award". Screen Daily, September 6, 2023. Jeremy Kay, "TIFF adds Carolina Markowicz, Lukasz Zal, Andy Lau to tribute line-up". Screen Daily, August 22, 2023. John Hazelton, "Toronto unveils 2023 Platform line-up; ‘Dream Scenario’ with Nicolas Cage to open". Screen Daily, August 2, 2023. Pat Mullen, "TIFF’s Canada’s Top Ten Includes BlackBerry, Solo, Humanist Vampire". That Shelf, December 6, 2023. Official website