Daet (IPA: [daʔet]), officially the Municipality of Daet (Central Bikol: Banwaan kan Daet; Tagalog: Bayan ng Daet), is a 1st class municipality and capital of the province of Camarines Norte, Philippines. According to the 2020 census, it has a population of 111,700 people. The municipality is a popular surfing spot among surfers worldwide. It is also home to the annual Daet International Aerosports Show which is first held in 2013. Daet is 342 kilometres (213 mi) from Manila. The name Daet was derived from the Bikol word dai-daitan which means, close to each other. Daet also originated from ancient Bicol term daet which, according to the first Bicol Spanish Dictionary Vocabulario de la Lengua Bicol authored by Fray Marcos de Lisboa, would mean "to make friend" or "to be reconciled".[citation needed] Daet was already an old community even before the discovery of the Philippines by Magellan in 1521. An ancient tomb unearthed in the Bicol region revealed references described in the Panayam manuscripts known to oriental history as corresponding to the first half of the thirteenth century. The early settlers were believed to be direct descendants of the group of datus who escaped from the court of Brunei to evade the enmity of a ruling rajah. In 1571, Juan de Salcedo arrived at the Bicol Region in quest for gold found in Camarines Norte and discovered that Daet was already a thriving settlement and noted that the houses were clustered together for reason of safety and protection. In June 1583, through a Franciscan Order confirmed the founding of Doctrinas including Daet. Long after the implantation of the Spanish sovereignty, Don Juan de Salcedo, "talented, dashing grandson of Miguel López de Legazpi" found this community in the course of an expedition in search of gold which the Camarines mountains were heart to abound, marking the beginning of over a three-century Spanish regime patterned after the sword and the cross. In the meantime, an incident happened in the court of Spain over the romances of a woman which pressed the King to exile a Spanish noble to the Philippines who eventually chose to come this way to spend the rest of his life, forget all, and start life anew. This noble was Don Manuel de la Estrada, Marquis de Camarines, who devoted a lifetime to help implement the Spanish colonization blueprint in the building of a new town over our old community. He supervised the construction of the church as it stands today, the old Spanish to exile a Spanish noble to the Philippines who eventually bridge (now covered by a Bailey bridge), other stone bridges buildings. He also brought the first abaca seedlings and encouraged its cultivation which has given the Philippines the world monopoly of hemp fiber. Incidentally, from the union of this noble to a Filipino woman followed a long line of blood relation which still link most of the old families of this community. The ruins of the palatial mansion of the Marquis de Camarines were still visible in recent years, on the spot where the new building of the Provincial Capitol now stands. Except for recurring raids by the Moro pirates who occasionally came on their fast frail vintas to pillage this community causing the fortification of barrio Mercedes (now an independent municipality since 1948) during the Spanish regime, this community lived progressively in blissful peace and contentment. Formerly, the whole of the present Province of Camarines Norte was known as the District of Daet and this capital was a "Comandancia" of the original province of Camarines during the Spanish regime. In the few times that the Province of Camarines Norte was separated from and again fused with Camarines Sur from the Spanish to the American regimes, Daet always retained her importance as the provincial capital. In the ensuing changes, this municipality lost further much of her territory which was restored to Camarines Sur, and due to the segregation of the Municipality of Basud which was a former barrio of this community in the year 1908. No less than thirteen martyrs were contributed by this community before the altar of liberty. They were butchered or burned alive and buried in a common grave during the Holy Week on Easter Sunday, April 1898. The local "insurrectus", however, made a remarkable feat in the last days of the Spanish regime when they succeeded in containing the Spanish local garrison and subjected them under relentless attack. The Spaniards were dramatically saved from annihilation by burning at the timely arrival of their rescue ship. Daet today takes a distinct pride for owning the first monument ever erected in the Philippines in honor of the foremost Filipino hero and martyr, Dr. Jose P. Rizal Protacio y Mercado, at the inspiration of Don Antonio Sans, Commanding Officer of the Philippine Revolutionary Forces in the sector. The Philippine–American War had a minimal impact on this town. American forces arrived unopposed on March 4, 1900, while most of the rest of the Bicol Region had already been subdued by Major McNamee, operating under the overall command of General Bates. Commander Antonio Sans had previously negotiated the terms of surrender in Camarines Sur, which were acceptable to the American command. The progress achieved by this community during the American regime has yet to be commemorated in the bold letters of gold. This period laid the foundation for the present-day progress of the current generation. On the evening of September 23, 1972, President Ferdinand Marcos announced on television that he had placed the Philippines, including Daet, under martial law. The marked the beginning of a 14-year period of one-man rule. Even though Martial Law was formally lifted on January 17, 1981, Marcos retained essentially all of his powers as dictator until he was deposed by the February 1986 People Power revolution. On June 14, 1982 Marcos administration forces opened fire on protesters from different barrios, who were marching to demand an increase in copra prices, and to denounce "fake elections" and Cocofed. The government forces who fired on the protesters were led by a certain Capt. Malilay." Four people died on the spot, and at least 50 were injured. Two of those who were seriously wounded died two months later. This has come to be known as the "1981 Daet massacre," and four of those killed have since been honored by having their names engraved on the Wall of Remembrance at the Bantayog ng mga Bayani memorial. A P30-million government center, a P30-million transport terminal and an improved airport are among the large-scale face-lift projects that Camarines Norte's capital town plans to embark on as it aggressively vies for cityhood. The projects, including a new face of the town plaza, were presented by Mayor Tito Sarion in an executive report last month. "The enhancement of the elevated plaza is necessary to decongest the downtown in an attempt to rebuild the center of the commercial district," he said. Sarion said the United Architects of the Philippines had agreed to design the new plaza through a P3-million grant provided by the party-list group Bayan Muna. The funds for the government center and transport facility will be borrowed from the Land Bank of the Philippines, while the revitalized Bagasbas airport project will be funded by the Air Transportation Office (ATO). Sarion said the proposed government center would make transactions with provincial and national government agencies more convenient while the new legislative hall would "create a breathing space and a better working environment at the municipal hall, where offices are crowded." In the 19th Congress of the Philippines, house bills were filed by various representatives which seeks Daet including other capital towns of provinces with no current component cities, independent component cities or highly urbanized cities to automatically convert into cities. Daet is politically subdivided into 25 barangays. Each barangay consists of puroks and some have sitios. Alawihao Awitan Bagasbas Barangay I Barangay II (Pasig) Barangay III (Bagumbayan) Barangay IV (Mantagbac) Barangay V (Pandan) Barangay VI (Centro Occidental) Barangay VII (Centro Oriental) Barangay VIII (Salcedo) Bibirao Borabod (formerly known as Anghit) Calasgasan Camambugan Cobangbang (formerly known as Carumpit) Dogongan Gahonon Gubat (3 Districts – Moreno, Gubat, & Mandulongan) Lag-on Magang Mambalite Pamorangon Mancruz San Isidro (formerly known as sitio Badas) In the 2020 census, the population of Daet, Camarines Norte, was 111,700 people, with a density of 2,400 inhabitants per square kilometre or 6,200 inhabitants per square mile. Poverty Incidence of Daet Source: Philippine Statistics Authority The municipality is rich in mineral resources such as diatomaceous earth (DE) or commonly called white clay. This is one of the income generating industries of the municipality. This non-metallic mineral has a total approximate reserve of 1,289,600 metric tons. The municipality also has a viable source of sand and gravel. It is being extracted by mining concessionaires. Emulating the city planning and zone development of Naga City as one of its primary market catchment, the local government of Daet intends to maintain its central area for commercial activities and public events in the convergence of its primary roads where the boundaries of Barangay 5, Barangay 6, Barangay 4, and Barangay 8 meet. Another central business district in development is located along the four-lane national road in barangay Lag-on where SM City Daet is situated in front of the central bus terminal near a local college foundation and a road going to the Cathedral of Daet. Land transportation is the primary means of transporting people, goods and services from the barangay to the town proper of Daet. The town is being linked to its different barangays by the municipality's major roads, namely the Maharlika Highway. It has a total length of 25.50 kilometers stretching from the boundary of the municipality of Daet to the Camarines Norte – Camarines Sur boundary. The Mangcamagong provincial road has a total length of 9.46 kilometers, stretching from the municipal boundary of Basud and Mercedes to the junction of Maharlika highway. Water supply: The barangays of the municipality is being served by levels I, II and III water supply. To cope with the consumption demand especially during summer, the CNWD has constructed an elevated water tank with a capacity of 200 cubic meters and implementing the "Tubig ng Buhay, Hatid sa Barangay" program. Some barangays are being served by shallow wells, deep wells or dug wells. Power supply: Daet is being served by electric power, formerly by the defunct Hidalgo Electric Enterprise, now by the National Power Corporation through the Camarines Norte Electric Cooperative (CANORECO). After the establishment of this cooperative, there was a great improvement in terms of power supply condition in the municipality. Communication: Daet has a telecommunication system that is being run by one personnel of the Department of Transportation (DOTr). There are three satellites of Smart, Globe and Dito. There is postal office and has a staff of one mail carriers serving all barangays in the municipality. These personnel cannot adequately serve the entire from the lack of personnel; another problem is the difficulty in the delivery of mails in the remote and far-flung barangays. Daet is a famous surfing and kiteboarding spot, as it has a long stretch of beach in Bagasbas. Because of the attention it has gotten from the local surfing community, the Philippine Department of Tourism turned it into a local accredited surfing spot. Aside from being a spot for surfing and kiteboarding, the Calaguas group of islands, in the jurisdiction of Vinzons, to its north has garnered attention from local and foreign tourists alike. The islands can be considered virgin as no resorts have been created there yet.[citation needed] University of Camarines Norte Central Plaza Mall (In Lag-On) Bagasbas Beach Bagasbas Airport Daet Elevated Plaza Cory Aquino Boulevard, the longest boulevard in the Philippines. SM City Daet (located in Lag-on) - The 3rd SM mall in Bicol region and 77th mall of SM Supermalls in the Philippines Most Holy Trinity Cathedral, it was built and was inaugurated in 1984. It is also the cathedral of the Diocese of Daet Parroquia de San Juan Bautista, established in 1611, it is one of the first church in Camarines Norte in the region built by the Franciscan Friars. Saint Joseph, Husband of Mary Parish, in Lag-on Our Lady Of Peñafrancia Parish in Moreno Divine Mercy Parish in Alawihao 1st Rizal Monument - The first monument in honor of a Filipino hero, Dr. José Rizal. Its foundation was made of mortars and boulders from the demolished old Spanish jail in Daet. Lt. Col. Antonio Sanz and Lt. Col. Ildefonso Alegre of Philippine Revolutionary Army initiated the construction of the monument which was unveiled on December 20, 1898. Provincial Capitol Old Daet Municipal Building Daet Elevated Town Plaza Daet Municipal Building Pineapple Fountain President Cory Aquino Boulevard (Bagasbas Boulevard) Daet Airport — located near the beach at barangay Bagasbas The Pineapple Festival (or "Pinyasan" as it is called by the locals) is considered to be the most colorful festivals in Camarines Norte. The festival started in 1992, and is about the province's prime agricultural product, which is the "Queen of All Pineapple" pineapple. Noted for its sweetness and flavor, this kind of pineapple is produced only in Camarines Norte, thereby making it a specialty in the province. The festival goes on for about 10 days, and several events are held in the municipality. The festival aims to promote the culture of Daet and its citizens. The Pineapple Festival is held every June 22–26 annually initiated by Mayor Tito Sarte Sarion. The Bantayog Festival celebrates the founding of Camarines Norte. As of 2009, it has been 89 years since the province has become independent, since March 3, 1975, when Ambos Camarines (At that time Camarines Norte and Camarines Sur were one province) was split from two. This festival promotes the province as one which has unnoticed potential in the fields of tourism and commerce, and also the rich culture and hospitality of the people of Camarines Norte. The Bantayog Festival is held every March or April annually. It was launched in April 1982. Manuel Conde, National Artist of the Philippines for Film (2009) Ricky Lee, National Artist of the Philippines for Film and Broadcast Arts (2022) Robin Padilla, Actor Ambet Nabus, Radio Anchor, Comedian and Show Business Reporter Fortunato "Atoy" Co, Former PBA Player, Actor, Politician Joross Gamboa, TV Actor Precious Paula Nicole, Drag Performer, Winner of Drag Race Philippines (Season 1) Sydney Joseph L. Torronueva, Top 3 Ten Outstanding Students of the Philippines 2022.  Municipality of Daet | (DILG) "2015 Census of Population, Report No. 3 – Population, Land Area, and Population Density" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. Quezon City, Philippines. August 2016. ISSN 0117-1453. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 25, 2021. Retrieved July 16, 2021. Census of Population (2020). "Region V (Bicol Region)". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved July 8, 2021. "PSA Releases the 2018 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates". Philippine Statistics Authority. December 15, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2022. "The Fall of the Dictatorship". Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. Archived from the original on September 3, 2017. Retrieved September 9, 2018. Francisco, Katerina (September 22, 2016). "Martial Law, the dark chapter in Philippine history". Rappler. Archived from the original on September 23, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2018. Tan, Ab (January 18, 1981). "Marcos Ends Martial Law, Keeps Tight Grip". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved September 9, 2018. "Back to the Past: A timeline of press freedom". CMFR. September 1, 2007. Retrieved March 2, 2018. Bantayog.org website - Martyrs of the 1981 Daet Massacre Doyo, Ma. Ceres P. "Martial law massacres". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Retrieved June 18, 2018. "Martyrs of the 1981 Daet Massacre". Bantayog ng mga Bayani. Retrieved April 10, 2020. Yap, Eric (June 30, 2022). "AN ACT AUTOMATICALLY CONVERTING THE CAPITAL TOWN OF PROVINCES WITH NO COMPONENT CITIES, INDEPENDENT COMPONENT CITIES OR HIGHLY URBANIZED CITIES WITHIN ITS TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION, INTO A COMPONENT CITY" (PDF). House of Representatives of the Philippines. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Palma, Wilter (August 9, 2022). "AN ACT AUTOMATICALLY CONVERTING THE CAPITAL TOWN OF PROVINCES WITH NO COMPONENT CITIES, INDEPENDENT COMPONENT CITIES, OR HIGHLY URBANIZED CITIES WITHIN ITS TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION, INTO A COMPONENT CITY" (PDF). House of Representatives of the Philippines. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Daza, Paul (August 11, 2022). "AN ACT CONVERING INTO COMPONENT CITIES THE CAPITAL TOWNS OF PROVINCES WITHOUT A CITY, AMENDING FOR THE PURPOSE SECTION 450 OF REPUBLIC ACT NO. 7610, AS AMENDED BY REPUBLIC ACT NO. 9009, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE OF 1991, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES" (PDF). House of Representatives of the Philippines. Retrieved April 1, 2023. "Daet, Camarines Norte Climatological Normal Values". Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration. Archived from the original on October 13, 2018. Retrieved October 13, 2018. "Daet, Camarines Norte Climatological Extremes". Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration. Archived from the original on October 13, 2018. Retrieved October 13, 2018. Census of Population (2015). "Region V (Bicol Region)". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved June 20, 2016. Census of Population and Housing (2010). "Region V (Bicol Region)" (PDF). Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. National Statistics Office. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Censuses of Population (1903–2007). "Region V (Bicol Region)". Table 1. Population Enumerated in Various Censuses by Province/Highly Urbanized City: 1903 to 2007. National Statistics Office.{{cite encyclopedia}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Province of Camarines Norte". Municipality Population Data. Local Water Utilities Administration Research Division. Retrieved December 17, 2016. "Poverty incidence (PI):". Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved December 28, 2020. "Estimation of Local Poverty in the Philippines" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. November 29, 2005. "2003 City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. March 23, 2009. "City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates; 2006 and 2009" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. August 3, 2012. "2012 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. May 31, 2016. "Municipal and City Level Small Area Poverty Estimates; 2009, 2012 and 2015". Philippine Statistics Authority. July 10, 2019. "PSA Releases the 2018 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates". Philippine Statistics Authority. December 15, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2022. A trip to Daet and the Calaguas Islands in Camarines Norte, galapinoy.com. Accessed July 31, 2022. "SM City Daet". "SM Prime to Open New Mall in Daet, Camarines Norte | SM Prime". Wikimedia Commons has media related to Daet. Municipality of Daet Philippine Standard Geographic Code Philippine Census Information