Four Rooms is a 1995 American anthology farce black comedy film co-written and co-directed by Allison Anders, Alexandre Rockwell, Robert Rodriguez, and Quentin Tarantino. The story is set in the fictional Hotel Mon Signor in Los Angeles on New Year's Eve. Tim Roth plays Ted, the bellhop and main character in the frame story, whose first night on the job consists of four very different encounters with various hotel guests. Four Rooms was released in the United States on December 25, 1995, by Miramax Films. The film received mixed reviews from critics who praised the segments directed by Rodriguez and Tarantino, but heavily criticized the segments by Anders and Rockwell. For her role, Madonna won for Worst Supporting Actress at the 16th Golden Raspberry Awards. On New Year's Eve, bellhop Sam (Marc Lawrence) of the Hotel Mon Signor briefs his replacement, Ted (Tim Roth). The film's animated opening credits, inspired by the cartoons of The Pink Panther Show, feature the scat song "Vertigogo" by Combustible Edison. Written and directed by Allison Anders Ted assists a group of unusual women with their luggage, which he brings to the Honeymoon Suite. He learns they are a coven of witches, attempting to reverse a spell cast on their goddess, Diana (Amanda De Cadenet). The ritual requires them each to place an ingredient into a large cauldron; however, one (Ione Skye) has still to retrieve her ingredient – semen – with one hour left. She seduces Ted and they have sex in the cauldron. He leaves and they complete the ritual, and Diana emerges from the cauldron. After Ted's service in the honeymoon suite, a party guest from another room (Lawrence Bender) calls the front desk for some ice. He is unsure which floor he is on, but eventually directs Ted to Room 404. Written and directed by Alexandre Rockwell At Room 404, Ted finds himself in a fantasy hostage situation. Siegfried (David Proval) maniacally accuses Ted, whom he calls Theodore, of having slept with his wife Angela (Jennifer Beals). Ted is forced at gunpoint to participate in the scenario, uncertain of what is real. He tries to escape through the bathroom window but gets stuck, and a party guest vomits onto him from the window above. As Ted frees himself and climbs out, another guest (Paul Skemp) arrives at Room 404 and is greeted by Siegfried in the same manner. Written and directed by Robert Rodriguez A husband (Antonio Banderas) and wife (Tamlyn Tomita) leave for a New Year's Eve party, tipping Ted $500 to keep an eye on their children, Sarah and Juancho (Lana McKissack and Danny Verduzco). Ted instructs the children to stay in their room; when he leaves, they vandalize the room, exploding a bottle of champagne. They call Ted for toothbrushes, and he tries unsuccessfully to put them to bed. He leaves but is summoned back to find the room in further chaos: a painting has been turned into a dartboard with lipstick and a syringe, Juancho has a cigarette, Sarah has a bottle of liquor, the television is set to an adult channel, and the children have found a dead prostitute (Patricia Vonne) in the box spring. Sarah stabs Ted in the leg with the syringe when he repeatedly uses the word "whore" and Juancho accidentally sets the room on fire. Their father returns, carrying his passed-out wife, and asks Ted, "Did they misbehave?" The sprinkler system activates while everyone stands still. Unsettled, Ted calls his boss Betty (Kathy Griffin) to quit. After a conversation with Margaret (Marisa Tomei), he gets Betty on the phone and tries to quit, but receives a call from the hotel penthouse. Betty persuades him to stay and tend to the guests. Written and directed by Quentin Tarantino The penthouse is occupied by famous director Chester Rush (Tarantino) and his friends. They request a block of wood, three nails, a ball of twine, a bucket of ice, a doughnut, a club sandwich, and a hatchet. Once Ted brings in the items, substituting a meat cleaver for the hatchet, he is invited to join their challenge. Inspired by the Alfred Hitchcock Presents episode "Man from the South" (incorrectly referred to as "The Man from Rio"), Chester's friend Norman (Paul Calderón) has bet his little finger against Chester's car that he can ignite his Zippo lighter ten times in a row. Ted tries to leave, but Chester entices him to stay by offering $100 to hear him out and a further $900 to act as referee and sever the finger should Norman fail. Ted agrees to participate; Norman's lighter fails on the first try, and Ted immediately chops off his finger, sweeps up the money, and leaves the penthouse with an energetic step. As the credits roll, Chester and company frantically prepare to take a screaming Norman to the hospital. Tim Roth as Ted Marc Lawrence as Sam Sammi Davis as Jezebel Amanda de Cadenet as Diana Valeria Golino as Athena Madonna as Elspeth Ione Skye as Eva Lili Taylor as Raven Alicia Witt as Kiva David Proval as Siegfried Jennifer Beals as Angela Lawrence Bender as Long Hair Yuppie Scum Paul Skemp as Real Theodore Quinn Thomas Hellerman as Baby Bellhop Antonio Banderas as Husband Tamlyn Tomita as Wife Lana McKissack as Sarah Danny Verduzco as Juancho Patricia Vonne as Corpse Salma Hayek as TV Dancing Girl Kathy Griffin as Betty Marisa Tomei as Margaret Julie McClean as Left Redhead Laura Rush as Right Redhead Quentin Tarantino as Chester Rush Jennifer Beals as Angela Paul Calderón as Norman Bruce Willis as Leo (uncredited) Kimberly Blair as Hooker (uncredited) The four segments are shown chronologically, except for "The Misbehavers", the events of which both precede and succeed the events of "The Wrong Man". There are some connections between the four segments: In "The Wrong Man", Ted recalls the witches' ritual in "The Missing Ingredient" with the expression "weird voodoo thing". Ted can be seen with the two cherries from "The Missing Ingredient" at the beginning of "The Misbehavers". Sarah in "The Misbehavers" calls a random room to ask a question. The man who picks up happens to be Siegfried from "The Wrong Man". Angela appears in both "The Wrong Man" and "The Man from Hollywood". When calling his boss, just before the beginning of "The Man from Hollywood", Ted recalls the events of the first three segments. Miramax presold Japanese distribution rights to Shochiku along with Gary Fleder's Things to Do in Denver When You're Dead, George T. Miller's Robinson Crusoe, John Ehle's The Journey of August King and Halloween: The Curse of Michael Myers in a bulk acquisition deal. James Berardinelli of ReelViews described it as "one of 1995's major disappointments". Hal Hinson of The Washington Post said it "asserts itself as a goof so laboriously and aggressively that you almost feel pinned back in your seat". Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times singled out Rodriguez's "The Misbehavers" segment as the funniest of the film and the one that most effectively capitalized on Roth. Of Tarantino's "The Man from Hollywood" segment, Ebert said, "Tarantino had the right idea in choosing to satirize himself but unfortunately does not seem to understand why he is funny. A movie about him making this film could have been hilarious." The film won a Razzie Award for Worst Supporting Actress for Madonna. The film holds a 13% "Rotten" rating from Rotten Tomatoes based on 45 reviews. The critical consensus reads: "Four Rooms comes stocked with a ton of talent on both sides of the camera, yet only manages to add up to a particularly uneven – and dismayingly uninspired – anthology effort. The film grossed $4,257,354 in only 319 theaters. The soundtrack features a score composed and performed by contemporary lounge music band Combustible Edison, coproduced by Mark Mothersbaugh. Additional music is by Juan García Esquivel. "Vertigogo (Opening Theme)" (Combustible Edison)  – 2:35 Tracks 2–11 from "The Missing Ingredient": "Junglero"  – 1:54 "Four Rooms Swing"  – 2:11 "Theme From 'Bewitched'" (Howard Greenfield and Jack Keller)  – 1:01 "Tea and Eva In The Elevator"  – 0:55 "Invocation"  – 1:26 "Breakfast At Denny's"  – 3:57 "Strange Brew"  – 0:27 "Coven Of Witches"  – 0:59 "The Earthly Diana"  – 0:36 "Eva Seduces Ted"  – 2:10 Tracks 12–17 from "The Wrong Man": "Hallway Ted"  – 0:31 "Headshake Rhumba"  – 0:41 "Skippen, Pukin, Siegfried"  – 0:29 "Angela"  – 0:46 "Punch Drunk"  – 2:57 "Male Bonding"  – 3:06 Tracks 18–25 from "The Misbehavers": "Mariachi"  – 0:29 "Antes De Medianoche"  – 2:45 "Sentimental Journey" (Written by Bud Green, Les Brown and Ben Homer, performed by Esquivel)  – 2:39 "Kids Watch TV"  – 2:03 "Champagne and Needles"  – 2:06 "Bullseye"  – 1:01 "Harlem Nocturne" (Written by Earle Hagen, performed by Esquivel)  – 2:30 "The Millionaire's Holiday"  – 2:13 Tracks 26–29 from "The Man from Hollywood": "Ted-o-vater"  – 0:39 "Vertigogo (Closing Credits)"  – 5:33 "'D' In The Hallway Credits"  – 0:25 "Torchy"  – 0:16 List of films set around New Year "Four Rooms (1995)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 8, 2014. Retrieved April 4, 2018. "Miramax Intl. Takes A World View". Variety. March 5, 1995. Archived from the original on April 20, 2021. Retrieved April 19, 2021. Berardinelli, James (December 25, 1995). "Four Rooms review". ReelViews. Archived from the original on December 10, 2019. Retrieved February 11, 2012. Hinson, Hal (December 25, 1995). "Four Rooms". Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 5, 2012. Retrieved February 11, 2012. Ebert, Roger (December 25, 1995). "Four Rooms movie review & film summary (1995)". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on December 8, 2017. Retrieved May 12, 2021. "The (Not So) Sweet Sixteenth Annual RAZZIE® Awards (for 1995)". Golden Raspberry Awards. December 4, 2005. Archived from the original on January 14, 2012. Retrieved February 11, 2012. Four Rooms at Rotten Tomatoes "Four Rooms". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 8, 2014. Retrieved February 11, 2012. Four Rooms at AllMusic "Soundtrack: Four Rooms". Soundtrack.net. Archived from the original on June 27, 2012. Retrieved February 11, 2012. "Four Rooms- Soundtrack details". soundtrackcollector.com. Archived from the original on February 12, 2012. Retrieved February 11, 2012. Four Rooms at IMDb Four Rooms at AllMovie Four Rooms at Box Office Mojo Four Rooms at Rotten Tomatoes