Santa Cruz, officially the Municipality of Santa Cruz (Tagalog: Bayan ng Santa Cruz), is a 1st class municipality and capital of the province of Laguna, Philippines. According to the 2020 census, it has a population of 123,574 people. Santa Cruz is situated on the banks of the Santa Cruz River which flows into the eastern part of Laguna de Bay. The town is bounded by the Bay on the north, by Lumban and Pagsanjan towns in the east, Pagsanjan and Magdalena towns in the south, and Pila in the west. It is 88 kilometres (55 mi) from Manila via Calamba and Los Baños. It is accessible by land from Metro Manila passing through Rizal Province via Manila East Road or via South Luzon Expressway Santa Cruz is considered as the service and commercial center on the eastern part of the province. The town is composed of five barangays in the Poblacion area and 21 classified urban barangays. Although relatively far from the immediate urbanizing influence of Metropolitan Manila, Santa Cruz continues to progress. It is now classified as first class municipality. The present administration is headed by the Mayor Egay San Luis Sr.. Santa Cruz is also the seat of the provincial government since 1885, giving the municipality an additional administrative function over the entire province. It also functions as the service center for transportation, commerce, health, education, and other social services for the predominantly rural north-eastern municipalities of the province. Boosting the economy of the municipality are the incipient and fast-growing agribusiness industries such as livestock raising, horticulture and aquaculture. The town is composed of twenty-six (26) urban barangays. All barangays are being classified as urban. The development of Santa Cruz as the administrative, commercial, and service center of Laguna makes it accessible for all private/public vehicles going to nearby places particularly Pagsanjan, Lake Caliraya, Liliw, Paete and Nagcarlan. During the last decade of the 16th century, Santa Cruz was once a well populated barrio of the present municipality of Lumban, as well as other contemporary towns like Pagsanjan, Cavinti, Paete and Pangil. On September 6, 1602, Santa Cruz separated from Lumban and became a pueblo with its church and local government. Since its foundation in 1602, the town had been ravaged by calamitous forces such as fires, typhoons, floods and human vandalism during the Philippine Revolution of 1896–1899, the war of the Philippine Independence (1899–1902), Battle of Santa Cruz, the assault of the Tulisanes (bandits) during the Spanish times. The Filipino troops of the pre-war 4th and 42nd Infantry Division of the Philippine Commonwealth Army and recognized guerrillas also came from the town and was involved in the Second Battle of Santa Cruz on January 26, 1945. Characterized by fertile flat lands situated along the coastal plains of Laguna de Bay, the economic base of the town had been traditionally anchored on two primary industries, namely agriculture and fishing which still remain up to the present. In view of the strategic location of Santa Cruz relative to the other coastal settlements about the lake, trading activities have likewise rooted on the town during those early settlement days. The town proper which has always been the focal point of activities used to be accessible to the other lake-shore areas due to the navigable Santa Cruz River aside from Laguna de Bay itself. Since those early days, water is the principal mode of transportation. Today, Santa Cruz serves as the capital of Laguna and is considered as the business and commercial center on the eastern part of the province. Situated at the central portion of Laguna province along the south-eastern coast of Laguna de Bay, Santa Cruz lies 87 kilometres (54 mi) southeast of Metro Manila via Calamba and is geographically located at approximately 14 degrees 17' latitude and 121 degrees 25' longitude. The municipality is bounded on the north and north-west by Laguna de Bay, on the north-east by Lumban, on the east by Pagsanjan, on the southeast by Magdalena, on the south by Liliw, and on the south-west by Pila. It has 26 barangays and covers approximate land area of 3860 hectares which comprises about 2% of the total land area of Laguna Province. Land Area: 3,860 hectares Residential: 381.97 Commercial: 35.96 Institutional: 92.17 Functional Open Space: 31.27 Roads: 157.73 Total Built-up: 696.10 Agricultural: 3,048.57 Special Use: 115.33 The two types of rocks found in Santa Cruz are alluvium and clastic rocks. Clastic rocks are located at the eastern portion of the municipality specifically in Barangay Alipit, San Jose, Oogong, Jasaan, San Juan, Palasan, and portions of Barangays Pagsawitan, Patimbao, Bubukal, Labuin and Malinao. These rocks consist of inter-bedded shale and sandstone with occasional thin lenses of limestone, tuff, and reworked sandy tuffs, calcareous sandstone and partly tuffaceous shale. Like most areas in the province of Laguna, the climate of Santa Cruz is characterized by two pronounced seasons: dry from January to April and wet during the rest of the year. The municipality has annual temperature of 27.2 degree Celsius and annual rainfall of 1962.7mm. Northeasterly winds with an average wind speed of 9 knots prevail in the municipality. Santa Cruz is politically subdivided into 26 barangays.  Alipit Bagumbayan Bubukal Calios Duhat Gatid Jasaan Labuin Malinao Oogong Pagsawitan Palasan Patimbao Poblacion I Poblacion II Poblacion III Poblacion IV Poblacion V San Jose San Juan San Pablo Norte San Pablo Sur Santisima Cruz Santo Angel Central Santo Angel Norte Santo Angel Sur In the 2020 census, the population of Santa Cruz, Laguna, was 123,574 people, with a density of 3,200 inhabitants per square kilometre or 8,300 inhabitants per square mile. Poverty Incidence of Santa Cruz Source: Philippine Statistics Authority The provincial capital of Laguna, Santa Cruz serves as service center of the province particularly for the municipalities on its north-eastern part. Trade and commerce remain to be one of the primary economic activities in the locality. The presence of jeepney services plying Lumban, Paete, Siniloan, San Pablo, Pila, Victoria, Cavinti-Caliraya, Luisiana, Majayjay, Calumpang, Nagcarlan, Liliw, Magdalena, Pagsanjan, Lucban, Lucena and Calamba has further enhanced the municipality's role as a commerce and trade center. The center of business activities is in the poblacion specifically at Barangay V where the four (4) buildings of Public Market is situated. Santa Cruz has many establishment that contribute to its development. Development in this vicinity has been a quasi-residential commercial type as manifested by the proliferation of structures which are used both for business and residential purposes by the proprietors/owners. There is also a concentration of business establishments at the section of the national highway/expressway especially Barangay Gatid where a Mall is located, and the abandoned PNR Railway (road) while a strip pattern of commercial development is noticeable along the Quezon Avenue and along the old highway and Pedro Guevarra Avenue. Along P Guevarra Avenue, several establishments are also located such as Hospitals, Meralco office, PLDT office, Red Cross, several Banking Institutions, and Executive Eminent Lending Company. There is also SL Agritech Corporation, in Barangay Oogong, Santa Cruz, Laguna. Annual local government collection: 2008 — ₱ 160,196,679.38 2007 — ₱ 135,792,097.46 2006 — ₱ 128,812,429.41 2005 — ₱ 117,351,293.14 Santa Cruz may not have natural tourist spots and no wide areas to develop but one thing the townsmen of Santa Cruz are proud of are the local foods available in the town. Santa Cruz boasts of the famous white cheese or kesong puti, freshly made from carabao's milk. Immaculate Concepcion Parish Church (Roman Catholic) Cathedral of the Our Lady of Maulawin (Aglipayan Church) Emilio Jacinto Shrine Burial Site Villa Valenzuela Santa Cruz Town Plaza Provincial Capitol of Laguna Aerial view with Santa Cruz in the centre and Pila in the foreground Laguna Provincial Capitol Rizal Monument Santa Cruz Public Market viewed from Regidor Street near Santisima Elementary School Pedro Guevara Avenue, in front of the Iglesia ni Cristo church. Pedro Guevara Avenue. At left is the Spanish-era Escuela Pía building. The bell tower of the Church of the Immaculate Conception can be seen at the background. Santa Cruz hosted the Palarong Pambansa from May 4–10, 2014. Festivals Kesong puti Festival — April 4–11 Anilag Festival — March 8–17 Partial list of schools Santa Cruz Central Elementary School (The Central School of Santa Cruz) Bagumbayan Elementary School Bubukal Elementary School Calios Elementary School Duhat Elementary School Gatid Elementary School Oogong Elementary School Pagsawitan Elementary School Palasan Elementary School Patimbao Elementary School San Jose Elementary School Santisima Cruz Elementary School Santo Angel Central Elementary School Santo Angel Norte Elementary School Santo Angel Sur Elementary School Silangan Elementary School Pedro Guevara Memorial National High School Basic Christian International School and Special Education Center, Inc. ACTS Computer College AMA Computer University AMA Computer Learning Center Capitol View Christian School Immaculate Conception Catholic College (formerly Don Bosco High School) Laguna Santiago Educational Foundation Inc. Laguna Senior High School Laguna State Polytechnic University Laguna University Little Javannah Montessori School Maranatha Christian Academy of Santa Cruz, Laguna Our Lady of Maulawin Educational Foundation, Inc. Philippine Women's University SHARPMINDS Tutorial Center STI College St. Therese Martin of Lisieux School and Business High School United Evangelical Church School Union College of Laguna Southbay Montessori School GOAL-DEN Learners Center iExcel Learning Hub Mind Builders Academy Rabbi Excellent Christian School Private Hospitals: 4 Rural Health Units: 2 Government Hospital: 1 Health Centers 26 Laguna Medical Center Santa Cruz Laguna Polymedic, Inc. Laguna Doctors Hospital Laguna Holy Family Hospital Jesus the Saviour Hospital Gen. Juan Cailles - First Filipino Military Governor of Laguna, Teacher, Soldier, and Public Servant Gen. Agueda Kahabagan - First Filipino Female General of 1st Republic of the Philippines Pedro Guevara - Soldier, Legislator, Lawyer and Writer Eduardo Quisumbing - National Scientist of the Philippines for Plant Taxonomy, Systematics, and Morphology Emil Q. Javier, National Scientist of the Philippines for Agriculture, and 17th President of the University of the Philippines Nena Saguil - modernist and abstract art painter Socorro Ramos – Filipina entrepreneurship and co-founder of National Book Store, the largest bookstore chain in the Philippines. Carmina Villarroel - Filipina actress, presenter, former child actress. Gov. Felicisimo T. San Luis - Former Provincial Governor of Laguna (1960–1992) Jacinto Vallenzuela - Former Mayor (1926–1929) Ariel Magcalas - Former Mayor (2007–2010) Rodolfo S. San Luis - Former Mayor and Representative of the 4th District of Laguna Henry Bautista - Former Mayor (1995 to 1998) Domingo G. Panganiban - Former Mayor (1998–2007; 2010–2019) Makati, Philippines DLTBCo PITX Metro Manila Skyway SLEX Real Calamba Pila - Santa Cruz plies via To Manila East Road in Siniloan-Santa Maria route or Mabitac Market also it offers plies Town of Santa Cruz to PITX Bay City Metro Manila & Cubao in Quezon City via SLEX North-Southbound Cupang,Alabang toll plaza flyover, Muntinlupa route North-South Bound. Lucena Lines Santa Cruz Laguna Bus Terminal it offer plies route to Pagsanjan, Laguna via East Manila Road & South Luzon Expressway (SLEX) route North-South Bound or Santa Cruz Province Of Laguna West Portion Of Real Calamba Exit via SLEX North-Southbound Cupang,Alabang Toll Plaza Flyover To EDSA kamias City Of Quezon City.  Municipality of Santa Cruz | (DILG) "2015 Census of Population, Report No. 3 – Population, Land Area, and Population Density" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. Quezon City, Philippines. August 2016. ISSN 0117-1453. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 25, 2021. Retrieved July 16, 2021. Census of Population (2020). "Region IV-A (Calabarzon)". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved 8 July 2021. "PSA Releases the 2018 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates". Philippine Statistics Authority. 15 December 2021. Retrieved 22 January 2022. "Santa Cruz: Average Temperatures and Rainfall". Meteoblue. Retrieved 11 May 2020. "Province: Laguna". PSGC Interactive. Quezon City, Philippines: Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved 12 November 2016. Census of Population (2015). "Region IV-A (Calabarzon)". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved 20 June 2016. Census of Population and Housing (2010). "Region IV-A (Calabarzon)" (PDF). Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. National Statistics Office. Retrieved 29 June 2016. Censuses of Population (1903–2007). "Region IV-A (Calabarzon)". Table 1. Population Enumerated in Various Censuses by Province/Highly Urbanized City: 1903 to 2007. National Statistics Office.{{cite encyclopedia}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Province of Laguna". Municipality Population Data. Local Water Utilities Administration Research Division. Retrieved 17 December 2016. "Poverty incidence (PI):". Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved December 28, 2020. "Estimation of Local Poverty in the Philippines" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. 29 November 2005. "2003 City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. 23 March 2009. "City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates; 2006 and 2009" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. 3 August 2012. "2012 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. 31 May 2016. "Municipal and City Level Small Area Poverty Estimates; 2009, 2012 and 2015". Philippine Statistics Authority. 10 July 2019. "PSA Releases the 2018 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates". Philippine Statistics Authority. 15 December 2021. Retrieved 22 January 2022. "Laguna wins Palaro hosting bid". SunStar. October 24, 2013. At this time, after the 1986 EDSA Revolution, President Corazon Aquino forced the resignation of all local government unit heads and appointed officers in charge in their place Appointed OIC Mayor Appointed OIC Vice-Mayor Wikimedia Commons has media related to Santa Cruz, Laguna. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Santa Cruz (Laguna). Wikisource has the text of a 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article about Santa Cruz, Laguna. Philippine Standard Geographic Code Philippine Census Information Local Governance Performance Management System Santa Cruz, Laguna(Official Website) Archived 2012-12-21 at archive.today Profile of Santa Cruz, Laguna