KPMG International Limited (or simply KPMG) is a multinational professional services network, and one of the Big Four accounting organizations, along with Ernst & Young (EY), Deloitte, and PwC. The name "KPMG" stands for "Klynveld Peat Marwick Goerdeler". The initialism was chosen when KMG (Klynveld Main Goerdeler) merged with Peat Marwick in 1987. The firm is multinationally based and operates worldwide. Based in Amstelveen, Netherlands, with executive offices in New York City, KPMG is a network of firms in 145 countries with 273,424 employees. The location of legal incorporation is London, England, where it maintains strong historical connections. It has three lines of services: financial audit, tax, and advisory. Its tax and advisory services are further divided into various service groups. Over the past decade, various parts of the firm's global network of affiliates have been involved in regulatory actions as well as lawsuits. In 1816, Robert Fletcher started working as an accountant and in 1839 the firm he worked for changed its name to Robert Fletcher & Co. William Barclay Peat joined the firm in 1870 at 17 and became head of the firm in 1891, renamed William Barclay Peat & Co. by then. In 1877, Thomson McLintock founded Thomson McLintock & Co in Glasgow. In 1897, Marwick Mitchell & Co. was founded by James Marwick and Roger Mitchell in New York City. In 1899, Ferdinand William LaFrentz founded the American Audit Co. in New York. In 1923, The American Audit Company was renamed FW LaFrentz & Co. In about 1913, Frank Wilber Main founded Main & Co. in Pittsburgh. In March 1917, Piet Klijnveld and Jaap Kraayenhof opened an accounting firm called Klynveld Kraayenhof & Co. in Amsterdam. In 1925, William Barclay Peat & Co. and Marwick Mitchell & Co., merged to form Peat Marwick Mitchell & Co. In 1963, Main LaFrentz & Co was formed by the merger of Main & Co and FW LaFrentz & Co. In 1969, Thomson McLintock and Main LaFrentz merged forming McLintock Main LaFrentz International and McLintock Main LaFrentz International absorbed the general practice of Grace, Ryland & Co. In 1979, Klynveld Kraayenhof & Co. (Netherlands), McLintock Main LaFrentz (United Kingdom / United States), and Deutsche Treuhand-Gesellschaft (Germany) formed KMG (Klynveld Main Goerdeler) as a grouping of independent national practices to create a strong European-based international firm. Deutsche Treuhand-Gesellschaft CEO Reinhard Goerdeler (son of leading anti-Nazi activist Carl Goerdeler, who would have become Chancellor if Operation Valkyrie had succeeded) became the first CEO of KMG. In the United States, Main Lafrentz & Co. merged with Hurdman and Cranstoun to form Main Hurdman & Cranstoun. In 1987, KMG and Peat Marwick joined forces in the first mega-merger of large accounting firms and formed a firm called KPMG in the United States and most of the rest of the world and Peat Marwick McLintock in the United Kingdom. In the Netherlands, due to the merger between PMI and KMG in 1988, PMI tax advisors joined Meijburg & Co. (The tax advisory agency Meijburg & Co. was founded by Willem Meijburg, Inspector of National Taxes, in 1939). Today, the Netherlands is the only country with two members of KPMG International: KPMG Audit (accountants) and Meijburg & Co (tax consultants). In 1991, the firm was renamed KPMG Peat Marwick, and in 1999, the name was reduced again to KPMG. In October 1997, KPMG and Ernst & Young announced they would merge. However, while the merger to form PwC was granted regulatory approval, the KPMG/Ernst & Young tie-up was later abandoned. In 2001, KPMG spun off its United States consulting firm through an initial public offering of KPMG Consulting, which was rebranded BearingPoint. In early 2009, BearingPoint filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. The UK and Dutch consulting arms were sold to Atos in 2002. In 2003, KPMG divested itself of its legal arm, Klegal and KPMG sold its Dispute Advisory Services to FTI Consulting. KPMG's member firms in the United Kingdom, Germany, Switzerland and Liechtenstein merged to form KPMG Europe LLP in October 2007. These member firms were followed by Spain, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, CIS (Azerbaijan, Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, Armenia and Georgia), Turkey, Norway, and Saudi Arabia. They appointed joint Chairmen, John Griffith-Jones and Ralf Nonnenmacher. In 2020, KPMG International Limited was incorporated in London, England. In February 2021, KPMG UK appointed its first female leaders, replacing Bill Michael, who stepped aside after making controversial comments. Bina Mehta was asked to step in as acting UK chairman and Mary O'Connor took over Michael's executive responsibilities as acting senior partner in UK. In April 2021, O'Connor quit the firm after being passed over for the permanent role. In November 2021, KPMG UK was reported as having revised its partnership process to introduce five levels of partnership which required partners to inject capital at levels starting at £150,000 and going up to £500,000. This along with the £115 million proceeds from the sale of its pensions business earlier in 2021, which it seems was not distributed to the partners, was intended to prepare the balance sheet for a potential large fine (up to £1 billion) arising out of the Carillion lawsuit. In April 2022, it was announced that KPMG will acquire 50% of the UK-based venture capital advisory specialist Acceleris subject to approval from the Financial Conduct Authority. In August 2022, KPMG announced plans to downsize its office footprint in New York City in 2025, when it moves its offices in the city from Midtown Manhattan to Two Manhattan West in Hudson Yards. Each national KPMG firm is an independent legal entity and is a member of KPMG International Limited, a UK Limited Company incorporated in London, United Kingdom. KPMG International changed its legal structure from a Swiss Verein to a co-operative under Swiss law in 2003 and to a limited company in 2020. This structure in which the Limited company provides support services only to the member firms is similar to other professional services networks. The member firms provide the services to the client. The purpose is to limit the liability of each independent member. KPMG's global chairman is Bill Thomas, former senior partner and CEO of Canadian member firm KPMG LLP. Some KPMG member firms are registered as multidisciplinary entities that also provide legal services in certain jurisdictions. In India, where regulations do not permit foreign auditing firms to operate, KPMG is licensed as an investment bank and carries out audits under the name of BSR & Co, an auditing firm KPMG purchased after the 1992 liberalisation of the Indian economy. During March 2022, in response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, KPMG announced that their Russian and Belarusian firms would leave the KPMG network. KPMG is organised into the following three service lines (the 2022 revenue shares are listed in parentheses): Audit ($11.85 billion) Advisory ($15.44 billion) Tax and Legal Services ($7.35 billion) Tax arrangements relating to tax avoidance and multinational corporations and Luxembourg which were negotiated by KPMG became public in 2014 in the so-called Luxembourg Leaks. KPMG was the preferred employer among the Big Four accounting firms according to CollegeGrad.com. It was also ranked No. 4 on the list of "50 Best Places to Launch a Career" in 2009 according to Bloomberg Businessweek. It was reported in early 2012 that KPMG has about 11,000 staff in the UK and 9,000 in mainland China and Hong Kong. KPMG's global deputy chairman predicted that headcount in China would overtake that of the UK by the end of 2013. KPMG agreed to pay $125 million and $75 million to settle lawsuits stemming from the firm's audits of Rite Aid and Oxford Health Plans Inc., respectively. KPMG agreed to pay $115 million to settle lawsuits stemming from the collapse of software company Lernout & Hauspie Speech Products NV. During August, KPMG LLP admitted to criminal wrongdoing and agreed to pay US$456 million in fines, restitution, and penalties as part of an agreement to defer prosecution of the firm, according to the US Justice Department and the Internal Revenue Service. In addition to the agreement, nine individuals-including six former KPMG partners and the former deputy chairman of the firm were to be criminally prosecuted. As alleged in a series of charging documents, the fraud relates to the design, marketing, and implementation of fraudulent tax shelters. American real estate financing firm Fannie Mae sued KPMG for malpractice for approving years of erroneous financial statements. In February, KPMG Germany was investigated for ignoring questionable payments in the Siemens bribery case. In November 2008, the Siemens Supervisory Board recommended changing auditors from KPMG to Ernst & Young. In February, KPMG Mauritius was sued by a group of South African pensioners who lost millions when investing in Leaderguard Spot Forex (LSF), a foreign exchange investment scheme backed by KPMG and Denmark-based Saxo Bank. The suit against KPMG was just for the portion lost during their involvement. In March, KPMG was accused of enabling "improper and imprudent practices" at New Century Financial, a failed mortgage company, and KPMG agreed to pay $80 million to settle suits from Xerox shareholders over manipulated earnings reports. In December, it was announced that two of Tremont Group's Rye Select funds, audited by KPMG, had $2.37 billion invested with the Madoff "Ponzi scheme". Class action suits were filed. In August, it was reported by the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority to the Swedish accountancy regulator after HQ Bank was forced into involuntary liquidation after the Financial Supervisory Authority revoked all its licences for breach of banking regulations. In August, KPMG conducted due diligence work on Hewlett-Packard's $11.1 billion acquisition of the British software company Autonomy. In November 2012 HP announced an $8.8 billion write off due to "serious accounting improprieties" committed by Autonomy management prior to the acquisition. According to an independent panel formed to investigate irregular payments made by Olympus which reported in December, KPMG's affiliate in Japan did not identify fraud at the company. In April, Scott London, a former KPMG LLP partner in charge of KPMG's US Los Angeles-based Pacific Southwest audit practice, admitted passing on stock tips about clients, including Herbalife, Skechers, and other companies, to his friend Bryan Shaw, a California jewelry-store owner. In return Shaw gave London $70,000 as well as gifts that included a $12,000 Rolex watch and concert tickets. On 6 May, Shaw agreed to plead guilty to one count of conspiracy to commit securities fraud. He also agreed to pay around $1.3 million in restitution, and to cooperate with the government as part of a plea deal with federal prosecutors. This scandal led KPMG to resign as auditor for Herbalife and Skechers. KPMG was accused by the Canada Revenue Agency of abetting tax evasion schemes: "The CRA alleges that the KPMG tax structure was in reality a 'sham' that intended to deceive the taxman." The Canada Revenue Agency offered an amnesty to KPMG clients caught using an offshore tax-avoidance scheme on the Isle of Man. KPMG US terminated five partners in its audit practice, including the head of its audit practice in the US, after an investigation of advanced confidential knowledge of planned audit inspections by its Public Company Accounting Oversight Board. This followed criticism about KPMG's failure to uncover illegal sales practices at Wells Fargo or potential corruption at FIFA, the governing international body of football. It was reported in 2017 that KPMG had the highest number of deficiencies, among the Big Four, cited by its regulator in the previous two years. This includes two annual inspections that were compromised as a result of advanced access to inspection information. In March 2019, David Middendorf and Jeffrey Wada, co-defendants in the scandal, were convicted. The UK accounting regulator, Financial Regulation Council (FRC), has opened an investigation into KPMG's audit of the financial statements of British aerospace company, Rolls-Royce plc for the year ended December 2010. In August, KPMG US paid a $6.2 million fine to the US Securities and Exchange Commission for inadequacies in its audit of the financial statements of oil and gas company, Miller Energy Resources. It also found KPMG guilty of a long list of violations with regard to its audits, including "lack of competence" and "highly unreasonable conduct." In November, 91 partners of KPMG Hong Kong faced contempt proceedings in Hong Kong High Court, as China Medical Technologies (CMED) liquidators investigating a $400 million fraud took action against KPMG with regard to its refusal to honor a February 2016 court order to produce Chinese working papers, correspondence, and records to the liquidators. The liquidators are asking that 91 defendants be held in contempt of court, which could result in criminal penalties, or weekly fines. KPMG had issued written audit reports for CMED from 2003 to 2008, and was replaced by PwC Zhong Tian in August 2009. "Perhaps locking up 91 KPMG partners over Christmas may spur the firms to find a solution to this problem", said Professor Paul Gillis of Peking University's Guanghua School of Management. During July, KPMG has come under criticism for its role in the bankruptcy of Dubai-based private equity firm, Abraaj Group, after it was determined that KPMG Lower Gulf Chairman and Chief Executive Vijay Malhotra's son has worked at Abraaj and an executive named Ashish Dave alternated between stints at KPMG and as Abraaj’s chief financial officer, a job he held twice. Also during July, the UK accounting watchdog, the Financial Reporting Council (FRC) announced an investigation into KPMG’s work for Conviviality, the British drinks supplier that collapsed into administration during April 2018. Also during July, KPMG paid HK$650 million (US$84 million) to settle legal claims after failing to identify fraud at a Chinese timber company, China Forestry. The liquidators of China Forestry claimed KPMG was negligent when it failed to detect serious false accounting by some of the company’s top management ahead of its listing in 2009. During August, Chile's Comision Para El Mercado Financiero(CMF) sanctioned KPMG Auditores Consultores Limitada (KPMG LLP's local affiliate) 3,000 UF (~$114,000), and Joaquín Lira Herreros, its partner, for offences incurred in the audit made to the financial statements of the Aurus Insignia Fondo de Inversión, managed by Aurus Capital S.A. Admnistradora General de Fondos Management (AGF), corresponding to the year 2014. In November, the Sultanate of Oman's Capital Market Authority (CMA) suspended KPMG from auditing entities regulated by the CMA for a period of one year after discovering major financial and accounting irregularities in the entities' records. In December, KPMG South Africa published an open apology for its participation in various scandals in South Africa, including publishing a misleading report that led to the resignation of the South African Finance Minister, involvement with the Gupta family who have been implicated in corruption scandal with former President, Jacob Zuma, and acting as the auditor of VBS Mutual Bank that collapsed due to fraud. Its top eight staff resigned during 2017 and its workforce shrank from 3,400 to 2,200. KPMG were fined £5 million by the Financial Reporting Council for misconduct shortly after the takeover of the Britannia Building Society by The Co-operative Bank, particularly relating to the valuation of Britannia's commercial loans and other liabilities. The takeover led to the near collapse of The Co-operative Bank. KPMG was fined £6 million by the Financial Reporting Council following a long running investigation by the regulator into misconduct in the firm’s auditing of Lloyds Syndicate 218 between 2007 & 2009. KPMG partner Mark Taylor has been fined £100,000, severely reprimanded and agreed to the imposition of a requirement to have a second partner review of his audits until the end of 2020. KPMG was fined $50 million by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission for illicit use of PCAOB data and cheating on training exams. During April, KPMG UK was fined £455,000 and a senior partner, Nicola Quayle, was fined £29,250 by the UK accounting regulator, Financial Regulation Council for failing to challenge what a client was telling them about certain complex supplier arrangements. In June, KPMG resigned from the auditor role at British fashion firm, Ted Baker plc after the company admitted accounting errors resulting in overstatement of its inventory by up to £58 million. In February, the liquidators for South African bank, VBS Mutual Bank, sued KPMG for 863.5 million rand (~US$59 million) over its audit opinion on the now defunct bank. In March, KPMG US agreed to pay $10 million to settle a 10-year gender discrimination lawsuit in a New York Federal Court that alleged claims by 450 women that its culture was rife with gender discrimination, sexual harassment, and retaliation. During May, members of the Canadian Parliament's House of Commons finance committee re-launched a probe into offshore tax evasion by interviewing Lucia Iacovelli, managing partner at KPMG. KPMG in the UK has been sued for more than £6 million (~€6.9 million, ~US$7.8 million) by property company Mount Anvil which claims it was left with an unexpected tax bill after the firm provided it with negligent advice. In July, the UK accounting regulator Financial Reporting Council (FRC) criticised KPMG for its "unacceptable" failure to meet required standards in its audits of banks for a third year running. Only 61% of KPMG’s audits sampled by the regulator met industry standards. The Government of Malaysia and the state sovereign fund, 1MDB, launched a lawsuit seeking over $5.6 billion in damages from KPMG partners for alleged breaches and negligence linked to a corruption scandal at the fund. South Africa's largest asset manager, the Public Investment Corporation (PIC) sued KPMG for 144 million rand (~U$9.5 million) it lost when the VBS Mutual Bank went bankrupt as a result of fraud. Its claim is centred on the rights issue and a revolving credit facility it participated in at VBS relying on financial statements audited by KPMG and its former senior partner, Sipho Malaba. In August, a tribunal convened by the UK regulator, FRC, fined KPMG £13m and ordered it to pay £2.75m in costs. This was because of its serious misconduct in the sale of bed company Silentnight. The tribunal found that KPMG had helped private equity group H.I.G Capital drive Silentnight into an insolvency process, so that HIG could acquire the company without its £100m pension scheme. KPMG was severely reprimanded by the tribunal, and was ordered to appoint an independent reviewer to check a sample of previous cases for similar failings. The tribunal ruled that KPMG's involvement with Silentnight was "deeply troubling" as it failed to act solely in its client's interests. In September, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board fined KPMG Australia $450,000 after it confessed to a cheating scandal involving over 1,100 (almost 12%) of its employees. In October, UK regulator The Financial Reporting Council (FRC), said KPMG and David Costley-Wood, a partner at the firm, used an "untruthful defence" in an investigation into the sale of Silentnight to a private equity firm in 2011. Costley-Wood, who was formerly head of KPMG’s Manchester restructuring division, was also fined £500,000 and barred from insolvency or accountancy licences for 13 years. In November, a British litigation financing firm—Augusta Ventures announced that it will bankroll three $152.4-million lawsuits in Canada against the previous auditor (KPMG LLP), authorized legal adviser (Cassels Brock & Blackwell LLP) and monetary adviser (Canaccord Genuity Corp) of the Money Retailer Monetary Providers Inc., a Canadian payday lender that filed for creditor safety in 2014. "It’s alleged in these lawsuits that KPMG, Cassels Brock and Canaccord triggered over $100-million in damages to Money Retailer and its collectors," mentioned Mr. Aziz, President of BlueTree Advisors Inc., a company restructuring advisory agency primarily based in Oakville, Ontario. Also in November, KPMG UK has been hit with a £15m lawsuit by insurance outsourcer Watchstone—formerly known as Quindell—over allegations it suffered losses because of the audit firm's negligence in 2013. Again in November, two units of Abraaj that are now in liquidation, filed a lawsuit in Dubai against KPMG LLP for damages of US$600 million alleging that KPMG accountants "failed to maintain independence and an appropriate attitude of professional skepticism," and breached their duty of care when auditing the private-equity firm. In January, the Malaysian government reported that KPMG's local affiliate had agreed to pay a fine of RM 333 million ($111 million) to settle the case filed against it in connection with the 1MDB funds scandal. A group of investors in Airbus, the Dutch foundation Stichting Investor Loss Compensation (SILC), filed a lawsuit against Airbus, KPMG and EY in the Hague District Court alleging they suffered damages worth at least €300 million (US$340 million) as a result of company's misleading publications about the manufacturer’s involvement in and financial settlements involving corruption, bribery, and other forms of fraud. UK regulator The Financial Reporting Council (FRC) fined KPMG £3 million for audit failings at collapsed alcohol retailer Conviviality. A settlement agreement between the UK regulator, the Financial Reporting Council and a KPMG Partner, Stuart Smith, who led the firm’s audit of IT company, Regenersis later renamed as Blancco Technology Group, resulted in a fine of £150,000 after he admitted misleading its inspectors. During March, British accounting regulator Financial Reporting Council (FRC) fined KPMG UK £1.3 million for serious failings within their audits of British bar chain, Revolution Bars Group. The US securities regulator, Securities Exchange Commission, announced an investigation into conflicts of interest at auditors, including KPMG's US branch, KPMG LLP. During April, the US accounting regulator, Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) fined the former head of KPMG's US audit practice, Scott Marcello, a record US$100,000 for having failed to reasonably supervise senior auditors who engaged in the scheme to improve KPMG’s inspection results. During May, the Financial Reporting Council confirmed that KPMG would face a £14.4 million (~US$18 million) fine and a severe reprimand over false representations made by KPMG employees to the regulator concerning Carillion. (See 'Carillion audit role' section below). In May, The Times reported that FRC was close to finishing its investigation, into KPMG UK's audit of the financial statements of Rolls-Royce plc for year ended December 2010; the investigation was begun in 2017 and the FRC may fine KPMG UK up to £4.5 million (~US$5.6 million) for questionable audit practices. In August, US Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) which reviews audit procedures of foreign firms that audit US-listed entities, fined KPMG South Korea US$500,000 for failing to have proper procedures in place to prevent its auditors from doctoring work papers. It also fined two of its partners and banned them from working for a PCAOB registered audit firm for three years, as they were found to have improperly altered documents and violated auditing standards during the Big Four firm’s 2018 audit of the Korean business of an unnamed US-listed company. In September, a lawsuit was filed in the Hong Kong High Court which accused KPMG of "appalling" audit work that allowed a Chinese medical technology company, China Medical Technologies, to commit a US$400 million accounting fraud, and which sought up to US$830 million in damages. In October, Dubai Emirate's financial regulator, Dubai Financial Services Authority handed provisional fines of US$2 million to KPMG's UAE affiliate (US$1.5 million) and one of its audit employees, Milind Navalkar, (US$0.5 million) for failing to follow international audit standards in the audit of the failed Dubai-based private equity firm, The Abraaj Group. Also, KPMG affiliate - KPMG Lower Gulf's CEO, Nader Haffar, quit consequent to a tumultuous year filled with accusations of nepotism, cronyism and partner discontent. This was a month after Nader had sent a letter to clients in the UAE and Oman in which the firm’s 30 partners said that they remained united. And, US accounting regulator Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) fined KPMG's Italian, Dutch and Canadian affiliates approx. US$275,000 for concealing the outsourcing of some audit work to unregulated firms in Poland and Romania. During November, KPMG UK agreed to pay £5 million (US$6 million) in settlement of a lawsuit by a former client, insurance software firm Quindell, relating to deficient audit work for Quindell (now known as Watchstone)relating to its 2013 financial statements. The Abu Dhabi Accountability Authority (ADAA) which monitors Abu Dhabi government-owned and related entities removed KPMG’s Lower Gulf affiliate from its list of authorized auditors that can sign off on financial statements. In December, US accounting regulator Public Company Accounting Oversight Board announced that its inspectors discovered that hundreds of KPMG employees in UK and Colombia affiliates cheated on their compliance exams. In addition, inspectors also discovered document alterations to deceive inspectors in KPMG's Colombia affiliate, and blank audit papers signed by an KPMG affiliate audit partner in India. KPMG LLP has agreed to pay US$7.7 million in fines. This follows a US$50 million fine in 2019 where KPMG employees were using data stolen from PCAOB to identify which audits would be reviewed. In February, KPMG UK confidentially settled the £1.3 billion (US$1.6 billion) lawsuit launched in 2022 by the UK's Official Receiver relating to KPMG's audit of the failed construction firm, Carillion, between 2014 - 2018. Also in February, a Disciplinary Tribunal, appointed by the UK's Financial Reporting Council and led by Sir Stanley Burnton concluded that members of the audit teams deliberately misled the FRC’s Audit Quality Review (AQR) teams of KPMG’s audits of Carillion plc and Regenersis plc by altering existing documents and by creating entirely new documents during the course of the inspection. This showed, the Tribunal found, a clear intention to mislead the regulator. In April, KPMG Lower Gulf was ordered by a Dubai court to pay UAE Dirhams 850 million (~US$231 million) to a group of investors who claim they lost money because of poor-quality audit of its client, The Abraaj Group. Also in April, KPMG’s Canadian affiliate was sued for Canadian $1.4 billion (~US$1.1 billion) by PriceWaterhouseCoopers, the Receiver winding down defunct financing firm, Bridging Finance Inc., for negligently failing to detect and report on misstatements in its financial statements before the firm’s collapse in 2021 And in April, UK's accounting regulator Financial Reporting Council fined KPMG's UK affiliate £1 million (Approx. US$1.3 million) for failing to meet audit requirements in case of its client, stationery company TheWorks.co.uk plc's 2020 financial statements, particularly its inventory. The Financial Reporting Council fined KPMG's UK affiliate £875,000 in April (Approx. US$1.1 million) for failing to meet audit requirements in case of its client, lighting company Luceco's, 2016 financial statements particularly its inventory cost errors. During May, the US accounting regulator Public Company Accounting Oversight Board released inspection reports regarding KPMG's China affiliate KPMG Huazhen LLP that Holding Foreign Companies Accountable Act (HFCAA) made possible. It concluded that it discovered "deficiencies of such significance that PCAOB staff believe the audit firm failed to obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence to support its work on the public company’s financial statements or internal control over financial reporting". During June, the UK accounting regulator Financial Reporting Council imposed a £877,000 (Approx. US$1.1 million) fine on KPMG's UK affiliate for not satisfying relevant requirements regarding its 2017 audit of the financial statements of logistics company, Eddie Stobart Group. In July, KPMG Nederland announced that over 100 employees of the Dutch affiliate of KPMG were found to have cheated annually on their exams over past five years and that its director Marc Hogeboom is also stepping down as boss of the accounting arm. In August, KPMG Australia was accused by two whistleblowers of submitting inflated invoices and billing the Australian Dept. of Defence for hours never worked. KPMG has reportedly charged this department A$1.8 billion (Approx. US$1.2 billion) over past decade. Also in August, the registration authority of the Abu Dhabi Global Market imposed a AED110,000 (~US$30,000) penalty on KPMG Lower Gulf for “ineffective systems and controls leading to non-compliance with audit requirements”. During November, the US accounting regulator Public Company Accounting Oversight Board imposed a fine of US$80,000 on KPMG affiliates in Brazil and Argentina for failing to communicate adequately with their client's audit committees, and a US$500,000 fine on its Japanese affiliate for quality control violations. During February, KPMG's South African affiliate is supposed to have entered into a confidential out-of-court settlement of 500 million Rand (~US$27 million) with the liquidators of bankrupt South African bank, VBS Mutual Bank in response to their lawsuit against KPMG filed in February 2021 for 863.5 million Rand (~$59 million). In March, KPMG's UK affiliate was fined £1.46 million ($1.9 million) by the UK accounting regulator, Financial Reporting Council for 'basic failings' in its audit of the 2018 financial statements of advertising agency, M&C Saatchi plc. FRC indicated that KPMG would have been fined £2.25 million had it not admitted to the breaches. In 2003, the IRS issued summonses to KPMG for information about certain tax shelters and their investors. In February 2004, the US Justice Department commenced a criminal inquiry. The United States member firm, KPMG LLP, was accused by the United States Department of Justice of fraud in marketing abusive tax shelters. KPMG fired or forced the retirement of over a dozen who were involved. KPMG LLP admitted criminal wrongdoing in creating fraudulent tax shelters to help wealthy clients avoid $2.5 billion in taxes between 1996 and 2002, and agreed to pay $456 million in penalties to avoid indictment. Under the deferred prosecution agreement, KPMG LLP would not face criminal prosecution if it complied with the terms of its agreement with the government. On 3 January 2007, the criminal conspiracy charges against KPMG were dropped. In 2012, KPMG brokered a deal for Microsoft with the Puerto Rico's government to give them a tax rate of nearly 0%, allowing Microsoft to sell its intellectual property to a 85-person local factory. It took years for the IRS to unravel the scheme, a "Rube Goldberg machine that channeled at least $39 billion in profits to Puerto Rico". The HBOS accounts were published in February 2008 and six months later HBOS had to be rescued by Lloyds Bank. One reason for undertaking an investigation into the audit, was that the audit did not reveal the HBOS Reading branch fraud. HBOS, and subsequently Lloyds Bank, accountant Sally Masterton wrote the Project Lord Turnbull Report which described how the Bank and other organizations reacted to the Reading Branch fraud. This report was highly critical of KPMG and stated, "KPMG have not only just been negligent but their direct involvement in a number of material malpractices and violations regarding HBoS is fundamental and exposes them to claims in relation to misconduct, serious dereliction of duty and breach of regulatory and statutory duties." However, the audit was investigated by the FRC which concluded, "there was not a realistic prospect that a tribunal would make an adverse finding against KPMG in respect of the matters within the scope of the investigation", and "The firm's work did not fall significantly short of the standards reasonably to be expected of the audit, the test that a tribunal would apply". In January 2018, it was announced that KPMG, auditor of collapsed UK construction firm Carillion, would have its role examined by the Financial Reporting Council, (FRC) and it was summoned to give evidence before two House of Commons select committees on 22 February 2018. On 13 February 2018, the 'Big 4' accountancy firms, including KPMG, were described by MP Frank Field as "feasting on what was soon to become a carcass" after collecting fees of £72m for Carillion work during the years leading up to its collapse. KPMG was singled out for particular criticism for signing off Carillion's last accounts before a profit warning in July 2017: "Either KPMG failed to spot the warning signs, or its judgement was clouded by its cosy relationship with the company and the multimillion-pound fees it received," said MP Rachel Reeves. Two out of three former Carillion finance directors had also worked for KPMG. KPMG defended itself, saying that in the construction industry "an accumulation of adverse events [...] can quite quickly cause a precipitous decline." KPMG chairman and senior partner Bill Michael said: "It does not follow automatically from a company collapse either that the opinion of management was wrong, or that the auditor did a bad job." On 22 February 2018, MPs contested evidence from KPMG (in one exchange MP Peter Kyle told KPMG partner Peter Meehan: "I would not hire you to do an audit of the contents of my fridge"). Rachel Reeves, chair of the business select committee, said: Auditing is a multi-million-pound business for the Big Four. On this morning's evidence from KPMG and Deloitte, these audits appear to be a colossal waste of time and money, fit only to provide false assurance to investors, workers and the public. [...] Carillion staff and investors could see the problems at the company but those responsible – auditors, regulators, and, ultimately, the directors – did nothing to stop Carillion being driven off a cliff. The final report of the Parliamentary inquiry into Carillion's collapse, published on 16 May 2018, criticised KPMG for its "complicity" in the company's financial reporting practices: KPMG audited Carillion for 19 years, pocketing £29 million in the process. Not once during that time did they qualify their audit opinion on the financial statements, instead signing off the figures put in front of them by the company's directors. Yet, had KPMG been prepared to challenge management, the warning signs were there in highly questionable assumptions about construction contract revenue and the intangible asset of goodwill accumulated in historic acquisitions. These assumptions were fundamental to the picture of corporate health presented in audited annual accounts. In failing to exercise—and voice—professional scepticism towards Carillion's aggressive accounting judgements, KPMG was complicit in them. It should take its own share of responsibility for the consequences. The select committee chairs (Frank Field and Rachel Reeves) called for a complete overhaul of Britain's corporate governance regime, saying the government had "lacked the decisiveness or bravery" to do so, accused the big four accounting firms of operating as a "cosy club", with KPMG singled out for its "complicity" in signing off Carillion's "increasingly fantastical figures". KPMG said: We believe we conducted our audit appropriately. However, it's only right that following a corporate collapse of such size and significance, the necessary investigations are performed. Auditing large and complex businesses involves many judgments and we will continue to cooperate with the FRC's ongoing investigation. ... We welcome any future review of our profession. If we consider how the profession has changed in the last decade […] it is clear there is a need for us to look closely at our business models. In a June 2018 report on audit standards across eight accounting firms, the FRC identified "failure to challenge management and show appropriate scepticism across their audits." It highlighted a decline in the quality of work undertaken by the Big Four, with KPMG performing the worst. There had, the FRC said, been an "unacceptable deterioration" in the quality of KPMG's work, and the FRC would scrutinise KPMG more closely as a result. In October 2018, the FRC proposed reforms to tackle the "underlying falling trust in business and the effectiveness of audit," and severely rebuked KPMG. In November 2018, KPMG said it would no longer undertake consultancy work for FTSE 350 Index-listed companies if it was also auditing them, in an effort to "remove even the perception of a possible conflict" of interest. The Carillion investigation followed FRC investigations into KPMG's role at HBOS, Quindell and The Co-operative Bank. In July 2018, the FRC started an investigation into KPMG's audit role at collapsed drinks merchant Conviviality. In January 2019, KPMG announced it had suspended the partner that led Carillion's audit and three members of his team; in August 2021, an FRC disciplinary panel was scheduled for 10 January 2022 to hear a formal complaint against KPMG and former KPMG partner Peter Meehan regarding the provision of allegedly false and misleading information concerning the 2016 Carillion audit. The tribunal convened to hear the formal complaint started on 10 January 2022. At the disciplinary hearing, KPMG's UK chief executive Jon Holt said the firm had discovered misconduct by it staff in its own internal investigations, and immediately reported it to the FRC. Following the FRC tribunal, KPMG was fined £14.4m (one of the biggest penalties in UK audit history) for misconduct relating to its audit of Carillion and another firm, and received a "severe reprimand" from the regulator. KPMG were also ordered to pay £3.95m in costs. The tribunal heard allegations that KPMG staff created false meeting minutes and retroactively edited spreadsheets before sharing them. A further tribunal will consider penalties for individual KPMG staff, including partner Peter Meehan; the FRC recommended that he be banned for 15 years and fined at least £400,000. In July 2022, it was announced that he had been fined £250,000 and banned for ten years; three other former KPMG executives also received fines and lengthy bans. A junior member of KPMG staff, Pratik Paw—who, aged 25, had been the most junior member of the Carillion audit team—faced a "life changing" fine of £50,000 and a four-year ban, prompting critics to suggest that accounting firms should enable junior colleagues to challenge their superiors, so that low ranking workers are not blamed for accounting scandals. Ultimately, Paw was not fined or suspended but was severely reprimanded. The FRC opened a second investigation into how KPMG audited Carillion's accounts. The FRC's first report, which found a number of breaches, was delivered to KPMG in September 2020; the FRC was awaiting a KPMG response before deciding whether to take enforcement action. In March 2021, KPMG was reported to be "inching towards a financial settlement with regulators" over its auditing of Carillion, with the FRC expected to impose a record fine, possibly around £25m, on KPMG for its failings. In May 2020, the FT reported that the Official Receiver was preparing to sue KPMG for £250m over alleged negligence in its audits of Carillion. In May 2021, the liquidator secured funding for its legal action, with speculation that the likely damages claim could be as much as £2 billion. In February 2022, Sky News reported the Official Receiver's claim would be in the range of £1bn-£1.5bn, with one source suggesting around £1.2bn. The OR's negligence claim focuses on the value of major contracts which were not properly accounted for in audits in 2014, 2015 and 2016, resulting in misstatements in excess of £800m within Carillion's financial reports. KPMG was said to have accepted management explanations for inflated revenue and understated cost positions. The OR had received legal advice that KPMG was answerable to Carillion's creditors for a portion of their losses. KPMG said: "We believe this claim is without merit and we will robustly defend the case. Responsibility for the failure of Carillion lies solely with the company's board and management, who set the strategy and ran the business." The claim, for £1.3 billion (US$1.77 billion), accused KPMG of missing "red flags" during audits of Carillion, in one of the largest claims against an audit firm. In November 2022, the OR said: KPMG had "failed to respond" to Carillion allegations that it had failed to properly audit the accounting of 20 significant construction contracts. KPMG reiterated that Carillion's failure was solely the fault of the company's board and management. In February 2023, The Guardian reported that KPMG had settled the £1.3bn lawsuit brought by Carillion's liquidators; details of the settlement were not made public. In October 2023, the Financial Reporting Council fined KPMG UK £21 million, saying it had failed to follow "the most basic and fundamental audit concepts" and an "unusually large number of breaches" had been found. For three years before the collapse Carillion was not subject to reliable audits. KPMG UK will also pay legal costs of about £5.3 million. The previous year a £14.4m penalty had been imposed on KPMG UK for providing misleading information to the regulator. In June 2019, KPMG was fined $50 million for altering its past audit work after receiving stolen data from accounting industry watch dog Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB). KPMG admitted to its mistakes and as a part of its settlement, it also agreed to hire an independent consultant to review its internal controls. In 2017, KPMG was embroiled in related scandals involving the Gupta family. KPMG, whose history in South Africa dated back to 1895, and which had been part of the international organization since its founding in 1979, faced calls for closure, and an uncertain future, as a consequence of the damage done to the South African economy as a result of its activities. KPMG had been working with a Gupta family company in the mining sector, Oakbay Resources and Energy, for 15 years prior to the revelations of corruption and collusion in 2016, at which point KPMG resigned. The full impact and financial profit that KPMG received is yet to be determined; however, at least one large company has terminated its services with KPMG due to its relationship with Oakbay. In July 2017, after controversial documents were leaked by the amaBhungane Centre for Investigative Journalism, former chief executive of KPMG South Africa and the former partner that was responsible for audits related to the Gupta family, Moses Kgosana, withdrew from becoming the chairman of Alexander Forbes, a financial services firm. In 2015, KPMG issued a controversial report that implicated former Finance Minister Pravin Gordhan in the creation of an illegal intelligence gathering unit of the South African Revenue Service (SARS). This report was seen by elements of the media to be part of a wider Gupta-linked state capture conspiracy, with the aim of forcing Gordhan out of his post. The report was withdrawn by KPMG in September 2017, earning the ire of the Commissioner of SARS, Tom Moyane. After an internal investigation that found work done for the Gupta family fell "considerably short" of the firm's standards and amid rising political and public backlash, KPMG's senior leadership in South Africa, including its chairman Ahmed Jaffer, CEO Trevor Hoole, COO Steven Louw, and five partners, resigned in September 2017. Save South Africa, a civil-society group, accused KPMG and UK PR firm Bell Pottinger of playing a "central role in facilitating state capture". Numerous South African companies either fired KPMG in the immediate aftermath of the scandal, or were reconsidering their relationships with the firm with the international chairman of KPMG, John Veihmeyer, apologising for the conduct of the South African arm and the firm pledged to donate fees earned from Gupta businesses, as well as the withdrawn SARS report, to anti-corruption activities. In 2001, a blogger named Chris Raettig discovered a number of "corporate theme songs", including one for KPMG. He created a page for these songs, and included deep links to the MP3 files on the source servers. KPMG responded by sending a takedown notice to Raettig, reading: "Please be aware such links require that a formal Agreement exist between our two parties, as mandated by our organization's Web Link Policy." Raettig wrote publicly about this takedown notice, responding that "my own organization's Web link policy requires no such formal agreement." The chorus to the anthem reads: "KPMG—We're as strong as can be, A team of power and energy, We go for the gold, together we hold, Onto our vision of global strategy!" Controversies around KPMG Lower Gulf first emerged in July 2022, when staff at the UAE division accused the multinational firm of neglecting multiple complaints filed against the Emirati CEO Nader Haffar. The employees, including former workers, alleged Haffar of fostering a "fear culture", where disagreeing with him led to employees getting "immediately sidelined or fired". Concerns were also raised after Haffar appointed his brother-in-law, Talal Cheikh Elard, as the head of clients and markets without disclosing the relationship to the partners. Both Haffar and Elard were accused of shouting at staff, slamming fists on tables, and acting against employees expressing "dissenting views". On 21 July, Haffar requested for a new election process for his position, which was to be governed by an external law firm. The controversy resurfaced in September 2022, when the global bosses were urged to suspend Haffar, citing "nepotism, cronyism and a culture of fear" under his leadership. In an email sent to KPMG International’s top executives, ten capital partners at the firm’s UAE branch asked them to address the "massive crisis" in the local company. They also raised concerns over the falling profits, affecting their pay. The average profits per partners fell, while they were not paid bonuses for 2021 due to "cash flow issues". In October 2022, the Financial Times published a report in which dozens of employees described that unethical employment practices at KPMG Saudi Arabia were commonplace and had left expatriate staff fearing for their personal safety and struggling with their mental health. Several former employees witnessed colleagues being fired abruptly for no reason, and put this down to hostility towards westerners from the largely Arab leadership team at KPMG Saudi Arabia. Racial tensions within the firm were also a problem, with xenophobic language being used towards certain nationalities. The FT has viewed copies of three whistleblowing reports sent to KPMG International since 2018, alleging issues in Saudi Arabia practice, including wrongful terminations, failure to pay staff and concerns about personal safety in the region. Just 11 days before Silicon Valley Bank's collapse, KPMG gave the bank a clean bill of health, and declared that it "stood behind its audits of SVB". The Swedish member firm was the main sponsor for Swedish biathlete Magdalena Forsberg, six-time world champion and two-time Olympic medalist. Forsberg was working as a tax consultant at the KPMG Sundsvall office parallel to her athletic career. In February 2008, Phil Mickelson, ranked one of the best golfers in the world, signed a three-year global sponsorship deal with KPMG. As part of the agreement, Mickelson was to wear the KPMG logo on his headwear during all golf related appearances. The sponsorship lasted until 22 February 2022, when the two parties mutually split following comments in which Mickelson called Saudi Arabia "scary" but would overlook the country's human rights controversies in the best interest of the PGA Tour. The Canadian member firm sponsored skier Alexandre Bilodeau, who won the first gold medal for Canada on home soil in the 2010 Vancouver Olympics. Alexandre's father is a tax partner in the Montreal office. In 2014, KPMG and McLaren Technology Group formed a ten-year strategic alliance to apply McLaren Applied Technologies' predictive analytics and technology to KPMG's audit and advisory services. KPMG's logo was also placed at the engine air intake of the McLaren F1 Team's cars. KPMG terminated the partnership in 2017 and McLaren signed a similar partnership with competitor Deloitte. Since 2016, KPMG has been strategic sponsor of Brain Bar, a Budapest-based, annually held festival on the future. KPMG ranked in the top two overall in Consultancy Rankings 2009 by OpRisk & Compliance—in recognition of KPMG's experience in risk management. In 2011, the company was ranked second on the World's Best Outsourcing Advisors—in recognition of the firm's depth of experience, global reach and holistic approach. That same year, the company was inducted into Working Mother Hall of Fame after being honored for 15 years as one of Working Mother magazine's 100 Best Companies for Working Mothers. KPMG was ranked number 13 in Consulting Magazine's Best Firms to Work for in 2016. In 2017, KPMG was ranked 29th on the Fortune list of 100 best companies to work for. That same year, KPMG, along with PwC, Deloitte, and PA Consulting Group, were among the UK's 25 top companies to work for. Companies portal Accounting networks and associations Big Four accounting firms Financial audit FTSE 100 Index Management consulting Professional services In 1818, John Moxham opened a company in Bristol. James Grace and James Grace Jr. bought John Moxham & Co. and renamed it James Grace & Son in 1857. In 1861, Henry Grace joined James Jr., and the company was renamed James & Henry Grace; the firm evolved to become Grace, Ryland & Co. "New York - Executive Offices". KPMG. 4 October 2019. Retrieved 13 March 2024. "KPMG global FY2023 revenues grow to US$36 billion with continued investment in Technology, Talent and ESG". 13 December 2023. Retrieved 13 December 2023. "Governance – KPMG Global". KPMG. 3 September 2020. "Who were K, P, M and G?" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 December 2008. Retrieved 31 October 2021. "Merger to Create World's Biggest Accounting Firm : Parent Firms of Peat Marwick and KMG Main Hurdman Reach an Agreement; Would Surpass Arthur Andersen". Los Angeles Times. 4 September 1986. Retrieved 8 August 2020. "KPMG delivers strong global revenues, reporting 14% growth in FY22". 13 December 2022. Retrieved 13 December 2022. "Governance". KPMG. 3 September 2020. Retrieved 19 February 2022. Your Planning Resource with Useful Tips and Techniques. John Wiley. 2008. p. 308. ISBN 978-0787996611. Curtis Jenkins Cornwell & Co: A Study in Professional Origins, 1816-1966, SVP Cornwell, Garland Publishing, 1991 "KPMG History". KPMG. 13 September 2021. Grant, Julia (1995). New York State Society of Certified Public Accountants: Foundation of a Profession. Routledge. p. 212. ISBN 978-0815322382. "Newspaper article". Pittsburgh Daily Post, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 16 February 1914. p. 11. Retrieved 28 June 2016. Family tree: Peat Marwick McLintock ICEAW "The forces of deinstiutionalisation and demise" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 August 2016. Retrieved 28 June 2016. Chartered Accountants in England and Wales: A Guide to Historical Records. Manchester University Press. 1994. p. 133. ISBN 9780719042294. "The Development of "The Big Eight" Accounting Firms in the United States, 1900 to 1990". Accounting Information. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 28 January 2017. "Meijburg & Co – History". Archived from the original on 23 August 2017. Retrieved 23 August 2017. Note: KPMG derived from predecessor company founders: Piet Klijnveld, William Barclay Peat, James Marwick, and Reinhard Goerdeler. "Ernst & Young, KPMG Peat Marwick to merge New company would be largest accounting, consulting firm in world". The Baltimore Sun. 21 October 1997. Archived from the original on 13 April 2015. Retrieved 5 September 2014. "KPMG Partners Vote For Ernst Merger". The New York Times. 22 December 1997. Retrieved 5 September 2014. "Accountancy merger off". BBC News. 13 February 1998. Retrieved 5 September 2014. "KMPG and Ernst call off $18bn accountancy mega-merger". The Independent. 14 February 1998. Retrieved 5 September 2014. "KPMG Consulting becomes BearingPoint". ITworld. 2 October 2002. Archived from the original on 22 September 2012. Retrieved 5 September 2014. Lazo, Alejandro (19 February 2009). "BearingPoint Seeks Bankruptcy Protection". The Washington Post. Aldrick, Philip (6 June 2002). "KPMG stuns with French Atos sale". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 5 September 2014. "KPMG ditches legal ambitions in KLegal split". Legal Week. 6 November 2003. Retrieved 5 September 2014. "FTI Consulting Completes Acquisition of Dispute Advisory Services Business Of KPMG". FTI Consulting. 3 November 2003. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. Retrieved 5 September 2014. Lomas, Ulrika (26 June 2007). "KPMG Swiss Merger To Create Europe's Largest Accountancy Firm". Tax-News. Wolters Kluwer. Archived from the original on 8 May 2021. Retrieved 7 May 2021. "Norway and Saudi Arabia to join KPMG Europe LLP". Consultant-news.com. 1 November 2010. Archived from the original on 20 March 2015. Retrieved 5 September 2014. "Norway and Saudi Arabia to join KPMG Europe LLP". KPMG International. 30 November 2010. Archived from the original on 4 September 2014. Retrieved 5 September 2014. "'Unconscious bias is utter crap': KPMG staff share shock at UK chair's Zoom comments". The Guardian. 11 February 2021. Retrieved 12 February 2021. "KPMG UK appoints first female leaders in 150 years". BBC News. 12 February 2021. Retrieved 12 February 2021. Marriage, Madison (11 February 2021). "KPMG appoints first female leaders in shake-up after Michael furore". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 12 February 2021. "KPMG's Mary O'Connor quits after being passed over for top UK job". Financial Times. 28 April 2021. Retrieved 4 August 2021. Booth, James (29 November 2021). "KPMG taps partners for extra cash ahead of £1bn Carillion claim". The Financial News. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "KPMG to cash in on tech funding boom with new venture". Sky News. 27 April 2022. Retrieved 28 April 2022. Putzier, Konrad (23 August 2022). "KPMG to Cut Manhattan Office Space in Move to New U.S. Headquarters at Hudson Yards". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 24 August 2022. Handelsregister des Kantons Zug Archived 29 March 2007 at the Wayback Machine (Registration Number CH-020.6.900.276-5) This is illustrated in the cases involving Parmalat where clients sought to hold Deloitte (the Swiss Verein) and Grant Thornton International (a UK company providing administrative services to its members) liable for the negligence of other member firms. "William B. Thomas". KPMG. Retrieved 15 May 2018. "All Your Profits Are Belong To Us". Above the law. 5 November 2014. Retrieved 6 November 2014. "Deloitte, KPMG have no licence to do audit work in India". Economic Times. 16 January 2009. Retrieved 29 September 2018. "SFIO names KPMG arm in Reebok chargesheet". The Indian Express. 29 September 2018. Retrieved 29 September 2018. "PwC and KPMG exit Russia and Belarus in wake of Ukraine invasion". Financial Times. 6 March 2022. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 21 March 2022. "Disney and Skype 'used Luxembourg tax deals'". BBC News. 10 December 2014. Retrieved 18 January 2015. "KPMG Named the Top Big Four Accounting Firm by CollegeGrad.com". CollegeGrad.com. 5 March 2008. Retrieved 5 September 2014. Lavelle, Louis. "Best Places to Launch a Career (2009)". Bloomberg Businessweek. Archived from the original on 11 October 2014. Retrieved 5 September 2014. Jones, Adam (25 January 2012). "China headcount to overtake UK at top firms". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 24 April 2012.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "China headcount to overtake UK at top firms". The Baltimore Sun. 11 March 2003. Archived from the original on 5 September 2014. Retrieved 5 September 2014. Taub, Stephen (12 October 2004). "KPMG Pays $115 Million to Settle Suit". CFO. Archived from the original on 3 July 2013. Retrieved 5 September 2014. Margaret Cronin Fisk (7 October 2004). "KPMG to Pay $115 Mln to Settle Lernout & Hauspie Suit". Bloomberg. Retrieved 8 September 2014. "KPMG to Pay $456 Million for Criminal Violations in Relation to Largest-Ever Tax Shelter Fraud Case". US Department of Justice. 29 August 2005. Retrieved 23 January 2022. Hilzenrath, David S. (13 December 2006). "Fannie Sues KPMG for Approving Bad Numbers". The Washington Post. Retrieved 8 September 2014. Esterl, Mike (24 February 2007). "KPMG Germany's Failure to Spot Siemens Problems Raises Questions". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 8 September 2014. "Siemens Supervisory Board Proposes Ernst & Young As Auditors". Easybourse.com. 10 May 2012.[dead link] "South Africa: Pensioners Sue KPMG Mauritius". allafrica.com. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Leaderguard investors to sue KPMG". www.fanews.co.za. Retrieved 3 August 2022. Bajaj, Vikas (26 March 2008). "Report Assails Auditor for Work at Failed Home Lender". The New York Times. Retrieved 8 September 2014. "Xerox, KPMG Settle Shareholder Suit". The Wall Street Journal. 28 March 2008. Retrieved 8 September 2014. Mackintosh, James (18 December 2008). "Accounting firms drawn into Madoff scandal". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 7 December 2014. Docket, Securities (20 February 2009). "Madoff-related class action filed in SDNY against Tremont Group, KPMG, others". Securities Docket. Archived from the original on 17 March 2009. Retrieved 25 December 2008. "HQ Bank accountant KPMG reported after flaws". The Swedish Wire. 30 August 2010. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011. Retrieved 18 November 2010. Singh, Rachael (20 November 2012). "KPMG conducted due diligence of Deloitte audit at Autonomy". Accountancy Age. Archived from the original on 8 September 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. Hardy, Quentin (20 November 2012). "Hewlett's Loss: A Folly Unfolds, by the Numbers". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 25 July 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. "The Culture Was Corrupt at Olympus, Panel Finds". The New York Times. 6 December 2011. Retrieved 8 September 2014. Snyder, Riley (2 June 2014). "Bryan Shaw Sentenced to Prison in KPMG Insider Trading Case". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 2 May 2018. Rapoport, Michael (6 May 2013). "Guilty Plea in KPMG Case". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 8 September 2014. Flitter, Emily (6 May 2013). "Friend of ex-KPMG auditor pleads guilty in insider case". Reuters. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. "Trading Case Embroils KPMG". The Wall Street Journal. 9 April 2013. Retrieved 8 September 2014. "KPMG Offshore 'Sham' Deceived Tax Authorities, CRA Alleges". cbc.ca. 10 September 2015. Retrieved 11 September 2015. "Secret tax deal for wealthy KPMG clients sparked anger inside Canada Revenue Agency". CBC News. 8 March 2016. Retrieved 9 March 2016. Michaels, Dave; Rapoport, Michael. "KPMG partners fired over ethics breach". MarketWatch.com. Retrieved 18 April 2017. Bray, Chad (12 April 2017). "KPMG Fires 6 Over Ethics Breach on Audit Warnings". The New York Times. Retrieved 18 April 2017. Rapoport, Michael. "Fired KPMG Audit Head: How Did Scott Marcello Fall From Grace?". The Wall Street Journal. Rapoport, Michael (11 March 2019). "KPMG Ex-Partner Convicted In 'Steal the Exam' Scandal". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Retrieved 31 March 2019. Thompson, Jennifer (4 May 2017). "Accounting watchdog to investigate KPMG over Rolls-Royce audits". The Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2022. "KPMG to pay more than $6.2 mln to settle U.S. charges -SEC". Reuters. 15 August 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017. "KPMG LLP and John Riordan, CPA" (PDF). SEC. 15 August 2017. Retrieved 11 May 2023. Costello, Eugene (20 December 2017). "KPMG partners facing Hong Kong contempt proceedings," Archived 24 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine International Investment. Miller, Matthew (20 December 2017). "Exclusive: KPMG partners face court contempt over China audit," Archived 22 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine Reuters. "KPMG partners face court contempt proceedings in Hong Kong over China audit; The accounting firm has refused to hand over audit papers relating to China Medical Technologies despite a 2016 court order," Archived 22 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine South China Morning Post, 20 December 2017. "Timeline: U.S., HK regulators struggle to get China audit papers," Reuters, 20 December 2017. "Contempt hit looms for KPMG," Archived 23 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine The Standard, 21 December 2017. Clark, Simon (3 July 2018). "KPMG Has Close Ties to Troubled Private Equity Firm". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 5 May 2021. "UK's accounting watchdog investigates KPMG". The Irish Times. 3 July 2018. Retrieved 12 May 2021. Kinder, Tabby (19 July 2021). "KPMG settles legal claims after failing to spot fraud at Chinese group". The Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "The CMF applies sanction against KPMG Auditors". Comision Para El Mercado Financiero. 22 August 2018. Retrieved 15 January 2022. Times of Oman, CMA suspends firm from auditing regulated entities, retrieved on 14 November 2018. Archived at the Wayback machine Gulf Business, Oman regulator suspends KPMG from new auditing work over "irregularities" – A review by the CMA "established professional negligence on the part of some audit firms", retrieved on 14 November 2018. Archived at the Wayback machine McCance, Danny (15 November 2018). "KPMG suspended in Oman". Economia. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 15 November 2018. Sguazzin, Anthony (10 December 2018). "KPMG South Africa Apologizes for Scandals, Seeks Second Chance". Bloomberg.com. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Kollewe, Julia (8 May 2019). "KPMG 'severely reprimanded' for audit failings at Co-op Bank". The Guardian. Retrieved 8 May 2019. Sweet, Pat (1 May 2019). "KPMG fined £6m over Lloyds syndicate audit failures". Accountancy Daily. "KPMG Paying $50 Million Penalty for Illicit Use of PCAOB Data and Cheating on Training Exams". 17 June 2019. Retrieved 29 May 2022. McKenna, Francine. "The KPMG cheating scandal was much more widespread than originally thought". MarketWatch. Retrieved 11 May 2023. Jones, Huw (2 April 2020). "KPMG fined 700,000 pounds for failing to challenge client". Nasdaq.com. Retrieved 22 May 2022. "KPMG Resigns as Ted Baker Auditor After Accounting Errors". Bloomberg. 1 June 2020. Retrieved 12 May 2021. "KPMG Sued in South Africa for $59.3m Over VBS Audit, BD Says". Bloomberg Tax. 24 February 2021. Retrieved 13 February 2022. Gurrieri, Vin (31 March 2021). "KPMG Strikes $10M Deal To End Decadelong Sex Bias Suit". Law360.com. Retrieved 16 January 2022. Snyder, Jesse (6 May 2021). "Finance committee relaunches probe into offshore tax evasion with questions over Isle of Man fraud". The Financial Post. Retrieved 20 May 2021. "KPMG in UK sued for £6m by property company Mount Anvil". Irish Times. 9 May 2021. Retrieved 13 February 2022. O’Dwyer, Michael (22 July 2021). "KPMG criticized for 'unacceptable' bank audits by UK regulator". The Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 23 July 2021. Latiff, Rozanna (9 July 2021). "Malaysia, 1MDB seeking more than $5.6 bln in damages from KPMG partners". Reuters. Retrieved 7 November 2021. Khumalo, Kabelo (5 July 2021). "PIC sues KPMG for R144m as VBS looting saga continues". Sunday World South Africa. Retrieved 13 February 2022. "KPMG faces record fine over 'conflict of interest' on Silentnight sale". Financial Times. 21 July 2021. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 8 August 2021. Robinson, Jon (5 August 2021). "KPMG fined £13m over role in bed maker's sale to private equity firm". Business Live. Retrieved 8 August 2021. Cassidy, Caitlin (12 September 2021). "US watchdog fines KPMG Australia over 'widespread' cheating on online training tests". The Guardian. Retrieved 17 December 2021. Jolly, Jasper (13 October 2021). "KPMG used 'untruthful defence' in Silentnight inquiry, says watchdog". The Guardian. Retrieved 7 November 2021. Kerr, Jarren (28 November 2021). "Britain-based litigation firm to finance lawsuit against Canadian advisers of failed payday lender". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 29 November 2021. Booth, James (30 November 2021). "KPMG hit with £15m lawsuit over Quindell audit failings". UK Today News. Archived from the original on 3 December 2021. Retrieved 1 December 2021. Geor Louch, William Patrick (11 November 2021). "KPMG Sued for $600 Million Over Alleged Sloppy Auditing in Dubai's Abraaj Scandal". Bloomberg. Retrieved 11 December 2021. "KPMG pays Malaysian government $111 million settlement over 1MDB audit scandal". ABC News – Australia. 13 January 2022. "Airbus faces €300mn suit alleging company misconduct". Ch Aviation Gmbh, Switzerland. 12 January 2022. Retrieved 16 January 2022. O'Dwyer, Michael (19 January 2022). "Regulator fines KPMG £3m for audit failings at collapsed retailer". The Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. O'Dwyer, Michael (18 January 2022). "KPMG auditor fined and banned for misleading watchdog inspectors". The Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. Bradley, Gerrard (8 March 2022). "KPMG fined £1.3 million for 'serious' breaches over Revolution Bars audit". The Evening Standard. Retrieved 28 April 2022. Michaels, Dave (15 March 2022). "Big Four Accounting Firms Come Under Regulator's Scrutiny". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 22 May 2022. Maurer, Mark (5 April 2022). "Fired KPMG Audit Head Fined Over Failure to Supervise Senior Auditors". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 28 April 2022. Makortoff, Kalyeena (12 May 2022). "KPMG to be fined £14m for forging documents over Carillion audit". The Guardian. Retrieved 13 May 2022. Lea, Robert (23 May 2022). "KPMG faces fine over Rolls-Royce audit". The Times. Retrieved 23 May 2022. O'Dwyer, Michael (17 August 2022). "KPMG Korea fined over auditors' misleading of US regulator". The Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 17 August 2022. Kinder, Tabby (5 September 2022). "KPMG sued for $830mn over 'appalling' Chinese audit". The Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 5 September 2022. Kerr, Simeon (3 October 2022). "Dubai hands out $2mn fine for KPMG's Abraaj audits". The Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 3 October 2022. O'Dwyer, Michael (12 October 2022). "KPMG Lower Gulf head quits after months of turmoil". The Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 22 October 2022. Foley, Stephen (20 October 2022). "KPMG flunks US overseas audit inspections twice as often as rivals". The Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 23 November 2022. O'Dwyer, Michael (14 November 2022). "KPMG reaches £5mn settlement over Watchstone audit negligence claim". The Financial Times. Retrieved 21 December 2022. O’Dwyer, Michael (18 November 2022). "KPMG blocked from Abu Dhabi audits as it elects new boss". The Financial Times. Retrieved 29 December 2022. Foley, Stephen (6 December 2022). "KPMG staff cheated on professional tests, US regulator says". The Financial Times. Retrieved 21 December 2022. Makortoff, Kalyeena (17 February 2023). "KPMG settles £1.3bn lawsuit from Carillion creditors over alleged negligence". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 March 2023. Highley, Richard (7 February 2023). "The FRC Disciplinary Tribunal's Decision in KPMG - Regenersis/Carillion Its significance for junior accountants and audit firms". Lexology. Retrieved 25 May 2023. Louch, Will (16 April 2023). "Dubai court orders KPMG to pay $231mn for Abraaj fund audit failure". The Financial Times. Retrieved 16 April 2023. Kiladze, Tim (17 April 2023). "KPMG faces $1.4-billion lawsuit for alleged role in Bridging Finance's collapse". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 5 May 2023. O'Dwyer, Michael (26 April 2023). "KPMG fined £1mn over 'rudimentary' failures in TheWorks audit". The Financial Times. Retrieved 15 May 2023. Jones, Huw (13 April 2023). "KPMG fined 875,000 pounds for failures in Luceco audit". Reuters. Retrieved 25 May 2023. Williams, Erica (10 May 2023). "PCAOB Releases 2022 Inspection Reports for Mainland China, Hong Kong Audit Firms". Public Company Accounting Oversight Board. Aglionby, John (29 June 2023). "KPMG and PwC fined over Eddie Stobart audits". The Financial Times. Retrieved 19 July 2023. Iacone, Amanda (17 July 2023). "KPMG Netherlands Cheating Scandal Embroils Top Leaders, Staff". Bloomberg Tax. Retrieved 19 July 2023. Grigg, Angus (6 August 2023). "Consulting firm KPMG overcharged Defence while raking in billions of dollars, whistleblowers say". Four Corners, ABC News. Retrieved 24 August 2023. Tamo, Omar (31 August 2023). "Abu Dhabi Regulator Fines KPMG Lower Gulf for Audit Failings". BloombergTax. Retrieved 4 September 2023. PCAOB (15 November 2023). "PCAOB Sanctions KPMG AZSA LLC for Quality Control Violations". PCAOB. Retrieved 24 January 2024. Mantshantsha, Sikonathi (1 February 2024). "KPMG agrees to cough up R500 million to quash lawsuit for flawed VBS Mutual Bank audit". News24.com. Retrieved 20 March 2024.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: url-status (link) Meddings, Sabah (4 March 2024). "British accounting watchdog fines KPMG $1.9 mn over Saatchi audit failings". Business Standard. Retrieved 12 March 2024.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: url-status (link) Browning, Lynnley (28 August 2005). "How an Accounting Firm Went From Resistance to Resignation". The New York Times. Johnson, Carrie (23 August 2005). "KPMG Nears Agreement On Tax-Shelter Abuses". The Washington Post. Johnson, Carrie (4 January 2007). "Charge Against KPMG Dropped". The Washington Post. Retrieved 8 September 2014. Kiel, Paul (22 January 2020). "The IRS Decided to Get Tough Against Microsoft. Microsoft Got Tougher". ProPublica. Retrieved 11 May 2023. "MPs press for a probe into KPMG over HBOS Reading". Evening Standard. 22 June 2018. Retrieved 27 May 2022. "Project Lord Turnbull: Operation Hornet" (PDF). All Party Parliamentary Group on Fair Business Banking. 1 September 2013. Retrieved 28 May 2022. "KPMG cleared by watchdog in HBOS audit investigation". The Guardian. 22 September 2017. Retrieved 22 May 2022. "Carillion auditor KPMG faces scrutiny for approving books months before collapse". The Telegraph. 15 January 2018. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 20 January 2018. "Committees publish responses from Big Four on Carillion". UK Parliament. 13 February 2018. Retrieved 13 February 2018. Davies, Rob (13 February 2018). "Carillion: accountants accused of 'feasting' on company". Guardian. Retrieved 13 February 2018. Marriage, Madison (22 February 2018). "MPs turn fire on KPMG and Deloitte partners over Carillion". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 22 February 2018. "Carillion audits – colossal waste of time and money". Parliament.uk. Archived from the original on 22 February 2018. Retrieved 22 February 2018. Davies, Rob (16 May 2018). "'Recklessness, hubris and greed' – Carillion slammed by MPs". Guardian. Retrieved 16 May 2018. Carillion: Second Joint report from the Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy and Work and Pensions Committees of Session 2017–19 (PDF). London: House of Commons. 2018. pp. 90–91. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 December 2020. Retrieved 16 May 2018. Davies, Rob (18 June 2018). "KPMG singled out in critical report on audit industry". Guardian. Retrieved 19 June 2018. Collinson, Patrick (8 October 2018). "Accounting watchdog could ban auditors from consultancy work". Guardian. Retrieved 8 October 2018. "KPMG stops consultancy for audit clients". BBC News. BBC. 9 November 2018. Retrieved 9 November 2018. Vincent, Matthew (3 July 2018). "Opening Quote: KMPG audit probed . . . again". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 3 July 2018. Morby, Aaron (21 January 2019). "KPMG suspends Carillion's lead auditor". Construction Enquirer. Retrieved 21 January 2019. "Carillion auditor faces disciplinary tribunal". The Construction Index. 1 September 2021. Retrieved 1 September 2021. O'Dwyer, Michael (1 September 2021). "KPMG accused of misleading regulator over Carillion audit". The Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 29 November 2021. Morby, Aaron (11 January 2022). "KPMG admits financial regulator misled in Carillion audits". Construction Enquirer. Retrieved 11 January 2022. Prior, Grant (25 July 2022). "KPMG fined £14.4m for Carillion audits". Construction Enquirer. Retrieved 26 July 2022. Gayne, Daniel (16 May 2022). "KPMG to pay £14.4m for misleading regulator on Carillion audit". Building. Retrieved 20 May 2022. "Carillion auditor KPMG receives record fine". The Construction Index. 26 July 2022. Retrieved 26 July 2022. Goss, Louis (20 May 2022). "KPMG should take blame for Carillion scandal, not junior accountant Pratik Paw, critics say". City AM. Retrieved 20 May 2022. Rutter Pooley, Cat (18 May 2022). "KPMG's Carillion case should worry juniors across the City". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 20 May 2022. Jones, Huw (22 January 2019). "KPMG subject of second UK investigation over Carillion audit". Reuters. Retrieved 22 January 2019. Nicolle, Emily (21 September 2020). "UK watchdog to accuse KPMG of breaches in Carillion audit". City AM. Retrieved 21 September 2020. Kleinman, Mark (18 March 2021). "KPMG inches towards settlement with audit regulator over Carillion collapse". Sky News. Retrieved 19 March 2021. Kinder, Tabby (12 May 2020). "KPMG faces £250m negligence lawsuit over Carillion". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 13 May 2020. Price, David (21 May 2021). "Carillion's liquidator gets funding for £250m legal claim". Construction News. Retrieved 21 May 2021. Booth, James (1 September 2021). "KPMG could face £2bn legal claim over Carillion collapse". Financial News. Retrieved 1 September 2021. Kleinman, Mark (2 February 2022). "Carillion liquidator's claim against KPMG to seek over £1bn in damages". Sky News. Retrieved 3 February 2022. Prior, Grant (4 February 2022). "KPMG being sued for £1.3bn over Carillion audit". Construction Enquirer. Retrieved 4 February 2022. Ridley, Kristin (3 February 2022). "KPMG sued for $1.8 bln over Carillion audits". Reuters. Retrieved 5 February 2022. Gerrard, Neil (28 November 2022). "Carillion: Auditor 'failed to respond' to accusations of failings". Construction Management. Retrieved 29 November 2022. Makortoff, Kalyeena (17 February 2023). "KPMG settles £1.3bn lawsuit from Carillion creditors over alleged negligence". The Guardian. Retrieved 17 February 2023. "KPMG settles Carillion lawsuit for undisclosed sum". Construction Manager. 20 February 2023. Retrieved 21 February 2023. Kollewe, Julia; Makortoff, Kalyeena (12 October 2023). "KPMG boss says Carillion auditing was 'very bad' as firm is fined record £21m". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 October 2023. "KPMG fined $US50m for using stolen watchdog data". Australian Financial Review. 18 June 2019. Retrieved 21 June 2019. "South Africans urge US law-enforcers to bring Gupta and friends down with McKinsey – BizNews.com". BizNews.com. 11 July 2017. Archived from the original on 27 April 2019. Retrieved 12 July 2017. "History". KPMG South Africa. Archived from the original on 29 September 2017. Retrieved 29 September 2017. "KPMG will die a natural death – Abedian". Moneyweb. 15 September 2017. Archived from the original on 30 September 2017. Retrieved 29 September 2017. "Exclusive: South Africa's central bank tells lenders that KPMG is 'too big to fail'". Reuters. Retrieved 29 September 2017. Cropley, Ed; Motsoeneng, Tisetso (4 April 2016). "KPMG, Sasfin cut links with Gupta firm". Sunday Times. Reuters. Retrieved 7 April 2016. Steyn, Lisa (28 July 2017). "JSE-listed Sygnia fires KPMG over 'Gupta links'". Mail & Guardian. Retrieved 30 August 2017. Wessels, Vernon (3 July 2017). "Ex-KPMG South Africa Boss Quits New Role to Face Gupta Claims". Bloomberg. Retrieved 22 September 2017. "Meet unrepentant Gupta tax dodge 'lapdog' Moses Kgosana, KPMG heavyweight (5 July 2017)". Biznews.com. 5 July 2017. Archived from the original on 23 September 2017. Retrieved 22 September 2017. "After the Gupta wedding and the SARS 'Rogue Unit' report fiascos: What future for KPMG in South Africa?". Daily Maverick. 4 July 2017. Retrieved 21 September 2017. "KPMG Shocker: Audit Firm Disavows Sars 'Rogue Unit' Report, Eight Senior Staff Resign". Huffingtonpost.co.za. 15 September 2017. Archived from the original on 20 September 2017. Retrieved 21 September 2017. "All out wars as SARS blames KPMG for reputational damage". Times Live. 18 September 2017. Retrieved 21 September 2017. "KPMG SA leadership axed in wake of Gupta revelations". ENCA. 15 September 2017. Archived from the original on 22 January 2018. Retrieved 15 September 2017. Brock, Joe (15 September 2017). "KPMG South Africa senior leaders resign over Gupta scandal". The Independent. Retrieved 22 September 2017. Cotterill, Joseph (15 September 2017). "KPMG South Africa chiefs resign over Gupta scandal". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 15 September 2017. Hilton Tarrant / 21 September 2017 (13 October 2015). "Hulisani drops KPMG due to reputational risk". Moneyweb. Archived from the original on 20 September 2017. Retrieved 21 September 2017.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "KPMG international chairman apologises for South Africa failings". Reuters. 19 September 2017. Retrieved 21 September 2017. "Gordhan, Jonas meet with KPMG over state=== capture | IOL News". Iol.co.za. 15 September 2017. Archived from the original on 21 September 2017. Retrieved 21 September 2017. "chris raettig - personal website". 7 February 2002. Archived from the original on 7 February 2002. Retrieved 11 May 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Manjoo, Farhad (6 December 2001). "Big Stink Over a Simple Link". wired.com. "The KPMG anthem". YouTube. Archived from the original on 30 October 2021. Marriage, Madison; O'Dwyer, Michael (9 July 2022). "Staff accuse KPMG of ignoring complaints about UAE boss". The Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 9 July 2022. "KPMG to rerun election of UAE boss after governance complaints". The Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 21 July 2022. "KPMG partners in Dubai seek suspension of local leadership". The Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 16 September 2022. "The plight of expat workers at KPMG Saudi Arabia". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 18 October 2022. "Three failed US banks had one thing in common: KPMG". Financial Times. 3 May 2023. Retrieved 11 May 2023. "KPMG Under Pressure After Clean Audits of SVB, Signature Bank". news.bloombergtax.com. Retrieved 11 May 2023. "Från skott till skatt". Aftonbladet. 24 March 2002. Archived from the original on 9 June 2011. Retrieved 22 March 2010. "Mickelson signs agreement with KPMG LLP". PGA Tour. 6 February 2008. Archived from the original on 21 June 2015. Retrieved 21 June 2015. "Phil Mickelson offers apology for Super Golf League comments, will focus on 'the best interests of golf'". ESPN. 22 February 2022. Kirbyson, Geoff (April 2010). "Golden opportunity for KPMG and skier". The Bottom Line. Archived from the original on 8 September 2014. Retrieved 8 September 2014. Newquist, Caleb (18 February 2010). "Alexandre Bilodeau Is KPMG Canada's Phil Mickelson". The Going Concern. Archived from the original on 21 June 2015. Retrieved 8 September 2014. "KPMG & McLaren join forces to transform services". 21 November 2014. Retrieved 24 February 2015. "McLaren unveils Honda-powered MP4-30". Eurosport. 29 January 2015. Retrieved 11 June 2023. Sweet, Pat (16 May 2017). "Deloitte takes pole position from KPMG for McLaren F1 technology". www.accountancydaily.co. Retrieved 11 June 2023. Medland, Dina (15 May 2017). "Deloitte And McLaren Join Forces To Build Data-Driven Business Products". Forbes. Retrieved 11 June 2023. "Brain Bar 2016". 2 June 2016. "Awards and Rankings – KPMG – CN". 27 July 2016. Archived from the original on 4 November 2015. Retrieved 16 November 2016. "IOAP 2011 Worlds Best Outsourcing Advisors". Archived from the original on 2 October 2014. Retrieved 5 September 2014. "Working Mother 100 Best Companies for 2011 Press Release". Working Mother. 15 September 2011. "KPMG". Consulting Magazine. Archived from the original on 13 November 2016. Retrieved 12 November 2016. "100 Best Companies to Work For". 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2018. "PwC, Deloitte, KPMG and PA among top 25 UK companies to work for". www.consultancy.uk. 30 May 2017. Retrieved 30 May 2017. Media related to KPMG at Wikimedia Commons Official website