The Cathedral Church of Our Lady and St Philip Howard is a Roman Catholic cathedral in Arundel, West Sussex, England. Dedicated in 1873 as the Catholic parish church of Arundel, it became a cathedral at the foundation of the Diocese of Arundel and Brighton in 1965. It now serves as the seat of the Bishop of Arundel and Brighton. The cathedral's location, construction, design, and dedication owe much to the Howard family, who, as Dukes of Norfolk and Earls of Arundel are the most prominent English Catholic family, and rank first (below the royal family) in the Peerage of England. Since 1102 the seat of the Howards' ancestors has been Arundel Castle. In 1664, Catholic worship was suppressed in England by the Conventicle Act, and all churches and cathedrals in England were transferred to the Church of England. With the Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829, the foundation of Catholic parishes became lawful once again. In 1868, Henry Fitzalan-Howard, 15th Duke of Norfolk, commissioned the architect Joseph Hansom to design a new Catholic sanctuary as a suitable counterpart to Arundel Castle. The architectural style of the cathedral is French Gothic, a style that would have been popular between 1300 and 1400—the period in which the Howards rose to national prominence in England. The building is Grade I listed and is regarded as one of the finest examples of Gothic Revival architecture in the French Gothic style in the country. The church was originally dedicated to Our Lady and St Philip Neri, but in 1971, following the canonisation of Philip Howard, 1st Earl of Arundel, and the reburial of his relics in the cathedral, the dedication was changed to Our Lady and St Philip Howard. The nave. The sanctuary. In 2002, Elizabeth Stratford was appointed Organist and Master of the Choristers of the cathedral, becoming the first woman to hold the post of Director of Music in an English cathedral. Stratford was educated at St. Joseph's Catholic College, Bradford and then at the University of Huddersfield winning scholarships for voice, composition and organ from the RCO and other trusts. She studied at the University of Leeds with Gordon Stewart (organ), Simon Lindley (choir training) and Philip Wilby (composition). She succeeded Alistair Warwick as the Organist and Director of Music of the cathedral, and she also teaches piano at Brighton College. The Cathedral was the location of a music video of Libera and also of some of its concerts (2007, 2009, 2010, 2012, 2014 and 2019). The annual Corpus Christi celebration at Arundel Cathedral features a stunning display of flowers and devotion, drawing in visitors and worshippers from various corners of the globe. The intricate floral carpet, painstakingly put together in just one day by dedicated volunteers, showcases a distinct theme each year. Guests have the opportunity to observe the creation process or marvel at the breathtaking display in all its glory over the subsequent days. Arundel cathedral from the South West front Interior Arundel Cathedral 2012 Saint Philip Howard's shrine Nave looking west towards the entrance Sanctuary from an oblique angle Catholicism portal South East England portal Grade I listed buildings in West Sussex List of places of worship in Arun Historic England. "Details from listed building database (1248090)". National Heritage List for England. Retrieved 10 November 2016. "Musical Direction". Arundel Cathedral. Archived from the original on 22 January 2014. Retrieved 28 May 2013. O Sanctissima (solo: Ben Philipp) - Libera Official, 2011 (YouTube). n Spanish Experience the Magic of Corpus Christi at Arundel Cathedral Wikimedia Commons has media related to Arundel Cathedral. Official website Friends of Arundel Cathedral 360° panorama of Cathedral interiors