Las Piñas (Tagalog: [las ˈpiɲɐs], officially the City of Las Piñas (Filipino: Lungsod ng Las Piñas), is a 1st class highly urbanized city in the National Capital Region of the Philippines. According to the 2020 census, it has a population of 606,293 people. Las Piñas was sixth in MoneySense Philippines "Best Places To Live" report in 2008. Attractions include Evia Lifestyle Center, SM Southmall, Robinsons Place Las Piñas and Las Piñas - Parañaque Wetland Park. The story about the true origin of the city's name, "Las Piñas", varies. One version mentioned, that traders from the province of Cavite and Batangas shipped their first piñas (Spanish for pineapples) for sale to this town before they were distributed to nearby markets. Another version related that it was "Las Peñas" (the rocks), evident by the quarrying of stones and adobe which were used to construct buildings and bridges. The old church bell from St. Joseph Parish Church founded by Diego Cera has been preserved inside the church museum. An inscription on the bell states, "Siendo cura del pueblo de Laspeñas el M.R.P. Padre Diego Cera se fundió este equilón año de 1820," showing that even during the time of Diego Cera, the town's first parish priest, the town was called "Las Peñas", for some time and eventually was renamed "Las Piñas". Las Piñas was one of the earliest fishing settlements on the shores of Manila Bay. It was proclaimed as a province of Manila either in 1762 or 1797. Agustin, a Spanish historian, and Fr. Juan de Medina placed it at 1762. Las Piñas was formerly called "Las Pilas" due to its separation from Parañaque due to tribal conflicts. On the other hand, Manuel Buzeta recorded the date at 1797. Felix Timbang was the first gobernadorcillo in 1762, while Mariano Ortiz was the first municipal president of the town of Las Piñas. Las Piñas is famous for its Bamboo Organ, which was built by Fr. Diego Cera and completed in 1824. In 1880, the city experienced an outbreak of cholera and smallpox leading to the loss of many lives. Years later, Las Piñas also became a central battleground between Spanish and Philippine forces during the Philippine Revolution. The town of Las Piñas was also a major war theater during the 1896 Philippine Revolution, as it was occupied by forces of General Emilio Aguinaldo. In 1901, the municipality of Las Piñas, previously a part of the province of Manila, was incorporated to the newly created province of Rizal pursuant to the Philippine Commission Act No. 137. On October 12, 1903, in accordance with Act No. 942, it was combined with the town of Parañaque, with the latter as the seat of a new municipal government. It was separated from Parañaque to become an independent municipality again on March 27, 1907, by virtue of Philippine Commission Act No. 1625. The town was occupied by the Japanese during World War II and liberated by the combined American and Filipino forces. On November 7, 1975, through Presidential Decree No. 824, Las Piñas was excised from the province of Rizal to form Metro Manila. Las Piñas became one of the municipalities making up the region. In the 1980s, economic growth erupted due to the advent of the construction of Coastal Road. Las Piñas currently serves as the proper gateway to Calabarzon. In the 1990s, Las Piñas was known for its rampant illegal drug trade. In an October 1989 privileged speech, Senator Ernesto F. Herrera shared the National Bureau of Investigation's findings that an estimated 40% of Las Piñas' police force was connected with a drug cartel. In 1995, then-Councilor Yoyoy Villame criticized the town's image as the "Drug Capital of the Philippines", while NCR Command Director Job Mayo alleged upon his appointment in early 1996 that the town's police force had the most drug-dependent police officers in the metropolis. On February 12, 1997, President Fidel V. Ramos signed the bill which elevated Las Piñas from municipality into a city. A plebiscite held a month after approved the city status by its residents, and Las Piñas became the 10th city of Metro Manila on March 26, 1997. It has been a city for 27 years. Las Piñas is bounded to the northeast by Parañaque; to the southeast by Muntinlupa; to the west by Bacoor; to the southwest by Dasmariñas; and to the northwest by Manila Bay. Half of its land area is residential and the remaining half is used for commercial, industrial and institutional purposes. The present physiography of Las Piñas consists of three zones: Manila Bay, coastal margin and the Guadalupe Plateau. Las Piñas is politically subdivided into 20 barangays. These barangays are grouped into two legislative districts, each with its own set of representatives in the city council. District 1 comprises the northwestern half of the city while District 2, the remaining half. The native language of Las Piñas is Tagalog, but the majority of the residents understand and speak English. People in Las Piñas are mainly Roman Catholic. Catholic churches in Las Piñas fall under the jurisdiction of the Diocese of Parañaque. Las Piñas is home of the 2 prominent pilgrim Catholic Shrine: Diocesan Shrine of St. Joseph Parish and Diocesan Shrine of the Five Wounds of Our Lord Jesus Christ. Other religions in Las Piñas includes various Protestant denominations, Jehovah's Witnesses, Iglesia ni Cristo, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Hinduism, Buddhism and Islam. Poverty Incidence of Las Piñas Source: Philippine Statistics Authority Las Piñas, like other cities of the Philippines, is a local government unit whose powers and functions are specified by the Local Government Code of the Philippines. In general, as a city, Las Piñas is headed by a mayor who heads the city's executive function and the vice mayor who heads the city's legislative function, which is composed of twelve councilors, six each from the city's two city council districts. For representation, the city is considered as one district, and therefore one representative, in the country's House of Representatives. Additionally, like other cities and municipalities, Las Piñas is subdivided into barangays. There are a total of 14 colleges, 21 private high schools, 18 public high schools, and 22 elementary schools that were built to accommodate the growing number of the enrollees every year. To date, there are 77 day care centers with feeding programs in 20 barangays within Las Piñas. ABE – Las Piñas Campus Bernardo College Centro Escolar Las Piñas Don Carlo Cavina School Dr. Filemon C. Aguilar Memorial College of Las Piñas-Talon Tres Campus, a local college that offers Bachelor's degree in Accountancy and Business Administration (with majors in Marketing Management, Financial Management, and Human Resource Development Management). Dr. Filemon C. Aguilar Memorial College of Las Piñas-Pamplona Tres Campus (formerly Dr. Filemon C. Aguilar Information Technology Training Institute or DFCAITTI), a local college that offers diploma courses like Computer Programming, Visual Graphics Design, and Animations. It also offers Bachelor's degrees in Information System and Computer Engineering. Philippine Merchant Marine School – Las Piñas Campus (Main) AMA Computer College, Las Piñas STI College, Las Piñas Saint Francis of Assisi College Southville International School and Colleges University of Perpetual Help System DALTA APEC Schools Las Piñas International Electronics and Technical Institute (IETI) - Las Piñas Las Piñas City National Science High School Las Piñas National High School - Almanza Uno Las Piñas East National High School - Verdant Equitable Village National High School (formerly Las Piñas East National High School - Equitable Village Annex II) Talon Village National High School (formerly Las Piñas East National High School - Talon Village Annex II) Las Piñas North National High School- Vergonville Subd., PulanLupa Dos Las Piñas National High School – Gatchalian Annex Las Piñas City Technical-Vocational High School (formerly Rizal Experimental Station and Pilot School of Cottage Industries – Las Piñas) Las Piñas City National Senior High School – Doña Josefa Campus Las Piñas City National Senior High School – Talon Dos Campus Las Piñas City National Senior High School – CAA Campus Las Piñas City National Senior High School – Manuyo Campus Las Piñas National High School – Senior High School CAA National High School - Main CAA National High School – Annex Golden Acres National High School Las Piñas North National High School Lydia Aguilar National High School (T.S. Cruz High School) Academy of Jesus Almanza Baptist Christian Academy Augustinian Abbey School Blessed Trinity School of Las Piñas Bloomfield Academy Center for Science and Technology Bethany School of Las Piñas Camella Homes Montessori Child Development Center Camella School INC Centro Escolar Las Piñas Don Carlo Cavina School Divine Light Academy Holy Rosary Academy of Las Piñas City Saint Joseph's Academy St. Rose of Lima (Las Piñas) School Inc. St. Michael's School, Inc. Sto. Niño De Eucharistia Academy St. Therese School Schola de Vita, Inc. Southville International School and Colleges Elizabeth Seton School Young Achievers International School Westfield Science-Oriented School and Colleges APEC Schools (Affordable Private Education Center) Father Angelico Lipani School- Annex Merry Treasure School Mary Immaculate Parish Special School Operation Brotherhood Montessori Center Our Lady of the Pilar Montessori Center Montessori De Manila Bloomfield Academy Center for Science and Technology Sto. Niño De Eucharistia Academy Blessed Trinity School of Las Piñas Holy Rosary Academy of Las Piñas City Almanza Elementary School CAA Elementary School - Main CAA Elementary School - Annex Daniel Fajardo Elementary School Doña Manuela Elementary School Gatchalian Elementary School Ilaya Elementary School Las Piñas Elementary School Central Manuyo Elementary School Moonwalk Elementary School Moonwalk Elementary School - Golden Acres Annex Moonwalk Elementary School - Mikesell Annex Pamplona Elementary School Central Pamplona Elementary School - Unit I Pilar Village Elementary School Pulanlupa Elementary School Pulanlupa Elementary School - Camella Annex Talon Elementary School Talon Tres Elementary School T.S. Cruz Elementary School Vergonville Elementary School Zapote Elementary School Las Piñas is part of the route of the extension of the LRT Line 1, the South Extension Project. The actual construction officially started on Tuesday, May 7, 2019 because the Right-of-way is "free and clear" from obstructions. Once it is fully operational, Las Piñas will be served by the LRT Line 1 through the Las Piñas station and Zapote station. The extension is slated for partial operations by late 2024 or early 2025 and full operations by second quarter of 2027. The road network of Las Piñas are radial in nature, and primarily relies on the Alabang–Zapote Road (N411), which serves as the city's road network backbone. The Manila-Cavite Expressway (formerly Coastal Road, and numbered E3), a toll expressway serves as the major traffic route towards Manila. Daang Hari, which hugs near the boundary with Muntinlupa, and the Aguinaldo Highway (N62) are the major traffic routes toward Cavite. The Muntinlupa-Cavite Expressway (MCX), which leads to South Luzon Expressway, supplements Daang Hari as an alternative to the congested Alabang-Zapote Road over Alabang and Ayala Alabang in Muntinlupa. The road network in Las Piñas suffers from traffic jams, especially on the primary artery, Alabang-Zapote Road, which carried more than 70,000 vehicles daily as of 2016. Public transport, like buses and jeepneys, fill up Alabang-Zapote Road, therefore causing further congestion. The city government petitioned the Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board (LTFRB) to suspend issuing of franchises on bus and jeepneys routes that uses Alabang-Zapote Road. The Las Piñas Friendship Route network serves as the alternate routes on the congested routes, but motorists have to obtain and display a sticker on their vehicle to use these routes, as most roads of the network are located in privately owned subdivisions (gated communities), like BF Homes, Pilar Village, and BF Resort. Jeepneys and buses form the major public transport system, and most of their routes follow the Alabang-Zapote Road. Most jeepneys through Las Piñas travel between Alabang and Zapote, within the city, or Baclaran, in Parañaque. Buses usually form routes between Alabang or SM Southmall and destinations in Manila. Buses and jeepneys are blamed for the worsening congestion on Alabang-Zapote Road. On February 22, 1995, then President Fidel V. Ramos signed Republic Act 8003 into a law – declaring Las Piñas Church and Bamboo Organ, Las Piñas Bridge, Asinan Area, Father Diego Cera Bridge, and Old District Hospital as tourist spots of Las Piñas. Las Piñas is famous for its Bamboo Organ located inside the St. Joseph Parish Church in the old district of the city. Built in 1824 by a Catholic priest, Fr. Diego Cera, it is the only organ of its kind in the world with organ pipes mostly made out of bamboo. The Las Piñas Historical Corridor Project was a program laid to restore the Old Town of Las Piñas. It was launched at the Malacañan Heroes' Hall on November 13, 1997. The project aims to educate the people of Las Piñas along the tourist corridor. 19 structures were included along the historical corridor: Boundary Arc Bulwagang Ezekiel Moreno Santuario de San Ezekiel Moreno Police and Fire Station Public Library Plaza Quezon – designated as the Freedom Park in the City of Las Piñas by City Ordinance No. 700-06, Series of 2006. This was in accordance with Section 15 of Batas Pambansa Blg. 880, otherwise known as the "Public Assembly Act of 1985". Central Elementary School E. Aldana Police Station Fr. Diego Cera Bridge Historical and Cultural Museum Las Piñas Fish Port Irasan Center Las Piñas Manpower Youth Council – TESDA Building Zapote Police Station Las Piñas General Hospital and Satellite Trauma Center Zapote Bridge Barangay Hall of Zapote Centennial Flyover Molino Dam The town fiesta of Las Piñas is celebrated every first Sunday of May each year to honor its patron saint, Saint Joseph. Saint Joseph's Day celebration is centered in St. Joseph Parish Church in the old poblacion of Las Piñas in Barangay Daniel Fajardo on Padre Diego Cera Ave. (Quirino Ave.). Las Piñas was also the home of Mary Immaculate Parish Church, popularly known as the Nature Church, designed by Architect Francisco "Bobby" Mañosa. Las Piñas is also home to unique festivals such as: International Bamboo Organ Festival – a music festival held in February celebrating the music of the unique Bamboo Organ with performances by local and foreign classical artists Waterlily Festival – every July 27 "Parol" or Lantern Festival – celebrated during Christmas season Las Piñas Historical Festival – celebrated every March to commemorate significant historical events that happened in the city Amani Aguinaldo, UFL football player, member of Philippine Azkals Anjo Damiles, actor Quest, r&b singer Rodjun Cruz, actor and dancer Rayver Cruz, actor and host Kevin Alas, PBA basketball player, member of Gilas Pilipinas and NLEX Road Warriors Rox Santos, songwriter Zara Aldana or Zephorah Aldana Mayon, Mutya ng Pilipinas 2007 Asia Pacific International and former housemate of Pinoy Big Brother: Celebrity Edition 2 Raymond Bagatsing, actor McNeal (Awra) Briguela, child actor as seen on Ang Probinsyano Ely Buendia, songwriter, vocalist and guitarist of Eraserheads, Pupil, Oktaves and Apartel Sef Cadayona, actor and dancer Tirso Cruz III, actor Jen Da Silva, model, dancer as part of the 26K girls of Kapamilya, Deal or No Deal and former housemate of Pinoy Big Brother: Celebrity Edition 2 Ranidel de Ocampo, PBA basketball player, member of Gilas Pilipinas and TNT KaTropa Mr. Fu, radio jock, comedian and host Michelle Gavagan, Miss Philippines Fire 2011 Enrique Gil, artist of ABS-CBN Nikki Gil, singer, actress, TV host and former MYX VJ Ruben Gonzaga, comedian and winner of Pinoy Big Brother: Celebrity Edition 2 Allan K., co-host of Eat Bulaga Pauleen Luna, actress Pol Medina Jr., author of Pugad Baboy Jennylyn Mercado, actress and singer Iwa Moto, actress Sitti Navarro, bossa nova singer Amy Perez, actress, host and radio anchor Kai Sotto, Member of Philippines Men's Basketball Team Gilas Pilipinas Zack Tabudlo, singer-songwriter Ronald Allen "Beware" Salanga, Member of the rap group Death Threat (hip hop group) Yasser Marta, actor and tv host Ashley Sarmiento, actress Parañaque, Metro Manila Muntinlupa, Metro Manila Pasay, Metro Manila Bacoor, Cavite Samal, Davao del Norte Sochi, Russia Ufa, Russia Battle of Zapote Bridge Las Piñas Boys Choir wmph is an internal identifier used by Wikimedia Philippines to identify the monument. This is not an official identifier, and only shown temporarily in the templates until the government creates an updated complete list.  City of Las Piñas | (DILG) "2015 Census of Population, Report No. 3 – Population, Land Area, and Population Density" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. Quezon City, Philippines. August 2016. ISSN 0117-1453. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 25, 2021. Retrieved July 16, 2021. Census of Population (2020). "National Capital Region (NCR)". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved July 8, 2021. Error: Unable to display the reference properly. See the documentation for details. moneysense (April 1, 2008). "Best places to live". MoneySense Philippines. Retrieved January 9, 2021. Pransism (2011-11). "Las Piñas (St. Joseph Church): Home of the Bamboo Organ". Back Trails. Retrieved April 7, 2013. Cavada y Méndez de Vigo, Agustín de la (1876). Historia geográfica, geológica y estadiśtica de Filipinas. Con datos geográficos, geológicos y estadiśticos de las islas de Luzon, Visayas, Mindanao y Joló; y los que corresponden a las islas Batanes, Calamianes, Balabac, Mindoro, Masbate, Ticao y Burias, situadas al n. so. y s. de Luzon (PDF). Manila: Imp. de Ramirez y Giraudier. de Medina, Juan S. (1893). Historia de los sucesos de la Orden de N. gran P. S. Agustín, de estas Islas Filipinas... / compuesta por el venerable Fray Juan de Medina. Sucesos que los religiosos de la Orden de N. P. S. Agustín han tenido en las Islas Filipinas... / compuesta por el Padre Pedro del Viva. Manila: Tipo-Litografía de Chofré y Comp. p. 486. Buzeta, Manuel (1851). Diccionario geográfico, estadístico, histórico de las Islas Filipinas ... / por Manuel Buzeta y Felipe Bravo. Madrid: Imprenta de José C. de la Peña. Salonga, Isayas R. (1934). Rizal Province Directory: History, Government and General Information with the Full Text of the Philippine Independence Law, Volume One. General Printing Press. "A Brief History of Las Pinas". Alabang Bulletin. May 31, 2012. Retrieved December 26, 2020. "An Act Reducing the Thirty-Two Municipalities of the Province of Rizal to Fifteen.". Act No. 942 of October 12, 1903. Retrieved April 24, 2022. Act No. 1625 of March 27, 1907. Retrieved April 24, 2022. Presidential Decree No. 824 (November 7, 1975), Creating The Metropolitan Manila And The Metropolitan Manila Commission And For Other Purposes, retrieved June 5, 2022 Evangelista, R. A. (September 25, 1994). "Narcs arrest six drug dealers". Manila Standard. Kamahalan Publishing Corp. p. 7. Retrieved December 6, 2022. Las Piñas town became known as the drug trade center in Metro Manila... Burdeos, B. (January 20, 1996). "Navarro relieves 2 officers". Manila Standard. Kamahalan Publishing Corp. p. 14. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Bocalvos' relief, according to Navarro, was due to the DEU's failure to arrest any suspected drug pusher for the past several months despite persistent reports that drug-related activities are rampant in Las Piñas. Herrera, Ernesto F. (July 1, 1990). "Extent of the drug problem in Metro Manila". Manila Standard. Kagitingan Publications, Inc. p. 6. Retrieved November 7, 2022. "Yoyoy vows to lead anti-drug campaign". Manila Standard. Kamahalan Publishing Corp. April 29, 1995. p. 16. Retrieved December 29, 2021. Calalo, Arlie (January 24, 1996). "Las Piñas has biggest number of drug-using cops, says Mayo". Manila Standard. Kamahalan Publishing Corp. p. 14. Retrieved July 5, 2022. "Las Pinas City Annual Audit Report" (PDF). Commission on Audit. July 29, 2019. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 29, 2019. Retrieved July 29, 2019. "Las Piñas: Average Temperatures and Rainfall". Meteoblue. Retrieved May 13, 2020. "Total Population by City, Municipality and Barangay: as of 1 August 2015" (PDF). Population density as of 2020 "New ZIP Code 2019" (PDF). PHLPOST: Philippine Postal Corporation, Philippines, Service, Stamps, Parcel. July 29, 2019. Retrieved July 29, 2019. Census of Population (2015). "National Capital Region (NCR)". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved June 20, 2016. Census of Population and Housing (2010). "National Capital Region (NCR)" (PDF). Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. National Statistics Office. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Censuses of Population (1903–2007). "National Capital Region (NCR)". Table 1. Population Enumerated in Various Censuses by Province/Highly Urbanized City: 1903 to 2007. National Statistics Office.{{cite encyclopedia}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Province of Metro Manila, 4th (Not a Province)". Municipality Population Data. Local Water Utilities Administration Research Division. Retrieved December 17, 2016. "Poverty incidence (PI):". Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved December 28, 2020. "Estimation of Local Poverty in the Philippines" (PDF). November 2005. Error: Unable to display the reference properly. See the documentation for details. "City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates; 2006 and 2009" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. August 3, 2012. "2012 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. May 31, 2016. Error: Unable to display the reference properly. See the documentation for details. Error: Unable to display the reference properly. See the documentation for details. Synchronized National and Local Elections Law – Republic Act No. 7166, Section 3.c.. Retrieved October 21, 2009. "Westfield Science Oriented School – #1 STEM School in Las Pinas | Top School in Las Pinas City". "APEC Schools". "Start of LRT-1 extension moved to May". The Philippine Star. Retrieved July 29, 2019. Manabat, Jacque. "Construction on LRT-1 extension to Cavite starts". ABS-CBN News. Retrieved July 29, 2019. Rey, Aika. "Construction of LRT1 Cavite extension 'full steam ahead'". Rappler. Retrieved July 29, 2019. Crisanto, Joyce & De la Torre, Visitacion (2006). Las Piñas: A City with Heritage (1st ed.). Villar Foundation.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Republic Act No. 8003". Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. April 22, 1995. Retrieved July 29, 2019. "City Ordinance No. 700-06, Series of 2006". The Official Website of the City of Las Piñas. Retrieved December 20, 2014. "Nature Church" Archived December 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. The Official Website of the City of Las Piñas. Retrieved December 20, 2014. "Festival Program" Archived December 20, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. International Bamboo Organ Festival Official Website. Retrieved April 21, 2013. "Water Lily Festival". The Official Website of the City of Las Piñas. Retrieved April 7, 2013. Tribune (January 6, 2013). "Las Piñas's 7th Parol Festival". The Daily Tribune. Retrieved April 7, 2013. "The Architectural Heritage of Manila/Metro Manila Project, 1571-1961". Institute of the Philippine Culture and the Society for the Preservation of Philippine Culture, Inc. Retrieved December 12, 2014. "Sister cities of Las Piñas — sistercity.info". Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Las Piñas. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Las Piñas. Official website Philippine Standard Geographic Code International Bamboo Organ Festival Geographic data related to Las Piñas at OpenStreetMap Barangay Daniel Fajardo