Blue Eye Samurai is an adult animated action television series created and written by wife-and-husband team Amber Noizumi and Michael Green, with supervising director and series producer Jane Wu, co-produced and animated by the French studio Blue Spirit [fr]. On December 11, 2023, the series was renewed for a second season. During Japan's Edo period (17th century), half-white half-Japanese onna-musha (female warrior) Mizu quests for vengeance against four white men, one of whom is her father, who illegally remained in Japan during the closing of its borders by the Tokugawa shogunate. Maya Erskine as Mizu, a female mixed-race blue-eyed bushi. Her experiences of discrimination as a mixed-race Japanese woman have left her cold, bitter and vengeful. She disguises herself as a man to pursue her path of revenge more freely. Masi Oka as Ringo, an optimistic, handless male cook who idolizes Mizu. Despite Mizu initially not wanting a companion, she later tolerates Ringo. He proves surprisingly helpful and loyal to Mizu. Darren Barnet as Taigen, a promising but arrogant male swordsman of humble origins. He is in love with Princess Akemi and harbors a strong resentment towards Mizu, which has lasted since their childhoods, and later seeks revenge after being humiliated in a duel which cuts off his engagement with Akemi. Brenda Song as Princess Akemi, the pampered but strong-willed daughter of a nouveau riche lord. She is in love with Taigen and resents her father's control over her and seeks a life of independence. George Takei as Seki, Princess Akemi's male tutor. He sympathizes with Akemi's situation and later takes steps to ensure her freedom. Randall Park as Heiji Shindo, Fowler's nominal jailor and accomplice. Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa as Master Eiji, a blind swordsmith who raised Mizu. He was the first person to show Mizu kindness, partially because he cannot see her; as a result, Mizu holds deep respect for him, referring to him as "Swordfather". Kenneth Branagh as Abijah Fowler, an Irish smuggler who is allied with the Shogun, in secret defiance of Japan's Sakoku closed-door policies. He plans to overthrow the current Shogun and replace him with a leader who will open Japan to outside influence. Stephanie Hsu as Ise, a prostitute. Ming-Na Wen as Madame Kaji, a cunning and savvy madam. Harry Shum Jr. as Takayoshi, the Shogun's second son. Mark Dacascos as Bloodsoaked Chiaki, an assassin and the leader of the Four Fangs gang. Orli Mariko Green as Young Mizu Judah Green as Young Taigen Patrick Gallagher as Lord Daichi, Akemi's father. Ann Harada as Mama, Mizu's unnamed adoptive mother. Although Mizu initially believed she was her biological mother, it's later revealed she was merely her maid who was paid to care for her. Byron Mann as Mikio, a disgraced samurai in Mizu's flashbacks Supporting voices are provided by Gedde Watanabe, Patrick Gallagher, Eric Bauza, Clyde Kusatsu, Keone Young, Brittany Ishibashi, Holly Chou, Marcus Choi, Amber Noizumi, Mark Dacascos, Matthew Yang King, Jane Wu, West Liang, Alain Uy, Takaaki Hirakawa, Sherry Cola, and Christine Ko. In October 2020 it was reported that Netflix had greenlit production of the series, with creators Green and Noizumi acting as writers, executive producers and showrunners, with 2D/3D-hybrid animation by French studio Blue Spirit. They wanted it to "look like a moving painting" with character design drawn from bunraku puppets. Inspiration was taken from the character Zatoichi, the "Man with No Name", and the works of Akira Kurosawa. The creators have stated their aim to make three or four seasons, and a possible spinoff. Episodes 1-7 have an aspect ratio of 16:9, with episode 8 changing to a more cinematic 2.35:1. On December 11, 2023, the series was renewed for a second season. The first episode was released on November 1, 2023 on Netflix's YouTube channel. The entire series was released on November 3 on Netflix, consisting of 8 episodes. A special version of episode 6 was released on November 15, 2023 on the Netflix YouTube channel. It features a largely black-and-white palette and an altered soundtrack. The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 100% critic rating with an average rating of 8.4 out of 10 based on 24 reviews. The website's critics' consensus says: "Visually dazzling while paying deft attention to character, Blue Eye Samurai is a masterfully rendered animated adventure." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned a score of 88 out of 100 based on 6 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". Animation and co-production Production This coincides with the historical Great Fire of Meireki Bitran, Tara (2023-11-14). "Swear Allegiance to the 'Blue Eye Samurai' This November". Netflix. Breznican, Anthony (26 September 2023). "The Pink-Haired Secret Weapon Behind 'Blue Eye Samurai'". Vanity Fair. Andreeva, Nellie (9 October 2020). "Netflix Orders 'Blue Eye Samurai' Animated Action Series from Michael Green & Amber Noizumi; Maya Erskine, George Takei, Masi Oka & Randall Park Lead Cast". "Behind the Animation of Blue Eye Samurai", TUDUM by Netflix, 2023-10-31 Deckelmeier, Joe (2023-11-03), "Blue Eye Samurai Interview: Creators On Clint Eastwood Inspiration & Live Action Feel In Animation", Screenrant "List of TV Shows with Aspect Ratios Wider Than 16:9", videofileblog.com Goldberg, Lesley (2023-12-11), "'Blue Eye Samurai' Renewed for Season 2 at Netflix", Hollywood Reporter Blue Eye Samurai | Hammerscale | Full Episode | Netflix, retrieved 2024-01-26 Blue Eye Samurai | All Evil Dreams & Angry Words | Special Edition | Full Episode | Netflix, retrieved 2024-01-26 "Blue Eye Samurai: Season 1". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved December 27, 2023. "Blue Eye Samurai: Season 1". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved November 13, 2023. Erik, Pedersen (January 25, 2024). "ACE Eddie Awards Nominations: 'Oppenheimer', 'Barbie', 'Anatomy of a Fall', & More Vie for Editing Prizes". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved January 25, 2024. "Annie Awards Nominations: 'Nimona' Looks Down On 'Boy And The Heron' & 'Across The Spider-Verse', Leads Film Field". Cartoon Brew. January 11, 2024. Archived from the original on 2024-01-11. Blue Eye Samurai on Netflix Blue Eye Samurai at IMDb