Muntinlupa (Tagalog: [mʊntɪnˈlupɐ]), officially the City of Muntinlupa (Filipino: Lungsod ng Muntinlupa), is a 1st class highly urbanized city in the National Capital Region of the Philippines. According to the 2020 census, it has a population of 543,445 people. It is bordered on the north by Taguig, to the northwest by Parañaque, by Bacoor and Las Piñas to the west, to the southwest by Dasmariñas, by San Pedro to the south, and by Laguna de Bay, the largest lake in the country, to the east. From high above, the city of Muntinlupa has many large, green patches, which is unusual for Metro Manila. Because of these green patches, Muntinlupa earned the name "Emerald City" by the tourism establishment and also known as the "Gateway to Calabarzon" as it is the southernmost city of the National Capital Region. Muntinlupa is known as the location of the national insular penitentiary, the New Bilibid Prison, where the country's most dangerous criminals are incarcerated. This was relocated from its old site in Santa Cruz, Manila. Before the relocation of New Bilibid Prison to Muntinlupa in the 1930s, Muntinlupa was mainly dedicated to fishing and farming. Ayala Alabang Village, one of the country's biggest and most expensive residential communities, where many of the wealthy and famous live, is also located in Muntinlupa. There are three plausible origins of the name of the city: Its association with the thin topsoil in the area, known locally as munting lupa, or "little soil" in Tagalog; Residents, purportedly answering a question from Spaniards in the 16th century of what the name of their place was, saying "Monte sa Lupa", apparently mistaking the question for what card game they were playing; and The topographical nature of the area, in which case the Spanish term monte, or "mountain", was expanded to muntinlupa, or "mountain land". The 1987 Philippine Constitution spells the city's name as "Muntinglupa" instead of "Muntinlupa". In 1601, some 88 years after the arrival of Portuguese navigator Ferdinand Magellan in the Visayas islands, the original lands constituting Muntinlupa could be deduced to have been friar lands administered by the Augustinians, then sold and assigned to the Sanctuary of Guadalupe. In 1869, the lands were transferred to the state and large individual landholders. In an effort by the Spanish Government to bring under closer administrative control the people living in the contiguous sitios, as well as those in Alabang, Tunasan, Sucat, and Cupang, the municipality was created upon the recommendation of Don Eduardo de Canizares. On August 6, 1898, the town supported the Philippine Revolution against the Spaniards and formally joined the revolutionary government headed by Gen. Emilio Aguinaldo. The Philippine Commission promulgated Rizal Province on June 11, 1901, through Act No. 137. Muntinlupa became part of the new province after being a part of the defunct province of Manila. On October 12, 1903, Muntinlupa, alongside Taguig, was merged with Pateros by virtue of Act No. 942. On November 25, 1903, Muntinlupa was incorporated under Act No. 1008 and included within the boundary of the province of La Laguna under the municipality of Biñan. Muntinlupa residents protested this Executive Act, and through their town head, Marcelo Fresnedi, filed a formal petition to the Governor for the return of the municipality to the province of Rizal. On March 22, 1905, Act No. 1308 paved the way for Muntinlupa's return to the province of Rizal to then become a part of Taguig, along with Pateros. On December 19, 1917, Governor-General Francis Burton Harrison signed Executive Order 108, which made Muntinlupa an independent municipality, separating it from Taguig. The law took effect on January 1, 1918. Vidal Joaquin, a native of Alabang, served as the first appointed mayor from 1918 to 1919, followed by Primo Ticman, native of Poblacion, from 1919 to 1922. Melencio Espeleta became the first elected mayor of Muntinlupa in 1922, serving until 1924. On January 22, 1941, the historic New Bilibid Prison, the national penitentiary, was established in the hills of Muntinlupa. During World War II, the New Bilibid Prison was used to lock up Filipino political prisoners by the Japanese occupation authorities, but they were set free by Hunters ROTC guerrillas. On November 7, 1975, Muntinlupa was transferred from the Province of Rizal to the newly formed Metropolitan Manila by virtue of Presidential Decree No. 824 issued by then-President Ferdinand Marcos. June 13, 1986, following the EDSA Revolution in February of that year, President Corazón C. Aquino appoints Ignacio R. Bunye, Officer-In-Charge of Muntinlupa as part of a nationwide revamp of local government units. In the ratification of the 1987 Constitution, Muntinlupa together with Las Piñas formed one political district. On December 6, 1988, President Corazon C. Aquino by Proclamation 351 declares December 19 as "Municipality of Muntinlupa Day". On February 16, 1995, House Bill No. 14401, which seeks to convert the municipality of Muntinlupa into a highly urbanized city, was approved by the House of Representatives. On March 1, 1995, Muntinlupa became the 65th city in the Philippines as signed into law by President Fidel V. Ramos, its conversion into a highly urbanized city by virtue of Republic Act (R.A.) No. 7926. Per Section 62 of R.A. 7926, Muntinlupa and Las Piñas were to constitute separate congressional districts, with each district electing its separate representative in the 1998 elections. This separation was additionally confirmed in the city charter of Las Piñas (R.A. 8251) which was approved by plebiscite on March 26, 1997. Ignacio Bunye, who previously served as mayor of Muntinlupa, was elected in 1998 as the first congressman representing the city. On March 1, 2001, Republic Act No. 9191 was enacted, declaring March 1 of every year as a Special Non-working Holiday in the City of Muntinlupa to be known as "The Muntinlupa City Charter Day". On August 3, 2007, the Muntinlupa City Hall was completely damaged and later abandoned due to a fire. The fire started from a slum area behind the city hall. Almost all files, important documents and other references of Muntinlupa were burned. It is bordered on the north by Taguig, to the northwest by Parañaque, to the west by Las Piñas, to the southwest by the cities of Bacoor and Dasmariñas in Cavite, to the south by the city of San Pedro in Laguna, and to the east by Laguna de Bay, the largest lake in the country. Muntinlupa's terrain is relatively flat to sloping towards the east along the lake. Gentle rolling hills occupy the western part of the city, with elevation increasing up to 60 meters (200 ft) and above towards its southwest portion. While a majority of the land area in the city is highly urbanized, the New Bilibid Prison (NBP) Reservation in barangay Poblacion is relatively free of urbanization, although there are ongoing discussions to move the national penitentiary to Nueva Ecija and Occidental Mindoro, respectively. Alabang is the business district of the city where the tallest structures in the city are located. It used to be the location of Alabang Stock Farm. Land reclamation is also done along the Laguna Lake for further developments in the city. During the dry season, the water level in the lake subsides, exposing the soil that is then used for farming. The dry season rungs through the months of November to April, while the wet season starts in May and lasts to November. The wet season reaches its peak in the month of August. Maximum rainfall in Muntinlupa usually occurs from the month of June to September. The average annual of rainfall is 2,014.8 millimeters (79.32 in) with a peak of 420.0 millimeters (16.54 in) in July and a low 26.9 millimeters (1.06 in) in April. The highest temperature occurs during the month of April and May at 34 °C (93 °F), while the lowest occurs during the months of January and February at 24 °C (75 °F). The west segment of the Marikina Valley Fault System, the West Valley Fault (WVF) cuts through parts of Muntinlupa and moves in a predominantly dextral strike-slip motion. The West Valley Fault is capable of producing large scale earthquakes on its active phases with a magnitude of 7 or higher. Muntinlupa is composed of a lone congressional district, and two legislative districts which are politically subdivided into nine barangays. The 1st legislative district includes barangays Bayanan, Putatan, Poblacion and Tunasan in the southern half of the city, while the 2nd legislative district are barangays Alabang, Buli, New Alabang Village, Cupang and Sucat in the northern portion of the city. Other zip codes include Muntinlupa Central Post Office 1770, Ayala Alabang Village 1780, Pleasant Village 1777, Susana Heights 1774, and Filinvest City 1781. The barangays of the city are named after the botanical characteristics, topographical features, and historical events that had been observed in the area when it was named. Tunasan from the plant tunas. Putatan got its name from a tree called putat. Cupang is likewise named after the cupang tree. Buli is named after the buri palm. Alabang is named after the river that passes through the barangay. Ayala Alabang was created by Batas Pambansa Bilang 219 out of Barangay Alabang. Sucat got its name from the vernacular word "sukat", which means "measurement" since it was measured during the Spanish era. While barangays are the administrative divisions of the city and are legally part of the addresses of homes and establishments, many residents identify themselves by their subdivision (village) instead of their barangay. People from Muntinlupa are referred to as Muntinlupeño as an adaptation from the standard Spanish suffix -(eñ/n)o. The native language of Muntinlupa is Tagalog, but the majority of the residents can understand and speak English. People in Muntinlupa are mainly Roman Catholic. Catholic churches in Muntinlupa fall under the jurisdiction of the Diocese of Parañaque, with about 11 parishes within Muntinlupa. Other religions in Muntinlupa include various Protestant denominations, Iglesia ni Cristo, Members Church of God International, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Hinduism, Buddhism and Islam. Poverty Incidence of Muntinlupa Source: Philippine Statistics Authority Barangay Alabang, part of the second district of Muntinlupa, has undergone tremendous growth mainly due to a development boom in the late 1990s. The development of two large-scale commercial real estate projects namely; the Filinvest Corporate City and Ayala Land's Madrigal Business Park, changed the landscape of Muntinlupa from what was once vast fields of cow pasture in the late 1980s, into a supercity that houses new residential, business, industrial and commercial establishments. The Muntinlupa "Business One-Stop-Shop" is recognized in the 2014 World Cities Summit in Singapore in its effectiveness in reducing the number of steps in acquiring a Business Permit. Northgate Cyberzone is the information technology park within Filinvest Corporate City in Alabang. The 18.7-hectare (46-acre), PEZA registered IT zone is designed, mastered-planned and built around the needs of technology-based companies engaged in Business Process Outsourcing (BPO), Knowledge Process Outsourcing (KPO), education, learning and firm, software design and multimedia, call centers, e-commerce, banking and financial services, as well as other IT support businesses and the like. It is home to Capital One Philippines Support Services Corp., Convergys Philippines Corp, HSBC Electronic Data Processing (Philippines), Inc., Genpact, Verizon Business and many more. Kawasaki Motors Philippines Corporation is in charge of production and distribution of Kawasaki Motors in the Philippines. KMPC, having been in the country for over 40 years, is hailed today as one of the top manufacturers in the Philippine motorcycle industry. Amkor Technology is a semiconductor product packaging and test services provider that established its first Philippine plant in Cupang. Pepsi-Cola Products Philippines has a plant located in Tunasan. Zuellig Pharma is also within the city. Shopping centers in Muntinlupa include Alabang Town Center and Ayala Malls South Park (also known as South Park Center), both owned by Ayala Malls, Festival Alabang owned and operated by Filinvest Development Corporation, Starmall Alabang (formerly known as Metropolis Star Alabang), SM Center Muntinlupa owned by SM Prime Holdings, Commercenter Alabang, and W.Mall Muntinlupa. There are multiple car dealerships located in Muntinlupa and most of them are along the Alabang–Zapote Road in Alabang. Ford Motors Alabang has a five-floor facility covering a floor area of nearly 13,000 square meters (140,000 sq ft) including a 2-floor, 23-vehicle showroom and a 4-floor, and an 80-bay service center. Toyota Alabang also constructed a facility with a showroom, parts warehouse, office & service facilities in a 5,000-square-meter (54,000 sq ft) lot. Audi Alabang, Chevrolet Alabang, Chrysler Alabang, Mitsubishi Motors Alabang, Nissan and Suzuki Alabang are also located within the area, most of which are along the Alabang–Zapote Road. Still in Alabang–Zapote Road but located in barangay Ayala Alabang are Hyundai Alabang, Isuzu Alabang and Honda Alabang. Muntinlupa is governed primarily by the city mayor, the vice mayor and the city councilors. The mayor acts as the chief executive of the city, while the city councilors act as its legislative body. The vice mayor, besides taking on mayoral responsibilities in case of a temporary vacancy, acts as the presiding officer of the city legislature. The legislative body is composed of 16 regular members (8 per district) and representatives from the barangay and the youth council. The Bureau of Corrections has its headquarters in the New Bilibid Prison Reservation in Muntinlupa. "Most Business Friendly City" on 2001, 2002 & 2006 as awarded by the Philippine Chamber of Commerce and Industry Muntinlupa is the first city in the Philippines to ban the use of plastic bags and styrofoam for packaging. The Muntinlupa city government encourages to "Bring your own Bag" or "BYOB" when shopping to reduce the use of plastic bags that would otherwise clog the waterways. ISO Certification on Quality Management System or ISO 9001:2000 has initially been acquired on 2004 and is valid for 3 years. Muntinlupa has re-acquired its ISO Certification on QMS in April 2015, ISO 9001:2008, together with Ospital ng Muntinlupa and Pamantasan ng Lungsod ng Muntinlupa as certified by BRS Rim of the World Operations, California. Designed by Manuel Amorsolo, son of a national artist Fernando Amorsolo, the city seal features the Philippine Eagle, the biggest, the strongest and the highest flying bird of the Philippine Republic, a bird that symbolizes the city's mission to become the Premiere Emerald City of the 21st Century. It is composed of: The Philippine Eagle – Symbolizes the City of Muntinlupa soaring into new heights in terms of progress and prosperity; the characteristics properly enlikened to a mother, that is caring, loving and nurturing her children to become good and responsible citizens of the country; and Muntinlupa's hope, vision and dream of becoming a premiere city of the nation. Bamboo Surrounding the Seal – Symbolizes the ability of the citizens of Muntinlupa to cope up with the fast changing times; that we can withstand the trials that come our way and stand still and ready to triumph again. Lakas, Talino at Buhay – These are words taken from the lyrics of the Muntinlupa March, the city's official anthem. These are values that will guide the city in achieving its goals and visions. 1917 and 1995 – The year 1917 marks the time when Muntinlupa became an independent town (although it was effective January 1, 1918, by virtue of Executive Order 108) while the year 1995 was the time when Muntinlupa became a city. The Philippine Flag – The flag behind the eagle symbolizes the City of Muntinlupa being a part of the Republic of the Philippines and its government. The Nine Stars – The nine stars symbolize the nine barangays that comprises the City of Muntinlupa, namely: Tunasan, Poblacion, Putatan, Bayanan, Alabang, Cupang, Buli, Sucat and Ayala Alabang. Muntinlupa has its official hymn, called "Martsa ng Muntinlupa", composed by Renato Dilig. It was adopted in 1989, during its time as municipality. Municipal Mayors: Vidal Joaquin - 1918–1919 Primo Ticman - 1919–1922 Melencio Espeleta - 1922–1924 Pedro E. Diaz - 1925–1930 Tomas M. Molina - 1931–1933 Marciano E. Arciaga - 1934–1936 Leon Mendiola - 1937–1939 Francisco Gilbuena - February–April 1945 Baldomero Viñalon - 1945–1946; 1952–1959 Bonifacio Ticman - 1946–1960 Francisco de Mesa Sr. - 1960–1964 Demetrio Loresca Sr. - March–September 1964 (Succession after Mayor de Mesa's assassination); October 1966–1971 Maximino Argana - October 1964 – October 1966; 1972–1985 Santiago V. Carlos - 1985–1986 Ignacio R. Bunye - 1986–1987; 1988–1995 Victor Aguinaldo - December 2, 1987–February 1, 1988 (as Officer in Charge after People Power Revolution) City Mayors: Ignacio R. Bunye - 1995–1998 Jaime R. Fresnedi - 1998–2007; 2013–2022 Aldrin L. San Pedro - 2007–2013 Rozzano Rufino B. Biazon - 2022–present Museo ng Muntinlupa is a five-story structure which is set to contain items of historical value to the city. The exterior is designed to look like a traditional fishtrap. Muntinlupa City Public Library is located at the recently constructed Plaza Central Building at Muntinlupa Poblacion. Plaza Central was inaugurated on October 6, 2017. It is located at the previous site of the Contessa Building (Old City Hall). Muntinlupa is home to the Muntinlupa Cagers, one of the Maharlika Pilipinas Basketball League's charter teams. Muntinlupa has 10 swimming pools, 14 billiard halls, 11 tennis courts, 8 resorts, 7 country clubs, 9 Dance/Fitness/Slimming Centers, 41 open basketball courts, 59 covered basketball courts and 11 parks & playgrounds. The Muntinlupa Sports Complex is used for a variety of activities such as concerts, conferences, reunions and graduations, the sports complex has 3,500 seating capacity and has two separate multipurpose rooms. The Muntinlupa Aquatic Center also hosts an Olympic-sized swimming pool, the first of its kind in the Philippines. Both the Sports Complex and Aquatic Center are located on a reclaimed area in Barangay Tunasan; it also has an open area which local residents enjoy their morning exercise and leisure time. Since 2017, the site of Karpos' Wanderland Music and Arts Festival has been hosted annually in Muntinlupa. The location of this venue is in the Filinvest City Events Grounds, situated in the heart of the Alabang district. The event hosts various bands, that range from international to homegrown artists, and live art performances. Muntinlupa is also home to 19 East, a premier live music venue that features the country's top artists. Gigs usually occur on a daily basis, suggesting that any given day would guarantee customers a lively experience. The sole distributor of electricity in Metro Manila is the Manila Electric Company, also known as Meralco. The de-commissioned Sucat Thermal Power Plant is located at Sucat. Water in Muntinlupa is provided by Maynilad Water Services (also known as Maynilad), which also serves western Metro Manila and some parts of Cavite. It is one of the two concessionaires that provide water to Metro Manila in the Philippines; the other one is Manila Water which serves the eastern Metro Manila. Majority of the land-line connection is provided by phone carrier Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company. Mobile telecommunication services are mostly provided by Globe Telecom, Smart Communications, and Dito Telecommunity. Muntinlupa can be accessed through private vehicles, buses, jeepneys, taxis, tricycles, and UV Express. Electric vehicles by both private and public sectors operate within the borders of the city. City buses with routes to Cavite, Makati, Manila, Valenzuela serve the two terminals at Alabang: the Vista Terminal Exchange at the former Starmall Alabang and South Station at Filinvest City. Point-to-point buses to Batangas, Makati, Manila, Ninoy Aquino International Airport, Ortigas Center and San Juan depart from the Vista Terminal Exchange, Alabang Town Center, and South Park Center in Alabang, respectively. Provincial buses to Batangas City, Lucena, Quezon, and Bicol Region also depart from Alabang. Jeepneys routes to General Mariano Alvarez, Calamba, and Pasay, including express services, also use the terminals at Alabang. UV Express routes also ply the city. Tricycles and pedicabs serve the interior of barangays and residential areas. "360 Eco-loop" is Filinvest City's fully integrated electric-powered public transport system operated by Filinvest as the main mode of transportation around Filinvest City. "electric-Jeepney Ride for Free," launched by the City Government of Muntinlupa on March 30, 2015, is composed of an initial fleet of 10 e-jeepneys produced in the Philippines. Philippine National Railways (PNR) has 3 stations in the city: Sucat, Alabang, and Muntinlupa (Barangay Poblacion) stations. There used to be a 4th and 5th stations in Barangay Tunasan and Barangay Buli; however, both were discontinued and demolished in 2009. Alabang station is the terminus of the Metro Commuter services; so, only the Provincial Commuter services that goes to Calamba stops in the Muntinlupa station which is currently two northbound trips in the morning and two southbound trips in the evening. Service southward to Alabang has resumed, but limited to Mamatid station in Cabuyao, Laguna. The PNR is slated to be replaced by the under construction North–South Commuter Railway, which will have stations at Sucat, Alabang, and Muntinlupa (Poblacion). Muntinlupa is served by expressways, national highways, and arterial roads, usually crowded. National highways serving the city include Maharlika Highway, which parallels the South Luzon Expressway and functions as the city's main artery and Alabang-Zapote Road, formerly known as "Real Street". Daang Hari Road, opened in 2003, lies on the boundary with Las Piñas near Ayala Alabang, Katarungan Village, and New Bilibid Prisons. Expressways passing through Muntinlupa include South Luzon Expressway, a part of the Pan-Philippine Highway (AH26) Luzon route, the elevated Skyway, and the Muntinlupa–Cavite Expressway. A proposed expressway, Laguna Lakeshore Expressway Dike, is being planned to run along Laguna de Bay from Taguig in Metro Manila to Calamba and Los Baños in Laguna. Arterial roads serve as the main route from the national roads to the barangays and its residential and commercial areas. Few examples of those roads include Commerce Avenue between Alabang and Ayala Alabang, Corporate Avenue in Filinvest City, Alabang, E. Rodriguez Sr. Avenue in Poblacion, E. Rodriguez Jr. Avenue in Tunasan, San Guillermo Street in Putatan, Montillano Street in Alabang, and Manuel L. Quezon Avenue from Alabang to Sucat and to the Taguig city boundary. The arterial roads are usually narrow, crowded with tricycles, pedestrians, and parked vehicles, and has few or no sidewalks, while a few, like Commerce Avenue, which has wide divided roads with traffic lights and sidewalks. Muntinlupa has 18 health centers, 1 public hospital, and 8 private hospitals. The sole public hospital of the city is the Ospital ng Muntinlupa, while the Asian Hospital and Medical Center and the Medical Center Muntinlupa are among the city's private hospital. The Food and Drug Administration, tasked to ensure the health and safety of food and drugs, has its headquarters located at Filinvest City, Alabang. The Research Institute for Tropical Medicine, a research facility dedicated to infectious and tropical diseases in the Philippines, is also based in Muntinlupa. Schools providing public education in Muntinlupa is administered by Schools Division Office of Muntinlupa City, a local division of the Department of Education. Muntinlupa has 89 child development centers (including day care centers, nursery schools and kindergarten schools), 20 public elementary schools, 8 public high schools, 1 public tertiary school, 1 public vocational/technical school, 88 private schools, 10 private tertiary schools and 9 private vocational/technical schools. The "Iskolar ng Bayan" program has been able to give financial assistance to 3,567 students with an allocated budget of ₱13 million. The city search for the Ten Muntinlupa Outstanding Students (MOST) is conducted annually to give recognition and honor to talented and academically excellent students in all public and private high schools of Muntinlupa. Muntinlupa National High School is a public high school located at Poblacion, Muntinlupa. MNHS also has a special curriculum, the Science Technology and Engineering or STE (formerly ESEP), that prepares students for careers in Science and Technology, Math, and Communication Arts. Muntinlupa Science High School or MunSci is a special public high school in the City of Muntinlupa, Philippines that provides a technical and science curriculum that aims to prepare students for careers in Science and Technology, Math, and Communication Arts. Nihongo and French classes are also offered to students. Classes are taught by teachers from the Japanese and French embassies. Pedro E. Diaz High School, formerly Annex of Fort Bonifacio College (FBC), is a public high school located at UP Side Subdivision, Alabang, Muntinlupa. Muntinlupa Business High School, formerly known as Pedro E. Diaz High School Annex, is located at Espeleta Street, Buli, Muntinlupa. The school makes education more accessible to students residing at barangays Buli, Cupang and Sucat. MBHS offers a curriculum focused on preparing its graduates into vocational and collegiate degree. Tunasan National High School, also known as Muntinlupa National High School-Tunasan Annex, is the newest public high school, established in 2012 which caters Technical Vocational Courses, TVL Maritime and Humanities and Social Sciences under Academic Track and Grades 7-10 of K–12 curriculum. Pamantasan ng Lungsod ng Muntinlupa is a local university in the city that started as a dream of former Mayor Ignacio Bunye who viewed education as potent tool for transforming society for the better. Upon his assumption of office in 1986, he included the objective of organizing and establishing an institution of higher learning in the Ten Point Agenda of his administration. Former Dean Enrico Vivar led the movement to convert the Muntinlupa Polytechnic College into a local university. Atty. Raul R. Corro, then Councilor and Chairman of the Committee on Education, sponsored City Ordinance No. 03-089 converting the Muntinlupa Polytechnic College to a Pamantasan ng Lungsod ng Muntinlupa (PLMun) in March 2003 during the 67th session. The Pamantasan ng Lungsod ng Muntinlupa is now ISO 9001:2008 CERTIFIED by the BRS Rim of the World Operations in California, USA. PLMun was awarded its Certification on April 27, 2015, at the City Hall Quadrangle of the City Government of Muntinlupa. Colegio De Muntinlupa is a local government school and CHED-recognized free higher education institution, Colegio de Muntinlupa (CDM) was established to help fill the gap in the science and technology sector of the Philippines. It is Situated in Posadas Avenue in Barangay Sucat and was founded in 2018 with Mayor Jaime Fresnedi overseeing its founding. With its complete and brand-new facilities that meet international standards and high-caliber professors, CDM aims to produce competent nation builders who will be the drivers of sustainable development in the country. Currently, CDM offers five (5) Engineering programs, namely Civil Engineering, Computer Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Electronics Engineering, and Mechanical Engineering. It is also set to offer 5 new programs namely Architecture, Construction Engineering and Management, Environmental Engineering, Industrial Engineering, and Robotics Engineering this coming Academic year 2022-2023. The college is also expecting their first batch of Graduates this 2022. Muntinlupa City Technical Institute (MCTI) offers technical vocational-training of TESDA Accredited Courses. Courses offered in MCTI are Automotive Servicing NC II, Building Wiring Installation NC II, Dressmaking NC II, Food & Beverage Services NC II and Massage Therapy NC II. ALS Center Bayanan, formerly Bayanan Elementary School Unit I, conducts Alternative Learning System classes during Saturdays and uses modules that students can answer at home. This program will help them finish secondary education to make them eligible to take courses offered by TESDA or be a college graduate. They will be given certificates by the Department of Education (DepEd) once they finish the program in five months. The project is being implemented by the local DepEd office in coordination with the city government. NBP Alternative Learning System is 10-month course offered by the Department of Education (DepEd). Convicts are given a chance to overcome illiteracy or acquire livelihood skills behind bars. This program is made possible by the coordination of Bureau of Corrections with the Department of Education. Architecture: Francisco Mañosa - National Artist of the Philippines for Architecture Entertainment personalities: Vic Sotto - Actor and TV host of Eat Bulaga Dong Puno - former news executive of ABS-CBN Pauleen Luna - Actress Charlene Gonzales - Actress, Beauty Queen Jodi Sta. Maria - Actress of ABS-CBN Lougee Basabas - Lead Singer of Mojofly Boboy Garovillo - Singer Champ Lui Pio - Vocalist of HALE Band Fernando Poe Jr. - Action film icon, National Artist Lea Salonga - Singer Ronnie Ricketts - Action film icon Mariz Ricketts - A multi-talented artist. Wife of Ronnie Ricketts Dale Baldillo - Child Actor & Socialite-Phlantrophist Matteo Guidicelli - Actor, Singer and TV Host Sarah Geronimo - Singer, Actress Ya Chang - Japanese/Filipino Accent Lindsay Custodio - Former Singer Karel Marquez - Actress & Model Niño Muhlach - Former Child Actor & Director Aga Muhlach - Actor Alonzo Muhlach - Child Actor Paolo Abrera - TV Host, Triathlete Marlo Mortel - Actor Sarita Pérez de Tagle - Actress Derek Ramsay - Actor Janos Delacruz - Painter Ernie Baron - former weather broadcaster and inventor of Baron Super Antenna Mark Maglasang - previously known as "Bosx1ne" and now known as "Honcho", he is a rapper, founder, and leader of Ex Battalion Archie dela Cruz - also known as "Flow-G", rapper and Ex Battalion member JRoa - former member of Ex Battalion, singer-songwriter John Marren Mangabang - also known as "Emcee Rhenn", rapper and Ex Battalion member Shernan Roy Gaite - known as “Shernan”, rapper and FlipTop emcee Allan Paule - actor Richard Gutierrez - actor Sarah Lahbati - actress Pageants: Bea Santiago - Beauty Queen Gwennaelle Ruais - Miss Philippines Fire 2010 Gwen Ruais - Miss World Philippines 2011, Miss World 2011 1st runner-up Sports people: Michael Christian Martinez - Figure Skater Tim Cone - PBA Coach Arwind Santos - PBA Player Scottie Thompson - PBA Player Troy Rosario - PBA Player Kevin Racal - PBA Player Ebrahim Enguio Lopez - ABL Player Jenny Guerrero - Swimmer Padim Israel - former Philippine Basketball Association player who plays at Purefoods Hotdogs. Rey Evangelista - former Purefoods player Robert Jaworski - PBA Legend Reynel Hugnatan - PBA Player Dennis Miranda - PBA player and currently assistant coach of FEU Tamaraws Gabby Espinas - PBA player Roi Sumang - PBA Player Dyan Castillejo - Sports analyst Kean Baclaan - basketball player playing for National University Kevin Quiambao - basketball player playing for De La Salle University Brent Paraiso - PBA player Evan Nelle - basketball player playing for De La Salle University Politicians: Ruffy Biazon - former congressman, former customs chief, and incumbent mayor of the city Rodolfo Biazon - former senator and former congressman of the city Ignacio Bunye - former mayor of the city and press secretary Fidel Ramos - former president Ming Ramos - former first lady Portal:  Philippines Luvi Constantino resigned on election as Cupang barangay captain in 2023.  City of Muntinlupa | (DILG) "2015 Census of Population, Report No. 3 – Population, Land Area, and Population Density" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. Quezon City, Philippines. August 2016. ISSN 0117-1453. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 25, 2021. Retrieved July 16, 2021. Census of Population (2020). "National Capital Region (NCR)". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved July 8, 2021. Error: Unable to display the reference properly. See the documentation for details. Bunye, Ignacio R. (December 23–26, 2016). "Speaking Out: Nearing nearing the century mark". Filipino Reporters. p. 37. "Muntinlupa City". Department of Tourism. Archived from the original on January 27, 2013. Retrieved December 19, 2012. "Muntinlupa History, Philippines". Travelgrove. Travelgrove, Inc. Archived from the original on September 27, 2021. Retrieved May 30, 2023. "THE 1987 CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE PHILIPPINES – ORDINANCE | GOVPH". Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. Act No. 942 (October 12, 1903), "An Act Reducing the Thirty-Two Municipalities of the Province of Rizal to Fifteen", Lawyerly, retrieved April 24, 2022 Act No. 1008 (November 25, 1903), "An Act Amending Act Numbered Nine hundred and thirty-nine, entitled "An Act reducing the thirty municipalities of the Province of La Laguna to nineteen," and Act Numbered Nine hundred and forty-two, entitled "An Act reducing the thirty - two municipalities of the Province of Rizal to fifteen," and providing that the boundary line between the Provinces of La Laguna and Rizal be changed so as to include in La Laguna the municipality of Muntinlupa now a part of Rizal.", Supreme Court E-Library, retrieved April 24, 2022 "History". City Government of Muntinlupa. Retrieved April 15, 2023. Act No. 1308 (March 22, 1905), "An Act providing for the return of the former municipality of Muntinlupa from the Province of La Laguna to the Province of Rizal, repealing paragraph (e) of section one and sections two and three of Act Numbered One thousand and eight, and changing the name of the municipality of Pateros, of the Province of Rizal, to Taguig", Lawyerly, retrieved April 24, 2022 Presidential Decree No. 824 (November 7, 1975), "Creating the Metropolitan Manila and the Metropolitan Manila Commission and for Other Purposes", Lawphil, archived from the original on March 12, 2016, retrieved July 10, 2020 Presidential Proclamation No. 351, s. 1988 (December 6, 1988), "Declaring Monday, December 19, 1988, as "Municipality of Muntinlupa Day"", Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, retrieved April 24, 2022 Republic Act No. 7926 (March 1, 1995), "An Act Converting the Municipality of Muntinlupa into a Highly Urbanized City to be Known as the City of Muntinlupa", Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, retrieved April 24, 2022 Republic Act No. 8251 (February 12, 1997), "An Act Converting the Municipality of Las Piñas into a Highly-Urbanized City to be Known as the City of Las Piñas", The Corpus Juris, retrieved April 24, 2022 Republic Act No. 9191 (March 1, 2021), "An Act Declaring the First Day of March of Every Year as a Special Nonworking Holiday in the City of Muntinlupa to be Known as the Muntinlupa City Charter Day", Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines, retrieved April 24, 2022 "Muntinlupa's city hall burns down". The Manila Times. Archived from the original on January 6, 2008. Retrieved August 4, 2007. "DoJ pressed on Bilibid prison transfer to Nueva Ecija". BusinessWorld. December 11, 2018. Archived from the original on September 24, 2021. Boledo, Jairo (August 18, 2022). "DOJ chief Remulla wants to relocate Bilibid to Occidental Mindoro". Rappler. Retrieved January 1, 2023. Salazar, Tessa R. "44-hectare Alabang sprawl home to global business community". Philippine Daily Inquirer. "Muntinlupa: Average Temperatures and Rainfall". Meteoblue. Retrieved May 13, 2020. "'Big One' Is Possible But Metro Is Unprepared". Quezon City, Philippines: Bulatlat. August 14, 2004. Retrieved February 3, 2010. If a major earthquake were to hit Metro Manila today, the devastation would be so big even disaster response authorities cannot simply cope with it. And it even looks like disaster preparedness occupies a low priority among officials down to the municipal level. Lozada, Bong (March 27, 2014). "Metro Manila is world's second riskiest capital to live in–poll". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Retrieved April 9, 2014. "City of Muntinlupa". PSGC Interactive. Makati, Philippines: National Statistical Coordination Board. Archived from the original on August 20, 2010. Retrieved June 15, 2013. Press release psa.gov.ph Census of Population (2015). "National Capital Region (NCR)". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved June 20, 2016. Census of Population and Housing (2010). "National Capital Region (NCR)" (PDF). Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. National Statistics Office. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Censuses of Population (1903–2007). "National Capital Region (NCR)". Table 1. Population Enumerated in Various Censuses by Province/Highly Urbanized City: 1903 to 2007. National Statistics Office.{{cite encyclopedia}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Province of". Municipality Population Data. Local Water Utilities Administration Research Division. Retrieved December 17, 2016. "Poverty incidence (PI):". Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved December 28, 2020. "Estimation of Local Poverty in the Philippines" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. November 29, 2005. "2003 City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. March 23, 2009. "City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates; 2006 and 2009" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. August 3, 2012. "2012 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. May 31, 2016. "Municipal and City Level Small Area Poverty Estimates; 2009, 2012 and 2015". Philippine Statistics Authority. July 10, 2019. Error: Unable to display the reference properly. See the documentation for details. "Muntinlupa's BOSS system lauded in World Cities Summit in Singapore". Manila Bulletin. ManilaBulletin. Retrieved June 21, 2014. "Northgate Cyberzone". www.northgate-cyberzone.com. "About the Bureau of Corrections Archived October 5, 2009, at the Wayback Machine." Bureau of Corrections. Retrieved on October 2, 2010. "Bureau of Corrections, NBP Reservation, Muntinlupa, Philippines." "Editorial: The 19th Cityhood of Muntinlupa". Manila Bulletin. Retrieved March 1, 2014. "Server Error" (PDF). info.worldbank.org. "First to ban plastics in NCR, Muntinlupa City takes campaign further". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Retrieved December 19, 2012. "Nothing Small in Muntinlupa: "The Model LGU"". "MuntiLGU now ISO 9001-certified". The Manila Times. "[url=http://www.muntinlupacity.gov.ph/index.php?target=about&params=request_._resord] "MUNTINLUPA MARCH/Hymn". Medium.com. Sales, Dexter Cabalza, Roselle Anne. "Muntinlupa building a museum designed like 'baklad' fish trap". Philippine Daily Inquirer.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Abad, Roderick (October 9, 2017). "Muntinlupa inaugurates P101.5-million Plaza Central - Roderick Abad". BusinessMirror. "Highlights of 2014 Accomplishment Report" (PDF). Hicap, Jonathan (March 1, 2022). "Muntinlupa LGU inaugurates Aquatic Center with Olympic-size swimming pool". Manila Bulletin. "Home". 19east.com. "Cruise around Filinvest City in earth-friendly e-vehicles". GMA News. Retrieved November 29, 2014. "Muntinlupa goes green". The Manila Times. Retrieved June 29, 2015. "Muntinlupa City taps electric jeepneys for free-ride program". BusinessWorld. Retrieved June 16, 2015. Dept. of Education Muntinlupa. "School Mission". "HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF THE PAMANTASAN NG LUNGSOD NG MUNTINLUPA (PLMUN)". "City Resolution No. 99-143 A Resolution Expressing the Desire of The City of Muntinlupa to For the Conversion of Muntinlupa Polytechnic College into a State College" (PDF). "Colegio de Muntinlupa – City Government of Muntinlupa". "Colegio de Muntinlupa". "Colegio de Muntinlupa to offer 5 new courses". Manila Bulletin. February 17, 2022. "Tech-voc graduates are skilled, job-ready--TESDA - TESDA". www.tesda.gov.ph. "Muntinlupa City Technical Institute | TESDA Courses and Schools". tesdacourse.com. Rhodina Villanueva. "Muntinlupa supports 100 women scholars". The Philippine Star. Retrieved August 28, 2008. "Alternative Learning System". DepEd. Jovic Yee. "DepEd chief to Bilibid grads: We're not that different". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Retrieved March 15, 2015. Sangguniang Bayan ng Muntinlupa (July 21, 1992). "Resolution No. 92-04" (PDF).[permanent dead link] Sangguniang Panglungsod ng Muntinlupa (November 10, 1999). "Resolution No. 99-147" (PDF).[permanent dead link] Sangguniang Panglungsod ng Muntinlupa (December 12, 2005). "Resolution No. 05-194" (PDF).[permanent dead link] Sangguniang Panglungsod ng Muntinlupa (December 7, 2006). "Resolution No. 06-362" (PDF).[permanent dead link] Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Muntinlupa. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Muntinlupa. Official website Philippine Standard Geographic Code Geographic data related to Muntinlupa at OpenStreetMap