The Libertarian Party of Russia (Russian: Либертарианская партия России; ЛПР, romanized: Libertarianskaya partiya Rossii; LPR) is a libertarian political party in the Russian Federation founded in 2008 based on "self-ownership and non-aggression". The party has had two members elected to local office, one in Moscow and the other in Moscow Oblast. The first, Vera Kichanova, was elected in 2012 to the municipal council of the Yuzhnoye Tushino District of Moscow. The second, Andrey Shalnev, was elected in 2014 as an independent deputy councilman for the Pushkinsky District. The party coordinates the Adam Smith Forum (an annual international libertarian conference in Moscow), participates in the organization of the Free People's Forum (which discusses Russian politics), and runs other activities and publications, including a monthly newspaper and a podcast series. Since 2017, the SVTV YouTube channel of Mikhail Svetov, a member of the Federal party Committee, has become very popular. The independent activity of regional offices has significantly increased. As of June 2017, the party had just over 1,000 members, including about 200 in the Moscow branch. In 2020, there was a split in the party. Today[when?] there are two different organizations calling themselves the Libertarian Party of Russia and using the same symbols.[clarification needed] Democratic Union (Russia) Russian Libertarian Movement "Активист из Самары возглавил Либертарианскую партию России" [An activist from Samara led the Libertarian Party of Russia]. www.kommersant.ru. 2 November 2020. Retrieved 18 November 2020. "Завершился VII съезд Либертарианской партии России" [The VII Congress of the Libertarian Party of Russia ended]. www.lp-russia.org. Retrieved 3 November 2020. "Главная - Либертарианская партия России" [Home - Libertarian Party of Russia]. www.lp-russia.org. Evans, Zenon (August 1, 2013). "Meet Vera Kichanova, Russia's Rising Libertarian Activist". Reason. Evans, Zenon (September 15, 2014). "Second-Ever Libertarian Elected in Russia". Reason. ""Власть очень умная. Мы ищем вас - у нас это хорошо получается"" [The authorities are very smart. We are looking for you - we are good at it]. www.znak.com. the Federal Committee of LPR. "Заявление Федерального комитета ЛПР о ситуации в партии" [Statement by the Federal Committee of the LPR on the situation in the party /A copy of the deleted version of the statement on the Internet Archive (Statement of the Federal Committee of LPR on the situation in the party)]. Archived from the original on 5 August 2020. "О попытке административного переворота в Либертарианской партии России" [About the attempted administrative coup in the Libertarian Party of Russia]. libertarian-party.ru. Official website (in Russian) Official website (in English) (archive) v t e