David Zobel (born 11 June 1996) is a German biathlete. He made his Biathlon World Cup debut in 2021 in Östersund. For most of the seasons from 2017 to 2021, Zobel ran in the IBU Cup, the 2nd highest competition series in international biathlon. He celebrated his first individual victory in March 2019 in Otepää in a sprint race, after previously failing to achieve a result among the top 60 at the European Championships in Minsk-Raubichi. In February 2021, he was on the podium again in a German double victory behind Philipp Nawrath as 2nd in the sprint in Brezno-Orsblie. A month later he was nominated for the World Cup for the first time at the season finale in Östersund and won his first World Cup points in the pursuit by finishing 32nd. In 2021 Zobel was involved in the World Cup races in Ruhpolding and Antholz. The German national coach Mark Kirchner nominated him as a substitute for the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing, where he was not used. The German Ski Association assigned him back to the perspective squad in the eight-person course group 1a. In the winter of 2022–23, Zobel started consistently in the World Cup for the first time. At the season opener in Kontiolahti he remained clean in the 20-kilometer individual race and came 3rd behind Martin Ponsiluoma and Niklas Hartweg. As the season progressed, Zobel reached the podium twice with the German relay team and ended the winter in 24th place in the overall World Cup rankings. All results are sourced from the International Biathlon Union. "Zobel David - Biathlon". www.biathlonworld.com. "David Zobel – real biathlon". www.realbiathlon.com. "David Zobel im Interview". www.youtube.com. "Deutschlands neue Biathlon-Hoffnung Zobel vom SC Garmisch: "Hilft auch mal, auf die Schnauze zu fallen"". www.merkur.de. "Porträt von David Zobel". www.dsv-jahrbuch.de. "BIATHLET ZOBEL WIRD DRITTER:"Es fühlt sich richtig, richtig gut an"". www.faz.net. "David Zobel – Cups". realbiathlon.com. "David Zobel – Relay". realbiathlon.com.