Candon, officially the City of Candon (Ilocano: Siudad ti Candon; Filipino: Lungsod ng Candon), is a 4th class component city in the province of Ilocos Sur, Philippines. According to the 2020 census, it has a population of 61,432 people. Dubbed the "Tobacco Capital of the Philippines", the city is the country's largest producer of Virginia tobacco. This once small resort town is known for making the heaviest and largest kalamay, a sweet and sticky snack made from sticky rice, coconut milk and sugar, in the world. This city also has a rich historical background. In its legends, the name of the city is derived from the legendary "kandong" tree which is almost extinct in the area. Its patron saint is John of Sahagún and celebrate his feast day on June 12. Candon is the center of the 2nd district of Ilocos Sur. Government district offices are all located in the city, which supports more than 100,000 residents in terms of commercial and industrial services. Several theories exist about the etymology of the city. One is that the name of the city was derived from the now-rare candong tree. Folk belief is that during Spanish times, powerful chieftains of the area held a cañao (a social and religious community gathering) and staged a wrestling contest called gabbu. This was to decide who was to marry Ineng, daughter of the most powerful chieftain Madal-ang, and thus be the ageing ruler's heir apparent. The contest was held under the shade of candong trees, by the residence of Madal-ang. The winner was Kalinio, from the caves of Cauplasan, who had defeated Madal-ang himself and another chieftain named Abay-a from the caves of Cadanglaan. Kalinio and Ineng were wed under the shade of a candong tree, with grandiose ceremony. During the nuptials a group of Spaniards, including Captain Juan de Salcedo, passed by and asked what was going on. The wedding party thought the strangers were asking for the name of the tree, so they replied "Candong". The Spanish noted this as "Candon", approximating the name in regional Spanish dialects. Another theory is that the city was named after the town of Candón in the southwest Spanish provincia of Huelva, in the autonomous community of Andalusia. According to the city archives, Malayan settlers were the first residents of Candon, establishing a village. These were mostly farmers, fishermen, woodsmen, and craftsmen. The village was then ruled by three local chieftains: Abay-a, Madal-ang and Kalinio. Madal-ang chose to live under a large tree in the center of the village, under which the people would gather to exchange pleasantries and barter. This is also where the village chief and elders settled disputes and offered advice. The villagers named the tree "Kandong”. When Spanish colonizers came in the 16th century, friars ordered the tree cut down and its wood used to build the first Catholic church in the area. The people were easily led into the new church and were baptised. The Spaniards named the place Candon after their spelling of "kandong". The church graveyard located south of the Población was opened in 1797. In 1780, the village became a municipality, and under Spanish rule Candon was quickly overridden by rich Spaniards, who employed the natives in conditions of near-slavery. Famine struck in 1881 and 1882. On March 25, 1898, a revolutionary government was declared and launched an attack on Spanish forces, which retook Candon in two days later. Most leaders and participants of the uprising were arrested then executed. During the Japanese Occupation in the Second World War, another revolution was staged. Several truckloads of Imperial Japanese forces and supplies perished along the national highway. However, the Japanese Soldiers retaliated back by burning the whole town in January 1942, which is considered the greatest event that ever happened in the history of Candon. Despite the hardships that the townsfolk went through during the War, residents were resolved to rebuild. Tall acacia trees at the town plaza and municipal buildings are testimonies to the people's steadfastness, while large trees up to 15 meters high and 20 feet in circumference now line the National Highway in the Población. In the Charter of Candon City, Candon applied to become the second city in the Province of Ilocos Sur so it can undertake government programs with additional funding from the national government to benefit the people in the field of social services, economic growth, peace and order, health, education, agriculture and infrastructure development. Like the "Kandong" tree of yore, Candon is just beginning to spread out its branches to reach out for the skies in its own bid to become the next city in Ilocos Sur. From the start of House Bill 7260 seeking to convert Candon into a component city was filed by then Congressman Eric D. Singson in the 10th Congress and later re-filed by Congresswoman Grace D. Singson in the 11th Congress. Owing to the merits and qualifications of Candon as the leading town in Southern Ilocos Sur, the bill easily got the approval of the Committees on Local Government in both House of Representatives and in the Senate. Until recently the aspiration for Candon to become a city remained a dream, but its destiny inevitable when the counterpart Senate Bill No. 2242 was sponsored by no less than Senate President Aquilino "Nene" Pimentel Jr., Senators Frank Drilon, Sergio Osmeña III and all the members of the Senate Committee on Local Government. It was subsequently approved unanimously by the Senate in plenary session, and now it is up to the townspeople to embrace this honor with an equally unanimous "YES to Cityhood" vote. Candon City is situated in the lower central portion of the Province of Ilocos Sur. It has a C-shape with elevations ranging from 10 – 500 ft above sea level. The city is 346 kilometres (215 mi) from Metro Manila and 61 kilometres (38 mi) from Vigan City, the provincial capital. Candon is politically subdivided into 42 barangays. Each barangay consists of puroks and some have sitios. Allangigan 1st Allangigan 2nd Amguid Ayudante Bagani Campo Bagani Gabor Bagani Tocgo Bagani Ubbog Bagar Balingaoan Bugnay Calaoa-an Calongbuyan Caterman Cubcubbuot Darapidap Langlangca 1st Langlangca 2nd Oaig Daya Palacapac Paras Parioc 1st Parioc 2nd Patpata 1st Patpata 2nd Paypayad Salvador 1st Salvador 2nd San Agustín San Andrés San Antonio (Población) San Isidro (Población) San José (Población) San Juan (Población) San Nicolás San Pedro Santo Tomás Tablac Talogtog Tamurong 1st Tamurong 2nd Villarica The climate is generally dry that usually occurs from the months of October to May. However, the southernmost portion is observed to be humid and rain is evenly distributed throughout the year while the eastern part is dry with rain not sufficiently distributed. August has the most rainfall while January and February have the least. The mean temperature in the province is 27 °C (81 °F). January is the coldest. In the 2020 census, the population of Candon was 61,432 people, with a density of 590 inhabitants per square kilometre or 1,500 inhabitants per square mile. Poverty Incidence of Candon Source: Philippine Statistics Authority Candon City has a geographical setting and proximity to the national highway and other towns that encouraged greater mobility in terms of trade, economic, social and cultural activities. The Department of Trade and Industry termed the city as the "Center for Trade and Commerce" in Ilocos Sur. Many adjacent towns frequent Candon for commercial activities, catering to the commercial needs of an estimated 100,000 population. The city also has a supermarket and shopping mall, banking and lending institutions, recreational facilities, tourism facilities, health and medical establishments. Existing industries in Candon City are manufacturing, agro-industry and cottage industry. The manufacturing sector owns the Tobacco Stalk Cement Bonded Board Plant that produces particle boards for low cost housing and other construction needs. Other manufacturing establishments are based on kalamay-making, chichacorn (deep-fried corn), baked goods, ice cream, and vinegar; furniture making, concrete products manufacturing, and a coconut oil processing plant located at Barangay Talogtog. On the other hand, cottage industries include balut egg production, fish re-drying, salt making, native delicacies, woodcraft and handicraft. Service establishments are also present in Candon, such as sari-sari and grocery stores, carinderias (small diners), nightclubs, barber shops, beauty parlors, gasoline stations and stores/outlets for the following: auto parts, agricultural equipment and supplies, school and office supplies, photo and supplies, appliances, pharmaceuticals, hardware and electrical. There are also video centers, bazaars, gift shops, pawnshops and mineral/distilled drinking water store outlets, and real estate. The city is the center of trade and commerce in the 2nd district of Ilocos Sur. Urban growth has a linear pattern along major thoroughfares in the city center and the national highway. Candon, belonging to the second congressional district of the province of Ilocos Sur, is governed by a mayor designated as its local chief executive and by a city council as its legislative body in accordance with the Local Government Code. The mayor, vice mayor, and the councilors are elected directly by the people through an election which is being held every three years. The official seal of the City of Candon was approved and adopted by the Sangguniang Panlungsod under Resolution No. 017-01 sponsored by Councilor David Gacusana. It is published to immortalize the “Cry of Candon” of March 1898 and to commemorate the ratification of its Cityhood charter under Republic Act 9018 on March 28, 2001. Explanatory notes: The seal is patterned after the Official Seal of Ilocos Sur, which is also the general pattern being used by all the seals of the different provinces in the Philippines. The emblem at the middle of the circle represents the Philippine Flag, which symbolizes the spirit of nationalism. The TORCH at the middle of the flag represents the spirit of 1898 demonstrating an ever-burning desire of our people for “liberty, justice and democracy.” The SABER and the RIFLE crossed below the torch are symbols of the readiness of the people to protect human rights. While the TOBACCO LEAVES behind them are like outstretched wings whereby the local agriculture economy thrives. The date on top of the glowing flame is the date of the immortal “Cry of Candon” when our forefathers, led by the indomitable Don Isabelo Abaya, fought and successfully liberated Candon from the Spanish overlords a full three months before the National uprising of June 12, 1898. Finally, the banner beneath the emblem contains the historic Candon City Charter – Republic Act 9018 of March 28, 2001, declaring Candon as a city. Candon Church (Saint John de Sahagun Parish Church) Darapidap Beach Tobacco Festival - Celebrated every month of March as thanksgiving for the city's vast harvest of tobacco Feria de Candon (Trade Fair)- Every first week of December in honor of Santa Barbara (December 4). Candon City Sports Complex - an indoor arena located at Brgy. Bagani Campo. With an area of 960 square meters (24m by 40m) and a stage with an area of 600 square meters. Its capacity was 5,000 people. The basement level of the arena will serve as the parking area, stock room, mechanical and electrical room, maintenance room, and will also have a fire exit stairs and a room for toilets for both genders. The second floor will provide a space for another lobby, seating area, two restaurant areas, two common dining areas, four snack stands, control room (for light and sound), toilets for both genders, and a roof deck. The third floor will also have a lobby, two snack stands, seating area, and roof decks. Because of the COVID-19 pandemic, the construction will be completed by 2022. It will host some major sporting events including the Philippine Basketball Association. Candon City is accessible via the McArthur National Highway, which is also the city's main thoroughfare. Other major streets in the city are 25 de Marzo Street and San Juan Street, both parallel to the National Highway. Quirino Boulevard is a secondary highway that connects the city proper to the upland barangays of Candon City and the upland municipalities of Ilocos Sur. The Darapidap Beach Road or the Samonte Boulevard where you can find the Muslim Mosque aside of it. This Road connects the seaside barangays to the urban center. Tricycles and jeepneys are the major types of transportation in the city. There are over 3000 registered tricycles in the city, the highest number of registered tricycles in the province (as an individual local government unit.) Buses provide long-distance trips to major cities like Manila, Baguio and Laoag. Mini-Buses provide short trips to neighboring municipalities and the nearby cities of Vigan and San Fernando, La Union. Major Bus Companies also established their terminals in the city, among them are: Partas Dominion Bus Lines Santa Lucia Express and Martinez Trans (managed by Victory Liner) Candon Bus Line North Luzon Philippines State College - Formerly a campus of the University of Northern Philippines, founded as the Candon Community College before its merger with UNP by virtue of a bill enacted by then Congressman Eric Singson. Saint Joseph Institute, Inc. - a co-ed private school owned and administered by the Sisters of St. Paul of Chartres. Candon National High School Candon City Information Technology National High School Nicosat Colleges - private school that offers kindergarten to college curriculum. DZTP 693 kHz Tirad Pass Broadcasting Network DWRE 104.5 Radyo Natin Honolulu, Hawaii, United States Baguio, Philippines  City of Candon | (DILG) "2015 Census of Population, Report No. 3 – Population, Land Area, and Population Density" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. Quezon City, Philippines. August 2016. ISSN 0117-1453. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 25, 2021. Retrieved July 16, 2021. Census of Population (2020). "Region I (Ilocos Region)". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved July 8, 2021. "PSA Releases the 2018 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates". Philippine Statistics Authority. December 15, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2022. "Candon City Official Website". Archived from the original on August 20, 2008. Retrieved August 13, 2005. "1stPhilippines.Com - Candon City in the Philippines". Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved February 8, 2010. http://candoncity.gov.ph/new/about-the-city/28-citihood[permanent dead link] "Candon: Average Temperatures and Rainfall". Meteoblue. Retrieved May 14, 2020. Census of Population (2015). "Region I (Ilocos Region)". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved June 20, 2016. Census of Population and Housing (2010). "Region I (Ilocos Region)" (PDF). Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. National Statistics Office. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Censuses of Population (1903–2007). "Region I (Ilocos Region)". Table 1. Population Enumerated in Various Censuses by Province/Highly Urbanized City: 1903 to 2007. National Statistics Office.{{cite encyclopedia}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Province of Ilocos Sur". Municipality Population Data. Local Water Utilities Administration Research Division. Retrieved December 17, 2016. "Poverty incidence (PI):". Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved December 28, 2020. "Estimation of Local Poverty in the Philippines" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. November 29, 2005. "2003 City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. March 23, 2009. "City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates; 2006 and 2009" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. August 3, 2012. "2012 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. May 31, 2016. "Municipal and City Level Small Area Poverty Estimates; 2009, 2012 and 2015". Philippine Statistics Authority. July 10, 2019. "PSA Releases the 2018 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates". Philippine Statistics Authority. December 15, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2022. "2019 National and Local Elections" (PDF). Commission on Elections. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 6, 2020. Retrieved March 11, 2022. http://candoncity.gov.ph/new/about-the-city/32-the-seal[permanent dead link] "News". Philippine Information Agency. "05/11/15 Honolulu and Candon City become Sister-Cities". honolulu.gov. Retrieved November 26, 2015. "Baguio and Candon City Sign Sisterhood MOU". SunStar. Retrieved June 28, 2016. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Candon. Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article "Candon". Official website Philippine Standard Geographic Code Philippine Census Information Local Governance Performance Management System