Marthe Kråkstad Johansen (born 5 January 1999) is a Norwegian biathlete. She has competed in the Biathlon World Cup since 2022. Marthe Kråkstad Johansen competed in her first international competitions at the 2016 Youth Olympic Games, where she won gold in the mixed relay with Marit Øygard, Fredrik Qvist Bucher-Johannessen, and Sivert Guttorm Bakken. She also earned three silver medals in the sprint, pursuit, and the single-mixed relay with Bucher-Johannessen. From 2017 to 2020, the Norwegian participated in youth and junior world championships, winning three relay medals. Her best individual result was a fifth place in the sprint at the 2020 Lenzerheide event. In 2020, she made her senior-level debut at the European Championships in Minsk-Raubitschy, finishing 26th in the pursuit. Johansen joined the B-national team for the following winter, competing in the IBU Cup and impressing with her shooting accuracy, achieving her first podium in February 2021. In the 2021/22 season, she improved further with four podium finishes, leading her to fourth place in the IBU Cup rankings. She also won a gold medal in the mass start at the Norwegian Championships. Johansen excelled in the winter of 2022/23, winning both the sprint and pursuit at the IBU Cup opener in Idre. At the European Championships, her best result was 9th place in the individual event, while in the season finale in Canmore, Canada, she regained her form, winning the mass start 60 and pursuit. She also won the single-mixed relay with Martin Uldal. Following her successful season, she earned a spot in the World Cup final in Oslo, finishing 18th in the sprint without shooting errors. She successfully defended her national championship title. In the following season, Johansen was part of the World Cup roster from the beginning. Her first top-10 finish was eighth in the opening individual event in Östersund. Shortly after, she was the starting athlete in a World Cup relay for the first time, securing her first World Cup victory with Juni Arnekleiv, Karoline Offigstad Knotten, and Ingrid Landmark Tandrevold. All results are sourced from the International Biathlon Union. 3 medals (1 silver, 2 bronzes) "Marthe Kråkstad Johansen". https://www.biathlonworld.com/results/BT2324SWRLCP01SWRL/skiing Marthe Kråkstad Johansen at IBU Marthe Kråkstad Johansen at FIS (cross-country) Marthe Kråkstad Johansen at Olympedia