Ilagan, officially the City of Ilagan (Ibanag: Siudad nat Ilagan; Ilocano: Siudad ti Ilagan; Filipino: Lungsod ng Ilagan), is a 1st class component city and capital of the province of Isabela, Philippines. According to the 2020 census, it has a population of 158,218 people making it the most populous city in the province. As of 2022, it holds the title as the most number of voters in the province with 101,050 electorates. With a total land area of 116,626 hectares (288,190 acres), it is the largest city on the island of Luzon and the fourth largest city in land area in the Philippines, after Davao City, Puerto Princesa, and Zamboanga City. From an inversion of the Ibanag word nagali which means move or transfer in the English language, due to the relocation of the site of the capital from Naguilian Baculod to its present site in barangay San Vicente. The move was due to the economy and security of the town. Another etymology, according to Fr. Julian Malumbres, Ilagan derived its name from the word laga, an Ibanag word for smallpox during the town's founding in 1686 when the disease was widespread. Historical affiliations  Spain 1587–1898  United States of America 1898–1942  Japan 1942–1945  Philippines 1946–present The town was then called by its native Gaddang settlers as Bolo during the pre-Spanish conquest era. It was one of the populous settlements during that period and the site of the vast tobacco plantation in the region making it one of the most important economic areas in northern Luzon. In 1581, Governor-General Gonzalo Ronquillo de Peñalosa sent Capt. Juan Pablo Carreon to explore Cagayan Valley as well as to establish missions. Among the Spanish missionaries who penetrated deeply into the region was Pedro Jimenez, who founded Ilagan. The town of Bolo was founded by the Dominicans in 1619 in honor of Saint Ferdinand of Castile. The old Bolo was situated on the western side of Cagayan River in what is known today as barangay Naguilian-Baculod. The cultural shock brought by the dominating social and economic regulations introduced by the Spanish authorities propelled the natives to dissent in the Mallig and the Ilagan-Tumauini territories in what was known as the Gaddang Revolution. The natives abandoned their settlement after burning their church and houses until 1622 when the Spanish government pardoned and exempted them from paying tribute within three years. After the Gaddang revolt, the natives re-established their settlement upon the efforts of Fr. Pedro Jimenez in 1678 on the east side of the river thereby giving the legendary name for Ilagan which is the reverse of the word nagali meaning move or transfer. The Dominicans accepted the settlement as an ecclesiastical mission given the name San Fernando de Ilagan in honor of its patron, Saint Ferdinand of Castile. On May 4, 1686, Ilagan was founded and missionaries converted the natives to Catholicism. Ilagan was made the capital town of Cagayan Valley when Brig. Manuel Sanchez Mira was then the governor of the whole territory. In 1763, Ilagan was the scene of the revolt led by Dabo and Juan Marayag against the collection of tribute, the enforcement of tobacco monopoly committed by the friars during the Spanish colonization. On May 1, 1856, Ilagan became the capital town when Isabela de Luzon was founded. Present-day Ilagan is an area that was detached from the old province of Nueva Vizcaya. The first municipal president of the town, Rafael Maramag, added luster to the history of his hometown by becoming the first governor of the province of Isabela after its reorganization by the Americans in 1901. On August 4, 1901, the American occupation under the United States-Philippine Commission enacted the Provincial Government Act 210 that re-established Isabela and other provinces in the Philippines. Rafael Maramag, a former municipal president (mayor) of Ilagan was appointed as the first governor. The act then re-established Ilagan as the provincial capital. On November 13, 1925, Gaffud approved a resolution filed by all Municipal Presidents of the Isabela (the counterpart of the present-day Mayor's League) following a four-day convention. The resolution called for the erection of a monument in honor of the country's National Hero José Rizal in Ilagan public plaza located in barangay Bagumbayan. The fortunes of Isabela as a province and Ilagan as a town followed a similar path to the rest of the country's history as a commonwealth nation and as a free republic in 1942, the Japanese occupation, liberation, political and military independence to this day. On June 19, 1945, Ilagan was liberated from the Japanese Army as part of the liberation campaign with the combined forces of 14th Infantry, United States Army Forces in the Philippines – Northern Luzon (USAFIP-NL), under the command of Lt Col. Romulo A. Manriquez, and the 37th Division of the U.S. Sixth Army against the Japanese. During this era, a man-made tunnel was constructed from the sweat and blood of detained Ilagueños and it is now a tourist destination in the city. The tunnels are believed to have served as headquarters of the Japanese soldiers. By the turn of the 1950s, the new Poblacion was located uphill from the old Saint Ferdinand Parish Church, formerly known as Saint Ferdinand Cathedral in barangay Bagumbayan to barangay San Vicente, which is the site of the current City Hall. When Ferdinand Marcos' September 1972 declaration of Martial law began 14 years of authoritarian rule, the province of Isabela, including the municipality of Ilagan became a center of both conflict and protest when Marcos cronies Danding Cojuangco and Antonio Carag managed to block a Spanish-era grant which was supposed to see the return of Hacienda San Antonio and Hacienda Santa Isabel in Ilagan to local farmers. Cojuangco and Carag purchased the two haciendas themselves, displacing tens of thousands of farmers who were supposed to get those lands back a hundred years after the Spanish acquired them. In its desire to serve its parishioners, the Roman Catholic Diocese of Ilagan hosted a Social Action Center which would help the farmers. In the Social Action Center's newsletter, the "Courier," researcher Sabino Padilla Jr. documented and exposed the ways by which Cojuangco, Carag, the provincial government, and the military harassed the farmers who were supposed to get the land. This all led to a protest march in joined by 12,000 protesters from all over Isabela, and eventually, for 4,000 farmers to finally get the titles to their land. But it also earned the ire of the administration. In 1982, Padilla and 12 others were arrested by the regime and jailed under poor conditions at the Bayombong, Nueva Vizcaya Stockade of the Philippine Constabulary until almost the end of the Marcos regime. In 1983, soldiers went as far as to raid the residence of the Bishop of Ilagan, Miguel Purugganan, in search of alleged rebels and firearms. They found none but continued to keep Bishop Puruggananan and the church workers under him under military surveillance. Ilagan has attempted to gain cityhood status at least three times in its history: On February 2, 1998, congress passed Republic Act 8474 which sought to convert Ilagan into a city. But the plebiscite held on March 14, 1999, turned down its bid for cityhood. The majority of the people voted no in that event. On March 2, 2005, House bill no. 3847 was filed and approved by the house and transmitted for the cityhood of Ilagan but remained pending concurrence in the senate. The bill did not go through when mayor Delfinito Albano was gunned down by three unidentified men in the night of June 27, 2006, in Quezon City. The campaign used the term C-U-DAD Ilagan for the cityhood status of Ilagan. On February 27, 2012, Ilagan renewed its bid for cityhood as sponsored by House bill no. 5917. Local officials of the town expressed support for the town's conversion into a city. On May 22, 2012, the congress approved the cityhood bill of Ilagan on its House resolution no. 144 and was signed by then President Benigno Aquino III on June 21, 2012. Plebiscite was held on August 11, 2012, with a majority of votes voting yes. By virtue of Republic Act 10169, Ilagan was then proclaimed as a new component city, the third in the province of Isabela and the fourth in Cagayan Valley on the same day by COMELEC Commissioner Armando Velasco. On August 28, 2019, the city government created the Ilagan Development Authority (ILAGANDA) which is aimed to transform Ilagan into a liveable city in the year 2030. On November 25-26, 2023, the City of Ilagan hosted the biggest and largest serbisyo caravan in the country, the Bagong Pilipinas Serbisyo Fair held at the City of Ilagan Sports Complex and Isabela National High School. The event saw the first time that the BPSF program went to Cagayan Valley, marking its eighth installment nationwide. With the aim of the national government delivering quality services closer to clients. Among the lined-up activities are Rise Up Financing, Online Business Name Registration, Barangay Micro Business Name Registration, One Town, One Product (OTOP) Mini Fair, Diskwento Caravan, Product Standard Showcase, and Negosyo Center Business Counseling Services. Under the initiative, Isabela residents received P152 million worth of cash, while a total of P500 million went to programs and services. The program benefited at least 100,000 recipients, with a total of 26 government agencies participating in the event, providing over 195 services. Among the services included is the Department of Social Welfare and Development’s (DSWD) Assistance to Individuals in Crisis Situations (AICS) program, which provided a provincial wide payout in the three cities and 34 municipalities of the province of Isabela. AICS assisted more than 42,000 individuals amounting to a total of P140 million in payout which included assistance for Agrarian Reform Beneficiaries (ARBs), Persons with Disabilities (PWDs), Indigenous Peoples (IPs), teachers, the transport sector, and fishermen; and collaborate with partner agencies. The BPSF also included other province-wide activities such as scholarship programs from the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) and the Commission on Higher Education (CHED). Other activities included livelihood assistance for various sectors in pre-identified eligible recipients across Isabela. The Department of Health (DOH) shared their Lab for All program, or the giving of free medical services closer to the people. While the Department of Agriculture (DA), spearheaded the distribution of financial assistance for farmers, seeds and fertilizers, and farm equipments and machineries. Products of farmers and fishermen were also on sale through the KADIWA ng Pangulo as a way to promote locally produced products. All of the products displayed were made affordable, fresh, and pesticide-safe for the consumers. The Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) also turned over fish cages, fish feeds, and fingerlings for the distribution and sale of seafood. Agencies like the Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR), Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE), Department of Science and Technology (DOST), Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), Philippine Coconut Authority (PCA), National Food Authority (NFA), and the Public Attorney’s Office (PAO) also provided livelihood, legal, and other relevant social services to the recipients. Other regulatory functions of the Philippine National Police (PNP), Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA), Land Transportation Office (LTO), National Bureau of Investigation (NBI), Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA), Professional Regulation Commission (PRC), Social Security System (SSS), PhilHealth, Government Service Insurance System (GSIS), and the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) also extended their programs and services during the two-day caravan. The city is located in the central portion of the province of Isabela. It is bounded by nine municipalities: on the north by the municipalities of Divilacan, Tumauini, and Delfin Albano; on the west by the municipality of Quirino; on the east by the municipalities of Divilacan and Palanan, and the Pacific Ocean; and on the south by the municipalities of Gamu, Naguilian, Benito Soliven and San Mariano. Ilagan is 83 kilometres (52 mi) south of Tuguegarao and 398 kilometres (247 mi) north of Metro Manila (linked by a national highway via Santa Fe, Nueva Vizcaya). Ilagan City is politically subdivided into 91 barangays, the highest number of barangays in the province.  Each barangay consists of puroks and some have sitios. Currently, 13 barangays in the city are considered urban (highlighted in bold). Barangays are grouped into four clusters, namely Poblacion, Eastern, Western, and San Antonio. Aggasian Alibagu Alinguigan 1st Alinguigan 2nd Alinguigan 3rd Arusip Baculud (Poblacion) Bagong Silang Bagumbayan (Poblacion) Baligatan Ballacong Bangag Batong-Labang Bigao Cabannungan 1st Cabannungan 2nd Cabeseria 2 (Dappat) Cabeseria 3 (San Fernando) Cabeseria 4 (San Manuel) Cabeseria 5 (Baribad) Cabeseria 6 and 24 (Villa Marcos) Cabeseria 7 (Nangalisan) Cabeseria 9 and 11 (Capogotan) Cabeseria 10 (Lupigui) Cabeseria 14 and 16 (Casilagan) Cabeseria 17 and 21 (San Rafael) Cabeseria 19 (Villa Suerte) Cabeseria 22 (Sablang) Cabeseria 23 (San Francisco) Cabeseria 25 (Santa Lucia) Cabeseria 27 (Abuan) Cadu Calamagui 1st Calamagui 2nd Camunatan Capellan Capo Carikkikan Norte Carikkikan Sur Centro - San Antonio Centro Poblacion Fugu Fuyo Gayong-Gayong Norte Gayong-Gayong Sur Guinatan Imelda Bliss Village Lullutan Malalam Malasin (Angeles) Manaring Mangcuram Marana I Marana II Marana III Minabang Morado Naguilian Norte Naguilian Sur Namnama Nanaguan Osmeña (Sinippil) Paliueg Pasa Pilar Quimalabasa Rang-ayan (Bintacan) Rugao Salindingan San Andres (Angarilla) San Felipe San Ignacio (Canapi) San Isidro San Juan San Lorenzo San Pablo San Rodrigo San Vicente (Poblacion) Santa Barbara (Poblacion) Santa Catalina Santa Isabel Norte Santa Isabel Sur Santa Maria (Cabeseria 8) Santa Victoria Santo Tomas Siffu Sindon Bayabo Sindon Maride Sipay Tangcul Villa Imelda (Maplas) As of December 31, 2022, the following barangays are considered urban: Alibagu, Baculud, Bagumbayan, Baligatan, Calamagui 1st, Calamagui 2nd, Centro Poblacion, Guinatan, Imelda Bliss Village, Osmeña, San Vicente, Santa Barbara, and Santa Isabel Sur. Ilagan has a tropical savanna climate (Köppen Aw) with consistently hot temperatures year-round, a dry season from January to April, and a wet season from May to December. Of the total 1,166.26 km2 land area of Ilagan; 31% are agricultural, 36% are forest areas, and the remaining 33% are built-up areas and open grassland areas that are available for industrial, commercial and residential uses. Ilagueños today reflect a combination of indigenous, Chinese, and Hispanic descent. The core community was composed of tribes notably the Agta, Ibanag, Gaddang, Yogad, and Kalinga which mirrors the habitation of the Philippines believed to have started 26,000 years ago with various strains of Aetas, then Indonesians coming 5,000 years ago and the Malays in droves starting 200 years B.C. up to 1500 A.D. Trade and cultural relations with Chinese preceded the 16th-century incursion of the Spaniards. Ilocanos who already developed their own distinct traits were recorded to have migrated massively in the 19th century owing to the accessibility of the land and vast opportunities in the area straddling the present-day provinces of Cagayan and Nueva Vizcaya. It was proclaimed a province by a Royal Decree and named Isabela de Luzon on the first day of May in 1856. There are three native languages in Ilagan, these are Ibanag, Ilocano, and Tagalog. English is used primarily in communication for government publications, local newsprints, road signs, and commercial signs and in doing official business transactions in the city. As of the 2020 census, Imelda Bliss Village is the most populous barangay with 7,951 people while Carikkikan Sur is the least populous barangay with just 208 people. The rapid increase of the population in Ilagan is attributed to the current growth of economic activities especially in the sectors of Commerce, Industry, Agriculture, and Housing. Ilagan is one of the 145 emerging cities in the Philippines with more than 100,000 residents. Statistics from the Philippine Statistics Authority show that Ilagan had a population 131,24311 in 2007, which increased to 135,174 people in the 2010 census making Ilagan as the most populous city in the province of Isabela and the second in Cagayan Valley after Tuguegarao. In the 2020 census, the population of Ilagan, was 158,218 people, with a density of 140 inhabitants per square kilometre or 360 inhabitants per square mile. Ilagan's population is predominantly Roman Catholic. The Diocese of Ilagan has 39 catholic churches all over the province of Isabela. Its former seat was in Saint Ferdinand Parish then it is now transferred to the Cathedral of Saint Michael the Archangel in Gamu, Isabela. There are also Protestants, Baptist, Church of Christ, Adventists, Born Again groups, Victory Christian Fellowship, Latter Day Saints, Jehovah's Witnesses, Islam, and Philippine-based groups like Iglesia ni Cristo, and Members Church of God International that accounts to the city's population. These religious organizations have their own temples and churches sparsely located in the city. Poverty Incidence of Ilagan Source: Philippine Statistics Authority At present, Ilagan has been one of the fastest-growing economies in the province of Isabela as well as in the whole Cagayan Valley over the past years. The city is the primary growth center and investment hub of the region due to the rapid commercialization and stabilization of the different sectors involved in its economy. The transformation of Ilagan into a fast-growing city in Cagayan Valley became evident upon the assumption into office of then Mayor Josemarie L. Diaz, the re-structuring of the economic landscape of the city and the eventual transformation of its business climate into a business-friendly environment successfully lured multi-national companies in investing their capitals into its market. The economic boom began to engulf Ilagan with the entry of eight banks and financial institutions in just several months. The Local Government of Ilagan responded positively to these developments by the enactment of legislative measures including the provision of the Investment Incentive Code which provided for tax incentives to investments. These measures eventually opened the floodgates for big investments to enter the local market that included the establishments of malls like the Xentro Mall (formerly called Northstar Mall) and Talavera Square Mall that house the Savemore, Robinsons Supermarket, Puregold, Jollibee, McDonald's, Red Ribbon, Goldilocks, Mang Inasal, Greenwich, Chowking, Ace Hardware, D.I.Y. Hardware, Pandayan Bookshop, Watsons, MR.DIY, Mercury Drug, Infinitea, Black Scoop Café, Turks Shawarma, 7-Eleven, Havaianas and many other stores. There are also thousands of commercial establishments composed of distributors, retail and wholesale. Pawnshops, lending companies, insurance agencies, cooperatives, and other financial institutions are spread all over the city. Agriculture and fishery remain the main backbone of Ilagan's economy. There are almost 23,803 hectares that are cultivated land and 314 hectares are utilized for fish culture. However, the suitable farm area of Ilagan is 32,153.19 hectares with potential for crops, livestock, and fish production. This figure shows that a significant percentage (24.99%) is not being fully utilized for agricultural production leaving them idle and underutilized. Most of the industries in the city are agri-based. For the last ten years, there has been a great number of local investment in poultry and hog raising. There are seven poultry contract growers and 33 small and medium-scale hog raisers in Ilagan. Other support facilities, warehouses, and small rice mills, strategically located in different barangays of Ilagan address the storage needs of farmers during the harvest season. Of all cities in the country, Ilagan ranks as the top producer of corn. As an agriculture-based city, it produces ample supply of corn, rice, vegetables, and legumes. Fruits like bananas are year-round products, especially in the mountainous areas of the city. Ilagan also produces seasonal fruits such as mangoes and pomelo. The Cagayan Valley Research Center (CVRC) is an attached agency of the Department of Agriculture (DA) that serves as the primary plant breeding institution in Cagayan Valley. It is one of the Bureau of Agricultural Research’s active partners in research and development in the region. It is located in barangay San Felipe along National Highway. Ilagan has rich forest resources. Hectares of forest land are strictly protected by authorities like the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), several NGOs, and the Local Government Unit. The Department of Agriculture Regional Field Office 2 (DA-RFO2) and the city government of Ilagan had agreed to establish an i-Corn Complex worth P199.2 million. The agreement was reached after a consultation meeting led by the DA Region 2 officials and representatives from other concerned government agencies. The Department of Agriculture will provide P107 million while the city government of Ilagan will provide P92.2 million for the said complex that will serve as a one-stop agri-commercial center once completed. The i-Corn Complex will serve Ilagueño corn farmers including those from Isabela and the rest of Cagayan Valley. The establishment of the facility is also aimed to solve problems in corn production, particularly drying during the wet season. The construction of the corn complex is in support of the Agriculture and Fisheries Modernization Act (AFMA), which aims to strengthen the agri-fisheries sector in a modernized perspective to attain food security, poverty alleviation, income enhancement and profitability, global competitiveness, and sustainability. The complex is designed to be used as a post-harvest, processing, and research facility that will ensure product quality and thus boost the income of farmers. It is expected to be operational by February 2024 with the operation of the Corn Innovation Center whose construction and implementation started in August 2023. The mechanical drying facility as one of its components will help farmers cope with losses and damage during calamities. The said corn complex facility is located in Barangay Marana 1st, where the city government donated the lot for the construction. The Corn Innovation Center in barangay Marana 1st is one of the flagship agri-support projects of the City Government of Ilagan’s thrust for the next three years on food sufficiency and producing finished corn products as Ilagan affirms its Corn Capital title. The groundbreaking ceremony was held on July 12, 2022 led by top officials and executives of the city of government alongside officials and representatives from the Department of Agriculture Regional Office 2 and Bureau of Agricultural Research. The City Government of Ilagan pledged P10 Million as its counterpart, in addition to the P10 Million from the Department of Agriculture itself. The facility will be utilized as a training center for farmers. It is also envisioned to be the city’s Tech-Hub Demonstration Center to showcase new technological advancements in corn processing and other commodities. The completion of its construction is set by the first quarter of 2024. On December 2, 2020, then Agriculture Sec. William Dar attended the Inauguration of the P500 million 2,400 Sow level Swine Breeding Complex of the Thai-based Agro-Industrial Company, Charoen Pokphand Foods Philippines Corporation in partnership with Sagittarian Agricultural Philippines Incorporated in Barangay Santa Victoria. The Department of Agriculture also signed the Memorandum of Understanding with the City Government of Ilagan for the establishment of the P270 million Ilagan Corn Processing Center and a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) for the implementation of the Urban Agriculture project. A joint venture of projects that is envisioned to transform the agricultural landscape of city and to support its farmers with their livelihood. On June 20, 2023, the contract signing was held at the Ilagan City Hall for the Phase II of the 5,400 Sow level Swine Breeding Complex investment in Ilagan by Charoen Pokphand Foods Philippines Corporation, Thailand's largest agriculture conglomerate and homegrown investor Sagittarian Agricultural Philippines Incorporated. The initial capitalization of the joint venture was valued at around P1 billion and set to be completed by 2024. The groundbreaking ceremony of the said project was held in Barangay Namnama on the same day. As of December 31, 2021, Ilagan has a total of 21 banks with a total volume of bank deposits at ₱15.7 billion. Government banks such as Landbank of the Philippines (LBP), and Development Bank of the Philippines (DBP) are present in the city. There were even more establishments in 1995 with a total of 1,877 in all. The trend shows that from 1995 to 2000, there was a growth of 2.94%, but from 2000 to 2006 a decreasing growth rate of -1.75% was registered. For the year 2000, commercial trade was at 1,996 revealing that there were more or less than 201 establishments that had been closed down within the period 2000–2006. Commerce and trade are the second economic-based income of the people of Ilagan. In the year 2006, statistics showed that there are currently 1,795 registered business establishments. Just like the past years, for the year 2006, commercial activities within the municipality are classified into wholesale, retail, and service-oriented businesses. There are several food and beverage companies in the city. The largest of which is the Coca-Cola Beverages Philippines, Inc. (CCBPI) which operates a softdrink bottling plant in Barangay Guinatan. Another is a vinegar and soy sauce fermentation company locally known as 'Best Choice', which is operated and owned by Robelly's Food Products and also the Jack Confectionery, which operates a wine fermentation plant. There are 15 bakeries/bakeshops and 1 ice cream/ice drop company. Aside from the increasing number of local cafés, restaurants, and several multi-national fast-food companies opened their respective branch[es] in the city. One major industry in Ilagan is furniture making. Several furniture shops, located along the National Highway in barangays Alinguigan 2nd and Alinguigan 3rd, manufacture and sell furniture made of quality narra and gmelina wood. These barangays were dubbed as "Butaka City" of Ilagan, where the Guinness Book of Records' entry for the biggest lounge chair in the world, the Butaka, was manufactured. The industrial sector of the municipal economy comprises 210 establishments in the year 2006 as compared with 207 in 2000. This reflects a 2.4% increase in industrial activities over six years (2000–2006). The existing industries are mostly on a micro-scale except for the Coca-Cola Bottlers Philippines, Inc. located in barangay Guinatan which is the only significant employment generator within the locality at that time. Following the previous year's trend, industries currently operating are agro-industries, wood-based manufacturing, or service-oriented industries. The commercial area includes areas that are occupied by public markets, wholesale and retail stores, restaurants, banks, shops, and other establishments or structures engaged in commercial activities. The bulk of those who are engaged in trade and commerce are found in the public markets. The area covered by the commercial area is approximately 90.56 hectares or 2.62% of the urban core. As compared to the 2000 existing commercial area of 17 hectares, the increase of 73.56 hectares in 2007 is an indication that Ilagan is racing towards commercialization. There are nine motor vehicle assembly shops in Ilagan; five jeepney assembly shops and four tricycle side-car makers. These motor vehicle assembly shops respond to the increasing need for transportation services in the city. The city has two major public markets: the old Pamilihang Bayan ng Ilagan (now called Xentro Market) located in Centro Poblacion and the multi-million pesos New Ilagan Public Market Complex in Barangay Baligatan. In front of the public market is a three-story structure called Ilagan City Mall, the first LGU-owned and operated mall in the city. The increasing number of market-goers coming from the different regions of the city and adjacent municipalities prompted city officials to facilitate the construction of the modern market. On November 23, 2023, the City Government of Ilagan held the groundbreaking ceremonies of San Antonio Public Market and Marana 1st Public Market with an initial capitalization of P25 million and P50 million, respectively. Each public market is expected to cater residents from the far-flung barangays located in San Antonio Cluster and Eastern Cluster to spur growth and development in their respective communities. The target completion of the two public markets is set in 2024. Ilagan is home to numerous subdivisions, which include Francisca Village, South Francisca Village, City Homes Subdivision, New Villa Jesusa Subdivision, Capitol Hills Subdivision, Richmond Hills Subdivision, California Homes Subdivision, Amurao Homes, Green Meadows Subdivision, Parkville Subdivision, St. Andrews Village, Big Prime Hills Exclusive Village, and Providers City San Felipe. These projects are owned by homegrown real-estate developers such as Brent Nathan Realty and Development Corporation, ITP Properties Corporation, Emmanuel Realty Services and Development Corporation, R.P. Alingog Development Corporation, CCL BIG Prime Hills, Vester Corporation and Providers Multi-Purpose Cooperative. In 2023, real estate giant, Ayala Land is also set to expand its presence in Ilagan with the launching of Avida Greenlane Settings. On March 19, 2021, home-grown retail giant Talavera Group of Companies expanded their presence in Ilagan with the opening of Talavera Hypermart and Homebuilders Depot located at the former Ilagan Bowling Alley in barangay Calamagui 2nd. On June 23, 2023, the Department of Science and Technology - Philippine Textile Research Institute (DOST-PTRI), Isabela State University (ISU) - City of Ilagan Campus, DOST - Philippine Council for Industry, Energy and Emerging Technology Research and Development (DOST PCIEERD), DOST Region II, City Government of Ilagan, and the Provincial Government of Isabela inaugurated the P40 million Regional Yarn Production and Innovation Center in the province of Isabela. The production and innovation facility located at the Isabela State University (ISU) - City of Ilagan Campus is under the DOST-GIA project - DOST Inclusive Innovation Textiles Empowering Lives Anew or i2TELA Program, which is the first of its kind in Northern Luzon. The establishment of the facility is aimed to strengthen the local textile ecosystem and bridge the gaps in textile supply chain by enabling the conversion of natural raw materials into spinnable fibers for yarns from blends of natural fibers including abaca, banana, bamboo and pineapple leaf, in combination with cotton. It is designed to operate as a micro-scale yarn-spinning facility that can produce 50 kilograms of yarn per day, which is equivalent to 270 meters of handloom fabrics. Ilagan became one of the largest producers of tobacco during the Spanish time. The tobacco monopoly caused the valley to languish in poverty from 1785 to 1797. The lifting of the monopoly was caused by the heavy loss incurred by the government. A royal decree was released in 1882 which aimed to abolish the monopoly and attracted foreign capitalists to invest in the country. In Ilagan, the Compañía General de Tabacos de Filipinas also known as La Tabacalera was established in 1881 and produced the famous La Flor de la Isabela which was the largest company of its kind in the world at that time. The Tabacalera acquired two haciendas in Ilagan which were Hacienda San Antonio and Hacienda Santa Isabel. The majority of the western barangays of the municipality are planting tobacco other than rice, corn, and high-value crops. The National Tobacco Administration is the attached agency under the Department of Agriculture that is mandated to conduct series of efficacy trials, scientific experiments and tests on new agricultural products, inputs, systems, and processes being introduced. They recommend and certify the applicability and efficacy of the recommended tobacco technologies. Its provincial field office is located at Barangay Osmeña. The city has various tourism sceneries, both natural and man-made, appealing to local and foreign tourists. Ilagan Sanctuary is a 200-hectare protected area located within the 819-hectare Fuyot Springs National Park along the foothills of the Sierra Madre mountain range in Barangay Santa Victoria, fifteen kilometers away from the city proper. Attractions inside the park include prayer mountain, bird viewing, Butterfly park, animal kingdom (mini zoo), natural spring pool, boating & kayaking, wall-climbing & rappelling, cable car & tree-top adventure, 350-meter long & 700-meter high zipline, 1.5-kilometer hike to Pinzal Falls, and the 400-meter limestone caves. Some activities in the sanctuary will require you to ride on an all-terrain vehicle (ATV). Abuan River is the main river of the Northern Sierra Madre Natural Park. It has an average elevation of 82 meters above sea level, and feeds the Abuan watershed in the city. Tourists and visitors can explore the diverse animal and plant life in one of the country’s remaining lush virgin forests. Burmurbur Falls and Disupi Falls are small waterfalls both located in a secluded and far-flung area within Barangay Sindon Bayabo. Kimmul-ong Falls and Kimmiskisan Falls are found in a remote area near the foothills of Sierra Madre mountain ranges in Barangay Capellan, several kilometers away from the city proper. The area surrounding these fresh bodies of water can only be accessed by small vehicles or by walking/hiking. Ilagan Japanese Tunnel is a former war tunnel located in barangay Santo Tomas. It served as the headquarters of a military base built by the Japanese during World War II and is about 40 meters by 3.66 meters wide but has yet to be fully scaled and explored. The Old Capitol Building, now the Isabela Museum and Library, is a museum and a library located in barangay Osmeña. It displays artifacts that preserve and give insight into Isabela's natural and cultural history such as fossils, ethnographic items, heirloom pieces, photographs, paintings, sculptures, other visual arts, dioramas, and miniature models of provincial landmarks, among others. Queen Isabela Park, also known as Skypark, is a park in barangay Alibagu whose centerpiece is the Queen Isabela II Monument, a sculpture of Queen Isabela II of Spain surrounded by sculptures of deceased Isabelan leaders and heroes. Century Park is a triangular shaped park situated in an intersection between barangays Osmeña and Calamagui 2nd. Beside the park is a popular attraction called Banchetto Ilagan, which is usually frequented by locals and visitors especially when the city government transforms the area into a Christmas themed village during the holiday season. The Mammangi Park (formerly called DBP Triangle) is located in barangay Osmeña along Maharlika Highway, established in 2018 by the city government to acknowledge the efforts of Ilagueño farmers for their contributory role as the backbone of the city’s local economy and agriculture sector being the largest corn producer in the Philippines. Bonifacio Park is also a triangular shaped park located in barangay Baligatan featuring a dancing fountain and the Giant Butaka, the largest wooden lounge chair in the world. Ilagan's Rizal Park is a scaled-down version of the Rizal Park in Luneta, Manila, located in barangay Centro Poblacion. Aside from a replica of the Rizal Monument, it also features a dancing fountain and three old church bells from Saint Ferdinand Parish Church, among others. Saint Ferdinand Parish Proto-Cathedral is a structure dating back to 1870 dedicated to Saint Ferdinand, Ilagan's patron saint. It is one of the oldest churches in Isabela, located beside Saint Ferdinand College and Rizal Park. At present, it is designated as a proto-cathedral by the Roman Catholic Diocese of Ilagan. On 29 October 2023, a mass was held for the celebration of the first Holy Rosary Festival wherein the pilgrim image of the St. Ferdinand Parish - Our Lady of the Most Holy Rosary was episcopally crowned by Most Rev. David William V. Antonio, D.D., STHD., bishop of the Diocese of Ilagan. Balai na Ilagan, also known as Friendship Hall, is a multi-purpose hall and former convent within the grounds of the diocese of the Roman Catholic Church in barangay Bagumbayan, set up by Stewards and Friends of Ilagan Inc. to give Ilagueños a communal space to nurture the artistic talents of Ilagan's residents. It celebrates art and culture in the province of Isabela. Ilagan today, being recognized as the corn capital of the country lives its economic boom while playing a vital contributory role for the province of Isabela as its capital since its creation as a province. To the predominantly agricultural economy of the province of Isabela, the city adds vigor to its trade, commercial, and cultural life. Aggaw na Ilagan (transl. Ilagan Day) is celebrated annually every May 4. It was the date when Ilagan was founded as a town. It was during the administration of then Mayor Albano that Binallay Festival became the official festivity of Ilagan but was later replaced by the Mammangui Festival. Celebrated every August 11. The city government celebrated the first anniversary of Ilagan's cityhood charter in 2013. On August 11, 2015, marked another day in the history of Ilagan as the Department of Agriculture proclaimed the city as the new Corn Capital of the Philippines during its third cityhood anniversary. The city is famous for its food culture. The much-loved food as part of the city's culture is called binallay. It's one of the famous rice cakes made from glutinous rice flour combined with water, mixed into a smooth batter, wrapped in a banana leaf, then steamed until cooked all the way through. Binallay is a native rice cake prepared year-round in Ilagan. It is being sold at the City of Ilagan Pasalubong Center located at the Bonifacio Park, in barangay Baligatan. Celebrated during the last week of May; Mammangi is an Ibanag word meaning the harvest or planting of corn. It honors the farmers who are the real foundation of Ilagan's economy and is celebrated as a thanksgiving activity for a good harvest. In 2011, General Ordinance No. 33 promulgated during the administration of then Mayor Diaz ordained Mammangui Festival as the official festivity of Ilagan to be celebrated on the month of May. As a predominantly Catholic nation, the culture of observing the feast days of the most venerated Roman Catholic icons is widespread in the Philippines. In Ilagan, the city celebrates the feast day of its patron, San Fernando, every May 30 including the celebration of the town fiesta. Film director Romm Burlat is set to produce Pira-Pirasong Pangarap, an upcoming film biography that will portray the interesting and inspiring story of the current mayor Josemarie L. Diaz as a political leader. Gabby Concepcion, a popular drama actor will portray as the mayor in the upcoming movie. The city has been the venue and the host of international, national, regional, and local sports competitions. The venue for these events are usually held at the City of Ilagan Sports Complex. On January 11, 2019, the Philippine Sports Commission (PSC) announced that Ilagan will be hosting the 2019 Batang Pinoy Luzon qualifying leg sports competition; it was held on March 16–23, 2019. Batang Pinoy is a national competition for athletes under fifteen years old and was established through Executive Order No. 44, which was signed by then President Joseph Estrada on December 2, 1998. In May 2022, Ilagan hosted the Philta National Youth Tennis Circuit 2022 and the Little League North Luzon baseball championship national sports events. The delegates for baseball are from the city of Ilagan, the municipality of Divilacan in Isabela, the provinces of Kalinga, Mountain Province, Ilocos Norte, and Zambales. While for tennis, the delegates are from the city of Manila, provinces of Palawan, Nueva Ecija, and Quirino, the cities of Santiago and Cauayan municipalities of Roxas and Alicia in Isabela. It was held on May 23–29, 2022 at the City of Ilagan Sports Complex. In February 2023, Ilagan hosted the Baseball Little League Philippine Games. An estimated number of 2,000 delegates composed of athletes, coaches and chairpersons from North and South Luzon including National Capital Region participated in the sports event held on February 5–12, 2023 at the City of Ilagan Sports Complex. The 2023 Little League Philippines National Finals was also held in Ilagan on April 9–16, 2023. The final leg of the 2023 Philippine Baseball Series was joined by 63 teams from regional tournaments in Luzon, Visayas and Mindanao. In March 2023, the Philippine Athletics Track and Field Association (PATAFA), Inc. management has chosen the City of Ilagan as the venue of the International Container Terminal Services Incorporated (ICTSI) - sponsored Philippine Athletic Championships where delegations from Malaysia, Vietnam, Thailand, Indonesia, Brunei, and Iraq converged in the city to compete for 165 medals in 80 athletic sports events. The 5-day sports competition was held at the City of Ilagan Sports Complex on March 22–26, 2023. The 2023 Cagayan Valley Regional Association of State Universities and Colleges (CaVRASUC) games and Socio-Cultural Festival was also held in Ilagan on March 27–30, 2023. The annual sports event was participated by an estimate of 1,500 student athletes, coaches and officials from the different delegations of state universities and colleges in the Cagayan Valley region which included Isabela State University, Quirino State University, Nueva Vizcaya State University, Batanes State College and Philippine Normal University - North Luzon campus. The 2023 Cagayan Valley Regional Athletic Association (CAVRAA) meet was held in Ilagan on April 23–28, 2023. An estimate of almost 7,000 delegates and technical officials from the provinces of Isabela, Quirino, Nueva Vizcaya, Cagayan, Batanes and the cities of Ilagan, Santiago, Tuguegarao, and Cauayan participated in the annual sports event that was hosted by the DepEd Schools Division of the City of Ilagan and the city government. The City of Ilagan Sports Complex (formerly called Paguirigan Memorial Athletic Stadium) is a sports facility equipped with modern rubber tracks, basketball, volleyball, badminton, and tennis courts, concrete bleachers, and a new swimming pool that was built to accommodate major sports and athletic events such as the Cagayan Valley Regional Athletic Association (CAVRAA) meet held in 2016 and 2017. It was the chosen venue by the Philippine Athletics Track and Field Association (PATAFA), Inc. for the 2017, 2018 and 2019 Ayala Philippine Athletics Championships, 12th and 14th South East Asia Youth Athletics Championship and the 2017 Philippine National Open Invitational Athletics Championship, where world class athletes from Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Vietnam, Cambodia, Timor-Leste, Laos, Brunei, Sri Lanka, Hong Kong, Fil-Am contingent, Philippine Team and the host City of Ilagan team participated in the said event. It is the first city outside Metro Manila to have hosted the championships for 2 years in a row, first and only Philippine city in this decade to have an International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF) certified track and field competition venue, first host city to stage the international format of athletics competition and the first host city to have organized the championships integrating entertainment and the thrill of sports competition. The City of Ilagan Community Center is a fully air-conditioned facility that was built to accommodate indoor events such as basketball games, badminton and volleyball tournaments, cheerdance competitions, concerts, and other important activities. The SK Federation in Ilagan has a yearly basketball tournament for the youth of the city. The facility was utilized for meeting and served as a vaccination site during COVID-19 pandemic. On June 12, 2023, the City Government led the ribbon-cutting of the newly-renovated former City of Ilagan Community Center, which is now renamed as the City Sports and Convention Center during the commemoration of the country's 125th Independence Day and the 78th liberation of the City of Ilagan. In 1993, Ilagan hosted the Palarong Pambansa (National Games) and in 2011 the SCUAA National Olympics. It was held at the Isabela Sports Complex. The sports complex was erected by the National Government and local officials during the presidency of Fidel V. Ramos as a permanent facility for the province of Isabela, in barangay Alibagu, Ilagan, the capital. The impressive facility of 50 hectares, on which has built a stadium with a 39,000 seating capacity, likewise has an athlete's village for housing participants. Some of the houses for the athlete's village were donated by certain civic-minded citizens and organizations who were approached by the officials of the province through the initiative of the late former Isabela Governor Benjamin G. Dy. The complex is also equipped with a basketball court, volleyball courts, swimming pool, badminton courts, tennis courts, a sepak takraw court, an oval rubber track, and a baseball field. The only golf course in Isabela is located in Ilagan. Built in early 60s, the golf course has nine holes, its fairways are well-trimmed and most of the sand greens are heavily guarded by bunkers which are well-maintained, throughout the year. The facilities include a clubhouse, pro shop, tee houses, restaurant, lockers and showers for male and female, a function room, a secure storage and more. This golf course has produced several World Junior Golf Champions. Table tennis is also a popular sport in the city. It is played regularly in Ping-Pong Central in Francisca Village, Baligatan, and hosted by the Table Tennis Association of Ilagan (TATAC-Ilagan). Regular ranking tournament is held monthly among residents of Ilagan. The open tournament is held annually. As a component city and the capital of the Province of Isabela, government officials at the provincial level are voted by the electorates of the city. The provincial government has political jurisdiction over the local transactions of the city government. The city of Ilagan is governed by a city mayor designated as its local chief executive and by a city council as its legislative body per the Local Government Code. The mayor, vice mayor, and councilors are elected directly by the people through an election that is held every three years. Barangays are also headed by elected officials: Barangay Captain, Barangay Council, whose members are called Barangay Councilors. The barangays have an SK federation which represents the barangay, headed by the SK chairperson and whose members are called SK councilors. All officials are also elected every three years. The city seal has an inscription of the city name "City of Ilagan" and the name of the province "Isabela" with the year 1686 as the foundation of the town and 2012 as the year of its cityhood declaration. Another inscription which is written in Latin words Vox populi, Vox Dei, meaning "the voice of the people, the voice of God". The mountain represents the Sierra Madre mountain ranges, the longest mountain ranges in the Philippines. The rivers represent the Cagayan River and Ilagan River. The Ilagan River flows westward from the Sierra Madre, joining the Cagayan River. The buildings represent the urbanization of the city with the municipal logo. The corn represents the city as the corn capital of the Philippines which is one of the major agricultural products of the city. Barangays also have their own seals which represent themselves. There were 28 municipal mayors during its municipal period since 1904. The first municipal mayor was Rafael Maramag who served the town from 1904 to 1906. Its first city mayor is Josemarie L. Diaz from 2012 to 2016. Ilagan belongs to the first legislative district of the province of Isabela. Currently, the city is represented by Antonio T. Albano in the House of Representatives. The mode of transportation in the city includes jeepneys, tricycles, buses, and taxis. The local government efforts in addressing the transportation needs. These include the upcoming Hybrid Electric Road Train, and Podcar Public Transportation System. Ilagan is the only place in Cagayan Valley that considers jeepneys as one of the primary means of public transportation within its vicinity and neighboring municipalities. There are 432 Jeepneys used as the major public transportation in Ilagan with corresponding routes from Centro-Calamagui-Alibagu-Upi junction-Guibang vice versa, Centro-Calamagui-Bliss Village-Salindingan vice versa, Centro-San Antonio region vice versa, Centro-Bintacan vice versa, and neighboring towns Ilagan-Gamu-Burgos-Roxas vice versa. There are around 4,000 tricycle units that ply around the city. Like jeepneys, these tricycle units have their own route to different parts of the city. There are few bus companies with its own terminal in the city. Each company operates a fleet of air conditioned buses with daily trips to Manila from their respective terminals. Several bus companies also use the Ilagan route from Tuguegarao City and Northern Isabela to Manila, Dagupan, Baguio and other destinations. Bus companies like Victory Liner, and GV Florida Transport have terminals within the city that offers daily trips bound to Metro Manila (like Kamias in Quezon City, Sampaloc in Manila) including the city of Baguio. The Local Government Unit (LGU) inaugurated the Ilagan City Integrated Central Terminal beside the Xentro Mall in barangay Alibagu on November 28, 2011. It is primarily being used as the main transport terminal for all kinds of public utility vehicles in Ilagan. On July 17, 2023, the Ilagan City Integrated Central Terminal was given the Certificate of Accreditation by the Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board (LTFRB), being the first Region Accredited Central Terminal in Cagayan Valley. The LGU-owned and operated transport facility has substantially complied with the guidelines for Off-Street Terminal Operations under Department Order No. 2017-011, otherwise known as the Omnibus Franchising Guidelines, in relation to Memorandum Circular 2017-030 and Memorandum Circular 2022-051. The city will soon adapt the Hybrid Electric Road Train (HERT) which was developed by the DOST as an alternative mode of transport for front-liners, community outreach activities, among others. Each coach of the HERT can accommodate 220 passengers. On May 4, 2022, the city government launched eleven units of taxis as LTFRB issued 90-day provisional authority. The transport service will ply across Cagayan Valley and it is the first in the region. Additionally, the city launched 58 public utility vehicles that will service the city as part of its modernization program. On February 23, 2023, the City Government of Ilagan in partnership with FUTRAN Philippines, Inc. conducted a public hearing at the Ilagan Community Center for the proposed FUTRAN Green Energy Podcar Public Transportation System. After months of feasibility study and coordination of all parties involved, the proposed multi-billion project was officially unveiled to the public on November 24, 2023 during its groundbreaking ceremony at the Ilagan City Integrated Central Terminal in barangay Alibagu, the first of its kind in the Northern Philippines. The first phase of the new transportation system project is designed to run 10-kilometers that will start in barangay Alibagu to barangay Centro Poblacion which is expected to be operational by March 2024. Top officials and executives from both parties attended the well-anticipated event. Ilagan's longest bridge is the Malalam Bridge in barangay Malalam going north, which was inaugurated on December 8, 1995. The bridge connects barangay Malalam to barangay Alinguigan 2nd going to Tuguegarao. Baculud Overflow Bridge. In 2014, the city government inaugurated the Baculud Overflow Bridge that connects the Poblacion area to the northeastern barangays going to Tuguegarao. In 2016, the structure was damaged by flood brought by the torrential rain when Typhoon Haima or locally known as Super Typhoon Lawin struck the provinces of Isabela and Cagayan. The authorities had to close the bridge until the completion of its rehabilitation which began in 2017. On May 4, 2019, the two-lane overflow bridge was reinaugurated by the city government during the 333rd founding anniversary of Ilagan. Lullutan Bridge. In February 2015, the Lullutan Bridge was opened to the public local by the national and local government. On April 8, 2015, then President Benigno Aquino III traveled to Isabela to lead the inauguration of the new bridge, which connects the east and west banks of the Cagayan River. It connects the city's western barangays and nearby municipalities of Delfin Albano and Tumauini with the city. Before the construction of the new bridge, residents have to use barges to transport agricultural products to the market. Due to this, travel time between barangays on either side of the river has been cut short drastically. The Santa Maria (Cabisera 8) bridge was completed and opened to the public in 2015. Road concreting and widening, creation of diversion and circumferential roads and farm to market roads were prioritized by the national and city government to help mobilize the transportation goods and delivery of basic services within the city's jurisdiction and neighboring municipalities. Cabisera 2 (Dappat) Bridge was inaugurated by the City Government of Ilagan on November 23, 2023. It is expected to provide ease and convenience in travelling to the residents of far-flung communities in San Antonio Region. Ilagan is linked by a national highway called Maharlika Highway (designated as Asian Highway 26, AH26 by Asian Highway Network). There are 29.313 kilometres (18.214 mi) of concrete road out of 24.56 kilometres (15.26 mi) of national road that passes through the city. Provincial Road. Other road networks are 33.005 kilometres (20.508 mi) provincial roads, 8,909 city streets and 269.713 kilometres (167.592 mi) of barangay roads. Ilagan is accessible by all means of land transportation. From the Poblacion to the 91 barangays and five adjacent municipalities. Regular jeepney trips are from 6:00 am to 9:00 pm. Tricycles are available 24 hours a day. Ilagan-Delfin Albano-Mallig (IDAM) Road was declared a national road in 2001 by the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH), stretching from Ilagan to the municipality of Mallig. With a total length of 38.78 kilometers, it also serves as an alternate gateway and vital route for the delivery of goods and basic services within Ilagan and its neighboring towns. Ilagan-Gamu Road is a segment of the national highway that serves as an alternate bypass route that connects the western barangays of Ilagan to the nearby town of Gamu. It is connected to the Gamu-Roxas Road that stretches from the municipality of Gamu to the municipalities of Burgos and Roxas, the gateway to the Mallig Plains region. Ilagan-Divilacan Road. The construction of an 82-kilometer Ilagan-Divilacan Road through the protected Sierra Madre mountains is ongoing to open access to the coastal towns of Divilacan, Palanan, and Maconacon. The approved budget contract of the project amounting to P1.5B, will pass through the foothills of the 359,486-hectare Northern Sierra Madre mountain ranges and will take four years to complete. The project will improve an old logging road used by the defunct Acme Logging Corp. The city has several internet cafés, and the majority of the country's Internet Service providers (ISPs) are available in Ilagan, such as Globe Broadband, Converge Fiber, PLDT Fiber, and Digitel. Cable TV provider Polaris Cable Vision also offers fiber Internet connection. The Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company provides fixed line services. Wireless mobile communications services are provided by Smart Communications and Globe Telecommunications. Dito Telecommunity is now available offering connectivity service. Postal and courier services. The Philippine Postal Corporation (PhilPOst) is the major postal service provider in Ilagan. Express delivery services are provided by LBC, FedEx (Air21),JRS Express, and EMS (through PhilPost). Other companies providing various telecommunications services such as telegraph and fax services are PT&T, and RCPI now Universal Storefront Services Corporation. Isabela Electric Cooperative II, Inc. (ISELCO II). Residences and establishments can get their energy needs through the service provided by the Isabela Electric Cooperative II, Inc. (ISELCO II). Its main office is located in barangay Alibagu. Based on MPDO record, 63 out of 91 barangays are energized. As of 2011, Ilagan is now 100% energized. Also, a sub-station of National Grid Corporation of the Philippines (NGCP) is located in barangay Baligatan. Freeway Lighting System. Ilagan is one of the few places in the Cagayan Valley region that has a continuous freeway lighting system. The city government has managed to install incandescent highway lights along the national road from barangay Alibagu in the south to barangay San Juan in the north. Solar Power Plant. The Department of Energy (DOE) approved on May 27, 2015, the service contract of the largest solar PV power plant in the Philippines. Cheap solar energy will be available for residents here soon after the proponents of the P7-billion solar power plant have already secured its funding. A twenty-five (25) year Service contract was signed between Living Project 4 People Philippines Inc. (LP4PP) and the Department of Energy. The signing will start the process of completion of the development, installation, construction, commissioning, and operation of a 100.0 MW Solar PV Project in the city. LP4PP said that the solar project will be constructed in 10 phases to install 10.0 MW for each phase that will start construction in August 2015. Accordingly, it is a pure solar PV Grid-connected installation that will avail of the privileges under the Renewable Energy Law of the country. The renewable energy to be generated will be sold directly to the National Grid Corporation of the Philippines (NGCP) under the Feed-in-Tariff Scheme of the RE law. The 100.0 MW Solar PV project will help alleviate the current electricity shortage in the country that causes regular blackouts resulting in industry closures as well as inconvenience to the consumers. The solar power facility will be constructed on a 100-hectare land at barangay Cabannungan, several kilometers away from the city proper. Solar Farm. In December 2022, the Department of Energy (DOE) has given the go signal to a Filipino-French joint venture to develop one of the biggest renewable energy projects in the Philippines - an ₱18-billion solar farm in Ilagan City. The project will be undertaken by San Ignacio Energy Resources Development Corporation, which is part of the Nextnorth Energy Group developing over 450 megawatts of solar and hydro projects in Northern Luzon, and French firm Total Eren S.A. The project will involve the development of a 440 MWp/336 MWac solar PV project to be built on around 400 hectares of available land located along the Northern Luzon high voltage transmission network of the National Grid Corporation of the Philippines (NGCP). The project is scheduled to start construction in 2024 and start feeding electricity into the grid in 2025. The groundbreaking ceremony of the multi-billion project took place in barangay Arusip on November 24, 2023. City of Ilagan Water District (CIWD). It is a government-owned and controlled corporation that is mandated to supply all the water needs of its concessionaires. It has managed to put up several pumping stations throughout the city to cater to the increasing demand of Ilagan's growing population and economy. Some residents and privately owned business entities have their own electric water pumps and some can up their own traditional deep wells for their own water needs and irrigation systems especially those residents from far-flung barangays who are not able to avail the service provided by the water district. Its main office is located in barangay Osmeña. Several water refilling stations have opened to serve as an alternative for the residents for their water needs. Also, the city government is continuously implementing solutions in line with the water and sewerage problems of the city such as the construction of deep wells in every barangay and the construction of drainages and canals in those areas affected by floods during the rainy and stormy season. Metro Ilagan Water. In 2018, the City of Ilagan Water District (CIWD) signed a joint venture deal with Filipinas Water Holdings Inc. (Filipinas Water) a consortium of Manila Water, Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiary Manila Water Philippine Ventures for the implementation, development, maintenance and construction of bulk water supply with system expansion and septage management project in the City of Ilagan. Under the agreement, all parties involved came up with a deal to form the Metro Ilagan Water, a joint venture company where the consortium shall own ninety percent and the local water district shall own ten percent of the outstanding capital stock. The partnership between the two entities hopes to resolve the current hurdles and increasing demands in the water supply system of the city and to address the main concerns of its concessionaires. The City of Ilagan Bulk Water Supply Project is a Public-Private Partnership (PPP) project approved by the National Economic Development Authority (NEDA). It is a joint venture between Metro Ilagan Water and Filipinas Water Holdings Corporation, Manila Water Company and Manila Water Philippine Ventures, Inc. for a 25-year contract on a project that will supply an additional 36 million liters of water per day (MLD) to the water system of the city itself. The consortium invested an initial capitalization of P1.13 billion to the project. The target completion of the Phase 1 of the project is set on July 2024. On November 24, 2023, the Metro Ilagan Water Treatment Facility in Barangay Calamagui 1st was officially inaugurated by the City Government of Ilagan and Metro Ilagan Water, the first of its kind in Ilagan. The multi-billion water treatment facility is designed to address the immediate concerns of its concessionaires, provide quality-adequate water supply and improve the current services in the city. The consortium pledged to invest in future projects which include the construction of Sewage Water Treatment Facilities in Barangays Namnama and Santa Catalina in 2024 to attain the Sustainable Plan & Development towards the goal of becoming a liveable city by 2030. Pasa Small Reservoir Irrigation Project (PSRIP). The irrigation project is a $21.7 million government project in barangay Pasa, a joint undertaking between the South Korean government, through the Korea International Cooperation Agency (Koica), and the Philippines, through the National Irrigation Administration and the local government of Isabela. The project entailed the construction of a 34-meter high earth-filled dam across the Pasa River, a reservoir with an active storage of 3.90 million cubic meters, with 5.93 kilometers of a main canal and 16.20 kilometers of lateral canals. According to authorities and government officials, the project is said to be under South Korea's five-year program under the East Asia Climate Change Partnership to address climate change and to bolster Green Growth in Asia. It was built to help mitigate floods with its small water impounding or catchment basin features aside from irrigating more farmlands in the province, the project is also aimed at reducing the impact of climate change and promoting water management in rural areas. The dam is expected to irrigate eight hundred (800) hectares of farmlands, covering the barangays of Pasa, Santa Victoria, Fuyo, Morado, and Minabang, all within Ilagan City, and should benefit seven hundred forty-seven (747) families in the province of Isabela. Also, the authorities added that the Pasa Dam project would further fortify Isabela as the country's leading agriculture province, which has kept the title as a top corn producer and second in rice production. On February 21, 2021, the City Government of Ilagan spearheaded the ground-breaking ceremony for the Phase 1 of the P250 million worth Multi-Purpose Sports, Commercial and Convention Center with a total maximum capacity of up to 10,000 seats, the biggest of its kind in Northern Luzon. The Phase 2 of said project is set to be completed by the first quarter of 2024. The Capital Arena is situated in the newly established 10-hectares civic center in barangay Alibagu wherein field offices of the different national government agencies were built upon since its establishment in 2020. These agencies include the Technical Skills and Development Authority (TESDA) Isabela Provincial Field Office, Department of Trade and Industry (DTI-Isabela), Department of Science and Technology (DOST-Isabela), New Ilagan City District Jail and Bureau of Jail Management and Penology (BJMP-Isabela), Social Security System (SSS) Regional Office, Department of Education (DepEd - Division of the City of Ilagan), PNP Highway Patrol Group Regional Office, Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE-Isabela), Philippine Coast Guard Northeastern Luzon District Office and the new Ilagan City Hotel. On January 24, 2023, the city government signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the Department of Human Settlements and Urban Development (DHSUD) for a housing project under the national government’s flagship banner Pambansang Pabahay Para sa Pilipino (4PH) which include 20 high-rise condominium-type buildings that is equivalent to almost 5,500 units. The ground-breaking ceremony of the said project was done on November 24, 2023 in barangay Alibagu. On August 7, 2023, the City Government of Ilagan inaugurated one of its flagship project which is the JLD Housing Project with a total capitalization of P100 million. The project aims to augment the housing backlogs of the city and to provide 100 housing units which are ready for occupancy to all qualified employees of the city government itself. The subdivision-type housing project is situated beside Richmond Hills Subdivision, few meters away from Xentro Mall (Northstar) and the City of Ilagan Civic Center in barangay Alibagu. These joint ventures of the city government and other attached agencies were all carefully planned in accordance with the vision of making Ilagan a liveable city by the year 2030. On November 22, 2023, the Philippine Statistics Authority - Civil Registry System (PSA-CRS) Outlet was officially opened and inaugurated to cater the Central Cagayan Valley Region. The modern facility is located in the newly built PSA Building within the grounds of the City Hall Complex in barangay San Vicente. The joint venture was made possible thru the initiative and support of the City Government of Ilagan and the Philippine Statistics Authority. It is expected to accommodate clients from neighboring cities, municipalities and nearby provinces who can now effortlessly request Civil Registry Documents without having to travel to the Regional Government Center in Tuguegarao City, Cagayan. On November 24, 2023, the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) Building was formally inaugurated by the City Government of Ilagan and PSA - Isabela Provincial Statistical Office. The three-story structure that house the PSA-CRS Outlet is located within the City Hall Complex in barangay San Vicente. Established in 1939, the Isabela Provincial Hospital is managed by the provincial government. In 2000, it was renamed as Gov. Faustino N. Dy, Sr. Memorial Hospital. It is located in barangay Calamagui 2nd. In 2014, the City Government inaugurated a diagnostic center in San Antonio City Hospital. Completed in 2014, the Department of Health – Drug Abuse Treatment and Rehabilitation Center Region II (DOH-DATRC RO2) was founded to bring hope and changes to the victims of drug dependency and to provide affordable, quality, and sustainable rehabilitative programs and services in partnership with other agencies towards the realization of its goal and for the fulfillment of its mandate. It is the first and only government-owned treatment and rehabilitation center in Cagayan Valley located at Barangay Centro San Antonio, with a total land area of 1.97 hectares. Upon accreditation of 50-bed capacity on 12 March 2017 and completion of some infrastructures, the facility was allowed to accommodate clients for a residential program. On 12 April 2017 the center had its first residential admission and two months after, the facility was inaugurated with the presence of former DOH Secretary Pauline Jean Ubial. On November 25, 2020, the city government inaugurated its own Molecular Laboratory at San Antonio City of Ilagan Hospital. It is the first LGU-owned and operated health facility of its kind in Cagayan Valley. The Department of Health (DOH) gave its license to operate and accommodate patients of COVID-19. On August 11, 2021, the city government inaugurated the City of Ilagan Medical Center (CIMC) located in Barangay Lullutan as one of the highlights during its 9th cityhood anniversary celebration. The facility is a level-II hospital with 100-bed capacity and is now being used as an isolation facility for COVID-19 patients. Due to its geographical location, it also caters patients coming from nearby municipalities. On May 4, 2022, the groundbreaking of the City of Ilagan Medical Arts building was led by the city government in Barangay Lullutan beside the City of Ilagan Medical Center (CIMC). The main purpose of the building is to house medical clinics for consultations and stalls for Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprises (MSME). On May 4, 2023, the city government undertook the groundbreaking of the Physical Rehabilitation and Infectious Disease building during the 337th Aggaw na Ilagan celebration. The proposed site of the health facility is located beside the City of Ilagan Medical Center in Barangay Lullutan. City Health Office I (San Vicente) City Health Office II (Marana 1st) City of Ilagan Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Center City of Ilagan Medical Center Gov. Faustino N. Dy, Sr. Memorial Hospital San Antonio City of Ilagan Hospital Isabela Doctors General Hospital Dr. Victor S. Villaroman Memorial Hospital Overall, the city has three public and two private hospitals and three City Health Units. There are also dozens of dental clinics, maternity and pediatric clinics, derma clinics and pharmacies scattered around the city. As of 2022, Citimed of Ilagan is still under construction. Ilagan is the center of education in the province of Isabela especially for neighboring municipalities of Tumauini, Gamu, Burgos, Roxas, Quirino, Naguilian, Benito Soliven, San Mariano and Delfin Albano. Provincial field offices of the different government agencies like the Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA) and Department of Education (DepEd) are all located in the city. The DepEd office located at the Government Center in barangay Alibagu governs school districts in the entire province of Isabela except for cities of Cauayan, Ilagan, and Santiago as these have their own respective schools division offices. The Schools Division of the City of Ilagan governs the city's public education system. The division office is a field office of the DepEd in Cagayan Valley region. The office governs the public and private elementary and public and private high schools throughout the city. There are six integrated high schools, ten secondary public schools, and three other private secondary schools. There are 88 elementary schools throughout Ilagan, while the most populated are located in the Poblacion area. Ilagan has formerly three districts namely: Ilagan East District, Ilagan West District, and Ilagan South District when it was under the Division of Isabela, the mother school division. These districts have clusters of schools geographically located. On January 21, 2013, the Schools Division of the City of Ilagan was created following the success of its cityhood bid in 2012. Denizon Domingo was installed as the first city school division superintendent. On June 17, 2013, the new school division reorganized the three existing school districts: Ilagan East District, Ilagan West District, and Ilagan South District to establish additional three school districts: Ilagan North District, Ilagan Northwest District, and San Antonio District. There are now six school districts in the city. Ilagan East District Ilagan North District Ilagan Northwest District Ilagan West District Ilagan South District San Antonio District On July 8, 2019, the Local School Board was reorganized through executive order of the City Mayor. Currently, the schools division is headed by Dr. Eduardo C. Escorpiso, Jr. since April 3, 2023. There are also technical schools in the city which is being governed by Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA). These institutions offer short, one or two-year courses. Chronicles Institute of Isabela Colegio de Ilagan Far East Computer Technology - Ilagan Isabela Provincial Training Center Isabela School of Arts and Trades (ISAT) Isabela State University also offers two year courses Saint Ferdinand College also offers TESDA courses TESDA Regional Technical Vocational Education and Training Innovation Center Ilagan also has two higher educational instructions which are accredited by CHED. They offer undergraduate and graduate programs to the public. The local government also supports scholarship grants to deserving students for college degree programs. The Saint Ferdinand College was established in 1950, and it is the only Catholic educational institution located in barangay Bagumbayan. The Isabela State University - Ilagan campus was considered as one of the three state universities (along with Cabangan and Echague campuses) to form the Isabela State University on June 10, 1978 through Presidential Decree 1434. It is located in barangay Calamagui 2nd. In the school year 2011-2012, the Ilagan campus has 3,700 students, 120 faculty members, and about 40 non-teaching staff. In 2023, the City Government of Ilagan had already completed all the necessary and pertinent documents as mandated by the Commission on Higher Education Regional Office 2 (CHED RO2) for the creation of the City of Ilagan College (CIC). The city government allotted P100 million for the construction of the said higher educational institution that is expected to offer health allied courses which include Nursing, Medical Laboratory Science, Pharmacy, Dentistry, Optometry and more. On May 4, 2023, the city government spearheaded the groundbreaking ceremony in Barangay Lullutan to officially mark the start of its construction which is set to be completed by 2024. On June 13, 2021, a memorandum of agreement was signed between the Philippine National Police and the City Government of Ilagan for the establishment of a PNP Training Facility situated in a 3-hectares property that was purchased by the city government from Tabacalera in barangay Santa Barbara. The newly inaugurated facility is expected to serve as PNP’s Recruitment and Training Center that will cater to police trainees all over Luzon including the National Capital Region. Ilagan's main media outlet is the radio. The following may not be in operation as of 2022. 711 kHz DZYI under Swara Sug Broadcasting Corporation / SonShine Radyo 900 kHz DZSE 900 Radyo Alerto Asean - AM Ilagan 101.7 MHz under Pacific Broadcasting Service The following Television stations are present: Channel 4 - People’s Television Network Channel 7 - GMA Network, Inc. Channel 41 - Interactive Broadcast Media, Inc. New Valley Times Press Squiggy Printing Services Silvestre Bello III Silvestre Bello III - former secretary of the Department of Labor and Employment. Miguel Purugganan - Roman Catholic Bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Ilagan honored at the Philippines' Bantayog ng mga Bayani for fighting against the Human rights abuses of the Marcos dictatorship. Ricci Rivero - a basketball player of the UAAP, actor, and TV host. Hezy Val B. Acuña II - is a Filipino professional basketball player for the MJAS Zenith–Talisay Aquastars of the Pilipinas VisMin Super Cup. Jackson Corpuz - is a Filipino professional basketball player for Magnolia Hotshots of Philippine Basketball Association. CPP, NPA and NDF since September 25, 2019 Gamu, Isabela, since March 4, 2024 Quezon City, Metro Manila Makati, Metro Manila Taguig, Metro Manila Taipei, Taiwan Ilagan Cathedral Ilagan Japanese War Tunnel Ilagan River Ilagan Sanctuary Ilagan Sports Complex "Ilagan, Center of Eco-Tourism Adventure". Official Website of the City of Ilagan. cityofilagan.com. Retrieved February 27, 2023. "Ilagan gunning for a world record with giant armchair". Philstar. philstar.com. April 26, 2003. Retrieved April 26, 2003. "Ilagan eyes sports center as tourism branding". Benjamin De Yro of the Northern Forum. northernforum.net. Retrieved March 26, 2017. "CITY OF ILAGAN IN ISABELA PHILIPPINES PROVES ITS CLASS AND STANDING AS THE SPORTS TOURISM HUB OF THE NORTH". Edited in Central London by Lexie Abraham & Written by Chino Hansel Philyang. world-media-organizations.org. March 22, 2023. Retrieved March 22, 2023. "Ilagan to build P270-M corn processing complex". The Northern Forum. northernforum.net. Retrieved October 20, 2020. "Sulong Ilagan March by Rev. Fr. Ingeno Rapadas". Gerry Yabes Blogs. blogs.gerryyabes.com. Retrieved January 27, 2015. "City of Ilagan Hymn". Official Facebook Page of MyCity Ilagan. facebook.com/cityofilagan.gov.ph. Retrieved October 9, 2023. "2022 Election Results:City of Ilagan". Rappler. Retrieved September 10, 2022.  City of Ilagan | (DILG) "2015 Census of Population, Report No. 3 – Population, Land Area, and Population Density" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. Quezon City, Philippines. August 2016. ISSN 0117-1453. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 25, 2021. Retrieved July 16, 2021. Census of Population (2020). "Region II (Cagayan Valley)". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved July 8, 2021. "PSA Releases the 2018 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates". Philippine Statistics Authority. December 15, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2022. "City of Ilagan LGU Profile". CITIES AND MUNICIPALITIES COMPETITIVE INDEX. cmci.dti.gov.ph. Retrieved December 31, 2022. "Highlights of the Region II (Cagayan Valley) Population 2020 Census of Population and Housing (2020 CPH)". Philippine Statistics Authority. psa.gov.ph. Retrieved August 23, 2021. "Number and Turn-Out of Registered Voters and Voters Who Actually Voted by City/Municipality". Official Website of the Commission on Elections PH. comelec.gov.ph. Retrieved August 5, 2022. "Ilagan City 2022 Electorate". Rappler PH. ph.rappler.com. Retrieved May 13, 2022. "List of Cities". PSGC Interactive. National Statistical Coordination Board. Archived from the original on July 6, 2016. "History". Official Website | City of Ilagan | The Corn Capital of the Philippines. Retrieved September 2, 2021. "PARISH OF SAINT PAUL THE APOSTLE". St Paul The Apostle Parish. Retrieved October 25, 2021. "Liberation of Ilagan, Isabela". PVAO - The official website of the Philippine Veterans Affairs Office. Retrieved October 17, 2021. "Ilagan Japanese War Tunnel". City of Ilagan. Retrieved January 14, 2023. Villano, Alexa (February 18, 2018). "Travel diaries: Discovering Isabela's rich history". Rappler.com. Retrieved January 14, 2023. "Ilagan: Death of a Town, Rise of a City". Raymund Catindig. April 18, 2011. Retrieved March 11, 2012. "PADILLA, Sabino "Abe" Garcia Jr". November 29, 2017. Retrieved September 9, 2020. "PURUGGANAN, Miguel Gatan". Bantayog ng mga Bayani. October 9, 2015. Retrieved September 4, 2020. "RA No. 8474". The LawPhil Project - Arellano Law Foundation. lawphil.net. Retrieved February 2, 2001. "Proclamation No. 1175" (PDF). The Official Gazette PH. officialgazette.gov.ph. Retrieved March 9, 2001. "Ilagan City Soon". NewsFlash.Org. December 31, 1997. Retrieved March 2, 2012. "Isabela town gears for cityhood". Philstar Global. philstar.com. Retrieved August 17, 2004. "Isabela folk cry for justice for slain Ilagan mayor". The Philippine Star. July 2, 2006. Archived from the original on January 31, 2013. Retrieved June 12, 2012. "Albano family: Let people see how mayor was murdered". GMA News Online. gmanetwork.com. June 28, 2006. Retrieved June 28, 2006. "House Bill No. 5917" (PDF). 15th Congress of the Philippines / Official Website of the Senate of the Philippines. legacy.senate.gov.ph. Retrieved February 27, 2012. "Isabela capital's cityhood bid gains House nod". Raymund Catindig, Charlie Lagasca(Philstar.com). philstar.com. October 20, 2011. Retrieved October 20, 2011. "Ilagan to renew cityhood bid". The Philippine Star. January 7, 2011. Archived from the original on January 31, 2013. Retrieved February 19, 2012. "Aquino signs Ilagan cityhood law". By Raymund Catindig, Charlie Lagasca(The Philippine Star). philstar.com. June 26, 2012. Retrieved June 26, 2012. "Plebiscite for Ilagan cityhood set on Aug. 11". Raymund Catindig(The Philippine Star). philstar.com. July 3, 2012. Retrieved July 3, 2012. "RA No. 10169" (PDF). The Official Gazette PH. officialgazette.gov.ph. Retrieved June 21, 2012. "Ilagan now 4th city in Cagayan Valley". INQUIRER.net. newsinfo.inquirer.net. Retrieved August 12, 2012. "Isabela's Ilagan now a component city". The Philippine Star. philstar.com. August 13, 2012. Retrieved August 13, 2012. "An order creating the Ilagan Development Authority (ILAGANDA) in the City of Ilagan" (PDF). Official Website | City of Ilagan | The Corn Capital of the Philippines. August 28, 2019. Retrieved September 5, 2021. "City exec eyes Ilagan as liveable city by 2030". Philippine Information Agency. September 26, 2019. Retrieved September 5, 2021. "Bagong Pilipinas Serbisyo Fair up in Region 2". Gene Baquiran of the Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved November 22, 2023. "'Bagong Pilipinas Serbisyo Fair' to benefit Cagayan Valley". Merlito Edale Jr. of the Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved November 9, 2023. "The BPSF of the Marcos' Admin will be coming in the City of Ilagan to be held at the City of Ilagan Sports Complex and Isabela National High School". Official Website of the City Government of Ilagan. cityofilagan.gov.ph. Retrieved November 20, 2023. "Speaker kicks off Isabela 'Serbisyo' fair". JD of the Daily Tribune. tribune.net.ph. Retrieved November 26, 2023. "Bagong Pilipinas Serbisyo Fair in Isabela to bring gov't services to 100K". Adrian Parungao - @inquirerdotnet. newsinfo.inquirer.net. Retrieved November 25, 2023. "'Serbisyo' caravan brings in P500M in Isabela". Maricel Cruz of the Manila Standard. manilastandard.net. Retrieved November 26, 2023. "Isabela farmers get P1.3-B farm resources". Leander C. Domingo of the Manila Times. manilatimes.net. Retrieved November 30, 2023. "Gov't launches Bagong Pilipinas Serbisyo Fair in Isabela". Halee Andrea Alcaraz(Philstar.com). philstar.com. Retrieved November 28, 2023. "PBBM's Serbisyo Caravan brings P500-M aid to Isabela – Romualdez". Jose Cielito Reganit of the Philippine News Agency. pna.gov.ph. Retrieved November 25, 2023. "Romualdez lauds PBBM's initiative as Bagong Pilipinas Serbisyo Fair rolls to Isabela". Manila Bulletin. mb.com.ph. Retrieved November 26, 2023. "Bagong Pilipinas fair goes to Isabela". Red Mendoza of The Manila Times. manilatimes.net. Retrieved November 26, 2023. "Province: Isabela". PSGC Interactive. Quezon City, Philippines: Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved November 12, 2016. "Barangays of Ilagan City, Isabela". cityofilagan.gov.ph. Retrieved March 17, 2019. "Barangays of Ilagan City, Isabela". Official Website of the City Government of Ilagan. cityofilagan.com. Retrieved February 3, 2023. "City of Ilagan (Capital) - Code:023114000". Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved October 18, 2021. "Definition of an urban barangay". Philippine Statistics Authority. psa.gov.ph. Retrieved February 3, 2023. "Ilagan, Isabela: Average Temperatures and Rainfall". World Weather Online. Retrieved October 31, 2015. "Land Area". TESDAISAT.Net Website. Archived from the original on July 18, 2012. Retrieved February 7, 2012. "City of Ilagan". Philipine Statistics Authority. Retrieved January 22, 2024. Census of Population (2015). "Region II (Cagayan Valley)". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved June 20, 2016. Census of Population and Housing (2010). "Region II (Cagayan Valley)" (PDF). Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. National Statistics Office. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Censuses of Population (1903–2007). "Region II (Cagayan Valley)". Table 1. Population Enumerated in Various Censuses by Province/Highly Urbanized City: 1903 to 2007. National Statistics Office.{{cite encyclopedia}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Province of Isabela". Municipality Population Data. Local Water Utilities Administration Research Division. Retrieved December 17, 2016. "Emerging Cities in the Philippines". Philippine-Islands.Net. Archived from the original on June 3, 2013. Retrieved February 7, 2012. "Poverty incidence (PI):". Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved December 28, 2020. "Estimation of Local Poverty in the Philippines" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. November 29, 2005. "2003 City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. March 23, 2009. "City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates; 2006 and 2009" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. August 3, 2012. "2012 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. May 31, 2016. "Municipal and City Level Small Area Poverty Estimates; 2009, 2012 and 2015". Philippine Statistics Authority. July 10, 2019. "PSA Releases the 2018 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates". Philippine Statistics Authority. December 15, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2022. Communications, CESO (January 17, 2020). "Ilagan Makes Its Way On The Map". CESO - Stronger economies. Better lives. Retrieved October 17, 2021. "Local Economic Development & Investment Promotion in the City of Ilagan". Official website of the City of Ilagan. cityofilagan.com. Retrieved March 8, 2022. "Why Ilagan Isabela Will Be Among the Top Cities in 2030". Official Website of the Executive Chronicles. executivechronicles.com. Retrieved August 25, 2023. "Economic Profile; City of Ilagan". CMCI DTI. cmci.dti.gov.ph. Retrieved March 8, 2022. "Xentro Mall Ilagan - Northstar Mall". Official Facebook Page of Xentro Mall Ilagan - Northstar Mall. facebook.com/leasing@xentromalls.com. Retrieved November 30, 2023. "Re-opening day of McDonald's Ilagan City, Isabela". Official Facebook Page of McDonald’s Northstar Mall Ilagan. facebook.com/mcdonaldsilaganisabela@gmail.com. Retrieved November 26, 2023. "Ace Hardware - Ilagan, Isabela is open at your service!". Official Facebook Page of Xentro Mall Ilagan - Northstar Mall. facebook.com/leasing@xentromalls.com. Retrieved January 25, 2021. "DIY Hardware Upper North Luzon Branches". Official Website of the D.I.Y Hardware. diyhardware.ph. Retrieved November 30, 2023. "The Grand Opening of Pandayan Bookshop - Northstar Mall Alibagu Ilagan, Isabela". Official Facebook Page of Pandayan Bookshop. facebook.com/pandayan.com.ph. Retrieved December 9, 2010. "The Grand Opening of Pandayan Bookshop - Baligatan". Official Facebook Page of Pandayan Bookshop Baligatan Ilagan. facebook.com/pandayanbookshopilagan. Retrieved July 3, 2023. "Ilagan welcomes opening of another Watsons Pharmacy in the city". Official Facebook Page of City Councilor Jayvee Diaz. facebook.com/citycouncilorjayveediaz. Retrieved September 28, 2022. "Grand Opening of MR.DIY located at Xentro Mall Ilagan (Northstar Mall)". Official Facebook Page of City Councilor Jayvee Diaz. facebook.com/citycouncilorjayveediaz. Retrieved September 21, 2019. "Mercury Drug - Ilagan, Isabela is open at your service". Official Facebook Page of Xentro Mall Ilagan - Northstar Mall. facebook.com/leasing@xentromalls.com. Retrieved May 3, 2020. "Infinitea Xentro Mall Alibagu". Official Facebook Page of Infinitea Xentro Mall Ilagan - Northstar Mall. facebook.com/infiniteanorthstarmall. Retrieved November 30, 2023. "Black Scoop Café City of Ilagan". Official Facebook Page of Black Scoop Café - City of Ilagan. facebook.com/blackscoopcafecityofilagan. Retrieved November 30, 2023. "Grand Opening of Turks Shawarma at Xentro Mall Ilagan". Official Facebook Page of City Councilor Jayvee Diaz. facebook.com/citycouncilorjayveediaz. Retrieved November 16, 2023. "The Grand Opening of 7-Eleven in Centro - Ilagan". Official Facebook Page of MyCity Ilagan. facebook.com/cityofilagan.gov.ph. Retrieved September 4, 2019. "The Grand Opening of 7-Eleven in Lullutan - Ilagan". Official Facebook Page of City Councilor Jayvee Diaz. facebook.com/citycouncilorjayveediaz. Retrieved November 20, 2023. "Prepare to indulge in shopping and make your way to XentroMall Ilagan, City of Ilagan, Isabela, as Havaianas is opening a new kiosk tomorrow!". Official Facebook Page of Xentro Mall Ilagan - Northstar Mall. facebook.com/leasing@xentromalls.com. Retrieved November 30, 2023. "Ilagan City, idineklarang 'Corn Capital of the Philippines'". Wilfredo Berganio of Press Reader. Retrieved August 21, 2015 – via PressReader. "DA's Technology Forum showcases CagVal's locally invented farm machineries, equipment". Merlito Edale Jr. of the Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved October 1, 2022. "The Department of Agriculture-Cagayan Valley Research Center (DA-CVRC) Agro-Eco Tourism Farm in Ilagan City was accredited by the Department of Tourism (DOT) as agri-tourism farm/site in Region 2". Rita T. Dela Cruz of the Bureau of Agricultural Research. bar.gov.ph. Retrieved May 26, 2016. "Corn program to support local agri workers, improve yield". Jel Santos of Manila Bulletin. mb.com.ph. Retrieved February 7, 2023. "Mammangi Festival 2023: Ilagan to build corn processing facility". Earl D.C. Bracamonte(Philstar.com). philstar.com. Retrieved August 20, 2023. "Corn processing facility rises in Isabela". Merlito Edale Jr. of Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved August 15, 2023. "Villar leads corn hub groundbreaking". Leander C. Domingo of The Manila Times. manilatimes.net. Retrieved August 9, 2023. "Corn complex to rise in Region 2". The Manila Times. manilatimes.net. December 21, 2022. Retrieved December 21, 2022. "Isabela's first ever Corn Innovation Center to rise in City of Ilagan". PIA. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Tripartite agreement signed for corn complex project in Ilagan". PIA. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved February 3, 2023. "Cagayan Valley's first I-Corn Complex breaks ground in Ilagan City". Jessica M. Bacud of Manila Standard. manilastandard.net. Retrieved August 8, 2023. "Corn Innovation Center, ipinapatayo para makatulong sa mga magsasaka". Bombo Radyo Cauayan. bomboradyo.com. Retrieved July 18, 2022. "Corn Innovation Center to rise in Ilagan". Leander C. Domingo of The Manila Times. manilatimes.net. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "𝐋𝐆𝐔 𝐈𝐥𝐚𝐠𝐚𝐧 𝐢𝐧𝐭𝐞𝐧𝐬𝐢𝐟𝐢𝐞𝐬 𝐅𝐨𝐨𝐝 𝐒𝐞𝐜𝐮𝐫𝐢𝐭𝐲 𝐚𝐧𝐝 𝐒𝐮𝐟𝐟𝐢𝐜𝐢𝐞𝐧𝐜𝐲 𝐀𝐠𝐞𝐧𝐝𝐚; 𝐆𝐫𝐨𝐮𝐧𝐝𝐛𝐫𝐞𝐚𝐤𝐬 𝐂𝐨𝐫𝐧 𝐈𝐧𝐧𝐨𝐯𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐨𝐧 𝐂𝐞𝐧𝐭𝐞𝐫". Official Facebook Page of City Councilor Jayvee Diaz. facebook.com/citycouncilorjayveediaz. Retrieved July 12, 2022. "Groundbreaking Ceremony for the 𝐂𝐨𝐫𝐧 𝐈𝐧𝐧𝐨𝐯𝐚𝐭𝐢𝐨𝐧 𝐂𝐞𝐧𝐭𝐞𝐫". Official Facebook Page of MyCity Ilagan. facebook.com/cityofilagan.gov.ph. Retrieved July 12, 2022. "Inauguration of P500 million Swine Breeding Complex in Ilagan City, Isabela". Official Facebook Page of MyCity Ilagan. facebook.com/cityofilagan.gov.ph. Retrieved December 2, 2020. "The Inauguration of P500 million Swine Breeding Complex of Charoen Pokphand Foods Corp. in Ilagan City, Isabela". Official Facebook Page of Sagittarian Agricultural Philippines, Inc. facebook.com/sagittarianagri.net. Retrieved December 2, 2020. "Contract Signing of the 2nd Phase of Swine Breeding Complex investment in Ilagan by Charoen Pokphand Foods Philippines Corporation and Sagittarian Agricultural Phils. Inc". Official Facebook Page of City Councilor Jayvee Diaz. facebook.com/citycouncilorjayveediaz. Retrieved June 20, 2023. "MOA Signing of the Phase 2 of a 5,400 SOW level Swine Breeding Complex investment of CPFPC & Sagittarian Agri. Phils. Inc". Official Facebook Page of Board Member Ejay Diaz. facebook.com/bmejaydiaz. Retrieved June 20, 2023. "Philippine Banking System Distribution of Domestic Deposits". PDIC. pdic.gov.ph. Retrieved December 31, 2021. "Financial Institutions in Ilagan City". Cybo. cybo.com. Retrieved February 28, 2023. "List of Offices - Land Bank of the Philippines" (PDF). Land Bank of the Philippines. Retrieved February 7, 2024. "DBP Branches and ATMs Locations". Development Bank of the Philippines. Retrieved February 7, 2024. "DENR eases ECC processing for 16 firms". Manila Bulletin. December 20, 2010. Retrieved February 7, 2012. "Cagayan Valley food processors get more than P2 million assistance from DOST". Philippine Information Agency. October 26, 2006. Retrieved October 18, 2021. "Ilagan gunning for a world record with giant armchair". Philstar Global. philstar.com. April 26, 2003. Retrieved April 26, 2003. "Butaka City". TESDAISAT.Net. Archived from the original on July 18, 2012. Retrieved February 7, 2012. "Biggest Butaka". Wikimapia.Org. Retrieved February 7, 2012. "Province of Isabela; Economic Profile of the City of Ilagan". Official website of the Province of Isabela. provinceofisabela.ph. Retrieved March 8, 2022. "Opening of the newest Savemore branch at the City Mall in Baligatan, City of Ilagan". Official Facebook Page of MyCity Ilagan. facebook.com/cityofilagan.gov.ph. Retrieved July 13, 2016. "SKFED News: A Step Closer Towards a Liveable City". Official Facebook Page of SK Federation - City of Ilagan. facebook.com/SKFEDCITYOFILAGAN. Retrieved November 23, 2023. "Groundbreaking Ceremony ng San Antonio Public Market". Official Facebook Page of Bagong Centro San Antonio. facebook.com/bagongcentrosanantonio. Retrieved November 23, 2023. "Groundbreaking Ceremonies ng San Antonio Public Market at Marana 1st Public Market sa Lungsod ng Ilagan". Official Facebook Page of Brgy. Namnama, City of Ilagan, Isabela. facebook.com/brgynamnamacityofilagan. Retrieved November 23, 2023. "The most awaited BIG Prime Hills Open House is coming your way!!". Official Facebook Page of CCL BIG Prime Hills - City of Ilagan, Isabela. facebook.com/cclbigprimehillscityofilaganisabela. Retrieved July 27, 2023. "BIG Prime Hills Exclusive Subdivision". Official Facebook Page of CCL BIG Prime Hills - City of Ilagan, Isabela. facebook.com/cclbigprimehillscityofilaganisabela. Retrieved September 1, 2023. "Project Dedication of Vester Corporation for its St. Andrews Village". Official Facebook Page of City Councilor Jayvee Diaz. facebook.com/citycouncilorjayveediaz. Retrieved June 24, 2022. "Providers City Subdivision Projects in Isabela". Official Facebook Page of Isabela Providers City Subdivision. facebook.com/isabelaproviderscitysubdivision. Retrieved July 28, 2023. "Revenge spending: Ayala Land amasses P2.16B land in last 12 months". Official Website of Bilyonaryo.com. bilyonaryo.com. Retrieved February 1, 2022. "Avida Land Corporation will soon rise in the City of Ilagan". Official Website of the City Government of Ilagan. business.cityofilagan.com. Retrieved February 18, 2023. "Grand Opening of Talavera Hypermart & Homebuilders Depot". Official Facebook Page of MyCity Ilagan. facebook.com/cityofilagan.gov.ph. Retrieved March 19, 2021. "The Grand Opening of Talavera Hypermart & Homebuilders Depot in Ilagan City, Isabela". Official Facebook Page of City Councilor Jayvee Diaz. facebook.com/citycouncilorjayveediaz. Retrieved March 19, 2021. "Grand Opening of Talavera Hypermart in Calamagui 2nd, Ilagan City, Isabela". Official Facebook Page of MyCity PIO. facebook.com/mycitypio. Retrieved March 19, 2021. "FOSTERING THE TEXTILE INDUSTRY OF THE NORTH - ISU houses the country's 2nd Regional Yarn Center". Official Website of the Isabela State University. isu.edu.ph. Retrieved June 23, 2023. "LAUNCHING OF THE REGIONAL YARN PRODUCTION AND INNOVATION CENTER (RYPIC) ISABELA". Official Website of the Department of Science and Technology - Philippine Textile Research Institute / Reina Rose B. Realino / Technology Transfer, Information and Promotions Staff. ptri.dost.gov.ph. Retrieved June 27, 2023. "P40M worth of Yarn production, innovation center inaugurated". Philippine Information Agency / Merlito Edale Jr. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved June 30, 2023. "Developing the textile industry of the north". The Manila Times / Leander C. Domingo. manilatimes.net. Retrieved July 15, 2023. "DOST to launch yarn production, innovation center in Isabela". Philippine Information Agency / Merlito Edale Jr. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved June 20, 2023. "Yarn innovation center to rise in Ilagan". Philippine News Agency / Ma. Cristina Arayata. pna.gov.ph. Retrieved May 13, 2022. "OUR HISTORY". Retrieved October 24, 2021. "600 tobacco farmers receive livelihood assistance". PIA. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved July 20, 2022. "A season of contented tobacco farmers". Philstar Global. philstar.com. Retrieved September 11, 2005. "Protocol Research Studies". DA-NTA PH. nta.da.gov.ph. Retrieved December 21, 2022. "Have you ever been to Isabela? If not, this is the time". Carol RH Malasig of Manila Bulletin. mb.com.ph. Retrieved March 29, 2023. "Travel diaries: Discovering Isabela's rich history". Alex Villano / Rappler PH. rappler.com. February 18, 2018. Retrieved February 18, 2018. Beezz (March 19, 2016) [2016-03-16]. "Take a Nature and Urban Adventure in Ilagan City, Isabela". TriptheIslands.com. Retrieved July 29, 2023. "Ilagan Sanctuary reopens for tourists". Merlito Edale Jr. / Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved March 15, 2023. "City gov't to open primary tourism site after rehab, beautification". Merlito Edale Jr. / Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved March 8, 2023. "The Inner Sanctum of Ilagan". Estefan Gavino / The Northern Forum. northernforum.net. Retrieved October 25, 2019. "No fear factor: Zipline fun in Ilagan". Jerald T. Uy / Rappler PH. rappler.com. March 13, 2013. Retrieved March 14, 2013. "Ilagan Sanctuary reopened to tourists". Vince Jacob Visaya / The Manila Times. manilatimes.net. March 15, 2023. Retrieved March 15, 2023. "Ilagan Sanctuary bubuksan na ngayong araw". Bombo Jayson Felina / Bombo Radyo Cauayan. bomboradyo.com. March 13, 2023. Retrieved March 13, 2023. "Looking for adventure? This sanctuary in Isabela is a must-visit". GMA News. gmanetwork.com. Retrieved May 3, 2022. "Ilagan Sanctuary: A Rising Tourist Spot in the Philippines". Golden Isabela. goldenisabela.weebly.com. Retrieved January 16, 2016. "Ilagan Sanctuary's EcoTourism Activities Make Every Nature Lover's Dream Come True". Department of Tourism PH. 7641islands.ph. Retrieved January 31, 2023. "Abuan River: Mother Nature's Washing Machines". Jhaypiee Guia of ViggattinTourism. vigattintourism.com. Retrieved May 22, 2022. "Isabela mayor eyes Abuan River as tourist spot". Merlito Edale / Philippine News Agency. pna.gov.ph. Retrieved December 5, 2017. "Take a Nature and Urban Adventure in Ilagan City, Isabela". Bezz of Trip the Islands Blogspot. triptheislands.com. Retrieved March 16, 2016. "Burmurbur Falls in Ilagan City, Isabela". Samuel Acosta & Ilagan City, Isabela Facebook Page. ilagancityisabela.facebook.com. Retrieved August 29, 2015. "Potential Tourism Destination; Disupi Falls in Sindun Bayabo". Official Facebook Page of MyCity Tourism Ilagan. facebook.com/tourism.cityofilagan.com. Retrieved September 19, 2020. "Kimmul-ong Falls in Barangay Capellan". Official Facebook Page of MyCity Tourism Ilagan. facebook.com/tourism.cityofilagan.com. Retrieved June 23, 2020. "Site Visit and Assessment of Kimmul-ong Falls". Official Facebook Page of MyCity Tourism Ilagan. facebook.com/tourism.cityofilagan.com. Retrieved June 4, 2020. "Turning Japanese in Ilagan". Benjie De Yro of The Northern Forum. northernforum.net. Retrieved October 25, 2019. "The Ilagan Japanese War Tunnel". The Auditor. theauditor.com. April 27, 2019. Retrieved October 25, 2019. "Isabela Museum and Library". Kheem Caparas of Viggattintourism. viggattintourism.com. Retrieved June 22, 2012. "ISABELA: Inside Isabela's Seat of Power". Rex Lim Lim of Transit Pinas. transitpinas.com. Retrieved March 3, 2020. "Wow na wow ang paskuhan sa City of Ilagan!". Official Facebook Page of 98.5 i-FM Cauayan. facebook.com/rmn.ph. Retrieved December 7, 2023. "Paskuhan Village is Waving!". Official Facebook Page of 98.5 i-FM Cauayan. facebook.com/rmn.ph. Retrieved November 29, 2023. "Welcome to this year's PASKUHAN VILLAGE". Official Facebook Page of City Councilor Jayvee Diaz. facebook.com/citycouncilorjayveediaz. Retrieved December 6, 2023. "Opening of Pag-ibig Village in Banchetto Ilagan". Official Facebook Page of BM Ejay Diaz. facebook.com/bmejaydiaz. Retrieved February 3, 2023. "CORN Capital of the Philippines; The Mammangi Park in Ilagan City". Official Facebook Page of Notch Vlog. facebook.com/notchvlog. Retrieved December 1, 2021. "The Mammangi Park is the former DBP Triangle". Official Facebook Page of City of Ilagan Tourist Information and Assistance Center. facebook.com/ilaganinfocenter. Retrieved July 17, 2018. "The Mammangi Park; A tribute to Ilagueño Corn Farmers". Official Facebook Page of City of Ilagan Tourist Information and Assistance Center. facebook.com/ilaganinfocenter. Retrieved December 10, 2018. Iñigo, Liezle (March 21, 2022). "'Padyak' to open tourism activities in Ilagan City". Manila Bulletin - The Nation's Leading Newspaper. Retrieved April 23, 2022. "World's Largest Butaka". Chaynieee Blogspot. chaynieee.home.blog. April 10, 2019. Retrieved April 10, 2019. "MGA KASAYSAYAN, KULTURA, PAMANA, SINING AT MAHALAGANG KAGANAPAN NG LUNGSOD NG ILAGAN; BONIFACIO PARK". Official Facebook Page of MyCity Tourism Ilagan. facebook.com/tourism.cityofilagan.com. Retrieved April 21, 2020. "Inauguration of Cagayan Valley's first Musical Dancing Fountain in the City of Ilagan". Official Facebook Page of MyCity Tourism Ilagan. facebook.com/tourism.cityofilagan.com. Retrieved August 15, 2022. "THE ILAGAN TOURIST SPOTS". Official Facebook Page of The Auditour. facebook.com/theauditour.com. Retrieved April 26, 2019. "Saint Ferdinand Parish Church (Proto-Cathedral of Ilagan): Ilagan City, Isabela". Official Facebook Page of Cagayan Heritage Conservation Society Community / Prince Wilson A. Macarubbo. facebook.com/CHCSC. Retrieved May 21, 2020. "St. Ferdinand Parish Church (Ilagan City, Isabela)". Philippine Faith and Heritage Tours. Retrieved July 29, 2023. "St. Ferdinand Parish Church (Ilagan City, Isabela)". Philippine Faith and Heritage Tours. Retrieved July 29, 2023. "Holy Rosary Festival 2023; Solemn Episcopal Coronation of the Pilgrim Image of St. Ferdinand Parish - Our Lady of the Most Holy Rosary". Official Facebook Page of St. Ferdinand Parish Ilagan. facebook.com/OfficialSFPO. Retrieved October 29, 2023. "Holy Rosary Festival of the Parish & Proto-Cathedral of Saint Ferdinand in Ilagan, Isabela". Official Facebook Page of Buen Viaje PH. facebook.com/BuenViajePH. Retrieved September 11, 2023. "PART 01: SNIPPETS from the Episcopal Coronation of the Pilgrim Image of the Most Holy Rosary at St. Ferdinand Parish Church". Official Facebook Page of SFC-SHS Gazette & St. Ferdinand Parish Official / Credits to Lawrence Laciste (Photographer & Layout Artist). facebook.com/sfc.edu.ph. Retrieved October 30, 2023. "PART 02: SNIPPETS from the Episcopal Coronation of the Pilgrim Image of the Most Holy Rosary at St. Ferdinand Parish Church". Official Facebook Page of SFC-SHS Gazette & St. Ferdinand Parish Official / Credits to Lawrence Laciste (Photographer & Layout Artist). facebook.com/sfc.edu.ph. Retrieved October 30, 2023. "Balai na Ilagan". Philippine Daily Inquirer. March 26, 2012. Retrieved September 11, 2012. "CULTURE AND ARTS IN ONE COZY PLACE". Official Facebook Page of Isabela: taga-DITO TAYO / Photo credits to Stewards and Friends of Ilagan, Inc. facebook.com/isabelatagaditotayo. Retrieved February 17, 2017. "History and Culture of Ilagan". Official Website of the City of Ilagan. Retrieved January 27, 2019. "May 4 is special non-working holiday in City of Ilagan". PIA via PHILPAR News. news.philpar.com. Retrieved May 4, 2021. "Aggaw na Ilagan and Opening of Mammangi Trade Fair & Bazaar". Official Website | City of Ilagan. May 5, 2018. Retrieved October 8, 2021. "355th Aggaw ng Ilagan, idinaos". BNFM Cauayan. brigadanews.ph. Retrieved May 4, 2021. "Agta tribesmen awarded gov't housing units". Raymund Catindig(Philstar.com). philstar.com. Retrieved May 6, 2012. "Binallay Festival". Philippine Retirement Authority. Archived from the original on November 19, 2011. Retrieved February 7, 2012. "August 11 declared special non-working holiday in Ilagan". Merlito Edale Jr. of the Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved August 10, 2022. Cauayan, iFM (August 6, 2022). "MGA AKTIBIDAD SA 10TH CITYHOOD ANNIVERSARY NG ILAGAN, NAKALATAG NA". iFM Cauayan. rmn.ph. Retrieved August 6, 2022. "City of Ilagan opens 2023 Mammangi festival, 11th cityhood". By Merlito Edale Jr. of Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved August 3, 2023. "Isabela's capital marks first charter day". The Philippine Star. Retrieved August 23, 2013. "Area of Coverage". ATI in Cagayan Valley. Retrieved December 23, 2021. "In Ilagan City, a big corn-y fetes farmers". BY AMADÍS MA. GUERRERO of Lifestyle Inquirer. lifestyle.inquirer.net. Retrieved September 16, 2023. "Ilagan City, idineklarang 'Corn Capital of the Philippines '". Wilfredo Berganio via Press Reader website. Retrieved August 21, 2015 – via PressReader. Comsti, Nino Angelo (February 20, 2020). "'Binallay': Lesser-known 'suman' is much loved in Isabela". Inquirer.net. Retrieved January 19, 2024. Macaalay, Raymund (July 12, 2019). "Binallay". AngSarap.net. Retrieved January 19, 2024. "Cagayan Valley Rice Cakes and Delicacies". Jan Karl Coballes of the Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved June 7, 2022. "Binallay". Chaynieee Blogspot. chaynieee.home.blog. April 10, 2019. Retrieved April 10, 2019. "More than a rice cake: How Itawits embrace spirituality through 'Sinipian'". Jap Tobias(Philstar.com). philstar.com. Retrieved March 31, 2021. "Mammangi Festival 2023: A three-day celebration of culture and heritage in Ilagan City". BY MB LIFESTYLE. mb.com.ph. Retrieved August 21, 2023. "Dreams for a more livable city is underlying theme in this year's Ilagan festival". Stargate People Asia. peopleasia.ph. Retrieved August 25, 2023. "Various activities lined up for Ilagan City's celebration of Mammangi Festival from May 24 to May 31". Liezle Basa Iñigo of Manila Bulletin. mb.com.ph. Retrieved May 23, 2023. "Mammangui Festival". Oh Philippines News. Archived from the original on November 10, 2012. Retrieved February 7, 2012. Mapa, Susan (May 8, 2018). "Mammangi Festival ng Ilagan na May 4 hanggang May 8, Isang Ordinansa Na!". Susan Mapa of RMN Network. rmn.ph. Retrieved May 8, 2018. "Isabelinos praise 'Mammangi' advocacy film". Villamor Visaya, Jr. of the Philippine News Agency. pna.gov.ph. Retrieved August 19, 2019. "Adrenaline rush at 4x4 off-road, motocross challenges in Isabela". By Halee Andrea Alcaraz(Philstar.com). philstar.com. Retrieved September 9, 2023. Darang, Josephine (May 27, 2012). "Ilagan, Isabela, celebrates feast day of St. Ferdinand of Castille on May 30th". INQUIRER.net | Philippine news for Filipinos. Retrieved October 8, 2021. "Welcome to the Official Investment Website of the Province of Isabela". RDC2 Web Portal. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Visaya, Vince Jacob (April 13, 2023). "Gabby Concepcion to portray Ilagan Mayor Josemarie Diaz in film bio". The Manila Times. Retrieved May 6, 2023. "Batang Pinoy-Luzon unfolds in Ilagan". Joey Villar(The Philippine Star). philstar.com. Retrieved March 17, 2019. "Ilagan City to host 2019 Batang Pinoy Luzon leg". batangpinoy.psc.gov.ph. Retrieved January 15, 2019. "2019 Batang Pinoy Luzon leg". Philippine Information Agency. Retrieved January 15, 2019. "PSC exec urges LGUs to boost livelihood thru sports tourism". Jean Malanum of the Philippine News Agency. pna.gov.ph. Retrieved March 17, 2019. "City of Ilagan hosts 2 major sports events". Merlito Edale Jr. of the Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved May 25, 2022. "Opening of Philta National Youth Tennis Circuit 2022 and the Little League North Luzon baseball championship". Bombo Lanie Velasco. bomboradyo.com. May 23, 2022. Retrieved May 24, 2022. "LGU Ilagan to host 2023 Baseball Little League Philippines". Merlito Edale Jr. of the Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved February 3, 2023. "Baseball Little League Philippines-North/South Luzon at NCR Series, umaarangkada na sa City of Ilagan, Isabela". Balitang Hilaga. balitanghilaga.net. February 6, 2023. Retrieved February 6, 2023. "Little League Philippines Series 2023". Little League Philippines. littleleague.org.ph. Retrieved January 15, 2023. "Little League Philippines to guarantee safety of 63 teams". Manila Bulletin Sports. mb.com.ph. Retrieved March 28, 2023. "63 teams vie for slots to AsPac Games in Little League PH". ABS-CBN News. news.abs-cbn.com. Retrieved March 28, 2023. "2023 Little League Philippines National Finals, pormal ng nagsimula kahapon". Bombo Lanie Velasco / Bombo Radyo Cauayan. bomboradyo.com. April 10, 2023. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Little League PH National Finals held in Ilagan City". Jerico Joshua Kahulugan / The Northern Forum. northernforum.net. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "PATAFA: ICTSI PH Athletics Championships a preview of SEA Games". ABSCBN News. news.abs-cbn.com. Retrieved March 14, 2023. "Philippine athletics meet slated". The Philippine Star. philstar.com. Retrieved March 15, 2023. "City of Ilagan hosts ICTSI Phil athletics championships". Merlito Edale Jr. of the Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved March 22, 2023. "Fil-foreigners shine in ICTSI PH athletics championships". Jean Malanum of the Philippine News Agency. pna.gov.ph. Retrieved March 22, 2023. "2023 Philippine Athletics Championship in Ilagan City concluded". The Northern Forum. northernforum.net. Retrieved March 27, 2023. "Opening Ceremony of the 2023 CaVRASUC games in Ilagan City". Official Facebook Page of Isabela State University - Roxas Campus. facebook.com. Retrieved March 28, 2023. "CaVRASUC officially opens, PNUNL takes part". Frank Mark V. Cristobal / Official Facebook Page of The TORCH North Luzonian. facebook.com. Retrieved March 27, 2023. "CaVRASUC 2023 unfolds through a Grand Opening Ceremony". Article by Jasser Ramirez / Photos by Jm Rigor Castillo & Mark Escobar / Official Facebook Page of The Sower Quirino State University - Diffun Campus. facebook.com. Retrieved March 28, 2023. "City of Ilagan hosts 2023 CAVRASUC games". Merlito Edale Jr. / Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved March 29, 2023. "Opening ceremony ng 2023 CAVRASUC isinagawa kagabi sa City of Ilagan Sports Complex". Bombo Jayson Felina / Bombo Radyo Cauayan. bomboradyo.com. Retrieved March 28, 2023. "Cagayan dominates CAVRAA Meet anew; bags 5th straight this year". The Northern Forum. northernforum.net. Retrieved April 29, 2023. "It's On: CAVRAA officially opens in Ilagan City". Joshua Jerico Kahulugan / The Northern Forum. northernforum.net. Retrieved April 25, 2023. "CAVRAA 2023 kicks off in Isabela with grand ceremony". Leonora Lo-oy / Guru Press Cordillera. gurupress-cordillera.com. Retrieved April 25, 2023. "Paghahanda sa CAVRAA MEET 2023, puspusan na". Official Facebook Page of the Cagayan Provincial Information Office. facebook.com. Retrieved March 22, 2023. "CAVRAA Meet 2023, pormal ng nagsimula". Bombo Radyo Cauayan. bomboradyo.com. Retrieved April 25, 2023. "Cagayan rules 2016 CAVRAA meet". Victor Martin(The Philippine Star). philstar.com. Retrieved March 1, 2016. "Cagayan is overall champion in CAVRAA 2017". The Northern Forum. northernforum.net. Retrieved February 28, 2017. "Cagayan kampeon sa CAVRAA". Victor Martin(The Philippine Star). philstar.com. Retrieved March 4, 2017. "Ace tracksters, region's best vie in Ayala Philippines meet". The Philippine Star. philstar.com. Retrieved April 12, 2018. "1K ASEAN athletes to join 2 tournaments in Ilagan City". Jean Malanum / Philippine News Agency. pna.gov.ph. Retrieved January 30, 2019. Maguddayao, Angelo (March 6, 2019). "Unang araw ng Tagisan sa Ayala Philippine Athletic Championship, Umarangkada!". Angelo Maguddayao / RMN Network. rmn.ph. Retrieved March 6, 2019. "Ilagan to stage SEA youth trackfest, Ayala Phl Open". Abac Cordero(The Philippine Star). philstar.com. Retrieved March 17, 2017. "Ilagan City hosts two major athletics events". Ramon Rafael C. Bonilla / Business Mirror. businessmirror.com.ph. January 31, 2019. Retrieved January 31, 2019. "SEA youth, national athletics championship unfold in Isabela". Leander C. Domingo, TMT. manilatimes.net. March 23, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2017. "Twin international sporting events, pormal na binuksan ngayong araw sa Isabela". Bombo Cauayan News Team. bomboradyo.com. March 2019. Retrieved May 1, 2019. "Nagbukas ngayong hapon Philippine National Open Invitational Athletics Championships sa Ilagan City". Bombo Cauayan News Team. bomboradyo.com. March 29, 2017. Retrieved March 29, 2017. "Security tightens as Ilagan hosts first int'l athletics hosting outside Metro Manila". Raymon Dullana / Rappler PH. rappler.com. March 24, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2017. "Ilagan to host SEA Youth Athletics Championship and Philippine National Open Invitational Athletics Championship". The Philippine Star. Retrieved March 12, 2017. "Ilagan to host PATAFA games anew". Philippine Information Agency. Retrieved June 8, 2018. "Ilagan to host 14th SEA Youth Athletics Championship and 2019 Philippine Athletics Championships". Singapore Athletics. Retrieved December 13, 2018. "IPHO isasagawa ang launching ng Human Papilloma Virus Vaccine sa City of Ilagan". Bombo Jayson Felina. bomboradyo.com. Retrieved March 16, 2023. "City exec bares 2022 accomplishments". Merlito Edale Jr. of the Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved November 25, 2022. "JLD-JAYVE CUP 2022, MULING BINUKSAN SA CITY OF ILAGAN". Rowena Munchang of RMN Network. rmn.ph. Retrieved April 9, 2022. Visaya, Villamor Jr. (October 16, 2020). "14-day ECQ imposed in Ilagan City". Philippine News Agency. Retrieved October 9, 2021. "Ilagan City mayor inaugurates newly-renovated sports and convention center on Independence Day". Merlito Edale Jr. of Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved June 14, 2023. "DECS Order #5, s. 1993; Palarong Pambansa 1993" (PDF). DepEd PH. deped.gov.ph. Retrieved January 8, 2003. "SCUAA off the wraps in Isabela". Philstar Global. philstar.com. Retrieved February 22, 2011. "SCUAA Games get underway in Isabela". GMA News Online. gmanetwork.com. Retrieved February 21, 2011. "Sports Complex". Panoramio.com. Retrieved February 7, 2012. "SCUAA National Olympics opens Monday". GMA News Online. gmanetwork.com. Retrieved February 19, 2011. "Isabela Golf Course". Golf Philippines. Retrieved February 7, 2012. "Isabela Golf Club". Golf Guide Philippines. Retrieved February 7, 2024. "Ilagan Table Tennis Club". Pinoy Sports Central. Archived from the original on September 6, 2012. Retrieved February 7, 2012. "Table Tennis Association City of Ilagan". Ratings Central. ratingscentral.com. Retrieved December 31, 2022. "City of Ilagan, Election Results 2022". COMELEC. Rappler.com. Retrieved February 25, 2023. "City of Ilagan Political Structure". City Government of Ilagan. cityofilagan.com. Retrieved February 25, 2023. "House of Representatives: 19th Congress". Official Website of the House of Representatives PH. congress.gov.ph. Retrieved May 15, 2022. "Kauna-unahang modernized PUV sa rehiyon, ilulunsad ngayong araw ng LTFRB at DOTR sa lunsod ng Ilagan". Bombo Lanie Velasco / Bombo Radyo Cauayan. bomboradyo.com. Retrieved May 27, 2022. "LTFRB-2: PUV modernization program to continue this year". Merlito Edale Jr. / Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved February 28, 2023. "More bus firms resume Manila-Northern Luzon trips". John Michael Mugas / Inquirer.net. newsinfo.inquirer.net. Retrieved April 7, 2022. "Ilagan Central Terminal opens tomorrow". Official Facebook Page of Isabela Aking Probinsya/PIO. facebook.com/isabelaakingprobinsya. Retrieved November 2, 2011. "CITY OF ILAGAN TERMINAL, KAUNA-UNAHAN SA REHIYON DOS NA MABIGYAN LTFRB ACCREDITATION". Official Facebook Page of XFM Santiago (KatropaMo). facebook.com/xfmsantiago. Retrieved November 7, 2023. "Cool ride with the Hybrid Electric Road Train goes to Ilagan City". Department of Science and Technology / DOSTv - Science for the People. dostv.ph. Retrieved November 26, 2021. "DOST- HERT to open more opportunities in Ilagan City, Isabela". DOST Region 2. region2.dost.gov.ph. Retrieved August 17, 2021. Arayata, Ma. Cristina (August 11, 2021). "Ilagan City to fabricate hybrid road train". Philippine News Agency. Retrieved September 3, 2021. "DOST, City of Ilagan eye HERT production". Merlito Edale Jr. / Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved August 24, 2021. "'Pinoy technology works': Hybrid electric road train fabrication project launched in Ilagan City". Charissa Luci-Atienza / Manila Bulletin. mb.com.ph. Retrieved August 18, 2021. "10 TAXI UNITS, ILULUNSAD SA CITY OF ILAGAN". iFM Cauayan. rmn.ph. Retrieved October 5, 2022. "Ilang units ng taxi na dumating sa lunsod ng Ilagan, kinagiliwan ng mga mamamayan". Bombo Lanie Velasco / Bombo Radyo Cauayan. bomboradyo.com. Retrieved April 23, 2022. Visaya, Vince Jacob (May 5, 2022). "First taxi fleet launched in Cagayan Valley". The Manila Times. Retrieved June 21, 2022. Visaya, Vince Jacob (May 28, 2022). "Ilagan has 58 new public utility vehicles". The Manila Times. Retrieved July 11, 2022. "58 public utility cars launched in Ilagan". Balitang Hilaga. balitanghilaga.net. Retrieved May 27, 2022. "Public Hearing for The FUTRAN Green Energy Podcar Public Transportation System". Official Facebook Page of the Sangguniang Panlungsod City of Ilagan. facebook.com/sangguniangpanlungsodcityofilagan. Retrieved February 20, 2023. "Paglalagay 'Pod-car System' sa City of Ilagan, Ibinida sa SOCA". Official Website of iFM Cauayan. iFM Cauayan/rmn.ph. Retrieved November 25, 2022. "The future of transportation is here! Official Groundbreaking Ceremony of FUTRAN Podcar Public Transportation System". Official Facebook Page of City Councilor Jayvee Diaz. facebook.com/citycouncilorjayveediaz. Retrieved November 24, 2023. "KAUNA-UNAHANG PODCAR TRANSPORT SYSTEM SA SOUTHEAST ASIA, AARANGKADA SA CITY OF ILAGAN". Official Facebook Page of XFM Santiago. facebook.com/XFMSANTIAGO. Retrieved November 24, 2023. "Groundbreaking Ceremony ng FUTRAN Podcar Public Transportation System sa Lungsod ng Ilagan". Official Facebook Page of XFM Santiago (Katropa Mo). facebook.com/XFMSANTIAGO. Retrieved November 24, 2023. "Groundbreaking Ceremony of the FUTRAN Podcar Public Transportation System". Official Facebook Page of the Ilagan Public Information Office(MyCity PIO). facebook.com/mycitypio. Retrieved November 24, 2023. "Groundbreaking Ceremony ng FUTRAN Podcar Public Transportation System sa Brgy. Alibagu". Official Facebook Page of 98.5 i-FM Cauayan. facebook.com/rmn.ph. Retrieved November 24, 2023. "PINAKA UNANG FUTRAN PODCAR TRANSPORT SYSTEM SA PILIPINAS, ITATAYO SA ILAGAN". Official Facebook Page of 98.5 i-FM Cauayan. facebook.com/rmn.ph. Retrieved November 24, 2023. "Major bridges completed". Manila Standard. Kamahalan Publishing Corp. December 6, 1995. p. 16. Retrieved February 11, 2023. "LandBank funds Ilagan City infra projects via ₧3.5-B loan". Raadee S. Sausa of the Business Mirror. businessmirror.com.ph. Retrieved March 23, 2023. "Haima was the Philippines' second typhoon in a week, and it left a trail of destruction". The Washington Post. washingtonpost.com. Retrieved October 20, 2016. "Typhoon 'Lawin' damage: P657M". Inquirer. newsinfo.inquirer.net. Retrieved October 20, 2016. "Cagayan, Isabela residents warned of higher floods". Move.PH /Rappler. October 16, 2016. Retrieved October 16, 2016. "Inauguration of Baculud Overflow Bridge". Official Facebook Page of MyCity Ilagan. May 4, 2019. Retrieved May 4, 2019. "Inauguration of the New Baculud Bridge na magdudugtong sa Poblacion at Northeastern Barangays". Official Facebook Page of City Councilor Jayvee Diaz. facebook.com/citycouncilorjayveediaz. Retrieved May 4, 2019. "PNoy leads inauguration of Ilagan's longest bridge". ABSCBN News. news.abs-cbn.com. Retrieved April 7, 2015. "Inauguration of the Lullutan Bridge". RVTM. rvtm.gov.ph. Retrieved April 7, 2015. "Inauguration of Lullutan Bridge in Isabela". Department of Public Works and Highways. April 8, 2015. Retrieved October 8, 2021. "President Benigno S. Aquino III traveled to Isabela to lead the inauguration of the New Lullutan Bridge". Official Facebook Page of the Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. facebook.com/officialgazette.gov.ph. Retrieved April 14, 2015. "DPWH completes P700-M bridge in Isabela". GOVPH. January 23, 2015. Retrieved January 26, 2015. "DPWH paving farm-to-market roads in Ilagan, Isabela". Department of Public Works and Highways. dpwh.gov.ph. Retrieved June 13, 2018. "Farm-to-market road in Ilagan nears completion — DPWH". Manila Bulletin. mb.com.ph. Retrieved June 13, 2018. "DPWH to finish paving Ilagan farm-to-market road this June". The Northern Forum. northernforum.net. Retrieved June 14, 2018. "Ilagan, Isabela farmers to have better road access; Dahil sa farm-to-market road projects". Politiko. northernluzon.politics.com.ph. June 14, 2018. Retrieved June 14, 2018. "Newly-opened farm-to-market road in Ilagan City to boost local economy". Liezle Basa Iñigo of Manila Bulletin. mb.com.ph. Retrieved November 22, 2023. "Inauguration of Cabisera 2 Bridge led by City Mayor Jay Diaz today, furthering transportation convenience in the San Antonio Region". Official Facebook Page of City Councilor Jayvee Diaz. facebook.com/citycouncilorjayveediaz. Retrieved November 23, 2023. "Isabela 1st District". Department of Public Works and Highways. dpwh.gov.ph. Retrieved March 4, 2023. "Declaring Ilagan - Delfin Albano - Mallig Road and Jct. to Delfin Albano Road into National Road" (PDF). Official Website of the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH PH). dpwh.gov.ph. Retrieved July 30, 2001. "Road improvement projects completed in Ilagan City". Official Website of the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH PH). dpwh.gov.ph. Retrieved November 29, 2017. "Declaring Various Roads as National Roads in Region II" (PDF). Official Website of the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH PH). dpwh.gov.ph. Retrieved June 21, 2022. "DPWH reports more damaged roads, bridges; 24 road sections still closed". Jun Marcos Tadios/Manila Bulletin. mb.com.ph. Retrieved November 4, 2022. "P1.6-B Isabela road to open soon". The Manila Times. manilatimes.net. October 2, 2019. Retrieved October 2, 2019. "P2-billion highway near Benham Rise to open before the end of 2018". Philstar Global. philstar.com. March 2, 2018. Retrieved March 2, 2018. "P2-b Isabela road via coastal towns half finished". Manila Standard. manilastandard.net. July 15, 2017. Retrieved July 15, 2017. "Provider of Internet and Cable Services". Polaris Cable Vision inc - Cable and Internet Provider. Retrieved October 8, 2021. "Philippine Postal Corporation". Philippine Postal Corporation. Archived from the original on January 9, 2012. Retrieved February 7, 2012. "JRS Express". JRS Express website. Archived from the original on February 12, 2012. Retrieved February 7, 2012. "ISELCO 2 Profile". Official Website of Isabela II Electric Cooperative - Province of Isabela. Retrieved September 2, 2021. "ISELCO II". Energy Regulatory Commission. Archived from the original on January 7, 2009. Retrieved February 7, 2012. "Philippines' Largest Solar Power Plant to Rise in Ilagan City, Isabela". Energy XPRT - The Energy Industry Online. June 1, 2015. Retrieved September 2, 2021. "440 MW solar energy project to rise in Isabela". The Manila Times. manilatimes.com. December 18, 2022. Retrieved December 18, 2022. "Philippines' Largest Solar Power Plant to Rise in Ilagan City, Isabela". Greenergy Solutions, Inc. energy-xprt.com. Retrieved June 1, 2015. "DOE clears P18 billion solar power project in Isabela province". Philstar Global. philstar.net. December 18, 2022. Retrieved December 18, 2022. "440-MW Isabela solar project boost to gov't RE thrust". Philippine News Agency. pna.gov.ph. Retrieved February 5, 2023. "The 440 megawatt Peak Solar PV Project, soon in the City of Ilagan!". Official Facebook Page of City Councilor Jayvee Diaz. facebook.com/citycouncilorjayveediaz. Retrieved November 24, 2023. "Provincial Government of Isabela top officials met with San Ignacio Energy Resources Development Corporation in Malacañan Palace". Official Facebook Page of Isabela PIO. facebook.com/isabelapio. Retrieved February 2, 2023. "Historical Background". Welcome to Ilagan City Water District. Retrieved October 8, 2021. "DENR, STAKEHOLDERS TAKE ACTION TO TACKLE WATER-RELATED ISSUES". DENR. r2.denr.gov.ph. Retrieved March 22, 2022. "Manila Water consortium signs joint venture deal with City of Ilagan Water District". Official Website of Manila Water. manilawater.com. Retrieved November 16, 2018. "Manila Water bags contract for Ilagan, Isabela project". Philippines News Agency. pna.gov.ph. Retrieved January 30, 2018. "City of Ilagan Water District Bulk Water Project". Official Website of Public-Private Partnership Center. ppp.gov.ph. Retrieved November 16, 2018. "RPMC monitors implementation of 4 infra projects in Isabela". Mark Djeron Tumabao of the Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved April 11, 2023. "Inauguration of Metro Ilagan Water Treatment Facility Phase 1". Official Facebook Page of City Councilor Jayvee Diaz. facebook.com/citycouncilorjayveediaz. Retrieved November 24, 2023. "SOON: Metro Ilagan Water Treatment Plant Phase 1". Official Facebook Page of the City of Ilagan Water District. facebook.com/cityofilaganwaterdistrict.gov.ph. Retrieved March 22, 2023. "Metro Ilagan Water: Information, Education & Communication Campaign". Official Facebook Page of the City of Ilagan Water District. facebook.com/cityofilaganwaterdistrict.gov.ph. Retrieved July 21, 2023. "INAGURASYON NG MGA BAGONG PROYEKTO SA ILAGAN, IBIBIDA SA SOCA". Official Facebook Page of 98.5 i-FM Cauayan. facebook.com/rmn.ph. Retrieved November 24, 2023. "$21.7M Korea-funded dam to reduce Isabela flooding". The Manila Times. Retrieved December 27, 2015. "P1-B Pasa Dam activated in Isabela". Inquirer. newsinfo.inquirer.net. Retrieved July 5, 2018. "Korea-funded Pasa Dam breaks ground in Isabela". The Manila Times. manilatimes.net. July 6, 2013. Retrieved July 6, 2013. "NIA SWITCHES ON P1.029-BILLION PASA SRIP". Official Website of the National Irrigation Administration PH. nia.gov.ph. Retrieved July 11, 2018. "Ilagan city to establish convention center". Jerico Joshua Kahulugan / The Northern Forum. northernforum.net. February 22, 2021. Retrieved February 22, 2021. "P250-M multi-purpose convention center to rise in City of Ilagan". Philippine Information Agency / Big News Network. bignewsnetwork.com. Retrieved February 21, 2021. "KONSTRUKSYON NG CAPITAL ARENA SA LUNGSOD NG ILAGAN, MALAPIT NA MATAPOS - CITY MAYOR JAY DIAZ". Official Facebook Page of 92.9 Brigada News Cauayan City. facebook.com/www.brigadafm.com. Retrieved November 30, 2023. "Ground breaking ceremony ng itatayong convention center sa Ilagan city, pinangunahan ng pamahalaang lungsod". Radyo Agila / Eagle Broadcasting Corporation / DZEC 1062kHz Manila. radyoagila.com. Retrieved February 21, 2021. "Groundbreaking of TESDA Isabela Office Building at the Ilagan Civic Center". Official Facebook Page of SP Jayvee Diaz-JECD. facebook.com. Retrieved October 22, 2021. "Blessing and Inauguration of TESDA Isabela Provincial Office Building". Official Facebook Page of SP Jayvee Diaz-JECD. facebook.com. Retrieved March 10, 2023. "TESDA Isabela Provincial Office has finally found its permanent home at the City Civic Center, Barangay Alibagu, City of Ilagan, Isabela after being a nomadic office". Official Facebook Page of TESDA Region II. facebook.com. Retrieved October 17, 2022. "Preparation for the Ceremonial Signing of Memorandum of Agreement for the Establishment of the City of llagan Consumer Welfare Assistance Center and Awarding of Livelihood Kits to the City of Ilagan Public Market Vendors and Groundbreaking Ceremony of DTI Isabela Provincial Office at the Civic Center in Brgy. Alibagu City of Ilagan, Isabela". Official Facebook Page of DTI R2 Isabela. facebook.com. Retrieved October 27, 2021. "DOST, THROUGH THE ASSISTANCE OF LGU ILAGAN, SETS TO RISE ITS NEW BUILDING IN ILAGAN CITY, ISABELA". Official Facebook Page of DOST - Region 2. facebook.com. Retrieved August 13, 2021. "Ground breaking ceremony for the 3,000 square meter lot granted by the Local Government of Ilagan City by virtue of a Contract of Usufruct for the establishment of new Ilagan City District Jail Facility at the City of Ilagan Civic Center, Alibagu, Ilagan City". Official Facebook Page of BJMP Ilagan. facebook.com. Retrieved August 11, 2021. "Groundbreaking of the Provincial offices of DOST and BJMP at the City of Ilagan Civic Center". Official Facebook Page of MyCity PIO / Ilagan Public Information Office. facebook.com. Retrieved August 11, 2021. "Groundbreaking Ceremony ng DepEd SDO Building isinagawa ngayong araw, October 2, 2023 sa City Civic Center ng Syudad ng Ilagan". Official Facebook Page of MyCity Ilagan. facebook.com/cityofilagan.gov.ph. Retrieved October 2, 2023. "Schools Division Office of the City of Ilagan- groundbreaking ceremony at the City of Ilagan Civic Center headed by Mayor Jay Diaz and city officials together w/ DepEd SDO of Ilagan". Official Facebook Page of City Councilor Jayvee Diaz. facebook.com/citycouncilorjayveediaz. Retrieved October 2, 2023. "DOLE Secretary Silvestre H. Bello III personally graced the groundbreaking ceremony of a new lot for the DOLE Isabela Field Office (IFO) and its soon-to-be constructed building in a ceremony conducted in Ilagan City". Official Facebook Page of DOLE Region 2. facebook.com. Retrieved June 28, 2021. "Philippine Coast Guard Northeastern Luzon District Office planong itayo sa City of Ilagan Civic Center". Official Facebook Page of MyCity Ilagan. facebook.com/cityofilagan.gov.ph. Retrieved October 5, 2023. "337th Aggaw na Ilagan Celebration Highlights". Official Facebook Page of BM Ejay Diaz. facebook.com. Retrieved May 4, 2023. "GROWING INTEREST; LGUs expressed their interest to PBBM's Pambansang Pabahay para sa mga Pilipino Program". Official Facebook Page of the Department of Human Settlements and Urban Development PH (DHSUD PH). facebook.com. Retrieved January 17, 2023. "City of Ilagan LGU formally signs up for PBBM's Pambansang Pabahay para sa Pilipino Program". Official Facebook Page of the Department of Human Settlements and Urban Development PH (DHSUD PH). facebook.com. Retrieved January 24, 2023. "MGA AKTIBIDAD SA CITY OF ILAGAN KAALINSABAY NG 2023 STATE OF THE CITY ADDRESS, NAKALATAG NA". Official Facebook Page of XFM Santiago (KaTropa Mo). facebook.com/XFMSANTIAGOCITY. Retrieved November 22, 2023. "Ilagan Inaugurates JLD Village - City Housing Project at barangay Alibagu today". Official Facebook Page of City Councilor Jayvee Diaz. facebook.com/citycouncilorjayveediaz. Retrieved August 7, 2023. "City housing project sa Ilagan bahagi ng pagsulong ng lungsod". Ann Esternon of Bilibb!Website. bilibb.ph. Retrieved August 16, 2023. "Groundbreaking, inauguration ng housing project pinasinayaan sa Ilagan". Jonjon Reyes of the Journal News Online. journalnews.com.ph. Retrieved August 7, 2023. "City exec eyes Ilagan as liveable city by 2030". Official Facebook Page of Ilagan Public Information Office (MyCity PIO) / Big News Network. bignewsnetwork.com. Retrieved September 16, 2019. "PSA CRS - CITY OF ILAGAN". Official Facebook Page of Philippine Statistics Authority Isabela. facebook.com/PSAIsabela. Retrieved November 17, 2023. "PSA CRS officially Opens in the City of Ilagan". Official Facebook Page of City Civil Registry Ilagan. facebook.com/cityofilagan.gov.ph. Retrieved November 22, 2023. "PSA CRS officially Opens in the City of Ilagan". Official Facebook Page of Ilagan Public Information Office (MyCity Pio). facebook.com/mycitypio. Retrieved November 22, 2023. "𝗕𝗜𝗥𝗧𝗛, 𝗗𝗘𝗔𝗧𝗛, 𝗔𝗧 𝗠𝗔𝗥𝗥𝗜𝗔𝗚𝗘 𝗖𝗘𝗥𝗧𝗜𝗙𝗜𝗖𝗔𝗧𝗘, 𝗠𝗔𝗔𝗔𝗥𝗜 𝗡𝗚 𝗠𝗔𝗞𝗔𝗞𝗨𝗛𝗔 𝗦𝗔 𝗟𝗨𝗡𝗚𝗦𝗢𝗗 𝗡𝗚 𝗜𝗟𝗔𝗚𝗔𝗡". Official Website of the Brigada Media Group. brigadanews.ph. Retrieved November 22, 2023. "Inauguration of PSA Building - City of Ilagan, Isabela". Official Facebook Page of City Councilor Jayvee Diaz. facebook.com/citycouncilorjayveediaz. Retrieved November 24, 2023. "Inspection of the ongoing construction of City of Ilagan Evacuation Center, Command Center and PSA Building". Official Facebook Page of MyCity Ilagan. facebook.com/cityofilagan.gov.ph. Retrieved July 27, 2022. "Gov. Faustino N. Dy, Sr. Memorial Hospital". provinceofisabela.ph. Retrieved January 21, 2024. "Rehab center in Cagayan Valley pushed". Charlie Lagasca(Philstar.com). philstar.com. June 15, 2011. Retrieved June 15, 2011. "DOH allots P570 M for drug rehab centers". Jess Diaz(The Philippine Star). philstar.com. November 27, 2016. Retrieved November 27, 2016. "Drug rehab center in City of Ilagan upgrades facilities". PIA / Big News Network. bignewsnetwork.com. Retrieved November 15, 2019. "Brief History of the Department of Health – Drug Abuse Treatment and Rehabilitation Center Region II (DOH-DATRC RO2)". DOH. datrcilagan.doh.gov.ph. Retrieved April 12, 2017. "DOH now helping drug dependents in first reg'l rehab center in Ilagan". The Northern Forum. northernforum.net. Retrieved November 23, 2017. "DOH Sec Ubial, Mayor Diaz Inaugurate Drug Treatment and Rehabilitation Center at the City of Ilagan". National Nutritional Council. nnc.gov.ph. June 21, 2017. Retrieved June 21, 2017. "Ubial at opening of Ilagan rehab center". Abe Almirol / manilastandard.net. manilastandard.net. June 8, 2017. Retrieved June 8, 2017. "Molecular Laboratory in the City of Ilagan, launched". Bombo Radyo Cauayan. bomboradyo.com. November 25, 2020. Retrieved November 25, 2020. Dig, Geronimo (November 26, 2020). "First LGU-operated Molecular Laboratory in Cagayan Valley launched in the City of Ilagan". RMN Network PH. rmn.ph. Retrieved November 26, 2020. "List of DOH Accredited & Licensed COVID-19 testing centers" (PDF). Department of Health PH. doh.gov.ph. Retrieved December 31, 2021. "City of Ilagan Medical Center, full operation na". 92.9 Brigada News FM. brigadanews.ph. Retrieved September 4, 2021. "City of Ilagan Medical Center, pormal nang binuksan ngayong araw". By Brigada News FM Cauayan. brigadanews.ph. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Edale, Merlito Jr. (August 12, 2021). "City of Ilagan's 100-bed capacity hospital inaugurated". Philippine Information Agency. Retrieved September 2, 2021. "City of Ilagan Medical Center binuksan bilang Community Isolation Center". Radyo Agila. radyoagila.com. Retrieved April 6, 2021. "Isolation facility for Ilagueño COVID-19 patients opened". Big News Network - Breaking News Around the World, Latest News. April 5, 2021. Retrieved September 3, 2021. "As part of Aggaw ng Ilagan, the local government unit started the construction of its Medical Arts Building at Brgy. Lullutan". Official Facebook Page of The Northern Forum. facebook.com. Retrieved May 5, 2022. "Ground Breaking Ceremony of the City of Ilagan Medical Arts Building, Distribution of Aid to Individuals in Crisis Situation Assistance and the 3-day Surgical Mission in partnership with CVMC as part of 336th Aggaw ng Ilagan". Official Facebook Page of The City of Ilagan Medical Center. facebook.com. Retrieved May 5, 2022. "City Mayor Jay L. Diaz conducted an inspection of the on-going construction of the Medical Arts Building in Lullutan, City of Ilagan". Official Facebook Page of the City Government of Ilagan (Mycity Ilagan). facebook.com. Retrieved November 10, 2022. "LANDBANK-funded bridges, hospital help boost Ilagan City's dev't". Landbank of the Philippines. landbank.com. Retrieved March 23, 2023. "Tatlong malalaking proyekto ng Ilagan City Government, sisimulan na ang pagpapatayo". Official Facebook Page of 104.9 xFM Santiago. facebook.com. Retrieved May 6, 2023. "337th Aggaw na Ilagan". Official Facebook Page of Ilagan Public Information Office. facebook.com. Retrieved May 4, 2023. "City Health Office 1". Official Website of CHO of Ilagan. health.cityofilagan.com. Retrieved February 28, 2023. "City Health Office 2". Official Website of the City of Ilagan. health.cityofilagan.com. Retrieved February 28, 2023. "Ilagan Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation Center". Official Website of the City of Ilagan. health.cityofilagan.com. Retrieved February 28, 2023. "City of Ilagan Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Center". Development Academy of the Philippines. coe-psp.dap.edu.ph. Retrieved December 31, 2019. "City of Ilagan's 100-bed capacity hospital inaugurated". Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved August 12, 2021. "CIMC passes 3 ISO certifications". Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved November 15, 2022. "City of Ilagan Medical Center". Official Website of the City of Ilagan. health.cityofilagan.com. Retrieved February 28, 2023. "Gov. Faustino N. Dy, Sr. Memorial Hospital". Official Website of the City of Ilagan. health.cityofilagan.com. Retrieved February 28, 2023. "Gov. Faustino N. Dy Sr. Memorial Hospital". Official Website of the Province of Isabela. Retrieved September 2, 2021. "San Antonio City Hospital". Official Website of the City of Ilagan. health.cityofilagan.com. Retrieved February 28, 2023. "List of Clinical Laboratories with Certificate of Performance" (PDF). Lung Center of the Philippines. Retrieved September 3, 2021. "San Antonio City Hospital of Ilagan, Isabela". DOH. nhfr.doh.gov.ph. Retrieved March 1, 2023. "Isabela Doctors General Hospital". Official Website of the City of Ilagan. health.cityofilagan.com. Retrieved February 28, 2023. "Isabela Doctors General Hospital Inc (Philippines)". Emerging markets research, data and news | EMIS. Retrieved September 3, 2021. "Dr. Victor S. Villaroman Memorial Hospital". Private Hospitals Association of the Philippines. phap-ph.org. Retrieved March 1, 2023. "Dr. Victor S. Villaroman Memorial Hospital". Official Website of the City of Ilagan. health.cityofilagan.com. Retrieved February 28, 2023. "Groundbreaking of the CitiMed of Ilagan". Official Facebook Page of Ilagan City, Isabela. Archived from the original on February 26, 2022. Retrieved September 4, 2016. "The United Architects of Philippines Student Auxiliary - Isabela State University-Ilagan Campus 5th year students explore on-site visits at the CitiMED City of Ilagan and the Ilagan Civic Center ongoing construction sites in fulfillment of their ARCH 524 subject requirement". Official Facebook Page of UAPSA Isabela State University - Ilagan. facebook.com. Retrieved March 17, 2023. "CITIMED OF ILAGAN INC". Facebook / Karla Codog / Video Credits by Maxi Xtremes. facebook.com. Retrieved September 19, 2022. "DEPED REGIONAL OFFICE NO. 02". DepED RO2 | The official website of DepED Regional Office No. 02. "Isabela State University Ilagan Campus". Isabela State University Ilagan Campus website. Retrieved February 7, 2012. "Isabela education official named OIC Dep-Ed Ilagan". Philippine Information Agency. January 25, 2013. Archived from the original on November 1, 2013. Retrieved October 30, 2013. "An Order Reorganizing the composition of the Local School Board (LSB) in the City of Ilagan, Isabela" (PDF). Official Website | City of Ilagan | The Corn Capital of the Philippines. July 8, 2019. Retrieved September 3, 2021. "SDO Ilagan to host the CAVRAA Meet 2023". Cherry Buyayo of The Corn Magnate/ Official Publication of SDO Ilagan/ Official Facebook Page of DepEd SDO Ilagan. facebook.com. Retrieved April 12, 2023. "SDO Batanes bid farewell to SDS Dr. Escorpiso". Official Facebook Page of DepEd SDO Batanes. facebook.com. Retrieved April 2, 2023. "Regional & Division Offices Directory". Department of Education. Retrieved September 3, 2021. "Tesda Course in Isabela School of Arts and Trades". TESDA Services and Scholarship Programs. Retrieved September 3, 2021. "TESDA Courses offered in St. Ferdinand College". Technical Skills and Development Authority (TESDA). tesdatrainingcourses.com. Retrieved December 31, 2022. "TESDA Courses by St. Ferdinand College, Inc. (Main)". Technical Skills and Development Authority (TESDA). tesdacoursesonline.com. Retrieved December 31, 2022. "TESDA inaugurates new innovation center". Merlito Edale Jr. of the Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved March 13, 2023. "TESDA OPENS INNOVATION CENTER IN ISABELA". Technical Skills and Development Authority (TESDA). tesda.gov.ph. Retrieved March 17, 2023. "Ilagan Campus | Isabela State University". Isabela State University | University for the People and Nature. Retrieved October 17, 2021. "LGU Ilagan pays courtesy visit to CHED Regional Office 2". Official Website of the Commission on Higher Education Regional Office II. chedregion2.com. Retrieved January 17, 2023. "First LGU owned college in Region 2 to be constructed in Ilagan, Isabela". Menchie Kinao of Guru Press - Cordillera. gurupress-cordillera.com. Retrieved April 20, 2023. "CITY OF ILAGAN COLLEGES, TARGET BUKSAN SA PAGSISIMULA NG KLASE SA SUSUNOD NA TAON". Official Facebook Page of 92.9 Brigada News Cauayan City. facebook.com/brigadafm.com. Retrieved November 28, 2023. "Highlights in the celebration of the 337th Aggaw na Ilagan". Official Facebook Page of the City Government of Ilagan. facebook.com. Retrieved May 4, 2023. "LANDBANK-funded bridges, hospital help boost Ilagan City's dev't". LandBank Press Release / Angely Mercado / Philippine Information Agency. pia.gov.ph. Retrieved April 3, 2023. "GROUNDBREAKING CEREMONY PARA SA PAGPAPATAYO NG CITY OF ILAGAN COLLEGE, ISINAGAWA". Official Facebook Page of Philippine Information Agency - Region 2. facebook.com. Retrieved May 8, 2023. "Aggaw na Ilagan ignites groundbreaking of three big projects today, May 4, 2023". Official Website of the City Government of Ilagan. cityofilagan.gov.ph. Retrieved May 4, 2023. "Signing of memorandum sa pagitan ng PNP at LGU Ilagan para PNP training facility, matagumpay na isinagawa". Brigada News Philippines. June 14, 2021. Retrieved September 3, 2021. "MOA Signing for the Opening and Operation of the PNP Training Center in the City of Ilagan". Official Facebook Page of SP Jayvee Diaz-JECD. facebook.com. Retrieved June 14, 2021. "Cagayan Valley Region, Philippines Radio Stations". Radio Station World. Retrieved October 25, 2021. "Radio Stations in Isabela Province, Philippines". ASIAWAVES: Radio and TV Broadcasting in South and South-East Asia. Retrieved October 25, 2021. "LIST OF TV BROADCAST STATION" (PDF). June 2016. Retrieved October 25, 2021. "THE NEW VALLEY TIMES PRESS, represented by TEODORO BASCOS, JR., Petitioner, v. NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS COMMISSION AND JOSE GOROSPE, Respondents". Chan Robles Law Firm. July 12, 1990. Retrieved October 25, 2021. Key, Aira (August 17, 2021). "DOLE chief Bello tests positive for COVID-19". Rappler. Retrieved September 2, 2021. Lo, Ricky (November 30, 2020). "Between showbiz & basketball". The Philippine Star. Retrieved September 2, 2021. Banan, Anselmo Jr. (September 25, 2019). "CPP-NPA, idineklarang "persona non grata" sa Ilagan City, Isabela". Bombo Radyo. Retrieved August 5, 2023. "A Memorandum of Understanding for the for Local Government Partnership has been signed and sealed between the City of Ilagan and Municipality of Gamu during the Flag Raising Ceremony held March 4, 2024 at the City Hall, City of Ilagan". MyCity Ilagan - Facebook.com. March 5, 2024. Retrieved March 20, 2024. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Ilagan. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ilagan. CITY OF ILAGAN - Corn Capital of the Philippines Isabela Government Website Economic Profile of the City of Ilagan Philippine Standard Geographic Code Ilagan Profile - Cities and Municipalities Competitive Index (dti.gov.ph) City Profile at the National Competitiveness Council of the Philippines Archived October 26, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Local Governance Performance Management System Philippine Census Information The Road to Cityhood Speech of President Aquino at the inauguration of the Lullutan Bridge Philippines’ Largest Solar Power Plant to Rise in Ilagan City, Isabela P7-B solar power plant to rise in Isabela