Santiago, officially the City of Santiago (Ilocano: Siudad ti Santiago; Ibanag: Siudad nat Santiago; Gaddang: Siudad na Santiago; Filipino: Lungsod ng Santiago), is a 1st class independent component city in the Cagayan Valley region of the Philippines. According to the 2020 census, it has a population of 148,580 people. It is formerly known as Pueblo de Carig during the time of the Spanish, it is located between southwestern part of Isabela and northwestern boundary of Quirino in Northeastern Luzon island of the Philippines. It is the gateway to the vast plains of Cagayan Valley. Santiago is situated 72 kilometres (45 mi) south of Ilagan, the provincial capital, and 326 kilometres (203 mi) north of Metro Manila. The city sits on a vast area of predominantly flat and fertile land in the Cagayan Valley, surrounded by the Caraballo Mountains to the south, the Great Sierra Madre to the east and the Cordillera Mountain Range to the west alongside the Magat River. Though statistically grouped by the Philippine Statistics Authority and geographically located within the boundaries of the province of Isabela, as well as part of the province's 4th District, Santiago City is administratively and legally independent from the province as stated in Section 25 of the Local Government Code. The origin of the name of Santiago can be drawn from the first native settlement discovered by the early Spanish missionaries at the bank of the old Carig River (now Diadi River) from which its original name, Carig, was derived. When the Spanish settled in, it was named Pueblo of Santiago Apostol de Carig, with Santiago as the Spanish name of Saint James the Apostle. In the early 1950s, the Municipal President Vicente Carreon changed the name to simply Santiago. Carig was initially established in 1743 at the foothills of mount Dalayag between present-day Isabela and Nueva Vizcaya. A few years later, it was moved to its present location 15 kilometers away. Carig was also the site of a military garrison established by the Spaniards as a base for expeditions against unconquered tribes in present-day Ifugao and Quirino and to guard the mountain pass to Nueva Vizcaya. The early inhabitants of Santiago were the Gaddangs and the Ibanags. Santiago was originally a part of the province of Cagayan (comprising the whole Cagayan Valley region), which was reorganized as a political subdivision in 1583 with Nueva Segovia (now Lallo) as its capital. When the province of Nueva Vizcaya was created in 1839, Santiago became part of the new province. On May 1, 1856, when the province of Isabela was carved out by a Royal Decree, Santiago was among the towns relinquished to the newly created province. The first five barrios after the Cadastral survey in 1927 were Patul, Batal, Nabbuan, Buenavista and Dubinan. It was said that there were only about three Filipino-owned sari-sari stores in Santiago in 1917. The settlers acquired most of their merchandise and other provisions from Chinese traders in Echague, the landing zone for products intended for Santiago and other towns, owing to its proximity to the Cagayan River. It was when the Villaverde Trail was opened when things were set in motion. It facilitated the entry of immigrants from various provinces in Luzon to the Cagayan Valley and Santiago absorbed a sizable share of these travelers. The new route served as an impetus for growth and introduced new technologies and business opportunities, and made Santiago a melting pot of different cultures. In 1942, during World War II, the Japanese forces entered and occupied Santiago. In 1945, the town was liberated by the Filipino soldiers of the 1st, 2nd, 12th, 13th and 15th Infantry Division and the USAFIP-NL 11th Infantry Regiment of the Philippine Commonwealth Army, the 1st Constabulary Regiment of the Philippine Constabulary and the recognized guerrilla fighter units. Santiago survived through the war, although badly damaged, and from then on developed to become the leading trading and commercial city in Cagayan Valley. On December 17, 1993, the bill converting Santiago into an independent component city was approved by the House of Representatives spearheaded by the then Mayor Jose "Pempe" Miranda. In the following year, the Senate Committee on Local Government approved another public hearing dated February 23, 1994. On May 5, 1994, President Fidel V. Ramos signed Republic Act 7720. The plebiscite was held on July 6, 1994, showed that voters approved this conversion, making Santiago the first city in Cagayan Valley and 5th independent component city, after Cotabato City, Dagupan, Naga, and Ormoc. On February 14, 1998, Republic Act 8528 repealed this statute transforming it to a component city. On December 29, 1999, the Supreme Court struck down the law and restored Santiago's cityhood. During the 13th Congress, House Bill No. 491 was filed in the House of Representatives, which sought to conduct a plebiscite for the constitutionality of Republic Act 8528, also another House Bill No. 3709 which sought to amend certain sections of Republic Act No. 7720, by Rep. Anthony C. Miranda, but both did not pass.[citation needed] The total land area the city is 80% flat or nearly level land in the portions of northwestern, eastern and western parts of the city. While adjacent areas have gently undulating and moderately rolling areas, and the remaining areas constitute steeply undulating and rolling lands. The Dariuk Hills is the highest point in the city.[citation needed] The geographic coordinate of the city lies between 16º35’00” to 16º47’30” north latitude and 121º25’00” to 121º37’00” east longitude. Santiago City is politically subdivided into 37 barangays.  Each barangay consists of puroks while some have sitios. The city has a climate with no pronounced wet or dry season. Usually, the city has a considerably dry climate with minimum rainfall. The average yearly temperature is measured at 24.9 °C (76.8 °F). Annual and daily temperature variation is minimal. Temperature ranges are usually from 18 to 35 °C (64 to 95 °F). The dominant religion in the city is Roman Catholic (Saint James the Apostle Parish in Barangay Centro West and Saint Francis of Assisi Parish in Barangay Rizal). However, other Christian sectors are also present in Santiago such as Iglesia ni Cristo, United Methodist Church, Pentecostal Missionary Church of Christ (4th Watch), Jesus is Lord Church, Christ the Rock Church and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Being a district full of different cultures, such as Indians, Muslim, and Chinese, several religious groups have also opened their places of worship to the public, such as Chinese Temple and Muslim Mosque. The "Gurudwara Jagat Sudhar Indian Sikh Temple" is at Doña Aurora St in Santiago where free Indian vegetarian cuisine is served to all visitors on sundays. Home of several business enterprises, banking institutions, educational entities, as well as manufacturing companies, Santiago City is considered the Commercial and Trading Center of Cagayan Valley and tagged as the Investment Hub of the North. Robinsons Land Corporation has launched Robinsons Place Santiago as its pioneer mall in Cagayan Valley. Vista Land and Lifescapes, Inc. built its first horizontal subdivision in the Valley with Camella Isabela Communities, Inc. In 2013, it launched another project named Camella Santiago. In 2018, Camella Santiago expanded and named as Camella Santiago Trails. It is building its banner mall in the Cagayan Valley Region, the Vista Mall Santiago. Another multi-national real estate developer will soon be built its prime subdivision, Primeworld Suburb, owned by Primeworld land holdings Company. The head-office of Grupo Marilens, the largest homegrown corporation in the region, is in Santiago City. Aljay, an agri-chemical company, has a presence in the city and has a manufacturing plant for agrichemical, fertilizer and feeds supply for poultry and piggery and the only manufacturing plant for fertilizer and agrichemical in the region. Three of the biggest TV networks in the country (i.e. ABS-CBN, GMA7, TV5) stationed their regional networks and relay stations in the city. San Miguel Corp., Pepsi Cola, Purefoods, Digitel and PLDT also operate in the city while different car companies abound(i.e. Mitsubishi, Nissan, Hyundai, KIA, Ford,Geely,MG and other car companies as well as Yamaha and Honda Motors). Toyota,Suzuki,Changan and Foton build their showroom in neighboring town to lessen their tax obligation.The National Food Authority competes with local traders to stabilize prices.Even no presence of SM city still the economy is competitive and that because of its strategic location that's SM couldn't consider this factor to build their mall. Wilcon depot,they use santiago city as their marketing strategy but they build their warehouse in neighboring town to lessen also their tax obligation. Poverty Incidence of Santiago Source: Philippine Statistics Authority Santiago City houses some of the biggest hospitals in the region. De Vera's Medical Center, Callang General Hospital and Medical Center and Santiago Adventist Hospital are private hospitals. The Southern Isabela Medical Center is the biggest public hospital while Flores Memorial Hospital and Medical Center is the oldest in the city. Santiago City also has Renmar Specialists' Hospital, which is a specialty hospital for complicated cases of pulmonology and orthopedics. Santiago Medical City is the latest addition. The city's location is key to the growth of smaller hospitals like Renmar Hospital and Corado Hospital. Based on the 2016 City Competitiveness Index, Santiago is the fastest growing local economy in the entire Philippines and is now ranked 51 in terms of economy size among all cities in the country. Despite rapid industrialization, agriculture is still the main source of livelihood. The main crops are rice, corn, and high-value fruits and vegetables. The city is where imposing grain stations can be found. Rice mills abound. It is the pivotal place for crops where harvests from Ifugao, Kalinga, Quirino, Nueva Vizcaya, and parts of Isabela are transported either to Nueva Ecija, Bulacan, Pangasinan or Batangas. In addition to the city's product is muscovado sugar which the local government has been promoting for export. During the Miranda Flagship, the city Government adopted the parental AxR Hybrid rice seed production as its flagship program for agriculture, which produces the offspring F1 Hybrid rice seed. This rice variety makes a phenomenal yield of 249 per ha. doubling the income of Santiago City farmers per cropping, and is expected to bring Santiago City over 2 billion in income and also additional taxes of 17 million and the national government of 33 million per year. After the previous leadership, The Navarro Administration added more life in culture and strengthen the livelihood of the people. The Navarros' spearheaded a unique program for farmers in planting on mid-summer and harvest by early September side by side in focusing on high-value fruits. As an independent component city in the Province of Isabela, government officials of Isabela are not voted by the electorates of this city. The provincial government has no political jurisdiction over local transactions of the city government. Residents of this city are not allowed to run in the provincial level except for congress representation which the city of Santiago forms part of Isabela's 4th congressional district. The city of Santiago is governed by a mayor-council system. There are ten city councilors. The council is the official governing body of the city, also known as the Sanguniang Panglungsod. The council agenda is presided over by the city vice mayor. Barangays are also headed by elected officials: Barangay Captain, Barangay Council, whose members are called Barangay Councilors. The barangays have SK federation which represents the barangay, headed by SK chairperson and whose members are called SK councilors. All officials in the city are elected every three years. Santiago is represented in the Philippine Congress as part of Isabela's 4th legislative district. Currently, Joseph S. Tan is the city's representative. The majority of the population speaks Tagalog and Ilocano. English is the medium of instruction in schools and is generally understood and spoken especially in the business community. Tourism is a new industry in the city. Serving as the jump-off point in northeastern Luzon for tourists, many landmarks are developed. Tourist spots near Santiago are Quirino Province, Magat Dam in Isabela, Banaue Rice Terraces in Cordillera, and white sand beaches in Aurora Province facing the Pacific Ocean. Balamban Dance Festival (formerly known as Balamban Butterfly Festival) - In the year 2014, a new festival was conceptualized by the city government to celebrate Santiago's cityhood anniversary. Balamban which means butterfly is a cultural dance of lowland Christians that originated in Santiago City. The dance depicts the graceful movement and fluttering of butterflies that throng Dariuk Hills' scented gardens. It is usually danced during wedding celebrations in Santiago. Pattaradday Festival - From 2006 to 2013 during the Navarro administration, Santiago's cityhood anniversary was celebrated through Pattaradday, a concept owned by a private organization called Pattaradday Foundation Inc. Pattaradday means unity in Ibanag. Ibanags are historically said to be the first settlers of the locality. It celebrated the unity of the ethno-linguistic groups that have merged in the city to make it the melting pot of culture of Region II. The festival won Hall of Fame in the Search for Best Tourism Event in the Philippines conducted by the Association of Tourism Officers of the Philippines. It featured different festivities participated in by many street dances from all over the country. "Redireksyon" thru the initiative of former City Mayor Jose "Pempe" C. Miranda Feast of Saint James (Santiago de Carig) - Celebrated every July 25 of the year is the Feast of Saint James the Apostle, the Patron Saint of the city. It features the life history of the patron saint as it saves the Christians against the Moros (based on the battle of Battle of Clavijo which, Saint James the Apostle appeared as "Santiago Matamoros" or Saint James the Moor-Killer) through Sarswela and the "Grand Batalla" (Grand Battle) or the Moro-Moro, a dance choreography depicting the battle. Santiago City is the gateway to the plains of Cagayan Valley. It connects several provinces with the following major roads crossing the city: Pan-Philippine Highway Santiago - Tuguegarao Road Santiago - Saguday Road Santiago - Diffun Road (Patul Road) Santiago Bypass Road (Sinsayon to Rizal) Santiago Bypass Road (Rizal to Divisoria) Santiago Bypass Road (Sinsayon to Baluarte)planned Santiago Bypass Road (Baluarte to Divisoria)planned Santiago City Road Alvarez Blvd Serving as a bridge to the region's provincial network, numerous bus terminals are present in the city. These include, Victory Liner, Northeast Luzon Bus Line (formerly Nelbusco), GV Florida Transport, Five Star Bus Company, EMC LBS bus lines, GMW trans (Santiago-Laoag-Vigan-Abra via Cagayan province among others. By air via Cauayan Airport. The Integrated Transport Terminal and Commercial Complex has also been established to cater for all public utility jeepneys, buses, and vans that operate from nearby provinces and localities to the city. Additional to city transport is the taxi, first in the city and whole Region 2. Notable school institutions located in the city are the School of Saint James the Apostle (formerly La Salette Elementary School), Santiago Cultural Institute (Chinese School), Children First School, Infant Jesus Montessori School, AMA Computer College Santiago City Campus, TAPS, Patria Sable Corpus College, University of La Salette and Northeastern College, one of the oldest schools in the region. The Southern Isabela College of Arts and Trades is the biggest vocational school operating in the city. Also, there are numerous international schools operating in the city. The Schools Division Office of Santiago City governs the city's public education system. The division office is a field office of the DepEd in Cagayan Valley region. The office governs the public elementary and public high schools throughout the city. Due to lack of own state university,student from santiago have struggle regarding their study.Some of the member of city council have connection of the some private school in the city. These are radio and TV stations that are available in the city. Some stations may not be in operation. 828 kHz DZRH Nationwide (DWRH; Manila Broadcasting Company) (repeater) DWSI 864 Sonshine Radio Santiago (DWSI; Sonshine Media Network International 1143 DZMR Missions Radio (DZMR; Far East Broadcasting Company) DWEY 1179 Life Radio Santiago (DWET; End-Time Mission Broadcasting Service) 92.9 Brigada News FM Cauayan (DWYI; Brigada Mass Media Corporation) (Served and the airwaves of Cauayan, Isabela and expanded areas) 93.7 Radyo Natin Santiago (DWTR; Manila Broadcasting Company/Radyo Natin Network) 94.5 MHz Love Radio Santiago (DWIP; Manila Broadcasting Company) 96.9 Big Radio (Rajah Broadcasting Network) (Soon to Air) 97.7 Sweet Radio (DWMX; Soundstream Broadcasting Corporation/Catholic Media Network) 100.1 MHz DWIZ Isabela (Own operated by Aliw Broadcasting Corporation and Barangay Rizal LPFM) 102.1 Radio Maria Isabela (DZRC; Radio Maria Philippines/Catholic Media Network) (repeater) 104.9 XFM (Palawan Broadcasting Corporation/Yes2Health Advertising, Inc.) 106.7 MHz Radio Adventist Hospital 107.9 MHz Taps Radio List of television stations that are in operation in the city. Some stations may no longer in operation. Channel 2 - ABS-CBN Corporation (DWAT) (defunct) Channel 7 - GMA Network Inc. (DWLE) Channel 21 - Interactive Broadcast Media, Inc. Channel 23 - Amcara Bctg. Net. Inc (DWWA) (defunct) Channel 25 - Mediascape, Inc. (DWDH) Channel 29 - Radio Philippines Network, Inc. Channel 31 - First United Broadcasting Corporation Channel 37 - Swara Sug Media Corporation (DWSA) Regal Cable TV Network New City Cable System Cignal TV G Sat 4th Impact (formerly 4th Power, Cercado Sisters, Gollayan Sisters, and MICA) is a girl group consisting of sisters Almira, Irene, Mylene and Celina Cercado, who have been singing and dancing together and joining international contests since 2001. Peter Musñgi, main voice-over artist or announcer of the Philippine media conglomerate ABS-CBN Corporation, most notably being the voice-over or announcer of ABS-CBN (1987–2020), Kapamilya Channel and Kapamilya Online Live (2020–present) and Star Cinema film trailers, and as narrator of the network's shows. Florence Finch, a Filipino-American member of the World War II resistance against the Japanese occupation of the Philippines. Heherson Alvarez, a Philippine politician (then Senator of the Phils.) Ilagan City[citation needed] Makati[citation needed] Marikina[citation needed] Puerto Princesa[citation needed] Rustavi, Georgia[citation needed] Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic "Santiago City, Election Results 2022". COMELEC. rappler.com. Retrieved February 25, 2023. "2022 Election Results:Santiago City, Isabela". GMA News. Retrieved September 10, 2022.  City of Santiago | (DILG) "2015 Census of Population, Report No. 3 – Population, Land Area, and Population Density" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. Quezon City, Philippines. August 2016. ISSN 0117-1453. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 25, 2021. Retrieved July 16, 2021. Census of Population (2020). "Region II (Cagayan Valley)". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved July 8, 2021. "PSA Releases the 2018 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates". Philippine Statistics Authority. December 15, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2022. "Santiago City Local Government Office". Santiago-City.com Website. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved November 5, 2013. "Republic Act No. 7160 LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE OF 1991". The LawPhil Project. Retrieved November 5, 2013. Salgado, Pedro. "Formation of Christian Towns in Diffun (Southern Isabela)". Cagayan Valley and Easter Cordillera: 1581-1898, Volume I. Rex Publishing. pp. 577–580. Perante, Caesar M. (June 30, 2018). "Transforming Santiago City into an independent component city up north". BusinessMirror. Archived from the original on September 24, 2019. Retrieved July 11, 2021. "G.R. No. 133064". E-Library | Supreme Court | Republic of the Philippines. September 16, 1999. Archived from the original on September 15, 2017. Retrieved July 11, 2021. "Province: Isabela". PSGC Interactive. Quezon City, Philippines: Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Census of Population and Housing (2010). "Region II (Cagayan Valley)" (PDF). Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. National Statistics Office. Retrieved June 29, 2016. "Average High/Low Temperature for Santiago City, Philippines". World Weather Online. Retrieved November 5, 2013. Census of Population (2015). "Region II (Cagayan Valley)". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved June 20, 2016. Censuses of Population (1903–2007). "Region II (Cagayan Valley)". Table 1. Population Enumerated in Various Censuses by Province/Highly Urbanized City: 1903 to 2007. National Statistics Office.{{cite encyclopedia}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Province of Isabela". Municipality Population Data. Local Water Utilities Administration Research Division. Retrieved December 17, 2016. "Department of Tourism Region 2". Retrieved November 8, 2013. "Poverty incidence (PI):". Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved December 28, 2020. "Estimation of Local Poverty in the Philippines" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. November 29, 2005. "2003 City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. March 23, 2009. "City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates; 2006 and 2009" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. August 3, 2012. "2012 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. May 31, 2016. "Municipal and City Level Small Area Poverty Estimates; 2009, 2012 and 2015". Philippine Statistics Authority. July 10, 2019. "PSA Releases the 2018 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates". Philippine Statistics Authority. December 15, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2022. "Santiago City, Election Results 2022". COMELEC. rappler.com. Retrieved February 25, 2023. "Santiago City Council". City Government of Santiago. cityofsantiago.gov.ph. Retrieved February 25, 2023. "House of Representatives: 19th Congress". Official Website of the House of Representatives PH. congress.gov.ph. Retrieved May 15, 2022. "DEPED REGIONAL OFFICE NO. 02". DepED RO2 | The official website of DepED Regional Office No. 02. "Cagayan Valley Region, Philippines Radio Stations". Radio Station World. Retrieved April 2, 2022. "Radio Stations in Isabela Province, Philippines". AsiaWaves.net. Retrieved April 2, 2022. "LIST OF TV BROADCAST STATION" (PDF). Media Owners Monitor. June 2016. Retrieved April 2, 2022. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Santiago City. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Santiago, Isabela. Official website League of Cities of the Philippines DOT Region 2 City Profile at the National Competitiveness Council of the Philippines Local Governance Performance Management System Philippine Standard Geographic Code Philippine Census Information Information about Santiago City Santiago City at the Isabela Government Website