Bayombong, officially the Municipality of Bayombong (Gaddang: Ili na Bayombong; Ilocano: Ili ti Bayombong; Tagalog: Bayan ng Bayombong), is a 1st class municipality and capital of the province of Nueva Vizcaya, Philippines. According to the 2020 census, it has a population of 67,714 people. Bayombong is the seat of the Provincial Capitol of Nueva Vizcaya. The name Bayombong emanated from the Gaddang word “Bayongyong” which means the confluence of two or more rivers. It has been reported that a certain tribe arrived and tried to invade the place, which caused the outbreak of the first tribal war in the area. The site was renamed “Bayumbung” as a sign of the Gaddangs' first victory in fighting for their private domains. The Gaddang phrase "Bayongyong," which denotes the confluence of two prominent rivers, is where the name Bayombong originated. According to a different interpretation, "bayongyong" refers to a bamboo pole approximately 2 meters long that is used to transport fresh water from wells constructed along riverbanks. When Spanish missionaries spotted the Gaddangs, they were forming long lines and carrying water-filled bamboo poles on their shoulders. When the friars asked about the bamboo water jugs, the carriers answered in unison with "Bayongyong." It was in 1739 when Spanish Augustinian Friars named the place "Bayumbung", which was later changed into Bayombong. Bayombong is located in the southeastern portion of the current barangays of La Torre North and South, where the Magat River flows. Prior to Spanish colonization, the town was inhabited by the Ifugaos and Gaddangs. Around 1718 there were tribal clashes between the Ifugaos, the Gaddangs and the Maalats from Isabela, with the Gaddangs gaining the upper hand and displacing the other tribes. Bayombong was formally founded on April 12, 1739, during the first Catholic mass celebrated in the region, officiated by Father Pedro Freire in a makeshift chapel at the foot of the Bangan Hill. Bayombong came under the administration of Dominican friars as a part of the Paniqui mission a few months after its founding. The pueblo census of 1747 records 470 residents. The names of those considered to be founding fathers of Bayombong were Ramon Cabauatan, Jacinto Gadingan, Vicente Saquing, Ignacio Abuag, Mariano Danao, Domingo Bayaua, a certain Bincatan and a certain Mamuric. All of them were Gaddangs. Their names are remembered today in major streets of the town. In 1754, the local government was formally organized. A Capitan del Pueblo was appointed as the chief executive. In 1982, the town became the seat of the new Diocese of Bayombong. From 1773 to 1792, Fray Juan Crespo constructed the brick St. Dominic's church, the convent, and the cemetery next to the church, and started the octagonal tower. By 1829, Fray Juan Molano finished the tower. In 1880 the church building was damaged in an earthquake, while in 1987, a fire destroyed the church and convent. During the 1990 Luzon earthquake, the church belfry collapsed. In 1789, the title of the chief executive was changed to Gobernadorcillo. In 1893, the title was changed to Capitan Municipal. During the revolutionary government in 1898, the Presidente Local was chief executive of the town but this was again changed to Mayor in 1937 as per provision of the Commonwealth Constitution. Bayombong became the provincial capital of Nueva Vizcaya in 1856, when the old capital of Camarag (now Echague) became part of the newly-established province of Isabela. On November 28, 1899, during the Philippine–American War, General Fernando Canon surrendered his 300-man battalion, plus 139 Spanish and 14 American prisoners, to 2nd Lt. James N. Munro's 53 men of the 4th Cavalry.: 148–149  Included in the release were William Rynders and Orrison Woodbury, captured with the rest of Lt. Gillmore's men during the Siege of Baler.: 149  In 1916, the American administration started a farm settlement school in Bayombong. In 1918, a high-school curriculum was added, and the school was named Bayombong Rural School. In 1928, Father de Gryse started St. Mary's, a Catholic elementary school. In 1930, Bayombong Rural School was re-purposed as Nueva Vizcaya Rural High School (NVRHS), and in 1934 St. Mary's added a high-school department. During World War II, the Japanese invaded the Philippines and turned Bayombong into a hub for sexual slavery. A "comfort station" was built by the Japanese in the town, where young girls and teenagers were forced to become sex slaves called "comfort women", and routinely gang-raped, brutalized, humiliated, and murdered by Japanese soldiers for entertainment. In 1947, the St. Mary's College (now St. Mary's University) was established by the CICM near the elementary and high-schools of the same name. In 1956, NVRHS was converted into two programs: Nueva Vizcaya General Comprehensive High School and Nueva Vizcaya National Agricultural School. In 1964 the agricultural school became Nueva Vizcaya Agricultural College, then in 1973 became the Nueva Vizcaya State Institute of Technology. Presently, the school is the Nueva Vizcaya State University. In the 19th Congress of the Philippines, house bills were filed by various representatives which seeks converting Bayombong and other capital towns of provinces with no component cities into independent component cities or highly urbanized cities to automatically convert into cities. The terrain is mountainous dominated by steep hills and mountains encompassing an area of 36.44% of its total land area. The percentage which is level to gently sloping consists of 32.03% of the total area, rolling to hilly consists of 8.09%, while the remaining 23.44% consists of very steep mountains. The town was founded at the juncture of the Calocool and Magat Rivers, and has grown to incorporate the Pan-Philippine Highway. Bayombong is 265 kilometres (165 mi) from Manila. Bayombong is politically subdivided into 25 barangays. Each barangay consists of puroks and some have sitios. Bonfal East Bonfal Proper Bonfal West Buenavista (Vista Hills) Busilac Casat La Torre North Magapuy Magsaysay Masoc Paitan Don Domingo Maddela (Poblacion) Don Tomas Maddela (Poblacion) Don Mariano Marcos District IV (Poblacion) Bansing Cabuaan Don Mariano Perez Ipil-Cuneg La Torre South Luyang Salvacion San Nicolas Santa Rosa Vista Alegre (B. Baringin) Ilocano, Bontoc, Gaddang, Ifugao, Isinay, Tagalog, and English are used always in Bayombong's schools, markets, and places of worship but in public schools they also use Ilocano. Poverty Incidence of Bayombong Source: Philippine Statistics Authority Capitol Park – It is considered the "Luneta of the North". This 8-hectare park is carpeted with green grass and elegantly landscaped. It has a boating lagoon, fountain and wishing well, picnic huts, and sports facilities. It also has painting murals depicting some significant legends, the indigenous tribes, and major attractions of the province. Bayombong Children's Park – located at the heart of the town and is a good playground for children. It is equipped with swings, slides, etc. St. Dominic Cathedral – It is located at the heart of the town and boasts of having the best-sounding church bells in the country. The structure is made of bricks and rare church antiques. The People's Museum and Library – This two-story historical building, where the provincial government was formerly seated, is now housing the Novo Vizcayano history and heritage. Bangan Hill National Park – A historic landmark and cultural treasure. It is the site of the annual "Stations of the Cross" staged by the local Catholic church during the Lenten season using live actors depicting the last moments leading to Jesus Christ's crucifixion. Also great for hiking enthusiasts. Rizal Shrine – located at Barangay Casat, Bayombong. Bansing or Ammococan Falls – Located at Barangay Bansing, Bayombong, Nueva Vizcaya. Magat River Bayombong, belonging to the lone congressional district of the province of Nueva Vizcaya, is governed by a mayor designated as its local chief executive and by a municipal council as its legislative body in accordance with the Local Government Code. The mayor, vice mayor, and most of the councilors are elected directly by the people through an election which is being held every three years. The council also includes three ex-officio, non-partisan members representing key sectors of the community. These members comprise the Indigenous Peoples' Mandatory Representative, the President of the Liga ng mga Barangay, and the President of the SK Municipal Federation. Together, they play a crucial role in the Sangguniang Bayan, contributing diverse perspectives and ensuring comprehensive representation in local governance. The Schools Division of Nueva Vizcaya governs the town's public education system. The division office is a field office of the DepEd in Cagayan Valley region. The office governs the public and private elementary and public and private high schools throughout the municipality. Nueva Vizcaya State University PLT College Inc. Saint Mary's University Sierra College Northern Luzon Technical Institute Vizcaya Institute of Computer Science First Gateway Scholastic College Vizcaya Prime Care Balasi-Secretario Training Center Nueva Vizcaya General Comprehensive High School Philippine Science High School — Cagayan Valley Campus Saint Mary's University High School / Science High School Nueva Vizcaya State University, Laboratory School Muir Woods Academy formerly known as Nueva Vizcaya Bright Child School, Inc. Bonfal National High School Casat National High School Paima National High School Ammococan Elementary School Bayombong South Elementary School Bayombong Central School Busilac Elementary School La Torre Elementary School Saint Mary's University Grade School Santa Rosa Elementary School Muir Woods Academy formerly known as Nueva Vizcaya Bright Child School, Inc. Bonfal Pilot Central School Masoc Elementary School Cabuaan elementary School Lingay Elementary School (LES) Bonfal Annex Elementary School Labbu Elementary School Pawac Elementary School Ipil-Cuneg Elementary School Casat Elementary School Luyang Elementary School Saint Mary's University Kindergarten United Methodist Christian School Muir Woods Academy formerly known as Nueva Vizcaya Bright Child School, Inc. Kingsway Christian Academy Bayfields School Salvacion Daycare Center Nueva Vizcaya State University Kidcare Learning Center PLT Preschool Department Casat Day Care Center Holy Infant Childcare and Playhouse GMA Network Channel 7 (Bayombong) via (Dagupan) ABS-CBN Channel 2 (Bayombong) via (Isabela) Roy Anthony Cutaran Bennett (1913–1990), editor of the Manila Bulletin who was tortured for his outspoken opposition to the Japanese occupation of the Philippines. Edith Lopez Tiempo, a National Artist of the Philippines in 1999 Gonohe, Aomori, Japan "2019 Election Results:Bayombong, Nueva Vizcaya". GMA News. Retrieved October 11, 2021.  Municipality of Bayombong | (DILG) "2015 Census of Population, Report No. 3 – Population, Land Area, and Population Density" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. Quezon City, Philippines. August 2016. ISSN 0117-1453. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 25, 2021. Retrieved July 16, 2021. Census of Population (2020). "Region II (Cagayan Valley)". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved July 8, 2021. "PSA Releases the 2018 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates". Philippine Statistics Authority. December 15, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2022. "Bayombong - Nueva Vizcaya, Philippines". Retrieved November 11, 2022. Linda A. Newsom, Conquest and Pestilence in the Early Spanish Philippines, page 226, U of Hawaii Press, 2009 Salgado, Pedro. "Various Towns of Nueva Vizcaya". Cagayan Valley and Easter Cordillera: 1581-1898, Volume II. Rex Publishing. p. 844. Westfall, M., 2012, The Devil's Causeway, Guilford: Lyons Press, ISBN 9780762780297 "Philippine Survivor Recounts Her Struggle As A 'Comfort Woman' For Wartime Japan". NPR.org. NPR. Retrieved August 15, 2021. The Other Empire: Literary Views of Japan from the Philippines, Singapore, and Malaysia. The University of the Philippines Press. 2008. ISBN 9789715425629. Retrieved August 15, 2021. "Women made to be Comfort Women - Philippines". Yap, Eric (June 30, 2022). "An Act Automatically Converting the Capital Town of Provinces With No Component Cities, Independent Component Cities or Highly Urbanized Cities Within Its Territorial Jurisdiction, Into a Component City" (PDF). House of Representatives of the Philippines. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Palma, Wilter (August 9, 2022). "An Act Automatically Converting the Capital Town of Provinces With No Component Cities, Independent Component Cities or Highly Urbanized Cities Within Its Territorial Jurisdiction, Into a Component City" (PDF). House of Representatives of the Philippines. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Daza, Paul (August 11, 2022). "An Act Converting Into Component Cities the Capital Towns of Provinces Without a City, Amending for the Purpose Section 450 of Republic Act No. 7610, As Amended by Republic Act No. 9009, Otherwise Known as the Local Government Code of 1991, and for Other Purposes" (PDF). House of Representatives of the Philippines. Retrieved April 1, 2023. "Bayombong: Average Temperatures and Rainfall". Meteoblue. Retrieved July 4, 2021. Census of Population (2015). "Region II (Cagayan Valley)". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved June 20, 2016. Census of Population and Housing (2010). "Region II (Cagayan Valley)" (PDF). Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. National Statistics Office. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Censuses of Population (1903–2007). "Region II (Cagayan Valley)". Table 1. Population Enumerated in Various Censuses by Province/Highly Urbanized City: 1903 to 2007. National Statistics Office.{{cite encyclopedia}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Province of Nueva Vizcaya". Municipality Population Data. Local Water Utilities Administration Research Division. Retrieved December 17, 2016. "Poverty incidence (PI):". Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved December 28, 2020. "Estimation of Local Poverty in the Philippines" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. November 29, 2005. "2003 City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. March 23, 2009. "City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates; 2006 and 2009" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. August 3, 2012. "2012 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. May 31, 2016. "Municipal and City Level Small Area Poverty Estimates; 2009, 2012 and 2015". Philippine Statistics Authority. July 10, 2019. "PSA Releases the 2018 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates". Philippine Statistics Authority. December 15, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2022. Rizal Shrine "2022 Election Results: Bayombong". Rappler. Retrieved January 20, 2024. "DepED Regional Office No. 02". DepED RO2. Archived from the original on April 12, 2022. Retrieved March 12, 2022. Nueva Vizcaya State University ["http://pltcollege.edu.ph/ PLT College Inc.] Saint Mary's University Saint Mary's University High School / Science High School Saint Mary's University Grade School Saint Mary's University Kindergarten https://www.facebook.com/hiccapbayombong2014[user-generated source] "International Exchange". List of Affiliation Partners within Prefectures. Council of Local Authorities for International Relations (CLAIR). Archived from the original on November 22, 2015. Retrieved November 21, 2015. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bayombong. Philippine Standard Geographic Code Philippine Census Information Local Governance Performance Management System