Leave the World Behind is a 2023 American apocalyptic psychological thriller film written and directed by Sam Esmail. It is based on the 2020 novel by Rumaan Alam. The film stars Julia Roberts, Mahershala Ali, Ethan Hawke, Myha'la, and Kevin Bacon as they attempt to make sense of the sequential rapid breakdown in phones, television, and other regularly used technology which points to a potential cataclysm. Leave the World Behind had its world premiere at the AFI Fest on October 25, 2023. It was released in select theaters on November 22, 2023, before its streaming release by Netflix on December 8, 2023. It received positive reviews from critics. Misanthrope Amanda Sandford arranges an impromptu weekend getaway at a vacation rental to spend quality time together with her husband Clay and their kids, Archie and Rose. While shopping for groceries, Amanda sees a man stocking up on large quantities of canned food and water. Later, while the family relaxes at a nearby beach, they evade an oil tanker that runs ashore. When they return to the house, they notice the TV and Wi-Fi are not working and a pair of deer stare at them. That night, the owner, George H. ("G.H.") Scott, and his daughter, Ruth, arrive at the house. Seeking shelter, G.H. explains that a blackout caused their return. Amanda is suspicious and doesn't want them to stay. Clay however trusts them and lets them stay the night. Later in the night, television switches to displaying an emergency warning from Emergency Broadcast System on all channels. The next morning, Rose is frustrated that the Wi-Fi and TV are still down, which has prevented her from watching the series finale of Friends. Amanda notices four news alerts on her phone, two of which are about the blackout affecting the entire East Coast, the third alert about a hacker attack being behind the power outage, and the final one beginning with the word "Breaking" and containing corrupted or encrypted text. Rose sees a larger herd of deer motionless in the backyard. Attempting to learn about the disruptions and fix the Wi-Fi, Clay drives to town while G.H. heads to his neighbor's house. Clay abandons a Spanish-speaking woman seeking help and drives from a drone dropping leaflets written in Arabic; during a few seconds of clear reception on his car radio he hears the news of the cyber attack having catastrophic environmental effects in the South. Meanwhile G.H. searches the neighbor's home, finds a satellite phone inside and determines that there's no signal from the satellites; on the beach nearby he discovers the wreckage of a plane crash, just as another airliner crashes on the beach and narrowly misses him. Elsewhere, Rose walks along with Archie in the nearby woods, where they come across an empty shed, and Archie removes a tick from his ankle on the way back. Returning to the house, G.H. confides to Amanda the events he has witnessed. He theorizes that satellite connectivity has been disrupted, but he is cut off by a loud, shrill noise that lasts several seconds. Amanda recalls the man stockpiling supplies, whom G.H. assumes to be Danny, his contractor. Clay returns shaken with the leaflet, which Archie partially translates as "Death to America". The Sandfords decide to drive to Amanda's sister in New Jersey, but find the expressway jammed with collided brand-new self-driving Teslas; they narrowly avoid more incoming Tesla cars continuing to drive into the pile-up, and are forced to return to G.H.'s house. Throughout the night, Ruth asks Clay provocative questions and they later discover flamingos in the pool. Amanda and G.H. establish a friendly bond but they are cut off by a second shrill noise, and the power fails. Later, Rose tells Amanda a version of the parable of the drowning man from an episode of The West Wing. The next morning, Archie's teeth inexplicably fall out. Believing it is related to the tick bite, G.H. suggests visiting Danny for medicine. Rose is now missing, and G.H. and Clay take Archie to visit Danny, while Amanda and Ruth search for Rose. At the shed, the two are confronted by an even larger herd of deer, which they scare away. Meanwhile, G.H. and Clay attempt to convince Danny to help Archie, which results in an armed standoff between G.H. and Danny. Clay intervenes, convincing Danny to help Archie. Danny informs them that another neighbor may be equipped with an underground bunker and suggests that the shrill noises which have most likely led to Archie's teeth falling out result from use of microwave weapons. Shaken, G.H. hypothesizes to Clay and Archie on the basis of his work with military contractors that the country is in a three-stage campaign leading first to progressive breakdown of social order and resulting in coup d'état or civil war. At the same time, Amanda and Ruth watch New York City being bombed. Rose then finds the neighbor's house with the bunker. Inside, a computer message warns of elevated radiation levels across multiple U.S. cities. She finds a DVD of Friends, and watches the series finale. Julia Roberts as Amanda Sandford Mahershala Ali as G.H. Scott Ethan Hawke as Clay Sandford Myha'la as Ruth Scott Farrah Mackenzie as Rose Sandford Charlie Evans as Archie Sandford Kevin Bacon as Danny Vanessa Aspillaga as Salvadora Netflix won a bidding war for the rights to the novel by Rumaan Alam in July 2020, with Sam Esmail attached to write and direct. Julia Roberts and Denzel Washington were set to star in and produce the film. Former U.S. president Barack and First Lady Michelle Obama executive-produced the film through their Higher Ground Productions banner. Obama included the novel on his 2021 summer reading list. The novel, according to writer and blogger Roxane Gay, is a psychological thriller that delves into the complexities of race, class, and family dynamics, mirroring the chaos of a world on the brink of collapse. In the opulent setting of the Hamptons, a white family's vacation from a "comfortable but not extravagant life in their Brooklyn home" takes a surreal turn when the black homeowners unexpectedly arrive. Obama offered Esmail his thoughts on the screenplay during the writing process. Esmail said, "He had a lot notes [sic] about the characters and the empathy we would have for them. I have to say he is a big movie lover, and he wasn't just giving notes about things that were from his background. He was giving notes as a fan of the book, and he wanted to see a really good film." In September 2021, Mahershala Ali had been cast in the film, replacing Washington, who had left the project. Ethan Hawke and Myha'la Herrold joined in January 2022. Filming began in April 2022 on Long Island, in a home designed by The Up Studio. Additional filming took place in Katonah, New York, in May 2022. Mac Quayle composed an original score for the film which consisted of nine notes and was inspired by French composer Olivier Messiaen and his Messiaen modes, namely Mode 3. Quayle said, "I started playing around with them and I found that Mode 3, which is essentially a scale, was producing a really interesting harmonic feeling," going on to say "And I got this idea that I might do the entire film in this one mode... I didn't know if it would carry me through the entire film, but it did." Esmail tried to pick songs that had not been used on TV or film before as he was worried viewers would have associations with those songs that would "interfere or complicate what the scene's about or what the viewer is feeling as they're watching the scene". For example, Esmail chose "Too Close" by Next, a song that he felt was "really funny and sweet at the same time" and had not been overused in film, for a scene that "goes from lighthearted and playful to sad and dark within a matter of a minute". Leave the World Behind had its world premiere as the opening film of the AFI Fest on October 25, 2023, with the cast not attending due to the 2023 SAG-AFTRA strike. It was released in limited theaters on November 22, before streaming Netflix on December 8, 2023. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 75% of 155 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 6.8/10. The website's consensus reads: "An exceptionally well-acted apocalyptic thriller, Leave the World Behind steadily draws the viewer in despite its leisurely pace and somewhat simplistic messaging." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 68 out of 100, based on 35 critics, indicating "generally favorable" reviews. In a positive review for The Washington Post, Michael O'Sullivan wrote, "It plays like an M. Night Shyamalan movie, but without the supernatural element and with a thick vein of social critique running throughout. What happens may be extreme, but it feels based on mundane reality." Wenlei Ma writing for The Sunday Times called the film "jittery and suspenseful", and that some overhead cinematography "emphasises that we're all puppets in someone's else [sic] marionette theatre ... we're not in control, but Esmail is of his startling, character-driven doomsday story". Bilge Ebiri for Vulture compared the film unfavorably to Alam's book: "every change made for the adaptation happens to be for the worse. ... the film doesn't demonstrate any kind of interest in, or affection for, its characters. ... This feels more like a collection of cool ideas than scenes that belong to the same emotional and consequential continuum." Alissa Wilkinson for The New York Times wrote, "After a while, the movie plays like a bulleted list of everything wrong with America ... the narrative tension dulls into passivity, both for us and for the characters", and that the "ending seems like a punchline." Esmail said he hoped the film's ending would provoke conversation: "...the expectation is at the end of [traditional disaster] films, your cast of characters overcomes the disaster and the world reverts back to some sane semblance of normalcy. I knew that I wasn't going to do that." From December 4 to December 10, 2023, the film topped the streaming charts and was the number one film on Netflix, with 41.7 million views. In January 2024, the film entered Netflix’s most popular films of all-time list at eighth place, scoring 136.3 million views in its first 52 days. As of February 2024, it's placed as the fifth most popular film in English of all time, with 141.3 million views. Grobar, Matt (April 14, 2022). "The Obamas' Higher Ground Boards Sam Esmail's Netflix Pic Leave the World Behind". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 5, 2023. Retrieved April 14, 2022. "Leave the World Behind (15)". BBFC. December 22, 2023. Archived from the original on December 23, 2023. Retrieved December 23, 2023. Fleming, Mike Jr. (July 20, 2020). "Netflix Wins Julia Roberts-Denzel Washington-Sam Esmail Package Leave The World Behind Based On Rumaan Alam's Upcoming Novel". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 7, 2023. Retrieved August 9, 2021. "'Leave the World Behind': Julia Roberts, Mahershala Ali, and Ethan Hawke Face the End-Times". Vanity Fair. September 27, 2023. Archived from the original on October 24, 2023. Retrieved January 1, 2024. Wilkinson, Alissa (December 7, 2023). "'Leave the World Behind' Review: It's the End of the World, I Guess". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 30, 2023. Retrieved December 30, 2023. Kroll, Justin (September 14, 2021). "Mahershala Ali To Co-Star With Julia Roberts In Sam Esmail and Netflix's Leave The World Behind". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 2, 2023. Retrieved September 14, 2021. Kroll, Justin (January 18, 2022). "Ethan Hawke, Industry's Myha'la Herrold & Others Join Julia Roberts In Netflix's Leave The World Behind". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 2, 2023. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Gonzalez, Umberto (April 18, 2022). "Kevin Bacon Joins Julia Roberts' Leave the World Behind at Netflix (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on April 19, 2023. Retrieved April 18, 2022. Lovece, Frank (April 5, 2022). "Julia Roberts' Netflix movie Leave the World Behind filming on Long Island". Newsday. Archived from the original on April 19, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2022. Ramirez, Jeffrey (August 10, 2023). "The House from Leave the World Behind". Archived from the original on August 11, 2023. Retrieved August 10, 2023. Croke, Karen (May 24, 2022). "Julia Roberts, Jesse Eisenberg projects filming in Katonah, Nyack". lohud. Archived from the original on October 9, 2023. Retrieved May 25, 2022. Cremona, Patrick (December 11, 2023). "Leave the World Behind soundtrack: All the songs in the Netflix thriller". Radio Times. Archived from the original on December 12, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Rankin, Seija (October 25, 2023). "What the 'Leave the World Behind' Adaptation (and a Julia Roberts-Starring Role) Means to Rumaan Alam". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 12, 2023. Retrieved November 6, 2023. Evans, Greg (October 2, 2023). "Leave The World Behind Trailer: Julia Roberts, Mahershala Ali & Ethan Hawke Face Apocalypse In Netflix Film". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 7, 2023. Retrieved October 2, 2023. "Leave the World Behind". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved December 21, 2023. "Leave the World Behind". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved December 9, 2023. O'Sullivan, Michael (November 20, 2023). "'Leave the World Behind': Real, and real scary". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 29, 2023. Ma, Wenlei (December 7, 2023). "Suspenseful movie taps into our anxieties". PerthNow. Archived from the original on December 30, 2023. Retrieved December 30, 2023. Ebiri, Bilge (December 8, 2023). "Leave the World Behind Doesn't Know What to Do With the Apocalypse". Vulture. Archived from the original on December 30, 2023. Retrieved December 30, 2023. Rose, Lacey (December 20, 2023). "'Leave the World Behind' Director Sam Esmail Explains His Controversial Ending". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 25, 2023. Retrieved December 25, 2023. Campione, Katie (December 12, 2023). "Leave The World Behind Dominates Netflix In Streaming Debut; Obliterated Takes No. 1 For TV". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 17, 2023. Retrieved December 18, 2023. Seitz, Loree (January 30, 2024). "'Leave the World Behind' Enters Netflix's Most-Watched Films". TheWrap. Retrieved March 5, 2024. "Top 10 Most Popular Movies on Netflix of All Time". www.netflix.com. Retrieved March 5, 2024. Leave the World Behind on Netflix Leave the World Behind at IMDb