Torre Annunziata (Italian: [ˈtorre annunˈtsjaːta]; Neapolitan: Torr'Annunziata) is a comune (municipality) in the Metropolitan City of Naples, in the Italian region of Campania. It is located on the Gulf of Naples, at the foot of Mount Vesuvius. The city was destroyed in the Vesuvius eruption of 79 AD and in 1631. It is known locally in the Neapolitan dialect as Torre Nunziata. The city was once the seat of important ironwork (Deriver, Dalmine) food processing and pasta industries. Today industries still active include naval, armament and pharmaceutical ones. The archaeological site of Oplonti is a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1997. Torre Annunziata borders with the municipalities of Boscoreale, Boscotrecase, Castellammare di Stabia, Pompei, Torre del Greco and Trecase. Trains from Torre Annunziata Centrale rail station operate to Naples and Pompei. On the Tabula Peutingeriana, Torre Annunziata is called Oplonti. In the communal territory, one of the richest Roman villas has been excavated. Dating to the 1st century BC, it probably belonged to the gens Poppaea, and is known as Villa Poppaea. Although a comparatively small town, essentially a suburb of Naples, Torre Annunziata has its own unique dialect, a variation of Neapolitan, quite distinct, particularly in pronunciation, which is known as Torrese. Torre Annunziata is home to F.C. Savoia 1908 who play at the Stadio Giraud and currently play in Serie D of Italy's football pyramid. Their highest achievement was during the 1923–24 season where they finished Serie A runners up. Professional footballer Ciro Immobile was born in Torre Annunziata. Dino De Laurentiis, film producer Alberto Nocerino, footballer Alfredo Donnarumma, footballer Ciro Immobile, footballer Irma Testa, boxer "Superficie di Comuni Province e Regioni italiane al 9 ottobre 2011". Italian National Institute of Statistics. Retrieved 16 March 2019. "Popolazione Residente al 1° Gennaio 2018". Italian National Institute of Statistics. Retrieved 16 March 2019. nap:Torre Nunziata Torre Nunziata, nap.wikipedia The Trainline, Trains to Torre Annunziata Centrale, accessed 13 October 2022 Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). "Torre Annunziata" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 27 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Torre Annunziata. Official website v t e