Koronadal, officially the City of Koronadal (Hiligaynon: Dakbanwa sang Koronadal; Cebuano: Dakbayan sa Koronadal; Maguindanaon: Kuta nu Kurunadal, Jawi: كوت نو كوروندل; Filipino: Lungsod ng Koronadal), also known as Marbel, is a 1st class component city and capital of the province of South Cotabato, Philippines. According to the 2020 census, it has a population of 195,398 people. It is the capital of the province of South Cotabato and regional administrative center of Soccsksargen (Region XII). Koronadal City is one of the Planned Cities of the Philippines that were signed by Congress on 1965. It became a component city of South Cotabato by virtue of Republic Act 8803 dated October 8, 2000. Koronadal City is one of the two cities in Mindanao where majority of the citizens are ethnic Hiligaynons, who comprise 95% of the city's population, the other being Tacurong City, Sultan Kudarat. In 2003 and 2005 the city was recognized as "Most Competitive City" in the small-city category, and in 2005 and 2006 as the most business friendly city in Mindanao. The settlement of Koronadal and its creation as a municipality by virtue of Executive Order No. #82 dated August 18, 1947, was marked by a rapid initial development, so that when the province of South Cotabato was created under Republic Act No. 4849 on July 18, 1966, it easily became the capital town. In the past, the place was populated by Blaan people and Maguindanaons. The word Koronadal is believed to have been derived from two Blaan words- kalon meaning cogon grass, and nadal or datal meaning plain, which aptly described the place to the natives. On the other hand, Marbel, which is another name for the poblacion, is a Blaan term marb el which means "murky waters" referring to a river, now called the Marbel River. Koronadal City used to comprise the area extending from the banks of Buluan Lake to the north to Barangay Polonoling in the municipality of Tupi, South Cotabato to the south from Quezon mountain range to the northeast to the municipality of T'boli, South Cotabato to the southeast. It was on August 18, 1947, when President Manuel Roxas signed the Executive Order creating the municipalities in the entire province of Cotabato, one of which was Marbel (now Koronadal). The same executive order likewise mandated the official function of the municipal government which began after the qualification and election of the first set of municipal officials. The municipal government of Koronadal began its official function on January 1, 1948, with an approved Annual Estimated Budget of P30,000.00. The land area of the municipality by then was comparable with the Province of Bataan embracing the present municipalities of Banga, Lake Sebu, Norala, Santo Niño, Surallah, T'Boli, Tampakan, Tupi, and Isulan in Sultan Kudarat. Municipal Council Resolution No. 32, Series of 1948 mandated and proclaimed January 10 of each year as the Municipal Town Fiesta commemorating the foundation of Marbel Settlement District of the National Land Settlement. Koronadal was converted into a component city of South Cotabato by virtue of Republic Act No. 8803 on October 8, 2000. At present, Koronadal City is a fast-developing growth center composed of twenty-seven barangays including the four zones in the poblacion. Being the capital city of South Cotabato, it is the center of the province in terms of political, cultural and socio-economic activities. By virtue of Executive Order No. 304 signed by then President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, Koronadal City was named as the Regional political and socio-economic center of Soccsksargen on March 30, 2004. Regional departments, bureaus and offices were ordered to move from Cotabato City, the former Regional Center of the Region. Koronadal is located in the central part of southern Mindanao, in a gently sloping plain surrounded by low mountains. Koronadal City is politically subdivided into 27 barangays. Each barangay consists of puroks while some have sitios. There are 8 barangays which classified as urban (highlighted in bold). Assumption (Bulol) Avanceña (Barrio Tres) Cacub Caloocan Carpenter Hill Concepcion (Barrio Sais) Esperanza General Paulino Santos (Barrio Uno) Mabini Magsaysay Mambucal Morales Namnama New Pangasinan (Barrio Kwatro) Paraiso Poblacion Zone I Poblacion Zone II Poblacion Zone III Poblacion Zone IV Rotonda San Isidro San Jose (Barrio Singko) San Roque Santa Cruz Santo Niño (Barrio Dos) Saravia (Barrio Otso) Topland (Barrio Syete) The climate of Koronadal is mild and sub-tropical, belonging to climate Type IV. The place is typhoon free. Rainy months are from June to October. The main language of the city is Hiligaynon, earning the city its nickname "Ilonggo Capital of Mindanao". Tagalog, Maguindanaon, Ilocano and Cebuano are also widely spoken. While Maranao, English, and Arabic are also heard in the city. Churches and Mosques in Koronadal: Churches Christ the King Cathedral (San Antonio de Padua Parish Church), Downtown Koronadal San Guillermo Parish Church, Brgy. Morales Sagrada Familia Parish Church, Brgy. San Jose Sacred Heart Parish Church, Brgy. General Paulino Santos Our Lady of the Holy Rosary Parish Church, Santa Cruz Passionist Seminary, Brgy. Paraiso Our Lady of Perpetual Help Seminary, Brgy. Santo Niño Seventh-Day Adventist Church, Downtown Koronadal Marbel Baptist Church (SBC), Downtown Koronadal Artesian Christian Fellowship (SBC), Brgy. San Roque Southern Cathedral of Faith (SBC), Downtown Koronadal Southern Baptist Church (SBC), Downtown Koronadal Gethsemane Baptist Church (SBC), Brgy. Sta. Cruz Life-Changing International Ministries (SBC), Brgy. Morales Bo. 6 Baptist Church (SBC), Brgy. Concepcion Iglesia ni Cristo, Downtown Koronadal Iglesia ni Cristo, Brgy. Morales Members Church of God International, Downtown Koronadal The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Downtown Koronadal Mosques Koronadal Grand Mosque, Downtown Koronadal Balik-Islam Mosque, Brgy. Morales Engineer Buisan Mosque, Downtown Koronadal Masjid Al-Fuqarah, Prk Kings compound Marbel Masjid, F.Antipolo Street Al-Masjidul Azraq, Tamnag Macasayon Old Mosque, Tamnag Poverty Incidence of Koronadal Source: Philippine Statistics Authority Home for many shopping malls in South Cotabato, it serves as one of the tourism economic activity of the city. Koronadal is considered as the main shopping hub for nearby municipalities and provinces. Koronadal became a city on October 8, 2000. Since then the City Government of Koronadal has been in charge of the political, socio-cultural and economic development of the city. Incumbent Officials: Mayor: Eliordo Ogena (Since 2019-present) Vice Mayor: Erlinda P. Araquil (Since 2022–present) The B'laan people are one of the indigenous peoples of the Southern Philippine island of Mindanao. Another tribe called the Maguindanao also inhabits the same area. The two tribes consider themselves to be brothers and sisters. Long ago, an Arab male (ancestral brother) married a B'laan female (ancestral sister) and through this marriage union, Islam infiltrated Southern Mindanao so that when the Spaniards arrived, their attempts to establish Catholicism were unsuccessful in the south. Eventually the B'laan and the Maguindanao became trade partners with the B'laan settling in the mountains and the Maguindanao settling along the coastal areas. From that time until now, the B'laans have been producing rice, vegetables, livestock, and rainforest products. The original religion of the Blaan is Animist. Presently, only 5% of the 8,000 B'laan tribal people are considered to be evangelical. The cultural diversity of the region is the result of a large influx of migrants from the north during American colonial period which continued later. Found here are three main cultural groups: the early Filipinos who belong to various indigenous tribes living in the highlands and remote areas of Mindanao, the Maguindanaons who were early converts to Islam and who regard the region as their traditional homeland in the historical Sultanate of Maguindanao, and the Catholic Filipinos who founded settlements and communities in the course of their migrations from other parts of the country. The Catholic Filipinos make up the great majority (over 70%) of the Southern Philippine population. They are relatively newcomers to the area; the first wave of Christian migrants came in the seventeenth century when the Spaniards sought to populate Zamboanga, Jolo, Dapitan and other areas by encouraging people from Luzon and the Visayas to settle there. In the nineteenth century Spanish policy found considerable success in encouraging migrations to Iligan and Cotabato. The Americans continued this pattern during their colonial administration. In 1913 the American colonial government provided resources for the establishment of agricultural colonies in Mindanao. By the time the Philippine Commonwealth was established, Mindanao had become a veritable frontier. Wave upon wave of migrants poured into the region, chiefly among them the Hiligaynons, Cebuanos, Ilocanos, and Kapampangans. These people did much to clear the virgin areas of Mindanao and open them to extensive agriculture and industry. Koronadal also hosted an international activity called Pyesta Kalon Datal: Koronadal International Folkloric Festival in coordination with Conseil international des organisations de festivals de folklore et d'arts traditionnels or the International Council of Organizations of Folklore Festivals and Folk Art (CIOFF) last August 10 to 18, 2015 and August 11 to 18, 2018 and several national activities such as the Palarong Pambansa in 1996 with General Santos and solo in 2007, Mindanao Business Forum, and National Schools Press Conference. On June 12, 2009, President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo together with Defense Secretary Gibo Teodoro celebrated the 111th Independence Day in the city, which marks a significant and historic event in the history of Koronadal. Hinugyaw Festival (January 8–10) – is the festival that marks the foundation anniversary of Koronadal as a municipality. It shows the festive spirit of the people of Koronadal with street dancing and night beer parties in the streets of Koronadal among other worthwhile activities. T'nalak Festival (July 16–18) – a festival that celebrates South Cotabato's Tboli tribe with colorful abaca cloth created and woven by the women from their tribe. It symbolizes the blending of culture, strength and unity of the various ethnic groups living in the province. They have Dayana Civic Parade which highlighted by a float and cheer dance competition. They perform on the streets of the city showcasing native costumes of Blaan, Tboli and other tribal groups in Mindanao. Cityhood Charter Anniversary (October 8) – celebrates the cityhood of Koronadal highlighted by "Negosyo Festival" showcasing the vibrancy of business and other economic enterprises in the City of Koronadal; consumers enjoy month-long citywide grand sale as participating business establishments give discounts of up to 70% off their regular prices on goods or services. Bong Gumne de Muhon Damweng Dmatal El Gawel Zoo Mambucal Hot Spring Saravia Falls Siok Falls Supon Falls Parks: CIOFF Park Freedom Park Paraiso Verde Water Park Rizal Park Museums and shrines: Albert Morrow and Santiago Odi Memorial Shrine Filipino – Japanese Memorial Shrine General Paulino Santos Roundball Historical Marker of the Seventeen Martyrs Notre Dame of Marbel University Library and Museum South Cotabato Community Museum Tantoco Memorial Showcase Health Facilities in Koronadal are also widely distributed to all Marbeleños. Hospitals in the City of Koronadal: South Cotabato Provincial Hospital, Aguinaldo Street Allah Valley Medical Specialists' Center, General Santos Drive Dr. Arturo P. Pingoy Medical Center, General Santos Drive Socomedics Medical Center, Judge Alba Street Education in Koronadal is widely distributed to all Koronadaleños. As for the school year 2009–2010, there are 95 primary and elementary schools in the city, both in public and private schools; while there are 17 secondary schools, both in public and private schools. There are two universities in the city: Notre Dame of Marbel University University of the Philippines Manila – Koronadal School of Health Sciences Other colleges are also vibrant in the education business. The list below shows the tertiary level schools present in the city: St. Alexius College - Dr. Arturo P. Pingoy Medical Center Green Valley College Foundation Incorporated Ramon Magsaysay Memorial Colleges - Marbel Holy Child College of Information Technology, Inc. (Permanently Closed) Regency Polytechnic College ACLC College of Marbel King's College of Marbel, Inc. Korbel College SITE Dizon STI College Koronadal Goldenstate College Marbel Marbel Institute of Technology College Marvelous College of Technology, Inc. SouthPhil Institute of Technology, Inc. The list below shows some prominent secondary and elementary schools present in the city: Philippine Science High School SOCCSKSARGEN Region Campus Notre Dame of Marbel University - Integrated Basic Education Department Notre Dame - Siena School of Marbel Notre Dame of San Jose Dolores Peneza Montessori Academy Inc. (formerly Casa Dolores Montessori School, Inc) St Alexius College - Integrated School Department Koronadal National Comprehensive High School Koronadal Southern Elementary School (Chinese School) Koronadal International School Maryland School King's College of Marbel, Inc. Marymount School Koronadal is also home to two seminaries, the Our Lady of Perpetual Help Seminary or locally known as OLPHS and the St. Gabriel College Seminary run by the Passionist Fathers of the Philippines which is located at Purok San Gabriel, Brgy. Zone 3. Popular mode of public transportation in the city are the tricycles which was divided in 2021 into 4 cluster routes: Red cluster (Northern Barangays) Avanceña Caloocan part of General Paulino Santos part of Morales Poblacion Zone 1 San Jose Yellow cluster (Eastern Barangays) Cacub Concepcion Esperanza General Paulino Santos Mabini Magsaysay New Pangasinan Poblacion Zone 2 Rotonda San Roque Santo Niño Topland Green cluster (Southern Barangays) Assumption Carpenter Hill Mambucal Poblacion Zone 2 Santa Cruz San Isidro Saravia Blue cluster (Western Barangays) Morales Paraiso Poblacion Zone 4 In accordance with the Public Utility Vehicle Modernization Program of the Philippine government, the government of Koronadal launched on 2022 the 10 routes that will serve the city: Koronadal will house the Koronadal terminus station of the Mindanao Railway Phase Two which will involve a 150 km (93 mi) segment south of Phase 1 between the cities of Digos and Koronadal, passing through General Santos. The nearest airport that serve Koronadal City is the General Santos International Airport in General Santos City. Alternative airports like the Francisco Bangoy International Airport in Davao City and the Cotabato Airport in Cotabato City are also accessible. The nearest seaport that serve Koronadal is the Makar Wharf in General Santos City. Alternative seaports like the Sasa Port in Davao City is also accessible. Christian Perez - darts player Jason Sabio - footballer who plays for Kaya Kenneth Duremdes - PBA basketball player Ernestine Tiamzon - DLSU Lady Spiker Lovely Abella - GMA 7 Artist Orlando Quevedo - cardinal of a Roman Catholic Church who served as an Archbishop Emeritus of Cotabato from 1998 to 2018. He was born and spent his very early years in Laoag, Ilocos Norte but was raised in Koronadal, a town at the time of his arrival in Mindanao, where he finished his remaining grade school and entire high school years. Valenzuela Iloilo City Ozamiz Cotabato City Pagadian Mandaluyong  City of Koronadal | (DILG) "2015 Census of Population, Report No. 3 – Population, Land Area, and Population Density" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. Quezon City, Philippines. August 2016. ISSN 0117-1453. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 25, 2021. Retrieved July 16, 2021. Census of Population (2020). "Region XII (Soccsksargen)". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved July 8, 2021. "PSA Releases the 2018 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates". Philippine Statistics Authority. December 15, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2022. Usman, Edd (March 10, 2019). "PHL's one-stop shop halal center opens". BusinessMirror. Retrieved December 16, 2021. "Kanami Koronadal :: Official Website of the City Government". Archived from the original on July 11, 2012. Retrieved May 19, 2012. Estabillo, Allen (November 6, 2007). "Koronadal searching for product to serve as city's identity". MindaNews. Retrieved December 16, 2021. "Kanami Koronadal :: Official Website". Archived from the original on April 20, 2012. Retrieved May 19, 2012. "The President's Day: April 27, 2004". Official Gazette. Office of the Press Secretary. April 27, 2004. Retrieved December 16, 2021. "Geography". koronadal.gov.ph. City of Koronadal. Retrieved July 8, 2020. "Koronadal: Average Temperatures and Rainfall". Meteoblue. Retrieved May 15, 2020. Census of Population (2015). "Region XII (Soccsksargen)". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved June 20, 2016. Census of Population and Housing (2010). "Region XII (Soccsksargen)" (PDF). Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. National Statistics Office. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Censuses of Population (1903–2007). "Region XII (Soccsksargen)". Table 1. Population Enumerated in Various Censuses by Province/Highly Urbanized City: 1903 to 2007. National Statistics Office.{{cite encyclopedia}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Province of South Cotabato". Municipality Population Data. Local Water Utilities Administration Research Division. Retrieved December 17, 2016. "Language". koronadal.gov.ph. City of Koronadal. Retrieved August 1, 2020. "Poverty incidence (PI):". Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved December 28, 2020. "Estimation of Local Poverty in the Philippines" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. November 29, 2005. "2003 City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. March 23, 2009. "City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates; 2006 and 2009" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. August 3, 2012. "2012 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. May 31, 2016. "Municipal and City Level Small Area Poverty Estimates; 2009, 2012 and 2015". Philippine Statistics Authority. July 10, 2019. "PSA Releases the 2018 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates". Philippine Statistics Authority. December 15, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2022. "Koronadal goes international with 'Pyesta Kolon Datal'". The Manila Times. August 8, 2015. Retrieved December 16, 2021. "Koronadal City to host 2nd CIOFF 2018 International Festival | Facebook". www.facebook.com. "Mindanao Railway Project to take 10-15 years to complete". October 27, 2020. Retrieved February 23, 2023. Tayona, Glenda; Silubrico, Ruby (August 25, 2018). "Iloilo to showcase culture to 'sister cities' tonight". Panay News. Archived from the original on April 9, 2019. Retrieved April 9, 2019. "Resolution Sisterhood Cities in Region12". Facebook. Archived from the original on February 26, 2022. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Koronadal. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Koronadal. Official website Koronadal Profile at the DTI Cities and Municipalities Competitive Index KoronadalSite "Taga Koronadal Ako Ya" City Travel Guide Philippine Standard Geographic Code