Robert Francis Kennedy Jr. (born January 17, 1954), also known by his initials RFK Jr., is an American politician, environmental lawyer, and activist who promotes anti-vaccine misinformation and public health conspiracy theories. He is the chairman and founder of Children's Health Defense, an anti-vaccine advocacy group, and an independent candidate in the 2024 presidential election. A member of the Kennedy family, Kennedy is a son of U.S. attorney general and senator Robert F. Kennedy and nephew of U.S. president John F. Kennedy and senator Ted Kennedy. Kennedy has advocated for the protection of waterways, indigenous rights, and renewable energy. He began his career as an assistant district attorney in New York City. In 1984 and 1986, he joined two nonprofits focused on environmental protection, Riverkeeper and the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC). His work at Riverkeeper set long-term environmental legal standards. At both organizations, he won legal battles against large corporate polluters. He became an adjunct professor of environmental law at Pace University School of Law in 1986. In 1987, he founded Pace's Environmental Litigation Clinic, where he held the post of supervising attorney and co-director until 2017. He founded the nonprofit environmental group Waterkeeper Alliance in 1999, serving as the president of its board. Since 2005, Kennedy has promoted the scientifically disproven claim of a causal link between vaccines and autism. Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, he has emerged as a leading proponent of COVID-19 vaccine misinformation in the United States. Many of his often disproved public health claims have targeted prominent figures such as Anthony Fauci, Bill Gates, and Joe Biden. He has written books including The Real Anthony Fauci (2021) and A Letter to Liberals (2022). Kennedy was born at Georgetown University Hospital in Washington, D.C., on January 17, 1954. He is the third of eleven children of senator and attorney general Robert F. Kennedy and Ethel Kennedy, née Skakel. He is a nephew of President John F. Kennedy and Senator Ted Kennedy. Kennedy was raised at the Kennedy Compound in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, and at Hickory Hill, the family estate in McLean, Virginia. He was nine years old when his uncle, President John F. Kennedy, was assassinated in 1963, and 14 when his father was assassinated while running for president in 1968. Kennedy learned of his father's shooting while at Georgetown Preparatory School, a Jesuit boarding school in North Bethesda, Maryland. A few hours later, he flew to Los Angeles on Vice President Hubert Humphrey's plane, along with his elder sister Kathleen and elder brother Joe. He was with his father when he died. Kennedy was a pallbearer at his father's funeral, where he spoke and read excerpts from his father's speeches at the Mass commemorating his death at Arlington National Cemetery. After his father's death, Kennedy was expelled from two boarding schools—Millbrook in upstate New York and Pomfret in Connecticut—for using drugs. In August 1970, Kennedy and his cousin Bobby Shriver were arrested in Barnstable, Massachusetts, for marijuana possession and placed on 13 months' probation. In June 1972, he graduated from the Palfrey Street School, a day school in Watertown, Massachusetts. While attending Palfrey, Kennedy lived with a surrogate family at a farmhouse in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Kennedy continued his education at Harvard University, graduating in 1976 with a Bachelor of Arts in American history and literature. He then studied at the London School of Economics before earning a Juris Doctor degree from the University of Virginia School of Law in 1982, and a Master of Laws from Pace University in 1987. In 1982, Kennedy was sworn in as an assistant district attorney for Manhattan. After failing his bar exam, he resigned in July 1983. That September, he was charged with heroin possession in Rapid City, South Dakota. He pleaded guilty in February 1984, whereupon he was sentenced to two years' probation and community service. After his arrest he entered a drug treatment center. To satisfy the conditions of his probation, Kennedy worked as a volunteer for the Natural Resources Defense Council and was required to attend regular drug-rehabilitation sessions. His probation ended a year early. In 1984, Kennedy began volunteering at The Hudson River Fisherman's Association, renamed Riverkeeper in 1986 after a patrol boat it had built with settlement money from legal victories preceding Kennedy's arrival. The association's office was in a farmhouse near the Natural Resources Defense Council, where Kennedy was doing the community service mandated by his sentence for heroin possession. After he was admitted to the New York bar in 1985, Riverkeeper hired him as senior attorney. Kennedy litigated and supervised environmental enforcement lawsuits on the east coast estuaries on behalf of Hudson Riverkeeper and the Long Island Soundkeeper, where he was also a board member. Long Island Soundkeeper sued cities and industries along the Connecticut and New York coastlines.[failed verification][citation needed] On the Hudson, Kennedy sued municipalities and industries, including General Electric, to stop discharging pollution and clean up legacy contamination. His work at Riverkeeper set long-term environmental legal standards. In 1995, Kennedy advocated for repeal of legislation during the 104th Congress that he considered unfriendly to the environment. In 1997, he worked with John Cronin to write The Riverkeepers, a history of the early Riverkeepers and a primer for the Waterkeeper movement. In 2000, a majority of Riverkeeper's board sided with Kennedy when he insisted on rehiring William Wegner, a wildlife lecturer and falcon trainer whom the organization's founder and president, Robert H. Boyle, had fired six months earlier after learning that Wegner had been convicted in 1995 for tax fraud, perjury, and conspiracy to violate wildlife protection laws. Wegner had recruited and led a team of at least 10 who smuggled cockatoo eggs, including species considered endangered by Australia, from Australia to the U.S. over a period of eight years. He served 3.5 years of a five-year sentence and was hired by Kennedy a few months after his release from prison. After the board's decision, Boyle, eight of the 22 members of the board, and Riverkeeper's treasurer resigned, saying it was not right for an environmental organization to hire someone convicted of environmental crimes and that it would hurt the organization's fundraising. Kennedy resigned from Riverkeeper in 2017, writing in his resignation letter that he had co-founded the organization. In 1987, Kennedy founded the Environmental Litigation Clinic at Pace University School of Law, where for three decades he was the clinic's supervising attorney and co-director and Clinical Professor of Law. Kennedy obtained a special order from the New York State Court of Appeals that permitted his 10 clinic students—second- and third-year law students—to practice law and try cases against Hudson River polluters in state and federal court, under the supervision of Kennedy and his co-director, Professor Karl Coplan. The clinic's full-time clients are Riverkeeper and Long Island Soundkeeper. The clinic has sued governments and companies for polluting Long Island Sound and the Hudson River and its tributaries. It argued cases to expand citizen access to the shoreline and won hundreds of settlements for the Hudson Riverkeeper. Kennedy and his students also sued dozens of municipal wastewater treatment plants to force compliance with the Clean Water Act. In 2010, a Pace lawsuit forced ExxonMobil to clean up tens of millions of gallons of oil from legacy refinery spills in Newtown Creek in Brooklyn, New York. On April 11, 2001, Men's Journal gave Kennedy its "Heroes" Award for creating the Pace Environmental Litigation Clinic. Kennedy and the clinic received other awards for successful legal work cleaning up the environment. The Pace Clinic became a model for similar environmental law clinics throughout the country, including Rutgers, Golden Gate, UCLA, Widener, and Boalt Hall at Berkeley. In June 1999, as Riverkeeper's success on the Hudson began inspiring the creation of Waterkeepers across North America, Kennedy and a few dozen Riverkeepers gathered in Southampton, Long Island, to found the Waterkeeper Alliance, which is now the umbrella group for the 344 licensed Waterkeeper programs located in 44 countries. As President of the Alliance, Kennedy oversees its legal, membership, policy and fundraising programs. The Alliance states that it is dedicated to promoting "swimmable, fishable, drinkable waterways, worldwide", and is also a clearinghouse, approving new Keeper programs and licensing use of the trademarked "Waterkeeper", "Riverkeeper", "Soundkeeper", "Lakekeeper", "Baykeeper", "Bayoukeeper", "Canalkeeper", "Coastkeeper", etc. names. Kennedy and his environmental work have been the focus of several films including The Waterkeepers (2000), directed by Les Guthman. In 2008, he appeared in the IMAX documentary film Grand Canyon Adventure: River at Risk, riding the Grand Canyon in a wooden dory with his daughter Kick and anthropologist Wade Davis. Kennedy resigned from Waterkeeper Alliance presidency in November 2020. Beginning in 1991, Kennedy represented environmentalists and New York City watershed consumers in a series of lawsuits against New York City and upstate watershed polluters. Kennedy authored a series of articles and reports alleging that New York State was abdicating its responsibility to protect the water repository and supply. In 1996, he helped orchestrate the $1.2 billion New York City Watershed Agreement, which New York magazine recognized in its cover story, "The Kennedy Who Matters". This agreement, which Kennedy negotiated on behalf of environmentalists and New York City watershed consumers, is regarded as an international model in stakeholder consensus negotiations and sustainable development. In 2000, Kennedy and environmental lawyer Kevin Madonna founded the environmental law firm Kennedy & Madonna, LLP, to represent private plaintiffs against polluters. The firm litigates environmental contamination cases on behalf of individuals, non-profit organizations, school districts, public water suppliers, Indian tribes, municipalities and states. In 2001, Kennedy & Madonna organized a team of prestigious plaintiff law firms to challenge pollution from industrial pork and poultry production. In 2004, the firm was part of a legal team that secured a $70 million settlement for property owners in Pensacola, Florida whose properties were contaminated by chemicals from an adjacent Superfund site. Kennedy & Madonna was profiled in the 2010 HBO documentary Mann v. Ford, which chronicles four years of litigation by the firm on behalf of the Ramapough Mountain Indians against the Ford Motor Company for dumping toxic waste on tribal lands in northern New Jersey. In addition to a monetary settlement for the tribe, the lawsuit contributed to the community's land being re-listed on the federal Superfund list, the first time that a de-listed site was re-listed. In 2007 Kennedy was one of three finalists nominated as "Trial Lawyer of the Year" by Public Justice for his role in the $396 million jury verdict against DuPont for contamination from its Spelter, West Virginia zinc plant. In 2017, the firm was part of the trial team that secured a $670 million settlement on behalf of over 3,000 residents from Ohio and West Virginia whose drinking water was contaminated by the toxic chemical perfluorooctanoic acid, which DuPont released into the environment in Parkersburg, West Virginia. In 2016, Kennedy became counsel to the Morgan & Morgan law firm. The partnership arose from the two firms' successful collaboration on the case against SoCalGas Company following the Aliso Canyon gas leak in California. In 2017, Kennedy and his partners sued Monsanto in federal court in San Francisco, on behalf of plaintiffs seeking to recover damages for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, that, the plaintiffs allege, were a result of exposure to Monsanto's glyphosate-based herbicide, Roundup. Kennedy and his team also filed a class action lawsuit against Monsanto for failing to warn consumers about the dangers allegedly posed by exposure to Roundup. In September 2018, Kennedy and his partners filed a class-action lawsuit against Columbia Gas of Massachusetts alleging negligence following gas explosions in three towns north of Boston. Of Columbia Gas, Kennedy said "as they build new miles of pipe, the same company is ignoring its existing infrastructure, which we now know is eroding and is dilapidated". In 1998, Kennedy, Chris Bartle and John Hoving created a bottled-water company, Keeper Springs, which donated all of its profits to Waterkeeper Alliance. In 2013, Kennedy and his partner sold the brand to Nestlé in exchange for a donation to local Waterkeepers. Kennedy was a venture partner and senior advisor at VantagePoint Capital Partners, one of the world's largest cleantech venture capital firms. Among other activities, VantagePoint was the original and largest pre-IPO institutional investor in Tesla. VantagePoint also backed BrightSource Energy and Solazyme, amongst others. Kennedy is a board member and counselor to several of Vantage Point's portfolio companies in the water and energy space, including Ostara, a Vancouver-based company that markets the technology to remove phosphorus and other excessive nutrients from wastewater, transforming otherwise pollution directly into high-grade fertilizer. He is also a senior advisor to Starwood Energy Group and has played a key role in a number of the firm's investments. He is on the board of Vionx, a Massachusetts-based utility scale vanadium flow battery systems manufacturer. On October 5, 2017, Vionx, National Grid and the U.S. Department of Energy completed the installation of advanced flow batteries at Holy Name High School in the city of Worcester, Massachusetts. The collaboration also includes Siemens and the United Technologies Research Center and constitutes one of the largest energy storage facilities in Massachusetts. Kennedy is a Partner in ColorZen, which offers a turnkey cotton fiber pre-treatment solution that reduces water usage and toxic discharges in the cotton dyeing process. Kennedy was a co-owner and Director of the smart grid company Utility Integration Solutions (UISol), which was acquired by Alstom. He is presently a co-owner and Director of GridBright, the market-leading grid management specialist. In October 2011, Kennedy co-founded EcoWatch, an environmental news site. He resigned from its board of directors in January 2018. In his first case as an environmental attorney, Kennedy represented the NAACP in a lawsuit against a proposal to build a garbage transfer station in a minority neighborhood in Ossining, New York. In 1987, he successfully sued Westchester County, New York, to reopen the Croton Point Park, which was heavily used primarily by poor and minority communities from the Bronx. He then forced the reopening of the Pelham Bay Park in the Bronx, which New York City had closed to the public and converted to a police firing range. Kennedy has argued that poor communities shoulder the disproportionate burden of environmental pollution. Speaking at the 2016 SXSW Eco environment conference in Austin, Texas, he said, "Polluters always choose the soft target of poverty", noting that Chicago's south side has the highest concentration of toxic waste dumps in America. Furthermore, he added that 80 percent of "uncontrolled toxic waste dumps" can be found in black neighborhoods, with the largest site in the United States being in Emelle, Alabama, which is 90 percent black. Starting in 1985, Kennedy helped develop the Natural Resources Defense Council's international program for environmental, energy, and human rights, traveling to Canada and Latin America to assist indigenous tribes in protecting their homelands and opposing large-scale energy and extractive projects in remote wilderness areas. In 1990, Kennedy assisted indigenous Pehuenches in Chile in a partially successful campaign to stop the construction of a series of dams on Chile's iconic Biobío River. That campaign derailed all but one of the proposed dams. Beginning in 1992, he assisted the Cree Indians of northern Quebec in their campaign against Hydro-Québec to halt construction of some 600 proposed dams on eleven rivers in James Bay. In 1993, Kennedy and NRDC, working with the indigenous rights organization Cultural Survival, clashed with other American environmental groups in a dispute about the rights of Indians to govern their own lands in the Oriente region of Ecuador. Kennedy represented the CONFENIAE, a confederation of Indian peoples, in negotiation with the American oil company Conoco to limit oil development in Ecuadorian Amazon and, at the same time, obtain benefits from resource extraction for Amazonian tribes. Kennedy was a vocal critic of Texaco for its previous record for polluting the Ecuadoran Amazon. From 1993 to 1999, Kennedy worked with five Vancouver Island Indian tribes in their campaign to end industrial logging by MacMillan Bloedel in Clayoquot Sound, British Columbia. In 1996, Kennedy met with Cuban President Fidel Castro to persuade the leader to halt his plans to construct a nuclear power plant at Juraguá. During a lengthy latenight encounter, Castro reminisced about Kennedy's father and uncle, speculating that U.S. relations with Cuba would have been far better had President Kennedy not been assassinated. Between 1996 and 2000, Kennedy and NRDC helped Mexican commercial fishermen to halt Mitsubishi's proposal to build a salt facility in the Laguna San Ignacio, a known area in Baja where gray whales bred, and nursed their calves. Kennedy wrote against the project, and took the campaign to Japan, meeting with the Japanese Prime Minister Keizo Obuchi. In 2000, he assisted local environmental activists to stop proposals by Chaffin Light, a real estate developer, and U.S. engineering giant Bechtel from building a large hotel and resort development that, Kennedy argued, threatened coral reefs and public beaches used by local Bahamians, at Clifton Bay, New Providence Island. Kennedy was one of the early editors of Indian Country Today, North America's largest Native American newspaper. He helped lead the opposition to the damming of the Futaleufú River in the Patagonia region of Chile. In 2016, citing the pressure precipitated by the Futaleufú Riverkeeper's campaign against the dams, the Spanish power company, Endesa, which owned the right to dam the river, reversed its decision and relinquished all claims to the Futaleufú. Kennedy has been a critic of environmental damage by the U.S. military. In a 2001 article, Kennedy described how he sued the U.S. Navy on behalf of fishermen and residents of Vieques, an island of Puerto Rico, to stop weapons testing, bombing, and other military exercises. Kennedy argued that the activities were unnecessary, and that the Navy had illegally destroyed several endangered species, polluted the island's waters, harmed the residents' health, and damaged its economy. He was arrested for trespassing at Camp Garcia Vieques, the U.S. Navy training facility, where he and others were protesting the use of a section of the island for training. Kennedy served 30 days in a maximum security prison in Puerto Rico. The trespassing incident forced the suspension of live-fire exercises for almost three hours. The lawsuits and protests by Kennedy, and hundreds of Puerto Ricans who were also imprisoned, eventually forced the termination of naval bombing in Vieques by the Bush administration. In a 2003 article for the Chicago Tribune, Kennedy said the U.S. federal government was "America's biggest polluter" and the U.S. Department of Defense as the worst offender. Citing the EPA, he said, "unexploded ordnance waste can be found on 16,000 military ranges...and more than half may contain biological or chemical weapons". For almost twenty years, Kennedy and his Waterkeepers waged a legal and public relations battle against pollution by factory farms. In the 1990s, he rallied opposition to factory farms among small independent farmers, convened a series of "National Summits" on factory meat products, and conducted press conference whistle stop tours across North Carolina, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Illinois, Ohio and in Washington DC. Beginning in 2000, Kennedy sued factory farms in North Carolina, Oklahoma, Maryland, and Iowa. He wrote articles on the subject, arguing that factory farms produce lower-quality, less healthy food, and are harmful to independent family farmers by poisoning their air and water, reducing their property values, and using extensive state and federal subsidies to impose unfair competition against smaller farmers. In 1995, Premier Ralph Klein of Alberta declared Kennedy persona non grata in the province due to Kennedy's activism against Alberta's large-scale hog production facilities. In 2002, Smithfield Foods filed a lawsuit against Kennedy in Poland, under a Polish law that makes criticizing a corporation illegal, after Kennedy denounced the company in a debate with Smithfield's Polish director before the Polish parliament. Kennedy has advocated for a global transition from fossil fuels to renewable energy. He has been particularly critical of the oil industry. In one of his first environmental cases, Kennedy filed a lawsuit against Mobil Oil for polluting the Hudson. Kennedy helped lead the battle against fracking in New York State. He had been an early supporter of natural gas as viable bridge fuel to renewables, and a cleaner alternative to coal. However, he said he turned against this controversial extraction method after investigating its cost to public health, climate and road infrastructure. As a member of Governor Andrew Cuomo's fracking commission, Kennedy helped engineer the Governor's 2013 ban on fracking in New York State. Kennedy mounted a national effort against the construction of liquefied natural gas facilities. Waterkeepers maintains a national watch that documents numerous crude oil spills annually. In 2013, Kennedy assisted the Chipewyan First Nation and the Beaver Lake Cree fighting to protect their land from tar sands production. In February 2013, while protesting the Keystone XL Pipeline Kennedy, along with his son, Conor, was arrested for blocking a thoroughfare in front of the White House during a protest. In August 2016, Kennedy and Waterkeeper participated in protests to block the extension of the Dakota Access pipeline across the Sioux Indian Standing Rock Reservation's water supply. Kennedy has maintained that the oil industry remains competitive against renewables and electric cars only due to massive direct and indirect subsidies and political interventions on behalf of the oil industry. In a June 2017 interview on EnviroNews, Kennedy said about the oil industry, "That's what their strategy is: build as many miles of pipeline as possible. And what the industry is trying to do is to increase that level of infrastructure investment so our country won't be able to walk away from it. Under Kennedy's leadership, Waterkeeper launched its "Clean Coal is a Deadly Lie" campaign in 2001, bringing dozens of lawsuits targeting mining practices, which include mountaintop removal, slurry pond construction, and targeting mercury emissions and coal ash piles by coal-burning utilities. Kennedy's Waterkeeper alliance has also been leading the fight against coal export, including from terminals in the Pacific Northwest. Kennedy has promoted replacing coal energy with renewable energy, which, he argues, would thereby reduce costs and greenhouse gases while improving air and water quality, the health of the citizens, and the number and quality of jobs. In June 2011, film producer Bill Haney televised his award-winning film The Last Mountain, co-written by Haney and Peter Rhodes, depicting Kennedy's fight to stop Appalachian mountaintop removal mining. Kennedy has been an opponent of conventional nuclear power, arguing that it is unsafe and not economically competitive. On June 15, 1981, he spoke at an anti-nuclear rally at the Hollywood Bowl, with Stephen Stills, Bonnie Raitt and Jackson Browne. His 34-year battle to close Indian Point nuclear power plant in New York ended when Entergy, the plant's operator, closed the plant in 2021. Kennedy was featured in a 2004 documentary, Indian Point: Imagining the Unimaginable, directed by his sister, documentary filmmaker Rory Kennedy. In 1991, Kennedy helped lead a campaign to block Hydro-Québec from building the James Bay Hydro-project, a massive dam project in northern Quebec. His campaigns helped block dams on Chile's Biobío River in 1990 and its Futaleufú River in 2016. In 2002, he mounted what was ultimately an unsuccessful battle against building a dam on Belize's Macal River. Kennedy termed the Chalillo Dam a boondoggle and brought a high-profile legal challenge against Fortis Inc., a Canadian power company and the monopoly owner of Belize's electric utility. In a 3–2 ruling in 2003, the Privy Council of the United Kingdom upheld the Belizean government's decision to permit dam construction. In 2004, Kennedy met with provincial officials and brought foreign media and political visitors to Canada to protest the building of hydroelectric dams on Quebec's Magpie River. Hydro-Québec dropped plans for the dam in 2017. In November 2017, the Spanish hydroelectric syndicate Endesa decided to abandon HydroAysen, a massive project to construct dams on dozens of Patagonia's rivers accompanied by thousands of miles of roads, power lines and other infrastructure. Endesa returned its water rights to the Chilean government. The Chilean press credits advocacy by Kennedy and Riverkeeper as critical factors in the company's decision. In 2005, Kennedy clashed with national environmental groups over his opposition to the Cape Wind Project, a proposed offshore wind farm off of the coast of Cape Cod, Massachusetts, in Nantucket Sound. Taking the side of Cape Cod's commercial fishing industry, Kennedy argued that the project was a costly boondoggle. This position angered some environmentalists, and brought Kennedy criticism by commentators such as Rush Limbaugh and John Stossel, the latter of whom called him a hypocrite.[better source needed] Kennedy argued in an opinion piece in The Wall Street Journal, "Vermont wants to take its nuclear plant off line and replace it with clean, green power from Hydro-Québec—power available to Massachusetts utilities—at a cost of six cents per kilowatt hour (kwh). Cape Wind electricity, by a conservative estimate and based on figures they filed with the state, comes in at 25 cents per kwh." Kennedy's political rhetoric often uses conspiracy theories. He expressed skepticism about the COVID-19 pandemic, contending that it served to benefit billionaires; according to Kennedy, the pandemic resulted in a "$4.4 trillion shift in wealth from the American middle class to this new oligarchy that we created—500 new billionaires with the lockdowns, and the billionaires that we already had increased their wealth by 30%". Kennedy has also said that the American government is dominated by corporate power; he said the Environmental Protection Agency was run by the "oil industry, the coal industry and the pesticide industry", and described the Food and Drug Administration as overly dominated by "Big Pharma". He has stated his belief that "systematic" erosion of the middle class is taking place, remarking in a 2023 interview with UnHerd that American politicians have "been systematically hollowing out the American middle class and printing money to make billionaires richer". He said that the financial industry and the military–industrial complex are funded at the expense of the American middle class. Kennedy sees a "vibrant middle class" as the economy's backbone and said that the economy has deteriorated because the middle class has become poorer. In an interview with Andrew Serwer, Kennedy remarked that the gap between rich and poor in the U.S. had become too great and said, "the very wealthy people should pay more taxes and corporations". He also expressed his support for Massachusetts senator Elizabeth Warren's wealth tax plan, which would impose an annual tax of 2% on every dollar of a household's net worth over $50 million and 6% on every dollar of net worth over $1 billion. Kennedy is critical of the United States' alliances with dictatorships like Saudi Arabia. He criticized the Saudi-led intervention in the Yemeni civil war, calling it a "genocide against the Iranian backed Houthi tribe." Kennedy is a supporter of Israel. In December 2023, he had a heated exchange with Breaking Points host Krystal Ball, in what Rabbi Shmuley Boteach called "the single greatest defense of Israel on videos since the start of the" 2023 Israel–Hamas war. An opponent of the military industry and foreign interventions, Kennedy was critical of the Iraq War as well as American support for Ukraine against Russia's invasion of the country. He condemned the Russian invasion of Ukraine, but called the Russo-Ukrainian War "a U.S. war against Russia" and said the war's goal was to "sacrifice the flower of Ukrainian youth in an abattoir of death and destruction for the geopolitical ambition of the neocons". He called for a peace agreement in Ukraine based on the Minsk Accords; in his view, the Donbas region should remain in Ukraine but also be given territorial autonomy and placed under the jurisdiction of United Nations peacekeeping forces, while Aegis missile systems should be removed from Eastern Europe. Kennedy said Ukraine should be forbidden from joining NATO, and announced that as president he would consider admitting Russia to NATO and deescalating tensions with the People's Republic of China. He said the 2014 Ukrainian revolution was an attempted coup sponsored by the U.S. against the Ukrainian government, and that the Ukrainian government committed atrocities against the Russian population in Donbas, wrongly claiming that all casualties of the Donbas War between 2014 and 2022 (about 14,000) were Russian civilians. He said that Russians living there "were being systematically killed by the Ukrainian government". Kennedy attacked the operations of former CIA director Allen Dulles, condemning U.S.-backed coups and interventions such as the 1953 Iranian coup d'état as "bloodthirsty", and blamed U.S. interventions in countries such as Syria and Iran for the rise of terrorist organizations such as ISIS and creating anti-American sentiment in the region. Kennedy said the CIA has no accountability and declared his intention to restructure the agency. Calling himself "arguably the leading environmentalist in the country", Kennedy promotes populist and anti-establishment environmental policies, claiming that the climate crisis was hijacked by "Bill Gates and the World Economic Forum and the billionaire boys' club in Davos". In a 2015 interview, of politicians skeptical of global warming, Kennedy said he "wished there were a law you could punish them under". He expressed his support for regenerative farming and said that environmentalists' priority should be to tackle the "carbon industry". He called the current society and economy unsustainable and based on a "longtime deadly addiction to coal and oil" and contended that the economic system rewards pollution. In 2020, Kennedy said: "Right now, we have a market that is governed by rules that were written by the carbon incumbents to reward the dirtiest, filthiest, most poisonous, most toxic, most war-mongering fields from hell, rather than the cheap, clean, green, wholesome and patriotic fields from heaven." Kennedy stated his support for Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's Green New Deal resolution and announced his plans to implement it. He spoke out against geoengineering, claiming that geoengineering solutions are an attempt by big business to profit from climate change. Despite his reputation as environmentalist, he voiced his support for agrarian movements, saying in 2023: "If we want to have democracy, we need a broad ownership of our land by a wide variety of yeoman farmers, each with a stake in our system." He opposes nuclear energy, considering it too expensive and unsafe. Kennedy believes that nuclear energy is a profit-making venture and that it is promoted by corporate lobbyists rather than environmental activists, saying in a 2023 interview, "it's not hippies in tie-dyed T-shirts who are saying it's dangerous; it's guys on Wall Street with suits and ties". Throughout the presidency of George W. Bush, Kennedy was critical of Bush's environmental and energy policies, saying Bush was defunding and corrupting federal science projects. Kennedy was also critical of Bush's 2003 hydrogen car initiative, arguing that it was a gift to the fossil fuel industry disguised as a green automobile. In 2003, Kennedy wrote an article in Rolling Stone about Bush's environmental record, which he subsequently expanded into a New York Times bestselling book. His opposition to the Bush administration's environmental policies earned him recognition as one of Rolling Stone's "100 Agents of Change" on April 2, 2009. During an October 2012 interview with Politico, Kennedy called on environmentalists to direct their dissatisfaction towards the U.S. Congress rather than President Barack Obama, reasoning that Obama "didn't deliver" due to having a partisan U.S. Congress "like we haven't seen before in American history". He said politicians who do not act on climate change policy serve special interests and sell out public trust. He said Charles and David Koch—the owners of Koch Industries, Inc., the nation's largest privately owned oil company—subverted democracy and made "themselves billionaires by impoverishing the rest of us". Kennedy has spoken of the Koch Brothers as leading "the apocalyptical forces of Ignorance and Greed". During the 2014 People's Climate March, Kennedy said: "American politics is driven by two forces. One is intensity, and the other is money. The Koch brothers have all the money. They're putting $300 million this year into their efforts to stop the climate bill. And the only thing we have in our power is people power, and that's why we need to put this demonstration on the street." Kennedy has written on foreign policy, beginning with a 1974 Atlantic Monthly article titled "Poor Chile", discussing the overthrow of Chilean President Salvador Allende. He also wrote editorials against the execution of Pakistan President Zulfikar Ali Bhutto by General Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq. In 1975, he published an article in The Wall Street Journal criticizing the use of assassination as a foreign policy tool. In 2005, he wrote an article for the Los Angeles Times decrying President Bush's use of torture as anti-American. His uncle Senator Ted Kennedy entered the article into the Congressional Record. In an article titled "Why the Arabs Don't Want Us in Syria" published in Politico in February 2016, Kennedy referred to the "bloody history that modern interventionists like George W. Bush, Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio miss when they recite their narcissistic trope that Mideast nationalists 'hate us for our freedoms.' For the most part they don't; instead they hate us for the way we betrayed those freedoms—our own ideals—within their borders". Kennedy blames the Syrian war on a pipeline dispute. He cites apparent WikiLeaks disclosures alleging that the CIA led military and intelligence planners to foment a Sunni uprising against Syria's president, Bashar al-Assad, following his rejection of a proposed Qatar-Turkey pipeline through Syria in 2009, well before the Arab Spring. In a June 2023 interview, Kennedy said that in broad terms he believes that U.S. foreign relations should involve significantly reducing the military presence in other nations. He specifically said the country must "start unraveling the Empire" by closing U.S. bases in different locations worldwide. Kennedy believes that the administration of President Joe Biden in large part caused the 2022 invasion of Ukraine by Russia due to reckless and militant action; he has specifically cited the issue of NATO expansion into Eastern Europe. At the same time, he has clarified that he refuses to connect this criticism with anything considered support of the government of Russia under Putin, particularly given Kennedy's ethical opposition to the regime's beliefs and politics. He has called Putin a "monster", a "thug", and a "gangster". Kennedy has said that he supports "common sense" gun control while also maintaining that he would not "take away anybody's guns." He has said: "I'm a constitutional absolutist. We can argue about whether the Second Amendment was intended to protect guns. That argument has now been settled by the Supreme Court." Kennedy also expressed support for a bipartisan assault weapons ban. In 2023, Kennedy said on camera to NBC reporter Ali Vitali that, if elected, he would sign a federal ban on abortions performed after 21 weeks of pregnancy. He added, "I think the states have a right to protect a child once the child becomes viable, and that right, it increases." His campaign quickly released a statement saying, "Today, Mr. Kennedy misunderstood a question posed to him by a NBC reporter in a crowded, noisy exhibit hall at the Iowa State Fair ... Mr. Kennedy's position on abortion is that it is always the woman's right to choose. He does not support legislation banning abortion." Kennedy has been critical of the integrity of the voting process. In June 2006, he published an article in Rolling Stone purporting to show that GOP operatives stole the 2004 presidential election for President George W. Bush. Journalist Farhad Manjoo countered Kennedy's conclusions. Kennedy has written about the ease of election hacking and the dangers of voter purges and voter ID laws. He wrote the introduction and a chapter in Billionaires and Ballot Bandits, a 2012 book on election hacking by the investigative journalist Greg Palast. Kennedy was on his uncle Ted Kennedy's 1970 and 1976 Massachusetts senatorial campaigns, and was on the national staff and a state coordinator for his uncle's 1980 presidential campaign. He was a co-founder and a former board member of the New York League of Conservation Voters. Kennedy endorsed and campaigned for Vice President Al Gore during his 2000 presidential campaign, and openly opposed Ralph Nader's Green Party presidential campaign. In the 2004 presidential election, Kennedy endorsed John Kerry, noting his strong environmental record. In late 2007, Kennedy and his sisters Kerry and Kathleen endorsed Hillary Clinton in the 2008 Democratic Party presidential primaries. After the Democratic Convention, Kennedy campaigned for Obama across the country. After the election, the Obama administration was reportedly considering Kennedy for administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, but felt his controversial statements and arrest for heroin possession in the 1980s made him unlikely to win Senate confirmation. Kennedy first considered running for political office in 2000, when New York Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan did not seek reelection to the U.S. Senate seat formerly held by Kennedy's father. In 2005, Kennedy considered running in the 2006 election for New York attorney general, which would have meant a possible run against his then brother-in-law Andrew Cuomo, but in the end he decided against entering the race, even though he had been considered the front-runner. On December 2, 2008, Kennedy said that he did not want New York Governor David Paterson to appoint him to the U.S. Senate seat expected to be vacated by Hillary Clinton, who had been designated as Obama's choice for United States secretary of state. Some outlets had speculated that Kennedy was a prospective candidate for the appointment. He felt that Senate service would allow him too little time with his family. As a "well-respected climate lawyer" in the 2000s, Kennedy was "often linked to top environmental jobs in Democratic administrations", including in the 2000, 2004, and 2008 presidential elections. He was considered as a potential White House Council on Environmental Quality chair for Al Gore in 2000 and considered for the role of EPA administrator under John Kerry in 2004 and Barack Obama in 2008. According to Politico, the Obama transition team decided to not nominate Kennedy due to his past heroin conviction and opposition from Senate Republicans. Then United States Chamber of Commerce lobbyist William Kovacs said that Kennedy's nomination "would speak volumes as to where Obama is going with his appointments... A Kennedy appointment is as liberal as you can possibly get... There is no one [candidate] based firmer in extremes.” Republican Senator Jim Inhofe of Oklahoma also criticized the proposal, saying Kennedy was too radical and would further a left-wing agenda if appointed. On March 3, 2023, in a speech in New Hampshire, Kennedy said he was considering a run for president in 2024, saying, "I am thinking about it. I've passed the biggest hurdle which is that my wife has greenlighted it." On April 5, 2023, Kennedy filed his candidacy for the Democratic presidential nomination in the 2024 presidential election. On October 9, 2023, he announced he was running as an independent. This makes him the fifth member of his family to seek the presidency of the United States. Kennedy is a prominent voice in the anti-vaccine movement, spreading anti-vaccine misinformation, disinformation and propaganda. Infectious disease specialist Michael Osterholm has said that Kennedy's "anti-vaccine disinformation" is effective "because it's portrayed to the public with graphs and figures and what appears to be scientific data. He has perfected the art of illusion of fact." Osterholm added: "this is about people's lives. And the consequences of promoting this kind of disinformation, as credible as it may seem, is simply dangerous." Kennedy has said that he is not against vaccines but wants them to be more thoroughly tested and investigated. In Thimerosal: Let the Science Speak, Kennedy writes that he does not see himself as anti-vaccine: "People who advocate for safer vaccines should not be marginalized or denounced as anti-vaccine. I am pro-vaccine. I had all six of my children vaccinated. I believe that vaccines have saved the lives of hundreds of millions of humans over the past century and that broad vaccine coverage is critical to public health. But I want our vaccines to be as safe as possible." Kennedy chairs Children's Health Defense (formerly known as the World Mercury Project), an anti-vaccine advocacy group he joined in 2015. In its early years, the group focused on mercury in industry and medicine, especially the ethylmercury used in thimerosal in vaccines. The group alleges that many American children have conditions as diverse as autism, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, food allergies, cancer, and autoimmune diseases due to exposure to certain chemicals and radiation. Children's Health Defense has blamed and campaigned against vaccines, fluoridation of drinking water, paracetamol (acetaminophen), aluminum, and wireless communication, among other things. The group has been identified as one of two major buyers of anti-vaccine Facebook advertising in late 2018 and early 2019. Members of his family have criticized Kennedy and his organization, saying he spreads "dangerous misinformation" and that his work has "heartbreaking" consequences. Kennedy and Children's Health Defense have falsely claimed that vaccines cause autism. Kennedy focused on the subset of vaccines that contained thimerosal, a mercury-based anti-microbial that has been falsely claimed to cause autism. Thimerosal has never been used in MMR, chickenpox, pneumococcal conjugate and inactivated polio vaccines, and in 2001 was removed from all other childhood (under 6 years old) vaccines except for a few versions of flu and hepatitis vaccines. No childhood vaccine now contains more than traces (1 microgram or less) of thimerosal, except for flu, which is also available without thimerosal in the US. For those 6 years and older, including pregnant women, all vaccines are now available in versions with only trace amounts of thimerosal. In 2020, the Center for Countering Digital Hate stated that Kennedy uses his status as an environmental activist to bolster the anti-vaccination movement, regularly appearing in online conversations with discredited former British doctor Andrew Wakefield, anti-vaccination activist Del Bigtree, and conspiracy theorist Rashid Buttar. Kennedy is listed as executive producer of Vaxxed II: The People's Truth, the 2019 sequel to Wakefield's and Bigtree's anti-vaccination documentary Vaxxed. In February 2021, Kennedy's Instagram account was deleted "for repeatedly sharing debunked claims" about COVID-19 vaccines. In March 2021, the Center for Countering Digital Hate identified Kennedy as one of 12 people responsible for up to 65% of anti-vaccine content on Facebook and Twitter. Kennedy has said that governments and the media are conspiring to deny that vaccines cause autism. In June 2005, Kennedy wrote an article, "Deadly Immunity", that appeared in both Rolling Stone and Salon and alleged a government conspiracy to conceal a connection between thimerosal and childhood neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism. The article contained factual errors, leading Salon to issue five corrections. Joan Walsh, Salon's editor-in-chief at the time and the sole Salon editor of the piece, said she had mistakenly relied on Rolling Stone's fact-checking, a process she later learned was "less than arduous". As soon as the piece was up, she said, "we were besieged by scientists and advocates showing how Kennedy had misunderstood, incorrectly cited, and perhaps even falsified data.... It was the worst mistake of my career. I probably should have been fired." Six years later Salon retracted the article in its entirety. According to Salon, the retraction was motivated by accumulating evidence of alleged errors and scientific fraud underlying the vaccine-autism claim. A corrected version of the original article was published on Rolling Stone's website. Kennedy said on the Joe Rogan Experience, and was paraphrased in The New York Times as saying, that "Salon caved to pressure from government regulators and the pharmaceutical industry." Walsh responded: "That's just another lie. We caved to pressure from the incontrovertible truth and our journalistic consciences." In May 2013, Kennedy delivered the keynote address at the anti-vaccination AutismOne / Generation Rescue conference. In 2014, Kennedy's book Thimerosal: Let the Science Speak: The Evidence Supporting the Immediate Removal of Mercury – a Known Neurotoxin – from Vaccines, was published. While methylmercury is a potent neurotoxin, ethylmercury, as used in vaccine preservatives, is safe. The book's preface is by Mark Hyman, a proponent of the alternative medical treatment called functional medicine. Kennedy has published many articles on the inclusion of thimerosal in vaccines. In April 2015, Kennedy participated in a Speakers' Forum to promote the film Trace Amounts, which promotes the discredited claim of a link between autism and mercury in vaccinations. At a screening, he called the increased cases of autism (which he calls an "autism epidemic") a "holocaust". On January 10, 2017, incoming White House Press Secretary Sean Spicer confirmed that Kennedy and President-elect Donald Trump met to discuss a position in the Trump administration. Kennedy said he had accepted an offer from Trump to chair the Vaccine Safety Task Force, but a spokeswoman for Trump's transition said that no final decision had been made. In an August 2017 interview with STAT News reporter Helen Branswell, Kennedy said that he had been meeting with federal public health regulators at the White House's request to discuss defects in vaccine safety science. On February 15, 2017, Kennedy and actor Robert De Niro gave a press conference at the National Press Club in Washington, D.C., in which they said the press were working for the vaccination industry and did not allow debates on vaccination science. They offered a $100,000 reward to any journalist or other citizen who could point to a study showing that it is safe to inject mercury into babies and pregnant women at levels currently contained in flu vaccines. Craig Foster, a psychology professor who studies pseudoscience, deemed the challenge "not science", observing that it was a "carefully constructed 'contest' that allows its creators to generate the misleading outcome they presumably want to see". He also stated, "Proving that something is safe is importantly different than proving that something is harmful". On June 4, 2019, during a visit to Samoa coinciding with that nation's 57th annual independence celebration, Kennedy appeared in an Instagram photo with Australian-Samoan anti-vaccine activist Taylor Winterstein. Kennedy's charity and Winterstein have both perpetuated the allegation that the MMR vaccine played a role in the 2018 deaths of two Samoan infants, despite the subsequent revelation that the infants had received a muscle relaxant along with the vaccine by mistake. Kennedy has drawn criticism for fueling vaccine hesitancy amid a social climate which gave rise to the 2019 Samoa measles outbreak, which killed over 70 people, and the 2019 Tonga measles outbreak. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Kennedy promoted multiple conspiracy theories related to COVID, including false claims that Anthony Fauci and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation were trying to profit off a vaccine, and suggesting that Bill Gates would cut off access to money of people who do not get vaccinated, allowing them to starve. In August 2020, Kennedy appeared in an hour-long interview with Alec Baldwin on Instagram and touted a number of incorrect and misleading claims about vaccines and public health measures related to the pandemic. Public health officials and scientists criticized Baldwin for letting Kennedy's claims go unchallenged. Kennedy has promoted misinformation about the COVID-19 vaccine, falsely suggesting that it contributed to the death of Hank Aaron and others. In February 2021, his Instagram account was blocked for "repeatedly sharing debunked claims about the coronavirus or vaccines". The Center for Countering Digital Hate identified Kennedy as one of the main propagators of conspiracy theories about Bill Gates and 5G phone technology. His conspiracy theory activities increased his social media impact considerably; between the spring and fall of 2020, his Instagram account grew from 121,000 followers to 454,000. In November 2021, Kennedy's book The Real Anthony Fauci: Bill Gates, Big Pharma, and the Global War on Democracy and Public Health was published. In it, Kennedy alleges that Fauci sabotaged treatments for AIDS, violated federal laws, and conspired with Bill Gates and social media companies such as Facebook to suppress information about COVID-19 cures, to leave vaccines as the only option to fight the pandemic. In the book, Kennedy calls Fauci "a powerful technocrat who helped orchestrate and execute 2020s historic coup d'etat against Western democracy." He claims without proof that Fauci and Gates had schemed to prolong the pandemic and exaggerate its effects, promoting expensive vaccinations for the benefit of "a powerful vaccine cartel". The book repeats several discredited myths about the COVID-19 pandemic, notably about the effectiveness of ivermectin. The Neue Zürcher Zeitung wrote that in the book "polemics alternate with chapters that pedantically seek to substantiate Kennedy's accusations with numerous quotations and studies." Kennedy also released a video depicting Fauci with a Hitler mustache. In response to the book, Fauci called Kennedy "a very disturbed individual". Kennedy wrote the foreword to Plague of Corruption, a 2020 book by former research scientist and anti-vaccine conspiracy theorist Judy Mikovits. On August 29, 2020, Kennedy appeared as a speaker at a partially violent demonstration in Berlin where populist groups called for an end to restrictions caused by COVID-19. His YouTube account was removed in late September 2021 for breaking the company's new policies on vaccine misinformation. During a January 23, 2022, speech at an anti-vaccination rally on the National Mall in Washington D.C., Kennedy said: "Even in Hitler's Germany, you could cross the Alps into Switzerland, you could hide in the attic like Anne Frank did. Today the mechanisms are being put in place that will make it so none of us can run, none of us can hide." The Auschwitz Memorial responded on Twitter: "Exploiting of the tragedy of people who suffered, were humiliated, tortured & murdered by the totalitarian regime of Nazi Germany—including children like Anne Frank—in a debate about vaccines & limitations during global pandemic is a sad symptom of moral & intellectual decay." Kennedy's wife, the actress Cheryl Hines, also condemned his comments, tweeting that the reference to Frank was "reprehensible and insensitive." Two days later, Kennedy apologized for his comment. In June 2023, Instagram reinstated his account. At a July 2023 dinner event, Kennedy said, "there is an argument that [COVID-19] is ethnically targeted", adding, "COVID-19 is targeted to attack Caucasians and Black people. The people who are the most immune are Ashkenazi Jews and Chinese ... we don't know whether it's deliberately targeted or not." The American Jewish Committee and the Anti-Defamation League immediately condemned his remarks, with the latter saying that Kennedy's statement "feeds into sinophobic and antisemitic conspiracy theories". Kennedy responded that he "never, ever suggested that the COVID-19 virus was targeted to spare Jews" and that he does not "believe and never implied that the ethnic effect was deliberately engineered". He explained his remarks by citing a 2021 study that he said showed that "COVID-19 appears to disproportionately affect certain races" due to racial differences in the effectiveness of COVID-19's furin cleave docking site, thus serving "as a kind of proof of concept for ethnically targeted bioweapons". Experts roundly criticized these further claims, pointing out that the study said nothing about Chinese people or bioweapons and that Chinese people and Ashkenazi Jews contract COVID at rates similar to other ethnic groups and nationalities. Virologist Angela Rasmussen said, "Jewish or Chinese protease consensus sequences are not a thing in biochemistry, but they are in racism and antisemitism". Kennedy targets Black Americans with anti-vaccine propaganda and conspiracy theories, linking vaccination with instances of medical racism such as the Tuskegee Syphilis Study. Echoing others in the anti-vaccination movement, Children's Health Defense claimed that the U.S. government seeks to harm ethnic minorities by prioritizing them for COVID vaccines. In early March 2021, Children's Health Defense released an anti-vaccine propaganda video, "Medical Racism: The New Apartheid", that promotes COVID-19 conspiracy theories and claims that COVID-19 vaccination efforts are medical experiments on Black people. Kennedy appears in the video, inviting viewers to disregard information dispensed by health authorities and doctors. Brandi Collin-Dexter, a Fellow at the Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy said, "the notorious figures and false narratives in the documentary were recognizable" and "the film's incompatible narratives sought to take advantage of the pain felt by Black communities". At the urging of disinformation experts, the film was removed from Facebook, but Kennedy was permitted to keep his account. In his book The Real Anthony Fauci: Bill Gates, Big Pharma, and the War on Democracy and Public Health, Kennedy writes that he takes "no position on the relationship between HIV and AIDS",: 347  but spends over 100 pages quoting HIV denialists such as Peter Duesberg who question the isolation of HIV and the etiology of AIDS. Kennedy refers to the "orthodoxy that HIV alone causes AIDS": 348  and the "theology that HIV is the sole cause of AIDS",: 351  and repeats the false HIV/AIDS denialist claim that no one has isolated the HIV particle and "No one has been able to point to a study that demonstrates their hypothesis using accepted scientific proofs".: 348  He also repeats the false claim that the early AIDS drug AZT is "absolutely fatal": 332  due to its "horrendous toxicity".: 298  Molecular biologist Dan Wilson points out that Kennedy falsely claims that Luc Montagnier, the discoverer of HIV, was a "convert" to Duesberg's fringe hypothesis. Wilson concludes that Kennedy is a "full blown" HIV/AIDS denialist. Several members of Kennedy's close family have distanced themselves from his anti-vaccination activities and conspiracy theories on public health, and condemned his comments equating public health measures with Nazi atrocities. On May 8, 2019, Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, Joseph P. Kennedy, and Maeve Kennedy McKean wrote an open letter saying that while Kennedy has championed many admirable causes, he "has helped to spread dangerous misinformation over social media and is complicit in sowing distrust of the science behind vaccines". On December 30, 2020, Kennedy's niece Kerry Kennedy Meltzer, a physician, wrote a similar open letter, saying that her uncle published misinformation about COVID-19 vaccines' side effects. Kennedy was a founding board member of the Food Allergy Initiative. His son has anaphylactic peanut allergies. Kennedy wrote the foreword to The Peanut Allergy Epidemic, in which he and the authors falsely link increasing food allergies in children to certain vaccines that were approved beginning in 1989. In 2003, Kennedy published an article in The Atlantic Monthly about the 1975 murder of Martha Moxley in Greenwich, Connecticut, in which he insists that his cousin Michael Skakel's indictment "was triggered by an inflamed media, and that an innocent man is now in prison". Kennedy argues that evidence suggests that Kenneth Littleton, the Skakel family's live-in tutor, killed Moxley, and calls Dominick Dunne the "driving force" behind Skakel's prosecution. In 2016, Kennedy released the book Framed: Why Michael Skakel Spent over a Decade in Prison for a Murder He Didn't Commit. In 2017, the rights to the book were optioned by FX Productions to develop a multi-part television series. In 2018, Skakel's conviction was vacated, and in 2020, prosecutors decided not to seek a new trial. On the evening of January 11, 2013, Charlie Rose interviewed Kennedy and his sister Rory at the Winspear Opera House in Dallas as a part of then Dallas Mayor Mike Rawlings's hand-chosen committee's year-long program of celebrating John F. Kennedy's life and presidency. Of JFK's assassination, RFK Jr. said his father was "fairly convinced" Lee Harvey Oswald had not acted alone and believed the Warren Commission report was a "shoddy piece of craftsmanship". According to RFK Jr. in January 2013, "The evidence at this point I think is very, very convincing that it was not a lone gunman". He endorsed the 2013 edition of JFK and the Unspeakable, saying it had moved him to visit Dealey Plaza for the first time. In November 2023, approaching the 60th anniversary of the assassination, RFK Jr. launched a petition on his presidential campaign website for the Biden administration to release the estimated remaining 1% of documents related to the case. He said that finally releasing full and unredacted documents could help restore trust in the government. In an interview on Lex Fridman's podcast, Kennedy said that the evidence that the CIA was involved in the assassination was "beyond any reasonable doubt". Kennedy does not believe that Sirhan Sirhan fired the shot that killed his father, Robert F. Kennedy. Based on the testimony of eyewitnesses, especially Paul Schrade, who was standing next to Kennedy and was shot himself, as well as the autopsy, he believes there was a second gunman. In December 2017, he visited the Richard J. Donovan Correctional Facility in San Diego to meet Sirhan. After meeting Sirhan, he gave his support for a reinvestigation of the assassination. In a June 2023 podcast interview with Jordan Peterson, Kennedy posited that several issues in children, including gender dysphoria, might be linked to atrazine contamination in the water supply. He cited a 2010 study by Hayes that claims that acute atrazine exposure causes chemical castration and feminization in frogs, leading some to become hermaphrodites. Kennedy suggested that there was other evidence indicating potential effects on humans. YouTube removed the interview under its vaccine misinformation policy, a decision Peterson and Kennedy criticized as censorship. Various publications denounced the theory, such as NBC News, Philadelphia Gay News, The Independent, and Vice. After media criticism, a spokesperson for Kennedy's 2024 presidential campaign told CNN that he was being mischaracterized and that he was not claiming that endocrine disruptors were the sole cause of gender dysphoria, but rather proposing further research. Andrea Gore, a professor of neuroendocrinology at the University of Texas at Austin, said, "I don't think people should be making statements about the relationship between environmental chemicals and changes in sexuality when there's zero evidence". Kennedy is a licensed master falconer and has trained hawks since he was 11. He breeds hawks and falcons and is also licensed as a raptor propagator and a wildlife rehabilitator. He holds permits for Federal Game Keeper, Bird Bander, and Scientific Collector. He was president of the New York State Falconry Association from 1988 to 1991. In 1987, while on Governor Mario Cuomo's New York State Falconry Advising Committee, Kennedy authored New York State's examination to qualify apprentice falconers. Later that year, he wrote the New York State Apprentice Falconer's Manual, which was published by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and remains in use. Kennedy is also a whitewater kayaker. His father introduced him and his siblings to whitewater kayaking during early trips down the Green and Yampa Rivers in Utah and Colorado, the Columbia River, the Middle Fork Salmon in Idaho, and the Upper Hudson Gorge. Between 1976 and 1981, Kennedy was a partner and guide at a whitewater company, Utopian, based in West Forks, Maine. He organized and led several "first-descent" whitewater expeditions to Latin America, including three hitherto unexplored rivers: the Apurimac, Peru, in 1975; the Atrato, Colombia, in 1979; and the Caroni, Venezuela, in 1982. In 1993 he made an early descent of the Great Whale River in northern Quebec. In 2015, Kennedy took two of his sons to the Yukon to visit Mount Kennedy and run the Alsek River, a whitewater river fed by the Alsek Glacier. Mount Kennedy was Canada's highest unclimbed peak when the Canadian government named it for John F. Kennedy in 1964. In 1965, Robert F. Kennedy Sr. was the first person to climb Mount Kennedy. On April 3, 1982, Kennedy married Emily Ruth Black, whom he met at the University of Virginia School of Law. They had two children: Robert Francis "Bobby" Kennedy III (born 1984 and married to writer, peace activist, and former CIA officer Amaryllis Fox) and Kathleen Alexandra ('Kick') Kennedy (born 1988). The latter shares the nickname of her great-aunt, the late Kathleen Cavendish, Marchioness of Hartington. Kennedy and Black separated in 1992 and divorced in 1994. On April 15, 1994, Kennedy married Mary Kathleen Richardson aboard a research vessel on the Hudson River. They had four children. On May 12, 2010, Kennedy filed for divorce from Mary; three days later she was charged with drunk driving. On May 16, 2012, Mary was found dead in a building on the grounds of her home in Bedford, New York. The Westchester County Medical Examiner ruled the death a suicide due to asphyxiation from hanging. Later it was reported that Mary had seen Kennedy's personal journal from 2001, in which he recorded sexual encounters with 37 different women. Kennedy married actress-director Cheryl Hines on August 2, 2014, at the Kennedy compound on Cape Cod. They were introduced by Hines's Curb Your Enthusiasm co-star Larry David and began dating in 2012. Kennedy and Hines reside in Los Angeles and Cape Cod, Massachusetts. In his 40s Kennedy developed spasmodic dysphonia, a disorder that causes his voice to quaver and makes speech difficult. It is a form of an involuntary movement disorder called dystonia that affects only the larynx. Kennedy is a Roman Catholic. In 2005, Michael Paulson called him "a deeply devout Catholic who attends daily Mass". Kennedy considers Saint Francis of Assisi his patron saint and a role model. In a 2005 interview with The Boston Globe, he said he was deeply inspired by Francis's devotion to social justice, helping the poor, animal welfare, and environmentalism; Francis is a patron saint of ecology. In 2004, Kennedy published a biography, Saint Francis of Assisi: A Life of Joy. He also said Catholicism was a vehicle of his environmentalism, adding, "environmental work is spiritual work". Despite identifying as pro-life, Kennedy also identifies with liberal Catholicism. He criticized the church's argument that John Kerry should have been denied communion because of his support for abortion rights. In a 2018 interview with Vatican News, Kennedy expressed his admiration for Pope John XXIII and stated his belief that "the Church should be an instrument of justice and kindness around the world". Kennedy has written books on subjects such as the environment, his anti-vaccination stance, biography, and American heroes. Kennedy Jr., Robert F. (1978). Judge Frank M. Johnson Jr.: A biography. Putnam. ISBN 978-0-399-12123-4. Cronin, John; Kennedy Jr., Robert F. (1997). The Riverkeepers: Two Activists Fight to Reclaim Our Environment as a Basic Human Right. New York: Scribner. ISBN 978-0684839080. Kennedy Jr., Robert F. (2005). Crimes Against Nature: How George W. Bush and His Corporate Pals Are Plundering the Country and Highjacking Our Democracy. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-074687-2. Kennedy Jr., Robert F., ed. (2014). Thimerosal: Let the Science Speak: The Evidence Supporting the Immediate Removal of Mercury – a Known Neurotoxin – from Vaccines. New York: Skyhorse Publishing. ISBN 978-1632206015. Kennedy Jr., Robert F. (2016). Framed: Why Michael Skakel Spent Over a Decade in Prison For a Murder He Didn't Commit. New York: Skyhorse Publishing. ISBN 978-1510701779. Kennedy Jr., Robert F. (2018). American Values: Lessons I Learned from My Family. Harper. ISBN 978-0060848347. Kennedy Jr., Robert F.; Russell, Dick (2020). Climate in Crisis: Who's Causing It, Who's Fighting It, and How We Can Reverse It Before It's Too Late. Hot Books. ISBN 978-1510760561. Kennedy Jr., Robert F. (2021). The Real Anthony Fauci: Bill Gates, Big Pharma, and the Global War on Democracy and Public Health. Skyhorse Publishing. ISBN 978-1510766808. Kennedy Jr., Robert F. (2022). A Letter to Liberals: Censorship and COVID: an Attack on Science and American Ideals. Skyhorse Publishing. ISBN 978-1510775596. Leake, John; McCullough, Peter A.; Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (2022). The Courage to Face COVID-19: Preventing Hospitalization and Death While Battling the Bio–Pharmaceutical Complex. Skyhorse Publishing. ISBN 978-1510776807. Kennedy Jr., Robert F.; Hooker, Brian (2023). Vax-Unvax: Let the Science Speak. Skyhorse Publishing. ISBN 9781510766969. Kennedy Jr., Robert F. (2023). The Wuhan Cover-Up: And the Terrifying Bioweapons Arms Race. Skyhorse Publishing. ISBN 978-1510773981. St. Francis of Assisi: A Life of Joy. Hyperion. 2004. ISBN 978-0-7868-1875-4. Robert F. Kennedy Jr.'s American Heroes: The Story of Joshua Chamberlain and the American Civil War. New York: Hyperion. 2007. ISBN 978-1-4231-0771-2. Robert Smalls: The Boat Thief. New York: Hyperion. 2008. ISBN 978-1423108023. Kennedy has received awards, as have groups he has been part of: 2018, The National Trial Lawyers, Mass Tort Trial Team of the Year – for "groundbreaking case of Dewayne "Lee" Johnson v. Monsanto Company" Kennedy was co-counsel at one of the two law firms involved in the case. 2017, Earth Justice Mountain Heroes 2017, Foro La Region Award for "La Proteccion de los Recursos Naturales" 2014, Stroud Award of Freshwater Excellence 2009, Rolling Stone "100 Agents of Change" 2008, USC Dornsife Sustainability Champion Award 2008, Theodre Gordon Flyfishers Conservation Award 2007, Vanity Fair "The Green Team" 2005, William O. Douglas Award, on behalf of the Waterkeeper Alliance 2003, Professional Resource Award, NY State Council of Trout Unlimited 2001, Distinguished Service Award presented at Pace Law School's 25th Anniversary 2001, Men's Journal "Heroes" Award 2000, 12th Annual Manhattan Award 2000, Jacques Sartisky Peace Award 2000, New York State Champion of the Environment 1999, Time's "Heroes of the Planet" 1998, William E. Ricker Resource Conservation Award 1997, EPA Environmental Quality Award 1997, The Brave 40 Award from NYC Department of Environmental Conservation 1997, Thomas Berry Environmental Award, presented to Robert F. Kennedy Jr. and the Pace Environmental Litigation Clinic 1995, Green Star Award presented by the Environmental Action Coalition 1991, Eleanor Roosevelt Val-Kill Award John F. Kennedy was elected president in 1960 in a successful presidential campaign. Robert F. Kennedy ran for the Democratic nomination for president in 1968, but he was assassinated in June of that year. Kennedy's uncle-by-marriage Sargent Shriver ran for the nomination in 1976, but later withdrew from the race. Ted Kennedy ran for the Democratic nomination in 1980, but he was defeated in the primaries by incumbent Democratic president Jimmy Carter. Multiple sources: Mnookin 2017 Zadrozny & Adams 2021 CCDH 2020 BBC 2021 Multiple sources: The Anti-Vaxx Playbook (PDF) (Report). Center for Countering Digital Hate. 2020. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 9, 2022. Retrieved June 9, 2023. Oshin, Olafimihan (January 23, 2022). "Auschwitz Memorial says RFK Jr. speech at anti-vaccine rally exploits Holocaust tragedy". The Hill. Archived from the original on January 24, 2022. Retrieved January 27, 2022. During a speech at the rally, Kennedy, a conspiracy theorist and prominent anti-vaxxer, warned of a massive surveillance network created with satellites in space and 5G mobile networks collecting data. "Cheryl Hines Blasts Husband RFK Jr. for Holocaust Remark". The Wrap. January 25, 2022. Archived from the original on January 25, 2022. Retrieved January 27, 2022. Cheryl Hines has publicly condemned a statement made by her husband Robert F. Kennedy Jr. at a rally on Sunday, in which the environmental lawyer and conspiracy theorist likened COVID regulations to the Holocaust. "Guests urged to be vaccinated at anti-vaxxer Robert F Kennedy Jr's party". The Guardian. December 18, 2021. Archived from the original on December 18, 2021. Retrieved January 27, 2022. The younger Kennedy has campaigned on environmental issues but is also a leading vaccines conspiracy theorist and activist against shots including those approved to combat Covid-19, which has killed more than 805,000 in the US and more than 5.3 million worldwide. Dorn, Sara. "RFK Jr. Makes Unfounded Claims About Mass Shootings, Covid-19: Here Are All The Conspiracies He Promotes". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 22, 2023. Retrieved June 22, 2023. "Robert F. Kennedy Jr.'s Conspiracy Theories Go Beyond Vaccines". The New York Times. July 6, 2023. Retrieved October 12, 2023. Robert F. Kennedy Jr., an environmental lawyer, is a leading vaccine skeptic and purveyor of conspiracy theories who has leaned heavily on misinformation as he mounts his long-shot 2024 campaign for the Democratic nomination. Smith, Michelle R. (December 15, 2021). "How a Kennedy built an anti-vaccine juggernaut amid COVID-19". Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 18, 2021. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Dr. Richard Allen Williams, a cardiologist, professor of medicine at UCLA and founder of the Minority Health Institute, said Kennedy is leading 'a propaganda movement' Weir, Keziah (May 13, 2021). "How Robert F. Kennedy Jr. Became the Anti-vaxxer Icon of America's Nightmares". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on July 4, 2021. Retrieved July 7, 2021. Little, Amanda (July 14, 2004). "An interview with Robert F. Kennedy Jr., environmental advocate and Bush basher". Grist. Archived from the original on October 7, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Agee, J'nelle (March 18, 2017). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. Resigns from Riverkeeper". Spectrum News. Archived from the original on October 4, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2023. "Robert F. Kennedy, Jr". JW Howard Attorneys. Archived from the original on May 2, 2023. Retrieved May 2, 2023. Smith, Steve (April 29, 2015). "RFK Jr. to address College of Law graduates". Nebraska Today. Archived from the original on October 4, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Mnookin, Seth (January 11, 2017). "How Robert F. Kennedy, Jr., Distorted Vaccine Science". Scientific American. Archived from the original on January 12, 2017. For more than a decade, Kennedy has promoted anti-vaccine propaganda completely unconnected to reality. Nagourney, Adam (February 26, 2022). "A Kennedy's Crusade Against Covid Vaccines Anguishes Family and Friends". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on February 28, 2022. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Oppenheimer 2015, pp. 5–6. Kennedy Jr., Robert F. (1999). The Riverkeepers: Two Activists Fight to Reclaim Our Environment as a Basic Human Right. Scribner. p. 92. ... Virginia and Cape Cod (Massachusetts) homes of my youth "Newlyweds Cheryl Hines, Robert F. Kennedy, Jr. Buy Malibu Compound". ABC News. Archived from the original on September 25, 2014. Retrieved March 5, 2023. in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, where he was raised "Hickory Hill: RFK's Virginia Home". PBS. Archived from the original on May 2, 2023. Retrieved May 2, 2023. Oppenheimer 2015, p. 27. Kennedy Jr., Robert (February 2007). "Oprah Talks to Bobby Kennedy Jr". O, The Oprah Magazine (Interview). Interviewed by Oprah Winfrey. Retrieved July 28, 2023. Storrin, Matt (June 7, 1969). "Folk Mass Honors RFK". The Boston Globe. p. 4 – via Newspapers.com. "Robert Kennedy's Words Sung In Mass Marking Assassination". The New York Times. June 7, 1970. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Taraborrelli, J. Randy (2019). The Kennedy Heirs: John, Caroline, and the New Generation – A Legacy of Tragedy and Triumph. St. Martin's Publishing Group. p. 183. Kovach, Bill (August 7, 1970). "Kennedy, Shriver Boys on Probation". The New York Times. The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 2, 2023. Retrieved May 2, 2023. "Robert Kennedy Jr. Marijuana". Associated Press. August 6, 1970. Archived from the original on May 2, 2023. Retrieved May 2, 2023. Oppenheimer 2015, p. 144. Oppenheimer, Jerry (2015). RFK Jr.: Robert F. Kennedy Jr. and the Dark Side of the Dream. St. Martin's Press. pp. 129–145. ISBN 978-1-250-03295-9. OCLC 908838847. "Crash Landing For Bobby". Time. September 26, 1983. The Backbone Cabinet – A Progressive Cabinet Roster Archived September 29, 2007, at the Wayback Machine, backbonecampaign.org. "Now it's ADA John F. Kennedy Jr". UPI. Retrieved May 2, 2023. "Robert Kennedy Jr. Admits He Is Guilty In Possessing Heroin". The New York Times. February 18, 1984. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Mark Leibovich (June 25, 2006). "Another Kennedy Living Dangerously". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 29, 2017. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Dunlap, David W.; Perlez, Jane (June 4, 1985). "New York Day by Day: A Quiet Victory For Robert F. Kennedy Jr". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on November 22, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Jamison, Peter (March 2, 2024). "How RFK Jr. hiring a bird smuggler threw his environmental group into turmoil". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Worth, Robert (November 5, 2000). "A Kennedy and His Mentor Part Ways Over River Group". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 27, 2015. Retrieved March 3, 2024. Cronin, John; Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (1997). The Riverkeepers: Two Activists Fight to Reclaim Our Environment as a Basic Human Right. New York: Scribner. p. 304. ISBN 0684839083. "Our core mission: Environmental enforcement". 2016. Riverkeeper Journal. Navasky, Bruno (August 11, 2016). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. on the Environment, Election, and a 'Dangerous' Donald Trump". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on November 1, 2019. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Navasky, Bruno (August 11, 2016). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. on the Environment, Election, and a 'Dangerous' Donald Trump". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on November 1, 2019. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Werth, Barry (May 2, 2004). "Somewhere Down the Crazy River". Outside Online. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Pool, Bob (June 30, 1995). "Cracking a Case of Egg Smuggling". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Worth, Robert (June 22, 2000). "Eight at Riverkeeper Resign Over Kennedy's Hiring of a Rare-Egg Smuggler". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 13, 2013. Retrieved March 2, 2024. "Robert F. Kennedy, Jr.'s historic 33-year run with Riverkeeper comes to a close". Riverkeeper. March 11, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2024. "Pace Environmental Litigation Clinic". Pace University School of Law. Archived from the original on October 13, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. Kennedy, Robert F. Jr., Solow, Steven P. (1993). "Environmental Litigation as Clinical Education: A Case Study". University of Oregon Journal of Environmental Law and Litigation Volume 8. "A conversation with the authors of 'The Riverkeepers: Two Activists Fight to Reclaim Our Environment as a Basic Human Right'". November 10, 1997. Charlie Rose. Cronin, John, and Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (July 26, 1997). "It's Our River – Let Us Get to It". The New York Times. Brown, Kim (July 8, 2004). "ExxonMobil Sued Over 55-Acre Oil Spill In Newtown Creek". Queens Chronicle. Archived from the original on August 20, 2023. Kaydo, Chad (April 13, 2001). "A Manly Awards Party for Men's Journal". BizBash. Pace Environmental Litigation Clinic. "Clinic Awards". Pace Law. Rutgers School of Law Environmental Law Clinic. "About this Organization". Justia Lawyers. Environmental Law Courses and Clinics. UCLA Law. Environmental Law Clinic. Widener Environmental Law Center. Widener Law. Environmental Law Clinic. Berkeley Law. Gallay, Paul. May 3, 2018. "China enlists local groups in environmental enforcement push" Archived May 11, 2023, at the Wayback Machine. Waterkeeper.org. Yaggi, Marc, Waterkeeper Alliance. August 2, 2018. "Let Our Rivers Run Free: A Global Look at How Dams are Destroying our Waterways". Waterkeeper Magazine. "Robert F. Kennedy, Jr. Honored at Water's Edge Gala". (2014). Stroudcenter.org. Wilke, Chris (March 19, 2012). "The Clean Water Act – A Story of Activism and Change". Read the Dirt. "Amazon.com: The Waterkeepers : Robert F. Kennedy Jr., John Cronin, Bob Boyle, Terry Backer, Rick Dove, BJ Cummings, Steve Fleishli, Les Guthman, Les Guthman, Les Guthman: Prime Video". www.amazon.com. "Grand Canyon Adventure: River at Risk". March 12, 2008 – via IMDb. "Robert F. Kennedy, Jr. Resigns as Waterkeeper Alliance President". Waterkeeper Alliance. November 10, 2020. Retrieved July 24, 2023. Worth, Robert (July 1, 2001). "Watershed Warrior". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Gordon, David K., and Kennedy Jr., Robert F. (September 1991). "The Legend of City Water: Recommendations For Rescuing the New York City Water Supply". The Hudson Riverkeeper Fund. Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (August 22, 1989). "New York City's Water: Down the Drain". The New York Times. p. 23. Archived from the original on April 16, 2023. Retrieved April 10, 2023 – via The New York Times Archives. "Approval of planning application C 990237 PSX" (PDF). nyc.gov. June 1, 1999. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 29, 2017. Retrieved October 14, 2017. Wechsler, Pat (November 27, 1995). "The Kennedy Who Matters". New York. Schneeweiss, Jonathan (1997). "Watershed Protection Strategies: A Case Study of the New York City Watershed in Light of the 1996 Amendments to the Safe Drinking Water Act". 8 Vill. Environmental Law Journal 77. "Team". Kennedy & Madonna, LLP. Archived from the original on September 29, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. "Farmers worried by suits targeting hog producers". Des Moines Register. January 7, 2001. p. 9 – via Newspapers.com. "ConocoPhillips agrees to $70M settlement for former Fla. facility". EENews.net. April 7, 2004. "Mann v. Ford" Archived March 2, 2017, at the Wayback Machine (2010). IMDb.[unreliable source?] "Mann v. Ford: Synopsis". HBO. Archived from the original on October 6, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. Strunsky, Steve (October 14, 2006). "Superfund Site Is Relisted, and Inquiry Begins". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved April 12, 2023. "DuPont Fined $196.2M In Class-Action Suit". CBS News. October 19, 2007. Archived from the original on April 13, 2023. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Rinehart, Earl (February 13, 2017). "DuPont to pay $670 million to settle C8 lawsuits". The Columbus Dispatch. Archived from the original on August 18, 2022. Retrieved April 12, 2023. "Attorney Robert F. Kennedy, Jr". Archived from the original on September 29, 2017. Retrieved October 14, 2017. Cruz, Nancy (February 18, 2016). "Porter Ranch Gas Leak With Attorney Robert F. Kennedy". KTLA. Archived from the original on April 12, 2023. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Stecker, Tiffany (June 27, 2017). "Monsanto's Foes Are Branching Out". Bloomberg Law. "Mass. Families file class action days after gas explosions". September 19, 2018. Archived from the original on October 14, 2018. Retrieved October 14, 2018. Patricia Winters Lauro (June 3, 1999). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. is pushing supermarkets to sell a new brand of bottled water, with a twist". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. "Nestle Waters Announces Partnership with Waterkeeper Alliance" (Press release). Nestle Waters. May 22, 2014. Wesoff, Eric (May 31, 2012) "Ostara Nutrient Recovery Wins $14.5M From VantagePoint et al." Archived January 13, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. Greentech Media. Wesoff, Eric (October 7, 2015). "Flow Battery Funding: Vionx Teams With Siemens, UTC, 3M, Starwood and Jabil". Greentech Media. "Vionx, National Grid, and US Department of Energy Complete Installation of one of the World's Most Advanced Flow Batteries at Holy Name High School, Worcester, MA". Business Wire (Press release). October 5, 2017. Archived from the original on October 16, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. Hilburn, Rachel Lewis (June 3, 2016). "CoastLine: Robert F. Kennedy, Jr. on the Origin of CAFOs, Environmental Justice". WHQR. "Robert F. Kennedy, Jr. Joins UISOL Board of Directors" (Press release). McDonnell Group. August 25, 2010. "Robert F. Kennedy, Jr. joins Board of Directors". November 1, 2016. GridBright.com. Spear, Stefanie (November 2, 2011). "EcoWatch and Waterkeeper Launch News Website". EcoWatch. Melvin, Tessa (April 7, 1991). "Expanded Recycling Site Upsets an Ossining Neighborhood". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 24, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Reed, Susan (July 2, 1990). "Polluters, Beware! Riverkeeper John Cronin Patrols the Hudson and Pursues Those Who Foul Its Waters". People. Archived from the original on October 16, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Hilburn, Rachel Lewis (June 3, 2016). "CoastLine: Robert F. Kennedy, Jr. on the Origin of CAFOs, Environmental Justice". WHQR. Archived from the original on October 16, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Wang, Ucilia (October 10, 2016). "Robert F Kennedy Jr takes big business to task over pollution at SXSW Eco". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on October 16, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Nirenberg, Michael Lee (May 23, 2017). "Conversation with Robert Kennedy Jr". HuffPost. Archived from the original on March 2, 2021. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Brancaccio, David (January 21, 2005). "Science and Health: Robert F. Kennedy, Jr". PBS Now. Archived from the original on October 19, 2017. Bowermaster, Jon. (November 1992). "Last Run Down the Bio Bio". Town and Country Travel. Archived October 19, 2017, at the Wayback Machine "Cree Chief Wins Environmental Prize For Anti-Dam Effort". The Christian Science Monitor. ISSN 0882-7729. Archived from the original on October 19, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Kane, Joe (September 20, 1993). "With Spears From All Sides". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on October 19, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (1991). Foreword for Amazon Crude by Judith Kimerling. Published by Natural Resource Defense Council. February 19, 1991. p. 131. ISBN 0960935851. Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (1995). Foreword for Clayoquot Mass Trials: Defending the Rainforest by Ronald MacIsaac and Anne Champagne (editors), published by New Society Publisher, February 1995, p. 208. ISBN 0865713200. Rohter, Larry (February 19, 1996). "Kennedy-Castro Encounter Touched by History". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 28, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Rohter, Larry (February 25, 1996). "February 18–24;Meeting Across an Old Breach". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 28, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2023. Smith, Matt (November 28, 2001). "The Unlikely Environmentalists". SFWeekly. Archived October 19, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (December 3, 1998). "Rubbing Salt in the World Heritage Plan". Japan Times. Roberts, Bradley, MP, PLP (November 20, 2005). "Bradley Roberts on Clifton". Address to Bahamas House of Assembly. Archived October 20, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (November 29, 2016). "'I'll See You at Standing Rock'". EcoWatch. Archived October 20, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Schaffer, Grayson (August 30, 2016). "Chile's Best Whitewater Rivers Won't Be Damned – For Now". Outside. Archived from the original on October 19, 2017. Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (September 12, 2016). "20 Year David and Goliath Fist Fight Saves Patagonia's Futaleufú". EcoWatch. Archived October 7, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Zukowski, Dan (June 22, 2017). "https://www.environews.tv/062217-act-war-rfk-jr-puts-u-s-military-cafos-blast-trashing-americas-waterways "'An Act of War': RFK Jr. Puts U.S. Military and CAFOs on Blast for Trashing America's Waterways"]. EnviroNews. Archived October 22, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (May 16, 2003). "Defending our Environment and Health from the U.S. Military". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on October 21, 2017. Robert F. Kennedy Jr. (January 10, 2001). "Why Are We in Vieques?". Outside. Archived from the original on October 8, 2017. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Greenhouse, Steven (July 16, 2001). "He's in Charge, in Demand, in Prison". The New York Times. Archived October 21, 2017, at the Wayback Machine "US Navy resumes Vieques war games". BBC News. August 2, 2001. Archived from the original on June 29, 2017. Retrieved August 20, 2023. Hernandez, Raymond (June 15, 2001). "Both Sides Attack Bush Plan To Halt Bombing on Vieques". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 21, 2017. Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (May 16, 2003). "Defending our environment and health from the U.S. military". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on October 21, 2017. Hahn Niman, Nicolette (February 17, 2009). Righteous Porkchop: Finding a Life and Good Food beyond Factory Farms. William Morrow. ISBN 978-0061466496.[page needed] Robert F. Kennedy Jr.; Eric Schaeffer (September 20, 2003). "An Ill Wind From Factory Farms". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Rogers, Shelagh, host, and Carty, Bob, reporter (February 12, 2001). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. warns Canada about Pollution from Pork Industry". This Morning: CBC Digital Archives. Ruf, Cory (May 25, 2013). "Robert Kennedy Jr. on his crusade for a 'green' economy". CBC News. Overheard with Evan Smith. (May 5, 2011). "Robert F. Kennedy, Jr. – Fossil Fuels". PBS. AP (March 2, 2013). "New York fracking held as Gov. Andrew Cuomo, Robert F. Kennedy Jr. talk health, AP sources say". Syracuse.com. Isensee, Laura (October 28, 2009). "Robert Kennedy Jr: solar and natural gas belong together". Reuters. Cusick, Marie (October 3, 2013). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. calls natural gas a "catastrophe"". StateImpact Pennsylvania. Archived from the original on October 4, 2013. Hakim, Danny (September 30, 2012). "Shift by Cuomo on Gas Drilling Prompts Both Anger and Praise". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. "Rally Against Pipelines". Salem Weekly. May 19, 2015. Weber, Bob (June 12, 2013). "Prominent U.S. Keystone critic Robert F. Kennedy Jr. to visit oilsands". Macleans. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Spear, Stefanie (February 13, 2013). "Robert F. Kennedy, Jr., Bill McKibben, Michael Brune, Among Others Will Risk Arrest Today at White House to Stop Tar Sands, Keystone XL Pipeline". EcoWatch. Manning, Sarah Sunshine (November 16, 2016). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. Visits Standing Rock on #NoDAPL Day of Action". Indian Country Today. Zukowski, Dan (June 26, 2017). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. Talks Tesla, Electric Big Rigs and the Impending Death of Fossil Fuels". EnviroNews. Baxter, Brandon (June 3, 2014). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. Praises Obama's Carbon Rules, Blasts Koch Brothers on 'The Ed Show'". EcoWatch. Perks, Rob (March 11, 2010). "Mountaintop Removal Redux: Bobby vs. Blankenship II" Archived January 13, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. NRDC. "Bobby Kennedy, Jr. Speaks on Coal Ash at Mt. Island Lake". July 25, 2013. Clean Air Carolina. Yaggi, Marc, Waterkeeper Alliance (Winter 2013). "Around the World a Coalition Against Coal: Waterkeepers from Idaho to India Unite to Stop the Deadly International Coal Trade". Waterkeeper Magazine. Staff writer (2015). "At Pennsylvania Coal Mine, Feds Come to Rescue after State Fails". Waterkeeper Magazine Vol. 11. Issue 1. The Last Mountain Archived October 3, 2020, at the Wayback Machine (2011) IMDb.[unreliable source?] Zukowski, Dan (June 23, 2017). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr.: 'I love James Hansen, but he is wrong on [the nuclear power issue". EniroNews. Brooks, Jon (June 22, 2011). "Interview: Robert F. Kennedy Jr. on 'Uninsurable' Nuke Energy Industry, BrightSource Solar Project". KQED. Paul Chin photograph. (June 15, 1981). Caption reads, "Robert F. Kennedy, Jr. speaks out against nuclear power". Archivegrid, Los Angeles Public Library. "Nuclear Ticking Time Bomb 28 Miles From NYC – America's Lawyer". Indian Point Safe Energy Coalition. April 4, 2017. Indian Point: Imagining the Unimaginable Archived February 9, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, (TV movie 2004). IMDb.[unreliable source?] Trueheart, Charles (April 7, 1994). "Quebec Power Company Finds Its High-Voltage Plans Short-Circuited". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Bowermaster, Jon (November 1992). "Last Run Down the Bio Bio". Town and Country. Guynup, Sharon (June 7, 2002). "Belize Dam Fight Heats Up as Court Prepares to Rule". National Geographic Today. Leaney, Stephen (April 11, 2003). "British finding 'secret war' in green laws by Kennedy". International Press Service. Hershowitz, Ari (January 2008). "A Solid Foundation: Belize's Chalillo Dam and Environmental Decisionmaking". Ecology Law Quarterly. 35 (1). Berkeley: University of California: 73–105. JSTOR 44321074. "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. on the river along with numerous leaders of conservation organizations". August 2, 2004. Canadian Parks And Wilderness Society – Quebec Chapter. Goujard, Clothilde (September 14, 2017). "Hydro-Québec abandons dam project on majestic Magpie River". Canada's National Observer. Martinez, Rodrigo (November 19, 2017). "Robert Kennedy Jr por Hidroaysén: 'Los beneficios económicos eran para unos pocos millonarios'". La Tercera. Archived November 20, 2017, at the Wayback Machine "The Radio Equalizer: Brian Maloney: RFK Jr Tirade, Air America, John Stossel, Rush Limbaugh, Sean Hannity". Archived from the original on October 25, 2017. Retrieved October 25, 2017. Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (July 18, 2011). "Nantucket's Wind Power Rip-off". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on February 24, 2020. Retrieved March 9, 2020. Cabral, Sam (July 18, 2023). "RFK Jr's conspiracy theories and Republican supporters". BBC News. Archived from the original on July 22, 2023. Retrieved July 22, 2023. Weissman, Jonathan (July 15, 2023). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. Airs Bigoted New Covid Conspiracy Theory About Jews and Chinese". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 21, 2023. Retrieved July 22, 2023. Hunnicutt, Trevor; Holland, Steve (July 17, 2023). "White House blasts RFK Jr for 'antisemitic conspiracy theories'". Reuters. Archived from the original on July 22, 2023. Retrieved July 22, 2023. Sayers, Freddie (May 3, 2023). "Robert Kennedy Jr: America needs a revolution". unherd.com. The Post. Archived from the original on May 11, 2023. Retrieved May 11, 2023. Shapero, Julia (April 22, 2023). "RFK Jr. claims middle class was 'systematically' wiped out under COVID lockdowns". The Hill. Archived from the original on May 10, 2023. Retrieved May 21, 2023. Belmonte, Adriana (January 19, 2020). "Robert Kennedy Jr: 'We've destroyed the middle class'". finance.yahoo.com. Archived from the original on May 21, 2023. Retrieved May 21, 2023. Kennedy Jr., Robert F. (February 22, 2016). "Why the Arabs Don't Want Us in Syria". Politico. Archived from the original on May 21, 2023. Retrieved May 21, 2023. "Robert F. Kennedy Jr hailed for 'single greatest defense of Israel': 'Worth three minutes of your time'". The Hindustan Times. December 19, 2023. "Robert Kennedy Jr. Is a Flawed Heretic". The Nation. July 5, 2023. "Robert Kennedy Jr: 'Let's be honest: it's a US war against Russia'". moderndiplomacy.eu. May 8, 2023. Archived from the original on May 20, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2023. Sayers, Freddie (May 3, 2023). "Robert Kennedy Jr: America needs a revolution". unherd.com. The Post. Archived from the original on May 11, 2023. Retrieved May 11, 2023. If you look at the Minsk accords, it sets the groundwork for a final settlement. The Donbas region, which is 80% ethnic Russian – and Russians that were being systematically killed by the Ukrainian government – would become autonomous within Ukraine and would be protected. Sayers, Freddie (May 3, 2023). "Robert Kennedy Jr: America needs a revolution". unherd.com. The Post. Archived from the original on May 11, 2023. Retrieved May 11, 2023. I always have been. I spent 35 years as – I don't want to toot my own horn, but – arguably the leading environmentalist in the country. Bennett, William John; Cribb, John T.E. (September 22, 2015). America the Strong: Conservative Ideas to Spark the Next Generation. Tyndale House Publishers. p. 54. ISBN 978-1496409751. Retrieved June 9, 2023. Mull, Teresa (September 23, 2014). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. wants a law to 'punish global warming skeptics'". The Week. Retrieved June 9, 2023. Zahn, Max (January 16, 2020). "Climate change is cost of society's 'addiction to coal and oil,' says Robert Kennedy Jr". finance.yahoo.com. Archived from the original on May 21, 2023. Retrieved May 21, 2023. 'Right now, we have a market that is governed by rules that were written by the carbon incumbents to reward the dirtiest, filthiest, most poisonous, most toxic, most war-mongering fields from hell, rather than the cheap, clean, green, wholesome and patriotic fields from heaven,' Kennedy adds. "Robert Kennedy, Jr says climate change will bring 'major disruptions' to civilization". irishcentral.com. January 17, 2020. Archived from the original on March 4, 2023. Retrieved June 12, 2023. Right now, we have a market that is governed by rules that were written by the carbon incumbents to reward the dirtiest, filthiest, most poisonous, most toxic, most war-mongering fields from hell, rather than the cheap, clean, green, wholesome, and patriotic fields from heaven. We need to rationalize our marketplace so that it does the things that market is supposed to do, which is to create a society that we're all proud of and that will sustain our children. "Read This Excerpt From 'Horsemen of the Apocalypse'". desmog.com. DeSmog. May 6, 2017. Archived from the original on March 24, 2023. Retrieved June 12, 2023. Zahn, Max (January 16, 2020). "Climate change is cost of society's 'addiction to coal and oil,' says Robert Kennedy Jr". finance.yahoo.com. Archived from the original on May 21, 2023. Retrieved May 21, 2023. Sayers, Freddie (May 3, 2023). "Robert Kennedy Jr: America needs a revolution". unherd.com. The Post. Archived from the original on May 11, 2023. Retrieved May 11, 2023. If we want to have democracy, we need a broad ownership of our land by a wide variety of yeoman farmers, each with a stake in our system. That's what Thomas Jefferson said. Wiping out the small farmers and giving control of food production to corporations is not in the interests of humanity. We need to help those farmers transition off the addiction that we imposed upon them in the first place. Griscom, Amanda (October/November 2004). "Environmental Justice". Mother Earth News. Roberts, Joel (January 29, 2003). "Bush: $1.2 Billion For Hydrogen Cars". CBS News. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Robert F. Kennedy Jr. (February 16, 2003). "A Bad Element". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. on the Climate Crisis: What Must Be Done". Rolling Stone. June 28, 2007. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Kennedy Jr., Robert F. (2004). Crimes Against Nature: How George W. Bush and His Corporate Pals Are Plundering the Country and Hijacking Our Democracy. HarperCollins. ISBN 0060746882. "The 100 People Who Are Changing America". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 3, 2009. Retrieved October 15, 2017. "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. advocates for green power". The Mercury News. October 14, 2010. Archived from the original on October 10, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. Dixon, Darius (October 12, 2012). "RFK Jr. to greens: Not Obama's fault". Politico. Robert F. Kennedy Jr. (2015) "What State Attorneys General can do about Climate-Change Deniers" Letter from the President", Waterkeeper Magazine Vol. 11. Issue 1. Spear, Stefanie (September 10, 2015). "Koch Brothers: Apocalyptical Forces of Ignorance and Greed, Says RFK Jr". EcoWatch. Goodman, Amy (September 22, 2014). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr.: "The Only Thing We Have in Our Power is People Power". Democracy Now. Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (February 1974). "Poor Chile". Atlantic Monthly. Kennedy Jr. Robert F. (February 25, 1979). "Plea to Pakistan". The Washington Post. Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (February 23, 1979). "Legacy at Stake in Pakistan". The Boston Globe. Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (December 16, 1975) "Politics and Assassinations". The Wall Street Journal Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (December 17, 2005). "America's anti-torture tradition". Los Angeles Times. Congressional Record Index. (Vol 151 – Part 23). January 4, 2005 – December 30, 2005. by Senator Edward M. Kennedy, p. 2054. Robert F. Kennedy Jr. (February 22, 2016). "Why the Arabs Don't Want Us in Syria". Politico. Archived from the original on January 7, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (February 25, 2016). "Syria: Another Pipeline War". EcoWatch. Hains, Tim (June 15, 2023). "Robert Kennedy Jr.: "Unravel The Empire" Of U.S. Military Bases Around The World". Real Clear Politics. Retrieved June 25, 2023. RFK Jr. says he is pro-choice, calls every abortion 'a tragedy' | Conversation with the Candidate WMUR-TV June 28, 2023 Baio, Ariana; Marcus, Josh (June 6, 2023). "RFK Jr comes out against gun control and blames school shootings on 'drugs'". The Independent. Retrieved June 25, 2023. Trudo, Hanna (June 28, 2023). "RFK Jr. argues gun control cannot 'meaningfully' reduce gun violence". The Hill. Retrieved July 22, 2023. Cohen, David (August 13, 2023). "RFK Jr. backs 15-week federal ban on abortion, then reverses himself". POLITICO. Retrieved October 4, 2023. Farhad Manjoo (June 3, 2006). "Was the 2004 election stolen? No". Salon. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Greg Palast (Author) Ted Rall (Illustrator). Introduction by Robert F. Kennedy Jr. (2012). Billionaires & Ballot Bandits: How to Steal an Election in 9 Easy Steps. Penguin Random House. p. 300. ISBN 978-1609804787 Brancaccio, David (January 21, 2005). "Science and Health: Robert F. Kennedy, Jr.". PBS Now. New York League of Conservative Voters. June 18, 2014. NYLCV Letterhead. Welch, Craig (October 29, 2003). "RFK Jr. blasts Bush, champions Kerry" Archived November 25, 2021, at the Wayback Machine. The Seattle Times. Jeff Zeleny; Carl Hulse (January 28, 2008). "Kennedy Chooses Obama, Spurning Plea by Clintons". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 10, 2008. Retrieved January 13, 2020. "eTown at the 2008 Democratic National Convention (Denver)". October 8, 2008. etown.org. Allen, Mike (November 5, 2008). "Obama considers stars for Cabinet". Politico. Retrieved July 17, 2023. Lovley, Erika (November 7, 2008). "RFK Jr.: Too controversial for EPA?". Politico. Archived from the original on December 7, 2016. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Bumiller, Elisabeth (November 24, 1988). "Public Lives: Putting Family Life Ahead of a Senate Seat". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Jonathan P. Hicks (January 25, 2005). "Robert Kennedy Won't Run for State Attorney General". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Jonathan P. Hicks (December 2, 2008). "Robert F. Kennedy's Son Not Interested in Senate Seat". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 6, 2019. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Bogardus, Kevin (November 13, 2023). "RFK Jr. was linked to — but never got — top-tier environmental job". POLITICO. Retrieved March 30, 2024. RFK Jr. was linked to — but never got — top-tier environmental job Phippen, Thomas; Steinhauser, Paul (March 3, 2023). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr 'thinking about' launching Democratic challenge to Biden for 2024 White House nomination". Fox News. Archived from the original on April 7, 2023. Retrieved March 3, 2023. Price, Michelle (April 5, 2023). "Anti-vaccine activist RFK Jr. challenging Biden in 2024". Associated Press. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2023. Pellish, Aaron (October 9, 2023). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. announces independent run for president, ending Democratic primary challenge to Biden". CNN. Archived from the original on October 9, 2023. Retrieved October 14, 2023. Greenfield, Jeff (December 3, 2019). "How RFK Could Have Become President". The Daily Beast. Retrieved July 17, 2023. Koster, R. M. (February 1976). "The Democratic Super Bowl". Harper's. Vol. 252, no. 1509. Harper's Foundation. pp. 14–17. Retrieved November 18, 2018.(subscription required) Farrell, John A. (October 29, 2022). "Ted Kennedy's Complicated Legacy, from Chappaquidick to Senate Lion". Time. Retrieved July 17, 2023. Zadrozny, Brandy; Adams, Char (March 11, 2021). "Covid's devastation of Black community used as 'marketing' in new anti-vaccine film". NBC News. Archived from the original on March 18, 2021. Retrieved March 15, 2021. The video – the newest in a series of anti-vaccine propaganda films produced or promoted by Kennedy – was distributed through Kennedy's organization, Children's Health Defense, Bergengruen, Vera (June 14, 2023). "Inside the Very Online Campaign of RFK Jr". Time. Retrieved June 14, 2023. Wadman, Meredith (January 10, 2017). "Exclusive Q&A: Robert F. Kennedy Jr. on Trump's proposed vaccine commission". Science. Archived from the original on April 8, 2020. Retrieved April 14, 2020. Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (June 27, 2019). "Stronger testing required to make vaccines safe". The Columbus Dispatch. Archived from the original on April 8, 2020. Retrieved April 14, 2020. Kennedy, Robert F. Jr., Thimerosal: Let the Science Speak (2015), p. 28. Rabin, Roni Caryn (May 8, 2019). "Brother and Sister of Robert F. Kennedy Jr. Accuse Him of Spreading Misinformation on Vaccines". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 21, 2019. Retrieved June 21, 2019. Golgowski, Nina (May 8, 2019). "Robert Kennedy Jr.'s Vaccine Views Slammed As 'Tragically Wrong' By Family". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on June 21, 2019. Retrieved June 21, 2019. Jamison, A.M.; Broniatowski, D. A.; Dredze, M. (November 13, 2019). "Vaccine-related advertising in the Facebook Ad Archive". Vaccine. 38 (3): 512–520. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.10.066. PMC 6954281. PMID 31732327. Sun, Lena H. (November 15, 2019). "Majority of anti-vaccine ads on Facebook were funded by two groups". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 17, 2019. Retrieved November 16, 2019. Rabin, Roni Caryn (May 9, 2019). "Family of Robert F Kennedy Jr criticise his 'dangerous' stance on vaccines". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on May 9, 2019. Retrieved June 7, 2020. "Vaccines do not cause autism". National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. Archived from the original on April 29, 2023. Retrieved April 29, 2023. Plotkin, Stanley; Gerber, Jeffrey S.; Offit, Paul A. (February 15, 2009). "Vaccines and Autism: A Tale of Shifting Hypotheses". Clinical Infectious Diseases. 48 (4): 456–461. doi:10.1086/596476. PMC 2908388. PMID 19128068. "Thimerosal and Vaccines". Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. August 25, 2020. Archived from the original on August 17, 2011. Retrieved April 28, 2023. Asif Doja; Wendy Roberts (2006). "Immunizations and Autism: A Review of the Literature". Canadian Journal of Neurological Sciences. 33 (4): 341–346. doi:10.1017/S031716710000528X. PMID 17168158. S2CID 4670282. Archived from the original on May 15, 2023. Retrieved June 5, 2023. "Thimerosal and Vaccines". Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Archived from the original on April 19, 2019. Retrieved August 24, 2019. "Thimerosal in Vaccines Questions and Answers". Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administration. February 18, 2021. Archived from the original on April 18, 2023. Retrieved May 13, 2023. The Anti-Vaxx Industry (PDF) (Report). Center for Countering Digital Hate. 2020. Pilkington, Ed (October 31, 2019). "Release of Vaxxed sequel prompts fears dangerous propaganda will spread again". The Guardian. Archived from the original on November 17, 2019. Retrieved November 18, 2019. "Instagram bans Robert F Kennedy Jr over Covid vaccine posts". BBC News. February 11, 2021. Archived from the original on February 13, 2021. Retrieved February 11, 2021. "Instagram removes anti-vaxxer Robert F Kennedy Jr for false Covid-19 claims". The Guardian. February 11, 2021. Archived from the original on February 13, 2021. Retrieved February 11, 2021. Srikanth, Anagha (March 24, 2021). "12 prominent people opposed to vaccines are responsible for two-thirds of anti-vaccine content online: report". The Hill. Archived from the original on March 25, 2021. Retrieved June 11, 2021. Scott, Katie (February 16, 2017). "Robert De Niro, Robert F. Kennedy Jr. offer $100K to anyone who can provide proof vaccines are safe". Global TV. Archived from the original on March 3, 2019. Retrieved March 3, 2019. Gorski, David (April 30, 2018). "Autism prevalence increases to 1 in 59, and antivaxers lose it…yet again". Science-Based medicine. Archived from the original on February 27, 2019. Retrieved February 27, 2019. Cadeski, Eric (July 11, 2019). "The Surrey Board of Trade shouldn't help anti-vaxxer Robert F. Kennedy Jr. build his brand". CBC News. Archived from the original on September 14, 2019. Retrieved November 18, 2019. Schmunk, Rhianna (June 17, 2019). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. will speak at Surrey event despite outcry, board of trade says". CBC News. Archived from the original on September 14, 2019. Retrieved November 18, 2019. Robert F. Kennedy Jr. (February 8, 2011). "Deadly Immunity". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Lauerman, Kerry (January 16, 2011). "Correcting our Record". Salon. Archived November 4, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Walsh, Joan (June 22, 2023). "Just Another RFK Jr. Lie. I Know, Because It's About Me". ISSN 0027-8378. Retrieved August 22, 2023. Oransky, Ivan (January 16, 2011) "Salon retracts 2005 Robert F. Kennedy Jr. piece on alleged autism-vaccine link". Retraction Watch. Archived August 31, 2017, at the Wayback Machine "More media stupidity: Chicago Sun-Times runs propaganda piece for Jenny McCarthy's anti-vaccine conference". The Panic Virus. Archived from the original on January 29, 2019. Retrieved January 28, 2019. Plait, Phil (June 5, 2013). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr.: Anti-Vaxxer". Slate. Archived from the original on February 8, 2018. Retrieved February 13, 2018. "Generation Rescue Conference 2013". AutismOne. Archived from the original on July 30, 2013. Retrieved February 13, 2018. Functional Medicine (CS31). McGill Office for Science and Society. April 13, 2019. Event occurs at 6:18. Retrieved April 18, 2019 – via YouTube. Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (May 11, 2010). "Central Figure in CDC Vaccine Cover-Up Absconds With $2M". HuffPost. Archived October 17, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (February 8, 2017). "Yale University Study Shows Association Between Vaccines and Brain Disorders". EcoWatch. Archived October 13, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (January 18, 2017) "CDC Knew its Vaccine Program Was Exposing Children to Dangerous Mercury Levels Since 1999". EcoWatch. Archived October 7, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (July 10, 2005). "Autism, Mercury, and Politics". The Boston Globe. Archived March 4, 2017, at the Wayback Machine White, Jeremy B. (April 7, 2015). "Robert Kennedy Jr. warns of vaccine-linked 'holocaust'". The Sacramento Bee. Archived April 11, 2015, at the Wayback Machine Phillip, Abby; Sun, Lena H.; Bernstein, Lenny (January 10, 2017). "Vaccine skeptic Robert Kennedy Jr. says Trump asked him to lead commission on 'vaccine safety'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 11, 2017. Retrieved January 11, 2017. "An interview with Robert Kennedy Jr. on vaccines". Interviewed by Helen Branswell. August 21, 2017. World Mercury Project. Archived October 13, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Foster, Craig (2017). "The $100,000 vaccine challenge: Another method of promoting anti-vaccination pseudoscience". Vaccine. 35 (32): 3905–3906. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.06.012. PMID 28624304. "RFK Jr. spent years stoking fear and mistrust of vaccines. These people were hurt by his work". AP News. October 18, 2023. Retrieved October 24, 2023. Lanuola, Tusani Tupufia (June 1, 2019). "John F. Kennedy's nephew joins Samoa's Independence celebration". Samoa Observer. Archived from the original on November 30, 2019. Retrieved November 30, 2019. Guarino, Ben; Satija, Neena; Sun, Lena H. (November 27, 2019). "Deadly measles outbreak hits children in Samoa after anti-vaccine fears". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 30, 2019. Retrieved November 30, 2019. Corsi, Jerome. "Says Dr. Anthony Fauci's name appears on '4 U.S. patents for a key glycoprotein' used to 'create the current COVID-19 epidemic'". Politifact. Archived from the original on January 28, 2021. Retrieved January 31, 2021. "Robert F. Kennedy, Jr says Dr. Fauci and Bill Gates stand to profit from COVID-19 vaccine". IrishCentral.com. April 27, 2020. Archived from the original on August 13, 2020. Retrieved September 1, 2020. "Robert Kennedy Jr. claims Bill Gates 'owns the WHO'". IrishCentral.com. May 7, 2020. Archived from the original on September 18, 2020. Retrieved September 1, 2020. Porterfield, Carlie. "Debunked Bill Gates Conspiracy Gets A Boost From RFK Jr., Marla Maples". Forbes. Archived from the original on February 14, 2021. Retrieved February 15, 2021. The digitalized economy? We get rid of cash and coins. We give you a chip. We put all your money in your chip. If you refuse a vaccine, we turn off the chip and you starve! "Robert F. Kennedy, Jr makes false COVID claims in live talk with Alec Baldwin". IrishCentral.com. August 13, 2020. Archived from the original on August 17, 2020. Retrieved September 1, 2020. Montgomery, Blake (January 23, 2021). "RFK Jr. Stoops to New Low by Falsely Tying Hank Aaron's Death to Vaccine". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on February 16, 2021. Retrieved February 15, 2021. Hank Aaron's tragic death is part of a wave of suspicious deaths among elderly closely following administration of COVID vaccines. He received the Moderna vaccine on Jan. 5 to inspire other Black Americans to get the vaccine. "RFK, Jr.'s niece speaks out against his COVID vaccine misinformation". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on January 4, 2021. Retrieved January 23, 2021. Singh, Mannvi (February 11, 2021). "Instagram removes anti-vaxxer Robert F Kennedy Jr for false Covid-19 claims". The Guardian. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021. Retrieved February 11, 2021. Iyengar, Rishi (February 10, 2021). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. has been banned from Instagram". CNN. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021. Retrieved February 11, 2021. Mostrous, Alexi (September 16, 2020). "How a Kennedy became a 'superspreader' of hoaxes on COVID-19, vaccines, 5G and more". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021. These posts include claims that 5G damages human DNA, causes cancer and is being installed in order to carry out mass surveillance. It's easy to see a motivation behind his sudden interest: 5G-related posts have garnered him more than 400,000 likes or other interactions. Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (November 16, 2021). The Real Anthony Fauci: Bill Gates, Big Pharma, and the Global War on Democracy and Public Health. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 9781510766815. Archived from the original on November 24, 2021. Retrieved November 24, 2021. Canales, Katie (July 25, 2021). "How JFK's nephew became one of Facebook's most prolific anti-vax misinformation spreaders". Business Insider. Archived from the original on July 26, 2021. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Müller, Katja (December 6, 2021). "The conspiracy-theorist Kennedy". Neue Zürcher Zeitung. Archived from the original on December 29, 2021. Retrieved December 29, 2021. "Robert F Kennedy Jr apologizes for Anne Frank comparison in anti-vax speech". The Guardian. Associated Press. January 25, 2022. Archived from the original on January 25, 2022. Retrieved January 25, 2022. "Fauci Calls RFK Jr. A 'Very Disturbed Individual' over Career Attacks". December 22, 2021. Archived from the original on July 20, 2022. Retrieved August 22, 2022. RBB: "Proteste in Berlin Fast 40.000 Menschen bei Corona-Demos - Sperren am Reichstag durchbrochen" Archived September 1, 2020, at the Wayback Machine (in German). August 29, 2020, accessed September 1, 2020. Ross, Alexander Reid; Zhubi, Patricia (September 2, 2020). "Inside the Weird Pro-QAnon German Group Behind RFK Jr.'s Latest Anti-Vaxx Stunt". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on November 26, 2020. Retrieved December 19, 2020. Alba, Davey (September 29, 2021). "YouTube bans all anti-vaccine misinformation". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved September 30, 2021. YouTube said on Wednesday that it was banning the accounts of several prominent anti-vaccine activists from its platform, including those of Joseph Mercola and Robert F. Kennedy Jr., as part of an effort to remove all content that falsely claims that approved vaccines are dangerous. Hanau, Shira (January 24, 2022). "'None of us can hide': RFK Jr. uses Holocaust analogy in speech at anti-vaccine mandate rally". Jewish Telegraphic Agency. Archived from the original on January 24, 2022. Retrieved January 24, 2022. Fortinsky, Sarah; Graef, Aileen (January 24, 2022). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. invokes Nazi Germany in offensive anti-vaccine speech". CNN. Archived from the original on January 24, 2022. Retrieved January 25, 2022. Lima, Cristiano (June 4, 2023). "Instagram reinstates Robert Kennedy Jr. after launch of presidential bid". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on June 5, 2023. Retrieved June 5, 2023. Koenig, Lauren; Shelton, Shania (July 15, 2023). "Jewish groups denounce RFK Jr.'s false remarks that Covid-19 was 'ethnically targeted' to spare Jews and Chinese people". CNN. Retrieved July 16, 2023. Weisman, Jonathan (July 15, 2023). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. Airs Bigoted New Covid Conspiracy Theory About Jews and Chinese". The New York Times. Retrieved July 17, 2023. Horovitz, Michael (July 15, 2023). "RFK Jr. suggests COVID-19 was 'ethnically targeted' to avoid Ashkenazi Jews". Times of Israel. Retrieved July 16, 2023. Stone, Will (June 8, 2021). "An Anti-Vaccine Film Targeted To Black Americans Spreads False Information". NPR News. Retrieved June 9, 2023. Hale Spencer, Saranac; Fichera, Angelo (March 11, 2021). "RFK Jr. Video Pushes Known Vaccine Misrepresentations". Factcheck.org. Annenberg Public Policy Center. Archived from the original on March 12, 2021. Retrieved March 21, 2021. Stone, Will (June 9, 2021). "An Anti-Vaccine Film Targeted to Black Americans Spreads False Information". Kaiser Health News. Archived from the original on February 2, 2022. Retrieved February 2, 2022. Murphy, Hannah; Venkataramakrishnan, Siddharth; Stacey, Kiran (March 15, 2021). "Facebook and Twitter resist calls to ban anti-vaxx campaigner". Financial Times. Retrieved June 15, 2023. Wilson, Dan (May 31, 2022). RFK Jr. Goes full HIV/AIDS denial in his terrible book about Anthony Fauci. Archived from the original on May 20, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2023 – via YouTube. Nagourney, Adam (February 26, 2022). "A Kennedy's Crusade Against Covid Vaccines Anguishes Family and Friends". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 28, 2022. Retrieved March 2, 2022. Kennedy Townsend, Kathleen; Kennedy, Joseph P.; Kennedy McKean, Maeve (May 8, 2019). "RFK Jr. Is Our Brother and Uncle. He's Tragically Wrong About Vaccines". Politico. Archived from the original on May 8, 2019. Retrieved May 8, 2019. Kennedy Meltzer, Kerry (December 30, 2020). "Vaccines Are Safe, No Matter What Bobby Kennedy Says". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 1, 2021. Retrieved January 2, 2021. Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (June 6, 2017). Foreword for The Peanut Allergy Epidemic: What's Causing It And How To Stop It. Third Edition. by Heather Fraser, New York: Skyhorse Publishing. ISBN 1510726314. Robert F. Kennedy Jr. (January–February 2003). "A Miscarriage of Justice". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on October 18, 2019. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Melia, Michael (July 12, 2016). "RFK Jr. Book Stokes Intrigue In Michael Skakel Murder Case". Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016. Schneider, Michael (September 20, 2017). "FX Prods. to Develop 'Framed,' Robert F. Kennedy Jr's Crusade to Clear His Cousin's Murder Conviction". IndieWire. Archived from the original on October 11, 2017. Ellis, Ralph; Casarez, Jean (May 4, 2018). "Court vacates Michael Skakel's murder conviction and orders a new trial". CNN. Cable News Network. Turner Broadcasting System, Inc. Archived from the original on May 5, 2018. Retrieved May 5, 2018. Mahony, Edmund H. (October 30, 2020). "Prosecutor in infamous Greenwich murder case tells judge state will not retry Kennedy cousin Michael Skakel in 1975 Martha Moxley killing". Hartford Courant. Retrieved October 30, 2020. DiEugenio, Jim (February 3, 2013). "The MSM and RFK Jr.: Only 45 years late this time". Kennedy and King (formerly CTKA). "RFK Jr: Dad believed Warren Commission 'shoddy'". CBS News. Associated Press. January 12, 2013. Archived from the original on March 2, 2021. Retrieved December 19, 2020. Orbis Books, JFK and the Unspeakable Archived December 29, 2019, at the Wayback Machine "Release the JFK Files Petition". Release the JFK Files Petition. Retrieved November 22, 2023. "RFK Jr. calls for Biden to release last of JFK assassination records". ny1.com. Retrieved November 22, 2023. "Podcast #388 - transcript 1:10:31". Lex Fridman podcast. July 6, 2023. Retrieved December 1, 2023. Jackman, Tom (June 5, 2018). "Who killed Bobby Kennedy? His son RFK Jr. doesn't believe it was Sirhan Sirhan". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 7, 2018. Hayes, Tyrone B.; Khoury, Vicky; Narayan, Anne; Nazir, Mariam; Park, Andrew; Brown, Travis; Adame, Lillian; Chan, Elton; Buchholz, Daniel; Stueve, Theresa; Gallipeau, Sherrie (March 9, 2010). "Atrazine induces complete feminization and chemical castration in male African clawed frogs (Xenopus laevis)". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 107 (10): 4612–4617. Bibcode:2010PNAS..107.4612H. doi:10.1073/pnas.0909519107. ISSN 0027-8424. PMC 2842049. PMID 20194757. Graziosi, Graig (June 20, 2023). "YouTube removes Robert F. Kennedy, Jr. video featuring bizarre claim that polluted water makes children transgender". The Independent. Retrieved June 22, 2023. Duffy, Clare (June 20, 2023). "YouTube removed video of Robert F. Kennedy, Jr. for violating vaccine misinformation policy". CNN Business. Retrieved July 20, 2023. Kacala, Alexander (August 7, 2018). "Infowars' Alex Jones has a long history of inflammatory, anti-LGBTQ speech". NBC News. Retrieved June 22, 2023. Brownworth, Victoria A. (June 21, 2023). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr.: The Shaming of a Legacy". Philadelphia Gay News. Retrieved June 22, 2023. Segalov, Michael (June 8, 2017). "A Quick Refresher: The Truth About Water Making You Gay". Vice. Retrieved July 20, 2023. Turner, Abby; Kaczynski, Andrew (July 13, 2023). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. repeatedly suggested that chemicals in water are impacting sexuality of children". CNN Politics. Retrieved July 20, 2023. Rubinowitz, Susan. (December 10, 2014). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. – The Bird Rehabilitator". Pet Place. News Staff (February 15, 2002). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. to speak at Syracuse University". Syracuse University News. Collier, Peter and Horowitz, David (1984). The Kennedys: An American Drama. Published by Summit Books. p. 576. ISBN 0671447939. Bowermaster, Jon (May 1993). "Sacrificial People–Will Quebec's Indians be Driven from Their Land?". Conde Nast Traveller. Jourdan, Michael (August 6, 2013). "Mountain Tribute to JFK Evoked by Kennedy Trip to Yukon". National Geographic. Archived from the original on January 28, 2023. Retrieved July 28, 2023. Kennedy, Robert (April 9, 1965). "Our Climb Up Mt. Kennedy". Life. "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. Weds Law Classmate". The New York Times. UPI. April 4, 1982. Archived from the original on October 29, 2014. Retrieved January 13, 2020. "Kathleen Alexandra Kennedy". geni_family_tree. April 13, 1988. Archived from the original on April 12, 2022. Retrieved April 12, 2022. "Kathleen 'Kick' Kennedy - the scandalous, rebellious, and tragic life of JFK's sister". IrishCentral.com. November 7, 2021. Archived from the original on August 13, 2016. Retrieved April 15, 2022. Shaw, Dan (March 28, 1994). "Chronicle". The New York Times. p. 6. Archived from the original on April 10, 2023. Retrieved April 10, 2023 – via The New York Times Archives. Brozan, Nadine (April 20, 1994). "Chronicle". The New York Times. p. 4. Archived from the original on December 11, 2012. Retrieved April 10, 2023 – via The New York Times Archives. Hall, Christine (May 17, 2012). "Police: Mary Kennedy Committed Suicide". The Bedford Daily Voice. Archived from the original on April 10, 2023. Retrieved April 10, 2023. Amira, Dan (September 9, 2013). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. Allegedly Had Affairs With 37 Women in 2001". New York Magazine. Retrieved July 31, 2023. Woletz, Bob (August 3, 2014). "No Curbs on Their Enthusiasm". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Andrews-Dyer, Helena (August 3, 2014). "Actress Cheryl Hines marries Robert F. Kennedy Jr. at Kennedy family compound in Cape Code". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 15, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. "RFK Jr. tells NH crowd he's considering a presidential run". www.wbur.org. Archived from the original on April 9, 2023. Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. [@RobertKennedyJr] (March 31, 2023). "With my friends @delbigtree + @AaronSiriSG at strategy session at my home on Cape Cod" (Tweet). Archived from the original on April 23, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2023 – via Twitter. Cox, Lauren (January 7, 2009). "Kennedy's Voice Draws Attention to Rare Disorder". ABC News. Archived from the original on March 2, 2021. Retrieved January 13, 2020. "A natural devotion". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on March 15, 2023. Retrieved March 15, 2023. Paulson, Michael (March 19, 2005). "Robert F. Kennedy Jr. takes a lesson from St. Francis". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on May 11, 2023. Retrieved May 11, 2023 – via Houston Chronicle. Gisotti, Alessandro (June 5, 2018). "Robert Kennedy Jr: My father's story, values, hopes". vaticannews.va. Vatican News. Archived from the original on May 11, 2023. Retrieved May 11, 2023. Millican, Scott (March 4, 2019). "Ring of Fire's RFK Jr. Wins Award for Monsanto Trial". trofire.com. Archived from the original on March 5, 2019. Retrieved March 5, 2019. "National Trial Lawyers 2019 Summit – Awards for 2018" (PDF). National Trial Lawyers. 2019. p. 3 of PDF. Retrieved June 12, 2023. Above: Bobby Kennedy speaking at the NTL Awards Luncheon. Bottom left: Mass Torts Trial Team of the Year – Mark Burton, Michael Baum, Robert F. Kennedy, Jr., Brent Wisner, Michelle Swanner, and David Dickens "Mountain Heroes: Robert F. Kennedy, Jr". Earth Justice. May 16, 2012. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. "El Foro La Región sobre la protección de los recursos naturales, en imágenes" [The Region Forum: On the protection of natural resources, in pictures]. La Región (in Spanish). May 16, 2017. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. "Robert F. Kennedy, Jr. Honored at Water's Edge Gala". Stroud Water Research Center. December 22, 2014. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. "Waterkeeper Alliance and Robert F. Kennedy Jr. Honored". University of Southern California. May 2008. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. "Clinic Awards". Pace University School of Law. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. "The Green Team". Vanity Fair. April 4, 2007. Archived from the original on July 26, 2016. Retrieved October 15, 2017. "Robert F. Kennedy, Jr. on William O. Douglas". williamodouglas.org. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. "25th Anniversary Alumni Leadership Awards Dinner Honors: Robert F. Kennedy, Jr., the Honorable Terry Jane Ruderman, and Peter John Sacripanti". newswire.blogs.pace.edu. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. "A Manly Awards Party for Men's Journal". bizbash.com. April 13, 2001. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. "Clinic Awards". Pace University School of Law. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved October 22, 2017. "Robert F. Kennedy, Jr". Waterkeeper Alliance. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. "William E. Ricker Resource Conservation Award | American Fisheries Society". Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved October 12, 2017. "Clinic Awards". Pace University School of Law. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved October 12, 2017. "Val-Kill awards to be presented on Sunday". Mid Hudson News. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. Wikiquote has quotations related to Robert F. Kennedy Jr.. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Robert F. Kennedy Jr.. Pace Law School Profile Archived February 24, 2019, at the Wayback Machine The Waterkeepers feature doccumentary (2000) Appearances on C-SPAN Robert F. Kennedy Jr. on the Muck Rack journalist listing site Robert F. Kennedy Jr. 2024 presidential exploratory committee: Team Kennedy Robert F. Kennedy Jr. on Politifact