Reptile is a 2023 American crime thriller film directed by Grant Singer in his feature-film directorial debut, from a screenplay he co-wrote with Benjamin Brewer and Benicio del Toro, and a story he co-wrote with Brewer. The film stars del Toro in the lead role, alongside Justin Timberlake, Alicia Silverstone, Eric Bogosian, Ato Essandoh, Domenick Lombardozzi, and Michael Pitt. It premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 7, 2023, and was released in the United States in select theaters on September 22, 2023, before streaming on Netflix on September 29. Will Grady finds his girlfriend Summer Elswick brutally murdered in a rural Maine house that they had been showing for sale as realtors. Tom Nichols and his partner Dan Cleary, police detectives assigned to the case, question Will, who reveals he wanted to marry Summer but could not as she was still married to Sam Gifford. Video evidence from nearby security footage shows a dark-colored car with a missing hubcap that Dan identifies as a 1990 Buick LeSabre; later on, Tom's wife Judy correctly identifies the vehicle as a Chrysler Imperial. After Summer's funeral, Will tells Tom of Eli Phillips, who tried to force himself into his mother's house a few nights earlier. Will explains that when his father ran the family's real estate company, they had forcibly bought Eli's family farm. Eli's father committed suicide, and Eli blames Will's family for it. Questioned by Tom and Dan, Eli accuses Will of murdering Summer. Eli has also been researching Tom himself, briefly discussing a corruption scandal involving Tom's former partner at a Philadelphia precinct. DNA analysis of semen found inside Summer matches that of Sam. This goes along with a statement from a friend of Summer's that the two of them were still seeing each other to have sex. Tom returns to Sam's with a warrant. Sam grabs Dan's gun and is fatally shot by Tom while attempting to flee. A search of his house finds 13 kilograms of heroin. The deceased Sam is declared to be Summer's murderer, but Tom is hesitant to consider the case solved. Eli shows up at his house at night and gives him a flash drive with evidence that Summer was caught up in a scheme by the Gradys to launder drug money. Properties are planted with drugs and then commandeered via civil asset forfeiture. The Gradys, operating under a shell company called White Fish, then snap up the properties at a discount. Summer was murdered to stop her from reporting the scheme to the DEA. Evidence points to police officer Wally Finn being behind White Fish, as he also heads a private security company called Active Duty Consulting that uses the same post office box as White Fish. Will shows up at Eli's house demanding the flash drive back. Another person shows up. Tom later arrives at Eli's house and finds him missing. Tom attends the birthday party for Captain Robert Allen, his superior officer and Judy's uncle. He attempts to inform Allen of Wally's role in Summer's murder and the money laundering scheme, but is interrupted. Later at the party, Tom discovers a Chrysler Imperial in Allen's garage with a new paint job. Allen finds Tom and tells him to let the matter go. Fearing for his safety, Tom comes home with Judy, explains what he knows to her, and tells her they must leave that night. Allen calls and tells Tom to come over the next day, where he will explain the matter. Tom agrees. He gives the flash drive to police chief Marty Graeber, and the two go together to Allen's house. Marty excuses himself to go to the bathroom, and Allen pleads with Tom to leave to save his life, before going upstairs, where an unseen person fatally shoots him. Tom confronts Marty, who is in on the scheme, in the bathroom. Marty reaches for his gun but Tom shoots and kills him. He then shoots Wally (who was the man upstairs who killed Allen) and subdues him. The FBI arrests Will as he is golfing. Benicio del Toro as Tom Nichols, a detective Justin Timberlake as Will Grady, the victim's boyfriend Alicia Silverstone as Judy Nichols, Tom's wife Michael Carmen Pitt as Eli Phillips, a suspect Ato Essandoh as Dan Cleary, a detective and Tom's partner Domenick Lombardozzi as Detective Wally, a friend of Nichols Karl Glusman as Sam Gifford, the victim's ex-husband Matilda Lutz as Summer Elswick, the victim Mike Pniewski as Chief Marty Graeber, a friend of Nichols Thad Luckinbill as Peter Sky Ferreira as Renee, the victim's best friend Owen Teague as Rudy Rackozy, drug smuggler Frances Fisher as Camille Grady Eric Bogosian as Captain Robert Allen, Nichols' boss and Judy's uncle Catherine Dyer as Deena Allen Michael Beasley as Victor James Devoti as Bennett Rosoff On August 26, 2021, Netflix was set to produce the crime thriller script Reptile with music video director Grant Singer set to make his directorial feature film debut and with Molly Smith, Trent Luckinbill, Seth Spector, Thad Luckinbill, Benicio Del Toro, and Rachel Smith as the film’s producers. On October 14, 2021, Singer and Brewer were credited as co-writers. Along with the announcement on August 26, 2021, Del Toro and Justin Timberlake were cast in the film. On September 30, 2021, Alicia Silverstone, Michael Pitt, Ato Essandoh, Frances Fisher, Eric Bogosian, Domenick Lombardozzi, Karl Glusman, Matilda Lutz, Owen Teague, and Catherine Dyer were cast in the film. On October 14, 2021, Mike Pniewski, Thad Luckinbill, Sky Ferreira, James Devoti, and Michael Beasley were cast in the film. On August 15, 2021, filming began in Atlanta, Georgia. The film score was composed by Yair Elazar Glotman, featuring Arca. Reptile premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 7, 2023. It was originally scheduled to be released by Netflix on October 6, 2023. It was later changed to having a limited release in select theaters in the United States on September 22, 2023, before streaming on Netflix on September 29. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 45% of 84 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 5.5/10. The website's consensus reads: "Strong work from Benicio del Toro and Alicia Silverstone isn't enough to make up for Reptile's convoluted and ultimately underwhelming story." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 52 out of 100, based on 23 critics, indicating "mixed or average" reviews. On October 10, 2023, Reptile earned the #1 spot for English language films around the world on Netflix with 19.9 million views for the week, and on October 17, 2023, Reptile earned the #1 spot for English language films around the world on Netflix with 14.2 million views. That being its third week in a row as the #1 most viewed English language film globally on Netflix. On October 19, 2023, The Wrap reported that for the third consecutive week Reptile was the most-watched title of all films and tv shows across any streaming service. "Reptile (15)". British Board of Film Classification. September 19, 2023. Retrieved September 19, 2023. Grobar, Matt (August 26, 2021). "'Reptile': Justin Timberlake Joins Benecio Del Toro In Film From Black Label Media As It Heads To Netflix". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved August 27, 2021. Grobar, Matt (September 30, 2021). "'Reptile': Domenick Lombardozzi, Karl Glusman, Owen Teague & More Join Netflix Thriller". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved August 27, 2021. Grobar, Matt (October 14, 2021). "'Reptile': Mike Pniewski, Thad Luckinbill, Sky Ferreira & More Round Out Cast Of Netflix Thriller". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Ho, Rodney (August 15, 2021). "What's filming in Georgia in August 2021?". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Retrieved September 30, 2021. "Yair Elazar Glotman Scoring Grant Singer's 'Reptile'". Film Music Reporter. August 7, 2023. Retrieved September 12, 2023. Gyarkye, Lovia (September 9, 2023). "'Reptile' Review: Benicio Del Toro, Alicia Silverstone and Justin Timberlake in a Police Procedural That Starts Strong, Grows Sluggish". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 12, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 24, 2023). "TIFF Lineup Unveiled Amid Strikes: Awards Contenders Dumb Money, The Holdovers, Rustin; Starry Pics For Sale With Scarlett Johansson, Kate Winslet, Michael Keaton, Viggo Mortensen & More". Retrieved July 24, 2023. DeVore, Britta (August 21, 2023). "Benicio del Toro & Alicia Silverstone Reunite to Find a Killer in First 'Reptile' Trailer". Collider. Retrieved August 21, 2023. DiLillo, John (September 13, 2023). "'Reptile': Everything You Need to Know About the New Benicio Del Toro Mystery". Netflix Tudum. Retrieved September 16, 2023. "Reptile". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "Reptile". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Reptile on Netflix Reptile at IMDb Reptile at Rotten Tomatoes