Dato' Sri Hajah Siti Nurhaliza Tarudin SSAP, DIMP, JSM, SAP, PMP, AAP (Jawi: سيتي نورهاليزا بنت تارودين; IPA: [ˈsiti nʊrhaˈliza ˈbinti taˈrudɪn]; born 11 January 1979) is a Malaysian singer, songwriter, actress and businesswoman with more than 300 local and international awards. She made her debut after she won a local singing competition show, Bintang HMI in 1995 when she was 16. Her debut single, Jerat Percintaan, won the 11th Anugerah Juara Lagu and another two awards for Best Performance and Best Ballad. Her debut album as of 2005 has sold more than 800,000 units in Malaysia. She has recorded and sung in multiple languages, including Malaysian, Javanese, English, Arabic, Japanese, and Mandarin. Throughout her career, Siti has received an unprecedented number of music awards in Malaysia and its neighbouring countries: 42 Anugerah Industri Muzik, 31 Anugerah Bintang Popular [ms], 28 Anugerah Planet Muzik, 22 Anugerah Juara Lagu, four MTV Asia Awards, three World Music Awards, two Anugerah Musik Indonesia (Indonesian Music Awards), and five records in the Malaysia Book of Records. Having 20 solo studio albums, 1 Special album, 2 duet albums, she is one of the most popular artists in the Malay Archipelago and Nusantara region – she has been voted for Regional Most Popular Artiste ten times in a row beating other fellow artists from Malaysia, Indonesia, and Singapore in the Anugerah Planet Muzik since 2001. Siti is currently listed as one of Malaysia's richest, most-influential, most award-winning, and most single-produced artist. She is also one of Malaysia's best selling artists with her album sales having contributed to 10 percent of Malaysia's total album sales for 2001. To date, she has sold more than 6 million in record sales. At international stage, Siti has won the Gold Award in Asia New Singer Competition at Shanghai Asia Music Festival in 1999, two awards from 'South Pacific International Song and Singing Competition 1999' held in Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia, and the Grand Prix Champion title in Voice of Asia in 2002 held in Almaty, Kazakhstan. In 2020, after receiving a record breaking of votes, she won the public choice for Adelaide Festival Centre's Walk of Fame 2019. Besides musical awards, she has various other achievements. In 1998, Siti was chosen to perform during the closing ceremony of 1998 Commonwealth Games in front of Queen Elizabeth II and her consort, Prince Philip, among other dignitaries and officials from 70 countries including those from the Commonwealth of Nations. In 2005, Siti became the first Southeast Asian singer, and third Asian singer to perform a solo concert at the Royal Albert Hall, London, while being backed by the London Symphony Orchestra. She was listed second by MTV Asia in Asia's Best Musical Artiste and Channel V's Biggest Asian Artiste in 2005. Later in 2008, she was named as one of Asia's Idol by Asia News Network. She also has been listed as one of The Muslim 500 - The World's 500 Most Influential Muslims from year 2015 to 2022. Her success in the Asian region has gained her honorific titles including the "Voice of Asia" and "Asia's Celine Dion". Siti Nurhaliza was born on 11 January 1979, in Berek Polis (police barrack) Kampung Awah in Temerloh, Pahang, Malaysia where she is the fourth child in a family of seven siblings to Tarudin Ismail, a police officer and Siti Salmah Bachik, a housewife. She comes from a musically inclined family; her brother, Saiful Bahri Tarudin, and her sisters, Siti Norsaida and Siti Nursairah are also singers. Her grandfather was a famous violinist, and her mother used to be a local traditional singer. During her childhood, she was involved in various school activities including sports and co-curricular activities. She attended her pre-school at Tabika Perkep, Balai Polis Kampung Awah, Temerloh where she first showcased her early singing talent at the age of six when she sang "Sirih Pinang", a Malay traditional song, at her kindergarten's certificate-receiving event. She later attended primary school at Sekolah Rendah Kebangsaan Clifford and followed up her secondary education at Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan Clifford, Kuala Lipis, Pahang. In 1991, when she was 12 years old, she won one of her earliest singing competitions, with the song "Bahtera Merdeka" at the Merdeka Day Singing Contest, a local patriotic song competition. During her schooling years, she was active in sports, especially in netball and this was evident when she participated in two different sports events – netball and 5x80 meter relay during the Fiesta Media Idola 2006 in Kuantan. She was also chosen as one of the torch bearers to light the games of the Fiesta, marking its opening alongside Malaysian actress, Fasha Sandha. Coming from a poor family, at the age of nine, Siti had to wake up at 4:00 am to help her mother make and sell various homemade kuih in her neighbourhood, where sometimes, she also had to carry a makeshift table down three flights of stairs to the main road to set up a small stall. She commented that all the hardships have not only helped her to be more frugal when spending, but also to be more confident when communicating with the public. She also jokingly said that the whole experience has helped to improve her vocal skills as she has to shout to call for customers. Apart from participating in singing competitions, she also used to follow her uncle, Abdul Rahim Bachik, to invitational shows like wedding ceremonies and dinner parties, which have helped to expose her to performing live. Although she had good SPM results, Siti Nurhaliza declined to pursue her tertiary education to focus solely on her music career. In a 2012 interview, Siti said that she didn't regret not obtaining a university degree as none of her family pursued higher education due to financial difficulties. "Jerat Percintaan" (1996) Siti Nurhaliza's single that managed to win the 11th Anugerah Juara Lagu. Problems playing this file? See media help. Siti Nurhaliza's family performed at many public local ceremonies in their hometown, such as weddings and public soirées. At the age of 2, Siti began to learn traditional songs from her mother and went on performing the same music genre during special occasions and events. She was also the vocalist for 'Family Group', a small band founded by her uncle, Abdul Rahim Bachik. She started to improve her singing skills by participating in numerous local singing competitions. When she was 14, she went for the audition for Asia Bagus but failed to go through. Despite her frustration, she did not give up. Two years later, she participated in 1995 RTM Bintang HMI competition at the age of 16 where she auditioned with a song made famous by Ruth Sahanaya, Kaulah Segalanya. In the competition, she met Adnan Abu Hassan, the music composer who tutored and helped her with her vocal performance, before she finally won the contest with the song by Aishah, Camar Yang Pulang. She signed a contract with Suria Records thus rejecting four other offers from different international recording companies, including Sony Music, BMG Music and Warner Music. In 1996, Suria Records released her first eponymous self-titled debut album, and the first single, Jerat Percintaan won the 11th Anugerah Juara Lagu In that year too, she won Most Popular Television Entertainer, Most Popular Female Singer, Most Popular Teen Artiste and the top award Most Popular Star in Anugerah Bintang Popular [ms] 1996. In 1997, Siti started to become a well-known figure in Indonesia's music industry when her story appeared in one of the most popular magazines in Indonesia, POS Kota, in April 1997's edition. She was taken as a formidable figure because it was difficult for foreign artists to break through in Indonesian's music industry if the artist has less to offer compared to their own artists. Siti was also said to be the first Malaysian singer to hold a live concert on Indosiar, a popular television station in Indonesia and it was televised nationwide. She has become one of the most influential artists in Indonesia which was evidenced by the series of big scale concerts she held in Jakarta, Bandung, Yogyakarta and many more cities over the next few years. She also won Best New Artist and Best Song (Jerat Percintaan) from Anugerah Industri Muzik 1997. In 1998, at the early age of 19, she launched her own company on 12 January (one day after her 19th birthday), Siti Nurhaliza Productions (M) Sdn. Bhd. which acts as her official management team. Siti made her first and biggest appearance on the international stage during the 1998 Commonwealth Games which was held in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia where she performed in front of Queen Elizabeth II and her consort, Prince Philip among other dignitaries and officials from 70 Commonwealth countries. She also shared the same stage with two international stars Céline Dion and Rod Stewart to entertain the crowd during the closing ceremony. The ceremony was televised in 70 nations worldwide, which led her to become known in the international arena for the first time. In November of the same year, she was invited to perform in Japan for five days at the Pop Queen Festival, also known as Saga Fiesta '98. In December 1999, Siti received one of her first international winnings from an international singing competition when she took part in 'Shanghai Asia Music Festival 1999' that was held in China, where she managed to win the Gold Award for the Asia New Singer Competition. She was also invited in 2000 and 2002 for the same competition as featuring artiste. In the same year earlier in May, she took part in 'South Pacific International Song and Singing Competition 1999' held in Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia where she was crowned with the first place in the category of 'Pop/Top 40 for International Song' beating contestants from all over South Pacific through her single, We'll Be As One. Siti also managed to catch the juries' attention with her vocal prowess, that finally led her to be awarded with the Best Female Vocal Performance with the same single even though the single was judged by cassette tape/compact disc sent by her recording company to the organiser and not through live performance. For the next few years, Siti took part in 'Voice of Asia 2002' which was held in Kazakhstan, where she performed one of her singles from her third album, Purnama Merindu and managed to grab the Grand Prix Champion title, the ultimate prize. In December 2003, she was invited to perform at 2003 Japan and ASEAN Pop Stars Dream Concert 2003 (J-ASEAN Pops 2003), held in Yokohama, Japan, alongside top Japan and ASEAN artists, including THE BOOM, You Hitoto, INSPi, Leonard Eto, Yuri Chika, Hiroshi Takano and Hideki Kurosawa from Japan. While ASEAN artists including Hans Anwar & Lo'Ryder (Brunei), Preap Sowat (Cambodia), AB Three (Indonesia), Alexandra (Laos), Lay Phyu & Iron Cross (Myanmar), Jolina Magdangal (Philippines), Tanya Chua (Singapore), Briohny (Thailand) and Lam Truong (Vietnam). For the concert, a special song was composed by a Japanese composer, Kazufumi Miyazawa with lyrics by a Singaporean lyricist, Dick Lee entitled, Treasure the World. The same song was also sung by each singer from each participating country in their native languages, where Siti's version which was in Malay, entitled Dunia Milik Kita was also performed for the first time during the event. Siti was the first non-Chinese artiste to be invited to perform at the 15th Golden Melody Awards, Taiwan in 2004. Apart from performing solo with 征服 (Conquer) cover of Na Ying's single, she also sang a duet with Leehom Wang in a song called 月亮代表我的心 (The Moon Represents My Heart) which is a cover of the late Teresa Teng and as awards presenter alongside Taiwanese news anchor Patty Hou. She also appeared on a half-hour special program by Azio TV during her brief four days in Taipei. She also made her third appearance on MTV Asia Awards in 2004 held in Singapore, where she performed for the second time in a row for the ceremony with Gareth Gates, the runner up from the first series of England version of Idol, Pop Idol, in a song originally by Gareth's himself, 'Say It Isn't So'. In 2004 also her company Siti Nurhaliza Production (M) Sdn. Bhd. (SNP) produced television programs. With the first musical program Muzikal Aidiladha (Musical of Eid Al-Adha) in conjunction with the Eid Al-Adha. After that, the company came up with the Siti Nurhaliza 3D (Siti Nurhaliza Dari Dalam Diri), a reality television series that exclusively reveal the private life of Siti Nurhaliza with 13 episodes and airing on RTM, a Malaysian public broadcasting network. In the same year also SNP produced Sukan dan Selebriti (Sports and Celebrities) programs involving the participation of popular artists and sports personalities in various fields with 26 episodes. In 2005, she was dubbed as The Voice of Asia, when Alicia Keys first introduced her with the title during the MTV Asia Aid in 2005 held in Bangkok, Thailand due to her powerful vocal, and her outstanding achievements locally and internationally. In the same year, Siti held a successful solo concert at the Royal Albert Hall in London in April 2005, although the majority of the audience were Malaysians living in the United Kingdom, together with the local citizens. British press compared her performance to those by Celine Dion and cited her as Asia's Celine Dion for her powerful vocal and outstanding performances. During the concert, she was backed by the London Symphony Orchestra conducted by Indonesian maestro, Erwin Gutawa where the concert was even attended by the Sultan and Sultanah of Pahang and royal families from Brunei. In the same year, Channel V listed her as the Second Biggest Asian Artist for her achievements, trailing behind Taiwanese singer Jay Chou, who is on the top of the list. Coincidentally, MTV Asia also rated her as the Second Asia's Best Musical Artist, also behind the same Taiwanese artiste, Jay Chou. Siti's eleventh studio album, Transkripsi, was released in April 2006 and contained contributions from producers and composers from Indonesia like Erwin Gutawa, Melly Goeslaw and Glenn Fredly and Malaysians, like Aubrey Suwito, Cat Farish, Jenny Chin, Firdaus Mahmud, Mac Chew, Yasin and Damian VE. Transkripsi became the year's best album after winning the Best Pop Album and Best Album categories in the Anugerah Industri Muzik. It also received praises before by critics as one of her best albums ever produced and the album released was her debut attempt of producing an album under her own production company. On 24 October 2006, she was conferred as "Dato'" after receiving the title of Darjah Indera Mahkota Pahang (DIMP) from the Sultan of Pahang, Sultan Ahmad Shah on his 76th birthday alongside two Malaysian designers, Bernard Chandran and Dayang Tom Abang Saufi. In 2007, she made her first appearance at the Grammy Award for the red carpet session on 11 February 2007 where she was the first Malaysian to walk the red carpet. On 20 and 21 April 2007, she performed at the Konsert Istana Cinta Nostalgia, which was a tribute concert for the late Tan Sri P. Ramlee and Puan Sri Saloma at Istana Budaya, Kuala Lumpur. The concert featured popular songs composed by Tan Sri P. Ramlee himself, performed by Siti and other invited artistes. Before this, Siti was also invited to perform a tribute concert for the late Sudirman Hj Arshad, also at Istana Budaya, Kuala Lumpur in 2002. On 30 April 2007, she garnered 4 nominations in the Anugerah Industri Muzik including Best Pop Album (Transkripsi), Best Vocal Female Performance in an Album (Transkripsi), Best Music Video (Bisakah) and Best Cover for an Album (Transkripsi). Out of the four nominations, she won two awards – Best Pop Album and Best Album for Transkripsi. She also received five nominations from Anugerah Planet Muzik 2007 for two categories that were voted by fans from Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore – Most Popular Female Artist and Most Popular Song (Biarlah Rahsia) and three categories that were judged by professional juries and judges – Best Female Artist, Best Song (Biarlah Rahsia) and Best Album. She won three out of five – Most Popular Female Artist, Best Female Artist and Best Song. Siti Nurhaliza was the first Malaysian to be given the honour of walking up the red carpet meant for invited celebrities at the Grammy Awards held at Staples Centre in Los Angeles on 11 February 2007, after she won the two tickets as Best Dressed celebrity at Star World's "Breakfast With the Stars" in conjunction with the 78th Annual Academy Awards. 2007 also showed Siti's participation on soundtracks for films where she recorded two songs for two different films where she sang Menanti Pasti and Hati for Kayangan and 1957: Hati Malaya respectively. However, only the song Hati was included in her twelfth studio album, Hadiah Daripada Hati and also received the award of Best Original Theme Song from Anugerah Festival Filem Malaysia ke-21 (21st Malaysian Film Festival) in 2008. In the same year too she finally agrees to act in a production where she performed as Azizah, P. Ramlee's mysterious lover, in the musical 'Remy ... Kisah P. Ramlee (Remy ... The Story of P. Ramlee), which is a tribute to the late P. Ramlee, staged at Istana Budaya from 19 October to 3 November 2007. On 10 December of the same year, Siti's twelfth studio album Hadiah Daripada Hati was released, with the Latin-influenced pop song Ku Mahu as the first single of this album and it was featured as the opening theme song for a local Malay drama, Spa-Q. Later, Melawan Kesepian was chosen as her second single and was the first track of this album to have a video clip. The song was a remake of a hit that was once popularised by an Indonesian band called Jikustik. Hadiah Daripada Hati came under criticism from the press when it was released. Critics said it was a moderate performance from her and was not on the same par as her previous album Transkripsi, which was touted as the best album she had ever made. But these criticisms were rebutted when Hadiah Daripada Hati received five nominations in the 15th edition of AIM including Best Pop Album, Song of The Year, Best Vocal Performance in an Album (Female), Best Arrangement and Best Album Cover making Siti the second nominee with the most nominations after newcomer Faizal Tahir. Out of five categories including three multiple nominations for Best Arrangement category, the album earned her three awards for Best Pop Album, Best Musical Arrangement in a Song (Malay) for the song Cintamu as well as her ninth Best Vocal Performance in an Album (Female) in which she had lost to Jaclyn Victor the previous year. Her acting debut in the musical 'Remy... The Story of P. Ramlee' also saw the debut of her third single Mulanya Cinta, which was composed by Dick Lee, a Singaporean composer. Siti has also become one of the most frequently searched persons on Google by Malaysian Google users, according to Google's 2007 Malaysia Year-End Zeitgeist, beating celebrities like Paris Hilton and Britney Spears. In January 2008, she was cited as one of the Asia's Idols by Asia News Network for her exemplary achievements and gaining the status as the icon of Malaysian entertainment. and on 21 March 2008, Siti held one of her first solo acoustic concert at the Esplanade Theatre in Singapore. The concert was called Diari Hati – Dato' Siti Nurhaliza's Heart (Diary of Dato' Siti Nurhaliza's Heart) where she performed numbers of her hits from her latest album, Hadiah Daripada Hati and previous albums. 26 December 2008, was the release date of her 13th album, Lentera Timur, her most recent traditional contemporary album, Irama Malaysia (her fourth Ethnic Creative album) since her third one, Sanggar Mustika in 2002. She commented that the album has more modern and contemporary songs unlike her usual traditional genre. For that album, she worked with multiple international composers like Singapore's M. Nasir and Indonesia's Katon Bagaskara. Nine out of 13 songs (which all was created and composed under three days) that have been chosen came from a songwriting workshop, Cipta Ekspress – Berirama Malaysia. The event which was organised by Malaysian Authors Copyright Protection (MACP) was specially organised to find the materials for the album. Despite of the poor sale due to the lack of promotions, the quality of the album has never been denied where it was evident when during the 16th Anugerah Industri Muzik, Lentera Timur grabbed multiple awards including Best Pop Ethnic and later on honoured as Album of the Year in AIM 16. She also took home Best Female Vocal trophy for the song 'Di Taman Teman'. She was not present at the award ceremony however as she was away to Mecca to perform Umrah with her family. Siti has also recorded two songs for the soundtrack for an Indonesian film, Perempuan Berkalong Sorban. One of the songs recorded is a cover of Opick's Ketika Cinta and also a new song, Batasku Asaku which was written by Siti herself. Both songs were included in her fourteenth album, Tahajjud Cinta. In the same year, her wealth is said to have reached RM 50 million by MTV Asia and was named one of the millionaires in entertainment in South East Asia. On 15 February, her father, Taruddin Ismail, died at 11.50 am at the age of 67, after a heart bypass operation days before does not show any improvement, leaving seven children, and 10 grandchildren behind. She announced a 40-day state of mourning for her father and put singing activity on hold, except for Konsert Malam Sinar Maulidur Rasul 1430 Hijrah (1430 Hijrah Special Mawlid Night Concert). Months after the loss, Siti went back to business where she announced her major three days concert at the Istana Budaya, SATU Konsert Eksklusif Dato' Siti Nurhaliza. It began its run on 26 June 2009 in Kuala Lumpur. The tickets were sold out weeks before the debut night. The concert received compliments from critics, and the show was attended by distinguished people such as region well-known artistes like Krisdayanti and Rossa from Indonesia to name some. A month before the concert, she won her ninth consecutive award of Most Popular Malaysian Artist of 2009 and also the Regional Most Popular Artist of 2009 from Anugerah Planet Muzik 2009 [ms], beating another 11 contestants where each country, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore has four representatives based on SMS votes. In March, Siti revealed that she would begin work on her next album later in the year. Apparently, the idea came about while Siti was taking part in an Erma Fatima theatre production, Sirah Junjungan. She also stated that, this will be her first attempt at spiritual songs and she plans to release the album for the holy month Ramadan of 2009 known as Tahajjud Cinta. In September, she became a host to 13 episodes cooking reality series Citarasa Selebriti Bersama Dato' Siti Nurhaliza with several guest artists. Later, Siti and fellow friend, Indonesian singer, Krisdayanti have planned to produce a duet album featuring eight duets where Siti will choose four Malaysian compositions while Krisdayanti will pick the other four from Indonesia. The album was released on 28 December in Malaysia and 27 January in Indonesia, under the name CTKD where it is an abbreviation with double meaning where it stands as the acronyms for the combination of both singers names, CT and KD, and also as the whole title of the album, which is Canda (Joke), Tangis (Cry), Ketawa (Laugh) and Duka (Sad). In July, her skill as a former ambassador for the Malaysian Red Crescent Society was put to the test when she and a panel doctor of Media Prima performed a Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) on the late Yasmin Ahmad when she fell unconscious during a presentation in a meeting in TV3's headquarters and in August, Siti was given a privileged of her own channel on Astro at Channel 188, Channel Siti for 28 hours on 30 August 2009 which has broadcast her concert in June of the same year, SATU Konsert Eksklusif Dato' Siti Nurhaliza, her previous concert which was held at Bukit Jalil, the Siti's Fantasia Tour concert in 2004 and some of her music videos. In 2010, she performed at Konsert Bagaikan Sakti which was held in Esplanade – Theatres on the Bay, Singapore alongside Malaysian producer-composer-songwriter, M. Nasir which also was broadcast live through Astro Box Office Events (Channel 955) on 1 January, and the repeat show from 2 to 10 January. Her own company, Siti Nurhaliza Productions (M) Sdn. Bhd. has also produced a concert for two Malaysian award-winning artists, Faizal Tahir and Aizat Amdan entitled Konsert Satu Suara which was accompanied by Simfoni Orkestra Kebangsaan (National Orchestra Symphony) on 12 February until 14th at Istana Budaya. On 25 March, she received her first award of the year, Anugerah Artis Contoh HIP TV 2009 (HIP TV Role Model Artist Award 2009) defeating four other candidates based on votes from viewers through short message service (SMS). On 30 March, she launched her own beauty and cosmetic products under the name SimplySiti. The products underwent research and development in Korea, and are incorporated with Nanotechnology before receiving approval of Halal status by JAKIM. 6 days later, she received her 13th consecutive award of Penyanyi Wanita Paling Popular 2009 (Most Popular Female Singer 2009) and the overall category award, Bintang Paling Popular 2009 (Most Popular Artist of 2009) from Anugerah Bintang Popular Bintang Harian 2009 with votes from over 225 300 votes from the readers of Berita Harian. The latter one is her seventh time winning the same accolade. On 21 April, Siti won herself another two awards based on popular votes through SMS service from Anugerah Pilihan Pembaca Media Hiburan (APPMH) 2009/10 (Media Hiburan Readers' Choice Awards 2009/10). She won the award for Artis Wanita Berkulit Cantik 2009/10 (Female Artist with a Flawless Skin 2009/10) and special piece of the ceremony, Anugerah Khas APPMH 2009/10 (Special Award of APPMH 2009/10). In addition, on 2 May, she won herself her sixth and seventh awards of 2010 from Anugerah Industri Muzik (AIM) ke-17 2010 (17th Malaysian Music Industry Awards 2010) where she won two vocal awards, Persembahan Vokal Terbaik Dalam Lagu (Wanita) (Best Vocal Performance in a Song (Female)) through her single, Ku Percaya Ada Cinta and Persembahan Vokal Berkumpulan Dalam Lagu (Best Group Vocal Performance in a Song) through her single, Amarah from her collaboration album with Indonesian artiste, Krisdayanti, CTKD. This is her 11th time winning Best Vocal Performance out of 17 years history of AIM, creating a record of her own. She also won another two awards from local fashion magazine, EH! voted by users through online and mail poles, Anugerah Stail EH! 2010 (EH!'s 2010 Style Awards) for the category of Selebriti Pencapaian Terbaik (Celebrity with the Best Achievements) and Selebriti Contoh (Role Model Celebrity) on 21 July. Less than two months after being commercialised since late March, her skincare products range, SimplySiti received "The Best Halal Product" under Cosmetic category by Halal Journal Magazine. and on 11 January 2011, she received two awards from The BrandLaureate – Small and Medium Enterprises Chapter Awards (The BrandLaureate – SME's Chapter Awards), one for her SimplySiti range, for Most Promising Brand and another one for herself, first time introduced in 2011, The BrandLaureate Tun Dr. Siti Hasmah SME's Women of The Year 2010 which was presented by Tun Dr. Siti Hasmah, wife of Malaysia's fourth Prime Minister, Tun Dr. Mahathir herself. She also received Inspiration Woman Award from Association of Malaysian and Indonesian Journalists (ISWAMI) on 29 January. In early 2011, she hosted her own talk show programme, SITI, which with 13 episodes, encompassing four main segments – V.I.P. Siti, Sentuhan Kasih (Caring Touch), Siti's Perspective and Siti's Symphony with the first episode aired on 12 February. In early March 2011, she announced that she is working on her first full English album, entitled All Your Love which was produced by her own stepson's production team What's Up Entertainment, with all the songs written and produced by Australian singers, Christian Alexanda and Bryan Bouro and released on 26 September with her first English single, Falling in Love debuted at a concert in UiTM where she also expressed her interest to further her study in that university. Two out of ten tracks from the album, Remember You and I Wait Forever were a duet between her and Sean Kingston and Christian Alexanda respectively. On 16 July, she won her tenth Regional Most Popular Artiste in a row beating fellow artistes from Malaysia, Indonesia and Singapore, thus setting a new record in the Anugerah Planet Muzik. However, this would be her last appearance in the category after the organiser has decided to drop her name from participating in the same category in the future. In September 2011, her company, Siti Nurhaliza Production (SNP) produced her first ever reality singing competition, I-Klon which was aired in November 2011. The aim of this show is to search for talents that not only can sing but also imitate their idol. On 17 October, she was reported to be working on her life documentary which was aired on History Channel on 11 January 2012 to coincide with her 33rd birthday. On 28 January 2012 she received the Anugerah Ikon (Icon Award) by (APPMH) 2011/12 (Media Hiburan Readers' Choice Awards 2011/12) and on 8 April, she received a special award, Anugerah Seri Perak from Anugerah Bintang Popular Berita Harian in conjunction with the silver jubilee of the award in April 2012, which she previously had won the Anugerah Bintang Paling Popular (Most Popular Star Award) for seven times from the same ceremony. In April 2012, she accepted an offer to be featured in Sami Yusuf's latest album, Salaam for his song, You Came To Me which was recorded in three languages, Arabic, Malay and English. She also performed the song alongside him for his debut concert in Singapore, 'Konsert Salaam Sami Yusuf' on 8 July. A day later, on 9 July, she was given the chance to perform as the opening act and also the closing ceremonies of the 15th Malaysia Games or SUKMA XV on 16 July. Few days earlier, on 5 July, she received another award by EH! magazine for the award of Celebrity with Best Achievements for a second time since 2010. In September, she announced a new album project with an Indonesian recording company, Virgo Records for Indonesian market where so far a number of Indonesian composers and lyricist have given their songs to Siti, including former lead vocal of Kerispatih, Samuel Simorangkir and Dewiq. The same album will also include a song written by herself and composed by a Malaysian composer, Aubrey Suwito. In the same month also, she received a special award by Anugerah Radio24 BERNAMA (BERNAMA Radio24 Awards) in the category of Entertainment Icon in conjunction with their fifth anniversary. And on 25 November, she was honoured with a special award of Anugerah Kesatria Puteri Kesenian from Puteri UMNO in their Himpunan Wanita Muda 2012 (2012 Female Youth Coalition). Two weeks earlier, on 11 November, she performed a 2-hour concert at Grand Ballroom, Bukit Gambang Resort City in Gambang, Pahang where it was attended by more than 5000 people including her fans from Indonesia and Singapore and the Sultan of Pahang, Sultan Haji Ahmad Shah. During the concert, she performed her latest single, Galau which was composed by an Indonesian composer, which will be featured in her latest project with Universal Music. After the concert, she announced that she will be start touring Indonesia from 8 December until 14 December in several major cities, including Jakarta, Pekanbaru and Banjarbaru. However, on 13 December, she has to call off her last destination tour for her husband was involved in a motorcycle accident in New Zealand. On 13 December also, she was announced as one of the finalists in World Music Awards 2012 alongside another Malaysian singer, Shila Amzah in the categories of World's Best Female Artist, World's Best Live Act and World's Best Entertainer of the Year. However, the awards ceremony was postponed from 22 December 2012 to a later date in 2013, due to logistic and immigration issues. On her 34th birthday, she has made a decision to fully observe the Islamic code of dressing for females by wearing a hijab at all times even when performing on stage. She also has commented that she will be taking a short break until April to take care of her husband who was involved in an accident in December 2012. In the same month, her company, Siti Nurhaliza Productions (SNP) was reported to be working on the second season of I-Klon, a reality singing competition, where it will be aired later this year after its debut in 2011. Later, in early February, she debuted her own 13-episode game show, Siti Ooo...Som where she co-hosted with Nabil Ahmad and Sharifah Shahira. The game show is basically divided into six main segments – Sepantas Kilat, Riuh Rendah, Siapa Hebat, Kebaboom, Siti Cabar and Huru Hara. Also, in the same month, she was revealed to be short listed for the fifth Shorty Awards in the category of Best Reality Star in Social Media where the winners were announced in New York City on 8 April 2013. On 2 March, she won the Bella On-Stage Award, beating other nine contenders in the Bella Awards inauguration event for Malaysian women that have made tremendous achievement in the performing arts. On the same day, her cosmetic company, SimplySiti received a recognition from Malaysia Book of Records for the entry of Biggest Participation in Skin Transformation event in One Day. On 7 March, she was chosen to perform in collaboration concert between Malaysia and Indonesia, Konsert Nusantara at Istana Budaya alongside Hafiz Suip, Rossa and few other Malaysian and Indonesian singers. On 21 March, she was given a chance to perform a duet with Kenny Babyface through the songs Fire and When I Fall in Love for Sapurakencana Petroleum Malaysia Grand Prix Charity Gala 2013 which was attended by various international artists including Josh Hartnett, Teri Hatcher, Kimora Lee Simmons and many others. The charity event managed to raise more than RM 200,000 which will be used to aid heart patients. In April, she announced that she will have her first solo concert at the Malaysian Philharmonic Orchestra for a 3-day concert from 5 to 7 July. In June, she received a special humanity award from Majlis Perundangan Pertubuhan Islam Malaysia (Mapim), for her effort and support of Mapim's Gaza fundraising. On 5 to 7 July, she performed at Siti Nurhaliza in Symphony – with the Malaysian Philharmonic Orchestra at Petronas Philharmonic Hall for three nights in a row in which tickets were sold out weeks before the said event. This was her first solo concert at the Petronas Philharmonic Hall where 12 years earlier she was only a guest performer at Tan Sri SM Salim's concert with the Malaysian Philharmonic Orchestra. In August, she received Anugerah Artis Wanita Pilihan (Favourite Female Artist Award) from the inaugural Anugerah Melodi 2013 during a special Eid episode of Melodi where the winners were chosen entirely by the viewers. In the same month, she was also chosen as one of the 'Inspirers' for Akademi Fantasia 2013 students alongside Melly Goeslaw and Faizal Tahir where they will share their experiences as singers and motivate the students in their paths as new artists. In August also, she was chosen among few select Malaysian artists to participate in Konsert 'Harmony and Unity' on 25 August which was held at Dataran Merdeka, alongside few Indonesian artists, including Ahmad Dhani and Rossa which was aired on both countries television stations, TV1 and Indosiar respectively. In September, she was interviewed by National Geographic Channel for a special documentary in conjunction with the 50th Malaysia Day, 'Malaysia: Through The Decades' which was aired on 16 September, alongside Yuna, Lat and Malaysia's first astronaut, Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor for their insights on Malaysia and what it has achieved over the past 50 years. She was also revealed to be nominated in Anugerah Planet Muzik 2013 at Suntec Convention Hall, Singapore in three different categories – Best Malaysia Song, Best Duo/Group and Regional Most Popular Song which are all shared with Hafiz Suip for their collaboration in both artists' single, Muara Hati. And on 18 October, both of them were revealed to be the winner for two out of three nominations (Best Duo/Group and Regional Most Popular Song). Also, in the same month of September, she held her second major concert in 2013, Konsert Lentera Timur Dato' Siti Nurhaliza Eksklusif bersama Orkestra Tradisonal Malaysia at Istana Budaya, which was also her first traditional concert in 18 years of her career. Backed by 40 musicians from Orkestra Tradisional Malaysia, with 35 different traditional songs, ranging from Zapin, Samrah, Keroncong, Joget to few other traditional genres, the 2-hour concert was tentatively planned to be only for three days in a row from 20 to 22 September, before the fourth day, which is 24 September was added after receiving high demands from her fans and fans of traditional music to add another date to the 3-day concert. On 27 October, the concert was revealed as the most successful solo concert ever held at Istana Budaya, where it managed to collect more than RM 900,000. In late November and December 2013, she was invited to perform for two international events. On 28 November, she was in Japan after receiving an invitation by the Japanese embassy in Malaysia for Asean-Japan Music Festival – Music for Healing after the Earthquake in commemoration of the 40th anniversary of Japan – Asean countries relationship, and as a musical appeal for relief aids for victims of 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami. During the festival, she performed a medley of songs that she personally had chosen – Biarlah Rahsia, Koibito yo (a Japanese song, made famous by Mayumi Itsuwa) and Nirmala in front of other representatives from both Japan and Asean countries and also the Japanese Prime Minister, Shinzō Abe who officiated the festival. Apart from local Japanese viewing, the festival was also made available for viewing for worldwide audience through NHK World. On 5 December, she was invited to perform at the 2013 Asian Television Awards at Resorts World Sentosa, Singapore, where she performed two songs – "Lebih Indah" and "On the Floor" where the show was broadcast for the first time to both STAR World and Channel V reaching audiences in Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam. On 6 January, she announced the dates for her first charity concert, where proceeds will be channelled to her own charity organisation, Yayasan Nurjiwa (Nurjiwa Foundation), where it will provide aid to those who are in needs. Named "Dato Siti Nurhaliza Live in Concert – Where the Heart is", the two-hour concert was held on two consecutive nights, 8 and 9 February at Plenary Hall, Kuala Lumpur Convention Centre. On 9 February, it was revealed that the two-day concert managed to reach its goal by grossing more than RM 1 million, from ticket sales and donations from philanthropists alone. In February, she announced a collaboration with Artelier Gallery Kuala Lumpur, in her continuous 2014 effort to raise funds for her foundation. With participation from 15 Malaysian, one Spanish and one Iranian painters, "SITI: An Iconic Exhibition of Dato' Siti Nurhaliza" was an exhibition of artworks and sculptures by the 17 painters and artists – their takes on how Siti Nurhaliza has inspired them. A month before the exhibition, every single painter and sculpture artist was given the opportunity to personally interview Siti before proceeding with producing their artworks based on their preferred materials and styles. The exhibition was opened from 27 February until 26 March. All the artworks were up for sale, where 30 percent of total grossed sale will be channelled to Yayasan Nurjiwa. The highest price goes to finger painting made by the Spanish painter, Andrian Torres, priced at RM 75,000. Also, in February, she announced her first concert in Singapore which was performed on 12 April at The Star Theater after a six-year absence since her last solo concert in Singapore in 2008. The one-day concert, billed as "Dato' Siti Nurhaliza – Live in Singapore" received positive reviews from local concert reviewers. One of the reviewers praised her ability to sound "flawless" while both singing and dancing at the same time. Apart from the announcement of the concert in Singapore, also in the same month, it was revealed that she was chosen by David Foster as one of the guest artists in a one-night only "David Foster and Friends" show that was originally scheduled as the major event of Sapurakencana Petroleum Malaysia Grand Prix Gala Dinner & Concert 2014 on 27 March. However, due to the date's proximity to the Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 incident, the entire show was later revamped to become a full-fledged tribute concert. During the night of the show, she was accompanied by Foster on piano to perform two songs that Foster originally produced – I Will Always Love You and Because You Loved Me. Foster also accompanied Siti to Siti's own single, Seindah Biasa. In April, she was honoured by the Malaysia Book of Records as one of the recipients of "Icon of Malaysia". The same award was also conferred to other Malaysians who have achieved success in their respective fields – Dato' Jimmy Choo, Datuk Dr. Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor and Tan Sri Tony Fernandes. On 30 June, she released her sixteenth solo album, Fragmen which was certified as Platinum, after more than 10,000 copies were shipped in less than two months. Two months later, on 17 October, Fragmen enabled Siti to win two awards from 2014 Anugerah Planet Muzik in the category of Best Female Artiste and Best Song (Malaysia) for "Lebih Indah". On 21 October, the Indonesian version of Fragmen was officially launched and released at Artotel, Central Jakarta with an additional track, a duet with Cakra Khan, "Seluruh Cinta". She also embarked on a 5-day promotional trip to Indonesia, where she participated in various Indonesian entertainment programs including on MNCTV, RCTI, Global TV, NET. and SCTV. In November she won three different awards — "National Icon" from Inaugural Malaysia Women of Excellence Awards 2014 on 10 November, "Jewel of Muslim World" award from the Jewels of Muslim World Awards 2014 on 11 November and "Asian Music Legend" award from 2014 Top Asia Corporate Ball on 22 November. On 6 December, she won three awards out of eight nominations that she received from 2014 Anugerah Industri Muzik in the category of Best Album Recording for the album Konsert Lentera Timur (Dato' Siti Nurhaliza Bersama Orkestra Tradisional Malaysia), Best Vocal Performance in a Song (Female) for "Lebih Indah" and Best Album for Fragmen. Her winning for "Lebih Indah" marked the twelfth time she wins the category since she joined the Malaysian music industry. On 18 December, she is one of the recipients of Anugerah Srikandi Negara from Peninsular Malay Students Federation (GPMS). Less than a week later, on 24 December, she was announced as the winner for three awards from 2014 World Music Awards – World's Best Female Malay Artist, World's Best Malay Live Act and World's Best Malay Entertainer. During the New Year's Eve of 2015, she was in Singapore as one of the guest artists for the countdown of Celebrate SG50, which marked Singapore's 50 years of independence. 2015 also marked her twentieth year in the Malaysian entertainment industry since she won 1995 RTM Bintang HMI singing competition. To celebrate the anniversary, a special one night only acoustic concert was planned and organized on 7 April 2015 at Istana Budaya. Titled Dato' Siti Nurhaliza Unplugged 2015, tickets for the concert sold out days before the concert date and her vocal performances and overall concert received positive reviews from reviewers and critics alike. Present in the concert were people who have helped her throughout the years including her former mentor, Adnan Abu Hassan and former Prime Minister of Malaysia, Tun Dr. Mahathir Mohamad. Two months later, the concert was released in multiple formats including CD and DVD with three additional tracks accompanying the CD release of the Unplugged album. In conjunction with her twentieth year in the industry, a special tribute song was gifted to her by Era FM and Raku (a radio station subsidiary of Astro). Titled "Inspirasi" (Inspiration), it was composed by Faizal Tahir and sung by him and Hafiz Suip. In August, she recorded and performed "Nenjae Ezhu", a song composed by A. R. Rahman – her first Tamil song for the opening performance of International Superstar 2015, an international Indian singing competition. In October, Siti was inducted in the 2016 edition of The 500 Most Influential Muslims. In the same month in Singapore, she shared an award with Cakra Khan from Indonesia in the category of Best Collaboration (Artiste) for their duet, "Seluruh Cinta" from the 2015 installment of Anugerah Planet Muzik. In the following month, she embarked on her second concert at Istana Budaya in 2015 on 7 and 8 November with Konsert Satu Suara, Vol. 2. Accompanied by Hetty Koes Endang (Indonesia) and Ramli Sarip (Singapore), the two-day concert was a commercial success, managing to raise more than RM 650,000 from tickets sales alone. During the two-day concert, rumours of her pregnancy arose. While initially refusing to confirm or deny the rumours, she finally revealed on her personal Instagram account on December 1 that she experienced a miscarriage after two months of pregnancy. She wrote, "I don't want to deny the news of my pregnancy as this was a beautiful gift that I have been waiting for a long time...This gift was too new and fragile, I was just waiting for the right time." On the same day, she was revealed as one of the top Asian artists in Malaysia on Spotify's annual Year in Music list. In the same month, she was invited to Indonesia as a guest judge for the Top 8 of Dangdut Academy Asia (D'Academy Asia), a Nusantara-wide dangdut singing competition featuring contestants from Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and Brunei. 2016 was a busy year for Siti as she was involved with a new business line, major concert, and multiple releases of new music. In January 2016, she returned to Indonesia as she celebrated her 37th birthday on the same day as she performed for Indonesian television station Indosiar's 21st anniversary, Konser Raya 21 Indosiar Untuk Indonesia. In March, after the success of Simplysiti, her own cosmetics and skincare line, she debuted the release of her own ready-to-wear fashion line for women, Creación by Siti Nurhaliza. In collaboration with Malaysian hijab brand Ariani and Malaysian textile company Jakel, she was involved heavily with the concept and design of the fashion line. On 2 April, she staged a one-night only Dato' Siti Nurhaliza & Friends Concert at Stadium Negara. Sponsored by Yonder Music and Celcom, the highly successful concert was attended by more than 7,000 people. Exclusive for the concert, she also debuted her digital duet "Memories" with American artist Whitney Houston. Throughout the entire two-hour concert, she sang over 20 songs and she was accompanied by both Malaysian and Indonesian guest artists including Anggun, Afgansyah Reza, Jaclyn Victor, and Faizal Tahir. Overall, Dato Siti Nurhaliza & Friends Concert received positive reviews and feedback from critics and concert reviewers. On 20 June, she released "Hari Kemenangan", a special single for Eid al-Fitr, after her last in 2006. On 12 August, "Dirgahayu" her duet with Faizal Tahir was released. The song serves as the theme song for Lara Aishah, a 100-episode Malaysian adaptation of Mexican telenovela, La Loba. On 4 November, the song was included as one of the bonus tracks of Faizal Tahir's fourth solo album, Anatomi. Its music video premiered as the backdrop during their live performance of the song at the 22nd Anugerah Muzik Industri Muzik. During the 22nd Anugerah Industri Muzik on 18 December, she was the most nominated artist of the event with seven nominations in six categories. She was 22nd Anugerah Industri Muzik's biggest winner and her live album Unplugged and its singles enabled her to win several major categories including her first Best Nasyid Song with "Mikraj Cinta" and the fan-voted Choice Malaysia Singer. A single that was recorded as a tribute to her father, "Menatap dalam Mimpi" won Best Musical Arrangement in a Song and her thirteenth Best Vocal Performance in a Song (Female). She also won her seventh Best Album with Unplugged. After receiving more than 300 songs submissions for her to shortlist and include in her new album since November 2016, SimetriSiti, her seventeenth solo album was released on 10 May 2017. Citing an estimate cost of RM100,000 to produce, the 10-track album featured collaborations with Malaysia rapper Joe Flizzow and Indonesian singer Judika. On 13 October, she revealed that she was four-month pregnant with her first child at the age of 38 after 11 years of marriage. She explained that the announcement is crucial to explain her inactivity few months prior and for her to focus on her personal life. A day later on 14 October, "Dirgahayu" was awarded Best Duo/Group from 2017 Anugerah Planet Muzik in Singapore. Few weeks later on 24 October, she was conferred by Sultan Ahmad Shah of Pahang the "Darjah Kebesaran Sri Sultan Ahmad Shah Pahang" (SSAP) and would be addressed with the honorific title of "Dato' Sri" henceforth. In November 2017, she was included in The 500 Most Influential Muslims for the third year in a row.[citation needed] In December, she was named Most Streamed Local Artiste in Malaysia by Spotify. 2018 saw the return of Siti to the music industry after a brief hiatus to focus on her pregnancy. On 5 March 2018, in anticipation of the birth of her first child, she released a special single, "Comel Pipi Merah". On 10 March, Malaysian animation concert Hora Horey Didi & Friends was released. It featured Siti playing new character "Mak Iti" who also sung "Oh Nana", a new song recorded by Siti for the animation. Nine days later on 19 March, she gave birth to her first child through caesarean section. A daughter, she was temporarily named Fatimah Az-Zahra after the daughter of Islamic prophet Muhammad. On 25 March, her daughter was officially named as Siti Aafiyah "Siti Nurhaliza Reveals Daughters Name". which means to be safe and good in everything during aqiqah and tahnik ceremonies at her home. After few months of professional break, she released a new duet single with Malaysian singer Khai Bahar in June 2018. A rerecorded version of "Comel Pipi Merah", "Cinta Syurga" is a slow song with added elements of Islamic zikir. Both versions of the songs were commercially successful. "Comel Pipi Merah" and "Cinta Syurga" were later certified four times platinum and gold respectively. In late July, she revealed that she was chosen alongside Faizal Tahir as regular judges for the inaugural season of Big Stage, a singing competition for rising new Malaysian singers. Few days earlier, she was reported to be working on a new single that was written by Malaysian singer Hael Husaini for September 2018 release. On 21 September, she released "Anta Permana". A single with both modern and classical elements, "Anta Permana" was well-received and was certified 11 times platinum in less than a year of its release. On 28 September, her duet with Indonesian singer Judika "Kisah Ku Inginkan" from SimetriSiti won Best Collaboration (Artiste) from the 2018 Anugerah Planet Muzik in Singapore. She returned to Japan on 4 October to represent Malaysia at the second ASEAN-Japan Music Festival. This was also her second appearance for the music festival after representing Malaysia for the same event in 2013. She was listed in The 500 Most Influential Muslims for the fourth year running in the same month. In early December, she was named Most Streamed Local Artistes in Malaysia by Spofity for second year in a row. 2019 continued to be a busy year for Siti as she was involved with local and international solo concerts, expansion of her cosmetics business, and multiple releases of new songs. Her live appearance on Malaysian television shopping program Go Shop on 6 January as spokesperson for cookware company Vantage set a new sale record for the program. In only two hours, she managed to sell 22,000 units of her special edition cookware etched with her signature for RM369 per unit. In total, she sold RM8 million worth of the special edition cookware at a rate of RM67,000 per minute. Five days later, her name and her birthday hashtag were trending topics among Malaysian Twitter users during her 40th birthday on 11 January. She was also honored by multiple Malaysian radio stations as they organized various special programs and segments to celebrate her birthday. First announced in December 2018, she embarked on Dato' Sri Siti Nurhaliza On Tour to Indonesia on 21 February, Singapore on 2 March, and Malaysia on 16 March. Citing production cost of RM10 million, it is the most expensive concert by a Malaysian artist. Her last stop for the tour in Malaysia at Axiata Arena on 16 March was attended by 12,000 people. "Ikhlas", a special Eid al-Fitr single featuring Siti with Indonesian singer Nissa Sabyan and Singaporean singer Taufik Batisah was released on 31 May. A special collaboration between Apple Music and Universal Music Malaysia, it is the first of its kind where singers from three countries sing together an Eid al-Fitr song. On 10 July 2019, "Kasihku Selamanya", theme song to the romantic-horror film Dendam Pontianak was released. It only took Siti two hours to complete the recording of her vocals for the song. After almost 10 years in the Malaysian market, she returned to Indonesia to launch and promote Simplysiti on 8 August. In the same month, she reprised her role as a regular judge for the second season of Big Stage. In collaboration with Shopee Malaysia, she performed for Shopee X Simplysiti mini concert at Kuala Lumpur Convention Centre on 14 September where more than 1,000 fans were in attendance. During the mini concert, she also launched her first health drink Beausiti. On 15 April 2020, Siti Nurhaliza launched a fund to aid frontliners and people affected by the coronavirus outbreak in Malaysia. The initiative is called Dana PKP (Peduli, Kemanusiaan, Prihatin) Siti Nurhaliza [Siti Nurhaliza PKP (Care, Humanity, Concern) Fund]. Siti said that the set goal will be increased and will go on as the Movement Control Order (MCO) is prolonged and different types of help will be given out. She is confident that everyone can help fight against the pandemic. The initiative is divided into three categories: Peduli (Care), Kemanusiaan (Humanity) and Prihatin (Concern). The fund is abbreviated as the Siti Nurhaliza PKP Fund. The Peduli (Care) category provides aid for facilities and equipment at hospitals that handle the pandemic. It also provides funds for the preparation of PPE, nose and mouth coverings, gloves and other equipment. Individuals and families who have lost their earnings including family members with disabilities or serious illness, will fall under the Kemanusiaan (Humanity) category. Last but not least is the Prihatin (Concern) category where for the month of Ramadan and Syawal, aid will be given to the underprivileged and charities. The newly launched fund has accumulated a jaw-dropping RM114,711 in just two weeks. In fact, Siti shared that the fund managed to raise RM78,625 in just five days and Siti's Live concert on YouTube, which aired live for almost two hours on April 18, managed to raise funds amounting to RM29,803. Siti Nurhaliza's 18th studio album, ManifestaSITI2020 was released on July 3, 2020. Originally planned to be released in April 2020, the album launching was postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic and nationwide quarantine to combatting the deadly coronavirus. ManifestaSITI2020 contains 11 tracks wherein 6 of them was released as singles earlier. The Malaysian music industry was revitalized when famed Malaysian music figure Dato Sri Siti Nurhaliza released her latest album titled ManifestaSITI2020 on 3 July amidst the Recovery Movement Control Order (RMCO). Her album received positive feedback from local music listeners and received a warm response for both digital platforms and physical album sales. The legendary singer also successfully held an online interactive concert ‘Manifestival Siti Nurhaliza x HotKool’ on 21 July 2020. Thanks to inspiration from previous concerts that were held in Korea and Thailand, the interactive 360-degree concert via Zoom is the first of its kind in Malaysia which also made Dato Siti Nurhaliza the first artist to be involved in a large-scale online concert. On 1 December 2020, Siti announced her pregnancy with a second child. The popular Malaysian singer took to Instagram on Tuesday to share the good news with her 7.9 million followers. In the post, which she wrote in Malay, Siti announced that she was four months pregnant. She included three black and white photos of herself cradling her baby bump. She later added that she underwent the same In-Vitro Fertilisation (IVF) procedure she did with her first child – daughter Siti Aafiyah. On the same day, Siti also announced her 2 new products, which are Beautéssence & BeauNest, which come under the BeauSiti X WonderLab collaboration via YouTube Live. On 7 December, she was listed as the Forbes Asia's 100 Digital Stars Most Influential Asian Pacific Celebrities for her advocacy work during the Covid-19 pandemic alongside International Stars such as Blackpink, BTS, and Shah Rukh Khan. Forbes Asia's inaugural 100 Digital Stars List highlights 100 singers, bands, and film and TV stars from across the Asia-Pacific region who have taken the digital world by storm. In 2020, Forbes Asia gives special focus to celebrities who, despite cancelled physical events and activities, managed to remain active and relevant, largely by using social media to interact with their fans, raise awareness and inspire optimism. Many also used their influence to help worthy causes, especially those with a Covid-19 focus. On 22 December, Adelaide Festival Centre announced that Siti would be one of the few international stars to be part of the Adelaide Festival Centre's Walk of Fame. The singer was selected among the eleven performers who performed at the centre last year after gaining the most online votes. This makes Siti the first South East Asian & Malaysian to have her name chosen for immortalization at Adelaide's Festival Center Walk of Fame. On 11 January 2021, Siti, who is a mother of 1 and 2, shared her IVF journey in a video titled Chapter 42: My IVF Story on getting her second child. The whole Vlog caught the attention of viewers as it shows the procedures that Siti underwent while pregnant with her second child. On 18 March, in conjunction with Siti Aafiyah's third birthday (19 March), Siti, alongside Siti Nurhaliza Productions (M) Sdn.Bhd, Universal Music Malaysia, BeauSiti, Wonder Lab & Cuckoo, held an event called 2 Legacy. During that event, she had an early birthday celebration for her daughter and a few important announcements about releasing her first single called "Medley Klasik Siti". At the event, Siti also received various awards from Universal Music Malaysia, which included a Gold Award for her SimetriSiti album, an 11 x Platinum Award (for Anta Permana single), a 4 x Platinum Award (Comel Pipi Merah single), a Gold Award (Cinta Syurga single), and a 2× Platinum Digital Award (Aku Bidadari Syurgamu single). Earlier this month, Siti also launched an exclusive new line of cookware called Vantage Siti Series 2021 and Siti Nurhaliza Special Edition Dinner Set under Siti Collection as Vantage Brand Ambassador. On 1 April 2021, Siti Nurhaliza celebrated her 25th anniversary in the music industry with the hashtag JubliSITI25 and the tagline 25 Years of Siti Nurhaliza. The 42-year-old artist, who has released 29 albums in her 25 years as a singer, launched a new album that features children's songs, befitting her little one's arrival.[better source needed] The album features seven tracks with two additional lullabies. Six of the songs are traditional children's songs which have been re-arranged and will have slightly different lyrics. Among them are Bintang Kecil, Burung Kakak Tua, Buai Laju-Laju, Tepuk Amai-Amai, and Suriram. Some will be turned into medley numbers. Another track, Anakku Sayangku, has been adapted from Tan Sri P. Ramlee's popular tune, Anakku Sazali, and the album also includes two songs composed by Siti herself for her children,[better source needed] for Siti Aafiyah [2018] & "Anaknda" by Dato' Sri Siti Nurhalizafor Muhammad Afwa [2021].[better source needed] Siti recorded the album over three days in early March 2021, with her pregnancy entering its 8th month. Later on 3 April, Siti, who runs several businesses, including Siti Nurhaliza Production (M) Sdn. Bhd, Siti Nurhaliza Marketing Sdn Bhd, Siti Nurhaliza Collections Sdn Bhd, SN Mobile Digital Sdn.Bhd, Siti Sound Sdn Bhd, Simply SS Trading Sdn Bhd [SimplySiti], Creación By Siti Nurhaliza, BeauTyra, BeauSiti, BeauNest, BeauKids & CTDK Holdings Sdn Bhd and her own foundation called Yayasan NurJiwa [NurJiwa Foundation], Siti launches her own hijab label called AFIYA by Siti Nurhaliza with the collaboration of famous Malaysian fashion designer Dato' Jovian Mandagie. She said that The Afiya Label pays tribute to her first-born child, who she says radiates positivity, intelligence, elegance and above all. Siti later added that the label is said to be like a "fairy tale come to life" and a "dream come true" for Siti Nurhaliza. Siti & Jovian, along with her make-up line SimplySiti, launched a Jovian 3-Ply Disposable Mask CTDK Edition the day before she launched her hijab label, which are said to be high quality, eco-friendly, with a variety of other benefits. Before Siti put her full focus on her second child, on 7 April 2021 Siti launched a limited edition gold wafer to mark her auspicious silver jubilee anniversary, which is a collaboration between CTDK Holdings Sdn Bhd, Simply SS Trading Sdn Bhd [SimplySiti], Siti Nurhaliza Production (M) Sdn. Bhd and the Malaysian Islamic Economic Development Foundation (YaPEIM) at the Islamic Arts Museum Malaysia. On 19 April, Siti welcomed her second child through a caesarean section which she announced via her official Instagram. On 26 April, she reveals her son name as Muhammad Afwa officially which means Forgiving during aqiqah and tahnik ceremonies at her home. On 29 May 2021, Siti Nurhaliza along with NurJiwa Foundation & CTDK Holdings, announce the launch of the NurJiwa Foundation & CTDK Holdings: Palestine and Covid-19 Special Aid Fund, which is the continuation and continuing efforts of the Siti Nurhaliza PKP Fund last year and now with the new fund name for the latest special assistance, namely the Palestine Special Assistance Fund and Covid-19. The initiative is divided into three categories: Palestine — Provides emergency aid, welfare aid, humanity aid and development assistance to the Palestinians. Covid-19 — Provides special assistance that includes survival assistance to the frontliners as well as victims or families of Covid-19 victims who are facing financial problems etc. Others — Offers additional welfare assistance and current needs. Musically classified as a lyric soprano, she is one of Malaysia's best singers for winning 13 times the award for the "Best Vocal Performance in an Album/Single" from Anugerah Industri Muzik, Malaysia's equivalent of Grammy Awards. Adjie Esa Poetra, an Indonesian vocal instructor described her voice as "She is very careful and never fails in the tone production and she's able to produce the most artistic and beautiful tone as possible.... In any songs, she can sing it with ease but powerful other than possessing more than four-octave vocal range." "Kurniaan Dalam Samaran" (1999) One of her songs that is rarely performed live and also one of the songs that is said to be the most technical in Pancawarna album Problems playing this file? See media help. M.Nasir, music critic and music composer has praised Siti's voice as saying, "When we talk about her, she is the voice...Give her any songs, she can deliver it very well and it is not a problem to find a suitable song for her." He further praised Siti for her brave efforts to experiment her voice melisma with new musics or songs. One of her trickiest songs to perform is Kurniaan Dalam Samaran, a Japanese enka-influenced song where it requires her play of transition of alto to soprano vocal tones and she rarely performed it live. However, at her recent SATU concert, she performed it live, where it received appraisals from critics and fans where one of the reviewers cited her live rendition as, "The Japanese-flavoured song required her to switch from her natural voice to falsetto in a hair-raising cadenza somewhere in the absurdly high range most women vocalists would cringe from. But she pulled it off effortlessly, sending shivers down my spine." Gareth Gates who has performed together with Siti during MTV Asia Awards 2004 when he was asked what does he think about Siti, he said, "She definitely has the looks and she certainly has the voice. If she continues to sing the way she does, she'll go really far." Lea Salonga, Filipino singer and actress who has done various theatrical work, including Miss Saigon and several Disney's movies has also expressed her praise and respect towards Siti's vocal ability during her concert in Malaysia in 2010 where she sang one of the songs made famous by Siti and 2 By 2, Tiga Malam during the closing ceremony of her concert. In 2011, another Filipino artist, Gary Valenciano during his visit in Malaysia has expressed her admiration of Siti's vocal ability. He commented, "Based on what I've been told by the local media, I believe the best Malay song and the best vocal I've ever heard has to be Siti Nurhaliza's. If it was possible for me to meet her, I would definitely want to do a duet with her. If [I] were given a chance, I definitely want to compose a song for her, that is if she wishes." Sami Yusuf who requested for her to be featured in his album, Salaam has commented, "Siti is not only has a good voice, but also has an interesting personality. She is a real woman that Malaysia and ASEAN should be proud of." In 2013, an American singer, Kenny Babyface who did a duet with her during Sapurakencana Petroleum Malaysia Grand Prix Charity Gala 2013 has also repeatedly expressed his admiration towards Siti. He praised Siti for her "beautiful voice" and her great singing skills. Growing up as a child, most of her time, she would perform traditional and classic Malay folk songs. However, she has been cited that her local idol and one of her greatest influences is Sudirman Arshad and also P. Ramlee whereas, her international idols would be Barbra Streisand, Celine Dion, Mariah Carey and Whitney Houston. In 2008, during Céline Dion's Taking Chances Tour in Malaysia, Siti was given an opportunity to meet her idol, where she also had given Céline one of her solo albums, Hadiah Daripada Hati complete with her signature. As a lyricist and record producer, most of her singles' lyrics revolve around the theme of love, although she has penned numbers of thematic single of spirituality and female empowerment. Several of her singles were written by her were targeted to a specific party – Biarlah Rahsia (Let It Be A Secret) was written with the allusion to the media who constantly investigate her private personal relationships and Cahaya Cinta (Light of Love) was written specially for her husband during her marriage in 2006. Born and raised in a traditional musically inclined family, she has recorded five ethnic pop oriented albums – four solo studio albums and one duet studio album with Noraniza Idris. She has been taught on how to sing traditional songs by her own mother who herself is a folk singer. She has been promoting this genre of music on almost each and every major concert of her like when she did at her concert at the Royal Albert Hall, medleys of Malay folk songs and traditional music songs. When she made her debut into the industry, she was often labelled as a penyanyi kampung (old-fashioned or conservative singer) for her modest attire and her refusal to take pictures with a man for a magazine cover, unless at a ceremony or at an award-accepting event. During her early years as a singer, she was criticised for refusing to wear daring clothes and her principle of not taking pictures with male artistes. She was quoted as saying: "As an artist, I do realize that there are many social responsibilities that I need to take care of. So, I opt to be moderate in everything, including in my sartorial matter." and "I want to show what my talent is, and my God-gifted vocal ability without relying [on the image] of being sexy.". Her debut in Indonesia in 1997 with modest, beautiful and talented personality has said to revolutionise Indonesian music industry which famous with Dangdut which before this promoted sensual and erotic elements through the performances, especially those by female artistes. Her modest image was the subject of appraisals and positive feedback even from the Islamic scholars from Malaysia and Indonesia. Since then, her popularity throughout the South East Asia music industry has remained strong, proven as she was voted as Most Popular Female Artiste ten times in a row and Regional Most Popular Artiste in 2011 in Anugerah Planet Muzik 2011, beating contenders from Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia. Her eastern image was also being cited as a good example for other artists to follow. In 2008, former State Minister for Youth and Sport Affairs of Indonesia, Adhyaksa Dault has advised Dewi Persik who is known for her open and sexy dancing movements to tone down her performances and follow the steps that Siti Nurhaliza has taken when venturing into the entertainment industry – "She's not over the top, she doesn't wear revealing clothes and doesn't dance sexily, but she's still able to be locally and internationally recognized". She has been cited as an idol and as an inspiration by many Malaysian and non-Malaysian artists like Malaysia's Aizat Amdan, Misha Omar [ms], Nicholas Teo, Soo Wincci, Singaporean Idol finalist, Maia Lee, Indonesian pop group vocalist, Sunu, from Matta, Judika and many others. In 2007, her image likeness was used as part of the promotion by Malaysian Ministry of Tourism, Malaysia Windows Live Agent – Siti to attract more visitors from Japan. The cartoon is used in the Windows Live Messenger (formerly known as MSN Messenger) where it will provide information on attractive tourist destinations in Malaysia. In January 2011, Siti was proposed as the cultural ambassador for Malay community by the Association of Malaysian and Indonesian Journalists (ISWAMI), based on both countries' communities acceptance of Siti's personality. ISWAMI chief believed that Siti may help ease strained relations should there be a crisis between Malaysia and Indonesia. Throughout her career, she has been involved in a number of charity-related event, including organising charity concerts, open houses and launching her own charity funds. In March 2004, she launched Tabung Prihatin Siti, making her the first Malaysian artist to have a charity fund after her namesake whose aim to raise at least RM 50,000 for children's education and medical treatment. In January 2005, Nurhaliza donated RM 35 000 (about United States dollar11,000) to three different organisations for the 2004 tsunami victims before her concert at the Royal Albert Hall in April of the same year. A year later in February, she donated RM 500,000 for the National Anti-Drug Campaign where she was also appointed as the ambassadress for the campaign. Six months later, she and her husband founded Yayasan Nurjiwa (Nurjiwa Foundation) where the foundation served as a platform for people to help those in need through charity concerts and dinner events where the money will be donated to the selected organisations. In 2009, she and her husband donated RM 1.5 million to build a new mosque in Tikam Batu, Kuala Muda where the land was given as a wakaf by both of them and Siti's mother-in-law where before this, her husband has also donated a sum of money to build two mosques in Kuala Lumpur and Pattani, Thailand which finally completed in February 2011 and officiated by Sultan of Kedah, Tuanku Abdul Halim Muadzam Shah. In 2011, Siti and her husband gave out an undisclosed amount of Zakat (alms) to more than 200 elderly people, single mothers and disabled people in Tikam Batu as part of their tradition apart from providing them with sarong, batik and some "Duit Raya" (pocket money during Eid al-Fitr) for the children. With success in her singing career, Siti then got herself involved in business. She set up her own company – Siti Nurhaliza Productions (M) Sdn. Bhd. – with activities generally in the entertainment scene. She has four subsidiary companies, Siti Nurhaliza Collections Sdn. Bhd., Siti Nurhaliza Marketing Sdn. Bhd., Siti Sound Sdn. Bhd. and SN Mobile Digital Sdn. Bhd. She is also the president of her own cosmetic range company, Simply Siti Sdn. Bhd. Siti sells her own tea, Ctea, brand of Malaysian tea, from tea cultivated on the foothills of Mount Kinabalu, Sabah. This Ctea brand comes in two flavours, Geranium Special and Pandan. And now besides having her own products, she receives substantial income through commissions and royalties for her endorsements and as ambassador of products. She has been an ambassador and spokesperson for various international products – Jusco, Maxis, Maybelline, Minolta, Mitsubishi, Olay, Pantene, Pepsi, Samsung and TM Net. On 17 July 2006, after months of speculation by the media, Siti and her then-fiancé, Datuk Khalid made a press conference announcing that their wedding would be held on 21 August. Her plan to marry Datuk Khalid caused criticisms and uproar, since she was going to marry a 47-year-old divorcee with four sons where she was accused of causing his divorce. However, the issue was rebutted when Jabatan Agama Islam Selangor (Selangor Islamic Council) verified that Datuk Khalid and his former wife, Tengku Zawyah Tengku Izham officially separated in February 2004, after 15 years of marriage. Some sources speculated that the total wedding cost was RM 12,888,888 (US$3,947,980 (adjusted to 2010 inflation)), however it was later denied by the couple and the wedding planner and stated that the total cost was roughly around RM 500,000. Her wedding dowry was revealed to cost at RM 22,222 and the hantaran (gifts from groom to bride and vice versa) cost around RM 30,000. The total sponsored items including Siti and spouse's jewelleries, dresses, etc., cost more than RM 9 million. Later, RM 1 million from the total price paid by TV3 to broadcast the whole ceremony was later donated to charity. The engagement ceremony was held at Masjid Wilayah Persekutuan (Federal Territory Mosque) on 21 August 2006. The ceremony was also televised live and gathered more than 2 million viewers. The first wedding reception was held on 28 August 2006, at the Kuala Lumpur Convention Centre (KLCC). and was televised to 6.3 million viewers nationwide. The wedding also received coverage from Indonesia, where 10 Indonesian media representatives were there to capture the moment including Trans TV, SCTV and Jawa Pos. Photographed by celebrity photographer Kid Chan, it was a star-studded affair, with guests including royal families, VIPs, celebrities, close friends and family. Indonesian celebrities like Hetty Koes Endang and one of Siti's closest friends, Krisdayanti were given the opportunity to give a performance to the newlywed and guests. A second reception was held on 3 September 2006, in Siti's hometown of Kuala Lipis, Pahang where more than 10,000 people attended the ceremony including those from neighbouring countries. In the same year, the wedding charted as one of the 20 top celebrity weddings on Yahoo! Buzz. In 2011, her wedding was also listed in CNBC's "Asia's Most High-Profile Weddings", where her wedding was ranked in the top 5. On 13 June 2010, Siti and her husband, Datuk Seri Khalid, was recognised by E! News Asia as the Third Most Powerful Celebrity Couple in Asia, behind Chinese entertainer couple, Simon Yam and wife, Qi Qi and Bollywood superstar couple, Aishwarya Rai and husband, Abhishek Bachchan. In December 2015, Siti suffered a miscarriage two months into her pregnancy prompting her to share her difficult fertility journey with the public. In October 2017 after seeking longterm treatment at an Alpha Fertility Centre, Siti announced via social media live that she was expecting her first child with Datuk Khalid. Their daughter was born on 19 March 2018 via caesarean section. The new parents said they chose Monday as the delivery date for their first child as it coincided with the Prophet Muhammad's birthday. They named their daughter Siti Aafiyah Khalid. On 1 December 2020, Siti announced she was 4 months pregnant via her social media. On 19 April 2021, Siti gave birth to her second child, a son. They named their son Muhammad Afwa Khalid. In December 2020, Siti as recipient for the homegrown Nona Superwoman Award, had mentioned that Khalid is the pusher in her success. Siti Nurhaliza and her husband Datuk Seri Khalid Mohamad Jiwa were issued a RM10,000 compound each for violating the Covid-19 standard operating procedure (SOP) during the tahnik ceremony for their second child. Selangor police chief Comm Datuk Arjunaidi Mohamed said Minister in the Prime Minister's Department (Religious Affairs) Datuk Dr Zulkifli Mohamad Al-Bakri along with Ustaz Azhar Idrus, Ustaz Don Daniyal and Ustaz Iqbal were also issued with RM2,000 compounds each. It was reported that police had earlier detected an article from an online news portal on the dissatisfaction of people online over the tahnik ceremony which was held at the celebrities' residence at Bukit Antarabangsa here. Siti is known to be a formidable and successful and well-known businesswoman in Malaysia. She currently tops the list of the 'Richest Artistes' in Malaysia. She is also reported to worth more than US$33 million [RM 142 million] as of 2022, enabling her to be named as one of the millionaires in entertainment industry, especially in the South East Asia region. As one of the most prolific artists in Malaysia, she is said to be paid RM 70,000 (US$16,728) for a 30 minutes show and RM 110,000 (US$26,287) for an hour show in also about RM 90,000 (US$21,507) for 4 songs show in 2019/2020.[1] Malaysia 1999: Konsert Live Siti Nurhaliza, Stadium Putra Bukit Jalil, Malaysia 2001: Konsert Mega Siti Nurhaliza, Bukit Jalil 2001, Malaysia 2002: Konsert Salam Akhir Siti Nurhaliza – Untukmu Sudir, Istana Budaya, Malaysia 2004: Siti Nurhaliza Live in Concert 2004, Stadium Nasional Bukit Jalil, Malaysia 2006: Konsert Akustik Siti Nurhaliza, Malaysia 2007: Konsert Istana Cinta, Istana Budaya, Malaysia 2009: SATU Konsert Eksklusif Dato' Siti Nurhaliza, Istana Budaya, Malaysia 2009: Konsert Seribu Warna, Stadium Malawati, Shah Alam, Malaysia 2010: Konsert SATU Suara, Istana Budaya, Malaysia 2012: Dato' Siti Nurhaliza Concert Live in Kuantan 2012, Bukit Gambang Resort City, Gambang, Malaysia 2013: Siti Nurhaliza in Symphony Live with The Malaysian Philharmonic Orchestra, Petronas Philharmonic Hall, Malaysia 2013: Konsert Lentera Timur Dato' Siti Nurhaliza Esklusif Bersama Orkestra Tradisional Malaysia, Istana Budaya, Malaysia 2014: Dato' Siti Nurhaliza Live in Concert – Where The Heart Is, Plenary Hall, Kuala Lumpur City Centre (KLCC), Malaysia 2015: Dato' Siti Nurhaliza Unplugged 2015, Istana Budaya, Malaysia 2015: Konsert Satu Suara, Vol. 2, Istana Budaya, Malaysia 2016: Dato' Siti Nurhaliza & Friends Concert, Stadium Negara, Malaysia 2019: Dato' Sri Siti Nurhaliza On Tour Concert, Axiata Arena, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 2019: Konsert Amal Orkestra Tradisional Malaysia bersama Siti Nurhaliza, Auditorium POWIIS, Prince of Wales Island International School, Penang, Malaysia 2019: Shopee X SIMPLYSITI Mini Concert, KL Convention Centre, Conference Hall 1–3, Malaysia 2019: Karya Agung Pak Ngah (Datuk Suhaimi Mohd Zain) bersama Orkestra Tradisional Malaysia dan Dato' Sri Siti Nurhaliza Singapore 2000: Siti Nurhaliza Live at Harbour Front, Singapore 2005: Siti Nurhaliza Live 2005, Indoor Stadium, Singapore 2008: Konsert Diari Hati Siti Nurhaliza, Esplanade Theatre, Singapore 2010: Konsert Bagaikan Sakti, Esplanade Theatre, Singapore 2014: Dato' Siti Nurhaliza Live in Singapore, The Star Theatre, Singapore 2019: Dato' Sri Siti Nurhaliza on Tour Concert, Singapore Expo, Singapore 2020: Konsert Karya Agung Pak Ngah – Pak Ngah's Legendary Hits in Concert by Orkestra Tradisional Malaysia ft. Dato' Sri Siti Nurhaliza, Esplanade Theatre, Singapore Indonesia 2002: Konsert 1 Jam Bersama Siti Nurhaliza 2003: Konsert Azimat Siti Nurhaliza 2003: Konsert Special Siti Nurhaliza 2004: Konsert Exclusive Melanesia - Siti Nurhaliza 2004: Konsert Mutiara Negeri Jiran - Siti Nurhaliza 2004: Siti Nurhaliza Indonesia Tour 2004, Indonesia 2011: Charity Concert Banjarmasin, Indonesia 2017: Golden Memories International Spesial Siti Nurhaliza 2019: Dato' Sri Siti Nurhaliza on Tour Concert, Istora Senayan, Jakarta, Indonesia Others 2002: Siti Nurhaliza Live in Brunei, Brunei 2005: Siti Nurhaliza in Concert, Royal Albert Hall London, United Kingdom 2010: Siti Nurhaliza Live @ Alumbra, Australia 2019: Siti Nurhaliza The Voice of Asia in Australia For One Night Only – OzAsia Festival, Festival Theatre, Adelaide, Australia 2014: SITI: An Iconic Exhibition of Dato' Siti Nurhaliza Apart from singing and hosting, she also has written numbers of articles in several newspapers and magazine. Honorific nicknames in popular music Music of Malaysia Malaysian pop List of Malaysians List of Malays "Jadi pengacara, Siti bukan pengacau". Utusan Online. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 19 February 2013. "Ulang tahun ke-40 Siti Nurhaliza hari ini". Astro AWANI. Astro AWANI Network Sdn. Bhd. Retrieved 22 November 2020. Siti Azira Abd. Aziz (25 October 2009). "Siti akui jualan album terjejas ekoran kekeruhan Malaysia-Indonesia". mStar Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 17 October 2013. Retrieved 16 February 2013. "Siti Nurhaliza". SitiZone. Archived from the original on 28 February 2010. Retrieved 24 January 2010. Malay Mail Staff (9 May 2005). "Career Highlights: Adnan Abu Hassan". The Malay Mail. AccessMyLibrary. Retrieved 6 February 2013. "Her Achievements". SitiZone. Archived from the original on 11 June 2009. Retrieved 14 June 2010. "Senarai Keputusan Pemenang Anugerah Planet Muzik APM 2011". Sensasi Selebriti. 16 July 2011. Retrieved 18 February 2013. Mohd Azam Shah Yaa'cob, Hidayatul Akmal Ahmad & Raja Norain Hidayah Raja Abdul Aziz (20 June 2010). "Milik harta tujuh angka". myMetro (in Malay). Archived from the original on 5 April 2012. Retrieved 23 June 2010. Shuib Taib (7 September 2009). "Top 10 influential celebrities in Malaysia: Stars with the x-factor sizzle". The New Straits Times. AsiaOne.com. Archived from the original on 29 August 2010. Retrieved 31 July 2010. "SACC showcase: Dato' Siti Nurhaliza and Krisdayanti". New Straits Times. Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. 14 April 2010. Archived from the original on 5 April 2012. Retrieved 11 November 2010. New Straits Times Staff (21 August 2000). "RIM takes on pirates". New Straits Times. AccessMyLibrary. Retrieved 6 February 2013. "Siti Nurhaliza menang anugerah antarabangsa". Utusan Online (in Malay). 21 May 1999. Archived from the original on 29 August 2013. Retrieved 13 September 2010. Olesya Ivanova (29 August 2002). "Grand Prix 2002 left for Malaysia". The Almaty Herald. Simply Siti Nurhaliza Zone. Retrieved 6 August 2010. New Straits Times Staff (7 August 2002). "Siti does us proud". New Straits Times. AccessMyLibrary. Retrieved 4 March 2013. Peter J Snee (21 December 2020). "Stars celebrated and record breaking votes for Adelaide Festival Centre's Walk of Fame". AussieTheatre.com. Retrieved 26 December 2020. "Best Ever Commonwealth Games Comes to a Close". Utusan Online. 22 September 1998. Archived from the original on 11 December 2013. Retrieved 12 May 2013. Hafidah Samat (14 January 2005). "Siti all set for London show". New Straits Times. AccessMyLibrary. Retrieved 28 February 2013. Charlie Lancaster (9 May 2010). "Top of the pops". Southeast Asia Globe. Archived from the original on 29 October 2010. Retrieved 31 July 2010. "Asia's Idols". Inquirer.net – Philippine News for Filipino. 5 January 2008. Archived from the original on 21 February 2013. Retrieved 31 July 2010. Khai Azfar (24 October 2018). "Siti Nurhaliza Disenarai 500 Muslim Paling Berpengaruh Empat Tahun Berturut-Turut". murai. Vijandren Ramadass. Retrieved 26 December 2020. "SACC showcase: Dato' Siti Nurhaliza and Krisdayanti". New Straits Times. 10 April 2010. Retrieved 7 January 2013. Dato' Siti Nurhaliza is a multiple-award winning Malaysian pop singer-songwriter who has garnered more than 100 local awards. Known as the Voice of Asia, Siti has recorded more than 30 albums including singles. She is also known to have the most number one singles than any other artist in Malaysia. "Siti Nurhaliza's Journey To Stardom Aired on Astro's History Channel". Bernama. 12 January 2012. Archived from the original on 10 November 2013. Retrieved 7 January 2013. The diva also became the first Malaysian artiste to ever perform at the prestigious Royal Albert Hall in London, where she was dubbed "Asia's Celine Dion" by the British press. Seneviratne, Kalinga (2012). Countering Mtv Influence in Indonesia and Malaysia. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. ISBN 9789814345231. Retrieved 31 May 2013. {{cite book}}: |work= ignored (help) "Siti Nurhaliza". KapanLagi.com – Kalau bukan sekarang, kapan lagi? (in Indonesian). Retrieved 3 October 2010. Siti Azira Abd. Aziz (22 October 2009). "Siti nafi ditawar jutaan ringgit untuk 'Konsert Seribu Warna'". mStar Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 29 January 2010. Retrieved 24 January 2010. Shazryn Mohd. Faizal (6 July 2010). "Siti teruja 'kembali' ke sekolah". Utusan Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 17 June 2011. Retrieved 13 September 2010. "Siti teruja 'kembali' ke sekolah". SimplySiti.com.my. 2013. Archived from the original on 19 June 2013. Retrieved 31 May 2013. Saharuddin Mustafa (31 August 2003). "Siti Nurhaliza terkenang Bahtera Merdeka". Utusan Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 3 February 2014. Retrieved 31 May 2013. New Straits Times Staff (10 January 2003). "Will this be you?". New Straits Times. AccessMyLibrary. Retrieved 31 May 2013. Nor Asikin Hassan (8 August 2010). "Siti Nurhaliza merakam nostalgia Clifford". Utusan Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 3 February 2014. Retrieved 31 May 2013. Nor Fadzillah Baharuddin (4 April 2006). "Fiesta Media Idola '06 tetap meriah walaupun kecoh". Utusan Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 3 February 2014. Retrieved 31 May 2013. Khadijah Ibrahim (4 September 2003). "Siti Nurhaliza – Melabur untuk masa depan adik". Utusan Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 3 February 2014. Retrieved 31 May 2013. Muhammad Arif Nizam Abdullah (13 November 2006). "Siti Nurhaliza muncul di Jalan Masjid India". Utusan Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 3 February 2014. Retrieved 31 May 2013. Amirah Amaly Syafaat (29 July 2012). "Antara Permata dan Hati". Utusan Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 3 February 2014. Retrieved 31 May 2013. Nizam Abdullah (17 October 2011). "Siti Nurhaliza Tidak Ambil Mudah". mStar Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 1 February 2014. Retrieved 31 May 2013. "Siti pukau jutaan peminat". Utusan Online (in Malay). 31 March 2002. Archived from the original on 17 June 2011. Retrieved 12 June 2010. Hizreen Kamal (6 January 2012). "Siti's inspiring journey". New Straits Times. Archived from the original on 1 February 2014. Retrieved 7 January 2013. "Siapa Pengganti Siti Nurhaliza?". Liriklagu.com (in Malay). Archived from the original on 15 October 2023. Retrieved 6 August 2010. "Siti Nurhaliza diburu syarikat rakaman". Bintang Popular – Berita Minggu (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 14 June 2009. Retrieved 13 September 2010. "Arkib Pemenang ABP". Anugerah Bintang Popular Berita Harian 2009 (in Malay). Archived from the original on 23 April 2011. Retrieved 13 April 2011. "Hos Rancangan Tv Indonesia". Berita Harian (in Malay). Retrieved 29 May 2010. "Konser Tunggal Siti Nurhaliza Di Gelar di 5 Kota Indonesia". KapanLagi.com – Kalau bukan sekarang, kapan lagi? (in Indonesian). Retrieved 3 October 2010. "Dato' Hajjah Siti Nurhaliza". Siti Zone (in Malay). Archived from the original on 26 January 2011. Retrieved 3 September 2010. "Siti all set for London show". New Straits Times. Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. 14 January 2005. Archived from the original on 22 July 2011. Retrieved 31 July 2010. Saharudin Musthafa (1 November 1998). "Siti Nurhaliza dapat pengiktirafan di Jepun". Utusan Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 17 June 2011. Retrieved 13 September 2010. "Liza Hanim dapat tempat kedua". Utusan Online (in Malay). 1 December 2000. Archived from the original on 3 February 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2010. "Siti Nurhaliza jumpa doktor pakar di Shanghai". Utusan Online (in Malay). 27 October 2002. Archived from the original on 3 February 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2010. "Japan and ASEAN Pop Stars Dream Concert 2003 J-ASEAN POPs in Yokohama". Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Japan. 2003. Retrieved 28 January 2011. "Siti Nurhaliza – Lagu Mandarin untuk pasaran Taiwan". Utusan Online (in Malay). 16 May 2004. Retrieved 22 September 2010. "Asia pop stars sing Golden Melody". China Daily Website – Connecting China Connecting the World. 9 May 2004. Retrieved 9 May 2004. "Muzikal Aidiladha... dakwah seni Siti Nurhaliza". Utusan Online. Utusan. Retrieved 19 February 2013. "Jadi pengacara, Siti bukan pengacau". Utusan Online. Utusan. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 19 February 2013. "INFO Siti Nurhaliza". Berita Harian (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. 23 February 2010. Retrieved 16 August 2010. Choi Tuck Wo (8 April 2005). "Siti displays true star power in London". The Star. Retrieved 8 April 2005. "Royal Albert Hall". World Architecture Images – Royal Albert Hall. Archived from the original on 24 May 2012. Retrieved 3 February 2010. Eri Akbar (22 July 2005). "Siti: Who forced Maia to wear kebaya?". Simply Siti Nurhaliza Zone. Retrieved 30 April 2010. Choi Tuck Woo (3 April 2005). "Siti Nurhaliza wows London with wit and elegance". The Star. Archived from the original on 22 June 2011. Retrieved 31 July 2010. "Transkripsi". SitiZone. Retrieved 28 December 2009. Zieman (4 January 2006). "Hati Siti "berbisik"". mStar Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 27 November 2010. Retrieved 17 September 2010. "Right AIM". Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 20 March 2006. Retrieved 11 August 2010. "Saingan sengit finalis AIM14". Berita Harian (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 30 March 2007. Retrieved 11 August 2010. "Transkripsi vokal terbaik Siti". Harian Metro. Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 2 March 2006. Retrieved 3 September 2010. "So gloriously Siti". New Straits Times. Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 11 March 2006. Retrieved 3 September 2010. Tengku Khalidah Tengku Bidin (14 May 2006). "Siti Nurhaliza di persimpangan dilema". Utusan Online (in Malay). Retrieved 3 May 2010. M. Hamzah Jamaluddin (24 October 2006). "Datukship for Siti Nurhaliza". New Straits Times. AccessMyLibrary. Retrieved 18 February 2013. "Abdullah heads awards list". The Star. 24 October 2006. Archived from the original on 14 October 2007. Retrieved 24 October 2006. "Siti Nurhaliza gets Grammy invite". The Star. 6 February 2007. Archived from the original on 6 February 2007. Retrieved 6 February 2007. Zieman (24 April 2007). "Siti hidupkan khazanah P. Ramlee dalam Konsert Istana Cinta". mStar Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 24 April 2007. "Penyertaan karyawan muzik Malaysia sedikit". Berita Harian (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 24 April 2007. Retrieved 2 September 2010. "Siti raih 3 anugerah APM 2007". Berita Harian (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 9 June 2007. Retrieved 2 September 2010. "Hadiah hati Siti". Metro Ahad (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 9 December 2007. Retrieved 2 September 2010. "Tuah filem hitam putih". Harian Metro (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 11 August 2008. Retrieved 2 September 2010. "Siti akhirnya berlakon". Harian Metro (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 4 August 2007. Retrieved 6 August 2010. "(Sesuatu yang dicari peminat ... )". Berita Harian (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 10 January 2008. Retrieved 6 August 2010. "Lagu Hantaran Daripada Hati 'hidupkan' Wadi Unung". Berita Harian (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 27 August 2009. Retrieved 6 August 2010. "Siti hilang bisa". Harian Metro (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 4 March 2008. Retrieved 6 August 2010. "Hadiah Siti kurang mantap". Harian Metro (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 25 February 2008. Retrieved 6 August 2010. Shazryn Mohd. Faizal (3 May 2008). "Faizal Tahir Ungguli AIM". Utusan Online (in Malay). Retrieved 4 May 2010. "Penjurian AIM15 lebih telus". Berita Harian (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 7 April 2008. Retrieved 6 August 2010. "Faizal Tahir Rocks at AIM Awards". New Straits Times. Retrieved 4 April 2008. "Hadiah hati Siti". Berita Harian (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 9 December 2007. Retrieved 6 August 2010. Wong Li Za (17 January 2008). "Hit list". The Star. Archived from the original on 21 May 2011. Retrieved 3 January 2010. Azhariah Kamin (16 September 2008). "Siti Nurhaliza is as popular as ever". The Star. Archived from the original on 27 December 2012. Retrieved 11 September 2012. "Lentera Timur". Harian Metro (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 4 January 2009. Retrieved 6 August 2010. "Misi angkat muzik tradisi". Harian Metro (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 16 January 2009. Retrieved 6 August 2010. Shazryn Mohd. Faizal (11 August 2009). "Antara dua dunia Siti". Utusan Online (in Malay). Retrieved 3 September 2010. Siti Azira Abd. Aziz (4 May 2009). "Penantian 7 tahun Misha berbaloi, Siti tetap unggul". mStar Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 27 December 2009. Retrieved 3 January 2010. "Siti's Almighty album". New Straits Times. Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 2 October 2009. Retrieved 3 September 2010. Budiey Isma (16 February 2009). "Ayah Dato' Siti Nurhaliza Selamat Disemadikan". Sensasi Selebriti (in Malay). Retrieved 11 April 2010. Roslen Fadzil (15 February 2009). "Ayah Siti Nurhaliza Meninggal Dunia". Murai.com.my (in Malay). Archived from the original on 12 April 2009. Retrieved 11 April 2010. "Siti derita ingat abah". Harian Metro (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 28 February 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2010. Shuib Talib (21 June 2009). "SHUIB ON SUNDAY: Can't get enough of Siti". The New Straits Times. AccessMyLibrary. Retrieved 21 June 2009. Siti Azira Abd. Aziz (19 July 2009). "Siti kekal 9 tahun paling popular serantau APM 2009!". mStar Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 5 April 2010. Retrieved 11 April 2010. Dennis Chua (22 July 2009). "Entertainment: Aizat wins big". The New Straits Times Online. Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. Retrieved 11 April 2010. Siti Azira Abd. Aziz. "APM2009: Siti senarai teratas Artis Serantau Paling Popular!". mStar Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 12 July 2009. Retrieved 11 April 2010. "Resepi Siti Nurhaliza, Sheila Rusly, Website Kulinari Daisy Chef Liza". Sensasi Selebriti. 30 August 2009. Retrieved 19 February 2013. Budiey Isma (25 December 2009). "Gambar Kulit Album Duet Dato' Siti Nurhaliza & Krisdayanti". Sensasi Selebriti (in Malay). Retrieved 22 May 2010. Hizreen Kamal (27 January 2010). "Two divas, one album". New Straits Times. Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. Retrieved 5 September 2010. Rizal Johan & Alan Koay (23 July 2009). "Film director Yasmin Ahmad in hospital (Update 7)". The Star. Archived from the original on 10 January 2010. Retrieved 11 April 2010. Au Yeong How & Shahril Adzrin (23 July 2009). "Pengarah Yasmin Ahmad selesai jalani pembedahan otak". mStar Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 5 April 2010. Retrieved 11 April 2010. "Tune in to SITI TV this Merdeka". The Malay Mail (in Malay). Archived from the original on 28 June 2011. Retrieved 12 May 2013. "Astro Siarkan Secara Langsung Konsert Bagaikan Sakti M.Nasir & Datuk Siti Nurhaliza". mStar (in Malay). Archived from the original on 21 December 2009. Retrieved 18 January 2010. Wahi Aziz (13 December 2009). "Siti Akan Terbitkan Konsert Aizat & Faizal Tahir di IB". mStar Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 18 January 2010. Retrieved 18 January 2010. "Keputusan Undian SMS Parti HIP TV Memuaskan". mStar Online (in Malay). 4 April 2009. Archived from the original on 22 July 2011. Retrieved 6 April 2010. Siti Azira Abd. Aziz (31 March 2009). "Artis Tak Harap Pada Rupa Antara Kelainan 'Parti HIP TV'". mStar Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 22 July 2011. Retrieved 6 April 2010. Farihad Shalla Mahmud (31 March 2009). "Siti perkenal SimplySiti". Berita Harian online (in Malay). Retrieved 6 April 2010. Akmal Abdullah (5 April 2010). "ABPBH 2009: Siti Nurhaliza paling popular". Berita Harian Online (in Malay). Retrieved 6 April 2010. Budiey Isma (22 April 2010). "Senarai Pemenang Anugerah PPMH Ulangtahun Ke 25 Media Hiburan". Sensasi Selebriti (in Malay). Retrieved 26 June 2010. Budiey Isma (22 April 2010). "Gambar Dato' Siti Nurhaliza di Anugerah PPMH Media Hiburan". Sensasi Selebriti (in Malay). Retrieved 26 August 2010. Azhariah Kamin (3 May 2010). "Yuna wins big at AIM awards". The Star. Retrieved 3 May 2010. Esme Johari Wahab (3 May 2010). "Siti tetap unggul". myMetro (in Malay). Retrieved 3 May 2010. Haswari Ali (22 July 2010). "Kerana Cantik & Seksi, Rozita Menang". Murai.com.my (in Malay). Archived from the original on 31 August 2010. Retrieved 22 July 2010. Mohd Al Qayum Aziz (29 May 2010). "SimplySiti Terima Anugerah Produk Halal Terbaik". Mstar Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 30 May 2010. Retrieved 6 April 2010. SultanMuzaffar (12 January 2011). "Siti Nurhaliza Terima Pengiktirafan BrandLaureate". Gua.com.my (in Malay). Archived from the original on 15 January 2011. Retrieved 11 February 2011. "Siti Nurhaliza terima Anugerah Wanita Inspirasi di Bandung". Utusan Online (in Malay). 29 January 2011. Archived from the original on 1 February 2011. Retrieved 11 February 2011. "A chat with Siti". The Star. 11 February 2011. Archived from the original on 3 June 2012. Retrieved 11 February 2011. Abie Abdullah (24 July 2011). "Tiba masa Siti". Metro Ahad (in Malay). Retrieved 25 July 2011. Norhadiani Baharom (4 March 2011). "Adib terbit album Inggeris Siti". Berita Harian (in Malay). Retrieved 6 March 2011. Hanisah Selamat (14 July 2011). "Selagi ada semangat". Berita Harian (in Malay). Retrieved 17 July 2011. Zubir Mohd Yunus (7 August 2011). "All Your Love Siti bakal jengah Eropah". Berita Harian (in Malay). Retrieved 7 July 2011. Syafiqah Jalal (16 July 2011). "APM 2011: Kali Terakhir Buat Siti Nurhaliza Sertai?". Murai.com.my (in Malay). Archived from the original on 19 July 2011. Retrieved 17 July 2011. "Dato' Siti Nurhaliza Terbit Program Realiti I-Klon". Murai.com (in Malay). Digital Five Sdn Bhd. Archived from the original on 13 April 2013. Retrieved 3 April 2013. Niezam Abdullah (17 October 2011). "Siti Nurhaliza Tidak Ambil Mudah". mStar (in Malay). Archived from the original on 19 October 2011. Retrieved 21 October 2011. "Sejarah hidup tanpa memori". Kosmo! Online (in Malay). 17 December 2011. Archived from the original on 23 April 2016. Retrieved 6 December 2011. Budiey (3 February 2012). "Gambar Siti Nurhaliza di Anugerah PPMH 2011/12". Sensasi Selebriti (in Malay). Retrieved 18 February 2013. Mohd Al Qayum Azizi (9 April 2012). "Siti Nurhaliza Terima Anugerah Seri Perak, Aaron Aziz Artis Paling Popular ABPBH2011". mStar (in Malay). Archived from the original on 16 July 2012. Retrieved 18 February 2013. Nani (24 April 2012). "Siti Nurhaliza Berduet Dengan Rockstar Islam, Sami Yusuf". Gua.com.my (in Malay). Archived from the original on 27 April 2012. Retrieved 5 May 2012. Mohd. Fairuz Yusof (9 July 2012). "SUKMA XV dibuka penuh gemilang". Utusan Online (in Malay). Retrieved 20 July 2012. Mohd. Fairuz Yusof (17 July 2012). "Sukan alat perpaduan negara – Najib". Utusan Online (in Malay). Retrieved 20 July 2012. Kheme Rosly (5 July 2012). "Rozita Che Wan Selebriti Paling Seksi 2012". Murai.com.my (in Malay). Archived from the original on 24 October 2012. Retrieved 18 February 2013. "Penawar Rindu Siti". Berita Harian (in Malay). 6 September 2012. Retrieved 15 November 2012. Suhana Yusop (30 September 2012). "5 terima anugerah Bernama Radio24". Kosmo! Online (in Malay). Archived from the original on 23 April 2016. Retrieved 18 February 2013. "Wartawan Utusan terima anugerah Puteri UMNO". Utusan Online (in Malay). 25 November 2012. Archived from the original on 3 February 2014. Retrieved 18 February 2013. "Siti Nurhaliza Persembah Single Baru "Galau" Di Kuantan". Gua.com.my (in Malay). 11 November 2012. Archived from the original on 28 November 2012. Retrieved 15 November 2012. Razif Rosdi (10 November 2012). "Sakit Tak Halang Siti Nurhaliza Hiburkan 5,000 Peminat". Gua.com.my (in Malay). Archived from the original on 14 November 2012. Retrieved 15 November 2012. "Siti Nurhaliza Bersyukur Impiannya Terlaksana". Gua.com.my (in Malay). 13 November 2012. Archived from the original on 16 November 2012. Retrieved 15 November 2012. Egie Gusman (13 December 2012). "Suami Kecelakaan, Siti Nurhaliza Batalkan Konser di Banjarmasin". Music.Okezone.com (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 1 February 2014. Retrieved 13 December 2012. "Shila Amzah & Dato' Siti Calon Penyanyi Terbaik Dunia". Mediahiburan.karangkraf.com (in Malay). 14 December 2012. Archived from the original on 18 December 2012. Retrieved 13 December 2012. "World Music Awards postponed due to visa issues, Newtown tragedy". Showbiz. GMA Network Inc. 21 December 2012. Archived from the original on 23 December 2012. Retrieved 1 April 2013. Mohd Al Qayum Azizi (18 February 2013). "Siti Nurhaliza Bertudung Bukan Untuk Berpolitik". mStar (in Malay). Archived from the original on 25 March 2013. Retrieved 26 March 2013. "Siti Lebih Ayu". Berita Harian (in Malay). 19 March 2013. Retrieved 26 March 2013. "Pencarian Klon Artis Bermula!". Media Hiburan Online. Grup Digital Karangkraf. Archived from the original on 27 March 2013. Retrieved 3 April 2013. "Siti Nurhaliza Jadi Pengacara 'Game Show' Pula". mStar Online (in Malay). 26 December 2012. Archived from the original on 1 February 2014. Retrieved 6 February 2012. Shorty Awards Staff (26 February 2013). "Announcing the 5th Annual Shorty Awards Vox Populi and Finalists!". Shorty Awards. Retrieved 26 March 2013. Hizreen Kamal (2 March 2013). "Siti Nurhaliza beats nine other strong contenders for 'Bella On-Stage Award'". New Straits Times. Archived from the original on 3 March 2013. Retrieved 26 March 2013. Budiey (2 March 2013). "Gambar Dato' Siti Nurhaliza di Roadshow Dermagic SimplySiti di Alamanda". SensasiSelebriti.com. Retrieved 26 March 2013. "Konsert Nusantara di Istana Budaya Mac ini". Utusan Online (in Malay). 2 February 2013. Retrieved 26 March 2013. Haswari Ali (22 March 2013). "Kenny Babyface Puji Kelunakan Suara Dato' Siti". Murai.com.my. Archived from the original on 23 March 2013. Retrieved 26 March 2013. Choong Mek Zhin (23 March 2013). "Grand prix charity gala raises RM200,000 in aid of heart patients". The Star. Archived from the original on 13 April 2013. Retrieved 26 March 2013. "Siti joins MPO for music showcase". The Malay Mail. 30 April 2013. Archived from the original on 2 May 2013. Retrieved 12 April 2013. "Siti Nurhaliza terima Anugerah Kemanusiaan Mapim". Utusan Online (in Malay). 29 June 2013. Retrieved 16 June 2013. Azhariah Kamin (11 July 2013). "Utterly Bewitching". The Star. Archived from the original on 9 January 2014. Retrieved 16 July 2013. Nani (12 August 2013). "Anugerah Melodi 2013 – Dato' Siti Nurhaliza Tetap Jadi Pilihan". Gua.com.my (in Malay). Archived from the original on 26 August 2013. Retrieved 27 September 2013. mD Staff (22 August 2013). "Siti Nurhaliza, Melly Goeslaw & Faizal Tahir Sertai Keluarga AF 2013". MalaysianDigest.com (in Malay). Archived from the original on 25 September 2013. Retrieved 27 September 2013.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Konsert merdeka Malaysia-Indonesia di Dataran Merdeka Ahad". Utusan Online (in Malay). 22 August 2013. Retrieved 27 September 2013. MSN Entertainment Malaysia Staff (12 September 2013). "A reflection of Malaysia!". entertainment.malaysia.msn.com/. Archived from the original on 29 September 2013. Retrieved 27 September 2013. "Senarai Penuh Pencalonan Anugerah Planet Muzik 2013". Murai.com.my (in Malay). 5 September 2013. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013. Retrieved 27 September 2013. "Hafiz Menang Besar Di Anugerah Planet Muzik 2013". gua.com.my (in Malay). 19 October 2013. Archived from the original on 19 October 2013. Retrieved 19 October 2013. MH Staff (30 August 2013). "Dato' Siti Nurhaliza Janji Yang Terbaik Di Konsert 'Lentera Timur'". mediahiburan.karangkraf.com (in Malay). Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 27 September 2013. Budiey (21 August 2013). "Ulasan Konsert Lentera Timur Dato' Siti Nurhaliza". Budiey.com (in Malay). Retrieved 27 September 2013. Astro Awani Staff (27 October 2013). ""Konsert Lantera Timur" Siti Nurhaliza catat rekod Istana Budaya". Astro Awani (in Malay). Retrieved 27 October 2013. "Siti wakil negara ke Jepun". Utusan Online (in Malay). 21 November 2013. Archived from the original on 29 November 2013. Retrieved 30 December 2013. Policarpio, Allan (24 November 2013). "Christian Bautista hopes to appeal for more relief aid in music fest". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Retrieved 30 December 2013. Astro Awani Staff (20 November 2013). "Siti Nurhaliza wakil negara ke Festival Muzik Asean-Jepun". Astro Awani (in Malay). Retrieved 30 December 2013. Tan Kee Yun (5 December 2013). "Award Winning Antics: 18th Asian Television Awards". The New Paper. Archived from the original on 30 December 2013. Retrieved 30 December 2013. Shreya Gopi (19 November 2013). "Asian Television Awards to be televised on Star World and Channel [V]". OnScreenAsia.com. Archived from the original on 30 December 2013. Retrieved 30 December 2013. Budiey (6 January 2014). "Konsert Dato Siti Nurhaliza Live in KLCC Where The Heart Is". Budiey.com. Retrieved 18 April 2014. Kenneth Chaw (10 February 2014). "An intimate encounter with Siti Nurhaliza". The Star. Archived from the original on 28 April 2016. Retrieved 18 April 2014. Mohd Al Qayum Azizi (7 January 2014). "Siti Nurhaliza Sasar Kutip RM4 Juta Untuk Kebajikan". Mstar (in Malay). Archived from the original on 15 July 2014. Retrieved 18 April 2014. Tengku Khalidah Tengku Bidin (10 February 2014). "Siti Nurhaliza berjaya kumpul dana RM1 juta". Utusan Online (in Malay). Retrieved 18 April 2014. Muzaffar Mustafa (19 February 2014). """SITI: An Iconic Exhibition of Dato Siti Nurhaliza", ilham penggiat seni baru". Astro Awani (in Malay). Retrieved 19 April 2014. Feride Hikmet Atak (28 February 2014). "Lukisan Wajah Siti Nurhaliza Dijual Sehingga RM75,000". Mstar (in Malay). Retrieved 18 April 2014. "Pameran Lukisan Ikonik Dato' Siti Nurhaliza". Murai.com.my (in Malay). 21 February 2014. Archived from the original on 9 April 2014. Retrieved 19 April 2014. Jeff Oon (21 February 2014). "Siti Nurhaliza returns for solo concert in Singapore after six-year absence". Yahoo! Entertainment Singapore. Archived from the original on 15 July 2014. Retrieved 10 June 2014. Eddino Abdul Hadi (5 April 2014). "Siti to sing Singapore songs". The New Paper. Retrieved 10 June 2014. Naadiah Bte Mohamad Munir Badib (14 April 2014). "Dato' Siti Nurhaliza live in Singapore – 3.5/5". Today. Retrieved 10 June 2014. Juliane June Rasul (16 April 2014). "Siti gets cheeky". The New Paper. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 10 June 2014. Budiey (17 February 2014). "Dato' Siti Nurhaliza Bakal Berkongsi Pentas Dengan David Foster". budiey.com. Retrieved 11 June 2014. Keirsten Clark (25 March 2014). "Q&A: David Foster, award-winning record producer and composer". Lifestyle Asia. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 11 June 2014. "Tragedi MH370, tiga konsert berskala besar dibatalkan". Kosmo! (in Malay). 27 March 2014. Archived from the original on 23 April 2016. Retrieved 11 June 2014. "Vince, Elvira pukau Foster". Harian Metro (in Malay). 30 March 2014. Retrieved 11 June 2014. Astro Awani Staff (1 May 2014). "High achievers receive MBR Award 2014 from Najib". Astro Awani. Retrieved 1 June 2014. Allan Koay and Hemananthani Sivanandam (30 April 2014). "Prime Minister pays tribute to record holders at Malaysia Book of Records event". The Star. Retrieved 11 June 2014. Farihad Shalla Mahmud (27 August 2014). "Hikmah sebalik musibah". Berita Minggu (in Malay). Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Astro Awani Staff (18 October 2014). "APM 2014: Siti Nurhaliza dinobat Penyanyi Wanita Terbaik". Astro Awani (in Malay). Retrieved 30 November 2014. Agustinus Shindu Alpito. "Siti Nurhaliza Rilis Album di Indonesia". MetroTV (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 16 October 2018. Retrieved 1 December 2014. Hannie Susanti (Producer) & Gerryndra Danurwendo (Producer) (20 October 2014). Persembahan Cinta 23 (Motion Picture) (in Indonesian). Indonesia: MNCTV. Armen E. Basauli (Producer) (21 October 2014). dahSyat (Motion Picture) (in Indonesian). Indonesia: RCTI. Pramudito Joedojo (Producer) (22 October 2014). Persembahan Cinta 23 (Motion Picture) (in Indonesian). Indonesia: Global TV. Wishnutama (Director) (1 November 2014). Sarah Sechan (Motion Picture) (in Indonesian). Indonesia: NET. Dini Putri (Director), Tiruma Imelda (Producer) & Jahja I. Rianto (Executive Producer) (21 October 2014). Inbox (Motion Picture) (in Indonesian). Indonesia: SCTV. Zaidi Mohamad (11 November 2014). "Siti Nurhaliza terima dua anugerah". Berita Harian (in Malay). Retrieved 30 November 2014. Kenneth Shaw (20 November 2014). "Siti Nurhaliza talks about album sales, AIM nominations and her 20 years in show business". The Star. Archived from the original on 20 November 2014. Retrieved 20 November 2014. Bernama Staff (26 November 2014). "Malaysia Bolot 2 Anugerah Pada Top Asia Corporate Ball 2014". Bernama (in Malay). Retrieved 30 November 2014. Norimy Aimi (7 December 2014). "Datuk Siti Nurhaliza Kuasai AIM 21". Mangga Online (in Malay). Utusan Karya Sdn Bhd. Archived from the original on 9 December 2014. Retrieved 6 December 2014. RotiKaya Staff (7 December 2014). "Siti Nurhaliza Rangkul Vokal Terbaik AIM Buat Kali Ke-12". RotiKaya.com (in Malay). Retrieved 8 December 2014. P. Aruna (18 December 2014). "Siti Hasmah honoured by students group she helped found in 1948". The Star. Retrieved 29 December 2014. World Music Awards' Admin (24 December 2014). "Siti Nurhaliza, Winner of the World's Best Malay Female Artist Award, Best Malay Live Act & Best Malay Entertainer". Facebook. Archived from the original on 26 February 2022. Retrieved 29 December 2014. Rebecca Lynne Tan (2 January 2015). "BigBang start to new year at Celebrate SG50 countdown party". Straits Times. Retrieved 1 January 2016. Najiy Jefri (29 March 2015). "Siti Nurhaliza selepas dua dasawarsa" [Siti Nurhaliza after 2 Decades]. Kosmo! (in Malay). Retrieved 1 January 2016. Shazryn Mohd Faizal (8 April 2015). "Siti Nurhaliza terus lengkapkan portfolio (Siti Nurhaliza Continues Completing Portfolio)". The Rakyat Post (in Malay). Archived from the original on 26 June 2015. Retrieved 1 January 2015. Murai Staff (9 April 2015). "Dato' Siti Nurhaliza Semakin Petah Berjenaka Di Pentas (Dato' Siti Nurhaliza is Getting Better to Banter on Stage)". Murai.com.my (in Malay). Archived from the original on 11 July 2015. Retrieved 1 January 2016. Kemalia Othman (8 April 2015). "Siti Nurhaliza Dedah Kisah Lalu Dalam Konsert Unplugged 2015 (Siti Nurhaliza Revealed Past Experiences in "Konsert Unplugged 2015")". mStar (in Malay). Retrieved 1 January 2016. Shazryn Mohd Faizal (2 July 2015). "Album 'Unplugged' beri signifikan tersendiri buat Siti Nurhaliza" [The 'Unplugged' album has its own significant to Siti Nurhaliza]. The Rakyat Post (in Malay). Archived from the original on 12 July 2015. Retrieved 1 January 2016. Nor Akmar Samudin (21 August 2015). "Inspirasi hadiah terbaik untuk Siti" ["Inspirasi" as the best gift for Siti]. Harian Metro (in Malay). Retrieved 2 January 2016. Malay Mail Staff (5 August 2015). "Siti Nurhaliza records Tamil song composed by AR Rahman (VIDEO)". Malay Mail. Retrieved 2 January 2016. The Star Staff (21 August 2015). "Siti Nurhaliza named among 500 most influential Muslims". The Star. Retrieved 2 January 2016. Kamaruddin Razal (10 October 2015). "Taufik Batisah Ungguli Anugerah Planet Muzik 2015" [Taufik Batisah Leads Anugerah Planet Muzik 2015]. Murai.com.my (in Malay). Archived from the original on 26 January 2016. Retrieved 2 January 2016. Rozdan Mazalan (31 December 2015). "Siti, Rossa paling cemerlang di Istana Budaya" [Siti, Rossa [are] the most successful at Istana Budaya]. Berita Harian (in Malay). Retrieved 2 January 2016. Tengku Khalidah Tengku Bidin (9 November 2015). "Siti Nurhaliza hamil?" [Siti Nurhaliza is pregnant?]. Utusan Malaysia (in Malay). Retrieved 2 January 2016. Kenneth Chaw (1 December 2015). "Siti Nurhaliza shares devastating news of miscarriage". The Star. Archived from the original on 3 February 2016. Retrieved 2 January 2016. The Malaysian Insider Staff (1 December 2015). "Ed Sheeran, Jay Chou are Spotify's most streamed artists in Malaysia". The Malaysian Insider. Archived from the original on 15 December 2015. Retrieved 2 January 2016. Putu Elmira (21 December 2015). "Duet Apik Siti Nurhaliza dan Hetty Koes Endang di D'Academy Asia" [A Great Duet between Siti Nurhaliza and Hetty Koes Endang on D'Academy Asia]. Bintang.com (in Indonesian). Retrieved 2 January 2016. Puji Astuti HPS (17 November 2015). "Memetakan Kekuatan Peserta D' Academy Asia dari 4 Negara" [Mapping the Strength of D'Academy Asia Contestants]. Liputan 6 (in Indonesian). Retrieved 2 January 2016. Fachrur Rozie (12 January 2016). "Ultah ke 37, Siti Nurhaliza Ingin Tetap Dicintai" [37th Birthday, Siti Nurhaliza still wants to be loved]. Liputan 6 (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 27 April 2019. Retrieved 27 April 2019. Pos Kota Staff (12 January 2016). "Iyeth Bustami dan Dato Siti Nurhaliza Pukau Penonton HUT Indosiar" [Iyeth Bustami and Dato Siti Nurhaliza spellbound viewers of Indosiar's anniversary [concert]]. Pos Kota (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 27 April 2019. Retrieved 27 April 2019. Farah Fazanna (18 March 2016). "Siti Nurhaliza launches ready-to-wear clothing line". The Star. Archived from the original on 27 April 2019. Retrieved 27 April 2019. MyNewsHub Staff (10 March 2016). "'Creacion' Jenama Pakaian Keluaran Datuk Siti Nurhaliza" [‘Creacion’ is Siti Nurhaliza's own clothing line]. MyNewsHub.tv (in Malay). Archived from the original on 27 April 2019. Retrieved 27 April 2019. Bissme S. (6 April 2016). "Siti at her best". The Sun. Archived from the original on 4 May 2016. Retrieved 28 April 2019. Bernama Staff Writer (2 March 2016). "Siti Nurhaliza To Perform At Special Concert Before Going On Long Break". Bernama. Archived from the original on 6 March 2016. Retrieved 28 April 2019. Haslina Kamaluddin (3 April 2016). "Ekspresi cinta Siti Nurhaliza" [Siti Nurhaliza's expression of love]. Sinar Harian (in Malay). Archived from the original on 4 May 2016. Retrieved 13 August 2019. Jemang Rahman (3 April 2016). "Memukau, Konsert Lima Bintang Siti Nurhaliza Sebelum Berehat Panjang" [Impressive, Siti Nurhaliza's five-star concert before taking a long break]. mStar (in Malay). Archived from the original on 4 May 2016. Retrieved 13 August 2019. Nurul Dayana Simangoon (21 May 2016). "Siti Nurhaliza keluarkan lagu Hari Raya baru, yang pertama dalam 10 tahun" [Siti Nurhaliza releases new Eid al-Fitr song, the first in 10 years]. Berita Mediacorp (in Malay). Archived from the original on 29 July 2016. Retrieved 13 August 2016. "Dirgahayu – Single". iTunes Store (MY). Apple. 12 August 2016. Archived from the original on 12 August 2019. Retrieved 13 August 2019. Muhammad Zaini Mohd Zin (30 August 2016). "'Lara Aishah' Adaptasi Telenovela Popular Mexico 'La Loba'" ['Lara Aishah' is an adaptation of popular Mexican telenovela,'La Loba']. Bernama (in Malay). Archived from the original on 30 August 2016. Retrieved 7 October 2016. Nur Syazwana Mansor (6 November 2016). "Faizal Tahir tiada niat cetus kontroversi kulit album baharu" [Faizal Tahir has no intention to create a controversy with his latest album cover]. Berita Harian (in Malay). Archived from the original on 9 November 2016. Retrieved 9 November 2016. Farihad Shalla Mahmud (18 December 2016). "Kejayaan Anatomi lonjak semangat Faizal Tahir" [Anatomi's success lifts Faizal Tahir's spirit]. Berita Harian (in Malay). Archived from the original on 18 December 2016. Retrieved 13 August 2019. Bibi Nurshuhada Ramli (13 October 2016). "(Showbiz) Siti Nurhaliza reigns supreme at AIM nominations". New Straits Times. Archived from the original on 13 August 2019. Retrieved 13 August 2019. Loong Wai Ting (23 December 2016). "Siti rules AIM22". New Straits Times. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 14 August 2019. Kenneth Chaw (20 December 2016). "Siti Nurhaliza is unbeatable at AIM". Star2. Archived from the original on 13 August 2019. Retrieved 13 August 2019. Farihad Shalla Mahmud (25 November 2016). "Siti terima 300 lagu daripada komposer lama, baharu" [Siti receives more than 300 Songs from old and new composers]. Berita Harian (in Malay). Archived from the original on 10 May 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2019. Mohd Al Qayum Azizi (6 May 2017). "Siti Nurhaliza sasar AIM" [Siti Nurhaliza aims for AIM]. mStar (in Malay). Archived from the original on 13 May 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2019. Sudirman Mohd Tahir (28 April 2017). "Siti gementar" [Siti is nervous]. Harian Metro (in Malay). Archived from the original on 20 May 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2019. Farihad Shalla Mahmud and Zaidi Mohamad (13 October 2017). "Siti Nurhaliza hamil empat bulan" [Siti is 4-month pregnant]. Berita Harian (in Malay). Archived from the original on 14 October 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2019. Fiza Kamaruddin (15 October 2017). "Senarai Pemenang Anugerah Planet Muzik 2017, Tahniah Kepada Semua Pemenang!" [List of 2017 Anugerah Planet Muzik winners, congratulations to all winners!]. Gempak (in Malay). Archived from the original on 16 August 2019. Retrieved 17 August 2019. Joash Ee Dee Silva (28 October 2017). "It's Datuk Seri Siti Nurhaliza now". The Star. MSN. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 28 October 2017. Gordon Kho (7 December 2017). "Malaysians love Siti Nurhaliza and Ed Sheeran, according to Spotify". Star2. Archived from the original on 9 December 2017. Retrieved 2 September 2019. Kemalia Othman (23 December 2017). "Siti Nurhaliza Kembali Aktif Selepas Bayi 6 Bulan" [Siti Nurhaliza will be more active when [her] baby is 6 months old]. mStar (in Malay). Archived from the original on 16 August 2019. Retrieved 17 August 2019. Harian Metro Staff (8 March 2017). "Doa beri Siti kekuatan" [Prayers give Siti strength]. Harian Metro (in Malay). Archived from the original on 8 March 2018. Retrieved 17 August 2019. Rahimah Abdullah (28 February 2018). "Konsert 'Hora Horey Didi & Friends' di pawagam bermula 10 Mac" ["Hora Horey Didi & Friends" concert in cinemas starting 10 March]. Gempak (in Malay). Archived from the original on 8 May 2018. Retrieved 17 August 2019. Fiza Kamarudin (15 October 2017). "Siti Nurhaliza Nyanyi Lagu Didi & Friends Pun Sedap... – Nantikan Animasi Didi & Friends Di Pawagam Mac 2018!" [Siti Nurhaliza, even singing Didi & Friends song is nice... - Stay Tuned for Didi & Friends animation in cinemas in March 2018]. Gempak (in Malay). Archived from the original on 17 September 2019. Retrieved 18 September 2019. Farihad Shalla Mahmud (5 March 2017). "Siti bakal lahir anak secara pembedahan" [Siti will give birth through surgery]. Berita Harian (in Malay). Archived from the original on 5 March 2018. Retrieved 17 August 2019. Kemalia Othman (25 March 2018). "Siti Aafiyah, 'Segala Yang Baik' Ilham Nama Puteri Siti Nurhaliza Dari Makkah" [Siti Aafiyah, "Everything that is Good" [is the] name inspiration of Siti Nurhaliza's princess from Mecca]. mStar (in Malay). Archived from the original on 16 August 2019. Retrieved 17 August 2019. Faisol Mustafa (8 June 2018). "Duet perdana Siti Nurhaliza, Khai Bahar" [Siti Nurhaliza and Khai Bahar's big duet]. Kosmo! (in Malay). Archived from the original on 24 August 2019. Retrieved 24 August 2018. Nor Eryani Yusup (23 May 2019). "Siti teruja bawa Aafiyah tunai umrah" [Siti is excited to bring Aafiyah for Umrah]. Kosmo! (in Malay). Archived from the original on 2 September 2019. Retrieved 2 September 2019. Syarrizuan Abdul Rashid and Muhamad Fairoz Azizan (25 July 2018). "Siti, Faizal janji tak garang" [Siti and Faizal promise not to be fierce]. Berita Harian (in Malay). Archived from the original on 1 January 2019. Mohd Al Qayum Azizi (22 July 2018). ""Sekali dengar terus suka" - Siti Nurhaliza rakam lagu Hael" ["Heard [the song] once and [I] like [it]" - Siti Nurhaliza records Hael's song]. mStar (in Malay). Archived from the original on 24 August 2019. Retrieved 25 August 2019. Mohd Al Qayum Azizi (21 September 2018). "'Anta Permana' usaha Siti Nurhaliza kembalikan perkataan Melayu klasik" ["Anta Permana" is Siti Nurhaliza's effort to revive classical Malay words]. mStar (in Malay). Archived from the original on 24 August 2019. Retrieved 25 August 2019. Nor Eryani Yusup (19 May 2019). "Siti raih 11 platinum untuk Anta Permana" [Siti received 11 Platinum for "Anta Permana"]. Kosmo! (in Malay). Archived from the original on 24 August 2019. Retrieved 25 August 2018. Eddino Abdul Hadi (29 September 2018). "Indonesian singers Judika, Rossa and more win big at awards show Anugerah Planet Muzik". The Straits Times. Archived from the original on 1 September 2019. Retrieved 2 September 2019. Jan Milo Severo (4 October 2018). "Sarah Geronimo meets other Asian superstars for ASEAN-Japan Music Festival". The Philippine Star. Archived from the original on 1 September 2019. Retrieved 2 September 2019. Annie May (1 September 2018). "Siti Nurhaliza To Represent Malaysia At ASEAN Music Festival in Tokyo". Hype.my. Archived from the original on 1 September 2019. Retrieved 2 September 2019. Silmia Putri (24 October 2018). "2 Hijabers Indonesia Masuk Daftar 500 Muslim Paling Berpengaruh di Dunia" [Two Indonesian hijabis included in list of the 500 most influential muslims in the world]. detik.com (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 2 September 2019. Retrieved 2 September 2019. FMT Reporters (2 November 2018). "Siti terima anugerah ikon pelancongan, Muslim paling berpengaruh" [Siti received tourism icon award, most influential muslim]. Free Malaysia Today (in Malay). Archived from the original on 2 September 2019. Retrieved 2 September 2019. Gordon Kho (5 December 2018). "Siti Nurhaliza & BTS are Malaysians' favourites on Spotify". Star2. Archived from the original on 2 September 2019. Retrieved 2 September 2019. Zulaikha Yusof (8 January 2019). "Siti Nurhaliza Catat Jualan 7 Kali Ganda Sasaran Awal Go Shop!" [Siti Nurhaliza achieved sales sevenfold higher than Go Shop's early target!]. Gempak (in Malay). Archived from the original on 10 September 2019. Retrieved 10 September 2019. Berita Mediacorp Staff (9 January 2019). "Siti Nurhaliza senyum lebar, cipta rekod penjualan tertinggi Go Shop" [Siti Nurhaliza is smiling, sets Go Shop's highest sale record]. Berita Mediacorp (in Malay). Archived from the original on 10 September 2019. Retrieved 11 September 2019. Utusan Malaysia Staff (7 January 2019). "Siti Nurhaliza raih jualan RM67,000 seminit" [Siti Nurhaliza earned sale of RM67,000 per minute]. Utusan Malaysia (in Malay). Archived from the original on 10 September 2019. Retrieved 11 September 2019. Kemalia Othman (11 January 2019). ""Segan pun ada ni…" Kata Siti Nurhaliza selepas nama jadi 'trending' pada hari lahir ke 40 tahun" ["I am kinda shy..." Says Siti Nurhaliza after her name was trending on 40th birthday]. mStar (in Malay). Archived from the original on 10 September 2019. Retrieved 11 September 2019. Muhamad Fairoz Azizan (11 January 2019). "Ulang tahun Siti 'trending' di laman sosial" [Siti's birthday is trending on social websites]. Berita Harian (in Malay). MSN News. Archived from the original on 10 September 2019. Retrieved 10 September 2019. Muhammad Zaini Mohd Zin (19 December 2018). "Siti Nurhaliza Set For 4-Nation Concert Tour". Bernama. Archived from the original on 10 September 2019. Retrieved 17 September 2019. Sudirman Mohd Tahir (23 December 2018). "Konsert Siti RM10 juta" [Siti's RM10 million concert]. Harian Metro (in Malay). Archived from the original on 17 September 2019. Retrieved 17 September 2019. Wafa Aula (18 March 2019). ""Korang nampak saya 'steady' atas pentas, tapi…," Tokti kongsi apa terjadi belakang pentas Siti Nurhaliza On Tour" ["You saw me looked "steady" on stage, but...," - Siti shares what happened behind the scenes of Siti Nurhaliza On Tour]. Dhia.com.my (in Malay). Archived from the original on 4 October 2019. Retrieved 17 September 2019. Izwan Ismail (29 May 2019). "Siti and friends take Raya tunes online". New Straits Times. Archived from the original on 4 October 2019. Retrieved 17 September 2019. Sudirman Mohd Tahir (13 April 2019). "Jiwa saya bebas" [My soul is free]. Harian Metro (in Malay). Archived from the original on 4 October 2019. Retrieved 17 September 2019. Mohd. Haikal Isa (10 July 2019). "Lagu baharu Siti, Kasihku Selamanya duduki carta pertama iTunes" [Siti's newest song, "Kasihku Selamanya" is atop iTunes chart]. Kosmo! (in Malay). Archived from the original on 22 September 2019. Retrieved 22 September 2019. Izwan Mohd. Isa (10 July 2019). "Siti ambil masa kurang dua jam rakam Kasihku Selamanya" [Siti took around two hours to record "Kasihku Selamanya"]. Kosmo! (in Malay). Archived from the original on 22 September 2019. Retrieved 22 September 2019. Nabilla Tashandra (8 August 2019). Bestari Kumala Dewi (ed.). "Siti Nurhaliza Luncurkan "Simplysiti", Kosmetik 'Halalan Toyyiban' di Indonesia" [Siti Nurhaliza launches "Simplysiti", Halalan Toyyiban cosmetics in Indonesia]. Kompas (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 6 October 2019. Retrieved 6 October 2019. Hasiolan Eko P Gultom, ed. (8 August 2019). "SimplySiti Meluncur di Indonesia, Siti Nurhaliza Ajak 'Selaraskan Cantikmu'" [Simplysiti is launched in Indonesia, Siti Nurhaliza invites [people] to "Tune Your Beauty"]. Kompas (in Indonesian). Archived from the original on 6 October 2019. Retrieved 6 October 2019. Azlina Mazli (19 August 2019). ""Tiada cabaran nyanyi lagu pilihan sendiri" - Siti Nurhaliza mahu peserta Big Stage musim kedua lebih variasi" ["Not challenging if singing [your] own song" - Siti wants Big Stage contestants to [show] more varieties]. mStar (in Malay). Archived from the original on 22 September 2019. Retrieved 22 September 2019. Syanty Octavia Amry (18 September 2019). "Sebak imbau perjalanan seni" [Touched when reminisced life journey [as a singer]]. Harian Metro (in Malay). Archived from the original on 17 September 2019. Retrieved 22 September 2019. SGMS Faida (16 September 2019). "Air Mata Siti Nurhaliza Tumpah Jua Selepas…" [Siti's tears still falling after...]. Xtra.com.my (in Malay). Archived from the original on 4 October 2019. Retrieved 22 September 2019. Koh, Lydia (16 April 2020). "Malaysian songstress Siti Nurhaliza launches COVID-19 relief fund". The Independent Singapore News. Retrieved 29 May 2021. Norfaezah Sakri (3 July 2020). "Siti Nurhaliza lega ManifestaSITI2020 lancar selepas tiga bulan tertangguh - "Hikmahnya saya dapat rakam sampai puas hati"". mStar Online. Retrieved 1 October 2020. Nadia Azam (3 July 2020). "Manifesta Siti undang rasa sebak Siti Nurhaliza". Malaysiakini. Retrieved 1 October 2020. "Watch Siti Nurhaliza's 'Manifestival Siti Nurhaliza x HotKool' live concert online". www.thesundaily.my. Retrieved 29 May 2021. "Malaysian singer Siti Nurhaliza reveals she's pregnant with her second child". CNA Lifestyle. Retrieved 14 July 2022. Watson, Rana Wehbe. "Forbes Asia's 100 Digital Stars". Forbes. Retrieved 14 July 2022. "Stars celebrated and record breaking votes for Adelaide Festival Centre's Walk of Fame | News". AussieTheatre.com. 21 December 2020. Retrieved 14 July 2022. "Siti Nurhaliza to be eternalised on Adelaide Festival Centre's Walk of Fame". sg.style.yahoo.com. Retrieved 14 July 2022. "Singer Siti Nurhaliza shares IVF journey". Singapore Yahoo. Retrieved 29 May 2021. "Singer Siti Nurhaliza shares IVF journey in video, says she cried a lot this time". CNA Lifestyle. Retrieved 14 July 2022. Alhamzah, Tahir (26 March 2021). "#Showbiz: Another album from Siti before the arrival of baby No. 2 | New Straits Times". NST Online. Retrieved 29 May 2021. Awani, Astro. "JubliSiti25: "Jangan berhenti merendah diri" - Pesan Siti Nurhaliza buat artis baharu". www.astroawani.com. Retrieved 14 July 2022. Legasi, 1 April 2021, retrieved 14 July 2022 "Siti Nurhaliza records children's songs". sg.news.yahoo.com. Retrieved 29 May 2021. Comel Pipi Merah - Remastered, 1 April 2021, retrieved 14 July 2022 Anakanda, 1 April 2021, retrieved 14 July 2022 CHEONG, BERVIN. "Siti Nurhaliza launches own hijab label, describes it as a 'dream come true'". The Star. Retrieved 29 May 2021. Alhamzah, Tahir (7 April 2021). "#Showbiz: Siti overwhelmed by anxiety about childbirth as due date approaches | New Straits Times". NST Online. Retrieved 29 May 2021. Saiful Sham, Nursyazwani. "Siti Nurhaliza gives birth to baby boy". www.astroawani.com. Retrieved 14 July 2022. "Siti Nurhaliza reveals son's name on his seventh day". sg.news.yahoo.com. Retrieved 29 May 2021. Jefri, Najiy (29 May 2021). "Siti Nurhaliza lancar Tabung Bantuan Khas Palestin & Covid-19". Harian Metro. Retrieved 29 May 2021. "Lagu Melayu ke lagu Indonesia?". Harian Metro (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. 8 May 2010. Retrieved 16 August 2010. "Sheila, Siti gegarkan AIM 17". Berita Harian (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. 16 April 2010. Retrieved 16 August 2010. Adjie Esa Poetra (27 March 2005). "Merebut Habitat Siti Nurhaliza". pikiran-rakyat.com (in Indonesian). Simply Siti Nurahliza Zone. Retrieved 27 July 2010. "Pancawarna". SitiZone. Retrieved 12 June 2010. Budiey Isma (17 November 2008). "M.Nasir Puji Suara Dato' Siti Nurhaliza". Sensasi Selebriti (in Malay). Retrieved 12 June 2010. Faridul Anwar Farinordin (26 June 2009). "Siti's tour de force". New Straits Times. Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. Retrieved 12 June 2010. Faridul Anwar Farinordin (20 February 2004). "It is so for Gareth". New Straits Times. Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. Retrieved 13 July 2010. Serimah Mohd Sallehuddin (25 May 2010). "Memang 'Power'". Berita Harian Online (in Malay). Retrieved 12 June 2010. Razif Rosdi (22 September 2011). "Gary V Teringin Berduet, Cipta Lagu Untuk Datuk Siti". Murai.com.my (in Malay). Archived from the original on 23 May 2012. Retrieved 6 April 2013. Ridzuan Abdul Rahman (12 July 2012). "Satu penghormatan besar". Harian Metro (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. Retrieved 20 July 2012. Norhadiani Baharom (27 March 2013). "Malam Penuh Bermakna". Harian Metro (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. Retrieved 6 April 2013. Hanisah Selamat (25 March 2013). "Babyface puji suara gemersik Siti". Berita Harian (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. Retrieved 6 April 2013. "Siti Nurhaliza... pamer kehebatan beraksi di konsert". Utusan Online (in Malay). 1 November 1999. Retrieved 13 September 2010. "Siti Nurhaliza, Malaysia's pop princess". Things Asian – Experience Asia Through the Eyes of Travelers. 4 March 2005. Retrieved 18 January 2010. "Peransang Abang Dalam Karier Siti Nurhaliza". Simply Siti Nurhaliza Zone (in Malay). Retrieved 25 January 2010. "Celine Peramah, Saida Pemalu – Siti". Murai.com.my (in Malay). 15 April 2008. Archived from the original on 25 September 2008. Retrieved 18 January 2010. Saharudin Musthafa (15 April 2008). "Akhirnya Siti bertemu Celine Dion". Utusan Online (in Malay). Retrieved 13 September 2010. "Tahajjud Cinta". SitiZone.com. Retrieved 19 August 2010. "Emosi dua diva". Berita Harian (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. 28 December 2009. Retrieved 19 August 2010. Shazryn Mohd Faizal (12 December 2009). "Ukhuwah dua diva tersohor". Utusan Online (in Malay). Retrieved 20 August 2010. Mohammad Arif Nizam Abdullah (24 June 2006). "Biarlah Rahsia kisah cinta Siti Nurhaliza". Utusan Online (in Malay). Retrieved 19 August 2010. Wanda Idris and Aziz Ittar (30 August 2006). "Kemuncak cinta Siti Nurhaliza – Datuk K". Utusan Online (in Malay). Retrieved 19 August 2010. "Juara Lagu Unearths Another New Star". Simply Siti Nurhaliza Zone. Archived from the original on 10 November 2007. Retrieved 13 May 2010. "Lentera Timur". SitiZone.com. Retrieved 19 August 2010. Saharuddin Mustafa (21 February 1999). "Noraniza Idris mahu popularkan Seri Balas". Utusan Online (in Malay). Retrieved 19 August 2010. "KONSERT SITI BERJAYA". Harian Metro (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. 4 April 2005. Retrieved 16 August 2010. "Evolusi Siti". Metro Ahad (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. 26 November 2006. Retrieved 16 August 2010. "Hormatilah Prinsip Saya". Utusan Online (in Malay). Simply Siti Nurhaliza Zone. 26 March 1997. Archived from the original on 10 November 2007. Retrieved 17 August 2010. "Populariti…Bukan Terletak Pada Gaya Seksi". Utusan Online (in Malay). 26 October 1998. Retrieved 17 August 2010. "Siti Nurhaliza Artis Yang Wajar Menjadi Contoh". Utusan Online (in Malay). 25 November 1998. Retrieved 17 August 2010. "Bukti kehebatan artis kita". Harian Metro (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. 21 July 2009. Retrieved 16 August 2010. "TERUSKAN LAGI SITI!". Harian Metro (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. 25 January 2005. Retrieved 16 August 2010. "SITI TERHARU (HL)". Harian Metro (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. 24 January 2005. Retrieved 16 August 2010. "Menpora Bantah 'Back Up' Dewi Persik". KapanLagi.com (in Indonesian). 14 April 2008. Archived from the original on 1 February 2014. Retrieved 13 May 2012. "Menpora: Dewi Persik Bisa Laku Tanpa Goyang & Buka-bukaan". OkeZone.com (in Indonesian). 14 April 2008. Archived from the original on 30 June 2013. Retrieved 13 May 2012. Anindhita Maharrani (14 April 2008). "Dewi Persik Diminta Menpora Contek Siti Nurhaliza". Hot.Detik.com (in Indonesian). Retrieved 13 May 2012. Kemalia Othman (2 May 2014). "Aizat Tolak Hasrat Siti Nurhaliza, Sheila Majid". mStar (in Malay). Retrieved 16 September 2010.[permanent dead link] "Siti Nurhaliza Inc". myMetro (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. 10 November 2003. Retrieved 17 August 2010. "Anugerah MTV untuk siapa?". Harian Metro (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. 4 August 2008. Retrieved 17 August 2010. Norhayati Nordin (23 January 2012). "Album Melayu sentuhan Ajai". Harian Metro (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. Retrieved 20 July 2012. "Matta curi tumpuan peminat di Malaysia". Berita Harian (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. 2 May 2008. Retrieved 16 August 2010. RotiKaya Staff (28 April 2012). "Judika Kagumi Amy Search & Luah Hasrat Ingin Berduet". RotiKaya.com (in Malay). Retrieved 13 May 2012. "Cartoon Siti acts as online envoy". The Star. 2 November 2007. Archived from the original on 18 October 2012. Retrieved 14 May 2011. "Siti Nurhaliza proposed as cultural ambassador". Bernama. 28 January 2011. Retrieved 7 February 2011. "THE MALAY MAIL BIG WALK 2007". Pacesetters – Athletic Club Malaysia. 22 April 2007. Archived from the original on 22 July 2011. Retrieved 17 July 2010. "Siti to host two charity concerts in T'ganu". Bernama. AccessMyLibrary. 30 January 2005. Retrieved 13 May 2013. "Siti Nurhaliza, Datuk K teruskan tradisi hulur zakat bantu penduduk". Utusan Online (in Malay). 29 February 2008. Archived from the original on 3 July 2013. Retrieved 13 May 2013. "Siti's broken promise". New Straits Times. AccessMyLibrary. 24 March 2004. Retrieved 13 May 2013. Nur Farhatul Aishati Azharie (29 February 2008). "DCHL lancar program kumpul dana bersama Yayasan Nurjiwa". Simplysiti.com (in Malay). Berita Harian. Retrieved 11 June 2010. "Songbird Siti chips in RM25 000". New Straits Times. AccessMyLibrary. 7 January 2005. Retrieved 11 June 2010. "Siti Nurhaliza Donates RM500 000 For National Anti Drug Campaign". Bernama. AccessMyLibrary. 19 February 2006. Retrieved 11 June 2010. "Siti Nurhaliza, suami sumbang RM1.5 juta bina masjid". Utusan Online (in Malay). 20 May 2009. Retrieved 11 June 2010. "Masjid dibiayai Siti dan Datuk K di Sungai Petani siap". Utusan Online (in Malay). 20 February 2011. Retrieved 25 February 2011. "Lima Warna Baru Lipstik SimplySiti Dilancar". mStar Online (in Malay). 1 October 2010. Archived from the original on 2 October 2010. Retrieved 19 October 2010. Sang Dewi & Rosh Abidin Yahya. "Siti Nurhaliza introduces Ctea". BruDirect.com. Archived from the original on 6 April 2010. Retrieved 28 December 2009. "Siti Nurhaliza Tarudin Official". Facebook. Retrieved 28 December 2009. "Keluarga suka Siti". Harian Metro (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 18 July 2006. Retrieved 17 September 2010. "Cerita sensasi panaskan dunia hiburan negara". Berita Harian (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 30 December 2006. Retrieved 17 September 2010. "Datuk K tak perlu kebenaran berpoligami". Berita Harian (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. 7 July 2006. Retrieved 17 September 2010. "DATUK K DENIES NEWS REPORT OF EXTRAVAGANT WEDDING". Bernama. AccessMyLibrary. 12 August 2006. Retrieved 8 May 2010. Hafidah Samat (18 July 2006). "Princess of Pop's regal wedding". Bernama. AccessMyLibrary. Retrieved 8 May 2010. "In ringgit and sen". New Straits Times. AccessMyLibrary. 29 August 2006. Retrieved 8 May 2010. Al-Attas, Suraya (2 September 2006). "Fairy-tale wedding, no less". New Straits Times. AccessMyLibrary. Retrieved 8 May 2010. "The Ratings are in: Siti 6.3 million Log". The Star. 30 August 2006. Archived from the original on 14 October 2007. Retrieved 30 August 2006. "Persandingan Siti – Datuk K meriah". Utusan Online (in Malay). 29 August 2006. Retrieved 3 May 2010. "Wedding Reception of Siti-Datuk K Steeped in Tradition". Bernama. 29 August 2006. Archived from the original on 6 April 2010. Retrieved 30 August 2006. Khoo, Rubin (20 January 2008). "The kid grows up". The Star. Archived from the original on 11 January 2013. Retrieved 3 January 2012. M. Hamzah Jamaludin (4 September 2006). "10,000 attend Siti's reception". New Straits Times. AccessMyLibrary. Retrieved 8 May 2010. Sinar Harian Staff (21 August 2015). "Cinta Siti, Datuk K makin utuh" [Siti and Datuk K's Love is Growing Stronger]. Sinar Harian. Rajeshni Naidu-Ghelani (26 April 2011). "Asia's Most High-Profile Weddings". CNBC. Retrieved 26 January 2014. Rajeshni Naidu-Ghelani (26 April 2011). "Asia's Most High-Profile Weddings". CNBC. Retrieved 26 January 2014. "Video: E! News Report: Asia's Most Powerful Couple in Asia". Aishwarya-Spice.com. 13 June 2010. Archived from the original on 29 October 2010. Retrieved 3 September 2010. "E! News report: No. 1 Powerful Couple in Asia-Aishwarya and Abhishek". PinkVilla.com. 13 June 2010. Archived from the original on 17 February 2020. Retrieved 3 September 2010. Badarudin, Nadia (2 August 2018). "Siti Nurhaliza's heartwarming journey to motherhood". NST Online. "Siti Nurhaliza Buka Rahsia Hamil 4 Bulan". Mohd Al-Qayum Azizi. mSTAR Online. 13 October 2017. Retrieved 14 October 2017. "Malaysian singer Siti Nurhaliza pregnant with her first child". Channel NewsAsia. 13 October 2017. Archived from the original on 13 October 2017. Retrieved 14 October 2017. Nirmal Narayanan (13 October 2017). "Malaysian singer Siti Nurhaliza confirms her pregnancy". International Business Times. Retrieved 14 October 2017. "Sah! Siti Nurhaliza hamil". Astro Awani. 13 October 2017. Retrieved 14 October 2017. CHAW, KENNETH (19 April 2021). "Siti Nurhaliza gives birth to baby No. 2". The Star (Malaysia). Retrieved 19 April 2021. Ermi Shuzila Mohammad (7 December 2020). "14 Tahun Hidup Bersama, Suami Sentiasa Jadi Pendorong DATUK SERI SITI NURHALIZA Bergelar Usahawan Terhebat". Nona. Nu Ideaktiv Sdn Bhd. Retrieved 11 December 2020. Siti Nurhaliza, minister compounded for violating SOP during 'tahnik' event Siti Nurhaliza and husband fined RM10,000 each for breaching SOP Shuinb Taib (20 September 2009). "The star will sing for you". New Straits Times. Digital Collections DC5: Cross Search. Retrieved 3 January 2010. "Konsert amal bantu penggiat seni kumpul dana RM80,000". malaysiakini. 21 July 2019. Retrieved 29 July 2019. Ahmad Isyafiq Mad. Desa (15 September 2019). "Siti kekal pendirian berehat daripada sertai AJL". Kosmo! Online. Utusan Melayu (Malaysia) Berhad. Archived from the original on 2 October 2019. Retrieved 16 September 2019. Chua, Dennis (8 November 2019). "#Showbiz: Honouring a giant". New Straits Times. New Straits Times Press (M) Bhd. Retrieved 8 November 2019. "The Voice of Asia in Australia For One Night Only". OzAsia Festival. Adelaide Festival Centre. Retrieved 20 October 2019. Siti Nurhaliza (8 January 2010). "Catatan Siti Nurhaliza". Mangga (in Malay). Utusan Karya. Retrieved 11 December 2011.[permanent dead link] Siti Nurhaliza (28 May 2011). "Iktibar dari tanah runtuh". Berita Harian (in Malay). Digital Collections DC5: Text Archive. Retrieved 11 December 2011. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Siti Nurhaliza. Siti Nurhaliza & SimplySiti Products Official Website Siti Nurhaliza at IMDb Siti Nurhaliza at Last.fm Siti Nurhaliza at AllMusic Siti Nurhaliza discography at Discogs Portals:  Malaysia  Biography  Pop music  Rhythm and blues  Television  Film