Pagadian, officially the City of Pagadian (Cebuano: Dakbayan sa Pagadian; Subanen: Gembagel G'benwa Pagadian; Maguindanaon: Kuta nu Pagadian, كوت نو ڤڬديان; Iranun: Bandar a Pagadian, بندر ا ڤاڬاديان; Chavacano: Ciudad de Pagadian; Filipino: Lungsod ng Pagadian), is a 1st class component city and the capital of the province of Zamboanga del Sur, Philippines. It is the regional center of Zamboanga Peninsula and the second-largest city in the region and in the province, after the independent city of Zamboanga. According to the 2020 census, it has a population of 210,452 people. The city will be converted to a highly urbanized city by the virtue of Proclamation No. 1247, signed by President Rodrigo Duterte dated November 8, 2021. Pagadian began as stop-over for traders who plied the road between the old Spanish fort-town of Zamboanga on the southwestern tip of the Zamboanga Peninsula and other bigger towns to the north of the old Zamboanga Province. Except for its sheltered bay and good fishing grounds, it was not a promising site because it is situated on steeply rolling terrain. In the course of its local history, waves of different kinds of people came to stay, and eventually called among themselves "Pagadianons". The iconic symbol of Pagadian is its uniquely designed tricycle built to adopt to the city's hilly terrain. It is the only place in the Philippines with a public transport inclined at about 25-40° angle. In recent years, these iconic inclined public transport has been slowly being replaced by modernized tricycles, locally called "bao-bao" a kind of auto rickshaw, due to the latter's fuel-efficiency, less noise and being environment-friendly due to its smoke-less emissions. The city proper and surrounding areas of today's barangays of Muricay, Tawagan Sur and White Beach was originally named Talapukan, an indigenous word that means "a place of numerous springs." The officially accepted origin of its name are words taken from Iranun, pagad ("to wait") and padian ("market") which shows that Pagadian had been a trading area in the past. Other theories suggest that it was named after a bird that the native inhabitants call gagadian or that the city's name came from the word pangadyi ("prayer"), later to be known as pangadyian ("a place to pray" or "land of prayers"). The name Pagadian is also speculated to be derived from the Subanen word pengadian which means "school". The first known settlers in Pagadian are the Subanens. Then came Iranun and Maguindanaon settlers who converted the people to Islam. A sizeable number of Subanens who refused to convert eventually settled in the highlands. Pagadian was under the rule of Sultan Datu Akob, an Iranun datu whose daughter caught the fancy of Datu Macaumbang (Sultan of Taga Nonok), also an Iranun from Malabang, Tukuran that is now part of Pagadian. He was the son of Sharif Apo Tubo who descended from the bloodline of Sharif Kabungsuan, the first Sultan of the Maguindanao Sultanate. With the approval of Sultan Datu Akob, Datu Macaumbang married Bai Putri Panyawan Akob, the beautiful daughter of the Sultan of Pagadian and Royal Bai Putri of Raya. Upon the death of Datu Akob also known as Datu Mimbalawag, his son-in-law, Datu Macaumbang (Sultan of Taga Nonok) assumed leadership; he established the territorial boundaries of the present city proper, from Balangasan River in the west of Tawagan Sur River in the east. Beyond the river of Tawagan Sur was the territory of Datu Balimbingan. At one time, Datu Macaumbang requested the assistance of the Philippine constabulary due to the rampant banditry and piracy in the area. A detachment led by Col. Tiburcio Ballesteros stationed at Malangas landed at the place and stationed themselves at Dumagoc Island. The arrival of the soldiers restored peace and order, thereby attracting the influx of settlers from other places. Christian settlers started arriving in the early part of the 20th century, most of which came from Cebu as evident on the veneration of the Santo Niño de Cebú. The increasing Christian population prompted the creation of the Parish of Pagadian in 1938 and was administered by the Jesuits, Columban and Filipino priests. The original Santo Niño Church of Pagadian was right across the city plaza, on the site of the current San Jose Parish church. The present Santo Niño Cathedral is now located in San Francisco District and was built in 1968. Pagadian Parish became a diocese on November 2, 1971, and is a suffragan of the Archdiocese of Ozamis. Msgr. Jesus B. Tuquib served as the first bishop and was installed on February 24, 1973. At that time, the Columban Fathers took care of the apostolic services for the first 13 parishes in the newly formed diocese. As of 2008, the Diocese of Pagadian had 24 parishes. Pagadian was occupied by Japanese troops during World War II. From November 5 to 20, 1944, the combined American and Filipino troops attempted to take the town from the Japanese. Sixteen Japanese soldiers were killed, but they remained in possession of Pagadian. The establishment of the general headquarters of the Philippine Commonwealth Army and the Philippine Constabulary were stationed in Pagadian and active from November 21, 1944, to June 30, 1946, during and in the aftermath of World War II, including the military operations and engagements against the Japanese and liberated areas in Mindanao from November 21, 1944, to August 15, 1945. The 1970s brought a period of numerous concurrent conflicts on the island of Mindanao, including Dumingag and Zamboanga del Sur. This included land dispute conflicts arising from the influx of settlers from Luzon and Visayas, and from the Marcos administration’s encouragement of militia groups such as the Ilaga. News of the 1968 Jabidah massacre ignited a furor in the Moro community, and ethnic tensions encouraged with the formation of secessionist movements. Additionally, an economic crisis in late 1969, violent crackdowns on student protests in 1970, and 1971, and eventually the declaration of Martial Law all led to the radicalization of many students. Many of them left schools in Manila and joined New People's Army units in their home provinces, bringing the Marxist-Leninist Maoist armed conflict to Mindanao for the first time. The September 1972 declaration of Martial Law began a 14-year period historically remembered for its human rights abuses, often involving the warrantless detention, murder, and physical, sexual, or mental torture of political opponents, student activists, journalists, religious workers, farmers, and others who fought against the Marcos dictatorship. In Zamboanga del Sur, these were often attributed to military-endorsed Militias, which included the Ilaga and a number of armed cult groups, which were used to enhance the military's numbers as it fought various resistance movements. Within Pagadian itself, documented human rights violations directly associated with the Philippine Constabulary included the killing of political prisoners at the Pagadian City Jail,: 94  while incidents of violence associated with the Militias and armed cult groups included violence during the leadup to the 1981 Philippine presidential election and referendum,: 45  and the killing of civilians at checkpoints.: 45 , including that of Catholic church worker Mateo Olivar at a checkpoint in Barangay Labangan, which led to local outrage in the Pagadian parish, and Olivar’s eventual honoring as a Martyr of the resistance against the dictatorship at the Philippines’ Bantayog ng mga Bayani memorial. On June 21, 1969, Pagadian became a chartered city through R.A. 5478, becoming the second city in Zamboanga del Sur after Zamboanga City and third city in the Zamboanga Peninsula (Administrative Region). In October 1990 President Corazon Aquino issued the Executive Order 429 that designated Pagadian City as the Regional Center for Region - IX (Zamboanga Peninsula). In November 2004, Pagadian was officially designated as the Regional Center for the Zamboanga Peninsula. Proclamation No. 1247 was signed by President Rodrigo Duterte on December 8, 2021, which seeks to convert Pagadian into a highly urbanized city. The present-day Pagadian had its beginnings as a sitio of Margosatubig. On July 1927, it became a barrio under the Municipal District of Labangan, Zamboanga del Sur upon the implementation of Executive Order no.70. The transfer the seat of the Labangan Government to Pagadian was made in 1934 through the efforts of Director Teofisto Guingona, Sr. who was commissioned by Philippine Governor-General Leonard Wood to find out the possibility of transferring the seat of government of the Labangan municipality to another place. A conference was first held, together with the Datus and the early Christian settlers as the idea of the transfer was at first largely opposed by the Christians. Eventually, a consensus was reached when the designated committee led by Datu Balimbingan of Labangan and with the consent of Datu Macaumbang surveyed the western part of the present area and found Talpokan, a part of the barrio of Pagadian, deemed as a suitable place for such transfer. At the same time, Datu Macaumbang donated 260 hectares of land to Christians who were willing to transfer to the area. On March 23, 1937, Pagadian became a municipality through Executive Order 77 due to the eager initiative of then Assemblyman Juan S. Alano, with the Jose Sanson appointed as acting mayor. Norberto Bana Sr. was elected as the first officially elected municipal mayor after the regular elections. The Municipality of Pagadian was formed by merging the municipal districts of Labangan and Dinas, as a result, making Labangan a district under its former barrio. The newly created town had 19 barangays or districts. (In 1950 the barrios of Dinas, Legarda, Mirapao, Migpulao, Kalipapa, Pisaan, Bubway, Tiniguangan, Tabina and Dimataling which were under the Municipality of Pagadian, were incorporated into the newly created town of Dimataling. In the same manner, the barrios of Dumalinao Proper, Begong, Nilo, Tigbao, Ticwas, Balongating, Baguitan, Pantad, Napolan, Tagulo, Camanga, Maragang, Sibucao, Tina, Guling, Miculong, Baga, Rebucon, and Mambilik were constituted into Dumalinao in 1956.) Pagadian was occupied by Japanese troops during World War II and was liberated from the Japanese occupation in 1944, eventually becoming the site of the general headquarters of the Philippine Commonwealth Army and the Philippine Constabulary from November 21, 1944 to June 30, 1946. On June 6, 1952, Congressman Roseller T. Lim authored R.A. 711 dividing Zamboanga into two provinces - Norte (north) and Sur (south) then three months after, on September 17, 1952, it became the capital town of the newly established province of Zamboanga del Sur. Pagadian became a chartered city through R.A. 5478 on June 21, 1969, becoming the third city in the Zamboanga Peninsula (Administrative Region). On August 16, 1976, the city was one of the hardest hit areas in the Moro Gulf earthquake and tsunami of 1976, considered as the most devastating tsunami disaster in the Philippines in recent times. Pagadian was the major city in the area that was struck by both the earthquake and tsunami and sustained the greatest number of casualties. In the 1980s, the late Pagadian City Mayor, Benjamin Arao initiated a layout for the city's future expansion by proposing a North Diversion Road of which a part would connect to F.S. Pajares Avenue, one of the city's two major roads via a Rotunda that overlooks the greater Illana Bay and the Moro Gulf beyond. On October 1990, President Corazon Aquino issued the Executive Order 429 that designated Pagadian City as the Regional Center for Region - IX (Zamboanga Peninsula). But it was not until November 12, 2004 that Pagadian officially became the Regional Center for Region IX- Zamboanga Peninsula due in part to the opposition of Zamboanga City, the former regional center, which delayed the process of the transfer. On November 8, 2021, President Rodrigo Duterte signed Proclamation No. 1247 that converts Pagadian City into a highly urbanized city and shall take effect upon ratification in a plebiscite after the 2023 Philippine barangay and Sangguniang Kabataan elections. Pagadian is on the northeastern side of the Western Mindanao region, bordering on Illana Bay. It is bounded by the municipalities of Tigbao and Dumalinao on the southwest, Lakewood on the west, Labangan on the east and northwest, and Midsalip on the north. About 45% of the total city area is steeply sloping terrain of hills and mountains on the northwestern portion that covers an estimated 15,090 hectares. Mt. Sugarloaf (1,376 m.), Mt. Pinukis (1,213 m.), and Mt. Palpalan (650 m.) are the three notable mountain peaks. Areas in the direct north and central part, have gentle to moderate slopes, making up 47% of the total. The remaining 8% is level or nearly level which makes up most of the eastern and the southern parts of the city. The urban area covers about 845.48 hectares. Elevation of the urban area of the city ranges from 1 MSL (mean sea level) near Pagadian Bay to about 100 MSL in the area of Barangay San Jose. The Tiguma, Bulatoc, Gatas, and Balangasan Rivers, drain to Pagadian Bay and serve as natural drainage. Due to its topography, most of the city's 54 barangays do not experience flooding. The low-lying southern and eastern part of the city occasionally experience flooding, especially during heavy rains. Located within the tropics of the northern hemisphere, Pagadian has a pronounced dry season from January to March and rainy season from April to December. The area is generally not affected by tropical storms and typhoons as it is located outside the Philippine Typhoon Belt. Temperature ranges from 22.2 to 32.9 °C (72.0 to 91.2 °F). The prevailing winds are the southwest wind that blow from over the sea during dry seasons going northeast, and the trade winds brought from the mountain ranges. Rainfall distribution is moderate from 2,500 to 3,000 millimetres (98 to 118 in) annually. Pagadian is politically subdivided into 54 barangays. Each barangay consists of puroks while some have sitios. Currently, there are 19 barangays which classified as urban (highlighted in bold) and the rest as rural.  Alegria Balangasan (poblacion) Balintawak Baloyboan Banale Bogo Bomba Buenavista Bulatok Bulawan Dampalan Danlugan Dao Datagan Deborok Ditoray Dumagoc Gatas (poblacion) Gubac Gubang Kagawasan Kahayagan Kalasan Kawit La Suerte Lala Lapidian Lenienza Lison Valley Lourdes Lower Sibatang Lumad Lumbia Macasing Manga Muricay Napolan Palpalan Pedulonan Poloyagan San Francisco (poblacion) San Jose (poblacion) San Pedro (poblacion) Santa Lucia (poblacion) Santa Maria Santiago (poblacion) Santo Niño (poblacion) Tawagan Sur Tiguma Tuburan (poblacion) Tulangan Tulawas Upper Sibatang White Beach The people of Pagadian (Pagadianons) are classified into three main groups which is based primarily on faith and heritage: (a) the Subanens (or any other indigenous tribes who had been living in the area before the advent of Islam in Mindanao), (b) the Muslim settlers who came from other parts of Mindanao and other places such as Sabah and Indonesia, and (c) the Christian settlers who generally came from the Visayas and Luzon. The majority of Pagadianons speak the Cebuano language. The national language, Filipino (Tagalog) is widely understood and is the native tongue of a small percentage of the population. Maguindanaon, Iranun, Maranao, Tausug, and Samal languages are used by the Muslim community. The Subanen dialect is exclusively used by the Subanen people, the original inhabitants of the area. Remaining percentage of the population are classified as Hiligaynon and Zamboangueño speakers. As with the rest of the Philippines, English is widely understood and is used as the primary language for business. Pagadian posted an average annual regular income of P662,511,106.21 from fiscal year 2009 to 2016, thus classifying it as a 1st class component city in the Philippines. As of 2023, it is the 7th wealthiest city in Mindanao with a total asset of P5.568 Billion. The city has an increasing number of businesses in the service sector mainly due to the transfer of the regional offices from Zamboanga City resulting to an influx of visitors from other towns and cities in the Zamboanga Peninsula. This is evident on the current bullish construction trend in the city. Some malls already had made a presence but the most prominent is the city-owned mall, City Commercial Center or C3 Mall, which was built in 2011. However, agriculture is still considered the primary economic resource with the production of rice, corn, coconut, fruit, root crops and animal husbandry. Special funding-assistance programs by the government are made available for local farmers; the City Livelihood Development Assistance Program (CILDAP) extends loans to those who need financial assistance for their livelihood. Production of raw materials like seaweeds, coco processing, cassava constitute a large part of the local economy; small-scale manufacturing of furniture and decors made out of wood, bamboo, rattan, steel and plastic; handicrafts made out of bamboo, rattan, coco shell, wood, marine shell, ceramics, and weaving. Pagadian Bay and the outer Illana Bay (Iranun Bay) abound with a wide variety of marine products; seaweed culture farming is flourishing in waters off the bay while fishponds near or along the bay yields milkfish, prawns and crabs. A number of large deep-sea fishing vessels that venture into the Sulu Sea and as far as the South China Sea make Pagadian fishport their base of operation. Another income-generating industry is mining in an area located 1.5 km southeast of Barangay Lison Valley proper approximately forty-nine kilometers from the city proper which yields gold, copper and molybdenum. The City Fiesta is celebrated every third Sunday of January in honor of its patron saint, the Holy Child Jesus (Santo Niño) which coincides with the feastday of Cebu City. It is officially called the Pasalamat Festival highlighted with a fluvial parade (regatta), trade exhibits, the Mutya ng Pagadian beauty pageant, carnival shows and a civic military parade. On every June 21, the Araw ng Pagadian is celebrated in commemoration of its founding as a chartered city; as Capital of Zamboanga del Sur, the city hosts the annual provincial celebration in September with agro-trade exhibits, a civic-military parade, cultural presentations and sports competitions. The Megayon Festival is a week-long celebration that coincides with the Zamboanga del Sur anniversary in September. It honors the tri-people settlers: the Subanens, BangsaMoro Muslims and Christians. "Megayon" is a Subanen word which means "Unity and Solidarity". The festival is a showcase of three distinctly different cultural heritage in songs, dances, rituals of peace, foods and crafts, to foster unity and understanding among the three cultures. Environment-related activities, peace and development forum, and indigenous sports competitions are being held. Pagadian City also officially celebrates the Chinese New Year. It honors the local Chinese community. The Pagadian Rotunda is a roundabout and circular park that overlooks Illana Bay where the North Diversion Road and F.S. Pajares Avenue converges, two of the three major roads in the city center (the third one being Rizal Avenue). Plaza Luz is a park located across Pagadian City Hall. The park has a musical dancing fountain that is usually turned on at 6:00 in the evening. Dao Dao Islands. The name is shared by two islands within Illana Bay; thus the addition of Dako (big) and Gamay (small) to the names of the islands for simple distinction. "Dao Dao Dako" is the bigger island which is about a hectare and is about 7 to 10‑minute ride by motorboat from the seaport. It has artificial coral reefs made of old tires. "Dao Dao Gamay" is technically not an island, but a sandbar that partially submerges during high tide. Springland Resort is a natural springwater resort, it has three swimming pools, a fishpond and multi-function halls for gatherings. Puting Balas is the literal translation for "white sand" in the local dialect. It is classified as a white sandbar. A number of caves and waterfalls can also be found in remote barangays of the city. The Provincial Government Complex is the civic, sports and cultural center of the Province of Zamboanga del Sur of which Pagadian is the capital. A standard-sized oval track and field, standard-sized swimming pools and buildings for indoor/outdoor sports as well as a cultural village and the Unity Park, a monument to the Tri-people group (the Lumads, Moslems and Christians) who settled in Pagadian, are located there. The city is governed by the City Mayor. The local Sangguniang Panglungsod (City Legislative Council) is presided by the City Vice Mayor with ten elected councilors, and two ex-officio members from the Sangguniang Kabataan (Youth Council) and Association of Barangay Captains (ABC) respectively, as members of the council. The city mayor, vice mayor, and councilors are popularly elected to serve a three-year term. Pagadian is also the seat of the Provincial Government of Zamboanga del Sur. Elected officials for the 2019–2022 term are: Tricycles or Bao-Bao are the primary public transport in the urban center while jeepneys usually ply the city's rural barangays. Private vehicles comprises the largest percentage of the traffic. Buses, minibuses, and jeepneys are the modes of transportation for transients bound for the neighboring municipalities and other parts of Zamboanga del Sur. These short-travel transports also serve the bus terminal which is located downtown. Airport. The city is served by a Principal Airport Class 1 (or major domestic). It is located in Barangay Muricay, approximately five kilometers from the city proper. The airport serves as the only air portal in the Province of Zamboanga del Sur with direct flights to and from Manila and Cebu. Seaport. The port of Pagadian City is served by shipping lines operating for both passenger and cargo vessels. Ports of call include Zamboanga City, Jolo and Siasi in Sulu, Bongao and Sitangkai in Tawi-tawi, and Cotabato City. Integrated Bus Terminal (IBT-Main). Served by two major bus companies and several other smaller Public Utility Vehicles(PUVs), i.e. vans, the terminal sits atop the hill as the station for both Eastbound and Westbound transport, particularly for public transports bound for Zamboanga City, Butuan, Ozamiz City, Dipolog, Iligan City, Cagayan de Oro, Cotabato City, Kidapawan City, Digos City, Davao CitY, Tacurong City, Koronadal City, and General Santos City. Integrated Bus Terminal (Annex Palacio), Served by several mini bus companies and other smaller PUVs, the terminal sits in urban Sta. Lucia District, as the station for both Eastbound and Westbound transport, particularly for public transport bound for neighboring towns especially in the Baganian Peninsula area. Telecommunications Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company (PLDT) and Cruztelco are the two major telecommunications providers. A project under the Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC), the Pagadian City Telephone Exchange (PACITELEX) serves the far-flung barangays that other telephone companies are not yet able to give service. Various cellular phone service providers in the country serve the city. Water and Power Supply Pagadian City Water District (PCWD or PAWAD) provides the city with potable water supply. Formed in 1976, PCWD has over 14,000 active service connections and sources its water from deep wells and springs. Electricity Electricity is supplied by the Zamboanga del Sur I Electric Cooperative, Incorporated (ZAMSURECO I) from the National Power Corporation Hydro-Electric Plant in Iligan City, sourced from the Maria Cristina Falls. About 77.70% or 42 out of 54 total barangays in the entire city have 24-hour supply of electricity. Educational institutions in Pagadian include: High School: Pagadian Junior College Incorporated (PJCI) (Junior and Senior High) Pagadian City Chamber School Pagadian City Science High School Pagadian City Pilot School Zamboanga del Sur National High School Holy Child Academy College: Medina College-Pagadian Saint Columban College Southern Mindanao Colleges Western Mindanao State University - External Studies Unit Universidad de Zamboanga - Pagadian Campus Pagadian Capitol College Eastern Mindanao College of Technology Zoom Vocational & Technical School West Prime Horizon Institute (SHS & College) Our Lady of Triumph Institute of Technology (OLT) Yllana Bay View College Pagadian City International College (PCIC) Zamboanga Del Sur, Pagadian Capitol College J.H. Cerilles State College (JHCSC) Southeast Asian Institute Pagadian City Campus Lucan Review Colleges Pagadian International College of Philsouth Inc. (Senior HS. and College) DXPR 603 RMN Pagadian (Radio Mindanao Network) DXBZ 756 Radyo Bagting (Baganian Broadcasting Corporation) DXKP 1377 Radyo Ronda (Radio Philippines Network) 91.1 Voice Radio (Kaissar Broadcasting Network) 91.9 Radyo Natin (Manila Broadcasting Company) 93.5 FMR (Philippine Collective Media Corporation) 94.1 Radio One (MIT Radio-TV Network, Inc.) 96.7 iFM (Radio Mindanao Network) 98.3 Energy FM (Ultrasonic Broadcasting System) 99.1 Muews Radio (Sagay Broadcasting Corporation) 99.9 Radyo Bisdak (Times Broadcasting Network Corporation) 103.1 Radyo Kidlat (Zamboanga del Sur I Electric Cooperative, Inc.; affiliated with Philippine Broadcasting Service) 103.9 LCM FM (Subic Broadcasting Corporation; operated by Loud Cry Ministries) 104.7 Radyo Sakto (Malindang Broadcasting Network Corporation) 105.7 Brigada News FM (Baycomms Broadcasting Corporation/Brigada Mass Media Corporation) 106.3 Bell FM (Baganian Broadcasting Corporation) 107.1 Juander Radyo (Capitol Broadcasting Center; operated by RSV Broadcasting Services) 88.7 CocoyBags Radio 101.5 DXID-FM Islamic Radio GMA Channel 3 Pagadian GTV Channel 26 Pagadian PTV - 11 Peoples Television Network Kismet Cable TV Unique Cable TV Cignal TV SatLite G Sat Antonio Cerilles - former Secretary of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) during the term of President Joseph Estrada; (from 1998 to 2001); Governor of Zamboanga del Sur from 2010 to 2019. Mateo Olivar - Catholic church worker of the Diocese of Pagadian assassinated during the Marcos dictatorship and one of the first to be formally acknowledged as a martyr of the religious sector's resistance against the Marcos dictatorship at the Philippines’ Bantayog ng mga Bayani. Enrique Ona - former Secretary of Health (2010 - December 19, 2014); former executive director of the National Kidney and Transplant Institute. Francese Therese Pinlac - is a member of MNL48's Team L. She was also a member of TGC Senbatsu before being promoted as an official member of MNL48, the official sister group of the highest-selling JPOP phenomenon, AKB48. Divina Grace Yu - current 1st district Representative of Zamboanga del Sur, and former vice mayor of Pagadian. Victor Yu - current Governor of Zamboanga del Sur from 2019–present. Cooma, New South Wales, Australia - established in 1975 through the Philippine-Australian Development Assistance Programme (PADAP) being with the contract with the Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation, based in the City of Cooma, which undertook development projects within the Province of Zamboanga del Sur. Koronadal City "Little Hongkong of the South". Retrieved March 29, 2009.  City of Pagadian | (DILG) "2015 Census of Population, Report No. 3 – Population, Land Area, and Population Density" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. Quezon City, Philippines. August 2016. ISSN 0117-1453. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 25, 2021. Retrieved July 16, 2021. Census of Population (2020). "Region IX (Zamboanga Peninsula)". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved July 8, 2021. "PSA Releases the 2018 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates". Philippine Statistics Authority. December 15, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2022. "Proclamation 1247" (PDF). The Official Gazette. November 8, 2021. Retrieved November 15, 2021. Tourism Philippines (retrieved: July 17, 2012) The Inclined Tricycles of Pagadian City (retrieved: July 17, 2012) My Pagadian.com(retrieved: March 31, 2009) "Legend of Pagadian City". Pagadian.com. Archived from the original on February 8, 2009. Retrieved April 26, 2009. The Iranon Tribe Blogspot (retrieved: March 29, 2009) "History of the Diocese of Pagadian - translated from Cebuano". Pagadian.com. Archived from the original on May 28, 2009. Retrieved April 26, 2009. "Ucan Diocesan Profiles". UCA News. April 22, 2009. Retrieved July 11, 2010.[dead link] Kent Holmes, Wendell Fertig and His Guerrilla Forces in the Philippines: Fighting the Japanese Occupation (Jefferson, N.C.: 2015), p. 116 Miclat, Gus (2002). "Our lives were never the same again". In Arguillas, Carolyn O. (ed.). Turning rage into courage : Mindanao under martial law. MindaNews Publications, Mindanao News and Information Cooperative Center. OCLC 644320116. The Bangsamoro Struggle for Self-Determintation: A Case Study Colin Mackerras; Foundation Professor in the School of Asian and International Studies Colin Mackerras (September 2, 2003). Ethnicity in Asia. Routledge. pp. 143–. ISBN 978-1-134-51517-2. Rodis, Rodel (January 30, 2015). "Remembering the First Quarter Storm". INQUIRER.net. Retrieved September 15, 2020. See "History of the Philippines: From Indios Bravos to Filipinos" By Luis H. Francia|[1] Link to page in the referenced book For an in-depth survey of indigenous peoples and forced land seizures in the Philippines, see [2] Cultural Survival Quarterly. George, T. J. S. (1980). Revolt in Mindanao : the rise of Islam in Philippine politics. Kuala Lumpur. ISBN 0-19-580429-5. OCLC 6569089.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) "Alfred McCoy, Dark Legacy: Human rights under the Marcos regime". Ateneo de Manila University. September 20, 1999. Abinales, P.N.; Amoroso, Donna J. (2005). State and society in the Philippines. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. ISBN 978-0742510234. OCLC 57452454. Pedroso, Kate (September 21, 2014). "'San Juanico Bridge,' other tortures detailed". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Agoncillo, Teodoro (1990). History of the Filipino People (8th ed.). Quezon City: C & E Publishing. Robles, Raissa (2016). Marcos Martial Law: Never Again. Quezon City: Filipinos for a Better Philippines, Inc. ISBN 978-621-95443-1-3. "Gone too soon: 7 youth leaders killed under Martial Law". Rappler. Retrieved June 15, 2018. Rachman, Arpan (December 2, 2014). "Private Armed Militias Worsen Impunity". Retrieved May 11, 2016. The Philippines: Violations of the Laws of War by Both Sides. Human Rights Watch. 1990. p. 41. ISBN 0929692527. Civilian Home Defense Forces. Report of an Amnesty International Mission to the Republic of the Philippines, 11 – 28 Nov 1981 (PDF) (Report). Amnesty International. November 28, 1981. "Mateo Olivar - Bantayog ng mga Bayani". June 20, 2023. Philippines Law Online (retrieved: March 16, 2009) "CONVERSION OF THE CITY OF PAGADIAN, ZAMBOANGA DEL SUR INTO A HIGHLY-URBANIZED CITY" (PDF). Official Gazette of the Republic of the Philippines. Retrieved July 5, 2023. Labangan Teachers, p69. (retrieved: March 29, 2009) 1stphilippines.com - Pagadian History Archived February 22, 2009, at the Wayback Machine (retrieved: March 29, 2009) History of Zamboanga del Sur, p37-38 (retrieved: March 29, 2009) History of Zamboanga del Sur, p38 (retrieved: March 29, 2009) "An act to create the municipality of Dimataling in the province of Zamboanga". LawPH.com. Archived from the original on July 12, 2012. Retrieved April 9, 2011. "An Act Creating Municipality of Dumalinao in the Province of Zamboanga Del Sur". LawPH.com. Archived from the original on July 10, 2012. Retrieved April 12, 2011. "The Philippine Tsunami of 1976". www.drgeorgepc.com. Retrieved April 26, 2009. Phivolcs Report, Earthquake of 1976 Archived April 27, 2011, at the Wayback Machine(retrieved: March 31, 2009) "Pagadian: Average Temperatures and Rainfall". Meteoblue. Retrieved May 1, 2020. "Province: Zamboanga del Sur". PSGC Interactive. Quezon City, Philippines: Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved November 12, 2016. Census of Population (2015). "Region IX (Zamboanga Peninsula)". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved June 20, 2016. Census of Population and Housing (2010). "Region IX (Zamboanga Peninsula)" (PDF). Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. National Statistics Office. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Censuses of Population (1903–2007). "Region IX (Zamboanga Peninsula)". Table 1. Population Enumerated in Various Censuses by Province/Highly Urbanized City: 1903 to 2007. National Statistics Office.{{cite encyclopedia}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Province of Zamboanga del Sur". Municipality Population Data. Local Water Utilities Administration Research Division. Retrieved December 17, 2016. "Cebuano, Hiligaynon, ilonggo, Aklanon, Capiznon, Kinaray-a, Bantoanon, Romblomanon, Cuyonon, Waray, Surigaonon, Butuanon, Tausog, dialect, cebuano, bisayans, visayans, bisaya, bisaya, bisdak, bisayang dako, bisaya, binisaya, bisaya, language". Pagadian.org. March 27, 2009. Retrieved March 23, 2022. Top 10 Wealthiest Cities in Mindanao 2023 (retrieved: July 29, 2023) Unsapa.com - ZamboSur Anniversary Archived November 20, 2008, at the Wayback Machine (retrieved: April 26, 2009) PIA - Zamboanga del Sur (retrieved: April 26, 2009) CAAP Official Website – About Us Archived October 30, 2013, at the Wayback Machine Local Water Utilities Administration Website Archived January 6, 2009, at the Wayback Machine(retrieved: March 28, 2009) "UCA News". Union of Catholic Asian News. November 26, 1998. Archived from the original on October 4, 2023. Retrieved October 4, 2023. "Martyrs and Heroes: Mateo Olivar". Bantayog ng mga Bayani website. June 20, 2023. Archived from the original on October 4, 2023. Retrieved October 4, 2023. City of Pagadian Official Website - Geographical Location(retrieved: July 17, 2012) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pagadian. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Pagadian. Pagadian Philippine Standard Geographic Code Philippine Census Information Official website Basic Facts for Pagadian