The Devil All the Time is a 2020 American Southern Gothic psychological crime thriller film directed by Antonio Campos, from a screenplay co-written with his brother Paulo, based on the novel of the same name by Donald Ray Pollock (who also serves as the film's narrator). The film follows several characters whose stories weave together in two Southern Ohio towns during the period from the end of World War II to the 1960s. It features an ensemble cast that includes Tom Holland, Bill Skarsgård, Sebastian Stan, Robert Pattinson, Riley Keough, Haley Bennett, Eliza Scanlen, Mia Wasikowska, and Jason Clarke. The Devil All the Time was released in select theaters on September 11, 2020, and on Netflix on September 16, 2020. It received polarizing reviews from critics, who praised the performances (particularly Holland and Pattinson) but were critical of the film's length and dark tone. During World War II, while serving in the Solomon Islands, U.S. Marine Willard Russell finds Gunnery Sergeant Miller Jones skinned and crucified by Japanese soldiers. Willard ends Jones's agony by shooting him with a nearby Luger pistol. After the war, on his way home to Coal Creek, West Virginia, Willard passes through Meade, Ohio, where he meets Charlotte, a waitress at a diner, and a photographer named Carl Henderson. Willard and Charlotte marry and move to Knockemstiff, Ohio, where they have a son, whom they name Arvin. In 1950, Helen Hatton marries Roy Laferty. Roy is a bizarre, albeit charismatic, evangelical preacher who pours venomous spiders over his head while giving sermons to demonstrate his faith in God. Helen and Roy have a daughter named Lenora. During a sermon, Roy is bitten by a spider on his face and has a severe allergic reaction that affects his grip on reality, coming to believe that he can resurrect the dead. Roy takes Helen out in the woods and stabs her in the neck with a screwdriver before trying and failing to resurrect her. A distraught Roy hitchhikes and is picked up by photographer Carl Henderson and his wife Sandy, who met at the same time and place Willard and Charlotte did. Carl and Sandy are revealed to be serial killers who pick up male hitchhikers and encourage them to have sex with Sandy while Carl takes photographs before murdering them. Roy refuses to have sex with Sandy but Carl kills him anyway. In 1957, Charlotte is diagnosed with cancer. Willard believes he can influence God with fervent prayer to remove the cancer from his wife's body. He prays to God and sacrifices Arvin's dog on a rustic cross he had erected in the woods behind his house. Charlotte dies despite his efforts, and Willard commits suicide by slitting his throat; his death is investigated by Sandy's brother, corrupt Sheriff Lee Bodecker. Arvin, now orphaned, goes to live with his grandmother Emma, who has also adopted Lenora. In 1965, Arvin - now a young adult working manual jobs around town - is given Willard's Luger as a birthday present. He is fiercely protective of high school-aged Lenora who is bullied by some local greasers, prompting Arvin to one day attack and beat them all mercilessly. Lenora grows close to the new, self-righteous Reverend Preston Teagardin, whom Arvin resents for previously ridiculing Emma. The pedophilic Preston grooms Lenora and she becomes pregnant. When she informs Preston, he rejects her. Overwhelmed by her bullying and pregnancy, Lenora hangs herself, though she briefly reconsiders. After the autopsy, Arvin is told that she was pregnant and deduces that Preston was the father. He follows Preston and sees him grooming another girl. Alone at church together, Arvin confronts Preston about Lenora and shoots and kills him with the Luger before fleeing. Arvin decides to hitchhike to his childhood home in Knockemstiff and is picked up by Carl and Sandy, whose relationship has become acrimonious. Realizing Carl's intentions, Arvin kills them both in self-defense. He finds evidence of their serial killings and takes some of it with him. Lee learns about her murder and, to protect himself and his coming reelection, goes to Carl and Sandy's apartment where he finds and burns Carl's photo collection. Investigating Carl's and Sandy's deaths, Lee eventually concludes it was Arvin, who has gone to bury his dog at Willard's cross. Lee tracks Arvin there and, armed with a shotgun, attempts to kill him and get revenge. A shootout ensues and Arvin shoots Lee in the stomach. As Lee dies, Arvin plants his copy of the evidence of Carl and Sandy's killing spree on his body so it can be revealed. As Preston's death is also uncovered, Arvin hitchhikes out of the area with a hippie headed to Cincinnati. As they drive off, Arvin falls asleep and contemplates his future, which he imagines will be very similar to Willard's. Tom Holland as Arvin Russell Michael Banks Repeta as Young Arvin Bill Skarsgård as Willard Russell, Arvin's father Riley Keough as Sandy Henderson, Lee's sister Jason Clarke as Carl Henderson, Sandy's husband Sebastian Stan as Deputy Lee Bodecker, Sandy's brother Haley Bennett as Charlotte Russell, Arvin's mother Harry Melling as Roy Laferty, Lenora's father Eliza Scanlen as Lenora Laferty Mia Wasikowska as Helen Hatton, Lenora's mother Robert Pattinson as Rev. Preston Teagardin Douglas Hodge as Leroy Brown Kristin Griffith as Emma Russell, Willard's mother and Lenora's adoptive mother Pokey LaFarge as Theodore, Roy's cousin In addition, narration throughout the film is performed by Donald Ray Pollock, author of the novel. Production for The Devil All the Time was announced in September 2018, with Tom Holland, Robert Pattinson, Chris Evans and Mia Wasikowska in talks to star. Antonio Campos was set to write and direct the film, with Jake Gyllenhaal serving as producer. In January 2019, Bill Skarsgård and Eliza Scanlen joined the cast, and Netflix was set to distribute the film. Sebastian Stan was cast to replace Evans, after scheduling conflicts caused him to drop out and personally recommended Stan for the role. Additionally, Jason Clarke, Riley Keough and Haley Bennett were announced as part of the cast, and in March 2019, Harry Melling also joined. Danny Bensi and Saunder Jurriaans composed the film's score. Principal photography began on February 19, 2019, in Alabama, with filming locations including Anniston, Pell City, Birmingham, and Montevallo. Filming completed on April 15, 2019. Campos stated that visual inspiration from the film mainly stemmed from the visual descriptions that Pollock provided in the novel itself. "The book kind of offers these amazing moments and images, things like, the prayer log, Carl's photographs in the book," Campos stated, "it gets your mind going." The film's visual style is inspired by painter Andrew Wyeth and photographer William Eggleston. Campos stated that the scenes that were inspired by Eggleston's work were mainly due to how colorful they were. Appalachia itself also inspired Campos and company when they were considering the visuals in the film. Campos wanted the film to mirror what Appalachia looked like during the timeline when the story takes place. The Devil All the Time was released in select theaters on September 11, 2020, and digitally, on Netflix, on September 16, 2020. The film was the most-watched on Netflix over its first two days, and third overall in its first five days. In November 2020, Variety reported the film was the 22nd-most watched straight-to-streaming title of 2020 up to that point. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 65% of 219 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 6.4/10. The website's consensus reads: "The Devil All the Time's descent into darkness can be harrowing to the point of punishment, but it's offset by strong work from a stellar cast." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 55 out of 100, based on 39 critics, indicating "mixed or average" reviews. The Chicago Tribune's Michael Phillips wrote, "It's easy on the eyes... worth seeing for an intriguingly cast ensemble, authenticating the milieu as much as possible. Holland's terrific, taking in each new setback in [his character's] life without revealing the full extent of the damage." Ryan Lattanzio of IndieWire gave The Devil All the Time a "C−" and called it "colossal misfire, a sweaty mess from start to finish," although he praised Holland and Pattinson's performances. Owen Gleiberman of Variety said that "it's hard to imagine how a movie with this much sordid crime and violence could be this rote" and wrote "The Devil All the Time shows us a lot of bad behavior, but the movie isn't really interested in what makes the sinners tick. And without that lurid curiosity, it's just a series of Sunday School lessons: a noir that wants to scrub away the darkness." Kroll, Justin (January 16, 2019). "'It' Star Bill Skarsgard and 'Sharp Objects' Actress Eliza Scanlen Join Netflix's 'The Devil All The Time'". Variety. Archived from the original on September 16, 2020. Retrieved January 16, 2019. Keene, Allison (January 16, 2019). "Chris Evans, Tom Holland Lead A-List Cast for Netflix Film 'The Devil All the Time'". Collider. Archived from the original on September 16, 2020. Retrieved February 19, 2020. Fleming, Mike Jr. (February 14, 2019). "Sebastian Stan Replacing Chris Evans In Netflix Film 'The Devil All The Time'". Archived from the original on September 16, 2020. Retrieved February 14, 2019. Fleming, Mike Jr. (February 19, 2019). "Haley Bennett, Jason Clarke, Riley Keough Join 'The Devil All The Time' At Netflix". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 16, 2020. Retrieved February 19, 2019. Wiseman, Andreas (March 4, 2019). "Netflix's Starry Pic 'The Devil All The Time' Adds 'Buster Scruggs' Star Harry Melling, Shoot Underway". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved March 4, 2019. "Danny Bensi & Saunder Jurriaans to Score Antonio Campos's 'The Devil All The Time'". FilmMusicReporter. November 20, 2019. Archived from the original on September 16, 2020. Retrieved July 17, 2020. "Make a Deal With 'The Devil All the Time'". Backstage. Archived from the original on February 19, 2019. Retrieved January 2, 2019. "Locations". latlong. Archived from the original on December 31, 2020. Retrieved August 26, 2020. Project Casting (February 8, 2019). "Tom Holland's 'The Devil All The Time' is Now Casting!". Archived from the original on December 31, 2020. Retrieved September 15, 2020. "Filming for the multi-million $$ @netflix film, "The Devil All the Time" happening in Bham today (Highland Park). Crew member says they're shooting the whole movie in AL & will wrap up April 15. The story is based on a book by David Ray Pollock & takes place in Ohio and West VA". Twitter. Archived from the original on October 11, 2020. Retrieved April 15, 2019. "Inspirations behind THE DEVIL ALL TIME". Instagram. Archived from the original on October 1, 2023. Retrieved April 30, 2022. Murray, Noel (September 14, 2020). "Everyone's a sinner in Antonio Campos' moody coal country crime drama The Devil All The Time". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on June 10, 2021. Retrieved November 6, 2022. Rottenberg, Josh (September 25, 2020). "With 'The Trial of the Chicago 7,' Netflix returns to movie theaters amid the pandemic". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 25, 2020. Retrieved November 6, 2022. Collis, Clark (July 17, 2020). "Tom Holland-starring Southern Gothic saga The Devil All the Time to premiere on Netflix in September". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 17, 2020. Retrieved July 17, 2020. Brueggemann, Tom (September 21, 2020). "'Antebellum' Immediate #1 on VOD Charts While RBG Films Soar on Apple TV". IndieWire. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved September 22, 2020. Bridge, Gavin (November 4, 2020). "DATA: 'BORAT 2' SECOND ONLY TO 'HAMILTON' IN MOST-WATCHED U.S. SVOD MOVIES OF 2020". Variety. Archived from the original on November 4, 2020. Retrieved November 4, 2020. "The Devil All the Time". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved August 20, 2023. "The Devil All the Time". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved August 20, 2023. Phillips, Michael (September 11, 2020). "'Devil All the Time' review: Tom Holland and Robert Pattinson wrestle with their sins in a bloody Southern Gothic". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on September 25, 2020. Retrieved September 11, 2020. Lattanzio, Ryan (September 11, 2020). "'The Devil All the Time' Review: Netflix and Antonio Campos' Bloated Gothic Profoundly Fails a Terrific Cast". IndieWire. Archived from the original on February 14, 2022. Retrieved September 11, 2020. Gleiberman, Owen. "'The Devil All the Time' Review: Tom Holland and Robert Pattinson in a Netflix Drama of Small-Town Sin". Variety. Archived from the original on December 31, 2020. Retrieved September 11, 2020. The Devil All the Time on Netflix The Devil All the Time at IMDb Portals:  Film  United States  Crime  Religion  Christianity