The 74th annual Berlin International Film Festival, usually called the Berlinale, took place between 15 and 25 February 2024 in Berlin, Germany. Kenyan-Mexican actress Lupita Nyong'o was named the Jury President for the main competition. This year’s Berlinale was Carlo Chatrian and Mariette Rissenbeek’s final edition in charge, following their dismissal in 2023. The festival opened with Tim Mielants' Small Things like These. Dahomey, directed by French-Senegalese filmmaker Mati Diop, won the Golden Bear, making it the second year in a row that a documentary won the festival's top prize, following On the Adamant's win in 2023. The Silver Bear Grand Jury Prize was awarded to A Traveler's Needs by Hong Sang-soo, and the Silver Bear for Best Leading Performance was awarded to Sebastian Stan for A Different Man. American filmmaker Martin Scorsese was awarded with the Honorary Golden Bear. Shortly before the Iranian film My Favourite Cake was selected for the Main Competition, filmmakers Behtash Sanaeeha and Maryam Moqadam were banned from leaving Iran to attend the Festival, had their passports confiscated, and will face a court trial in relation to their work as artists and filmmakers. The Iranian government decision was met, once again, with international protests, following Golden Bear winners Jafar Panahi and Mohammad Rasoulof arrests in 2022/2023, and numerous others censorship attempts in the last years. Amid controversy, Berlinale's directors Mariette Rissenbeek and Carlo Chatrian uninvited representatives of the far-right party Alternative for Germany (German: Alternative für Deutschland, AfD) from attending the festival’s Opening Ceremony Gala. The decision followes further controversies around the party statements in opposition to immigration. An open letter was signed by over 200 German cultural industry professionals expressing outrage with the invitations. In the introductory press release for the 2024 festival, Berlinale opted not to mention freedom of speech as one of their core values, despite having done so in the previous year's statement.[verification needed] During the festival, hundreds of past and present Berlinale participants signed open letters criticizing Berlinale's complicity in Germany's censorship of pro-Palestine voices, including over 280 Berlinale Talents alumni, over 190 filmmakers with films in the 2024 festival and over 60 Berlinale contractors.[verification needed] In further protest, John Greyson, Suneil Sanzgiri and Ayo Tsalithaba all withdrew their films from the festival, while Maryam Tafakory, Advik Beni, and Monica Sorelle dropped out of the Berlinale Talents programme and Emilia Beatriz withdrew from the European Film Market. Unlike its response to the public's outrage at the AfD invitation, Berlinale directors remained silent to the demands of their filmmakers, alumni, and contractors in support of Palestine.[citation needed] Throughout the festival, artists continued to use their platforms to make statements in solidarity with Palestine. On February 16, curators of the Berlinale's Forum Expanded program joined artist's expressions of solidarity, stating, "We, too, want to add our voice and share our concern by expressing that the Forum Expanded curators support the urgent call for an immediate ceasefire in Gaza." On February 18, pro-Palestine activists laid down on the front steps of the Gropius Bau drenched in fake blood with a sign reading, “Welcome to the Red Carpet,” while inside the building others unfurled pro-Palestinian banners from the upper floor. During the Closing Night Ceremony at the Berlinale Palast, on February 25, there were numerous pro-Palestine statements and protests during the red carpet and acceptance speeches, including from Golden Bear winner Mati Diop, and No Other Land Palestinian and Israeli filmmakers Basel Adra, Hamdan Ballal, Yuval Abraham, and Rachel Szor. The Teddy Award jury posted a statement in solidarity with Gaza which was met with audience applause as well as loud booing.[verification needed] An Instagram account linked to the Panorama section published an allegedly official statement from the festival organizers, stating "we acknowledge that our silence makes us complicit in Israel's ongoing genocide in Gaza and ethnic cleansing of Palestine" adding: "From our unresolved Nazi past to our genocidal present – we have always been on the wrong side of history." Minutes later, the Berlinale's main Instagram account stated that the Panorama account was hacked and the posts "do not represent the Berlinale's position", and announced plans to “file criminal charges against unknown persons”. During No Other Land acceptance speech, after winning the Best Documentary award, co-director Yuval Abraham stated, referring to his Palestinian co-director Basel: "I am under civilian law; Basel is under military law. We live 30 minutes from one another but I have voting rights. Basel does not have voting rights. I am free to move where I want in this land. Basel, like millions of Palestinians, is locked in the occupied West Bank. This situation of apartheid between us, this inequality, has to end". Berlin Mayor, Kai Wegner, and numerous other German politicians expressed outrage, calling the closing ceremony statements "anti-Semitic". Germany's minister of state for culture Claudia Roth was criticized for clapping during Basel and Yuval's speech, later she claimed that she was only clapping for the Israeli half of the filmmaking team, and declared that "The statements at the Bears ceremony were shockingly one-sided and characterized by a profound hatred of Israel". While the Festival is mainly funded by the German government, the organizers stated that the "filmmakers' statements were independent and should be accepted as long as they respect the legal framework". Following the ceremony, Abraham said that a right-wing mob in Israel had threatened his family after he was called antisemitic, stating, "The appalling misuse of this word by Germans... to silence Israelis like me who support a ceasefire... empties the word antisemitism of meaning and thus endangers Jews all over the world". Lupita Nyong'o, Kenyan-Mexican actress - Jury President Brady Corbet, American filmmaker and actor Ann Hui, Hong Kong-Chinese filmmaker and actress Christian Petzold, German filmmaker Jasmine Trinca, Italian actress and filmmaker Albert Serra, Spanish filmmaker Oksana Zabuzhko, Ukrainian novelist and poet Lisandro Alonso, Argentine filmmaker Denis Côté, Canadian filmmaker Tizza Covi, Italian filmmaker Ilker Çatak, German filmmaker Xabier Erkizia, Spanish sound artist and researcher Jennifer Reeder, American filmmaker, video artist and lecturer Amjad Abu Alala, Sudanese filmmaker Banafshe Hourmazdi, Iranian-German actress Ira Sachs, American filmmaker Eliza Hittman, American filmmaker Andréa Picard, Canadian Senior Film curator at the Toronto International Film Festival and advisor to the Marrakech International Film Festival Katrin Pors, Danish producer Abbas Fahdel, Iraqi filmmaker Thomas Heise, German filmmaker Véréna Paravel, French artist, and anthropologist The following films were selected for the main competition for the Golden Bear: The following films are selected for the Berlinale Special section: The following films are selected for the Encounters section: The following films are selected for the Berlinale's Short Film Competition section: The following films are selected for the Panorama section: The following films are selected for the Forum section: The following films are selected for the Generation sections: The following films are selected for the Berlinale Classics section: The following films are selected for the Retrospective section: Golden Bear: Dahomey by Mati Diop Silver Bear Grand Jury Prize: A Traveler's Needs by Hong Sang-soo Silver Bear Jury Prize: The Empire by Bruno Dumont Silver Bear for Best Director: Nelson Carlo De Los Santos Arias for Pepe Silver Bear for Best Leading Performance: Sebastian Stan for A Different Man Silver Bear for Best Supporting Performance: Emily Watson for Small Things like These Silver Bear for Best Screenplay: Matthias Glasner for Dying Silver Bear for Outstanding Artistic Contribution: Martin Gschlacht for The Devil’s Bath by Veronika Franz and Severin Fiala (cinematography) Martin Scorsese Edgar Reitz Cu Li Never Cries by Phạm Ngọc Lân No Other Land by Basel Adra, Hamdan Ballal, Yuval Abraham, Rachel Szor Special Mention: Direct Action by Guillaume Cailleau and Ben Russell Best Film: Direct Action by Guillaume Cailleau and Ben Russell Best Director: Juliana Rojas for Cidade; Campo Special Jury Award: Some Rain Must Fall by Qiu Yang The Great Yawn of History by Aliyar Rasti Golden Bear for Best Short Film: An Odd Turn by Francisco Lezama Silver Bear Jury Prize: Remains of the Hot Day by Wenqian Zhang Special Mention: That’s All from Me by Eva Könnemann Berlin Short Film Candidate for the European Film Awards: That’s All from Me by Eva Könnemann Feature film 1st place: Memories of a Burning Body by Antonella Sudasassi Furniss 2nd place: Crossing by Levan Akin 3rd place: All Shall Be Well by Ray Yeung Documentary 1st place: No Other Land by Basel Adra, Hamdan Ballal, Yuval Abraham, Rachel Szor 2nd place: My Stolen Planet by Farahnaz Sharifi 3rd place: Teaches of Peaches by Philipp Fussenegger, Judy Landkammer Generation Kplus International Jury Grand Prix of the International Jury for the Best Film: Reinas by Klaudia Reynicke Special Mention: Through Rocks and Clouds by Franco García Becerra Special Prize of the International Jury for the Best Short Film: A Summer's End Poem by Lam Can-zhao Special Mention: Uli by Mariana Gil Ríos Generation 14plus International Jury Grand Prix of the International Jury for the Best Film: Who by Fire by Philippe Lesage Special Mention: Maydegol by Sarvnaz Alambeigi Special Prize of the International Jury for the Best Short Film: A Bird Flew by Leinad Pájaro De la Hoz Special Mention: Songs of Love and Hate by Saurav Ghimire Children's Jury Generation Kplus Crystal Bear for the Best Film: It's Okay! by Kim Hye-young Special Mention: Young Hearts by Anthony Schatteman Crystal Bear for the Best Short Film: Butterfly by Florence Miailhe Special Mention: Amplified by Dina Naser Youth Jury Generation 14plus Crystal Bear for the Best Film: Last Swim by Sasha Nathwani Special Mention: She Sat There Like All Ordinary Ones by Qu Youjia Crystal Bear for the Best Short Film: Cura sana by Lucía G. Romero Special Mention: Lapse by Caroline Cavalcanti Best Feature Film: All Shall Be Well by Ray Yeung (Panorama) Best Documentary/Essay Film: Teaches of Peaches by Philipp Fussenegger, Judy Landkammer (Panorama) Best Short Film: Grandmamauntsistercat by Zuza Banasińska (Forum Expanded) Teddy Jury Award: Crossing by Levan Akin (Panorama) Special Teddy Award: Lothar Lambert "Berlinale Special 2024: First Film Titles". www.berlinale.de. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "Academy Award Winner Lupita Nyong'o to Be Jury President of the Berlinale 2024". www.berlinale.de. 11 December 2023. Retrieved 12 December 2023. Roxborough, Scott (17 January 2024). "Middle East, Gender Politics in Focus in Berlin Sidebars". The Hollywood Reporter. Roxborough, Scott (2 September 2023). "Berlin Film Festival Artistic Director Carlo Chatrian to Step Down After 2024 Edition". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 26 February 2024. "Small Things Like These Starring Cillian Murphy Set to Open Berlinale". www.berlinale.de. 18 January 2024. Retrieved 18 January 2024. Ntim, Zac (1 February 2024). "Berlin Film Festival: Christian Petzold, Ann Hui & Albert Serra Among Names Joining Lupita Nyong'o's International Jury". Deadline Hollywood. "The Prizes of the International Jury". www.berlinale.de. Retrieved 24 February 2024. Lodge, Guy (24 February 2024). "Mati Diop Doc Dahomey Wins Golden Bear at Berlin; Sebastian Stan and Emily Watson Take Acting Awards". Variety. Retrieved 24 February 2024. "The Honorary Golden Bear". www.berlinale.de. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "Berlinale Issues Call for Freedom of Movement, Freedom of Expression for Competition Directors Maryam Moghaddam & Behtash Sanaeeha". www.berlinale.de. Retrieved 4 February 2024. "Berlinale Makes Appeal For Iranian 2024 Golden Bear Contenders Maryam Moghaddam & Behtash Sanaeeha As They Barred From Travel". Deadline Hollywood. February 2024. Goodfellow, Melanie (1 February 2024). "Berlinale Makes Appeal For Iranian 2024 Golden Bear Contenders Maryam Moghaddam & Behtash Sanaeeha As They Barred From Travel". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "Leading German Filmmaker Says Berlinale Far-Right Invitation Is "Highly Problematic"". Deadline Hollywood. 6 February 2024. "Berlinale Opening: Disinvitation of AfD Politicians". www.berlinale.de. Retrieved 10 February 2024. "Berlin Film Festival Disinvites Far-Right Politicians From Opening Ceremony After Backlash". Variety. 8 February 2024. Keslassy, Elsa (8 February 2024). "Berlin Film Festival Disinvites Far-Right Politicians From Opening Ceremony After Backlash". Variety. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Dalton, Ben (8 February 2024). "Berlinale disinvites far-right AfD politicians from opening ceremony". Screen International. Retrieved 9 February 2024. "Lupita Nyong'o on Berlinale Disinviting Far-Right Politicians From Opening Ceremony: 'I'm Glad I Don't Have to Be in That Position'". Variety. 15 February 2024. "Berlinale Statement". www.berlinale.de. Retrieved 27 February 2024. "Berlinale 2023: Solidarity with Ukraine and Iran". www.berlinale.de. Retrieved 27 February 2024. "A statement from Berlinale Talents alumni". Google Docs. Retrieved 27 February 2024. "A letter from filmmakers participating in the 74th Berlinale". Google Docs. Retrieved 27 February 2024. "A statement from Berlinale workers - adding our voices". Google Docs. Retrieved 27 February 2024. Pontone, Maya (16 February 2024). "Berlinale Film Festival Curators Join Call for Gaza Ceasefire". Hyperallergic. Retrieved 27 February 2024. Meza, Ed (24 February 2024). "Hillary Clinton, Film Market Hit by Protests in Berlin as Pro-Palestinian Group Calls for Boycott of German Cultural Institutions". Variety. Retrieved 27 February 2024. "Instagram". www.instagram.com. Retrieved 27 February 2024. Welk, Brian (26 February 2024). "Berlinale Files Criminal Charges Against Hackers Who Posted Gaza Ceasefire Message". IndieWire. Retrieved 27 February 2024. Ntim, Zac (26 February 2024). "Berlin Mayor Criticizes "Anti-Semitic" Berlinale Closing Ceremony As Hackers Post Ceasefire Message To Fest's Social". Deadline. Retrieved 27 February 2024. Ntim, Zac (26 February 2024). "Berlin Mayor Criticizes "Anti-Semitic" Berlinale Closing Ceremony As Hackers Post Ceasefire Message To Fest's Social". Deadline. Retrieved 27 February 2024. Bergeson, Samantha (26 February 2024). "'No Other Land' Director Received 'Death Threats' After Calling for Gaza Ceasefire at Berlinale". IndieWire. Retrieved 27 February 2024. Ntim, Zac (26 February 2024). "Berlin Mayor Criticizes "Anti-Semitic" Berlinale Closing Ceremony As Hackers Post Ceasefire Message To Fest's Social". Deadline. Retrieved 27 February 2024. "Wegner und Roth kündigen Aufarbeitung von Israel-Kritik bei Berlinale an". www.rbb24.de. 26 February 2024. Retrieved 27 February 2024. Oltermann, Philip (27 February 2024). "German minister says she clapped Israeli film-maker, not his Palestinian colleague, at Berlinale". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 27 February 2024. Sharma, Gouri. "'Complete censorship': Germany's Palestinian diaspora fights crackdown". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 27 February 2024. "Berlinale film festival marred by 'antisemitic' protests". euronews. 26 February 2024. Retrieved 26 February 2024. Vicente, Álex (20 February 2024). "The Berlinale on the war front: How the Israel–Palestine conflict undermined the film festival". El País. Retrieved 26 February 2024. Frater, Patrick (26 February 2024). "Berlin Film Festival Files Criminal Charges After Anti-Semitic Hacking, Criticizes Award-Winner Statements". Variety. Vlessing, Etan (27 February 2024). "Israeli Filmmaker Slams German Politicians for Branding Berlin Award-Winning Speech "Antisemitic"". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 28 February 2024. "Awards & Juries". www.berlinale.de. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Parfitt, Orlando (17 January 2024). "Berlinale unveils complete 2024 Panorama, Generation, Forum sections". Screen International. Retrieved 3 February 2024. "The 2024 Berlinale Classics Section Presents Ten World Premieres of Films in Their Digitally Restored Versions". www.berlinale.de. Retrieved 16 January 2024. "Berlinale Classics 2024:Silent Film Classic Kohlhiesel's Daughters by Ernst Lubitsch in the World Premiere of the 4K Restored Version". www.berlinale.de. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "Berlinale Camera". www.berlinale.de. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "GWFF Best First Feature Award". www.berlinale.de. Retrieved 24 February 2024. "Berlinale Documentary Award and Jury". www.berlinale.de. Retrieved 24 February 2024. "The Awards and Jury of Encounters". www.berlinale.de. Retrieved 24 February 2024. "The Awards and Jury of Berlinale Shorts". www.berlinale.de. Retrieved 24 February 2024. "The Panorama Audience Awards". www.berlinale.de. Retrieved 24 February 2024. "Generation Awards and Juries". www.berlinale.de. Retrieved 24 February 2024. "Here they are! The winners of the 38. TEDDY AWARD | #teddyaward". 23 February 2024. Retrieved 24 February 2024. Wikimedia Commons has media related to 2024 Berlin Film Festival. Official website