Andrés Manuel López Obrador (Spanish: [anˈdɾes maˈnwel ˈlopes oβɾaˈðoɾ] ; born 13 November 1953), also known by his initials AMLO, is a Mexican politician who is the 65th and current president of Mexico. He previously served as Head of Government of Mexico City from 2000 to 2005. Born in Tepetitán, in the municipality of Macuspana, in the south-eastern state of Tabasco, López Obrador earned a degree in political science from the National Autonomous University of Mexico following a hiatus from his studies to participate in politics. He began his political career in 1976 as a member of the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI). His first public position was as director of the Indigenous Institute of Tabasco, where he promoted the addition of books in indigenous languages and the project of the Chontal ridge. In 1989, he joined the Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD), becoming the party's 1994 candidate for Governor of Tabasco and national leader between 1996 and 1999. In 2000, he was elected Head of Government of Mexico City. During his tenure, his crime, infrastructure and social spending policies made him a popular figure on the Mexican left. In 2004, his state immunity from prosecution was removed after refusing to cease construction on land allegedly expropriated by his predecessor, Rosario Robles. This legal process lasted a year, ending with López Obrador maintaining his right to run for office. López Obrador was nominated as the presidential candidate for the Coalition for the Good of All during the 2006 elections, where he was narrowly defeated by the National Action Party (PAN) candidate Felipe Calderón. While the Federal Electoral Tribunal noted a number of irregularities, it denied López Obrador's request for a general recount, which sparked protests across the country. In 2011, he founded Morena, a civil association and later political party. He was a candidate for the Progressive Movement coalition in the 2012 elections, won by the Commitment to Mexico coalition candidate Enrique Peña Nieto. In 2012, he left the PRD after protesting the party's signing of the Pact for Mexico and joined Morena. As part of the Juntos Haremos Historia coalition, López Obrador was elected president after a landslide victory in the 2018 general election. Described as being center-left, progressive, left-wing populist, social democratic, and economic nationalist, López Obrador has been a national politician for over three decades. During his presidency, he has promoted public investment in sectors that had been liberalized under previous administrations and has implemented several progressive social reforms. Supporters have praised him for promoting institutional renewal after decades of high inequality and corruption and refocusing the country's neoliberal consensus towards improving the state of the working class. Critics have claimed that he and his administration stumbled in their response to the COVID-19 pandemic and attempts to deal with drug cartels. López Obrador was born in Tepetitán, a small village in the municipality of Macuspana, in the southern state of Tabasco, on 13 November 1953. He is the firstborn son of Andrés López Ramón (son of Lorenzo López and Beatriz Ramón) and Manuela Obrador González, Tabasco and Veracruz-based merchants. His younger siblings include José Ramón, José Ramiro, Pedro Arturo, Pío Lorenzo, and twins Candelaria Beatriz and Martín Jesús. His maternal grandfather José Obrador Revuelta was a Cantabrian who arrived as an exile in Mexico from Ampuero, Spain, while his maternal grandmother Úrsula González was the daughter of Asturians. Through his paternal grandparents, López Obrador is also of Indigenous and African descent. López Obrador attended the only elementary school in town, the Marcos E. Becerra school, managed by the Seventh-day Adventist Church and named after the Mexican poet of the same name. During afternoons, he helped his parents at the La Posadita store. López Obrador began middle school in Macuspana but finished it in the state capital of Villahermosa, where his family moved in the mid-1960s and opened a clothes and shoe store called Novedades Andrés. On 8 June 1969, when he was 15 years old, his brother José Ramón López Obrador died from a gunshot to the head. According to Jorge Zepeda Patterson's [es] Los Suspirantes 2018, José Ramón found a pistol, played with it, and it slipped out of his hands, firing a bullet into his head. The Tabasco newspapers Rumbo Nuevo, Diario de Tabasco, and Diario Presente presented a story where they were both playing around with the pistol and that Andrés Manuel fired it by accident. According to Zepeda Patterson, Andrés Manuel became "taciturn, much more thoughtful" following the incident. López Obrador finished high school and, at age 19, went to Mexico City to study at the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM). He studied political science and public administration at the UNAM from 1973 to 1976. He returned to school to complete his education after having held several positions within the government of Tabasco and the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI). In 1987, he received a degree in political science and public administration after the presentation of his thesis, Proceso de formación del Estado Nacional en México 1821-1867 (Formation Process of the National State in Mexico 1821–1867). He lived in the Casa del Estudiante Tabasco during his college years on Violeta Street in the Guerrero neighborhood of Mexico City. The institution was financed by the administration of Tabasco governor Mario Trujillo García through efforts of the poet Carlos Pellicer, with whom López Obrador began discussing. There was empathy between the two because the young man raised his concern for the Chontal Maya. After the meeting, the poet invited him to his senate campaign during the 1976 elections. His university professor, Enrique González Pedrero, was another figure that influenced López Obrador's political trajectory. After attending school from 1973 to 1976, he returned to his native Tabasco, where he held various government positions and was a professor at the Juárez Autonomous University of Tabasco. During his stint, he met Rocío Beltrán Medina, a sociology student, who suggested López Obrador embrace the progressive wing of the PRI. They eventually married on 8 April 1978. They had three sons: José Ramón López Beltrán (born 1981), Andrés Manuel López Beltrán (born 1986), and Gonzalo Alfonso López Beltrán (born 1991). Beltrán Medina died on 12 January 2003 due to respiratory arrest caused by lupus, which she had suffered for several years. On 16 October 2006, he married Beatriz Gutiérrez Müller, who had worked in the Mexico City government during his tenure as Head of Government of Mexico City. Together they have one son, Jesús Ernesto. During his first presidential run, some news reports identified López Obrador as a Protestant; in a television interview, he self-identified as a Roman Catholic. In March 2018, he declared, "When I am asked what religion I adhere to, I say that I am a Christian, in the broadest sense of the word, because Christ is love and justice is love." López Obrador has held a variety of nicknames throughout his life, including El Molido, El Americano (The American), La Piedra (The Rock), El Comandante (The Commander), and the most popular among them is El Peje, named after the common Tabasco fish, the pejelagarto. A baseball fan, his favorite sportsteam is the St. Louis Cardinals. López Obrador was named one of Time magazine's 100 Most Influential People of 2019. On 24 January 2021, he announced that he had tested positive for COVID-19. Member of the PRI He joined the PRI in 1976 to support Carlos Pellicer's campaign for a Senate seat for Tabasco. A year later, he headed the Indigenous People's Institute of Tabasco. In 1984, he relocated to Mexico City to work at the National Consumers' Institute, a federal government agency. Member of the PRD López Obrador resigned from his position with the government of Tabasco in 1988 to join the new dissenting left wing of the PRI, then called the Democratic Current, led by Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas. This movement formed the National Democratic Front and later became the Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD). In 1994, he ran for the governorship of Tabasco but lost to PRI candidate Roberto Madrazo. López Obrador gained national exposure as an advocate for the rights of indigenous people when, in 1996, he appeared on national TV drenched in blood following confrontations with police for blocking Pemex oil wells to defend the rights of local indigenous people impacted by pollution. He was president of the PRD from 2 August 1996 to 10 April 1999. On 2 July 2000, he was elected Head of Government of the Federal District, a position akin to that of city mayor for the national capital district, with 38.3% of the vote. As mayor, López Obrador implemented various social programs that included extending financial assistance to help vulnerable groups in Mexico City, including single mothers, senior citizens, and the physically and mentally challenged. He invested in housing and schools, created old-age pensions, and expanded services. He also helped found the first new university in Mexico City in three decades, the Universidad Autónoma de la Ciudad de México. López Obrador hired former New York City mayor Rudy Giuliani to craft a zero-tolerance policy that would help reduce crime in Mexico City. He directed the restoration and modernization of Mexico City's historic downtown, which has 16th- and 17th-century buildings and many tourist spaces. He led a joint venture with billionaire businessman Carlos Slim Helú, a native of downtown Mexico City, to expropriate, restore, rebuild, and gentrify large parts of the area, creating shopping and residential areas for middle- and upper-income residents. López Obrador used fiscal policy to encourage private sector investment in housing. He granted construction firms tax breaks and liberalized zoning regulations, leading to the construction of more condominiums and office buildings during his tenure than during any other period in Mexico City's history. New high-density condos emerged in the upscale neighborhoods of Polanco and Lomas de Chapultepec. To improve traffic flow on the city's two main inner-city roads, Periférico and Viaducto, he added sections of second stories to the Anillo Periférico. He renovated about 10% of those roads. The Metrobús, an express bus service based on the Curitiba model, was built down Avenida Insurgentes, cutting through the city some 20 km from north to south. López Obrador's popularity diminished after the lynching of two federal law-enforcement officers performing an undercover investigation in Tláhuac in November 2004. The Mexico City Police rescued one agent, but the city's chief of police, Marcelo Ebrard, and federal Secretary of Public Safety, Ramón Martín Huerta, were both accused of not organizing a timely rescue effort. López Obrador's secretary of government, Alejandro Encinas, was criticized for declaring that the lynching should be understood as stemming from indigenous customary law (usos y costumbres). After a thorough investigation, López Obrador gave Ebrard a vote of confidence, despite a request from President Vicente Fox Quesada for him to be relieved of duty. Later, using his constitutional powers, Fox fired Ebrard. At the same time, Martín Huerta, a member of Fox's cabinet, received a reprimand and continued to hold office as Secretary of Public Safety until he died in a helicopter accident. López Obrador later appointed Ebrard as Secretary of Social Development and supported his candidacy in the PRD primaries to run for office as Head of Government of the Federal District in 2006. Elected government officials in Mexico have an official immunity called fuero that prevents criminal charges from being brought against them, which can be removed through desafuero. In 2004, the Attorney General's Office asked Congress to strip López Obrador of his immunity under charges of a misdemeanor (ignoring a court order). The misdemeanor against López Obrador was his refusal to order the cessation of the construction of a private hospital on land expropriated by Rosario Robles (who preceded López Obrador as Head of Government of the Federal District under the Ernesto Zedillo government). Under federal law, any person with criminal charges during the electoral process would not be eligible to run in a presidential election. A legal process begun in 2004 would likely have continued during the presidential campaigns of 2006, ending López Obrador's presidential run. Although his political opponents argued he should be subject to the same judicial process as anyone else, newspaper editorials throughout the world charged that the desafuero was politically motivated (including The New York Times and The Washington Post), that it undermined Mexican democracy, and that López Obrador's exclusion from the upcoming elections would delegitimize the eventual winner. After Congress voted to remove López Obrador's immunity, he asked for leave from his post for a few days. President Vicente Fox, wanting to avoid a political crisis and knowing that the decision made by Congress was widely unpopular, appeared on national television in April 2005, stating that the issue would not be pursued further. The controversy closed on a technicality, and López Obrador, despite the removal of immunity, was not prosecuted and thus remained eligible to participate in the 2006 presidential election. Weeks later, Attorney General Rafael Macedo de la Concha resigned. As Head of Government of the Federal District, López Obrador became one of the country's most recognizable politicians. He left office with an 84% approval rating, according to an opinion poll by Consulta Mitofsky. According to an article by Reforma newspaper, he kept 80% of the promises he made as a candidate. In September 2005, the PRD nominated López Obrador as presidential pre-candidate for the 2006 general election. Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas declined to participate in the internal elections when polls showed López Obrador as the clear favorite. Until March 2006, polls showed him as the presidential frontrunner; however, his numbers had declined by late April. An article published by La Crónica de Hoy in March 2006 said that Mexican Bolivarian Circles and students, allegedly assisted by Venezuelan agents, distributed "Bolivarian propaganda in favor of Andrés Manuel López Obrador" throughout cities in Mexico and that such groups were given "economic support, logistics advice and ideological instruction" from the Hugo Chávez government. Some left-wing politicians and analysts criticized López Obrador for including in his close staff many former members of the PRI who fought against his party in the 1980s and 1990s, such as Arturo Núñez (one of the authors of Fobaproa contingency fund), Manuel Camacho Solís and Marcelo Ebrard. The guerrilla leader of the Zapatista Army of National Liberation (EZLN), Subcomandante Marcos, said López Obrador was a false left-wing candidate, arguing that he was a centrist candidate. Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas did not participate in campaign events but stated that he would still vote for his party, the PRD. López Obrador's proposals, including his 50 commitments, produced mixed opinions from analysts. The Washington Post wrote that López Obrador used U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt as inspiration for his proposals. On 19 May, Roberto Madrazo, the PRI's presidential candidate, hinted at the possibility of an alliance with López Obrador to prevent National Action Party (PAN) candidate Felipe Calderón from winning the election after both parties criticized president Vicente Fox for what they saw as illegal support by the federal government for Calderón. A PRD spokesperson said both parties entered an information-sharing agreement regarding the issue. This, combined with calls from high-ranking PRI member Manuel Bartlett (former Secretary of the Interior during the 1988 presidential election fraud) to vote for López Obrador, aroused media speculation that the PRI and the PRD would ally. On 28 May, after López Obrador discounted any such alliance because the PRI and PRD political tendencies could not be reconciled, Roberto Madrazo indicated that his comments were misunderstood and that he would not step down or endorse any other candidate. In 2006, the Spanish newspaper El País criticized López Obrador for what it characterized as "extreme" verbal insults toward Mexican government institutions and President Vicente Fox. On 6 July 2006, the Federal Electoral Institute (IFE) announced the final vote count in the 2006 presidential election, resulting in a narrow margin of 0.56 percentage points (243,934 votes) of victory for his opponent, Felipe Calderón. López Obrador appealed the results, claiming widespread irregularities, and demanded an election recount. (A generalized recount is only to be carried in extreme circumstances, according to Mexican Electoral Tribunal Jurisprudence S3ELJ14-2004.) On 8 July 2006, López Obrador called for nationwide protests to ask for a national recount, stating "the government would be responsible for any flare-up of anger after officials rejected his demand for a manual recount of Sunday's extremely close vote." However, on 5 September 2006, the Federal Electoral Tribunal (TEPJF) ruled that the election was fair and that Calderón was the winner and would become president. In contesting the election, López Obrador and his coalition made several arguments: (a) that President Fox, the Consejo Coordinador Empresarial (CCE), a business interest group, and other organizations had illegally interfered in the presidential campaign, which is strictly prohibited by electoral law, thereby providing grounds for election annulment; that (b) that votes were fraudulently tallied on 2 July and afterward; and that (c) there was widespread and significant evidence of electoral irregularities, ranging from stuffed ballot boxes and inconsistent tally reports to improper and illegal handling of the ballot trail and voter intimidation. The Court did find that President Fox and the CCE had interfered in the elections by campaigning for Felipe Calderón, which is against electoral laws. The TEPJF determined that it was unfeasible to accurately evaluate the influence this interference had on the election results but estimated the impact of Fox's interference as insignificant. Similarly, the tribunal stated that it could not gauge the importance of CCE's interference.[citation needed] Consequently, the Court ruled that both interferences could not be considered a sufficient judicial cause to annul the election. In response to fraud allegations, the Court stated there was insufficient evidence to annul the election. López Obrador and his coalition had alleged irregularities in many polling stations and requested a national recount. Ultimately, the TEPJF, in a unanimous vote, ordered a recount of about 9% of the polling stations. The Supreme Court later ruled that the evidence presented did not demonstrate the occurrence of sufficient irregularities to change the election outcome. In response to this result, in a move reminiscent of Francisco I. Madero declaring himself provisional President of Mexico after calling the 1910 elections against Porfirio Díaz fraudulent, López Obrador's followers proclaimed him the Presidente Legitimo (Legitimate President), inaugurated him in a ceremony in the Zócalo and called for the creation of an alternative, parallel government. López Obrador announced his victory to his supporters on the night of the election, stating that exit polls declared he had won by 500,000 votes. He did not cite any polls at the time and later referenced Covarrubias and IMO. Several days later, the Federal Electoral Institute (IFE) published its final tally, which had him down by a margin of 0.58%, or approximately 243,000 votes. López Obrador then initiated legal actions, claiming election irregularities in 54% of polling stations, and demanded a "vote by vote" recount in all polling stations. The Federal Electoral Tribunal (TEPJF) discussed the case and eventually dismissed it. The IFE called for the candidates to refrain from proclaiming themselves as the winner, president-elect, or president until the final resolution. Both candidates disobeyed this call. In an interview with U.S. Spanish-language TV network Univision, López Obrador referred to himself as "President of Mexico." López Obrador held several gatherings in downtown Mexico City, with hundreds of thousands attending. On 31 July, as an act of civil disobedience, he organized a blockade of 12 kilometers of Paseo de la Reforma, one of the city's most important roads, which houses several hotels, corporate headquarters, and the Mexico City Stock Market. Business groups said the blockades cost Mexico City businesses in the area millions of pesos in losses. On 5 August, the TEPJF met in a public session to decide the outcome of the complaints the PRD and its coalition partners had filed. The seven magistrates voted unanimously to order a recount of 11,839 ballot boxes in 155 districts (9.2% of the total) despite López Obrador's public demand for a total recount. The TEPJF based its decision for a partial recount on its finding that, despite publicly demanding a vote-by-vote general recount, López Obrador's party filed legal challenges for 71,000 polling stations (54%). Therefore, by law, the TEPJF found it could order a recount of only those 71,000 polling stations contested. The TEPJF ruled it could not order a recount of the votes not in controversy because "the certainty asked by the [López Obrador] Coalition is tied to the respect for the tallies certified by the citizens in the polling stations, not in controversy." The TEPJF did certify that principles of certainty were grounds for a recount in some stations since there was evidence of possible irregularities. López Obrador rejected the resolution as too narrow, and he and his followers intensified their civil resistance. For about two hours on 9 August, protesters took over the tollbooths on four federal highways linking Mexico City to Cuernavaca, Querétaro, Toluca, and Pachuca. The protesters prevented personnel from charging tolls on some roads and allowed vehicles to pass freely. Also, hundreds of López Obrador supporters surrounded four of the main offices of foreign banks, including Citibank, Banamex, BBVA, and the Mexican subsidiary of HSBC, closing them for about four hours, claiming that foreign banks "ransack the country" and "widen the barrier between rich and poor" alleging banks had become involved in Mexican politics by supporting Calderón. On 8 August, López Obrador sent a message to the press regarding the blockades, where he explained his reasons for continuing the "peaceful civil resistance." López Obrador held a rally called "National Democratic Convention" on 16 September, Independence Day, when a military parade was scheduled. The convention started after the military parade. Claiming he country's institutions to be colluded, López Obrador said that they "no longer work" and called for creating new ones. López Obrador led a rally on the day of the State of the Union speech, where sympathizers prevented President Vicente Fox from delivering a speech inside the Legislative Palace of San Lázaro. They claimed that the President "had created a police state" in the area around Congress. They interpreted it as an unconstitutional act that made it impossible for Congress to be called into session. López Obrador told his followers not to be lured into violent confrontations with the police, declaring, "We aren't going to fall into any trap. We aren't going to be provoked." He urged his followers to remain in the Zócalo instead of marching to the Legislative Palace. According to a poll published on 1 December 2006 in El Universal, 42% thought that Calderón's victory was fraudulent, and 46% thought it was not. On 20 November 2006, during the federal holiday commemorating the Mexican Revolution, López Obrador's sympathizers proclaimed him the "Legitimate President" at a rally in the Zócalo in Mexico City. The action was planned in another rally, the "National Democratic Convention," in which supporters gave him the title. López Obrador called for the establishment of a parallel government and shadow cabinet at the convention. He also advocated for the abolition or reform of several institutions,[which?] alleging they had become lavish and corrupt, and asked for changes to the constitution to ensure the institutions work "for the people," providing welfare and assistance to the elderly and other vulnerable groups.[citation needed] After supporters proclaimed him as the "Legitimate President of Mexico," López Obrador created a "Cabinet of Denunciation" to protest actions made by President Felipe Calderón. In his speech at the proclamation ceremony, López Obrador promised to "procure the happiness of the people" and announced twenty "actions of government," such as fostering a process for renewal of public institutions and defending the right to information and demanding openness of communication media. Days later, López Obrador announced that he would earn a salary of 50,000 pesos (US$2,500) a month, provided by donations. Reactions to the "legitimate presidency" varied widely. An opinion by El País said that López Obrador's "lack of consideration for democratic institutions and the rule of law seriously endanger civil peace in Mexico." After speculation on whether or not López Obrador's self-proclamation was against the law, the PRI stated that this political action was not a crime. Liébano Sáenz, chief of staff of former President Ernesto Zedillo, said López Obrador "will become the conscience of the nation, which will do much good for Mexican democracy." José Raúl Vera López, the Roman Catholic bishop of Saltillo, Coahuila, declared that the so-called "legitimate presidency" was a result of the "profound discontent with how the country has been run" and that López Obrador had "very deep moral backing." A poll by Grupo Reforma indicated that 56% of Mexicans disapproved of López Obrador taking the title, while only 19% approved. Sixty-three percent of those polled said the former candidate had lost credibility. Other responses in the poll included 82% describing the political atmosphere in Mexico as "tense," 45% of those polled blamed it on the PRD, 20% blamed it on the PAN, and 25% blamed both parties. The poll was a telephone survey of 850 adults on 18 November with 95% confidence interval of +/-3.4% margin of error. In the first few months of his term, President Calderón announced initiatives that mirrored López Obrador's initiatives. These included price ceilings for tortillas through the Tortilla Price Stabilization Pact, that protected small corn producers, reductions to the president and cabinet minister salaries, and the proposal for a constitutional amendment that, if passed, would have lowered wages for public servants and impose caps on their remuneration. Some interpreted this measures as "seeking to fulfill a campaign promise to incorporate the agenda of election rival Andrés Manuel López Obrador into his government." Others saw them as intending to undercut the opposition government. In 2008, the PRD held leadership elections. López Obrador's candidate, Alejandro Encinas Rodríguez, was opposed by Jesús Ortega. Allegations of fraud on both sides halted recounts and raised doubts about the election's legitimacy. Media figures commented that while López Obrador had used phrases such as "fraud," "illegitimacy," "corruption," etc. in the 2006 presidential election, the same words were now used to describe the PRD's election. Many feared that, no matter what the outcome, there would be a "legitimate" and a "spurious" President inside the Party. According to exit polls conducted by Mitofsky and IMO, Encinas won by 5% and 8% points, respectively. Congress was also taken by legislators of the Broad Progressive Front (FAP), the PRD, Labor, and Convergence parties on 10 April 2008 because they disagreed with the Government regarding energy policy discussions, claiming they were unconstitutional. López Obrador's followers, using chairs and tables and barricades, took both chambers of Congress and had them chained, thus avoiding the passage of secondary laws which modified the legal framework of the Mexican state-owned oil company, Pemex. López Obrador and his followers opposed these laws and viewed them as leading to the de facto privatization of the company. López Obrador requested a four-month debate on energy policies instead of the 50-day one presented by the PAN, PRI, Green Party and New Alliance. López Obrador ran again as the PRD, Labor Party, and Citizens' Movement candidate under the coalition Movimiento Progresista in the 2012 presidential election. In November 2011, López Obrador announced some of his economic proposals: Job creation: A sustained 6% growth rate to generate the new 1.2 million jobs needed each year. Austerity: Reducing salaries of government officials and unnecessary spending, saving around US$30 billion a year. Progressive fiscal reforms: López Obrador said the people who make less should pay a smaller percentage of taxes than those who make more money. No new taxes or increases on existing taxes: López Obrador plans to focus on ending fiscal privileges. Competition: End monopolies; any private citizen who wants to participate in media, television, and telephony should be able to. López Obrador had been a firm critic of Felipe Calderón's crime strategy and promised to reduce military presence on the streets, offering reparations to victims of the Mexican Drug War and emphasizing the protection of human rights in the country. López Obrador proposed a single police command that would gradually assume the activities of the Mexican Navy and the Mexican Army, as well as a single intelligence agency to tackle the financial networks of criminal organizations. The new police force would promote "civic and moral values." He promised to increase the salaries and benefits given to law enforcement officials throughout Mexico. His security strategy comprised ten proposals, but all of them had the main theme: organized crime cannot be tackled if the government is responsible for the erosion of human rights. He also stated that if elected, he would reject any intelligence activity from the United States, including money and weapons in aid. This policy would stop the operations in Mexico of the Central Intelligence Agency and the Drug Enforcement Administration, including the use of drones. But it could also discourage U.S. aid to Mexico (US$1.6 billion since 2008). The proposal intended to appeal to discontent over U.S. actions in "Operation Fast and Furious," where ATF agents were involved in a gun-walking scandal. López Obrador promised to reactivate the economy and social growth, so more people could have access to a "better life" without joining cartels and abandoning the rule of law. He also pledged to improve the education system and create more jobs before the criminal groups can recruit them. He also spoke of taming corruption, impunity, drug consumption, addiction, and elite privileges. The security Cabinet he proposed would work directly with the municipal and state forces in a unified command. López Obrador summed up his security policy as "Abrazos, no balazos" (Hugs, not bullets). At the start of his campaign, he said he would remove Mexican Army personnel from the streets. Still, in May 2012, it stated that the military would continue to operate until Mexico had a "trained, skilled and moralized police force." López Obrador announced a tentative cabinet. Among them were: Marcelo Ebrard as Secretary of the Interior Rogelio Ramírez de la O as Secretary of the Treasury Juan Ramón de la Fuente as Secretary of Education Claudia Sheinbaum Pardo as Secretary of the Environment Javier Jiménez Espriú as Secretary of Communications and Transportation Fernando Turner as Secretary of Economic Development Adolfo Hellmund López as Secretary of Energy René Drucker Colín as Secretary of Science and Technology Elena Poniatowska as Secretary of Culture Héctor Vasconcelos as Secretary of Foreign Affairs The election was won by Enrique Peña Nieto of the PRI, with 38.2%, to 31.6% for López Obrador. López Obrador did not accept the preliminary results, as most votes had not been counted. Subsequently, he claimed vote buying and other irregularities and demanded a full recount by the Federal Electoral Institute (IFE). The IFE found irregularities but confirmed the results on 6 July. López Obrador rejected this announcement and filed a complaint to invalidate the election. He alleged vote-buying, spending above election regulations, illegal fundraising, and vote fraud. On 30 August, the Electoral Tribunal of the Federal Judiciary formally rejected his complaint. At a news conference, López Obrador claimed that the election was "plagued with irregularities" and accused the PRI of vote buying. He also claimed that the PRI handed out gifts to lure voters into casting their vote for that party with the cooperation of Soriana, a retail chain. On the day of the 2012 presidential elections, people who voted for the PRI would receive pre-paid gift cards. Nonetheless, the PRI and the store denied those accusations and threatened to sue López Obrador. Peña Nieto vowed to imprison anyone – including members of the PRI – if they were found guilty of electoral fraud. Despite Peña Nieto's statement, videos by citizens about the Soriana cards surfaced on the internet. Following the 2012 presidential election loss, López Obrador told a rally in Mexico City's Zócalo on 9 September 2012 that he would withdraw from the Democratic Revolution Party "on the best of terms." He said he was working on founding a new party from the Movement for National Regeneration ("Movimiento de Regeneración Nacional" in Spanish), or MORENA, for its acronym in Spanish. A couple of days after his departure from the PRD, federal deputy Ricardo Monreal stated it was a "divorce for convenience," and that López Obrador did the most responsible thing to avoid polarization of the country. According to polls and surveys, in 2012 most of the Mexican public had a negative view of the establishment of MORENA as a political party. On 7 January 2014, Martí Batres, president of MORENA, presented the documentation to the INE to be acknowledged political party. In 2014, López Obrador revealed why he left the PRD, stating, "I left the PRD because the leaders of that party betrayed the people, they went with Peña Nieto and approved the Pact for Mexico, which is nothing more than a Pact against Mexico. I can not be in a party where tax increases were approved, and it was approved that they would increase the price of gasoline every month. Gasoline in Mexico costs more than in the United States, the salary in Mexico is the lowest in the entire North American continent, and instead of asking for wage increases, the PRD rose to the podium to ask for an increase in the price of gasoline, it's an embarrassment." After Cuauhtémoc Cárdenas criticized him for forming his political party, on 7 July 2014, López Obrador posted on social media that, "PRD leaders and most of its legislators voted for the fiscal reforms [raising taxes and gas prices] and with their collaboration they paved the way for privatization of the oil industry."[dubious – discuss] On 10 July 2014, the INE approved MORENA as an official political party to receive federal funds and participate in the 2015 legislative elections. López Obrador participated again in the 2018 presidential election, his third presidential run. In the election, he represented MORENA, the left-wing Labor Party (PT), and the socially conservative right-wing Social Encounter Party (PES) under the coalition Juntos Haremos Historia. Pre-election polls indicated he had a double-digit lead over candidates Ricardo Anaya, José Antonio Meade, and Jaime Rodríguez Calderón. In 2018, the Mexican publication Aristegui Noticias criticized Vicente Fox for what it characterized as "extreme" verbal insults on Twitter towards López Obrador's crackdown on institutional corruption. Background On 24 June 2017, the PT agreed to fight the 2018 election in an electoral alliance with MORENA; however, the coalition had not officially registered with the National Electoral Institute (INE), the country's electoral authority. For MORENA, the alliance consolidated after the withdrawal of the PT's candidate Óscar González Yáñez, who resigned his candidacy and called for votes in favor of Delfina Gómez Álvarez, the standard-bearer in the state elections of the State of Mexico in 2017. In October 2017, at PT's National Congress, as party president Alberto Anaya was reelected to another 6-year term, PT formalized its coalition with MORENA. At first, there was speculation about the possibility of a front grouping all the left-wing parties: MORENA, the PRD, PT, and the MC. However, López Obrador rejected any agreement due to political differences, especially after the 2017 State of Mexico elections, where the candidates of the PRD and MC continued with their campaigns and refused to support the MORENA candidate. At the end of November 2017, the leaders of MORENA and the PES announced that they were in talks to form a possible alliance: Hugo Eric Flores Cervantes, president of the PES, said: "We don't negotiate with the PRI, we have two options, go alone or with MORENA." Confirmation On 13 December 2017, PES joined the coalition between MORENA and the PT, and it was formalized under the name Juntos Haremos Historia (Together We Will Make History). Following the signing of the agreement, López Obrador was appointed as a pre-candidate for the three political groups. It was a partial coalition that supported López Obrador as the presidential candidate and divided the legislative elections between the three: MORENA chose candidates in 150 federal electoral districts (out of 300) and 32 Senate rates, while the PT and the PES each nominated 75 candidates for the Chamber of Deputies and 16 for the Senate. The alliance received criticism as it was a coalition between two left-wing parties (MORENA and the PT) with a formation related to the evangelical right (PES). In response, MORENA national president Yeidckol Polevnsky said that her party "believes in inclusion and teamwork to rescue Mexico" and that they will continue to defend human rights; in turn, Hugo Eric Flores Cervantes, national president of the PES, said that "the only possibility of real change in our country is the one headed by Andrés Manuel López Obrador" and that his party had decided to be "on the right side of history". Andrés Manuel López Obrador said this would be his last attempt to become president, rejecting the idea of becoming a permanent moral leader for the Mexican left-wing. In Paris, France, there is the "Official French Committee of MORENA", on which several occasions have presented their support to the candidate in small rallies in that European country. In February 2018, French deputy and former presidential candidate Jean-Luc Mélenchon, founder of the La France Insoumise party, met with López Obrador, before the official start of the electoral campaign in Mexico, and described his possible victory in the following terms: "If they manage to thwart the plans against them and win the elections, it will be a great change for Mexico and all of Latin America." Miguel Ángel Revilla, president of the Autonomous Community of Cantabria, Spain, mentioned López Obrador in an interview on the El Hormiguero program, where he spoke of the possibility of victory for the presidential candidate in 2018: "I think he's going to win because Mexico needs a change to a good person because they are presenting him as a Chávez-type populist, or Fidel Castro-type, but really, because he wants to end corruption and inequality within [the limits of] what he can do because the country does not deserve what it has until now; I want to send my support to this man, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, from here." López Obrador has been referred to as the "ideological twin" of the US's progressive leader Bernie Sanders and the UK's Labour Party leader, Jeremy Corbyn, the latter having visited López Obrador and invited him over to the British Parliament. In December 2017, López Obrador presented his proposed cabinet: Olga Sánchez Cordero as Secretary of the Interior Héctor Vasconcelos as Secretary of Foreign Affairs Carlos Manuel Urzúa Macías as Secretary of Finance Maria Luisa Albores as Secretary of Social Development Josefa González Blanco Ortiz Mena as Secretary of Environment Rocío Nahle [es] as Secretary of Energy Graciela Márquez Colín as Secretary of Economy Esteban Moctezuma Barragán as Secretary of Education Víctor Villalobos as Secretary of Agriculture Javier Jiménez Espriú as Secretary of Communications Irma Eréndira Sandoval as Secretary of the Civil Service Jorge Alcocer Varela as Secretary of Health Luisa María Alcalde Luján as Secretary of Labor Román Meyer Falcón as Secretary of Agrarian Development and Urban Planning Miguel Torruco Marqués as Secretary of Tourism Alejandra Frausto Guerrero as Secretary of Culture Replacements It was announced on 5 July 2018 that Héctor Vasconcelos would be replaced at Foreign Affairs by Marcelo Ebrard, following Vasconcelos's election to the Senate. Arturo Herrera replaced Carlos Manuel Urzúa Macías at Finance on 10 July 2019. Víctor Manuel Toledo replaced Josefa González Blanco Ortíz Mena as Minister of Environment and Natural Resources on 25 May 2019. López Obrador has been described as left-wing and populist. Other outlets have claimed that López Obrador toned down his rhetoric for the 2018 election, allying with business figures and narrowing his criticism of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). In his inauguration speech, he inveighed against neoliberalism, calling it a "disaster" and a "calamity" for the country, and promised "a fourth transformation," in reference to three major events in Mexican history, the Mexican War of Independence (1810–1821), the Reform War (1858–1861) and the Mexican Revolution (1910–1920). He proposed the cancellation of the under-construction New Mexico City International Airport, the conversion of the president's official residence and office complex, Los Pinos, into a cultural center, as well as universal health care, free internet, and a sale of the presidential aircraft. López Obrador has offered to hold referendums on various issues, among them a performance evaluation halfway through his term during the 2021 legislative elections (instead of his former proposal of every two years)) that would cut his six-year term short if he lost the consultation. He proposed dispersing the cabinet throughout the country's states, with the objective of "promoting development throughout the national territory," while the Presidency and the Ministries of National Defense, the Navy, the Interior, Foreign Affairs, and Finance and Public Credit would remain in the capital. New Airport for Mexico City Corruption, geological, and environmental problems related to the construction of a new airport in Texcoco, State of Mexico, were major issues during López Obrador's 2018 presidential campaign. After winning the election but before taking office, he sponsored a citizen referendum on replacing the Texcoco airport with rebuilding the military airport Santa Lucia in Zumpango, State of Mexico. The referendum passed with 70% of the 1 million votes cast. Canceling the airport cost MXN 75 billion (US$3.98 billion). The new airport in Zumpango was named "Felipe Ángeles International Airport," and construction began on 17 October 2019. The airport opened in March 2022. López Obrador's chief pledge was to eradicate institutional corruption by enacting constitutional laws and policies to make corruption more difficult. One example is two laws enacted that make corruption and voter fraud a criminal act without bail, as well as removing corrupt government officials with due process. López Obrador pledged a combination of zero tolerance and personal honesty to sweep it out "from top to bottom like cleaning the stairs." He asked international organizations to come to Mexico to help investigate cases of corruption and human rights abuses. He announced a willingness to allow the creation of a body akin to the International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala to help local prosecutors build graft cases. He also proposed to amend an article in the constitution to make it possible to try presidents for corruption. López Obrador has had mixed views on the privatization of oil that was signed into law in 2013. He has called for a referendum over the 2013 energy reform (Reforma energética (México) [es]) that ended Pemex's monopoly in the oil industry. Rocío Nahle [es], his top energy adviser, has called for a freeze on future deepwater drilling auctions and a review of contracts with international oil companies. In February 2018, his business adviser, Alfonso Romo, said, "[he] reviewed most of the oil tenders awarded to private drillers and found them to be beneficial for Mexico." He has also pledged to end oil exports to focus internally, as well as invest in refineries along with ending the importation of gasoline from the United States, saying the nation must recover energy self-sufficiency "as a principle of national security" and should make loss-making state refineries operable and assess biodiesel production. López Obrador has promised no more gasolinazos as well as no more hikes in electricity and gas prices. On 30 November 2018, López Obrador told the press that the previous administration's oil reforms, which permitted auctioning oil field rights to private companies, would not continue under his administration. Shortly after taking office, López Obrador cracked down on the robbery of motor fuels: Huachicolero. Despite the 18 January 2019 Tlahuelilpan pipeline explosion that cost the lives of at least 119 in Tlahuelilpan, Hidalgo, and local fuel shortages, gasoline theft was cut by 95% from 81,000 barrels in November 2018 to 4,000 barrels in April 2019 with a savings of 11 billion pesos ($581 million). By 2023 Mexico plans to have seven oil refineries, including a new one that is being built at the Dos Bocas port in Paraíso, Tabasco. Construction on the Dos Bocas refinery began in August 2019, with an estimated cost between US$6 billion and $8 billion. With his saying, "Becarios sí, sicarios, no" (Scholarship recipients, yes; hitmen, no), López Obrador promised guaranteed schooling and employment to all young Mexicans, through universal access to public colleges, and proposed monthly scholarships of 2,400 MXN to low-income university students. López Obrador is against the educational reform passed into law in 2013, stating he opposes the use of standardized test scores as a basis for firing teachers, saying, "It is an ideological problem of the right, of conservatism; deep down they do not want public education, they want education to be privatized, that is the mentality that prevails in these people. I ask them to be serene and if you really want to help improve education, do not polarize or disqualify [the teachers]." He also argued that: "children go to school without eating and that is not addressed in the so-called education reform." The educational reform laws passed during the Peña Nieto administration were overturned in September 2019. The new laws promise to assess teachers' opinions and preserve the public nature of the school system. As the Mexican Drug War that started under President Calderón (2006–12) dragged on into its 12th year, he reiterated his 2012 presidential run strategy of "Abrazos, no balazos" (Hugs, not bullets), arguing that jobs and better wages, especially for younger people and the rural populace, are necessary to combat crime, not the use of more military force. He has proposed amnesty for some drug war criminals, for which he would seek the aid of international NGOs, Pope Francis, and UN Secretary-General António Guterres. Héctor Vasconcelos, a former diplomat, said a López Obrador government would gradually pull back the Army and Navy from the streets where they have been engaged. López Obrador is willing to establish a truth commission to bring closure to tens of thousands of people exposed to murders and disappearances of their friends and families, such as the 2014 Ayotzinapa kidnapping. He declared that he would consider legalizing certain drugs as part of a broader strategy to fight poverty and crime. López Obrador declared an end to the Drug War, announcing that he wished to shift from capturing capos (drug lords) to reducing violence and paying more attention to health and socioeconomic concerns. Nonetheless, the murder rate increased during his first year in office. López Obrador has sent the newly formed, militarized National Guard to fight crime, but they have not been any more successful than previous police and military efforts. A major setback was a failed attempt to arrest Ovidio Guzmán López in October 2019, which set off fierce gun battles in Culiacán, Sinaloa, and had to be called off. López Obrador later explained that his primary concern was saving lives. When three adults and six children, American citizens belonging to the LeBaron family, were killed near the border between Sinaloa and Chihuahua, President Donald Trump briefly threatened to declare the cartels terrorist organizations. López Obrador persuaded him not to do so. Lopez Obrador describes himself as an adherent of a mixed economy. At an event on 3 June 2018, he explained that "there will be a mixed economy; the State with public investment could not face the challenge of growth in Mexico, private investment is required, and the social sector is also required." Based on his economic proposals, he wants the country to be "self-sufficient" and to "rescue the agriculture industry" affected by the North American Free Trade Agreement. He has also doubled compensations to both, pensions to two million five hundred senior citizens, and the nation's minimum wage. López Obrador has also created a special zone along Mexico's northern border with lower value-added taxes, lower rent taxes, and a higher minimum wage. His advisers also said that the same measures could also be directed at Mexico's southern border and elsewhere to contain migration. He has planned a host of infrastructure projects in partnership with the private sector, including rail links in the forests of Yucatán and across the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, to spark economic growth in Mexico's economically depressed south. At a major banking conference in March 2018, he made promises to maintain economic stability and respect the autonomy of the Bank of Mexico, saying: "We will support banks and we won't confiscate assets. There won't be expropriations or nationalizations." López Obrador has criticized NAFTA, arguing small Mexican corn farmers have been affected, as well as proposing to defend avocado farmers from agricultural tariffs. He has asked Peña Nieto's administration to postpone the current renegotiation of the agreement, arguing both Donald Trump and Peña Nieto do not have a strong, amicable relationship, tainted by a cancelled foreign trip. During the general assembly of the American Chamber of Commerce in Mexico, he said he does not want the agreement cancelled, arguing it benefits the three member nations. In June 2018, during a presidential debate, he argued that if there is a failure in the NAFTA renegotiation, the domestic economy must be strengthened, saying, "[it] cannot be fatal for Mexicans, our country has a lot of natural resources, a lot of wealth." López Obrador has argued in favor of increasing workers' salaries "because wages in our country are very low; they are the lowest wages in the world and we need to strengthen the domestic market and improve the income of workers; you can not be paying the workers of the maquilas 800 pesos a week." Mexico and the United States reached a new trade agreement on 27 August 2018, and Canada agreed on 30 September. The new trade agreement is called the United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement (USMCA). The USMCA increases environmental and labor regulations, and incentivizes the domestic production of cars and trucks. The agreement also provides updated intellectual property protections. Then-U.S. Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer, Canadian Deputy Prime Minister Chrystia Freeland, and Deputy Minister for North America Jesús Seade Kuri signed a modified agreement in Mexico City on 10 December 2018. The Mexican Senate ratified the treaty on 19 June 2019, the US on January 29, 2020 (Public Law No: 116–113), and Canada on March 13, 2020. Arguing he would be fiscally conservative, López Obrador proposed raising social spending without tax hikes or accumulation of public debt, via proposed austerity measures on politician and bureaucrat salaries and subsidies, including the president's salary and post-presidential pension, as well as fighting private corruption and tax fraud. López Obrador has reduced the presidential salary by 60% to MXN 108,000 (US$5,000) per month and has limited what public servants and judiciary members can earn. He opened the presidential housing complex of Los Pinos to the public, taking up residence in the National Palace. On top of this, he has sold off government assets, including vehicles and real estate; proceeds have gone to social programs for the poor. An austerity law passed in October 2019 restricts remodeling of government offices, bans government employees for ten years from working in private companies they regulated while in office, and cuts presidential pensions. The president flies commercial airlines, but has not yet found a buyer for the presidential airplane. Following accusations by interest groups and the opposition, which have alleged influences by the Venezuelan government and drawn comparisons with Donald Trump, López Obrador stated, "No to Chavismo, no to Trumpismo; yes to Juarismo, yes to Maderismo, yes to Cardenismo, yes to Mexicanismo." He has repeatedly stated that he wants to continue the bilateral relationship with the United States based on mutual respect and friendship, "and not of subordination", insisting that "Mexico will not be a piñata of any foreign government". He has also said, "we no longer want Mexico to be seen as a country of conquest, the looting is over." During a presidential debate, López Obrador argued that "the best foreign policy is domestic policy," in that if the country has no corruption and crime, it will help develop trust for investment and tourism because the image of Mexico would improve the perception of Mexico in the international arena. He has campaigned on Mexico's former foreign policy of non-interventionism and the Principle of the self-determination of the peoples' nations, the Estrada Doctrine, stated in the Mexican constitution, article 89. López Obrador reiterated his commitment to non-interventionism with the statement he made during his presidential victory speech, "We will be friends of all the world's people and governments. The principles of non-intervention, self-determination, and the peaceful settlement of disputes will be applied again." After the 2019 election victory in Argentina, López Obrador developed a close relationship with President Alberto Fernández in what El País described as a "progressive alliance," with Fernández making one of his first official trips abroad to Mexico (the first being to Israel). The two countries later developed a closer bond in cooperation regarding the COVID-19 vaccine. López Obrador also expressed support for Argentina's claim to the Falkland Islands and has urged the United Kingdom to negotiate an end to the dispute with Argentina. As President Donald Trump accused Mexican illegal immigrants of "bringing drugs [and] crime" during his presidential campaign, López Obrador took a stance against Trump's proposals for the wall on the U.S.-Mexico border as well as the deportation of undocumented immigrants in the United States. In 2017, he called on the Peña Nieto administration to "[present] a lawsuit at the United Nations against the U.S. government for violation of human rights and racial discrimination". He promised to convert the 50 Mexican consulates in the United States into "procurators" for the defense of migrants, suggested appointing Alicia Bárcena, current Executive Secretary of the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, as Mexico's permanent representative to the UN, and pledged to put pressure on the United States through organizations like the United Nations. He accused the establishment parties of the corruption that keeps migrants from receiving the support they need. Regarding migration to Mexico, he asserted his government would not "continue the dirty work" of the United States and detain Central American migrants at the country's southern border. Following his proposed idea of decentralizing the nation's cabinet away from Mexico City, he would move the National Institute of Migration to Tijuana, Baja California. He suggested that the NAFTA renegotiations should create a development plan for Central America as a means to address emigration in the region, including a proposed "alliance for progress" including Mexico, the United States, Canada, and Central America to foster job creation, grow the economy and pacify the region. López Obrador said he wants to broker a deal with President Trump to stem illegal immigration through jobs and development rather than a border wall. López Obrador's pick for the proposed re-establishment of the Secretariat of Public Security, Alfonso Durazo, declared in July 2018 that there are plans to create a border police that would mainly patrol Mexico's southern border to halt illegal immigration, drugs, and weapons. In October 2018, López Obrador declared working visas for Central American immigrants. Days later, following the arrival of Central American migrant caravans into Mexico en route to the United States, he asked for solidarity with the migrants. López Obrador won the election on 1 July 2018 with 53% of the popular vote–the first candidate to win an outright majority since 1988, and the first candidate not from the PRI or its predecessors to do so since the Mexican Revolution. In terms of states won, López Obrador won in a landslide, carrying 31 out of 32 of the country's states. Around 30 minutes after polls closed in the country's northwest, José Antonio Meade, speaking at a news conference from PRI headquarters, conceded defeat and wished Andrés Manuel López Obrador "every success". Ricardo Anaya also conceded defeat within an hour of the polls closing, and independent candidate Jaime Rodríguez Calderón recognized López Obrador's victory shortly afterward. López Obrador took office on 1 December 2018. When he was president-elect, he announced he would take a 60% salary pay cut. Before taking office, from 22 to 25 October, he held an impromptu vote, organized by supporters of his party, on whether or not the New International Airport for Mexico City was to be scrapped, citing that the project was rife with corruption, cronyism, and a waste of taxpayer's money. About 70% of the results voted against the continuation of the project. López Obrador proposed expanding the Santa Lucía Air Force Base instead. In December 2018, López Obrador ordered the creation of a truth commission to re-examine one of the country's most notorious unsolved crimes: the kidnapping and presumed murder of 43 trainee teachers who disappeared after an attack by cartel gunmen and police officers. After the 2018 presidential election, media organizations, including Forbes, reported that López Obrador said the victory of his party, MORENA, was "La Cuarta Transformación" (The Fourth Transformation). The phrase is a reference to three major historical reforms, namely Mexican independence, the Reform War, and the Mexican Revolution. Just before his 1 December inauguration, a documentary on López Obrador was broadcast on Now This World. In his first year, López Obrador's approval ratings were high, approximately the same as previous administrations at the same point in their terms. Despite that, there has appeared to be little progress on issues on which he campaigned, which critics pointed out. The Economist criticized his first year as lacking in statecraft and abundant in theatrical gestures. In August 2019, Bloomberg News did an extended interview with López Obrador. The China Global Television Network did a short special assessment of López Obrador's first year in office. He argues his presidency is the "Fourth Transformation" in Mexican history, with the first three being the Mexican War of Independence (1810–1821), the War of the Reform (1857–1861), and the Mexican Revolution (1910–1920). He invokes imagery likening his presidency to the work of Jesus Christ, with concern for the less fortunate being a top priority under López Obrador. Direct communication with the electorate has become a key feature of his presidency. He holds daily briefings (mañaneras) broadcast on state media. López Obrador stated that citizen forums, consultations, and referendums would be a key part of his decision-making process. Such consultations have been held on major infrastructure projects such as constructing a new airport, an oil refinery, an electric plant, and the Mayan Train. Other consultations have been held on various social issues, and more are planned for the future—including LGBTQ rights and amnesty for low-level drug offenders. In 2020, a judge in Campeche issued an injunction against the Mayan Train, citing its approval in a "simulated consultation". In 2022, he held a referendum on his presidency, winning with more than 90% of the votes but with a low turnout rate of around 18 percent, far below the 40 percent level needed for the poll to be legally binding. Other consultations held in 2018 and 2019 also enjoyed widespread support (70% or more), but were criticized for low turnout (2% or less) and other reasons. Morning Consult's Global Leader Approval Rating Tracker, which evaluates the approval rating of 13 world leaders weekly, positioned López Obrador as the second-highest net approval rating as of February 10, 2022. During his presidency, López Obrador frequently preferred social media blogs and news sites at his briefings and often answered questions only from them. He has also frequently criticized environmentalists, non-governmental organizations, regulatory agencies and social media companies, the latter for alleged political bias. In 2024, a video on his official YouTube channel showing him revealing the phone number of a New York Times reporter who had investigated his associates' connections with drug traffickers was taken down by the site, prompting him to accuse the platform of censorship and being taken over by conservatives. A top priority during López Obrador's campaign was his pledge to end corruption. In 2018, Mexico was on par with Russia at 138 (of 180 countries), according to Transparency International's Corruption Perceptions Index. López Obrador has made high-profile gestures against corruption, but his critics see them as not getting at the core issue. He stated his administration will no longer employ the agency designed to uncover corruption in government spending, the National Institute for Access to Information and Data Protection (INAI), citing its complicity in covering up high-profile scandals such as the Odebrecht case. Enrique Krauze has criticized López Obrador's move, saying "Now there is absolutely no transparency in the use of public money, and, at the same time, the awarding of contracts to companies owned by the president's friends." López Obrador's anti-corruption efforts have concentrated in five areas[citation needed]: illegal fuel sales known as Huachicolero, accounting methods and tax fraud, illegal outsourcing, judicial corruption, and money laundering. The Unidad de Inteligencia Financiera on 27 December 2019, announced that it has opened investigations into four former governors. In August 2019 Rosario Robles was sent to prison for her involvement in the MXN $7,760 million (US$420 million) "Master Scam" (Spanish: Estafa Maestra), and charges against former Pemex officials such as CEO Emilio Lozoya Austin and union leader Carlos Romero Deschamps. In October 2019, a justice of the Supreme Court of Justice of the Nation (SCJN) was forced to resign due to irregularities involving an irregular bank deposit worth MXN $80 million (US$4 million). Despite initial praise from human rights group Washington Office on Latin America (WOLA) in October 2019 regarding Lopez' ambitious plan, which introduced anti-corruption prosecutors both at federal and state levels through an independent National Anti-Corruption System, its 2021 report concluded that, while the structure of the System could theoretically work, it had been essentially crippled by the lack of independence or any real autonomy, amongst other factors. In 2019 López Obrador consolidated some projects to support the educational system in Mexico, some of them being the creation of one hundred public universities and the approval of the reforms to articles 3, 31 and 73 of the Mexican Constitution, about education, in which parents, teachers and authorities participated. That same year, he also implemented the scholarship program "Bienestar Benito Juárez" in all educational levels of public service, in order to encourage the permanence of students and also reverted the Education Reform implemented during the Peña Nieto administration, replacing it with one that would guarantee free education at all levels. In 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic in Mexico, face-to-face classes were suspended since March, in order to avoid contagions of the disease. In August, the president signed an agreement with the television networks Televisa, TV Azteca, Imagen Televisión and Grupo Multimedios so that preschool, primary and secondary school students could begin receiving classes and educational content on television. In December, he announced Delfina Gómez Álvarez as the new secretary of Public Education, replacing Esteban Moctezuma Barragán, who would become Mexico's ambassador to the United States. In 2021, a protocol was announced with which students could gradually return to face-to-face classes, but only in those states that were on a green light of the epidemiological traffic light during the COVID pandemic. The exchange between Delfina and Moctezuma was officially carried out on 15 February. The return of face-to-face classes since the beginning of the pandemic took place on 7 June in Mexico City, San Luis Potosí and Aguascalientes, and on the 14 of the same month in the State of Mexico. However, this return was silently canceled again when cases of children infected with COVID-19 began to be registered inside schools, little student presence, and the beginning of a third wave of infections by the disease. Despite this, the president announced that the return of face-to-face classes would be "rained, thundered or lighted" in August, one of his motivations being to avoid the supposed "addiction to video games" that kids have today. López Obrador's energy policy has prioritized the state over the market. Petroleum is at the center of his strategy, with the construction of a refinery in Tabasco, and has essentially banned private investment in the sector. There was low or flat economic growth in his first year of office. He implemented a minimum wage increase of 16.21% in 2019 before uplifting the wage increase to 20% the same year. The coronavirus pandemic is expected to cause lasting damage to the economy, with some critics arguing López Obrador has not effectively planned and responded to economic uncertainty, with the peso falling in the first months of the pandemic. López Obrador made good on his promise to cancel the building of a new airport (Texcoco Airport) to serve Mexico City, with $13.3 billion already spent. Instead, the Felipe Ángeles International Airport was reworked to replace it. The trade deal with the U.S. and Canada was ratified by all three nations and went into effect in July 2020. López Obrador traveled to the U.S. to sign the agreement, but Justin Trudeau, Prime Minister of the third partner, Canada, did not attend, claiming the coronavirus as the reason. Trump and López Obrador signed the agreement at the White House. With the COVID-19 pandemic, remittances from Mexicans in the U.S. have fallen. In addition, with the U.S.-Mexico border increasingly difficult to cross, Mexicans in the U.S. are now aging and dying, often being buried in their hometowns and villages. His 2023 federal budget prioritized the funding of social programs, including a boost to pensions for older adults and infrastructure projects concentrated largely in southern Mexico. According to José Olivares of The Intercept, leaked intelligence documents indicate the U.S. government is displeased with the Mexican state prioritizing social spending over furthering U.S. interests, such as "investments needed to address bilateral issues with the US, such as migration, security and trade." According to Los Angeles Times, the initial response by López Obrador's government was as late as March 2020 and was met with significant criticism. The president continued to hold rallies, be tactile with crowds, and downplay the threat of coronavirus to Mexicans' health and the Mexican economy. When COVID-19 arrived in Mexico, the government ramped up preparedness. The healthcare system is undergoing reforms to lessen the possibility of corruption and to shift from the existing insurance system to a universal one. In March 2020, López Obrador pledged to donate a quarter of his salary to help the country weather the pandemic. As of 25 January 2021, 1,763,219 people have contracted the virus and 149,614 have died.[needs update] Rates of crime remain high in Mexico and conflict and violence of drug mafias has not been stemmed. The number of murders nationwide in 2019 was over 34,000. Although the rate of women's murders is only about 10% of that number, femicide (murders of women specifically because they are women) has risen and resulted in major demonstrations in early 2020.[citation needed] López Obrador initially backed away from the policy of taking out mafia heads. His policy was not a harsh crackdown, offering "abrazos, no balazos"" ("hugs, not gunshots"), which confused and demoralized the security forces. He then gave the army nation-wide control of security. A high-profile situation developed in Sinaloa in October 2019 when Ovidio Guzmán López "El Ratón," son of imprisoned drug mafia head Joaquín “El Chapo” Guzmán, was captured by a small government force. The mafia responded there with a shootout on the Culiacán city streets, resulting in the government freeing Ovidio Guzmán. On 5 January 2023, after six months of planning and vigilance, another military operation took place, this time with air support from a Mexican Air Force UH-60 Black Hawk helicopter equipped with a M134 Minigun (used for the first time since the killing of the Beltrán-Leyva Organization leader Juan Francisco Patrón Sánchez "El H2" in 2017) sent in response to Guzmán's armed men using .50 caliber weapons of alleged U.S. origin during the initial shootout, that resulted in Oviedo Guzmán being captured once more, this time successfully, resulting in another fight between the Mexican military and the Sinaloa Cartel on the streets of Culiacán. This all resulted in the deaths of 10 soldiers and 19 members of the cartel, along with the arrests of 21 other alleged members, without civilian casualties, according to official reports. Most of these deaths occurred during the initial shootout between the military and the Sinaloa Cartel while Guzmán was being detained. Obrador claimed that the authorities acted "with responsibility" to protect the civilian population and that the operation was done without any involvement from the U.S. government. Ovidio Guzmán has now been moved to the "Altiplano" maximum security prison in the State of Mexico. He's expected to be eventually extradited to the U.S. per request of the U.S. government since September 2019. Still, he will remain in Mexico while various legal proceedings take place, as the Mexican Secretary of Foreign Affairs Marcelo Ebrard reported. On the same day, Ernesto Alfredo Piñón de la Cruz "El Neto," leader of the violent criminal organization affiliated with the Sinaloa Cartel known as "Los Mexicles," was killed by state and federal police while trying to flee from his residence during a police raid in Ciudad Juárez, Chihuahua, just four days after violently escaping prison. López Obrador has acceded to U.S. requests to extradite criminals to the U.S. In Michoacán, drug mafias have been extorting avocado producers, an ongoing issue especially following the rise in demand in the U.S. for the crop. In April 2020, at the beginning of the coronavirus pandemic, Mexican drug cartels had been handing out food relief in their core regions. López Obrador called on them instead to end the violence. Cartels have been acting with continued impunity in Mexico City, with the Jalisco New Generation Cartel targeting the chief of its police force, Omar García Harfuch for assassination in an early morning. He survived wounded, but two of his bodyguards and a civilian were killed. López Obrador's policy toward drug cartels has been criticized in the press in the United States on an ongoing basis. Since 2020, a gradual decrease in intentional homicides has been shown nationwide in Mexico. In 2020, the amount of reported intentional homicides was 0.4% less than in 2019, further decreasing by 4.6% in 2021 and again in 2022 by 7.1%. López Obrador stated in his 6 January 2022 report that he plans to continue this trend throughout the rest of his presidency. Despite this, 2019 was one of the most violent years in Mexican history, with 34,690 reported intentional homicides. The reports conclude that nearly half of all intentional homicides in 2022 occurred in six out of 32 states and that 23 states showed a decrease as high as 13%. In the State of Zacatecas, which saw a sharp increase in total homicide rates in 2021 —of 41% in the first 11 months, making it the biggest statewide increase in the country on that year—, intentional homicides decreased by 13.76% and total homicides by 7.57% in 2022, according to the Executive Secretary of the National Public Security System (SESNSP). Though a nationwide decrease has been perceived, some areas have perceived an increase in 2022. In 17 out of the 50 "priority municipalities," where intentional homicides are concentrated, an average increase of 8.5% in such homicides was reported. In contrast, in 32, an average decrease of 24.3% was reported, with Cuernavaca and Morelos being the only municipalities with no reported changes. Plans to legalize the personal use of marijuana missed a 24 October 2019 SCJN deadline, which was extended to 30 April 2020, as users, growers, and businesses could not agree on details. In June 2021, the Supreme Court in effect legalized the recreational use of cannabis. As of 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic interrupted supply chains from China to Mexico that provided the precursor chemicals to create fentanyl and methamphetamine, usually then exported to the U.S. On Monday, 22 January 2024, the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit ruled in favor of the Mexican Government regarding a lawsuit filed against several U.S. firearms producers, annulling the case's dismissal by a Massachusetts court in September 2022. The Mexican Government claims that weapons from various gun producers, including Smith & Wesson, Barrett Firearms Manufacturing and several others, are widely used by drug cartels and accuses them of facilitating this through "negligent commercial practices." The lawsuit was originally filed in August 2021, while Marcelo Ebrard was Secretary of Foreign Affairs. The ruling was celebrated by Ebrard and the current Secretary of Foreign Affairs Alicia Bárcena, who enthusiastically claimed it was a "great step" and "great news," respectively. Alejandro Celorio, a legal consultant of the Secretariat of Foreign Affairs, claims this "is to advance in the accountability of those who negligently trade firearms that violate the peace and security of our country." That same day, Bárcena reported during a morning press conference that weapons exclusively used by the U.S. military had illegally entered Mexican territory, and that the governments of both countries agreed on Friday to investigate this problem. For these reasons, the U.S. Ambassador to Mexico Ken Salazar announced that the issue of gun trafficking into Mexico will be central to a meeting between politicians of both countries in February, though he stated he was unaware of the issue regarding U.S. military weapons being smuggled into Mexico and maintains that the authorities of both countries constantly exchange information about the flow of firearms between them. A month prior, Salazar acknowledged that 70% of weapons smuggled into Mexico are of U.S. origin or are manufactured in the U.S. In March 2023, López Obrador claimed that 70% of homicides in Mexico were committed using weapons from the U.S., criticising the U.S. government for this issue. Just eleven days prior to the Court of Appeals' ruling, a U.S. citizen was arrested by the Mexican authorities during a routine check in Agua Prieta, Sonora, while attempting to cross the border with Arizona, when it was found that he was trying to smuggle over 1300 .50 caliber cartridges into Mexican territory. López Obrador's government has been criticized for failing to combat violence against women in Mexico and its high rate of femicide, which has risen since 2018. López Obrador has been accused of being slow to respond to women's demands to act on the issue of femicide. After a particularly well-publicized femicide of a kidnapped girl, women marches spiked nationally; as a result, the Head of Government of Mexico City, Claudia Sheinbaum (who is also a member of MORENA) announced new measures to prevent further femicides in the city, while López Obrador also announced a package of new measures to address the issue. Soon after, women's groups called for two days of action, a massive demonstration in Mexico City on International Women's Day (8 March), following by a strike on 9 March 2020. The Mexico City demonstration had some 80,000 participants. On Monday, 9 March 2020, the second day of action was marked by the absence of women at work, in class, shopping and other public activities. The "Day Without Us" (Día Sin Nosotras) was reported in the international press along with the previous day's demonstrations. On 7 November 2023, López Obrador called for a ceasefire in the Israel–Hamas war. The Trump administration in the U.S. pressed for building a wall on Mexico's northern border, and it also implemented measures attempting to stem the flow of migrants from Central America and other regions of the world. Although López Obrador expressed sympathy with migrants during his campaign, when the number of migrants surged, the U.S. threatened his government with trade sanctions, which led him to solidify the southern border. Government forces broke up migrant caravans heading through Mexico to the U.S. At the northern border, Mexico is now the stopping point for migrants sent back to Mexico by U.S. immigration authorities awaiting adjudication of their asylum claims. Citing widespread corruption, López Obrador dismantled the Federal Police and incorporated elements of it into the recently created National Guard, which has been employed to stop Central American immigrants at the southern border. In March 2023, López Obrador was sharply critical of some "hypocritical" Republican lawmakers, in particular Dan Crenshaw and Marjorie Taylor Greene, for introducing bills that would authorize the U.S. military to invade Mexico and attack drug cartels, declaring that "we remind those hypocritical and irresponsible politicians that Mexico is an independent and free country, not a colony or a protectorate of the United States." Former Bolivian President Evo Morales, who was forced to resign amid allegations of fraud in October's presidential election, fled Bolivia during the night of 11 November 2019 on a plane for Mexico, which offered him asylum. Mexican Foreign Minister Marcelo Ebrard said his country decided to grant asylum "for humanitarian reasons, and given the urgent situation faced in Bolivia". AMLO had Mexican government airplane sent to pick him up. López Obrador defended former U.S. president Donald Trump against a potential indictment, saying that "Right now, former President Trump is declaring that they are going to arrest. If that were the case...it would be so that his name doesn't appear on the ballot." The same month, he criticized the United States, saying the country is "anti-democratic" in seeking to arrest Julian Assange and deny Trump an opportunity to seek re-election. He also referenced the allegations that the U.S. is responsible for the 2022 Nord Stream pipeline sabotage, saying, "If we are talking about acts of violence, how is it that an award-winning journalist in the United States claims that the US government sabotaged the gas pipeline from Russia to Europe?", and criticized the fentanyl epidemic in America. Early in his presidency, López Obrador declared in February 2019 that his government would no longer fund environmental NGOs. Around 6.2 billion Mexican pesos (around USD$321 million at the time) in funding was cut. In 2020 he cut funding to Mexico's national parks service, the National Commission of Protected Areas (CONANP), by 75 pecent and also cut 75 percent of the budget of the National Institute of Anthropology and History (INAH which oversees more than 100,000 heritage and archaeological sites, museums and monuments. Over the six years of his presidency, López Obrador's government continued to cut funding for environmental protection. Between 2018 and 2023, Mexico's environment department received 35% less money than under the previous government, according to an analysis of Mexico’s 2024 budget, including funding cuts to the environmental department of US$510 million (9 billion pesos) or 11% in 2024. Major historical commemorations took place in 2021. The events are the founding of Tenochtitlan (although the date of its founding is often given as 1325); the 1521 fall of Tenochtitlan; and the 1821 consummation of Mexican independence. The Mexico City Metropolitan Cathedral is being repaired, along with other colonial-era buildings in advance of the commemorations. During conmemorations, he apologized in the name of Mexico to indigenous peoples and Mexicans of Chinese descent for historical abuses. López Obrador invited King Felipe VI of Spain and Pope Francis to Mexico for the commemorations, and asked them to apologize for the conquest of America. The Pope declined the invitation, saying he had apologized in 2015. In June 2021 midterm elections, López Obrador's Juntos Hacemos Historia coalition lost seats in the lower house of Congress. However, his ruling coalition maintained a simple majority, but López Obrador failed to secure the two-thirds congressional supermajority. The main opposition was a coalition of Mexico's three traditional parties: the PRI, the PAN and the PRD.  Mexico: Grand Master and Collar of the Order of the Aztec Eagle (1 December 2018).  Guatemala: Great Collar of the Order of the Quetzal (5 May 2022).  Honduras: Grand Cross of the Order of José Cecilio del Valle (6 May 2022).  Cuba: Medal of the Order of José Martí (8 May 2022). World No Tobacco Day Award by the World Health Organization, in 2022. López Obrador, Andrés Manuel (1986). Los Primeros Pasos, Tabasco, 1810-1867. Villahermosa, Tabasco: Universidad Juárez Autónoma de Tabasco. OCLC 21117234. —————————————— (1988). Del esplendor a la sombra: la República restaurada, Tabasco 1867-1876. Villahermosa, Tabasco: Universidad Juárez Autónoma de Tabasco. OCLC 48297841. —————————————— (1990). Tabasco, Víctima de un Fraude. Mexico City: Nuestro tiempo. OCLC 651573248. —————————————— (1996). Entre la Historia y la Esperanza: corrupción y lucha democrática en Tabasco. Mexico City: Grijalbo. OCLC 906604879. —————————————— (1999). Fobaproa, expediente abierto: reseña y archivo. Mexico City: Grijalbo. OCLC 654341802. —————————————— (2004). Un proyecto alternativo de nación: hacia un cambio verdadero. Mexico City: Grijalbo. ISBN 9685956979. —————————————— (2005). Contra el desafuero: mi defensa jurídica. Mexico City: Grijalbo. ISBN 9685957908. —————————————— (2007). La mafia nos robó la Presidencia. Mexico City: Grijalbo. ISBN 9789707802155. —————————————— (2008). La gran tentación: el petróleo de México. Mexico City: Grijalbo. ISBN 9789708105651. —————————————— (2010). La mafia que se adueñó de México... y el 2012. Mexico City: Grijalbo Mondadori. ISBN 9786073100694. —————————————— (2012). No decir adiós a la esperanza. Mexico City: Grijalbo. ISBN 9786073113434. —————————————— (2014). Neoporfirismo hoy como ayer. Mexico City: Grijalbo. ISBN 9786073123129. —————————————— (2015). El poder en el trópico. Mexico City: Planeta mexicana. ISBN 9786070728211. —————————————— (2016). Catarino Erasmo Garza Rodríguez ¿Revolucionario o Bandido?. México City: Planeta. ISBN 9786070733314. —————————————— (2017). 2018 La salida. Decadencia y renacimiento de México. Mexico City: Planeta. ISBN 9786070738739. —————————————— (2017). Oye, Trump. Mexico City: Planeta. ISBN 9786070742644. —————————————— (2019). Hacia una economía moral. Mexico City: Planeta. ISBN 9786070764820. —————————————— (2021). A la mitad del camino. Mexico City: Planeta. ISBN 9786070780950. In October 2019, López Obrador said he wanted to retire in peace once he left the presidency and did not want any streets or statues named for him. Nevertheless, on 18 July 2020, the newspaper El Universal published a list of places that bear his name: López Obrador Street, Tezonttila, Xochimilco, CDMX (since 2003) Avenida López Obrador, San Vicente Chicolapa de Juarez, Chimalhuacán, State of Mexico A neighborhood in Arcelia municipality, Guerrero An alley in La Montańa de Guerrero, Acapulco, Guerrero A street in San Juan Bautista Tuxtepec, Oaxaca A street in La Concepción, Veracruz ¿Quién es el señor López? – a 2006 documentary film Pink tide History of Mexico History of democracy in Mexico Politics of Mexico Mexican Drug War Fourth Transformation COVID-19 pandemic in Mexico Morena was not officially registered as a political party until 10 July 2014. Dropped out of the race, but votes towards her will be counted "Semblanza". Lopezobrador.org.mx (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 23 December 2023. Retrieved 10 December 2016. "Andrés Manuel López Obrador". gob.mx (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 6 March 2019. Retrieved 3 March 2019. Monica Campbell (17 March 2004). "Clean and austere: Mexico's next president?". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on 3 May 2008. Retrieved 15 June 2008. "Más de un millón repudiaron el abuso del poder". La Jornada (in Spanish). April 25, 2005. Archived from the original on May 3, 2008. Retrieved June 16, 2008. "Ilegal la campaña empresarial del 2006 contra AMLO: TEPJF". Proceso (in Spanish). 30 October 2008. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 17 February 2022. "Campaign row heats up in Mexico". BBC News. 23 May 2006. Archived from the original on 9 December 2006. Retrieved 16 June 2008. "En breve acto, Calderón recibe constancia de presidente electo - La Jornada". La Jornada (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 17 February 2022. "Lopez Obrador Progressive". Apboroda. Archived from the original on 25 September 2020. Retrieved 20 May 2020. "Mexico's populist would-be president". The Economist. 16 March 2017. Archived from the original on 12 August 2017. Retrieved 5 April 2018. A figure of national consequence for more than 20 years... Romero, Luis Gómez (8 February 2019) [February 8, 2019]. "López Obrador Takes on Corruption and Poverty in Mexico Through Austerity". Pacific Standard. Archived from the original on 19 February 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2022. Krauze, Enrique (2 July 2020). "Mexico's Ruinous Messiah". The New York Review of Books. ISSN 0028-7504. Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 13 August 2020. Arredondo, Alejandra (22 November 2018). "La vida de López Obrador: de activista a presidente". La Voz de América (U.S. Agency for Global Media, formerly Broadcasting Board of Governors). Archived from the original on 27 August 2019. Retrieved 16 December 2019. López Obrador es el hijo de dos comerciantes de Tabasco. Nació el 13 de noviembre del 1953 en Villa Tepetitán, municipio Macuspana. "El origen de López Obrador en sus propias palabras". Morena. Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Retrieved 13 July 2018. Enrique Krause (30 June 2006). "El mesías tropical". Letras Libres. Archived from the original on 16 December 2020. Retrieved 12 January 2018. Alcauter, Brando (8 March 2017). "Quiénes son los hermanos de Andrés Manuel López Obrador". Archived from the original on 24 November 2020. Retrieved 13 July 2018. José Obrador, el abuelo de AMLO que cruzó el Atlántico escondido en un barril Archived 11 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine - 26 March 2019 Las raíces cántabras de López Obrador Archived 31 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine - 9 September 2017 El nacimiento de AMLO relatado por él mismo Archived 29 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine - 13 November 2016 "El origen de López Obrador en sus propias palabras – Morena – La esperanza de México". Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Retrieved 11 August 2020. "El día que Andrés Manuel López Obrador vio la muerte de su hermano". Nacion 321. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 27 June 2018. García Ramírez, Fernando. "8 de junio de 1969". El Financiero. Archived from the original on 19 February 2018. Retrieved 27 June 2018. Guzmán, Armando; Vergara, Rosalía (2011). "Vocación de resistencia". Proceso - los Aspirantes 2012: López Obrador; la Resistencia (9): 7–9. "López Obrador: el fósil de la UNAM" Archived 26 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine Vivir Mexico. "Tesis Digital". 132.248.9.195. Archived from the original on 20 May 2018. Retrieved 24 May 2018. Miguel Ángel Vargas V. (10 June 2012). "Las tesis universitarias de los candidatos presidenciales". ADN Político. Archived from the original on 13 November 2016. Retrieved 12 January 2018. Guzmán, Armando; Vergara, Rosalía (2011). "Vocación de resistencia". Proceso - los Aspirantes 2012: López Obrador; la Resistencia (9): 7–9. Sánchez Olmos, Pablo (6 July 2018). "La suerte e infortunios de López Obrador, el presidente de México que no quiere guardaespaldas". El Mundo. Archived from the original on 28 August 2018. Retrieved 27 August 2018. "La Jornada Virtu@l". www.jornada.unam.mx. Archived from the original on 25 June 2018. Retrieved 25 June 2018. "Andrés Manuel López Obrador (perfil)". El Universal. Archived from the original on 13 August 2020. Retrieved 13 July 2018. México, El Universal, Compañia Periodística Nacional. "Fallece la esposa de López Obrador". Archived from the original on 13 August 2020. Retrieved 25 June 2018.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Beatriz Gutiérrez Müller, la esposa (y defensora) de AMLO - 2012 - ADNPolítico.com". static.adnpolitico.com. Archived from the original on 5 July 2018. Retrieved 25 June 2018. "¿Quiénes son los hijos de Andrés Manuel López Obrhador?". Milenio.com (in Spanish). 12 January 2018. Archived from the original on 24 December 2018. Retrieved 3 January 2019. "AMLO ¿protestante?". La Jornada (in Spanish). 10 May 2006. Archived from the original on 27 January 2008. Retrieved 15 June 2008. "¿Un presidente evangélico en México?". ALC Noticias (in Spanish). 1 May 2016. Archived from the original on 18 January 2008. Román, José Antonio (29 March 2018). "Como "cristiano en sentido amplio", se define AMLO". La Jornada. Archived from the original on 12 October 2018. Retrieved 8 October 2018. "Otros apodos de AMLO a lo largo de su vida (además de 'el Peje')". www.nacion321.com (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 6 July 2018. Retrieved 25 June 2018. "Siete datos curiosos de Andrés Manuel López Obrador". www.milenio.com. 12 April 2017. Archived from the original on 14 July 2018. Retrieved 25 June 2018. "Andrés Manuel López Obrador: The 100 Most Influential People of 2019". Time. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 22 September 2020. Pitofsky, Marina (24 January 2021). "Mexico's president tests positive for COVID-19". The Hill. Archived from the original on 25 January 2021. Retrieved 25 January 2021. "Quién es Carlos Pellicer, el padre político de López Obrador y una de sus máximas influencias intelectuales". BBC News Mundo (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 17 February 2022. Guzmán, Armando; Vergara, Rosalía (20 March 2012). "AMLO: vocación de resistencia". Proceso (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 17 February 2022. Bizberg, Ilán; Meyer, Lorenzo; Alba, Francisco (2003). Una historia contemporánea de México. Internet Archive. México, D.F. : Oceano. p. 26. ISBN 978-970-651-845-3. "Levantan bloqueos; no aceptaremos simulaciones: López Obrador". La Jornada (in Spanish). 17 February 1996. Archived from the original on 11 November 2004. Retrieved 15 June 2008. "Luces y sombras de la "república amorosa" de Andrés Manuel López Obrador | Nueva Sociedad". Nueva Sociedad | Democracia y política en América Latina. 2 December 2020. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 17 February 2022. "INSTITUTO ELECTORAL DE LA CIUDAD DE MÉXICO". www.iedf.org.mx. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007. Retrieved 11 August 2020. "In support of Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador – Mayor of Mexico City". World Mayor. Archived from the original on 7 May 2012. Retrieved 8 May 2012. Theodore Hamm (June 2003). "Viva Rudy?". The Brooklyn Rail. Archived from the original on 3 May 2008. Retrieved 15 June 2008. "UACM: ¿Qué fue de la universidad de AMLO y qué carreras ofrece?". Radio Fórmula (in Mexican Spanish). 21 April 2022. Archived from the original on 2 September 2023. Retrieved 2 September 2023. "En mayo arranca el proyecto de remodelación del Centro Histórico". Proceso (in Spanish). 12 February 2002. Archived from the original on 19 February 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2022. María José Ortega Moncada (10 September 2001). "El Gobierno del Distrito Federal ante el reto de la modernización inmobiliaria" (in Spanish). Inmobiliare Magazine. Archived from the original on 4 May 2008. Retrieved 15 June 2008. Arturo Cerda (31 October 2004). "No hay que pensar en proyectos muy sofisticados para cambiar las cosas en el país; sólo hace falta cumplir la Constitución, dice López Obrador" (in Spanish). EsMas.com. Archived from the original on 3 May 2008. Retrieved 15 June 2008. Marla Dickerson (19 June 2005). "Mayor seeks a way to ease traffic". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on 22 November 2007. Retrieved 15 June 2008. "Linchan a agentes de la PFP en Tláhuac" (in Spanish). EsMas.com. 23 November 2004. Archived from the original on 4 May 2008. Retrieved 15 June 2008. "La PJDF rescata a agente de la PFP" (in Spanish). EsMas.com. 23 November 2004. Archived from the original on 3 May 2008. Retrieved 15 June 2008. ""No estoy justificando lo injustificable": Encinas" (in Spanish). EsMas.com. 26 November 2004. Archived from the original on 17 June 2008. Retrieved 15 June 2008. Francisco Barradas (25 November 2004). "Explota "Jefe Diego" Vs. usos y costumbres" (in Spanish). EsMas.com. Archived from the original on 18 June 2008. Retrieved 15 June 2008. "In the pre-electoral atmosphere, human rights issues are in the last place" (PDF). Centro de Derechos Humanos Miguel Agustín Pro Juárez. Autumn 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 May 2008. Retrieved 15 June 2008. "Mexico: Federal Cops Lynched". Tulane University. 28 November 2004. p. 8. Archived from the original (TXT) on 4 May 2008. Retrieved 15 June 2008. Bolaños, Ángel (10 February 2005). "El nombramiento de Ebrard, ni desafío ni para apuntalarlo hacia 2006: el GDF". La Jornada. Archived from the original on 20 September 2022. Retrieved 18 September 2022. "El ABC del desafuero". El Universal (in Spanish). 29 August 2004. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 17 February 2022. "Let Mexico's Voters Decide". The New York Times. 7 April 2005. Archived from the original on 10 April 2005. Retrieved 16 June 2008. "Decision on Democracy". The Washington Post. April 6, 2005. Archived from the original on November 12, 2012. Retrieved June 16, 2008. Castillo García, Gustavo (28 April 2005). "Renuncio en aras de la gobernabilidad democrática, dijo Macedo de la Concha". La Jornada. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 17 February 2022. "López Obrador: El nuevo desafío". Proceso.com.mx. 29 July 2005. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 10 December 2016. "Quedan compromisos pendientes de cumplir". Reforma. 28 July 2005. p. 4B. Archived from the original on 21 February 2024. Retrieved 21 September 2006. "Andrés Manuel López Obrador and Mexico's presidential election". The Economist (requires subscription). April 20, 2006. Archived from the original on May 3, 2008. Retrieved June 15, 2008. Ávila, Antonio Ortega (6 July 2005). "Cárdenas se retira de la carrera del PRD a la presidencia de México". El País (in Spanish). ISSN 1134-6582. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 17 February 2022. Ulises Beltrán, Alejandro Cruz Martínez (April 2006). "Se cierra la contienda" (PDF) (in Spanish). BGC, Ulises Beltrán y Asociados. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 May 2008. Retrieved 16 June 2008. Reséndiz, Francisco (8 March 2006). "Operan grupos bolivarianos 10 centros logísticos en DF". La Crónica de Hoy. Archived from the original on 18 January 2015. Retrieved 18 January 2015. "Los mineros, los muertos, los políticos". Archived from the original on 30 April 2006. Retrieved 11 August 2020. "Arturo Núñez justifica la aprobación de Fobaproa – El Universal – México". El Universal. Archived from the original on 1 May 2012. Retrieved 8 May 2012. "Falta de apoyo a AMLO no originó su derrota en 2006: Cárdenas". Excélsior (in Spanish). 8 February 2012. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 17 February 2022. Roig-Franzia, Manuel (23 June 2006). "Using FDR as Model, Presidential Hopeful Out to Build New Deal for Mexico". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 5 January 2010. Retrieved 25 April 2010. "Calderón Remains on Top in Mexico: Angus Reid Global Monitor". Angus-reid.com. Archived from the original on 5 February 2007. Retrieved 8 May 2012. "La posición del IFE es tibia y débil: Madrazo". Archived from the original on 21 November 2007. Retrieved 11 August 2020. ""Asume" el IFE que Fox será imparcial el 2 de julio". Archived from the original on 26 June 2006. Retrieved 11 August 2020. "Mexican PRI Senator Throws Support to Lopez Obrador (Update3)". Bloomberg. 25 May 2006. Archived from the original on 26 June 2009. "La alianza con el PRI es decisión del PRD: AMLO". Archived from the original on 21 November 2007. Retrieved 11 August 2020. "No declinaré, mucho menos en favor de otro candidato, asegura Madrazo". Archived from the original on 21 November 2007. Retrieved 11 August 2020. "El Economista.com.mx" (in Spanish). El Economista.com.mx. Archived from the original on 3 May 2008. Retrieved 8 May 2012. Ortega Ávila, Antonio (3 September 2006). "López Obrador extrema su postura y manda "al diablo" a las instituciones mexicanas". El País. Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Retrieved 8 October 2018. "Va AMLO al Trife :: México". esmas. 6 July 2006. Archived from the original on 19 June 2012. Retrieved 8 May 2012. [1] Archived 5 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine "Supporters of Mexico's Leftist Candidate Obrador Take to Streets". Fox News. 9 July 2006. Archived from the original on 11 July 2006. Retrieved 8 July 2006. Carlos Avilés, Arturo Zárate (5 September 2006). "Proponen magistrados declarar Presidente electo a Calderón". El Universal (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 17 April 2008. Retrieved 16 June 2008. "Lopez Obrador Plans Protest Camps to Press Recount (Update1)". Bloomberg. 30 July 2006. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 17 February 2022. "(TEPJF) Injerencia de Fox, mayor irregularidad: Navarro" (in Spanish). Invertia.com. 5 September 2006. Archived from the original on 12 July 2012. Retrieved 16 June 2008. "(TEPJF) Afirma que CCE tuvo injerencia en campaña electoral" (in Spanish). Invertia.com. 5 September 2006. Archived from the original on 12 July 2012. Retrieved 16 June 2008. Jorge Herrera, Arturo Zárate (August 5, 2006). "Precisan recuento: 9.07% de las casillas en 149 distritos". El Universal (in Spanish). Archived from the original on May 3, 2008. Retrieved June 16, 2008. "Rinde AMLO protesta como "presidente legítimo" – El Universal – Sucesión". El Universal. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 8 May 2012. "Somos respetuosos de la autoridad electoral, pero ganamos la Presidencia, subraya López Obrador". Archived from the original on 8 October 2007. Retrieved 4 August 2006. "El PRD dice que López encabeza los sondeos a pie de urna y convoca a la población al Zócalo a las 23:00". Actualidad.terra.es. Archived from the original on 8 February 2009. Retrieved 8 May 2012. "Exit Poll and Quick Count Carried Out by IMO in Mexico" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 August 2006. Retrieved 4 August 2006. "Página no está disponible". Univision.com. 28 July 2006. Archived from the original on 15 October 2009. Retrieved 8 May 2012. "El" (in Spanish). Economista.com.mx. Archived from the original on 3 May 2008. Retrieved 8 May 2012. "WTOP | Washington's Top News". WTOP. Archived from the original on 11 June 2011. Retrieved 11 August 2020. "El" (in Spanish). Economista.com.mx. Archived from the original on 3 May 2008. Retrieved 8 May 2012. Jorge Herrera, Arturo Zarate (5 August 2006). "Precisan recuento: 9.07% de las casillas en 149 distritos". El Universal. Archived from the original on 12 October 2009. Retrieved 31 May 2008. Defienden Certeza de Proceso Electoral Archived 21 February 2024 at the Wayback Machine, El Norte, 8 August 2006 (requires subscription) "Condenan banqueros bloqueos en centros financieros – El Universal – Elecciones". El Universal. Archived from the original on 3 December 2011. Retrieved 8 May 2012. "portada". reforma.com. Archived from the original on 8 May 2012. Retrieved 8 May 2012. "10 razones para resistencia civil". Eluniversal.com.mx. Archived from the original on 12 October 2012. Retrieved 8 May 2012. "AMLO, presidente legítimo; toma posesión el 20 de noviembre: CND". La Jornada. Archived from the original on 19 February 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2022. "Nacional | Plantea AMLO: soy presidente o resistencia". El Porvenir. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 8 May 2012. "Informe: "Sí se pudo": simpatizantes de AMLO en Zócalo – El Universal – México". El Universal. Archived from the original on 3 December 2011. Retrieved 8 May 2012. "La toma de la tribuna impide a Fox leer mensaje al Congreso". Archived from the original on 10 May 2007. Retrieved 11 August 2020. Arcos, Eduardo (1 September 2006). "López Obrador pide no moverse del Zócalo". Hipertextual (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 19 February 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2022. "7 de cada 10 desaprueban eventual boicot al cambio de poderes – El Universal – México". El Universal. Archived from the original on 9 October 2012. Retrieved 8 May 2012. "La izquierda mexicana proclama a López Obrador 'presidente legítimo' del país". Elmundo.es. Archived from the original on 1 October 2016. Retrieved 10 December 2016. "La convención democrática sentará las bases de una nueva República: AMLO". La Jornada. Archived from the original on 19 February 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2022. "Izquierdista Lopez Obrador prepara su 'gabinete'". terra. Archived from the original on 8 September 2008. Retrieved 8 May 2012. "Requires subscription". Elnorte.com. 6 April 2010. Archived from the original on 4 February 2024. Retrieved 8 May 2012. "Requires subscription". Elnorte.com. 6 April 2010. Archived from the original on 4 February 2024. Retrieved 8 May 2012. "Requires Subscription". Elnorte.com. 6 April 2010. Archived from the original on 8 January 2024. Retrieved 8 May 2012. "Pone AMLO en peligro paz de México: El País – El Universal – Sucesión". El Universal. Archived from the original on 26 January 2012. Retrieved 8 May 2012. "AMLO no usurpa funciones como "presidente legítimo": PRI – El Universal – Sucesión". El Universal. Archived from the original on 26 January 2012. Retrieved 8 May 2012. La Jornada. "A la mitad del foro – La Jornada". Jornada.unam.mx. Archived from the original on 3 December 2011. Retrieved 8 May 2012. Emir Olivares Alonso (21 November 2006). "El acto de López Obrador, por reclamo social, no por capricho: el obispo Vera". La Jornada. Archived from the original on 9 February 2009. Retrieved 31 May 2008. ""Reprueban nombramiento de AMLO", by Grupo Reforma -In Spanish- (requires subscription)". Gruporeforma.elnorte.com. 6 April 2010. Archived from the original on 8 January 2024. Retrieved 8 May 2012. Calderon signs accord to contain tortilla prices Archived 29 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine "The accord limits tortilla prices to 8.50 pesos ($0.78) per kilogram and threatens prison sentences of up to 10 years for companies found hoarding corn." "Calderon Proposes Cap on Mexican Government Salaries". Bloomberg. 23 January 2007. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 16 June 2008. Magar, Eric; Romero, Vidal (2008). "México: Reformas pese a un gobierno dividido". Revista de ciencia política (Santiago). 28 (1): 265–285. doi:10.4067/S0718-090X2008000100013. ISSN 0718-090X. Archived from the original on 22 September 2022. Retrieved 18 September 2022 – via SCIELO. Olivares Alonso, Emir (21 November 2006). "El acto de López Obrador, por reclamo social, no por capricho: el obispo Vera". La Jornada (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 12 September 2021. Retrieved 25 July 2021. Ramos, Jorge (13 April 2008). "Comisión técnica se rehusa a reabrir cómputo en PRD". El Universal (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 11 February 2009. Retrieved 31 October 2008. Muñoz, Alma E.; Enrique Méndez (27 March 2008). "Ortega sólo podría ganar con trampas, asegura IMO". La Jornada (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 9 February 2009. Retrieved 31 October 2008. Gómez, Ricardo; Andrea Merlos (9 April 2008). "Reforma energética, una privatización encubierta: González Garza" (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 21 September 2008. Retrieved 31 October 2008. Muñoz, Alma (20 June 2008). "Se reactivará la toma del Congreso si PRI-AN pretended aprobar la venta de Pemex: AMLO". La Jornada. Archived from the original on 20 September 2022. Retrieved 19 September 2022. Zárate, Arturo; Andrea Merlos; Ricardo Gómez (15 April 2008). "Rechaza el FAP debate de 50 días" (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 11 February 2009. Retrieved 31 October 2008. Flores Olea, Víctor (26 March 2012). "Andrés Manuel López Obrador, el candidato". La Jornada (in Mexican Spanish). Archived from the original on 20 September 2022. Retrieved 18 September 2022. "Las 6 promesas económicas de AMLO". CNNExpansión. 5 November 2011. Archived from the original on 6 April 2012. Retrieved 17 July 2018. Wilson, Tim (8 February 2012). "Mexico Presidential Candidates Play it Safe with Security Plans". InSight Crime. Archived from the original on 10 February 2012. Retrieved 25 June 2012. García, Jacobo (28 May 2012). "Los candidatos mexicanos, cara a cara con las víctimas de la violencia". El Mundo (in Spanish). Retrieved 23 September 2022.[permanent dead link] Jonsson, Patrik (26 July 2011). "How Mexican killers got US guns from 'Fast and Furious' operation". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on 29 June 2012. Retrieved 25 June 2012. "Andrés Manuel López Obrador: Drilling to the root of Mexico's pain". The Dallas Morning News. 14 June 2012. Archived from the original on 2 August 2012. Retrieved 25 June 2012. Shoichet, Catherine E. (24 June 2012). "Mexican election could mean drug war strategy shift, U.S. officials say". CNN. Archived from the original on 25 June 2012. Retrieved 25 June 2012. "Sitio Oficial de Andrés Manuel López Obrador" (in Spanish). 31 March 2012. Archived from the original on 1 February 2012. Retrieved 31 March 2012. Archibold, Randal C. (1 July 2012). "Newly Elected Mexican Leader Peña Pledges Transparency". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 23 August 2012. "Vote buying alleged, recount demanded in Mexico". CBS News. Archived from the original on 4 July 2012. Retrieved 4 July 2012. "Tribunal electoral rechaza invalidar la elección de Enrique Peña Nieto". RFI. 31 August 2012. Archived from the original on 19 February 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2022. "Pena Nieto set to become Mexico's president". Al Jazeera. 3 July 2012. Archived from the original on 19 July 2012. Retrieved 18 July 2012. Diaz, Lizbeth (9 July 2012). "Mexican leftist refuses to accept election result". Reuters. Archived from the original on 16 July 2012. Retrieved 18 July 2012. Quintero, Josefina (6 July 2012). "Las tarjetas Soriana que dio el PRI tienen dinero: poseedores". Jornada. Archived from the original on 11 September 2018. Retrieved 11 September 2018. "Mexican retailer lashes out at losing presidential candidate". 2 August 2012. Archived from the original on 19 September 2016. Oppenheimer, Andres (15 July 2012). "Mexico's president-elect vows to imprison vote buyers". Miami Herald. Archived from the original on 25 April 2013. Retrieved 19 July 2012. Jo Tuckman. "Mexico elections: claims of dirty tricks cast shadow over Peña Nieto's victory | World news". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 October 2016. Retrieved 10 December 2016. "Mexico vote-buy scandal". New York Daily News. 3 July 2012. Archived from the original on 6 October 2016. Retrieved 10 December 2016. Quintero, Josefina; Ramón, José (5 July 2012). "Sin fondos, tarjetas Soriana; se dicen timados por el PRI". La Jornada (in Mexican Spanish). Archived from the original on 20 September 2022. Retrieved 19 September 2022. "Ex-candidate quits Mexico leftist party". Al Jazeera English. 10 September 2012. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 10 December 2016. "LA SEPARACIÓN DE LÓPEZ OBRADOR DEL PRD FUE UN "DIVORCIO POR CONVENIENCIA"". Expansion. 13 September 2012. Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Retrieved 9 July 2018. "Sólo 21% a favor que Morena sea partido político: Parametría". Animal Politico. 22 November 2012. Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Retrieved 6 July 2018. "Solicita Morena al IFE su registro como partido político". Aristegui Noticias. Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Retrieved 6 July 2018. Lara Paz, Ana Paola. "AMLO indicó que se salió del PRD porque los dirigentes de ese partido se fueron con EPN y traicionaron al pueblo". MVS Noticias. Archived from the original on 24 January 2018. Retrieved 9 July 2018. Chouza, Paula (10 July 2014). "Mexico's López Obrador registers new leftist party to run in 2015 election". El Pais. Archived from the original on 8 November 2019. Retrieved 6 July 2018. Zepeda, Aurora (10 July 2014). "Aprueban tres nuevos partidos; a partir de agosto recibirán dinero público". Excelsior. Archived from the original on 6 July 2018. Retrieved 6 July 2018. "Mexican leftist frontrunner extends lead for presidency: poll". Reuters. 15 May 2018. Archived from the original on 25 June 2018. Retrieved 17 May 2018. "Mexican leftist Lopez Obrador opens 20-point lead in presidential poll". Reuters. 14 May 2018. Archived from the original on 25 June 2018. Retrieved 17 May 2018. "As Mexico vote looms, leftist's support jumps to 52 percent: poll". Reuters. 30 May 2018. Archived from the original on 25 June 2018. Retrieved 25 June 2018. Aristegui, Carmen (8 April 2018). "Arremete Fox contra AMLO en Twitter y aclara que sigue apoyando a Meade - Aristegui Noticias". Aristegui Noticias. Archived from the original on 25 May 2019. Retrieved 25 May 2019. Digital, Milenio. "PT acuerda ir con Morena por la Presidencia en el 2018". Milenio. Archived from the original on 5 September 2017. Retrieved 5 September 2017. "Aprueba PT coalición con Morena en elecciones de 2018". SDPnoticias.com. 25 June 2017. Archived from the original on 5 September 2017. Retrieved 5 September 2017. "PRD avala "frente amplio" en 2018; PT se va con Morena (Documento)". aristeguinoticias.com. Archived from the original on 5 September 2017. Retrieved 5 September 2017. García, Carina (23 October 2017). "PT va con MORENA y reelige a Alberto Anaya en liderazgo". El Universal. Archived from the original on 26 June 2018. Retrieved 26 June 2018. Daen, Arturo (12 June 2017). "López Obrador cierra la puerta a una alianza con el PRD para 2018; solo iría con el PT". Animal Político (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 23 September 2022. Retrieved 23 September 2022. "No negociaremos con el PRI; vamos solos o con Morena: PES". Excélsior. 7 December 2017. Archived from the original on 10 December 2017. Retrieved 9 December 2017. "Partido del Trabajo y Encuentro Social anuncian coalición con Morena". Expansión. Archived from the original on 13 December 2017. Retrieved 13 December 2017. Nación321 (13 December 2017). "Morena y Encuentro Social oficializan su unión rumbo a 2018". Archived from the original on 14 December 2017. Retrieved 13 December 2017.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Redacción (13 December 2017). "Morena, PT y Encuentro Social firman coalición rumbo a elección de 2018". El Financiero. Archived from the original on 13 December 2017. Retrieved 13 December 2017. Zavala, Misael (13 December 2017). "Firman acuerdo Morena, PES y PT para ir en coalición". El Universal. Archived from the original on 14 December 2017. Retrieved 13 December 2017. Camhaji, Elías (13 December 2017). "López Obrador se alía con el conservador Encuentro Social para las elecciones de 2018". El País. Archived from the original on 13 December 2017. Retrieved 13 December 2017. "En Morena creemos en la inclusión: Yeidckol ante las críticas por alianza con el PES". El Financiero Bloomberg. 13 December 2017. Archived from the original on 9 July 2018. Retrieved 14 December 2017 – via YouTube. "La única opción para cambiar el país es la que encabeza AMLO: Hugo Eric Flores". El Financiero Bloomberg. 13 December 2017. Archived from the original on 9 July 2018. Retrieved 14 December 2017 – via YouTube. "A Palacio o a La Chingada; no seré líder moral: AMLO". El Universal (in Spanish). 27 October 2017. Archived from the original on 14 August 2018. Retrieved 12 March 2019. "Mexicanos muestran su apoyo a AMLO desde París". SDPnoticias.com (in European Spanish). 1 April 2018. Archived from the original on 26 April 2018. Retrieved 26 April 2018. Mélenchon, Jean-Luc (26 February 2018). "Le Mexique à l'horizon !". L'Ère du Peuple (in French). Archived from the original on 26 April 2018. Retrieved 25 April 2018. "VIDEO: Él es el gobernante español que quiere que AMLO gane". Nación 321. Archived from the original on 26 April 2018. Retrieved 25 April 2018. "AMLO se reúne con Jeremy Corbin en el parlamento inglés". 6 September 2017. Archived from the original on 22 May 2018. Retrieved 21 May 2018. San Martin Texmelucan, Matthew Campbell (13 May 2018). "'Corbyn's twin' Lopez Obrador poised for power in Mexico". Archived from the original on 22 May 2018. Retrieved 21 May 2018 – via www.thetimes.co.uk. Agren, David; Phillips, Tom (7 May 2018). "'Amlo': the veteran leftwinger who could be Mexico's next president". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 21 May 2018. Retrieved 21 May 2018. Tucker, Duncan (25 June 2017). "Corbyn surge raises hopes that Mexico might soon have a friend in No 10". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 25 June 2017. Retrieved 21 May 2018. "Presenta AMLO Gabinete para Presidencia 2018-2024 #GabineteAMLO – AMLO". lopezobrador.org.mx. Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Retrieved 25 June 2018. "Mexico's president-elect Lopez Obrador picks Marcelo Ebrard as foreign minister". Reuters. 5 July 2018. Archived from the original on 9 September 2019. Retrieved 5 July 2018. "Marcelo Ebrard a la Cancillería; Héctor Vasconcelos va al Senado: AMLO". Aristegui Noticias. Archived from the original on 12 September 2019. Retrieved 6 July 2018. "¿Quién es Arturo Herrera, nuevo secretario de Hacienda?" [Who is Arturo Herrera, new Treasury Secretary?]. UNO TV (in Spanish). 9 July 2019. Archived from the original on 9 July 2019. Retrieved 27 December 2019. Jimenez, Gabriela (27 May 2019), "Víctor Manuel Toledo, el nuevo titular de la Semarnat: AMLO" [Víctor Manuel Toledo, the new leader of the Secretary of the Environment], El Sol de Mexico (in Spanish), Mexico City, archived from the original on 11 July 2019, retrieved 10 July 2019 Velasco, León Krauze, Fernando Pizarro, Janet Rodriguez, Paulina (10 April 2018). "Mexican Voters Are Swinging Hard to the Left in the Age of Trump". Slate. Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Retrieved 21 May 2018.{{cite journal}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) O’Grady, Mary Anastasia (7 January 2018). "The Reinvention of Mexico's López Obrador". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 21 May 2018. Retrieved 21 May 2018 – via www.wsj.com. "AMLO dice que un colapso del TLCAN no "sería fatal" para México". 13 June 2018. Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Retrieved 25 June 2018. Llerenas Morales, Vidales (11 May 2018). "AMLO y los empresarios (o como quien dice, el 2018 no es el 2006)". El Economista (in Mexican Spanish). Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 25 September 2022. Carlsen, Laura (9 December 2018). "Mexico in the Era of AMLO". Jacobin. Archived from the original on 18 December 2020. Retrieved 10 December 2018. Webber, Jude (2 December 2018). "Mexico's López Obrador vows to end neo-liberalism in inauguration". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 10 December 2018. "AMLO presidente: ¿qué es la "Cuarta Transformación" que propone Andrés Manuel López Obrador para México?" [AMLO president: What is the "Fourth Transformation" proposed by Andrés Manuel López Obrador for Mexico?]. BBC News Mundo (in Spanish). 26 November 2018. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 22 January 2020. "Mexico front-runner must respect oil, airport contracts: business..." Reuters. 2018. Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Andrés Manuel López Obrador (2 April 2018). "No viviré en Los Pinos: AMLO". Archived from the original on 30 October 2021. Retrieved 25 June 2018 – via YouTube. "Quiere convertir AMLO a 'Los Pinos' en complejo cultural". 31 March 2018. Archived from the original on 13 August 2020. Retrieved 25 June 2018. "Atacar corrupción para entregar medicina gratuita a todo el pueblo, plantea AMLO - Proceso". 12 June 2018. Archived from the original on 30 September 2020. Retrieved 25 June 2018. "AMLO ofrece internet gratuito en áreas públicas". El Heraldo de Mexico. Archived from the original on 7 August 2018. Retrieved 7 August 2018. "No security for Mexico's next president: 'The people will protect me'". Mexico News Daily. 4 July 2018. Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Retrieved 5 July 2018. González, Isabel (30 October 2016). "Puntualiza AMLO: sobre libertad sexual y aborto es la gente la que decide". Excelsior. Archived from the original on 25 January 2021. Retrieved 13 July 2018. Oré, Diego (16 March 2018). "Mexican election front-runner offers referendums, could end term early". Reuters. Archived from the original on 2 February 2021. Retrieved 25 June 2018. Solomon, Daina Beth (3 July 2018). "Mexico's Lopez Obrador meets outgoing president, wants three-year referendum". Reuters. Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Retrieved 3 July 2018. "López Obrador Officially Launches Third Bid for Mexico's Presidency". 13 December 2017. Archived from the original on 25 September 2020. Retrieved 25 June 2018. "The ten proposals of AMLO's pre-campaign". 14 December 2017. Archived from the original on 24 December 2020. Retrieved 25 June 2018. Mark Stevenson (29 October 2018). "Mexico referendum cancels partly built $13 billion airport". AP News. Archived from the original on 28 December 2019. Retrieved 28 December 2019. Mexico pay MXN 75 billion to settle Texcoco Airport Archived 14 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine El Universal, 29 August 2019 Así avanzan las obras del aeropuerto de Santa Lucía Archived 23 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine Milenio, 16 December 2019 Arellano García, César (21 March 2022). "Se inaugura hoy el AIFA en el plazo y costo prometidos". La Jornada (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 23 September 2022. Retrieved 23 September 2022. Zerega, Georgina (21 February 2019). "México aprueba la prisión preventiva para los acusados de corrupción, delitos electorales y robo de combustible". El País (in Spanish). ISSN 1134-6582. Archived from the original on 25 May 2019. Retrieved 25 May 2019. Webber, Jude (13 June 2018). "Missionary zeal: 'Amlo' promises to shake up Mexico". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 25 June 2018. "Mexico presidential candidate open to international help, truth commission on drugs, corruption". NBC News. 9 May 2018. Archived from the original on 18 June 2018. Retrieved 25 June 2018. "Anxiety rising over fate of Mexico's energy reforms". Houston Chronicle. 14 September 2017. Archived from the original on 14 December 2020. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Krauss, Clifford (26 April 2018). "'Mexico First' Campaign Could End Welcome for U.S. Oil Giants". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 22 May 2018. Retrieved 21 May 2018. "Mexico's Obrador Backs Private Oil Contracts, Top Adviser Says". Bloomberg. 20 February 2018. Archived from the original on 22 May 2018. Retrieved 21 May 2018. Webber, Jude (13 March 2018). "Mexicans torn on how much to fear 'dangerous' Amlo". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 12 February 2021. "López Obrador vows to clean out corruption 'from top to bottom'". Financial Times. 20 November 2017. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. "No habrá gasolinazos ni aumentos al gas o la luz: AMLO". 17 March 2018. Archived from the original on 29 June 2018. Retrieved 25 June 2018. "Incoming Mexican president: 'neo-liberal' oil plan shelved". Reuters. 30 November 2018. Archived from the original on 30 November 2018. Retrieved 30 November 2018. 'Huachicoleo': Oil theft in Mexico and around the world Archived 28 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine By Kristen Martinez-Gugerli, Panoramas Scholarly Platform, 28 January 2019 Death toll from Mexico pipeline explosion increase to 119 Archived 9 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine Efe/Epa, 31 January 2019 "Mexico gasoline theft cut by 95%, says Pemex". The Mazatlan Post. 25 April 2019. Archived from the original on 28 December 2019. Retrieved 28 December 2019. Serán siete las refinerías de México en 2022 Archived 28 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine Informador, 9 May 2019 Construcción de la nueva refinería de México arranca en agosto, confirma el ministerio de Energía Archived 28 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine America Economia, retrieved 27 December 2019 Nueva refinería en México costará entre 6,000 y 8,000 mdd, dice la Sener Archived 28 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine Expansion (CNN), 11 March 2019 "'Becarios sí, sicarios, no', garantiza López Obrador". Zocalo. Archived from the original on 13 June 2018. Retrieved 19 June 2018. "Si llega a la Presidencia, López Obrador suspenderá examen de admisión a universidades". El Arsenal. 2017. Archived from the original on 3 April 2018. Retrieved 2 April 2018. "Reitera AMLO propuesta de "becarios si, sicarios no"". El Universal. 12 December 2017. Archived from the original on 15 June 2018. Retrieved 19 June 2018. PÁRAMO, ARTURO (11 May 2018). "AMLO reitera rechazo a reforma educativa". Excelsior. Archived from the original on 17 June 2018. Retrieved 19 June 2018. ""Vamos a cancelar la Reforma Educativa", reitera AMLO". Aristegui Noticias. Archived from the original on 13 June 2018. Retrieved 19 June 2018. "AMLO responde a Nuño: "como si la Reforma Educativa fuera cosa muy buena. Hasta me da risa"". Sinembargo. 24 March 2017. Archived from the original on 13 June 2018. Retrieved 19 June 2018. Reforma educativa: fin de una afrenta Archived 28 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine La Jornada, 27 September 2019 "Con "abrazos, no balazos", AMLO promete reducir violencia". www.milenio.com. Archived from the original on 31 March 2019. Retrieved 25 June 2018. Diaz, Lizbeth (4 January 2018). "Mexico presidential favorite puts himself at heart of security plan". Reuters. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 25 June 2018. Linthicum, Kate (12 December 2017). "He's been running for president in Mexico for more than a decade. He's floated amnesty for drug criminals. Could he win?". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 13 December 2017. Retrieved 13 December 2017. ...increase aid for students and the elderly and consider amnesty for drug war criminals. "Presidential candidates 'gang up' on López Obrador in first debate". 23 April 2018. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 25 June 2018. Daniel, Frank Jack (20 November 2017). "Mexico's presidential front-runner vows stable economy; aide urges..." Reuters. Retrieved 25 June 2018. Avilés, Francisco Díaz, Ricardo Almazán y Raymundo Ruiz. "La Jornada Guerrero - Ofrece AMLO a padres de los 43 crear una comisión para el caso Ayotzinapa". www.lajornadaguerrero.com.mx. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 30 May 2018.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "AMLO, the drug trade, and Fox". 3 December 2017. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 25 June 2018. "Mexico president-elect says will look at legalizing some drugs". Reuters. 7 October 2018. Archived from the original on 10 October 2018. Retrieved 10 October 2018. Mexico's Drug War Archived 16 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine Council on Foreign Relations, 22 October 2019 'Call it off, please': video shows how operation against El Chapo's son fell apart Archived 28 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine Jo Tuckman, The Guardian, 30 October 2019 LeBarón and Ciudad Juárez attacks: the rise of four Mexican drug cartels Archived 19 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine El Universal English, 8 November 2019 TRUMP IS READY TO DESIGNATE MEXICAN DRUG CARTELS 'TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS' BUT REFRAINS, CLAIMING REQUEST FROM MEXICAN PRESIDENT Archived 28 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine By JEFFERY MARTIN, Newsweek, 6 December 2019 "Llama AMLO a todos los empresarios para unirse y sacar adelante al país, "amor y paz" – AMLO". AMLO. 3 June 2018. Archived from the original on 25 May 2019. Retrieved 25 May 2019. @ecra; romeo.valentin (13 January 2019). "Elevan al doble pensión para adultos mayores". Diario de México (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 23 January 2019. Retrieved 25 May 2019. "Mexico doubles minimum wage in northern border zones". Associated Press. 18 December 2018. Archived from the original on 25 May 2019. Retrieved 25 May 2019. "AMLO propone bajar impuestos en la frontera". Forbes Mexico. 5 April 2018. Archived from the original on 13 June 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. "AMLO dice que va por reducción de IVA e ISR". El Financiero. 15 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 June 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. Graham, Dave (10 June 2018). "Mexico leftist's pitch to Trump: growth, not walls to fix migration". Reuters. Archived from the original on 18 June 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. Eschenbacher, Stephanie (9 March 2018). "Mexican leftist seeks to court bankers, to mixed reviews". Reuters. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. "AMLO Descarta Expropiaciones a La Banca y Promete Respetar Autonomía de Banxico". Expansion. 9 March 2018. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. Grillo, Ioan. "Why Mexico Is Turning Left". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. Dyer, Evan (16 March 2018). "Mexico's election poses a growing threat to NAFTA's survival". CBC News. Archived from the original on 19 November 2022. Retrieved 22 September 2022. Monroy, Jorge. "Pide López Obrador que lo dejen renegociar el TLC con Trump". El Economista. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. "El TLCAN debe continuar y beneficiar a los 3 países: AMLO". 9 April 2018. Archived from the original on 23 May 2018. Retrieved 22 May 2018. Esposito, Anthony; Torres, Noe (13 June 2018). "In final debate, Mexican presidential favorite says a NAFTA fail 'not fatal'". Reuters. Archived from the original on 18 June 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. "AMLO Dice Que Un Colapso Del TLCAN No "Sería Fatal" Para México". Expansion. 13 June 2018. Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Retrieved 20 June 2018. "Propuestas en política exterior de los presidenciables". Excelsior. 17 April 2018. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. "¿Que es el USMCA?". El Economista. Archived from the original on 27 December 2019. Retrieved 27 December 2019. "Labour, environment standards key to getting USMCA through: Canadian ambassador". National Post. 3 December 2018. Archived from the original on 26 April 2021. Retrieved 27 December 2019. "Los negociadores comerciales de Estados Unidos, Canadá y México firman el acuerdo modificado del T-MEC" [Trade negotiators from the United States, Canada and Mexico sign the modified T-MEC agreement]. CNN Commercio (in Spanish). 10 December 2019. Archived from the original on 27 December 2019. Retrieved 27 December 2019. "Mexican Senate Ratifies Treaty". International Institute for Sustainable Development. 27 June 2019. Archived from the original on 3 January 2020. Retrieved 27 December 2019. "President Donald J. Trump's United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement Delivers a Historic Win for American Workers". whitehouse.gov. Archived from the original on 9 November 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2020 – via National Archives. "Canadian Parliament rushes through ratification of USMCA trade pact". Reuters. 13 March 2020. Archived from the original on 26 November 2020. Retrieved 14 March 2020. "Mexico's Presidential Front-Runner Proposes Urzua for Finance Minister". Bloomberg News. 14 December 2017. Archived from the original on 14 June 2018. Retrieved 25 June 2018. "AMLO kicks off campaign with austerity promise". El Universal. 1 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 October 2021. Retrieved 18 September 2022. Webber, Jude (9 March 2018). "Mexico leftist Amlo vows no nationalisation, no expropriations". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 18 September 2022. "Gobernaré con austeridad: López Obrador". 31 March 2018. Archived from the original on 22 May 2018. Retrieved 21 May 2018. "AMLO ofrece no aumentar impuestos ni deuda pública". 23 April 2018. Archived from the original on 14 June 2018. Retrieved 25 June 2018. "Pensiones de ex presidentes se destinarán para reactivar el campo: AMLO". El Sol de Toluca. 29 May 2018. Archived from the original on 14 June 2018. Retrieved 25 June 2018. Thompson, Jennifer (28 July 2018). "Mexico's new leftwing leader may turn out to be a fiscal hawk". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 23 August 2018. He wants to spend more on old age and disability pensions, provide more funds for youth programmes, provide financial support to struggling farmers and improve infrastructure, particularly in Mexico's poorest southern regions. He hopes to achieve this by clamping down on corruption and adjusting existing public spending programs, notably reducing bureaucrats' salaries, including politicians. "President López Obrador continues to prioritize fiscal austerity". Justice in Mexico. 7 July 2019. Archived from the original on 28 December 2019. Retrieved 27 December 2019. Michael O'Boyle (8 October 2019). "Mexico Passes AMLO's Austerity Law Curbing Excessive Spending". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 28 December 2019. Retrieved 28 December 2019. "Mexico's presidential plane is so luxurious the UN hasn't been able to sell it". El Universal English. 18 August 2019. Archived from the original on 31 May 2021. Retrieved 28 December 2019. "Ellos operaron la campaña negra contra AMLO en 2018". Nación321 (in Mexican Spanish). Archived from the original on 25 May 2019. Retrieved 25 May 2019. González, Isabel (14 March 2018). "Ni chavismo, ni trumpismo, pero sí mexicanismo, aclara AMLO". Excelsior. Archived from the original on 9 July 2018. Retrieved 9 July 2018. "López Obrador llama "Ricky Riquín Canallín" a Anaya y ofrece "abrazos, no balazos" a contrincantes". Proceso. 20 May 2018. Archived from the original on 20 September 2018. Retrieved 20 September 2018. Zavala, Misael; Morales, Alberto (1 April 2018). "México no será piñata de ningún gobierno extranjero: lanza AMLO a". El Universal. Archived from the original on 14 September 2018. Retrieved 20 September 2018. "Versión estenográfica de la conferencia de prensa matutina del presidente Andrés Manuel López Obrador – AMLO". 29 April 2019. Archived from the original on 4 May 2019. Retrieved 25 May 2019. "La Mejor Política Exterior Es La Política Interior: AMLO". TV Azteca Noticias. Archived from the original on 26 July 2018. Retrieved 9 July 2018. "Lineamientos Constiutucionales de La Polític Exterior en México" (PDF). Camara de Diputados Legislatura LXIV. September 2005. Archived from the original on 19 August 2019. Retrieved 25 May 2019.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Smith, Scott (9 July 2018). "Mexico's new president could help ease pressure on Venezuela". AP News. Archived from the original on 9 July 2018. Retrieved 9 July 2018. Manetto, Francesco (23 February 2021). "México y Argentina sellan un nuevo eje progresista en América Latina" [Mexico and Argentina seal a new progressive axis in Latin America]. El País (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 25 January 2022. Retrieved 25 January 2022. "Fernández flies to Israel in first foreign trip as president". Buenos Aires Times. 21 January 2020. Archived from the original on 25 January 2022. Retrieved 25 January 2022. "Con AMLO, Alberto Fernández celebró la "independencia de poder tener nuestras vacunas"" [With AMLO, Alberto Fernández celebrated the "independence of being able to have our vaccines"]. Perfil (in Spanish). 25 May 2021. Archived from the original on 25 January 2022. Retrieved 25 January 2022. "AMLO reiteró su apoyo en el reclamo por la soberanía Argentina sobre las Islas Malvinas" (Digital Newspaper). Escenario Mundial (in Spanish). 25 February 2021. Archived from the original on 21 March 2023. Retrieved 10 May 2022. Rama, Anahi (26 January 2017). "Mexico opposition leader urges U.N. lawsuit over Trump wall". Reuters. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 19 June 2018. Luna, Kausha (24 May 2018). "Mexico's Presidential Candidates on Migration Issues". CIS.org. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 19 June 2018. Esposito, Anthony (21 May 2018). "Mexican rivals attack leftist in second debate, Trump hovers over..." Reuters. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 19 June 2018. Cattan, Nacha (9 July 2018). "AMLO planea que México tenga su propia 'patrulla fronteriza'". El Financiero. Archived from the original on 13 July 2018. Retrieved 13 July 2018. "AMLO will provide working visas to Central Americans immigrants". Theyucatantimes.com. 18 October 2018. Archived from the original on 1 November 2018. Retrieved 31 October 2018. "AMLO pide solidaridad con la caravana migrante: 'donde come uno, comen dos'". Forbes. 22 October 2018. Archived from the original on 1 November 2018. Retrieved 31 October 2018. Murray, Christine; Oré, Diego (July 2018). "Mexican Lopez Obrador wins historic election landslide for left". Reuters. Archived from the original on 2 July 2018. Retrieved 2 July 2018. "Jose Antonio Meade of Mexico's ruling party concedes defeat to Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador in presidential vote". ABC News (USA). 1 July 2018. Archived from the original on 2 July 2018. Retrieved 1 July 2018. "Le deseo el mayor de los éxitos a AMLO: Meade". Excélsior. 1 July 2018. Archived from the original on 17 September 2020. Retrieved 1 July 2018. "Anaya reconoce victoria de AMLO". El Universal (Mexico City). 1 July 2018. Archived from the original on 29 November 2020. Retrieved 1 July 2018. "Mexico election: Exit polls put López Obrador in front". BBC News. 1 July 2018. Archived from the original on 2 May 2020. Retrieved 1 July 2018. García, Aracely (1 July 2018). "'El Bronco' reconoce triunfo de López Obrador". Excélsior. Archived from the original on 16 September 2020. Retrieved 1 July 2018. Sheridan, Mary Beth (1 December 2018). "AMLO inaugurated as Mexico's president, vowing to transform the country". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 2 December 2018. Retrieved 1 December 2018. "Mexico's president-elect Amlo to take 60% pay cut in austerity push". The Guardian. 16 July 2018. Archived from the original on 16 July 2018. Retrieved 16 July 2018. Navarro, Andrea; Martin, Eric; Villamil, Justin (28 October 2018). "Mexico's AMLO Scraps $13 Billion Airport Project; Peso Plunges". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 29 October 2018. Retrieved 1 November 2018. Agren, David (3 December 2018). "Mexico's new president creates truth commission to investigate 43 missing students". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Retrieved 15 December 2018. Morfini, Nicola; Sainz Martínez, Bernardo (19 September 2018). "López Obrador hacia la cuarta transformación". Forbes. Archived from the original on 20 September 2018. Retrieved 8 October 2018. "The Rise of Mexico's Andrés Manuel López Obrador" | NowThis World 2020/11/29 Archived 15 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine accessed 12 March 2020 Carlos G. Castañeda, "López Obrador Is Cruising, Mexico Is Not." New York Times Op-Ed 2019/12/12 Archived 25 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine accessed 12 March 2020 “Mexico Needs Statecraft, yet its president offers theater.” The Economist, 2020/02/27 Archived 19 December 2020 at the Wayback Machine accessed 12 March 2020 "Bloomberg interview with AMLO 2019/08/05" Archived 21 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine accessed 12 March 2020. "AMLO's first year in office" YouTube Archived 1 April 2020 at the Wayback Machine accessed 12 March 2020 The Economist, “The Surprising Similarities between AMLO and Jair Bolsonaro” 5 December 2019 Archived 19 December 2020 at the Wayback Machine accessed 29 June 2020 Nájar, Alberto (31 January 2019). "Así son las "mañaneras", la novedosa estrategia para gobernar de AMLO en México". BBC News Mundo (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 25 September 2022. AMLO recurre a las consultas ciudadanas como una herramienta para su gobierno Archived 3 January 2020 at the Wayback Machine Expansion Politica, 17 July 2018 "Otorgan suspensión provisional contra el Tren Maya por 'consulta simulada"". www.proceso.com.mx (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 12 December 2023. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "Mexican President Lopez Obrador wins low-turnout recall vote, early count shows". France 24. Agence France-Presse. 11 April 2022. Archived from the original on 26 November 2023. Retrieved 26 November 2023. ¿Participación ciudadana? Éstas son todas las consultas populares de AMLO Archived 15 November 2019 at the Wayback Machine Ana Grimaldo Santana, El Heraldo de Mexico, 3 September 2019 Alexis Ortiz (19 December 2019). "Rechaza ONU consulta ciudadana del Tren Maya" [UN rejects citizen consultation of the Mayan Train]. El Universal Nacion (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 25 May 2020. Retrieved 28 January 2020. "Global Leader Approval Tracker". Morning Consult. Archived from the original on 4 February 2021. Retrieved 7 January 2021. "Mexican president slams YouTube for taking down his video that shared a journalist's phone number". Associated Press. Retrieved 27 February 2024. "AMLO uses his anti-corruption drive to gain power and scare critics". The Economist. 30 November 2019. Archived from the original on 29 October 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2024. "AMLO: Inai es "la gran tapadera"; ha reservado información sobre Odebrecht, acusa". El Universal (in Spanish). 14 January 2021. Archived from the original on 19 February 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2022. "México asciende en el barómetro global contra la corrupción" [Mexico ascends in the global barometer against corruption]. Informador (in Spanish). 27 December 2019. Archived from the original on 28 December 2019. Retrieved 28 January 2020. "Investigan a cuatro exgobernadores ligados con actos de corrupción" [Four former governors linked to acts of corruption are investigated]. Forbes Mexico (in Spanish). 27 December 2019. Archived from the original on 27 January 2020. Retrieved 28 January 2020. David Marcial Perez (18 September 2019). "La exministra de Peña Nieto encarcelada por corrupción es inhabilitada ahora por mentir sobre su patrimonio" [Peña Nieto's ex-minister jailed for corruption is now disabled for lying about her estate]. El Pais (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 28 December 2019. Retrieved 28 January 2020. "Former Pemex director is accused of money laundering, fraud, and bribery". El Universal English. 29 May 2019. Archived from the original on 2 December 2019. Retrieved 28 January 2020. "Gobierno de AMLO presentó 2 denuncias antela FRG contra Romero Deschamps" [AMLO Government files 2 complaints before AG against Romero Deschamps]. El Universal (in Spanish). 16 October 2019. Archived from the original on 20 December 2019. Retrieved 28 January 2020. HÉCTOR FIGUEROA ALCÁNTARA (8 October 2019). "Aprueba Senado renuncia de Medina Mora a la Corte" [Senate approves Medina Mora's resignation from the Court]. Excelsior (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 26 February 2020. Retrieved 28 January 2020. Gina Hinojosa (28 October 2019). "What's Happening with Mexico's National Anti-Corruption System? Progress and Continued Challenges at the Federal and State Level". WOLA. Archived from the original on 21 February 2020. Retrieved 28 January 2020. Moses Ngong and Stephanie Brewer (5 April 2021). "Mexico: A Closer Look at State Anti-Corruption Prosecutors" (PDF). WOLA. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 February 2023. Retrieved 15 December 2022. "Se consolida el proyecto educativo de López Obrador: SEP". Excelsior (in Spanish). 1 December 2019. Archived from the original on 25 January 2022. Retrieved 6 February 2021. "Presenta presidente de México logros del Programa Nacional de Becas para el Bienestar Benito Juárez". Gobierno de México (in Spanish). 1 July 2019. Archived from the original on 29 July 2023. Retrieved 6 February 2021. "Logro, cancelación de la llamada Reforma Educativa: Presidente AMLO". Gobierno de México (in Spanish). 2019. Archived from the original on 10 April 2021. Retrieved 6 February 2021. "SEP suspende clases en México del 20 de marzo al 20 de abril por coronavirus". LatinUs (in Spanish). 14 March 2020. Archived from the original on 3 February 2023. Retrieved 6 February 2021. "Firma acuerdo inédito López Obrador con 4 televisoras: "no significa concesiones"". Diario de Yucatan (in Spanish). 3 August 2020. Archived from the original on 22 April 2021. Retrieved 6 February 2021. "Regreso a clases SEP: Horarios para ciclo escolar 2020-2021 preescolar, primaria y secundaria". El Heraldo (in Spanish). 3 August 2020. Retrieved 6 February 2021.[permanent dead link] "Delfina Gómez sustituirá a Esteban Moctezuma en la Secretaría de Educación". CNN Expansión (in Spanish). 20 December 2020. Archived from the original on 23 December 2020. Retrieved 6 February 2021. "Delfina Gómez, excandidata al Gobierno del Edomex, es la nueva titular de la SEP". El Economista (in Spanish). 21 December 2020. Archived from the original on 20 January 2021. Retrieved 6 February 2021. "Regreso a clases presenciales: estos son los requisitos que pide la SEP para la reapertura de escuelas". infobae (in Spanish). 4 February 2021. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 6 February 2021. "AMLO hizo oficial cambio en la SEP: se va Esteban Moctezuma y llega Delfina Gómez". infobae (in Spanish). 15 February 2021. Archived from the original on 20 April 2021. Retrieved 25 July 2021. "México regresa a clases presenciales este 7 de junio". infobae (in Spanish). 7 June 2021. Archived from the original on 25 July 2021. Retrieved 25 July 2021. "¡Es hoy! Este lunes inició el regreso a clases presenciales en Edomex". UNOTV.com (in Spanish). 14 June 2021. Archived from the original on 15 June 2021. Retrieved 25 July 2021. Claudio Bañuelos y Vicente Juárez (8 June 2021). "Cancelan clases mañana en una escuela de Aguascalientes por Covid-19". La Jornada (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 25 July 2021. Retrieved 25 July 2021. Suárez, Karina (14 June 2021). "Ciudad de México registra seis menores contagiados de la covid-19 tras la reapertura de escuelas". El País (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 25 July 2021. Retrieved 25 July 2021. "Escuelas del Edomex registran poca presencia estudiantil tras regreso a las aulas". El Sol de Toluca (in Spanish). 14 June 2021. Archived from the original on 28 June 2021. Retrieved 25 July 2021. "La tercera ola de covid en México se extiende entre jóvenes y no vacunados". The San Diego Union-Tribune (in Spanish). 20 July 2021. Archived from the original on 25 July 2021. Retrieved 25 July 2021. "Regreso a clases presenciales será en agosto "llueva, truene o relampaguee": AMLO". Aristegui noticias (in Spanish). 25 July 2021. Archived from the original on 25 July 2021. Retrieved 25 July 2021. "AMLO exige que los niños regresen a las aulas para evitar la "adicción por los vieojuegos"". Atomix (in Spanish). 22 July 2021. Archived from the original on 25 July 2021. Retrieved 25 July 2021. "Mexico to Increase Minimum Wage for 2019". www.hklaw.com. Retrieved 21 May 2019.[permanent dead link] "As Mexican peso collapses over coronavirus threat, criticism falls on president Lopez Obrador" Los Angeles Times 2020/03/20 Archived 2 September 2020 at the Wayback Machine accessed 20 March 2020 "Canadian Parliament rushes through ratification of USMCA trade pact" Reuters 2020/03/13 Archived 15 December 2020 at the Wayback Machine accessed 5 May 2020 John Lee Anderson, "Why López Obrador Went to Dinner With Donald Trump" Archived 6 September 2020 at the Wayback Machine The New Yorker 9 July 2020, accessed 17 July 2020 "Mexico's emigrants in America are ageing". The Economist. 23 July 2020. Archived from the original on 15 December 2020. Retrieved 22 September 2022. Olivares, José (26 May 2023). "The U.S. is Unhappy that Mexico is Spending Money on its Own Citizens". The Intercept. Archived from the original on 27 September 2023. Retrieved 4 June 2023. "As Mexican peso collapses over coronavirus threat, criticism falls on president Lopez Obrador" Los Angeles Times 2020/03/20 Archived 2 September 2020 at the Wayback Machine. Accessed 20 March 2020 "Mexico's president to donate part of salary to coronavirus effort". Reuters. 17 March 2020. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 28 February 2021. "Mexico Coronavirus: 1,763,219 Cases and 149,614 Deaths - Worldometer". www.worldometers.info. Archived from the original on 3 June 2020. Retrieved 25 January 2021. Villegas, Paulina (6 January 2020). "A New Toll in Mexico's Drug War". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 24 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. "The AMLO Doctrine: Lessons from a Shootout in Sinaloa". The Economist. 24 October 2019. Archived from the original on 20 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. "Minigun, la potente ametralladora que usó la Fuerza Aérea en Jesús María, Culiacán, para capturar a Ovidio Guzmán" [Minigun, the powerful machine gun that the Air Force used in Jesús María, Culiacán, to capture Ovidio Guzmán]. Infobae (in Spanish). 6 January 2023. Archived from the original on 7 January 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2023. Sotelo, Alfonso (5 January 2023). "Un helicóptero Sikorsky y la Dillon Minigun: las claves del ataque aéreo con el que cayó Ovidio Guzmán" [A Sikorsky helicopter and the Dillon Minigun: the key points of the air strike which caused Ovidio Guzmán's fall]. El Heraldo de México (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 6 January 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2023. Ferri, Pablo (6 January 2023). "La captura de Ovidio Guzmán: seis meses de espera, una estrategia medida y una batalla entre dos ejércitos" [The capture of Ovidio Guzmán: six months of waiting, a measured strategy and a battle between two armies]. El País (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 6 January 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2023. "Operativo para detener a Ovidio Guzmán dejó 29 muertos, 35 heridos y 21 detenidos; descartan bajas civiles" [Operation to arrest Ovidio Guzmán left 29 dead, 35 wounded and 21 arrested; no civilian casualties reported]. Animal Político (in Spanish). 6 January 2023. Archived from the original on 6 January 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2023. "Recapturan a Ovidio Guzmán en Sinaloa; fue trasladado al penal del Altiplano, en el Edomex" [Ovidio Guzmán has been recaptured in Sinaloa; has been moved to the Altiplano prison, in the State of Mexico]. Animal Político (in Spanish). 5 January 2023. Archived from the original on 6 January 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2023. "Murió "El Neto", líder de Los Mexicles, tras un intenso operativo en Ciudad Juárez" ["El Neto," leader of Los Mexicles, died after intense operation in Ciudad Juárez]. Infobae (in Spanish). 5 January 2023. Archived from the original on 8 January 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2023. "Muere 'El Neto', líder de 'Los Mexicles' en operativo para recapturarlo" ["El Neto," leader of "Los Mexicles," dies in operation to recapture him]. La Jornada (in Spanish). 5 January 2023. Archived from the original on 6 January 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2023. Semple, Kirk (24 February 2020). "Under Pressure From Trump, Extraditions to U.S. From Mexico Soar". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 13 November 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. Grillo, Ioan (2 March 2020). "Boycotting Avocados Won't Hurt Cartels". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 8 March 2020. Retrieved 12 March 2020. "Mexican President tells gangs to stop donating food, end crime instead". Reuters. 21 April 2020. Archived from the original on 9 September 2023. Retrieved 21 September 2022. Prada, Paula (26 June 2020). "Mexico City police chief shot in assassination attempt, blames drug cartel". Reuters. Archived from the original on 9 September 2023. Retrieved 22 September 2022. Kahn, Carrie (23 July 2020). "As Mexico's Dominant Cartel Gains Power, The President Vows 'Hugs, Not Bullets". NPR. Archived from the original on 30 September 2022. Retrieved 22 September 2022. "Homicidios dolosos disminuyeron un 4.6% en 2021: López Obrador" [Intentional homicides decreased by 4.6% in 2021: López Obrador]. Infobae (in Spanish). 6 January 2022. Archived from the original on 13 January 2022. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Diciembre de 2022, mes con menos homicidios dolosos en seis años: SSPC" [December 2022, the month with the least intentional homicides in six years: SSPC]. Secretariat of Security and Civilian Protection (Mexico) (in Spanish). 17 January 2023. Archived from the original on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 18 January 2023. Rodríguez, Iván; Monroy, Jorge (11 January 2022). "Continúa violencia homicida en los estados prioritarios" [Homicidal violence continues in the priority states]. El Economista (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Registra Zacatecas reducción de homicidios dolosos del 2021 al 2022" [Zacatecas sees reduction of intentional homicides from 2021 to 2022]. Mirador (in Spanish). 18 January 2023. Archived from the original on 19 January 2023. Retrieved 18 January 2023. Morales, Alberto (17 January 2023). "Aumentan homicidios dolosos en 17 de 50 municipios prioritarios" [Intentional homicides increase in 17 out of 50 priority municipalities]. El Universal (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 18 January 2023. "El largo camino hacia la legalización del cannabis en México". France24. 13 November 2019. Archived from the original on 3 January 2020. Retrieved 28 January 2020. Agren, David (28 June 2021). "Mexico supreme court strikes down laws that ban use of recreational marijuana". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 February 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2022. "Wuhan coronavirus chokes the drug trade". Los Angeles Times. 24 April 2020. Archived from the original on 26 April 2020. Retrieved 26 April 2020. Camhaji, Elías (22 January 2024). "Victoria legal para México: una corte de apelaciones afirma que sí puede demandar a los fabricantes de armas en EE UU" [Mexican legal victory: a court of appeals grants the country the ability to sue gun producers in the US]. El País (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 23 January 2024. Retrieved 22 January 2024. Dina, Eduardo (22 January 2024). ""Gran noticia": SRE celebra fallo de Corte en EU a favor de México en demanda contra empresas fabricantes de armas" ["Great news:" Secretariat of Foreign Affairs celebrates US Court ruling in favor of Mexico regarding lawsuit against gun manufacturing companies]. El Universal (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 22 January 2024. Retrieved 22 January 2024. "Tráfico de armas será tema central entre México y EU en reunión de febrero: Ken Salazar" [Gun trafficking will be a central topic between Mexico and the US in February meeting, Ken Salazar announces]. El Economista (in Spanish). 22 January 2024. Archived from the original on 21 February 2024. Retrieved 22 January 2024. "Sin información sobre tráfico de armas de uso del Ejército de EU: Salazar" [Not informed about trafficking of US Army weapons, Salazar claims]. La Jornada (in Spanish). 22 January 2024. Archived from the original on 23 January 2024. Retrieved 22 January 2024. Magallanes, Jatziri (22 January 2024). "Ken Salazar, sin conocimiento de ingreso de armas de uso exclusivo del Ejército de EU en México" [Ken Salazar, unaware of the entrance of weapons used exclusively by the US Army into Mexico]. MVS Noticias (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 23 January 2024. Retrieved 22 January 2024. Arista, Lidia (4 December 2023). "Ken Salazar reconoce que el 70% de las armas que entran a México proceden de EU" [Ken Salazar acknowledges that 70% of weapons that enter Mexico come from the US]. Expansión Política (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 23 January 2024. Retrieved 22 January 2024. Arista, Lidia (14 March 2023). "El 70% de homicidios en México se comete con armas de EU, señala López Obrador" [70% of homicides in Mexico are committed with US arms, López Obrador claims]. Expansión Política (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 23 January 2024. Retrieved 22 January 2024. Moreno Valenzuela, Gerardo (11 January 2024). "Autoridades de Sonora detienen a un estadounidense que planeaba traficar armas" [Sonora authorities arrest an American planning to smuggle weapons]. El Heraldo de México (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 23 January 2024. Retrieved 22 January 2024. "The long road to justice, prosecuting femicide in Mexico". UN Women. Archived from the original on 5 August 2021. Retrieved 14 May 2018. Semple, Kirk; Villegas, Paulina (19 February 2020). "The Grisly Deaths of a Woman and a Girl Shock Mexico and Test Its President". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 21 April 2022. Retrieved 21 April 2022. "'Despicable' - Women seethe over Mexican leader's wobbly response to violence". Reuters. 6 March 2020. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 11 August 2020 – via www.reuters.com. Hernandez, Erick (18 February 2020). "Sheinbaum anuncia 'alerta previa' contra violencia a la mujer". Archived from the original on 4 June 2020. Retrieved 11 March 2020. "Sheinbaum anuncia que la CdMx reforzará la Alerta de Género después del feminicidio de Fátima". SinEmbargo MX. 21 February 2020. Archived from the original on 22 February 2020. Retrieved 11 March 2020. "Feminicidios en México: medidas implementadas por el gobierno para evitar crímenes contra mujeres". La República. 27 February 2020. Archived from the original on 10 March 2020. Retrieved 11 March 2020. New York Times, "Mexican Women Strike and Protest" Archived 9 March 2020 at the Wayback Machine. accessed 10 March 2020 "Mexican Women Stay Home to Protest Femicides in a Day Without Us", National Public Radio Archived 10 March 2020 at the Wayback Machine accessed 10 March 2020 "Mexico rules out severing ties with Israel over Gaza, calls for peace". Reuters. 7 November 2023. Archived from the original on 14 November 2023. Retrieved 17 November 2023. Semple, Kirk; McDonald, Brent (24 January 2020). "Mexico Breaks Up a Migrant Caravan, Pleasing White House". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 6 September 2022. Retrieved 19 September 2022. Ramos, Jorge (7 February 2020). "Trump Got his Wish: Mexico is the Now the Wall". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 September 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. "'Mexico is not a US colony!': AMLO Condemns Invasion Threats, Celebrates Nationalization of Oil and Lithium". Scheerpost. 23 March 2023. Archived from the original on 27 March 2023. Retrieved 27 March 2023. Padilla, Liliana (11 November 2019). "México dará asilo político a Evo Morales por razones humanitarias". Milenio (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 6 December 2020. Jackson, Jon (21 March 2023). "Mexico's president sides with Trump, saying charges are a "fabrication"". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 27 March 2023. Retrieved 27 March 2023. "Mexico's AMLO Upbraids America, Seeking To Distract His Countrymen From Homegrown Problems". The New York Sun. 23 March 2023. Archived from the original on 27 March 2023. Retrieved 27 March 2023. "Mexico's president accuses US of lying about his country's human rights record". www.aa.com.tr. Archived from the original on 27 March 2023. Retrieved 27 March 2023. "AMLO llama a la sociedad civil "instrumento de los conservadores"". YouTube. Archived from the original on 26 November 2023. Retrieved 26 November 2023. Lopez, Oscar; Murray, Christine (11 June 2020). "'Party' ahead for illegal loggers? Mexico's national parks in doubt with cuts". Reuters. Archived from the original on 26 November 2023. Retrieved 26 November 2023. Blair, Laurence (23 June 2020). "Funding cuts threaten ancient sites, warn Mexican archaeologists". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2023. Retrieved 26 November 2023. "More parks, less money: Advocates say Mexico's new budget doesn't add up for natural protected areas". AP News. Associated Press. 14 November 2023. Archived from the original on 25 November 2023. Retrieved 26 November 2023. "AMLO alista 3 conmemoraciones en 2021 en rescate memorial histórica" Politico MX. 2019/03/25 Archived 1 May 2020 at the Wayback Machine accessed 20 March 2020 "Alistan un comité para 2021" El Heraldo de México 2020/01/03 Archived 20 March 2020 at the Wayback Machine accessed 20 March 2020. "Catedral reparada para 2021 preven". El Universal 2020/02/19 Archived 24 May 2020 at the Wayback Machine accessed 20 March 2020 "En el 2021 habrá 3 conmemoraciones importantes en Mexico adelanta" XEVT 2019/03/25 Archived 20 March 2020 at the Wayback Machine accessed 20 March 2020 "Buscar hermanarnos en reconciliación historica para 2021 invita presidente López Obrador a España y a la iglesia católica". Gobierno de México 2019/03/25 Archived 20 March 2020 at the Wayback Machine accessed 20 March 2020 "El Papa ya se disculpó por la Conquista: Vaticano". Excélsior (in Spanish). 26 March 2019. Archived from the original on 14 September 2021. Retrieved 14 September 2021. Karol Suarez, Rafael Romo and Joshua Berlinger. "Mexico's President loses grip on power in midterm elections marred by violence". CNN. Archived from the original on 17 November 2021. Retrieved 23 November 2021. Redacción (5 May 2022). "¿Qué es la Condecoración de la Orden del Quetzal que recibió AMLO en Guatemala?" [What is the Order of the Quetzal with which AMLO was honored in Guatemala?]. El Financiero (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 6 May 2022. Retrieved 6 May 2022. Redacción ADN40 (6 May 2022). "Condecoran a AMLO en Honduras durante gira por Centroamérica" [AMLO condecorated in Honduras amid his tour in Central America]. ADN40 (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 7 May 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Vincent, Mauricio (8 May 2022). "López Obrador recibirá en Cuba la Orden José Martí durante una visita de alto simbolismo político" [López Obrador will be honored in Cuba with the Order of José Martí during a visit with high political symbolism]. El País (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 5 December 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2022. "World No Tobacco Day 2022 awards – the winners". who.int. World Health Organization. 27 May 2022. Archived from the original on 28 May 2022. Retrieved 29 May 2022. WHO Director-General Special award [...] President of Mexico Mr. Andrés Manuel López Obrador, United Mexican States "Several Mexico streets are named after President López Obrador". El Universal (in Spanish). 18 July 2020. Archived from the original on 20 December 2020. Retrieved 23 July 2020. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Andrés Manuel López Obrador. Wikiquote has quotations related to Andrés Manuel López Obrador. "The Crime Trends That AMLO Will Face". Archived from the original on 29 January 2018. Retrieved 29 January 2018. "Official site of the "Legitimate Government"". Archived from the original on 2 January 2007. Retrieved 1 January 2007. | Shlaes, Amity (26 May 2006). "Blame Mexico, Too, for U.S. Immigration Trouble". Bloomberg.com. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. "The front-runner under pressure, With his opinion-poll lead wobbling, Andrés Manuel López Obrador has yet to define precisely what sort of change he stands for". The Economist. 20 April 2006. Thompson, Ginger (11 July 2006). "Leftist Screens Videos He Says Prove Fraud in Mexico Vote". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 20 October 2006. "Official site of the "Legitimate Government"". Archived from the original on 2 January 2007. Retrieved 1 January 2007. In Spanish, this site promotes news and articles about the civil resistance movement that López Obrador calls "Legitimate Government", and in which he is said to be "Legitimate" President "Mexico mayor back on track". BBC News. 30 July 2005. Poniatowska, Elena; Paco Ignacio Taibo II (18 April 2005). "Democracy Now!". Description of Obrador's magnetism. [audio] "Official Site". lopezobrador.org (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 9 July 2006. Retrieved 11 July 2006. "Official Campaign site". amlo.org (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 14 July 2006. Retrieved 11 July 2006. "Unofficial campaign site". Lopez-obrador.com.mx (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 14 July 2006. Retrieved 11 July 2006. "Extended biography by CIDOB Foundation". cidob-org (in Spanish). Retrieved 1 January 2007. "Collection of articles from Council on Hemispheric Affairs concerning Mexican politics". 18 March 2023. "Zapatista leader blasts López". El Universal (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 22 June 2005. "Redes Ciudadanas Baja California". amlo.org (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 9 July 2006. Retrieved 11 July 2006. Appearances on C-SPAN