Tandag, officially the City of Tandag (Tandaganon/Surigaonon: Siyudad nan Tandag; Cebuano: Dakbayan sa Tandag; Filipino: Lungsod ng Tandag), is a 5th class component city and capital of the province of Surigao del Sur, Philippines. According to the 2020 census, it has a population of 62,669 people. Farming and fishing are the main economic activity for most of the people in Tandag. The chief farm products are rice, corn, and coconut. Livestock- and poultry-raising are also important sources of income. Tandag has a national secondary airport and a seaport. Tandag has a land area of 291.73 square kilometers or 112.64 square miles. This constitutes 5.91% of the land area of Surigao del Sur. The population density of the city is at 193 inhabitants per square kilometer or 500 inhabitants per square mile.[citation needed] Many versions have been given regarding the name of Tandag. One version states that Father Calan, Father Encarnacion, and another priest were on their way to visit chieftain Suba to baptize his people. When one of the missionaries asked a native rowing their boat what name of the place was with fingers pointing downward, the native thought the priest meant the school of fish. He answered "tamda", meaning 'look down'. This name later became Tandag. Father Encarnacion, a member of the group, was later killed by the natives. Another version states that when Spanish-Peruvian historian and explorer Inca Garcilaso de la Vega landed in Tandag to subdue the ferocious Caragas (as the rebellious natives were called then), he did not know the name of the place so he inquired from a native who was gathering the leaves of an herb locally known as tanglad. The native, who did not understand Spanish, answered "tangad". Later the name was changed to Tandag. One more account tells of a group of Spanish soldiers and missionaries who lost their way around the settlement. When they asked for correct directions, the natives, who could not understand Spanish, merely laughed at them, continually saying the word "tarantados", meaning 'lost'. Thus, the name Tandag' meant lost. Long before Tandag became what it is today—the bustling capital town of Surigao del Sur was inhabited by the Manobos and the Mamanwas who lived along the river banks under the leadership of Suba, their Chieftain. Suba was later converted into Christianity by Father Juan de la Encarnacion, a Spanish missionary. After Legazpi’s final conquest to the Philippines in 1609, the Spanish government sent missionaries accompanied by platoons of guardia civil to subdue the hostile natives. One of these missionaries was Father Juan de la Vega who was assigned in Tandag. In an effort to establish a symbol of authority, Fr. dela Vega erected a stone fort and built a small settlement about a size of a football field enclosed by a stone wall. Out of this settlement rose the town of Tandag, which later on became a center of faith. During this period Tandag became a port-of-call for the Spanish galleons that sailed along the southern part of Mindanao. It is still believed that somewhere underneath the sea near Tandag's Linungao Islands lies a sunken galleon ship. After the Spanish missionaries' visit to Tandag, a group of Italian explorers and soldiers then landed in the city. They did what the Spanish did, but mandated that Italian be one of the city's primary language aside from Surigaonon, Cebuano, and Filipino. Strict compliance was enforced during those times, which explains why Italian became Tandag's local dialect aside from the mainstay Surigaonon. In 1650, Tandag became the capital town of Surigao or Caraga, then a district that covered the present provinces of Agusan del Sur, Agusan del Norte, Surigao del Sur, Surigao del Norte, and a part of Davao. As the center of faith and capital town, Tandag was fortified with cottas which were erected sometime in the 18th century. The cottas were placed in the northern part of the town and near the old cemetery on the western side. These fortifications served to protect the town from Moro raids. In several separate attacks between 1754 and 1767, the Moro pirates wrought havoc and destruction to Tandag. Father Jose Ducos, a Jesuit from Iligan, came to the rescue and rebuilt Tandag. He established the Tandag Garrison and restored the Tandag priory. Although a part of the Tandag fort survived, it was demolished during the Second World War. Calamities like typhoons and earthquakes destroyed what remained of it. This explains why there are no remains of these structures that could be seen today. During World War II, for much of the war Tandag was free from the Japanese occupation that followed the American and Filipino military forces' surrender in May 1942. However, on April 27, 1944, about 500 Japanese troops landed by a number of boats a short distance outside town. Most of the residents fled to the mountains nearby when the Japanese arrived. The 10th Military District of the U.S. Army maintained a guerrilla presence in Mindanao in World War II. Capt. Charles Hansen led a small group of guerrillas against the Japanese. Outnumbered, the guerrillas were unable to dislodge the Japanese and about ten days later another group of guerrillas made a second attempt to force the Japanese out. The Japanese remained in town several weeks and left after causing much damage in Tandag. Real transformation was finally afforded to Tandag via Republic Act No. 2786, an act that created Surigao del Sur and whose salient measure made Tandag the capital and seat of the provincial government of Surigao del Sur. On June 23, 2007, Tandag, by virtue of Republic Act No. 9392, became a city. The Supreme Court declared the cityhood law of Tandag and 15 other cities unconstitutional after a petition filed by the League of Cities of the Philippines in its ruling on November 18, 2008. On December 22, 2009, the cityhood law of Tandag and 15 other municipalities regain its status as cities again after the court reversed its ruling on November 18, 2008. On August 23, 2010, the court reinstated its ruling on November 18, 2008, causing Tandag and 15 cities to become regular municipalities. Finally, on February 15, 2011, Tandag becomes a city again including the 15 municipalities declaring that the conversion to cityhood met all legal requirements. After six years of legal battle, in its board resolution, the League of Cities of the Philippines acknowledged and recognized the cityhood of Tandag and 15 other cities. Tandag City is located along the northeastern coast of Mindanao facing the Philippine Sea. It is bounded on the north by the municipalities of Cortes and Lanuza, on the east by the Philippine Sea, on the south by the towns of Tago and San Miguel, and on the west by the Municipality of Sibagat in the province of Agusan del Sur. It is located 448 nautical miles from Manila and 150 nautical miles from Cebu. The distance from Surigao City in the north to Tandag is about 200 kilometres (120 mi) and 331 kilometres (206 mi) is the distance from Davao City to the south. Tandag is politically subdivided into 21 barangays. Each barangay consists of puroks while some have sitios. Most of the barangays are considered rural areas. Awasian (Tandag Airport) Bag-ong Lungsod (Poblacion) Bioto Bongtud (Poblacion) Buenavista (includes Mahayag) Dagocdoc (Poblacion) Mabua (Poblacion) Mabuhay Maitum Maticdum Pandanon Pangi Quezon Rosario Salvacion San Agustin Norte San Agustin Sur or Dawis San Antonio San Isidro San Jose Telaje (Poblacion) Tandag has a tropical rainforest climate (Af) with heavy-to-very-heavy rainfall year-round and extremely heavy rainfall in January. It consists of twenty-one (21) barangays. Six of which are urban barangays, five are coastal barangays, four are built-up expansions, and six are hinterland barangays. The urban barangays comprise 1,594.10 hectares; 3,464.61 hectares for coastal barangays; 2,233.15 hectares for built-up expansion barangays and 4,964.34 hectares for hinterland barangays. Major languages spoken in the area are Tandaganon, Surigaonon, Filipino, and Cebuano (Mindanao variant). English is widely used in schools, businesses, and government offices. Poverty Incidence of Tandag Source: Philippine Statistics Authority Gaisano Capital Tandag is located along Cabrera and Navales Street. Gaisano Capital Group is a shopping mall chain in the Philippines, owned by Cebu-based Gaisano family. TT & Company Prince Town Tandag Ultrastar Supermart LBC Tandag J&T Express JRS Tandag Entrego Tandag annually celebrates the feast day of San Nicolas de Tolentino, Tandag's patron saint, every September 10. A novena in honor of San Nicholas is held for nine consecutive days starting September 1 in the San Nicholas de Tolentino Cathedral. It is the highlight of the city's Fiesta. In connection to this, a week-long celebration is organized by the Local Government Unit of Tandag. Parades, concerts, and bazaars are just some of the activities lined up for the said celebration. Diwatahan Festival is held every January in honor of the Santo Niño. Tandag City also organizes a one-day cultural dance competition for interested dance groups held at the Tandag City Plaza. Diwatahan Festival is the counterpart of Cebu City's Sinulog festival. Since Tandag is the capital of the province of Surigao del Sur, it hosts the annual Araw ng Surigao del Sur Celebration. A trade fair showcasing products from the different municipalities of Surigao del Sur is one of the events in the celebration. Another event is a local pageant, Mutya ng Surigao del Sur, held at the Tandag City Gymnasium in Bongtud. Charter Day is held every 23rd day of June to celebrate the cityhood of Tandag. Different events are held during the day. Laguboh! is a drums and lyre corps competition among elementary and secondary schools in the city. Summer Kite Festival – an annual event initiated by the City Government of Tandag enhancing the artistic talent and creativity among the teenagers through the making of fantastic designs of kite enjoying the sun, sand and sea during summer time. Eco Sports Festival – Tandag City is a coastal city, with 10 of its 21 barangays facing the Pacific Ocean. Thus, the City Government of Tandag initiates a three-day event consisting of activities that promote the good care for the ocean. The events are participated by the youth sector, enhancing their skills in different activities like skim boarding, Frisbee, beach volleyball, urban adventure race, and sand castle sculpture making. For the culmination of the Ocean Month Celebration, there are live performances of bands from all over the country. TAMDA Festival – a Tandaganon variation of the word "Tan-awa" which means to "see beneath" or "to take care of". This showcases the correct and historically accurate cultural festival and explains the Tandaganons' art – dances, rituals, music, life ways, and creative expressions. It is an annual event of Tandag City in celebration of the Charter Day held every June 23. Tago – Green Falls San Isidro – Busay Falls Bioto – Cold Spring Pangi – Bugsukan Falls & Tagbak stream Salvacion – Abaca Plantation Quezon – Cave, Falls, & Wild Life Maticdum – Falls, Water Spring, Cave, Forest, & Wild Life Conservation San Agustin – Norte Beach Resort & Mangroves Mabuhay – Panugmakan Creek (Potable Water Source) Mt. Resort & Cave Dagocdoc – Board Walk (Dike) & Floating Restaurant Awasian – Ihawan Mt. Spring Resort/Hitaub IP Gawad Kalinga Project Pandanon – Cold Spring Rosario – Andap Falls & Spring Bag-ong Lungsod – Tandag City Boulevard Bongtud – Twin Linungao Island, Mancagangi Island & MPA (Fish Sanctuary) Buenavista – MPA (Fish Sanctuary) Mabua Beach Resort (MPA) – Fish Sanctuary Tricycle (roams around the vicinity of the city) Pedicab Jeepney via Tandag Airport: From Cebu, you can take direct flight to Tandag through Cebgo, which flies this route every M-W-F (destination terminated as of 2019). via Francisco Bangoy (Davao) International Airport: From Manila or Cebu to Davao City as transit point, Philippine Airlines, Cebu Pacific and Cebgo fly the Manila-Davao (and vice versa) route (approx. 1-1+1⁄2 hours travel time) and the Cebu-Davao (and vice versa) route (approx. 45 minutes travel time) several trips daily. via Surigao Airport: From Manila or Cebu to Surigao City as transit point, Cebgo flies these routes (approx. 1-1+1⁄2 hours travel time) daily. via Bancasi (Butuan) Airport: From Manila or Cebu to Butuan as transit point, PAL Express, Cebu Pacific, and Cebgo fly these routes (approx. 1-1+1⁄2 hours travel time) three times a week. Multicabs, vans and jeepneys around northern and southern Surigao del Sur routes include Butuan, (fastest are the white vans plying the Butuan-Tandag route; their terminal is at the Bancase Airport), Surigao City, San Francisco, Agusan del Sur and Bislig. Buses – direct travel with bus companies like Bachelor Express are serving routes from Davao City, Butuan, Surigao City, and Bislig. Philtranco and PP Bus Line serving Pasay/Cubao via Cantilan are also available. Buses, vans and jeepneys can be located at Tandag City Overland Transport (TCOTT) (Balilahan Bus Terminal). Some jeepneys and tricycles bound for Surigao City, Cantilan, Cortes, Tago, San Miguel, and nearby municipalities and barangays can be found at Moonglow Public Market. Inter-island vessel Cokaliong Shipping Lines ply the Cebu-Surigao City routes on regular schedules with Surigao City Port as transit point. Multi-cabs and tricycles are available at the wharf going to Surigao City Integrated Terminal for the regular bus trips to Tandag. Adela Serra Ty Memorial Medical Center – On February 15, 1993, the Surigao del Sur Provincial Hospital was renamed Adela Serra Ty Memorial Medical Center by Virtue of RA No. 7433 authored by then Congressman Mario Serra Ty. Pama Polyclinic Philippine Red Cross Tandag Tandag Pilot Elementary School Tandag Central Elementary School Telaje Elementary School Quintos Elementary School Saint Theresa College of Tandag Jacinto P. Elpa National High School Tandag National Science High School Vicente L. Pimentel Sr. National High School Buenavista Nursery School Buenavista Elementary School Buenavista National High School Tandag Christian School, Inc. Tandag City SpEd Center Tandag Science Elementary School Engr. Nestor Ty Memorial Elementary School Bongtud Elementary School Meliton M. Ajos Memorial Elementary School San Jose Elementary School Mahanon Elementary School Mabuhay Elementary School Pandanon Elementary School Carmen Integrated School San Antonio Elementary School Saint Theresa College of Tandag – College Dept. North Eastern Mindanao State University – Main Campus Radio FM 89.3 MHz Real Radio (PEC Broadcasting Corporation) 90.1 MHz Kakampi FM (St. Jude Thaddeus Institute of Technology) 92.9 MHz Brigada News FM (Brigada Mass Media Corporation) 95.9 MHz Radyo Natin (Manila Broadcasting Company/Radyo Natin Network) 96.7 MHz Energy FM (Ultrasonic Broadcasting System) 97.5 MHz Shure FM (Iddes Broadcast Group) 99.1 MHz Radyo Gugma (Capitol Broadcasting Center) 100.7 MHz Radyo Bandera News FM (Bandera News Philippines/Fairwaves Broadcasting Network) 102.3 MHz DABIG C Radio (Prime Broadcasting Network) 103.1 MHz Unitas Radio (Palawan Broadcasting Corporation) AM 837 kHz Radyo Pilipinas Tandag DXJS AM (Philippine Broadcasting Service) Internet Radio 93.9 MHz iFM Davao "Ang Best Friend Mo!" For desktop users, you may click the link provided below. And or if you're using mobile phones, use your preferred Internet browser by clicking the link below: https://rmn.ph/ifm939davao/ Television TV-2 GMA Network TV-6 TNTV-6 (Tandag Network Television) Surigao Del Sur's local community channel TV-8 – PEC Broadcasting Corporation TV-12 – ABS-CBN (defunct) TV-23 – TV5 TV-26 – ABS-CBN Sports+Action Cable providers Morning Star Cable TV Cignal Digital TV Telephone providers TETCO Internet Service provider Globe Broadband PLDT Home Bro Smart Bro TETCO DSL Cellular Network Providers Globe Telecom Smart Communications Sun Cellular The Surigao del Sur Sports Center (formerly named as Gregorio P. Murillo Sports Complex) is a multi-sports complex, located near the provincial capitol situated in Tandag City, which has hosted the Caraga Regional Athletic Meet, several times. The Tandag City Gymnasium is an indoor gymnasium located at Luis Perez corner Serra Street, adjacent the local police station. Malaybalay, Philippines  City of Tandag | (DILG) "2015 Census of Population, Report No. 3 – Population, Land Area, and Population Density" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. Quezon City, Philippines. August 2016. ISSN 0117-1453. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 25, 2021. Retrieved July 16, 2021. Census of Population (2020). "Caraga". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved July 8, 2021. "PSA Releases the 2018 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates". Philippine Statistics Authority. December 15, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2022. Virginia Hansen Holmes, Guerrilla Daughter (Kent, Ohio: Kent State U. Press, 2009), pp. 127, 168. Kent Holmes, Wendell Fertig and His Guerrilla Forces in the Philippines: Fighting the Japanese Occupation, 1942–1945 (Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Co., 2015), p. 72. "Climate: Tandag". Climate-Data.org. Retrieved October 26, 2020. Census of Population (2015). "Caraga". Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved June 20, 2016. Census of Population and Housing (2010). "Caraga" (PDF). Total Population by Province, City, Municipality and Barangay. National Statistics Office. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Censuses of Population (1903–2007). "Caraga". Table 1. Population Enumerated in Various Censuses by Province/Highly Urbanized City: 1903 to 2007. National Statistics Office.{{cite encyclopedia}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Poverty incidence (PI):". Philippine Statistics Authority. Retrieved December 28, 2020. "Estimation of Local Poverty in the Philippines" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. November 29, 2005. "2003 City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. March 23, 2009. "City and Municipal Level Poverty Estimates; 2006 and 2009" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. August 3, 2012. "2012 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates" (PDF). Philippine Statistics Authority. May 31, 2016. "Municipal and City Level Small Area Poverty Estimates; 2009, 2012 and 2015". Philippine Statistics Authority. July 10, 2019. "PSA Releases the 2018 Municipal and City Level Poverty Estimates". Philippine Statistics Authority. December 15, 2021. Retrieved January 22, 2022. Laguboh! Unknown. "Where water falls". Retrieved October 31, 2020. "The Capitol City of the Province". SURIGAO DEL SUR. January 14, 2015. Retrieved October 31, 2020. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tandag. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Tandag. Tandag Profile at the DTI Cities and Municipalities Competitive Index Philippine Standard Geographic Code