Hiligaynon, also often referred to as Ilonggo or Binisaya/Bisaya nga Hiniligaynon/Inilonggo, is an Austronesian regional language spoken in the Philippines by about 9.1 million people, predominantly in Western Visayas and Soccsksargen, most of whom belong to the Hiligaynon people. It is the second-most widely spoken language in the Visayas and belongs to the Bisayan languages, and it is more distantly related to other Philippine languages. It also has one of the largest native language-speaking populations of the Philippines, despite it not being taught and studied formally in schools and universities until 2012. Hiligaynon is given the ISO 639-2 three-letter code hil, but has no ISO 639-1 two-letter code. Hiligaynon is mainly concentrated in the regions of Western Visayas (Iloilo, Capiz, Guimaras, and Negros Occidental), as well as in South Cotabato (including General Santos), Sultan Kudarat, and North Cotabato in Soccsksargen. It is spoken in other neighboring provinces, such as Antique and Aklan in Western Visayas, Negros Oriental in Central Visayas, Masbate in Bicol Region, and southern parts of Mindoro, Romblon and Palawan in Mimaropa. It is spoken as a second language by Kinaray-a speakers in Antique, Aklanon/Malaynon speakers in Aklan, Capiznon speakers in Capiz, Cebuano speakers in Negros Oriental, and spoken and understood by native speakers of Maguindanaon, Cebuano, Ilocano, Blaan, Tboli and other settler and indigenous languages in Soccsksargen in Mindanao. There are approximately 9,300,000 people in and out of the Philippines who are native speakers of Hiligaynon and an additional 5,000,000 capable of speaking it with a substantial degree of proficiency. Aside from Hiligaynon, the language is also referred to as Ilonggo, also spelled Ilongo, as it originated in Iloilo. Many speakers outside Iloilo argue, that this is an incorrect usage of the word Ilonggo. In precise usage, these people opine that Ilonggo should be used only in relation to the ethnolinguistic group of native inhabitants of Iloilo and the culture associated with native Hiligaynon speakers in that place, including their language. The disagreement over the usage of Ilonggo to refer to the language extends to Philippine language specialists and native laypeople. Historically, the term Visayan had originally been applied to the people of Panay. In terms of language, Visayan is more used today to refer to what is known as Cebuano. As pointed out by H. Otley Beyer and other anthropologists, the term Visayan was first applied only to the people of Panay and to their settlements eastward in the island of Negros, especially its western portion, and northward in the smaller islands, which now compose the province of Romblon. At the early part of Spanish Colonization in the Philippines, the Spaniards used the term Visayan only for these areas. While the people of Cebu, Bohol and Leyte were for a long time known only as Pintados. The name Visayan was later extended to these other islands because, as several of the early writers state, their languages are closely allied to the Visayan dialect of Panay. Historical evidence from observations of early Spanish explorers in the Archipelago shows that the nomenclature used to refer to this language had its origin among the people of the coasts or people of the Ilawod ("los [naturales] de la playa") in Iloilo, Panay, whom Spanish explorer Miguel de Loarca called Yligueynes (or the more popular term Hiligaynon, also referred to by the Karay-a people as Siná). The term Hiligaynon came from the root word ilig ('to go downstream'), referring to a flowing river in Iloilo. In contrast, the Kinaray-a has been used by what the Spanish colonizers called Arayas, which may be a Spanish misconception of the Hiligaynon words Iraya or taga-Iraya, or the current and more popular version Karay-a ('highlanders' – people of Iraya/highlands). Similar to many languages in the Philippines, very little research on dialectology has been done on Hiligaynon. Standard Hiligaynon, simply called Ilonggo, is the dialect that is used in the province of Iloilo, primarily in the northern and eastern portions of the province. It has a more traditional and extensive vocabulary, whereas the Urban Hiligaynon dialect spoken in Metro Iloilo has a more simplified or modern vocabulary. For example, the term for 'to wander,' 'to walk,' or 'to stroll' in Urban Hiligaynon is lágaw, which is also widely used by most of the Hiligaynon speakers, whereas in Standard Hiligaynon, dayán is more commonly used, which has rarely or never been used by other dialects of the language. Another example, amó iní, ('this is it') in Standard Hiligaynon can be simplified in Urban Hiligaynon and become 'mó'ní. Some of the other widely recognized dialects of the language, aside from Standard Hiligaynon and Urban Hiligaynon, are Bacolodnon Hiligaynon (Metro Bacolod dialect), Negrense Hiligaynon (provincial Negros Occidental dialect that is composed of three sub-variants: Northern, Central and Southern Negrense Hiligaynon), Guimaras Hiligaynon, and Mindanao Hiligaynon (which incorporated some Cebuano and other languages due to the mass influx of migrants from Cebu, Bohol, Siquijor and Cebuano-speaking parts of Mindanao reside in the Soccsksargen area). Some native speakers also consider Kinaray-a (also known as Hiniraya or Antiqueño) and Capiznon dialects of Hiligaynon. However, linguists have classified Kinaray-a as a Western Bisayan language, while Capiznon is a Central Bisayan language closely related to Hiligaynon. Consonants [d] and [ɾ] were once allophones but cannot interchange as in other Philippine languages: patawaron ('to forgive') [from patawad, 'forgiveness'] but not patawadon, and tagadiín ('from where') [from diín, 'where'] but not tagariín. There are four main vowels: /a/, /i ~ ɛ/, /o ~ ʊ/, and /u/. [i] and [ɛ] (both spelled i) are allophones, with [i] in the beginning and middle and sometimes final syllables and [ɛ] in final syllables. The vowels [ʊ] and [o] are also allophones, with [ʊ] always being used when it is the beginning of a syllable, and [o] always used when it ends a syllable. Hiligaynon is written using the Latin script. Until the second half of the 20th century, Hiligaynon was widely written largely following Spanish orthographic conventions. Nowadays there is no officially recognized standard orthography for the language and different writers may follow different conventions. It is common for the newer generation, however, to write the language based on the current orthographic rules of Filipino. A noticeable feature of the Spanish-influenced orthography absent in those writing following Filipino's orthography is the use of "c" and "qu" in representing /k/ (now replaced with "k" in all instances) and the absence of the letter "w" ("u" was formerly used in certain instances). The core alphabet consists of 20 letters used for expressing consonants and vowels in Hiligaynon, each of which comes in an uppercase and lowercase variety. The apostrophe ⟨'⟩ and hyphen ⟨-⟩ also appear in Hiligaynon writing, and might be considered separate letters. The hyphen, in particular, is used medially to indicate the glottal stop san-o 'when' gab-e 'evening; night'. It is also used in reduplicated words: adlaw-adlaw 'daily, every day', from adlaw 'day, sun'. This marking is not used in reduplicated words whose base is not also used independently, as in pispis 'bird'. Hyphens are also used in words with successive sounds of /g/ and /ŋ/, to separate the letters with the digraph NG. Like in the word gin-gaan 'was given'; without the hyphen, it would be read as gingaan /gi.ŋaʔan/ as opposed to /gin.gaʔan/. In addition, some English letters[which?] may be used in borrowed words. Hiligaynon has three types of case markers: absolutive, ergative, and oblique. These types in turn are divided into personal, that have to do with names of people, and impersonal, that deal with everything else, and further into singular and plural types, though the plural impersonal case markers are just the singular impersonal case markers + mga (a contracted spelling for /maŋa/), a particle used to denote plurality in Hiligaynon. (*)The articles sing and sing mga means the following noun is indefinite, while sang tells of a definite noun, like the use of a in English as opposed to the; however, it is not as common in modern speech, being replaced by sang. It appears in conservative translations of the Bible into Hiligaynon and in traditional or formal speech. (**)The plural personal case markers are not used very often and not even by all speakers. Again, this is an example of a case marker that has fallen largely into disuse, but is still occasionally used when speaking a more traditional form of Hiligaynon, using fewer Spanish loan words.[clarification needed] The case markers do not determine which noun is the subject and which is the object; rather, the affix of the verb determines this, though the ang-marked noun is always the topic. In addition to this, there are two verbal deictics, karí, meaning 'to come to the speaker', and kadto, meaning 'to go yonder'. Hiligaynon lacks the marker of sentence inversion ay of Tagalog/Filipino or hay of Akeanon. Instead sentences in SV form (Filipino: Di karaniwang anyo) are written without any marker or copula. Examples: Si Sara ay maganda (Tagalog) Si Sara matahum / Gwapa si Sara (Hiligaynon) = 'Sara is beautiful.' 'Sara is beautiful' (English) There is no direct translation for the English copula to be in Hiligaynon. However, the prefixes mangin- and nangin- may be used to mean will be and became, respectively. Example: Manamì mangín manggaránon. 'It is nice to become rich.' The Spanish copula estar ('to be') has also become a part of the Hiligaynon lexicon. Its meaning and pronunciation have changed compared to its Spanish meaning, however. In Hiligaynon it is pronounced as istar and means 'to live (in)/location' (Compare with the Hiligaynon word puyô). Example: Nagaistar ako sa tabuk suba. 'I live in tabuk suba'. Tabuk suba translates to 'other side of the river' and is also a barangay in Jaro, Iloilo. To indicate the existence of an object, the word may is used. Example: May EXIST idô dog (a)ko 1SG May idô (a)ko EXIST dog 1SG I have a dog. When an adjective modifies a noun, the linker nga links the two. Example: Ido nga itom 'black dog' Sometimes, if the linker is preceded by a word that ends in a vowel, glottal stop or the letter N, it becomes acceptable to contract it into -ng, as in Filipino. This is often used to make the words sound more poetic or to reduce the number of syllables. Sometimes the meaning may change as in maayo nga aga, '(the) good morning', and maayong aga, the greeting for 'good morning'. The linker ka is used if a number modifies a noun. Example: Anum ka ido 'six dogs' The interrogative pronouns of Hiligaynon are as follows: diin, san-o, sin-o, nga-a, kamusta, ano, and pila Diin means 'where'. Example: Diin ka na subong? 'Where are you now?' A derivation of diin, tagadiin, is used to inquire the birthplace or hometown of the listener. Example: Tagadiin ka? 'Where are you from?' San-o means 'when' Example: San-o inâ? 'When is that?' Sin-o means 'who' Example: Sin-o imo abyan? 'Who is your friend?' Nga-a means 'why' Example: Nga-a indi ka magkadto? 'Why won't you go?' Kamusta means 'how', as in "How are you?" Example: Kamusta ang tindahan? 'How is the store?' Ano means 'what' Example: Ano ang imo ginabasa? 'What are you reading?' A derivative of ano, paano, means 'how', as in "How do I do that?" Example: Paano ko makapulî? 'How can I get home?' A derivative of paano is paanoano, an archaic phrase which can be compared with kamusta. Example: Paanoano ikaw? 'How art thou?' Pila means 'how much/how many' Example: Pila ang gaupod sa imo? 'How many are with you?' A derivative of pila, ikapila, asks the numerical order of the person, as in, "What place were you born in your family?"(first-born, second-born, etc.) This word is notoriously difficult to translate into English, as English has no equivalent. Example: Ikapila ka sa inyo pamilya? 'What place were you born into your family?' A derivative of pila, tagpila, asks the monetary value of something, as in, "How much is this beef?" Example: Tagpila ini nga karne sang baka? 'How much is this beef?' As it is essential for sentence structure and meaning, focus is a key concept in Hiligaynon and other Philippine languages. In English, in order to emphasize a part of a sentence, variation in intonation is usually employed – the voice is stronger or louder on the part emphasized. For example: The man is stealing rice from the market for his sister. The man is stealing rice from the market for his sister. The man is stealing rice from the market for his sister. The man is stealing rice from the market for his sister. Furthermore, active and passive grammatical constructions can be used in English to place focus on the actor or object as the subject: The man stole the rice. vs. The rice was stolen by the man. In contrast, sentence focus in Philippine languages is built into the construction by grammatical elements. Focus is marked by verbal affixes and a special particle prior to the noun in focus. Consider the following Hiligaynon translations of the above sentences: Nagakawat ang lalaki sang bugas sa tinda para sa iya utod. Ginakawat sang lalaki ang bugas sa tinda para sa iya utod. Ginakawatan sang lalaki sang bugas ang tinda para sa iya utod. Ginakawatan sang lalaki sang bugas sa tinda para sa iya utod. (lalaki 'man'; kawat 'to steal'; bugas 'rice'; tinda 'market'; utod 'sibling'; kamot 'hand') Hiligaynon, like other Philippine languages, employs reduplication, the repetition of a root or stem of a word or part of a word for grammatical or semantic purposes. Reduplication in Hiligaynon tends to be limited to roots instead of affixes, as the only inflectional or derivational morpheme that seems to reduplicate is -pa-. Root reduplication suggests 'non-perfectiveness' or 'non-telicity'. Used with nouns, reduplication of roots indicate particulars which are not fully actualized members of their class. Note the following examples. (1) balay-bálay house-house balay-bálay house-house toy-house, playhouse (2) maestra-maestra teacher-teacher maestra-maestra teacher-teacher make-believe teacher Reduplication of verbal roots suggests a process lacking a focus or decisive goal. The following examples describe events which have no apparent end, in the sense of lacking purpose or completion. A lack of seriousness may also be implied. Similarly, reduplication can suggest a background process in the midst of a foreground activity, as shown in (5). (3) Nag-a- NAG-IMP- hìbî-híbî cry-cry ang FOC bátâ. child Nag-a- hìbî-híbî ang bátâ. NAG-IMP- cry-cry FOC child The child has been crying and crying. (4) Nag-a- NAG-IMP- tinlò-tinlò clean-clean akó 1SG.FOC sang UNFOC lamésa table Nag-a- tinlò-tinlò akó sang lamésa NAG-IMP- clean-clean 1SG.FOC UNFOC table I'm just cleaning off the table (casually). (5) Nag-a- NAG-IMP- kàon-káon eat-eat gid just silá 3PL.FOC sang UNFOC nag-abót NAG-arrive ang FOC íla 3PL.UNFOC bisíta. visitor Nag-a- kàon-káon gid silá sang nag-abót ang íla bisíta. NAG-IMP- eat-eat just 3PL.FOC UNFOC NAG-arrive FOC 3PL.UNFOC visitor They were just eating when their visitor arrived. When used with adjectival roots, non-telicity may suggest a gradualness of the quality, such as the comparison in (6). In comparative constructions the final syllables of each occurrence of the reduplicated root are accented. If the stress of the second occurrence is shifted to the first syllable, then the reduplicated root suggests a superlative degree, as in (7). Superlatives can also be created through prefixation of pinaka- to the root, as in pinaka-dakô. While non-telicity can suggest augmentation, as shown in (7), it can also indicate diminishment as in shown in (9), in contrast with (8) (note the stress contrast). In (8b), maàyoáyo, accented in the superlative pattern, suggests a trajectory of improvement that has not been fully achieved. In (9b), maàyoayó suggests a trajectory of decline when accented in the comparative pattern. The reduplicated áyo implies sub-optimal situations in both cases; full goodness/wellness is not achieved. (6) Iní this.FOC nga LINK kwárto room ma-dulùm-dulúm MA-dark-dark sang UNFOC sa OBL sinâ that.UNFOC Iní nga kwárto ma-dulùm-dulúm sang sa sinâ this.FOC LINK room MA-dark-dark UNFOC OBL that.UNFOC This room is darker than that one. Hiligaynon has a large number of words derived from Spanish including nouns (e.g., santo from santo, 'saint'), adjectives (e.g., berde from verde, 'green'), prepositions (e.g., antes from antes, 'before'), and conjunctions (e.g., pero from pero, 'but'). Nouns denoting material items and abstract concepts invented or introduced during the early modern era include barko (barco, 'ship'), sapatos (zapatos, 'shoes'), kutsilyo (cuchillo, 'knife'), kutsara (cuchara, 'spoon'), tenedor ('fork'), plato ('plate'), kamiseta (camiseta, 'shirt'), and kambiyo (cambio, 'change', as in money). Spanish verbs are incorporated into Hiligaynon in their infinitive forms: edukar, kantar, mandar, pasar. The same holds true for other languages such as Cebuano. In contrast, incorporations of Spanish verbs into Tagalog for the most part resemble, though are not necessarily derived from, the vos forms in the imperative: eduká, kantá, mandá, pasá. Notable exceptions include andar, pasyal (from pasear) and sugal (from jugar). Just like other Philippine languages that are influenced by Spanish, Hiligaynon uses 2 systems of numbers, one from its Austronesian roots and one derived from Spanish. The names of the days of the week are derived from their Spanish equivalents. Amay namon, nga yara ka sa mga langit Pagdayawon ang imo ngalan Umabot sa amon ang imo ginharian Matuman ang imo boot Diri sa duta siling sang sa langit Hatagan mo kami niyan sing kan-on namon Sa matag-adlaw Kag patawaron mo kami sa mga sala namon Siling nga ginapatawad namon ang nakasala sa amon Kag dili mo kami ipagpadaog sa mga panulay Hinunuo luwason mo kami sa kalaot Amen. Literal translation as per photo: Believe in God and worship only him Do not use the name of God without purpose Honor the day of the Lord Honor your father and mother Do not kill Do not pretend to be married against virginity (don't commit adultery) Do not steal Do not lie Do not have desire for the wife of your fellow man Do not covet the riches of your fellow man Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (Ang Kalibutánon nga Pahayag sang mga Kinamaatárung sang Katáwhan) Peter Solis Nery (born 1969) – prolific writer, poet, playwright, novelist, editor, "Hari sang Binalaybay", and champion of the Hiligaynon language. Born in Dumangas. Antonio Ledesma Jayme (1854–1937) – lawyer, revolutionary, provincial governor and assemblyman. Born in Jaro, lived in Bacolod. Graciano López Jaena (1856–1896) – journalist, orator, and revolutionary from Iloilo, well known for his written works, La Solidaridad and Fray Botod. Born in Jaro. Flavio Zaragoza y Cano (1892–1994) – lawyer, journalist and the "Prince of Visayan poets". Born in Janipaan, Cabatuan. Conrado Saquian Norada (born 1921) – lawyer, intelligence officer and governor of Iloilo from 1969 to 1986. Co-founder and editor of Yuhum magazine. Born in Miag-ao. Ramon Muzones (1913–1992) – prolific writer and lawyer, recipient of the National Artist of the Philippines for Literature award. Born in Miag-ao. Magdalena Jalandoni (1891–1978) – prolific writer, novelist and feminist. Born in Jaro. Angel Magahum Sr. (1876–1931) – writer, editor and composer. Composed the classic Iloilo ang Banwa Ko, the unofficial song of Iloilo. Born in Molo. Valente Cristobal (1875–1945) – noted Hiligaynon playwright. Born in Polo (now Valenzuela City), Bulacan. Elizabeth Batiduan Navarro – Hiligaynon drama writer for radio programs of Bombo Radyo Philippines. Genevieve L. Asenjo – Filipino poet, novelist, translator and literary scholar in Kinaray-a, Hiligaynon and Filipino. Her first novel, Lumbay ng Dila, (C&E/DLSU, 2010) received a citation for the Juan C. Laya Prize for Excellence in Fiction in a Philippine Language in the National Book Award. Philippines portal Language portal Cebuano language Hiligaynon people Languages of the Philippines Kinaray-a language Capiznon language "2010 Census of Population and Housing, Report No. 2A - Demographic and Housing Characteristics (Non-Sample Variables)" (PDF). Retrieved May 2, 2022. Lewis, M. Paul (2009). "Hiligaynon". www.ethnologue.com/. Archived from the original on July 17, 2011. Retrieved December 27, 2022. "2010 Census of Population and Housing, Report No. 2A - Demographic and Housing Characteristics (Non-Sample Variables)" (PDF). Retrieved May 2, 2022. Lewis, M. Paul (2009). "Hiligaynon". www.ethnologue.com/. Archived from the original on July 17, 2011. Retrieved July 23, 2011. Ulrich Ammon; Norbert Dittmar; Klaus J. Mattheier (2006). Sociolinguistics: an international handbook of the science of language and society. Vol. 3. Walter de Gruyter. p. 2018. ISBN 978-3-11-018418-1. "Islas de los Pintados: The Visayan Islands". Ateneo de Manila University. Archived from the original on September 27, 2011. Retrieved March 29, 2013. Arellano, Bernardo Muerong III (October 9, 2020). "Ang Pagpangayaw sa Dutang Ginsaad: A History of Migration and Settlement of Ilonggos in Central Mindanao, 1951-1960s". Researchgate.net. Retrieved October 16, 2023. Philippine Census, 2000. Table 11. Household Population by Ethnicity, Sex and Region: 2000 "My Working Language Pairs". www.bj-informatique.com/. Archived from the original on December 6, 2010. Retrieved January 3, 2011. G. Nye Steiger, H. Otley Beyer, Conrado Benitez, A History of the Orient, Oxford: 1929, Ginn and Company, pp. 122-123. G. Nye Steiger, H. Otley Beyer, Conrado Benitez, A History of the Orient, Oxford: 1929, Ginn and Company, pp. 122-123. Cf. BLAIR, Emma Helen & ROBERTSON, James Alexander, eds. (1903). The Philippine Islands, 1493–1803. Volume 05 of 55 (1582–1583). Historical introduction and additional notes by Edward Gaylord BOURNE. Cleveland, Ohio: Arthur H. Clark Company. ISBN 978-0554259598. OCLC 769945704. "Explorations by early navigators, descriptions of the islands and their peoples, their history and records of the Catholic missions, as related in contemporaneous books and manuscripts, showing the political, economic, commercial and religious conditions of those islands from their earliest relations with European nations to the beginning of the nineteenth century.", pp. 120-121. Cf. Miguel de Loarca, Relacion de las Yslas Filipinas (Arevalo, June 1582) in BLAIR, Emma Helen & ROBERTSON, James Alexander, eds. (1903). The Philippine Islands, 1493–1803. Volume 05 of 55 (1582–1583). Historical introduction and additional notes by Edward Gaylord BOURNE. Cleveland, Ohio: Arthur H. Clark Company. ISBN 978-0554259598. OCLC 769945704. "Explorations by early navigators, descriptions of the islands and their peoples, their history and records of the catholic missions, as related in contemporaneous books and manuscripts, showing the political, economic, commercial and religious conditions of those islands from their earliest relations with European nations to the beginning of the nineteenth century.", pp. 128 and 130. Arellano III, Bernardo (2020). "Ang Pagpangayaw sa Dutang Ginsaad: A History of Migration and Settlement of Ilonggos in Central Mindanao, 1951-1960s". doi:10.13140/RG.2.2.12033.48483. Retrieved March 11, 2024. "Capiznon". ethnologue.com. Archived from the original on February 3, 2013. "Kinaray-a". ethnologue.com. Archived from the original on February 3, 2013. Wolfenden, Elmer (1971). Hiligaynon Reference Grammar. Hawaii: University of Hawaii Press. pp. 61–67. ISBN 0-87022-867-6. Motus, Cecile (1971). Hiligaynon Lessons. University of Hawaii Press. pp. 112–4. ISBN 0-87022-546-4. Wolfenden, Elmer (1971). Hiligaynon Reference Grammar. University of Hawaii Press. pp. 136–7. ISBN 0-87022-867-6. Spitz, Walter L. (February 1997), Lost Causes: Morphological Causative Constructions in Two Philippine Languages (Thesis), Digital Scholarship Archive, Rice University, p. 513, hdl:1911/19215, archived from the original on October 5, 2011 Spitz, Walter L. (February 1997), Lost Causes: Morphological Causative Constructions in Two Philippine Languages (Thesis), Digital Scholarship Archive, Rice University, p. 514, hdl:1911/19215, archived from the original on October 5, 2011 Spitz, Walter L. (February 1997), Lost Causes: Morphological Causative Constructions in Two Philippine Languages (Thesis), Digital Scholarship Archive, Rice University, pp. 514–515, hdl:1911/19215, archived from the original on October 5, 2011 Spitz, Walter L. (February 1997), Lost Causes: Morphological Causative Constructions in Two Philippine Languages (Thesis), Digital Scholarship Archive, Rice University, pp. 514–515, hdl:1911/19215, archived from the original on October 5, 2011 "FLAVIO ZARAGOSA Y CANO: (1892-1965)" (PDF). National Historical Commission of the Philippines. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 5, 2011. "Conrado Saquian Norada". Panitikan.com.ph. September 27, 2019. Retrieved November 26, 2022. Locsin-Nava, Ma Cecilia (2001). "The Life and Times of Ramon Muzones". History & Society in the Novels of Ramon Muzones. Ateneo University Press. ISBN 978-971-550-378-5. "MAGDALENA G. JALANDONI: (1891-1978)" (PDF). National Historical Commission of the Philippines. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 13, 2011. Retrieved November 26, 2022. Salvilla, Rex. "Angel M. Magahum Sr". The News Today. Archived from the original on April 9, 2022. Retrieved November 26, 2022. "Today in History". Bayanihan. May 21, 2010. Archived from the original on March 23, 2012. Wolfenden, Elmer Paul (1972). A Description of Hiligaynon Phrase and Clause Constructions (Ph.D. thesis). University of Hawaii at Manoa. hdl:10125/11716. Wolfenden, Elmer (1975). A Description of Hiligaynon Syntax. Norman, Oklahoma: Summer Institute of Linguistics. – published version of Wolfenden's 1972 dissertation Abuyen, Tomas Alvarez (2007). English–Tagalog–Ilongo Dictionary. Mandaluyong City: National Book Store. ISBN 978-971-08-6865-0. Hiligaynon language test of Wikipedia at Wikimedia Incubator Wikivoyage has a phrasebook for Hiligaynon. Omniglot on Hiligaynon writing Ilonggo Community & Discussion Board Dictionaries Hiligaynon Dictionary Hiligaynon to English Dictionary English to Hiligaynon Dictionary Bansa.org Hiligaynon Dictionary Kaufmann's 1934 Hiligaynon dictionary on-line Diccionario de la lengua Bisaya Hiligueina y Haraya de la Isla de Panay (by Alonso de Méntrida, published in 1841) Learning resources Some information about learning Ilonggo Hiligaynon Lessons (by Cecile L. Motus. 1971) Hiligaynon Reference Grammar (by Elmer Wolfenden 1971) Writing system (Baybayin) Baybayin – The Ancient Script of the Philippines The evolution of the native Hiligaynon alphabet The evolution of the native Hiligaynon alphabet: Genocide The importance of the Hiligaynon 32-letter alphabet Primary texts Online E-book of Ang panilit sa pagcasal ñga si D.ª Angela Dionicia: sa mercader ñga contragusto in Hiligaynon, published in Mandurriao, Iloilo (perhaps in the early 20th century) Secondary Literature Language and Desire in Hiligaynon (by Corazón D. Villareal. 2006) Missionary Linguistics: selected papers from the First International Conference on Missionary Linguistics, Oslo, March 13–16th, 2003 (ed. by Otto Zwartjes and Even Hovdhaugen)