The Asia–Pacific (APAC) is the region of the world adjoining the western Pacific Ocean. The region's precise boundaries vary depending on context, but countries and territories in Australasia, East Asia, and Southeast Asia are often included. In a wider context, Central Asia, North Asia, the Pacific Islands, South Asia, West Asia (excluding the Arabian Peninsula and the Levant), and even Pacific-adjoining countries in the Americas can be included. For example, the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) includes five countries (Canada, Chile, Mexico, Peru, and the United States) in the New World. The term has become popular since the late 1980s in commerce, finance, and politics. Despite the heterogeneity of the regions' economies, most individual nations within the zone are emerging markets experiencing rapid growth. Sometimes, the notion of "Asia–Pacific excluding Japan" (APEJ) is considered useful. Central and Eastern Asia (CEA) Eastern Asia – some companies separate their Eastern Asian business from the rest of Asia, and refer to the Oriental region separately from the Western/Central Asia region Oceania South-eastern Asia Southern Asia Western Asia In accordance with the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), the Asia–Pacific region includes a total of 51 countries and seven territories grouped into five subregions: East and North East Asia (ENEA)  People's Republic of China  Hong Kong, China  Macao, China Democratic People's Republic of Korea (North Korea)  Japan  Mongolia Republic of Korea (South Korea)  Republic of China (Taiwan) North and Central Asia (NCA)  Armenia  Azerbaijan  Georgia  Kazakhstan  Kyrgyzstan  Russian Federation  Tajikistan  Turkmenistan  Uzbekistan South and South West Asia (SSWA)  Afghanistan  Bangladesh  Bhutan  India  Iran (Islamic Republic of)  Maldives    Nepal  Pakistan  Sri Lanka  Turkey (Türkiye) South East Asia (SEA) – ASEAN  Brunei Darussalam  Cambodia  Indonesia  Lao People's Democratic Republic (Laos)  Malaysia  Myanmar (Burma)  Philippines  Singapore  Thailand  Timor-Leste (East Timor)  Viet Nam (Vietnam) The Pacific (PACIFIC)  American Samoa (United States)  Australia  Cook Islands  Fiji  French Polynesia (France)  Guam (United States)  Kiribati  Marshall Islands  Micronesia (Federated States of)  Nauru  New Caledonia (France)  New Zealand  Niue  Northern Mariana Islands (United States)  Palau  Papua New Guinea  Samoa  Solomon Islands  Tonga  Tuvalu  Vanuatu In a wider context, the following countries and territories can also be included in the Asia–Pacific region: Asia  Bahrain  British Indian Ocean Territory (United Kingdom)  Cyprus  Iraq  Israel  Jordan  Kuwait  Lebanon  Oman  Palestine  Qatar  Saudi Arabia  Syria  United Arab Emirates  Yemen North America  Canada  Costa Rica  El Salvador  Guatemala  Honduras  Mexico  Nicaragua  Panama  United States Oceania  Baker Island (United States)  Clipperton Island (France)  Coral Sea Islands (Australia)  Howland Island (United States)  Jarvis Island (United States)  Johnston Atoll (United States)  Kingman Reef (United States)  Midway Atoll (United States)  Norfolk Island (Australia)  Palmyra Atoll (United States)  Pitcairn Islands (United Kingdom)  Tokelau (New Zealand)  Wake Island (United States)  Wallis and Futuna (France) South America  Chile  Colombia  Ecuador  Peru Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Asia Pacific Forum Asia Pacific Foundation of Canada Asia-Pacific Network Information Centre (APNIC) Asia Society Asian Century China Rim East Asia Summit East–West dichotomy Free and Open Indo-Pacific Indo-Pacific List of country groupings (including AMEA and AMER) Oceania Pivot to Asia South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Valeriepieris circle "Digital creativity and innovation lacking in kids in APAC: report". May 10, 2019. Archived from the original on May 4, 2021. Retrieved May 4, 2021. Pan, Hui, ed. (October 2004). "Vonage and Cisco to sell phone equipment". VoIP Monthly Newsletter. 2 (10). Information Gatekeepers Inc: 3. Retrieved 2011-12-15. APEJ (Asia-Pacific Excluding Japan) and EEMEA (Eastern Europe, Middle East, and Africa) will grow their combined share of this figure from 17 percent to 22 percent during the same period, as North America's share adjusts from 53 percent to 46 percent. "List of countries in the Asia-Pacific region and subregions". www.unescap.org. Archived from the original on 2023-04-02. Retrieved 2023-09-29. APEC official website The Asia Pacific Foundation of Canada Asia Pacific Indigenous Youth Network (APIYN) BBC Asia-Pacific Archived 2010-05-07 at the Wayback Machine