Maranao (Filipino: Mëranaw; Kirim: باسا أ مراناو) is an Austronesian language spoken by the Maranao people in the provinces of Lanao del Sur and Lanao del Norte and the cities of Marawi and Iligan City in the Philippines, as well as in Sabah, Malaysia. It is a subgroup of the Danao languages of the Moros in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao. Iranun was once considered a dialect of Maranao. Unique among other Danao languages, Maranao is spoken with a distinct downstep accent, as opposed to stress accent.[citation needed] Additionally, Maranao features aspirated "hard consonants", which also raise the quality of following vowels. Maranao is spoken in the provinces of Lanao del Sur and Lanao del Norte and in northwestern Maguindanao, northwestern Cotabato, northwestern Bukidnon, and parts of Zamboanga del Sur all of which are located in the island of Mindanao in southern Philippines. Maranao was historically written in Arabic letters, which were known as Batang Arab. It is now written with Latin letters. Though there is no officially proclaimed standard orthography, Maranao is more or less written as influenced by contemporary Filipino conventions. The following are the letters used in writing out native words: A, B, D, E, G, H, I, K, L, M, N, NG, O, P, R, S, T, U, W, Y In general, double vowels are pronounced separately, for example, kapaar is pronounced as /kapaʔaɾ/. The final /w/ sound in diphthongs and "w" were marked with "-o" in older orthographies, as in other Philippine languages, but both are nowadays spelled as "w". Also, "i" was used in older orthographies to transcribe /j/, which is currently spelled as "Y". "H" is only used for Malay loanwords, and "sh" (pronounced as /ʃ/) is normally used for Arabic loanwords and names such as Ishak (Isaac). "Di" or "j" are used to transcribe the /d͡ʒ/ sound, such as radia/raja (from the Sanskrit word for 'king', "Rāja") or the English name John. In representing the mid central vowel (or schwa) /ə/, different authors have employed various means to represent this sound (e.g. "E" or "U"). In social media, speakers use either of the two letters or just leave it blank (e.g. saken can also be spelled sakn and sakun on the internet). Meanwhile, the Commission on the Filipino Language recommends spelling this sound using "Ë" for different Philippine languages in its 2013 Ortograpiyang Pambansa. In a revised Maranao Dictionary by McKaughan and Macaraya in 1996, the digraph "'ae" was introduced and used to represent the supposed presence of the vowel /ɨ/. However, analysis by Lobel (2009, 2013) showed that this may actually be an allophone of /ə/ after hard consonants. McKaughan and Macaraya also used "q" for the glottal stop regardless of position. Diphthongs such as [aw, aj, oi] were spelled as "ao, ai, oi". The orthography used in the study by Lobel (2009) was the one developed by Aleem Abdulmajeed Ansano of Taraka (1943–2008), Senator Ahmad Domocao "Domie" Alonto of Ramain (1914– 2002), and Shaiekh Abdul Azis Guroalim Saromantang of Tugaya (1923–2003). In this orthography, the "hard consonants" /pʰ, tʰ, kʰ, sʰ/ are written as "ph, th, kh, z". Below is the sound system of Maranao including underlying phonetic features. Maranao has four vowel phonemes that can become more close or higher when in certain environments (see hard consonants below). The vowel raising effects of hard consonants may have led earlier studies to Although previous studies have analyzed the [ɨ] sound as a separate phoneme (written with ae) instead of a raised allophone of /ə/. Vowel [e] only occurs in loanwords from Spanish through Tagalog or Cebuano and from Malay. According to Lobel (2013), Maranao has the following consonants: In Maranao, /ʔ/ is not phonemic word-initially (similar to non-Philippine English). Hence, layok aken ('friend of mine') is smoothly pronounced [la.jo.ka.kən]. Since the heavy consonants developed from consonant clusters, they are only found word-medially. Orthography-wise, "r" is used for /ɾ/, "y" is used for /j/, and "ng" is used for /ŋ/ According to Lobel (2013), [h] only occurs in a few recent Malay loanwords: tohan 'God' tahon 'astrological sign' hadapan 'in front (of God)' Earlier Arabic loanwords with "h" that entered Proto-Danao or earlier Maranao were realized as k. kalal 'halal (anything that is permissible in Islam)' karam 'haram (anything not permissible in Islam)', kadî 'hadji (title for a man who has made the Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca)' Kadis 'Hadith' Consonants are also pronounced longer if preceded with a schwa /ə/. However, this process is not a form of gemination since consonant elongation in Maranao is not distinctive as seen in other Philippine languages such as Ilokano and Ibanag. Some of these are: tepad [təpːad] 'get off a vehicle' tekaw [təkːaw] 'startled; surprised' Since 2009, it has been proposed that previous studies on the phonology of Maranao had overlooked the presence of "heavy" consonants, these four "heavy" consonants being /p’ t’ k’ s’/. Vowels that follow these consonants are raised in position. There are four possible environments for that determine whether the vowel will be raised or not: Non-raising – /p t k s m n ŋ r w y/ Obligatory raising – /p’ t’ k’ s’ (h)/ Tohan is pronounced as [t̪o.hɤn] instead of [to.han] Optional raising – /b d g/ Evidenced by some younger speakers writing gagaan as gegaan. Transparent – /l ʔ/ – the raising from the consonant before it will "pass through" and affect the following vowel. Consonant cluster homogenization occurred in earlier Danao and Subanon, where the articulations of the first consonant followed that of the second (Ex: *-gp- > *-bp-). A study by Allison noted that Proto-Danao *b, *d, g* were lost in modern Maranao when found before other consonants with the same place of articulation (Ex: *bp > *p), but preserved elsewehere. Lobel noted that this sound change actually resulted in two features of Maranao phonology: heavy consonants and raised vowels (*[-bpa-] > [-pʰɤ-]). Aspirated consonants also developed in a similar way in Southern (Lapuyan) Subanon, but without the vowel-raising. In contrast to Tagalog which has three case markers (ang/ng/sa), and Iloko which has two (ti/iti), Maranao has four: (so/ko/o/sa). Curiously, the sa is indefinite in Maranao, whereas it is definite/specific in Cebuano and Tagalog. Maranao pronouns can be free or bound to the word/morpheme before it. May actually be eka, and assimilates with the vowel before it, as in batî ika 'your brother-in-law', and babô oka 'your aunt'. Below are common words found in Maranao sentences, their translations in English, Cebuano, and Tagalog, and similar words in distant Philippine languages. Maranao: Langon a taw na inimbawata a ndudon so kapaar ago ndatadatar sa bantogan ago kabnar. Bigan siran sa kabnar ago gagaw na aya patot a di kapakasusurota o omani isa ko kapakiphapagariya. Cebuano: Ang tanang tawo kay gipakatawo nga may kagawasan ug managsama sa kaligdong. Sila gigasahan og pangisip ug tanlag ug mag-ilhanay sa usa'g usa sa diwa managsoon. English: All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood. These phrases were taken from Alonto's Maranao Drills. Legend: topic, direct object, indirect object, possessive, verb Languages of the Philippines "2020 Census of Population and Housing, Report No. 2A - Demographic and Housing Characteristics (Non-Sample Variables)" (PDF). Retrieved May 2, 2022. Komisyon ng Wikang Filipino (2013). Ortograpiyang Pambansa [National Orthography] (PDF) (in Filipino). Archived from the original (PDF) on October 12, 2013. Retrieved August 28, 2013. Mëranaw is the spelling recommended by the Commission on the Filipino Language Lobel, Jason William (2013). Philippine and North Bornean Languages: Issues in Description, Subgrouping, and Reconstruction (PDF) (Ph.D. dissertation). University of Hawaii at Manoa. Lobel, Jason William; Riwarung, Labi Hadji Sarip (2009). "Maranao Revisited: An Overlooked Consonant Contrast and its Implications for Lexicography and Grammar". Oceanic Linguistics. 48 (2): 403–438. doi:10.1353/ol.0.0040. JSTOR 40783537. S2CID 145549504. Ethnologue "Maranao Language and Alphabet". Omniglot. Retrieved September 23, 2018. Rubino, Carl. "Maranao". iloko.tripod.com. McKaughan, Howard P.; Macaraya, Batua A. (1967). A Maranao Dictionary (PDF). Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. Lobel, Jason William; Riwarung, Labi Hadji Sarip (2011). "Maranao: A Preliminary Phonological Sketch With Supporting Audio". Language Documentation & Conservation. 5: 31–59. hdl:10125/4487. Allison, E. Joe (1979). "Proto-Danaw: A Comparative Study of Maranaw, Magindanaw, and Iranun". In Gallman, A.; Allison, E.; Harmon, C.; Witucki, J. (eds.). Papers in Philippine Linguistics No. 10. Pacific Linguistics Series A – No. 55. Canberra: The Australian National University. pp. 53–112. doi:10.15144/PL-A55.53. Alonto, Almahdi G.; Adam, Abdullah B.; Zorc, R. David (2009). Lobel, Jason (ed.). Maranao Dialogs and Drills. Hyattsville, Md.: Dunwoody Press. ISBN 978-1-931546-65-2. Kaufman, Daniel (2010). "The Grammar of Clitics in Maranao". In Billings, Loren; Goudswaard, Nelleke (eds.). Piakandatu Ami: Dr. Howard P. McKaughan (PDF). Manila: Linguistic Society of the Philippines and SIL Philippines. pp. 132–157. ISBN 978-971-780-026-4 – via SIL. Bansa.org, Maranao Dictionary Maranao at Omniglot Maranao at Wiktionary The files for a Maranao lexical database with English glosses are archived with Kaipuleohone hdl:10125/40873 SEAlang Library Maranao Resources SIL Philippines Maranao - English Dictionary