Viktor Brandt (born 8 July 1999) is a Swedish biathlete. He is the 2024 World Champion in the Men's Relay. Viktor Brandt competed in the Youth World Championships for the first time in 2017, but did not achieve any special results. He took part in the season highlight every year in the following years until 2021, but did not compete at senior level. However, the races at junior level were rarely successful for Brandt, only achieving a result in the top 30 in 2021 with 26th place in the sprint at the Junior World Championships. The Swede celebrated his debut in the IBU Cup in Idre in November 2021 and immediately finished 17th in the sprint. He then confirmed his good form with a seventh place in the second sprint in Idre, and his first podium finish came after the turn of the year in the single-mixed relay in Obertilliach alongside Elisabeth Högberg behind the Russian team. Brandt also took part in the European Championships and finished 21st in the individual race. The Swede also competed almost exclusively in the IBU Cup in the 2022/23 season, achieving a seventh place in the mass start 60 in Ridnaun and narrowly missing out on another podium finish with Ella Halvarsson in Canmore. As Emil Nykvist was unable to compete due to illness, he made his World Cup debut in Östersund at the end of the season and finished 47th in the individual race. In the winter of 2023/24, Brandt competed in the season-opening individual event in Östersund, but was then transferred to the IBU Cup. However, as he impressed in Sjusjøen with three top 10 finishes, including fifth place in the sprint, the Swede was called back into the World Cup after the turn of the year, reached the first pursuit race at the highest level in Oberhof and scored his first World Cup points with 32nd place in the short individual race in Antholz. At the 2024 World Championships in Nové Město, he became the champion in the relay race together with Jesper Nelin, Martin Ponsiluoma and Sebastian Samuelsson. Viktor Brandt lives at the biathlon base in Östersund. He studies computer science at Mid Sweden University, also in Östersund. Brandt's brother Oskar, who is four years older, is also a biathlete. All results are sourced from the International Biathlon Union. 1 medal (1 gold) "Švédi Viktor Brandt, Jesper Nelin, Martin Ponsiluoma a Sebastian Samuelsson vyhrali štafetu na MS v biatlone". Denník N. February 17, 2024. "International Biathlon Union - IBU". International Biathlon Union - IBU. December 19, 2021. https://www.langd.se/skidskytte/karriarens-forsta-varldscuppoang-for-brandt-thingnes-bo-overlagsen/ Padovani, Loïc (February 17, 2024). "Biathlon | Nove Mesto : la Suède soigne son bilan grâce aux relais | Nordic Mag | N°1 Biathlon | Ski nordique". www.nordicmag.info. "Team Brandt - Skidskytte". brandtbiathlon.com. Viktor Brandt at IBU