Tausūg (Bahasa Sūg; Jawi: بَهَسَ سُوگ‎; Malay: Bahasa Sūlūk, lit. 'Language of Sulu/the Tausūg people') is an Austronesian language spoken in the province of Sulu in the Philippines and in the eastern area of the state of Sabah, Malaysia, by the Tausūg people. It is widely spoken in the Sulu Archipelago (Sulu, Tawi-Tawi, and Basilan), the Zamboanga Peninsula (Zamboanga del Norte, Zamboanga Sibugay, Zamboanga del Sur, and Zamboanga City), southern Palawan, and Malaysia (eastern Sabah). Tausūg has some lexical similarities or near similarities with Surigaonon language of the provinces Surigao del Norte, Surigao del Sur, and Agusan del Sur and with the Butuanon language of Agusan del Norte; it has also some vocabulary similarities with Sugbuanon, Bicolano, and with other Philippine languages. Many Malay and Arabic words are found in Bahasa Sūg. In English, the language is primarily known as Tausug (i.e., Tausug language "language of the Tausug people"). The local name of the language is bahasa Sūg (Sulu language). The term Tausūg (tau Sūg, meaning "people of Sulu") is derived from two words: tau ("person") and Sūg (The transformation of "Sūk", itself the contraction of Sūlūk). Thus, in Tausug, Tausug refers to people while Bahasa Sūg refers to the language. Several scholars postulate that "Sūlūk" derives from "Ahl ul-Sūlūk", or "people of the path (to Allah)," in reference to the Islamic missionaries who arrived to spread the religion of Islam. Meanwhile, a similar sounding word "sug", which means "water-current", has been given by a number of writers as the etymologic source of the term; the two words, even if similarly pronounced, are not related. In the past, the language has also been simply referred to using the generic term "Moro". Tausūg is an Austronesian language. It is classified by linguists as being a member of the Bisayan languages family, which includes Cebuano and Waray. In particular, it has many similarities with the Surigaonon language of the provinces Surigao del Norte, Surigao del Sur and Agusan del Sur and with the Butuanon language of Agusan del Norte – both spoken in northeastern Mindanao; hence, Zorc (1977) groups these three languages as part of a "South Bisayan" grouping. Tausūg is primarily spoken in the Sulu Archipelago, which aside from the island of Sulu, also includes the Tawi-Tawi chain of islands and the island of Basilan. It is a lingua franca spoken in different areas/islands of the archipelago. Due to migration, the language is also spoken alongside other local languages in the Zamboanga Peninsula (e.g., Cebuano and Chavacano), which includes the provinces of Zamboanga del Norte, Zamboanga Sibugay and Zamboanga del Sur and Zamboanga City. It is also spoken in Southern Palawan and in Eastern Sabah, Malaysia. Tausūg has three vowel phonemes: /a/, /i/, /u/, with phonemic length (e.g. īpun, "shrimp" vs. ipun, "tooth"). Stress is not phonemic and usually occurs on the final syllable. The vowel phonemes have a broad range of allophones: /a/: [a,ɐ,ɑ] /i/: [i,ɪ] /u/: [u,ʊ,ɤ,ʌ,ə] Tausūg has expectedly developed some variations in accent and vocabulary from one area to another, but there are two basic dialects characterized by differences with regard to vowel sounds. The "Gimbahanun" (literally means people from the farm) speakers, the residents of the out-of-town rural areas, use four vowels: /a/, /i/, /u/ and /ə/, the last vowel representing schwa sound or "obscure u", a retention from Proto-Philippine and Proto-Bisayan. The "Parianun", the residents of the urban areas, use only three vowel phonemes: /a/, /i/, /u/,; the loss of /ə/ is common in many Bisayan and other Philippine languages. The consonant phonemes are: Allophones: /b/: per default [b], but [β] between vowels /g/: per default [ɡ], but [ɣ] between vowels /h/: per default [h], but [ɦ] between vowels /r/: per default [r], but [ɹ] before /m,n,g,k/ Medial gemination (of all non-glottal consonants) is phonemic. Tausūg has three pronouns sets: The case markers of Tausūg are: Non-subject undergoers take the oblique marker when definite or a proper noun, but indefinite common nouns take the genitive marker sin. Hi Nasul in kimaun ha mampallam. "It was Nasul who ate the mango." Nagdakdak sin baju' in manga bujang. "The maidens washed clothes." The positive existential ("there is") is aun, the negative existential ("there is none") is way. Verbs in Tausūg are inflected for focus and aspect. Affixes expressing ability: Tausūg numerals: Tausūg is today primarily written using the Latin alphabet. Historically, it had previously been written using the Arabic alphabet. The script used was inspired by the use of Jawi in writing the Malay language. An example of the Arabic alphabet in writing the Tausūg language: Latin script – Wayruun tuhan malayngkan Allāh, hi Muhammad ing (in) rasūl sin Allāh Arabic script – وَيْرُؤُنْ تُهَنْ مَلَيِڠْکَن هَالله، هِمُحَمَّدْ ئِڠ رَسُولْ سِن الله English translation – There is no god but Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah The Arabic script used to write Tausūg differs in some aspects from the script used for Arabic and in the Jawi script used for Malay. One of the main differences is in the way that word-initial vowels are written. In Arabic, /in/ is (إن); in Jawi (Malay), it is (ان). In Tausūg, it is (ئِن). The Tausūg Arabic script utilizes the letter yā' with a hamza (ئ) to represent a short vowel. If a kasra (ئِ) is added, it becomes an 'i' sound. If a fatha (ئَ) is added, it becomes an 'a' sound. If a damma (ئُ) is added, it becomes a 'u' sound. Many Tausug words derive from the Arabic language. Some examples of Arabic words in Tausug are Tausūg words derived from Sanskrit "Unu in ngān mu?" is a literal translation of Tagalog question "Ano ang pangalan mo?" (or "What is your name?" in English) but is not used by autochthonous Tausūg in day-to-day conversations. To use "Unu in ngān mu" is a glaring sign that the speaker is not a Tausug. "Siyu (or Hisiyu) in ngān mu?" is used for knowing the given or personal name, but to know other callings that are not personal, "Unu" is used, as in: "Unu in pagtawag kaymu ha bāy?" (What is your calling in the house?... "In pagtawag kāku' Bungsu, sabab aku in kabungsuhan." (My calling is Bungsu because I am the youngest); "Unu in ama' mu? Siyu in ngān niya?" (What is your father? What is his name?)..."In ama' ku mangingista'. In ngān niya hi Abdulla." (My father is a fisherman. His name is Abdulla);[citation needed] Languages of the Philippines Yakan Bikol Cebuano Chavacano Hiligaynon Kapampangan Ilocano Pangasinan Bisayan languages Waray language "2010 Census of Population and Housing, Report No. 2A - Demographic and Housing Characteristics (Non-Sample Variables)" (PDF). Retrieved May 2, 2022. Bangahan, Benjamin S. (2015). "English-Bahasa Sūg Dictionary". Vibal Publishing House. Jannaral, Julmunir I. (September 11, 2019). "English-Bahasa Sug Dictionary Launched Today". The Manila Times. Retrieved December 3, 2020. Haskins, Jim (1982). The Filipino Nation: The Philippines: Lands and Peoples, a Cultural Geography. Grolier International. p. 190. ISBN 9780717285099. "Tausug". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved December 3, 2020. Hamsain, AbdulAziz H. (June 27, 2016). "The Journey of a Tausug Doctor". TausugOnline. Retrieved December 3, 2020. Philippine Commission (1901). Report of the Philippine Commission to the President (Report). Washington: Government Printing Office. Nevertheless, anyone who knows Visaya will note the moment that he studies the Moro language of Sulu that... Zorc, David Paul (1977). The Bisayan Dialects of the Philippines: Subgrouping and Reconstruction. Canberra, Australia: Dept. of Linguistics, Research School of Pacific Studies, Australian National University. doi:10.15144/PL-C44. ISBN 0858831570. "Tausug". www.csueastbay.edu. Retrieved December 3, 2020. Peneyra (1992), pp. 1–2. Tan (1967), p. 16 Tan (1967). Rubino (2005). Peneyra (1992), p. 1. Peneyra (1992), pp. 4–5. Peneyra (1992), pp. 7, 14–15. Peneyra (1992), p. 32. Peneyra (1992), pp. 35–47. "Archived". mpi-lingweb.shh.mpg.de. Archived from the original on September 9, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2023. Peneyra, Irma V. (1992). A Grammatical Sketch of the Tausug Language. The Archive, Publication 6. Diliman: University of the Philippines. Rubino, Carl R. Galvez (2005). Intensive Tausug: A Pedagogical Grammar of the Language of Jolo, Philippines. Dunwoody Press. ISBN 978-1-931546-17-1. Tan, Evangeline K. (1967). The Phonology of Tausug: A Descriptive Analysis (Master's thesis). University of British Columbia. doi:10.14288/1.0105420. Sundita, Christopher Allen (2002). In Bahasa Sug: An Introduction to Tausug. Lobel & Tria Partnership, Co. ISBN 971-92226-6-2. Cameron, C. R. (1917). Sulu Writing, an Explanation of the Sulu-Arabic Script as Employed in Writing the Sulu Language of the Southern Philippines. Zamboanga: The Sulu Press – via University of Michigan Library Digital Collections. Soderberg, Craig and Ashley, Seymour A. and Olson, Kenneth S. (2012). "Tausug (Suluk)". Illustrations of the IPA. Journal of the International Phonetic Association. 42 (3): 361–364. doi:10.1017/S0025100312000230{{cite journal}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link), with supplementary sound recordings. Tausug language test of Wikipedia at Wikimedia Incubator Wikivoyage has a phrasebook for Tausug. Publications in Tausūg and other Philippine languages Tausug-English Dictionary of SIL International. online version accessible from Webonary.org. Tausug at Wiktionary Tausug Language by Dr. Carl G. Rubino Bansa.org Tausug Dictionary Archived March 3, 2016, at the Wayback Machine Tausug English Glossary Search for common Tausug Words Tausug 101 by Anak Iluh