Dobrujan Tatar is the Tatar language of Romania. It includes Kipchak dialects, but today there is no longer a sharp distinction between the dialects and it is mostly seen as one language. This language belongs to the Kipchak Turkic languages, specifically to Kipchak-Nogai. In Romania is it commonly called as Tatar language. But in some sources is also seen Romanian Tatar, Dobrujan Tatar, Danube Tatar, Budjak Tatar, Moldovan-Romanian Tatar, Nogai, Nogai-Tatar, Dobrujan Nogai, Budjak Nogai, Crimean Tatar, Dobrujan Crimean Tatar, Authentic Crimean Tatar or Colloquial Crimean Tatar. In the grammar book by University of Bucharest are these dialects written: Kerĭş Şoñğar Tat Cemboylıq Cedĭsan Cetĭşqul Some sources defined the dialects under their influence from Oghuz. The middle Oghuz influenced language spoken by about 70% of Tatars. It's spoken mainly in the south and center of Constanța and has been heavily influenced by Oghuz. The little Oghuz influenced language spoken by about 20% Tatars. It's spoken in Tulcea, near and far north of Constanța, and is the most conservative in preserving Kipchak elements. The high Oghuz influenced language spoken by about 10% of Tatars. It's spoken around the cities of Hacıoğlu Pazarcık (Dobrich) and is the closest to Oghuz languages. Dobrujan Tatar is a highly agglutinative language; that is, much of the grammar is expressed by means of suffixes added to nouns and verbs. It is very regular compared with many other languages of non-Turkic group. For example, "şeherlerden" (from the cities) can be analysed as "şeher" (city), "-ler" (plural suffix) and "-den" (ablative case, meaning "from"); "alaman" (I take) as "al" (take), "-a" (present tense) and "-man" (first person singular). Tatar spoken in Romania has two distinct facets existing, interweaving and forming together the literary Tatar language "edebiy Tatarşa". One of these aspects is the authentic Tatar called "calpı Tatarşa" or "calpaq Tatarşa" and the other is the academic Tatar language called "muwallımatşa". Academic Tatar language, means writing and pronouncing Arabic and Persian neologisms - occurring mostly in science, religion, literature, arts or politics - in their original form. Authentic Tatar language, means writing and pronouncing words, including those of Arabic and Persian origin, by strictly adapting them to the own phonetic system. Naturalization is shifting the spelling of academic speech sounds to authentic sounds following the patterns below, where a greater-than sign indicates that one sound changes to another. f > p v > w v > b ç > ş ç > j h > (skip over) h > k h > y h > w ţ > s In addition to pronouns above, genitive pronouns can also has absolute possessive suffix -qı/kĭ by adding after genitive forms, resulting on forms menĭmkĭ, bĭzĭmkĭ, senĭñkĭ, sĭzĭñkĭ, onıñqı, and olarnıñqı. This suffix can be also added on nouns. The accusative forms bĭzdĭ, sĭzdĭ and olardî can also be bĭznĭ, sĭznĭ and olarnı. The dative forms mağa and sağa can also be ma and sa. The pronoun olar- is also possible as onlar-. The demonstrative pronouns include proximal bo and şo. There is a total of 10 letters used to represent determinant sounds of which 9 mark authentic determinant sounds: a, e, ı, ĭ, i, o, ö, u, ü while the letter â is used for an academic vowel. The writing system registers authentic consonants with 19 letters: b, c, ç, d, g, ğ, j, k, l, m, n, ñ, p, q, r, s, ş, t, z and has three signs standing for the academic consonants: f, h, v. There are also two authentic semivowels: y, w. An old authentic Turkic consonant, the sound /ç/ represented by the letter ⟨Ç⟩ is rarely heard because authentic speakers of Tatar spoken in Dobruja spell it /ş/ as letter ⟨Ş⟩. As the written language most often follows the spoken language shifting ⟨Ç⟩ to ⟨Ş⟩, the result is that in Tatar spoken in Romania letter ⟨Ç⟩ and sound /ç/ are often treated as academic. The Dobrujan Tatar language did get a Latin alphabet in 1956, it was established as a section in University of Bucharest the Faculty of Foreign Languages and Literatures in 1957 and also in 1977 it was disbanded. Most of the teachers who taught at the Tatar language department graduated from the Faculty of History and Philology of Kazan State University (Tatarstan - Russian Federation), specializing in Tatar language and literature. In the communist period, Tatar books were brought from the USSR to teach the Tatar language in Romania, but it failed. Nowadays the Tatar language is taught in some Romanian schools using Tatar language books. There are some Tatar magazines in Romania, also novels, dictionaries, poetry books, school books and science books. Some of the dictionaries are printed by the help of UDTTMR. In Romanian television broadcasts was also Tatar learning rubrics called „Tatarşa üyrenemĭz“ (Romanian: Învățăm tătărește; "We learn Tatar") and the TV show „Romanya'dan Tatarlar“ (Romanian: Tătarii din România; "Tatars from Romania") showed. However, the language is not supported in language keyboards or in language codes. The Government of Romania recognises the Tatar community. Also every 5 May is the official Tatar language Day in Romania. Nilghuin Ismail describes the situation: "Nowadays the Romanian Tatar language is preserved only as spoken language. Even so in accordance with the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, in the Recommendation 1201 (1993), on an additional protocol on the rights of national minorities, is stipulated: Every person belonging to a national minority shall have theright to freely use his/her mother tongue in private and in public, both orally and inwriting. This right shall also apply to the use of his/her language in publications andin the audiovisual sector. Despite all these recommendations, in Romania we still do not have literary Tatar language." Tatars of Romania Dobrujan Tatar alphabet Vuap-Mocanu, Şukran (1985). Curs practic de limba tătară. Bucureşti: Universitatea din Bucureşti (Romanian) Akmolla, Güner (2009). Tatarlar. Constanța, NewLine (Tatar) Ibraim, Neriman; Ibram, Nuredin (2014). Din lirica tătarăĭ. Constanța: Imperium (Romanian) Ibram, Nuredin (2017). Tătarii din România. Constanța: Muntenia (Romanian) "Reservations and Declarations for Treaty No.148 – European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages". Council of Europe. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 28 December 2016. Ismail, Nilghiun. "Romanian Tatar language communication in the multicultural space". https://www.researchgate.net/publication/287996468_Ekstra_Kucuk_Bir_Dil_Olarak_Romanya_Tatar_Turkcesi_As_an_Extra_Small_Language_Romania_Tatar_Turkish THE TURKISH LANGUAGE SPOKEN BY THE TURK-TATAR COMMUNITY LIVING IN ROMANIA "Общие сведения о татарах Добруджи". Академия наук Республики Татарстан. Archived from the original on 2022-01-19. Retrieved 2022-01-19. "Дунайские или румынские татары. Откуда взялись и как живут в настоящее время" (in Russian). Archived from the original on 2022-01-18. Retrieved 2022-01-19. http://lls.unibuc.ro/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/13_07_21_19AUB_Foreign_Languages_and_Literatures_2009_part_II.pdf The Sounds of Tatar Spoken in Romania: The Golden Khwarezmian Language of the Nine Noble Nations, Taner Murat, Anticus Press, Constanța, 2018, ISBN 978-606-94509-4-9 "Некоторые итоги переписи 2004 года в Молдавии". www.demoscope.ru. Archived from the original on 2012-01-20. Retrieved 2015-11-23. https://www.turkedebiyati.org/dil-lehce-sive-agiz-nedir/ https://de.scribd.com/document/702611419/Curs-General-de-Limba-T%C4%83tar%C4%83-Fonetic%C4%83-Fonologie-Morfologie-1975, p.18 Eker, Süer (2006). Ekstra küçük bir dil olarak Romanya "Tatar Türkçesi" Archived 2012-04-17 at the Wayback Machine Kîrîm tatarşa — Kazakşa Sózlík, Taner Murat, CreateSpace, Charleston SC, USA, 2011, ISBN 978-1461083108 Secția de Limba tătară Implementation of the Tatar Language in the Schools of Romania UDTTMR Publications Books of Taner Murat "Dobruca Kırımtatar Ağzı Sözlüğü". UDTTMR Rubric; Friday, 18:00 in LITORAL TV (See description) UDTTMR TV show; Friday, 18:00 in LITORAL TV (See description) Tatar language Day in Romania Website of The Democratic Union of Turkish-Muslim Tatars of Romania Website of The Cultural Union of Tatars from Romania Website of The Democratic Tatar Union Romanian Tatar in Omniglot Curs General de Limba Tătară - Fonetică, Fonologie, Morfologie (1975) de Mamut Enver, Universitatea din București (Grammar book in Romanian)