Masters of the Air is a 2024 American war drama television miniseries created by John Shiban and John Orloff for Apple TV+. It is based on the 2007 book of the same name by Donald L. Miller and follows the actions of the 100th Bomb Group, a Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress heavy bomber unit in the Eighth Air Force in eastern England during World War II. The series serves as a companion to Band of Brothers (2001) and The Pacific (2010). It is the first series to be produced by Apple Studios in cooperation with Playtone and Amblin Television and stars Austin Butler, Callum Turner and Anthony Boyle as part of an ensemble cast. The series consists of nine episodes. Principal photography began in England in 2021 but was delayed on several occasions due to strict government measures related to COVID-19. Masters of the Air premiered on January 26, 2024. The series received positive reception. Masters of the Air recounts the story of the 100th Bomb Group during World War II and follows bomber crews on dangerous missions to destroy targets inside German-occupied Europe. The show portrays the intensity of war, the dangers that the airmen face, and the friendships and relationships that develop. Austin Butler as Major Gale "Buck" Cleven Callum Turner as Major John "Bucky" Egan Anthony Boyle as Lt. Harry Crosby Barry Keoghan as Lt. Curtis Biddick Nikolai Kinski as Colonel Harold Huglin Stephen Campbell Moore as Major Marvin "Red" Bowman Sawyer Spielberg as Lt. Roy Frank Claytor Isabel May as Marjorie "Marge" Spencer James Murray as Colonel Neil "Chick" Harding Nate Mann as Major Robert "Rosie" Rosenthal Kai Alexander as Sgt. William Quinn Laurie Davidson as Lt. Herbert Nash Joanna Kulig as Paulina Louis Hofmann as Lt. Ulrich Haussmann Jamie Parker as Dr. Huston Bel Powley as Alessandra "Sandra" Wesgate Sam Hazeldine as Col. Albert Clark Josiah Cross as 2nd Lt. Richard D. Macon Branden Cook as 2nd Lt. Alexander Jefferson Ncuti Gatwa as 2nd Lt. Robert Daniels Jerry MacKinnon as Col. Benjamin O. Davis Jr. Josh Dylan as Lt. George Niethammer Darragh Cowley as Lt. Glenn Graham Matt Gavan as Lt. Charles Cruikshank Jonas Moore as Capt. Frank Murphy Jordan Coulson as Lt. Howard Hamilton Ben Radcliffe as Capt. John D. Brady David Shields as Major Everett Blakely Edward Ashley as Major Jack Kidd Raff Law as Sgt. Ken Lemmons Adam Long as Capt. Bernard DeMarco Elliot Warren as Lt. James Douglass Samuel Jordan as Sgt. John J. "Winks" Herrmann Harry Ames as Capt. August H. Gaspar Bailey Brook as Sgt. Charles K. Bailey Louis Greatorex as Capt. Joseph "Bubbles" Payne John Hopkins as Dr. Wendell "Smokey" Stover Nathen Solly as Lt. John Hoerr Josh Bolt as Lt. Winifred "Pappy" Lewis Ian Dunnett Jnr as Lt. Ron Bailey Thomas Flynn as Barr James Frecheville as Major Bill Veal Jonathan Halliwell as Sgt. William J. DeBlasio Dean John-Wilson as Lt. Clifford Milburn Tom Joyner as Cpt. "Stormy" Becker Riley Neldam as Sgt. Michael V. Boccuzzi Adam Silver as Lt. David Solomon Ben Spong as Major Ollie Turner Spike White as Lt. Charles A. Via 100th Bomb Group Daniel Briggs as Sgt. William Crabb Freddy Carter as Lt. David Friedkin James Meunier as Lt. Kenneth Lorch Kieron Moore as Sgt. Clifford Starkey Oaklee Pendergast as Sgt. William Hinton Francesco Piacentini-Smith as Sgt. Ray H. Robinson Dean Ridge as FO. Richard L. Snyder Sonny Ashbourne Serkis as Lt. James Evans George Smale as Lt. Raymond Nutting George Webster as Lt. Glenn W. Dye Ben Dilloway as Lt. Col. Bill Aring Luke Coughlan as Sgt. James M. Johnson Jon Ewart as Lt. William Couch Max Hastings as Lt. Kenneth Allen Nitai Levi as Sgt. Paul A. Vrabec, Jr. Fionn O'Shea as Sgt. Steve Bosser Neil Pendleton as Sgt. William Stewart Thomas Perry as Sgt. Harold E. Clanton Charlie Rix as Lt. Glen Van Noy Elliott Ross as Lt. Donald Strout Alex Boxall as Sgt. Monroe Thornton Elan Butler as Lt. Robert Shoens Lino Facioli as Lt. Adams Christopher Lakewood as Col Thomas Jeffery Dimitri Leonidas as Sgt. George J. Petrohelos Phillip Lewitski as Lt. Francis Harper Jojo Macari as Capt. Oran Petrich John Schwab as Lt. Col. James W. Lann Corin Silva as Lt. Col. John Bennett Louis Sparks as Sgt. Lester Saunders Tuskegee Airmen Kwame Agyei as Lt. Joseph Evans Gordon Tomisin Ajani as Captain Erwin B. Lawrence Bradley Banton as Lieutenant Lee "Buddy" Archer Jonathan Jules as Lt. Shelby F. Westbrook Darryl Mundoma as Lt. Charles M. Bussey Francis Lovehall as Captain Wendell O. Pruitt Rahshan Wall as Lt. Frederick D. Funderburg Other Nancy Farino as Lil, a barmaid at a pub frequented by the airmen Tommy Jessop as Tommy, a local whom Egan befriends Toby Eden as Billy Taylor, a boy who lives near the airfield, looked after by Lemmons Alfie Tempest as Sammy Hurry, a boy who lives near the airfield, looked after by Lemmons Harriet Leitch as Tatty Spaatz, a volunteer for the American Red Cross Emma Canning as Helen, a volunteer for the American Red Cross who makes a connection with Lt. Nash Ben Segers as Vincent, a Belgian resistance fighter aiding Quinn and Bailey in returning to England Vincent Londez as Jean Achten, a Belgian resistance fighter aiding Quinn and Bailey in returning to England Barney White as Bob, a German spy who attempts to blend in with Quinn and Bailey Bronwyn James as Susie, an attendee at Lt. Dye's celebration Lauren McQueen as Rose, an attendee at Lt. Dye's celebration David Austin-Barnes as Stuart O'Neill, a POW at Stalag Luft III Robert Hands as Major Gustav Simoleit, Deputy Commandant at Stalag Luft III Saro Emirze as Hanns Scharff, a Luftwaffe interrogator In October 2012, there were reports of a third World War II miniseries, in the same vein as Band of Brothers and The Pacific, but focusing on United States Army Air Forces aircrews of the Eighth Air Force, that was being considered by Tom Hanks and Steven Spielberg. In January 2013, HBO confirmed that it was developing the miniseries, based on Donald L. Miller's book Masters of the Air: America's Bomber Boys Who Fought the Air War Against Nazi Germany, to be adapted by John Orloff. The series would focus on the 100th Bombardment Group of the Eighth Air Force. In October 2019, it was reported that Apple had made a deal with Spielberg's and Hanks's respective production companies to stream the series exclusively on Apple TV+ instead of HBO. In a statement, HBO later confirmed that it had decided not to move forward with the series. The Hollywood Reporter said it would consist of nine episodes at a total cost of $250 million. The series is the first Apple TV+ series to go into production under the technology firm's in-house production company, Apple Studios. In October 2020, Cary Joji Fukunaga was announced as director of the first three episodes. In February 2021, Austin Butler and Callum Turner were cast to star. Anthony Boyle and Nate Mann joined the cast in March, with Raff Law, James Murray and Tommy Jessop added in April. Freddy Carter revealed his casting in a May interview, while set photos revealed that Barry Keoghan was also cast. In June, Dee Rees was announced as directing episodes of the series. In July, Anna Boden and Ryan Fleck were also announced as directing episodes. Colleen Atwood served as costume designer. In February 2021, it was reported that production had begun at Dalton Barracks (the former WWII airfield RAF Abingdon) in Oxfordshire, England. Retrospective temporary 12-month planning permission was applied for at Newland Park, Chalfont St Peter, following the construction of a WWII barracks on the site. Filming paused briefly in July due to positive COVID-19 tests. Production also occurred in Hemel Hempstead. The series used on-set virtual production by Lux Machina for cockpit scenes. Masters of the Air premiered on Apple TV+ on January 26, 2024. A companion documentary titled The Bloody Hundredth, narrated by Tom Hanks, tells the story of the 100th Bomb Group that inspired the stories in Masters of the Air. It was released on March 15, 2024, on Apple TV+. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 85% of 95 critics' reviews are positive. The website's consensus reads: "Soaring high with its immaculate production design and acutely well-observed characters, Masters of the Air can stand proud alongside its sibling series Band of Brothers and The Pacific." Metacritic assigned the series a weighted average score of 73 out of 100 based on 40 critics. Writing for The Guardian, Rebecca Nicholson gave the series five out of five, describing it as "truly fantastic television", portraying the experience of the pilots "as thrilling as it is terrible". However, in the i, Emily Baker rated the series two out of five, describing it as "the first big TV disappointment of 2024". Baker criticizes the predictable and "formulaic" drama, thin characterization, and storylines and suggests that the series is "too old-fashioned to compete with today's prestige TV". "Blake Neely Scoring Apple TV+'s 'Masters of the Air'". Retrieved December 28, 2023. "Masters of the Air". Writers Guild of America West. Retrieved November 6, 2023. Solly, Meilan (November 9, 2023). "Watch the Trailer for 'Masters of the Air,' Steven Spielberg's Long-Awaited Follow-Up to 'Band of Brothers'". Smithsonian Magazine. Smithsonian Institution. Retrieved November 10, 2023. "Masters of the Air Season 1". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved January 27, 2024. Webster, Andrew (October 5, 2023). "Apple's World War II series Masters of the Air premieres in January". The Verge. Retrieved October 5, 2023. Keene, Allison (October 19, 2012). "HBO Considering Third BAND OF BROTHERS TV Series". Collider. Archived from the original on February 24, 2020. Guthrie, Marisa (January 18, 2013). "HBO Developing Third WWII Miniseries with Tom Hanks, Steven Spielberg (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 26, 2021. "What We Know So Far About Apple TV's Masters of the Air: The Latest on Upcoming WWII Miniseries About The Mighty Eighth". Footsteps Research. November 7, 2019. Retrieved February 26, 2021. Fleming, Mike Jr. (October 11, 2019). "Apple Enlists For 'Masters Of The Air' As Steven Spielberg, Tom Hanks & Gary Goetzman Fly From HBO For WWII Series". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved February 26, 2021. Gonzalez, Sandra (October 11, 2019). "'Masters of the Air' from Steven Spielberg and Tom Hanks lands at Apple". CNN. Retrieved February 26, 2021. Kroll, Justin (February 26, 2021). "'Masters Of The Air': Austin Butler And Callum Turner To Star in 'Band Of Brothers' Sequel For Apple, Amblin & Playtone". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved February 26, 2021. Goldberg, Lesley (October 11, 2019). "Apple Launches In-House Studio With 'Band of Brothers'/'The Pacific' Follow-Up". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 26, 2021. Thorne, Will (October 11, 2019). "Apple Launches In-House Studio, Sets 'Band of Brothers' Follow-Up Series". Variety. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Kroll, Justin (October 8, 2020). "007 Helmer Cary Joji Fukunaga To Direct Trio Of WWII 'Masters Of The Air' Episodes For Apple TV+, Playtone & Amblin; Filmmaker Also Closing First-Look Apple Deal". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved February 26, 2021. Kroll, Justin (March 16, 2021). "'Masters Of The Air': Anthony Boyle Joins 'Band Of Brothers' Sequel For Apple, Amblin And Playtone". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 16, 2021. Zorrilla, Mónica Marie (March 29, 2021). "Nate Mann to Star in Tom Hanks and Steven Spielberg's World War II Series 'Masters of the Air' at Apple". Variety. Retrieved March 29, 2021. Wiseman, Andreas (April 6, 2021). "Raff Law Joins Apple Studios' 'Masters Of The Air', Playtone & Amblin WWII Drama Underway In UK". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved April 6, 2021. Thomson, Emily (April 30, 2021). "What do we know about Spielberg and Hanks' war series set in Norfolk?". Eastern Daily Press. Retrieved June 21, 2021. Beresford, Jack. "Irish actor starring in Band of Brothers sequel Masters of the Air". The Irish Post. Retrieved May 6, 2021. "Freddy Carter Live Q&A with Entertainment Weekly". Instagram. TeamFreddyCUK. Retrieved May 6, 2021. Fletcher, Harry (April 25, 2021). "Line Of Duty's Tommy Jessop spotted on set of Steven Spielberg's WWII drama". Metro. Retrieved May 3, 2023. Keegan, Rebecca (June 17, 2021). "Director Dee Rees on the Importance of Debut 'Pariah' Becoming a Criterion Release: "We Have to Widen the Canon"". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 20, 2021. Prosser, Eirian Jane (July 19, 2021). "Masters of the Air cast: who could be spotted at Dalton Barracks, Oxfordshire". Oxford Mail. Retrieved July 19, 2021. "'Story Telling Through Time' - Hats of the Stage and Screen". The British Hat Guild. February 3, 2022. Retrieved October 19, 2022. Prosser, Eirian Jane (February 22, 2021). "First look at set for 'Tom Hanks' and 'Spielberg' TV show being filmed in Oxfordshire". Oxford Mail. Retrieved February 23, 2021. "Chiltern & South Bucks Areas Planning Portal". Buckinghamshire Council. February 4, 2021. Retrieved April 27, 2021. The New Normal on U.K. Productions: Vaccination Questions, Double Props and Tennis Balls Smith, Matthew (October 20, 2021). "After Life Series 3, Masters of the Air and Sex Pistols biopic filming handed council six figures after closing town". Hertfordshire Mercury. Retrieved November 4, 2021. "MoTA = @cary_fukunaga". www.instagram.com. Retrieved February 4, 2023. "Lux Machina Consulting on Instagram: "2022 was a big year for us. We continued to innovate and lead the industry in the areas of Live Events, Brand & Agency, Broadcast, Episodic & film. And we couldn't have done it without you! So what's next? Well, we're ready to keep building on that momentum into 2023 and beyond—and we can't wait to partner with you! #NEPVS #broadcast #film #tv #production #newyear"". Instagram. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Anderson, John (March 15, 2024). "'The Bloody Hundredth' Review: Real People, Real Heroism". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved March 19, 2024. "Masters of the Air: Season 1". Metacritic. Retrieved January 27, 2024. Nicholson, Rebecca (January 24, 2024). "Masters of the Air review – Spielberg and Hanks's Band of Brothers follow-up is absolutely classic TV". The Guardian. Retrieved January 26, 2024. "Masters of the Air review: The first TV disappointment of 2024". www.inews.co.uk. January 26, 2024. Retrieved January 28, 2024. Official website Masters of the Air at IMDb Introducing The Mighty 8th We Have Ways podcast interview with John Orloff