The European Green Party (EGP), also referred to as European Greens, is the European political party that represents national parties from across Europe who share Green values. The European Greens works closely with the Greens–European Free Alliance (Greens/EFA) parliamentary group in the European Parliament which is formed by elected Green party members along with the European Free Alliance, European Pirate Party and Volt Europa. The European Greens' partners include its youth wing the Federation of Young European Greens (FYEG), the Green European Foundation (GEF) and the Global Greens family. Green politics emerged from grassroots political movements, such as the environmental, peace, and women's rights movements. They forged the Greens' political priorities: climate change, peace, environment, democracy, social justice and health. Greens emerged as a new political force in the 1970s in several European countries and have been represented in the European Parliament since 1984. The European Green Party was founded at the 4th Congress of the European Federation of Green Parties on 20–22 February 2004 in Rome, as the evolution of this already existing federation. The foundation of the new party was finalised with the signing of the treaty constituting the party. 32 Green parties from across Europe joined this new pan-European party. The Greens were the first to form a political party at the European level. The European political party amplifies the political expression of member parties by having common policy positions, mutual election manifestos, and cohesive European election campaigns. The European Greens also has networks which brings Green politicians together, such as the Local Councillors Network. They are in government in eight countries in Europe: Austria (The Greens), Belgium (Groen and Ecolo), Bulgaria (Green Movement), Germany (Alliance 90/The Greens), the Republic of Ireland (Green Party), Latvia (The Progressives), Montenegro (United Reform Action) and Scotland (Scottish Greens). The table below shows the results of the Greens in each election to the European Parliament, in terms of seats and votes. It also shows how many European Commissioners the European Greens have, and who led the parliamentary group. It also lists how the Green parliamentary group and supra-national organisations was named and what European parliamentary group they joined. The European Green Party is a European political party, constituted out of political parties from European countries. Parties can also become associate members. Members of the Greens/EFA group in the European Parliament not belonging to a member party can be admitted as a special member with speaking rights but no vote. The governing bodies of the EGP are the Council and the Committee. The Council takes place twice a year and is the main decision-making body of the European Greens and consists of delegates of member parties. During Councils, delegates from European Greens parties set a common political direction, linked to the development of the European project and its values. They do so by debating and vote on resolutions on key issues in Europe. Delegates are allotted based on their most recent European or national election results. Each party has at least two delegates. consists of delegates of member parties. These are allotted on the basis of their most recent European or national election results. Each party has at least two delegates. The Committee consists of nine members, including two Co-Chairs (one man and one woman), a Secretary General and a Treasurer. They are responsible for daily political affairs, execution of the Council's decisions and the activities of the EGP office and staff. Co-Chairs Thomas Waitz and Mélanie Vogel, Secretary General Benedetta De Marte, Treasurer Ute Michel, and Committee Members Vula Tsetsi, Sibylle Steffan, Małgorzata Tracz, Rasmus Nordqvist and Mina Jack Tolu were elected at the 35th European Green Party in Riga, Latvia. The EGP has had several Co-Chairs. The Congress is an enlarged meeting of the Council which is convened by the Council at least once every 5 years and hosts more delegates. The EGP hosts a collection of networks that have specific special interest focus, including: Balkan Network Mediterranean Network Gender Network European Queer Greens Local Councillors Networks European Green Disability Network European Network of Green Seniors According to its charter Archived 20 June 2023 at the Wayback Machine, the European Greens is working towards a just and sustainable transition towards societies "respectful of human rights and built upon the values of environmental responsibility, freedom, justice, diversity and non-violence". The charter’s guiding principles provide a framework for the political actions taken by member parties.   The priorities outlined in the charter include protecting human health and wellbeing, maintaining biological diversity, combatting global warming, transitioning to a just and sustainable economy, strengthening inclusive democracies, safeguarding diversity, and ensuring social justice.   The European Green Party statutes Archived 19 October 2023 at the Wayback Machine define the party in legal terms. The European Greens have committed themselves to the basic tenets of Green politics, such as environmental responsibility, individual freedom, inclusive democracy, diversity, social justice, gender equality, global sustainable development and non-violence. The European Greens was the first European political party to form, signalling its commitment to the European project. In its charter Archived 20 June 2023 at the Wayback Machine, it nevertheless affirms that the political party is working to make the European Union more just, democratic and inclusive.   2019: Time to renew the promise of Europe. Archived 24 August 2023 at the Wayback Machine   2014: Change Europe, Vote Green. Archived 30 October 2023 at the Wayback Machine   2009: A Green New Deal for Europe. Archived 23 May 2023 at the Wayback Machine 2004: Europe Can Do Better. You Decide! Archived 20 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine 1999: A Common Green Manifesto for the 1999 European Elections. Archived 20 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine 1994: Election Platform – Green Parties of the EU. Archived 20 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine The candidates for the 2019 European Parliament election were Ska Keller and Bas Eickhout, who campaigned for climate protection, a social Europe, more democracy and stronger rule of law. That year, the Greens made the strongest ever showing across Europe, in part due to rising public awareness about climate change and the impact of youth movements for climate. The strongest surge was in Germany as Alliance 90/The Greens replaced the centre-left Social Democratic Party of Germany as the second-strongest party. The Greens/EFA group in the European Parliament obtained 74 seats in total. The Greens' results signified a new balance of power as the European People's Party (EPP) and the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats (S&D) lost their majority. In the 2014 European Parliament election the Green candidates were José Bové and Ska Keller. These elections marked the first time there were primaries including Spitzenkandidaten at the European elections, which allows Europeans to not only vote for who should represent them in the European Parliament, but also help to decide who should lead the European Commission. In May they presented a common programme including the Green New Deal Archived 26 March 2023 at the Wayback Machine at the launch of the European Greens' campaign which called for "a new direction of economic policy aimed at reducing our carbon footprint and improving our quality of life". The slogan of the campaign was 'Change Europe, vote Green'. The Greens/EFA group in the European Parliament obtained 50 seats in total. In the 2009 European Parliament election, even though the European Parliament was reduced in size, the European Greens' member parties won 46 seats, the best result of the Green Parties in 30 years. The Greens/EFA group in the European Parliament secured 55 seats in total. In the 2004 European Parliament election, member parties won 35 Seats and the Greens/EFA group in the European Parliament secured 43 in total. Federation of Young European Greens Greens/EFA group in the European Parliament Global Greens Green European Foundation Environment portal Alter-globalization Anti-nuclear movement Club of Rome Common good (economics) Communalism Ecofeminism Ecological economics Environmental movement Ethics of care Participatory economics Political ecology Tobin tax Universal Basic Income Via Campesina Michaele Schreyer for Alliance '90/The Greens includes 6 independent MEPs elected for the Europe Écologie group Includes 14 MEPs, from 8 countries, NOT affiliated with EGP member parties. Dutch-speaking electoral college Flemish seats in the Belgian Chamber of Representatives, including seats for bilingual Brussels. All seats for the French and German-speaking electoral colleges. All seats for French and German-speaking Communities in the Belgian Chamber of Representatives, including seats for bilingual Brussels. The Irish Green Party operates also in Northern Ireland as the "Green Party in Northern Ireland". The Northern Irish party is separately listed in this table although it does not have separate membership in the EGP. Ernest Urtasun is member of both Catalunya en Comú and Green Left. Catalan seats in the Congress of Deputies; two Catalunya en Comú diputies are also members of Green Left. English and Welsh seats in the House of Commons. Scottish seats in the House of Commons (the party has 7 seats in the devolved Scottish Parliament). It does not have separate membership in the EGP because it is a part of the Irish Green Party. Northern Irish seats in the House of Commons. Ålandic seats in the Parliament of Finland. Full member from 1994 to 2016. Downgraded to associate member in 2016. The Irish Green Party operates also in Northern Ireland as the "Green Party in Northern Ireland". The Northern Irish party is separately listed in this table although it does not have separate membership in the EGP. Esquerra Verda is member party of Catalunya en Comú. Nordsieck, Wolfram (2019). "European Union". Parties and Elections in Europe. Archived from the original on 8 June 2017. Retrieved 30 May 2019. History of the European Green Party at greens-efa.eu History of the European Green Parts at europeangreens.eu [1] Local Councillors Network "Directory". Retrieved 26 August 2015. "Results of the 2014 European elections – European Parliament". results-elections2014.eu. Retrieved 16 October 2016. "Statutes of the European Green Party" (PDF). europeangreens.eu. 20 May 2018. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 January 2019. Retrieved 24 January 2019. "EGP Rule Book" (PDF). europeangreens.eu. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 October 2023. Retrieved 17 November 2022. "Adopted Annex B - EGP Membership List - 37th EGP EoCongress, Vienna 3 June 2023" (PDF). European Greens. European Green Party. p. 24. Retrieved 10 August 2023. In a coalition with Yes, Bulgaria! and Democrats for a Strong Bulgaria as Democratic Bulgaria with SYPOL As part of the GreenLeft-Labour alliance. Parties included in the coalition are the Democratic Left Alliance (since 16 February), The Greens (since 17 February), Now! (since 18 February), Civic Platform (since 21 February), Modern, Democratic Party (since 22 February), Polish People's Party, Union of European Democrats (since 23 February), Social Democracy of Poland (since 2 March), Liberty and Equality (since 3 March), League of Polish Families (since 11 March) and Feminist Initiative (since 15 March). The Coalition also gained the support from Barbara Nowacka and her movement, the Polish Initiative and civic organisation Committee for the Defence of Democracy. The Coalition came in second place in the 2019 European Parliament election with 38.5% of the vote, returning 22 MEPs. The party participate in the 2019 Polish parliamentary election as part of the Civic Coalition. These are the results for Unitary Democratic Coalition. "2019 European Parliament election in Portugal", Wikipedia, 12 June 2023, retrieved 19 October 2023 "2022 Portuguese legislative election", Wikipedia, 8 August 2023, retrieved 19 October 2023 On 2 July 2020, former ICV members announced the founding of a new party and that it would be part of the En Comú Podem, with David Cid, Marta Ribas and Ernest Urtasun being members of the new party. Wikimedia Commons has media related to European Green Party. Official website A little group of papers of the European Green Party, is held by the Historical Archives of the European Union. Portals:  European Union  Politics  Environment  Ecology  Earth sciences  Energy