Iskra is a Slovenian and former Yugoslavian company for electromechanics, telecommunications, electronics and automation. Iskra developed from the SPRAD and a modest factory in Kranj / Strojne tovarne Kranj, a former subsidiary of the Luftfahrtgerätewerk, Berlin. In 1946, prof. dr. Mirjan Gruden renamed Strojne tovarne Kranj to Iskra (in Slovenian: Spark). One year after it was established, Iskra developed its first switch, followed by its first FM antenna, capacitor, and then one of the key milestones in Iskra's success – the establishment of its design department. In 1962, this was the first industrial design department in Yugoslavia. The bureau for railway automation, BAŽ, was founded. In the 1970s, Iskra developed into the largest Yugoslavian company for electromechanics, telecommunications, electronics and automation, proving itself time and time again with exceptional industrial design in telephony, measuring instruments, and machinery. At the start of the 1990s, Iskra's logo was on all electrical devices, and the product portfolio was expanded with measuring instruments, short-wave navy radio receivers, drilling machines, movie projectors, etc.[citation needed] In 1989, Iskra SOZD consisted of the following organizations: Iskra Banka Iskra Commerce Iskra Servis Iskra Telematika Iskra Delta Iskra Kibernetika Iskra električna orodja Iskra Elektrozveze Iskra Merilna elektronika Iskra Elektrooptika Iskra Avtomatika Iskra Orodja Iskra Elementi Iskra Mikroelektronika Iskra Antene Iskra Elekroakustika Iskra Elektromotorji Iskra Videomatika Iskra Rotomatika Iskra Avtoelektrika Iskra Kondenzatorji Iskra Baterije Zmaj Iskra Institut za kakovost Iskra "ZORIN" Iskra Invest servis Iskra High School Following the breakup of Yugoslavia, it is now a company in Slovenia. The company's operations in Slovenia were divided into many separate companies, including Iskratel, Iskra Avtoelektrika, Iskraemeco, Fotona, Iskra Amesi, Iskra, elektro in elektronska industrija, d.d. (Iskra d.d. for short) Iskra d.o.o has been the largest knowledge hub in the region for 75 years. Iskra d.o.o is operating in the areas of Energy sector Electrotechnical components Efficient Installations Traffic Telecommunications Security, supply and facility management List of companies of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Predan, Barbara; Požar, Cvetka (2009). Iskra non-aligned design 1946-1990. Ljubljana: Arhitekturni muzej Ljubljana. ISBN 978-961-6669-10-8. Retrieved 10 October 2018. Perko, Borut (28 July 2012). "Iskra zapustila Gorenjsko". Slovenske novice. Retrieved 16 October 2018. "Iskra's Strategic Milestones". Iskra.eu. Retrieved 16 October 2018. Perko, Borut (28 July 2012). "Iskra zapustila Gorenjsko". Slovenske novice. Retrieved 16 October 2018. "Pregledna razstava Iskra: Neuvrščeno oblikovanje 1946-1990" (PDF) (in Slovenian). Retrieved 6 September 2010. Iskra: Vodič po Iskri, Ljubljana, Slovenia: Iskra Commerce, dejavnost marketinških raziskav in komuniciranja, 1989 Iskra d.d. Web site (Source for Iskra d.d. only) "Iskra's Strategic Milestones".