SpaceX CRS-30, also known as SpX-30, is a Commercial Resupply Service mission to the International Space Station (ISS) launched on 21 March 2024. The mission is contracted by NASA and is scheduled to be flown by SpaceX using Cargo Dragon C209. This will be the tenth flight for SpaceX under NASA's CRS Phase 2 and first Dragon 2 launch from SLC-40, as the pad was reconfigured and a new Crew Access Tower and Arm was added. SpaceX plans to reuse the Cargo Dragons up to five times. The Cargo Dragon will launch without SuperDraco abort engines, without seats, cockpit controls and the life support system required to sustain astronauts in space. Dragon 2 improves on Dragon 1 in several ways, including lessened refurbishment time, leading to shorter periods between flights. The new Cargo Dragon capsules under the NASA CRS Phase 2 contract will land east of Florida in the Atlantic Ocean. NASA and SpaceX now are currently targeting no earlier than 20:55 UTC on 21 March 2024, for the launch of the company’s 30th commercial resupply services mission to the International Space Station. CRS-30 mission will be the first with a Dragon spacecraft to launch from Launch Complex 40 at Cape Canaveral. NASA contracted for the CRS-30 mission from SpaceX and therefore determines the primary payload, date of launch, and orbital parameters for the Cargo Dragon. CRS 30 will bring up the ArgUS 1 payload for Airbus Defense which will comprise of the following payloads. Ball Aerospace will be re-flying their inferred lidar along with several other instruments to test technologies for future spacecraft and landers headed to the moon and into deep space. Prime contractor Thales Alenia Space will be testing a highspeed computer on this flight to improve spacecraft command and control. This computer is being designed for Orion, Gateway, and the Axiom Space Station which Thales is the prime contractor. NASA and ESA are flying an upgraded 4K resolution HD video camera which is a fallow on to HDEV which ended its mission several years ago. This camera will stream live video from the station which will be shown online and on the NASA and ESA show Earth Views. Along with these ArgUS 1 will be carrying several CPU boards to test a network for the development of CubeSats some of which will be flying on the platform the rest will be launched from inside the station. Nanoracks will be testing a scientific payload to shield electronics from EMP and space radiation. The payload will fly up on a pallet with ArgUS 1 and will be installed on NREP which is attached to Kibo.. Various experiments will be transported to the orbiting laboratory, and will provide valuable insight for researchers. SpaceX’s Dragon will deliver new science investigations, food, supplies, and equipment to the international crew. NASA and partner research flying aboard the CRS-30 mission includes a look at plant metabolism in space and a set of new sensors for free-flying Astrobee robots to provide 3D mapping capabilities. Other studies include a fluid physics study that could benefit nanoparticle solar cell technology and a university project from CSA (Canadian Space Agency) that will monitor sea ice and ocean conditions. Signals of Opportunity P-band Investigation (SNOOPI) is a 6U CubeSat mission led by James Garrison, a professor at Purdue University, aimed at using P-band signals from telecommunications satellites to measure soil moisture and snow water content from space. This project is significant for enhancing agricultural practices, water management, and climate prediction by offering a more accessible method to gather important environmental data. Unlike traditional methods that face challenges with radio frequency spectrum access and require large antennas, SNOOPI uses an innovative approach that captures reflected signals from the Earth's surface to measure moisture and snow depth. This technique, known as P-band signals of opportunity reflectometry, is effective because it can penetrate vegetation and provide accurate data on soil and snow conditions. This mission not only seeks to validate the effectiveness of using P-band signals for environmental measurements but also aims to pave the way for future space missions by providing a cost-effective and efficient solution for global monitoring of soil moisture and snow water equivalent. Plants can be used in regenerative life support systems, to provide food, and to contribute to the well-being of astronauts on future deep space exploration missions. C4 Photosynthesis in Space (APEX-09) examines how microgravity affects the mechanisms by which two types of grasses, known as C3 and C4, capture carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Results could clarify plant responses to stressful environments and inform the design of bio-regenerative life support systems on future missions, as well as systems for plant growth on Earth. A technique called Global Navigation Satellite System reflectometry (GNSS-R), which receives satellite signals reflected from the surface of Earth, as a way to monitor ocean phenomena and improve climate models. Killick-1: A GNSS Reflectometry CubeSat for Measuring Sea Ice Thickness and Extent (Nanoracks KILLICK-1) tests using this technique to measure sea ice. The project supports development of space and science capabilities in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada, by providing hands-on experience with space systems and Earth observation. More than 100 undergraduate and graduate engineering students participated in the project. GNSS-R technology is low-cost, light, and energy efficient. Its potential applications on Earth include providing data for weather and climate models and improving the understanding of ocean phenomena such as surface winds and storm surge. Multi-resolution Scanner (MRS) Payload for the Astrobee (Multi-Resolution Scanning) tests technology to automate 3D sensing, mapping, and situational awareness systems. The technology combines multiple sensors, which compensates for weaknesses in any one of them and provides very high-resolution 3D data and more accurate trajectory data to understand how the robot moves around in space. The technology could be used for autonomous operation of spacecraft with minimal or no human occupancy where robots must sense the environment and precisely maneuver, including the lunar Gateway space station. Other uses could be to inspect and maintain spacecraft and for autonomous vehicle operations on other celestial bodies. Results also support improvements in robotic technologies for harsh and dangerous environments on Earth. The Nano Particle Haloing Suspension investigation examines how nanoparticles and microparticles interact within an electrical field. A process called nanoparticle haloing uses charged nanoparticles to enable precise particle arrangements that improve the efficiency of quantum-dot synthesized solar cells. Quantum dots are tiny spheres of semiconductor material with the potential to convert sunlight into energy much more efficiently. Conducting these processes in microgravity provides insight into the relationship between shape, charge, concentration, and interaction of particles. The investigation is supported by NASA’s Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), which partners with government, higher education, and industry on projects to improve a research infrastructure and research and development capacity and competitiveness. Uncrewed spaceflights to the International Space Station "Falcon 9 Block 5 | CRS SpX-30". nextspaceflight.com. Retrieved 26 February 2024. Reckart, Timothy (15 June 2022). "Microgravity Research Flights". NASA. Retrieved 24 July 2022. Office of Inspector General (26 April 2018). Audit of Commercial Resupply Services to the International Space Center (PDF) (Report). Vol. IG-18-016. NASA. pp. 24, 28–30. Retrieved 4 April 2021. This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain. "Dragon 2 modifications to Carry Cargo for CRS-2 missions". Teslarati. Retrieved 4 April 2021. Clark, Stephen (2 August 2019). "SpaceX to begin flights under new cargo resupply contract next year". Spaceflight Now. Retrieved 4 April 2021. "NASA Invites Media to SpaceX's 30th Resupply Launch to Space Station - NASA". Retrieved 26 February 2024. "SpaceX Commercial Resupply". ISS Program Office. NASA. 1 July 2019. Archived from the original on 18 October 2016. Retrieved 4 April 2021. This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain. "Space Station Research Investigation". Retrieved 22 March 2024. "NASA's SpaceX 30th Resupply Mission to Launch Experiments to Station - NASA". 26 February 2024. Retrieved 26 February 2024.