"Gelem, Gelem" is a song composed by Žarko Jovanović, often used as the anthem of the Romani people. The title has been adapted in many countries by local Roma to match their native orthography and spoken dialect of the Romani language. Some of the song's many titles include: "Đelem, Đelem" (Latin Serbian and Bosnian orthography) "Djelem, Djelem" (German and French orthography) "Dzelem, Dzelem" "Dželem, Dželem" (Latin Serbian and Bosnian orthography) "Gyelem, Gyelem" (Hungarian orthography) "Jelem, Jelem" "Opré Roma" "Romale Shavale" "Ѓелем, Ѓелем" (Macedonian orthography) "Джелем, джелем" (Russian, Ukrainian and Bulgarian orthography) "Ђелем, Ђелем" (Cyrillic Serbian and Bosnian orthography) "Џелем, Џелем" (alternative Cyrillic Serbian and Bosnian orthography) "Kara Çocuk Raksı" (Turkish version, lit. black child dance) In an interview with reporter Mike Kalezić, Jovanović himself titled the song "Opre Roma". After experiencing firsthand the incarceration of Roma during the Porajmos (the Romani Holocaust of World War II) in the Independent State of Croatia, Jovanović later composed the lyrics of "Gelem, Gelem" and set them to a traditional melody in 1949. The song was first adopted by delegates of the first World Romani Congress held in 1971. E tsarentsa, bahtale Rromentsa There are many versions of "Gelem, Gelem", notably those translated by Ronald Lee. In 2004, the band Vaya Con Dios released an interpretation, with lyrics in French by their singer Dani Klein, with the similar sounding title "Je l'aime, Je l'aime". bANDİSTA - Kara Çocuk Raksı, retrieved 2022-05-23 Kalezić, Mike. "Ministar na koljenima". prvi tamburaški online magazine. Retrieved 30 September 2012. "Romani Nationalism, Flag and Anthem". www.grthmlondon.org.uk. Gypsy Roma Traveller History Month London. Archived from the original on 27 May 2015. Retrieved 13 November 2012. Zahariev, Atanas (2 August 2016). "A Song for the Roma Genocide". European Roma Rights Centre. Retrieved 11 April 2023. "Djelem Djelem [Romani] song lyrics". Dunav.org. Archived from the original on 2012-11-27. (archived 2 April 2007). Patrin Web Journal - Gelem, Gelem: Roma Anthem Romani nationalism Kosovo Roma Oral History Project - Roma Culture: Music