Cristiano Ronaldo dos Santos Aveiro GOIH ComM (Portuguese pronunciation: [kɾiʃˈtjɐnu ʁɔˈnaldu]; born 5 February 1985) is a Portuguese professional footballer who plays as a forward for and captains both Saudi Pro League club Al Nassr and the Portugal national team. Widely regarded as one of the greatest players of all time, Ronaldo has won five Ballon d'Or awards, a record three UEFA Men's Player of the Year Awards, and four European Golden Shoes, the most by a European player. He has won 33 trophies in his career, including seven league titles, five UEFA Champions Leagues, the UEFA European Championship and the UEFA Nations League. Ronaldo holds the records for most appearances (183), goals (140) and assists (42) in the Champions League, goals in the European Championship (14), international goals (128) and international appearances (205). He is one of the few players to have made over 1,200 professional career appearances, the most by an outfield player, and has scored over 850 official senior career goals for club and country, making him the top goalscorer of all time. Ronaldo began his senior career with Sporting CP, before signing with Manchester United in 2003, winning the FA Cup in his first season. He would also go on to win three consecutive Premier League titles, the Champions League and the FIFA Club World Cup; at age 23, he won his first Ballon d'Or. Ronaldo was the subject of the then-most expensive association football transfer when he signed for Real Madrid in 2009 in a transfer worth €94 million (£80 million). He became a key contributor and formed an attacking trio with Karim Benzema and Gareth Bale which was integral to the team winning four Champions Leagues from 2014 to 2018, including La Décima. During this period, he won back-to-back Ballons d'Or in 2013 and 2014, and again in 2016 and 2017, and was runner-up three times behind Lionel Messi, his perceived career rival. He also became the club's all-time top goalscorer and the all-time top scorer in the Champions League, and finished as the competition's top scorer for six consecutive seasons between 2012 and 2018. With Real, Ronaldo won four Champions Leagues, two La Liga titles, two Copas del Rey, two UEFA Super Cups and three Club World Cups. In 2018, he signed for Juventus in a transfer worth an initial €100 million (£88 million), the most expensive transfer for an Italian club and for a player over 30 years old. He won two Serie A titles, two Supercoppa Italiana trophies and a Coppa Italia, became the inaugural Serie A Most Valuable Player and became the first footballer to finish as top scorer in the English, Spanish and Italian leagues. He returned to Manchester United in 2021, finishing his only full season as the club's top scorer, before his contract was terminated in 2022. In 2023, he signed for Al Nassr. Ronaldo made his international debut for Portugal in 2003 at the age of 18 and has since earned more than 200 caps, making him both the country and history's most-capped player of all time, recognised by the Guinness World Records. With more than 100 goals at international level, he is also the sports all-time top goalscorer. Ronaldo has played in and scored at eleven major tournaments; he scored his first international goal at Euro 2004, where he helped Portugal reach the final. He assumed captaincy of the national team in July 2008. In 2015, Ronaldo was named the best Portuguese player of all time by the Portuguese Football Federation. The following year, he led Portugal to their first major tournament title at Euro 2016, and received the Silver Boot as the second-highest goalscorer of the tournament. This achievement would see him receive his fourth Ballon d'Or. He also led them to victory in the inaugural UEFA Nations League in 2019, receiving the top scorer award in the finals, and later received the Golden Boot as top scorer of Euro 2020. One of the world's most marketable and famous athletes, Ronaldo was ranked the world's highest-paid athlete by Forbes in 2016, 2017, and 2023, and the world's most famous athlete by ESPN from 2016 to 2019. Time included him on their list of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2014. He is the first footballer and the third sportsman to earn US$1 billion in his career. Cristiano Ronaldo dos Santos Aveiro was born on 5 February 1985 in the São Pedro parish of Funchal, the capital of the Portuguese island of Madeira, and grew up in the nearby parish of Santo António. He is the fourth and youngest child of Maria Dolores dos Santos Viveiros da Aveiro, who worked as a cook in the hospitality industry and a cleaning woman, and José Dinis Aveiro, a municipal gardener at the Junta de Freguesia of Santo António and part-time kit man for football club Andorinha. His great-grandmother on his father's side, Isabel da Piedade, an African woman, was born in the island of São Vicente, in what was then Portuguese Cape Verde, and moved to Madeira Island at 16. He has one older brother, Hugo, and two older sisters, Elma and Liliana Cátia "Katia". He was named after actor and U.S. President Ronald Reagan, whom his father was a fan of. His mother revealed that she wanted to abort him due to poverty, his father's alcoholism, and having too many children already, but her doctor refused to perform the procedure, as abortions were illegal in Portugal at that time. Ronaldo grew up in an impoverished Roman Catholic home, sharing a room with all his siblings. As a child, Ronaldo played for Andorinha from 1992 to 1995, where his father was the kit man, and later spent two years with Nacional. In 1997, aged 12, he went on a three-day trial with Sporting CP, who signed him for a fee of £1,500. He subsequently moved from Madeira to Lisbon to join Sporting CP's youth system. By age 14, while struggling with his school duties and responsibilities in Escola EB2 de Telheiras, his school in the Telheiras area of Lisbon, Ronaldo believed he had the ability to play semi-professionally and agreed with his mother and his tutor at Sporting CP, Leonel Pontes, to cease his education to focus entirely on football. With a troubled life as a student and living in Lisbon area away from his Madeiran family, he did not complete schooling beyond the 6th grade. While popular with other students at school, he had been expelled after throwing a chair at his teacher, who he said had "disrespected" him. One year later, he was diagnosed with tachycardia, a condition that could have forced him to give up playing football. Ronaldo underwent heart surgery where a laser was used to cauterise multiple cardiac pathways into one, altering his resting heart rate. He was discharged from the hospital hours after the procedure and resumed training a few days later. In 2021, Cristiano Ronaldo's mother, Dolores Aveiro, stated in an interview for Sporting CP's official television channel (Sporting TV) that her son would be a bricklayer if he hadn't become a professional football player. At age 16, Ronaldo was promoted from Sporting's youth team by first-team manager László Bölöni, who was impressed with his dribbling. He subsequently became the first player to play for the club's under-16, under-17 and under-18 teams, the B team and the first team, all within a single season. On 14 August 2002, Cristiano Ronaldo, then 17, played his first official match for a Sporting CP's senior team, in a UEFA Champions League qualifying round at José Alvalade Stadium against Inter Milan. He came on in the 58th minute in place of Toñito. As far as the Portuguese football league system's competitions is concerned, Sporting CP B was the 1st team in his senior career playing domestically, where he debuted in a 2–1 away loss against Sport Clube Lusitânia on 1 September 2002, in a game for the Segunda Divisão B championship played in the Azores. On 29 September 2002, Ronaldo made his debut in the Primeira Liga, playing for Sporting CP's main team against Braga, and on 7 October, he scored two goals against Moreirense in their 3–0 win. Over the course of the 2002–03 season, his representatives suggested the player to Liverpool manager Gérard Houllier and Barcelona president Joan Laporta. Manager Arsène Wenger, who was interested in signing Ronaldo, met with him at Arsenal's stadium in November to discuss a possible transfer. Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson was determined to acquire Ronaldo on a permanent move urgently, after Sporting defeated United 3–1 at the inauguration of the Estádio José Alvalade on 6 August 2003. Initially, United had planned to sign Ronaldo and loan him back to Sporting for a year. Having been impressed by him, the United players urged Ferguson to sign him. After the game, Ferguson agreed to pay Sporting £12.24 million for what he considered to be "one of the most exciting young players" he had ever seen. A decade after his departure from the club, in 2013, Sporting honoured Ronaldo by selecting him to become their 100,000th member. "There have been a few players described as 'the new George Best' over the years, but this is the first time it's been a compliment to me." —Former Manchester United player George Best hails the 18-year-old Cristiano Ronaldo in 2003. Ronaldo's move to Manchester United was completed on 12 August 2003, too late for the 2003 FA Community Shield but in time for their game against Bolton Wanderers on the opening day of the 2003–04 season, and made him the first Portuguese player to sign for the club. His transfer fee made him, at the time, the most expensive teenager in English football history. Although he requested the number 28, his number at Sporting, he received the squad number 7 shirt, which had previously been worn by such United players as George Best, Eric Cantona and David Beckham. Wearing the number 7 became an extra source of motivation for Ronaldo. A key element in his development during his time in England proved to be Ferguson, of whom he later said: "He's been my father in sport, one of the most important and influential factors in my career." Ronaldo made his debut as a substitute in a 4–0 home win over Bolton Wanderers in the Premier League on 16 August 2003, and received a standing ovation when he came on for Nicky Butt. His performance earned praise from Best, who hailed it as "undoubtedly the most exciting debut" he had ever seen. Ronaldo scored his first goal for Manchester United with a free-kick in a 3–0 win over Portsmouth on 1 November. Three more league goals followed in the second half of the campaign, the last of which came against Aston Villa on the final day of the season, a match in which he also received the first red card of his career. Ronaldo ended his first season in English football by scoring the opening goal in United's 3–0 win over Millwall in the 2004 FA Cup Final, earning his first trophy. BBC pundit Alan Hansen described him as the star of the final. The British press had been critical of Ronaldo during the season for his "elaborate" step-overs in trying to beat opponents, but teammate Gary Neville said he was "not a show pony, but the real thing", and predicted he would become a world-class player. "He has got the tricks and party pieces, we know that, but they're not much good unless there is something at the end of it all. We still have to remember, of course, that the lad is only 19 years of age. Considering that, you have to say he has got massive talent. His feet are mesmerising at times, and if he can couple that with some consistently good crossing, the future looks frightening." —Former BBC pundit Alan Hansen commenting on Ronaldo after his first season. Ronaldo scored United's 1,000th Premier League goal on 29 October 2004, their only goal in a 4–1 loss to Middlesbrough. A few weeks later, he signed a new contract with the club that extended his previous deal by two years to 2010. At the start of 2005, Ronaldo played two of his best matches of the 2004–05 season, producing a goal and an assist against Aston Villa and scoring twice against rivals Arsenal. He played the full 120 minutes of the 2005 FA Cup Final against Arsenal, which ended in a goalless draw; although Ronaldo scored his attempt in the penalty shoot-out, United lost 5–4. Ronaldo won his second trophy in English football, the Football League Cup, after scoring the third goal in United's 4–0 final win over Wigan Athletic. During his third season in England, Ronaldo was involved in several incidents. He had a one-match ban imposed on him by UEFA for a "one-fingered gesture" towards Benfica fans, and was sent off in the Manchester derby (a 3–1 defeat) for kicking Manchester City's former United player Andy Cole. Ronaldo clashed with a teammate, striker Ruud van Nistelrooy, who took offence at the winger's showboating style of play. Following the 2006 FIFA World Cup, in which he was involved in an incident where club teammate Wayne Rooney was sent off, Ronaldo publicly asked for a transfer, lamenting the lack of support he felt he had received from the club over the incident. United denied the possibility of him leaving the club. Although his World Cup altercation with Rooney resulted in Ronaldo being booed throughout the 2006–07 season, it proved to be his break-out year, as he broke the 20-goal barrier for the first time and won his first Premier League title. An important factor in this success was his one-to-one training by first-team coach René Meulensteen, who taught him to make himself more unpredictable, improve his teamwork, call for the ball and capitalise on goalscoring opportunities rather than waiting for the chance to score the aesthetically pleasing goals for which he was already known. He scored three consecutive braces at the end of December, against Aston Villa (a win that put United on top of the league), Wigan and Reading. Ronaldo was named the Premier League Player of the Month in November and December, becoming only the third player to receive consecutive honours. At the quarter-final stage of the 2006–07 UEFA Champions League, Ronaldo scored his first goals in his 30th match in the competition, scoring twice in a 7–1 win over Roma. He subsequently scored four minutes into the first semi-final leg against Milan, which ended in a 3–2 win, but was marked out of the second leg as United lost 3–0 at the San Siro. He also helped United reach the 2007 FA Cup Final, but the final against Chelsea ended in a 1–0 defeat. Ronaldo scored the only goal in the Manchester derby on 5 May (his 50th goal for the club), as United won their first league title in four years. As a result of his performances, he amassed a host of personal awards for the season. He won the Professional Footballers' Association's Player's Player, Fans' Player and Young Player of the Year awards, as well as the Football Writers' Association's Footballer of the Year award, becoming the first player to win all four main PFA and FWA honours. His wages were raised to £120,000 a week as part of a five-year contract extension. Ronaldo was named runner-up to Kaká for the 2007 Ballon d'Or, and came third, behind Kaká and Lionel Messi, in the running for the 2007 FIFA World Player of the Year award. Ronaldo scored his first hat-trick for United in a 6–0 win against Newcastle United on 12 January 2008, which put United top of the league table. On 19 March, he captained United for the first time in a home win over Bolton and scored both goals in a 2–0 win. His second goal was his 33rd of the campaign, surpassing George Best's total of 32 goals in the 1967–68 season, setting the club's new single-season record by a midfielder. His 31 league goals earned him the Premier League Golden Boot, as well as the European Golden Shoe, which made him the first winger to win the latter award. He additionally received the PFA Players' Player of the Year and FWA Footballer of the Year awards for the second consecutive season. In the knockout stage of the Champions League, Ronaldo scored the decisive goal against Lyon to help United advance to the quarter-finals 2–1 on aggregate; while playing as a striker, he scored with a header in the 3–0 aggregate win over Roma. United reached the final against Chelsea in Moscow on 21 May, where, despite his opening goal being negated by an equaliser and his penalty kick being saved in the shoot-out, United emerged victorious 1–1, winning the penalties 6–5. As the Champions League top scorer, Ronaldo was named the UEFA Club Footballer of the Year. Ronaldo scored a total of 42 goals in all competitions during the 2007–08 season, his most prolific campaign during his time in England. He missed three matches after headbutting a Portsmouth player at the start of the season, an experience he said taught him not to let opponents provoke him. As rumours circulated of Ronaldo's interest in moving to Real Madrid, United filed a tampering complaint with governing body FIFA over Madrid's alleged pursuit of their player, but they declined to take action. FIFA president Sepp Blatter asserted that the player should be allowed to leave his club, describing the situation as "modern slavery". Despite Ronaldo publicly agreeing with Blatter, he remained at United for another year. Ahead of the 2008–09 season, on 7 July, Ronaldo underwent ankle surgery, which kept him out of action for 10 weeks. Following his return, he scored his 100th goal in all competitions for United with the first of two free kicks in a 5–0 win against Stoke City on 15 November, which meant he had now scored against all 19 opposition teams in the Premier League at the time. At the close of 2008, Ronaldo helped United win the 2008 FIFA Club World Cup in Japan, assisting the final-winning goal against Liga de Quito and winning the Silver Ball in the process. With his 2008 Ballon d'Or and 2008 FIFA World Player of the Year, Ronaldo became United's first Ballon d'Or winner since Best in 1968, and the first Premier League player to be named the FIFA World Player of the Year. His match-winning goal in the second leg against Porto, a 40-yard strike, earned him the inaugural FIFA Puskás Award, presented by FIFA in recognition of the best goal of the year; he later called it the best goal he had ever scored. United advanced to the final in Rome, where he made little impact in United's 2–0 defeat to Barcelona. Ronaldo ended his time in England with nine trophies, as United claimed their third successive league title and a Football League Cup. He finished the campaign with 26 goals in all competitions, 16 goals fewer than the previous season, in four more appearances. His final goal for United came on 10 May 2009 with a free kick in the Manchester derby at Old Trafford. Ahead of the 2009–10 season, Ronaldo joined Real Madrid for a world record transfer fee at the time of £80 million (€94 million). His contract, which ran until 2015, was worth €11 million per year and contained a €1 billion buy-out clause. At least 80,000 fans attended his presentation at the Santiago Bernabéu, surpassing the 25-year record of 75,000 fans who had welcomed Diego Maradona at Napoli. Since club captain Raúl already wore the number 7 (the number Ronaldo wore at United), Ronaldo received the number 9 shirt, which was presented to him by former Madrid player Alfredo Di Stéfano. Ronaldo made his La Liga debut against Deportivo La Coruña on 29 August, scoring a penalty in a 3–2 home win. He scored in each of his first four league games, the first Madrid player to do so. His first Champions League goals for the club followed with two free kicks in the first group match against Zürich. His strong start to the season was interrupted when he suffered an ankle injury in October while on international duty, which kept him sidelined for seven weeks. A week after his return, he received his first red card in Spain in a match against Almería. Midway through the season, Ronaldo finished second in the 2009 Ballon d'Or and the 2009 FIFA World Player of the Year awards, behind Messi. He finished the season with 33 goals in all competitions, including a hat-trick in a 4–1 win against Mallorca on 5 May 2010, his first in La Liga, and became Real Madrid's highest goalscorer that season. Although Ronaldo helped amass a club record 96 points in the league, he did not win a trophy in his first season. Following Raúl's departure, Ronaldo was given the number 7 shirt for Madrid before the 2010–11 season. His subsequent return to his Ballon d'Or-winning form was epitomised when, for the first time in his career, he scored four goals in a single match during a 6–1 rout against Racing Santander on 23 October. Ronaldo subsequently scored further hat-tricks against Athletic Bilbao, Levante, Villarreal and Málaga. Despite his performances, he did not make the top three in the inaugural 2010 FIFA Ballon d'Or. During a historic series of four Clásicos against rivals Barcelona in April 2011, Ronaldo scored twice to equal his personal record of 42 goals in all competitions. Though he failed to score in either leg of the Champions League semi-finals as Madrid were eliminated, he equalised from the penalty spot in the return league game and scored the match-winning goal in the 103rd minute of the 2011 Copa del Rey Final, winning his first trophy in Spain. His two goals in the last match of the season against Almería made him the first player in La Liga to score 40 goals. In addition to the Pichichi Trophy, Ronaldo won the European Golden Shoe for a second time, becoming the first player to win the award in different leagues. During the following season, Ronaldo achieved a new personal best of 60 goals in all competitions. He finished as runner-up to Messi for the 2011 FIFA Ballon d'Or, after scoring hat-tricks against Real Zaragoza, Rayo Vallecano, Málaga, Osasuna and Sevilla, the last of which put Madrid on top of the league by the season's midway point. Ronaldo found greater team success in the league, helping Madrid win their first league title in four years with a record 100 points. Following a hat-trick against Levante as Madrid further increased their lead over Barcelona, he scored his 100th league goal for Madrid in a 5–1 win over Real Sociedad on 24 March 2012, a milestone he reached in just 92 matches across three seasons, breaking the previous club record held by Ferenc Puskás. Another hat-trick in the Madrid derby against Atlético Madrid brought his total to 40 league goals, equalling his record of the previous season. His final league goal of the season, against Mallorca, took his total to 46 goals, four short of the new record set by Messi, though he became the first player to score against all 19 opposition teams in a single La Liga season. Ronaldo began the 2012–13 season by lifting the 2012 Supercopa de España, his third trophy in Spain. With a goal in each leg, he helped Madrid win the Spanish Super Cup on away goals following a 4–4 aggregate draw against Barcelona. Although Ronaldo publicly commented that he was unhappy with a "professional issue" within the club, prompted by his refusal to celebrate his 150th goal for Madrid, his goalscoring rate did not suffer. After netting a hat-trick, including two penalties, against Deportivo, he scored his first hat-trick in the Champions League in a 4–1 win over Ajax. Four days later, he became the first player to score in six successive Clásicos when he hit a brace in a 2–2 draw at Camp Nou. His performances again saw Ronaldo voted second in the running for the 2012 FIFA Ballon d'Or, behind four-time winner Messi. Following the 2012–13 winter break, Ronaldo captained Madrid for the first time in an official match, scoring twice to lift 10-man Madrid to a 4–3 win over Sociedad on 6 January. He subsequently became the first non-Spanish player in 60 years to captain Madrid in El Clasico on 30 January, a match which also marked his 500th club appearance. Three days prior, he had scored his 300th club goal as part of a perfect hat-trick against Getafe. He scored his 200th goal for Madrid on 8 May in a 6–2 win against Málaga, reaching the landmark in 197 games. He helped Madrid reach the 2013 Copa del Rey Final by scoring twice in El Clásico, which marked the sixth successive match at Camp Nou in which he had scored, a club record. In the final, he headed the opening goal of an eventual 2–1 extra time defeat to Atlético, but was shown a red card for violent conduct. In the first knockout round of the Champions League, Ronaldo faced his former club Manchester United for the first time. After scoring the equaliser in a 1–1 draw at home, he scored the winning goal in a 2–1 win on his first return to Old Trafford. He did not celebrate scoring against his former club as a mark of respect. After scoring three goals against Galatasaray in the quarters, he scored Madrid's only goal in the 4–1 away defeat to Borussia Dortmund in the semi-finals and Real were eliminated at the semi-final stage for the third consecutive year despite a 2–0 win in the second leg. At the start of the 2013–14 season, Ronaldo signed a new contract that extended his stay by three years to 2018, with a salary of €17 million net, making him briefly the highest-paid player in football. He was joined at the club by winger Gareth Bale, whose world record transfer fee of €100 million surpassed the fee Madrid had paid for Ronaldo four years prior. Together with striker Karim Benzema, they formed an attacking trio popularly dubbed "BBC", an acronym of Bale, Benzema and Cristiano, and a play on the name of the British public service broadcaster, the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC). By late November, Ronaldo had scored 32 goals from 22 matches for both club and country, including hat-tricks against Galatasaray, Sevilla, Real Sociedad, Northern Ireland, and Sweden. He ended 2013 with 69 goals in 59 appearances, his highest year-end goal tally. He received the 2013 FIFA Ballon d'Or, an amalgamation of the Ballon d'Or and the FIFA World Player of the Year award, for the first time in his career. Concurrently with his individual achievements, Ronaldo enjoyed his greatest team success in Spain to date, as he helped Madrid win La Décima, their tenth European Cup. His goal in a 3–0 home win over Dortmund (his 100th Champions League match) took his total for the season to 14 goals, equalling the record Messi had set two years before. After hitting a brace in a 4–0 defeat of Bayern Munich at the Allianz Arena, he scored from the penalty spot in the 120th minute of the 4–1 final win over Atlético, becoming the first player to score in two European Cup finals for two different winning teams. His overall performance in the final was subdued as a result of patellar tendinitis and related hamstring problems, which had plagued him in the last months of the campaign. Ronaldo played the final against medical advice, later commenting: "In your life you do not win without sacrifices and you must take risks". As the competition's top goalscorer for the third time, with a record 17 goals, he was named the UEFA Best Player in Europe. In the Copa del Rey, Ronaldo helped Madrid reach the final by scoring two penalties against Atlético at the Vicente Calderón, the first of which meant he had now scored in every single minute of a 90-minute football match. His continued issues with his knee and thigh caused him to miss the final, where Madrid defeated Barcelona 2–1 to claim the trophy. Ronaldo scored 31 goals in 30 league games, which earned him the Pichichi and the European Golden Shoe, receiving the latter award jointly with Liverpool striker Luis Suárez. Among his haul was his 400th career goal, in 653 appearances for club and country, which came with a brace against Celta Vigo on 6 January; he dedicated his goals to compatriot Eusébio, who had died two days before. A last-minute, back-heeled volley scored against Valencia on 4 May (his 50th goal in all competitions) was recognised as the best goal of the season by the Liga Nacional de Fútbol Profesional, which additionally named Ronaldo the Best Player in La Liga. During the 2014–15 season, Ronaldo set a new personal best of 61 goals, starting with both goals in Madrid's 2–0 win over Sevilla in the UEFA Super Cup. He subsequently achieved his best-ever goalscoring start to a league campaign, with 15 goals in the first eight rounds. His record 23rd La Liga hat-trick, scored against Celta Vigo on 6 December, made him the fastest player to reach 200 goals in La Liga, reaching the milestone in 178th matches. After winning the 2014 FIFA Club World Cup, Ronaldo received the 2014 Ballon d'Or, joining Johan Cruyff, Michel Platini and Marco van Basten as a three-time recipient. Madrid finished in second place in La Liga and exited at the semi-final stage in the Champions League. In the latter competition, Ronaldo extended his run of scoring away to a record 12 matches with his strike in a 2–0 win against Schalke 04. He scored both of his side's goals in the semi-finals against Juventus, where Madrid were eliminated 3–2 on aggregate. With 10 goals, he finished as top scorer for a third consecutive season, alongside Messi and Neymar. On 5 April, he scored five goals in a game for the first time in his career, including an eight-minute hat-trick, in a 9–1 rout of Granada. His 300th goal for his club followed three days later in a 2–0 win against Rayo Vallecano. Subsequent hat-tricks against Sevilla, Espanyol and Getafe took his number of hat-tricks for Madrid to 31, surpassing Di Stéfano's club record of 28. He finished the season with 48 goals, winning a second consecutive Pichichi and the European Golden Shoe for a record fourth time. At the start of his seventh season at Madrid, the 2015–16 campaign, Ronaldo became the club's all-time top scorer, first in the league and then in all competitions. His five-goal haul in a 6–0 away win over Espanyol on 12 September took his tally in La Liga to 230 goals in 203 games, surpassing the club's previous record holder, Raúl. A month later, on 17 October, he again surpassed Raúl when he scored the second goal in a 3–0 defeat of Levante at the Bernabéu to take his overall total for the club to 324 goals. Ronaldo also became the all-time top scorer in the Champions League with a hat-trick in the first group match against Shakhtar Donetsk, having finished the previous season level with Messi on 77 goals. Two goals against Malmö FF in a 2–0 away win on 30 September saw him reach the milestone of 500 career goals for club and country. He subsequently became the first player to score double figures in the competition's group stage, setting the record at 11 goals, including another four-goal haul against Malmö. Ronaldo's four goals in a 7–1 home win over Celta de Vigo on 5 March 2016 took his total to 252 goals in La Liga, becoming the competition's second-highest scorer in history behind Messi. He scored a hat-trick against VfL Wolfsburg to send his club into the Champions League semi-finals. The treble took his tally in the competition to 16 goals, making him the top scorer for the fourth consecutive season and the fifth overall. Suffering apparent fitness issues, Ronaldo gave a poorly-received performance in the final against Atlético, in a repeat of the 2014 final, though his penalty in the subsequent shoot-out secured Madrid's 11th victory. For the sixth successive year, he ended the season having scored over 50 goals across all competitions. For his efforts during the season, he received the UEFA Best Player in Europe Award for a second time. Ronaldo missed Madrid's first three matches of the 2016–17 season, including the 2016 UEFA Super Cup against Sevilla, as he continued to rehabilitate the knee injury he suffered against France in the Euro 2016 final. On 15 September, he did not celebrate his late free kick equaliser against Sporting CP in the Champions League, with Ronaldo stating post match that "they made me who I am". On 7 November, his contract was updated for the second time and extended by three years to 2021. On 19 November, he scored a hat-trick in a 3–0 away win against Atlético, making him the all-time top scorer in the Madrid derby with 18 goals. On 15 December, Ronaldo scored his 500th club career goal in the 2–0 win over Club América in the semi-finals of the 2016 FIFA Club World Cup. He then scored a hat-trick in the 4–2 win over Japanese club Kashima Antlers in the final. Ronaldo finished the tournament as top scorer with four goals and was also named player of the tournament. He won the 2016 Ballon d'Or, his fourth, and the inaugural 2016 The Best FIFA Men's Player, a revival of the former FIFA World Player of the Year, largely owing to his success with Portugal in winning Euro 2016. In the 2016–17 UEFA Champions League quarter-finals against Bayern in April, Ronaldo scored both goals in a 2–1 away win which saw him make history by becoming the first player to reach 100 goals in UEFA club competition. In the second leg of the quarter-finals, Ronaldo scored a 'perfect' hat-trick and reached his 100th Champions League goal, becoming the first player to do so as Madrid again defeated Bayern 4–2 after extra-time. On 2 May, Ronaldo scored another hat-trick as Madrid defeated Atlético 3–0 in the Champions League semi-final first leg. On 17 May, Ronaldo overtook Jimmy Greaves as the all-time top scorer in the top five European leagues, scoring twice against Celta de Vigo. He finished the season with 42 goals in all competitions as he helped Madrid to win their first La Liga title since 2012. In the Champions League Final, Ronaldo scored two goals in a 4–1 victory over Juventus to take him to 12 goals for the season, making him the competition's top goalscorer for the fifth straight season (sixth overall), as well as the first player to score in three finals in the Champions League era; the second goal was the 600th of his senior career. Madrid also became the first team to win back-to-back finals in the Champions League era. At the start of the 2017–18 season, Ronaldo scored Madrid's second goal in the 80th minute of a 3–1 win over Barcelona in the first leg of the 2017 Supercopa de España at Camp Nou; however, he was sent off two minutes later and missed the second leg. On 23 October, his performances throughout 2017 saw him awarded The Best FIFA Men's Player award for the second consecutive year. On 6 December, he became the first player to score in all six Champions League group stage matches with a curling strike at home to Dortmund. A day later, Ronaldo won the 2017 Ballon d'Or, receiving his fifth-time award on the Eiffel Tower in Paris. On 16 December, he scored a free kick winner, as Madrid won their second Club World Cup in a row by beating Grêmio in the final. On 3 March 2018, he scored two goals in a 3–1 home win over Getafe, his first being his 300th La Liga goal in his 286th appearance, making him the fastest player to reach this landmark and only the second player to do so after Messi. On 18 March, he reached his 50th career hat-trick, scoring four goals in a 6–3 win against Girona. On 3 April, Ronaldo scored the first two goals in a 3–0 away win against Juventus in the quarter-finals of the 2017–18 UEFA Champions League, with his second goal being an acrobatic bicycle kick. Described as a "PlayStation goal" by Juventus defender Andrea Barzagli, with Ronaldo's foot approximately 7 ft 7 in (2.31 m) off the ground, it garnered him a standing ovation from the opposing fans in the stadium as well as a plethora of plaudits from peers, pundits and coaches. On 11 April, he scored in the second leg at home to Juventus, a 98th-minute injury time penalty in a 3–1 defeat, meaning Madrid advanced 4–3 on aggregate. It was his tenth goal against Juventus, a Champions League record against a single club. In the final on 26 May, Madrid defeated Liverpool 3–1, winning Ronaldo his fifth Champions League title, the first player to do so. He finished as the top scorer of the tournament for the sixth consecutive season with 15 goals. After the final, Ronaldo referred to his time with Madrid in the past tense, sparking speculation that he could leave the club. Despite months of negotiation to sign a new Real Madrid contract, on 10 July 2018, Ronaldo signed a four-year contract with Italian club Juventus after completing a €100 million transfer, which included an additional €12 million in other fees and solidarity contributions to Ronaldo's youth clubs. The transfer was the highest ever for a player over 30 years old, and the highest paid by an Italian club. Upon signing, Ronaldo cited his need for a new challenge as his rationale for departing Madrid, but later attributed the transfer to the lack of support he felt was shown by club president Florentino Pérez. On 18 August, Ronaldo made his debut in a 3–2 away win against Chievo Verona. On 16 September, Ronaldo scored his first two goals for Juventus in his fourth appearance in a 2–1 home win over Sassuolo in Serie A; his second was the 400th league goal of his career. On 19 September, in his first Champions League match for Juventus, against Valencia, he was sent off in the 29th minute for "violent conduct", his first red card in 154 tournament appearances. Ronaldo became the first player in history to win 100 Champions League matches, setting up Mario Mandžukić's winner in a 1–0 home win over Valencia, which sealed Juventus's passage to the knock-out stages of the competition. In December, he scored his tenth league goal of the season, from the penalty spot, the third in a 3–0 away win over Fiorentina. After placing second in both the UEFA Men's Player of the Year and The Best FIFA Men's Player for the first time in three years, behind Luka Modrić, Ronaldo performances in 2018 also saw him voted runner-up for the 2018 Ballon d'Or, finishing once again behind his former teammate. Ronaldo won his first trophy with the club on 16 January 2019, the 2018 Supercoppa Italiana, after he scored the only goal from a header against AC Milan. On 10 February, Ronaldo scored in a 3–0 win over Sassuolo, the ninth consecutive away game in which he had scored in the league, equalling Giuseppe Signori's single season Serie A record of most consecutive away games with at least one goal. On 12 March, Ronaldo scored a hat-trick in a 3–0 home win against Atlético in the second leg of the Champions League round of 16, helping Juventus overcome a two-goal deficit to reach the quarter-finals. The following month, he scored his 125th goal in the competition, opening the scoring in a 1–1 away draw in the quarter-final first leg against Ajax on 10 April. In the second leg in Turin on 16 April, he scored the opening goal, but Juventus eventually lost the match 2–1 and were eliminated from the competition. On 20 April, Ronaldo played in the scudetto clinching game against Fiorentina, as Juventus won their eighth successive title after a 2–1 home win, thereby becoming the first player to win league titles in England, Spain and Italy. On 27 April, he scored his 600th club goal, the equaliser in a 1–1 away draw against Derby d'Italia rivals Inter Milan. Ending his first Serie A campaign with 21 goals and 8 assists, Ronaldo won the inaugural Serie A award for Most Valuable Player. Ronaldo scored his first goal of the 2019–20 season in a 4–3 home league win over Napoli on 31 August 2019. On 23 September, he came in 3rd place for the Best FIFA Men's Player Award. On 1 October, he reached several milestones in Juventus's 3–0 Champions League group stage win over Bayer Leverkusen: he scored in a 14th consecutive season, equalling Raúl and Messi's record; he broke Iker Casillas' record for most Champions League wins of all time, and equalled Raúl's record of scoring against 33 different opponents. On 6 November in a 2–1 away win against Lokomotiv Moscow, he equalled Paolo Maldini as the second-most capped player in UEFA club competitions with 174 appearances. On 18 December, Ronaldo leapt to a height of 8 ft 5 in (2.57 m), higher than the crossbar, to head the winning goal in a 2–1 away win against Sampdoria. He scored his first Serie A hat-trick on 6 January 2020, in a 4–0 home win against Cagliari. His 56th career hat-trick, he became only the second player after Alexis Sánchez to score hat-tricks in the Premier League, La Liga and Serie A. On 2 February, he scored twice from the penalty spot in a 3–0 home win over Fiorentina, equalling David Trezeguet's club record of scoring in nine consecutive league games, and broke the record six days later by scoring in his tenth consecutive league game, a 2–1 away defeat to Hellas Verona. On 22 February, Ronaldo scored for a record-equalling 11th consecutive league game, alongside Gabriel Batistuta and Fabio Quagliarella, in what was his 1,000th senior professional game, a 2–1 away win against SPAL. On 22 June, he scored a penalty in a 2–0 away win over Bologna, overtaking Rui Costa to become the highest scoring Portuguese player in Serie A history. On 4 July, he scored his 25th league goal from a free kick in a 4–1 home win over rivals Torino, becoming the first Juventus player to achieve this milestone since Omar Sívori in 1961; the goal was also his first from a free kick with the club after 43 attempts. On 20 July, Ronaldo scored twice in a 2–1 home win over Lazio; his first goal was his 50th in Serie A. He became the second-fastest player to reach this landmark, after Gunnar Nordahl, and the first player in history to reach 50 goals in the Premier League, La Liga and Serie A, and becoming the second player after Edin Džeko to score 50 goals in three of Europe's top five major leagues. With his brace, he also reached 30 league goals for the season, becoming just the third player (after Felice Borel in 1934 and John Hansen in 1952) in Juventus's history to reach that milestone in a season. Moreover, he became the oldest player, at the age of 35 years and 166 days, to score over 30 goals in one of the five top European leagues since Ronnie Rooke with Arsenal in 1948. On 26 July, Ronaldo scored the opening goal in a 2–0 home win over Sampdoria as Juventus were crowned Serie A champions for a ninth consecutive time. He finished his second league campaign with 31 goals, making him the second-highest goalscorer in the league behind only European Golden Shoe winner Ciro Immobile, with 36 goals. On 7 August, Ronaldo scored a brace in a 2–1 home win against Lyon in the second leg of the Champions League round of 16, which saw him finish the season with 37 goals in all competitions; the tally allowed him to break Borel's club record of 36 goals in a single season. Despite the win, the tie finished 2–2 on aggregate and Juventus were eliminated from the competition on the away goals rule. On 20 September 2020, Ronaldo scored in Juventus's opening league match of the season, a 3–0 home win over Sampdoria. On 1 November, having taken nearly three weeks to recover from COVID-19, he returned to action against Spezia; he came off the bench in the second half and scored within the first three minutes, before scoring a second goal from the penalty spot in an eventual 4–1 away win. On 2 December, he scored a goal against Dynamo Kyiv in a Champions League group stage match, his 750th senior career goal. Ronaldo played his 100th match in all competitions for Juventus on 13 December, scoring two penalties in a 3–1 away win over Genoa in the league to bring his goal tally to 79. On 20 January 2021, Juventus won the 2020 Supercoppa Italiana after a 2–0 win against Napoli, with Ronaldo scoring the opening goal. On 2 March, he scored a goal in a 3–0 win over Spezia in his 600th league match, to become the first player to score at least 20 goals in 12 consecutive seasons in the top five leagues of Europe. On 14 March, he scored his 57th career hat-trick in a 3–1 away win over Cagliari. On 12 May, Ronaldo scored a goal in a 3–1 away win over Sassuolo to reach his 100th goal for Juventus in all competitions on his 131st appearance, becoming the fastest Juventus player to achieve the feat. With Juventus's victory in the 2021 Coppa Italia Final on 19 May, Ronaldo became the first player in history to win every major domestic trophy in England, Spain and Italy. Ronaldo ended the season with 29 league goals, winning the Capocannoniere award for highest goalscorer and becoming the first footballer to finish as top scorer in the English, Spanish and Italian leagues. On 22 August, Ronaldo started the first game of the new season on the bench, coming on as a substitute for Álvaro Morata in a 2–2 draw against Udinese, scoring a goal that was ruled out by VAR. Though manager Massimiliano Allegri confirmed it was his decision due to Ronaldo's fitness, it came amid reports Ronaldo would depart the club before the closure of the transfer window, and Ronaldo would tell Allegri he had "no intention" of remaining a Juventus player. On 26 August, Ronaldo and his agent Jorge Mendes reached a verbal agreement with Manchester City over personal terms, but the club pulled out of the deal the following day due to the overall cost of the transfer. On the same day, it was confirmed that City's rivals Manchester United, Ronaldo's former club, were in advanced talks to sign him, while former manager Alex Ferguson and several ex-teammates had been in contact to persuade him to re-sign for United. On 27 August 2021, Manchester United announced they had reached an agreement with Juventus to re-sign Ronaldo, subject to agreement of personal terms, visa and medical. The transfer was for an initial £12.85 million, with a two-year contract plus an optional year, and was confirmed on 31 August. Ronaldo was given the number 7 shirt after Edinson Cavani agreed to switch to 21. The first 24 hours of Ronaldo's shirt sales was reported to have broken the all-time record following a transfer, overtaking Messi after his move to Paris Saint-Germain. On 11 September, Ronaldo made his second debut at Old Trafford, scoring the opening two goals in a 4–1 league victory against Newcastle United. On 29 September, he scored a last-minute winner in United's 2–1 victory at home to Villarreal in the Champions League, and overtook Iker Casillas as the player with the most appearances in the competition. In the next Champions League fixture on 20 October, Ronaldo again scored a last minute winner, helping United overturn a two-goal deficit in a 3–2 home victory against Atalanta, and scored both goals, including a last minute equaliser, in the reverse fixture against Atalanta on 2 November. On 23 November, Ronaldo became the first player to score in five consecutive matches of a Champions League campaign for an English club, after opening United's 2–0 victory away against Villarreal, with his six goals being crucial to United's qualifying for the round of 16 as group winners. On 2 December, Ronaldo netted two goals in a 3–2 home league win against Arsenal, which saw him surpass 800 career goals. The following month, after enduring a fractured relationship with his teammates and interim manager Ralf Rangnick, his performances and his team's declined during the season, with Ronaldo equalling his worst goalscoring run since 2010 during his time with Real Madrid, being two months without scoring a goal, before scoring his first goal in the new year, opening United's 2–0 win home against Brighton & Hove Albion on 15 February 2022. Following a hamstring injury, which saw him miss the Manchester derby against Manchester City, Ronaldo made his return from injury on 12 March, scoring a hat-trick in a 3–2 victory against Tottenham Hotspur, which saw him pass Josef Bican's record for goals scored in professional football with 807 career goals, although the Football Association of the Czech Republic claimed that Bican had scored 821 career goals. On 16 April, Ronaldo scored his 50th club hat-trick in a 3–2 win over Norwich City. On 23 April, he scored his 100th Premier League goal in a 3–1 defeat to Arsenal. After scoring in the following matches against Chelsea and Brentford, he was named the Premier League Player of the Month for April. He finished the season with 24 goals in all competitions, 18 of those goals being in the Premier League, making him the third-highest goalscorer in the league behind Golden Boot winners Mohamed Salah and Son Heung-min, being named in the Premier League Team of the Year and the winner of United's Sir Matt Busby Player of the Year award, given to the club's best player from the previous season; however, with United finishing in a disappointing sixth place and qualifying for the UEFA Europa League, Ronaldo went trophyless for the first time since 2010. After growing dissatisfaction with the direction of United on and off the field, Ronaldo missed the club's pre-season tour of Thailand and Australia due to family reasons, amid reports of his desire to leave to join a club competing in the Champions League, despite incoming manager Erik ten Hag insisting that he was not for sale and was part of the club's plans. His agent Jorge Mendes began negotiating with various clubs for a transfer on loan or on a free transfer, including Bayern Munich, Paris Saint-Germain and Chelsea, with the latter club's new owner Todd Boehly being keen on a possible transfer. However, due to his age, overall cost of a transfer and high wages demands, multiple European clubs rejected the opportunity to sign him, including Chelsea after their manager Thomas Tuchel did not approve his signing. Having failed to secure a transfer, Ronaldo lost his place in the starting line-up to Marcus Rashford and Anthony Martial, mostly featuring in Europa League matches. He scored his first goal in the competition aged 37, converting a penalty to make it 2–0 against Sheriff Tiraspol on 15 September. On 2 October, Ronaldo was an unused substitute in United's 6–3 loss to Manchester City, with ten Hag saying that he refused to bring him on out of "respect for his big career". On 9 October, Ronaldo came on as a substitute and scored his 700th career club goal in a 2–1 win against Everton. Ten days later, Ronaldo refused to be brought on as a substitute during a home game against Tottenham and left the ground before the full-time whistle; Ten Hag punished him by dropping him from the squad for an upcoming fixture with Chelsea, and made him train separately from the first team. Following discussions with the manager, Ronaldo returned to training and started in United's home win over Sheriff on 27 October, scoring the third goal and ensuring United's qualification to the Europa League knockout stage. Ten Hag named Ronaldo as captain for a 3–1 defeat to Aston Villa on 6 November, saying that Ronaldo was "an important part of the squad, we are happy with him and now he has to take even more of the leader role". Ronaldo then missed United's following matches before the World Cup break, with Ten Hag saying that Ronaldo was ill. On 14 November, an interview with Piers Morgan was published, where Ronaldo said that he felt "betrayed" by Ten Hag and senior executives who wanted Ronaldo to leave the club, and accused the club of doubting him regarding the illness of his daughter that led him to miss pre-season, adding that he did not respect ten Hag "because he doesn't show respect for me", leading him to be disappointed with the communication of the club. Ronaldo claimed that ten Hag deliberately provoked him by first leaving him on the bench against City, and then wanting to bring him on in the final moments against Tottenham, but added that he regretted his decision to leave early. He also questioned the appointment of Rangnick the previous season as he was a "sporting director and not even a coach". On the club itself, Ronaldo stated there was "no evolution" since the departure of former manager Alex Ferguson in 2013, despite expecting changes in "technology, infrastructure". Ronaldo claimed that the Glazer family "did not care about the club" as he never spoke with them, and described United as a "marketing club". Following the interview, which aired in two-parts on 16 and 17 November, United began seeking legal action over whether Ronaldo had breached his contract, and were looking to terminate his contract. On 22 November, Ronaldo's contract was terminated by mutual agreement with immediate effect. On 30 December 2022, Saudi club Al Nassr reached an agreement for Ronaldo to join the club effective 1 January 2023, signing a contract until 2025. As reported by Fabrizio Romano of The Guardian, Ronaldo received the highest football salary in history, worth €200 million per year; this included an annual guaranteed football salary of €90 million, with commercial and sponsorship deals included bringing his total annual salary to €200 million. He was also reportedly paid a signing-on bonus in the region of €100 million. According to media reports, Ronaldo rejected a move to Major League Soccer club Sporting Kansas City to join Al Nassr. Ronaldo was due to appear in a match against Al-Tai on 5 January 2023, but had to serve a two-match ban incurred while he was still at Manchester United for knocking a phone out of a 14-year-old Everton fan's hand after a 1–0 loss at Goodison Park in April 2022. On 19 January, Ronaldo played for the first time since transferring to Saudi Arabia, in an exhibition game featuring a combined team of Riyadh's Al Nassr and Al Hilal players against Paris Saint-Germain. Ronaldo scored twice in a 5–4 loss. He made his debut for Al Nassr on 22 January, as club captain, playing the full 90 minutes of a 1–0 win over Al-Ettifaq, and scored his first goal in a 2–2 draw against Al-Fateh by converting a last-minute penalty. On 9 February, Ronaldo scored all four goals in a 4–0 win over Al Wehda, his first goal of the match being his 500th career league goal. On 25 February, he scored his second hat-trick for the club, helping his side to a 3–0 away league victory against Damac, in the process, he became the first player in the history of Saudi Pro League to score a hat-trick in the first half of a match. Ronaldo was awarded the Player of the Month award for February after scoring eight goals and assisting twice. Ronaldo spent another season without winning a league title, as Al Nassr finished second in the league in the 2022–23 season. Ronaldo's signing for Al-Nassr resulted in increased popularity both domestically and internationally of the Saudi Pro League, with various European players such as Karim Benzema, Sadio Mané, N'Golo Kanté, Rúben Neves, Riyad Mahrez, Roberto Firmino and Neymar moving to the Saudi Pro League during the summer transfer window, crediting Ronaldo as one of the main factors for moving to the league. He scored his first goal of the 2023–24 season in a 4–1 win over Union Monastirienne in the Arab Club Champions Cup on 31 July. In the next Arab Club Champions Cup fixture on 3 August, Ronaldo scored a late equaliser against Zamalek, to help his side secure a 1–1 draw and qualify for the quarter-finals in second place of their group. In the semi-finals on 9 August, Ronaldo scored the only goal of a win over Al-Shorta, converting a penalty to help Al Nassr reach their first ever Arab Club Champions Cup final. In the final on 12 August, Ronaldo scored both goals for a ten-man Al Nassr as they defeated rivals Al-Hilal 2–1 after extra time to win the competition for the first time in their history. Ronaldo was awarded the competition's top scorer award having scored six goals in the competition. On 18 August, Ronaldo made his first league appearance of the season in a 2–0 defeat to Al-Taawoun, and scored his first hat-trick of the season in a 5–0 away win against Al-Fateh a week later. On 29 August, Ronaldo scored twice and assisted once in a 4–0 win against rivals Al-Shabab. Ronaldo was awarded the SPL Player of the Month award for August after scoring five goals and assisting twice. On 2 September, he scored a goal in Al-Nassr's 5–1 away win against Al-Hazem, his 850th senior career goal. On 19 September, Ronaldo made his AFC Champions League debut, starting in a 2–0 win over Persepolis, becoming the first player in football history to record 1000 career games unbeaten (776 wins and 224 draws). Ronaldo received the SPL Player of the Month award for a second consecutive month after recording five goals and three assists in September. On 2 October, he scored his first AFC Champions League goal in the home fixture against Istiklol, the equaliser in an eventual 3–1 win. On 8 December, Ronaldo made his 1200th senior career appearance for club and country, scoring the first goal of a 4–1 win over Al-Riyadh. On December 30, Ronaldo closed the 4–1 win over Al Taawon. At the close of the year, Ronaldo scored 54 goals in all competitions for Al-Nassr and Portugal, making him the outright top scorer in 2023. His 54 goals was the most goals he had scored in a calendar year since 2016, and sixth time he achieved that feat in his career (2011, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016 and 2023). In the first knockout round of the AFC Champions League, Ronaldo faced fellow Saudi Arabian club Al-Fayha. After scoring the winner in a 1–0 win away in his 1000th club appearance, he scored the winning goal in a 2–0 win at home, helping Al-Nassr reach the quarter-finals of the competition. On 25 February 2024, Ronaldo was filmed making an alleged obscene gesture towards rival fans who were jeering him after a 3–2 victory over Al-Shabab. This act resulted in Ronaldo being suspended four days later for one match by the Disciplinary and Ethics Committee of the Saudi Arabia Football Federation. On 11 March, Ronaldo became the first football player to achieve 800 career wins following a match against Al Ain in the second leg of the AFC Champions League quarter-finals. Four days later, Ronaldo scored his 50th goal for Al-Nassr, netting a penalty in a narrow 1–0 win over rivals Al-Ahli. Ronaldo began his international career with Portugal under-15 in 2001. During his international youth career, Ronaldo would represent the under-15, under-17, under-20, under-21 and under-23 national sides, amassing 34 youth caps and scoring 18 goals overall. Aged 18, Ronaldo made his first senior appearance for Portugal in a 1–0 win over Kazakhstan on 20 August 2003, coming on as a half-time substitute for Luís Figo. He was subsequently called up for UEFA Euro 2004, held in his home country, and scored his first international goal in a 2–1 group stage loss to eventual champions Greece, his eighth appearance for Portugal. After converting his penalty in a shoot-out against England in the quarter-finals, he helped Portugal reach the final by scoring the opening goal in a 2–1 win over the Netherlands. He was featured in the team of the tournament, having provided two assists in addition to his two goals. Ronaldo was Portugal's second-highest scorer in their qualification group for the 2006 FIFA World Cup with seven goals. During the tournament, he scored his first World Cup goal against Iran with a penalty kick in Portugal's second match of the group stage. At the age of 21 years and 132 days, Ronaldo became the youngest ever goalscorer for Portugal at a World Cup finals. In Portugal's infamously dirty round of 16 match against the Netherlands, Ronaldo was forced off injured in the first half after a tackle from Dutch defender Khalid Boulahrouz. Following Portugal's 1–0 win, Ronaldo accused Boulahrouz of intentionally trying to injure him, although he recovered in time to play in the next game. In Portugal's quarter-final against England, Ronaldo's Manchester United teammate Wayne Rooney was sent off for stamping on Portugal defender Ricardo Carvalho. Although the referee later clarified that the red card was only due to Rooney's infraction, the English media speculated that Ronaldo had influenced his decision by aggressively complaining, after which he was seen in replays winking at Portugal's bench following Rooney's dismissal. Ronaldo went on to score the vital winning penalty during the shoot-out which sent Portugal into the semi-finals. Ronaldo was subsequently booed during their 1–0 semi-final defeat to France. FIFA's Technical Study Group overlooked him for the tournament's Best Young Player award and handed it to Germany's Lukas Podolski, citing his behaviour as a factor in the decision. Following the 2006 World Cup, Ronaldo would go on to represent Portugal in four qualifying games for Euro 2008, scoring two goals in the process. One day after turning 22, Ronaldo captained Portugal for the first time in a friendly game against Brazil on 6 February 2007, as requested by Portuguese Football Federation (FPF) president Carlos Silva, who had died two days earlier. Ahead of Euro 2008, he was given the number 7 shirt for the first time. While he scored eight goals in qualifications, the second-highest tally, he scored just one goal in the tournament, netting the second goal of their 3–1 win in the group stage match against the Czech Republic. In the same game, he also set-up Portugal's third goal in injury time, which was scored by Quaresma, and was named man of the match for his performance. Portugal were eliminated in the quarter-finals with a 3–2 loss against eventual finalists Germany. After Portugal's unsuccessful performance at Euro 2008, Luiz Felipe Scolari was replaced as coach by Carlos Queiroz, formerly the assistant manager at United. Queiroz made Ronaldo the squad's permanent captain in July 2008. Ronaldo failed to score a single goal in the qualification for the 2010 World Cup, as Portugal narrowly avoided a premature elimination from the tournament with a play-off victory over Bosnia and Herzegovina. In the group stage of the World Cup, he was named man of the match in all three matches, against Ivory Coast, North Korea and Brazil. His only goal of the tournament came in their 7–0 rout of North Korea, which marked his first international goal in 16 months. Portugal's World Cup ended with a 1–0 loss against eventual champions Spain in the round of 16. Ronaldo scored seven goals in qualifications for Euro 2012, including two strikes against Bosnia and Herzegovina in the play-offs, to send Portugal into the tournament, where they were drawn in a "group of death". In the last group stage game against the Netherlands, Ronaldo scored twice to secure a 2–1 win. He scored a header in the quarter-final against the Czech Republic to give his team a 1–0 win. In both games against the Netherlands and the Czech Republic he was named man of the match. After the semi-finals against Spain ended scoreless, Portugal were eliminated in the penalty shoot-out. Ronaldo did not take a penalty as he had been slated to take the unused fifth slot. Ronaldo's own teammate, Nani, said that Ronaldo "demanded" to take the last penalty. As the joint top scorer with three goals, alongside five other players, he was again included in the team of the tournament. During the qualification for the 2014 World Cup, Ronaldo scored a total of eight goals. A qualifying match on 17 October 2012, a 1–1 draw against Northern Ireland, earned him his 100th cap. His first international hat-trick also came against Northern Ireland, when he scored three times in a 15-minute spell of a 4–2 qualifying win on 6 September 2013. After Portugal failed to qualify during the regular campaign, Ronaldo scored all four of the team's goals in the play-offs against Sweden, billed as a battle between Ronaldo and Zlatan Ibrahimović, which ensured their place at the tournament. His hat-trick in the second leg took his international tally to 47 goals, equalling Pauleta's record. Ronaldo subsequently scored twice in a 5–1 friendly win over Cameroon on 5 March 2014 to become his country's all-time top scorer. Ronaldo took part in the tournament despite suffering from patellar tendinitis and a related thigh injury, potentially risking his career. Ronaldo later commented: "If we had two or three Cristiano Ronaldos in the team I would feel more comfortable. But we don't." Despite ongoing doubts over his fitness, being forced to abort practice twice, Ronaldo played the full 90 minutes of the opening match against Germany, although he was unable to prevent a 4–0 defeat. After assisting an injury-time 2–2 equaliser against the United States, he scored a late match-winning goal in a 2–1 win over Ghana. His 50th international goal made him the first Portuguese to play and score in three World Cups. Portugal were eliminated from the tournament at the close of the group stage on goal difference. Ronaldo scored five goals, including a hat-trick against Armenia, in the qualification for Euro 2016. With the only goal in another win over Armenia on 14 November 2014, he reached 23 goals in the UEFA European Championship, including qualifying matches, to become the competition's all-time leading goalscorer. At the start of the tournament, Ronaldo failed to convert his chances in Portugal's draws against Iceland and Austria, despite taking 20 shots on goal. In the latter match, he overtook Figo as Portugal's most capped player with his 128th international appearance, which ended scoreless after he missed a penalty in the second half. With two goals in the last match of the group stage, a 3–3 draw against Hungary, Ronaldo became the first player to score in four European Championships, having made a record 17 appearances in the tournament. Although placed third in their group behind Hungary and Iceland, his team qualified for the knockout round as a result of the competition's newly expanded format, despite not winning any of their games. In Portugal's first knockout match, Ronaldo's only attempt on goal was parried by Croatia's goalkeeper Danijel Subašić into the path of Ricardo Quaresma, whose finish then secured a 1–0 win late in extra time. After his team progressed past Poland on penalties, with Ronaldo scoring Portugal's opening penalty, he became the first player to participate in three European Championship semi-finals; he scored the opener in a 2–0 win against Wales, equalling Michel Platini as the competition's all-time top scorer with nine goals. In the final against hosts France, Ronaldo was forced off after just 25 minutes following a challenge from Dimitri Payet, despite multiple treatments and attempts to play on, he was stretchered off the pitch and replaced by Quaresma. During extra time, substitute Eder scored in the 109th minute to earn Portugal a 1–0 victory. As team captain, Ronaldo lifted the trophy in celebration of his country's first triumph in a major tournament. He was awarded the Silver Boot as the joint second-highest goalscorer, with three goals and three assists, and was named to the team of the tournament for the third time in his career. Following the Euro 2016 success, Ronaldo played his first professional match on his home island of Madeira on 28 March 2017 at age 32, opening a 2–3 friendly defeat to Sweden at the Estádio dos Barreiros. With the goal, he tied with Miroslav Klose on 71 goals as the third-highest scoring European in international football. In Portugal's opening match of the 2017 FIFA Confederations Cup against Mexico on 17 June, Ronaldo set up Quaresma's opening goal in a 2–2 draw. Three days later, he scored in a 1–0 win over hosts Russia. On 24 June, he scored from a penalty in a 4–0 win over New Zealand, which saw Portugal top their group and advance to the semi-finals of the competition; with his 75th international goal, Ronaldo also equalled Sándor Kocsis as the second-highest European international goalscorer of all time, behind only Ferenc Puskás. He was named man of the match in all three of Portugal's group stage matches. Ronaldo left the competition early; after Chile defeated Portugal 3–0 on penalties in the semi-finals, he was allowed to return home to be with his newborn children, and missed Portugal's third-place play-off match in which Portugal defeated Mexico 2–1 after extra time. On 31 August 2017, Ronaldo scored a hat-trick in a 5–1 win in a 2018 World Cup qualifying match over the Faroe Islands, which saw him overtake Pelé and equal Hussein Saeed as the joint-fifth-highest goalscorer in international football with 78 goals. These goals brought his tally in the World Cup qualifiers to 14, equalling Predrag Mijatović's record for most goals in a single UEFA qualifying campaign, and also saw him break the record for the most goals scored in a European qualifying group, overtaking the previous record of 13 goals set by David Healy and Robert Lewandowski. Ronaldo's hat-trick took his World Cup qualifying goals total to 29, making him the highest scorer in UEFA qualifiers, ahead of Andriy Shevchenko, and the highest goalscorer in World Cup qualifying and finals matches combined with 32 goals, ahead of Miroslav Klose. Ronaldo later added to this tally by scoring a goal against Andorra in a 2–0 win. On 15 June 2018, Ronaldo became the oldest player to score a hat-trick in a FIFA World Cup match, helping Portugal secure a 3–3 draw against Spain (his third goal a 30-yard curling free kick with two minutes remaining) in their opening match. In doing so, he became the first Portuguese player to score a goal in four World Cups and one of four players of any nationality to do so. On 20 June, Ronaldo scored the only goal in a 1–0 win against Morocco, breaking Puskás' record as the highest European goalscorer of all time, with 85 international goals. In the final group match against Iran on 25 June, Ronaldo missed a penalty in an eventual 1–1 draw which saw Portugal progress to the second round as group runners-up behind Spain. On 30 June, Portugal were eliminated following a 2–1 defeat to Uruguay in the last 16. For his performances in the tournament, Ronaldo was named in the World Cup Dream Team. After the World Cup, Ronaldo missed six international matches, including the entire league phase of the 2018–19 UEFA Nations League, but played for hosts Portugal in the inaugural Nations League Finals in June 2019. In the semi-finals on 5 June, he scored a hat-trick against Switzerland to reach the final. Upon scoring the opening goal, he became the first player to score in 10 consecutive international competitions, breaking the record he previously shared with Ghana's Asamoah Gyan. In the final of the tournament four days later, Portugal defeated the Netherlands 1–0. On 10 September 2019, Ronaldo scored four goals in a 5–1 away win over Lithuania in a Euro 2020 qualifying match; in the process, he overtook Robbie Keane (23 goals) as the player with most goals in the UEFA European Championship qualifying, setting a new record with 25 goals. He also set a new record for scoring against the most national teams, 40, while also completing his eighth international hat-trick. On 14 October, he scored his 700th senior career goal for club and country from the penalty spot, in his 974th senior career appearance, a 2–1 away loss to Ukraine in a Euro 2020 qualifier. On 17 November, Ronaldo scored his 99th international goal in a 2–0 win over Luxembourg, leading Portugal to qualify for Euro 2020. On 8 September 2020, Ronaldo scored his 100th and 101st international goals in a 2–0 away win over Sweden in a 2020–21 UEFA Nations League match, becoming only the second male player ever to achieve this milestone (after Ali Daei of Iran) and the first in Europe. On 13 October, the FPF announced that Ronaldo tested positive for COVID-19 while being asymptomatic. By 30 October, Ronaldo had recovered. On 15 June 2021, Ronaldo scored twice in Portugal's first game of Euro 2020, a 3–0 win against Hungary in Budapest. This took him to a total of 11 European Championship goals, two clear of Michel Platini, as the all-time top goalscorer in the competition's history. He also became the first player to score at five Euros, and in eleven consecutive tournaments. The brace made Ronaldo the oldest player to score two goals in a match in the competition, and the oldest player to score for Portugal at a major tournament. On 23 June, he scored two penalties in Portugal's 2–2 draw with France in their final group stage match, equalling Daei's record of 109 international goals. On 27 June, Portugal were eliminated following a 1–0 loss against Belgium in the round of 16. Ronaldo finished the tournament with five goals (tied with Czech Patrik Schick) and one assist, earning him the Golden Boot. On 1 September, Ronaldo scored two headed goals, with his second coming seconds before the full-time whistle, in a 2–1 home win against the Republic of Ireland in a World Cup qualifier at the Estádio Algarve, which saw him pass Ali Daei to become the sole record holder by breaking the men's international scoring record with his 110th and 111th international goals. On 9 October, he scored the opening goal in a 3–0 friendly win over Qatar at the Estádio Algarve; with his 181st international appearance, he also overtook Sergio Ramos's record for the most international caps received by a European player. In the following match against Luxembourg on 12 October, also played at the Estádio Algarve, Ronaldo scored a hat-trick in a 5–0 win for Portugal, and became the first player to score 10 hat-tricks in men's international football. Ronaldo was named in Portugal's squad for the 2022 FIFA World Cup in Qatar, making it his fifth World Cup. On 24 November, in Portugal's opening match against Ghana, Ronaldo scored a penalty kick and became the first male player to score in five different World Cups. In the last group game against South Korea, Ronaldo received criticism from his own coach for his reaction at being substituted. He was dropped from the starting line-up for Portugal's last 16 match against Switzerland, marking the first time since Euro 2008 that he had not started a game for Portugal in a major international tournament, and the first time Portugal had started a knockout game without Ronaldo in the starting line-up at an international tournament since Euro 2000. He came off the bench late on as Portugal won 6–1, their highest tally in a World Cup knockout game since the 1966 World Cup, with Ronaldo's replacement Gonçalo Ramos scoring a hat-trick. Portugal employed the same strategy in the quarter-finals against Morocco, with Ronaldo once again coming off the bench; in the process, he equalled Bader Al-Mutawa's international appearance record, becoming the joint–most capped male footballer of all time, with 196 caps. Portugal lost 1–0, with Morocco becoming the first CAF nation ever to reach the World Cup semi-finals. Following the World Cup, despite having his future with the national team in doubt, after rumours of a possible omission by new manager Roberto Martínez, Ronaldo was named in Portugal's squad for the UEFA Euro 2024 qualifiers against Liechtenstein and Luxembourg. On 23 March, Ronaldo scored a brace in a 4–0 win over Liechtenstein; with his 197th international appearance, he overtook Al-Mutawa's record and became the most capped male footballer of all time. On 20 June, Ronaldo made his 200th appearance for his national team, scoring the only goal of an away win over Iceland, in the Euro qualifiers, as he became the first player in the history of men's international football to make 200 appearances for his country. On 13 October, Ronaldo scored a brace in a 3–2 win over Slovakia, leading Portugal to qualify for Euro 2024, marking the nation's fastest qualification to a major tournament in their history. On 16 October, Portugal secured first place in their group, following a 5–0 away victory over Bosnia and Herzegovina, with Ronaldo scoring twice. The landmark goals saw him score in more than 100 goals in each of the last three decades (2000s, 2010s, 2020s). A versatile attacker, Ronaldo is capable of playing on either wing as well as through the centre of the pitch, and, while ostensibly right-footed, is very strong with both feet. Tactically, Ronaldo has undergone several evolutions throughout his career. While at Sporting and during his first season at Manchester United, he was typically deployed as a traditional winger on the right side of midfield, where he regularly looked to deliver crosses into the penalty area. In this position, he was able to use his pace and acceleration, agility and technical skills to take on opponents in one-on-one situations. Ronaldo became noted for his dribbling and flair, often displaying an array of tricks and feints, such as the step overs and so-called 'chops' that became his trademark; he has also been known to use the flip-flap. His strength and jumping ability, combined with his elevation, heading accuracy and height of 1.87 m (6 ft 1+1⁄2 in), give him an edge in winning aerial duels. These attributes allow him to function as a target-man and make him an aerial goal threat in the penalty area; consequently, many of his goals have been headers. Allied with his increased stamina and work-rate, his goalscoring ability improved drastically on the left wing where he was given the positional freedom to move into the centre to finish attacks. He has also increasingly played a creative role for his team, often dropping deep to pick up the ball, participate in the build-up of plays and create chances for his teammates, courtesy of his vision and passing ability. In his final seasons at United, Ronaldo played an even more attacking and central role, functioning both as a striker and as a supporting forward, or even as an attacking midfielder on occasion. He developed into a prolific goalscorer, capable of finishing well both inside the penalty area and from distance with an accurate and powerful shot, courtesy of his striking ability. An accurate penalty kick taker, he also became a set piece specialist, renowned for his powerful, bending free kicks. When taking free kicks, Ronaldo is known for using the knuckleball technique, which was developed by Juninho Pernambucano. He also adopts a trademark stance before striking the ball, which involves him standing with his legs far apart. Regarding Ronaldo's unique style of taking free kicks, former United assistant manager Mike Phelan commented: "People used to put the ball down, walk away, run up and hit it. He brought in a more dynamic showmanship. He places the ball down, the concentration level is high, he takes his certain amount of steps back so that his standing foot is in the perfect place to hit the ball in the sweet spot. He is the ultimate showman. He has that slight arrogance. When he pulls those shorts up and shows his thighs, he is saying 'All eyes on me' and this is going in. He understands the marketing side of it. The way he struts up and places it; the world is watching him." At Real Madrid, Ronaldo continued to play a more offensive role, while his creative and defensive duties became more limited, although not entirely diminished. Initially deployed as a centre forward by managers Manuel Pellegrini and José Mourinho, he was later moved back onto the left wing, though in a free tactical role; this position allowed him to drift into the centre at will to get onto the end of crosses and score, or draw out defenders with his movement off the ball and leave space for teammates to exploit. Madrid's counter-attacking style of play also allowed him to become a more efficient and consistent player, as evidenced by his record-breaking goalscoring feats. While he mainly drew praise in the media for his prolific goalscoring, Ronaldo also demonstrated his ability as an effective creator in this role. This unique role has been described by pundits as that of a "false", "attacking", or "goalscoring winger", as Ronaldo effectively almost functioned as a striker at times with his central runs into the penalty area, despite actually playing on the left flank. From 2013 onwards, under manager Carlo Ancelotti, he effectively adapted his style to the physical effects of ageing with increasingly reduced off-the-ball movement and general involvement, completing fewer dribbles and passes per game, and instead focusing on short-distance creating and goalscoring. Since 2017, Ronaldo adapted his style of play yet again to become more of a free-roaming centre forward under manager Zinedine Zidane, a role in which he continued to excel and maintain a prolific goalscoring record; in this position, he earned praise in the media for his intelligent movement both on and off the ball, positional sense, link-up play and finishing, as well as his ability to lose or anticipate his markers, find space in the box and score from few touches or opportunities. In his first season at Juventus, Ronaldo continued to play in a variety of different attacking roles under manager Massimiliano Allegri, depending on whom he was partnered with. While he had occupied an increasingly offensive role in his final years at Real Madrid, at times he functioned in a free role at Juventus, either as a lone striker or in his trademark role on the left wing, in a 4–2–3–1 or 4–3–3 formation, in which he often switched positions with Mario Mandžukić. In this role, he was also given licence to drop deep or even out wide onto the right flank to receive the ball, and be more involved in the build-up of plays; as such, aside from scoring goals himself, he began to take on opponents and create chances for other players with greater frequency than he had in his final seasons with Real Madrid. Off the ball, he was also capable of creating space for teammates with his movement and attacking runs into the box, or finishing off chances with his head or feet by getting onto the end of his teammates' crosses. On occasion he also played in an attacking partnership alongside Mandžukić in a 4–3–1–2, 4–4–2, or 3–5–2 formation. He continued to play a similar role in his second season with the club under manager Maurizio Sarri. "In the six years we had him, you just saw his game grow all the time, and he was a fantastic player. Now you see the complete player. His decision-making, his maturity, his experience, plus all the great skills he has got, they all make him the complete player." —Former manager Alex Ferguson, January 2013 Ronaldo is widely regarded as one of the two best players of his generation, alongside Lionel Messi. Winning his first Ballon d'Or in 2008 by a record-high vote count at age 23, over the next decade Ronaldo has often featured in debates concerning who is the greatest player in history. Acclaimed for his prolific and consistent goal-scoring, he is considered a decisive player who is also a game changer, especially in important and high-pressured situations. Ronaldo is noted for his work ethic, elite body conditioning and dedication to improvement on the training pitch, as well being regarded as a natural leader. On his longevity and "extraordinary commitment to physical preparation", Adam Bate of Sky Sports said: "Dedication is a huge part of staying at the top and Ronaldo's focus is perhaps unparalleled within the game." While stating they were stylistically different players who shared an equal desire to score goals, former Brazil international Ronaldo praised Cristiano's approach to training, arguing that "there are so few players who take care of their body like he does. I trained because I had to, he does it because he loves it." His drive and determination to succeed are fuelled by a desire to be talked about alongside other greats such as Pelé and Diego Maradona once retiring. He is credited, along with his compatriot, coach José Mourinho, with inspiring changing fortunes of Portuguese football in 2010s and 2020s. At times, he has been criticised for simulating when tackled. He was also occasionally criticised early in his career by manager Alex Ferguson, teammates and the media for being a selfish or overly flamboyant player. Jonathan Wilson of The Guardian opined that Ronaldo had made Juventus, who he joined aged 33 in 2018, weaker, due to "his relative immobility" in his mid-30s, even if his personal goal-scoring output remained high. During his career, Ronaldo has also been described as having an "arrogant image" on the pitch, with Ronaldo stating that he had become a "victim" because of how he was portrayed in the media. He is often seen moaning, gesticulating and scowling while trying to inspire his team to victory, with Ronaldo insisting that his competitive nature should not be mistaken for arrogance. His managers, teammates and various journalists have said that this reputation has caused an unfair image of him. Ronaldo has adopted several goal celebrations throughout his career, including one particular celebration which gained widespread coverage in the media, when he squatted and stared directly into a camera on the sidelines of the pitch with his hand on his chin. After scoring a goal, he usually celebrates with a "storming jump" and "turn", before "landing in spread-eagled fashion" into his "signature power stance", while usually simultaneously exclaiming "Sí" (Spanish and Italian for "yes"). This trademark celebration has been dubbed the "Siu" in the media. Both Ronaldo and Lionel Messi have scored in multiple UEFA Champions League finals and have regularly broken the 50-goal barrier in a single season. Sports journalists and pundits regularly weigh the individual merits of both players in an attempt to argue who they believe is the best player in modern football or in the history of the game. It has been compared to several sports rivalries, among them the Muhammad Ali–Joe Frazier rivalry in boxing, the Borg–McEnroe rivalry in tennis and the Senna–Prost rivalry from Formula One motor racing. Some commentators choose to analyse the differing physiques and playing styles of the two. Part of the debate revolves around the contrasting personalities of the two players, as Ronaldo is sometimes depicted as an arrogant and theatrical showoff, while Messi is portrayed as a shy, humble character. "It's part of my life now. People are bound to compare us. He tries to do his best for his club and for his national team, as I do, and there is a degree of rivalry with both of us trying to do the best for the teams we represent." —Ronaldo commenting on his rivalry with Messi. In a 2012 interview, Ronaldo commented on the rivalry, saying: "I think we push each other sometimes in the competition, this is why the competition is so high." Alex Ferguson, Ronaldo's manager during his time at Manchester United, opined: "I don't think the rivalry against each other bothers them. I think they have their own personal pride in terms of wanting to be the best." Messi himself denied any rivalry, saying that it was "only the media, the press, who wants us to be at loggerheads but I've never fought with Cristiano." Responding to the claims that he and Messi do not get on well on a personal level, Ronaldo commented: "We don't have a relationship outside the world of football, just as we don't with a lot of other players." Ronaldo added that in years to come he hopes they can laugh about it together, stating: "We have to look on this rivalry with a positive spirit, because it's a good thing." Representing archrivals Barcelona and Real Madrid, the two players faced each other at least twice every season in the world's biggest club game, El Clásico, which is among the world's most viewed annual sporting events. In a debate at Oxford Union in October 2013, when asked whether FIFA president Sepp Blatter preferred Messi or Ronaldo, Blatter paid tribute to the work ethic of the Argentine before taking a swipe at Ronaldo, claiming "one of them has more expenses for the hairdresser than the other." Real Madrid demanded and promptly received a full apology. In response to Blatter's "commander" on the pitch comment, Ronaldo issued his own riposte with a mock-salute celebration after scoring a penalty against Sevilla. In August 2019, Ronaldo and Messi were interviewed while sat next to each other prior to the announcement of the UEFA Men's Player of the Year, with Ronaldo stating: "I pushed him and he pushed me as well. So it's good to be part of the history of football." In September 2023, Ronaldo declared that his rivalry with Messi was over and "gone", after 36 official fixtures and 15 years of "sharing the stage". After Messi led Argentina to victory in the 2022 FIFA World Cup, a number of football critics, commentators and players have opined that Messi has settled the debate between the two players. Since his reputation grew at Manchester United, Ronaldo has signed many sponsorship deals for consumer products, including sportswear, football boots; since November 2012, Ronaldo has worn the Nike Mercurial Vapor personalised CR7 edition, soft drinks, clothing, automotive lubricants, financial services, electronics, and video games. Ronaldo featured as the cover star of FIFA video game FIFA 18 and was heavily involved in the game's promotion. His "Sii" goal celebration features in the FIFA series, accompanied with his own voiceover. He was also the face of Pro Evolution Soccer, appearing on the covers of the 2008, 2012 and 2013 editions of the game. With earnings of €720 million (£615 million) from 2010 to 2019, Ronaldo was ranked second in Forbes list of the decade's highest-paid athletes, behind boxer Floyd Mayweather Jr. Forbes twice ranked Ronaldo first on its list of the world's highest-paid football players; his combined income from salaries, bonuses and endorsements was $73 million in 2013–14 and $79 million in 2014–15. The latter earnings saw him listed behind only Mayweather on the magazine's list of The World's Highest-Paid Athletes. In 2016, he became the first footballer to top the Forbes list of highest-earning athletes, with a total income of $88 million from his salary and endorsements in 2015–16. He topped the list for the second straight year with earnings of $93 million in 2016–17. He is the first footballer and only the third sportsman to earn $1 billion in their career. Ronaldo is one of the world's most marketable sportsmen: SportsPro rated him the fifth most marketable athlete in 2012 and eighth most marketable athlete in 2013. Sports market research company Repucom named Ronaldo the most marketable and most recognised football player in the world in May 2014. He was additionally named in the 2014 Time 100, Time's annual list of the most influential people in the world. ESPN named Ronaldo the world's most famous athlete in 2016, 2017, 2018 and 2019. Ronaldo has established a strong online presence. The most popular sportsperson on social media, he counted over 500 million total followers across Facebook, Twitter and Instagram by February 2021, making him the first person to pass half a billion followers. The most-followed person on Facebook (168 million), most-followed on Instagram (615 million) and most-followed sportsperson on Twitter (109 million), his sponsors earned $936 million in media value across his accounts between June 2016 and June 2017. In December 2011, he launched an iPhone game called Heads Up with Cristiano, created by developer RockLive, and in December 2013, he launched Viva Ronaldo, a dedicated social networking website and app. Computer security company McAfee produced a 2012 report ranking footballers by the probability of an internet search for their name leading to an unsafe website, with Ronaldo's name first on the list. Ronaldo's autobiography, titled Moments, was published in 2007. His sponsor Castrol produced the television film Ronaldo: Tested to the Limit, in which he was physically and mentally tested in several areas; his physical performance was subject to scrutiny by world media upon the film's release in September 2011. Cristiano Ronaldo: The World at His Feet, a documentary narrated by actor Benedict Cumberbatch, was released via Vimeo in June 2014. A documentary film directed by Anthony Wonke about his life and career, titled Ronaldo, was released on 9 November 2015. Demand for a replica Ronaldo shirt has been high throughout his career. In 2008, Ronaldo's number 7 Manchester United shirt was the best-selling Premier League sports product. In 2015, Ronaldo's number 7 Real Madrid shirt was the second best-selling worldwide, after Messi's number 10 Barcelona shirt. In 2018, within 24 hours of his number 7 Juventus shirt being released, over 520,000 had been sold, with $62.4 million generated in one day. Ronaldo opened a fashion boutique under the name CR7 (his initials and shirt number) on the island of Madeira in 2006 and opened a second in Lisbon in 2008. In partnership with Scandinavian manufacturer JBS Textile Group and the New York fashion designer Richard Chai, Ronaldo co-designed a range of underwear and sock line, released in November 2013. He expanded his CR7 fashion brand by launching a line of premium shirts and shoes in July 2014. In September 2015, Ronaldo released his own fragrance, "Legacy", in a partnership with Eden Parfums. In 2007, C.D. Nacional renamed its youth campus Cristiano Ronaldo Campus Futebol (Cristiano Ronaldo Football Campus). In December 2013, Ronaldo opened a museum, Museu CR7, in his hometown of Funchal, Madeira, to house trophies and memorabilia; the museum is an official sponsor of the local football team União da Madeira. At a ceremony held at the Belém Palace in January 2014, President of Portugal Aníbal Cavaco Silva raised Ronaldo to the rank of Grand Officer of the Order of Prince Henry "to distinguish an athlete of world renown who has been a symbol of Portugal globally, contributing to the international projection of the country and setting an example of tenacity for future generations." A bronze statue of Ronaldo, designed by artist Ricardo Madeira Veloso, was unveiled in Funchal on 21 December 2014. In June 2010, during the build-up to the World Cup, Ronaldo became the fourth footballer (after Steven Gerrard, Pelé, and David Beckham) to be represented as a waxwork at Madame Tussauds London. Another waxwork of him was presented at the Madrid Wax Museum in December 2013. In June 2015, astronomers led by David Sobral from Lisbon and Leiden discovered a galaxy which they named Cosmos Redshift 7 (CR7) in tribute to Ronaldo. On 23 July 2016, following Portugal's triumph at Euro 2016, Madeira Airport in Funchal was renamed as Cristiano Ronaldo International Airport. The unveiling of the rebranded terminal took place on 29 March 2017, which included a bust of his head being presented. The bust and the name change were controversial, with the lack of the bust's likeness to Ronaldo being ridiculed by comedians, including Saturday Night Live, while the name change was subject to much debate locally by some politicians and citizens, who even started a petition against the move, an action criticised by President of Madeira Miguel Albuquerque. A year later, sports website Bleacher Report commissioned sculptor Emanuel Santos to create another bust; however, this bust was never used and a new one was made by a Spanish sculptor, shown to the public on 15 June 2018. On 21 September 2020, the Sporting CP's football academy in Alcochete, until then called Academia Sporting, was renamed Academia Cristiano Ronaldo. Since October 26, 2023, the new owners of Medialivre (Correio da Manhã, Record and Jornal de Negócios publisher) are a group of investors that include Cristiano Ronaldo through Portuguese company Expressão Livre. In 2023, the Lisbon City Council approved awarding him, at the proposal of its president, Carlos Moedas, the Medal of Honor of the City, because he is "a great Lisboner, in the sense of the passion he has for the city". Ronaldo has made contributions to various charitable causes throughout his career. Television footage of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami showed an eight-year-old boy survivor named Martunis wearing a Portuguese football shirt who was stranded for 19 days after his family was killed. Following this, Ronaldo visited Aceh, Indonesia, to raise funds for rehabilitation and reconstruction. After accepting undisclosed damages from a libel case against The Sun newspaper in 2008, Ronaldo donated the damages to a charity in Madeira. In 2009, Ronaldo donated £100,000 to the hospital that saved his mother's life in Madeira following her battle with cancer, so that they could build a cancer centre on the island. In support of the victims of the 2010 Madeira flood, Ronaldo pledged to play in a charity match in Madeira between Primeira Liga club Porto and players from Madeiran-based clubs Marítimo and Nacional. In 2012, Ronaldo and his agent paid for specialist treatment for a nine-year-old Canarian boy with apparently terminal cancer. In December 2012, Ronaldo joined FIFA's "11 for Health" programme to raise awareness amongst kids of how to steer clear of conditions including drug addiction, HIV, malaria, and obesity. In January 2013, Ronaldo became Save the Children's new Global Artist Ambassador, in which he hopes to help fight child hunger and obesity. In March 2013, Ronaldo agreed to be the ambassador for The Mangrove Care Forum in Indonesia, an organisation aiming to raise awareness of mangrove conservation. Ronaldo was named the world's most charitable sportsperson in 2015 after donating £5 million to the relief effort after the earthquake in Nepal which killed over 8,000 people. In June 2016, Ronaldo donated the entirety of his €600,000 Champions League bonus after Real Madrid won the competition. In August, Ronaldo launched CR7Selfie, a selfie app for charity to help Save the Children that lets participants take a selfie with him in one of several different outfits and poses. Ronaldo has five living children. He first became a father to a son, who was born on 17 June 2010 in the United States. He has full custody of the child and has not publicly revealed the identity of the mother per an agreement with her. In January 2015, Ronaldo's five-year relationship with Russian model Irina Shayk ended. Ronaldo became a father to twins, born on 8 June 2017 in the United States via surrogacy. He is currently in a relationship with Argentine-born Spanish model Georgina Rodríguez, who gave birth to a daughter on 12 November 2017. The couple expected a pair of twins in 2022. The male twin died during childbirth while the female twin survived. Ronaldo's father, José, died of an alcoholism-related liver condition at age 52 in September 2005 when Ronaldo was 20. In January 2023, after Ronaldo moved to Saudi Arabia with his family having been signed by Saudi Pro League side Al Nassr, the rulers of the Muslim-leaning Kingdom made Ronaldo an exception to the rule that unmarried couples are not allowed to live together in Saudi Arabia. An unnamed Saudi lawyer told Spanish news agency EFE that "the laws of the Kingdom still prohibit cohabitation without a marriage contract", but Saudi authorities have begun to "turn a blind eye and stop prosecuting anyone, even though these laws are applied when there is a problem or a crime". Ronaldo is of Cape Verdean descent through his great-grandmother. He is a Roman Catholic. Ronaldo has said that he does not drink alcohol, and he received libel damages over a Daily Mirror article that reported him drinking heavily in a nightclub while recovering from an injury in July 2008. He also does not have any tattoos as he regularly donates blood and bone marrow. In July 2017, Ronaldo was charged with fraudulently evading almost €15 million in tax between 2011 and 2014, a claim he denied at the time. In June 2018, Ronaldo was given a two-year suspended jail sentence and fined €18.8 million, later reduced to €16.8 million after reaching a deal with Spanish authorities. The sentence can be served under probation, without any jail time, so long as he does not re-offend. Ronaldo and another man were investigated by the British Crown Prosecution Service after a 2005 rape allegation was brought forward by two women. Within days, the two women withdrew their allegation and Scotland Yard later issued a statement declaring there was not enough evidence for a prosecution. In April 2017, it was reported that Ronaldo was being investigated by the Las Vegas Police Department for an allegation by a woman that he had raped her in 2009. Documents, confirmed by Ronaldo's lawyers, state that Ronaldo paid a woman US$375,000 in a non-disclosure settlement. Ronaldo and his lawyers issued a lengthy statement denying all accusations, describing them as an "intentional defamation campaign" with parts significantly "altered and/or completely fabricated", a claim which Der Spiegel categorically denied. In July 2019, Las Vegas prosecutors said they would not charge Ronaldo over allegations of rape; the statement added: "Based upon a review of information at this time, the allegations of sexual assault against Cristiano Ronaldo cannot be proven beyond a reasonable doubt." The same woman, in September 2018, filed a civil lawsuit in Nevada accusing Ronaldo of rape. The Daily Mirror, citing court documents, reported in 2021 that the woman sought £56 million in damages from Ronaldo. In October 2021, federal magistrate judge Daniel Albregts recommended that the lawsuit be dismissed, citing that the woman's lawyer, Leslie Stovall, "acted in bad faith by asking for, receiving, and using Football Leaks documents to prosecute" the case, despite the documents containing "privileged communications" between Ronaldo and his lawyers. Additionally, Albregts stated that no evidence was found of Ronaldo's lawyers having "intimidated [the woman] or impeded law enforcement" during the 2010 settlement with her. In June 2022, the woman's rape lawsuit was dismissed with prejudice in the United States District Court for the District of Nevada, as district judge Jennifer A. Dorsey ruled that Stovall's repeated use of "cyber-hacked attorney–client privileged documents" were actions representing "abuses and flagrant circumvention of the proper litigation process". As of match played 30 March 2024 Includes Taça de Portugal, FA Cup, Copa del Rey, Coppa Italia, King Cup Includes Football League Cup All appearances in UEFA Champions League, unless otherwise noted Two appearances in UEFA Cup Appearance in FA Community Shield Appearance(s) in FIFA Club World Cup Does not include one goal scored on 18 September 2010 against Real Sociedad. Marca, which awards the Pichichi Trophy, attribute it to Ronaldo, while La Liga and UEFA attribute it to Pepe. Appearance(s) in Supercopa de España One appearance and two goals in UEFA Super Cup, two appearances in Supercopa de España, two appearances in FIFA Club World Cup One appearance in UEFA Super Cup, one appearance and one goal in Supercopa de España, two appearances and two goals in FIFA Club World Cup Appearance in Supercoppa Italiana Appearances in UEFA Europa League Appearance in Saudi Super Cup Appearances in AFC Champions League Appearances in Arab Club Champions Cup As of match played 26 March 2024 Notes Appearances in the 2001 European Youth Summer Olympic Festival. Two appearances and three goals in the 2002 UEFA European Under-17 Championship qualification, two appearances in the 2002 UEFA European Under-17 Championship. Appearances in the 2003 Toulon Tournament. Appearances in the 2004 UEFA European Under-21 Championship qualification. Appearances in the 2004 Summer Olympics. Six appearances and two goals in UEFA Euro 2004, five appearances and five goals in the 2006 FIFA World Cup qualification. Appearances in the 2006 FIFA World Cup qualification. Six appearances and one goal in the 2006 FIFA World Cup, four appearances and three goals in the UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying. Appearances in the UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying. Three appearances and one goal in UEFA Euro 2008, two appearances in the 2010 FIFA World Cup qualification. Appearances in the 2010 FIFA World Cup qualification. Four appearances and one goal in the 2010 FIFA World Cup, two appearances and two goals in the UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying. Appearances in the UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying. Five appearances and three goals in UEFA Euro 2012, four appearances and one goal in the 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification. Appearances in the 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification. Three appearances and one goal in the 2014 FIFA World Cup, two appearances and two goals in the UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying. Appearances in the UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying. Seven appearances and three goals in UEFA Euro 2016, three appearances and seven goals in the 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification. Six appearances and eight goals in the 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification, four appearances and two goals in the 2017 FIFA Confederations Cup. Appearances in the 2018 FIFA World Cup. Eight appearances and eleven goals in the UEFA Euro 2020 qualifying, two appearances and three goals in the 2019 UEFA Nations League Finals. Appearances in the 2020–21 UEFA Nations League. Seven appearances and six goals in the 2022 FIFA World Cup qualification, four appearances and five goals in UEFA Euro 2020. Two appearances in the 2022 FIFA World Cup qualification, five appearances and two goals in the 2022–23 UEFA Nations League, five appearances and one goal in the 2022 FIFA World Cup. Appearances in the UEFA Euro 2024 qualifying. Sporting CP Supertaça Cândido de Oliveira: 2002 Manchester United Premier League: 2006–07, 2007–08, 2008–09 FA Cup: 2003–04 Football League Cup: 2005–06, 2008–09 FA Community Shield: 2007 UEFA Champions League: 2007–08 FIFA Club World Cup: 2008 Real Madrid La Liga: 2011–12, 2016–17 Copa del Rey: 2010–11, 2013–14 Supercopa de España: 2012, 2017 UEFA Champions League: 2013–14, 2015–16, 2016–17, 2017–18 UEFA Super Cup: 2014, 2017 FIFA Club World Cup: 2014, 2016, 2017 Juventus Serie A: 2018–19, 2019–20 Coppa Italia: 2020–21 Supercoppa Italiana: 2018, 2020 Al Nassr Arab Club Champions Cup: 2023 Portugal UEFA European Championship: 2016 UEFA Nations League: 2018–19 Individual Ballon d'Or/FIFA Ballon d'Or: 2008, 2013, 2014, 2016, 2017 FIFA World Player of the Year: 2008 The Best FIFA Men's Player: 2016, 2017 The Best FIFA Special Award for Outstanding Career Achievement: 2021 UEFA Club Footballer of the Year: 2007–08 UEFA Men's Player of the Year Award: 2013–14, 2015–16, 2016–17 European Golden Shoe: 2007–08, 2010–11, 2013–14, 2014–15 Golden Foot: 2020 FIFA Puskás Award: 2009 FIFA Club World Cup Golden Ball: 2016 UEFA European Championship Golden Boot: 2020 UEFA Champions League top scorer: 2007–08, 2012–13, 2013–14, 2014–15, 2015–16, 2016–17, 2017–18 Premier League Player of the Season: 2006–07, 2007–08 La Liga Best Player: 2013–14 Serie A Footballer of the Year: 2019, 2020 Premier League Golden Boot: 2007–08 Pichichi Trophy: 2010–11, 2013–14, 2014–15 Capocannoniere: 2020–21 Portuguese Sportsman of the Year: 2011, 2012, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019 FPF Portuguese Player of the Year: 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2022 Orders Medal of Merit, Order of the Immaculate Conception of Vila Viçosa (Portuguese Royal Family) Grand officer of the Order of Prince Henry Commander of the Order of Merit Cordão Autonómico de Distinção Association football portal Portugal portal Biography portal List of footballers with 100 or more UEFA Champions League appearances List of top international men's football goal scorers by country List of men's footballers with 100 or more international caps List of men's footballers with 50 or more international goals List of men's footballers with the most official appearances List of men's footballers with 500 or more goals Varies between 1.85 and 1.89 by source. FIFA and Sports Illustrated give 1.85, Luca Caioli [es; fi] 1.86, Soccerway and Eurosport 1.87, Premier League 1.87, and the Portuguese Football Federation 1.89. Although there was no third-place playoff, both losing semi-finalists (Germany and Portugal) were awarded bronze medals by UEFA. The terminology for the award has varied. Ronaldo received three Ballons d'Or as awarded by France Football magazine (2008, 2016, 2017) and two FIFA Ballons d'Or (2013, 2014) as well as the 2008 FIFA World Player of the Year and 2016 and 2017 Best FIFA Men's Player awards. Real Madrid had previously recognised Ronaldo as their all-time top scorer after he scored a brace against Malmö FF on 30 September 2015. The club's official record book attributes to Ronaldo a 74th-minute goal in a 2–1 win over Real Sociedad on 18 September 2010, despite his free-kick having been deflected by Pepe. "Cristiano Ronaldo Fast Facts". CNN. 20 January 2021. Retrieved 16 June 2021. "FIFA World Cup Qatar 2022: List of players: Portugal" (PDF). FIFA. 15 November 2022. p. 22. Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 November 2022. Retrieved 22 November 2022. Kay, Stanley (16 August 2017). "How Tall is Cristiano Ronaldo?". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on 13 July 2019. Retrieved 13 July 2019. Caioli 2016, Facts and figures. "Cristiano Ronaldo". Eurosport. Archived from the original on 13 October 2023. Retrieved 15 May 2020. "Cristiano Ronaldo". Premier League Football. 11 July 2023. Archived from the original on 17 April 2018. Retrieved 5 August 2023. "Cristiano Ronaldo" (in Portuguese). Portuguese Football Federation. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Regulations for UEFA Euro 2012" (PDF). UEFA. September 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 February 2010. Retrieved 29 December 2020. "Cristiano Ronaldo becomes all-time international cap leader". Guinness World Records. 10 December 2022. Archived from the original on 10 August 2023. Retrieved 9 August 2023. "Desporto – Pelos caminhos de Ronaldo". Diário de Notícias. 6 July 2009. Archived from the original on 8 August 2017. Retrieved 22 July 2017. Jimenez, Ruben (5 February 2017). "Cristiano turns 32". Marca. Spain. Archived from the original on 15 July 2017. Retrieved 22 July 2017. "Família de Cristiano Ronaldo inaugura restaurante em Gramado: 'Me apaixonei pela cidade', diz irmã". G1 (in Brazilian Portuguese). 6 July 2018. Archived from the original on 20 November 2023. Retrieved 20 November 2023. DIA, BOM (26 April 2023). "Cristiano Ronaldo, do início humilde à grandeza no futebol". BOM DIA Suíça (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 20 November 2023. Retrieved 20 November 2023. Hayward, Ben (23 June 2017). "The 'little bee' who always cried – the story of young Ronaldo's path to greatness in Madeira". Goal. Archived from the original on 30 August 2017. Retrieved 23 August 2017. "José Dinis: «O meu filho é uma força da natureza»". www.record.pt (in European Portuguese). Archived from the original on 20 November 2023. Retrieved 20 November 2023. "Deixou a Madeira em lágrimas e chegou ao topo do Mundo". www.dn.pt (in European Portuguese). 18 June 2011. Archived from the original on 20 November 2023. Retrieved 20 November 2023. Miguel Neves, Pedro. "Cristiano Ronaldo tem 'costela' cabo-verdiana". Sapo Expresso (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 13 July 2017. Retrieved 23 July 2017. Sousa, Hugo Daniel (12 January 2015). "O que mais distingue Cristiano Ronaldo dos outros? A potência". PÚBLICO (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 16 January 2024. Retrieved 16 January 2024. Lewis, Tim (8 June 2008). "He's got the world at his feet". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 27 September 2013. Retrieved 5 November 2008. Payne, Marissa (19 January 2016). "Cristiano Ronaldo was named after Ronald Reagan. No, really". Washington Post. Archived from the original on 6 March 2023. Retrieved 23 June 2023 – via GQ. My parents named me after [Ronald Reagan] because they both liked this name and thought it sounded strong. [...] I know that my father admired him. "Cristiano Ronaldo's mother: I wanted an abortion, but God said no". Eurosport. 5 November 2015. Retrieved 26 January 2021. "Ronaldo's mother reveals she tried to abort her son". Irish independent. 18 July 2014. Archived from the original on 30 June 2022. Retrieved 30 June 2022. "Lei n.º 6/84, de 11 de maio". dre.pt (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 3 May 2023. Retrieved 3 May 2023. "Cristiano Ronaldo spills all to his 'close friend' Jasmine about women, football, cars... and money". Daily Mirror. 3 July 2011. Archived from the original on 19 August 2013. Retrieved 21 August 2013. "Bola de Ouro – Ronaldo conquistou primeiro prémio aos oito anos no Andorinha". Diário de Notícias (in Portuguese). 2 December 2008. Archived from the original on 23 August 2017. Retrieved 23 August 2017. "Clash of the Titans". Manchester Evening News. 18 April 2010. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. Roseiro, Bruno. "Leonel, o homem que faz a Ponte(s): tutor de Ronaldo, aluno de 17,5 valores, uma década com Bento e o (extinto?) Jumilla". Observador (in European Portuguese). Archived from the original on 7 December 2023. Retrieved 7 December 2023. "Cristiano Ronaldo: I was expelled from school for throwing a chair at the teacher". Now Magazine. 6 July 2011. Archived from the original on 29 April 2015. Retrieved 22 August 2017. Castello Branco, Igor (14 August 2012). "Uma década de CR7: atacante vira profissional e logo se torna 'diabólico'". globoesporte.com. Archived from the original on 16 August 2012. Retrieved 7 December 2023. "Cristiano Ronaldo tinha medo de ir à escola". www.cmjornal.pt (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 18 December 2022. Retrieved 18 December 2022. "Ronaldo tells judge: "I never had this problem in England, that's why I want to go back there"". Diario AS. EFE. 4 August 2017. Archived from the original on 18 December 2022. Retrieved 18 December 2022. "Ronaldo em tribunal: "Só tenho o sexto ano de escolaridade"". www.dn.pt (in Portuguese). 4 August 2017. Archived from the original on 18 December 2022. Retrieved 18 December 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 12 August 2018. Retrieved 11 August 2018. Conte, Peter (8 May 2018). "What you didn't know about Cristiano Ronaldo". NewsComAu. Archived from the original on 12 August 2018. Retrieved 11 August 2018. "Manchester United winger Cristiano Ronaldo needed heart operation to save career". The Telegraph. 29 January 2009. Archived from the original on 23 August 2017. Retrieved 22 August 2017. ADN de Leão | Episódio 37: Dolores Aveiro, archived from the original on 28 September 2023, retrieved 28 September 2023 "Boloni își amintește de debutul lui Ronaldo la Sporting: "Nu reușeam să îl opresc să facă driblinguri"". DigiSport. 13 January 2015. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 24 February 2016. UEFA.com. "History: Sporting CP-Inter: UEFA Champions League 2002/03 Qualif. 3". UEFA.com. Archived from the original on 24 December 2023. Retrieved 24 December 2023. "38 anos, 38 momentos marcantes da carreira de Cristiano Ronaldo". SAPO Desporto (in Portuguese). Retrieved 24 December 2023. "Cristiano Ronaldo's five senior debuts in his career and how he fared in them". Planet Football. 10 September 2021. Archived from the original on 24 December 2023. Retrieved 24 December 2023. KeeG. "Sabia Que o 1º jogo como sénior de Cristiano Ronaldo foi nos Açores?". I Love Azores. Archived from the original on 10 August 2023. Retrieved 10 August 2023. "Famous players featured in U17 c'ships". UEFAu17.com. Archived from the original on 2 June 2009. "Liverpool 'turned down Ronaldo'". Eurosport. 6 December 2011. Archived from the original on 8 December 2010. Retrieved 30 August 2014. Conn, David (19 January 2011). "The brightest star in Europe and £1m to a mysterious agent". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 5 October 2013. Retrieved 11 November 2011. Pilger, Sam (6 October 2017). "'He Was There to Put on a Show': Ronaldo's Legendary Manchester United Audition". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 28 May 2018. Retrieved 27 May 2018. Marshall, Adam (12 August 2003). "United confirm Ronaldo capture". Sky Sports. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Message from the president". Sporting CP. 29 April 2013. Archived from the original on 17 May 2014. Retrieved 15 May 2014. Barnes, Justin (12 June 2014). "George Best on Ronaldo's Debut For Man Utd". Sabotage Times. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Man Utd sign Ronaldo". BBC Sport. 12 August 2003. Archived from the original on 31 July 2017. Retrieved 27 August 2014. Wallace, Sam (12 August 2003). "United fork out record £12m fee to land teenager". The Daily Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 10 August 2019. Taylor, Daniel (13 August 2003). "Teenager takes Beckham No7 shirt". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. McDonnell, David (29 September 2007). "Cristiano Ronaldo exclusive". Daily Mirror. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Ronaldo vows to justify price tag". BBC Sport. 4 July 2009. Archived from the original on 21 July 2017. Retrieved 4 July 2009. Wilson, Paul (17 August 2003). "Only one Ronaldo as United find new idol". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Man Utd see off Pompey". BBC Sport. 1 November 2003. Archived from the original on 9 August 2017. Retrieved 27 August 2014. Weaver, Paul (22 March 2004). "United rediscover form and put Arsenal on red alert". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. Ridley, Ian (15 May 2004). "Ronaldo's good and bad day". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Man Utd win FA Cup". BBC Sport. 22 May 2004. Archived from the original on 25 February 2009. Retrieved 26 January 2011. Hansen, Alan (22 May 2004). "Wing wizard lights up final". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 23 August 2006. Retrieved 11 January 2021. "Ones to Watch: Cristiano Ronaldo". BBC Sport. 25 May 2004. Archived from the original on 30 January 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2021. McNulty, Phil (23 June 2004). "Neville wary of Ronaldo". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 24 October 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2021. "Middlesbrough 4–1 Man Utd". BBC Sport. 29 October 2005. Archived from the original on 6 December 2011. Retrieved 1 February 2010. "Ronaldo extends Man Utd contract". BBC Sport. 18 November 2005. Archived from the original on 14 August 2017. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "Man Utd 3–1 Aston Villa". BBC Sport. 22 January 2005. Archived from the original on 14 August 2017. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Arsenal 2–4 Man Utd". BBC Sport. 1 February 2005. Archived from the original on 14 August 2017. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Arsenal 0–0 Man Utd (aet)". BBC Sport. 21 May 2005. Archived from the original on 14 August 2017. Retrieved 19 October 2015. "Man Utd ease to Carling Cup glory". BBC Sport. 26 February 2006. Archived from the original on 28 August 2007. Retrieved 26 January 2011. "Ronaldo ban after finger gesture". BBC Sport. 14 November 2015. Archived from the original on 5 February 2006. Retrieved 3 February 2006. Buckingham, Mark (15 January 2006). "Fergie upset with red card". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Brennan, Stuart (17 January 2006). "Ruud and Ron in training bust-up". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Taylor, Daniel (3 July 2006). "Rooney must look at himself rather than blame Ronaldo". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Stirling, James (9 July 2006). "Ronaldo: I can't stay in Manchester". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Buckingham, Mark (12 July 2006). "United: Ronaldo not for sale". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Tyldesley, Clive (25 September 2006). "Ronaldo has last laugh on Reading fans". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Winter, Henry (29 August 2013). "The secrets behind the development of Real Madrid's Cristiano Ronaldo, revealed by Rene Meulensteen". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 10 August 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. James, Stuart (24 December 2006). "Cristiano's stockings full of gifts for United". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 28 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Taylor, Daniel (27 December 2006). "Ferguson giddy with glee as Ronaldo stretches United's lead". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Wilson, Paul (31 December 2006). "Ronaldo stretches United's advantage". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "Ronaldo wins monthly award again". BBC Sport. 11 January 2007. Archived from the original on 13 February 2007. Retrieved 2 January 2010. "Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo goal for goal". UEFA. 11 December 2019. Archived from the original on 21 April 2018. Retrieved 4 May 2019. McCarra, Kevin (11 April 2007). "Seven wonders of sublime United dazzle and destroy helpless Roma". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 3 October 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. Glendenning, Barry (24 April 2007). "Man Utd 3 – 2 AC Milan". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. McCarra, Kevin (3 May 2007). "AC Milan 3 – 0 Man Utd". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "FA Cup final – Chelsea 1–0 Man Utd". BBC Sport. 19 May 2007. Archived from the original on 24 May 2007. Retrieved 19 May 2007. Wilson, Paul (6 May 2007). "Misfiring Ronaldo gets a kick out of giving City the runaround". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Ronaldo wins PFA double". World Soccer. 23 April 2007. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Buckingham, Mark (4 May 2007). "Writers award for Ronaldo". Sky Sports. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Ronaldo secures PFA awards double". BBC Sport. 22 April 2007. Archived from the original on 14 April 2008. Retrieved 18 April 2018. Kay, Oliver (14 April 2007). "Ferguson lets rip at Madrid after Ronaldo signs £31m deal". The Times. London. Retrieved 16 April 2007. "Kaká's year capped by Ballon d'Or". UEFA. 2 December 2007. Archived from the original on 5 December 2012. Retrieved 3 July 2012. "Ronaldo:Going the right way". FIFA. 17 December 2007. Archived from the original on 18 December 2007. Retrieved 18 December 2007. "Man Utd 6–0 Newcastle". BBC Sport. 12 January 2008. Archived from the original on 15 January 2008. Retrieved 12 January 2008. Kay, Oliver (20 March 2008). "Cristiano Ronaldo revels in role of Captain Fantastic as United stretch lead". The Times. London. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Taylor, Daniel (1 April 2008). "Best's crown intact until Ronaldo cures his travel sickness". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 1 January 2014. Retrieved 2 April 2008. "Ronaldo & Ferguson win top awards". BBC Sport. 14 May 2008. Archived from the original on 18 May 2008. Retrieved 16 January 2014. "Ronaldo scoops ESM Golden Shoe". UEFA. 17 June 2008. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Ronaldo named player of the year". BBC Sport. 27 April 2008. Archived from the original on 1 May 2008. Retrieved 18 April 2018. "Ronaldo wins writers' award again". BBC Sport. 2 May 2008. Archived from the original on 15 August 2017. Retrieved 29 August 2014. Brown, Oliver (5 March 2008). "Cristiano Ronaldo puts Man Utd into quarters". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014. Herbert, Ian (2 April 2008). "Ronaldo and Rooney combine to leave Roma in ruins again". The Independent. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Hodges, Vicki (22 May 2008). "Cristiano Ronaldo's penalty technique 'unacceptable'". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Champions League (Sky Sports)". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 19 January 2023. Retrieved 19 January 2023. McNulty, Phil (22 May 2008). "Man Utd earn dramatic Euro glory". BBC. Archived from the original on 26 May 2008. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Cristiano Ronaldo". UEFA. Archived from the original on 29 May 2016. Retrieved 24 May 2016. "Ronaldo pledges to keep his cool". BBC Sport. 15 August 2007. Archived from the original on 1 January 2009. Retrieved 2 January 2010. Gardner, Alan (16 June 2008). "Fifa decline to take action against Real". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. Dall, James (10 July 2008). "Blatter – Let Ronaldo leave". Sky Sports. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Taylor, Daniel (11 July 2008). "I am a slave, says Ronaldo as he pushes for Madrid move". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Ronaldo sticks with United". ESPN. 7 August 2008. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Ronaldo ankle surgery a 'success'". BBC Sport. 7 July 2008. Archived from the original on 30 December 2008. Retrieved 2 January 2010. Hart, Simon (17 September 2008). "Villarreal return to frustrate United". UEFA. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Weaver, Paul (17 November 2008). "United swear by Ronaldo as Stoke can only curse". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Stat Attack". The United Review. 70 (11). Manchester United: 65. 15 November 2008. Bailey, Richard (18 December 2008). "United secure final date". Sky Sports. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Bevan, Chris (21 December 2008). "Liga de Quito 0–1 Man Utd". BBC. Archived from the original on 22 December 2008. Retrieved 29 August 2014. Roughley, Gregg (2 December 2008). "Ronaldo beats off Messi and Torres to scoop Ballon d'Or". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Ronaldo named Fifa player of 2008". BBC Sport. 12 January 2009. Archived from the original on 18 January 2009. Retrieved 2 January 2010. "Ronaldo's 'incredible, fantastic' goal". FIFA. 21 December 2009. Archived from the original on 24 December 2009. Retrieved 15 January 2011. "Ronaldo stunner thrills Ferguson". BBC Sport. 15 April 2009. Archived from the original on 17 April 2009. Retrieved 15 April 2009. "United cruise into final". Sky Sports. 5 May 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Williams, Richard (27 May 2009). "Cristiano Ronaldo in a mess as Lionel Messi takes lead role on grand stage". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 9 October 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Player Profile Cristiano Ronaldo". Premier League. Archived from the original on 7 March 2016. Retrieved 17 March 2016. "Man Utd 0–0 Tottenham (aet)". BBC Sport. 1 March 2009. Archived from the original on 2 March 2009. Retrieved 17 March 2016. "Premier League Team of the Year". Sky Sports. 28 April 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "United closing in on glory". Sky Sports. 10 May 2009. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Ogden, Mark (11 June 2009). "Cristiano Ronaldo transfer: Real Madrid agree £80 million fee with Manchester United". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 21 August 2010. Retrieved 5 November 2010. "Ronaldo agrees six-year Real deal". BBC Sport. 26 June 2009. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016. Retrieved 27 June 2009. "Cristiano Ronaldo welcomed by 80,000 fans at Real Madrid unveiling". The Guardian. London. 6 July 2009. Archived from the original on 16 December 2013. Retrieved 6 July 2009. "Cristiano Ronaldo To Wear No. 9 at Real Madrid – Report". Goal. 6 June 2009. Archived from the original on 6 July 2009. Retrieved 6 June 2009. "Ronaldo aims shot at English game". BBC Sport. 6 July 2009. Retrieved 6 July 2009. "Ronaldo in winning start for Real". BBC Sport. 29 August 2009. Retrieved 29 August 2009. "Cristiano Ronaldo makes Real Madrid history". The Daily Telegraph. London. 23 September 2009. Archived from the original on 27 December 2014. Retrieved 25 August 2010. "Tuesday's Champions League review". BBC Sport. 15 September 2009. Retrieved 15 September 2009. Glendenning, Barry (3 November 2009). "Champions League: Milan v Real Madrid – as it happened". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 15 July 2014. Retrieved 22 April 2014. "Ronaldo forced out of Milan meetings". UEFA. 11 October 2009. Archived from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo scores and sent off in Real victory". BBC Sport. 5 December 2009. Retrieved 5 December 2009. "Cristiano Ronaldo: Cristiano Ronaldo Dos Santos Aveiro: 2009–10". BDFutbol. Archived from the original on 26 December 2013. Retrieved 25 December 2013. "Cristiano Ronaldo hat-trick keeps Real Madrid on Barcelona's tail". The Guardian. 6 May 2010. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "92 Points Not Good Enough for Real Madrid to Win La Liga". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 19 July 2022. Retrieved 4 August 2022. Corrigan, Dermot (12 December 2016). "Was this Real Madrid and Portugal star Cristiano Ronaldo's best year?". ESPN. Retrieved 25 October 2019. Sempere, Pablo (28 July 2010). "La historia del 7 madridista" [The history of the Madrid 7]. Marca (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 16 June 2021. Retrieved 15 June 2021. "Cristiano Ronaldo scores four in Real Madrid victory". BBC. 23 October 2010. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Ronaldo matches Messi's treble as Real and Barca go goal crazy". CNN. 20 November 2010. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Ronaldo hat-trick sees Real past Villarreal". Eurosport. 9 January 2011. Archived from the original on 12 January 2011. Retrieved 30 August 2014. Lowe, Sid (4 March 2011). "No redemption for Manuel Pellegrini on a grim return to the Bernabéu". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. Chadband, Ian (30 November 2015). "Messi, Ronaldo and Neymar are Ballon d'Or nominees". Reuters. Archived from the original on 16 February 2016. Retrieved 29 March 2016. "Cristiano Ronaldo: Cristiano Ronaldo Dos Santos Aveiro: 2010–11". BDFutbol. Archived from the original on 26 December 2013. Retrieved 25 December 2013. "Madrid clinch Copa del Rey". Sky Sports. 21 April 2011. Archived from the original on 27 November 2022. Retrieved 27 November 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo sets new Primera Liga scoring record". BBC. 21 May 2011. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Record-breaking Ronaldo wins 2010/11 Golden Shoe". UEFA. 23 May 2011. Archived from the original on 5 August 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Real Madrid Squad Stats (Spanish Primera División) – 2011–12"[permanent dead link]. ESPN. Retrieved 7 September 2014 "Cristiano Ronaldo grabs hat-trick as Real Madrid defeat Zaragoza 6–0". The Daily Telegraph. London. 28 August 2011. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Hat tricks for Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo". ESPN. 24 September 2011. Archived from the original on 4 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Ronaldo grabs hat-trick as Real go top in Spain". CNN. 22 October 2011. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Cristiano Ronaldo's sixth hat-trick of the season sees Real Madrid open 10-point lead over Barcelona". The Daily Telegraph. London. 13 February 2012. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Madrid and Barca victorious". ESPN. 24 March 2011. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Cristiano Ronaldo scores hat-trick as Real Madrid defeat Atletico 4–1 to maintain four=point cushion over Barcelona". The Daily Telegraph. London. 12 April 2012. Archived from the original on 11 October 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Lionel Messi: Barcelona striker's goal record in numbers". BBC. 29 March 2016. Archived from the original on 2 December 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2019. Kwesi O'Mard, Marcus (15 May 2012). "Jose Mourinho Boasts as Real Madrid and Cristiano Ronaldo Smash Records en Route to La Liga Title". NESN. Archived from the original on 15 February 2019. Retrieved 15 February 2019. "Barcelona 3–2 Real Madrid – as it happened". The Guardian. 23 August 2012. Archived from the original on 4 December 2013. Retrieved 30 August 2012. Ogden, Mark (3 September 2012). "Cristiano Ronaldo 'sad' at Real Madrid and upset with 'people in the club' after choosing not to celebrate goals". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 26 August 2014. Retrieved 22 August 2014. Tynan, Gordon (4 October 2012). "Cristiano Ronaldo grabs another Real Madrid hat-trick". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. Jenson, Pete (8 October 2012). "Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo: a class apart in el Clasico". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Messi crowned world's best for record fourth time". CNN. 8 January 2013. Archived from the original on 3 April 2013. Retrieved 10 May 2013. "Iker Casillas turns down Ronaldo's mid-game offer of the captain's armband". Yahoo Sports. Retrieved 6 December 2021. Lowe, Sid (30 January 2013). "Real Madrid 1–1 Barcelona Copa del Rey semi-final first leg match report". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 31 December 2013. Retrieved 21 February 2013. "Ronaldo scores 300th club goal". Independent Online. 27 January 2013. Archived from the original on 3 March 2013. Retrieved 21 February 2013. Hayward, Ben (8 May 2013). "Cristiano Ronaldo reaches 200 goals for Real Madrid with Malaga strike". Goal. Archived from the original on 7 June 2013. Retrieved 10 May 2013. Lowe, Sid (26 February 2013). "Cristiano Ronaldo scores twice as Real Madrid crush Barcelona". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 31 December 2013. Retrieved 13 March 2013. "Real Madrid vs. Atletico Madrid, 2013 Copa del Rey: Final score 1–2 in thrilling extra time upset". sbnation.com. 18 May 2013. Archived from the original on 7 June 2013. Retrieved 1 June 2013. Lowe, Sid (13 February 2013). "Cristiano Ronaldo rises to big occasion with impeccable timing". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 December 2013. Retrieved 21 February 2013. Taylor, Daniel (5 March 2013). "Nani's red card opens door and Real Madrid defeat Manchester United". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 11 August 2013. Retrieved 6 March 2013. "Cristiano Ronaldo: "I didn't celebrate the goal out of respect for United"". Marca. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. Retrieved 8 October 2018. Lowe, Sid (30 April 2013). "Real Madrid 2–0 Borussia Dortmund Champions League semi-final, second leg match report". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 August 2013. Retrieved 10 May 2013. Wallace, Sam (16 September 2013). "Cristiano Ronaldo agrees £76m Real Madrid deal to end hopes of Manchester United return". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Gareth Bale contract leak sparks panic at Real Madrid – and agent's fury". The Telegraph. No. 21 January 2016. 21 January 2016. Archived from the original on 27 February 2016. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "200 goals for the BBC". Real Madrid CF. 24 October 2015. Archived from the original on 18 November 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Unstoppable Ronaldo fires Portugal to Brazil". ESPN. 19 November 2013. Archived from the original on 18 October 2014. Retrieved 11 October 2014. "Cristiano Ronaldo hits hat-trick as Real Madrid hammer Galatasaray". Sky Sports. 17 September 2013. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Ronaldo and Bale among the goals as Real Madrid win 10-goal thriller". CNN. 31 October 2013. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Cristiano Ronaldo's goal-den 2013, month by month". Marca. Spain. 31 December 2013. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2019. Homewood, Brian (14 January 2014). "Emotional Ronaldo ends Messi run". Reuters. Archived from the original on 17 February 2014. Retrieved 13 January 2015. Dhruva, Siddharth (2 April 2014). "Cristiano Ronaldo Equals Messi's Record For Most Goals in One UEFA Champions League Season". World Soccer Talk. Archived from the original on 17 April 2014. Retrieved 17 April 2014. "Bayern Munich 0–4 Real Madrid: Cristiano Ronaldo beats Messi's Champions League record". ESPN. 29 April 2014. Archived from the original on 30 April 2014. Retrieved 14 May 2014. "Ronaldo first to score for two different European Cup winners". Eurosport. Reuters. 24 May 2014. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Ronaldo 'risked career' by playing through pain barrier". ESPN. 9 October 2014. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Record-breaking Ronaldo takes scoring honours". UEFA. 24 May 2014. Archived from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Ronaldo named UEFA Best Player in Europe". UEFA. 28 August 2014. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Ronaldo tops Aragonés record". Marca. Spain. 11 February 2014. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Treadaway, Dan (12 February 2014). "Cristiano Ronaldo Has Scored a Goal in Every Minute of a Game Throughout His Career". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Barcelona 1–2 Real Madrid". BBC Sport. 16 April 2014. Archived from the original on 17 April 2014. Retrieved 17 April 2014. "Suarez claims top billing with Ronaldo". ESPN. 19 May 2014. Archived from the original on 20 May 2014. Retrieved 21 May 2014. "Cristiano Ronaldo reaches 400-goal milestone and dedicates achievement to Eusébio after Real Madrid win". The Daily Telegraph. London. 7 January 2014. Archived from the original on 7 October 2014. Retrieved 13 January 2014. "Cristiano Ronaldo, winner of the 'Best Goal in the 2013–14 Liga BBVA'". LFP. 27 October 2014. Archived from the original on 29 October 2014. Retrieved 4 November 2014. Rigg, Nicholas (28 October 2014). "Atlético Madrid snubbed at La Liga awards despite winning league ahead of Spanish giants Real Madrid and Barcelona". The Independent. Archived from the original on 9 March 2016. Retrieved 18 November 2018. "Ronaldo beats his personal best for a single season". AS. 24 May 2015. Archived from the original on 24 May 2015. Retrieved 24 May 2015. "Real Madrid 5–0 Athletic Bilbao". BBC News. 5 October 2014. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Real Madrid's Cristiano Ronaldo breaks La Liga hat trick record". ESPN. 6 December 2014. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Real Madrid claim FIFA Club World Cup". UEFA. 20 December 2014. Archived from the original on 25 December 2014. Retrieved 21 December 2014. "Ronaldo, Kessler, Low and Kellermann triumph at FIFA Ballon d'Or 2014" Archived 2 June 2016 at the Wayback Machine. FIFA. Retrieved 13 January 2015 Simon, Thomas (12 January 2015). "Cristiano Ronaldo dans la troisième dimension". France Football. Archived from the original on 10 October 2015. Retrieved 12 April 2016. Rigg, Nicholas (27 May 2015). "Cristiano Ronaldo eclipses his best in an up-and-down Real Madrid campaign". ESPN. Archived from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Cristiano levels Raúl and Messi in Europe with Schalke goal". AS. 19 February 2015. Archived from the original on 19 February 2015. Retrieved 19 February 2015. "Cristiano Ronaldo ties Alfredo Di Stefano in Real Madrid scoring chart". ESPN. 13 May 2015. Archived from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Neymar, Messi and Ronaldo top scoring charts". UEFA. 6 June 2015. Archived from the original on 8 June 2015. Retrieved 7 June 2015. "Real Madrid 9–1 Granada". BBC. Archived from the original on 6 April 2015. Retrieved 5 April 2015. "Rayo Vallecano 0–2 Real Madrid". BBC Sport. 8 April 2015. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Un histórico Ronaldo lidera la goleada al Espanyol" [A historic Ronaldo leads the thrashing at Espanyol]. laliga.es. 12 September 2015. Archived from the original on 14 September 2015. Retrieved 12 September 2015. "Real Madrid 3–0 Levante". BBC Sport. 17 October 2015. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 17 October 2015. "Cristiano Ronaldo scores a hat-trick as Real Madrid beat Shakhtar". Sky Sports. 16 September 2015. Archived from the original on 17 September 2015. Retrieved 16 September 2015. "Real Madrid forward Cristiano Ronaldo scores 500th career goal". ESPN. 30 September 2015. Archived from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Walker, Joseph (8 December 2015). "Ronaldo rampant as Madrid put eight past Malmö". UEFA. Archived from the original on 23 September 2017. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Real Madrid 7 Celta Vigo 1: Ronaldo hits four to beat Zarra mark". FourFourTwo. 5 March 2016. Archived from the original on 20 March 2016. Retrieved 5 March 2016. "3–0: Comeback accomplished, now for the semi-finals; Real Madrid overcome Wolfsburg courtesy of a Cristiano Ronaldo hat-trick, to take their place in Friday's Champions League draw". 12 April 2016. Archived from the original on 18 November 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Cristiano Ronaldo takes scoring prize again". UEFA. 28 May 2016. Archived from the original on 31 May 2016. Retrieved 31 May 2016. Stevens, Samuel (30 May 2016). "Cristiano Ronaldo brands his critics 'jealous' after third Champions League triumph". The Independent. Archived from the original on 30 May 2016. Retrieved 31 May 2016. "Cristiano Ronaldo named Best Player in Europe". UEFA. 25 August 2016. Archived from the original on 16 December 2016. Retrieved 9 January 2017. "Cristiano Ronaldo set to miss Real Madrid's first three games of season with knee injury". sportskeeda. 8 March 2017. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved 4 November 2017. "Cristiano Ronaldo: I couldn't celebrate goal against Sporting, they made me who I am". Eurosport. 15 September 2016. Archived from the original on 11 October 2018. Retrieved 11 October 2018. "Cristiano Ronaldo signed his contract extension with Real Madrid". Real Madrid C.F. 7 November 2016. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 9 November 2020. "Cristiano Ronaldo, all-time top scorer in the derby against Atlético". Real Madrid C.F. 20 November 2016. Archived from the original on 21 November 2016. Retrieved 20 November 2016. "Real Madrid forward Cristiano Ronaldo scores 500th club goal". ESPN. 15 December 2016. Archived from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Madrid see off spirited Kashima in electric extra time final". FIFA. 18 December 2016. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 18 December 2016. "Ronaldo, Modric and Shibasaki sweep awards". FIFA. 18 December 2016. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 18 December 2016. "The world at Cristiano Ronaldo's feet". FIFA. 10 January 2017. Archived from the original on 3 June 2017. Retrieved 14 May 2017. "Ronaldo makes history with 100th European goal". UEFA. 12 April 2017. Archived from the original on 14 April 2017. Retrieved 13 April 2017. "Cristiano Ronaldo scores 100th Champions League goal". Goal. 18 April 2017. Archived from the original on 19 April 2017. Retrieved 19 April 2017. "Cristiano Ronaldo smashes Jimmy Greaves' all-time goal record". Sky Sports. 17 May 2017. Archived from the original on 18 May 2017. Retrieved 18 May 2017. "Real Madrid win La Liga title with victory at Malaga". BBC. 21 May 2017. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Real Madrid's Cristiano Ronaldo nets 600th goal, boasts 'I was very good'". ESPN. 3 June 2017. Archived from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Das, Andrew; Smith, Rory (3 June 2017). "Champions League Final: Real Madrid Confirms Its Spot as World's Best". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 June 2017. Retrieved 3 June 2017. "Cristiano Ronado, sent off for diving and pushes the referee". Sport English. 14 August 2017. Archived from the original on 30 August 2017. Retrieved 30 August 2017. "The Best FIFA Men's Player". FIFA. Archived from the original on 24 November 2017. Retrieved 23 October 2017. "Real Madrid 3 – 2 Borussia Dortmund". BBC. 9 December 2017. Archived from the original on 28 November 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Ballon d'Or 2017: Cristiano Ronaldo beats Lionel Messi to win fifth award". BBC. 8 December 2017. Archived from the original on 28 November 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Real Madrid 1 Gremio 0". BBC Sport. 16 December 2017. Retrieved 20 December 2017. Corrigan, Dermot (3 March 2018). "Cristiano Ronaldo becomes fastest to score 300th goal in La Liga". ESPN. Archived from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Real Madrid 6–3 Girona". BBC. 18 March 2018. Archived from the original on 1 May 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2019. Nevin, Pat (3 April 2018). "Cristiano Ronaldo bicycle kick: Night Juventus Stadium rose to applaud Real Madrid forward". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 3 April 2018. Retrieved 4 April 2018. "UEFA Champions League: Real Madrid 1–3 Juventus". UEFA. Archived from the original on 12 April 2018. Retrieved 12 April 2018. "Ronaldo edges Real Madrid past Juventus". UEFA. 11 April 2018. Archived from the original on 17 April 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Ronaldo first to win five Champions League titles". UEFA. 26 May 2018. Archived from the original on 16 September 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Madrid beat Liverpool to complete hat-trick". UEFA. 26 May 2018. Archived from the original on 15 June 2020. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Corrian, Dermot (26 May 2018). "Cristiano Ronaldo puts future in doubt: 'It's been very nice playing for Real Madrid'". ESPN. Archived from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Real Madrid: Everything you need to know about Cristiano Ronaldo's Real future". Marca. 27 May 2018. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 9 November 2020. "Cristiano Ronaldo signs for Juventus!" (Press release). Juventus. 10 July 2018. Archived from the original on 10 December 2021. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo to Juventus: Is £99m signing a good deal for Italian champions?". BBC. Archived from the original on 11 July 2018. Retrieved 10 July 2018. "Ronaldo breaks transfer record". Football Italia. 10 July 2018. Archived from the original on 11 July 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Cristiano Ronaldo: Juventus sign Real Madrid forward for £99.2m". BBC. 10 July 2018. Archived from the original on 10 July 2018. Retrieved 10 July 2018. Fifield, Dominic (29 October 2018). "Cristiano Ronaldo: I left Real Madrid because of president Florentino Pérez". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 30 October 2018. Retrieved 30 October 2018. Gamba, Emanuele (18 August 2018). "Buona la prima di Ronaldo in Italia: gioca bene e la Juventus batte il Chievo 3–2". La Repubblica (in Italian). Retrieved 14 July 2021. "Ronaldo ends Juventus drought". Football Italia. 16 September 2018. Archived from the original on 16 September 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Valencia 0–2 Juventus". BBC Sport. 19 September 2018. Archived from the original on 19 September 2018. Retrieved 19 September 2018. Della Valle, Fabiana (28 November 2018). "Juve, Ronaldo e Mandukic: che simbiosi. Tra capolavori, assist e gol". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Archived from the original on 28 November 2018. Retrieved 28 November 2018. "Fiorentina 0–3 Juventus". BBC Sport. 1 December 2018. Archived from the original on 2 December 2018. Retrieved 2 December 2018. Das, Andrew (12 December 2018). "Luka Modric Wins Ballon d'Or, Ending Decade of Ronaldo and Messi Triumphs". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 4 December 2018. Retrieved 4 December 2018. Burnton, Simon (16 January 2019). "Juventus 1–0 Milan: Supercoppa Italiana – as it happened". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 April 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2019. "Juve, CR7 da record: 9 trasferte di fila con gol in Serie A. E nel mirino c'è Messi". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 11 February 2019. Retrieved 11 February 2019. "Cristiano Ronaldo hat-trick against Atlético fires Juventus into last eight". The Guardian. 12 March 2019. Retrieved 12 March 2019. "Cristiano Ronaldo's Champions League record – can Lionel Messi match it?". BBC Sport. 11 April 2019. Retrieved 11 April 2019. Henson, Mike (16 April 2019). "Juventus 1–2 Ajax (agg 2–3)". BBC Sport. Retrieved 17 April 2019. Dampf, Andrew; Smith, Adam (22 April 2019). "Ronaldo Becomes first player to win Europe's top 3 leagues". AP News. Archived from the original on 22 October 2019. Retrieved 22 October 2019. "Inter Milan 1–1 Juventus". BBC Sport. 27 April 2019. Retrieved 27 April 2019. "Ronaldo MVP in Serie A Awards". Football Italia. 18 May 2019. Archived from the original on 13 August 2019. Retrieved 18 May 2019. Begley, Emlyn (31 August 2019). "Juventus–Napoli 4–3". BBC Sport. Retrieved 1 September 2019. "Messi, Rapinoe Crowned The Best in Milan". FIFA. 23 September 2019. Archived from the original on 23 June 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2019. Jacot, Sam (2 October 2019). "Cristiano Ronaldo breaks series of records after scoring 128th Champions League goal in Juventus win over Bayer Leverkusen". 90 Min. Retrieved 5 November 2019. "Juve, Ronaldo raggiunge Maldini: 174 presenze nelle competizioni Uefa. Al primo posto..." Calciomercato (in Italian). 6 November 2019. Archived from the original on 14 June 2020. Retrieved 8 November 2019. "Cristiano Ronaldo: Juventus forward defies gravity with jump". BBC. 18 December 2019. Retrieved 20 December 2019. "Juventus 4–0 Cagliari: Cristiano Ronaldo scores first Serie A hat-trick". BBC Sport. 6 January 2019. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Juve, Ronaldo come Trezeguet: in gol per la nona volta di fila in Serie A". Il Corriere dello Sport (in Italian). 2 February 2020. Retrieved 9 February 2020. Wright, Chris (10 February 2020). "Amazing giant Cristiano Ronaldo figure towers over town at Italian carnival". ESPN FC. Retrieved 10 February 2020. "Cristiano Ronaldo scores in win to equal Serie A record in 1,000th game". BBC Sport. 22 February 2020. Retrieved 22 February 2020. "Cristiano Ronaldo overtakes Rui Costa to become Serie A's top Portuguese scorer". Yahoo Sports. 22 June 2020. Retrieved 23 June 2020. "Juventus 4–1 Torino: Cristiano Ronaldo scores first free-kick for Juve in win". BBC Sport. 4 July 2020. Archived from the original on 5 July 2020. Retrieved 4 July 2020. Bhargav (24 September 2020). "Top 5 players who have succeeded in 3 top-5 leagues". www.sportskeeda.com. Archived from the original on 25 January 2024. Retrieved 25 January 2024. "Cristiano Ronaldo became the first player to score 50 goals in Serie A, La Liga and the Premier League as his double against Lazio put Juventus on the brink of the Serie A title". BBC Sport. 20 July 2020. Retrieved 20 July 2020. "Cristiano Ronaldo hits 50 league goals in England, Spain and Italy". AS. 20 July 2020. Archived from the original on 26 November 2022. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo equals a record from 1948". Marca. 21 July 2020. Archived from the original on 22 July 2020. Retrieved 22 July 2020. "Juventus 2–0 Sampdoria: Maurizio Sarri's side claim ninth straight Serie A title". BBC Sport. 27 July 2020. Retrieved 6 August 2020. "Cristiano Ronaldo denied chance to be Serie A top scorer". AS.com. 1 August 2020. Archived from the original on 2 August 2021. Retrieved 2 August 2020. Richardson, Andrew Cesare (1 August 2020). "Immobile wins Golden Shoe, levels Serie A record". ESPN. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 6 August 2020. "Ronaldo breaks all-time Juventus scoring record with Lyon double". Goal. 7 August 2020. Archived from the original on 9 August 2020. Retrieved 7 August 2020. Rostance, Tom (7 August 2020). "Juventus 2–1 Lyon". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 24 May 2021. Retrieved 7 August 2020. "Juventus-Sampdoria 3–0: gol e highlights. Tris bianconero, Pirlo vince al debutto". Sky Sport (in Italian). 20 September 2020. Retrieved 20 September 2020. "Cristiano Ronaldo scores twice in first match since recovering from COVID-19". Sportsnet.ca. 1 November 2020. Archived from the original on 2 November 2020. Retrieved 1 November 2020. "Ronaldo scores 750th career goal in Juventus' Champions League victory over Dynamo Kiev". Goal. 2 December 2020. Archived from the original on 8 December 2020. Retrieved 15 July 2021. "Serie A, Genoa-Juventus 1–3: Dybala e CR7 stendono i rossoblù". Sport Mediaset. 13 December 2020. Archived from the original on 14 December 2020. Retrieved 13 December 2020. "Juventus-Napoli 2–0: Ronaldo, 760 gol e regala (con Morata) la Supercoppa ai bianconeri" [Juventus-Napoli 2–0: Ronaldo, 760 goals and gives (with Morata) the Super Cup to the bianconeri]. Sky Sport (in Italian). 20 January 2021. Retrieved 14 July 2021. "Cristiano Ronaldo breaks another record during his 600th league game". CNN. 3 March 2021. Retrieved 15 July 2021. "Ronaldo hat-tricks inspired by Cagliari". Football Italia. 14 March 2021. Archived from the original on 14 March 2021. Retrieved 14 March 2021. "Ronaldo becomes fastest player to reach 100 Juventus goals". Goal. 12 May 2021. Archived from the original on 13 May 2021. Retrieved 12 May 2021. "Cristiano Ronaldo cements domestic dominance as Juventus wins Coppa Italia". CNN. 20 May 2021. Archived from the original on 15 December 2022. Retrieved 21 May 2021. "Cristiano Ronaldo first player to finish as top scorer in Serie A, Premier League, La Liga". ESPN. 23 May 2021. Archived from the original on 24 May 2021. Retrieved 23 May 2021. "Cristiano Ronaldo dropped to Juventus bench for Serie A opener amid future doubts". ESPN. 22 August 2021. Archived from the original on 23 August 2021. Retrieved 27 August 2021. "Cristiano Ronaldo: Juventus boss says he decided to use Portuguese star from the bench on Sunday". Sky Sports. 23 August 2021. Archived from the original on 23 August 2021. Retrieved 27 August 2021. Pattle, Alex (27 August 2021). "Cristiano Ronaldo has 'no intention' of staying at Juventus as Man City close in". The Independent. Archived from the original on 27 August 2021. Retrieved 27 August 2021. Delaney, Miguel (26 August 2021). "Cristiano Ronaldo: Man City agree personal terms with Juventus star ahead of possible transfer". The Independent. Archived from the original on 26 August 2021. Retrieved 27 August 2021. Dawson, Rob (27 August 2021). "Cristiano Ronaldo to Manchester City off: Manchester United now front-runners". ESPN. Archived from the original on 27 August 2021. Retrieved 27 August 2021. Stone, Simon (27 August 2021). "Cristiano Ronaldo: Man Utd in advanced talks to sign Juventus forward". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 27 August 2021. Retrieved 27 August 2021. "Cristiano Ronaldo: Manchester United in advanced talks to sign forward after Manchester City pull out of deal". Sky Sports. 27 August 2021. Archived from the original on 27 August 2021. Retrieved 27 August 2021. Delaney, Miguel (27 August 2021). "Cristiano Ronaldo: How Manchester United sealed a transfer 12 years in the making in a matter of hours". The Independent. Archived from the original on 27 August 2021. Retrieved 27 August 2021. Ogden, Mark (27 August 2021). "Cristiano Ronaldo's Man Utd return: ex-teammates' Whatsapp messages helped end Man City move". ESPN. Archived from the original on 27 August 2021. Retrieved 27 August 2021. "United confirm Ronaldo agreement". Manchester United F.C. 27 August 2021. Archived from the original on 31 August 2021. Aarons, Ed; Romano, Fabrizio (27 August 2021). "'Welcome back': Manchester United agree €20m deal for Cristiano Ronaldo". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 August 2021. Retrieved 27 August 2021. "Cristiano Ronaldo to Man Utd: 'I'm back where I belong' and dedicates return to Sir Alex Ferguson". BBC Sport. 31 August 2021. Archived from the original on 1 September 2021. Retrieved 31 August 2021. Ostlere, Lawrence (2 September 2021). "Cristiano Ronaldo shirt number: New Manchester United forward takes No7 from Edinson Cavani". The Independent. Archived from the original on 3 September 2021. Retrieved 2 September 2021. Fiore, Tommaso (6 September 2021). "Cristiano Ronaldo: New Manchester United No 7 smashes shirt sale record and causes media frenzy". Sky Sports. Retrieved 7 September 2021. Stone, Simon (11 September 2021). "Cristiano Ronaldo twice scores as Manchester United beat Newcastle". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 11 September 2021. Marsh, Charlotte (29 September 2021). "Man Utd 2–1 Villarreal: Cristiano Ronaldo snatches dramatic late Champions League victory for United". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 5 October 2021. Retrieved 30 September 2021. "Manchester United 3-2 Atalanta: Ronaldo delivers again as Red Devils rally from two goals down". FotMob. 20 October 2021. Archived from the original on 19 February 2023. Retrieved 14 November 2022. "Late Cristiano Ronaldo goal salvages dramatic point for Manchester United in Champions League". CNN. 3 November 2021. Archived from the original on 6 December 2022. Retrieved 14 November 2022. "Villarreal 0-2 Man Utd: Cristiano Ronaldo and Jadon Sancho score as United reach Champions League last 16". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 23 February 2023. Retrieved 13 November 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo: Man Utd & Portugal forward becomes first player to score 800 top-level goals". BBC Sport. 3 December 2021. Retrieved 4 December 2021. "Ronaldo at 37: Is time finally catching up with Man Utd superstar?". Goal.com. 8 February 2022. Archived from the original on 20 February 2023. Retrieved 11 November 2022. Stone, Simon (15 February 2022). "Manchester United 2-0 Brighton & Hove Albion: Ronaldo scores as Man Utd beat Brighton". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 12 November 2022. Retrieved 15 February 2022. "Premier League: Ronaldo scores hat-trick as Man Utd beat Tottenham – reaction". BBC Sport. 11 March 2022. Retrieved 12 March 2022. Wilson, Jonathan. "Filling in the Blanks on (Possibly) the Greatest Goalscorer Ever". Sports Illustrated. "Cristiano Ronaldo seals milestone 50th club hat-trick with rare free-kick". 90min.com. 16 April 2022. Archived from the original on 25 April 2022. Retrieved 23 April 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo scores 100th Premier League goal: Can you name other players to reach landmark?". BBC Sport. 23 April 2022. Carney, Sam (12 May 2022). "Ronaldo wins Player of the Month". manutd.com. Retrieved 13 May 2022. Garrick, Omar (9 June 2022). "PFA Premier League Team of the Year: Ronaldo, De Bruyne, Salah included". The Athletic. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Nelson, Joe (4 June 2022). "Ronaldo named United's Player of the Year". Manchester United. Retrieved 4 June 2022. "Comparing Messi's PSG record with Ronaldo's at Man Utd in 2021-22". Planet Football. 23 May 2022. Retrieved 12 June 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo leaves Old Trafford before Man Utd pre-season friendly even finishes". Daily Mirror. 31 July 2022. Retrieved 11 November 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo reiterates desire to leave Manchester United during Carrington meeting". The Athletic. 28 July 2022. Retrieved 11 November 2022. Aarons, Ed (14 July 2022). "Chelsea decide against signing Cristiano Ronaldo after talks with representatives". The Guardian. Retrieved 27 November 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo in limbo: Manchester United legend unwanted by elite clubs". ESPN. 7 October 2022. Retrieved 11 November 2022. "Erik ten Hag explains why Cristiano Ronaldo did not come on for Manchester United vs Man City". Manchester Evening News. 2 October 2022. Retrieved 19 November 2022. "Manchester United's Cristiano Ronaldo reaches 700 club goals". ESPN. 9 October 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2022. Whitwell, Laurie (20 October 2022). "Cristiano Ronaldo left Old Trafford before final whistle after being unused substitute in Manchester United win". The Athletic. Retrieved 20 October 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo: Man Utd forward leaves Old Trafford before full-time". BBC Sport. 20 October 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2022. Jackson, Jamie (20 October 2022). "Ronaldo banished by Manchester United and reluctant to engage with some staff". The Guardian. Retrieved 20 October 2022. Whitwell, Laurie (20 October 2022). "Cristiano Ronaldo made to train alone after refusing to come on as substitute". The Athletic. Retrieved 20 October 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo returns to Manchester United first-team training ahead of Europa League tie with Sheriff". Sky Sports. 26 October 2022. Retrieved 11 November 2022. Marshall, Tyrone (6 November 2022). "Why Erik ten Hag named Cristiano Ronaldo Manchester United captain vs Aston Villa". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 14 November 2022. Fay, Richard (14 November 2022). "Erik ten Hag issues Cristiano Ronaldo update after Manchester United beat Fulham". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 14 November 2022. Lund, Tommy; David, Toby (14 November 2022). "Ronaldo accuses Manchester United of betrayal". CNN. Retrieved 14 November 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo: Manchester United forward says he feels 'betrayed' and has 'no respect' for Erik ten Hag". Sky Sports. 14 November 2022. Retrieved 14 November 2022. Jackson, Jamie (18 November 2022). "Manchester United explore legal action as they look to force Ronaldo exit". The Guardian. Retrieved 19 November 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo: Manchester United exploring ways to terminate contract". Sky Sports. 19 November 2022. Retrieved 19 November 2022. Jackson, Jamie (22 November 2022). "Cristiano Ronaldo to leave Manchester United with immediate effect". The Guardian. Retrieved 22 November 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo: Former Manchester United forward signs for Saudi Arabian club Al-Nassr". Sky Sports. 30 December 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2022. Romano, Fabrizio (30 December 2022). "Cristiano Ronaldo completes deal to join Saudi Arabian club Al Nassr". The Guardian. Retrieved 30 December 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo joins Saudi Arabian side Al Nassr until 2025". BBC Sport. 30 December 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2022. Brennan, Feargal (30 December 2022). "Cristiano Ronaldo considers Al Nassr offer: Salary, contract details as star moves on from Man United". The Sporting News. Retrieved 30 December 2022. McDowell, Sam (2 January 2023). "The inside story of how Sporting KC pursued Cristiano Ronaldo. How close were they?". The Kansas City Star. Retrieved 22 January 2024. "Cristiano Ronaldo banned from making Al-Nassr debut". The Independent. 5 January 2023. Retrieved 5 January 2023. "Riyadh Season XI 4-5 PSG summary: Messi and Ronaldo score, goals, highlights". As. 20 January 2023. "Cristiano Ronaldo: Portugal forward makes competitive debut in Al Nassr win". BBC Sport. 22 January 2023. Retrieved 23 January 2023. "Cristiano Ronaldo scores late penalty for first Al Nassr goal in Saudi Arabia". BBC Sport. 3 February 2023. Retrieved 3 February 2023. "Ronaldo scores four goals to pass 500 in club career". Reuters. 9 February 2023. Retrieved 10 February 2023. Hodgson, George (28 May 2023). "Ronaldo suffers Saudi Pro League title heartbreak as Al Nassr miss out". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 8 June 2023. "Ronaldo hat-trick puts Al Nassr top of Saudi Pro League". Reuters. 25 February 2023. Retrieved 26 February 2023. "رونالدو أفضل لاعب لشهر فبراير وغروهي أفضل حارس وتتويج ثالث لمدرب الشباب وثاني للصعدي" [Ronaldo is the best player for February, Grohe is the best goalkeeper, and a third award for Al-Shabab coach and a second for Al-Saadi]. spl.sa (in Arabic). 28 February 2023. Archived from the original on 28 February 2023. Retrieved 4 March 2023. "Cristiano Ronaldo, Karim Benzema & the football stars who moved to the Saudi Pro League". "Match Report of US Monastir vs Al Nassr Saudi Club - 2023-07-31 - King Salman Club Cup - Global Sports Archive". globalsportsarchive.com. McAuley, John (4 August 2023). "Cristiano Ronaldo rescues Al Nassr's King Salman Cup bid as Sadio Mane makes debuts". The National. Retrieved 4 August 2023. Banerjee, Ritabrata (9 August 2023). "WATCH: Cristiano Ronaldo does it again! CR7 fires Al-Nassr to Arab Club Champions Cup final with clinical penalty against Al-Shorta". Goal. Retrieved 10 August 2023. Summerscales, Robert (12 August 2023). "Cristiano Ronaldo Wins First Trophy Since 2021 After Scoring Two Goals For 10-Man Al Nassr In Arab Club Champions Cup Final". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved 12 August 2023. "النصر السعودي يتلقى الهزيمة الثانية.. والتعاون بعد فوزه: نحن هنا". 18 August 2023. "Cristiano Ronaldo scores hat-trick and Sadio Mane twice for Saudi Pro League side Al-Nassr". BBC Sport. "Saudi Pro League: Cristiano Ronaldo, Sadio Mane and Riyad Mahrez score in Al-Nassr and Al-Ahli wins". BBC Sport. "رونالدو ونونو وغروهي والعييري الأفضل في أغسطس". Archived from the original on 31 August 2023. Retrieved 31 August 2023. Asikci, Emre (3 September 2023). "Cristiano Ronaldo becomes 1st player to score 850 official goals in history". Anadolu Ajansı. Retrieved 7 September 2023. "Ronaldo becomes 1st player to reach 1000 total career games unbeaten". sportsbrief.com. 20 September 2023. Retrieved 31 October 2023. "رونالدو وكاسترو وغروهي وفقيهي الأفضل في سبتمبر". Archived from the original on 5 October 2023. Retrieved 3 October 2023. Church, Michael (2 October 2023). "Ronaldo sparks fightback as Al-Nassr given Asian Champions League scare". Reuters. "Cristiano Ronaldo chega aos 1200 jogos na carreira: «Que viagem, mas ainda não acabámos»". Record. 8 December 2023. "Cristiano Ronaldo to end 2023 as world's top goal scorer". ESPN. 30 December 2023. "Cristiano Ronaldo Ends 2023 Two Goals Clear Of Harry Kane And Kylian Mbappe As Top Scorer In World Soccer". Sports Illustrated. 30 December 2023. "Cristiano Ronaldo: Al Nassr Star Reacts After Scoring on His 1000th Club Appearance". Sports Brief. 15 February 2024. "Ronaldo strikes as Al-Nassr confirm Asian Champions League progress". BNN. 21 February 2024. Duerden, John (28 February 2024). "Cristiano Ronaldo suspended for one match over alleged offensive gesture in Saudi league game". Associated Press. Retrieved 29 February 2024. "Cristiano Ronaldo é o primeiro jogador da história a chegar às 800 vitórias na carreira". Mais Futebol. 13 March 2024. Retrieved 18 March 2024. Arellano, Bryan (16 March 2024). "Cristiano Ronaldo reaches another milestone". AS. Retrieved 16 March 2024. "Cristiano Ronaldo: Young lion". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 26 April 2006. Retrieved 16 June 2021. Flanagan, Chris (8 September 2020). "Long read: Cristiano Ronaldo's incredible journey to 100 Portugal goals – and the all-time international record still to come". FourFourTwo. Retrieved 16 June 2021. Harte, Adrian (25 June 2004). "Portugal hold their nerve against England". UEFA. Archived from the original on 19 April 2016. Retrieved 23 April 2016. McCarra, Kevin (1 July 2004). "Portugal have the final word". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 4 December 2013. Retrieved 25 August 2010. "UEFA EURO 2004 Statistics: Assists". Archived from the original on 2 December 2013. Retrieved 9 September 2013. "Portugal Vs Iran match". FIFA. 17 June 2006. Archived from the original on 26 June 2012. Retrieved 3 July 2012. "Portugal 2–0 Iran". BBC Sport. 17 June 2006. Retrieved 16 June 2021. "Ronaldo cries foul". Irish Examiner. 26 June 2006. Retrieved 1 July 2010. "Ronaldo cleared over Rooney red card". ESPN. 4 July 2006. Archived from the original on 10 November 2012. Retrieved 17 November 2006. Taylor, Daniel (3 July 2006). "Ronaldo smiles as England bawl him out over Rooney". The Guardian. Retrieved 16 June 2021. Chick, Alex (6 July 2006). "Scolari's fortunes take a dive". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 4 September 2014. Retrieved 3 October 2023. "Podolski beats Ronaldo to award". BBC Sport. 7 July 2006. Archived from the original on 10 July 2006. Retrieved 10 July 2006. "Portugal – Azerbaijão". Portuguese Football Federation. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 7 July 2018. "Portugal – Cazaquistão". Portuguese Football Federation. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 7 July 2018. "Scolari delighted with Portugal victory over Brazil". Rediff. 7 February 2007. Archived from the original on 29 June 2010. Retrieved 15 July 2009. "Portugal". UEFA. Archived from the original on 16 January 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2013. "Top scorers for Euro 2008 European Qualifying campaign". ESPN. Archived from the original on 7 October 2010. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Full-time report Czech Republic-Portugal" (PDF). UEFA. 11 June 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 March 2013. Retrieved 26 June 2012. Sanderson, Pete (12 June 2008). "Ronaldo show seals Portugal progress". UEFA. Archived from the original on 1 August 2018. Retrieved 1 August 2018. Winter, Henry (20 June 2008). "Euro 2008: German power leaves Portugal in despair". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 30 August 2010. Retrieved 25 August 2010. "Queiroz appointed Portugal coach". FIFA. 11 July 2008. Archived from the original on 9 September 2009. Retrieved 25 August 2010. Burton, Chris (20 May 2008). "Ronnie named Portugal skipper". Retrieved 26 November 2022. Liew, Jonathan (20 November 2009). "Cristiano Ronaldo: Portugal star player at World Cup 2010". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 9 May 2016. Retrieved 23 April 2016. "Full-time report Côte d'Ivoire-Portugal". FIFA. 15 June 2010. Archived from the original on 13 May 2012. Retrieved 26 June 2012. "Full-time report North Korea-Portugal". FIFA. 21 June 2010. Archived from the original on 18 June 2012. Retrieved 26 June 2012. "Full-time report Brazil-Portugal". FIFA. 25 June 2010. Archived from the original on 13 May 2012. Retrieved 26 June 2012. Clegg, Jonathan (21 June 2010). "Portugal Beats North Korea in 7–0 Rout". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 26 July 2010. Taylor, Daniel (29 June 2010). "World Cup 2010: David Villa raises the roof as Spain push past Portugal". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 18 November 2018. Retrieved 28 May 2014. Bevan, Chris (16 June 2012). "Euro 2012: Who will survive the Group of Death?". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 10 February 2015. Williams, Richard (17 June 2012). "Cristiano Ronaldo downs a double to join the party spirit". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 December 2013. Retrieved 19 June 2012. "Euro 2012: Cristiano Ronaldo's header sends Portugal into semi-finals with 1–0 win over Czech Republic". Daily News. New York. 21 June 2012. Archived from the original on 24 June 2012. Retrieved 26 June 2012. "Euro 2012 Full-time Report: Portugal-Netherlands (2–1)" (PDF). UEFA. 17 June 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 May 2014. Retrieved 24 May 2015. "Czech Republic–Portugal (0–1)" (PDF). UEFA. 21 June 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 May 2014. Retrieved 24 May 2015. "Cristiano Ronaldo 'happy with contribution' as Portugal bow out of Euro 2012 against Spain". The Independent. 28 June 2012. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Williams, Richard (27 June 2012). "Euro 2012: Cristiano Ronaldo's save-it-for-later approach hurts Portugal". The Guardian. Retrieved 28 June 2012. "Portugal winger Nani suggests that Ronaldo demanded the fifth penalty against Spain to take the glory". Fox Sports. 30 June 2012. Retrieved 2 September 2020. "Centurion Ronaldo honoured by UEFA". UEFA. 17 October 2012. Archived from the original on 10 August 2013. Retrieved 15 August 2013. "Cristiano Ronaldo treble seals Portugal comeback against Northern Ireland". The Guardian. 6 September 2013. Retrieved 19 June 2022. O'Connor, Philip (20 November 2013). "Cristiano Ronaldo showed 'I am here' after stunning hat-trick for Portugal in World Cup play-off against Sweden". The Independent. London. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Brassell, Andy (19 November 2013). "Cristiano Ronaldo's hat-trick fires Portugal past battling Sweden". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 16 May 2017. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "Ronaldo not interested in records". ESPN. 6 March 2014. Retrieved 19 June 2012. "Portugal's Cristiano Ronaldo suffering from tendinosis before World Cup". The Guardian. London. 4 June 2014. Archived from the original on 4 June 2014. Retrieved 4 June 2014. Krishnan, Joe (19 June 2014). "Cristiano Ronaldo: Portugal star defies medics who warn playing against USA could end his career". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Taylor, Daniel (5 November 2015). "Cristiano Ronaldo film captures giant ego and strange, lonely world of being CR7". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 30 November 2015. Retrieved 4 December 2015. "World Cup 2014: Cristiano Ronaldo limps out of training". BBC Sport. 19 June 2014. Archived from the original on 11 March 2016. Retrieved 13 July 2016. "Ronaldo '100 percent fit' for U.S. game". ESPN. 18 June 2014. Archived from the original on 22 June 2014. Retrieved 21 June 2014. Ogden, Mark (23 June 2014). "Cristiano Ronaldo produces last gasp moment of magic to keep hopes alive". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "Portugal 2–1 Ghana" Archived 7 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine. BBC Sport. Retrieved 26 June 2014 "Cristiano Ronaldo is the first Portuguese to score in three final stages". Diário de Notícias. Retrieved 26 June 2014 (in Portuguese) "Armenia 2–3 Portugal". BBC Sport. 13 June 2015. Archived from the original on 14 June 2015. Retrieved 14 June 2015. "European Championship's all-time top scorers". UEFA. 14 November 2014. Archived from the original on 18 November 2014. Retrieved 14 November 2014. Brassell, Andy (21 June 2016). "Euro 2016: What's wrong with Portugal's Cristiano Ronaldo?". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 24 June 2016. Retrieved 16 July 2016. "Cristiano Ronaldo becomes first to score in four European Championships". espnfc.com. 22 June 2016. Archived from the original on 23 June 2016. Retrieved 22 June 2016. "Ronaldo sets record for all-time Euro appearances". UEFA. 22 June 2016. Retrieved 2 July 2016. Keel, Toby (22 June 2016). "Third place at Euro 2016: How it works, who qualified and last 16 draw". Eurosport. Archived from the original on 15 July 2016. Retrieved 16 July 2016. "Portugal's Cristiano Ronaldo the first to play in three Euro semi-finals". ESPN. 6 July 2016. Archived from the original on 9 July 2016. Retrieved 8 July 2016. "Cristiano Ronaldo equals Michel Platini's Euros goal-scoring recorde". ESPN. 7 July 2016. Archived from the original on 7 July 2016. Retrieved 7 July 2016. "Portugal striker Cristiano Ronaldo forced off injured in Euro 2016 final". ESPN. 10 July 2016. Archived from the original on 11 July 2016. Retrieved 10 July 2016. "UEFA EURO 2016 Team of the Tournament revealed". UEFA. 11 July 2016. Archived from the original on 16 July 2016. Retrieved 11 July 2016. "France forward Antoine Griezmann wins Golden Boot". UEFA. 10 July 2016. Retrieved 11 July 2016. Douglas, Steve (29 March 2017). "Bittersweet return for Ronaldo as Portugal beaten by Sweden in Madeira, Russia fight back against Belgium". The Independent. Archived from the original on 29 March 2017. Retrieved 30 March 2017. Ames, Nick (18 June 2017). "Héctor Moreno's stoppage-time header earns Mexico draw against Portugal". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 24 June 2017. Retrieved 24 June 2017. "Cristiano Ronaldo header earns Portugal Confederations Cup win over Russia". The Guardian. 21 June 2017. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 24 June 2017. "Confederations Cup: Ronaldo helps Portugal into semi-final as hosts Russia out". BBC Sport. 24 June 2017. Archived from the original on 28 June 2017. Retrieved 24 June 2017. "Ronaldo second on all-time list of international scorers". UEFA. 24 June 2017. Archived from the original on 23 June 2017. Retrieved 24 June 2017. "FIFA Confederations Cup Russia 2017 – Awards – Man of the Match". FIFA. Archived from the original on 21 June 2017. Retrieved 26 June 2017. Corrigan, Dermot (29 June 2017). "Cristiano Ronaldo confirms birth of twins, leaves Portugal at Confed Cup". ESPN. Archived from the original on 2 July 2017. Retrieved 30 June 2017. "Portugal come from behind to finish third". FIFA. 2 July 2017. Archived from the original on 2 July 2017. Retrieved 2 July 2017. "Pele congratulates Cristiano Ronaldo on surpassing his goals record". BeIN Sports. 1 September 2017. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 2 September 2017. Saffer, Paul (1 September 2017). "Cristiano Ronaldo equals European Qualifiers goal record". UEFA. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 2 September 2017. "Ronaldo 'desbloqueia' e Portugal vence em Andorra". Correio da Manhã. 7 October 2017. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 31 May 2018. "Spain vs. Portugal final score: Crazy draw as Cristiano Ronaldo becomes oldest to score World Cup hat trick". cbssports.com. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 16 June 2018. Brown, Luke (20 June 2018). "Cristiano Ronaldo goal, Portugal vs Morocco World Cup 2018: Real Madrid forward breaks record with header". The Independent. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. Henry, Matthew (25 June 2018). "Iran 1–1 Portugal". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 12 July 2018. Retrieved 9 July 2018. Rose, Gary (30 June 2018). "Uruguay 2–1 Portugal". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 1 July 2018. Retrieved 1 July 2018. "Fan Dream Team and prize winners revealed!". FIFA. 23 July 2018. Archived from the original on 28 August 2018. Retrieved 18 August 2018. Kappel, David (6 June 2019). "Hat-Trick Hero Ronaldo Sets New World Record". Soccer Laduma. Retrieved 6 June 2019. Taylor, Daniel (9 June 2019). "Portugal win Nations League as Gonçalo Guedes does for the Netherlands". The Guardian. Estádio do Dragão. Retrieved 2 February 2020. "Ronaldo scores four as Portugal beat Lithuania". ESPN FC. 10 September 2019. Retrieved 10 September 2019. "CR7, altro record da fenomeno: ne fa 4 in Lituania, nessuno come lui nelle qualificazioni europee". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 10 September 2019. Retrieved 10 September 2019. Di Marzio, Gianluca (10 September 2019). "Ronaldo, poker con la Lituania e record: è il re del gol nelle qualificazioni europee" (in Italian). gianlucadimarzio.com. Retrieved 11 September 2019. Grez, Matias (11 September 2019). "Cristiano Ronaldo hits four against Lithuania and nears all-time goals record". CNN. Retrieved 11 September 2019. "Ukraine 2–1 Portugal". BBC Sport. 14 October 2019. Retrieved 14 October 2019. "Luxembourg 0–2 Portugal: holders secure finals place". UEFA. Retrieved 3 October 2021. "Sweden vs. Portugal – Football Match Report". ESPN. 8 September 2020. Retrieved 8 September 2020. "Sweden 0–2 Portugal". BBC Sport. 8 September 2020. Archived from the original on 8 September 2020. Retrieved 8 September 2020. "Cristiano Ronaldo tests positive for coronavirus". Marca English. 13 October 2020. Retrieved 13 October 2020. "Juve: Ronaldo has recovered from COVID". Football Italia. 30 October 2020. Ehantharajah, Vithushan (15 June 2021). "Cristiano Ronaldo puts historic stamp on Portugal's late victory over Hungary at Euro 2020". The Independent. Retrieved 15 June 2021. White, Tom (15 June 2021). "Comparing Cristiano Ronaldo with the other European Championship sharp-shooters". The Independent. Retrieved 15 June 2021. "Cristiano Ronaldo becomes top scorer in European Championship history". The Athletic. 15 June 2021. Retrieved 15 June 2021. Smith, Emma (15 June 2021). "Portugal legend Ronaldo breaks Euros goal record and becomes first player to feature at five finals tournaments". Goal.com. Retrieved 15 June 2021. Bhawani, Vishal. "Cristiano Ronaldo breaks record as Portugal beats Hungary". Football Express. Retrieved 17 June 2021. "Cristiano Ronaldo equals men's international goalscoring record". BBC Sport. 23 June 2021. "Cristiano Ronaldo on Portugal exit: We gave it our all". Marca. 28 June 2021. "Cristiano Ronaldo wins Euro 2020 Alipay Top Scorer award". UEFA. 11 July 2021. Retrieved 11 July 2021. Begley, Emlyn (1 September 2021). "Cristiano Ronaldo breaks men's international scoring record with 110th and 111th goals". BBC Sport. Retrieved 1 September 2021. Smith, Joshua (9 October 2021). "Cristiano Ronaldo breaks another international record while scoring 112th goal". Manchester Evening News. Retrieved 10 October 2021. "Cristiano Ronaldo bate recorde europeu de internacionalizações". Maisfutebol (in Portuguese). Retrieved 3 January 2024. "Cristiano Ronaldo scores a record-breaking 10th international hat-trick for Portugal". Sporting Life. 13 October 2021. Retrieved 6 December 2022. Garcia, Adriana (24 November 2022). "Portugal's Cristiano Ronaldo becomes first male player to score in 5 World Cups". ESPN. Retrieved 24 November 2022. Wilson, Jeremy (5 December 2022). "Cristiano Ronaldo slapped down by Portugal coach for unacceptable reaction". The Telegraph. Retrieved 7 December 2022. McNulty, Phil (6 December 2022). "World Cup 2022: 'Cristiano Ronaldo reduced to role of superstar nobody wants'". BBC Sport. Retrieved 7 December 2022. Humayun, Ali (6 December 2022). "Cristiano Ronaldo dropped for Portugal's World Cup clash with Switzerland". The Athletic. Retrieved 6 December 2022. Jolly, Richard (6 December 2022). "Cristiano Ronaldo shocked by seismic shift in Portugal's World Cup pecking order". The Independent. Retrieved 6 December 2022. "Morocco 1-0 Portugal: World Cup 2022 quarter-final – as it happened". The Guardian. 10 December 2022. Retrieved 11 December 2022. "Ronaldo equals men's international appearance record". FIFA.com. Retrieved 17 December 2022. "Roberto Martinez names Cristiano Ronaldo in first Portugal squad since World Cup". ESPN. 17 March 2023. Retrieved 24 March 2023. Marshall, Matthew (23 March 2023). "Ronaldo at the double as Portugal beat Liechtenstein 4–0 in the Euro 2024 qualifiers". PortuGOAL. Retrieved 23 March 2023. Marshall, Matthew (20 June 2023). "Cristiano Ronaldo celebrates his 200th cap in style by firing Portugal to a 1-0 win in Iceland". PortuGOAL. Retrieved 20 June 2023. "Portugal já está no Euro-2024 (e com a qualificação mais rápida de sempre!)". Abola. Retrieved 13 October 2023. "João Neves é o segundo estreante da "era" Roberto Martínez" [João Neves is the second debutant of the Roberto Martínez "era"] (in European Portuguese). RTP. 16 October 2023. Retrieved 16 October 2023. "Cristiano Ronaldo scored a brace in Portugal's win over Bosnia". KhelNow. Retrieved 21 February 2024. ""38 and still shining," "Messi did this ages ago" - Fans react as incredible new Cristiano Ronaldo stat comes to light". Sportskeeda. Retrieved 21 February 2024. "Why Cristiano Ronaldo is better than Lionel Messi!". Zeenews.india.com. 26 August 2012. Archived from the original on 4 August 2013. Retrieved 30 July 2013. Wilson, Jonathan (24 March 2010). "Why are so many wingers playing on the 'wrong' wings?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 August 2016. Retrieved 16 July 2016. "E' Ronaldo il Bolt del calcio" (in Italian). Sport mediaset. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 14 December 2014. "Cristiano Ronaldo – Portogallo". Archived from the original on 28 April 2014. Retrieved 14 December 2014. Goodman, Mike L. (22 September 2015). "The Evolution of Cristiano Ronaldo". Grantland. Archived from the original on 12 May 2016. Retrieved 25 April 2016. "WATCH: Ronaldo's elastico nutmeg!". Sky Sports. 20 February 2017. Retrieved 8 April 2020. "Real Madrid's Cristiano Ronaldo: The Fastest In Football – German Study". Goal. Retrieved 14 June 2019. Molinaro, John. "Ronaldo Vs. Messi: The Case For Ronaldo As World's Best Player". Sportsnet. Archived from the original on 27 June 2018. Retrieved 26 June 2018. Marcotti, Gabriele (6 July 2016). "Ronaldo, Portugal accept manager's challenge to reach Euro 2016 final". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 27 June 2018. Retrieved 26 June 2018. "How did Cristiano Ronaldo score his incredible header against Manchester United?". The Daily Telegraph. London. 14 February 2013. Archived from the original on 30 May 2013. Retrieved 1 June 2013. "Eden Hazard the new penalty taker king; Julio Cesar the best stopper". ESPN FC. 7 October 2014. Archived from the original on 14 November 2016. Retrieved 18 July 2016. "From Messi to Ronaldo – the world's best free kick takers". The Belfast Telegraph. Retrieved 4 November 2012. Anka, Carl (12 December 2018). "Noughty Boys: No one hit a free-kick quite like Juninho Pernambucano". BBC. Archived from the original on 12 December 2018. Retrieved 13 December 2018. Scott, Chris (16 June 2018). "Cristiano Ronaldo: Portuguese commentator goes wild over CR7". CNN. Archived from the original on 15 December 2018. Retrieved 13 December 2018. Sharma, Sarthak (4 November 2018). "Former Manchester United coach reveals why Cristiano Ronaldo takes free-kicks in his iconic style". Fox Sports Asia. Archived from the original on 15 December 2018. Retrieved 13 December 2018. Bate, Adam (15 November 2016). "Cristiano Ronaldo's evolution: Could he really play beyond the age of 40?". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 1 October 2018. Retrieved 1 October 2018. Rigg, Nicholas (25 September 2014). "The argument for playing Cristiano Ronaldo centrally at Real Madrid". ESPN FC. Retrieved 14 December 2014. Driscoll, Jon (2 August 2018). "Cristiano Ronaldo's rise at Real Madrid". Football Italia. Retrieved 18 April 2020. "How Liverpool can stop Cristiano Ronaldo". FourFourTwo. 21 October 2014. Archived from the original on 14 December 2014. Retrieved 14 December 2014. "Real Madrid's Cristiano Ronaldo: The Most Underrated Man in Football?". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 9 April 2018. Retrieved 8 April 2018. "Did Jose Mourinho's Tactics Help Cristiano Ronaldo Flourish at Real Madrid?". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 19 June 2015. Retrieved 14 December 2014. Marcotti, Gabriele (25 May 2018). "Real Madrid v Liverpool: The five phases of Cristiano Ronaldo". The Times. Retrieved 28 June 2018. Dunne, Robbie (14 March 2018). "Cristiano Ronaldo evolving into an effective striker for Real Madrid". ESPN FC. Retrieved 18 April 2020. Bate, Adam (15 November 2016). "Cristiano Ronaldo's evolution: Could he really play beyond the age of 40?". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 29 June 2018. Retrieved 28 June 2018. Hunter, Graham (23 October 2014). "Real Madrid vs. Barcelona: Clasico promises goals aplenty". ESPN FC. Retrieved 28 June 2018. Haugstad, Thore (13 February 2018). "Why Cristiano Ronaldo has been Real Madrid's major problem this season... but he can also be their solution". FourFourTwo. Archived from the original on 27 June 2018. Retrieved 26 June 2018. "Cristiano Ronaldo can become great centre-forward, says Gary Neville". Sky Sports. 20 April 2017. Archived from the original on 29 May 2018. Retrieved 28 May 2018. "Cristiano Ronaldo joins illustrious list of players who reinvented themselves in a new position". The Daily Telegraph. 10 May 2017. Archived from the original on 29 May 2018. Retrieved 28 May 2018. Cox, Michael (19 February 2019). "Juventus' twin towers of Ronaldo, Mandzukic to provide a unique test for Atletico's stingy defence". ESPN FC. Retrieved 30 April 2019. Robson, Stewart (5 October 2019). "Ronaldo's free role with Juventus is a headache for Sarri. How can he work around his star?". ESPN FC. Retrieved 12 October 2019. Marcotti, Gabriele (22 August 2018). "Cristiano Ronaldo conundrum: How should Max Allegri use Juventus' star?". ESPN FC. Retrieved 30 April 2019. McKay, Gaby (3 October 2018). "Dybala gives Allegri a headache". Football Italia. Retrieved 30 April 2019. Walker-Roberts, James (6 December 2018). "Is Cristiano Ronaldo undergoing another evolution at Juventus?". Sky Sports. Retrieved 30 April 2019. "Cristiano Ronaldo is the 'complete player', admits Sir Alex Ferguson". The Guardian. London. 9 January 2013. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 25 January 2013. Various sources: Macdonald, Paul. "A future without Messi and Ronaldo". Goal. Retrieved 8 June 2018. Staunton, Peter. "Messi and Ronaldo: Changing the face of football". Goal. Retrieved 8 June 2018. Haugstad, Thore (11 January 2016). "Whoever wins the Ballon d'Or, the Messi-Ronaldo duopoly is coming to an end". Eurosport. Retrieved 8 June 2018. Brewin, John (16 July 2018). "Will Cristiano Ronaldo's Madrid departure hasten the end of the 'Greatest' era?". Tifo Football. Archived from the original on 11 August 2018. Retrieved 11 August 2018. Kilpeläinen, Juuso (2 September 2018). "Ronaldo, Messi, Pele: The GOAT debate is unending, and shouldn't matter". Football Paradise. Archived from the original on 2 September 2018. Retrieved 15 December 2020. Ruthven, Graham (7 June 2017). "Cristiano Ronaldo is the greatest goalscorer of all time". Marca. Retrieved 21 January 2018. Purnell, Gareth (21 August 2009). "Manchester United will miss Ronaldo says Lampard". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 12 February 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2012. Various sources: Dawson, Alan (13 April 2018). "We analysed who the better big-game player is, Cristiano Ronaldo or Lionel Messi – and the stats show the winner is clear". Business Insider. Retrieved 8 June 2018. Weiner, David (7 March 2018). "Scary proof Ronaldo is the ultimate big game player". The Queensland Times. Retrieved 8 June 2018. Jones, Robert (5 April 2018). "Ronaldo has become king of the big-game occasion for Real Madrid". The Belfast Telegraph. Retrieved 8 June 2018. Mitten, Andy (5 March 2013). "How Ronaldo became the world's best: the inside story". Eurosport. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo: Is Euro 2016 triumph his greatest achievement?". CNN. 11 July 2016. Archived from the original on 28 March 2018. Retrieved 28 March 2018. "Ronaldo: I trained because I had to, Cristiano Ronaldo does it because he loves it". Marca. Retrieved 12 May 2021. "Cristiano Ronaldo says he has no idea how much money he has". Archived 12 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine. London. Daily Mirror. Retrieved 5 September 2014 Brassell, Andy (9 June 2021). "How Portugal became a European super power in football". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 11 June 2021. Retrieved 17 June 2021. Various sources: Sunderland, Tom (11 November 2013). "10 Biggest Divers in World Football § 6. Cristiano Ronaldo". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 8 June 2018. Pickup, Oliver (30 June 2014). "Arjen Robben joins list of top 9 football divers of all time, but where does he rank compared to the others?". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2017. "Sir Alex Ferguson admits Cristiano Ronaldo was a diver". Sport English. 2015. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 8 June 2018. Daly, Jim (16 September 2014). "Rio Ferdinand claims Cristiano Ronaldo was once blasted by Sir Alex Ferguson for playing selfishly". Daily Mirror. London. Archived from the original on 19 December 2014. Retrieved 14 December 2014. Wilson, Jonathan (28 August 2021). "Cristiano Ronaldo held Juventus back: just what do Manchester United see in him?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 August 2021. Retrieved 29 August 2021. Kilpeläinen, Juuso (8 June 2018). "Blood, sweat and toil: The foundations for the legacy of Cristiano Ronaldo". Football Paradise. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 15 December 2020. "Ronaldo admits perceived arrogance has cost him". CNN. 8 November 2012. Archived from the original on 22 November 2012. Retrieved 23 November 2012. "Jose Mourinho claims Cristiano Ronaldo deserved to win Ballon d'Or". ESPN. 20 March 2013. Archived from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Pepe: 'Cristiano is a symbol'". Marca. Spain. 10 September 2013. Archived from the original on 13 September 2013. Retrieved 10 September 2013. Balague, Guillem (14 January 2014). "Ballon d'Or: Cristiano Ronaldo's improved image helped win, says Guillem Balague". Sky Sports. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Russell, Bradley (6 October 2017). "How to do the 12 new FIFA 18 celebrations – plus more of our favourites". FourFourTwo. Retrieved 26 November 2022. Matchett, Karl (3 May 2017). "Chronology of Cristiano Ronaldo Told Through His Goal Celebrations". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 15 December 2018. Retrieved 13 December 2018. Murray, Caitlin (9 December 2016). "Everyone mocks Cristiano Ronaldo's new goal celebration, including his own son". Fox Sports. Archived from the original on 15 December 2018. Retrieved 13 December 2018. Lloyd, Simon (March 2018). "What does Cristiano Ronaldo's goal celebration mean?". joe.co.uk. Archived from the original on 15 December 2018. Retrieved 13 December 2018. Wright, Chris (27 September 2017). "Little fan absolutely nails Cristiano Ronaldo goal celebration". ESPN. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Mendes, Chris (24 June 2014). "Cristiano Ronaldo's personal duel with Lionel Messi is affecting his performances for Portugal". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 7 October 2014. Retrieved 30 September 2014. Hunter, Graham (28 November 2010). "The game's best rivalry". ESPN. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 30 September 2014. "Messi v Ronaldo". Sky Sports. 17 October 2011. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Hughes, Rob (13 September 2011). "Ronaldo May Look Like the Best, but There Is Someone Better". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 July 2015. Retrieved 30 September 2014. Hayward, Paul (26 May 2009). "Cristiano Ronaldo versus Lionel Messi pits showman against shy man". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 9 October 2014. Retrieved 30 September 2014. Lewis, Tim (24 November 2013). "Cristiano Ronaldo: he's got a god-given talent – and he knows it". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 30 September 2014. Calvin, Michael (15 June 2014). "Crunch time for Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo". The Independent. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 30 September 2014. "Messi and I are colleagues, work friends". Archived 25 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine. Marca (Spain). 28 August 2014. Retrieved 21 November 2014. Montague, James; Pinto, Pedro (29 May 2012). "Cristiano Ronaldo: I'm better than Messi". CNN. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 30 September 2014. Palmer, Kevin (20 December 2012). "Fergie: Ronaldo and Messi are equals". ESPN. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Barcelona's Lionel Messi blames media for inventing rivalry with Real Madrid's Cristiano Ronaldo". The Daily Telegraph. London. 15 August 2012. Archived from the original on 7 October 2014. Retrieved 30 September 2014. "Lionel Messi Reaches $50 Million-A-Year Deal With Barcelona". Archived 6 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine. Forbes. 16 May 2014. Retrieved 1 October 2014 "Cristiano Ronaldo: Sepp Blatter's apology to Real Madrid". BBC Sport. 29 October 2013. Archived from the original on 25 January 2016. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Cristiano Ronaldo, Lionel Messi & Eric Cantona light up Uefa awards". BBC. Retrieved 30 August 2019. "Cristiano Ronaldo: Lionel Messi rivalry now 'gone' says Portuguese great". BBC Sport. 7 September 2023. Retrieved 11 September 2023. Usry, Rob (18 December 2022). "Lionel Messi puts the GOAT debate to rest with storybook World Cup win". SBNation.com. Archived from the original on 21 December 2022. Retrieved 20 December 2022. McIntyre, Doug (18 December 2022). "Lionel Messi Cements His Goat Status With A Little Help From His Friends". Fox Sports. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 20 January 2023. Sharland, Pete (18 December 2022). "World Cup 2022 Final: Win Or Lose, Argentina Star Lionel Messi Has Settled The Goat Debate Forever". ESPN. Archived from the original on 22 December 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2023. "Nike's CR7 Collection Reflects Attitude And Irreverence Of A Global Icon". Nike. 7 November 2012. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 6 July 2018. "Cristiano Ronaldo expands his brand with the launch of Legacy fragrance". Forbes. 26 November 2015. Archived from the original on 22 September 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2019. Booth, Robert (11 June 2009). "From £175 to £80m in 14 years – but can Cristiano Ronaldo earn it like Beckham?". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 17 December 2013. Retrieved 8 July 2013. Badenhausen, Kurt (7 November 2012). "Is Cristiano Ronaldo The World's Most Marketable Athlete?". Forbes. Archived from the original on 2 June 2013. Retrieved 8 July 2013. Badenhausen, Kurt (2 December 2016). "Why Cristiano Ronaldo's $1 Billion Nike Deal May Be A Bargain For Sportswear Giant". Forbes. Archived from the original on 5 July 2018. Retrieved 6 July 2018. "EA Unveil new FIFA 18 trailer and official cover art". Goal. 22 August 2017. Archived from the original on 8 November 2017. Retrieved 8 November 2017. "Fifa 18 release date confirmed with Cristiano Ronaldo as cover star". London Evening Standard. 6 June 2017. Archived from the original on 6 July 2018. Retrieved 5 July 2018. Badenhausen, Kurt. "The Highest-Paid Athletes Of The Decade: Mayweather, Ronaldo And LeBron Dominate". Forbes. Retrieved 13 January 2020. Settimi, Christina (7 May 2014). "The world's highest paid football players". Forbes. Archived from the original on 10 May 2014. Retrieved 8 May 2014. "The world's highest paid football players 2015". Forbes. Archived from the original on 26 November 2015. Retrieved 26 November 2015. "The World's Highest-Paid Athletes". Forbes. Archived from the original on 18 January 2015. Retrieved 14 January 2015. Reynolds, Ben (8 June 2016). "Cristiano Ronaldo first footballer to top Forbes rich list of highest-earning athletes". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 10 June 2016. Retrieved 9 June 2016. "Cristiano Ronaldo Produced Nearly $1 Billion in Value for Sponsors on Social Media". Archived 13 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine. Forbes. 15 June 2016. Retrieved 30 August 2017. Settimi, Christina. "Ronaldo's $105 Million Year Tops Messi And Crowns Him Soccer's First Billion-Dollar Man". Forbes. Retrieved 9 June 2020. "MS Dhoni, Mary Kom world's 16th, 38th most marketable athletes". The Times of India. 26 June 2012. Archived from the original on 18 June 2013. "50 Most Marketable 2013 – Cristiano Ronaldo". SportsProMedia. 8 May 2013. Archived from the original on 15 May 2014. Retrieved 15 May 2014. "Top 10 Most Marketable Footballers in the World" (PDF). Repucom (press release). 28 May 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 22 August 2015. Pelé (23 April 2014). "Cristiano Ronaldo by Pelé: Time 100". Time. Archived from the original on 2 June 2014. Retrieved 3 June 2014. "ESPN World Fame 100". ESPN. 3 June 2016. Archived from the original on 13 July 2016. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "ESPN World Fame 100". ESPN. 30 May 2017. Archived from the original on 31 May 2017. Retrieved 1 June 2017. "ESPN ranks the 100 most famous athletes". USA Today. 31 May 2018. "World Fame 100 – 2019". ESPN. Retrieved 14 September 2019. "Huge statue of Cristiano Ronaldo erected – and there's something slightly stiff about it". Eurosport. 21 December 2014. Retrieved 23 January 2019. "Ronaldo Is The First Person To Pass Half A Billion Followers On Social Media". SportBible. Retrieved 13 February 2021. "How Mobile Games Are Sports Stars' Newest Marketing Channel". Mashable. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "'Viva Ronaldo' – Cristiano creates his own online community". AS. 13 December 2013. Archived from the original on 26 December 2013. Retrieved 15 May 2014. "McAfee Names Most Dangerous Football Team in Europe". Infosecurity. 28 June 2012. Archived from the original on 30 June 2012. Retrieved 15 May 2012. "Moments". Chapters. 27 March 2009. Archived from the original on 23 May 2009. Brown, Brigid (June 2014). "WATCH: Benedict Cumberbatch Narrates Cristiano Ronaldo Documentary". BBC America. Archived from the original on 10 May 2015. Retrieved 10 May 2015. "Footballer Cristiano Ronaldo awarded with Guinness World Records certificates at London film premiere", Archived 15 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine. Guinness World Records. Retrieved 10 November 2015. Denham, Jess (10 June 2015). "Cristiano Ronaldo confirms film being made about his life with Amy and Senna director on board". Independent. Archived from the original on 14 June 2015. Retrieved 2 August 2015. "Manchester United's Wayne Rooney is king of the replica kit". The Guardian. London. 22 July 2011. Archived from the original on 30 June 2018. Retrieved 13 October 2018. "Leo Messi's Barcelona Shirt Is the Most Sold Worldwide, Cristiano Ronaldo 2nd". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 4 January 2019. "Juventus Have Sold $60 Million Of Ronaldo Jerseys In 24 Hours". Forbes. Archived from the original on 13 October 2018. Retrieved 13 October 2018. "New CR7 store in London". Football Shirt Culture. 10 October 2008. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2019. Tilley, Jonathan (1 November 2013). "M&C Saatchi launches underwear range with giant image of Ronaldo in pants". PR Week. Archived from the original on 17 May 2014. Retrieved 15 May 2014. "Cristiano Ronaldo Is Working With Richard Chai to Add Shirts to His CR7 Underwear Line". Complex. 15 July 2014. Archived from the original on 19 July 2014. Retrieved 23 July 2014. "Cristiano Ronaldo launches SHOE range as he branches out into fashion". Irish Mirror. 17 July 2014. Archived from the original on 28 July 2014. Retrieved 23 July 2014. Badenhausen, Kurt (16 September 2015). "Cristiano Ronaldo Expands His Brand With Launch Of New Fragrance". Forbes. Retrieved 27 November 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo Football Campus". CD Nacional. Archived from the original on 22 December 2017. Retrieved 21 December 2017. Jones, Alice (25 February 2014). "Inside Cristiano Ronaldo's museum: 'I have room for more trophies'". The Independent. Archived from the original on 1 July 2014. Retrieved 15 May 2014. "Cristiano Ronaldo associa-se ao União da Madeira". Maisfutebol.iol.pt. Archived from the original on 25 August 2017. Retrieved 24 December 2017. "Cristiano Ronaldo associa-se ao União da Madeira". Tvi24.iol.pt. 20 November 2014. Archived from the original on 25 August 2017. Retrieved 24 December 2017. "Cristiano Ronaldo made Grand Officer of the Order of Prince Henry". El País. 21 January 2014. Archived from the original on 17 May 2014. Retrieved 15 May 2014. "Cristiano Ronaldo immortalized in bronze statue outside his personal museum". CNN. 22 December 2014. Archived from the original on 23 December 2014. Retrieved 24 December 2014. "World Cup 2010: Cristiano Ronaldo gets Madam Tussauds waxwork". The Daily Telegraph. London. 10 June 2010. Archived from the original on 6 February 2015. Retrieved 15 May 2014. "Cristiano Ronaldo sends stylist to museum to brush waxwork's hair". BBC Sport. 5 March 2015. Archived from the original on 23 June 2018. Retrieved 4 November 2017. "Cristiano Ronaldo: CR7 name given to discovered galaxy". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 21 October 2015. "Madeira airport renamed after Cristiano Ronaldo". The World Game. Special Broadcasting Service. Archived from the original on 24 July 2016. Retrieved 23 July 2016. Corrigan, Dermot (10 March 2017). "Cristiano Ronaldo airport rename critics slammed by Madeira president". ESPN. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Weekend Update: Cecilia Gimenez on Cristiano Ronaldo Bust - SNL. Saturday Night Live. 9 April 2017. Archived from the original on 24 October 2022. Retrieved 20 December 2022 – via YouTube. "Madeira airport preparing to be renamed after Cristiano Ronaldo". Espn.com. 28 March 2017. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Ronaldo statue: Sculptor Emanuel Santos takes another shot at bust". BBC News. 30 March 2018. Archived from the original on 25 May 2018. Retrieved 30 May 2018. "Aeroporto da Madeira tem novo busto de Cristiano Ronaldo". SAPO. 17 June 2018. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "Academia Cristiano Ronaldo". sporting.pt. "Nacional "estupefacto e desagradado" com Sporting por dar nome de Ronaldo a Academia". www.sabado.pt (in European Portuguese). Retrieved 27 September 2023. "What is the media company owned by Cristiano Ronaldo?". Portugal Business News. 27 October 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. "Lisbon awards Cristiano Ronaldo with City Medal of Honour". www.theportugalnews.com. Retrieved 9 March 2024. "Ronaldo raises funds for tsunami-hit Aceh". People's Daily. 13 June 2005. Archived from the original on 9 March 2011. Retrieved 2 April 2011. "Tsunami Survivors: New Life For A Decimated Football Club". FIFA. 9 January 2008. Archived from the original on 11 March 2013. Retrieved 3 July 2012. "Cristiano Ronaldo accepts Daily Telegraph libel payout". BBC News. Archived from the original on 15 September 2018. Retrieved 14 October 2018. "Ronaldo donates to Cancer-stricken mums saviors". Now. 25 June 2012. Archived from the original on 12 February 2013. Retrieved 25 June 2012. "Ronaldo to play in charity match for Madeira". Reuters. 22 February 2010. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo funds cancer treatment for 9-year-old boy". AS.com. 19 June 2012. Archived from the original on 17 May 2014. Retrieved 15 May 2014. "Messi and Ronaldo join forces for FIFA's '11 for Health'". Marca. Spain. 31 December 2012. Archived from the original on 6 February 2013. Retrieved 21 February 2013. "Cristiano Ronaldo Kicks Off the New Year as Save the Children's New Global Artist Ambassador for Child Hunger and Nutrition". Save the Children. 27 March 2013. Archived from the original on 27 September 2017. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Ronaldo ambassador for mangrove". The Jakarta Post. 17 March 2013. Archived from the original on 21 March 2013. Retrieved 15 May 2014. "Cristiano Ronaldo: Real Madrid forward donates €600,000 Champions League win bonus to charity". The Independent. 3 June 2016. Archived from the original on 5 June 2016. Retrieved 3 June 2016. Griner, David (9 August 2016). "Cristiano Ronaldo's New Charity App Lets You Post Selfies With Him, Topless or Otherwise". Adweek. Archived from the original on 11 August 2016. Retrieved 11 August 2016. "Cristiano Ronaldo announces he is the father of a baby boy on Twitter". The Daily Telegraph. 4 July 2010. Archived from the original on 21 August 2010. Retrieved 5 July 2010. "Baby 'joy' for Cristiano Ronaldo". BBC Sport. 4 July 2010. Archived from the original on 22 July 2017. Retrieved 4 July 2010. "Cristiano Ronaldo names son Cristiano Ronaldo". The Daily Telegraph. London. 8 July 2010. Archived from the original on 1 May 2013. Retrieved 8 July 2010. "Cristiano Ronaldo breaks up with girlfriend Irina Shayk". USA Today. 20 January 2015. Archived from the original on 22 January 2015. Retrieved 21 January 2015. Sharland, Pete (29 June 2017). "Cristiano Ronaldo confirms he is a father of twins". Eurosport. Archived from the original on 1 July 2017. Retrieved 29 June 2017. Leyra, Paloma (25 February 2022). "La argentina Georgina Rodríguez con Forbes: "Me encanta ser la mujer de Cristiano Ronaldo, pero lo que tengo en el banco lo gané yo"". Forbes Argentina (in Spanish). "Cristiano Ronaldo, Georgina Rodriguez confirm birth of baby girl". ESPN. 12 November 2017. Retrieved 19 June 2022. Jackson, Jamie (18 April 2022). "Cristiano Ronaldo and Georgina Rodríguez announce death of baby son". The Guardian. Retrieved 18 April 2022. Davies, Hunter (16 January 2014). "The Fan: Cristiano Ronaldo the tarnished icon". New Statesman. Archived from the original on 26 July 2014. Retrieved 18 July 2014. "Cristiano Ronaldo & Georgina Rodriguez: Saudi-Arabien duldet wilde Liebe". sportbild.bild.de (in German). 5 January 2023. Retrieved 12 January 2023. Doyle, Paul (12 January 2013). "Cape Verde are minnows no more on eve of Africa Cup of Nations debut". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 18 July 2023. Rhodes, Charlie (17 December 2018). "Cristiano Ronaldo: "Juventus? As a group, it is better than Real Madrid"". Sportslens.com. Retrieved 4 August 2023. "Ronaldo receives libel damages over drink story". USA Today. 9 November 2009. Archived from the original on 13 November 2009. Retrieved 12 April 2010. "Does Cristiano Ronaldo have tattoos? Juventus star's position on body ink explained". Goal. 3 November 2019. "Cristiano Ronaldo gets right up your nose". The Guardian. 31 July 2017. Archived from the original on 12 September 2017. Retrieved 11 September 2017. De Menezes, Jack (15 June 2018). "Cristiano Ronaldo 'agrees' two-year suspended jail sentence and €18.8m fine over tax evasion case". The Independent. Archived from the original on 15 June 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "Ronaldo will not face rape charge". BBC. Archived from the original on 8 October 2018. Retrieved 8 October 2018. "Cristiano Ronaldo's Secret". Der Spiegel. 19 April 2017. Archived from the original on 10 September 2017. Retrieved 11 September 2017. "Cristiano Ronaldo's lawyers claim rape allegation documents have been altered". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 October 2018. Retrieved 16 October 2018. Her Name Is Kathryn The Woman Who Accuses Ronaldo of Rape. Archived 17 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine Der Spiegel, 29 September 2018. "Cristiano Ronaldo: 'Allegations of rape based on completely fabricated documents'". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 10 October 2018. Retrieved 10 October 2018. "Cristiano Ronaldo rape allegation: Las Vegas police reopen case". BBC. Archived from the original on 16 October 2018. Retrieved 11 October 2018. "Cristiano Ronaldo: 'German Magazine stands by reporting'". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 12 October 2018. Retrieved 10 October 2018. "Ronaldo will not face charges over alleged rape". BBC. 22 July 2019. "US judge dismisses rape suit against football star Ronaldo". France 24. Agence France-Presse. 11 June 2022. Retrieved 12 June 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo: Kathryn Mayorga demands £56m in damages over rape allegation". The Independent. 29 April 2021. Retrieved 23 September 2021. Ritter, Ken (8 October 2021). "Court says Ronaldo rape lawsuit in Vegas should be dismissed". Associated Press. Retrieved 12 June 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo: US judge dismisses Las Vegas rape lawsuit". Deutsche Welle. 11 June 2022. Retrieved 12 June 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo » Club matches". WorldFootball.net. 21 February 2024. Retrieved 16 March 2024. Cristiano Ronaldo at Soccerway. Retrieved 16 March 2024. "Sporting Lisboa B (02/03)". National Football Teams. Archived from the original on 5 December 2020. Retrieved 5 December 2020. "Cristiano Ronaldo: Juventus forward scores on 1,000th senior appearance". BBC Sport. 22 February 2020. Archived from the original on 23 February 2020. Retrieved 7 May 2022. "Pepe's goal is awarded to Cristiano Ronaldo". Marca (in Spanish). 18 September 2010. Archived from the original on 12 November 2010. Retrieved 4 December 2010. "Cristiano Ronaldo". eu-football.info. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Cristiano Ronaldo". Juventus. Archived from the original on 4 June 2019. "Cristiano Ronaldo: Overview". Premier League. Archived from the original on 17 April 2018. Retrieved 28 September 2018. "Cristiano Ronaldo (CR7)". Real Madrid C.F. Archived from the original on 28 January 2017. Retrieved 21 February 2017. "Ronaldo FIFA Special The Best Award". FIFA. 17 January 2022. Retrieved 17 January 2022. Football Italia staff (1 December 2020). "Ronaldo wins Golden Foot Award". Football Italia. Retrieved 18 December 2020. UEFA.com (10 June 2023). "Champions League all-time top scorers: Cristiano Ronaldo, Lionel Messi, Robert Lewandowski, Karim Benzema | UEFA Champions League". UEFA.com. Retrieved 26 August 2023. "Ronaldo crowned Serie A best player". Football Italia. 2 December 2019. Retrieved 2 December 2019. "Cristiano Ronaldo giocatore dell'anno per il 2020: la premiazione al Galà del Calcio 2021" [Cristiano Ronaldo player of the year for 2020: the award ceremony at the Gala del Calcio 2021]. Sky Sport. 19 March 2021. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "Cristiano Ronaldo premiado na XXII Gala dos Globos de Ouro". Caras. Retrieved 24 May 2017. "Ronaldo named Portugal's player of the year; Sanches best young player". ESPN. 21 March 2017. Retrieved 19 June 2022. "Ronaldo named Portugal's player of the year; Sanches best young player". 21 March 2017. Archived from the original on 15 December 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2019. "D. Duarte condecora selecção nacional". Correio da Manhã (in Portuguese). 31 August 2006. Archived from the original on 27 August 2017. Retrieved 27 August 2017. "Presidente da República condecora jogadores com grau de comendador da Ordem do Mérito". Record.pt. Archived from the original on 12 July 2016. Retrieved 10 July 2016. "Ronaldo vai ser condecorado na Madeira". ojogo.pt (in Portuguese). 6 February 2014. Archived from the original on 10 August 2019. Retrieved 10 August 2019. Caioli, Luca (2016) [2012]. Ronaldo: The Obsession for Perfection (2017 updated ed.). New York: Icon Books. ISBN 978-1-78578-140-7. Balagué, Guillem (2015). Cristiano Ronaldo: The Biography (hardcover ed.). London: Orion Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-4091-5504-1. Cristiano Ronaldo at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Al Nassr official profile Manchester United official profile Real Madrid official profile Portuguese Football Federation profile Cristiano Ronaldo at BDFutbol Cristiano Ronaldo at Premier League