Jennifer Lynn Affleck (née Lopez; born July 24, 1969), also known by her nickname J.Lo, is an American singer, actress, and dancer. Often dubbed the "Queen of Dance", Lopez is regarded as one of the most influential entertainers in the world. She was credited with helping propel the Latin pop movement in music and breaking barriers for Latino Americans in Hollywood. She further impacted popular culture through fashion, branding, and shifting mainstream beauty standards. Lopez began her career as a dancer, making her television debut as a Fly Girl on the sketch comedy series In Living Color in 1991. She later rose to prominence as an actress, with leading roles in the films Selena (1997), Anaconda (1997) and Out of Sight (1998) establishing her as the highest-paid Latin actress. She successfully ventured into the music industry with her debut album On the 6 (1999). In 2001, she became the first woman to simultaneously have the number one album and film in the United States with her second album J.Lo and romantic comedy The Wedding Planner. She has since become known for starring in romantic comedies, including Maid in Manhattan (2002), Shall We Dance? (2004), and Monster-in-Law (2005). Lopez released two albums in 2002: J to tha L–O! The Remixes and This Is Me... Then, the former becoming the first remix album to top the US Billboard 200. Media scrutiny and the failure of her film Gigli (2003) preceded a career downturn. Her subsequent albums included Rebirth (2005) and Como Ama una Mujer (2007); the latter broke first-week sales records for a debut Spanish album. In 2011, Lopez returned to prominence as a judge on American Idol and released the album Love?. In the latter 2010s, she performed a concert residency, starred in the police drama series Shades of Blue (2016–2018), served as a judge on World of Dance (2017–2020), and garnered critical praise for her role in the crime drama Hustlers (2019). She has since starred in the films Marry Me (2022), The Mother (2023) and This Is Me... Now: A Love Story (2024), the latter of which accompanies her ninth studio album. With over 80 million records sold, Lopez's most successful singles include: "If You Had My Love", "Waiting for Tonight", "Let's Get Loud", "Love Don't Cost a Thing", "I'm Real", "Ain't It Funny", "Jenny from the Block", "All I Have", "Get Right", and "On the Floor". Her accolades include a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, the Billboard Icon Award and the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award. She has been ranked among the 100 most influential people in the world by Time and the World's 100 Most Powerful Women by Forbes. Her other ventures include a lifestyle brand, beauty and fashion lines, fragrances, a production company and a charitable foundation. Jennifer Lynn López was born on July 24, 1969, in the Bronx, a borough of New York City, and raised in its Castle Hill neighborhood. Her parents, David López and Guadalupe Rodríguez, were born in Puerto Rico and met in New York City. After serving in the army, David worked as a computer technician at Guardian Insurance Company. Guadalupe was a homemaker for the first ten years of López's life and later worked as a Tupperware salesperson and a kindergarten and gym teacher. They divorced in the 1990s after 33 years of marriage. Lopez is a middle child; she has an older sister, Leslie, and a younger sister, Lynda. The three shared a bedroom. Lopez has described her upbringing as "strict". She was raised in a Roman Catholic family; she attended Mass every Sunday and received a Catholic education, attending Holy Family School and the all-girls Preston High School. In school, Lopez ran track on a national level, participated in gymnastics and was on the softball team. She danced in school musicals and played a lead role in a production of Godspell. She described herself as a "tomboy" and "very athletic". There was "lots of music" in the typically Puerto Rican household, and Lopez and her sisters were encouraged to sing, dance and create their own plays for family events. West Side Story made a particular impression on the young Lopez, who wanted to be an entertainer from an early age. As a teenager, she learned flamenco, jazz and ballet at the Kips Bay Boys & Girls Club and taught dance to younger students, including Kerry Washington. After graduating from high school, she had a part-time secretarial job at a law firm and studied business at New York's Baruch College for one semester. At age 18, she enrolled as a full-time student at Manhattan's Phil Black Dance Studio, where she had already taken night classes in jazz and tap dance. Her parents were unhappy with her decision to leave college to pursue a dance career. According to Lopez, her parents felt it was "foolish" because "no Latinas did that". Her mother asked her to move out of the family home and they stopped speaking for eight months. Lopez moved to Manhattan, sleeping in the dance studio's office for the first few months. Lopez's first professional job came in 1989 when she spent five months touring Europe with the musical revue show Golden Musicals of Broadway. She was upset at being the only member of the chorus not to have a solo, and later characterized it as a pivotal moment where she had to "try harder and become that much more committed". In 1990, she danced alongside MC Hammer in an episode of Yo! MTV Raps, and traveled around Japan for four months as a chorus member in Synchronicity. When she returned to the United States, she was hired as a backup dancer for New Kids on the Block's performance of "Games" at the 1991 American Music Awards. She also traveled around America with regional productions of the musicals Jesus Christ Superstar and Oklahoma!. During this period, Lopez also danced in music videos including Doug E. Fresh's "Summertime", Richard Rogers' "Can't Stop Loving You", EPMD's "Rampage", and Samantha Fox's "(Hurt Me! Hurt Me!) But the Pants Stay On". Lopez stated: "I'd dance in a piece-of-garbage rap or pop video for 50 bucks and make the money last a whole month." Her most high-profile job as a professional dancer was as a Fly Girl jazz-funk dancer on the sketch comedy television series In Living Color. The show's choreographer, Rosie Perez said she chose Lopez because "she had that look that I knew the audience would tune in to". Lopez moved to Los Angeles in late 1991 for the job; she filmed In Living Color during the day and attended acting classes taught by Aaron Speiser at night. Lopez felt ostracized by the other Fly Girls because of her "voluptuous figure", and also clashed with Perez. The head of Virgin Records considered signing The Fly Girls as a girl group to rival the Spice Girls, but the deal fell apart. After appearing as a Fly Girl in seasons three and four of In Living Color, Lopez left to work as a backup dancer for Janet Jackson, and appeared in the music video for "That's the Way Love Goes". She was scheduled to tour with Jackson on her Janet World Tour in late 1993 but opted to pursue an acting career instead. Lopez hired In Living Color producer Eric Gold as her manager. He advised Lopez to lose weight if she wanted to succeed as an actress. Lopez's first professional acting job was a small recurring role on the television show South Central (1994). She was invited to audition for the pilot by a casting director who had seen her speak to camera during a behind-the-scenes In Living Color segment. She then acquired an agent and was cast in the CBS show Second Chances; the series was quickly cancelled, but her popularity with viewers led to her being cast in its spin-off Hotel Malibu. She subsequently appeared in the television film Lost in the Wild (1993). For her first major movie role, in Gregory Nava's 1995 drama Mi Familia, Lopez received a nomination for the Independent Spirit Award for Best Supporting Actress. She then starred in the action comedy Money Train (1995). The film was not a box office success, though her performance was reviewed positively, which led to her being further noticed in Hollywood. In 1996, Lopez had a supporting role opposite Robin Williams in the comedy Jack, which director Francis Ford Coppola cast her in after seeing her performance in Mi Familia. She next starred opposite Jack Nicholson in the neo-noir thriller Blood and Wine (1996), where David Rooney of Variety felt she delivered in "juggling" the "smoldering and soulful sides" of the character. With her casting as the singer Selena Quintanilla-Pérez in the biopic Selena (1997), Lopez became the first Latina actress to earn $1 million. She described her salary for the film as a "statement to the world", but expressed disappointment that other Latina actors were not being afforded the same opportunities. Despite having previously worked with the film's director Gregory Nava on Mi Familia, Lopez participated in an intense auditioning process and spent time with the late singer's family in Corpus Christi, Texas before filming began. Selena was a box office hit, and Lopez's performance received critical acclaim. Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times described it as "a star-making performance" and wrote: "She has the star presence to look convincing in front of 100,000 fans." Lopez received her first Golden Globe nomination for the performance. Nava asked the heads of Warner Bros. to fund an Academy Award campaign for Lopez but was told the Academy would "never nominate a Latina." Later in 1997, Lopez starred opposite Ice Cube in the horror film Anaconda, which received negative reviews from critics but was a box office success. Joe Leydon of Variety found the film "silly" but said it deserved "a little credit" for being "the first movie of its kind to have a Latina and an African-American" as its stars. In the crime film U Turn (1997), Lopez appeared topless in a sex scene that was added by director Oliver Stone during filming. Speaking in 2003, Lopez said it was not something "I would have chosen to do" and that she and Stone fought over it: "It's hard being the only woman on a set." Lopez starred opposite George Clooney in the crime caper Out of Sight (1998), Steven Soderbergh's adaptation of the Elmore Leonard novel of the same name. Cast as a deputy federal marshal who falls for a charming criminal, she won rave reviews for her performance. Janet Maslin of The New York Times described it as her "best movie role thus far, and she brings it both seductiveness and grit; if it was hard to imagine a hard-working, pistol-packing bombshell on the page, it couldn't be easier here." Turan of the Los Angeles Times described Lopez as "an actress who can be convincingly tough and devastatingly erotic" and said the film solidified "her position as a woman you can confidently build a film around." In 2021, Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian named Lopez and Clooney's partnership as one of the best examples of on-screen chemistry in cinema history. Also in 1998, Lopez provided the voice of Azteca in the animated film Antz, and ventured into product endorsement, becoming a national spokesperson for Coca-Cola and L'Oréal. Lopez decided to pursue a music career after working on Selena, realizing that she had missed "the excitement of the stage". Her new manager Benny Medina sought to position her as "a brand name that will cross over into all media." Lopez, who was "really feeling [her] Latin roots", recorded a Spanish-language demo for circulation among prospective labels. With Lopez being a high-profile personality, a bidding war ensued. Tommy Mottola, the head of Sony Music's Work Group, signed her but suggested that she sing in English instead. Her record deal with Sony was described as "lucrative", having outbid other offers from Capitol Records and EMI Latin. While Lopez worked on her debut album, Sony "began a major push" to feature her with other high-profile entertainers, leading her to appear in the Sean Combs music video "Been Around the World" (1997). Her debut album On the 6 (1999), named after the 6 Subway line which connected her childhood home in the Bronx to Manhattan, was met with positive reviews and further propelled her public profile. The album was a success and Lopez's debut single, "If You Had My Love", topped the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 for five consecutive weeks, with another single, "Waiting for Tonight", reaching number eight and becoming a celebratory anthem for the new millennium. Other singles from the album included "Let's Get Loud", which became one of Lopez's signature songs, and "No Me Ames", a duet with future husband Marc Anthony. In July 1999, she performed "If You Had My Love" and "Let's Get Loud" at the 1999 FIFA Women's World Cup closing ceremony. It was watched by over one billion viewers worldwide, exposing Lopez's music career to a larger international audience. In February 2000, Lopez and then-boyfriend Sean Combs attended the Grammy Awards, with Lopez wearing a plunging green Versace silk chiffon dress. The dress generated worldwide attention and became the most popular search query in Google's history, leading to the creation of Google Images, while boosting Lopez's album and movie ticket sales. Later that year, Lopez starred in the psychological thriller The Cell, for which she received a $4 million salary. The film, where Lopez played a psychologist who uses radical experimental therapy to enter the mind of a killer, received mixed reviews but was a box office success. Lopez became the first woman to have a number one film and album simultaneously in January 2001, with the release of her sophomore album J.Lo and her romantic comedy The Wedding Planner, which co-stars Matthew McConaughey. The Wedding Planner received highly negative reviews but became a box office success. Jessica Winter of The Village Voice found Lopez miscast as a "buttoned down, celibate" woman in the film. Lopez titled her album J.Lo after the nickname which her fans and the media had been increasingly referring to her as. She also adopted J.Lo as her stagename. J.Lo received polarized reviews from critics but became the most successful album of her career, selling 12 million copies worldwide. It included the singles "Love Don't Cost a Thing", which reached number one in various countries, "I'm Real" featuring Ja Rule, which peaked atop the Billboard Hot 100, "Ain't It Funny", and "Play". In support of the album, Lopez performed two-concert residency in Puerto Rico, which was later broadcast in November 2001 as an NBC special, Jennifer Lopez in Concert. It was one of the most-watched concert specials of the year in the United States, with an audience of almost 12 million. In other 2001 work, Lopez launched her first business venture, the clothing line J.Lo by Jennifer Lopez. The line catered to women of all sizes, as Lopez felt "the voluptuous woman [was] almost ignored" in the fashion industry. She also founded her production company, Nuyorican Productions, with manager Benny Medina. Her next film was the romantic drama Angel Eyes, starring opposite Jim Caviezel. Lopez's performance was well-reviewed, though the film was a critical and commercial disappointment. She was slated to star alongside Ricky Martin in a remake of Elvis Presley's Viva Las Vegas, but this did not eventuate. There was a time when I was very overworked and I was doing music and movies and so many things. I was suffering from a lack of sleep ... I was like — I don't want to move, I don't want to talk, I don't want to do anything. It was on that movie, Enough ... I had a nervous breakdown. —Lopez, discussing the "height of her fame" Lopez released two albums in 2002. The first was J to tha L–O! The Remixes, which became the first remix album in history to debut at number one on the Billboard 200. Its singles included "Ain't It Funny (Murder Remix)" and "I'm Gonna Be Alright", which reached number one and ten on the Billboard Hot 100, respectively. Lopez's third studio album, This Is Me... Then, was released in late 2002, and was heavily influenced by her relationship with then-fiancé Ben Affleck. It received mixed critical reviews; Billboard's Michael Paoletta noted the "considerable growth she reveals as a performer and tunesmith" on the album, while Jon Caramanica called it "the least interesting music on the pop charts today." The album became a commercial success, achieving the highest opening sales week of her career. The album's lead single "Jenny from the Block", which peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100, was viewed as a response to the notion that Lopez had alienated her "core fan base: the black and Hispanic hip-hop community." The album also spawned the number one single "All I Have". Lopez starred as an abused wife who fights back in the thriller Enough (2002), a role which required her to learn Krav Maga. An overworked Lopez suffered a nervous breakdown in 2001 while filming it. The film received negative reviews; Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times felt it was "tacky material" and was surprised to see "an actress like Jennifer Lopez" involved with the project. Her next film was the romantic comedy, Maid in Manhattan (2002), in which Lopez starred opposite Ralph Fiennes as a maid and single mother from the Bronx. It became the highest-grossing film of her career. Reviewing Maid in Manhattan, A. O. Scott of The New York Times enjoyed Lopez as a romantic lead and said "her greatest skill as an actress" was "her ability to melt without cracking the hard shell of composure she wears." In 2002 business ventures, Lopez opened Madre's, a Los Angeles restaurant serving Latin cuisine, and released her first fragrance, Glow by JLo. It became the top-selling fragrance in the US. Lopez became the subject of widespread media criticism in 2003 due to her public relationship with Ben Affleck and the tabloid depiction of her as a demanding diva. She fired both her personal manager Benny Medina and her publicist in mid-2003; The New York Times reported that movie executives had become frustrated by having their communications with Lopez "largely filtered" through Medina. That year, Lopez starred opposite Affleck in the romantic comedy Gigli, which was a box-office bomb and is considered one of the worst films of all time. Rex Reed of The Observer criticized the lead actors, calling them "pathetically incompetent" in both "craft and talent". Roger Ebert agreed that the movie "doesn't quite work", but found Lopez and Affleck "appealing in their performances" and noted the couple's chemistry. Later in 2003, she released her second fragrance Still Jennifer Lopez, and became the face of Louis Vuitton's fall advertising campaign. Lopez had a minor role opposite Affleck in the film Jersey Girl (2004). Following test audiences' negative reactions to the onscreen couple, her screen time was halved. Lopez later described this as the lowest point of her career and admitted she felt "eviscerated" by the media coverage surrounding Gigli: "I lost my sense of self, questioned if I belonged in this business, thought maybe I did suck at everything. And my relationship self-destructed in front of the entire world. It was a two-year thing for me until I picked myself up again." Months later, she starred opposite Richard Gere in the romantic comedy-drama Shall We Dance?, which was a box-office success. Lopez's clothing lines and two fragrances generated over $300 million in revenue throughout 2004. The marketing for the romantic comedy Monster-in-Law (2005), in which Lopez starred opposite Jane Fonda, played up her "Gigli-and-tabloid tarnished image", and it became a box office success. She released her fourth studio album, Rebirth, in early 2005. Its title was symbolic of Lopez's hopes for "a new professional beginning". It was recorded during a period where Lopez felt "a little bit lost, trying to get my footing in a new life", "I had just gotten married [to singer Marc Anthony] ... I wasn't with Benny [Medina]." In a review of Rebirth, journalist Alexis Petridis remarked that the title "suggests even Lopez has realised that something is amiss with her career ... Despite the highlights, you're still left pondering the question: what happened to Jennifer Lopez?" The album reached number two on the Billboard 200, but failed to replicate the sales of her previous albums. Its lead single "Get Right", however, reached number twelve on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming one of her most successful songs. Also in 2005, Lopez launched her second fashion label, Sweetface, which was geared towards "high fashion" in comparison, and appeared in a Kill Bill-inspired Pepsi commercial with Beyoncé and David Beckham. The next year, she returned to the top five of the Billboard Hot 100 as a featured artist on "Control Myself", the lead single from LL Cool J's twelfth studio album. Lopez's next three movie projects were box office failures. She starred alongside Robert Redford and Morgan Freeman in the drama An Unfinished Life (2005). Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times predicted that the typical review would be unkind: "It will have no respect for Jennifer Lopez, because she is going through a period right now when nobody is satisfied with anything she does ... Give Lopez your permission to be good again; she is the same actress now as when we thought her so new and fine." In 2006, she reunited with director Gregory Nava to star in the crime drama Bordertown as a journalist investigating female homicides in Ciudad Juárez, Mexico. The film was negatively reviewed and received a direct-to-video release. David D'Arcy of Screen Daily found Lopez "unconvincing" as a journalist. In 2007, she starred opposite her then-husband Marc Anthony in the music biopic El Cantante, which told the story of Puerto Rican salsa singer Héctor Lavoe and his wife Puchi. It did not perform well at the box office and received mixed reviews from film critics; Lopez's performance, which she expressed pride in, drew both praise and criticism. Lopez released two studio albums in 2007. Her fifth album, Como Ama una Mujer, was her first to be recorded entirely in Spanish. Chris Willman of Entertainment Weekly acknowledged that the album offered "fairly persuasive proof" that Lopez can sing, but was unimpressed by the "flaccid torch songs." It became the fifth Spanish album to debut in the top ten of the Billboard 200, and achieved the highest first-week sales for an artist's debut Spanish album at the time. The lead single "Qué Hiciste" reached number 86 on the Billboard Hot 100 while the second single "Me Haces Falta" failed to chart. Lopez's sixth studio album Brave, released later that year, was her lowest-charting album worldwide. Jonathan Bernstein of Entertainment Weekly was disappointed that Lopez had returned to "listless vocals" for her "back-to-the-dance-floor album." The album debuted at number 12 on the Billboard 200 and produced two singles, "Do It Well" and "Hold It Don't Drop It". The first peaked at number 31 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, while the latter failed to chart. While pregnant with twins, Lopez embarked upon her first ever concert tour, a show co-headlined by Anthony, in September 2007; the tour was well-received. She also created, produced and was featured in the MTV show DanceLife, which she described as a "passion project". After giving birth to twins in February 2008, Lopez took a career break. Her restaurant Madre's closed permanently, as did her two fashion lines. After rehiring former manager Medina, Lopez released two songs in late 2009, "Louboutins" and "Fresh Out of the Oven". The songs were intended for her seventh studio album but failed to make an appearance on the Billboard charts, leading to her departure from Sony Music and Epic Records. Lopez's first theatrical role in three years was in the romantic comedy The Back-up Plan (2010). Manohla Dargis of The New York Times was unimpressed by the movie and described Lopez as "an appealing screen presence with a disappointing big-screen track record. That's probably not all her fault: romantic roles for women often are the provenance of the bland or the blonde." A "big turning point" in Lopez's career came when she joined the judging panel of the singing competition series American Idol for its tenth season, replacing Simon Cowell. Despite being advised that it was a "huge gamble", she accepted the job, as she was "not getting offered a whole bunch of movies". Lopez's appearance on American Idol in 2011 returned her to prominence. Hannah Elliot of Forbes described it as "a remarkable comeback", writing: "Idol humanized her. Viewers who knew only an attention-grabbing siren met a hardworking, self-made, empathetic single mother, who got emotional when contestants did well and when they failed." Lopez subsequently experienced what Billboard called "the most impressive reality-TV-based rejuvenation of a music career ever." After signing a new recording contract with Island Records, her seventh studio album, Love?, was released in early 2011. While the album itself was a moderate commercial success, the single "On the Floor" was the year's highest-selling single by a female artist. It reached number three on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming her highest-charting single as a lead artist since "All I Have". The album produced two more singles, "I'm Into You" and "Papi". Around this time, Lopez became a brand ambassador for L'Oréal, Gilette Venus, Tous and Fiat. She also launched the Jennifer Lopez Collection, a clothing and homeware line with Tommy Hilfiger for Kohl's; the collection generated an estimated $3 billion in sales during its first year. Lopez returned as a judge for American Idol's eleventh season in 2012, earning a reported $20 million. That year, she released her greatest hits album Dance Again... the Hits, to fulfil her contractual obligations with her former label Epic Records. Lopez, who was divorcing Anthony and navigating the "breakup of a family", felt as if the album's sole single, "Dance Again", had come to her at the "perfect moment". "Dance Again" reached number 17 on the US Billboard Hot 100. Lopez launched the Dance Again World Tour, her first headlining concert tour, in mid-2012. It grossed over $1 million per show. Also that year, she launched Teeology, a luxury T-shirt brand. Lopez returned to the big screen in 2012, starring alongside an ensemble cast in the film What to Expect When You're Expecting, which is based on the book of the same name. Lopez voiced Shira, a saber tooth tiger, in the animated film, Ice Age: Continental Drift, the fourth film in the Ice Age franchise. Also in 2012, a talent show, ¡Q'Viva! The Chosen followed Lopez, Anthony, and director-choreographer Jamie King as they travelled across 21 countries in Latin America to find new talent for a Las Vegas show. In 2013, Lopez starred alongside Jason Statham in the crime thriller Parker, in which she played Leslie. Her performance earned positive reviews, with the Chicago Tribune commending the role for giving Lopez "an opportunity to be dramatic, romantic, funny, depressed, euphoric and violent. The audience stays with her all the way". That year, Lopez released the single "Live It Up", founded the mobile phone retail brand Viva Móvil, and was named chief creative officer of NuvoTV. She also served as an executive producer of the television series The Fosters (2013–2018), a show about a lesbian couple raising a family. Lopez's desire to work on the series was driven by her late aunt, who was gay. After a one-season absence, Lopez returned to American Idol for its thirteenth season, earning a reported $17.5 million. Her eighth studio album, A.K.A., was released in mid-2014 through Capitol Records, experiencing lacklustre sales, becoming her lowest-selling album in the US. The album produced three singles: "I Luh Ya Papi", featuring French Montana, "First Love", and "Booty", featuring Iggy Azalea. They reached 77, 87 and 18 respectively on the Billboard Hot 100. Also that year, Lopez released "We Are One (Ole Ola)", the official song for the 2014 FIFA World Cup along with Pitbull and Claudia Leitte. Lopez partnered with Endless Jewelry on a range of jewelry, and released a book, True Love, which became a New York Times best-seller. 2015 saw the release of The Boy Next Door, an erotic thriller that Lopez both co-produced and starred in as a high school teacher who becomes involved with a student, which eventually leads to his dangerous obsession with her. The film received negative reviews from critics. Despite this, it became her most successful opening at the box office for a live action film since Monster-in-Law. Lopez had a voice role in the animated feature Home and contributed the single "Feel the Light" to the film's official soundtrack. She also starred in the independent drama film Lila & Eve, alongside Viola Davis. In January 2016, Lopez commenced a concert residency show, All I Have, at Planet Hollywood's Zappos Theater in Las Vegas. She performed 120 shows during the three-year run, grossing over $100 million in ticket sales. At the beginning of the residency, Lopez signed a multi-album deal with her former label Epic Records, and released "Ain't Your Mama", one of her most successful singles during the 2010s. Also in 2016, she began starring in NBC's crime drama series Shades of Blue, which she also executive produced. She played Harlee Santos, a single mother and police detective who goes undercover for the FBI to investigate her own squad. The series' premiere brought NBC its most-watched Thursday debut in seven years. Starring alongside Ray Liotta, Lopez's performance received critical praise. That year, she also reprised her voice role as Shira in the animated film Ice Age: Collision Course (2016), and designed a capsule collection of shoes and jewelry in collaboration with Giuseppe Zanotti. Lopez was executive producer and judge on NBC's dance competition series World of Dance, which was a ratings success upon its May 2017 premiere. That year, Lopez released the singles "Ni Tú Ni Yo" and "Amor, Amor, Amor", which were intended to be included on her second Spanish-language album Por Primera Vez, which was ultimately shelved. In late 2017, she was announced as the new face of clothing company Guess, becoming the oldest spokeswoman in the company's history. In 2018, Lopez released a string of Spanish and Spanglish singles: "Se Acabó el Amor", "El Anillo", "Dinero" featuring DJ Khaled and Cardi B, and "Te Guste" with Bad Bunny. Forbes noted that the songs were unable to "completely connect on a crossover, mainstream level", but were more successful on US-based Latin charts, nearly all of them reaching number one on the Billboard Latin Airplay chart. In collaboration with Inglot Cosmetics, she launched a limited-edition makeup collection. She later starred in and executive produced the comedy film Second Act (2018), directed by Peter Segal; she also recorded the single "Limitless" for its soundtrack. Second Act earned mixed reviews from critics, but performed well at the box office, grossing $72.3 million during its theatrical run. In the first half of 2019, Lopez embarked on an international concert tour, It's My Party, to celebrate her 50th birthday. The tour grossed an estimated $54.7 million from thirty-eight shows. Variety reported that most shows were sold out. She also signed with new label Hitco Entertainment and released the single "Medicine" featuring French Montana. In other 2019 activities, she became the global face of the Coach brand, launched a collection of sunglasses with the brand Quay Australia, and modeled an updated version of her Green Versace dress at Milan Fashion Week. She also became executive producer of two television series, Good Trouble and Thanks a Million. Lopez executive produced and starred in the crime drama film Hustlers (2019). Directed by Lorene Scafaria, the film is inspired by a true story, following a group of Manhattan strippers who con wealthy men. Lopez's portrayal of a veteran stripper in Hustlers garnered acclaim from critics, with some deeming it the best performance of her acting career. The film also gave Lopez her highest opening weekend at the box office for a live action film, grossing $33.2 million. Her performance received nominations for Best Supporting Actress at the Golden Globe Awards, Screen Actors Guild Awards, Critics' Choice Movie Awards and Independent Spirit Awards; her omission from the Academy Awards nominations was widely viewed as a snub. The success of Hustlers was regarded by various media outlets as a comeback as an actress for Lopez. In February 2020, Lopez co-headlined the Super Bowl LIV halftime show in Miami, Florida alongside Shakira; the performance included an appearance by her child Emme Muñiz. The performance was widely praised and became the most-watched Super Bowl halftime show to date. Later that year, Lopez released the singles "Pa' Ti" with Maluma―which became her most successful song since 2017―and "In the Morning", before headlining the 2021 Dick Clark’s New Year’s Rockin’ Eve with Ryan Seacrest special on ABC. In January 2021, she performed at the 2021 inauguration of President Joe Biden in Washington, D.C. In business, Lopez focused on investments and creating her own brands. She launched her skin care line, JLo Beauty, released a shoe collection in partnership with DSW, and invested in companies including Hims & Hers Health, Bodyarmor SuperDrink, Goli nutritional supplements and meal delivery service Wonder. In mid-2021, she signed a multi-year deal with Netflix to produce a range of films and television shows through her own Nuyorican Productions, and released the reggaeton Spanish single "Cambia el Paso" with Rauw Alejandro. Lopez co-produced and starred opposite Owen Wilson and Maluma in the romantic comedy Marry Me, which was released in February 2022. The film grossed over $50 million at the box office while becoming the most-streamed day-and-date film on Peacock, and received generally mixed reviews from critics. Lopez also released a soundtrack for the film, with Maluma, which generated the singles "On My Way" and "Marry Me". In March 2022, Lopez was appointed as the chief "entertainment and lifestyle" officer of the cruise line, Virgin Voyages. Her next project was the documentary Jennifer Lopez: Halftime, which focuses on her life following the release of Hustlers and in preparation for her Super Bowl performance. Released on Netflix in June 2022 following its premiere at the Tribeca Film Festival, it garnered generally positive reviews from film critics. In September, Lopez was announced as the global ambassador of Italian lingerie label Intimissimi. The following month, Jimmy Fallon and Lopez released a children's book, Con Pollo: A Bilingual Playtime Adventure, which became a New York Times best-seller. Lopez co-produced and starred opposite Josh Duhamel and Jennifer Coolidge in the action-comedy Shotgun Wedding, which was released on Amazon Prime Video in January 2023. It became one of the top-streamed films on Prime Video that year. She also led and co-produced the action thriller feature The Mother, directed by Niki Caro and released on Netflix in May 2023. The film received mixed reviews, but became the most-watched film on the platform in 2023. That September, she entered a "recording and publishing" partnership with BMG Rights Management, in conjunction with her Nuyorican Productions. Lopez's business ventures in 2023 included: launching a spritz brand named Delola, a collaboration between her lifestyle brand J.Lo by Jennifer Lopez and fashion retailer Revolve, and a footwear line, JLO Jennifer Lopez, which was released as three collections in March, May, and June. Lopez's ninth studio album This Is Me... Now, a sequel album to This Is Me... Then (2002), was released by Nuyorican and BMG on February 16, 2024. The album formed part of a "three-part multimedia project" which included a companion musical film, This Is Me... Now: A Love Story directed by Dave Meyers, and a documentary, The Greatest Love Story Never Told, both of which were released on Prime Video. Lopez plays a fictionalized version of herself in A Love Story, which was described as an "autobiographical musical rom-com action sci-fi"; Tim Jonze of The Guardian suggested that Lopez had possibly invented the "therapy-musical biopic" genre. After potential partners backed out, Lopez financed the film herself for $20 million before Amazon subsequently purchased it. "Can't Get Enough" was released as the album's lead single. Lopez also released a lingerie collection with Intimissimi which was inspired by the album. She is set to embark on This Is Me... Now: The Tour in North America, beginning June 2024. Lopez released a remixed version of "This Time Around" featuring Korean pop group (G)I-dle as the album's third single. Lopez filmed the sci-fi thriller Atlas from September to November 2022 in Los Angeles and New Zealand, her third project under her Netflix deal. She will star alongside Jharrel Jerome in William Goldenberg's biographical wrestling drama Unstoppable, produced by Ben Affleck and Matt Damon, and based on the life of wrestler Anthony Robles. Lopez has signed on to star in the Bill Condon-directed film adaptation of the Broadway musical Kiss of the Spider Woman, which she will also executive produce. It is her first role in a full-fledged musical; filming will begin in April 2024 in New Jersey. She has also committed to lead and co-produce Netflix's film adaptation of the bestselling novel, The Cipher. She has several projects in the works as a producer. In May 2024, Lopez will co-host the annual Met Gala in Manhattan. Lopez was in a nearly decade-long relationship with David Cruz, her high school boyfriend, until the mid-1990s. The couple were engaged at one point, and Cruz relocated to Los Angeles to be with Lopez when she began pursuing her career. She would later say of Cruz, "You get lucky, you have a first love like that." She was married to Cuban waiter Ojani Noa from February 1997 to January 1998. In subsequent court cases, Noa was prevented from publishing a book about their marriage and from using private honeymoon footage of Lopez in a documentary. Lopez was in an on again–off again relationship with record producer and rapper Sean Combs (then known as "Puff Daddy") from 1999 to early 2001. On the night of December 27, 1999, Lopez and Combs were arrested and charged with criminal possession of a weapon and possession of stolen property, after leaving the scene of a shooting at a Times Square nightclub. Charges against Lopez were dropped within an hour while Combs was acquitted of all charges at trial in early 2001. They broke up shortly thereafter. Lopez later said that, while she had "cared very much" about Combs, their "crazy, tumultuous" relationship "was always something I knew would end." She was married to Cris Judd, her former backup dancer, from September 2001 to January 2003. Before her divorce with Judd was finalized, Lopez was in a relationship with actor and filmmaker Ben Affleck from mid-2002 to early 2004. Although they had crossed paths several times before (including at the 70th Academy Awards and at the premiere of Armageddon, both in 1998), the first major meeting was on the set of Gigli (2003) in December 2001. They later worked together on the music video for "Jenny from the Block" and the film Jersey Girl (2004). Her album This Is Me... Then was dedicated to and inspired by Affleck. Their relationship was extensively publicized. Tabloids referred to the couple as "Bennifer", a portmanteau Vanity Fair described as "the first of that sort of tabloid branding". They became engaged in November 2002, but their planned wedding on September 14, 2003, was postponed with four days' notice because of "excessive media attention". They ended their engagement in January 2004. Years later, Lopez said Affleck's discomfort with media scrutiny was one reason for their split and described it as her "first real heartbreak": "I think different time, different thing, who knows what could've happened, but there was a genuine love there." After her relationship with Affleck, Lopez stopped discussing her personal life in interviews. She was married to singer Marc Anthony from June 2004 to June 2014; they had previously worked together and dated for a few months in the late 1990s. Their wedding took place five months after the end of her relationship with Affleck. During their marriage, they collaborated on music and performed together, as well as co-starring in El Cantante (2006). Lopez gave birth to fraternal twins, a boy and a girl, on Long Island in February 2008. People paid a reported US$6 million for the first photographs of the twins, making them the most expensive celebrity pictures ever taken at the time. In 2009, Anthony and Lopez purchased a stake in the Miami Dolphins. The couple announced their separation in July 2011. Anthony filed for divorce in April 2012 and it was finalized in June 2014. Lopez retained primary physical custody of the two children. Lopez occasionally performs with Emme. Lopez had an on again-off again relationship with her former backup dancer Casper Smart from October 2011 to August 2016. She dated New York Yankees baseball player Alex Rodriguez from February 2017 to early 2021. They became engaged in March 2019 but postponed their wedding twice due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In response to tabloid speculation about the state of their relationship, they released a statement in March 2021, saying they were "working through some things". They announced the end of their relationship in April 2021. In April 2021, Lopez and Affleck were reported to be dating again, with Lopez publicly confirming their rekindled relationship that July. In April 2022, Lopez announced their second engagement, 20 years after the first proposal. They were married in Las Vegas on July 16, 2022, and held a wedding celebration for family and friends the following month. Following the September 11 attacks, Lopez was heavily involved in charitable activities. Joining other artists, she was featured on charitable singles such as "What's Going On" and "El Ultimo Adios (The Last Goodbye)", which benefited people affected by the tragedy. In February 2007, Lopez was honored with the Artists for Amnesty prize by Amnesty International for her work in Bordertown, which shed light on the hundreds of feminicides in Ciudad Juárez. Lopez described it as "one of the world's most shocking and disturbing, underreported crimes against humanity". That year, one dollar from each ticket sold at Lopez and Anthony's co-headlining North American concert tour, which grossed an estimated $10 million, was donated to the Run for Something Better program, which fights childhood obesity. Lopez has been a long-time supporter of the Children's Hospital Los Angeles. Her album Rebirth (2005) is dedicated to Paige Peterson, an eleven-year-old cancer patient she befriended at the hospital who died in 2004. Lopez stated that "[she doesn't] like to do [her] charity work in public. That's not what you do it for." In 2009, Lopez launched the Lopez Family Foundation (originally known as the Maribel Foundation) alongside her sister, Lynda. The organization works to increase healthcare access for underprivileged women and children, including through a telemedicine program in partnership with the Children's Hospital Los Angeles. The foundation has facilitated the expansion of medical facilities in Panama and Puerto Rico, and created the Center for a Healthy Childhood at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx. In December 2012, Lopez held a charity drive to benefit her three favorite charities: the Gloria Wise Boys and Girls Club, the Children's Hospital Los Angeles and the American Red Cross, mainly benefiting victims of Hurricane Sandy. In May 2015, she became the first celebrity spokesperson for the Children's Miracle Network Hospitals and the BC Children's Hospital Foundation (BCCHF), appearing in a campaign entitled "Put Your Money Where the Miracles Are". That September, she became the first Global Advocate for Girls and Women at the United Nations Foundation. This role sees her mobilizing action to address issues including maternal health care programs, education and violence against women. In September 2017, following Hurricane Irma and Hurricane Maria, Lopez donated $1 million from the proceeds of her Las Vegas residency to humanitarian aid for Puerto Rico. Along with Marc Anthony, she launched a humanitarian relief campaign entitled Somos Una Voz (English: We Are One Voice), an effort supported by various celebrities to rush supplies to areas affected by Hurricane Maria. Lopez and Anthony presented a subsequent concert and telethon for disaster relief, "One Voice: Somos Live!", which raised over $35 million. She was also among various artists featured on Lin-Manuel Miranda's charity single "Almost Like Praying" which benefits Puerto Rico. As of 2021, Lopez continues to regularly donate to and support charities. In September 2021, she launched her own philanthropic organization, Limitless Labs, that supports and empowers Latina entrepreneurs and business owners. Lopez announced a partnership between the venture and the 10,000 Small Businesses initiative. In June 2022, Lopez and Limitless Labs partnered with nonprofit Grameen America as a national ambassador to empower women-led Latina businesses with $14 billion in business loans and "6 million hours of financial education and training by 2030." Lopez has performed at charity concerts throughout her career, including the Los Angeles Dodgers Foundation's Blue Diamond Gala in 2022, which raised $3.6 million for education, health care, homelessness and social justice causes. A supporter of the Democratic Party, Lopez has a long history of backing Democratic candidates for public office. She endorsed President Barack Obama in his 2012 presidential campaign, speaking in television advertisements and attending fundraising events for Obama. She endorsed Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton in 2016, headlining a free concert in Florida in support of her that October. Lopez was critical of President Donald Trump during his presidency. During her Super Bowl halftime show performance in 2020, she performed her song "Let's Get Loud" while cloaked in a large Puerto Rican flag, with children in metal cages displayed on the field. It was interpreted as a statement about the Mexico–United States border crisis and Trump's immigration policy. The NFL attempted to remove the cages from the performance but Lopez refused. She endorsed President Joe Biden in his 2020 presidential campaign. She later performed at Biden's 2021 inauguration, where she sang "This Land Is Your Land" and "America the Beautiful", while reciting the last phrase of the Pledge of Allegiance in Spanish. She also worked "Let's Get Loud" into the performance as a "reprise" to her political message at the Super Bowl. Lopez is an avid supporter of LGBT rights, and has raised millions of dollars for HIV/AIDS research. In June 2013, amfAR presented her with its humanitarian award for her philanthropic work. That September, she was awarded the Ally for Equality award presented by the Human Rights Campaign, for her support of the LGBT community. The following year, she received the GLAAD Vanguard Award. In July 2016, Lopez released a single entitled "Love Make the World Go Round", a collaboration with Lin-Manuel Miranda, which benefits victims of the Orlando nightclub shooting. She was also featured on the song "Hands" along with numerous other artists, also benefiting those affected by the Orlando shooting. Lopez signed an open letter from Billboard magazine to the United States Congress in 2016, which demanded action on gun control. In June 2020, Lopez attended a Black Lives Matter movement protest in Los Angeles, in connection with the broader George Floyd protests. Lopez has also been an active advocate for the Time's Up movement. In January 2022, she became one of the Co-Chairs for Michelle Obama's When We All Vote. She expressed solidarity with the people of the Gaza Strip during the 2023 Israel–Hamas war. Lopez, as part of a group called Artists4Ceasefire, signed a letter urging President Joe Biden to call for an immediate ceasefire in Gaza. Lopez has cited Madonna as her "first big musical influence", explaining "It was all about Madonna for me. She inspired me to want to sing, to dance, to work hard." Her other major influences include Tina Turner, James Brown, and Michael Jackson. Another major influence on Lopez is Barbra Streisand, stating that, "watching her career over the years, watching her sing and act and direct, was very inspiring to me." Lopez has cited Janet Jackson as a major inspiration for her own dance and videos, stating that she "probably started dancing" because of Jackson's music video for "The Pleasure Principle". She also looked to the careers of Cher, Bette Middler and Diana Ross, and has been inspired by younger artists such as Lady Gaga. Growing up, she was influenced by Latin music styles ranging from salsa to bachata, and artists including Celia Cruz and Tito Puente. However, it was the hip hop song "Rapper's Delight" (1979) by The Sugarhill Gang that she said changed her life. Another key inspiration for Lopez in her youth was Puerto Rican actress Rita Moreno's performance in the musical film West Side Story (1961). Moreno was the only performer Lopez was able to identify with, at a time when Latinos were rarely on television. "Waiting for Tonight" A sample of "Waiting for Tonight", a Euro-centric dance-pop song with distinctly Latin influences, which Lopez is known for incorporating in her music. It was credited with establishing her as a leading artist in the dance-pop genre. Problems playing this file? See media help. Musically, Lopez is described as a "chameleon" by outlets like Variety and Forbes, having been known to experiment and jump between genres. Her music strongly identifies with hip hop while exploring the "romantic innocence" of Latin music. Billboard observed that she has "never been one to downplay her Latinidad, and always makes sure to display it" in her music, "regardless of genre". On the 6 and J.Lo, described by Lopez as Latin soul, fuse a wide range of Latin genres with R&B and hip hop, while also containing dance-pop. While mostly English, the albums include some Spanish and bilingual songs such as "Cariño", with Lopez also speaking in Spanish and asserting her Latin identity on songs like "Let's Get Loud". A departure from her previous work, This Is Me... Then blends 1970s soul with "streetwise" hip hop. Rebirth was noted for its "relaxing" atmosphere, while Como Ama una Mujer was characterized as "silkily Spanish Sade worship". Described as autobiographical, much of Lopez's music has centered around the "ups and downs" of love. Lyrically, This Is Me... Then is largely focused on her relationship with Ben Affleck, with the song "Dear Ben" being described as the album's "glowing centerpiece". Its sequel album, This Is Me... Now, was informed by her reunion and marriage with Affleck; Lopez called it an "emotional, spiritual, and psychological journey of the past two decades". Como Ama una Mujer features introspective lyrics about romance, heartache and self-loathing. Regarding Love?, Lopez stated: "There's still so much to learn and that's why the question mark." Other recurrent themes in Lopez's music have included her upbringing in the Bronx, social class and women's empowerment. Lopez has received mixed reviews for her "light" soubrette voice, which critics have deemed limited, "radio-friendly" and overshadowed by her music's production. With On the 6, The Baltimore Sun regarded Lopez as having a "breathy" stylistic range but lacking personality, while Rolling Stone remarked: "Instead of strained vocal pyrotechnics, Lopez sticks to the understated R&B murmur of a round-the-way superstar who doesn't need to belt because she knows you're already paying attention ... She makes a little va-va and a whole lot of voom go a long way." In reviewing Love?, AllMusic called her voice "slight" and wrote: "Lopez was never, ever about singing; she was about style". Pitchfork described her "notoriously serviceable, airy and light" voice as being "stronger than ever" on This Is Me... Now, while noting that "the thinness of the voice has often been beside the point, if not a boon to her early career", which was marked by "Bronx regularness". Lopez has been criticized for her use of background vocals from demo singers, prompting rumors of ghost singers' vocals being used in place of her own. The rumors have been debunked by producers and background singers who worked with Lopez. Christina Milian, who is credited as a writer and background singer on "Play", called the controversy "funny" and said: "It's no different than Michael Jackson having background singers on songs or Britney Spears. This is what music is made of." Considered one of dance's "greatest success stories", Lopez has received praise for her highly choreographed dancing, and is noted for her technical skill. Lopez, who felt an emotional connection to dance since her youth, has been trained in a range of dance styles, including ballet, jazz, flamenco, ballroom, pole dancing, breakdancing, street dance, and hip hop. A dominant figure on MTV since early in her career, she is known for her body-emphasizing music videos and provocative choreography. CNN's Holly Thomas stated that "Lopez's years of professional dance experience gave her a captivating, commanding presence in her videos." Madeline Roth of MTV wrote: "Her diverse videography encompasses some of the most memorable visuals of the 21st century", with Rolling Stone writer Brittany Spanos observing that her "dancing skills and ability to toy with her own celebrity have made her videos an important part of the new millennium's pop canon". Her videography has sometimes attracted controversy for its sexual suggestiveness, and has been noted for its influence on 2000s fashion trends. On stage, Lopez is recognized for her showmanship, sex appeal, and costumes, which often include bodysuits. Author Priscilla Peña Ovalle stated in Dance and the Hollywood Latina: Race, Sex and Stardom (2011) that Lopez was one of the Latin stars who "used dance to gain agency as working performers with mainstream careers, yet many of their roles paradoxically racialized and sexualized their bodies". Troy Patterson of Entertainment Weekly also observed that she used her body for emphasis on stage, "She turned herself out as the fly girl hyperversion of postfeminist power, flaunting her control by toying with the threat of excess. In consequence, her star went supernova." Her signature movements include "clock-wise pivoting with salsa hip circles and sequential torso undulations". While being noted to lip sync in the early stages of career, Lopez's Dance Again World Tour was praised for showcasing live vocals and choreography synchronously. In a review of her Las Vegas residency All I Have, Los Angeles Times writer Nolan Feeney remarked that her dancing is "undoubtedly the centerpiece of the show". Her provocative stage performances have also drawn scrutiny at times. Robin Givhan of The Daily Beast criticized Lopez's performance at the 2011 American Music Awards where she wore a nude bodysuit, stating that it "cried out for attention in all the wrong ways" and was "banal exhibitionism". In May 2013, her performance on the finale of the television series Britain's Got Talent was deemed inappropriate for family-friendly television, and drew viewer complaints to Ofcom. Following her controversial performance at the musical festival Mawazine in 2015, Moroccan Prime Minister Abdelilah Benkirane called it "indecent" and "disgraceful", while an education group claimed that she "disturbed public order and tarnished women's honor and respect". Lopez's films often see her playing "relatable everywomen", with Cady Lang of Time writing: "A longtime hallmark of Lopez’s filmography is her penchant for stories about survivors. Her characters are never shrinking violets." Discussing the roles she is drawn to, Lopez said in 1998: "I don't think of them as strong women ... I like characters that are really part of the story as opposed to window dressing, but I think the interesting thing is that they are real people. Nobody walks around being strong all the time." Film critic Stephanie Zacharek described Lopez as "one of the most gifted and appealing performers of the past two decades ... and yet the movies have rarely known what to do with her and her significant gifts as an actor." While Lopez received acclaim for her early film work, The New York Times writer Kyle Buchanan noted that her tendency to star in romantic comedies, and her pop music career, "lowered her critical bona fides". Taylor Hackford, who directed Lopez in Parker, said she "can really act": "She knows how to transmit nuances, to make the subtlest of shifts. Does she have humor? Yes. But at the same time she can get into the deepest dramatic areas." Lopez, who identifies the romantic comedy as her favorite film genre, has been referred to as the "Patron Saint of Romantic Comedies" and the "Queen of Romantic Comedies". In her early films, Lopez played stereotypical roles which signified her as a "racialized, exoticized" other. In films such as Blood and Wine and U Turn, her body is fetishized "through extreme close-ups" and "framed as animalistic, primitive, and irresistibly dangerous to the Anglo American male characters." This shifted with her role in Selena, which "affirmed her Latinx identity, and won her the loyalty of that significant section of the US and global audience." She has also been criticized for playing ethnically ambiguous parts and tapping into "the ability to perform a panethnic other" to commodify herself. Her role as an Italian woman in The Wedding Planner has been described as "a case of classic Hollywood whitewashing." Lopez has been a polarizing figure in popular culture. Andrew Barker of Variety writes that she "exhibits a plethora of contradictions", observing: "Despite a carefully cultivated image as an imperious pop empress in ludicrously expensive outfits, her signature hits bear the titles 'I'm Real' and 'Jenny From the Block'." In 2002, Lynette Holloway of The New York Times described Lopez's image as including "a dash of ghetto fabulousness" and "middle-class respectability" for mass appeal. The media discerned a shift in her public image upon joining American Idol in 2011, with Entertainment Weekly writing: "Gone was her old cut-a-bitch swagger; J. Lo 2.0 is an all-embracing, Oprahfied earth madre." People editor Peter Castro said American Idol made Lopez "a celebrity of the people" whereas before, "there was a huge distance with the American public." Lopez is widely celebrated for her curvaceous hourglass figure, which earned her the nickname La Guitarra (the guitar). Vanity Fair described her buttocks as "in and of themselves, a cultural icon". Recounting her experience on early films, Lopez stated: "I've always had costume people looking at me a little weary and immediately fitting me out with things to hide my bottom." She often wears revealing outfits to accentuate her curves. Author Mary Beltrán opined that for Lopez to "unashamedly display her well-endowed posterior during this time period" could be viewed as "a revolutionary act with respect to Anglo beauty ideals". However, she was also criticized for perceived changes in her image upon launching her music career, which included "weight loss and lightening her hair". Considered a fashion icon, Lopez is known for her sense of style and "breaking fashion rules". She is recognized for both her "bold" red carpet fashion and her everyday street style, which is "discussed ad infinitum by the fashion press." British Vogue said she "added megawatt glamour to every outfit she wore", with Billboard describing her style as "scantily clad". Lopez's style has been influenced by "women who epitomize old Hollywood glamour like Rita Hayworth", as well as her Bronx upbringing and Nuyorican identity. Described as the "ultimate sex symbol" of the early 21st century, various publications have ranked her as the most beautiful or sexiest woman in the world, including People, People en Español, Vibe, Details, and FHM, with Lopez topping the latter's 100 Sexiest Women list twice. Lopez has criticized "this funny notion in America that you can't be a mom and be sexy", stating: "The truth is that women can be sexy until the day they die." Described as "one of the most photographed women in the world", Lopez has been a tabloid fixture, and admits to having a "less-than-perfect" public image. Frances Negrón-Muntaner wrote that by 1999, "Internet chat rooms exploded with anti-Lopez babble" and she became "one of the easiest moving targets for cheap laughs as well as anxieties about working-class ‘loud’ sexuality and specifically Latino visibility." Much of the media coverage surrounding Lopez in the 2000s "focused on her dramatic private life", with several writers describing her as overexposed at the time, despite her continued success. Media outlets often compare her to actress Elizabeth Taylor, due to her numerous failed relationships and glamorous public persona. Her high-profile relationship with Combs was described as having "defined an age", with Vanity Fair writing that they entered "the pantheon of slightly notorious celebrity couples: Liz and Dick, Frank and Ava." Throughout her career, she has also received a bad reputation as being a demanding and outspoken "diva", something which she denies, stating: "I've always been fascinated by how much more well-behaved we have to be than men." Some of the backlash and fabricated tabloid stories surrounding Lopez have been attributed to her 1998 interview with Movieline, in which she was quoted as criticizing various actors and directors. Lopez, who "cried for hours" after the article was published, said the comments were made in jest and she was "so misquoted and so taken out of context". In 2003, Lawrence Donegan of The Guardian posited that "indefensible" misogyny and racism were to blame for her position as "the most vilified woman in modern popular culture". In 2021, Ben Affleck said: "People were so fucking mean about her; sexist, racist, ugly vicious shit was written about her in ways that if you wrote it now, you would literally be fired for saying some of the things you said." Lopez is regarded as the most influential Latin entertainer of all time, credited with breaking racial barriers in the entertainment industry. She was described as "the first Latina superstar" by writer Ned Zeman, and the "embodiment of the American Dream" by Robert C. Cottrell in Icons of American Popular Culture (2009). Often dubbed the "Queen of Dance", she is considered a triple threat performer, and was one of few actors to successfully cross over into music. Rachel Sklar of The Huffington Post called Lopez a trailblazer, writing: "Beyoncé, Miley, Gaga, any actress who's ever released an album — they are all standing on the shoulders of J.Lo. She was a true triple threat — actress, singer, dancer ... and packaged it sometimes outrageously but always sexily." Lopez is considered a pop icon, with VH1 ranking her at number 15 on their list of 200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons, number 16 on 100 Greatest Women In Music, and number 21 on 50 Greatest Women of the Video Era. The highest-paid Latina actress in history, Lopez's film career has been credited with paving the way for greater representation of Latino Americans in Hollywood, which was historically a "whites-only preserve". Biographer Kathleen Tracy opined that "Lopez blazed a trail no openly Latin actress had gone before", noting that previous Latina stars cosmetically downplayed their ethnicity and changed their names. With Out of Sight (1998), she achieved "ethnic 'blind' casting", making her an "anomaly in the traditionally white space" of mainstream Hollywood. By deliberately avoiding stereotypical roles, biographer James Robert Parish said Lopez "helped minimize racial boundaries in show business." Her perceived Academy Award snub for Hustlers (2019) was referenced by Los Angeles mayor Eric Garcetti when announcing a new initiative for Latino representation in Hollywood. With her musical debut, Lopez contributed to the 1990s "Latin explosion" in entertainment; The Recording Academy called her the "breakout female star" of the Latin pop movement in American music. Historian Roger Bruns considered her "an influential force in driving a growing Latin cultural influence in popular music" at the time. Her career ascent has been credited with paving the way for American-born Latina pop artists including Selena Gomez and Becky G, and for Latin American pop artists to venture into English music, including Shakira, Thalía and Paulina Rubio. Along with Ricky Martin, she helped increase the visibility of Latin music in international markets including East Asia and Canada. Due to her "multi-tasking career", she has been described as "the next-generation Madonna", and "the first woman to demonstrate that a Madonna could be a Latina". Lopez's music has been credited with helping influence the trajectory of 2000s music, including dance music, Latin music, R&B, and pop rap collaborations. Billboard named her the "Greatest Pop Star" of the year 2001. Scholar Miriam Jiménez Román suggested that Lopez, who represents the "often-suppressed" history of Puerto Ricans in hip hop culture, was "able to traverse the difficult racial boundaries". In 2011, following her return to prominence, Lopez was deemed the "world's greatest musical comeback act", based on a study which analysed over one billion Google searches since 2004. In July 2023, Madame Tussauds New York unveiled a wax figure of Lopez inspired by her performance at the Super Bowl LIV halftime show. The figure celebrates her lasting legacy as a multifaceted entertainer. Lopez was named one of Time's 100 most influential people in the world in 2018. In 2012, Forbes ranked her as the world's most powerful celebrity and the 38th most powerful woman. Latina magazine founder Christy Haubegger attributed Lopez's influence to her being "the first icon that generationally fits" young Latino Americans who followed celebrity culture. Lopez was featured on the first cover of Latina in 1996, with editor Galina Espinoza writing in 2011 that there is "no recounting of modern Latina history without Jennifer". Jonathan Van Meter of Vogue described Lopez as having "changed the face of modern celebrity." Her ability to start trends has prompted the usage of the phrase "the J.Lo effect" in popular culture, which has been used in various different contexts, including the trend of networks hiring "big name" judges for reality competition programs after Lopez's successful casting on American Idol. With her moniker J.Lo, Lopez started a trend of celebrities being given abbreviated nicknames, while "Bennifer" began the convention of celebrity couple name blending. Described by scholar Helene A. Shugart of the University of Utah as "arguably the most visible Latina in contemporary mainstream popular culture", Lopez has been the subject of considerable academic analysis, including in relation to ethnicity, class, "body politics", race, Latin culture, and gender. While credited with opening "the door to [Latino culture having a] broader appeal", Lopez has also been a polarizing figure, generating "often vehement disagreement about what is and isn't Latino." As a result of the public emphasis on her curvaceous figure, Lopez has been credited with influencing a shift in cultural beauty standards. The surge in popularity of buttock augmentation surgery in the early 2000s was attributed to Lopez. In Latin Sensations (2001), Herón Marquez wrote: "Because she wasn't rail thin, Lopez had broken the mold ... Suddenly, it was okay for women to have hips, curves, and a big backside." This has been considered a sign of Lopez's social power in "changing cultural standards within the mainstream media as a whole". In 2014, scientists named a species of aquatic mite found in Puerto Rico, Litarachna lopezae, after Lopez. In Tok Pisin, a language spoken in Papua New Guinea, the term palopa is used to describe non-heteronormative people whose identities may correlate with western definitions of homosexual men or trans women; its etymology is derived from the name Jennifer Lopez. In 2019, she was presented with keys to the city of Miami Beach, with July 24 being declared "Jennifer Lopez Day". The Council of Fashion Designers of America presented Lopez with its Fashion Icon Award in 2019 for her "long-standing and global impact on fashion". Her green Versace "Jungle Dress" was voted the fifth most iconic red carpet dress of all time in a poll run by The Daily Telegraph. The dress had a significant impact on the fashion industry, celebrity endorsements, and the evolution of red carpet fashion. The images of Lopez wearing the dress became the most popular search query of all time at that point, and subsequently led to the creation of Google's image search. Lopez has been credited with popularizing various fashion and beauty trends throughout her career. In 2003, she inspired a trend of curvier mannequins being designed, which fuelled a rise in sales for manufacturers and retailers. Lopez's personal style and brand deals have had a considerable effect on sales in the fashion industry. The success of Louis Vuitton's fall 2003 campaign, for which Lopez was the brand's model, led to more Hollywood stars "becoming image models of fashion and cosmetic labels". In 2021, The Daily Telegraph reported that she was among ten celebrities whose personal style choices drove the greatest spikes in searches and news coverage for brands. Her appearance at Milan Fashion Week in 2019 generated over $31.8 million in total media impact value. Described as a "branding pioneer", Lopez has been credited with ushering in a new era of celebrity branding. Her first fragrance, Glow by JLo, influenced the rise of celebrity fragrances in the 2000s. Her fragrance line became the most successful celebrity line in the world, with sales exceeding $2 billion as of 2012[update]. Lopez's clothing brand was one of the first celebrity fashion lines; scholars have credited her with redefining "how fashion is produced and entwined with other artistic endeavors", and popularizing a trend of utilizing racial ambiguity for branding purposes in fashion and cosmetics. As of 2018[update], Lopez has sold more than 80 million records worldwide and her films have grossed a cumulative total of US$3.1 billion. She remains the only female entertainer to have a number one album and film simultaneously in the United States. With J.Lo (2001), Lopez became the first female solo recording artist under Epic Records to achieve a number one album in the United States since its inception in 1953. J to tha L-O! The Remixes (2002) was acknowledged by the Guinness World Records as the first number one remix album on the US Billboard 200. Lopez's single "On the Floor" is among the best-selling singles of all time, and its music video was recognized as the "Highest Viewed Female Music Video of All Time" by Guinness World Records in 2012. Lopez was named the top Billboard Hot 100 female artist of 2001. Billboard ranked her as the ninth greatest dance club artist of all time in 2016, having scored 18 number-one songs on its Dance Club Songs chart. She was named the top Latin touring artist of the decade by Pollstar in 2021. In 2010, Lopez was honored by the World Music Awards with the Legend Award for her contribution to the arts. In 2013, she was presented with the prestigious landmark 2,500th star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for her musical contributions, and Univision presented her with the World Icon Award in its Premios Juventud. In 2014, she became the first female recipient of the Billboard Icon Award. In 2017, she was awarded the Telemundo Star Award at the Billboard Latin Music Awards. In 2018, Lopez received the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award at the 2018 MTV Video Music Awards, making her the first Latin performer to receive the honor since its introduction in 1984. In 2022, she received the Generation Award at the MTV Movie & TV Awards for her contributions to film and television, and the Icon Award at the iHeart Radio Music Awards. On the 6 (1999) J.Lo (2001) This Is Me... Then (2002) Rebirth (2005) Como Ama una Mujer (2007) Brave (2007) Love? (2011) A.K.A. (2014) This Is Me... Now (2024) Films starred Nurses on the Line: The Crash of Flight 7 (1993) My Family (1995) Money Train (1995) Jack (1996) Blood and Wine (1996) Selena (1997) Anaconda (1997) U Turn (1997) Out of Sight (1998) Antz (1998) The Cell (2000) The Wedding Planner (2001) Angel Eyes (2001) Enough (2002) Maid in Manhattan (2002) Gigli (2003) Shall We Dance? (2004) Monster-in-Law (2005) An Unfinished Life (2005) El Cantante (2006) Bordertown (2007) The Back-up Plan (2010) What to Expect When You're Expecting (2012) Ice Age: Continental Drift (2012) Parker (2013) The Boy Next Door (2015) Lila & Eve (2015) Home (2015) Ice Age: Collision Course (2016) Second Act (2018) Hustlers (2019) Marry Me (2022) Shotgun Wedding (2022) The Mother (2023) This Is Me... Now: A Love Story (2024) Atlas (2024) Unstoppable (2024) Lopez has written a memoir and co-written one children's book so far. Lopez, Jennifer. True Love. Celebra, 2014. ISBN 9780451468680. Lopez, Jennifer and Jimmy Fallon (authors). Con Pollo: A Bilingual Playtime Adventure. Feiwel & Friends, 2022. ISBN 9781250876362. Headlining tours Dance Again World Tour (2012) It's My Party Tour (2019) This Is Me... Now: The Tour (2024) Co-headlining tours Jennifer Lopez & Marc Anthony en Concierto (2007) Enrique Iglesias & Jennifer Lopez Tour (2012) Residencies Let's Get Loud (2001) Jennifer Lopez: All I Have (2016–2018) History of women in Puerto Rico List of artists who reached number one in the United States List of dancers List of Puerto Ricans Mami (hip hop) Nuyorican List of most-followed Instagram accounts Sanchez, Rosa (November 9, 2022). "Jennifer Lopez Defends Her Name Change to Mrs. Affleck After Wedding to Ben". Harper's Bazaar. Retrieved October 2, 2023. her name change to Jennifer Affleck ... People are still going to call me Jennifer Lopez. But my legal name will be Mrs. Affleck because we're joined together. Schillaci, Sophie (August 1, 2023). "Inside Jennifer Lopez's 54th Birthday Party Hosted by Ben Affleck". Entertainment Tonight. Retrieved October 20, 2023. "Jennifer Lopez's Biggest Hits, From Her Best Hip-Hop Collaborations To The Dance Floor Classics". The Recording Academy. September 27, 2023. Retrieved February 13, 2024. Letkemann, Jessica (May 15, 2014). "Jennifer Lopez's Top 10 Biggest Billboard Hits". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 23, 2018. Retrieved December 26, 2021. "Duty Captain's Report". Court TV. January 17, 2001. Archived from the original on February 9, 2008. Retrieved October 29, 2006. Gallick 2003 "Jennifer Lopez: Actress, Reality Television Star, Dancer, Singer (1969–)". Biography.com. A&E Networks. Retrieved February 11, 2019. Cartlidge, Cherese (2012). Jennifer Lopez. Lucent Books. p. 13. ISBN 978-1420507553. Jennifer Lynn Lopez's parents, David and Guadalupe, were both born in Ponce, the second-largest city in Puerto Rico. Dawn, Randee (June 22, 2016). "Jennifer Lopez opens up about her dad: 'He was just proud of me'". Today. Retrieved February 11, 2019. Rodriguez, Giovanni René. "JLo's Dad Lends A Hand In Silicon Valley". Forbes. Retrieved June 6, 2021. "J.Lo Opens Up About Her Parents' Divorce". HuffPost. July 10, 2013. Retrieved June 6, 2021. Molloy, Joanna (September 24, 2010). "It's nice Jennifer Lopez wants to give kids free health care, but why not help out your old block". New York Daily News. Retrieved November 6, 2021. Fernandez, Celia (June 22, 2019). "Jennifer Lopez's Sisters Still Think of Their Middle Sister as a "Goofball"". OprahDaily. Retrieved August 15, 2022. "Jennifer Lopez: Dream Girl". W. Retrieved June 7, 2021. Robinson, Lisa. "Jenny Back on the Block". Vanity Fair. Retrieved June 6, 2021. Lipton, James (host) (October 10, 2004). "Jennifer Lopez". Inside the Actors Studio. Season 11. Episode 153. Ovation TV. Parish 2009, p. 14 Parish 2009, p. 21 Parish 2009, p. 8 Meyers, Kate (December 1, 1995). "Jennifer Lopez on her burgeoning film career". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved July 6, 2021. "Behind the Music: Jennifer Lopez". Behind the Music. Season 12. Episode 6. July 4, 2010. VH1. "The Triple Threat: Jennifer Lopez is Born". Evan Carmichael. Archived from the original on February 26, 2012. Retrieved March 23, 2012. McRady, Rachel (May 3, 2017). "Exclusive: Kerry Washington Reflects on Her Bronx Childhood, Dishes on Husband's Hilarious Met Gala Antics". ETonline. Retrieved June 11, 2021. Parish 2009, pp. 18–22 Kochman, Ben. "Former employer raffles J.Lo concert tix to help pop star's old school". Bronx Times-Reporter. Retrieved June 11, 2021. "Jennifer Lopez credits Barry Manilow with saving relationship with mom". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. May 10, 2011. Archived from the original on June 12, 2021. Retrieved June 12, 2021. Tracy 2008, p. 7 Morales, Ed (March 30, 1999). "It's Not La Vida Loca to Her". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved March 11, 2012. "Jennifer Lopez left red-faced!". Hindustan Times. April 25, 2010. Retrieved June 15, 2021. Perricon, Kathleen (May 10, 2011). "Jennifer Lopez dances with New Kids on the Block in 1991 video clip". The New York Times. Retrieved December 26, 2021. "Jennifer Lopez The Crossover Dream Comes True". BMI.com. October 31, 1999. Retrieved June 12, 2021. Reid, Shaheem (September 28, 2017). "Is that really LL Cool J in EPMD's "Rampage" video? Parrish addresses an urban legend". Revolt. Retrieved June 15, 2021. Roth, Jaclyn (December 23, 2022). "Samantha Fox Reveals She Discovered Jennifer Lopez, Cast Her In Video". OK!. Retrieved February 25, 2024. Parish 2009, p. 23 Parish 2009, p. 27 "Living Single". Vibe. May 2001. p. 100. Archived from the original on June 21, 2020. Retrieved July 6, 2012. Parish 2009, p. 29 Woog 2020, p. 28 Parish 2009, p. 30 Parish 2009, p. 36 Marquez 2001, p. 54 Parish 2009, p. 38 Rooney, David (September 24, 1996). "Blood and Wine". Variety. Retrieved July 7, 2021. Setoodeh, Ramin (August 26, 2019). "Why Wasn't Jennifer Lopez Nominated for an Oscar for 'Selena'?". Variety. Retrieved September 22, 2021. "Medium". Getty Images. Retrieved April 28, 2022. "Lopez gets Selena role". Dallas Morning News. Associated Press. June 14, 1996. Cobo, Leila (March 21, 2017). "Jennifer Lopez on Playing Selena: 'She Had a Sense of Living in the Present & Following Her Heart'". Billboard. Retrieved December 26, 2021. Marquez 2001, p. 56 Parish 2009, pp. 57–58 Ebert, Roger. "Selena movie review & film summary (1997) | Roger Ebert". RogerEbert.com. Retrieved September 26, 2021. Bances, Gisselle (May 19, 2020). "Why J.Lo's Oscar campaign for 'Selena' never got off the ground". Yahoo Entertainment. Retrieved June 8, 2022. Parish 2009, p. 49 Leydon, Joe (April 20, 1997). "Anaconda". Variety. Retrieved October 1, 2021. Parish 2009, p. 61 Woog 2020, p. 42 Parish 2009, pp. 65–66 Buchanan, Kyle (January 13, 2020). "Why Did the Oscars Ignore Jennifer Lopez in 'Hustlers'?". The New York Times. Retrieved February 12, 2024. Maslin, Janet (June 26, 1998). "'Out of Sight': A Thief, a Marshal, an Item". The New York Times. Retrieved October 1, 2021. Morales, Ed (May 30, 1999). "It's Not La Vida Loca to Her". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 8, 2022. "From Brangelina to Bogart and Bacall: the best on-screen chemistry". The Guardian. August 6, 2021. Retrieved September 26, 2021. Kleinhans, Chuck (December 1998). "Selena ¡Siempre Selena!". Jump Cut (42): 28–31. Retrieved February 27, 2024. Susman, Gary (May 28, 2003). "Ben Affleck follows J. Lo to L'Oreal". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved February 28, 2024. Mendible 2007, p. 150 Bruns 2008, p. 299 "On the Down Lo". Billboard. Vol. 119, no. 5. February 3, 2007. p. 27. ISSN 0006-2510. Retrieved July 1, 2012. Ovalle 2011, p. 138 "Puff Daddy out on bail". BBC News. December 28, 1999. Retrieved July 3, 2012. Parish 2009, p. 2 Shemesh, Yasmine (January 15, 2021). "J.Lo At 20: Celebrating The Album That Made Jennifer Lopez An Icon - MTV". MTV News. Retrieved January 25, 2021. "Jennifer Lopez". TV Moments. May 2002. VH1. Barrera, Magdalena (2002). "Hottentot 2000: Jennifer Lopez and Her Butt". In Phillips, Kim M.; Reay, Barry (eds.). Sexualities in history: a reader. Routledge. p. 407. ISBN 9780415929356. "J.Lo's infamous green Grammys dress is the reason Google Images exists". USA Today. Retrieved February 12, 2017. Lee, Michelle (February 11, 2003). Fashion victim: our love-hate relationship with dressing, shopping, and the cost of style. Broadway Books. p. 122. ISBN 978-0-7679-1048-4. Retrieved May 16, 2011. Linder, Brian (August 21, 2000). "Weekend Box Office: Hype vs. Quality". IGN. Retrieved February 27, 2024. Tyrangiel, Josh (August 13, 2005). "Jennifer Lopez". Time. Archived from the original on March 1, 2009. Retrieved January 13, 2007. Zaragoza, Alex (February 19, 2020). "That's Not Amore: Everything That's Wrong With 'The Wedding Planner'". Vice. Retrieved February 12, 2024. "Bride for Your Sins". The Village Voice. January 30, 2001. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Deanne, Kenyatta & Lowery 2005, pp. 107–109 Woog 2020, pp. 55–56 Azzopardi, Chris (September 1, 2016). "Jennifer Lopez's 'I'm Real' 15 Years Later: How the Rule-Breaking Duet With Ja Rule Prevented a Sophomore Slump". ETonline. CBS Studios, Inc. Retrieved November 23, 2016. Hay, Carla (January 19, 2002). "Music & Showbiz". Billboard. Vol. 114, no. 3. Nielsen Business Media, Inc. p. 76. Retrieved February 27, 2024. "Lopez is simply out of sight in 'Angel Eyes'". The Detroit News. May 18, 2001. Ebert, Roger. "Angel Eyes movie review & film summary (2001) | Roger Ebert". RogerEbert.com. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Holden, Stephen (May 18, 2001). "FILM REVIEW; Is He or Isn't He? It's a Haunting Question". The New York Times. Retrieved October 16, 2021. Woog 2020, p. 55 Ashcer-Walsh, Rebecca (March 26, 2001). "J. Lo and Ricky Martin may update Viva Las Vegas". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved February 21, 2024. Singh, Anita (October 7, 2008). "Jennifer Lopez: I had a nervous breakdown". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved October 20, 2012. Bronson, Fred (2003). The Billboard Book of Number One Hits (5 ed.). Crown. p. 922. ISBN 9780823076772. Paoletta, Michael (December 7, 2002). "Reviews and Previews". Billboard. Vol. 114, no. 49. p. 65. Retrieved April 5, 2013. "Made in Manhattan". The Village Voice. February 4, 2003. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Holloway, Lynette (December 9, 2002). "Keeping J. Lo in Spotlight Has Risks for Her Career As Well as Rich Rewards". The New York Times. Retrieved June 30, 2013. Schaefer, Stephen (May 19, 2002). "Movies: Singer-actress Jennifer Lopez shows her strength in thriller 'Enough'". Boston Herald. Boston. Ebert, Roger (May 24, 2002). "Enough". Chicago Sun-Times. Parish 2009, p. 76 Gray, Brandon (April 22, 2010). "Bankability Breakdown: Jennifer Lopez". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved October 17, 2016. Scott, A. O. (December 13, 2002). "FILM REVIEW; Puttin' Down Mop, Puttin' On the Ritz". The New York Times. Retrieved October 2, 2021. "J.Lo's Restaurant Huevos Goodbye". TMZ. July 9, 2008. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Jones, Geoffrey (February 25, 2010). Beauty Imagined:A History of the Global Beauty Industry. Oxford University Press. ISBN 9780191609619. Retrieved October 22, 2012. "Observer profile: J-Lo". The Guardian. September 14, 2003. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Holson, Laura M. (July 14, 2003). "When Jenny Dumped Benny". The New York Times. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Stern, Marlow (August 1, 2013). "A Look Back at 'Gigli,' the Infamous Bennifer-Starring Film, on Its 10th Anniversary". The Daily Beast. IAC. Retrieved December 26, 2021. Bailey, Jason (January 25, 2021). "Hear me out: why Gigli isn't a bad movie". The Guardian. Retrieved June 15, 2022. "This Smash-Up Is Just Smashing!". Observer. August 11, 2003. Retrieved October 6, 2021. Ebert, Roger (August 1, 2003). "Gigli Review". Retrieved June 15, 2022. "J-Lo new face Louis Vuitton". FashionUnited. April 18, 2003. Retrieved October 5, 2021. "Kevin Smith Says Test Audiences Hated Bennifer in 'Jersey Girl' Days". TMZ. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Tess Katz, Emily (January 23, 2015). "Jennifer Lopez Opens Up About 'The Gigli Era': 'It Was Very Tough'". HuffPost. Retrieved December 26, 2021. McLean, Bethany (October 31, 2017). "J-Rod! Jennifer Lopez and Alex Rodriguez on Love, Beauty, and Redemption". Vanity Fair. Lowe, Kinsey R. (May 16, 2005). "'Monster-in-Law' gets a cheery reception". Los Angeles Times. Los Angeles, California. Retrieved December 26, 2021. Tracy 2008, p. 107 Van Meter, Jonathan (March 15, 2012). "Jennifer Lopez: Venus Rising". Vogue. Retrieved February 12, 2024. "CD: Jennifer Lopez, Rebirth". The Guardian. February 18, 2005. Barker, Andrew (June 20, 2013). "Jennifer Lopez Receives Star for Music on Hollywood Walk of Fame". Variety. Retrieved June 25, 2013. Freeman, Hadley (February 11, 2005). "No more velour: J-Lo label aims upmarket aims for high fashion cred". The Guardian. Retrieved December 10, 2016. Gaslin, Glenn (January 24, 2019). "Huge Celebrities Who Have Sold You Pepsi". TV Guide. Retrieved February 28, 2024. Pietroluongo, Silvio (April 29, 2006). "LL Cool J Sees Historic Re-Entry". Billboard. Vol. 118, no. 18. p. 46. ISSN 0006-2510. Ebert, Roger. "An Unfinished Life movie review (2005)". RogerEbert.com. Retrieved October 7, 2021. Summers, Chris (September 10, 2006). "Hollywood tackles Mexican mystery". BBC News. Retrieved July 24, 2012. D'Arcy, David. "Bordertown". Screen. Retrieved October 9, 2021. Scott, A. O. (August 3, 2007). "When the Salsa Throbs, a Singer's Soul Is Revealed". The New York Times. Retrieved August 16, 2014. Escobedo Shepherd, Julianne (February 22, 2024). "Jennifer Lopez: This Is Me... Now Album Review". Pitchfork. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Tracy 2008, p. 107 LaSalle, Mick (August 3, 2007). "A salsa star who couldn't keep drugs out of the mix". SFGate. Retrieved October 9, 2021. Reed, James (March 27, 2007). "Lopez turns the lights down low". Boston Globe. Archived from the original on October 21, 2012. Retrieved December 26, 2021. Willman, Chris (March 27, 2007). "Como Ama Una Mujer | EW.com". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved February 16, 2016. Cobo, Leila (October 6, 2016). "Jennifer Lopez to Release Spanish Album, Executive Produced by Marc Anthony: Exclusive". Billboard. Retrieved December 26, 2021. Copsey, Robert (May 4, 2011). "Jennifer Lopez: 'Love?'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on May 5, 2011. Retrieved December 26, 2021. Bernstein, Jonathan (October 8, 2007). "Brave". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved October 7, 2009. "Kid Rock's Jesus Overpowers Bruce Springsteen's Magic On Billboard Chart". MTV News. Retrieved October 9, 2021. Sanneh, Kelefa (October 9, 2007). "Sure, Bring Your Family to Work". The New York Times. Retrieved October 9, 2021. Persall, Steve (April 21, 2010). "Jennifer Lopez returns from 3-year break in 'The Back-up Plan'". Tampa Bay Times. Archived from the original on May 10, 2017. Retrieved December 13, 2016. Elliott, Hannah (April 18, 2012). "The Real American Idol: How J.Lo Got Her Mojo Back". Forbes. Retrieved May 24, 2012. "J.Lo puts music on back burner". TODAY.com. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Gatecrasher (February 23, 2010). "After 'Louboutins', 'Fresh Out of the Oven' flop, Epic Records gives Jennifer Lopez the boot: source". Daily News. New York. Retrieved August 16, 2014. Dargis, Manohla (April 22, 2010). "Love Means Having to Say, 'I Feel ...'". The New York Times. Retrieved October 3, 2021. Gilmour, Lyndsay. "Jennifer Lopez: calling the shots". Stylist. Retrieved February 23, 2024. Setoodeh, Ramin (August 26, 2019). "How Jennifer Lopez Learned to Dance Again". Variety. Retrieved October 9, 2021. Lipshutz, Jason (July 27, 2012). "Jennifer Lopez And Her 'American Idol' Rejuvenation: An Appreciation". Billboard. Retrieved February 27, 2024. "IFPI digital music report 2012 – key facts and figures" (PDF). International Federation of the Phonographic Industry. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 30, 2012. Retrieved January 23, 2012. Caulfield, Keith (May 11, 2011). "Beastie Boys Score No. 2 Debut on Billboard 200, Adele Holds at No. 1". Billboard. Retrieved December 26, 2021. "Jennifer Lopez Talks About Her New Single "Goin' In"". 925maxima Radio. May 28, 2012. Archived from the original on December 16, 2012. Retrieved June 23, 2012. Murray, Michael (March 30, 2012). "Jennifer Lopez Talks 'Dance Again' & Her Upcoming 'Greatest Hits' Album". Ryan Seacrest Productions. Archived from the original on April 2, 2012. Retrieved March 31, 2012. "No. 5: Jennifer Lopez ($45 million)". Forbes. Retrieved February 8, 2015. Huspeni, Andrea (July 12, 2012). "Jennifer Lopez to Launch Teeology". Business Insider. Retrieved August 5, 2012. Labrecque, Jeff (June 24, 2011). "Jennifer Lopez signs on for 'What to Expect When You're Expecting'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 30, 2011. Retrieved December 26, 2021. Wheeler, Jeremy. "Ice Age: Continental Drift 3D – Cast, Reviews, Summary, and Awards". AllRovi. Archived from the original on January 28, 2012. Retrieved October 30, 2011. "Ice Age storms the weekend box office". San Francisco Chronicle. Associated Press. July 15, 2012. "Jennifer Lopez and Marc Anthony's 'Q'Viva: The Chosen': First Broadcast Partners Announced". The Hollywood Reporter. October 19, 2011. "Hackford's 'Parker' packs a big punch". Chicago Tribune. January 28, 2013. Archived from the original on July 29, 2013. Retrieved December 5, 2013. Cheng, Roger (May 23, 2013). "Jennifer Lopez dishes on new Viva Movil shopping (Q&A)". CNET. Archived from the original on May 28, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2021. "Jennifer Lopez lobbies for more diversity on TV". BBC News. June 13, 2013. "Jennifer Lopez Wants Latinos To Realize Their Power". Fox News Latino. June 13, 2013. Archived from the original on June 17, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2021. "Jennifer Lopez's Lesbian Aunt: Star Says 'The Fosters' TV Show Inspired By Late Relative". HuffPost. April 24, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2021. "Lopez to earn USD 17.5 million for American Idol return". Business Standard. September 1, 2013. Retrieved September 24, 2013. Lipshutz, Jason (June 30, 2014). "Jennifer Lopez's 'A.K.A.' Debut: An Icon Reaches a Crossroads". Billboard. Retrieved December 26, 2021. Cheng, Andrea (January 15, 2015). "Here's Your First Look at Jennifer Lopez's New Jewelry Designs". InStyle. Archived from the original on September 7, 2015. Retrieved September 21, 2015. Cowles, Gregory (November 14, 2014). "Inside the List". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 3, 2022. Retrieved December 10, 2016. Moreno, Carolina (December 23, 2014). "Jennifer Lopez On Why Her New Movie Is 'Breaking Down' Stereotypes". HuffPost. Retrieved December 26, 2021. "'Strange Magic,' 'Mortdecai,' 'The Boy Next Door': Review Revue". The Wall Street Journal. January 23, 2015. Retrieved January 24, 2015. Mendelson, Scott (January 24, 2015). "Friday Box Office: Johnny Depp's 'Mortdecai' Flops, Jennifer Lopez's 'Boy Next Door' Scores". Forbes. Retrieved January 26, 2015. "The Boy Next Door (2015)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved March 10, 2015. Dickey, Josh (October 3, 2013). "Jennifer Lopez, Steve Martin Board DreamWorks Animation's 'Home' (Exclusive)". The Wrap News Inc. Retrieved October 4, 2013. Pell, Michael (February 24, 2015). "Exclusive! Watch Jennifer Lopez's Cute 'Feel The Light' Video". MTV. Archived from the original on February 26, 2015. Retrieved February 26, 2015. Seidman, Robert (January 27, 2014). "Viola Davis & Jennifer Lopez To Star In Indie Film 'Lila and Eve' Produced By Lifetime Films & A+E Studios". Zap2it. Archived from the original on February 23, 2014. Retrieved March 11, 2014. "Jennifer Lopez Reveals Title and Artwork for Vegas Show". CBS Las Vegas. September 20, 2015. Retrieved September 20, 2015. Leach, Robin (January 21, 2016). "Review: J.Lo inks three-year contract; Pitbull, Ne-Yo, Ja Rule join her onstage". Las Vegas Sun. Archived from the original on July 2, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Chiu, Melody (September 30, 2018). "Jennifer Lopez Surpasses $100 Million in Ticket Sales as She Wraps Star-Studded Vegas Residency". People. Retrieved October 1, 2018. "Jennifer Lopez Signs New Deal With Epic Records". Billboard. United States. Prometheus Global Media. March 2, 2016. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved December 26, 2021. "Jennifer Lopez's Official biggest songs in the UK revealed". Official Charts Company. July 24, 2019. Retrieved February 9, 2024. "NBC Orders Cop Drama Starring Jennifer Lopez to Series". Variety. February 21, 2014. Retrieved July 20, 2014. Maglio, Tony (January 8, 2016). "Ratings: J Lo's 'Shades of Blue' Is Most-Watched NBC Thursday Debut in 7 Years". TheWrap. Retrieved January 8, 2016. "104 Women Who Defined the Decade in Pop Culture". Glamour. December 20, 2019. Retrieved February 13, 2024. Paskin, Willa (January 6, 2016). "Shades of Blue". Slate. Retrieved December 26, 2021. "Ice Age: Collision Course". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved June 30, 2016. Underwood, Khalea (July 27, 2016). "Jennifer Lopez Teams Up With Giuseppe Zanotti for 'Bad Ass High Heels' Collection". Us Weekly. Retrieved July 28, 2016. Wagmeister, Elizabeth (July 19, 2016). "NBC Greenlights Reality Dance Competition Series from Jennifer Lopez". Variety. Retrieved July 23, 2016. Maglio, Tony (May 31, 2017). "Ratings: J Lo's 'World of Dance' Scores Big Premiere After 'AGT'". TheWrap. The Wrap News, Inc. Retrieved June 1, 2017. O'Connell, Michael (May 31, 2017). "TV Ratings: NBC's 'World of Dance' Scores a Big Post-'Talent' Debut". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 1, 2017. Wass, Mike (November 7, 2017). "Jennifer Lopez Announces New Single "Amor Amor Amor"". Idolator. Hive Media. Archived from the original on June 26, 2022. Retrieved November 9, 2017. Gray, Yasmine (November 28, 2017). "Jennifer Lopez Stars in Spring 2018 GUESS Campaign". Billboard. Retrieved February 27, 2024. Benjamin, Jeff (November 9, 2018). "Jennifer Lopez & Bad Bunny Team For Tropical-Trap Joint 'Te Gusté': Watch". Forbes. Archived from the original on November 11, 2018. Retrieved November 10, 2018. "Inglot Cosmetics Announces Collaboration With Jennifer Lopez". PR Newswire. April 5, 2018. Retrieved April 9, 2018. Galuppo, Mia (June 22, 2017). "Jennifer Lopez to Star in Romantic Comedy 'Second Act' for STX". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 22, 2017. Lyndsey Havens (September 10, 2018). "Jennifer Lopez Performs 'Limitless' at the 2018 American Music Awards: Watch". Billboard. Retrieved December 26, 2021. Schaffstall, Katherine (December 20, 2018). "'Second Act': What the Critics Are Saying". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 14, 2019. "Second Act (2018)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved February 10, 2019. Setoodeh, Ramin (2019). "How Jennifer Lopez Learned to Dance Again". Variety. Retrieved September 9, 2019. Live Nation Entertainment (March 22, 2019). "World's Hottest Entertainer Jennifer Lopez Reveals Tantalizing Details of North American It's My Party Tour to Celebrate Milestone Birthday with Fans". PR Newswire. United States: Cision Inc. Retrieved March 23, 2019. Intner, Katie (September 30, 2019). "Jennifer Lopez Named the New Global Face of Coach". People. Archived from the original on December 30, 2019. Retrieved December 30, 2019. Hamanaka, Kari (March 20, 2019). "Quay Nabs Deal With Jennifer Lopez, Alex Rodriguez on Eyewear Collaboration". Women's Wear Daily. Retrieved April 18, 2019. Tapp, Tom (May 29, 2020). "Jennifer Lopez's 'Thanks A Million' Renewed For Season 2 By Quibi – Watch The Trailer". Deadline. Retrieved June 8, 2022. Wood, Lucy (February 5, 2019). "J.Lo and Constance Wu Will Star in a Movie About Savvy Former Strippers". Marie Claire. Retrieved February 14, 2019. Campbell, Christopher (September 8, 2019). "Hustlers First Reviews: Jennifer Lopez Is Oscar-Worthy in the Surprise Hit of the Toronto International Film Fest". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved September 9, 2019. Yang, Rachel (September 8, 2019). "Hustlers reviews are in: Jennifer Lopez amazes in one of this year's best films". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved September 9, 2019. Sharf, Zack (September 9, 2019). "Jennifer Lopez Overwhelmed by 'Hustlers' Oscar Buzz: 'It Brings Tears to Your Eyes'". IndieWire. Retrieved September 9, 2019. Mendelson, Scott (September 15, 2019). "'Hustlers' Box Office: Jennifer Lopez And Constance Wu Break Records With Huge $33 Million Weekend". Forbes. Retrieved September 15, 2019. Kohn, Eric (December 11, 2019). "Jennifer Lopez Is a Gifted Actress, So Why Do We Always Take Her for Granted?". Indiewire. Retrieved June 8, 2022. Vary, Adam B. (January 13, 2020). "Academy Awards Barely Escape a Reprise of #OscarsSoWhite". Variety. Retrieved January 31, 2020. Nicolaou, Elena (February 7, 2020). "The Oscars Robbed Us of a Historic Jennifer Lopez Moment—and I Can't Forgive Them". OprahDaily. Retrieved June 8, 2022. Robey, Tim (February 2, 2020). "Laura Dern doesn't need another award". Telegraph. Retrieved June 8, 2022. Aguilar, Carlos (January 13, 2020). "J.Lo Was Robbed. Latinas Were Robbed". The New York Times. Retrieved June 15, 2022. McClintock, Pamela (September 11, 2019). "'Hustlers': Jennifer Lopez Poised for Major Box Office Comeback". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 22, 2019. Hornaday, Ann (September 10, 2019). "J-Lo makes a commanding comeback in the sexually charged caper flick 'Hustlers'". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 22, 2019. Mendelson, Scott (September 14, 2019). "'Hustlers' Tops Box Office With Record $13 Million Friday, But 'The Goldfinch' Bombs". Forbes. Retrieved September 22, 2019. Yang, Rachel (February 2, 2020). "Jennifer Lopez's daughter Emme, 11, joins her on stage during Super Bowl halftime show". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved June 22, 2020. Martin, Laura (September 27, 2022). "Why Jennifer Lopez is Hollywood's most underestimated star". BBC. Retrieved February 12, 2024. Bustios, Pamela (October 8, 2020). "Jennifer Lopez and Maluma's 'Pa' Ti' Debuts In Top 10 on Hot Latin Songs Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 9, 2020. Retrieved October 11, 2020. Peters, Mitchell (January 1, 2021). "Jennifer Lopez Delivers Powerful 'New Year's Rockin' Eve' Performance: 'We Made It'". Billboard. Retrieved June 29, 2023. Gold, Michael (January 20, 2021). "Jennifer Lopez sang classic tributes to America at the inauguration". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Lee, Amy (January 1, 2021). "Jennifer Lopez's Skincare Line JLo Beauty Is Here!". Entertainment Tonight. Retrieved January 3, 2021. Pener, Degen (November 2, 2021). "Jennifer Lopez to Dwayne Johnson: Hollywood's Next Billion-Dollar-Brand Builders". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 28, 2024. "Jennifer Lopez signs multi-year production deal with Netflix". NBC News. June 9, 2021. Retrieved June 15, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 13, 2021). "Jennifer Lopez & Owen Wilson Romantic Comedy 'Marry Me' Going Theatrical Day & Date On Peacock". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved August 6, 2023. "Jennifer Lopez". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved May 17, 2022. Mass, Jennifer (March 7, 2022). "'Marry Me' Is the Most-Streamed Day-and-Date Movie on Peacock and 'Bel-Air' Top Original Series, Comcast CEO Says". Variety. Retrieved June 8, 2022. Bacon, Jess (February 11, 2022). "Jennifer Lopez and Owen Wilson rom-com Marry Me gets first reviews". Digital Spy. Retrieved June 23, 2022. Sims, David (February 11, 2022). "Marry Me and the Revenge of the Old-Fashioned Rom-Com". The Atlantic. Retrieved June 1, 2022. Dado, Natasha (March 9, 2022). "Jennifer Lopez Joins Billionaire Richard Branson's Virgin Voyages Cruise Line: 'Jenny from the Dock'". People. Retrieved July 29, 2023. Goldsmith, Jill (June 9, 2022). "Tribeca Festival Kicks Off With Celebratory Doc 'Halftime,' Low Key Presence By Star Jennifer Lopez". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved June 9, 2022. "Halftime". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved February 14, 2024. Garcia, Tess (June 14, 2022). "All Jennifer Lopez Asked Was to Be Treated Like a White Man". Gamour. Retrieved June 15, 2022. Roeper, Richard (June 13, 2022). "'Halftime': Jennifer Lopez doc seems to bare some but not all". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved June 15, 2022. Das, Poulomi (June 15, 2022). "Halftime review: Jennifer Lopez in rousing, effective documentary: "it's clear as day that not recognizing Lopez's work on Hustlers is nothing short of an act of malice. Halftime ensures that the world remembers it."". Firstpost. Retrieved June 15, 2022. Richford, Rhonda (September 27, 2022). "EXCLUSIVE: Intimissimi Signs Jennifer Lopez as New Global Brand Ambassador". Women's Wear Daily. Retrieved November 10, 2023. Jakiel, Olivia (February 28, 2022). "Jennifer Lopez and Jimmy Fallon Team Up to Write Adorable Bilingual Children's Book 'Con Pollo'". People. Retrieved February 28, 2022. "Children's Picture Books - The New York Times Bestseller List". The New York Times. October 15, 2022. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Rodrick, Stephen (February 13, 2024). "Jennifer Lopez's $20 Million Gamble: Why the Superstar Spent Her Own Money and Defied Skeptics to Tell Her Ben Affleck Love Story". Variety. Retrieved February 15, 2024. Pulliam-Moore, Charles (January 18, 2023). "Netflix's 2023 movie lineup is looking kind of lean". The Verge. Retrieved January 18, 2023. Alexandria, Lavender (June 12, 2013). "Jennifer Lopez Celebrates A Month Of "The Mother" Being Netflix's Top Film". HotNewHipHop. Retrieved February 15, 2024. Dick, Jeremy (December 30, 2023). "Netflix Viewing Data Confirms Jennifer Lopez Action Movie Was a Massive Hit on Streaming". Comic Book Resources. Retrieved February 9, 2024. Roiz, Jessica (September 11, 2023). "Jennifer Lopez to Release First Solo Album In Nine Years Under New Partnership With BMG: Exclusive". Billboard. United States. ISSN 0006-2510. Archived from the original on September 11, 2023. Retrieved September 11, 2023. DeBianchi, Antonia (April 3, 2023). "Jennifer Lopez Launches Lower-Calorie Alcohol Line Named After Her 'Carefree, Fun Side' (Exclusive)". People. Retrieved June 28, 2023. Hu, Zoe (March 17, 2023). "Jennifer Lopez signs footwear deal with Revolve". Drapers. Retrieved June 28, 2023. Muhammad, Latifah (March 17, 2023). "Jennifer Lopez Debuts a Dazzling New Shoe Collab With Revolve: Shop the Collection". Billboard. Retrieved June 28, 2023. Wiseman, Andreas (November 27, 2023). "Jennifer Lopez: Release Dates Revealed For First Album in a Decade This Is Me... Now & Related Movie About Her "Love Life" Which Will Stream On Amazon". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 27, 2023. Retrieved November 27, 2023. Garcia, Thania (November 27, 2023). "Jennifer Lopez Reveals Release Date for 'This Is Me... Now' Album and Short Film". Variety. Retrieved November 27, 2023. Staples, Louis (February 15, 2024). "This is Me... Now: A Love Story: Why J-Lo deserves respect for her 'bonkers' new musical movie". BBC Online. Retrieved February 15, 2024. Jonze, Tim (February 2, 2024). "Jennifer Lopez's new film about herself is a strange, sexy mess. But there's method in the madness". the Guardian. Archived from the original on February 6, 2024. Retrieved February 6, 2024. Rizzo, Carita (November 27, 2023). "Jennifer Lopez Announces Film to Accompany This Is Me... Now Album". Rolling Stone. ISSN 0035-791X. Archived from the original on November 27, 2023. Retrieved November 27, 2023. Johnston, Rylee (October 18, 2023). "Jennifer Lopez & Intimissimi Launch a Lingerie Line Inspired by Her Upcoming Album: Shop It Here". Billboard. Retrieved November 10, 2023. Calvario, Liz (February 16, 2024). "Jennifer Lopez announces 'This Is Me...Now The Tour': EXCLUSIVE". Today. Retrieved February 16, 2024. Chin, Carmen (March 15, 2024). "Jennifer Lopez enlists (G)I-DLE for remix of 'This Time Around'". NME. Retrieved March 15, 2024. Kroll, Justin (June 15, 2021). "Jennifer Lopez To Star In Netflix's Sci-Fi Thriller 'Atlas' With Brad Peyton Directing". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved July 18, 2022. Rajput, Priyanca (September 1, 2022). "2022 Film and high-end TV productions shooting globally: latest updates". Kemps Film and TV Production Services Handbook. Archived from the original on September 1, 2022. Retrieved September 1, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 17, 2023). "Jharrel Jerome To Star As Wrestler Anthony Robles Alongside Jennifer Lopez In 'Unstoppable' From Artists Equity And Amazon". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved June 28, 2023. Vary, Adam B. (December 6, 2023). "Jennifer Lopez Attached to Star in 'Kiss of the Spider Woman' Musical Film From 'Dreamgirls' Director Bill Condon (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Retrieved January 10, 2024. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 26, 2021). "Jennifer Lopez Netflix Pic 'The Cipher': Scribes Jason Smilovic And Todd Katzberg Adapting Isabella Maldonado Novel". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved June 29, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 28, 2022). "Jennifer Lopez's Nuyorican Productions, Skydance TV Developing Post-WWII NYC Set Prime Video Series 'Backwards In Heels'". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved July 18, 2022. Cordero, Rosy (May 11, 2022). "Jennifer Lopez To EP Limited Series Based On Rodgers & Hammerstein's 'Cinderella' With Skydance And Concord". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved July 18, 2022. Shoard, Catherine (January 25, 2024). "Jennifer Lopez to produce Bob the Builder movie". The Guardian. Retrieved January 25, 2024. Associated Press (February 15, 2024). "Jennifer Lopez, Bad Bunny, Chris Hemsworth and Zendaya to chair 2024 Met Gala". ABC News. Retrieved February 24, 2024. "Jennifer Lopez's Late High School Sweetheart David Cruz Was 'Soft-Spoken and Kind' Says Source". People. Retrieved June 11, 2021. Parish 2009, p. 22 Morris, Alex (February 7, 2022). ""I Just Said, Fuck It": How Jennifer Lopez Broke All the Rules to Get to the Top". Rolling Stone. Retrieved June 1, 2022. "J-Lo Wins Payout From Ex". The Sydney Morning Herald. August 9, 2007. Retrieved August 28, 2007. Harris, Chris (April 11, 2006). "Jennifer Lopez Sues First Husband To Block Tell-All Book". MTV News. Retrieved December 26, 2021. "Jennifer Lopez Sues Ex over Honeymoon Tape". People. Retrieved May 20, 2021. "Jennifer Lopez halts sale of 'intimate' honeymoon tape". NZ Herald. Retrieved May 20, 2021. "All of Jennifer Lopez's Famous Loves". People. Retrieved May 20, 2021. Susman, Gary. "J. Lo finally dishes on P. Diddy". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved May 20, 2021. "Puff Daddy Arrested On Weapons Charge After Nightclub Shooting". MTV News. Retrieved May 20, 2021. "Puff Daddy Acquitted". ABC News. Retrieved May 20, 2021. Tannenbaum, Emily. "Jennifer Lopez and Diddy Fans Are Hoping for Reunion After the Rapper Posted Sweet Throwback". Glamour. Retrieved June 7, 2021. "Flings in the world of Hollywood!". Times of India. March 4, 2011. Retrieved January 27, 2023. Devaney, Susan (July 24, 2021). "Every Time Jennifer Lopez Wrote Her Own Style Rules In The '90s". British Vogue. Retrieved June 25, 2022. Chiu, Melody (March 25, 2016). "Jennifer Lopez Says... "I really felt like when I met Ben, 'Okay, this is it."". PEOPLE. Retrieved May 31, 2022. Lieberman, Ellen (April 19, 2002). "J. Lo opens Madre's... Affleck gave J. Lo congratulatory flowers". CNN. Retrieved May 31, 2022. Goldstein, Patrick (October 14, 2007). "Ben Affleck's Roller Coaster Takes a New Turn". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 17, 2015. Dam, Julie (November 18, 2002). "Jewels of Engagement – Vol. 58 No. 21". People. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2017. Blake, Meredith (May 12, 2021). "Why is Bennifer 2.0 so exciting? Because last time, we screwed it up". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved May 13, 2021. Robinson, Lisa (August 4, 2011). "Jenny Back on the Block". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on July 14, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2017. Silverman, Stephen (November 11, 2002). "Ben's Proposal 'Beautiful,' Says Lopez". People. Retrieved February 24, 2019. Williams, Jeanne (December 10, 2002). "J. Lo, Ben make first appearance as fiances". USA Today. p. 2. Armstrong, Mark (September 10, 2003). "Lopez, Affleck Postpone Weekend Wedding". People. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved December 26, 2021. Adekaiyero, Ayomikun (April 14, 2022). "Ben Affleck once asked Jennifer Lopez if media criticism bothered her but the pop star said she 'expected this'". Insider. Retrieved June 15, 2022. Dagostino, Mark (March 9, 2004). "Affleck on 'Good Terms' with Lopez". People. Archived from the original on April 15, 2017. Retrieved April 14, 2017. "Jennifer Lopez on relationships and tabloids in the "Bennifer Era"". CBS News. December 23, 2019. Retrieved February 23, 2024. "Jennifer Lopez Reflects on Relationship with Ben Affleck". Extra TV. March 25, 2016. Archived from the original on December 21, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2017. Bruns 2008, p. 301 Dansby, Andrew (June 7, 2004). "J.Lo, Marc Anthony Marry | Music News". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 5, 2017. Retrieved April 1, 2012. "Wedding highlights J.Lo's true talent: getting us talking". Austin American-Statesman. June 9, 2004. Retrieved February 25, 2012. Bustios, Pamela (June 26, 2019). "Rewinding the Latin Charts: 20 Years Ago, Jennifer Lopez & Marc Anthony First Bonded With 'No Me Ames'". Billboard. Retrieved June 7, 2022. Legaspi, Althea (February 8, 2022). "Video: Jennifer on working and performing with Marc... "Jenny From the Block" reflects on her early days for The First Time". Rolling Stone. Retrieved June 7, 2022. "EXCLUSIVE: Jennifer Lopez & Marc Anthony Welcome Twins!". People. February 22, 2008. Retrieved February 24, 2019. "Jennifer Lopez & Marc Anthony Reveal Baby Names". People. February 29, 2008. Retrieved February 24, 2019. Rose, Lacey. "Jackson Pic Won't Make List Of Priciest Celeb Photos". Forbes. Retrieved March 21, 2012. Roiz, Jessica (May 19, 2021). "Latin Artists Who Own Sports Teams: Gloria Estefan, Bad Bunny & More". Billboard. Retrieved July 7, 2022. "Jennifer Lopez Divorce — Marc Anthony Files Divorce From JLo". Hollywood Life. April 11, 2012. Archived from the original on June 18, 2013. Retrieved June 18, 2013. "Jennifer Lopez & Marc Anthony's Divorce Has An Anti-Paparazzi Clause". TMZ.com. June 18, 2014. Archived from the original on June 19, 2014. Retrieved April 13, 2016. The divorce — 2 years in the making —became official Monday [June 16, 2014]. "Jennifer Lopez gets her name changed | Entertainment & Showbiz from CTV News". Ctvnews.ca. January 3, 2015. Retrieved May 15, 2015. Cordero, Rosy (June 9, 2019). "Jennifer Lopez sings with daughter Emme during 'It's My Party' world tour kick-off". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved June 19, 2022. Kaliviotis, Chrisanthi (February 2020). "Let's Get Loud For Jennifer Lopez And Her Daughter Emme At The Super Bowl LIV Halftime Show". Grazia. Retrieved June 19, 2022. "Jennifer Lopez introduces one of her twins with gender neutral pronouns". CTVNews. June 20, 2022. Retrieved June 20, 2022. Nudd, Tim. "Jennifer Lopez and Casper Smart Split". People. Retrieved February 24, 2019. Quinn, Dave (August 24, 2016). "Jennifer Lopez and Beau 'Casper' Smart Have Split, Says Source: 'It Wasn't Anything Dramatic'". People. Retrieved February 24, 2019. "Jennifer Lopez and Alex Rodriguez 'Getting More Serious' as Source Says Their Kids Have Met: 'Everyone Is Getting Along'". April 5, 2017. France, Lisa Respers (March 31, 2017). "Alex Rodriguez talks dating Jennifer Lopez". CNN. Calvario, Liz (March 9, 2019). "Jennifer Lopez and Alex Rodriguez Are Engaged -- See Her Massive Ring!". Entertainment Tonight. Retrieved March 10, 2019. Kacala, Alexander (March 13, 2021). "Jennifer Lopez and Alex Rodriguez announce they are still together". USA Today. Retrieved May 31, 2022. Clements, Erin (April 15, 2021). "Jennifer Lopez and Alex Rodriguez announce breakup in TODAY exclusive". Today. Archived from the original on April 16, 2021. Retrieved April 15, 2021. Mizoguchi, Karen (May 10, 2021). "Jennifer Lopez and Ben Affleck 'Spent Several Days' Together in Montana, Source Says". People. Retrieved October 18, 2021. LeGardye, Quinci (July 24, 2021). "J.Lo Goes Instagram-Official With Ben Affleck on Her 52nd Birthday". Harper's Bazaar. VanHoose, Benjamin (April 12, 2022). "Jennifer Lopez Details Ben Affleck's 'Bubble Bath' Proposal: 'Tears Were Coming Down My Face'". People. Retrieved June 1, 2022. Garcia, Thania (July 17, 2022). "Jennifer Lopez and Ben Affleck Get Married in Las Vegas". Variety. Retrieved July 17, 2022. "Jennifer Lopez Reveals She and Ben Affleck Faced 'Unexpected Setbacks' Before 'Perfect' Ga. Wedding". Peoplemag. Retrieved September 4, 2022. "Jennifer Lopez & Michelle Obama Take a Selfie at 2014 LULAC Convention!". E! Online. July 10, 2014. Retrieved September 4, 2022. "LL Cool J, U2's Edge, More Join 'What's Going On' Project". MTV News. Retrieved March 23, 2012. J Stone, Stephanie (May 27, 2011). "Complete list of 'El Ultimo Adios' artists". Discogs. Retrieved February 17, 2010. "Amnesty honour for Jennifer Lopez". BBC News. February 15, 2007. Retrieved November 15, 2016. Johnson, Reed (February 14, 2007). "Mexico's murdered women find a voice in 'Bordertown'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved November 15, 2016. Kilgore, Kym (August 13, 2007). "Jennifer Lopez to drop 'Brave' new album". LiveDaily. Archived from the original on May 28, 2012. Retrieved September 4, 2010. Cobo, Leila (June 7, 2008). "Together Again". Billboard. Vol. 120, no. 23. p. 10. ISSN 0006-2510. Retrieved May 28, 2012. Rebirth (Booklet). Jennifer Lopez. New York City: Epic Records, a division of Sony Music Entertainment. 2005.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) "Lopez's Cancer Hero Dies". Contactmusic. January 11, 2005. Retrieved April 9, 2013. Barker, Andrew (October 7, 2014). "Jennifer Lopez Aims to Improve Health Care Through Her Foundation". Variety. Retrieved November 15, 2016. Rosario, Mariela (May 12, 2009). "J.Lo's Medical Scare with Baby Emme Leads Her to Charity". Latina. Archived from the original on November 15, 2016. Retrieved November 15, 2016. Moody, Nekesa (December 17, 2012). "Jennifer Lopez on Holiday Charity Drive and Jenni Rivera: 'It's a Wake-Up Call'". Billboard. Retrieved January 3, 2013. Takeuchi, Craig (May 11, 2015). "Jennifer Lopez debuts as B.C. Children's Hospital's newest spokesperson". The Georgia Straight. Vancouver Free Press. Retrieved December 21, 2016. "United Nations Foundation Announces Jennifer Lopez as Global Advocate for Girls and Women". PRWeb. September 24, 2015. Retrieved September 23, 2015. "United Nations Foundation Announces Jennifer Lopez as Global Advocate for Girls and Women". United Nations Foundation. September 23, 2015. Retrieved November 15, 2016. Cobo, Leila (September 24, 2017). "Jennifer Lopez Donating $1 Million to Aid Hurricane Victims in Puerto Rico". Billboard. Retrieved September 25, 2017. Connick, Tom (September 24, 2017). "Jennifer Lopez donates $1 million to Puerto Rico hurricane victims". NME. Retrieved September 25, 2017. Diaz, Thatiana (September 27, 2017). "J.Lo and Marc Anthony Form Alliance with Ed Sheeran and Bruno Mars to Help Puerto Rico". People. Retrieved September 28, 2017. Pederson, Erik (October 16, 2017). "'One Voice: Somos Live!' Disaster-Relief Telethon Raises $35M In Pledges – Update". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 17, 2017. Weldon, Sarah (October 6, 2017). "Lin-Manuel Miranda debuts star-studded single for Puerto Rico, 'Almost Like Praying' – listen here". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved October 6, 2017. Quintana, Dolores (December 7, 2021). "Jennifer Lopez and Ben Affleck Hold Holiday Food Drive for the charity Rise Against Hunger With Their Kids". Palisades News. Retrieved December 7, 2021. Forde, Kisha (September 14, 2021). "How Jennifer Lopez Is Helping Shine a Light on Latina Entrepreneurs Ahead of Hispanic Heritage Month". E! News. Retrieved December 7, 2021. Garcia, Thania (June 9, 2022). "Jennifer Lopez Partners With Nonprofit Grameen America to Financially Empower Women-Led Latina Businesses". Variety. Retrieved June 9, 2022. Blackwelder, Carson (June 9, 2022). "Jennifer Lopez wants to 'change the fabric of America' for Latina entrepreneurs". Good Morning America. Retrieved June 9, 2022. "Global superstar Jennifer Lopez headlined the Los Angeles Dodgers Foundation's star-studded Blue Diamond Gala". mlb. June 16, 2022. Retrieved June 17, 2022. Vollman, Taylor (January 30, 2021). "Is Jennifer Lopez a Democrat or a Republican?". Heavy. Retrieved June 9, 2022. "Jennifer Lopez in New Obama TV Ad, Wears Hot High-Slit Dress at Fundraiser". Fox News Latino. October 2, 2012. Archived from the original on November 19, 2016. Retrieved November 19, 2016. Donelan, Loretta (October 31, 2016). "Hillary Clinton Joins Jennifer Lopez On Stage At The Star's Concert & It's A Great Show Of Support — Video". Bustle. Retrieved November 19, 2016. Mallenbaum, Carly (October 30, 2016). "J.Lo takes stage for Hillary Clinton, samples Michelle Obama speech". USA Today. Retrieved November 19, 2016. Jennifer Lopez: Halftime (Documentary). Netflix. 2022. Retrieved February 25, 2024. Butler, Bethonie (January 20, 2021). "Jennifer Lopez sang 'Lets Get Loud' at inauguration. The dance track actually made perfect sense". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 24, 2024. Saenz, Arlette (October 16, 2020). "Jennifer Lopez endorse Joe Biden". CNN. Retrieved June 9, 2022. Lipke, David (June 14, 2013). "Jennifer Lopez Honored at amfAR's Inspiration Gala". Women's Wear Daily. Retrieved November 15, 2016. "HRC to Honor Jennifer Lopez with Ally for Equality Award at 2013 National Dinner". HRC Blog. Human Rights Campaign. September 20, 2013. Archived from the original on September 25, 2013. Retrieved September 25, 2013. "Jennifer Lopez Honored at GLAAD Awards". Billboard. April 13, 2014. Retrieved November 15, 2016. Getz, Dana (July 7, 2016). "Jennifer Lopez, Lin-Manuel Miranda team for Orlando tribute 'Love Make the World Go Round'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved July 7, 2016. Quackenbush, Casey (July 6, 2016). "Listen to Britney Spears, Pink, Jennifer Lopez and Others Sing 'Hands' for Orlando". Time. Retrieved November 15, 2016. "An Open Letter to Congress from the Music Industry". Billboard. June 23, 2016. Retrieved November 19, 2016. Todisco, Eric (June 8, 2020). "Jennifer Lopez & Alex Rodriguez Attend Black Lives Matter Protest in L.A.: 'We Are Proud to Join'". People Magazine. Retrieved June 9, 2020. Jimenez, Ashley (January 7, 2018). "Jennifer Lopez Delivers #TimesUp Speech In Puerto Rico In Honor of Golden Globes". Latina Magazine. Archived from the original on March 16, 2018. Retrieved March 15, 2018. Gardner, Chris (January 31, 2022). "Jennifer Lopez, Steph Curry and H.E.R. Join Michelle Obama's When We All Vote as Co-Chairs". USA Today. Retrieved June 9, 2022. "Celebrities call for ceasefire, decry civilian deaths: Hollywood reacts to Israel-Hamas war". USA Today. October 16, 2023. Miller, Prairie (December 2002). "NY Rock Interview with Jennifer Lopez". NY Rock. Archived from the original on December 20, 2002. Retrieved February 12, 2012. Pollitt, Anna (October 22, 2015). "How this image of Madonna changed Jennifer Lopez's life". Stylist. Retrieved February 20, 2021. "10 Questions for Jennifer Lopez". Time. October 18, 2007. Archived from the original on October 21, 2007. Retrieved August 18, 2012. "India is on my mind: Jennifer Lopez". The Times of India. Chowdary, Asa. August 25, 2012. Retrieved August 30, 2014. Schiller, Rebecca (May 20, 2018). "Jennifer Lopez on Working With Cardi B, Why Janet Jackson Is an Idol at Billboard Music Awards: Watch". Billboard. Retrieved September 24, 2019. Eames, Tom (June 16, 2011). "Jennifer Lopez: 'Lady GaGa inspires me'". Digital Spy. Retrieved February 2, 2020. Parish 2009, pp. 13–14 Parish 2009, pp. 9–11 Malone, Chris (June 1, 2019). "Jennifer Lopez's 'On the 6' at 20: All the Tracks Ranked". Billboard. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Lockett, Dee (June 26, 2014). "Once overrated, Jennifer Lopez is now underrated". St. Louis Post-Dispatch. Archived from the original on August 30, 2014. Retrieved January 8, 2015. Mossman, Kate (February 9, 2024). "Jennifer Lopez's beautifully unhinged visual album". New Statesman. Retrieved February 23, 2024. Morales, Ed (2003). The Latin Beat: The Rhythms And Roots Of Latin Music From Bossa Nova To Salsa And Beyond. Da Capo Press. p. 163. ISBN 078673020X. Woog 2020, p. 55 "Latest From Lopez Made for the Mass Market". The Miami Herald. January 26, 2001. p. 3. Tarradell, Mario (June 4, 1999). "On the 6". Orlando Sentinel. Tarradell, Mario (June 13, 1999). "Pop go the Latin acts Do artists leave heritage behind for crossover success?". The Dallas Morning News. "How Jennifer Lopez Turned Hitting 'Rock Bottom' Into A Memoir". HuffPost. November 5, 2014. Retrieved December 26, 2021. Dinh, James (May 3, 2011). "J.Lo Contemplates 'Love' (And Love?) Through The Years". MTV. Archived from the original on July 27, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2021. Cinquemani, Sal (November 20, 2002). "Jennifer Lopez: This Is Me... Then". Slant Magazine. Retrieved July 24, 2012. Garcia, Thania (November 25, 2022). "Jennifer Lopez Announces First Album in Eight Years, 'This Is Me... Now'". Variety. Archived from the original on March 8, 2023. Retrieved July 22, 2023. Williott, Carl (January 13, 2014). "Jennifer Lopez Reminds Us She's The "Same Girl" In Music Video Teaser: Watch". Idolator. Retrieved March 8, 2014. George, Kat (March 15, 2016). "J-Lo is the feminist celebrity icon you never knew you had". Dazed. Waddell Limited. Retrieved December 1, 2016. Amorosi, A.D. (July 31, 2012). "J-Lo's doing it well, singing and dancing in A.C." The Philadelphia Inquirer. Retrieved February 22, 2024. "Jennifer Lopez finds her voice on new album". Rap-Up. SpinMedia. Retrieved February 12, 2012. Henderling, Lisa (December 2007). "Revolutions". Vibe. Vol. 15, no. 12. p. 107. ISSN 1070-4701. Considine, J.D. (June 3, 1999). "Actress Jennifer Lopez can sing, but it isn't enough". The Baltimore Sun. ISSN 1930-8965. Sheffield, Rob (July 8, 1999). "On the 6". Rolling Stone. Retrieved April 8, 2013. Stephen Thomas Erlewine (April 19, 2011). "Love? – Jennifer Lopez". AllMusic. Retrieved May 3, 2011. Myers, Owen (August 15, 2023). "Up next is … JLo? When pop stars crash karaoke". The Guardian. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Gariano, Francesca (February 4, 2024). "Ayo Edebiri seemingly owns up to her Jennifer Lopez 'scam' comments during 'SNL' sketch". NBC Dallas-Fort Worth. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Juzwiak, Rich (November 4, 2019). "Ashanti Did Sing on 'I'm Real,' Duh". Jezebel. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Bell, Sadie (September 20, 2023). "Christina Milian Has No Beef with Jennifer Lopez over 'Play': 'Couldn't Believe at 19 Years Old I Wrote a Song for J.Lo'". People. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Chou, Jessica (July 22, 2015). "11 Of Pop's Most Iconic Dancers, Ranked". Refinery29. Retrieved August 10, 2018. "Jam On: Music's Best Dancers Since Michael Jackson". BET. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Ovalle 2011, p. 130 Vena, Jocelyn (March 3, 2011). "Jennifer Lopez's 'On The Floor' Video Creates 'Dance Buzz'". MTV News. Retrieved May 31, 2013. Boccard, Sophia (January 28, 2008). "Jennifer Lopez Interview for Shall We Dance?". The Cinema Source. Archived from the original on May 15, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2013. Ovalle 2011, pp. 134–136 "Asia Pacific Quarterly". Billboard. Vol. 111, no. 32. Nielsen Business Media. August 7, 1999. p. 56. ISSN 0006-2510. Brown, Jane Delano; Steele, Jeanne R.; Walsh-Childers, Kim (2002). Sexual Teens, Sexual Media: Investigating Mediás Influence on Adolescent Sexuality. Routledge. p. 260. ISBN 0805834907. Thomas, Holly (January 31, 2020). "Super Bowl headliner Jennifer Lopez is the star of bouncing back". CNN. Retrieved February 1, 2020. Roth, Madeline (July 31, 2018). "Jennifer Lopez, Living Icon, Is Your 2018 VMA Video Vanguard". MTV. Retrieved August 5, 2018. Spanos, Brittany (August 18, 2018). "5 Artists Who Could Win Future VMA Video Vanguard Awards". Rolling Stone. Retrieved August 19, 2018. Costanza, Ashley Justine (April 9, 2012). "Jennifer Lopez's 'Dance Again' Video Stirs Controversy: Her Five Trashiest Videos". International Business Times. Retrieved June 30, 2013. "Nobody Puts J.Lo's Booty in a Box". ETOnline. October 1, 2014. Retrieved December 27, 2014. Halabian, Layla (August 7, 2018). "Never forget that Jennifer Lopez was the queen of early-'00s style". The Fader. Retrieved February 18, 2024. D. Kennery, Gerrick (January 24, 2016). "Review Jennifer Lopez gives all she's got – and more – in Vegas". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 20, 2016. Mountford, Jaye (July 22, 2016). "Jennifer Lopez Las Vegas Residency Extended: Her Show-Stopping Stage Looks". Latin Times. Retrieved February 15, 2024. Ovalle 2011, pp. 3–4 Patterson, Troy (December 19, 2000). "Rock Frock". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 3, 2013. Retrieved June 30, 2013. Potuoglu-Cook, Oyku (2008). Night Shifts: Moral, Economic, and Cultural Politics of Turkish Belly Dance. p. 167. ISBN 978-0549541301. "Lip syncing takes the fun out of seeing an artist live". Contra Costa Times. June 21, 2002. Woog 2020, p. 56 Fuller, Bonnie (December 5, 2012). "Jennifer Lopez 'Dance Again' Tour — Why She Had to Divorce Marc Anthony". Hollywood Life. Retrieved May 31, 2013. Concepcion, Pocholo (November 27, 2012). "JLo enchants capacity crowd at MOA Arena concert". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Retrieved November 27, 2012. Givhan, Robin (November 21, 2011). "Jennifer Lopez's Fashion Blunder at American Music Awards". The Daily Beast. Retrieved February 16, 2024. "Jennifer Lopez: 'Britain's Got Talent producers said to wear outfit'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on June 4, 2013. Retrieved May 31, 2013. Shepherd, Jack (June 8, 2015). "Jennifer Lopez concert: Moroccan PM demands investigation into 'provocative' performance". The Independent. Retrieved November 23, 2016. Wilson, Jake (December 6, 2018). "Second Act review: Jennifer Lopez's working woman sends mixed messages". Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved February 12, 2024. Lang, Cady (February 11, 2022). "The 16 Best J. Lo Movies Of All Time". Time. Retrieved February 12, 2024. Gristwood, Sarah (December 11, 1998). "Jennifer Lopez is on her way up". Tampa Bay Times. Retrieved February 12, 2024. Zacharek, Stephanie (February 7, 2022). "Why Jennifer Lopez Remains the Patron Saint of Romantic Comedies". Time. Retrieved February 12, 2024. Tapia, Sara (January 26, 2023). "Jennifer Lopez dishes on her career and marriage to Ben Affleck". Who. Retrieved February 12, 2024. Tangcay, Jazz (January 27, 2023). "Jennifer Lopez's Rom-Coms Ranked, From 'Maid in Manhattan' to 'Shotgun Wedding'". Variety. Retrieved February 12, 2024. Keates, Emma (November 27, 2023). "Jennifer Lopez is releasing a film to accompany her first album in a decade". The A.V. Club. Retrieved February 12, 2024. Valdivia, Angharad N.; Molina Guzmán, Isabel (2004). "Brain, Brow, and Booty: Latina Iconicity in U.S. Popular Culture". The Communication Review. 7 (2). Routledge: 205–221. doi:10.1080/10714420490448723. Halperin, Shirley (May 19, 2011). "Secrets Behind 'American Idol's' Incredible Comeback". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 23, 2024. Fernandez, Sandy M. (May 21, 2005). "Jenny's Image On the Block: Latinos Say Lopez Is Selling a Shift in Culture". The Washington Post. p. 4. La Porte, Nicole (May 15, 2011). "Jennifer Lopez, the People's Pop Star". The New York Times. Retrieved February 26, 2024. Markovitz, Adam (May 4, 2011). "Love? review – Jennifer Lopez". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved November 20, 2016. Mendible 2007, p. 2 Negrón-Muntaner 2004, pp. 235–237 "Marisa Meltzer:For Posteriors' Sake". The New York Times. September 17, 2014. Archived from the original on January 3, 2022. Negrón-Muntaner 2004, p. 233 Marquez 2001, p. 59 Beltrán, Mary (January 2002). "The Hollywood Latina Body as Site of Social Struggle: Media Constructions of Stardom and Jennifer Lopez's 'Cross-over Butt'". Quarterly Review of Film and Video (19). Routledge: 71–86. doi:10.1080/10509200214823. Baez, Jillian M. (Winter 2007). "Speaking of Jennifer Lopez: Discourses of Iconicity and Identity Formation Among Latina Audiences". Media Report to Women. 35 (1): 5–11. Bateman, Kristen (June 4, 2019). "CFDA Fashion Awards 2019: Jennifer Lopez and Barbie among winners". CNN. Retrieved July 20, 2019. Curran, Amanda (January 13, 2023). "Jennifer Lopez Just Wore a Sheer Button-Front Dress Over Pants". Glamour. Retrieved February 11, 2024. Brookins, Laurie (April 16, 2019). "Jennifer Lopez Is CFDA's 2019 Fashion Icon". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 13, 2024. Allaire, Christian (July 24, 2020). "Nobody Does Athleisure Style Quite Like J.Lo". Vogue. Retrieved February 23, 2024. Yotka, Steff (April 6, 2019). "Jennifer Lopez Will Receive the Fashion Icon Honor at the CFDA Awards". Vogue. Retrieved February 23, 2024. Savage, Lauren (February 29, 2012). "J.Lo Plays Gender-Bending Boxer for V Magazine Cover". Billboard. Retrieved December 26, 2021. Chambers, Veronica (July 1, 2007). "Jennifer Talks". Glamour. Retrieved June 25, 2022. "Greatest Pop Star of Ever Year: 1981 to 2020". Billboard. Retrieved February 15, 2024. "Jennifer Lopez Named Most Beautiful". CBS News. April 27, 2006. Retrieved February 23, 2024. "The 19 Most Lustable Celebs Since '93". Vibe. April 17, 2013. Archived from the original on May 20, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2021. Halza, George Halza (November 16, 1998). "Jennifer Lopez named sexiest woman of the year". Reading Eagle. p. 5. "FHM – Jennifer Lopez". FHM. Archived from the original on December 16, 2008. Retrieved March 10, 2012. "Jennifer Lopez Walks Us Through 15 of Her Favorite Beauty Moments". Allure. February 16, 2021. Retrieved February 17, 2024. Johnson, Steve (September 22, 2010). "Will Lopez, Tyler be good for 'American Idol'?". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved January 28, 2015. Saney, Daniel (February 8, 2005). "J.Lo blames films for bad public image". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on September 20, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2021. Negrón-Muntaner 2004, p. 243 Riley 2010, p. 242 "Vibe Media Group". Vibe. Vol. 11, no. 7. July 2003. ISSN 1070-4701. Hirschberg, Lynn (July 9, 2013). "Jennifer Lopez: Dream Girl". W. Archived from the original on July 11, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2021. "Lopez doesn't mind Liz link". The Age. December 27, 2002. Retrieved February 23, 2024. Zeman, Ned (August 2001). "Every Move She Makes". Vanity Fair. Retrieved February 26, 2024. "Demanding diva Jennifer Lopez bans domestic staff from speaking to her". London Evening Standard. September 13, 2012. Retrieved January 8, 2013. Lee, Esther (May 18, 2016). "Jennifer Lopez Addresses Sexism in Hollywood, Being Branded a Diva: 'Am I Difficult Because I Care?'". US Magazine. Retrieved June 6, 2022. Feinberg, Scott (January 14, 2021). "'Awards Chatter' Podcast — Ben Affleck ('The Way Back')". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 1, 2023. Liptak, Carena (October 7, 2022). "Run The World: How Jennifer Lopez' Triple-Threat Superstardom Brought Latin Culture To Center Stage". The Recording Academy. Retrieved October 11, 2022. "J.Lo tops list of most influential Hispanics". Reuters. January 4, 2007. Retrieved February 12, 2007. Parish 2009, pp. 4–5 Cottrell 2009, pp. 221 Publications referring to Lopez as the "Queen of Dance": Al Saafin, Aziz (February 15, 2024). "Jennifer Lopez on love, heartbreak, and her new musical film". 1 News. Archived from the original on February 14, 2024. Retrieved March 7, 2024. Lopez, frequently dubbed the Queen of Dance... Carras, Christi (September 29, 2020). "Dance to Jennifer Lopez and Maluma for a good cause with the #PaTiChallenge". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 17, 2020. Retrieved September 30, 2020. May, Naomi (August 2, 2023). "Jennifer Lopez Is Officially The Queen Of Dancing Like Nobody's Watching". Elle. Retrieved March 6, 2024. Steiner, Amanda Michelle (December 18, 2014). "PEOPLE Magazine Awards: Jennifer Lopez Wins Triple Threat Award". People. Retrieved January 10, 2020. Feeney, Nolan (February 11, 2016). "Review: Jennifer Lopez's New Residency Turns Las Vegas Into Destination Diva". Time. Retrieved January 10, 2020. Bronson, Fred (June 12, 1999). "Actress Lopez Out of Sight on Hot 100". Billboard. Vol. 111, no. 24. Nielsen Business Media, Inc. p. 90. ISSN 0006-2510. Retrieved February 19, 2024. Sklar, Rachel (March 18, 2010). "The J. Lo Decade". The Huffington Post. Retrieved February 19, 2024. Cottrell 2009, pp. 219 Lloyd, Sophie (January 26, 2024). "Jennifer Lopez's New Career Move Mocked". Newsweek. Retrieved February 9, 2024. "The 200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons Complete Ranked List". PR Newswire. Archived from the original on May 1, 2017. Retrieved June 30, 2013. Graham, Mark (February 13, 2012). "VH1's 100 Greatest Women In Music". VH1. Archived from the original on February 14, 2012. Retrieved February 29, 2012. "Ep. 071 | 50 Greatest Women of the Video Era". VH1. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011. Retrieved August 10, 2013. "Jennifer Lopez - Biography". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved November 19, 2016. "Solid as a Rock". Vibe. July 2003. p. 96. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved August 25, 2017. Gonzalez, Irina (July 10, 2019). "How Jennifer Lopez Paved the Way for a Generation of Latinas". Oprah Daily. Retrieved February 10, 2024. Roginson, Mia (October 3, 2019). "In appreciation of Jennifer Lopez: The triple-threat star continues to break barriers and pave roads". USC Annenberg Media. Retrieved February 11, 2024. Barbeito, Carmen (March 21, 2023). "'Selena' Movie Made J.Lo the First Latina Actress To Earn $1 Million for a Role". Mitú. Retrieved February 10, 2024. Pearlman, Cindy (August 14, 1999). "For the record; Very hot and ambitious actress Jennifer Lopez has music on her mind". The Record. Kitchener, Ontario. ISSN 0824-5150. Tracy 2008, p. ix Negrón-Muntaner 2004, pp. 244–245 Hipes, Patrick (January 13, 2020). "Los Angeles Mayor Calls On #JusticeForJLo After Oscar Snub At Event Launching LA Collab To Boost Latino Involvement In Hollywood". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved February 11, 2024. Tarradell, Mario (February 20, 2000). "Latin aftershocks Music's ethnic boom reshapes the Grammy landscape". The Dallas Morning News. Haack, Brian (October 6, 2017). "1999: The Year Latin Pop Conquered America". The Recording Academy. Retrieved June 17, 2018. "50 Greatest Latin Pop Songs". Rolling Stone. July 9, 2018. Hurtado, Aida (Spring 2006). "Much More Than a Butt: Jennifer Lopez's Influence On Fashion". Spectator. 26 (1). University of Southern California: 149–155. LeBlanc, Larry (June 12, 1999). "Martin, Lopez Help Pick Up the Pace of Canada's Latin Beat". Billboard. Vol. 111, no. 24. Nielsen Business Media, Inc. p. 41. "From the block . . . to the top". Chicago Tribune. December 15, 2002. Retrieved February 23, 2024. "Jennifer Lopez". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 22, 2024. Retrieved February 15, 2024. "Christina Milian: 'Things have evolved when it comes to culture, when it comes to respect, when it comes to women'". The Independent. October 15, 2022. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Román, Miriam Jiménez; Flores, Juan (2009). The Afro-Latin@ Reader: History and Culture in the United States. Duke Press. p. 548. ISBN 978-0822391319. Retrieved July 2, 2013. Kennedy, Gerrick D. (December 13, 2011). "Jennifer Lopez named 'world's greatest musical comeback act' -- seriously". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved February 15, 2024. "Jennifer Lopez's Newest Wax Figure is in NYC!". Madame Tussauds New York. July 19, 2023. Retrieved February 28, 2024. "Madame Tussauds Unveils Jennifer Lopez Wax Figure Inspired by Super Bowl Performance". WWD. July 19, 2023. Retrieved February 28, 2024. Reilly, Katie (April 19, 2018). "Jennifer Lopez and Shawn Mendes to Perform at the 2018 TIME 100 Gala". Time. Retrieved April 30, 2018. Goudreau, Jenna (August 22, 2012). "The World's Most Powerful Women: 16 New Faces". Forbes. Retrieved November 23, 2016. Espinoza, Galina (September 12, 2011). "Lessons Learned From 15 Years of Jennifer Lopez". HuffPost. Retrieved December 26, 2021. Hauser, Brooke (November 2007). "The Lopez Effect" (PDF). Allure: 196–201. Retrieved February 13, 2024. Bakar, Faima (August 17, 2021). "What Is The J-Lo Effect And How Can You Channel It?". The Huffington Post. Retrieved February 13, 2024. Bahr, Sarah (August 5, 2021). "What Is the 'J. Lo Effect'?". The New York Times. Retrieved February 13, 2024. Lacey Rose, Shirley Halperin (February 15, 2012). "The J.Lo Effect: $15 Million Becoming the New Standard as Reality Salaries Soar". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 4, 2013. "Robert Pattinson disdains 'hypocritical' activist celebrities". The Sydney Morning Herald. June 13, 2012. Retrieved February 15, 2024. Shugart, Helene A. (May 8, 2007). "Crossing Over: Hybridity and Hegemony in the Popular Media". Communication and Critical/Cultural Studies. 4 (2). National Communication Association: 115–141. doi:10.1080/14791420701296505. Negrón-Muntaner 2004, p. 232 Garrod, Andrew; Kilkenny, Robert; Gómez, Christina (2007). Mi Voz, Mi Vida/ My Voice, My Life: Latino College Students Tell Their Life Stories. Cornell University Press. p. 179. ISBN 978-0801473869. Sayej, Nadja (June 28, 2022). "'Halftime' Director Amanda Micheli on Capturing Jennifer Lopez's Resilience". Shondaland. Retrieved February 21, 2024. Amanda Micheli: She practically redefined our cultural ideal of beauty by embracing her body when it didn't fit the mold. Ovalle 2011, p. 131 Mendible 2007, p. 1 Studeman, Kristin Tice (August 27, 2014). "Cultural Obsession With Butts". Vogue. Retrieved February 17, 2024. Marquez 2001, p. 47 Redmond 2007, pp. 282–283 Gibsone, Harriet (July 17, 2014). "Scientists name new species of water mite after Jennifer Lopez". The Guardian. Retrieved July 19, 2014. Besnier, Niko; Alexeyeff, Kalissa (December 31, 2014). Gender on the Edge: Transgender, Gay, and Other Pacific Islanders. University of Hawaii Press. p. 327. ISBN 978-0-8248-4019-8. Stewart, Christine (December 2, 2014). Name, Shame and Blame: Criminalising Consensual Sex in Papua New Guinea. ANU Press. pp. xxi. ISBN 978-1-925021-22-6. "Miami Beach Honors J-Lo On Her 50th Birthday, Making July 24th 'Jennifer Lopez Day'". CBS News. July 24, 2019. Retrieved February 15, 2024. Khan, Urmee (October 9, 2008). "Liz Hurley 'safety pin' dress voted the greatest dress". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved May 1, 2011. Fury, Alexander (January 28, 2020). "Alexander Fury: How JLo's Green Versace Dress Changed History". Another Magazine. Retrieved February 13, 2024. "Why Jennifer Lopez's Grammy's Dress Was Responsible For Google Images". Yahoo! News. April 9, 2015. Retrieved February 16, 2024. Riley 2010, p. 241 Schmidt, Eric (January 19, 2015). "The Tinker's Apprentice". Project Syndicate. Retrieved January 25, 2015. Keeler, Janet K. (April 15, 2003). "Choice words for short shorts". Tampa Bay Times. Retrieved February 16, 2024. Cerini, Marianna (April 27, 2020). "Remember when J.Lo made Juicy Couture tracksuits cool?". CNN. Retrieved February 16, 2024. Horyn, Cathy (June 25, 2002). "Hats Are for Hiding, Yes, but How They Can Show Off". The New York Times (151). London, Lela (July 22, 2020). "Meet Makeup Artist Scott Barnes, The CEO Who Turned Jennifer Lopez Into J-Lo". Forbes. Retrieved February 16, 2024. "Dummy's guide to fashion". The Age. August 1, 2005. Retrieved February 12, 2024. "Big-bottomed mannequins boost profile in New York". The New Zealand Herald. December 13, 2004. Retrieved February 13, 2024. "Shapely dummy helps maker's bottom line". The Sydney Morning Herald. January 29, 2005. Retrieved February 12, 2024. Deeley, Rachel (January 16, 2020). "Why the Fashion Industry Is Betting Big on Jennifer Lopez". Business of Fashion. Retrieved February 17, 2024. "More Hollywood endorsers". Philippine Daily Inquirer. December 25, 2004. p. 119. Retrieved March 20, 2024. Abraham, Tamara (November 16, 2021). "How Jennifer Lopez became the world's most powerful midlife style star". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved February 18, 2024. "Jennifer Lopez revives dress behind the invention of Google Images". BBC News. September 21, 2019. Retrieved December 30, 2019. Lockwood, Lisa (September 27, 2019). "Jennifer Lopez Gives Big Boost to Media Impact Value at Milan Fashion Week". Women's Wear Daily. Archived from the original on September 30, 2019. Retrieved September 30, 2019. Granatstein, Lisa (September 19, 2021). "Jennifer Lopez Is Adweek's 2021 Brand Visionary". Adweek. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Naughton, Julie (February 9, 2012). "Getting to the Heart of J.Lo". WWD. Retrieved October 21, 2012. Noble, Audrey (September 28, 2022). "How Glow by J.Lo Forever Changed the Celebrity Fragrance Market". InStyle. Retrieved September 28, 2022. McIntosh, Steven (February 28, 2017). "Is this the end of celebrity fragrances?". BBC News. Retrieved July 5, 2018. "Jennifer Lopez and nuvoTV Announce Exclusive Creative, Production and Marketing Partnership". Los Angeles. PR Newswire. September 12, 2012. Archived from the original on September 6, 2014. Retrieved July 20, 2014. Kaplan, Julee (June 24, 2009). "Jennifer Lopez Exits Apparel in the U.S." WWD. Retrieved February 13, 2024. Ovalle 2011, p. 144 Tornow, Sam (July 31, 2018). "Jennifer Lopez to Receive Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award at 2018 VMAs". Billboard. Retrieved August 8, 2022. "Jennifer Lopez Movie Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved December 14, 2017. Total: $3,057.7 million Specter, Emma (November 8, 2022). "5 Things You Didn't Know About Jennifer Lopez". Vogue. Retrieved February 13, 2024. "Billboard 200". Billboard. Vol. 113, no. 6. February 10, 2001. p. 94. Retrieved April 13, 2013. "Diaz tops actress pay list". BBC News. August 27, 2004. Retrieved April 18, 2009. Rodriguez, Priscilla (September 19, 2014). "7 Latino Celebrities With Guinness World Records". Latina. Archived from the original on June 29, 2015. Retrieved December 5, 2015. "2001 The Year in Music". Billboard. Vol. 112, no. 52. December 29, 2021. p. YE-32. Retrieved February 18, 2024. "Greatest of All Time Top Dance Club Artists". Billboard. Retrieved September 28, 2017. Willman, Chris (June 16, 2021). "Pollstar Awards Laud Beyonce, Lady Gaga, Garth Brooks and Others as Touring Artists of the Decade". Variety. Retrieved February 17, 2024. "Jennifer López, premiada por toda su carrera en los World Music Awards". www.hola.com. Archived from the original on June 26, 2022. Johnson, Reed (June 23, 2013). "Jennifer Lopez, new Walk of Famer, cites Fonda among role models". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved June 26, 2013. Baida, Aiyana (July 19, 2013). "Jennifer Lopez Wins Premios Juventud's World Icon Award (Video)". HuffPost. Retrieved December 26, 2021. Ramirez, Erika (May 18, 2014). "Jennifer Lopez Receives Icon Award, Performs 'First Love' at the 2014 Billboard Music Awards". Billboard. Retrieved December 26, 2021. "Nicky Jam Wins Big at Billboard Latin Music Awards: See the Full Winners List". Billboard. April 27, 2017. Retrieved December 26, 2021. Dresdale, Andrea (July 31, 2018). "Jennifer Lopez to receive Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award at MTV VMAs". ABC News Radio. Archived from the original on August 2, 2018. Retrieved August 2, 2018. Juneau, Jen (June 5, 2022). "Jennifer Lopez Thanks Those 'Who Lied to Me' and 'Broke My Heart' at 2022 MTV Movie & TV Awards". People. Retrieved June 6, 2022. Callahan, Chrissy (March 23, 2022). "12 drag queens join Jennifer Lopez onstage dressed in her greatest looks". Today. Retrieved March 24, 2022. Reyes, Luis (2000). Hispanics in Hollywood: A Celebration of 100 Years in Film and Television. iFilm Publishing/Lone Eagle. ISBN 978-1-58065-025-0. Marquez, Herón (2001). Latin Sensations. Twenty-First Century Books. ISBN 9780822549932. Retrieved July 3, 2012. Gallick, Sarah (2003). National Enquirer (ed.). J.Lo: The Secret Behind Jennifer Lopez's Rise to the Top. From the Files of the National Enquirer Series. Ami Books. ISBN 1-932270-07-8. Negrón-Muntaner, Frances (2004). Boricua pop: Puerto Ricans and the latinization of American culture. New York: New York Univ. Press. ISBN 0814758185. Deanne, Stacy; Kenyatta, Kelly; Lowery, Natasha (2005). Sanders, Kwynn (ed.). Alicia Keys, Ashanti, Beyoncé, Destiny's Child, Jennifer Lopez & Mya: Divas of the New Millennium. Amber Books Publishing. ISBN 9780974977966. Mendible, Myra (2007). From Bananas to Buttocks: The Latina Body in Popular Film and Culture. University of Texas Press. ISBN 9780292714939. Redmond, Sean (2007). Holmes, Su (ed.). Stardom and Celebrity: A Reader. SAGE. pp. 282–283. ISBN 978-1446202388. Bruns, Roger (August 30, 2008). Icons of Latino America: Latino Contributions to American Culture, Volume 1 and 2. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 9781573567961. Tracy, Kathleen A. (September 30, 2008). Jennifer Lopez: A Biography. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 9780313355165. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Cottrell, Robert C. (2009). Icons of American Popular Culture: From P. T. Barnum to Jennifer Lopez. M. E. Sharpe. ISBN 9780765628350. Parish, James Robert (2009). Jennifer Lopez. New York: Infobase Publishing. ISBN 9781438111919. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Riley, Sam G. (2010). Star Struck: An Encyclopedia of Celebrity Culture. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 9780313358135. Retrieved February 24, 2024. Ovalle, Priscilla Peña (2011). Dance and the Hollywood Latina: Race, Sex, and Stardom. Rutgers University Press. ISBN 978-0813548807. Lopez, Jennifer (2014). True Love. Celebra. ISBN 9780451468680. Woog, Adam (2020). The Great Hispanic Heritage Series: Jennifer Lopez, Updated Edition. Infobase Publishing. ISBN 9781438197999. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jennifer Lopez. Wikiquote has quotations related to Jennifer Lopez. Jennifer Lopez – official site JLo Beauty – official beauty site Jennifer Lopez at AllMusic Jennifer Lopez at AllMovie Jennifer Lopez discography at Discogs Jennifer Lopez at IMDb Appearances on C-SPAN Portals:  Fashion  Film  Hispanic and Latino Americans  Los Angeles  New York City  Pop music  Puerto Rico