Kelly Brianne (born Kelly Brianne Clarkson; April 24, 1982) is an American singer, songwriter, television personality, and author. She rose to fame after winning the first season of American Idol in 2002, which earned her a record deal with RCA Records. Her debut single, "A Moment Like This", topped the US Billboard Hot 100, and became the country's best-selling single of 2002. It was included on her debut studio album, Thankful (2003), which entered the Billboard 200 at number one, and also yielded the top-10 single "Miss Independent". Trying to reinvent her image, Clarkson parted ways with Idol management and shifted to pop rock for her second studio album, Breakaway (2004). Supported by four US top-ten singles – the title track, "Since U Been Gone", "Behind These Hazel Eyes", and "Because of You" – Breakaway sold over 12 million copies worldwide and won two Grammy Awards. Clarkson took further creative control for her third studio album, My December (2007), co-writing all of its tracks and becoming its executive producer. However, her label was dissatisfied with the album's darker rock music and promoted it reluctantly. Clarkson's fourth and fifth studio albums, All I Ever Wanted (2009) and Stronger (2011), returned to a lighter tone and pop rock sound, with the former becoming her second US number-one album and the latter making her the first artist to win the Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album twice. Both albums spawned a Hot 100 number-one single: "My Life Would Suck Without You", which holds the record for the biggest jump to number one in the chart's history, and "Stronger (What Doesn't Kill You)", which became her best-selling single worldwide. Clarkson then had the best-selling Christmas album of the year with Wrapped in Red (2013). Its single, "Underneath the Tree", was named the ASCAP's most popular Christmas song released in the 21st century. Her seventh studio album, Piece by Piece (2015), debuted at number-one in the US, while its title track reached the top ten. After leaving RCA and signing with Atlantic in 2016, Clarkson released her soul-influenced eighth album, Meaning of Life (2017), her second Christmas album, When Christmas Comes Around... (2021), and her tenth studio album, Chemistry (2023), alongside the Adult Top 40 top-10 singles "Love So Soft" and "Mine". Clarkson also served as a coach on The Voice from its fourteenth season to the twenty-first season, and again for the twenty-third season. Since 2019, she has hosted her own talk show, The Kelly Clarkson Show. Among her numerous accolades, she has received three MTV Video Music Awards, three Grammy Awards, four American Music Awards, two Academy of Country Music Awards, seven Daytime Emmy Awards, and a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Clarkson has sold over 25 million albums and 45 million singles worldwide. She has 11 top-ten singles in the US, and nine top-ten singles in the UK, Canada, and Australia. She became the first artist in history to top each of Billboard's pop, adult contemporary, adult pop, country, and dance charts. Billboard has hailed Clarkson as "one of pop music's greatest singers", and honored her with the Powerhouse Award, while VH1 ranked her nineteenth on their list of the 100 Greatest Women in Music. Kelly Brianne Clarkson was born in Fort Worth, Texas, to Jeanne Ann (née Rose), a first-grade English teacher, and Stephen Michael Clarkson, a former engineer. She has an older brother, Jason and an older sister, Alyssa. Clarkson also has two younger half-brothers from her father's second marriage. Her parents divorced when she was six years old, whereupon her brother went to live with their father, her sister went to live with an aunt, and she stayed with her mother. Clarkson's mother later married Jimmy Taylor. Clarkson is of English, Welsh, Irish and Greek descent. Her mother is a descendant of Republican state senator Isaiah Rose, whose life story was discussed on Clarkson's episode of Who Do You Think You Are? in 2013. Clarkson was raised Southern Baptist. She has said, "I always grew up in church. I was the leader of our youth group. I've always grown up pretty close to church and with God. But I think I've just gotten a lot closer just because He's the only one I can lean on." She later said of her upbringing, "My family was highly conservative; I had to go to church on Sunday and Wednesday." Clarkson grew up in Burleson, Texas, and was educated at Pauline Hughes Middle School. In the seventh grade, the school's choir teacher, Cynthia Glenn, overheard her singing in a hallway and asked her to audition for the school choir. Clarkson told her she had never received any professional vocal training. Clarkson graduated from Burleson High School in 2000, where she performed in several musicals, such as Annie Get Your Gun, Seven Brides for Seven Brothers, and Brigadoon. Clarkson started voice training, hoping to secure a college scholarship in music. After graduating from high school, Clarkson declined full scholarships to the University of Texas at Austin, University of North Texas, and Berklee College of Music. She declined them stating, "I'd already written so much music and wanted to try on my own. And I figured you're never too old to go to college." She worked several jobs to finance a demo, recording material and trying to market it to record labels, but she received little response. Clarkson turned down two recording contracts from Jive Records and Interscope Records, saying, "They would have completely pigeonholed me as a bubblegum act. I was confident enough that something better would come along." In 2001, she traveled to Los Angeles, pursuing a career in music. She appeared as an extra in a few television series such as Sabrina, the Teenage Witch and Dharma & Greg, and briefly worked with musician Gerry Goffin to record five demo tracks in an effort to secure a record deal. According to Clarkson, her early attempts to launch her music career floundered when she was turned down by almost every U.S. record label for sounding "too black". Lack of other career opportunities and a fire incident in her apartment forced Clarkson to return to Burleson, where she promoted Red Bull energy drinks, worked as a telemarketer and as a cocktail waitress in a comedy club. Upon returning to Burleson, Clarkson was encouraged by her friends to audition for the inaugural season of the reality television series American Idol: The Search for a Superstar in May 2002. Despite receiving a "golden ticket", a pass to the Hollywood rounds, in the series premiere, Clarkson made her first appearance during the second episode. In an interview in 2012, Clarkson referred to the inaugural season as "ghetto", explaining: "On our season we were like kids in camp. Nobody knew what to do. The show was ever changing every day. They did one season of Pop Idol in the UK, but America is a very different market. They dropped us off in a mall and said 'find some clothes to wear on national television'. I am maybe the closest to white trash you can get. What do I buy? White pants I guess? I definitely looked like a cocktail waitress." Clarkson went on to win the competition on September 4, 2002, at the Kodak Theatre (now Dolby), earning 58% of the votes against runner-up Justin Guarini. Immediately after winning American Idol, Clarkson was signed to a record deal with RCA Records, 19 Recordings, and S Records by talent manager Simon Fuller, who created American Idol, and music mogul Clive Davis, who was slated to executive-produce her debut album. On September 17, 2002, her debut double-A-side single, "Before Your Love"/"A Moment Like This", was released. Both songs were performed by Clarkson during the season finale of American Idol. After debuting at number 60 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, the single climbed to number 52 the following week, and subsequently ascended to number one. It broke a 38-year-old record set by the British band The Beatles for the biggest leap to number one. It eventually went on to become the best-selling single of 2002 in the United States. Clarkson's debut album, Thankful, was released on April 15, 2003. The album contained aspects of pop, contemporary R&B, and gospel music, with several established musicians such as Rhett Lawrence, Diane Warren, The Underdogs, and Babyface contributing on to the tracks. Released during a time of urban-R&B dominance, the album was well received by several critics. AllMusic critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine praised the album for its vocal ability: "throughout this record, (Clarkson) makes it seem effortless and charming. She can croon, she can belt out a song, she can be sexy and sassy while still being graceful and as wholesome as the girl next door." Henry Goldblatt of Entertainment Weekly remarked: "Clarkson glides through octaves with the masterful control of someone who's been doing this for decades." Thankful was a commercial success, debuting at number one on the Billboard 200 chart and went on to sell over 4.5 million copies worldwide. It was later certified double platinum by the RIAA, platinum in Canada, and gold in Japan and Australia. Its lead single, "Miss Independent", became her first international hit, reaching the top ten in five national charts, including the US. It was later certified gold by the RIAA. It earned Clarkson her first Grammy Award nomination for "Best Female Pop Vocal Performance" at the 46th Grammy Awards. It was followed with two moderately successful singles, "Low" and "The Trouble with Love Is"; the latter was used on the soundtrack of British romantic film Love Actually. Her first video album, Miss Independent, was released on November 18, 2003, and was certified gold by the RIAA. To support Thankful, Clarkson and Idol second season runner-up Clay Aiken co-headlined the 2004 Independent Tour throughout the US. Clarkson made her film debut with Guarini with the release of the musical romantic comedy film From Justin to Kelly in June 2003. The film was poorly received by critics and was unsuccessful at the box office, with Clarkson explaining that she was "contractually obligated" to do the film and didn't like it. In 2002, Clarkson, along with American Idol judges Paula Abdul and Randy Jackson and hosts Brian Dunkleman and Ryan Seacrest, participated in the season premiere of the eighth season of the television comedy series MADtv. She also portrayed Brenda Lee in two episodes of the television drama American Dreams between 2003 and 2004. On December 25, 2003, Clarkson participated in the television special competition World Idol in London, along with the inaugural winners of the several Idol television series around the world. Clarkson was contractually obligated to participate, and she performed Aretha Franklin's "(You Make Me Feel Like) A Natural Woman". She ended up as the runner-up with 97 points, behind the first Norwegian Idol Kurt Nilsen. Trying to distance herself from her American Idol image, Clarkson decided to part ways with Fuller and 19 Management and hired the services of talent manager Jeff Kwatinetz of The Firm. She reinvented her musical direction by developing a more rock-oriented sound with her second studio album, Breakaway. Davis served as the executive producer for the record, while Clarkson co-wrote six of the tracks with pop and rock songwriters such as former Evanescence band members Ben Moody and David Hodges, Kara DioGuardi, Dr. Luke and Max Martin. Breakaway received critical acclaim, with Erlewine of AllMusic remarking: "What gives Breakaway its spine are the driving, anthemic pop tunes, numbers that sound simultaneously mainstream and youthful, which is a hard trick to pull off, and they are the tracks that illustrate Clarkson is a rare thing in the 2000s: a pop singer who's neither hip nor square, just solidly and enjoyably in the mainstream." Breakaway was released on November 30, 2004, and became Clarkson's most commercially successful album. After debuting at number three on the Billboard 200, its longevity allowed it to become the third-best-selling album of 2005 in the US and was certified sextuple platinum by the RIAA. The album also enjoyed success throughout the world; it topped the charts in the Netherlands and Ireland, became the world's seventh-best-selling album of 2005 and went on to sell more than twelve million copies worldwide. Clarkson supported Breakaway with the Breakaway Tour, Hazel Eyes Tour, and Addicted Tour which took place from 2005 to 2006. Five singles were released to promote Breakaway. Its title track, "Breakaway", was originally released in July 2004, as the soundtrack for Disney film The Princess Diaries 2: Royal Engagement and was later re-released as the album's fifth single in May 2006. It became Clarkson's third top-ten single on the Billboard Hot 100 with a peak of number six. It was a major success on adult contemporary radio, topping the Billboard Adult Contemporary for 21 weeks and the Adult Contemporary Audience chart for 28 weeks (her longest number one on any charts). "Since U Been Gone" was released as the album's lead single in November 2004 and became Clarkson's most successful single on the Hot 100 despite peaking at number two. The second and third singles, "Behind These Hazel Eyes" and "Because of You", also followed suit—peaking at number six and number seven on the Hot 100, respectively. "Because of You" became Clarkson's biggest single worldwide, reaching number one on the European Hot 100 Singles chart and the national charts in Brazil, the Netherlands, Denmark, and Switzerland. The fourth single, "Walk Away", peaked at number twelve on the Hot 100. According to Mediabase, Clarkson was the most-played artist of 2006 in the U.S. Breakaway garnered Clarkson many accolades, including two trophies at the 48th Grammy Awards—the Best Female Pop Vocal Performance for "Since U Been Gone" and the Best Pop Vocal Album. She also won Best Female Video two years in a row, for "Since U Been Gone" and "Because of You", at the MTV Video Music Awards. Clarkson's second video album, Behind Hazel Eyes, was released on March 29, 2005. In 2005, she performed and participated during the thirtieth season of the American sketch-comedy series, Saturday Night Live, and the reality series Damage Control with Simple Plan frontman Pierre Bouvier. She performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" at Game 2 of the NBA Finals. She also performed during the festivities All-Star Game and the 2006 Winter Olympics in Torino, Italy; In 2006, Clarkson recorded "Go" as a free download for the Ford Motor Company advertising campaign. Clarkson's third studio album, My December, was released on June 22, 2007. The album relied on darker themes and heavier rock music. Clarkson replaced Davis as the executive producer and co-wrote all the tracks. She opted to collaborate with her band members rather than her previous producers and collaborators. Its production and release became a subject of a dispute with RCA, particularly with Davis. He noted the album's lack of professional production input and wanted her to re-record tracks with a more mainstream appeal, which she refused. Clarkson defended herself saying, "I've sold more than 15 million records worldwide, and still nobody listens to what I have to say. I couldn't give a crap about being a star. I've always just wanted to sing and write." The album received positive response, but lack of promotion due to reluctance of RCA led Clarkson to dismiss Kwatinetz and Live Nation to cancel its accompanying tour, the My December Tour, and reschedule it into a smaller scale with supporting acts Jon McLaughlin, Sean Kingston and Mandy Moore. Clarkson later hired talent manager Narvel Blackstock of Starstruck Management. Blackstock was the husband of country artist Reba McEntire, of whom Clarkson is a close friend. Clarkson later issued an apology to Davis, citing him as "a key advisor" in her success. My December debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 chart and was certified platinum by the RIAA. The album went on to sell over 2.5 million copies worldwide. It featured only one major hit single, "Never Again", which debuted and peaked at number eight on the Billboard Hot 100—her highest debut on the chart ever. On July 7, 2007, Clarkson performed on the American leg of Live Earth concert. Clarkson partnered with NASCAR during their 2007 season, appearing in televised advertisements, performed at pre-race concerts, promoted NASCAR Day, and appeared at the Champions' Banquet in December. Clarkson collaborated with Reba McEntire in an hour-long CMT Crossroads special at Nashville's Ryman Auditorium on February 22, 2007. Introduced by Dolly Parton, Clarkson performed "Why Haven't I Heard from You" and "Does He Love You" with Martina McBride on the television special CMT Giants: Reba McEntire. She also appeared on an episode of McEntire's sitcom Reba, which aired on January 14, 2007. At the Academy of Country Music Awards on May 16, 2007, Clarkson and McEntire sang a country version of "Because of You", which also became the lead single from the album Reba: Duets. It peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot Country Songs chart and was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Country Collaboration with Vocals. Throughout 2008, Clarkson and McEntire embarked on the 2 Worlds 2 Voices Tour to support Reba: Duets and My December. Clarkson's fourth album, All I Ever Wanted, was released on March 10, 2009. Clarkson continued to co-write her own material, but this time she returned to a mainstream-oriented sound by reuniting with previous collaborators Dr. Luke, Martin, and DioGuardi, and new collaborators Howard Benson, Claude Kelly, Ryan Tedder, Glen Ballard, Matt Thiessen and Katy Perry in contributing tracks for the album. The release of All I Ever Wanted was met with positive acclaim from music critics for its lighter themes. The album was a commercial success, debuting at number one on the Billboard 200 and remaining there for two weeks. The album has sold over a million copies in the U.S. and garnered Clarkson a nomination for Best Pop Vocal Album at the 52nd Grammy Awards. Its first single, "My Life Would Suck Without You", became an international hit. It entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 97 and rose to the top position the following week, breaking the record for the biggest jump to number one in a single week previously held by Britney Spears' "Womanizer". It also topped the charts in the United Kingdom, Canada, and Hungary. It was followed with two more top-twenty singles, "I Do Not Hook Up" and "Already Gone". The release of "Already Gone" became a subject of another dispute between Clarkson and RCA, after she realized its similarities with Beyoncé's song "Halo", both of which were produced by Tedder. Further promotion for the album was abruptly ended with the limited success of its fourth and final singles, "All I Ever Wanted" and "Cry". Clarkson supported All I Ever Wanted with the All I Ever Wanted Tour from 2009 to 2010. She also performed as one of many main artists for the return of VH1 Divas in September 2009. Clarkson became a guest mentor on the Dutch television series X Factor in November 2009. Clarkson recorded a country duet with Jason Aldean, "Don't You Wanna Stay", for his 2010 album My Kinda Party. It became her first number-one song on the Billboard Hot Country Songs chart and has sold over 2.7 million copies, making it the best-selling country collaboration in history. It received numerous country-related accolades, including a nomination for a Grammy Award for Best Country Duo/Group Performance at the 54th Grammy Awards. Clarkson incorporated a slight country vibe into her fifth studio album, Stronger, which was also influenced by Prince, Tina Turner, Sheryl Crow, and Radiohead. She worked with several producers including Greg Kurstin, Ester Dean, Darkchild, Toby Gad, Steve Jordan, and Howard Benson. Released on October 21, 2011, Stronger debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 and was certified platinum by the RIAA. It was also critically applauded and won the Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album at the 2013 Grammy Awards, making her the first artist to win the award twice. Stronger's lead single, "Mr. Know It All", was released in September 2011. It reached number one in Australia and South Korea and attained a top-ten position in seven countries, including the U.S., where it became her ninth top-ten hit on the Billboard Hot 100 chart. It also became a crossover hit to the country charts, prompting RCA to reissue a country version. "Stronger (What Doesn't Kill You)" served as the second single in January 2012, and topped sixteen Billboard charts, becoming her third number one on the Hot 100. It also reached number one in Poland and Slovakia and reached the top ten in many other charts worldwide. It remains Clarkson's best-selling single, with 4.9 million copies sold in the U.S. alone. The song was nominated for three Grammy Awards—Record of the Year, Song of the Year, and Best Pop Solo Performance. "Dark Side" was released as the third and final single in June 2012, and it achieved a modest success. It became her eleventh top-ten hit on the Billboard Adult Pop Songs chart, and she surpassed Sheryl Crow and Katy Perry as the female artist with the most top-ten songs on the chart. The release of Stronger was accompanied by two EPs, The Smoakstack Sessions and iTunes Session. The latter debuted at number 85 on the Billboard 200, and it was promoted by its only single, a cover of "I'll Be Home for Christmas". Clarkson co-wrote "Tell Me a Lie", which was recorded by British boy band One Direction for their debut album, Up All Night (2011). Clarkson promoted Stronger with two concert tours, the Stronger Tour and the co-headlining the Kelly Clarkson / The Fray Tour with the alternative rock band The Fray. On February 5, 2012, she performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" at Super Bowl XLVI to widespread critical acclaim. She later released a promotional single, "Get Up (A Cowboys Anthem)", for use in Pepsi's NFL advertising campaign. Clarkson served as a mentor and judge, alongside John Legend, Jennifer Nettles, and Robin Thicke, on the ABC television show Duets, which premiered on May 24, 2012. The show concluded on July 19, 2012, with Clarkson's contestant Jason Farol finishing as the second runner-up. She also became a guest mentor to Blake Shelton's team on second season on The Voice. The two later collaborated on a cover of "There's a New Kid in Town" for Shelton's 2012 Christmas album, Cheers, It's Christmas. Commemorating the 10th anniversary of her career in music, Clarkson released her first greatest hits album, Greatest Hits – Chapter One, on November 19, 2012. Three new songs recorded for the compilation—"Catch My Breath", "Don't Rush" (featuring country musician Vince Gill) and "People Like Us"—were all released as singles. "Catch My Breath" became her 14th top-twenty hit on the Hot 100 chart as well as her 13th million-selling single in the United States. According to Billboard, it was the third biggest adult contemporary song of 2013. However, its follow-up singles performed moderately well on the charts. Clarkson earned more nominations from the country music industry, including Best Country Duo/Group Performance for "Don't Rush" at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards and Female Vocalist of the Year at the 2012 Country Music Association Awards. Chapter One was eventually certified gold in Australia, the UK and the U.S. In January 2013, Clarkson performed "My Country, 'Tis of Thee" at the second inauguration of U.S. President Barack Obama. Her live rendition was acclaimed by critics, who contrasted it with Beyoncé's pre-recorded performance during the same event. In February 2013, she performed "Tennessee Waltz" and "(You Make Me Feel Like) A Natural Woman" at the 55th Annual Grammy Awards as a tribute to Patti Page and Carole King. She also released a non-album single, "Tie It Up", exclusively to country music stations in June 2013. Clarkson and Maroon 5 performed at 24 concerts as part of the 12th Annual Honda Civic Tour, starting on August 1, 2013, and ending on October 6, 2013. She was featured on the re-recorded version of "Foolish Games" for Jewel's first compilation, Greatest Hits (2013). Clarkson also collaborated with singer Robbie Williams on the song "Little Green Apples" for his 2013 album Swings Both Ways. Clarkson's sixth studio album and first Christmas record, Wrapped in Red, was solely produced by Greg Kurstin. She co-wrote all five original songs and recorded eleven cover versions of Christmas standards and carols. Released on October 25, 2013, the album debuted at number one on the Billboard Top Holiday Albums and at number three on the Billboard 200 chart. By December 2013, Wrapped in Red had already been certified platinum by the RIAA and eventually became the best-selling holiday album of the year. The album's lead single, "Underneath the Tree", was an adult contemporary number-one hit in both the U.S. and Canada. Clarkson subsequently became Billboard's ninth top adult contemporary act of 2013. On December 11, 2013, her first Christmas special debut, Kelly Clarkson's Cautionary Christmas Music Tale, garnered over 5.3 million viewers. In December 2013, Citizen Watch Co. announced Clarkson as their newest Brand Ambassador. Retaining her relationship with country music acts in 2014, Clarkson collaborated with Martina McBride on "In the Basement" (originally by Etta James and Sugar Pie DeSanto) for McBride's album Everlasting and with Trisha Yearwood on "PrizeFighter" for Yearwood's compilation PrizeFighter: Hit After Hit. Clarkson also performed a rendition of "All I Ask of You" with Josh Groban on his seventh studio album, Stages, and its companion television special. She was featured on Ben Haenow's "Second Hand Heart", the lead single from his debut studio album. In February 2015, Clarkson released Piece by Piece, her seventh and final studio album under her recording contract with RCA Records. Musically, it is an electropop and dance album, featuring collaborations with Kurstin, Jesse Shatkin, Sia, John Legend, and Shane McAnally, among others. Piece by Piece received a reasonably positive response from music critics and became her third album to debut at the top of the Billboard 200 chart. To promote the album, Clarkson appeared in several televised performances, including the fourteenth season of American Idol, where she became the only alumnus ever to be dedicated with a competing week featuring her discography. She also supported the Piece by Piece Tour throughout 2015, which was cut short of its worldwide visits following medical recommendations for a vocal rest during the year. Piece by Piece spawned three singles. The first one, "Heartbeat Song", peaked at number 21 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart and became a top-ten hit in the UK, Austria, Poland, and South Africa. However, Clarkson failed to achieve a similar success with the second single, "Invincible". The third and final single, "Piece by Piece", debuted and peaked at number eight on the Hot 100 chart, following Clarkson's emotional performance on the fifteenth season of American Idol. It became her eleventh U.S. top-ten hit and matched "Never Again" as her highest debut on the chart. At the 58th Annual Grammy Awards, the album and "Heartbeat Song" were nominated for Best Pop Vocal Album and Best Pop Solo Performance, respectively. At the following year, the title track also received a nomination for Best Pop Solo Performance. In February 2016, it was announced that Clarkson had signed a book deal with HarperCollins. Her first children's book, River Rose and the Magical Lullaby was released on October 4, 2016. The book features an original lullaby written and performed by Clarkson. On the possibility of writing any more books in the future, Clarkson told Publishers Weekly, "I've got a few ideas – there could be a lullaby for each book. We've got a plethora of stories, and I've already written seven songs, full out, so we'll just have to see which ones might pan out to be a book. But yes, there will definitely be more." The second book featuring River Rose, River Rose and the Magical Christmas, was released on October 24, 2017, and included an original song written and sung by Clarkson, "Christmas Eve". On March 15, 2016, First Lady Michelle Obama released "This Is for My Girls", a collaborative track featuring vocals from Clarkson, Janelle Monáe, Kelly Rowland, Lea Michele, Zendaya, and Missy Elliott to coincide with Barack Obama's SXSW speech and to promote the First Lady's third-world educational initiative Let Girls Learn. Clarkson recorded a solo version of "It's Quiet Uptown" for The Hamilton Mixtape. Her version was released on November 3, 2016, as a promotional single for the album. She also recorded a duet called "Love Goes On" with Aloe Blacc for the original soundtrack of The Shack, which was released in the United States on March 3, 2017. On May 11, 2017, it was announced that Clarkson would join The Voice as a coach for the series' fourteenth season. On June 24, 2016, Clarkson announced she had signed a long-term worldwide deal with Atlantic Records, with the intentions of releasing a soul-influenced eighth studio album in 2017. Her lead single "Love So Soft", was released on September 7, 2017, along with the song "Move You". On September 6, 2017, Clarkson announced that her album, Meaning of Life, would be released on October 27, 2017. Clarkson opened the 45th American Music Awards with P!nk, and together they performed R.E.M.'s "Everybody Hurts" to honor first responders. Later in the show, she performed "Miss Independent" and "Love So Soft". "Love So Soft" was nominated for Best Pop Solo Performance at the 60th Annual Grammy Awards, giving her the record for the most nominations in that category with four. With the release of Meaning of Life, Clarkson revealed that she had discussions with Atlantic Records about the sound of the follow-up record and has expressed interest in venturing deeper into R&B and soulful pop music. Clarkson lent her voice in the computer-animated film The Star, alongside Oprah Winfrey, Steven Yeun, Tyler Perry, and others. The film is based on the Nativity of Jesus. Developed by Sony Pictures Animation, the film was released on November 17, 2017. This was the first film in which Clarkson performed a voice role. Clarkson also had a guest voice role in the Netflix animated series Home: Adventures with Tip & Oh, portraying herself in the series' 2017 animated Christmas special, Home for the Holidays, alongside Ben Schwartz. In March 2018, Clarkson released "I've Loved You Since Forever", a ballad version of the children's book by Hoda Kotb. Clarkson hosted and performed at the 2018 Billboard Music Awards on May 20, 2018. In the fourteenth season of The Voice, Brynn Cartelli was crowned the winner, giving Clarkson her first victory. In the fifteenth season of The Voice, Chevel Shepherd was crowned the winner, giving Clarkson her second consecutive victory and making her the first female coach to win multiple seasons. On February 28, 2019, it was announced that she would return to host the 2019 Billboard Music Awards, which aired on May 1, 2019. Clarkson voiced Moxy and provided original songs in the animated musical comedy film UglyDolls, which was released on May 3, 2019. On March 27, 2019, she released "Broken & Beautiful", the lead single from the UglyDolls: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack. Clarkson also began hosting the daytime variety talk show, The Kelly Clarkson Show, which premiered on September 9, 2019. In December 2019, Jake Hoot was crowned the winner of the seventeenth season of The Voice, giving Clarkson her third victory as a coach in four seasons. In November 2019, Clarkson announced a Las Vegas residency, Kelly Clarkson: Invincible. The residency was due to take place at the Zappos Theater. It was supposed to run from April to September 2020, but it was postponed indefinitely due to the coronavirus pandemic. Also in November 2019, Clarkson made an appearance on the Apple TV+ drama series The Morning Show as herself, performing her song "Heat" and interacting with the fictional hosts of the show. In February 2020, Clarkson became a brand ambassador for Wayfair. In addition, Wayfair released "an 'exclusive' collection of furniture and decor inspired by Clarkson and her Texan roots." On April 10, 2020, Trolls World Tour, which featured a character voiced by Clarkson, was released. On April 16, 2020, Clarkson released the standalone single "I Dare You" in English, as well as duets in five different languages with five native-speaking artists. In May 2020, The Kelly Clarkson Show earned seven nominations, the most for any talk show, with Clarkson winning in the category Outstanding Entertainment Talk Show Host. In June 2020, it was announced that she would receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2021, being inducted into the category of Recording. In May 2021, NBC announced that Clarkson's show would take over the time slot of The Ellen DeGeneres Show after it ends in 2022. In June 2021, Clarkson won two Daytime Emmy Awards, including Outstanding Talk Show Entertainment and a second consecutive win for Outstanding Entertainment Talk Show Host. On September 23, 2021, Clarkson released "Christmas Isn't Canceled (Just You)", the lead single off her ninth studio album and second Christmas album, When Christmas Comes Around... The album was released on October 15, 2021, to positive reviews and earned Clarkson a nomination for the Grammy Award for Best Traditional Pop Vocal Album. In November 2021, Clarkson performed at the second annual iHeartRadio Holiday Special. She hosted her second Christmas special, Kelly Clarkson Presents: When Christmas Comes Around, which premiered on December 1, 2021. Also in December 2021, Girl Named Tom were crowned winners of the twenty-first season of The Voice. They are the first group act to win an American season & secured Clarkson's fourth victory as a coach. In February 2022, Clarkson and Snoop Dogg were named co-hosts of the singing competition series American Song Contest. It is an adaptation of the popular international songwriting competition Eurovision Song Contest. The series premiered on March 21, 2022. On June 9, 2022, Clarkson released Kellyoke, an EP consisting of six cover songs that Clarkson covered during her "Kellyoke" segment on her talk show. She also revealed that her tenth studio album and follow-up to 2017's Meaning of Life and 2021's Christmas album When Christmas Comes Around... was complete, but Clarkson wanted more time to prepare for the promotion and release of the collection. In June 2022, Clarkson won two Daytime Emmys, including Outstanding Talk Show Entertainment for the second consecutive year and Outstanding Entertainment Talk Show Host for the third consecutive year. Clarkson received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on September 19, 2022. Clarkson appeared on the Kelsea Ballerini song, "You're Drunk, Go Home" along with Carly Pearce, which was released in September 2022. Clarkson hosted the 12th Annual NFL Honors on February 9, 2023. After taking the twenty-second season of The Voice off, it was announced in October 2022, that Clarkson would return for the twenty-third season in 2023. Clarkson covered the Cole Porter song, "Don't Fence Me In" on Jeff Goldblum and The Mildred Snitzer Orchestra's EP, Play Well with Others, which was released in March 2023. On March 26, 2023, she announced her tenth studio album, Chemistry, which was released on June 23, 2023. The album's double A-side lead singles, "Mine" and "Me" were released on April 14, 2023. On March 27, 2023, Clarkson announced a ten night Las Vegas residency, Chemistry: An Intimate Evening with Kelly Clarkson, which ran from July 28 to August 19, 2023, at the Bakkt Theater. Four additional dates were added for December 2023, and February 2024. In October 2023, Clarkson relocated and moved production of The Kelly Clarkson Show from Los Angeles to New York City to start its fifth season. On November 8, 2023, Clarkson launched her own Sirius XM channel, Kelly Clarkson Connection. The channel will feature Clarkson's own music, music she loves, and music from artists who inspire her. She will also tell stories about her own music. On November 10, 2023, Clarkson's studio album Chemistry earned her a sixth nomination for the Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album, making her the most nominated performer in the category. On December 15, 2023, she won two Daytime Emmy Awards, including Outstanding Daytime Talk Series and Outstanding Daytime Talk Series Host. "Dark Side" Clarkson displaying her upper soprano range, displaying variations in vibrato as well as her noted dynamic and emotive delivery "Don't Rush" Clarkson displaying a softer, breathier timbre to her vocal while also demonstrating her harmonizing capabilities in her duet with Vince Gill Problems playing these files? See media help. Critics have described Clarkson as having a soprano voice. Describing Clarkson's voice, Arion Berger of Rolling Stone wrote that "her high notes are sweet and pillowy, her growl is bone-shaking and sexy, and her mid-range is amazingly confident." In reviewing a live performance of Clarkson's, Jon Caramanica of The New York Times said she "showed off a voice that moved in all sorts of ways, without ever appearing to strain", continuing "Ms. Clarkson, who has a malleable voice and a boatload of vocal confidence, might be a soul siren in the making". However, in a separate review of Stronger, Caramanica said Clarkson's voice is "too huge, too violent" for warmer and sweeter vocal stylings, stating "she's on a par with Taylor Swift when it comes to vengeance, and she'll do it louder and with more brutality in comparison to her contemporary." In a live review as part of her Stronger Tour, Sophie Sinclair of Hit The Floor said "Kelly's strong and powerful voice was flawless throughout the night, and some may even say she sounds better live than she does on her albums". Mark Deming from Phoenix New Times stated that "in an era when pop music means over-singing a song into a bloody pulp, Clarkson has consistently displayed both charisma and a welcome sense of restraint, knowing how to sound passionate and heartfelt without forgetting where the melody and the root note is supposed to go." Dr. Luke, who produced some of Clarkson's hits, said "She has powerful lungs. She's like the Lance Armstrong of vocal cords." In an interview with Good Morning America, Simon Cowell was asked of the then six American Idol winners, who he thought had the best voice. Cowell immediately answered that Clarkson did "by a mile", noting that she was "up there" with other great singers such as Celine Dion. Esquire wrote that Clarkson has "the best voice in the history of pop music". Reviewing Stronger, Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone states, Clarkson has "one of music's most remarkable voices." Jason Lipshutz from Billboard considered Clarkson as one of the greatest singers in pop music. Regarding the controversial practice of lip-syncing, Clarkson says she never has and never will lip-sync, elaborating in an interview with Cory Myers, "I've actually never done that because I'm terrified; if I ever did that, something horrible would happen, the track would skip. I have a really unhealthy fear about it. So no, I've never done that". Clarkson has earned the title "Queen of Covers" for her ability to perform songs from artists of various genres. At age eight, Clarkson was first inspired to venture into music during a visit to an African-American church in Fort Worth, Texas. She recalled: "I was like, 'Wow, whatever they're feeling, I want to feel it too'." Clarkson has been influenced by musicians across various genres. She cited soul singer Aretha Franklin as her major influence. Many of her chosen Idol numbers were Aretha Franklin covers, including "(You Make Me Feel Like) A Natural Woman", which is considered her breakout moment during the competition. Other soul acts who influenced Clarkson were Whitney Houston, Mariah Carey, Etta James and Stevie Wonder. Clarkson was also influenced by rock acts such as Radiohead, Garbage, Aerosmith, and Jimi Hendrix, as well as Reba McEntire, Bette Midler, and Rosemary Clooney. Regarding her musical influence, Clarkson explained: I grew up with three totally different parents that were into different music. My stepfather is into Willie Nelson and Elvis and all that kind of stuff. And my real father is into Whitney and Mariah, and Aretha, all those soulful singers. My mom is into more, like, adult contemporary—Celine Dion, Barbra [Streisand], Bette Midler, all those types of things. And then my brother is a big influence on me. He's like ten years older than me, so you always wanna be around your cool brother and hang out, so I grew up loving Guns N' Roses. I was all about Metallica. I was all about all those bands, and I still am. I love Aerosmith and No Doubt. I have so many influences on me that are so different. And even country. I love Reba McEntire. I could listen to her all the time. The [talent] show just gives you your 15 minutes. It gives you the chance to be seen on television. It's what you do afterwards that really counts. A lot of people just want to be famous. If that's your goal, it's not going to be long term. Anyone can be famous. It's called YouTube. —Clarkson on her career longevity. Clarkson has scored over 100 number ones on the Billboard charts and sold over 25 million albums and 45 million singles worldwide, including 14 million albums and 35 million digital singles in the United States alone. She became the first artist to top each of Billboard's pop, adult contemporary, adult pop, country and dance charts. She was ranked nineteenth on VH1's list of 100 Greatest Women in Music. Television channel Fuse included Clarkson among "30 Greatest Musicians to Come From Singing Competitions" list. Music executive Simon Cowell believed that "What [Clarkson] sold in the UK, Europe, Asia had nothing to do with American Idol. It had everything to do with the fact that she made a great record and she's got an incredible voice. She's not a girl who got lucky in a talent competition; we got lucky to find her." According to The Hollywood Reporter, Clarkson is "the embodiment of the perfect pop star. Her unmistakable pipes are a powerful presence in top 40 and country, with forays into anthemic rock and dance." Nolan Feeney from Time asserted that Clarkson "has had more of a lasting impact on the pop music landscape than casual listeners might realize." According to Billboard, Clarkson was a "phenomenon" who "helped legitimize" the impact of talent shows. The Washington Post wrote that "Clarkson's powerhouse voice and dynamic presence signaled that the music industry should take these reality show contestants seriously: Her first two albums, Thankful and Breakaway, sold about ten million copies combined, and her pop tunes became empowerment anthems across the globe." Glenn Gamboa of Newsday believed Clarkson "has set the standard for all singing competition contestants with her savvy mix of pop, rock and country."Fox Broadcasting Company said that Clarkson gave "lasting credibility" to American Idol and "in so many ways she cleared a road" for all of the next contestants." George Varga from The San Diego Union-Tribune underlined the difference of Clarkson from most other talent show contestants is that she "writes or co-writes a fair number of [her] own songs. She is also the only one whose quest to follow her artistic instincts—the better to rock out and break free from the Idol cookie-cutter pop mold—prompted her to fire her management team and engage in a prolonged public battle with her record company, RCA." Jon Lisi from PopMatters cited Clarkson as one of the forces of female domination in pop music of the 2000s. He explained that "Clarkson's anti-sexual image appealed to those who were uncomfortable with Britney Spears' overt exhibitionism. When Clarkson performed "Since U Been Gone" at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards, for instance, she only showed her midriff, and it was clear that she was marketing herself to an alternative group of young females who liked pop music's conventional sound but didn't want to be confronted with sexual imagery." Mickey Rapkin of Billboard magazine, who called Clarkson a role model and compared her vocals to golden-era Aretha Franklin, stated that Clarkson "has never shied away from speaking her mind, whether in her propulsive pop anthems or on her filter-free Twitter feed." Clarkson has been an influence on other artists, including Vanessa Hudgens, Demi Lovato, Ava Max, Jordin Sparks, Ashley Tisdale, Avril Lavigne, as well as country music singers such as Kelsea Ballerini and Priscilla Block. In 2013, Clarkson began dating talent manager Brandon Blackstock, son of her former manager Narvel Blackstock and former stepson of Reba McEntire. She and Blackstock married on October 20, 2013, at Blackberry Farm in Walland, Tennessee. During their marriage, Brandon was her manager. Together, they have a daughter, born in June 2014, and a son, born in April 2016. In June 2020, Clarkson filed for divorce from Blackstock, citing irreconcilable differences. In March 2022, it was reported their divorce had been finalized. In February 2022, Clarkson officially changed her legal name to Kelly Brianne. In an interview, she revealed the name change was for her personal life, while her public name would remain the same. Clarkson stated the reason behind her name change was due to a strained relationship with her late father. On November 21, 2023, Clarkson was awarded more than $2.6 million from her ex-husband, Brandon Blackstock, for commissions paid to him for business deals he procured as her manager. The California Labor Commissioner ruled that Blackstock violated the state's Talent Agencies Act by handling these deals, which should have been managed by Clarkson's talent agents at Creative Artists Agency. The ruling included commissions from Clarkson's role on The Voice and other promotional agreements, but did not require repayment for deals related to The Kelly Clarkson Show. In October 2019, Clarkson said that she has been managing an autoimmune condition and a thyroid condition since 2006, which she had previously addressed on Today in 2018. In April 2007, Clarkson took part in "Idol Gives Back", a fundraiser for people in poverty in both Africa and the U.S., performing "Up to the Mountain" along with Jeff Beck. She would also perform a five-song set later that year on the American leg of Live Earth concerts opting for environmental awareness about climate change. She has served as ambassador for the March of Dimes since she was on American Idol, raising money regularly and assisting in volunteer service, having walked for "March for Babies", for the cause of improvement of the health of mothers and babies. Clarkson, additionally, got involved in the organization "Houses of Hope", who take care and build orphanages for children in South Africa who have been affected by HIV/AIDS, abuse and poverty. She has visited those children and also participated in "A Night for Hope" fund-raiser concert (held by Clarkson's background vocal singers, Jill and Kate), where she performed a song she wrote after her trip to South Africa, "You Still Won't Know What It's Like". Clarkson also supports the charities Save the Children, UNICEF, "Do Something" and "STOMP Out Bullying" and music causes like the Save the Music Foundation. Clarkson had a ranch in Texas for unwanted animals, which included amputee goats, blind dogs, and horses that survived colic; there are more than 80 animals at the sanctuary. She helped provide veterinary care for them and found them an adoptive family.[citation needed] Clarkson performed in a benefit concert on March 1, 2013, supporting the Omaha based Opportunity Education Foundation, an organization that provides access to education for children around the world, stating "Education was a key part of my childhood, and I am better for it. Anything for education I am really into and especially for kids. A lot of people don't have computers, and they can't afford them. Without education, you get far behind. As long as they have a chance, you know, I think that's important. I want every kid to have a chance." In 2013, Clarkson teamed up with State Farm Insurance to support teen safe driving as a part of Celebrate My Drive program. In 2013, Clarkson supported Feeding America, The Ad Council and their Child Hunger PSA Campaign, which provides food for children facing hunger. Also in 2013, Clarkson participated in Green Mountain Coffee's Great Coffee, Good Vibes, Choose Fair Trade campaign by traveling to coffee farms in Peru to draw attention to the importance of being Fair Trade Certified. Studio albums Thankful (2003) Breakaway (2004) My December (2007) All I Ever Wanted (2009) Stronger (2011) Wrapped in Red (2013) Piece by Piece (2015) Meaning of Life (2017) When Christmas Comes Around... (2021) Chemistry (2023) Residencies Chemistry: An Intimate Evening with Kelly Clarkson (2023–2024) Clarkson, Kelly (2016). River Rose and the Magical Lullaby. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-0624-2756-4. Clarkson, Kelly (2017). River Rose and the Magical Christmas. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-0626-9764-6. List of artists who reached number one on the Australian singles chart List of artists who reached number one on the UK Singles Chart List of Idols winners In February 2022, she removed her "Clarkson" surname from her legal name in her personal life. She still uses the name Kelly Clarkson for her professional career. Small, Elle. "Kelly Clarkson All I Ever Wanted Review". BBC. Archived from the original on November 25, 2017. Retrieved August 25, 2017. Kaplan, Ilana (June 23, 2023). "Kelly Clarkson Turns the Messiness of Divorce into Showstopping Pop Spectacle on 'Chemistry'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 21, 2024. Clarkson is at her strongest when she's sticking to grunge guitars and power-pop anthems Donnelly, Matthew Scott (June 26, 2016). "9 Kelly Clarkson Tracks That Prove a Soul Album Could Be Just The Ticket Read More: 9 Kelly Clarkson Tracks That Prove a Soul Album Could Be Just The Ticket". PopCrush. Retrieved March 21, 2024. Still, across seven albums, she's offered hints of commercial R&B and soul-pop that might collectively give her next LP a bit of context Byrne, Suzy (March 22, 2022). "Kelly Clarkson sets the record straight on name change to Kelly Brianne". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on March 31, 2022. Retrieved March 30, 2022. "Kelly Clarkson Biography". Rolling Stone. Wenner Media LLC. Archived from the original on July 9, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Willman, Chris (December 9, 2021). "What Are the Biggest Christmas Songs Released This Century? ASCAP Has a List and Checked It Twice". Variety. Archived from the original on January 25, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2022. Wagmeister, Elizabeth (September 7, 2022). "Can Kelly Clarkson Save Daytime? The Host on Taking Over Ellen's Spot, Touring Again and Broadway Dreams". Variety. Variety Media, LLC. Archived from the original on June 28, 2023. Retrieved September 7, 2022. "Kelly Clarkson, 'Stronger': Track-By-Track Review". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 8, 2019. Retrieved July 8, 2019. "Kelly Clarkson Biography". Fox News. News Corporation. August 1, 2007. Archived from the original on June 18, 2013. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Leach, Robin (November 15, 2010). "Jessica Lowndes celebrates her 22nd birthday in Las Vegas". Las Vegas Sun. Archived from the original on January 30, 2013. Retrieved February 6, 2013. "Yahoo". Yahoo. Archived from the original on April 16, 2014. Retrieved July 8, 2019. "Kelly Clarkson – Who Do You Think You Are (Complete)". Youtube. July 24, 2013. Archived from the original on June 30, 2014. Retrieved February 8, 2014. "Kelly Clarkson Biography". Fox News. August 1, 2007. Archived from the original on June 18, 2013. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Stated on Who Do You Think You Are?, July 23, 2012 Shawver, Sam. "Singer Kelly Clarkson visits the area". NewsandSentinel.com. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2013. "Kelly Clarkson sings Ave Maria". The Washington Times. News World Communications. August 19, 2008. Archived from the original on November 6, 2008. Retrieved September 14, 2012. "Listening in ... R.J. Helton & Kelly Clarkson". CCM Magazine. May 28, 2004. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 24, 2014. Goldblatt, Henry (August 31, 2011). "Kelly Clarkson on the soundtrack of her life". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 24, 2014. "Kelly Clarkson Biography". Yahoo! Music. Yahoo! Inc. Archived from the original on October 6, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. "Kelly Clarkson Biography". People. Time Inc. Archived from the original on October 19, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. "Kelly Clarkson – Artist International". MTV Romania (in Romanian). Viacom Media Networks. Archived from the original on September 7, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Nash, Alanna. "Single Minded". Archived from the original on May 25, 2010. Retrieved December 16, 2022. "Five Questions with Kelly Clarkson". Seventeen. June 25, 2007. Archived from the original on May 3, 2023. Retrieved May 3, 2023. "Kelly Clarkson Biography". The Biography Channel. A&E Television Networks. Archived from the original on July 12, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Sullivan, Caroline (March 4, 2015). "Kelly Clarkson: 'I've had to cry in record label offices to get my singles released'". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on December 9, 2016. Retrieved December 12, 2016. Lamb, Bill. "Kelly Clarkson Profile – Biography of Pop Star Kelly Clarkson". About.com. Archived from the original on November 10, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Angermiller, Michele Amabile (August 14, 2012). "Kelly Clarkson Talks Football, 'Entitled' 'American Idol' Contestants and New Judge Mariah Carey". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 15, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. "Kelly Clarkson Crowned 'American Idol'". MTV.com. Archived from the original on October 29, 2017. Retrieved February 26, 2022. Neal, Rome (August 16, 2004). "Kelly Clarkson: Breakaway". CBS News. CBS Corporation. Archived from the original on October 9, 2013. Retrieved June 29, 2012. Green, Paul (May 6, 2011). "Chart Watch Extra: 20 Years Of Top Songs". Chart Watch. Yahoo Music. Archived from the original on October 5, 2012. Retrieved June 29, 2012. Fuller, Simon (2002). American Idol: The Search for a Superstar (DVD) (Documentary). Fremantle Media. OCLC 974411073. Archived from the original on March 1, 2019. Retrieved February 28, 2019. Silverman, Stephen (April 23, 2003). "Kelly Clarkson's New CD 'Idol'-ize". People. Time Inc. Archived from the original on March 29, 2011. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Goldblatt, Henry (April 25, 2003). "Music Review – Thankful – Kelly Clarkson". Entertainment Weekly. Time Inc. Archived from the original on September 12, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Thankful — Kelly Clarkson : Songs, Reviews, Credits, Awards : AllMusic". AllMusic. Rovi Corporation. Archived from the original on August 27, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. "RIAA — Searchable Database: Clarkson, Kelly". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on October 19, 2015. Retrieved June 18, 2012. Strauss, Neil (December 5, 2003). "Rap Rules Among the Grammy Award Nominations". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Moss, Corey (January 13, 2004). "Clay Aiken, Kelly Clarkson Plan Joint Headlining Tour". MTV News. Archived from the original on December 7, 2011. Retrieved July 22, 2019. "From Justin to Kelly (2003)". Rotten Tomatoes. Flixster. June 20, 2003. Archived from the original on August 26, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. "Kelly Clarkson Didn't Like From Justin To Kelly' Either". The Gadsden Times. New York: Halifax Media Group. February 3, 2006. Archived from the original on June 2, 2022. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Snierson, Dan (August 19, 2006). "Stupid Questions with Kelly Clarkson". Entertainment Weekly. Time Inc. Archived from the original on October 21, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Silverman, Stephen (January 2, 2004). "Norway's Nilsen Wins 'World Idol' Title". People. Time Inc. Archived from the original on August 11, 2011. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Breakaway — Kelly Clarkson : Songs, Reviews, Credits, Awards : AllMusic". AllMusic. Rovi Corporation. Archived from the original on October 8, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Suzman, Gary (December 8, 2004). "Comfortably 'Numb'". Entertainment Weekly. Time Inc. Archived from the original on June 19, 2013. Retrieved September 14, 2012. J. Freedom du Lac (March 10, 2009). "Clarkson Pops Back From Cold 'December'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on February 5, 2013. Retrieved September 14, 2012. International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (March 31, 2006). "Coldplay had biggest selling album of 2005". NME. Time, Inc. Archived from the original on April 21, 2014. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Suzman, Gary (November 21, 2011). "Kelly Clarkson and Bruno Mars on 'The X Factor'". TV by the Numbers. Tribune Media Services. Archived from the original on November 22, 2011. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Davis, Carolyn E. (April 27, 2005). "Kelly Clarkson Turns 23; Fans' Tour Wishes Come True". MTV News. Archived from the original on December 8, 2011. Retrieved July 22, 2019. Bronson, Fred (June 11, 2012). "American Idol's Tenth Anniversary: Kelly Clarkson's Journey to 73 Billboard Chart Toppers". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on November 14, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. "Ward, Gnarls Barkley Lock Down U.K. Charts". Billboard. April 24, 2006. Archived from the original on January 5, 2017. Retrieved May 2, 2017. "Mediabase Announces 2006 Radio Airplay Leaders" (Press release). Premiere Radio Networks, Inc. December 21, 2006. Archived from the original on March 19, 2007. Retrieved September 14, 2012. "Kelly Clarkson". Grammy Award. Archived from the original on February 21, 2017. Retrieved May 2, 2017. Desens, Krista Desens. "Kelly Clarkson To Final Four Fest". fantasymusicleague. Archived from the original on August 18, 2007. Retrieved March 20, 2009. Lamb, Bill (June 9, 2005). "Will Smith, Kelly Clarkson, Alanis Morissette, Stevie Wonder Entertain At NBA Finals". About.com. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved March 20, 2009. Lamb, Bill (January 30, 2006). "Winter Olympics Concerts: Kelly Clarkson, Whitney Houston, Avril Lavigne, and More". About.com. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved March 20, 2009. ""Bold Moves" puts consumers at center of all Ford-brand marketing". Ford Motor Company. Archived from the original on October 5, 2012. Retrieved July 30, 2012. "Kelly Clarkson fans may be addicted to Ford". Ford Motor Company. Archived from the original on January 30, 2013. Retrieved July 30, 2012. Endelman, Michael (January 18, 2008). "Kelly Clarkson, 'My December' (RCA)". Spin. Archived from the original on April 5, 2018. Retrieved October 8, 2018. "My December > Credits". AllMusic. Archived from the original on October 8, 2018. Retrieved October 8, 2018. "Kelly Clarkson // Journal". Archived from the original on June 10, 2007. "Kelly Clarkson - ELLE". Archived from the original on June 9, 2007. Retrieved June 12, 2007. Cohen, Jonathan (September 4, 2007). "Kelly Clarkson Unveils Fall Tour Plans". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on April 14, 2013. Retrieved March 20, 2009. Jones, Alan (October 31, 2011). "UK Album Chart analysis: Coldplay's Mylo Xyloto smashes through 200k sales barrier". Music Week. Intent Media. Archived from the original on October 19, 2015. Retrieved June 18, 2012. Faber, Judy (February 11, 2009). "Kelly Clarkson: Under New Management". CBS News. CBS Corporation. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Fulton, Rick (February 27, 2009). "I'm not as controversial as the media portrays me, says original American Idol winner Kelly Clarkson". Daily Record. Archived from the original on July 21, 2022. Retrieved March 20, 2009. "Live Earth on MSN: The Concerts For A Climate In Crisis". MSN. Archived from the original on December 11, 2008. Retrieved August 6, 2011. "NASCAR and Kelly Clarkson Announce Unprecedented Partnership". nascar.com. January 19, 2007. Archived from the original on July 27, 2013. Retrieved March 20, 2009. "Clarkson Duets With Reba On 'idol' Reunion". Allbusiness.com. Archived from the original on July 17, 2012. Retrieved August 6, 2011. "Reba McEntire, Kelly Clarkson Plan Tour Together". Country Music Television. MTV Networks. November 15, 2007. Archived from the original on December 19, 2007. Retrieved July 22, 2019. "Music: Kelly Clarkson's 'All I Ever Wanted'". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Hearst Corporation. March 11, 2009. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Trust, Gary (January 23, 2015). "Hot 100 Chart Moves: Kelly Clarkson's 'Heartbeat Song' Debuts in Top 40". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 28, 2015. Retrieved January 28, 2015. Trust, Gary (September 10, 2017). "Ask Billboard: Kelly Clarkson's Career Sales & 'Wild Thoughts' About Rihanna". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on August 19, 2020. Retrieved September 10, 2017. "The 52nd Grammy Award Nominees List". Grammy.com. 2009. Archived from the original on December 6, 2010. Retrieved August 6, 2011. Martens, Todd (January 28, 2009). "Kelly Clarkson's 'My Life' makes history". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 7, 2013. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Montgomery, James (July 27, 2009). "Think Kelly Clarkson's 'Already Gone' Sounds Like Beyonce's 'Halo?' So Does Kelly ..." MTV. Viacom Media Networks. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2012. Juzwiak, Rich (July 21, 2009). "Adele, Kelly Clarkson, Leona Lewis and Miley Cyrus Head VH1 Divas Lineup!". VH1. Viacom Media Networks. Archived from the original on June 20, 2013. Retrieved September 14, 2012. "Kelly Clarkson blij met billen" (in Dutch). RTL. Archived from the original on March 23, 2009. Retrieved July 22, 2019. "Jason Aldean To Release 'My Kinda Party' November 2 – Country Music Is Love". Countrymusicislove.com. Archived from the original on July 8, 2011. Retrieved August 6, 2011. Grein, Paul (July 20, 2011). "Week Ending July 17, 2011. Songs: Demi's Breakthrough". Yahoo. Archived from the original on February 1, 2013. Retrieved February 6, 2013. "The 54th Grammy Award Nominees List". Grammy.com. 2011. Archived from the original on July 27, 2013. Retrieved August 6, 2011. Rosen, Christopher (February 4, 2013). "Best Pop Vocal Album – Kelly Clarkson". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on February 13, 2013. Retrieved February 13, 2013. Bronson, Fred (March 9, 2013). "'American Idol' on the Charts: Fantasia Looks for Another 'Win'". The Hollywood Reporter. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on March 13, 2013. Retrieved March 10, 2013. Caulfield, Keith (August 3, 2012). "Weekly Chart Notes: Kylie Minogue's 9th No. 1 Dance Hit, Scissor Sisters' 'Kiki' Debuts". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on May 29, 2013. Retrieved August 17, 2012. "Kelly Clarkson's Official Website Store". Myplaydirect.com. Archived from the original on July 11, 2011. Retrieved August 6, 2011. Chen, Joyce (February 6, 2012). "Kelly Clarkson sings National Anthem at Super Bowl: 'I've never been more nervous in my life'". NY Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on February 9, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2012. Caulfield, Keith (March 18, 2009). "Kelly Clarkson Tops Billboard 200". Billboard.com. Archived from the original on May 24, 2009. Retrieved March 20, 2009. "McCoy (Giants) ribs Clarkson (Cowboys)". ESPN. September 5, 2012. Archived from the original on February 28, 2014. Retrieved September 14, 2012. "Kelly Clarkson Among Singers Starring in Duets". People Magazine. March 8, 2012. Archived from the original on April 21, 2012. Retrieved April 1, 2012. Pacella, Megan (December 4, 2012). "'Blake Shelton's Not So Family Christmas Special' Leaves Viewers in Stitches". Taste of Country. Townsquare Media. Archived from the original on March 14, 2014. Retrieved June 7, 2013. Bronson, Fred (January 5, 2014). "'American Idol' on the Charts: Alums End 2013 on High Notes". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 11, 2014. Retrieved January 5, 2014. "Grammy Awards 2014: Full Nominations List". Billboard. December 6, 2013. Archived from the original on August 13, 2016. Retrieved December 7, 2013. "Beyonce, Kelly Clarkson To Perform At President Obama's Second Inauguration". MTV. Viacom Media Networks. Archived from the original on January 12, 2013. Retrieved January 9, 2013. "Kelly Clarkson Was Not Lip-Syncing: Singer's Rendition Of 'My Country 'Tis Of Thee' Was Live". Huffingtonpost.com. January 22, 2013. Archived from the original on March 25, 2017. Retrieved April 21, 2020. "Kelly Clarkson's Natural Woman and Tennessee Waltz in Tribute to Carole King and Patti Page". Zap2it. Tribune Media Services. Archived from the original on February 12, 2013. Retrieved February 13, 2013. Carlson, Adam (June 10, 2013). "Kelly Clarkson goes country on new single, 'Tie It Up': Hear it here!". Entertainment Weekly. Time Inc. Archived from the original on June 13, 2013. Retrieved June 20, 2013. Graff, Gary (December 10, 2012). "Jewel Releasing 'Greatest Hits' on Feb. 5". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on May 28, 2013. Retrieved February 6, 2013. "Robbie Williams announces new album 'Swings Both Ways'-video". Digital Spy. September 11, 2013. Archived from the original on September 13, 2013. Retrieved September 11, 2013. "Kelly Clarkson's 'Wrapped In Red' Debuts At Number 3 On Billboard Top 200". Contact Music. December 2013. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved January 7, 2014. "Kelly's Clarkson's Wrapped In Red Certified Platinum By The RIAA". RCA Records. December 5, 2013. Archived from the original on December 13, 2013. Retrieved December 6, 2013. "Mediabase: Year-End Charts 2013". Mediabase. December 7, 2013. Archived from the original on December 16, 2013. Retrieved December 8, 2013. "TV Ratings: 'Sing-Off' tops 'X Factor', while 'Survivor' leads CBS Wednesday". Hitfix. December 12, 2013. Archived from the original on December 13, 2013. Retrieved December 13, 2013. "CITIZEN Introduces Grammy Award Winner Kelly Clarkson as New Brand Ambassador". Citizen Watch Company. Archived from the original on December 16, 2013. Retrieved December 16, 2013. "Enlists Don Was for a "Dream Come True"". Martina McBride. January 15, 2014. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 2, 2015. Goodman, Jessica (November 3, 2015). "See Kelly Clarkson and Josh Groban perform 'All I Ask Of You' for PBS special". Entertainment Weekly. Time Inc. Archived from the original on November 19, 2015. Retrieved November 18, 2015. Schillaci, Sophie (September 30, 2015). "Kelly Clarkson Featured on New Song After Canceling More Tour Dates". Entertainment Tonight. CBS. Archived from the original on October 1, 2015. Retrieved October 2, 2015. Feeney, Nolan (February 27, 2015). "Kelly Clarkson: I Will Never Tell My Daughter About From Justin to Kelly". Time. Archived from the original on March 6, 2015. Retrieved February 27, 2015. "'Piece By Piece' reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on March 6, 2015. Retrieved March 6, 2015. Caulfield, Keith (March 11, 2015). "Kelly Clarkson Claims Her Third No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on March 11, 2015. Retrieved March 11, 2015. Slezak, Michael (March 30, 2015). "American Idol: Kelly Clarkson Week Song Spoilers Revealed!". tvline.com. TVLine Media, LLC. Archived from the original on April 23, 2015. Retrieved April 22, 2015. Bliss, Karen (September 26, 2015). "Kelly Clarkson's Canadian & U.K. Tour Dates Canceled". Billboard.com. Billboard. Archived from the original on September 29, 2015. Retrieved September 26, 2015. "Radio & Records: Going For Adds: Hot AC". Radio & Records. May 18, 2015. Archived from the original on May 7, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015. "Hot/Modern/AC Future Releases". All Access Media Group. Archived from the original on October 29, 2015. Retrieved October 29, 2015. Gage, Jeff (December 7, 2015). "Dallas Gets Grammy Nods with Leon Bridges, Kelly Clarkson and More". Dallas Observer. Archived from the original on December 9, 2015. Retrieved December 7, 2015. "Kelly Announces New Children's Book". Sony Music Entertainment. February 9, 2016. Archived from the original on February 10, 2016. Maughan, Shannon (September 22, 2016). "Q&A with Kelly Clarkson". Publishers Weekly. Archived from the original on September 26, 2016. Retrieved September 26, 2016. Clarkson, Kelly. "River Rose and the Magical Christmas – Kelly Clarkson – Hardcover". HarperCollins US. Archived from the original on August 11, 2017. Retrieved October 28, 2017. Lindner, Emilee (March 15, 2016). "Michelle Obama Teams with Missy Elliott, Janelle Monae, Zendaya & More for New Song". Fuse. Archived from the original on August 25, 2017. Retrieved March 15, 2016. "Kelly Clarkson, The Roots Share First 2 Covers Off 'The Hamilton Mixtape': Listen". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 8, 2019. Retrieved July 8, 2019. "Tim McGraw, Kelly Clarkson, Lady Antebellum, Skillet and More Contribute New Songs to 'The Shack' Soundtrack: Listen". Billboard.com. January 27, 2017. Archived from the original on October 23, 2017. Retrieved October 28, 2017. Holloway, Daniel (May 11, 2017). "Kelly Clarkson Joins The Voice Season 14 as Coach (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. United States: Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on May 11, 2017. Retrieved May 12, 2017. Lynch, Joe (June 24, 2016). "Kelly Clarkson Signs Long-Term Deal With Atlantic, Preparing Soul/R&B-Inspired Album for 2017". Billboard. United States: Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on June 27, 2016. Retrieved June 24, 2016. McIntyre, Hugh (September 7, 2017). "Kelly Clarkson Reappears With A Pair Of New Singles, 'Love So Soft' And 'Move You'". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 3, 2023. Retrieved May 3, 2023. TV News Deck (November 16, 2017). "Kelly Clarkson & Pink Join Forces to Open 2017 American Music Awards". Broadway World. Wisdom Digital Media. Archived from the original on November 17, 2017. Retrieved November 16, 2017. 60th GRAMMY Awards: Full Nominees List Archived January 28, 2018, at the Wayback Machine Grammy.com, November 28, 2017 Masters, Kim (January 5, 2016). "Studios' 2017 Forecast: Big Bets, Franchise Fears and Executive Intrigue". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 6, 2017. Retrieved January 6, 2017. Boone, John (November 17, 2017). "Kelly Clarkson Gets Animated in 'DreamWorks Home For the Holidays' Christmas Special (Exclusive)". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved December 1, 2017. Braca, Nina (March 8, 2018). "Kelly Clarkson Turns Children's Book 'I've Loved You Since Forever' Into a Heartwarming Lullaby Watch Kelly Clarkson Turn a Children's Book Into a Heartwarming Lullaby". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 9, 2018. Retrieved March 9, 2018. "Billboard Music Awards Winners 2018: The Complete List". Billboard. May 20, 2018. Archived from the original on January 27, 2020. Retrieved May 21, 2018. Crombleholme, Hayley (May 22, 2018). "Brynn Cartelli of Longmeadow wins season 14 of NBC's 'The Voice'". WWLP. Archived from the original on May 23, 2018. Retrieved May 23, 2018. "Kelly Clarkson to Return as Host for 2019 Billboard Music Awards". www.msn.com. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved May 7, 2020. Gregg Kilday (July 10, 2018). "Kelly Clarkson Joins 'UglyDolls' Voice Cast". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 11, 2018. Retrieved July 10, 2018. Acevedo, Angelica (March 27, 2019). "'UglyDolls' Soundtrack Features New Music From Nick Jonas, Kelly Clarkson & More: See Track List". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved March 29, 2019. Hibberd, James (September 19, 2018). "Kelly Clarkson officially launching a daytime talk show". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 20, 2018. Retrieved September 20, 2018. Seeman, Matthew (May 1, 2020). "Kelly Clarkson postpones Las Vegas residency to 2021". KSNV. Archived from the original on May 21, 2020. Retrieved May 7, 2020. Sheckells, Melinda (November 1, 2019). "Kelly Clarkson Sets 2020 Invincible Residency at Las Vegas' Zappos Theater: Exclusive". Billboard. United States: Eldridge Industries. Archived from the original on November 1, 2019. Retrieved November 1, 2019. "Kelly Clarkson meets Reese Witherspoon's Bradley Jackson in The Morning Show sneak peek". Entertainment Weekly. November 7, 2019. Archived from the original on December 19, 2021. Retrieved December 19, 2021. Dumcius, Gintautas (February 19, 2020). "Kelly Clarkson tapped as Wayfair's first 'brand ambassador'". Boston Business Journal. Archived from the original on May 15, 2021. Retrieved February 25, 2020. N'Duka, Amanda; D'Alessandro, Anthony (October 4, 2018). "Kelly Clarkson Joins 'Trolls 2' & Will Perform Original Song". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 5, 2018. Retrieved October 5, 2018. Seemayer, Zach (April 16, 2020). "Kelly Clarkson Talks About Recording New Single 'I Dare You' in 6 Languages". ET. Archived from the original on April 24, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. Ausiello, Michael (May 21, 2020). "Daytime Emmy Nominations: GH Tops Soaps, Kelly Clarkson Leads Talkers". TVLine. Archived from the original on May 21, 2020. Retrieved May 22, 2020. "Daytime Emmys 2020: 'Jeopardy,' 'The View,' 'Ellen,' Alex Trebek, 'Young and the Restless' Among Top Winners". Variety. June 26, 2020. Retrieved May 3, 2023. Dresdale, Andrea (June 18, 2020). "Kelly Clarkson to receive star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame". ABC News Radio. Archived from the original on June 19, 2020. Retrieved June 18, 2020. "Kelly Clarkson to replace Ellen DeGeneres on US TV". BBC. May 28, 2021. Archived from the original on May 27, 2021. Retrieved May 28, 2021. Pedersen, Erik (June 25, 2021). "Daytime Emmys Winners List – Updating Live". Deadline. Archived from the original on June 28, 2021. Retrieved July 3, 2021. Mamo, Heran (September 15, 2021). "Kelly Clarkson Announces New Holiday Single 'Christmas Isn't Canceled (Just You)'". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 16, 2021. Retrieved September 16, 2021. White, Jack (September 22, 2021). "Kelly Clarkson to release second festive album When Christmas Comes Around... on October 15". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on September 23, 2021. Retrieved September 22, 2021. Lee, Taila (November 15, 2022). "2023 GRAMMY Nominations: See The Complete Winners & Nominees List". Archived from the original on November 15, 2022. Retrieved March 26, 2023. Atkinson, Katie (November 5, 2021). "Kelly Clarkson, Michael Buble, Pentatonix & Train to Bring Holiday Hits to iHeartRadio Christmas Concert". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 7, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Dwortz, Mallory (December 1, 2021). "How to Watch "Kelly Clarkson Presents: When Christmas Comes Around"". MLive. Archived from the original on December 3, 2021. Retrieved January 30, 2022. Thompson, Avery (December 15, 2021). "'The Voice' Recap: A Historic Winner Is Crowned The Season 21 Champion". Hollywood Life. Archived from the original on December 15, 2021. Retrieved December 15, 2021. "Snoop Dogg & Kelly Clarkson To Host NBC's 'American Song Contest' Reality Series". Deadline Hollywood. February 13, 2022. Archived from the original on February 14, 2022. Retrieved February 13, 2022. Aniftos, Rania (May 25, 2022). "Kelly Clarkson Announces 'Kellyoke' EP With New Cover of Billie Eilish's 'Happier Than Ever'". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 25, 2022. Retrieved May 25, 2022. "Kelly Clarkson is Ready to Put Out a New Album but We Have to Wait | E! Red Carpet & Award Shows". YouTube. Archived from the original on May 30, 2022. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Mitovich, Matt Webb (June 24, 2022). "Daytime Emmy Awards 2022 Winners List". Deadline. Archived from the original on November 9, 2022. Retrieved November 25, 2022. Brathwaite, Lester Fabian (September 19, 2022). "Kelly Clarkson's Walk of Fame induction was an American Idol reunion". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved September 19, 2022. Norwin, Alyssa (September 12, 2022). "Carly Pearce Teases 'Super Fun' New Song With Kelsea Ballerini & Kelly Clarkson". Hollywood Life. Archived from the original on November 10, 2022. Retrieved September 23, 2022. "Kelly Clarkson to host 12th annual NFL Honors". NFL. NFL Enterprises LLC. December 16, 2022. Archived from the original on December 16, 2022. Retrieved December 16, 2022. Jean-Philippe, McKenzie (October 11, 2022). "The Voice Season 23 Coaches Have Been Revealed—See the Brand New Lineup". NBC. Archived from the original on October 12, 2022. Retrieved October 12, 2022. "Jeff Goldblum taps Kelly Clarkson for upcoming EP Play Well With Others". Yahoo! Life. January 27, 2023. Archived from the original on January 27, 2023. Retrieved January 27, 2023. Jones, Alexis (March 26, 2023). "Kelly Clarkson Details New Album Chemistry: 'The Arc of an Entire Relationship'". People. Archived from the original on April 12, 2023. Retrieved March 26, 2023. Legaspi, Althea (March 26, 2023). "Kelly Clarkson Details New Album Chemistry". Rolling Stone. United States. Archived from the original on April 2, 2023. Retrieved March 26, 2023. Peters, Mitchell (March 26, 2023). "Kelly Clarkson Announces Post-Divorce Album Chemistry, Explains Meaning Behind the Title". Billboard. United States. Archived from the original on April 12, 2023. Retrieved March 26, 2023. "Kelly Clarkson Is Coming for What's Hers". Vulture. April 14, 2023. Archived from the original on December 1, 2023. Retrieved May 3, 2023. Weisholtz, Drew (March 27, 2023). "Kelly Clarkson is playing Vegas this summer. Here's how to get tickets". Today. NBC Universal. Archived from the original on June 28, 2023. Retrieved March 27, 2023. Katsilometes, John (October 23, 202). "Kelly Clarkson to play NYE, Super Bowl weekends at Planet Hollywood". Las Vegas Review-Journal. Archived from the original on October 23, 2023. Retrieved October 23, 2023. Jackie Manno (October 17, 2023). "This Is Why Kelly Clarkson Moved Her Talk Show from LA to NYC". NBCUniversal Media. Archived from the original on October 23, 2023. Retrieved October 20, 2023. Iahn, Buddy (November 8, 2023). "Kelly Clarkson, Dolly Parton, John Mayer launching SiriusXM channels". Music Universe. Archived from the original on November 8, 2023. Retrieved November 8, 2023. McClellan, Jennifer; Ruggieri, Melissa (November 10, 2023). "SZA leads Grammy nominees, Miley could get 1st win and Taylor Swift is poised to make history". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 10, 2023. Retrieved November 10, 2023. Rice, Lynette (December 15, 2023). "Daytime Emmy Awards: 'General Hospital' Wins Outstanding Drama – Full Winners List". Deadline. Archived from the original on December 16, 2023. Retrieved December 15, 2023. Corner, Lewis (October 26, 2011). "Kelly Clarkson – Stronger Review". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on October 27, 2011. Retrieved October 26, 2011. Robinson, Peter (October 2011). "Kelly Clarkson – Interview". Popjustice. Archived from the original on June 16, 2013. Retrieved December 11, 2011. Scaggs, Austin (March 15, 2012). "Kelly Clarkson – Q&A". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 30, 2017. Retrieved March 29, 2017. Feldberg, Isaac (October 26, 2017). "Kelly Clarkson pours her soul into 'Meaning of Life'". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on October 29, 2017. Retrieved October 28, 2017. Kelly Clarkson: Thankful : Music Reviews Rolling Stone. Retrieved August 13, 2009. Caramanica, Jon (January 22, 2012). "Happily Up to Her Ears in Angst". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved February 2, 2013. Caramanica, Chinen, Jon, Nate (October 24, 2011). "Former 'American Idol' Now the Voice of Vengeance". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 24, 2012. Retrieved February 10, 2012.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Sinclair, Sophie (October 22, 2012). "Live Review: Kelly Clarkson – Wembley Arena 2012". HitTheFloor.com. Archived from the original on July 21, 2022. Retrieved April 25, 2013. Deming, Mark (August 24, 2015). "Why Kelly Clarkson Is the American Idol Winner Who Actually Matters". Phoenix New Times. Archived from the original on March 25, 2017. Retrieved March 29, 2017. Kaufman, Gil Kelly Clarkson's New Single Could Recapture Her 'Since U Been Gone' Glory, Producer Says VH1.com. Retrieved August 13, 2009. Simon Cowell: The Full Interview – ABC News Archived June 24, 2016, at the Wayback Machine abcnews.go.com.(video) Retrieved August 13, 2009. "The 75 Greatest Women of All Time". Esquire. Archived from the original on November 13, 2014. Retrieved September 30, 2014. Rosen, Jody (October 25, 2011). "Kelly Clarkson – Stronger Review". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 11, 2012. Retrieved December 29, 2012. Myers, Cory (January 29, 2013). "Kelly Clarkson Has Never Lip-Synced". Electric Barnyard. Archived from the original on February 15, 2013. Retrieved February 2, 2012. Various sources: "'American Idol' Phillip Phillips' 'Home' Scores Huge Debut". MTV. Viacom Media Networks. May 31, 2012. Archived from the original on July 2, 2012. Retrieved June 24, 2012. Only the original "American Idol," Kelly Clarkson, can boast a bigger digital sales week: "Kelly Clarkson Drives 'Stronger' to Hot 100 Summit". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. February 8, 2012. Archived from the original on June 23, 2012. Retrieved June 24, 2012. The uptempo pop anthem becomes the original "American Idol" champion's third leader on the list. Mapes, Jillian (November 17, 2011). "Kelly Clarkson's 5 Outrageous Quotes Cut From Her 'Unplugged' Special". The Hollywood Reporter. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on December 21, 2011. Retrieved June 24, 2012. The original American Idol has always been known for speaking her mind and letting that sense of humor rip. Grossman, Samantha (July 23, 2015). "15 Times Kelly Clarkson Totally Nailed a Cover Song". Time. Archived from the original on June 22, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. American Idol alum Kelly Clarkson is the undisputed Queen of Covers. She consistently borrows other artists' songs and puts her signature spin on them, often producing something even better than the original. Goodman, Jessica (September 8, 2015). "Every Kelly Clarkson tour cover — ranked". Entertainment Weekly. Time Inc. Archived from the original on May 12, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. The Queen of Covers has been asking fans to submit requests for every stop of her Piece by Piece Tour. Hosken, Patrick (November 16, 2015). "Demi Lovato Can Sing Kelly Clarkson And Lil Wayne Songs Like It's NBD". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Kelly is herself an undisputed Queen of Covers, as we've pointed out before, so maybe there's a bit of torch-passing here? Rose, Rebecca (July 27, 2015). "Queen of Covers Kelly Clarkson Does "Blank Space," Taylor Swift Approves". Cosmopolitan. Hearst Communications, Inc. Archived from the original on June 22, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. "Kelly Clarkson – UK Biography". Sony Music Entertainment. Archived from the original on January 9, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2012. "'American Idol' Begins: When Kelly Clarkson Wasn't Even on the Radar & More Season 1 Memories". Billboard.com. April 5, 2016. Archived from the original on November 3, 2017. Retrieved October 28, 2017. "Kelly Clarkson on Loving Whitney Houston, Adele and More". Rolling Stone. March 15, 2012. Archived from the original on April 6, 2022. Retrieved April 6, 2022. "Kelly Clarkson is 'saving all her love' in latest Whitney Houston cover". October 2021. Archived from the original on April 6, 2022. Retrieved April 6, 2022. Dinh, James (February 15, 2011). "Kelly Clarkson Influenced By Prince, Aretha Franklin, Others For New Album". MTV. Archived from the original on February 10, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2012. Moss, Cory (March 2, 2004). "Kelly Clarkson's Rockin', Soulful Side To Show On New LP". MTV. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2012. "As Kelly Clarkson Drops LP, She's Thankful For Simon's Barbs". Mtv.com. Archived from the original on August 26, 2017. Retrieved October 28, 2017. Dzidrums, Christine (2016), Kelly Clarkson: Behind Her Hazel Eyes: Y Not Girl Volume 2, Creative Media Publishing, p. 75, ISBN 9781938438202 Setoodeh, Ramin (October 10, 2017). "Kelly Clarkson on Her New Album, 'The Voice' and How Michelle Obama Inspired a Song". Variety. Archived from the original on November 2, 2019. Retrieved November 14, 2019. Raftery, Liz (April 13, 2018). "The Most Successful American Idol Winners, Ranked". TV Guide. Archived from the original on April 14, 2018. Retrieved April 15, 2018. Harris, Sarah (January 31, 2019). "Kelly Clarkson brings down the house at Salt Lake City show". Daily Herald. Archived from the original on April 10, 2019. Retrieved May 28, 2020. "Hot Stuff: Why This Week's Billboard Hot 100 Is History-Making". Billboard.com. February 24, 2012. Archived from the original on November 23, 2017. Retrieved October 28, 2017. "30 Greatest Musicians to Come From Singing Competitions". Fuse.tv. Archived from the original on October 6, 2017. Retrieved October 28, 2017. "Simon Defends Kelly – EW.com". Entertainment Weekly. October 23, 2012. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012.{{cite magazine}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Angermiller, Michele Amabile (September 4, 2012). "Kelly Clarkson's 'American Idol' Victory, 10 Years Later". Hollywoodreporter.com. Archived from the original on October 6, 2017. Retrieved October 28, 2017. "Here Are 7 Ways 'American Idol' Influenced Pop Culture". Time.com. Archived from the original on March 24, 2018. Retrieved October 28, 2017. "The Legacy of 'American Idol': It Was Always About the Stars". Billboard.com. May 11, 2015. Archived from the original on December 11, 2017. Retrieved October 28, 2017. Yahr, Emily (March 31, 2016). "You may scoff at 'American Idol' now, but it changed pop culture forever". Washingtonpost.com. Archived from the original on May 16, 2017. Retrieved March 25, 2017. "LI's Shaggy poised to make a comeback". Newsday.com. May 28, 2015. Archived from the original on May 17, 2017. Retrieved October 28, 2017. "Check out This Week On Idol – American Idol on FOX". Fox.com. Archived from the original on March 25, 2017. Retrieved October 28, 2017. Varga, George (April 5, 2012). "Kelly Clarkson grows stronger, more determined". Sabdiegouniontribune.com. Archived from the original on October 29, 2017. Retrieved October 28, 2017. "How Women Dominated Pop Music in the '00s". Popmatters.com. Archived from the original on October 14, 2017. Retrieved October 28, 2017. "Billboard Women in Music 'Powerhouse' Kelly Clarkson on Finally Finding Artistic Freedom". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 27, 2020. Retrieved January 9, 2020. Glenn Rowley. "Vanessa Hudgens Credits Kelly Clarkson with Inspiring Her Career – Billboard". Billboard.com. Archived from the original on May 2, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2022. "Album reviews: Demi Lovato's 'Here We Go Again' and Jordin Sparks' 'Battlefield'". Latimesblogs.latimes.com. July 20, 2009. Archived from the original on August 11, 2017. Retrieved October 28, 2017. ... Lovato who's most influenced by Kelly Clarkson's style. "Ava Max - Interview and "Kings & Queens" Performance with The Kelly Clarkson Show". NBC. September 22, 2020. Archived from the original on December 12, 2021. Retrieved October 12, 2021. "Jordin Sparks". Digitalspy.com. May 29, 2009. Archived from the original on July 21, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2022. "Ashley Tisdale Embraces Her Inner Kelly Clarkson On 'Guilty Pleasure' | News". MTV. July 28, 2009. Archived from the original on July 21, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2022. Lentini, Liza (February 18, 2022). "5 Albums I Can't Live Without: Avril Lavigne". Spin. Archived from the original on February 19, 2022. Retrieved October 27, 2022. "Kelsea Ballerini Says Kelly Clarkson Inspired Her to do Music - E! Online". Archived from the original on July 16, 2020. Retrieved July 21, 2022. "Priscilla Block Says Kelly Clarkson Changed Her Life". CMT. February 9, 2022. Archived from the original on July 13, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Webber, Stephanie (October 21, 2013). "Kelly Clarkson Marries Fiance Brandon Blackstock In Tennessee – All the Details!". Us Weekly. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013. Retrieved October 21, 2013. Nessif, Bruna (February 12, 2013). "Reba McEntire "Thrilled to Death" to Have Kelly Clarkson as Daughter-in-Law". E!. Retrieved October 21, 2013. Webber, Stephanie (October 21, 2013). "Kelly Clarkson Marries Fiance Brandon Blackstock – All the Details!". Us Weekly. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013. Retrieved October 21, 2013. Vivinetto, Gina (October 1, 2018). "Kelly Clarkson reveals secret to working with her hubby: 'It comes down to respect'". Today. Archived from the original on December 27, 2018. Retrieved December 26, 2018. "River Rose Blackstock is Kelly Clarkson's baby's name". United Press International. June 15, 2014. Archived from the original on January 23, 2022. Retrieved May 3, 2023. "Kelly Clarkson Shares First Photos of Her Son Remington". Time.com. Archived from the original on March 30, 2017. Retrieved October 28, 2017. Drysdale, Jennifer (June 11, 2020). "Kelly Clarkson Files for Divorce From Husband Brandon Blackstock". Entertainment Tonight. United States. Archived from the original on June 11, 2020. Retrieved June 11, 2020. Trepany, Charles (September 21, 2020). "Kelly Clarkson reveals she 'definitely didn't see' her divorce coming on talk show premiere". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved December 5, 2020. "Kelly Clarkson Settles Divorce, Will Pay Brandon Blackstock Over $1.3M Plus Monthly Spousal Support". Peoplemag. Archived from the original on December 6, 2023. Retrieved November 26, 2022. Donahue, Bill (November 30, 2023). "Kelly Clarkson's Ex-Husband Ordered To Repay Her $2.6M Over 'Unlawfully Procured' Business Deals". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 1, 2023. Retrieved December 1, 2023. Kelly Opens Up About Her Autoimmune Disease & How A Book Changed Her Life | The Kelly Clarkson Show, archived from the original on December 27, 2019, retrieved November 1, 2019 "Kelly Clarkson reveals weight loss is 'side effect' of controlling thyroid issue". TODAY.com. June 8, 2018. Archived from the original on November 15, 2019. Retrieved November 1, 2019. "What We Know About Kelly Clarkson's Thyroid Issue". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 12, 2019. Retrieved November 1, 2019. "Kelly Clarkson Stamps for Idol Gives Back". Trend Hunter. April 10, 2008. Archived from the original on January 30, 2013. Retrieved September 15, 2012. "Kelly Clarkson". March of Dimes. March of Dimes Foundation. 2012. Archived from the original on December 25, 2014. Retrieved September 15, 2012. Contactmusic (April 2, 2011). "Kelly Clarkson – Kelly Clarkson Visits South African Orphanage". Contactmusic.com. Archived from the original on January 30, 2013. Retrieved September 15, 2012. "Kelly Clarkson Charity Work, Events and Causes". Look To The Stars. 2006–2012. Archived from the original on July 26, 2012. Retrieved September 15, 2012. "Charity". Kelly Clarkson. Sony Music Entertainment. 2012. Archived from the original on September 15, 2012. Retrieved September 15, 2012. Tarradell, Mario. "Kelly Clarkson wants to be an "Annie," and she's got soulful swagger during sold-out benefit concert at Verizon Theatre". Morning News. Dallas. Archived from the original on March 4, 2013. "Celebrate My Drive". Archived from the original on September 26, 2013. Retrieved August 17, 2013. "More than One in Five Children in the U.S. Face Hunger, According to New USDA Report". MultiVu, Feeding America, The Ad Council. Archived from the original on November 9, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2013. "Kelly Clarkson Trades Bridal Duties for a Trip to Peru". People. Archived from the original on September 18, 2013. Retrieved September 16, 2013. Phares, Heather. "Kelly – Biography". Allmusic. Lamb, Bill. "Kelly Clarkson – Profile" Archived November 10, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. About.com. Retrieved February 11, 2006. Phares, Heather. "Kelly Clarkson – Biography". Yahoo LAUNCHcast. Retrieved February 11, 2006. Kelly Gets Cocky Archived August 21, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Idol winner fires Simon Fuller. PopSugar.com. Blog Archives. Retrieved February 25, 2006. Croatto, Pete. From Justin to Kelly. [Watching From Justin to Kelly, one question looms over the entire production: Why was this movie made?] Retrieved May 4, 2006. Kelly Clarkson at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website Kelly Clarkson at AllMusic Kelly Clarkson at AllMovie Kelly Clarkson at IMDb Kelly Clarkson discography at Discogs Kelly Clarkson collected news and commentary at The New York Times