The Vietnam War (also known by other names) was a conflict in Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia from 1 November 1955 to the fall of Saigon on 30 April 1975. It was the second of the Indochina Wars and was a major conflict of the Cold War. While the war was officially fought between North Vietnam and South Vietnam, the north was supported by the Soviet Union, China, and other communist states, while the south was supported by the United States and other anti-communist allies, making the war a proxy war between the United States and the Soviet Union. It lasted almost 20 years, with direct U.S. military involvement ending in 1973. The conflict also spilled over into neighboring states, exacerbating the Laotian Civil War and the Cambodian Civil War, which ended with all three countries officially becoming communist states by 1976. After the fall of French Indochina with the 1954 Geneva Conference on 21 July, the country gained independence from France but was divided into two parts: the Viet Minh took control of North Vietnam, while the U.S. assumed financial and military support for South Vietnam. The Viet Cong (VC), a South Vietnamese common front under the direction of the north, initiated a guerrilla war in the south. The People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN), also known as the North Vietnamese Army (NVA), engaged in more conventional warfare with U.S. and Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN) forces. North Vietnam invaded Laos in 1958, establishing the Ho Chi Minh Trail to supply and reinforce the VC.: 16  By 1963, the north had sent 40,000 soldiers to fight in the south.: 16  U.S. involvement increased under President John F. Kennedy, from just under a thousand military advisors in 1959 to 23,000 by 1964.: 131  Following the Gulf of Tonkin incident in August 1964, the U.S. Congress passed a resolution that gave President Lyndon B. Johnson broad authority to increase U.S. military presence in Vietnam, without a formal declaration of war. Johnson ordered the deployment of combat units for the first time and dramatically increased the number of American troops to 184,000. U.S. and South Vietnamese forces relied on air superiority and overwhelming firepower to conduct search and destroy operations, involving ground forces, artillery, and airstrikes. The U.S. also conducted a large-scale strategic bombing campaign against North Vietnam: 371–374  and continued significantly building up its forces, despite little progress being made. In 1968, North Vietnamese forces launched the Tet Offensive. Though it was a tactical defeat for them, it was a strategic victory, as it caused U.S. domestic support for the war to fade.: 481  By the end of the year, the VC held little territory and were sidelined by the PAVN. In 1969, North Vietnam declared the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Republic of South Vietnam. Operations crossed national borders, and the U.S. bombed North Vietnamese supply routes in Laos and Cambodia. The 1970 deposing of the Cambodian monarch, Norodom Sihanouk, resulted in a PAVN invasion of the country (at the request of the Khmer Rouge), and then a U.S.-ARVN counter-invasion, escalating the Cambodian Civil War. After the election of Richard Nixon in 1969, a policy of "Vietnamization" began, which saw the conflict fought by an expanded ARVN, while U.S. forces withdrew in the face of increasing domestic opposition. U.S. ground forces had largely withdrawn by early 1972, and their operations were limited to air and artillery support, advisors, and materiel shipments. The Paris Peace Accords of January 1973 saw all U.S. forces withdrawn : 457  The accords were broken almost immediately, and fighting continued for two more years. Phnom Penh fell to the Khmer Rouge on 17 April 1975, while the 1975 spring offensive saw the Fall of Saigon to the PAVN on 30 April, marking the end of the war. North and South Vietnam were reunified on 2 July the following year. The war exacted an enormous human cost: estimates of the number of Vietnamese soldiers and civilians killed range from 966,000 to 3 million. Some 275,000–310,000 Cambodians, 20,000–62,000 Laotians, and 58,220 U.S. service members also died in the conflict. The end of the Vietnam War would precipitate the Vietnamese boat people and the larger Indochina refugee crisis, which saw millions of refugees leave Indochina, an estimated 250,000 of whom perished at sea. Once in power, the Khmer Rouge carried out the Cambodian genocide, while conflict between them and the unified Vietnam would eventually escalate into the Cambodian–Vietnamese War, which toppled the Khmer Rouge government in 1979 and ended the genocide. In response, China invaded Vietnam, with subsequent border conflicts lasting until 1991. Within the United States, the war gave rise to what was referred to as Vietnam syndrome, a public aversion to American overseas military involvement, which, together with the Watergate scandal, contributed to the crisis of confidence that affected America throughout the 1970s. The U.S. Air Force destroyed more than 20% of the jungles of South Vietnam and 20–50% of the mangrove forests, by spraying over 20 million U.S. gallons (75 million liters) of toxic herbicides (defoliants), including Agent Orange. The war is one of the most commonly used examples of ecocide. Various names have been applied to the War. These have shifted over time, although Vietnam War is the most commonly used title in English. It has been variously called the Second Indochina War since the war spread to both Laos and Cambodia, the Vietnam Conflict, and Nam (colloquially 'Nam). In Vietnam it is commonly known as Kháng chiến chống Mỹ (lit. 'Resistance War against America'). The Vietnamese Government officially refers to it as the Resistance War against America to Save the Nation. It is also sometimes called the American War. Vietnam had been under French control as a part of French Indochina since the mid-19th century. Under French rule, Vietnamese nationalism was heavily suppressed, and as a result Vietnamese revolutionary groups often conducted their activities abroad, namely in France and China. One such nationalist, Nguyen Sinh Cung, established the Indochinese Communist Party in 1930, a Marxist–Leninist political organization which operated primarily in Hong Kong and the Soviet Union. The party aimed to overthrow French rule and establish an independent communist state in Vietnam. In September 1940, the Japanese Empire invaded French Indochina, following France's capitulation to Nazi Germany two months prior. French influence was suppressed by the Japanese, and in 1941 Cung, now known as Ho Chi Minh, returned to Vietnam to establish the Viet Minh, an anti-Japanese resistance movement that advocated for Vietnamese independence. Throughout the war, the Viet Minh received aid from the Allied Powers, namely the United States, Soviet Union, and Republic of China. Beginning in 1944, the U.S. Office of Strategic Services (O.S.S.) began to provide the Viet Minh with weapons, ammunition, and training to fight the occupying Japanese and Vichy French forces. President Franklin D. Roosevelt was an ardent supporter of Vietnamese resistance, and proposed that Vietnam's independence be granted following the end of the war. Following Japan's surrender on August 15, 1945, the Viet Minh launched a revolution in Indochina, overthrowing the Japanese-backed Empire of Vietnam and seizing weapons from the surrendering Japanese forces. On September 2, Ho Chi Minh proclaimed the Declaration of independence of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, declaring Vietnam an independent nation. However, on September 23, French forces overthrew the DRV and reinstated French rule in Vietnam. American support for the Viet Minh promptly ended, and O.S.S. forces left Vietnam as the French sought to reassert their control of the country. Tensions between the Viet Minh and French authorities had erupted into full-scale war by 1946, a conflict which soon became entwined into the larger Cold War. On March 12, 1947, U.S. president Harry S. Truman announced the Truman Doctrine, an anticommunist foreign policy which pledged U.S. support to nations resisting "attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures". In January 1950, the communist states of China and the Soviet Union recognized the Viet Minh's Democratic Republic of Vietnam, based in Hanoi, as the legitimate government of Vietnam. The following month, the capitalist countries of the United States and United Kingdom recognized the French-backed State of Vietnam in Saigon, led by former Emperor Bảo Đại, as the legitimate Vietnamese government.: 377–379 : 88  The outbreak of the Korean War in June 1950 convinced many Washington policymakers that the war in Indochina was another example of communist expansionism directed by the Soviet Union.: 33–35  Military advisors from China began assisting the Viet Minh in July 1950.: 14  Chinese weapons, expertise, and laborers transformed the Viet Minh from a guerrilla force into a regular army.: 26  In September 1950, the United States enforced the Truman Doctrine by creating a Military Assistance and Advisory Group (MAAG) to screen French requests for aid, advise on strategy, and train Vietnamese soldiers.: 18  By 1954, the United States had spent $1 billion in support of the French military effort, shouldering 80 percent of the cost of the war.: 35  During the Battle of Dien Bien Phu in 1954, U.S. carriers sailed to the Gulf of Tonkin and the U.S. conducted reconnaissance flights. France and the United States also discussed the use of three tactical nuclear weapons, although reports of how seriously this was considered and by whom are vague and contradictory.: 75  According to then-Vice President Richard Nixon, the Joint Chiefs of Staff drew up plans to use small tactical nuclear weapons to support the French. Nixon, a so-called "hawk" on Vietnam, suggested that the United States might have to "put American boys in".: 76  President Dwight D. Eisenhower made American participation contingent on British support, but the British were opposed.: 76  Eisenhower, wary of involving the United States in a land war in Asia, decided against military intervention.: 75–76  Throughout the conflict, U.S. intelligence estimates remained skeptical of France's chance of success. On 7 May 1954, the French garrison at Dien Bien Phu surrendered. The defeat marked the end of French military involvement in Indochina. At the Geneva Conference, the French negotiated a ceasefire agreement with the Viet Minh, and independence was granted to Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam. At the 1954 Geneva Conference, Vietnam was temporarily partitioned at the 17th parallel. Ho Chi Minh had wished to continue the war in the south, but was restrained by his Chinese allies who convinced him that he could win control by electoral means.: 87–88  Under the terms of the Geneva Accords, civilians were allowed to move freely between the two provisional states for a 300-day period. Elections throughout the country were to be held in 1956 to establish a unified government.: 88–90  However, the United States, represented at the conference by Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, objected to the resolution; Dulles' objection was supported only by the representative of Bảo Đại. Roughly one million northerners, mainly minority Catholics, fled south, fearing persecution by the Communists.: 96  This followed an American psychological warfare campaign, headed by the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) under the command of CIA director Allen Dulles, which exaggerated anti-Catholic sentiment among the Viet Minh and distributed propaganda material attributed to Viet Minh threatening an American attack on Hanoi with atomic bombs.: 96–97  The exodus was coordinated by a U.S.-funded $93 million relocation program, which included the use of the Seventh Fleet to ferry refugees. The northern, mainly Catholic refugees gave the later Ngô Đình Diệm regime a strong anti-communist constituency.: 238  Diệm staffed his government's key posts mostly with northern and central Catholics.[citation needed] In addition to the Catholics flowing south, over 130,000 "Revolutionary Regroupees" went to the north for "regroupment", expecting to return to the south within two years.: 98  The Viet Minh left roughly 5,000 to 10,000 cadres in the south as a base for future insurgency.: 104  The last French soldiers left South Vietnam in April 1956.: 116  The PRC completed its withdrawal from North Vietnam at around the same time.: 14  Between 1953 and 1956, the North Vietnamese government instituted various agrarian reforms, including "rent reduction" and "land reform", which resulted in significant political oppression. During the land reform, testimony from North Vietnamese witnesses suggested a ratio of one execution for every 160 village residents, which when extrapolated results in an initial estimate of nearly 100,000 executions nationwide. Because the campaign was concentrated mainly in the Red River Delta area, a lower estimate of 50,000 executions became widely accepted by scholars at the time.: 143 : 569  However, declassified documents from the Vietnamese and Hungarian archives indicate that the number of executions was much lower than reported at the time, although likely greater than 13,500. In 1956, leaders in Hanoi admitted to "excesses" in implementing this program and restored a large amount of the land to the original owners.: 99–100  The south, meanwhile, constituted the State of Vietnam, with Bảo Đại as Emperor and Ngô Đình Diệm (appointed in July 1954) as his prime minister. Neither the United States government nor Ngô Đình Diệm's State of Vietnam signed anything at the 1954 Geneva Conference. With respect to the question of reunification, the non-communist Vietnamese delegation objected strenuously to any division of Vietnam, but lost out when the French accepted the proposal of Viet Minh delegate Phạm Văn Đồng,: 134  who proposed that Vietnam eventually be united by elections under the supervision of "local commissions".: 119  The United States countered with what became known as the "American Plan", with the support of South Vietnam and the United Kingdom.: 140  It provided for unification elections under the supervision of the United Nations, but was rejected by the Soviet delegation.: 140  The United States said, "With respect to the statement made by the representative of the State of Vietnam, the United States reiterates its traditional position that peoples are entitled to determine their own future and that it will not join in any arrangement which would hinder this".: 570–571  U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower wrote in 1954: I have never talked or corresponded with a person knowledgeable in Indochinese affairs who did not agree that had elections been held as of the time of the fighting, possibly eighty percent of the population would have voted for the Communist Ho Chi Minh as their leader rather than Chief of State Bảo Đại. Indeed, the lack of leadership and drive on the part of Bảo Đại was a factor in the feeling prevalent among Vietnamese that they had nothing to fight for. According to the Pentagon Papers, which commented on Eisenhower's observation, Diệm would have been a more popular candidate than Bảo Đại against Hồ, stating that "It is almost certain that by 1956 the proportion which might have voted for Ho - in a free election against Diem - would have been much smaller than eighty percent." In 1957, independent observers from India, Poland, and Canada representing the International Control Commission (ICC) stated that fair, unbiased elections were not possible, with the ICC reporting that neither South nor North Vietnam had honored the armistice agreement. From April to June 1955, Diệm eliminated any political opposition in the south by launching military operations against two religious groups: the Cao Đài and Hòa Hảo of Ba Cụt. The campaign also focused on the Bình Xuyên organized crime group, which was allied with members of the communist party secret police and had some military elements. The group was ultimately defeated in April following a battle in Saigon. As broad-based opposition to his harsh tactics mounted, Diệm increasingly sought to blame the communists. In a referendum on the future of the State of Vietnam on 23 October 1955, Diệm rigged the poll supervised by his brother Ngô Đình Nhu and was credited with 98.2 percent of the vote, including 133% in Saigon. His American advisors had recommended a more "modest" winning margin of "60 to 70 percent." Diệm, however, viewed the election as a test of authority.: 224  Three days later, he declared South Vietnam to be an independent state under the name Republic of Vietnam (ROV), with himself as president. Likewise, Ho Chi Minh and other communist officials always won at least 99% of the vote in North Vietnamese "elections".: 193–194, 202–203, 215–217  The domino theory, which argued that if one country fell to communism, then all of the surrounding countries would follow, was first proposed as policy by the Eisenhower administration.: 19  John F. Kennedy, then a U.S. senator, said in a speech to the American Friends of Vietnam: "Burma, Thailand, India, Japan, the Philippines and obviously Laos and Cambodia are among those whose security would be threatened if the Red Tide of Communism overflowed into Vietnam." A devout Roman Catholic, Diệm was fervently anti-communist, nationalist, and socially conservative. Historian Luu Doan Huynh notes that "Diệm represented narrow and extremist nationalism coupled with autocracy and nepotism.": 200–201  Most Vietnamese people were Buddhist, and they were alarmed by Diệm's actions, like his dedication of the country to the Virgin Mary. Beginning in the summer of 1955, Diệm launched the "Denounce the Communists" campaign, during which suspected communists and other anti-government elements were arrested, imprisoned, tortured, or executed. He instituted the death penalty against any activity deemed communist in August 1956. The North Vietnamese government claimed that, by November 1957, over 65,000 individuals were imprisoned and 2,148 were killed in the process. According to Gabriel Kolko, 40,000 political prisoners had been jailed by the end of 1958.: 89  In October 1956, Diệm launched a land reform program limiting the size of rice farms per owner. More than 1.8m acres of farm land became available for purchase by landless people. By 1960, the land reform process had stalled because many of Diem's biggest supporters were large land owners.: 14–16  In May 1957, Diệm undertook a ten-day state visit to the United States. President Eisenhower pledged his continued support, and a parade was held in Diệm's honor in New York City. Although Diệm was publicly praised, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles privately conceded that Diệm had to be backed because they could find no better alternative.: 230  Between 1954 and 1957, the Diệm government succeeded in preventing large-scale organized unrest in the countryside. In April 1957, insurgents launched an assassination campaign, referred to as "extermination of traitors". Seventeen people were killed in an attack at a bar in Châu Đốc in July, and in September a district chief was killed with his family on a highway. By early 1959, however, Diệm had come to regard the (increasingly frequent) violence as an organized campaign and implemented Law 10/59, which made political violence punishable by death and property confiscation. There had been some division among former Viet Minh whose main goal was to hold the elections promised in the Geneva Accords, leading to "wildcat" activities separate from the other communists and anti-GVN activists. Douglas Pike estimated that insurgents carried out 2,000 abductions, and 1,700 assassinations of government officials, village chiefs, hospital workers and teachers from 1957 to 1960.: 106  Violence between the insurgents and government forces increased drastically from 180 clashes in January 1960 to 545 clashes in September. In September 1960, COSVN, North Vietnam's southern headquarters, gave an order for a full scale coordinated uprising in South Vietnam against the government and 1/3 of the population was soon living in areas of communist control.: 106–107  In December 1960, North Vietnam formally created the Viet Cong with the intent of uniting all anti-GVN insurgents, including non-communists. It was formed in Memot, Cambodia, and directed through COSVN.: 55–58  According to the Pentagon Papers, the Viet Cong "placed heavy emphasis on the withdrawal of American advisors and influence, on land reform and liberalization of the GVN, on coalition government and the neutralization of Vietnam." The identities of the leaders of the organization often were kept secret. Support for the VC was driven by resentment of Diem's reversal of Viet Minh land reforms in the countryside. The Viet Minh had confiscated large private landholdings, reduced rents and debts, and leased communal lands, mostly to poorer peasants. Diem brought the landlords back to the villages. People who had been farming land for years had to return it to landlords and pay years of back rent. Marilyn B. Young wrote that "The divisions within villages reproduced those that had existed against the French: 75 percent support for the NLF, 20 percent trying to remain neutral and 5 percent firmly pro-government".: 73  In March 1956, southern communist leader Lê Duẩn presented a plan to revive the insurgency entitled "The Road to the South" to the other members of the Politburo in Hanoi; however, as both China and the Soviets opposed confrontation at this time, Lê Duẩn's plan was rejected.: 58  Despite this, the North Vietnamese leadership approved tentative measures to revive the southern insurgency in December 1956. This decision was made at the 11th Plenary Session of the Lao Dong Central Committee. Communist forces were under a single command structure set up in 1958. In May 1958, North Vietnamese forces seized the transportation hub at Tchepone in Southern Laos near the demilitarized zone between North and South Vietnam.: 24  The North Vietnamese Communist Party approved a "people's war" on the South at a session in January 1959,: 119–120  and, in May, Group 559 was established to maintain and upgrade the Ho Chi Minh trail, at this time a six-month mountain trek through Laos. On 28 July, North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao forces invaded Laos, fighting the Royal Lao Army all along the border. Group 559 was headquartered in Na Kai, Houaphan province in northeast Laos close to the border.: 26  About 500 of the "regroupees" of 1954 were sent south on the trail during its first year of operation. The first arms delivery via the trail was completed in August 1959. In April 1960, North Vietnam imposed universal military conscription for adult males. About 40,000 communist soldiers infiltrated the south from 1961 to 1963.: 76  In the 1960 U.S. presidential election, Senator John F. Kennedy defeated incumbent Vice President Richard M. Nixon. Although Eisenhower warned Kennedy about Laos and Vietnam, Europe and Latin America "loomed larger than Asia on his sights.": 264  In April 1961, Kennedy approved the Bay of Pigs Invasion, which ended in failure. In June 1961, he bitterly disagreed with Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev when they met in Vienna to discuss key U.S.–Soviet issues. Only 16 months later, the Cuban Missile Crisis (16–28 October 1962) played out on television worldwide. It was the closest the Cold War came to escalating into a full-scale nuclear war, and the U.S. raised the readiness level of Strategic Air Command (SAC) forces to DEFCON 2. The Kennedy administration remained essentially committed to the Cold War foreign policy inherited from the Truman and Eisenhower administrations. In 1961, the U.S. had 50,000 troops based in South Korea, and Kennedy faced four crisis situations: the failure of the Bay of Pigs Invasion that he had approved on 4 April, settlement negotiations between the pro-Western government of Laos and the Pathet Lao communist movement in May ("Kennedy sidestepped Laos, whose rugged terrain was no battleground for American soldiers."),: 265  the construction of the Berlin Wall in August, and the Cuban Missile Crisis in October. Kennedy believed that yet another failure to gain control and stop communist expansion would irreparably damage U.S. credibility. He was determined to "draw a line in the sand" and prevent a communist victory in Vietnam. He told James Reston of The New York Times immediately after his Vienna summit meeting with Khrushchev, "Now we have a problem making our power credible and Vietnam looks like the place." Kennedy's policy toward South Vietnam assumed that Diệm and his forces had to ultimately defeat the guerrillas on their own. He was against the deployment of American combat troops and observed that "to introduce U.S. forces in large numbers there today, while it might have an initially favorable military impact, would almost certainly lead to adverse political and, in the long run, adverse military consequences." The quality of the South Vietnamese military, however, remained poor. Poor leadership, corruption, and political promotions all played a part in weakening the ARVN. The frequency of guerrilla attacks rose as the insurgency gathered steam. While Hanoi's support for the Viet Cong played a role, South Vietnamese governmental incompetence was at the core of the crisis.: 369  One major issue Kennedy raised was whether the Soviet space and missile programs had surpassed those of the United States. Although Kennedy stressed long-range missile parity with the Soviets, he was also interested in using special forces for counterinsurgency warfare in Third World countries threatened by communist insurgencies. Although they were originally intended for use behind front lines after a conventional Soviet invasion of Europe, Kennedy believed that the guerrilla tactics employed by special forces, such as the Green Berets would be effective in a "brush fire" war in Vietnam. Kennedy advisors Maxwell Taylor and Walt Rostow recommended that U.S. troops be sent to South Vietnam disguised as flood relief workers. Kennedy rejected the idea but increased military assistance yet again. In April 1962, John Kenneth Galbraith warned Kennedy of the "danger we shall replace the French as a colonial force in the area and bleed as the French did." Eisenhower put 900 advisors in Vietnam, and by November 1963, Kennedy had put 16,000 American military personnel in Vietnam.: 131  The Strategic Hamlet Program was initiated in late 1961. This joint U.S.–South Vietnamese program attempted to resettle the rural population into fortified villages. It was implemented in early 1962 and involved some forced relocation and segregation of rural South Vietnamese into new communities where the peasantry would be isolated from the Viet Cong. It was hoped these new communities would provide security for the peasants and strengthen the tie between them and the central government. However, by November 1963 the program had waned, and it officially ended in 1964.: 1070  On 23 July 1962, fourteen nations, including China, South Vietnam, the Soviet Union, North Vietnam, and the United States, signed an agreement promising to respect the neutrality of Laos. The inept performance of the ARVN was exemplified by failed actions such as the Battle of Ấp Bắc on 2 January 1963, in which a small band of Viet Cong won a battle against a much larger and better-equipped South Vietnamese force, many of whose officers seemed reluctant even to engage in combat.: 201–206  During the battle the South Vietnamese had lost 83 soldiers and 5 US war helicopters serving to ferry ARVN troops that had been shot down by Vietcong forces, while the Vietcong forces had lost only 18 soldiers. The ARVN forces were led by Diệm's most trusted general, Huỳnh Văn Cao, commander of the IV Corps. Cao was a Catholic who had been promoted due to religion and fidelity rather than skill, and his main job was to preserve his forces to stave off coup attempts; he had earlier vomited during a communist attack. Some policymakers in Washington began to conclude that Diệm was incapable of defeating the communists and might even make a deal with Ho Chi Minh. He seemed concerned only with fending off coups and had become more paranoid after attempts in 1960 and 1962, which he partly attributed to U.S. encouragement. As Robert F. Kennedy noted, "Diệm wouldn't make even the slightest concessions. He was difficult to reason with ..." Historian James Gibson summed up the situation: Strategic hamlets had failed ... The South Vietnamese regime was incapable of winning the peasantry because of its class base among landlords. Indeed, there was no longer a 'regime' in the sense of a relatively stable political alliance and functioning bureaucracy. Instead, civil government and military operations had virtually ceased. The National Liberation Front had made great progress and was close to declaring provisional revolutionary governments in large areas. Discontent with Diệm's policies exploded in May 1963, following the Huế Phật Đản shootings of nine unarmed Buddhists protesting against the ban on displaying the Buddhist flag on Vesak, the Buddha's birthday. This resulted in mass protests against discriminatory policies that gave privileges to the Catholic Church and its adherents over the Buddhist majority. Diệm's elder brother Ngô Đình Thục was the Archbishop of Huế and aggressively blurred the separation between church and state. Thuc's anniversary celebrations occurred shortly before Vesak had been bankrolled by the government, and Vatican flags were displayed prominently. There had also been reports of Catholic paramilitaries demolishing Buddhist pagodas throughout Diệm's rule. Diệm refused to make concessions to the Buddhist majority or take responsibility for the deaths. On 21 August 1963, the ARVN Special Forces of Colonel Lê Quang Tung, loyal to Diệm's younger brother Ngô Đình Nhu, raided pagodas across Vietnam, causing widespread damage and destruction and leaving a death toll estimated to range into the hundreds. U.S. officials began discussing the possibility of a regime change during the middle of 1963. The United States Department of State wanted to encourage a coup, while the Defense Department favored Diệm. Chief among the proposed changes was the removal of Diệm's younger brother Nhu, who controlled the secret police and special forces, and was seen as the man behind the Buddhist repression and more generally the architect of the Ngô family's rule. This proposal was conveyed to the U.S. embassy in Saigon in Cable 243. The CIA contacted generals planning to remove Diệm and told them that the United States would not oppose such a move nor punish the generals by cutting off aid. President Diệm was overthrown and executed, along with his brother, on 2 November 1963. When Kennedy was informed, Maxwell Taylor remembered that he "rushed from the room with a look of shock and dismay on his face.": 326  Kennedy had not anticipated Diệm's murder. The U.S. ambassador to South Vietnam, Henry Cabot Lodge, invited the coup leaders to the embassy and congratulated them. Ambassador Lodge informed Kennedy that "the prospects now are for a shorter war".: 327  Kennedy wrote Lodge a letter congratulating him for "a fine job". Following the coup, chaos ensued. Hanoi took advantage of the situation and increased its support for the guerrillas. South Vietnam entered a period of extreme political instability, as one military government toppled another in quick succession. Increasingly, each new regime was viewed by the communists as a puppet of the Americans; whatever the failings of Diệm, his credentials as a nationalist (as Robert McNamara later reflected) had been impeccable.: 328  U.S. military advisors were embedded at every level of the South Vietnamese armed forces. They were however criticized for ignoring the political nature of the insurgency. The Kennedy administration sought to refocus U.S. efforts on pacification – which in this case was defined as countering the growing threat of insurgency – and "winning over the hearts and minds" of the population. The military leadership in Washington, however, was hostile to any role for U.S. advisors other than conventional troop training. General Paul Harkins, the commander of U.S. forces in South Vietnam, confidently predicted victory by Christmas 1963.: 103  The CIA was less optimistic, however, warning that "the Viet Cong by and large retain de facto control of much of the countryside and have steadily increased the overall intensity of the effort". Paramilitary officers from the CIA's Special Activities Division trained and led Hmong tribesmen in Laos and into Vietnam. The indigenous forces numbered in the tens of thousands and they conducted direct action missions, led by paramilitary officers, against the Communist Pathet Lao forces and their North Vietnamese supporters. The CIA also ran the Phoenix Program and participated in Military Assistance Command, Vietnam – Studies and Observations Group (MAC-V SOG), which was originally named the Special Operations Group, but was changed for cover purposes. President Kennedy was assassinated on 22 November 1963. Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson had not been heavily involved with policy toward Vietnam; however, upon becoming president, Johnson immediately focused on the war. On 24 November 1963, he said, "the battle against communism … must be joined … with strength and determination." Johnson knew he had inherited a rapidly deteriorating situation in South Vietnam, but he adhered to the widely accepted domino theory argument for defending the South: Should they retreat or appease, either action would imperil other nations beyond the conflict. Findings from RAND's Viet Cong Motivation and Morale Project bolstered his confidence that an air war would weaken the Viet Cong. Some have argued that the policy of North Vietnam was not to topple other non-communist governments in South East Asia.: 48  The military revolutionary council, meeting in lieu of a strong South Vietnamese leader, was made up of 12 members. This council was headed by General Dương Văn Minh, whom Stanley Karnow, a journalist on the ground, later recalled as "a model of lethargy".: 340  Lodge, frustrated by the end of the year, cabled home about Minh: "Will he be strong enough to get on top of things?" Minh's regime was overthrown in January 1964 by General Nguyễn Khánh.: 341  There was also persistent instability in the military, however, as several coups—not all successful—occurred in a short period of time. On 2 August 1964, USS Maddox, on an intelligence mission along North Vietnam's coast, allegedly fired upon and damaged several torpedo boats that had been stalking it in the Gulf of Tonkin.: 124  A second attack was reported two days later on USS Turner Joy and Maddox in the same area. The circumstances of the attacks were murky.: 218–219  Lyndon Johnson commented to Undersecretary of State George Ball that "those sailors out there may have been shooting at flying fish." An undated NSA publication declassified in 2005 revealed that there was no attack on 4 August. The second "attack" led to retaliatory airstrikes, and prompted Congress to approve the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution on 7 August 1964.: 78  The resolution granted the president power "to take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the United States and to prevent further aggression" and Johnson would rely on this as giving him authority to expand the war.: 221  In the same month, Johnson pledged that he was not "committing American boys to fighting a war that I think ought to be fought by the boys of Asia to help protect their own land".: 227  The National Security Council recommended a three-stage escalation of the bombing of North Vietnam. Following an attack on a U.S. Army base in Pleiku on 7 February 1965, a series of airstrikes was initiated, Operation Flaming Dart, while Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin was on a state visit to North Vietnam. Operation Rolling Thunder and Operation Arc Light expanded aerial bombardment and ground support operations. The bombing campaign, which ultimately lasted three years, was intended to force North Vietnam to cease its support for the Viet Cong by threatening to destroy North Vietnamese air defenses and industrial infrastructure. It was additionally aimed at bolstering the morale of the South Vietnamese. Between March 1965 and November 1968, Rolling Thunder deluged the north with a million tons of missiles, rockets and bombs.: 468  Bombing was not restricted to North Vietnam. Other aerial campaigns, such as Operation Barrel Roll, targeted different parts of the Viet Cong and PAVN infrastructure. These included the Ho Chi Minh trail supply route, which ran through Laos and Cambodia. The ostensibly neutral Laos had become the scene of a civil war, pitting the Laotian government backed by the US against the Pathet Lao and its North Vietnamese allies. Massive aerial bombardment against the Pathet Lao and PAVN forces were carried out by the US to prevent the collapse of the Royal central government, and to deny the use of the Ho Chi Minh Trail. Between 1964 and 1973, the U.S. dropped two million tons of bombs on Laos, nearly equal to the 2.1 million tons of bombs the U.S. dropped on Europe and Asia during all of World War II, making Laos the most heavily bombed country in history relative to the size of its population. The objective of stopping North Vietnam and the Viet Cong was never reached. The Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force Curtis LeMay, however, had long advocated saturation bombing in Vietnam and wrote of the communists that "we're going to bomb them back into the Stone Age".: 328  Following the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, Hanoi anticipated the arrival of US troops and began expanding the Viet Cong, as well as sending increasing numbers of North Vietnamese personnel southwards. At this phase they were outfitting the Viet Cong forces and standardizing their equipment with AK-47 rifles and other supplies, as well as forming the 9th Division.: 223  "From a strength of approximately 5,000 at the start of 1959 the Viet Cong's ranks grew to about 100,000 at the end of 1964 ... Between 1961 and 1964 the Army's strength rose from about 850,000 to nearly a million men." The numbers for U.S. troops deployed to Vietnam during the same period were much lower: 2,000 in 1961, rising rapidly to 16,500 in 1964. During this phase, the use of captured equipment decreased, while greater numbers of ammunition and supplies were required to maintain regular units. Group 559 was tasked with expanding the Ho Chi Minh trail, in light of the near constant bombardment by US warplanes. The war had begun to shift into the final, conventional warfare phase of Hanoi's three-stage protracted warfare model. The Viet Cong was now tasked with destroying the ARVN and capturing and holding areas; however, the Viet Cong was not yet strong enough to assault major towns and cities. In December 1964, ARVN forces had suffered heavy losses at the Battle of Bình Giã, in a battle that both sides viewed as a watershed. Previously, the VC had utilized hit-and-run guerrilla tactics. At Binh Gia, however, they had defeated a strong ARVN force in a conventional battle and remained in the field for four days.: 58  Tellingly, South Vietnamese forces were again defeated in June 1965 at the Battle of Đồng Xoài.: 94  On 8 March 1965, 3,500 U.S. Marines were landed near Da Nang, South Vietnam.: 246–247  This marked the beginning of the American ground war. U.S. public opinion overwhelmingly supported the deployment. The Marines' initial assignment was the defense of Da Nang Air Base. The first deployment of 3,500 in March 1965 was increased to nearly 200,000 by December.: 349–351  The U.S. military had long been schooled in offensive warfare. Regardless of political policies, U.S. commanders were institutionally and psychologically unsuited to a defensive mission.: 349–351  General William Westmoreland informed Admiral U. S. Grant Sharp Jr., commander of U.S. Pacific forces, that the situation was critical.: 349–351  He said, "I am convinced that U.S. troops with their energy, mobility, and firepower can successfully take the fight to the NLF (Viet Cong)". With this recommendation, Westmoreland was advocating an aggressive departure from America's defensive posture and the sidelining of the South Vietnamese. By ignoring ARVN units, the U.S. commitment became open-ended.: 353  Westmoreland outlined a three-point plan to win the war: Phase 1. Commitment of U.S. (and other allies) forces necessary to halt the losing trend by the end of 1965. Phase 2. U.S. and allied forces mount major offensive actions to seize the initiative to destroy guerrilla and organized enemy forces. This phase would end when the enemy had been worn down, thrown on the defensive, and driven back from major populated areas. Phase 3. If the enemy persisted, a period of twelve to eighteen months following Phase 2 would be required for the final destruction of enemy forces remaining in remote base areas. The plan was approved by Johnson and marked a profound departure from the previous administration's insistence that the government of South Vietnam was responsible for defeating the guerrillas. Westmoreland predicted victory by the end of 1967. Johnson did not, however, communicate this change in strategy to the media. Instead he emphasized continuity. The change in U.S. policy depended on matching the North Vietnamese and the Viet Cong in a contest of attrition and morale. The opponents were locked in a cycle of escalation.: 353–354  The idea that the government of South Vietnam could manage its own affairs was shelved.: 353–354  Westmoreland and McNamara furthermore touted the body count system for gauging victory, a metric that would later prove to be flawed. The American buildup transformed the South Vietnamese economy and had a profound effect on society. South Vietnam was inundated with manufactured goods. Stanley Karnow noted that "the main PX [Post Exchange], located in the Saigon suburb of Cholon, was only slightly smaller than the New York Bloomingdale's ...": 453  Washington encouraged its SEATO allies to contribute troops. Australia, New Zealand, Thailand, and the Philippines: 556  all agreed to send troops. South Korea would later ask to join the Many Flags program in return for economic compensation. Major allies, however, notably the NATO countries of Canada and the United Kingdom, declined Washington's troop requests. The U.S. and its allies mounted complex search and destroy operations, designed to find enemy forces, destroy them, and then withdraw, typically using war helicopters. In November 1965, the U.S. engaged in its first major battle with the PAVN, the Battle of Ia Drang. The operation was the first large scale helicopter air assault by the U.S., and first to employ Boeing B-52 Stratofortress strategic bombers in a tactical support role.: 284–285  These tactics continued in 1966–1967 with operations such as Masher, Thayer, Attleboro, Cedar Falls, and Junction City. However, the PAVN/VC insurgents remained elusive and demonstrated great tactical flexibility. By 1967, the war had generated large-scale internal refugees, numbering nearly 2.1 million in South Vietnam, with 125,000 people evacuated and rendered homeless during Operation Masher alone, which was the largest search and destroy operation in the war up to that point.[citation needed] Operation Masher would have negligible impact, however, as the PAVN/VC returned to the province just four months after the operation ended.: 153–156  Despite the continual conductance of major operations, which the Viet Cong and PAVN would typically evade, the war was characterized by smaller-unit contacts or engagements. Up to the war's end, the Viet Cong and PAVN would initiate 90% of large firefights, of which 80% were clear and well-planned operations, and thus the PAVN/Viet Cong would retain strategic initiative despite overwhelming US force and fire-power deployment. The PAVN and Viet Cong had furthermore developed strategies capable of countering U.S. military doctrines and tactics (see NLF and PAVN battle tactics). Meanwhile, the political situation in South Vietnam began to stabilize with the coming to power of prime minister Air Marshal Nguyễn Cao Kỳ and figurehead chief of state, General Nguyễn Văn Thiệu, in mid-1965 at the head of a military junta. This ended a series of coups that had happened more than once a year. In 1967, Thieu became president with Ky as his deputy, after rigged elections. Although they were nominally a civilian government, Ky was supposed to maintain real power through a behind-the-scenes military body. However, Thieu outmanoeuvred and sidelined Ky by filling the ranks with generals from his faction. Thieu was also accused of murdering Ky loyalists through contrived military accidents. Thieu, mistrustful and indecisive, remained president until 1975, having won a one-candidate election in 1971.: 706  The Johnson administration employed a "policy of minimum candor": 18  in its dealings with the media. Military information officers sought to manage media coverage by emphasizing stories that portrayed progress in the war. Over time, this policy damaged the public trust in official pronouncements. As the media's coverage of the war and that of the Pentagon diverged, a so-called credibility gap developed.: 18  Despite Johnson and Westmoreland publicly proclaiming victory and Westmoreland stating that the "end is coming into view", internal reports in the Pentagon Papers indicate that Viet Cong forces retained strategic initiative and controlled their losses. Viet Cong attacks against static US positions accounted for 30% of all engagements, Viet Cong/PAVN ambushes and encirclements for 23%, American ambushes against Viet Cong/PAVN forces for 9%, and American forces attacking Viet Cong emplacements for only 5% of all engagements. In late 1967, the PAVN lured American forces into the hinterlands at Đắk Tô and at the Marine Khe Sanh combat base in Quảng Trị Province, where the U.S. fought a series of battles known as The Hill Fights. These actions were part of a diversionary strategy meant to draw U.S. forces towards the Central Highlands. Preparations were underway for the General Offensive, General Uprising, known as Tet Mau Than, or the Tet Offensive, with the intention of Văn Tiến Dũng for forces to launch "direct attacks on the American and puppet nerve centers—Saigon, Huế, Danang, all the cities, towns and main bases ..." Le Duan sought to placate critics of the ongoing stalemate by planning a decisive victory.: 90–94  He reasoned that this could be achieved through sparking a general uprising within the towns and cities,: 148  along with mass defections among ARVN units, who were on holiday leave during the truce period. The Tet Offensive began on 30 January 1968, as over 100 cities were attacked by over 85,000 VC/PAVN troops, including assaults on key military installations, headquarters, and government buildings and offices, including the U.S. Embassy in Saigon.: 363–365  U.S. and South Vietnamese forces were initially shocked by the scale, intensity and deliberative planning of the urban offensive, as infiltration of personnel and weapons into the cities was accomplished covertly; the offensive constituted an intelligence failure on the scale of Pearl Harbor.: 556  Most cities were recaptured within weeks, except the former imperial capital of Huế in which PAVN/Viet Cong troops captured most of the city and citadel except the headquarters of the 1st Division and held on in the fighting for 26 days.: 495  During that time, they had executed approximately 2,800 unarmed Huế civilians and foreigners they considered to be enemy's spies.: 495  In the following Battle of Huế American forces employed massive firepower that left 80 percent of the city in ruins.: 308–309  Further north, at Quảng Trị City, the ARVN Airborne Division, the 1st Division and a regiment of the US 1st Cavalry Division had managed to hold out and overcome an assault intended to capture the city.: 104  In Saigon, Viet Cong/PAVN fighters had captured areas in and around the city, attacking key installations and the neighborhood of Cholon before US and ARVN forces dislodged them after three weeks.: 479  During one battle, Peter Arnett reported an infantry commander saying of the Battle of Bến Tre (laid to rubble by U.S. attacks) that "it became necessary to destroy the village in order to save it." During the first month of the offensive, 1,100 Americans and other allied troops, 2,100 ARVN and 14,000 civilians were killed. By the end of the first offensive, after two months, nearly 5,000 ARVN and over 4,000 U.S. forces had been killed and 45,820 wounded. The U.S. claimed 17,000 of the PAVN and Viet Cong had been killed and 15,000 wounded.: 104 : 82  A month later a second offensive known as the May Offensive was launched; although less widespread, it demonstrated the Viet Cong were still capable of carrying out orchestrated nationwide offensives.: 488–489  Two months later a third offensive was launched, the Phase III Offensive. The PAVN's own official records of their losses across all three offensives was 45,267 killed and 111,179 total casualties. By then it had become the bloodiest year of the war up to that point. The failure to spark a general uprising and the lack of defections among the ARVN units meant both war goals of Hanoi had fallen flat at enormous costs.: 148–149  By the end of 1968, the VC insurgents held almost no territory in South Vietnam, and their recruitment dropped by over 80%, signifying a drastic reduction in guerrilla operations, necessitating increased use of PAVN regular soldiers from the north. Prior to Tet, in November 1967, Westmoreland had spearheaded a public relations drive for the Johnson administration to bolster flagging public support. In a speech before the National Press Club he said a point in the war had been reached "where the end comes into view." Thus, the public was shocked and confused when Westmoreland's predictions were trumped by the Tet Offensive. Public approval of his overall performance dropped from 48 percent to 36 percent, and endorsement for the war effort fell from 40 percent to 26 percent.": 546  The American public and media began to turn against Johnson as the three offensives contradicted claims of progress made by the Johnson administration and the military. At one point in 1968, Westmoreland considered the use of nuclear weapons in Vietnam in a contingency plan codenamed Fracture Jaw, which was abandoned when it became known to the White House. Westmoreland requested 200,000 additional troops, which was leaked to the media, and the subsequent fallout combined with intelligence failures caused him to be removed from command in March 1968, succeeded by his deputy Creighton Abrams. On 10 May 1968, peace talks began between the United States and North Vietnam in Paris. Negotiations stagnated for five months, until Johnson gave orders to halt the bombing of North Vietnam. At the same time, Hanoi realized it could not achieve a "total victory" and employed a strategy known as "talking while fighting, fighting while talking", in which military offensives would occur concurrently with negotiations. Johnson declined to run for re-election as his approval rating slumped from 48 to 36 percent.: 486  His escalation of the war in Vietnam divided Americans into warring camps, cost 30,000 American lives by that point and was regarded to have destroyed his presidency.: 486  Refusal to send more U.S. troops to Vietnam was also seen as Johnson's admission that the war was lost. As Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara noted, "the dangerous illusion of victory by the United States was therefore dead.": 367  Vietnam was a major political issue during the United States presidential election in 1968. The election was won by Republican party candidate Richard Nixon who claimed to have a secret plan to end the war.: 515  U.S. president Richard Nixon began troop withdrawals in 1969. His plan to build up the ARVN so that it could take over the defense of South Vietnam became known as "Vietnamization". As the PAVN/VC recovered from their 1968 losses and generally avoided contact, Creighton Abrams conducted operations aimed at disrupting logistics, with better use of firepower and more cooperation with the ARVN.: 517  On 27 October 1969, Nixon had ordered a squadron of 18 B-52s loaded with nuclear weapons to race to the border of Soviet airspace to convince the Soviet Union, in accord with the madman theory, that he was capable of anything to end the Vietnam War. Nixon had also sought détente with the Soviet Union and rapprochement with China, which decreased global tensions and led to nuclear arms reduction by both superpowers; however, the Soviets continued to supply the North Vietnamese with aid. In September 1969, Ho Chi Minh died at age 79. The failure of the 1968 Tet Offensive in sparking a popular uprising in the south caused a shift in Hanoi's war strategy, and the Giáp-Chinh "Northern-First" faction regained control over military affairs from the Lê Duẩn-Hoàng Văn Thái "Southern-First" faction.: 272–274  An unconventional victory was sidelined in favor of a strategy built on conventional victory through conquest.: 196–205  Large-scale offensives were rolled back in favor of small-unit and sapper attacks as well as targeting the pacification and Vietnamization strategy. In the two-year period following Tet, the PAVN had begun its transformation from a fine light-infantry, limited mobility force into a high-mobile and mechanized combined arms force.: 189  By 1970, over 70% of communist troops in the south were northerners, and southern-dominated VC units no longer existed. The anti-war movement was gaining strength in the United States. Nixon appealed to the "silent majority" of Americans who he said supported the war without showing it in public. But revelations of the 1968 My Lai Massacre,: 518–521  in which a U.S. Army unit raped and killed civilians, and the 1969 "Green Beret Affair", where eight Special Forces soldiers, including the 5th Special Forces Group Commander, were arrested for the murder of a suspected double agent, provoked national and international outrage. In 1971, the Pentagon Papers were leaked to The New York Times. The top-secret history of U.S. involvement in Vietnam, commissioned by the Department of Defense, detailed a long series of public deceptions on the part of the U.S. government. The Supreme Court ruled that its publication was legal. Following the Tet Offensive and the decreasing support among the U.S. public for the war, U.S. forces began a period of morale collapse, disillusionment and disobedience.: 349–350 : 166–175  At home, desertion rates quadrupled from 1966 levels. Among the enlisted, only 2.5% chose infantry combat positions in 1969–1970. ROTC enrollment decreased from 191,749 in 1966 to 72,459 by 1971, and reached an all-time low of 33,220 in 1974, depriving U.S. forces of much-needed military leadership. Open refusal to engage in patrols or carry out orders and disobedience began to emerge during this period, with one notable case of an entire company refusing orders to engage or carry out operations. Unit cohesion began to dissipate and focused on minimizing contact with Viet Cong and PAVN. A practice known as "sand-bagging" started occurring, where units ordered to go on patrol would go into the country-side, find a site out of view from superiors and rest while radioing in false coordinates and unit reports.: 407–411  Drug usage increased rapidly among U.S. forces during this period, as 30% of U.S. troops regularly used marijuana,: 407  while a House subcommittee found 10–15% of U.S. troops in Vietnam regularly used high-grade heroin.: 526  From 1969 on, search-and-destroy operations became referred to as "search and evade" or "search and avoid" operations, falsifying battle reports while avoiding guerrilla fighters. A total of 900 fragging and suspected fragging incidents were investigated, most occurring between 1969 and 1971.: 331 : 407  In 1969, field-performance of the U.S. Forces was characterized by lowered morale, lack of motivation, and poor leadership.: 331  The significant decline in U.S. morale was demonstrated by the Battle of FSB Mary Ann in March 1971, in which a sapper attack inflicted serious losses on the U.S. defenders.: 357  William Westmoreland, no longer in command but tasked with investigation of the failure, cited a clear dereliction of duty, lax defensive postures and lack of officers in charge as its cause.: 357  On the collapse of U.S. morale, historian Shelby Stanton wrote: In the last years of the Army's retreat, its remaining forces were relegated to static security. The American Army's decline was readily apparent in this final stage. Racial incidents, drug abuse, combat disobedience, and crime reflected growing idleness, resentment, and frustration ... the fatal handicaps of faulty campaign strategy, incomplete wartime preparation, and the tardy, superficial attempts at Vietnamization. An entire American army was sacrificed on the battlefield of Vietnam.: 366–368  Beginning in 1970, American troops were withdrawn from border areas where most of the fighting took place and instead redeployed along the coast and interior. US casualties in 1970 were less than half of 1969 casualties after being relegated to less active combat. While U.S. forces were redeployed, the ARVN took over combat operations throughout the country, with casualties double US casualties in 1969, and more than triple US ones in 1970. In the post-Tet environment, membership in the South Vietnamese Regional Force and Popular Force militias grew, and they were now more capable of providing village security, which the Americans had not accomplished under Westmoreland. In 1970, Nixon announced the withdrawal of an additional 150,000 American troops, reducing the number of Americans to 265,500. By 1970, Viet Cong forces were no longer southern-majority, as nearly 70% of units were northerners. Between 1969 and 1971 the Viet Cong and some PAVN units had reverted to small unit tactics typical of 1967 and prior instead of nationwide grand offensives. In 1971, Australia and New Zealand withdrew their soldiers and U.S. troop count was further reduced to 196,700, with a deadline to remove another 45,000 troops by February 1972. The United States also reduced support troops, and in March 1971 the 5th Special Forces Group, the first American unit deployed to South Vietnam, withdrew to Fort Bragg, North Carolina.: 240  Prince Norodom Sihanouk had proclaimed Cambodia neutral since 1955, but permitted the PAVN/Viet Cong to use the port of Sihanoukville and the Sihanouk Trail. In March 1969 Nixon launched a massive secret bombing campaign, called Operation Menu, against communist sanctuaries along the Cambodia/Vietnam border. Only five high-ranking congressional officials were informed of Operation Menu. In March 1970, Prince Sihanouk was deposed by his pro-American prime minister Lon Nol, who demanded that North Vietnamese troops leave Cambodia or face military action. Lon Nol began rounding up Vietnamese civilians in Cambodia into internment camps and massacring them, provoking harsh reactions from both the North Vietnamese and South Vietnamese governments. In April–May 1970, North Vietnam invaded Cambodia at the request of the Khmer Rouge following negotiations with deputy leader Nuon Chea. Nguyen Co Thach recalls: "Nuon Chea has asked for help and we have liberated five provinces of Cambodia in ten days." U.S. and ARVN forces launched the Cambodian Campaign in May to attack PAVN and Viet Cong bases. A counter-offensive in 1971 as part of Operation Chenla II by the PAVN would recapture most of the border areas and decimate most of Lon Nol's forces. The U.S. incursion into Cambodia sparked nationwide U.S. protests as Nixon had promised to deescalate the American involvement. Four students were killed by National Guardsmen in May 1970 during a protest at Kent State University in Ohio, which provoked further public outrage in the United States. The reaction to the incident by the Nixon administration was seen as callous and indifferent, reinvigorating the declining anti-war movement.: 128–129  The U.S. Air Force continued to heavily bomb Cambodia in support of the Cambodian government as part of Operation Freedom Deal. Building up on the success of ARVN units in Cambodia, and further testing the Vietnamization program, the ARVN were tasked to launch Operation Lam Son 719 in February 1971, the first major ground operation aimed directly at attacking the Ho Chi Minh trail by attacking the major crossroad of Tchepone. This offensive would also be the first time the PAVN would field-test its combined arms force. The first few days were considered a success but the momentum had slowed after fierce resistance. Thiệu had halted the general advance, leaving armored divisions able to surround them. Thieu had ordered air assault troops to capture Tchepone and withdraw, despite facing four-times larger numbers. During the withdrawal the PAVN counterattack had forced a panicked rout. Half of the ARVN troops involved were either captured or killed, half of the ARVN/US support helicopters were downed by anti-aircraft fire and the operation was considered a fiasco, demonstrating operational deficiencies still present within the ARVN.: 644–645  Nixon and Thieu had sought to use this event to show-case victory simply by capturing Tchepone, and it was spun off as an "operational success".: 576–582  Vietnamization was again tested by the Easter Offensive of 1972, a massive conventional PAVN invasion of South Vietnam. The PAVN quickly overran the northern provinces and in coordination with other forces attacked from Cambodia, threatening to cut the country in half. U.S. troop withdrawals continued, but American airpower responded, beginning Operation Linebacker, and the offensive was halted.: 606–637  The war was central to the 1972 U.S. presidential election as Nixon's opponent, George McGovern, campaigned on immediate withdrawal. Nixon's National Security Advisor, Henry Kissinger, had continued secret negotiations with North Vietnam's Lê Đức Thọ and in October 1972 reached an agreement. President Thieu demanded changes to the peace accord upon its discovery, and when North Vietnam went public with the agreement's details, the Nixon administration claimed they were attempting to embarrass the president. The negotiations became deadlocked when Hanoi demanded new changes. To show his support for South Vietnam and force Hanoi back to the negotiating table, Nixon ordered Operation Linebacker II, a massive bombing of Hanoi and Haiphong 18–29 December 1972.: 649–663  Nixon pressured Thieu to accept the terms of the agreement or else face retaliatory military action from the U.S. On 15 January 1973, all U.S. combat activities were suspended. Lê Đức Thọ and Henry Kissinger, along with the PRG Foreign Minister Nguyễn Thị Bình and a reluctant President Thiệu, signed the Paris Peace Accords on 27 January 1973.: 508–513  This officially ended direct U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War, created a ceasefire between North Vietnam/PRG and South Vietnam, guaranteed the territorial integrity of Vietnam under the Geneva Conference of 1954, called for elections or a political settlement between the PRG and South Vietnam, allowed 200,000 communist troops to remain in the south, and agreed to a POW exchange. There was a sixty-day period for the total withdrawal of U.S. forces. "This article", noted Peter Church, "proved ... to be the only one of the Paris Agreements which was fully carried out." All U.S. forces personnel were completely withdrawn by March 1973.: 260  In the lead-up to the ceasefire on 28 January, both sides attempted to maximize the land and population under their control in a campaign known as the War of the flags. Fighting continued after the ceasefire, this time without US participation, and continued throughout the year.: 508–513  North Vietnam was allowed to continue supplying troops in the South but only to the extent of replacing expended material. Later that year the Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to Kissinger and Thọ, but the North Vietnamese negotiator declined it saying that true peace did not yet exist. On 15 March 1973, Nixon implied the US would intervene again militarily if the North launched a full offensive, and Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger re-affirmed this position during his June 1973 confirmation hearings. Public and congressional reaction to Nixon's statement was unfavorable, prompting the U.S. Senate to pass the Case–Church Amendment to prohibit any intervention.: 670–672  PAVN/VC leaders expected the ceasefire terms would favor their side, but Saigon, bolstered by a surge of U.S. aid received just before the ceasefire went into effect, began to roll back the Viet Cong. The PAVN/VC responded with a new strategy hammered out in a series of meetings in Hanoi in March 1973, according to the memoirs of Trần Văn Trà.: 672–674  With U.S. bombings suspended, work on the Ho Chi Minh trail and other logistical structures could proceed unimpeded. Logistics would be upgraded until the North was in a position to launch a massive invasion of the South, projected for the 1975–1976 dry season. Tra calculated that this date would be Hanoi's last opportunity to strike before Saigon's army could be fully trained.: 672–674  The PAVN/VC resumed offensive operations when the dry season began in 1973, and by January 1974 had recaptured territory it lost during the previous dry season. Within South Vietnam, the departure of the US military and the global recession that followed the 1973 oil crisis hurt an economy that was partly dependent on U.S. financial support and troop presence. After two clashes that left 55 ARVN soldiers dead, President Thieu announced on 4 January 1974, that the war had restarted and that the Paris Peace Accords were no longer in effect. There were over 25,000 South Vietnamese casualties during the ceasefire period.: 683  Gerald Ford took over as U.S. president on 9 August 1974 after the resignation of President Nixon, and Congress cut financial aid to South Vietnam from $1 billion a year to $700 million. Congress also voted in further restrictions on funding to be phased in through 1975 and to culminate in a total cutoff in 1976.: 686  The success of the 1973–1974 dry season offensive inspired Trà to return to Hanoi in October 1974 and plead for a larger offensive the next dry season. This time, Trà could travel on a drivable highway with regular fueling stops, a vast change from the days when the Ho Chi Minh trail was a dangerous mountain trek.: 676  Giáp, the North Vietnamese defense minister, was reluctant to approve of Trà's plan since a larger offensive might provoke U.S. reaction and interfere with the big push planned for 1976. Trà appealed to Giáp's superior, first secretary Lê Duẩn, who approved the operation. Trà's plan called for a limited offensive from Cambodia into Phước Long Province. The strike was designed to solve local logistical problems, gauge the reaction of South Vietnamese forces, and determine whether the U.S. would return.: 685–690  On 13 December 1974, North Vietnamese forces attacked Phước Long. Phuoc Binh, the provincial capital, fell on 6 January 1975. Ford desperately asked Congress for funds to assist and re-supply the South before it was overrun. Congress refused. The fall of Phuoc Binh and the lack of an American response left the South Vietnamese elite demoralized. The speed of this success led the Politburo to reassess its strategy. It decided that operations in the Central Highlands would be turned over to General Văn Tiến Dũng and that Pleiku should be seized, if possible. Before he left for the South, Dũng was addressed by Lê Duẩn: "Never have we had military and political conditions so perfect or a strategic advantage as great as we have now." At the start of 1975, the South Vietnamese had three times as much artillery and twice the number of tanks and armored cars as the PAVN. They also had 1,400 aircraft and a two-to-one numerical superiority in combat troops over the PAVN/VC.[citation needed] However, heightened oil prices meant that many of these assets could not be adequately leveraged. Moreover, the rushed nature of Vietnamization, intended to cover the US retreat, resulted in a lack of spare parts, ground-crew, and maintenance personnel, which rendered most of the equipment inoperable.: 362–366  On 10 March 1975, General Dung launched Campaign 275, a limited offensive into the Central Highlands, supported by tanks and heavy artillery. The target was Buôn Ma Thuột, in Đắk Lắk Province. If the town could be taken, the provincial capital of Pleiku and the road to the coast would be exposed for a planned campaign in 1976. The ARVN proved incapable of resisting the onslaught, and its forces collapsed on 11 March. Once again, Hanoi was surprised by the speed of their success. Dung now urged the Politburo to allow him to seize Pleiku immediately and then turn his attention to Kon Tum. He argued that with two months of good weather remaining until the onset of the monsoon, it would be irresponsible to not take advantage of the situation. President Thiệu, a former general, was fearful that his forces would be cut off in the north by the attacking communists; Thieu ordered a retreat, which soon turned into a bloody rout. While the bulk of ARVN forces attempted to flee, isolated units fought desperately. ARVN general Phu abandoned Pleiku and Kon Tum and retreated toward the coast, in what became known as the "column of tears".: 693–694  On 20 March, Thieu reversed himself and ordered Huế, Vietnam's third-largest city, be held at all costs, and then changed his policy several times. As the PAVN launched their attack, panic set in, and ARVN resistance withered. On 22 March, the PAVN opened the siege of Huế. Civilians flooded the airport and the docks hoping for any mode of escape. As resistance in Huế collapsed, PAVN rockets rained down on Da Nang and its airport. By 28 March 35,000 PAVN troops were poised to attack the suburbs. By 30 March 100,000 leaderless ARVN troops surrendered as the PAVN marched victoriously through Da Nang. With the fall of the city, the defense of the Central Highlands and Northern provinces came to an end.: 699–700  With the northern half of the country under their control, the Politburo ordered General Dung to launch the final offensive against Saigon. The operational plan for the Ho Chi Minh Campaign called for the capture of Saigon before 1 May. Hanoi wished to avoid the coming monsoon and prevent any redeployment of ARVN forces defending the capital. Northern forces, their morale boosted by their recent victories, rolled on, taking Nha Trang, Cam Ranh and Da Lat.: 702–704  On 7 April, three PAVN divisions attacked Xuân Lộc, 40 miles (64 km) east of Saigon. For two bloody weeks, severe fighting raged as the ARVN defenders made a last stand to try to block the PAVN advance. On 21 April, however, the exhausted garrison was ordered to withdraw towards Saigon.: 704–707  An embittered and tearful president Thieu resigned on the same day, declaring that the United States had betrayed South Vietnam. In a scathing attack, he suggested that Kissinger had tricked him into signing the Paris peace agreement two years earlier, promising military aid that failed to materialize. Having transferred power to Trần Văn Hương on 21 April, he left for Taiwan on 25 April.: 714  After having appealed unsuccessfully to Congress for $722 million in emergency aid for South Vietnam, President Ford had given a televised speech on 23 April, declaring an end to the Vietnam War and all U.S. aid. By the end of April, the ARVN had collapsed on all fronts except in the Mekong Delta. Thousands of refugees streamed southward, ahead of the main communist onslaught. On 27 April, 100,000 PAVN troops encircled Saigon. The city was defended by about 30,000 ARVN troops. To hasten a collapse and foment panic, the PAVN shelled Tan Son Nhut Airport and forced its closure. With the air exit closed, large numbers of civilians found that they had no way out.: 716  Chaos, unrest, and panic broke out as hysterical South Vietnamese officials and civilians scrambled to leave Saigon. Martial law was declared. American helicopters began evacuating South Vietnamese, U.S. and foreign nationals from various parts of the city and from the U.S. embassy compound. Operation Frequent Wind had been delayed until the last possible moment, because of U.S. Ambassador Graham Martin's belief that Saigon could be held and that a political settlement could be reached. Frequent Wind was the largest helicopter evacuation in history. It began on 29 April, in an atmosphere of desperation, as hysterical crowds of Vietnamese vied for limited space. Frequent Wind continued around the clock, as PAVN tanks breached defenses near Saigon. In the early morning hours of 30 April, the last U.S. Marines evacuated the embassy by helicopter, as civilians swamped the perimeter and poured into the grounds.: 718–720  On 30 April 1975, PAVN troops entered the city of Saigon and quickly overcame all resistance, capturing key buildings and installations. Two tanks from the 203rd Tank Brigade of the 2nd Corps crashed through the gates of the Independence Palace and the Viet Cong flag was raised above it at 11:30 am local time. President Dương Văn Minh, who had succeeded Huong two days earlier, surrendered to Lieutenant colonel Bùi Văn Tùng, the political commissar of the 203rd Tank Brigade.: 95–96  Minh was then escorted to Radio Saigon to announce the surrender declaration (spontaneously written by Tung).: 85  The statement was on air at 2:30 pm. During the course of the Vietnam War a large segment of the American population came to be opposed to U.S. involvement in Southeast Asia. In January 1967, only 32% of Americans thought the U.S. had made a mistake in sending troops to Vietnam. Public opinion steadily turned against the war following 1967 and by 1970 only a third of Americans believed that the U.S. had not made a mistake by sending troops to fight in Vietnam. Early opposition to U.S. involvement in Vietnam drew its inspiration from the Geneva Conference of 1954. American support of Diệm in refusing elections was seen as thwarting the democracy America claimed to support. John F. Kennedy, while senator, opposed involvement in Vietnam. Nonetheless, it is possible to specify certain groups who led the anti-war movement at its peak in the late 1960s and the reasons why. Many young people protested because they were the ones being drafted, while others were against the war because the anti-war movement grew increasingly popular among the counterculture. Some advocates within the peace movement advocated a unilateral withdrawal of U.S. forces from Vietnam. Opposition to the Vietnam War tended to unite groups opposed to U.S. anti-communism and imperialism, and for those involved with the New Left, such as the Catholic Worker Movement. Others, such as Stephen Spiro, opposed the war based on the theory of Just War. Some wanted to show solidarity with the people of Vietnam, such as Norman Morrison emulating the self-immolation of Thích Quảng Đức. High-profile opposition to the Vietnam War increasingly turned to mass protests in an effort to shift U.S. public opinion. Riots broke out at the 1968 Democratic National Convention during protests against the war.: 514  After news reports of American military abuses, such as the 1968 My Lai Massacre, brought new attention and support to the anti-war movement, some veterans joined Vietnam Veterans Against the War. On 15 October 1969, the Vietnam Moratorium attracted millions of Americans. The fatal shooting of four students at Kent State University in 1970 led to nationwide university protests. Anti-war protests declined after the signing of the Paris Peace Accords and the end of the draft in January 1973, and the withdrawal of American troops from Vietnam in the months following. The People's Republic of China provided significant support for North Vietnam when the U.S. started to intervene, included through financial aid and the deployment of hundreds of thousands of military personnel in support roles. China said that its military and economic aid to North Vietnam and the Viet Cong totaled $20 billion (approx. $160 billion adjusted for inflation in 2022) during the Vietnam War; included in that aid were donations of 5 million tons of food to North Vietnam (equivalent to North Vietnamese food production in a single year), accounting for 10–15% of the North Vietnamese food supply by the 1970s. In the summer of 1962, Mao Zedong agreed to supply Hanoi with 90,000 rifles and guns free of charge, and starting in 1965, China began sending anti-aircraft units and engineering battalions to North Vietnam to repair the damage caused by American bombing. In particular, they helped man anti-aircraft batteries, rebuild roads and railroads, transport supplies, and perform other engineering works. This freed North Vietnamese army units for combat in the South. China sent 320,000 troops and annual arms shipments worth $180 million.: 135  The Chinese military claims to have caused 38% of American air losses in the war. The PRC also began financing the Khmer Rouge as a counterweight to North Vietnam at this time. China "armed and trained" the Khmer Rouge during the civil war, and continued to aid them for years afterward. The Soviet Union supplied North Vietnam with medical supplies, arms, tanks, planes, helicopters, artillery, anti-aircraft missiles and other military equipment. Soviet crews fired Soviet-made surface-to-air missiles at U.S. aircraft in 1965. Over a dozen Soviet soldiers died in this conflict. Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russian Federation officials acknowledged that the USSR had stationed up to 3,000 troops in Vietnam during the war. According to Russian sources, between 1953 and 1991, the hardware donated by the Soviet Union included: 2,000 tanks; 1,700 APCs; 7,000 artillery guns; over 5,000 anti-aircraft guns; 158 surface-to-air missile launchers; and 120 helicopters. In total, the Soviets sent North Vietnam annual arms shipments worth $450 million.: 364–371  From July 1965 to the end of 1974, fighting in Vietnam was observed by some 6,500 officers and generals, as well as more than 4,500 soldiers and sergeants of the Soviet Armed Forces, amounting to roughly 11,000 military personnel. The KGB had also helped develop the signals intelligence capabilities of the North Vietnamese, through an operation known as Vostok (named after the Vostok 1). As South Vietnam was formally part of a military alliance with the US, Australia, New Zealand, France, the United Kingdom, Pakistan, Thailand and the Philippines, the alliance was invoked during the war. The UK, France and Pakistan declined to participate, and South Korea, Taiwan, and Spain were non-treaty participants. The ethnic minority peoples of South Vietnam, like the Montagnards (Degar) in the Central Highlands, the Hindu and Muslim Cham, and the Buddhist Khmer Krom, were actively recruited in the war. There was an active strategy of recruitment and favorable treatment of Montagnard tribes for the Viet Cong, as they were pivotal for control of infiltration routes. Some groups had split off and formed the United Front for the Liberation of Oppressed Races (French: Front Uni de Lutte des Races Opprimées, acronym: FULRO) to fight for autonomy or independence. FULRO fought against both the South Vietnamese and the Viet Cong, later proceeding to fight against the unified Socialist Republic of Vietnam after the fall of South Vietnam. During the war, the South Vietnamese president Ngo Dinh Diem began a program to settle ethnic Vietnamese Kinh on Montagnard lands in the Central Highlands region. This provoked a backlash from the Montagnards, some joining the Viet Cong as a result. The Cambodians under both the pro-China King Sihanouk and the pro-American Lon Nol supported their fellow co-ethnic Khmer Krom in South Vietnam, following an anti-ethnic Vietnamese policy. Following Vietnamization many Montagnard groups and fighters were incorporated into the Vietnamese Rangers as border sentries. A large number of war crimes took place during the Vietnam War. War crimes were committed by both sides during the conflict and included rape, massacres of civilians, bombings of civilian targets, terrorism, the widespread use of torture, and the murder of prisoners of war. Additional common crimes included theft, arson, and the destruction of property not warranted by military necessity. In 1968, the Vietnam War Crimes Working Group (VWCWG) was established by the Pentagon task force set up in the wake of the My Lai Massacre, to attempt to ascertain the veracity of emerging claims of war crimes by U.S. armed forces in Vietnam, during the Vietnam War period. Of the war crimes reported to military authorities, sworn statements by witnesses and status reports indicated that 320 incidents had a factual basis. The substantiated cases included 7 massacres between 1967 and 1971 in which at least 137 civilians were killed; seventy eight further attacks targeting non-combatants resulting in at least 57 deaths, 56 wounded and 15 sexually assaulted; and 141 cases of U.S. soldiers torturing civilian detainees or prisoners of war with fists, sticks, bats, water or electric shock. Journalism in the ensuing years has documented other overlooked and uninvestigated war crimes involving every army division that was active in Vietnam, including the atrocities committed by Tiger Force. Rummel estimated that American forces committed around 5,500 democidal killings between 1960 and 1972, from a range of between 4,000 and 10,000 killed. U.S. forces established numerous free-fire zones as a tactic to prevent Viet Cong fighters from sheltering in South Vietnamese villages. Such practice, which involved the assumption that any individual appearing in the designated zones was an enemy combatant that could be freely targeted by weapons, is regarded by journalist Lewis M. Simons as "a severe violation of the laws of war". Nick Turse, in his 2013 book, Kill Anything that Moves, argues that a relentless drive toward higher body counts, a widespread use of free-fire zones, rules of engagement where civilians who ran from soldiers or helicopters could be viewed as Viet Cong and a widespread disdain for Vietnamese civilians led to massive civilian casualties and endemic war crimes inflicted by U.S. troops.: 251  One example cited by Turse is Operation Speedy Express, an operation by the 9th Infantry Division, which was described by John Paul Vann as, in effect, "many Mỹ Lais".: 251  A report by Newsweek magazine suggested that at least 5,000 civilians may have been killed during six months of the operation, and there were approximately 748 recovered weapons and an official US military body count of 10,889 enemy combatants killed. R.J. Rummel estimated that 39,000 were killed by South Vietnam during the Diem-era in democide from a range of between 16,000 and 167,000 people; for 1964 to 1975, Rummel estimated 50,000 people were killed in democide, from a range of between 42,000 and 128,000. Thus, the total for 1954 to 1975 is 81,000, from a range of between 57,000 and 284,000 deaths caused by South Vietnam. Benjamin Valentino estimates 110,000–310,000 deaths as a "possible case" of "counter-guerrilla mass killings" by U.S. and South Vietnamese forces during the war. The Phoenix Program, coordinated by the CIA and involving US and South Vietnamese security forces, was aimed at destroying the political infrastructure of the Viet Cong. The program killed 26,369 to 41,000 people, with an unknown number being innocent civilians.: 341–343  Torture and ill-treatment were frequently applied by the South Vietnamese to POWs as well as civilian prisoners.: 77  During their visit to the Con Son Prison in 1970, U.S. congressmen Augustus F. Hawkins and William R. Anderson witnessed detainees either confined in minute "tiger cages" or chained to their cells, and provided with poor-quality food. A group of American doctors inspecting the prison in the same year found many inmates suffering symptoms resulting from forced immobility and torture.: 77  During their visits to transit detention facilities under American administration in 1968 and 1969, the International Red Cross recorded many cases of torture and inhumane treatment before the captives were handed over to South Vietnamese authorities.: 78  Torture was conducted by the South Vietnamese government in collusion with the CIA. South Korean forces were also accused of war crimes. One documented event was the Phong Nhị and Phong Nhất massacre where the 2nd Marine Brigade reportedly killed between 69 and 79 civilians on 12 February 1968 in Phong Nhị and Phong Nhất village, Điện Bàn District, Quảng Nam Province. South Korean forces are also accused of perpetrating other massacres, namely: Bình Hòa massacre, Binh Tai Massacre and Hà My massacre. Ami Pedahzur has written that "the overall volume and lethality of Viet Cong terrorism rivals or exceeds all but a handful of terrorist campaigns waged over the last third of the twentieth century", based on the definition of terrorists as a non-state actor, and examining targeted killings and civilian deaths which are estimated at over 18,000 from 1966 to 1969. The US Department of Defense estimates the VC/PAVN had conducted 36,000 murders and almost 58,000 kidnappings from 1967 to 1972, c. 1973. Benjamin Valentino attributes 45,000–80,000 "terrorist mass killings" to the Viet Cong during the war. Statistics for 1968–1972 suggest that "about 80 percent of the terrorist victims were ordinary civilians and only about 20 percent were government officials, policemen, members of the self-defence forces or pacification cadres.": 273  Viet Cong tactics included the frequent mortaring of civilians in refugee camps, and the placing of mines on highways frequented by villagers taking their goods to urban markets. Some mines were set only to go off after heavy vehicle passage, causing extensive slaughter aboard packed civilian buses.: 270–279  Notable Viet Cong atrocities include the massacre of over 3,000 unarmed civilians at Huế during the Tet Offensive and the killing of 252 civilians during the Đắk Sơn massacre. 155,000 refugees fleeing the final North Vietnamese Spring Offensive were reported to have been killed or abducted on the road to Tuy Hòa in 1975. According to Rummel, PAVN and Viet Cong troops killed 164,000 civilians in democide between 1954 and 1975 in South Vietnam, from a range of between 106,000 and 227,000 (50,000 of which were reportedly killed by shelling and mortar on ARVN forces during the retreat to Tuy Hoa). North Vietnam was also known for its abusive treatment of American POWs, most notably in Hỏa Lò Prison (aka the Hanoi Hilton), where torture was employed to extract confessions.: 655  American women served on active duty performing a variety of jobs. Early in 1963, the Army Nurse Corps (ANC) launched Operation Nightingale, an intensive effort to recruit nurses to serve in Vietnam.: 7  First Lieutenant Sharon Lane was the only female military nurse to be killed by enemy gunfire during the war, on 8 June 1969.: 57  One civilian doctor, Eleanor Ardel Vietti, who was captured by Viet Cong on 30 May 1962, in Buôn Ma Thuột, remains the only American woman unaccounted for from the Vietnam War. Although a small number of women were assigned to combat zones, they were never allowed directly in the field of battle. Unlike the men, the women who served in the military were solely volunteers. They faced a plethora of challenges, one of which was the relatively small number of female soldiers. Living in a male-dominated environment created tensions between the sexes. By 1973, approximately 7,500 women had served in Vietnam in the Southeast Asian theater. American women serving in Vietnam were subject to societal stereotypes. To address this problem, the ANC released advertisements portraying women in the ANC as "proper, professional and well protected." This effort to highlight the positive aspects of a nursing career reflected the feminism of the 1960s–1970s in the United States. Although female military nurses lived in a heavily male environment, very few cases of sexual harassment were ever reported.: 71  Unlike the American women who went to Vietnam, both South and North Vietnamese women were enlisted and served in combat zones. Women were enlisted in both the PAVN and the Viet Cong, many joining due to the promises of female equality and a greater social role within society. Some women also served for the PAVN and Viet Cong intelligence services. The deputy military commander of the Viet Cong, was a female general, Nguyễn Thị Định. All-female units were present throughout the entirety of the war, ranging from front-line combat troops to anti-aircraft, scout and reconnaissance units. Female combat squads were present in the Cu Chi theater. They also fought in the Battle of Hue.: 388–391  In addition, large numbers of women served in North Vietnam, manning anti-aircraft batteries, providing village security and serving in logistics on the Ho Chi Minh trail. Other women were embedded with troops on the front-lines, serving as doctors and medical personnel. Đặng Thùy Trâm became renowned after her diary was published following her death. The Foreign Minister for the Viet Cong and later the PRG was also a woman, Nguyễn Thị Bình. In South Vietnam, many women voluntarily served in the ARVN's Women's Armed Force Corps (WAFC) and various other Women's corps in the military. Some, like in the WAFC, served in combat with other soldiers. Others served as nurses and doctors in the battlefield and in military hospitals, or served in South Vietnam or America's intelligence agencies. During Diệm's presidency, his sister-in-law Madame Nhu was the commander of the WAFC. Many women joined provincial and voluntary village-level militia in the People's Self-Defense Force especially during the ARVN expansions later in the war. During the war, more than one million rural people migrated or fled the fighting in the South Vietnamese countryside to the cities, especially Saigon. Among the internal refugees were many young women who became the ubiquitous "bar girls" of wartime South Vietnam, "hawking her wares—be that cigarettes, liquor, or herself" to American and allied soldiers. American bases were ringed by bars and brothels. 8,040 Vietnamese women came to the United States as war brides between 1964 and 1975. Many mixed-blood Amerasian children were left behind when their American fathers returned to the United States after their tour of duty in South Vietnam; 26,000 of them were permitted to immigrate to the United States in the 1980s and 1990s. Women also played a prominent role as front-line reporters in the conflict, directly reporting on the conflict as it occurred. A number of women volunteered on the North Vietnamese side as embedded journalists, including author Lê Minh Khuê embedded with PAVN forces, on the Ho Chi Minh trail as well as on combat fronts. A number of prominent Western journalists were also involved in covering the war, with Dickey Chapelle being among the first as well as the first American female reporter killed in a war. The French-speaking Australian journalist Kate Webb was captured along with a photographer and others by the Viet Cong in Cambodia and traveled into Laos with them; they were released back into Cambodia after 23 days of captivity. Webb would be the first Western journalist to be captured and released, as well as cover the perspective of the Viet Cong in her memoir On The Other Side. Another French-speaking journalist, Catherine Leroy, was briefly captured and released by North Vietnamese forces during the Battle of Huế, capturing some famous photos from the battles that would appear on the cover of Life Magazine.: 245  The experience of American military personnel of African ancestry during the Vietnam War had received significant attention. For example, the website "African-American Involvement in the Vietnam War" compiles examples of such coverage, as does the print and broadcast work of journalist Wallace Terry whose book Bloods: An Oral History of the Vietnam War by Black Veterans (1984), includes observations about the impact of the war on the black community in general and on black servicemen specifically. Points he makes on the latter topic include: the higher proportion of combat casualties in Vietnam among African American servicemen than among American soldiers of other races, the shift toward and different attitudes of black military volunteers and black conscripts, the discrimination encountered by black servicemen "on the battlefield in decorations, promotion and duty assignments" as well as their having to endure "the racial insults, cross-burnings and Confederate flags of their white comrades"—and the experiences faced by black soldiers stateside, during the war and after America's withdrawal. Civil rights leaders protested the disproportionate casualties and the overrepresentation in hazardous duty and combat roles experienced by African American servicemen, prompting reforms that were implemented beginning in 1967–68. As a result, by the war's completion in 1975, black casualties had declined to 12.5% of US combat deaths, approximately equal to percentage of draft-eligible black men, though still slightly higher than the 10% who served in the military. During the early stages of the war, the Viet Cong mainly sustained itself with captured arms; these were often of American manufacture or were crude, makeshift weapons used alongside shotguns made of galvanized pipes. Most arms were captured from poorly defended ARVN militia outposts. In 1967, all Viet Cong battalions were reequipped with arms of Soviet design such as the AK-47 assault rifle, carbines and the RPG-2 anti-tank weapon. Their weapons were principally of Chinese or Soviet manufacture. In the period up to the conventional phase in 1970, the Viet Cong and PAVN were primarily limited to 81 mm mortars, recoilless rifles, and small arms and had significantly lighter equipment and firepower in comparison with the US arsenal. They relied on ambushes, superior stealth, planning, marksmanship, and small-unit tactics to face the disproportionate US technological advantage. After the Tet Offensive, many PAVN units incorporated light tanks such as the Type 62, Type 59 tank., BTR-60, Type 60 artillery, amphibious tanks (such as the PT-76) and integrated into new war doctrines as a mobile combined-arms force. The PAVN started receiving experimental Soviet weapons against ARVN forces, including MANPADS 9K32 Strela-2 and anti-tank missiles, 9M14 Malyutka. By 1975, they had fully transformed from the strategy of mobile light-infantry and using the people's war concept used against the United States. The US service rifle was initially the M14. The M14 was a powerful, accurate rifle, but it was heavy, hard-recoiling, and especially unwieldy in jungle fighting, as it was unsuited for the combat conditions, often suffering from feed failure. It was gradually replaced by the M16 rifle, designed by Eugene Stoner, between 1964 and 1970. When first deployed, the M16 also suffered from a propensity to jam in combat, leaving the soldier defenseless and potentially killing him. According to a congressional report, the jamming was not related to operator error or to an inherent flaw in the rifle, but instead due to a change in the gunpowder to be used in the rifle's cartridges, which led to rapid powder fouling of the action and failures to extract or feed cartridges. This decision, made after "inadequate testing", proved that "the safety of soldiers was a secondary consideration." The issue was solved in early 1968 with the issuance of the M16A1, featuring a chrome-plated bore, which reduced fouling, and the introduction of a cleaner-burning powder.: 408–411  Incorporating features from the German FG-42 and MG-42, the U.S. replaced their earlier M1919 Browning in most roles with the M60 machine gun, including on helicopters where it was used for suppressive fire. While its issues were not as severe as they were in the M14 or M16, the M60 still could fail to fire at crucial times – spent casings could get stuck inside of the chamber, meaning the barrel would have to be replaced before it could fire again. The AC-130 "Spectre" Gunship and the UH-1 "Huey" gunship were used frequently by the U.S. during the war. The AC-130 was a heavily armed ground-attack aircraft variant of the C-130 Hercules transport plane, while the Huey is a military helicopter powered by a single, turboshaft engine; approximately 7,000 UH-1 aircraft saw service in Vietnam. The U.S. heavily armored, 90 mm M48A3 Patton tank saw extensive action during the Vietnam War, and over 600 were deployed with U.S. Forces. US ground forces also had access to B-52 and F-4 Phantom II and other aircraft to launch napalm, white phosphorus, tear gas, chemical weapons, precision-guided munition and cluster bombs. The Vietnam War was the first conflict where U.S. forces had secure voice communication equipment available at the tactical level. The National Security Agency ran a crash program to provide U.S. forces with a family of security equipment, codenamed NESTOR, fielding 17,000 units initially; eventually 30,000 units were produced. However, limitations of the units, including poor voice quality, reduced range, annoying time delays and logistical support issues, led to only one unit in ten being used. While many in the U.S. military believed that the Viet Cong and PAVN would not be able to exploit insecure communications, interrogation of captured communication intelligence units showed they could understand the jargon and codes used in real time and were often able to warn their side of impending U.S. actions.: 4, 10  The U.S. dropped over 7 million tons of bombs on Indochina during the war, more than triple the 2.1 million tons of bombs the U.S. dropped on Europe and Asia during all of World War II and more than ten times the amount dropped by the U.S. during the Korean War. 500 thousand tons were dropped on Cambodia, 1 million tons were dropped on North Vietnam, and 4 million tons were dropped on South Vietnam. On a per capita basis, the 2 million tons dropped on Laos make it the most heavily bombed country in history; The New York Times noted this was "nearly a ton for every person in Laos." Due to the particularly heavy impact of cluster bombs during this war, Laos was a strong advocate of the Convention on Cluster Munitions to ban the weapons, and was host to the First Meeting of States Parties to the convention in November 2010. Former U.S. Air Force official Earl Tilford has recounted "repeated bombing runs of a lake in central Cambodia. The B-52s literally dropped their payloads in the lake." The Air Force ran many missions of this kind to secure additional funding during budget negotiations, so the tonnage expended does not directly correlate with the resulting damage. On 2 July 1976, North and South Vietnam were merged to form the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Despite speculation that the victorious North Vietnamese would, in President Nixon's words, "massacre the civilians there [South Vietnam] by the millions," there is a widespread consensus that no mass executions took place. However, in the years following the war, a vast number of South Vietnamese were sent to re-education camps where many endured torture, starvation, and disease while being forced to perform hard labor. According to Amnesty International Report 1979, this figure varied considerably depend on different observers: "... included such figures as "50,000 to 80,000" (Le Monde, 19 April 1978), "150,000" (Reuters from Bien Hoa, 2 November 1977), "150,000 to 200,000" (The Washington Post, 20 December 1978), and "300,000" (Agence France Presse from Hanoi, 12 February 1978)." Such variations may be because "Some estimates may include not only detainees but also people sent from the cities to the countryside." According to a native observer, 443,360 people had to register for a period in re-education camps in Saigon alone, and while some of them were released after a few days, others stayed there for more than a decade. Between 1975 and 1980, more than 1 million northerners migrated south to regions formerly in the Republic of Vietnam, while, as part of the New Economic Zones program, around 750,000 to over 1 million southerners were moved mostly to uninhabited mountainous forested areas. Gabriel García Márquez, a Nobel Prize winning writer, described South Vietnam as a "False paradise" after the war, when he visited in 1980: The cost of this delirium was stupefying: 360,000 people mutilated, a million widows, 500,000 prostitutes, 500,000 drug addicts, a million tuberculous and more than a million soldiers of the old regime, impossible to rehabilitate into a new society. Ten percent of the population of Ho Chi Minh City was suffering from serious venereal diseases when the war ended, and there were 4 million illiterates throughout the South. The U.S. used its security council veto to block Vietnam's recognition by the United Nations three times, an obstacle to the country receiving international aid. By 1975, the North Vietnamese had lost influence over the Khmer Rouge.: 708  Phnom Penh, the capital of Cambodia, fell to the Khmer Rouge on 17 April 1975. Under the leadership of Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge would eventually kill 1–3 million Cambodians out of a population of around 8 million, in one of the bloodiest genocides in history. The relationship between Vietnam and Democratic Kampuchea (Cambodia) escalated right after the end of the war. In response to the Khmer Rouge taking over Phu Quoc on 17 April and Tho Chu on 4 May 1975 and the belief that they were responsible for the disappearance of 500 Vietnamese natives on Tho Chu, Vietnam launched a counterattack to take back these islands. After several failed attempts to negotiate by both sides, Vietnam invaded Democratic Kampuchea in 1978 and ousted the Khmer Rouge, who were being supported by China, in the Cambodian–Vietnamese War. In response, China invaded Vietnam in 1979. The two countries fought a brief border war, known as the Sino-Vietnamese War. From 1978 to 1979, some 450,000 ethnic Chinese left Vietnam by boat as refugees or were deported. The Pathet Lao overthrew the monarchy of Laos in December 1975, establishing the Lao People's Democratic Republic under the leadership of a member of the royal family, Souphanouvong. The change in regime was "quite peaceful, a sort of Asiatic 'velvet revolution'"—although 30,000 former officials were sent to reeducation camps, often enduring harsh conditions for several years. The conflict between Hmong rebels and the Pathet Lao continued in isolated pockets.: 575–576  Unexploded ordnance, mostly from U.S. bombing, continues to detonate and kill people today and has rendered much land hazardous and impossible to cultivate. According to the Vietnamese government, ordnance has killed some 42,000 people since the war officially ended. In Laos, 80 million bombs failed to explode and remain scattered throughout the country. According to the government of Laos, unexploded ordnance has killed or injured over 20,000 Laotians since the end of the war and currently 50 people are killed or maimed every year. It is estimated that the explosives still remaining buried in the ground will not be removed entirely for the next few centuries.: 317  Over 3 million people left Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia in the Indochina refugee crisis after 1975. Most Asian countries were unwilling to accept these refugees, many of whom fled by boat and were known as boat people. Between 1975 and 1998, an estimated 1.2 million refugees from Vietnam and other Southeast Asian countries resettled in the United States, while Canada, Australia, and France resettled over 500,000. China accepted 250,000 people. Of all the countries of Indochina, Laos experienced the largest refugee flight in proportional terms, as 300,000 people out of a total population of 3 million crossed the border into Thailand. Included among their ranks were "about 90 percent" of Laos's "intellectuals, technicians, and officials.": 575  An estimated 200,000 to 400,000 Vietnamese boat people died at sea, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Failure of U.S. goals in the war is often placed at different institutions and levels. Some have suggested that the failure of the war was due to political failures of U.S. leadership. Others point to a failure of U.S. military doctrine. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara stated that "the achievement of a military victory by U.S. forces in Vietnam was indeed a dangerous illusion.": 368  The inability to bring Hanoi to the bargaining table by bombing also illustrated another U.S. miscalculation, and demonstrated the limitations of U.S. military abilities in achieving political goals.: 17  As Army Chief of Staff Harold Keith Johnson noted, "if anything came out of Vietnam, it was that air power couldn't do the job." General William Westmoreland admitted that the bombing had been ineffective, saying he doubted "that the North Vietnamese would have relented." U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger wrote in a secret memo to President Gerald Ford that "in terms of military tactics … our armed forces are not suited to this kind of war. Even the Special Forces who had been designed for it could not prevail." Hanoi had persistently sought unification of the country since the Geneva Accords, and the effects of U.S. bombings had negligible impact on the goals of the North Vietnamese government.: 1–10  The effects of U.S. bombing campaigns had mobilized the people throughout North Vietnam and mobilized international support for North Vietnam due to the perception of a super-power attempting to bomb a significantly smaller, agrarian society into submission.: 48–52  In the post-war era, Americans struggled to absorb the lessons of the military intervention. President Ronald Reagan coined the term "Vietnam Syndrome" to describe the reluctance of the American public and politicians to support further military interventions abroad after Vietnam. U.S. public polling in 1978 revealed that nearly 72% of Americans believed the war was "fundamentally wrong and immoral.": 10  The Vietnam War POW/MIA issue, concerning the fate of U.S. service personnel listed as missing in action, persisted for many years after the war's conclusion. The costs of the war loom large in American popular consciousness; a 1990 poll showed that the public incorrectly believed that more Americans died in Vietnam than in World War II. Between 1953 and 1975, the United States was estimated to have spent $168 billion on the war (equivalent to $1.65 trillion in 2023). This resulted in a large federal budget deficit. Other figures point to $138.9 billion from 1965 to 1974 (not inflation-adjusted), 10 times all education spending in the US and 50 times more than housing and community development spending within that time period. General record-keeping was reported to have been sloppy for government spending during the war. It was stated that war-spending could have paid off every mortgage in the US at that time, with money leftover. As of 2013, the U.S. government is paying Vietnam veterans and their families or survivors more than $22 billion a year in war-related claims. More than 3 million Americans served in the Vietnam War, some 1.5 million of whom actually saw combat in Vietnam. James E. Westheider wrote that "At the height of American involvement in 1968, for example, 543,000 American military personnel were stationed in Vietnam, but only 80,000 were considered combat troops." Conscription in the United States had existed since World War II, but ended in January 1973. By the war's end, 58,220 American soldiers had been killed, more than 150,000 had been wounded, and at least 21,000 had been permanently disabled. The average age of the U.S. troops killed in Vietnam was 23.11 years. According to Dale Kueter, "Of those killed in combat, 86.3 percent were white, 12.5 percent were black and the remainder from other races." Approximately 830,000 Vietnam veterans suffered some degree of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Vietnam veterans suffered from PTSD in unprecedented numbers, as many as 15.2% of Vietnam veterans, because the U.S. military had routinely provided heavy psychoactive drugs, including amphetamines, to American servicemen, which left them unable to process adequately their traumas at the time. Drug use, racial tensions, and the growing incidence of fragging—attempting to kill unpopular officers and non-commissioned officers with grenades or other weapons—created severe problems for the U.S. military and impacted its capability of undertaking combat operations. Between 1969 and 1971 the U.S. Army recorded more than 900 attacks by troops on their own officers and NCOs with 99 killed.: 44–47  An estimated 125,000 Americans left for Canada to avoid the Vietnam draft, and approximately 50,000 American servicemen deserted. In January 1977, United States president Jimmy Carter granted a full and unconditional pardon to all Vietnam-era draft evaders with Proclamation 4483. The Vietnam War called into question the U.S. Army doctrine. Marine Corps general Victor H. Krulak heavily criticized Westmoreland's attrition strategy, calling it "wasteful of American lives ... with small likelihood of a successful outcome." In addition, doubts surfaced about the ability of the military to train foreign forces. Furthermore, throughout the war there was found to be considerable flaws and dishonesty by officers and commanders due to promotions being tied to the body count system touted by Westmoreland and McNamara. And behind the scenes Secretary of Defense McNamara wrote in a memo to President Johnson his doubts about the war: "The picture of the world's greatest superpower killing or seriously injuring 1,000 noncombatants a week, while trying to pound a tiny backward nation into submission on an issue whose merits are hotly disputed, is not a pretty one." One of the most controversial aspects of the U.S. military effort in Southeast Asia was the widespread use of chemical defoliants between 1961 and 1971. 20 million gallons of toxic herbicides (like Agent Orange) were sprayed on 6 million acres of forests and crops by the U.S. Air Force. They were used to defoliate large parts of the countryside to prevent the Viet Cong from being able to hide weaponry and encampments under the foliage, and to deprive them of food. Defoliation was also used to clear sensitive areas, including base perimeters and possible ambush sites along roads and canals. More than 20% of South Vietnam's forests and 3.2% of its cultivated land was sprayed at least once. 90% of herbicide use was directed at forest defoliation.: 263  The chemicals used continue to change the landscape, cause diseases and birth defects, and poison the food chain. Official US military records have listed figures including the destruction of 20% of the jungles of South Vietnam and 20-36% (with other figures reporting 20-50%) of the mangrove forests. The environmental destruction caused by this defoliation has been described by Swedish Prime Minister Olof Palme, lawyers, historians and other academics as an ecocide. Agent Orange and other similar chemical substances used by the U.S. have also caused a considerable number of deaths and injuries in the intervening years, including among the US Air Force crews that handled them. Scientific reports have concluded that refugees exposed to chemical sprays while in South Vietnam continued to experience pain in the eyes and skin as well as gastrointestinal upsets. In one study, ninety-two percent of participants suffered incessant fatigue; others reported monstrous births. Meta-analyses of the most current studies on the association between Agent Orange and birth defects have found a statistically significant correlation such that having a parent who was exposed to Agent Orange at any point in their life will increase one's likelihood of either possessing or acting as a genetic carrier of birth defects. Although a variety of birth defects have been observed, the most common deformity appears to be spina bifida. Chloro-dioxins, which are inevitably formed as a byproduct of Agent Orange synthesis, are highly teratogenic, and there is substantial evidence that the birth defects carry on for three generations or more. In 2012, the United States and Vietnam began a cooperative cleaning up of the toxic chemical on part of Danang International Airport, marking the first time Washington has been involved in cleaning up Agent Orange in Vietnam. Vietnamese victims affected by Agent Orange attempted a class action lawsuit against Dow Chemical and other U.S. chemical manufacturers, but the District Court dismissed their case. They appealed, but the dismissal was cemented in February 2008 by the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. As of 2006[update], the Vietnamese government estimates that there are over 4,000,000 victims of dioxin poisoning in Vietnam, although the United States government denies any conclusive scientific links between Agent Orange and the Vietnamese victims of dioxin poisoning. In some areas of southern Vietnam, dioxin levels remain at over 100 times the accepted international standard. The U.S. Veterans Administration has listed prostate cancer, respiratory cancers, multiple myeloma, Diabetes mellitus type 2, B-cell lymphomas, soft-tissue sarcoma, chloracne, porphyria cutanea tarda, peripheral neuropathy as, "presumptive diseases associated with exposure to Agent Orange or other herbicides during military service." Spina bifida is currently the sole birth defect in children of veterans that is recognized as being caused by exposure to Agent Orange. Estimates of the number of casualties vary, with one source suggesting up to 3.8 million violent war deaths in Vietnam for the period 1955 to 2002. A detailed demographic study calculated 791,000–1,141,000 war-related deaths during the war for all of Vietnam, for both military and civilians. Between 195,000 and 430,000 South Vietnamese civilians died in the war.: 450–453  Extrapolating from a 1969 US intelligence report, Guenter Lewy estimated 65,000 North Vietnamese civilians died in the war.: 450–453  Estimates of civilian deaths caused by American bombing of North Vietnam in Operation Rolling Thunder range from 30,000: 176, 617  to 182,000. A 1975 US Senate subcommittee estimated 1.4 million South Vietnamese civilians casualties during the war, including 415,000 deaths.: 12  The military forces of South Vietnam suffered an estimated 254,256 killed between 1960 and 1974 and additional deaths from 1954 to 1959 and in 1975.: 275  Other estimates point to higher figures of 313,000 casualties. The official US Department of Defense figure for PAVN/VC killed in Vietnam from 1965 to 1974 was 950,765. Defense Department officials believed that these body count figures need to be deflated by 30 percent. Guenter Lewy asserts that one-third of the reported "enemy" killed may have been civilians, concluding that the actual number of deaths of PAVN/VC military forces was probably closer to 444,000.: 450–453  According to figures released by the Vietnamese government there were 849,018 confirmed military deaths on the PAVN/VC side during the war. The Vietnamese government released its estimate of war deaths for the more lengthy period of 1955 to 1975. This figure includes battle deaths of Vietnamese soldiers in the Laotian and Cambodian Civil Wars, in which the PAVN was a major participant. Non-combat deaths account for 30 to 40% of these figures. However, the figures do not include deaths of South Vietnamese and allied soldiers. These do not include the estimated 300,000–500,000 PAVN/VC missing in action. Official figures from the Vietnamese government estimate 1.1 million dead and 300,000 missing from 1945 to 1979, with approximately 849,000 dead and 232,000 missing from 1960 to 1975. US reports of "enemy KIA", referred to as body count were thought to have been subject to "falsification and glorification", and a true estimate of PAVN/VC combat deaths may be difficult to assess, as US victories were assessed by having a "greater kill ratio". It was difficult to distinguish between civilians and military personnel on the Viet Cong side as many persons were part-time guerrillas or impressed laborers who did not wear uniforms and civilians killed were sometimes written off as enemy killed because high enemy casualties was directly tied to promotions and commendation.: 649–650  Between 275,000 and 310,000 Cambodians were estimated to have died during the war including between 50,000 and 150,000 combatants and civilians from US bombings. 20,000–62,000 Laotians also died, and 58,281 U.S. military personnel were killed, of which 1,584 are still listed as missing as of March 2021. The Vietnam War has been featured extensively in television, film, video games, music and literature in the participant countries. In Vietnam, one notable film set during Operation Linebacker II was the film Girl from Hanoi (1974) depicting war-time life in Hanoi. Another notable work was the diary of Đặng Thùy Trâm, a North Vietnamese doctor who enlisted in the Southern battlefield, and was killed at the age of 27 by U.S. forces near Quảng Ngãi. Her diaries were later published in Vietnam as Đặng Thùy Trâm's Diary (Last Night I Dreamed of Peace), where it became a bestseller and was later made into a film Don't Burn (Đừng đốt). In Vietnam, the diary has often been compared to The Diary of Anne Frank, and both are used in literary education. One of the first major films based on the Vietnam War was John Wayne's pro-war The Green Berets (1968). Further cinematic representations were released during the 1970s and 1980s, some of the most noteworthy examples being Michael Cimino's The Deer Hunter (1978), Francis Ford Coppola's Apocalypse Now (1979), Oliver Stone's Platoon (1986) – based on his service in the U.S. Army during the Vietnam War, Stanley Kubrick's Full Metal Jacket (1987). Other Vietnam War films include Hamburger Hill (1987), Good Morning, Vietnam (1987), Casualties of War (1989), Born on the Fourth of July (1989), The Siege of Firebase Gloria (1989), Forrest Gump (1994), We Were Soldiers (2002), and Rescue Dawn (2007). The war also influenced a generation of musicians and songwriters in Vietnam, the United States, and throughout the world, both pro/anti-war and pro/anti-communist, with the Vietnam War Song Project having identified 5,000+ songs about or referencing the conflict. The band Country Joe and the Fish recorded The "Fish" Cheer/I-Feel-Like-I'm-Fixin'-to-Die Rag in 1965, and it became one of the most influential anti-Vietnam protest anthems. Myths play a central role in the historiography of the Vietnam War, and have become a part of the culture of the United States. Much like the general historiography of the war, discussion of myth has focused on U.S. experiences, but changing myths of war have also played a role in Vietnamese and Australian historiography. Recent scholarship has focused on "myth-busting",: 373  attacking the previous orthodox and revisionist schools of American historiography of the Vietnam War. This scholarship challenges myths about American society and soldiery in the Vietnam War.: 373  Kuzmarov in The Myth of the Addicted Army: Vietnam and the Modern War on Drugs challenges the popular and Hollywood narrative that US soldiers were heavy drug users, in particular the notion that the My Lai massacre was caused by drug use.: 373  According to Kuzmarov, Richard Nixon is primarily responsible for creating the drug myth.: 374  Michael Allen in Until The Last Man Comes Home also accuses Nixon of myth making, by exploiting the plight of the League of Wives of American Prisoners in Vietnam and the National League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast Asia to allow the government to appear caring as the war was increasingly considered lost.: 376  Allen's analysis ties the position of potential missing or prisoner Americans into post-war politics and recent presidential elections, including the Swift boat controversy in US electoral politics.: 376–377  On 25 May 2012, President Barack Obama issued a proclamation of the commemoration of the 50th Anniversary of the Vietnam War. On 10 November 2017, President Donald Trump issued an additional proclamation commemorating the 50th Anniversary of the Vietnam War. Vietnam portal United States portal 1950s portal 1960s portal 1970s portal History of Cambodia History of Laos History of Vietnam List of conflicts in Asia Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War U.S. news media and the Vietnam War Third Indochina War Sino-Vietnamese War The Vietnam War (TV series) Soviet–Afghan War Due to the early presence of U.S. troops in Vietnam, the start date of the Vietnam War is a matter of debate. In 1998, after a high-level review by the Department of Defense (DoD) and through the efforts of Richard B. Fitzgibbon's family, the start date of the Vietnam War according to the U.S. government was officially changed to 1 November 1955. U.S. government reports currently cite 1 November 1955 as the commencement date of the "Vietnam Conflict", because this date marked when the U.S. Military Assistance Advisory Group (MAAG) in Indochina (deployed to Southeast Asia under President Truman) was reorganized into country-specific units and MAAG Vietnam was established.: 20  Other start dates include when Hanoi authorized Viet Cong forces in South Vietnam to begin a low-level insurgency in December 1956, whereas some view 26 September 1959, when the first battle occurred between the Viet Cong and the South Vietnamese army, as the start date. 1955–1963 1963–1969 1964–1968 According to Hanoi's official history, the Viet Cong was a branch of the People's Army of Vietnam. Upper figure initial estimate, later thought to be inflated by at least 30% (lower figure): 450–453  The figures of 58,220 and 303,644 for U.S. deaths and wounded come from the Department of Defense Statistical Information Analysis Division (SIAD), Defense Manpower Data Center, as well as from a Department of Veterans fact sheet dated May 2010; the total is 153,303 WIA excluding 150,341 persons not requiring hospital care the CRS (Congressional Research Service) Report for Congress, American War and Military Operations Casualties: Lists and Statistics, dated 26 February 2010, and the book Crucible Vietnam: Memoir of an Infantry Lieutenant.: 65, 107, 154, 217  Some other sources give different figures (e.g. the 2005/2006 documentary Heart of Darkness: The Vietnam War Chronicles 1945–1975 cited elsewhere in this article gives a figure of 58,159 U.S. deaths, and the 2007 book Vietnam Sons gives a figure of 58,226) Prior to this, the Military Assistance Advisory Group, Indochina (with an authorized strength of 128 men) was set up in September 1950 with a mission to oversee the use and distribution of U.S. military equipment by the French and their allies. Shortly after the assassination of Kennedy, when McGeorge Bundy called Johnson on the phone, Johnson responded: "Goddammit, Bundy. I've told you that when I want you I'll call you." On 8 March 1965 the first American combat troops, the Third Marine Regiment, Third Marine Division, began landing in Vietnam to protect the Da Nang Air Base. They were: Senators John C. Stennis (MS) and Richard B. Russell Jr. (GA) and Representatives Lucius Mendel Rivers (SC), Gerald R. Ford (MI) and Leslie C. Arends (IL). Arends and Ford were leaders of the Republican minority and the other three were Democrats on either the Armed Services or Appropriations committees. A study by Jacqueline Desbarats and Karl D. Jackson estimated that 65,000 South Vietnamese were executed for political reasons between 1975 and 1983, based on a survey of 615 Vietnamese refugees who claimed to have personally witnessed 47 executions. However, "their methodology was reviewed and criticized as invalid by authors Gareth Porter and James Roberts." Sixteen of the 47 names used to extrapolate this "bloodbath" were duplicates; this extremely high duplication rate (34%) strongly suggests Desbarats and Jackson were drawing from a small number of total executions. Rather than arguing that this duplication rate proves there were very few executions in post-war Vietnam, Porter and Roberts suggest it is an artifact of the self-selected nature of the participants in the Desbarats-Jackson study, as the authors followed subjects' recommendations on other refugees to interview. Nevertheless, there exist unverified reports of mass executions. The references for this article are grouped in three sections. Citations: references for the in-line, numbered superscript references contained within the article. Main sources: the main works used to build the content of the article, but not referenced as in-line citations. Additional sources: additional works used to build the article "Name of Technical Sergeant Richard B. Fitzgibbon to be added to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial". Department of Defense (DoD). Archived from the original on 20 October 2013. Lawrence, A.T. (2009). Crucible Vietnam: Memoir of an Infantry Lieutenant. McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-4517-2. Olson & Roberts 2008, p. 67. "Chapter 5, Origins of the Insurgency in South Vietnam, 1954–1960". The Pentagon Papers (Gravel Edition), Volume 1. Boston: Beacon Press. 1971. Section 3, pp. 314–346. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 17 August 2008 – via International Relations Department, Mount Holyoke College. The Paris Agreement on Vietnam: Twenty-five Years Later (Conference Transcript). Washington, DC: The Nixon Center. April 1998. Archived from the original on 1 September 2019. Retrieved 5 September 2012 – via International Relations Department, Mount Holyoke College. Military History Institute of Vietnam 2002, p. 182. "By the end of 1966 the total strength of our armed forces was 690,000 soldiers." Doyle, Edward; Lipsman, Samuel; Maitland, Terence (1986). The Vietnam Experience The North. Time Life Education. pp. 45–49. ISBN 978-0-939526-21-5. "China admits 320,000 troops fought in Vietnam". Toledo Blade. Reuters. 16 May 1989. Retrieved 24 December 2013. Roy, Denny (1998). China's Foreign Relations. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 27. ISBN 978-0-8476-9013-8. Womack, Brantly (2006). China and Vietnam. Cambridge University Press. p. 179. ISBN 978-0-521-61834-2. Tucker, Spencer C (2011). The Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War: A Political, Social, and Military History. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-85109-960-3. "Area Handbook Series Laos". Retrieved 1 November 2019. O'Ballance, Edgar (1982). Tracks of the bear: Soviet imprints in the seventies. Presidio. p. 171. ISBN 978-0-89141-133-8. Pham Thi Thu Thuy (1 August 2013). "The colorful history of North Korea-Vietnam relations". NK News. Archived from the original on 24 April 2015. Retrieved 3 October 2016. Le Gro, William (1985). Vietnam from ceasefire to capitulation (PDF). US Army Center of Military History. p. 28. ISBN 978-1-4102-2542-9. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 February 2023. "The rise of Communism". www.footprinttravelguides.com. Archived from the original on 17 November 2010. Retrieved 31 May 2018. "Hmong rebellion in Laos". Members.ozemail.com.au. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 11 April 2021. "Vietnam War Allied Troop Levels 1960–73". Archived from the original on 2 August 2016. Retrieved 2 August 2016., accessed 7 November 2017 Doyle, Jeff; Grey, Jeffrey; Pierce, Peter (2002). "Australia's Vietnam War – A Select Chronology of Australian Involvement in the Vietnam War" (PDF). Texas A&M University Press. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 November 2022. Blackburn, Robert M. (1994). Mercenaries and Lyndon Johnson's "More Flage": The Hiring of Korean, Filipino, and Thai Soldiers in the Vietnam War. McFarland. ISBN 0-89950-931-2. Marín, Paloma (9 April 2012). "Spain's secret support for US in Vietnam". El País. Hirschman, Charles; Preston, Samuel; Vu, Manh Loi (December 1995). "Vietnamese Casualties During the American War: A New Estimate" (PDF). Population and Development Review. 21 (4): 783. doi:10.2307/2137774. JSTOR 2137774. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 October 2013. Lewy, Guenter (1978). America in Vietnam. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-987423-1. "Battlefield:Vietnam – Timeline". PBS. Archived from the original on 4 June 2023. Moyar, Mark. "Triumph Regained: The Vietnam War, 1965–1968." Encounter Books, December 2022. Chapter 17 index: "Communists provided further corroboration of the proximity of their casualty figures to American figures in a postwar disclosure of total losses from 1960 to 1975. During that period, they stated, they lost 849,018 killed plus approximately 232,000 missing and 463,000 wounded. Casualties fluctuated considerably from year to year, but a degree of accuracy can be inferred from the fact that 500,000 was 59 percent of the 849,018 total and that 59 percent of the war's days had passed by the time of Fallaci's conversation with Giap. The killed in action figure comes from "Special Subject 4: The Work of Locating and Recovering the Remains of Martyrs From Now Until 2020 And Later Years," downloaded from the Vietnamese government website datafile on 1 December 2017. The above figures on missing and wounded were calculated using Hanoi's declared casualty ratios for the period of 1945 to 1979, during which time the Communists incurred 1.1 million killed, 300,000 missing, and 600,000 wounded. Ho Khang, ed, Lich Su Khang Chien Chong My, Cuu Nuoc 1954–1975, Tap VIII: Toan Thang (Hanoi: Nha Xuat Ban Chinh Tri Quoc Gia, 2008), 463." "Chuyên đề 4 CÔNG TÁC TÌM KIẾM, QUY TẬP HÀI CỐT LIỆT SĨ TỪ NAY ĐẾN NĂM 2020 VÀ NHỮNG NĂM TIẾP THEO". Datafile.chinhsachquandoi.gov.vn. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 11 April 2021. "Công tác tìm kiếm, quy tập hài cốt liệt sĩ từ nay đến năm 2020 và những năn tiếp theo" [The work of searching and collecting the remains of martyrs from now to 2020 and the next] (in Vietnamese). Ministry of Defence, Government of Vietnam. Archived from the original on 17 December 2018. Retrieved 11 June 2018. Joseph Babcock (29 April 2019). "Lost Souls: The Search for Vietnam's 300,000 or More MIAs". Pulitzer Centre. Archived from the original on 10 November 2022. Retrieved 28 June 2021. Hastings, Max (2018). Vietnam an epic tragedy, 1945–1975. Harper Collins. ISBN 978-0-06-240567-8. James F. Dunnigan; Albert A. Nofi (2000). Dirty Little Secrets of the Vietnam War: Military Information You're Not Supposed to Know. Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-312-25282-3. "North Korea fought in Vietnam War". BBC News Online. 31 March 2000. Archived from the original on 12 March 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2015. Pribbenow, Merle (November 2011). "North Korean Pilots in the Skies over Vietnam" (PDF). Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars. p. 1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 June 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2023. Thayer, Thomas C. (1985). War Without Fronts: The American Experience in Vietnam. Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-7132-0. Rummel, R.J (1997), "Table 6.1A. Vietnam Democide : Estimates, Sources, and Calculations", Freedom, Democracy, Peace; Power, Democide, and War, University of Hawaii System, archived from the original (GIF) on 13 March 2023 Clarke, Jeffrey J. (1988). United States Army in Vietnam: Advice and Support: The Final Years, 1965–1973. Center of Military History, United States Army. The Army of the Republic of Vietnam suffered 254,256 recorded combat deaths between 1960 and 1974, with the highest number of recorded deaths being in 1972, with 39,587 combat deaths "The Fall of South Vietnam" (PDF). Rand.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 January 2023. Retrieved 11 April 2021. Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund (4 May 2021). "2021 NAME ADDITIONS AND STATUS CHANGES ON THE VIETNAM VETERANS MEMORIAL" (Press release). Archived from the original on 29 April 2023. National Archives–Vietnam War U.S. Military Fatal Casualties, 15 August 2016, retrieved 29 July 2020 "Vietnam War U.S. Military Fatal Casualty Statistics: HOSTILE OR NON-HOSTILE DEATH INDICATOR." U.S. National Archives. 29 April 2008. Accessed 13 July 2019. America's Wars (PDF) (Report). Department of Veterans Affairs. May 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 January 2014. Anne Leland; Mari–Jana "M-J" Oboroceanu (26 February 2010). American War and Military Operations: Casualties: Lists and Statistics (PDF) (Report). Congressional Research Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 May 2023. Aaron Ulrich (editor); Edward FeuerHerd (producer and director) (2005, 2006). Heart of Darkness: The Vietnam War Chronicles 1945–1975 (Box set, Color, Dolby, DVD-Video, Full Screen, NTSC, Dolby, Vision Software) (Documentary). Koch Vision. Event occurs at 321 minutes. ISBN 1-4172-2920-9. Kueter, Dale (2007). Vietnam Sons: For Some, the War Never Ended. AuthorHouse. ISBN 978-1-4259-6931-8. T. Lomperis, From People's War to People's Rule (1996) "Australian casualties in the Vietnam War, 1962–72". Australian War Memorial. Archived from the original on 14 February 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2013. "Overview of the war in Vietnam". New Zealand and the Vietnam War. 16 July 1965. Archived from the original on 26 July 2013. Retrieved 29 June 2013. "America Wasn't the Only Foreign Power in the Vietnam War". 2 October 2013. Archived from the original on 18 April 2023. Retrieved 10 June 2017. "Vietnam Reds Said to Hold 17 From Taiwan as Spies". The New York Times. 1964. Archived from the original on 7 March 2023. Larsen, Stanley (1975). Vietnam Studies Allied Participation in Vietnam (PDF). Department of the Army. ISBN 978-1-5176-2724-9. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 June 2023. "Asian Allies in Vietnam" (PDF). Embassy of South Vietnam. March 1970. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 May 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2015. Shenon, Philip (23 April 1995). "20 Years After Victory, Vietnamese Communists Ponder How to Celebrate". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 27 May 2023. Retrieved 24 February 2011. The Vietnamese government officially claimed a rough estimate of 2 million civilian deaths, but it did not divide these deaths between those of North and South Vietnam. Obermeyer, Ziad; Murray, Christopher J L; Gakidou, Emmanuela (23 April 2008). "Fifty years of violent war deaths from Vietnam to Bosnia: analysis of data from the world health survey programme". British Medical Journal. 336 (7659): 1482–1486. doi:10.1136/bmj.a137. PMC 2440905. PMID 18566045. From 1955 to 2002, data from the surveys indicated an estimated 5.4 million violent war deaths ... 3.8 million in Vietnam Heuveline, Patrick (2001). "The Demographic Analysis of Mortality Crises: The Case of Cambodia, 1970–1979". Forced Migration and Mortality. National Academies Press. pp. 102–104, 120, 124. ISBN 978-0-309-07334-9. As best as can now be estimated, over two million Cambodians died during the 1970s because of the political events of the decade, the vast majority of them during the mere four years of the 'Khmer Rouge' regime. ... Subsequent reevaluations of the demographic data situated the death toll for the [civil war] in the order of 300,000 or less. Banister, Judith; Johnson, E. Paige (1993). Genocide and Democracy in Cambodia: The Khmer Rouge, the United Nations and the International Community. Yale University Southeast Asia Studies. p. 97. ISBN 978-0-938692-49-2. An estimated 275,000 excess deaths. We have modeled the highest mortality that we can justify for the early 1970s. Sliwinski, Marek (1995). Le Génocide Khmer Rouge: Une Analyse Démographique [The Khmer Rouge genocide: A demographic analysis]. L'Harmattan. pp. 42–43, 48. ISBN 978-2-7384-3525-5. Eckhardt, George (1991). Vietnam Studies Command and Control 1950–1969. Department of the Army. p. 6. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 31 October 2014. Ang, Cheng Guan (2002). The Vietnam War from the Other Side. RoutledgeCurzon. ISBN 978-0-7007-1615-9. "Vietnam War Allied Troop Levels 1960–73". Archived from the original on 2 August 2016. Retrieved 1 June 2018. Li, Xiaobing (2010). Voices from the Vietnam War: Stories from American, Asian, and Russian Veterans. University Press of Kentucky. p. 85. ISBN 978-0-8131-7386-3. Military History Institute of Vietnam 2002, pp. 247–249. Kolko, Gabriel (1985). Anatomy of a War: Vietnam, the United States, and the Modern Historical Experience. Pantheon Books. ISBN 978-0-394-74761-3. Kalb, Marvin (22 January 2013). "It's Called the Vietnam Syndrome, and It's Back". Brookings Institution. Archived from the original on 24 December 2022. Retrieved 12 June 2015. Horne, Alistair (2010). Kissinger's Year: 1973. Phoenix Press. pp. 370–371. ISBN 978-0-7538-2700-0. Fox, Diane N. (2003). "Chemical Politics and the Hazards of Modern Warfare: Agent Orange". In Monica, Casper (ed.). Synthetic Planet: Chemical Politics and the Hazards of Modern Life (PDF). Routledge Press. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 July 2010. Kolko 1994, pp. 144–145. sfn error: no target: CITEREFKolko1994 (help) Westing, Arthur H. (1984). Herbicides in War: The Long-term Ecological and Human Consequences. Taylor & Francis. pp. 5ff. Zierler, David (2011). The invention of ecocide: agent orange, Vietnam, and the scientists who changed the way we think about the environment. Athens, Georgia: Univ. of Georgia Press. ISBN 978-0-8203-3827-9. Falk, Richard A. (1973). "Environmental Warfare and Ecocide — Facts, Appraisal, and Proposals". Bulletin of Peace Proposals. 4 (1): 80–96. doi:10.1177/096701067300400105. ISSN 0007-5035. JSTOR 44480206. S2CID 144885326. Chiarini, Giovanni (1 April 2022). "Ecocide: From the Vietnam War to International Criminal Jurisdiction? Procedural Issues In-Between Environmental Science, Climate Change, and Law". Cork Online Law Review. SSRN 4072727. Factasy. "The Vietnam War or Second Indochina War". PRLog. Archived from the original on 25 April 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2013. Factasy. "The Vietnam War or Second Indochina War". PRLog. Retrieved 29 June 2013. "The National Archives – Vietnam Conflict Extract Data File". 15 August 2016. Retrieved 8 December 2020. Marlatt, Greta E. "Research Guides: Vietnam Conflict: Maps". Libguides.nps.edu. Archived from the original on 5 April 2023. Retrieved 11 April 2021. Meaker, Scott S.F. (2015). Unforgettable Vietnam War: The American War in Vietnam – War in the Jungle. ISBN 978-1-312-93158-9. Burns, Robert (27 January 2018). "Grim reminders of a war in Vietnam, a generation later". Concord Monitor. Archived from the original on 28 January 2018. Retrieved 28 February 2019. It's been more than for 40-plus years, the war that Americans simply call Vietnam but the Vietnamese refer to as their Resistance War Against America. Miller, Edward. "Vietnam War perspective: the unreconciled conflict". USA TODAY. Retrieved 6 September 2023. "Asian-Nation: Asian American History, Demographics, & Issues:: The American / Viet Nam War". Archived from the original on 27 May 2023. Retrieved 18 August 2008. The Viet Nam War is also called 'The American War' by the Vietnamese Umair Mirza (1 April 2017). The Vietnam War The Definitive Illustrated History. "The OSS in Vietnam, 1945: A War of Missed Opportunities by Dixee Bartholomew-Feis". The National WWII Museum | New Orleans. 15 July 2020. Retrieved 19 December 2023. Kinzer, Stephen (2013). The Brothers: John Foster Dulles, Allen Dulles, and Their Secret World War. Macmillan. pp. 195–196. ISBN 978-1-4299-5352-8. Hess, Gary R. (1972). "Franklin Roosevelt and Indochina". The Journal of American History. 59 (2): 353–368. doi:10.2307/1890195. ISSN 0021-8723. JSTOR 1890195. "Page:Pentagon-Papers-Part I.djvu/30 - Wikisource, the free online library". en.wikisource.org. Retrieved 19 December 2023. Administration, United States National Archives and Records (4 July 2006). Our Documents: 100 Milestone Documents from the National Archives. Oxford University Press, USA. ISBN 978-0-19-530959-1. McNamara, Robert S.; Blight, James G.; Brigham, Robert K.; Biersteker, Thomas J.; Schandler, Herbert (1999). Argument Without End: In Search of Answers to the Vietnam Tragedy. New York: PublicAffairs. ISBN 978-1-891620-87-4. "The History Place – Vietnam War 1945–1960". Archived from the original on 12 March 2023. Retrieved 11 June 2008. Herring, George C. (2001). America's Longest War: The United States and Vietnam, 1950–1975 (4th ed.). McGraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-253618-8. Maclear, Michael (1981). The Ten Thousand Day War: Vietnam 1945–1975. Thames. p. 57. ISBN 978-0-312-79094-3. The Pentagon Papers (Gravel Edition), Volume 1. pp. 391–404. "The Final Declarations of the Geneva Conference July 21, 1954". The Wars for Viet Nam. Vassar College. Archived from the original on 7 August 2011. Retrieved 20 July 2011. "Geneva Accords | history of Indochina | Britannica". www.britannica.com. Retrieved 28 October 2022. "China Contributed Substantially to Vietnam War Victory, Claims Scholar". Wilson Center. 1 January 2001. Archived from the original on 2 May 2023. Retrieved 20 May 2018. Prados, John (January–February 2005). "The Numbers Game: How Many Vietnamese Fled South In 1954?". The VVA Veteran. Archived from the original on 27 May 2006. Retrieved 11 May 2017. Patrick, Johnson, David (2009). Selling "Operation Passage to Freedom": Dr. Thomas Dooley and the Religious Overtones of Early American Involvement in Vietnam (Thesis). University of New Orleans. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023.{{cite thesis}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Murti, B.S.N. (1964). Vietnam Divided. Asian Publishing House. Karnow 1997 Turner, Robert F. (1975). Vietnamese Communism: Its Origins and Development. Hoover Institution Press. ISBN 978-0-8179-6431-3. Gittinger, J. Price (1959). "Communist Land Policy in North Viet Nam". Far Eastern Survey. 28 (8): 113–126. doi:10.2307/3024603. JSTOR 3024603. Courtois, Stephane; et al. (1997). The Black Book of Communism. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-07608-2. Dommen, Arthur J. (2001). The Indochinese Experience of the French and the Americans. Indiana University Press. p. 340. ISBN 978-0-253-33854-9. Vu, Tuong (25 May 2007). "Newly released documents on the land reform". Vietnam Studies Group. Archived from the original on 20 April 2011. Retrieved 15 July 2016. There is no reason to expect, and no evidence that I have seen to demonstrate, that the actual executions were less than planned; in fact the executions perhaps exceeded the plan if we consider two following factors. First, this decree was issued in 1953 for the rent and interest reduction campaign that preceded the far more radical land redistribution and party rectification campaigns (or waves) that followed during 1954–1956. Second, the decree was meant to apply to free areas (under the control of the Viet Minh government), not to the areas under French control that would be liberated in 1954–1955 and that would experience a far more violent struggle. Thus the number of 13,500 executed people seems to be a low-end estimate of the real number. This is corroborated by Edwin Moise in his recent paper "Land Reform in North Vietnam, 1953–1956" presented at the 18th Annual Conference on SE Asian Studies, Center for SE Asian Studies, University of California, Berkeley (February 2001). In this paper Moise (7–9) modified his earlier estimate in his 1983 book (which was 5,000) and accepted an estimate close to 15,000 executions. Moise made the case based on Hungarian reports provided by Balazs, but the document I cited above offers more direct evidence for his revised estimate. This document also suggests that the total number should be adjusted up some more, taking into consideration the later radical phase of the campaign, the unauthorized killings at the local level, and the suicides following arrest and torture (the central government bore less direct responsibility for these cases, however). cf. Szalontai, Balazs (November 2005). "Political and Economic Crisis in North Vietnam, 1955–56". Cold War History. 5 (4): 395–426. doi:10.1080/14682740500284630. S2CID 153956945. cf. Vu, Tuong (2010). Paths to Development in Asia: South Korea, Vietnam, China, and Indonesia. Cambridge University Press. p. 103. ISBN 978-1-139-48901-0. Clearly Vietnamese socialism followed a moderate path relative to China. ... Yet the Vietnamese 'land reform' campaign ... testified that Vietnamese communists could be as radical and murderous as their comrades elsewhere. The Pentagon Papers (Gravel Edition), Volume 3. Beacon Press. 1971. Eisenhower 1963, p. 372. "Evolution of the War. Origins of the Insurgency" (PDF). National Archives. 15 January 1969. p. 6. Retrieved 8 October 2023. Woodruff 2005, p. 6 states: "The elections were not held. South Vietnam, which had not signed the Geneva Accords, did not believe the Communists in North Vietnam would allow a fair election. In January 1957, the International Control Commission (ICC), comprising observers from India, Poland, and Canada, agreed with this perception, reporting that neither South nor North Vietnam had honored the armistice agreement. With the French gone, a return to the traditional power struggle between north and south had begun again." "America's Stakes in Vietnam Speech to the American Friends of Vietnam, June 1956". JFK Library. Archived from the original on 26 June 2012. Retrieved 26 June 2012. Turner, Robert F. (1975). Vietnamese Communism: Its Origins and Development. Hoover Institution Publications. pp. 174–178. ISBN 978-0817964313. Doyle, Edward; Weiss, Stephen (1984). The Vietnam Experience, a Collision of Cultures. Boston Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0939526123. McNamera, Robert S.; Blight, James G.; Brigham, Robert K. (1999). Argument Without End. PublicAffairs. p. 35. ISBN 1-891620-22-3. "Excerpts from Law 10/59, 6 May 1959". Archived from the original on 23 July 2008. Kelly, Francis John (1989) [1973]. History of Special Forces in Vietnam, 1961–1971. Washington, D.C.: United States Army Center of Military History. p. 4. CMH Pub 90-23. Archived from the original on 12 February 2014. Retrieved 14 May 2021. Young, Marilyn (1991). The Vietnam Wars: 1945–1990. Harper Perennial. ISBN 978-0-06-092107-1. Military History Institute of Vietnam 2002, p. 68. Prados, John (1999). The Blood Road: The Ho Chi Minh Trail and the Vietnam War. Wiley. ISBN 9780471254652. Morrocco, John (1985). Rain of Fire: Air War, 1969–1973. Volume 14 of Vietnam Experience. Boston Publishing Company. ISBN 9780939526147. Military History Institute of Vietnam 2002, p. xi. Prados, John (2006). "The Road South: The Ho Chi Minh Trail". In Wiest, Andrew (ed.). Rolling Thunder in a Gentle Land. Oxford: Osprey Publishing. pp. 74–95. ISBN 978-1-84603-020-8. "It's Time to Stop Saying that JFK Inherited the Bay of Pigs Operation from Ike". History News Network. 12 May 2015. Archived from the original on 7 February 2023. The case of John F. Kennedy and Vietnam Presidential Studies Quarterly. Mann, Robert. A Grand Delusion, Basic Books, 2002. Vietnam Task Force (1969). "IV. B. Evolution of the War 4. Phased Withdrawal of U.S. Forces in Vietnam, 1962–64". Report of the Office of the Secretary of Defense Vietnam Task Force (PDF). Washington, DC: Office of the Secretary of Defense. pp. 1–2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 May 2015. Stavins, Ralph L. (22 July 1971). "A Special Supplement: Kennedy's Private War". The New York Review of Books. ISSN 0028-7504. Archived from the original on 6 April 2023. Retrieved 2 December 2017. Galbraith, John Kenneth (1971). "Memorandum to President Kennedy from John Kenneth Galbraith on Vietnam, 4 April 1962". The Pentagon Papers (Gravel Edition), Volume 2. Boston: Beacon Press. pp. 669–671. Sheehan, Neil (1989). A Bright Shining Lie – John Paul Vann and the American War in Vietnam. Vintage. ISBN 978-0-679-72414-8. Live interview by John Bartlow Martin. Was Kennedy Planning to Pull out of Vietnam? New York City. John F. Kennedy Library, 1964, Tape V, Reel 1. Gibson, James (1986). "The Perfect War: Technowar in Vietnam". The Atlantic Monthly Press. p. 88. "304. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam—Washington, November 6, 1963—7:50 p.m.". Foreign Relations of the United States, 1961–1963, Volume IV, Vietnam, August–December 1963. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023 – via Office of the Historian. Demma 1989. "Counterinsurgency in Vietnam: Lessons for Today". The Foreign Service Journal. April 2015. Archived from the original on 7 April 2023. "Pacification". Vietnam War Dictionary. Archived from the original on 5 April 2023. Blaufarb, Douglas S. (1977). The Counterinsurgency Era: U.S. Doctrine and Performance, 1950 to the Present. Free Press. p. 119. ISBN 978-0-02-903700-3. Schandler, Herbert Y. (2009). America in Vietnam: The War That Couldn't Be Won. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 36. ISBN 978-0-7425-6697-2. Southworth, Samuel; Tanner, Stephen (2002). U.S. Special Forces: A Guide to America's Special Operations Units: the World's Most Elite Fighting Force. Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-81165-4. Warner, Roger (1996). Shooting at the Moon The story of America's clandestine war in Laos. Steerforth Press. ISBN 978-1-883642-36-5. Karnow 1997, pp. 336–339. Johnson viewed many members that he inherited from Kennedy's cabinet with distrust because he had never penetrated their circle during Kennedy's presidency; to Johnson's mind, those like W. Averell Harriman and Dean Acheson spoke a different language. VanDeMark, Brian (1995). Into the Quagmire. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 13. Karnow 1997, p. 339. Before a small group, including Henry Cabot Lodge, the new president also said, "We should stop playing cops and robbers [a reference to Diệm's failed leadership] and get back to ... winning the war ... tell the generals in Saigon that Lyndon Johnson intends to stand by our word ... [to] win the contest against the externally directed and supported Communist conspiracy." Karnow 1997, p. 339: "At a place called Hoa Phu, for example, the strategic hamlet built during the previous summer now looked like it had been hit by a hurricane. ... Speaking through an interpreter, a local guard explained to me that a handful of Viet Cong agents had entered the hamlet one night and told the peasants to tear it down and return to their native villages. The peasants complied without question." Hunt, Michael (2016). The World Transformed – 1945 to the Present. New York: Oxford. pp. 169–171. ISBN 978-0-19-937102-0. Kutler, Stanley I. (1996). Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War. Charles Scribner's Sons. p. 249. ISBN 978-0-13-276932-7. Shane, Scott (31 October 2005). "Vietnam Study, Casting Doubts, Remains Secret". The New York Times]. Archived from the original on 11 December 2008. Retrieved 4 July 2021. Moïse, Edwin E. (1996). Tonkin Gulf and the Escalation of the Vietnam War. University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-2300-2. Simon, Dennis M. (August 2002). "The War in Vietnam, 1965–1968". Archived from the original on 26 April 2009. Retrieved 7 May 2009. Nalty 1998, pp. 97, 261. Tilford, Earl L. (1991). Setup: What the Air Force did in Vietnam and Why (PDF). Air University Press. p. 89. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 April 2023. Kiernan, Ben; Owen, Taylor (26 April 2015). "Making More Enemies than We Kill? Calculating U.S. Bomb Tonnages Dropped on Laos and Cambodia, and Weighing Their Implications". The Asia-Pacific Journal. 13 (17). 4313. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 18 September 2016. Vietnam War After Action Reports. BACM Research. p. 84. Kahin, George; Lewis, John W. (1967). The United States in Vietnam: An analysis in depth of the history of America's involvement in Vietnam. Delta Books. Moyar, Mark (2006). Triumph Forsaken: The Vietnam War, 1954–1965. Cambridge University Press. p. 339. ISBN 978-0-521-86911-9. McNeill, Ian (1993). To Long Tan: The Australian Army and the Vietnam War 1950–1966. Allen & Unwin. ISBN 978-1-86373-282-6. "Generations Divide Over Military Action in Iraq". Pew Research Center. 17 October 2002. Archived from the original on 21 November 2022. United States – Vietnam Relations, 1945–1967: A Study Prepared by the Department of Defense, vol. 4, p. 7. United States – Vietnam Relations, 1945–1967: A Study Prepared by the Department of Defense, vol. 5, pp. 8–9. United States – Vietnam Relations, 1945–1967: A Study Prepared by the Department of Defense, vol. 4, pp. 117–19. and vol. 5, pp. 8–12. Public Papers of the Presidents, 1965. Washington, DC Government Printing Office, 1966, vol. 2, pp. 794–99. Mohr, Charles (16 May 1984). "McNamara on Record, Reluctantly, on Vietnam". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Church, Peter (2006). A Short History of South-East Asia. John Wiley & Sons. p. 193. ISBN 978-0-470-82481-8. Galloway, Joseph (18 October 2010). "Ia Drang – The Battle That Convinced Ho Chi Minh He Could Win". Historynet. Archived from the original on 22 March 2023. Retrieved 2 May 2016. Ward, Geoffrey C.; Burns, Ken (5 September 2017). The Vietnam War: An Intimate History. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. p. 125. ISBN 978-1-5247-3310-0. By the end of the year, more than 125,000 civilians in the province had lost their homes ... Ward, Geoffrey C.; Burns, Ken (2017). The Vietnam War: An Intimate History. Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-307-70025-4. "Chapter 2, US Ground Strategy and Force Deployments, 1965–1968". The Pentagon Papers (Gravel Edition), Volume 4. Section 4, pp. 277–604. Archived from the original on 26 June 2019. Retrieved 12 June 2018 – via International Relations Department, Mount Holyoke College. "TWE Remembers: General Westmoreland Says the "End Begins to Come Into View" in Vietnam". Council on Foreign Relations. Archived from the original on 5 June 2023. Retrieved 12 June 2018. "Interview with NVA General Tran Van Tra | HistoryNet". www.historynet.com. 12 June 2006. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Retrieved 1 June 2018. "The Urban Movement and the Planning and Execution of the Tet Offensive". Wilson Center. 20 October 2014. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Retrieved 1 June 2018. Nguyen, Lien-Hang T. (2012). Hanoi's War: An International History of the War for Peace in Vietnam. Univ of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-1-4696-2835-6. Wiest, Andrew (1 March 2018). "Opinion | The Tet Offensive Was Not About Americans". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 16 April 2023. Retrieved 1 June 2018. Bowden, Mark (2017). Hue 1968 A turning point of the American war in Vietnam. Atlantic Monthly Press. Hosmer, Stephen T. (1970). Viet Cong Repression and its Implications for the Future. Rand Corporation. pp. 72–8. Villard, Erik B. (2008). The 1968 Tet Offensive Battles of Quang Tri City and Hue (PDF). U.S. Army Center of Military History. ISBN 978-1-5142-8522-0. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 June 2023. Ankony, Robert C. (2009). Lurps: A Ranger's Diary of Tet, Khe Sanh, A Shau, and Quang Tri. Rowman & Littlefield Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-7618-3281-2. Keyes, Ralph (2006). The Quote Verifier: Who Said What, Where, and When. St. Martin's Griffin. ISBN 978-0-312-34004-9. Weinraub, Bernard (8 February 1968). "Survivors Hunt Dead of Bentre, Turned to Rubble in Allied Raids". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Triều, Họ Trung (5 June 2017). "Lực lượng chính trị và đấu tranh chính trị ở thị xã Nha Trang trong cuộc Tổng tiến công và nổi dậy Tết Mậu Thân 1968". Hue University Journal of Science: Social Sciences and Humanities. 126 (6). doi:10.26459/hujos-ssh.v126i6.3770 (inactive 31 January 2024). ISSN 2588-1213.{{cite journal}}: CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of January 2024 (link) "Tết Mậu Thân 1968 qua những số liệu" (in Vietnamese). Archived from the original on 7 April 2023. Retrieved 1 June 2018. Eyraud, Henri (March 1987). "Anatomy of a War: Vietnam, the United States, and the Modern Historical Experience. By Kolko Gabriel. [New York: Pantheon Books, 1985. 628 pp.]". The China Quarterly. 109: 135. doi:10.1017/s0305741000017653. ISSN 0305-7410. S2CID 154919829. Witz (1994). The Tet Offensive: Intelligence Failure in War. Cornell University Press. pp. 1–2. ISBN 978-0-8014-8209-0. Berman, Larry (1991). Lyndon Johnson's War. W.W. Norton. p. 116. Sanger, David E. (6 October 2018). "U.S. General Considered Nuclear Response in Vietnam War, Cables Show". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 14 March 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2018. Sorley, Lewis (1999). A Better War: The Unexamined Victories and Final Tragedy of America's Last Years in Vietnam. Harvest. pp. 11–6. ISBN 0-15-601309-6. "North Vietnam's "Talk-Fight" Strategy and the 1968 Peace Negotiations with the United States". Wilson Center. 16 April 2012. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Retrieved 1 June 2018. Command Magazine Issue 18, p. 15. Johns, Andrew (2010). Vietnam's Second Front: Domestic Politics, the Republican Party, and the War. University Press of Kentucky. p. 198. ISBN 978-0-8131-7369-6. Sagan, Scott Douglas; Suri, Jeremi (16 June 2003). "The Madman Nuclear Alert: Secrecy, Signaling, and Safety in October 1969". International Security. 27 (4): 150–183. doi:10.1162/016228803321951126. ISSN 1531-4804. S2CID 57564244. Evans, Michael. "Nixon's Nuclear Ploy". nsarchive2.gwu.edu. Archived from the original on 7 April 2023. Retrieved 8 February 2018. "Foundations of Foreign Policy, 1969-1972". Foreign Relations, 1969-1976, Volume I. U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on 13 May 2023. Retrieved 4 July 2021. Van Ness, Peter (December 1986). "Richard Nixon, the Vietnam War, and the American Accommodation with China: A Review Article". Contemporary Southeast Asia. 8 (3): 231–245. JSTOR 25797906. "Ho Chi Minh Dies of Heart Attack in Hanoi". The Times. 4 September 1969. p. 1. Currey, Cecil B. (2005). Victory at Any Cost: The Genius of Viet Nam's Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap. Potomac Books, Inc. p. 272. ISBN 978-1-57488-742-6. Kiernan, Ben (February 2017). Viet Nam: A History from Earliest Times to the Present. Oxford University Press. p. 447. Stein, Jeff (1992). A Murder in Wartime: The Untold Spy Story that Changed the Course of the Vietnam War. St. Martin's Press. pp. 60–2. ISBN 978-0-312-07037-3. Bob Seals (2007). "The "Green Beret Affair": A Brief Introduction". Archived from the original on 9 May 2008. USA.gov (February 1997). "The Pentagon Papers Case". eJournal USA. 2 (1). Archived from the original on 12 January 2008. Retrieved 27 April 2010. Stewart, Richard (2005). American Military History, Volume II, The United States Army in a Global Era, 1917–2003. United States Army Center of Military History. ISBN 978-0-16-072541-8. Daddis, Gregory A. (2017). Withdrawal: Reassessing America's Final Years in Vietnam. Oxford University Press. p. 172. ISBN 978-0-19-069110-3. Heinl, Robert D. Jr. (7 June 1971). "The Collapse of the Armed Forces" (PDF). Armed Forces Journal. Sevy, Grace (1991). The American Experience in Vietnam: A Reader. University of Oklahoma Press. p. 172. ISBN 978-0-8061-2390-5. Richard Halloran (12 August 1984). "R.O.T.C. Booming as Memories of Vietnam Fade". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 15 April 2023. Retrieved 14 June 2018. "General Won't Punish G.I.'s for Refusing Orders". The New York Times. 23 March 1971. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Retrieved 13 June 2018. Robert, Graham (1984). "Vietnam: An Infantryman's View of Our Failure" (PDF). Military Affairs. 48 (3 (Jul. 1984)): 133–139. doi:10.2307/1987487. JSTOR 1987487. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 June 2023. Stanton, Shelby L. (2007). The Rise and Fall of an American Army: U.S. Ground Forces in Vietnam, 1963–1973. Random House Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-307-41734-3. "Vietnamization: 1970 Year in Review". UPI.com. Archived from the original on 31 August 2011. Wiest, Andrew (2007). Vietnam's Forgotten Army: Heroism and Betrayal in the ARVN. NYU Press. pp. 124–140. ISBN 978-0-8147-9451-7. Porter, Gareth (1993). Vietnam: The Politics of Bureaucratic Socialism. Cornell University Press. p. 26. ISBN 978-0-8014-2168-6. Stanton, Shelby L. (2003). Vietnam order of battle. Stackpole Books. ISBN 978-0-8117-0071-9. Willbanks 2009, p. 110. "Facts about the Vietnam Veterans memorial collection". National Park Service. 2010. Archived from the original on 28 May 2010. Retrieved 26 April 2010. Sihanouk, Prince Norodom. "Cambodia Neutral: The Dictates of Necessity". Foreign Affairs. 1958: 582–583. Sutsakhan, S. (1987). The Khmer Republic at War and the Final Collapse (PDF). United States Army Center of Military History. p. 42. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 April 2019. Lipsman, Samuel; Doyle, Edward (1983). The Vietnam Experience Fighting for time. Boston Publishing Company. p. 145. ISBN 978-0-939526-07-9. Susan E. Cook (2004). Genocide in Cambodia and Rwanda. Yale Genocide Studies Program Monograph Series. Yale University. p. 54. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Willbanks 2014, p. 89. Willbanks 2014, p. 118. Beschloss, Michael (2018). Presidents of War: The Epic Story, from 1807 to Modern Times. New York: Crown. p. 579. ISBN 978-0-307-40960-7. Church, Peter (2006). A Short History of South-East Asia. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 193–194. ISBN 978-0-470-82181-7. "This Day in History 1974: Thieu announces war has resumed". History.com. Archived from the original on 20 January 2013. Retrieved 17 October 2009. "Ford asks for additional aid". history.com. Archived from the original on 11 August 2018. Retrieved 11 August 2018. Dougan, Clark; Fulgham, David (1985). The Vietnam Experience The Fall of the South. Boston Publishing Company. p. 22. ISBN 978-0-939526-16-1. Finney, John W. (12 April 1975). "Congress Resists U.S. Aid In Evacuating Vietnamese". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Retrieved 4 July 2021. "Transcript of speech by President Gerald R. Ford - April 23, 1975". Tulane University. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Retrieved 4 July 2021. Thai Binh Department of Information and Communications (30 July 2020), "Soldier from Thai Binh who put flag on the roof of Independence Palace", Thai Binh Provincial Portal, Thai Binh, archived from the original on 9 April 2023, retrieved 15 January 2022 "Reunion of the Veterans organization of Tank Amour force in the South Vietnam". Dinh Độc Lập official website. 28 April 2020. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Leong, Ernest (31 October 2009), "Vietnam Tries to Create New Image 30 Years After End of War", Voice of America, archived from the original on 4 April 2023, retrieved 14 January 2022 Terzani, Tiziano (1976). Giai Phong! The Fall and Liberation of Saigon. Angus & Robertson (U.K.) Ltd. pp. 92–96. ISBN 0207957126. Bui, Tin (1999). Following Ho Chi Minh: The Memoirs of a North Vietnamese Colonel. University of Hawaii Press. pp. 84–86. ISBN 9780824822330. "CBS News Poll: U.S. involvement in Vietnam". CBS News. 28 January 2018. Archived from the original on 1 February 2023. Lunch, W. & Sperlich, P. (1979). The Western Political Quarterly. 32(1). pp. 21–44 Hagopain, Patrick (2009). The Vietnam War in American Memory. University of Massachusetts Press. pp. 13–4. ISBN 978-1-55849-693-4. Zimmer, Louis B. (2011). The Vietnam War Debate. Lexington Books. pp. 54–5. ISBN 978-0-7391-3769-7. 1969: Millions march in US Vietnam Moratorium. BBC On This Day. Bob Fink. Vietnam – A View from the Walls: a History of the Vietnam Anti-War Movement. Greenwich Publishing. Archived from the original on 11 January 2013. Retrieved 18 August 2008. Qiang, Zhai (2000). China and the Vietnam Wars, 1950–1975. University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-4842-5. Bezlova, Antoaneta (21 February 2009). "China haunted by Khmer Rouge links". Asia Times. Archived from the original on 23 February 2009.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Russians Acknowledge a Combat Role in Vietnam". The New York Times. 14 April 1989. p. 13. Archived from the original on 7 April 2023. "Soviet Involvement in the Vietnam War". historicaltextarchive.com. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 22 February 2012. Sarin, Oleg; Dvoretsky, Lev (1996). Alien Wars: The Soviet Union's Aggressions Against the World, 1919 to 1989. Presidio Press. pp. 93–4. ISBN 978-0-89141-421-6. "Soviet rocketeer: After our arrival in Vietnam, American pilots refused to fly" (in Russian). rus.ruvr. Archived from the original on 17 January 2013. Retrieved 26 May 2010. Pribbenow, Merle (December 2014). "The Soviet-Vietnamese Intelligence Relationship during the Vietnam War: Cooperation and Conflict" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 April 2019. Retrieved 1 June 2018. Kaminsky, Arnold P.; Long, Roger D. (2016). Nationalism and Imperialism in South and Southeast Asia: Essays Presented to Damodar R.SarDesai. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-351-99742-3. Solis, Gary D. (2010). The Law of Armed Conflict: International Humanitarian Law in War. Cambridge University Press. pp. 301–303. ISBN 978-1-139-48711-5. Nick Turse; Deborah Nelson (6 August 2006). "Civilian Killings Went Unpunished". latimes.com. Archived from the original on 15 December 2012. Retrieved 14 September 2013. Sallah, Michael (2006). Tiger Force: a true story of men and war. Little, Brown. p. 306. ISBN 978-0-316-15997-5. "Free Fire Zone – The Vietnam War". The Vietnam War. Archived from the original on 5 February 2023. Retrieved 20 June 2018. Lewis M. Simons. "Free Fire Zones". Crimes of War. Archived from the original on 19 October 2016. Retrieved 5 October 2016. Turse, Nick (2013). Kill Anything That Moves: The Real American War in Vietnam. Metropolitan Books. ISBN 978-0-8050-8691-1. Kevin Buckley (19 June 1972). "Pacification's Deadly Price". Newsweek. pp. 42–43. Valentino, Benjamin (2005). Final Solutions: Mass Killing and Genocide in the 20th Century. Cornell University Press. p. 84. ISBN 978-0-8014-7273-2. Otterman, Michael (2007). American Torture: From the Cold War to Abu Ghraib and Beyond. Melbourne University Publishing. p. 62. ISBN 978-0-522-85333-9. Hersh, Seymour (15 December 2003). "Moving Targets". The New Yorker. Retrieved 20 November 2013. McCoy, Alfred (2006). A question of torture: CIA interrogation, from the Cold War to the War on Terror. Macmillan. p. 68. ISBN 978-0-8050-8041-4. Greiner, Bernd (2010). War Without Fronts: The USA in Vietnam. Vintage Books. ISBN 978-0-09-953259-0. "Torture: What the Vietcong Learned and the CIA Didn't". Newsweek. 15 December 2014. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Retrieved 20 June 2018. "The Man in the Snow White Cell". Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 13 June 2007. Retrieved 20 June 2018. Go Gyeong-tae (15 November 2000). 잠자던 진실, 30년만에 깨어나다 "한국군은 베트남에서 무엇을 했는가" ... 미국 국립문서보관소 비밀해제 보고서·사진 최초공개. Hankyoreh (in Korean). Archived from the original on 7 April 2023. Retrieved 8 September 2016. Pedahzur, Ami (2006). Root Causes of Suicide Terrorism: The Globalization of Martyrdom. Taylor & Francis. p. 116. ISBN 978-0-415-77029-3. Lanning, Michael; Cragg, Dan (2008). Inside the VC and the NVA: The Real Story of North Vietnam's Armed Forces. Texas A&M University Press. pp. 186–188. ISBN 978-1-60344-059-2. Kiernan, Ben (2017). Viet Nam: A History from Earliest Times to the Present. Oxford University Press. p. 444. ISBN 978-0-19-062730-0. Pike, Douglas (1996). PAVN: People's Army of Vietnam. Presidio Press. ISBN 978-0-89141-243-4. Wiesner, Louis (1988). Victims and Survivors: Displaced Persons and Other War Victims in Viet-Nam, 1954–1975. Greenwood Press. pp. 318–319. ISBN 978-0-313-26306-4. Norman, Elizabeth M. (1990). "Women at War: the Story of Fifty Military Nurses Who Served in Vietnam". New Jersey Nurse. Studies in Health, Illness, and Caregiving. 22 (2). University of Pennsylvania: 15. ISBN 978-0-8122-1317-1. JSTOR j.ctt3fhsqj. PMID 1570214. "Vietti, Eleanor Ardel". POW Network. Archived from the original on 6 February 2023. Retrieved 4 January 2018. Fisher, Binnie (28 October 2001). "The last missing woman from the Vietnam War". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on 7 April 2023. Retrieved 4 January 2018. Lloyd, Alice B. (29 May 2017). "Fact Check: Why Are So Few Women's Names on the Vietnam Memorial Wall?". Weekly Standard. Archived from the original on 7 June 2022. Retrieved 4 January 2018. Holm 1992, p. 206. Wood, Jordan (October 2015). "Taking on a Superpower: A Salute to the Women of Vietnam". Kaleidoscope. 3 (1). "The women who fought for their country". BBC News. 6 December 2016. Retrieved 19 June 2018. Herman, Elizabeth D. (6 June 2017). "Opinion | The Women Who Fought for Hanoi". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 16 April 2023. Retrieved 1 June 2018. Nguyen, Hai T. (17 January 2017). "Opinion | As the Earth Shook, They Stood Firm". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 16 April 2023. Retrieved 1 June 2018. Shapiro, T. Rees (27 April 2011). "Mme. Ngo Dinh Nhu, who exerted political power in Vietnam, dies at 87". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 24 December 2011. Retrieved 4 February 2014. Gustafsson, Mai Lan (2011). "Freedom. Money. Fun. Love': The Warlore of Vietnamese Bargirls". Oral History Review. 38 (2): 308–330. doi:10.1093/ohr/ohr097. PMID 22175096. S2CID 7718015. Hunt, Richard A. (1995). Pacification: The American Struggle for Vietnam's Hearts and Minds. Westview Press. p. 40. ISBN 978-0-8133-3459-2. Barry, Kathleen (1995). The Prostitution of Sexuality. NYU Press. p. 133. ISBN 978-0-8147-1277-1. Trinh Võ, Linda; Sciachitano, Marian (2004). Asian American women: the Frontiers reader. University of Nebraska Press. p. 144. ISBN 978-0-8032-9627-5. Lamb, David (June 2009). "Children of the Vietnam War". Smithsonian Magazine. Archived from the original on 24 May 2023. Becker, Elizabeth (17 November 2017). "Opinion | The Women Who Covered Vietnam". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Retrieved 1 June 2018. "The Stars, The Earth, The River | Northwestern University Press". www.nupress.northwestern.edu. Archived from the original on 18 June 2018. Retrieved 1 June 2018. Lamb, David (10 January 2003). "Vietnam's Women of War". Los Angeles Times. ISSN 0458-3035. Archived from the original on 25 November 2022. Retrieved 1 June 2018. "Kate Webb – Captured in Cambodia". UPI. Archived from the original on 11 February 2018. Retrieved 1 June 2018. "Fully Integrated". African-American Involvement in the Vietnam War (aavw.org). Retrieved 11 May 2017. Terry 1984, Epigraph, pp. xv–xvii. Appy, Christian (1993). Working-class War: American Combat Soldiers and Vietnam. The University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-6011-3. Chinese Support for North Vietnam during the Vietnam War: The Decisive Edge, Bob Seals, Military History Online, 23 September 2008 Albert Parray, Military Review, "Soviet aid to Vietnam" Archived 28 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine, June 1967 Miller, Robert; Wainstock, Dennis D. (2013). Indochina and Vietnam: The Thirty-five Year War, 1940–1975. Enigma Books. pp. 101–102. ISBN 978-1-936274-66-6. "North Vietnam's Master Plan | HistoryNet". www.historynet.com. 12 June 2006. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Retrieved 1 June 2018. C.H. Chivers (2 November 2009). "How Reliable is the M16 Rifle?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Maraniss, David (2003). They Marched into Sunlight: War and Peace Vietnam and America October 1967. Simon and Schuster. p. 410. ISBN 978-0-7432-6255-2. Dockery, Kevin (2012). The M60 Machine Gun. Osprey Publishing. p. 58. Biggs, David (25 November 2017). "Opinion | Vietnam: The Chemical War". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 16 April 2023. Retrieved 20 June 2018. "A History of U.S. Communications Security; the David G. Boak Lectures" (PDF). National Security Agency. 1981. p. 43. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 March 2023. "Disarmament". The United Nations Office at Geneva. United Nations. November 2011. Retrieved 20 September 2013. Greenberg, Jon (11 September 2014). "Kissinger: Drones have killed more civilians than the bombing of Cambodia in the Vietnam War". Politifact.com. Retrieved 18 September 2016. Robbers, Gerhard (2007). Encyclopedia of world constitutions. Infobase Publishing. p. 1021. ISBN 978-0-8160-6078-8. Elliot, Duong Van Mai (2010). "The End of the War". RAND in Southeast Asia: A History of the Vietnam War Era. RAND Corporation. pp. 499, 512–513. ISBN 978-0-8330-4754-0. Elliot, Duong Van Mai (2010). "The End of the War". RAND in Southeast Asia: A History of the Vietnam War Era. RAND Corporation. pp. 512–513. ISBN 978-0-8330-4754-0. cf. Porter, Gareth; Roberts, James (Summer 1988). "Creating a Bloodbath by Statistical Manipulation: A Review of A Methodology for Estimating Political Executions in Vietnam, 1975–1983, Jacqueline Desbarats; Karl D. Jackson". Pacific Affairs. 61 (2): 303–310. doi:10.2307/2759306. JSTOR 2759306. see Nguyen Cong Hoan' testimony in Human Rights in Vietnam: Hearings Before the Subcommittee on International Organizations of the Committee on International Relations: House of Representatives, Ninety-Fifth Congress, First Session (Report). U.S. Government Printing Office. 26 July 1977. pp. 149, 153.; see also Desbarats, Jacqueline; Jackson, Karl D. (September 1985). "Vietnam 1975–1982: The Cruel Peace". The Washington Quarterly. 8 (4): 169–182. doi:10.1080/01636608509477343. PMID 11618274. Sagan, Ginetta; Denney, Stephen (October–November 1982). "Re-education in Unliberated Vietnam: Loneliness, Suffering and Death". The Indochina Newsletter. Retrieved 1 September 2016. Nghia, M. Vo (2004). The Bamboo Gulag: Political Imprisonment in Communist Vietnam. McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-1714-8. "Amnesty International Report, 1979". Amnesty International. 1979. p. 116. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 March 2023. Retrieved 26 March 2018. Huy, Đức. Bên Thắng Cuộc. OsinBook. Desbarats, Jacqueline (1987). Repression in the Socialist Republic of Vietnam: Executions and Population Relocation. Indochina report ; no. 11. Singapore: Executive Publications. Chapman, William (17 August 1979). "Hanoi Rebuts Refugees on 'Economic Zones'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 14 June 2023. Retrieved 30 June 2021. "Read Gabriel García Márquez's Moving Vietnam Piece". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 25 April 2018. "Vietnam Is Admitted to the U.N. As 32d General Assembly Opens". The New York Times. 21 September 1977. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Retrieved 27 April 2018. Sharp, Bruce (1 April 2005). "Counting Hell: The Death Toll of the Khmer Rouge Regime in Cambodia". Retrieved 15 July 2016. The range based on the figures above extends from a minimum of 1.747 million, to a maximum of 2.495 million. The Documentation Center of Cambodia has mapped some 23,745 mass graves containing approximately 1.3 million suspected victims of execution; execution is believed to account for roughly 60% of the full death toll. See: Seybolt, Taylor B.; Aronson, Jay D.; Fischoff, Baruch (2013). Counting Civilian Casualties: An Introduction to Recording and Estimating Nonmilitary Deaths in Conflict. Oxford University Press. p. 238. ISBN 978-0-19-997731-4. Ben Kiernan cites a range of 1.671 to 1.871 million excess deaths under the Khmer Rouge. See Kiernan, Ben (December 2003). "The Demography of Genocide in Southeast Asia: The Death Tolls in Cambodia, 1975–79, and East Timor, 1975–80". Critical Asian Studies. 35 (4): 585–597. doi:10.1080/1467271032000147041. S2CID 143971159. Farrell, Epsey Cooke (1998). The Socialist Republic of Vietnam and the law of the sea: an analysis of Vietnamese behavior within the emerging international oceans regime. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. ISBN 90-411-0473-9. "Vietnam War Bomb Explodes Killing Four Children". The Huffington Post. 3 December 2012. Vietnam war shell explodes, kills two fishermen The Australian (28 April 2011) Wright, Rebecca (6 September 2016). "'My friends were afraid of me': What 80 million unexploded US bombs did to Laos". CNN. Retrieved 18 September 2016. "Lao PDR - Casualties and Victim Assistance". Landmine and Clustering Munition Monitor. Retrieved 17 July 2022. Stephen Castles; Mark J. Miller (10 July 2009). "Migration in the Asia-Pacific Region". Migration Polict Institute. Robinson, William (1998). Terms of refuge: the Indochinese exodus & the international response. Zed Books. p. 127. ISBN 978-1-85649-610-0. Nghia, M. Vo (2006). The Vietnamese Boat People, 1954 and 1975–1992. McFarland & Company. ISBN 978-0-7864-2345-3. Lippman, Thomas W. (9 April 1995). "McNamara Writes Vietnam Mea Culpa". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 28 December 2019. Retrieved 28 March 2020. As recounted by McNamara ... the war could and should have been avoided and should have been halted at several key junctures, one as early as 1963. According to McNamara, he and other senior advisers to President Lyndon B. Johnson failed to head it off through ignorance, inattention, flawed thinking, political expediency and lack of courage. Buzzanco, Bob (17 April 2000). "25 Years After End of Vietnam War, Myths Keep Us from Coming to Terms with Vietnam". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on 5 June 2008. Retrieved 11 June 2008. Kissinger 1975. "Victory in Europe 56 Years Ago". Gallup News Service. 8 May 2001. Dacy, Douglas (1986). Foreign aid, war, and economic development: South Vietnam 1955–1975 (PDF). Cambridge University Press. p. 242. ISBN 978-0-521-30327-9. "How Much Did The Vietnam War Cost?". The Vietnam War. 22 January 2014. Retrieved 17 May 2018. "CQ Almanac Online Edition". library.cqpress.com. Retrieved 14 June 2018. "US still making payments to relatives of Civil War veterans, analysis finds". Fox News. Associated Press. 20 March 2013. Jim Lobe (30 March 2013). "Iraq, Afghanistan Wars Will Cost U.S. 4–6 Trillion Dollars: Report". Inter Press Service. "Echoes of Combat: The Vietnam War in American Memory". Stanford University. Archived from the original on 8 May 2012. Retrieved 29 May 2011. Westheider 2007, p. 78. "Military draft system stopped". The Bulletin. Bend, Oregon. UPI. 27 January 1973. p. 1. "Military draft ended by Laird". The Times-News. Hendersonville, North Carolina. Associated Press. 27 January 1973. p. 1. "The War's Costs". Digital History. Archived from the original on 5 May 2008. Retrieved 3 November 2019. Combat Area Casualty File, November 1993. (The CACF is the basis for the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, i.e. The Wall), Center for Electronic Records, National Archives, Washington, DC "The Drugs That Built a Super Soldier: During the Vietnam War, the U.S. Military Plied Its Servicemen with Speed, Steroids, and Painkillers to Help Them Handle Extended Combat". The Atlantic. 8 April 2016. Archived from the original on 20 May 2023. Lepre, George (2011). Fragging: Why U.S. Soldiers Assaulted their Officers in Vietnam. Texas Tech University Press. ISBN 978-0-89672-715-1. "War Resisters Remain in Canada with No Regrets". ABC News. 19 November 2005. Archived from the original on 12 March 2023. Retrieved 26 February 2010. "Vietnam War Resisters in Canada Open Arms to U.S. Military Deserters". Pacific News Service. 28 June 2005. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 12 August 2014. "Proclamation 4483: Granting Pardon for Violations of the Selective Service Act, August 4, 1964 To March 38, 1973". 21 January 1977. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 11 June 2008. Scheer, Robert (8 July 2009). "McNamara's Evil Lives On". The Nation. ISSN 0027-8378. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 28 February 2020. Palmer 2007; Stone 2007. Peeples, Lynne (10 July 2013). "Veterans Sick From Agent Orange-Poisoned Planes Still Seek Justice". The Huffington Post. Retrieved 4 September 2013. "How Imperative Is It To Consider Ecocide As An International Crime?". IJLLR. 18 December 2022. Retrieved 21 June 2023. Cassandra, Bianca (17 February 2022). "Industrial disasters from Bhopal to present day: why the proposal to make 'ecocide' an international offence is persuasive". The Leaflet. Retrieved 21 June 2023. "'Ecocide' movement pushes for a new international crime: Environmental destruction". NBC News. 7 April 2021. Retrieved 21 June 2023. Rose, Hilary A.; Rose, Stephen P. (1972). "Chemical Spraying as Reported by Refugees from South Vietnam". Science. Vol. 177, no. 4050. pp. 710–712. doi:10.1126/science.177.4050.710. Ngo Anh, D.; Taylor, Richard; Roberts, Christine L.; Nguyen, Tuan V. (13 February 2006). "Association between Agent Orange and Birth Defects: Systematic Review and Meta-analysis". International Journal of Epidemiology. 35 (5). Oxford University Press: 1220–1230. doi:10.1093/ije/dyl038. PMID 16543362. Ornstein, Charles; Fresques, Hannah; Hixenbaugh, Mike (16 December 2016). "The Children of Agent Orange". ProPublica. Retrieved 23 February 2018. "U.S. starts its first Agent Orange cleanup in Vietnam". Reuters. 9 August 2012. Roberts 2005, p. 380 In his 234-page judgment, the judge observed: "Despite the fact that Congress and the President were fully advised of a substantial belief that the herbicide spraying in Vietnam was a violation of international law, they acted on their view that it was not a violation at the time." Crook 2008. Faiola, Anthony (13 November 2006). "In Vietnam, Old Foes Take Aim at War's Toxic Legacy". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 11 July 2007. Retrieved 8 September 2013. Administration, US Department of Veterans Affairs, Veterans Health. "VA.gov | Veterans Affairs". www.publichealth.va.gov. Retrieved 10 September 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Veterans' Diseases Associated with Agent Orange". United States Department of Veterans Affairs. Archived from the original on 9 May 2010. Retrieved 4 September 2013. "Vietnam War U.S. Military Fatal Casualty Statistics, Electronic Records Reference Report". U.S. National Archives. 30 April 2019. DCAS Vietnam Conflict Extract File record counts by CASUALTY CATEGORY (as of April 29, 2008). Retrieved 2 August 2021. (generated from the Vietnam Conflict Extract Data File of the Defense Casualty Analysis System (DCAS) Extract Files (as of 29 April 2008)) "fifty years of violent war deaths: data analysis from the world health survey program: BMJ". 23 April 2008. Retrieved 5 January 2013. From 1955 to 2002, data from the surveys indicated an estimated 5.4 million violent war deaths ... 3.8 million in Vietnam. "Vietnam War | Facts, Summary, Years, Timeline, Casualties, Combatants, & Facts". www.britannica.com. 16 June 2023. Retrieved 8 July 2023. "Vietnam War: Causes, Facts & Impact". HISTORY. 28 March 2023. Retrieved 8 July 2023. Lind, Michael (1999). "Vietnam, The Necessary War: A Reinterpretation of America's Most Disastrous Military Conflict". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 7 March 2023. Retrieved 17 January 2014. "Vietnam War". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 5 March 2008. Meanwhile, the United States, its military demoralized and its civilian electorate deeply divided, began a process of coming to terms with defeat in its longest and most controversial war Friedman, Herbert. "Allies of the Republic of Vietnam". Archived from the original on 7 March 2012. Retrieved 1 May 2019. Kempster, Norman (31 January 1991). "In This War, Body Count Is Ruled Out: Casualties: Gen. Schwarzkopf makes it clear he's not repeating a blunder made in Vietnam". Los Angeles Times. ISSN 0458-3035. Retrieved 3 June 2018. Aman, Mohammed M. (April 1993). "General H. Norman Schwarzkopf: The Autobiography: It Doesn't Take a Hero; H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre". Digest of Middle East Studies. 2 (2): 90–94. doi:10.1111/j.1949-3606.1993.tb00951.x. ISSN 1060-4367. Willbanks 2008, p. 32. Rand Corporation "Some Impressions of Viet Cong Vulnerabilities, an Interim Report" Archived 16 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine 1965 Kelman, H.C; Hamilton, V. (1989). "The My Lai Massacre: A Military Crime of Obedience". Crimes of Obedience: Towards a Social Psychology of Authority and Responsibility. Yale University Press. pp. 1–12. ISBN 978-0-300-04813-1. "Declassification of the BDM Study, "The Strategic Lessons Learned in Vietnam"" (PDF). Defense Technical Center. pp. 225–234. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 April 2019. Kiernan, Ben (2004). How Pol Pot Came to Power: Colonialism, Nationalism, and Communism in Cambodia, 1930–1975. Yale University Press. p. xxiii. ISBN 978-0-300-10262-8. "Vietnam-era unaccounted for statistical report" (PDF). 1 March 2021. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 April 2023. "Amsterdam Mayor visits Hanoi-Amsterdam High School". VOV Online Newspaper. 10 December 2014. Archived from the original on 28 April 2019. Retrieved 17 June 2018. Brummer, Justin. "The Vietnam War: A History in Song". History Today. Retrieved 6 August 2021. Milam, Ron (2009). Not A Gentleman's War: An Inside View of Junior Officers in the Vietnam War. University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-3712-2. Kuzmarov, Jeremy (2009). The Myth of the Addicted Army: Vietnam and the Modern War on Drugs. Univ of Massachusetts Press. pp. 3–4. ISBN 978-1-55849-705-4. Office of the Press Secretary (25 May 2017). "Presidential Proclamation Commemoration of the 50th Anniversary of the Vietnam War". whitehouse.gov. Washington, DC: White House. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Retrieved 13 November 2017. "Commemoration of the 50th Anniversary of the Vietnam War". Federal Register. Washington, DC: National Archives and Records Administration. 25 May 2012. Archived from the original on 14 November 2017. Retrieved 11 November 2017. Alt URL Dwyer, Devin (10 November 2017). "Trump marks Veterans Day with commemoration in Vietnam". ABC News. New York City: ABC. Archived from the original on 10 April 2023. Retrieved 13 November 2017. "Commemorating the 50th Anniversary of the Vietnam War". Federal Register. Washington, DC: National Archives and Records Administration. 10 November 2017. Archived from the original on 17 November 2017. Retrieved 20 November 2017. (Alt URL) Cooper, John F. (2019). Communist Nations' Military Assistance. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-429-72473-2. Crook, John R. (2008). "Court of Appeals Affirms Dismissal of Agent Orange Litigation". American Journal of International Law. 102 (3): 662–664. doi:10.2307/20456664. JSTOR 20456664. S2CID 140810853. Demma, Vincent H. (1989). "The U.S. Army in Vietnam". American Military History. Washington, DC: US Army Center of Military History. pp. 619–694. Archived from the original on 20 January 2020. Retrieved 13 September 2013. Eisenhower, Dwight D. (1963). Mandate for Change. Doubleday & Company. Holm, Jeanne (1992). Women in the Military: An Unfinished Revolution. Novato, CA: Presidio Press. ISBN 978-0-89141-450-6. Karnow, Stanley (1997). Vietnam: A History (2nd ed.). New York: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-026547-7. Kissinger (1975). "Lessons of Vietnam" by Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, ca. May 12, 1975 (memo). Archived from the original on 9 May 2008. Retrieved 11 June 2008. Leepson, Marc, ed. (1999). Dictionary of the Vietnam War. New York: Webster's New World. Military History Institute of Vietnam (2002). Victory in Vietnam: The Official History of the People's Army of Vietnam, 1954–1975. Translated by Merle Pribbenow. University of Kansas Press. ISBN 0-7006-1175-4. JSTOR j.ctt1dgn5kb. Nalty, Bernard (1998). The Vietnam War. New York: Barnes and Noble. ISBN 978-0-7607-1697-7. Olson, James S.; Roberts, Randy (2008). Where the Domino Fell: America and Vietnam 1945–1995 (5th ed.). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4051-8222-5. Palmer, Michael G. (2007). "The Case of Agent Orange". Contemporary Southeast Asia. 29 (1): 172–195. doi:10.1355/cs29-1h. JSTOR 25798819. Roberts, Anthea (2005). "The Agent Orange Case: Vietnam Ass'n for Victims of Agent Orange/Dioxin v. Dow Chemical Co". ASIL Proceedings. 99 (1): 380–385. JSTOR 25660031. Stone, Richard (2007). "Agent Orange's Bitter Harvest". Science. 315 (5809): 176–179. doi:10.1126/science.315.5809.176. JSTOR 20035179. PMID 17218503. S2CID 161597245. Terry, Wallace, ed. (1984). Bloods: An Oral History of the Vietnam War by Black Veterans. Random House. ISBN 978-0-394-53028-4. Truong, Như Tảng (1985). A Vietcong memoir. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. ISBN 978-0-15-193636-6. Westheider, James E. (2007). The Vietnam War. Westport, CN: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-33755-0. Willbanks, James H. (2008). The Tet Offensive: A Concise History. Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-12841-4. Willbanks, James H. (2009). Vietnam War almanac. Infobase Publishing. ISBN 978-0-8160-7102-9. Willbanks, James H. (2014). A Raid Too Far: Operation Lam Son 719 and Vietnamization in Laos. Texas A&M University Press. ISBN 978-1-62349-117-8. Woodruff, Mark (2005). Unheralded Victory: The Defeat of The Viet Cong and The North Vietnamese. Arlington, VA: Presidio Press. ISBN 978-0-89141-866-5. Central Intelligence Agency. "Laos". The World Factbook. "Cora Weiss Collection". Special Collections – Lloyd Sealy Library: Manuscript Collections. John Jay College of Criminal Justice. Materials related to war resistance and peace activism movements during the Vietnam War. Foreign Relations of the United States Keefer, Edward C.; Sampson, Charles S., eds. (1992). Volume I, Vietnam 1964. General Editor: John P. Glennon. U.S. Government Printing Office. ISBN 0-16-032358-4 – via Office of the Historian. Humphrey, David C.; Landa, Ronald D.; Smith, Louis J., eds. (1996). Volume II, Vietnam January–June 1965. General Editor: Glenn W. LaFantasie. ISBN 0-16-045126-4 – via Office of the Historian. Humphrey, David C.; Keefer, Edward C.; Smith, Louis J., eds. (1996). Volume III, Vietnam June–December 1965. General Editor: Glenn W. LaFantasie. U.S. Government Printing Office. ISBN 0-16-045129-9 – via Office of the Historian. Humphrey, David C., ed. (1998). Volume IV, Vietnam 1966. General Editor: David S. Patterson. ISBN 0-16-048812-5 – via Office of the Historian. Ho, Chi Minh (1960–1962). "Vietnam Declaration of Independence". Selected Works. LeMay, Curtis E.; Kantor, MacKinlay (1965). Mission with LeMay. Autobiography of controversial former Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force. O'Connell, Kim A. (2006). Primary Source Accounts of the Vietnam War. Berkeley Heights, NJ: MyReportLinks.com. ISBN 978-1-59845-001-9. McCain, John (1999). Faith of My Fathers: A Family Memoir. Harper Collins. ISBN 0-06-095786-7. Marshall, Kathryn (1987). In the Combat Zone: An Oral History of American Women in Vietnam, 1966–1975. Little, Brown. ISBN 0-316-54707-7. Myers, Thomas (1988). Walking Point: American Narratives of Vietnam. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-505351-6. Pentagon Papers (Gravel ed.). Boston: Beacon Press. 1971. 5 volumes. "Chapter I, Background to the Crisis, 1940–50". Volume 1. pp. 1–52. Archived from the original on 18 August 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2006 – via International Relations Department, Mount Holyoke College. Combination of narrative and secret documents compiled by Pentagon. Public Papers of the Presidents, 1965 (1966). Official documents of U.S. presidents. Schlesinger, Arthur M. Jr. (1978). Robert Kennedy and His Times. A first-hand account of the Kennedy administration by one of his principal advisors. Sinhanouk, Prince Norodom (1958). "Cambodia Neutral: The Dictates of Necessity". Foreign Affairs. Describes the geopolitical situation of Cambodia. United States – Vietnam Relations, 1945–1967: A Study Prepared by the Department of Defense. Washington, D.C.: Office of the Secretary of Defense, 1971, 12 volumes. Vietnam: A Television History. American Experience. PBS. 1983. Anderson, David L. (2004). Columbia Guide to the Vietnam War. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-11492-9. Angio, Joe. Nixon a Presidency Revealed (2007) The History Channel television documentary Appy, Christian G. (2006). Vietnam: The Definitive Oral History, Told from All Sides. London: Ebury Press. ISBN 978-0-09-191011-2. Asselin, Pierre (2024). Vietnam's American War: A New History. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781009229302. Baker, Kevin. "Stabbed in the Back! The past and future of a right-wing myth", Harper's Magazine (June 2006) "Stabbed in the back! The past and future of a right-wing myth (Harper's Magazine)". Retrieved 11 June 2008. Berman, Larry (1989). Lyndon Johnson's War: The Road to Stalemate in Vietnam. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-02636-8. Blaufarb, Douglas S. (1977). The Counterinsurgency Era: U.S. Doctrine and Performance, 1950 to the Present. New York: Free Press. ISBN 978-0-02-903700-3. Blaufarb Douglas S. The Counterinsurgency Era (1977). A history of the Kennedy Administration's involvement in South Vietnam. Brigham, Robert K. Battlefield Vietnam: A Brief History. A PBS interactive website. Brocheux, Pierre (2007). Ho Chi Minh: a biography. Cambridge University Press. p. 198. ISBN 978-0-521-85062-9. Buckley, Kevin (19 June 1972). "Pacification's Deadly Price". Newsweek. Retrieved 5 August 2008. Carney, Timothy (1989). "The Unexpected Victory". In Karl D. Jackson (ed.). Cambodia, 1975–1978: Rendezvous with Death. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. pp. 13–35. ISBN 978-0-691-07807-6. Church, Peter, ed. (2006). A Short History of South-East Asia. Wiley. ISBN 978-0-470-82181-7. Cooper, Chester L. (1970). The Lost Crusade: America in Vietnam. Dodd, Mead. ISBN 978-0-396-06241-7. a Washington insider's memoir of events. Courtwright, David T. (2005). Sky as Frontier: Adventure, Aviation, and Empire. College Station: Texas A&M University Press. ISBN 978-1-58544-384-0. Crump, Laurien (2015). The Warsaw Pact Reconsidered: International Relations in Eastern Europe, 1955–1969. Oxon: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-315-73254-1. Dennis, Peter; et al. (2008). The Oxford Companion to Australian Military History (2nd ed.). Melbourne: Oxford University Press Australia & New Zealand. ISBN 978-0-19-551784-2. DoD (6 November 1998). "Name of Technical Sergeant Richard B. Fitzgibbon to be added to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial". Department of Defense (DoD). Archived from the original on 20 October 2013. Dror, Olga (2018). Making Two Vietnams: War and Youth Identities, 1965–1975. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781108556163. Duiker, William J. (1981). The Communist Road to Power in Vietnam. Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-89158-794-1. Duncanson, Dennis J. (1968). Government and Revolution in Vietnam. Oxford University Press. OCLC 411221. Etcheson, Craig (2005). After the Killing Fields: Lessons from the Cambodian Genocide. New York: Praeger. ISBN 978-0-275-98513-4. Fall, Bernard B. (1967). The Two Viet-Nams: A Political and Military Analysis (2nd ed.). New York: Praeger. ISBN 978-0-9991417-9-3. Fincher, Ernest Barksdale (1980). The Vietnam War. Ford, Harold P. (1998). CIA and the Vietnam Policymakers: Three Episodes, 1962–1968. OCLC 39333058. Gerdes, Louise I., ed. (2005). Examining Issues Through Political Cartoons: The Vietnam War. Greenhaven Press. ISBN 978-0-7377-2531-5. Gettleman, Marvin E.; Franklin, Jane; Young, Marilyn (1995). Vietnam and America: A Documented History. Greiner, Bernd (2010). War Without Fronts: The USA in Vietnam. London: Vintage Books. ISBN 978-0-09-953259-0. Healy, Gene (2009). The Cult of the Presidency: America's Dangerous Devotion to Executive Power. Cato Institute. ISBN 978-1-933995-19-9. Herring, George C. (2001). America's Longest War: The United States and Vietnam, 1950–1975 (4th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-253618-8. Hitchens, Christopher. The Vietnam Syndrome. Kelly, Michael P. (2002). Where We Were in Vietnam. Oregon: Hellgate Press. ISBN 978-1-55571-625-7. Khong, Yuen Foong (1992). Analogies at War: Korea, Munich, Dien Bien Phu, and the Vietnam Decisions of 1965. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-07846-5. Kiernan, Ben (2008). The Pol Pot Regime: Race, Power, and Genocide in Cambodia Under the Khmer Rouge (3rd ed.). New Haven, CN: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-14434-5. ———; Owen, Taylor. "Bombs over Cambodia" (PDF). The Walrus (October 2006): 62–69. Kolko, Gabriel (1985). Anatomy of a War: Vietnam, the United States, and the Modern Historical Experience. New York: Pantheon Books. ISBN 978-0-394-74761-3. Kort, Michael G. (2017). The Vietnam War Reexamined. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781107110199. Kutler, Stanley I., ed. (1996). Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. ISBN 978-0-13-276932-7. Lawrence, A.T. (2009). Crucible Vietnam: Memoir of an Infantry Lieutenant. Jefferson, NC: McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-4517-2. Lawrence, Mark Atwood (2008). The Vietnam War: A Concise International History. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-531465-6. Lewy, Guenter (1978). America in Vietnam. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-502732-7. Logevall, Fredrik (2001). The Origins of the Vietnam War. Harlow: Longman. ISBN 978-0-582-31918-9. ——— (2010). "The Indochina wars and the Cold War, 1945–1975". In Melvyn P. Leffler; Odd Arne Westad (eds.). The Cambridge History of the Cold War, Volume II: Crises and Détente. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 281–304. ISBN 978-0-521-83720-0. McGibbon, Ian; ed (2000). The Oxford Companion to New Zealand Military History. Auckland: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-558376-2. McMahon, Robert J. (1995). Major Problems in the History of the Vietnam War: Documents and Essays. McNeill, Ian (1993). To Long Tan: The Australian Army and the Vietnam War 1950–1966. St Leonards: Allen & Unwin. ISBN 978-1-86373-282-6. Miller, Edward (2013). Misalliance: Ngo Dinh Diem, the United States, and the Fate of South Vietnam. Harvard University Press. ISBN 9780674072985. Milne, David (2008). America's Rasputin: Walt Rostow and the Vietnam War. New York: Hill & Wang. ISBN 978-0-374-10386-6. Moïse, Edwin E. (1996). Tonkin Gulf and the Escalation of the Vietnam War. Chapel Hill, N C: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-8078-2300-2. ——— (2002). Historical Dictionary of the Vietnam War. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-4183-3. Moss, George D. (2002). Vietnam (4th ed.). textbook. Moyar, Mark (2006). Triumph Forsaken: The Vietnam War, 1954–1965. New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-86911-9. Neale, Jonathan (2001). The American War: Vietnam, 1960–1975. London: Bookmarks. ISBN 978-1-898876-67-0. Neel, Spurgeon (1991). Medical Support of the U.S. Army in Vietnam 1965–1970. Department of the Army. official medical history Nelson, Deborah (2008). The War Behind Me: Vietnam Veterans Confront the Truth about U.S. War Crimes. Philadelphia, PA: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-00527-7. Nguyen, Duy Lap (2020). The Unimagined Community: Imperialism and Culture in South Vietnam. Manchester University Press. ISBN 978-1-5261-4396-9. Oberdorfer, Don (2001) [1971]. Tet! The Turning Point in the Vietnam War. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-6703-3. Obermeyer, Ziad; Murray, Christopher J.L.; Gakidou, Emmanuela (2008). "Fifty years of violent war deaths from Vietnam to Bosnia: analysis of data from the world health survey programme". BMJ. 336 (7659): 1482–1486. doi:10.1136/bmj.a137. PMC 2440905. PMID 18566045. Palmer, Bruce Jr. (1984). The Twenty-Five Year War. Narrative military history by a senior U.S. general. Palmer, Dave R. (1978). Summons of Trumpet: U.S.–Vietnam in Perspective. Novato, CA: Presidio Press. ISBN 978-0-89141-550-3. Robbins, Mary Susannah (2007). Against the Vietnam War: Writings by Activists. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. ISBN 978-0-7425-5914-1. Roberts III, Mervyn Edwin (2018). The Psychological War for Vietnam, 1960–1968. Schandler, Herbert Y. (2009). America in Vietnam: The War That Couldn't Be Won. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-6697-2. Schell, Jonathan. The Time of Illusion (1976). Schulzinger, Robert D. A Time for War: The United States and Vietnam, 1941–1975 (1997). Sheehan, Neil (1989). A Bright Shining Lie: John Paul Vann and America in Vietnam. New York: Vintage. ISBN 978-0-679-72414-8. Sorley, Lewis, A Better War: The Unexamined Victories and Final Tragedy of America's Last Years in Vietnam (1999), based upon still classified tape-recorded meetings of top level US commanders in Vietnam, ISBN 0-15-601309-6 Spector, Ronald. After Tet: The Bloodiest Year in Vietnam (1992), very broad coverage of 1968. Stanton, Shelby L. (2003). Vietnam order of battle. Stackpole Books. ISBN 978-0-8117-0071-9. Stuart-Fox, Martin (1997). A History of Laos. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-59235-2. Summers, Harry G. On Strategy: A Critical Analysis of the Vietnam War, Presidio press (1982), ISBN 0-89141-563-7 (225 pages) Thayer, Thomas C. (1985). War Without Fronts: The American Experience in Vietnam. Boulder, CO: Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-7132-0. Tucker, Spencer. ed. Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War (1998) 3 vol. reference set; also one-volume abridgement (2001). ——— (1999). Vietnam. London: UCL Press. ISBN 978-1-85728-921-3. Tran, Nu-Anh (2022). Disunion: Anticommunist Nationalism and the Making of the Republic of Vietnam. University of Hawaiʻi Press. ISBN 9780824887865. Tucker, Spencer (2011) [1998]. The Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War: A Political, Social, and Military History. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-85109-960-3. Turner, Robert F. (1975). Vietnamese Communism: Its Origins and Development. Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press. ISBN 978-0-8179-6431-3. Turse, Nick (2013). Kill Anything That Moves: The Real American War in Vietnam. New York: Metropolitan Books. ISBN 978-0-8050-8691-1. Young, Marilyn B. (1991). The Vietnam Wars, 1945–1990. New York: HarperPerennial. ISBN 978-0-06-092107-1. Xiaoming, Zhang. "China's 1979 War With Vietnam: A Reassessment", China Quarterly. Issue no. 184, (December 2005) Zhang, Xiaoming (2005). "CJO – Abstract – China's 1979 War with Vietnam: A Reassessment". The China Quarterly. 184: 851. doi:10.1017/S0305741005000536. S2CID 154831743. Appy, Christian G. (2006). Vietnam : The Definitive Oral History told from All Sides. London: Ebury. ISBN 978-0-0919-1011-2. OCLC 1302551584. Hall, Simon (September 2009). "Scholarly Battles over the Vietnam War". Historical Journal. 52 (3): 813–829. doi:10.1017/S0018246X09990185. S2CID 161303298. Olson, James Stuart, ed. The Vietnam War: Handbook of the literature and research (Greenwood, 1993) excerpt. Miller, Edward; Vu, Tuong (2009). "The Vietnam War as a Vietnamese War: Agency and Society in the Study of the Second Indochina War". Journal of Vietnamese Studies. 4 (3): 1–16. doi:10.1525/vs.2009.4.3.1. Kort, Michael G. (2017). "The Vietnam War in History". The Vietnam War Reexamined. Cambridge University Press. pp. 6–36. ISBN 978-1107110199. Berry, Jan (1976). Demilitarized Zones – Veterans after Vietnam. Perkasie, PA: East River Anthology. ISBN 0-917238-01-X. Nau, Terry L. (2013). Reluctant Soldier ... Proud Veteran: How a cynical Vietnam vet learned to take pride in his service to the USA. Leipzig: Amazon Distribution GmbH. ISBN 978-1-4827-6149-8. OCLC 870660174. Conboy, Ken & Morrison, James (November–December 1999). "Plausible Deniability: US-Taiwanese Covert Insertions into North Vietnam". Air Enthusiast (84): 29–34. ISSN 0143-5450. Hammond, William (1987). Public Affairs: The Military and the Media, 1962–1968. ——— (1995). Public Affairs: The Military and the Media, 1968–1973. (Full-scale history of the war by U.S. Army; much broader than title suggests.) Kolbert, Elizabeth (12 October 2020). "This Close: The day the Cuban missile crisis almost went nuclear" (a review of Martin J. Sherwin's Gambling with Armageddon: Nuclear Roulette from Hiroshima to the Cuban Missile Crisis, New York, Knopf, 2020). "The Day Nuclear War Almost Broke Out" [online version]. The New Yorker. The Vietnam War: The Definitive Illustrated History. DK. 2017. Miller, Edward; Nguyen, Lien-Hang T., eds. (2024). The Cambridge History of the Vietnam War, Volume I: Origins. Vol. 1. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-10508-9. Preston, Andrew; Nguyen, Lien-Hang T., eds. (2024). The Cambridge History of the Vietnam War, Volume II: Escalation and Stalemate. Vol. 2. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-10510-2. Asselin, Pierre; Nguyen, Lien-Hang T., eds. (2024). The Cambridge History of the Vietnam War, Volume III: Endings and Aftermaths. Vol. 3. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-10512-6. Vietnam War at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata A Vietnam Diary's Homecoming Video produced by the PBS Series History Detectives Detailed bibliography of Vietnam War Documents Relating to American Foreign Policy–Vietnam Archived 13 August 2012 at the Wayback Machine primary sources on U.S. involvement Fallout of the War from the Dean Peter Krogh Foreign Affairs Digital Archives Glossary of Military Terms & Slang from the Vietnam War Impressions of Vietnam and descriptions of the daily life of a soldier from the oral history of Elliott Gardner, U.S. Army Archived 30 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine Stephen H. Warner Southeast Asia Photograph Collection at Gettysburg College Timeline US – Vietnam (1947–2001) in Open-Content project The U.S. Army in Vietnam the official history of the United States Army The Vietnam War at The History Channel UC Berkeley Library Social Activism Sound Recording Project: Anti-Vietnam War Protests Vietnam war timeline comprehensive timeline of the Vietnam War Virtual Vietnam Archive – Texas Tech University 1965–1975 Another Vietnam; Unseen images of the war from the winning side – Mashable Archival collections about the Vietnam War, University Archives and Special Collections, Joseph P. Healey Library, University of Massachusetts Boston