Roger Federer (German pronunciation: [ˈrɔdʒər ˈfeːdərər]; born 8 August 1981) is a Swiss former professional tennis player. Federer was ranked world No. 1 in singles by the Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP) for 310 weeks, including a record 237 consecutive weeks, and finished as the year-end No. 1 five times. He won 103 singles titles on the ATP Tour, the second most of all time, including 20 major men's singles titles (among which a record eight men's singles Wimbledon titles, and an Open Era joint-record five men's singles US Open titles) and six year-end championships. A Wimbledon junior champion in 1998 and former ball boy, Federer won his first major singles title at Wimbledon in 2003 at age 21. Between 2003 and 2009, Federer played in 21 out of 28 major singles finals. He won three of the four majors and the ATP Finals in 2004, 2006, and 2007 as well as five consecutive titles at both Wimbledon and the US Open. He completed the career Grand Slam at the 2009 French Open after three consecutive runner-up finishes to Rafael Nadal, his main rival until 2010. At age 27, he surpassed Pete Sampras's record of 14 major men's singles titles at Wimbledon in 2009. Federer and Stan Wawrinka led the Switzerland Davis Cup team to their first title in 2014, following their Olympic doubles gold victory at the 2008 Beijing Olympics. Federer also won a silver medal in singles at the 2012 London Olympics, finishing runner-up to Andy Murray. After a half-year hiatus in late 2016 to recover from knee surgery, Federer returned to tennis, winning three more majors over the next two years, including the 2017 Australian Open over Nadal and an eighth singles title at the 2017 Wimbledon Championships. At the 2018 Australian Open, Federer became the first man to win 20 major singles titles and shortly after the oldest ATP world No. 1 at age 36. In September 2022, he retired from professional tennis following the Laver Cup. A versatile all-court player, Federer's grace on the court made him popular among tennis fans. Originally lacking self-control as a junior, he transformed his on-court demeanor to become well-liked for his graciousness, winning the Stefan Edberg Sportsmanship Award 13 times. He also won the Laureus World Sportsman of the Year award a record five times. Outside of competition, Federer played an instrumental role in the creation of the Laver Cup team competition. He is also an active philanthropist. He established the Roger Federer Foundation, which targets impoverished children in southern Africa, and has raised funds in part through the Match for Africa exhibition series. By the end of his career, Federer was routinely one of the top-ten highest-paid athletes in any sport, and ranked first among all athletes with $100 million in endorsement income in 2020. Federer was born on 8 August 1981 in Basel, Switzerland. A member of the Federer family, his Swiss father, Robert Federer, is from Berneck in the canton of St. Gallen and his Afrikaner mother, Lynette Federer (née Durand), is from Kempton Park, Gauteng, in South Africa. He has one sibling, his older sister, Diana, the mother of twins. Since Federer's mother is South African, he holds both Swiss and South African citizenship. As youngsters, Federer and his elder sister Diana used to accompany their parents, both of whom worked for Ciba-Geigy Pharmaceuticals, to the company's private tennis courts at the weekends, where he first played tennis at the age of three. Soon after enrolling in school at the age of six, Federer became the best in his age group. Feeling that Federer had outgrown the Ciba club and needed to be amongst better juniors, his mother Lynette enrolled him at age eight in the elite junior programme of the Old Boys Tennis Club in Basel, where he received his initial tennis instruction from veteran Czech coach Adolf Kacovsky. Federer began using the one-handed backhand from an early age not only because Kacovsky was a fan of it, but also because all of his childhood idols, Stefan Edberg, fellow German Boris Becker, and later Pete Sampras, used the one-hander too. From ages 8 to 10, Federer received group and individual training from Kacovsky. At age 10, Federer began being taught at the club by Australian former tennis player Peter Carter. Federer has credited Carter for his "entire technique and coolness". Possessing boundless energy, Federer grew up playing many sports, such as badminton, basketball, football, and tennis, but he was most taken by the latter two. He also tried skiing and swimming and spent hours playing soft tennis on the street. He credits his hand-eye coordination to the wide range of sports he played as a child. In 1993, Federer won the U12 Swiss national junior championships in Lucerne. Becoming the best junior in the country helped him decide to become a professional tennis player, so he stopped playing football at age twelve to concentrate solely on tennis, where he felt he had more control over his victories or defeats, rather than relying on the performances of his teammates. Federer was also a ball boy at his hometown Basel event, the Swiss Indoors in 1992 and 1993, and he even received a medal after the 1993 final, together with the other ballboys, from the hands of the champion Michael Stich. He was brought to train at the Swiss National Tennis Center, then located in Ecublens in the canton of Vaud, between 1995 and 1997. It was in this new setting that he learned French at the age of 14. He completed his compulsory education at La Planta secondary school in Chavannes-près-Renens and obtained his certificate in July 1997, in the upper division, commercial studies section. In 1995, at age 13, Federer won the U14 Swiss national junior championship and was subsequently invited to train at the prestigious National Tennis Centre in the French-speaking Écublens, where he enrolled shortly after his 14th birthday. There, he had the opportunity to combine three hours of tennis training per day alongside education, but Federer had little interest in studying and struggled to balance his education with his tennis commitments. Speaking little French and struggling with the whole concept of living away from home, Federer found his first months at Écublens depressing. He was the youngest player in the group and also felt isolated as the “Swiss German” by many of the students and staff at the academy, experienced mild bullying, and was often on the verge of packing his bags and returning home. Federer credits this difficult period of his life as the reason behind his independent spirit. Federer played his first ITF junior match in July 1996, at the age of 14, at a grade-2 tournament in Switzerland. He then played in the 1996 NEC World Youth Cup Final in Zürich against tennis players like Lleyton Hewitt. In January 1997, at age 15, Federer won both the indoor and outdoor U18 Swiss national championship, defeating the three-year older Yves Allegro in both finals. In May, Federer won his first-ever ITF junior title on the clay courts of a second-category tournament in Prato, doing so without the loss of a set. In September, Federer earned the first 12 ATP points of his career in a four-week Swiss satellite tournament in Bossonnens, thus making his debut in the ATP rankings at No. 803, just five spots ahead of future rival Lleyton Hewitt. His main accomplishments as a junior player came at Wimbledon in 1998, when he won both the Boys' singles final over Irakli Labadze, and the Boys' doubles final, teamed with Olivier Rochus, defeating the team of Michaël Llodra and Andy Ram. Federer then reached the US Open Junior final, which he lost to David Nalbandian; this was the only occasion Federer lost a final on the junior circuit. He then brought his junior career to an end at the prestigious Junior Orange Bowl in Miami, where he defeated Nalbandian in the semifinals and Guillermo Coria in the final. By the end of 1998 he attained the No. 1 junior world ranking and was awarded ITF Junior World Champion. He ended his junior career at the end of 1998 with a high-ranking of No. 1 in singles and No. 7 in doubles (both attained on 31 December 1998) and a win–loss record of 78–20 in singles and 36–21 in doubles. Junior Grand Slam results – Singles: Australian Open: SF (1998) French Open: 1R (1998) Wimbledon: W (1998) US Open: F (1998) Junior Grand Slam results – Doubles: Australian Open: SF (1998) French Open: 1R (1998) Wimbledon: W (1998) US Open: 1R (1998) In July 1998, an almost 17-year-old Federer made his ATP debut at the Swiss Open Gstaad, in his home country of Switzerland, losing to No. 88 Lucas Arnold Ker in the first round. Later that year, he won his first ATP match against Guillaume Raoux in Toulouse. He then received a wildcard into the 1998 Swiss Indoors in his hometown in Basel, where he lost in the first round to former world No. 1 Andre Agassi. He finished 1998 ranked as the world No. 301. In April 1999, Federer made his Davis Cup debut in a World Group first round against Italy, defeating Davide Sanguinetti. In August, Federer won his first-ever professional title on the Challenger tour in Segovia, pairing with Sander Groen to beat Ota Fukárek and Alejandro Hernández in the final, which was played on Federer's 18th birthday. Despite losing in the first rounds of both the French Open and Wimbledon and having just turned 18, he entered the world’s Top 100 for the first time on 20 September 1999. Later that month, Federer won his first and only singles ATP Challenger title in Brest, defeating Max Mirnyi in the final. In his first full year as a professional, Federer finished the year as the world No. 64, and in doing so at 18 years and four months of age, he became the youngest player to end the year among the world’s top 100. His first Grand Slam win came at the Australian Open, where he defeated former World No. 2 Michael Chang. His first singles final came at the Marseille Open in February 2000, where he lost to fellow Swiss Marc Rosset. Federer then entered the Top 50 in March and ended 2000 ranked as the world No. 29. Federer made his Olympic debut at Sydney, where he surprised many by reaching the semifinals, where he lost to Tommy Haas and then to Arnaud Di Pasquale in the bronze medal match. In January 2001, Federer won the Hopman Cup representing Switzerland, along with world No. 1 Martina Hingis. The duo defeated the American pair of Monica Seles and Jan-Michael Gambill in the finals. Federer later said that his experience with Hingis "definitely helped me to become the player I am today." In 2001, Federer won his first singles title at the 2001 Milan Indoor tournament, where he defeated Julien Boutter in the final. Federer then reached his first Grand Slam quarterfinal at the French Open, losing to former world No. 2 and eventual finalist Àlex Corretja. His international breakthrough came at the Wimbledon Championships, when the 19-year-old Federer faced the four-time defending champion and all-time Grand Slam leader Pete Sampras in the fourth round. Federer defeated the No. 1 seed in a five-set match to snap Sampras' 31-match win streak at Wimbledon before losing in the quarter-finals to Tim Henman. In 2002, Federer reached his first Masters final at the Miami event, where he lost to Andre Agassi, but then won his first Masters title in Hamburg, defeating Marat Safin in the final; the victory put him in the top 10 for the first time. On 1 August, Federer suffered the devastating loss of his long-time Australian coach and mentor, Peter Carter, in a car crash in South Africa. Although he suffered first-round losses in the three tournaments he entered after Carter's death, Federer gathered himself together and began playing with more determination than ever. After reaching the fourth round of the US Open, he won the Vienna Open, jumping in the rankings from No. 13 at the end of September to No. 7 by early November, which allowed him to qualify for the first time for the year-end Masters Cup, where he won all of his matches in the round-robin stage before losing the semifinals to the then-world no. 1 and eventual champion Lleyton Hewitt. At age 21, he ended 2002 ranked as the world No. 6. In 2003, Federer won his first Grand Slam singles title at Wimbledon, beating Andy Roddick in the semifinals and Mark Philippoussis in the final. In doing so, he joined the likes of Björn Borg, Pat Cash and Stefan Edberg as the only singles players to win both the junior and senior Wimbledon titles. In August he had a chance to take over the No. 1 ranking for the first time from Andre Agassi if he made it to the Montreal final. However, he fell in the semifinals to Roddick, in a final-set tiebreaker, leaving him 120 points behind Agassi. This, coupled with early losses to David Nalbandian at Cincinnati and the US Open, denied Federer the chance to become No. 1 in 2003. Federer won his first and only doubles Masters event in Miami with Max Mirnyi, beating the pair of Leander Paes and David Rikl in the final. He then reached the singles final of the Rome Masters on clay, which he lost to Félix Mantilla. Federer reached nine finals on the ATP Tour and won seven of them on four different surfaces, including the 500 series events at Dubai and Vienna, defeating Jiří Novák and Carlos Moyá in the respective finals. Lastly, Federer won the year-end championships over Andre Agassi, finishing the year as world No. 2, narrowly behind Andy Roddick by only 160 points. In 2004, Federer won three Grand Slam singles titles, becoming the first person to do so in a single season since Mats Wilander in 1988. His first major hard-court title came at the Australian Open over Marat Safin, making him the world No. 1 for the first time. He then won the Indian Wells on hardcourts and the Hamburg Masters on clay, beating Tim Henman and Guillermo Coria in the finals respectively, snapping the latter's 31-match winning streak on clay. Federer won his second Wimbledon crown over Andy Roddick. At the Summer Olympics in Athens, Federer was the clear favorite after claiming the world No. 1 ranking for the first time earlier in the year. However, he lost in the second round to 18-year-old Tomáš Berdych. He then won the Canada Masters, defeating Roddick in the final. At the US Open, Federer defeated the 2001 champion, Lleyton Hewitt, for his first title there. Federer also won his first tournament on home soil by capturing the Swiss Open in Gstaad and he wrapped up the year by winning the year-end championships for the second time after beating Hewitt in the final. His 11 singles titles were the most of any player in two decades, and his record of 74–6 was the best since Ivan Lendl in 1986. In 2005, Federer failed to reach the finals of the first two Grand Slam tournaments, losing the Australian Open semifinal to eventual champion Safin after holding match points, and the French Open semifinal to eventual champion Rafael Nadal. However, Federer reestablished his dominance on grass, winning Wimbledon for a third time by defeating Andy Roddick. At the US Open, Federer defeated Andre Agassi in the latter's last major final. Federer also took four Masters wins: Indian Wells, Miami and Cincinnati on hard court, and Hamburg on clay. The win in Miami was particularly noteworthy as it was the first final contested between Federer and Nadal. Federer recovered from two sets down to take the final in five sets. Furthermore, Federer won two ATP 500 series events at Rotterdam and Dubai. Federer lost the year-end championships to David Nalbandian in five sets while playing through a foot injury that sidelined him for almost the rest of the season after September. He maintained his position as No. 1 for the entire season. That year, Federer won 11 singles titles, which tied his mark during the 2004 season. Federer's 81 match victories were the most since Pete Sampras in 1993, and his record of 81–4 (95.2%) remains the third-best winning percentage in the Open Era behind John McEnroe's 1984 and Jimmy Connors's 1974. The 2006 season was statistically the best season of Federer's career. In November 2011, Stephen Tignor, chief editorial writer for Tennis.com, ranked Federer's 2006 season as statistically the second-best season of all time during the Open Era, behind Rod Laver's Grand Slam year of 1969. Federer won 12 singles titles (the most of any player since Thomas Muster in 1995 and John McEnroe in 1984) and had a match record of 92–5 (the most wins since Ivan Lendl in 1982). Federer reached the finals in an astounding 16 of the 17 tournaments he entered during the season. In 2006, Federer won three Grand Slam singles titles and reached the final of the other, with the only loss coming against Nadal in the French Open. This was Federer and Nadal's first meeting in a Grand Slam final. He was the first man to reach all four finals in a calendar year since Rod Laver in 1969. Federer defeated Nadal in the Wimbledon Championships final. In the Australian Open, Federer defeated Marcos Baghdatis, and at the US Open, Federer defeated 2003 champion Roddick. In addition, Federer reached six Masters finals, winning four on hard surfaces and losing two on clay to Nadal. Federer, however, consistently pushed Nadal to the limit on clay throughout the season taking him to fourth-set tiebreakers in Monte-Carlo and Paris, and a thrilling match in Rome that went to a deciding fifth-set tiebreaker. Federer won one ATP 500 series event in Tokyo and captured the year-end championships for the third time in his career, again finishing the year as world No. 1. Federer only lost to two players during 2006, to Nadal four times in finals, and to 19-year-old Andy Murray in the second round of the 2006 Cincinnati Masters, in what was Federer's only defeat before the final of a tournament that year. Federer finished the season on a 29-match winning streak, as well as winning 48 of his last 49 matches after the French Open. Near the end of the season, he won his hometown tournament, the Swiss Indoors in Basel, Switzerland for the first time, having finished runner up in 2000 and 2001, and missing the tournament in 2004 and 2005 due to injuries. In 2007, Federer reached all four Grand Slam singles finals, winning three of them again. At the Australian Open, he became the first man since Björn Borg in 1980 to win a major without dropping a set, beating Fernando González in the final. Federer captured his fourth Dubai crown to extend his winning streak to 41 matches, the longest of his career and only five shy of the all-time record. Federer then entered Indian Wells as the three-time defending champion, but his streak ended in controversy when he was defeated by Guillermo Cañas, who had failed a drug test for illegal doping. This surprising first-round loss marked the first time that he was defeated since August 2006, a period spanning over seven months. During the clay season, Federer snapped Nadal's 81-match winning streak on clay, an Open-era record, in the final of the Hamburg Masters after turning the match around from a set down, including a final set bagel. This win convinced some that Federer could win the French Open to become the first man in almost 40 years to hold all four majors simultaneously, but instead he lost in a four-set final to Nadal again. At Wimbledon, Federer defeated Nadal for a second consecutive year in the final, this time in a thrilling five-set encounter that many analysts hailed as the greatest Wimbledon final since 1980. This victory equaled him with Björn Borg for the record of five consecutive Wimbledon championships. At the Canada Masters, Federer lost in the final to Novak Djokovic in a final-set tiebreaker upset. Federer rebounded in Cincinnati to capture his fifth title of the year. Federer entered the US Open as the three-time defending champion and faced Djokovic in the final. This time, Federer prevailed in a close straight-set match. This victory moved him ahead of Laver and Borg for third on the all-time list of major championship victories. He closed out the year with victories in Basel and the year-end championships in Shanghai. He finished the season as the year-end No. 1 for the fourth year in a row, compiling an impressive 68–9 record. After his phenomenal triple Grand Slam season yet again, Federer became the only player in history to win three majors in a year for three years (2004, 2006, 2007). It was the third consecutive season that Federer held the No. 1 ranking for all 52 weeks of the year. Federer's success in 2008 was severely hampered by a lingering bout of mononucleosis, which he suffered during the first half of the year. At the Australian Open Federer lost in the semifinals to eventual winner Djokovic, which ended his record of 10 consecutive finals. He lost twice in Masters finals on clay to Nadal, at Monte Carlo and Hamburg. Federer captured three titles playing in 250-level events at Estoril, Halle, and Basel. Federer was defeated by Nadal in two Grand Slam finals, the French Open and Wimbledon, which was regarded as the best match of tennis history by many, when he was going for six straight wins to break Björn Borg's record. He came back from two sets down to force a fifth set, where he fell just two points from the title. At the Olympic Games, Federer and Stan Wawrinka won the gold medal in doubles by beating the Bryan brothers American team in the semifinals and the Swedish duo of Simon Aspelin and Thomas Johansson in the final. However, Federer could reach only the quarterfinals in the singles draw, bowing out to then No. 8 James Blake, thus ceding his No. 1 ranking to Nadal after being at the top for a record 237 consecutive weeks. Federer captured his only Grand Slam of 2008 at the US Open, defeating Andy Murray in the final. At the end of the year, Federer suffered a back injury, which caused him to withdraw from the Paris Masters and resulted in a poor showing at the year-end championship, where he was eliminated in the round-robin stage. This marked the only time in his career that he was eliminated before the semifinals. Federer ended the year ranked No. 2. Federer began the 2009 season with a loss to Nadal in the final of the Australian Open in a hotly contested five-set match. Federer struggled following the defeat in Melbourne and entered the clay season without a title. Federer's season turned around in the final Masters event of the clay season when he defeated Nadal on clay for only the second time to capture the Madrid Masters. After Nadal's unexpected defeat to Robin Söderling, Federer became the overwhelming favorite to win the elusive French Open. In his next match, he came from two sets and break point down in the third set to defeat Tommy Haas in five sets. He also fought back from a two-sets-to-one deficit against a young Juan Martín del Potro to win a five-setter in the semifinals. In the final, he defeated Söderling in straight sets to finally capture the Coupe des Mousquetaires and career Grand Slam. This victory also tied him with Pete Sampras for the most Grand Slam singles titles at 14. In Wimbledon, Federer faced long-time rival Andy Roddick in the final in what was their eighth and final meeting at a Grand Slam. The final was historic for being the longest Grand Slam final in terms of games played with Federer prevailing 16–14 in a record-setting fifth set, thus winning his 15th Grand Slam singles title and breaking the all-time record of Pete Sampras. Federer continued his summer run by winning his third Cincinnati Masters, defeating Novak Djokovic in the final. For the third consecutive year, Federer defeated Djokovic in the semifinals of the US Open. On the penultimate point, he hit what many consider to be the greatest shot of his career, a tweener winner, to set up match points. Federer was defeated by del Potro in the final despite falling just two points from the title in the fourth set. Federer finished the season as the year-end No. 1 for the fifth time in his career. Federer started the year with a win at the Australian Open, where he defeated Andy Murray in the final, extending the Grand Slam singles record to sixteen titles and matching Andre Agassi's record of four Australian Open titles. Since 2005 Wimbledon, Federer had made 18 out of 19 finals in Grand Slam tournaments, a period of sustained excellence unparalleled in the Open Era. This tournament, however, marked the end of his dominance at the majors. At the French Open, Federer won his 700th tour match and 150th tour match on clay. However, he failed to reach a Grand Slam semifinal for the first time since the 2004 French Open, losing to Söderling in the quarterfinals and relinquishing his No. 1 ranking, having been just one week away from equaling Pete Sampras's record of 286 weeks as world No. 1. In a huge upset at Wimbledon, Federer lost in the quarterfinals again to Tomáš Berdych and fell to No. 3 in the rankings for the first time in six years and eight months. Towards the middle of July, Federer hired Pete Sampras's old coach, Paul Annacone, on a trial basis to put his tennis game and career back on track. At the US Open, Federer reached the semifinals, where he lost a five-set match to Novak Djokovic after holding two match points. Federer reached four Masters finals prevailing against Mardy Fish at Cincinnati. Federer finished the year in strong form, winning indoor titles at the Stockholm Open, Swiss Indoors and the ATP Finals in London, beating Djokovic and Nadal in the finals of the latter two. It remains the only tournament in his career in which Federer defeated all fellow members of the Big Four. In 2010, Federer finished in the top two for the eighth consecutive season. The year 2011 was a lean year for Federer, although great by most player's standards. He was defeated in straight sets in the semifinals of the Australian Open by eventual champion Novak Djokovic. At the French Open semifinals, Federer ended Djokovic's undefeated streak of 43 consecutive wins with a four-set victory, but he then lost in the final to Rafael Nadal. At Wimbledon, Federer lost in the quarterfinals to Jo-Wilfried Tsonga. It marked the first time in his career that he had lost a Grand Slam match after winning the first two sets. At the US Open, Federer lost in the semifinals to Novak Djokovic in five sets after winning the first two sets for the second time in 2011. In a repeat of the previous year's semifinal event, Federer again squandered two match points, this time on his own serve. The loss meant that it was the first time since 2002 that Federer had not won any of the four Grand Slam titles. Federer finished the season successfully in the indoor season, winning his last three tournaments of the year at the Swiss Indoors, Paris Masters and ATP Finals, forming a 16-match winning streak. Federer finished the year ranked No. 3. Federer began the 2012 season by reaching the semifinal of the Australian Open, which he lost to Nadal. He then won the Rotterdam Open for the first time since 2005, defeating del Potro in the final. In the Dubai Championships, he defeated Murray in the final. Federer then won the Indian Wells Masters after defeating Nadal in the semifinals, and John Isner in the final. Federer went on to compete at the Madrid Masters on the new blue clay surface, where he beat Tomáš Berdych in the final, thus regaining the No. 2 ranking from Rafael Nadal. In the French Open, Federer reached the semifinals before losing to Djokovic in straight sets, in a rematch of the previous year's semifinal. At Wimbledon, Federer played a five-set match in the third round against Julien Benneteau on his way to winning the tournament, defeating Djokovic in the semifinals and then Murray in a four-set final to win his seventh Wimbledon championship, tying Sampras' Open Era record. With this victory, Federer returned to the top spot in the world rankings and, in doing so, broke Sampras' record of 286 weeks atop the list. In the 2012 Summer Olympics, Federer defeated Del Potro in a 4-hour 26-minute semifinal by winning 19–17 in the third and final set. Clearly exhausted from his clash with Del Potro, Federer then lost the final to Murray in a surprisingly lopsided match, thus winning a silver medal for his country. In August, Federer won the Cincinnati Masters, beating Djokovic in the final. In the US Open, Federer was defeated by Tomáš Berdych in the quarterfinals. At the Shanghai Masters, after defeating Wawrinka in the third round, Federer confirmed his 300th week at No. 1, thus becoming the first player to reach this milestone. Federer ended the season by reaching the final of the ATP Finals, where he lost to Djokovic. Federer developed back injuries in March and July and his ranking dropped from No. 2 to No. 6. Federer's first and only title of 2013 came at the Gerry Weber Open, defeating Mikhail Youzhny in the final. With the victory in Halle, he tied John McEnroe for the third-most ATP titles won by a male player in the Open Era. Federer, however, was unable to maintain his form into Wimbledon, suffering his worst Grand Slam tournament defeat since 2003 in the second round against Sergiy Stakhovsky. This loss ended Federer's record streak of 36 consecutive quarterfinals at Grand Slam tournaments, and it also meant that he would drop out of the top 4 for the first time since July 2003. After Wimbledon, Federer continued to be upset early in tournaments in Hamburg and Gstaad because of a serious back injury through October, when he announced that he was parting ways with Paul Annacone, his coach for the last three years. Federer made the final in Basel, succumbing to Juan Martín del Potro in three sets, and indicated it was a mistake to have played certain tournaments while suffering from a back injury. On 27 December 2013, Federer announced that Stefan Edberg was joining his team as co-coach with Severin Lüthi. At the Australian Open, Federer defeated Tsonga and Murray to reach his 11th consecutive semifinal in Melbourne, before losing to Rafael Nadal in straight sets. At the Dubai Championships, he defeated Djokovic in the semifinals and Berdych in the final to win his sixth Dubai crown. Federer then reached the Indian Wells final, but lost to Djokovic in a final-set tiebreaker. The emergence of countryman Stanislas Wawrinka as a Grand Slam singles champion in 2014 renewed hope for Federer in his Davis Cup quest, and the pair both committed to playing each tie in the Davis Cup. Their commitment paid off as wins over Serbia, Kazakhstan (in which Federer won the first deciding rubber of his Davis Cup career), and Italy allowed the Swiss team to advance to the final for the first time since 1992. During the clay season, Federer took a wild card into the Monte-Carlo Masters, defeating Djokovic on his way to the final, which he lost to Wawrinka. At the Halle Open, Federer reached both the singles and the doubles finals, beating Alejandro Falla in the singles final. At Wimbledon, Federer reached a record ninth final, but he was defeated by Djokovic in an epic five-set match. Federer reached the final of the Canadian Open, where he was defeated by Tsonga. Federer then defeated Spain's David Ferrer in three sets to capture his sixth Cincinnati crown. He then reached the semifinals at the US Open but lost in straight sets to eventual champion Marin Čilić. At Shanghai Masters, Federer saved five match points against Leonardo Mayer in the second round before defeating Djokovic in the semifinals to end his 28-match unbeaten run on Chinese soil. He then beat Gilles Simon to win his second Shanghai final. The victory saw Federer return to the No. 2 ranking for the first time since May 2013. Federer then won the Swiss Indoors for a record sixth title, defeating David Goffin in the final. Federer also reached the finals of the 2014 ATP Finals to face Djokovic again, but withdrew from the final because of another back injury. Despite his injury, Federer finished the season on a high by defeating Richard Gasquet to clinch the Davis Cup for Switzerland for the first time in its history. The final was held at the Stade Pierre-Mauroy in Lille, France, attracting over 27,000 spectators per match; this broke attendance record for the highest ever officially sanctioned competition tennis match. Federer started his 2016 season by winning the Brisbane International, defeating Milos Raonic in the final, thereby becoming only the third man in the Open Era to have 1,000 or more wins, joining Jimmy Connors and Ivan Lendl, as well as the first man in the Open Era to win at least one title in each of 15 consecutive years. At the Dubai Championships, Federer successfully defended his title with a straight-set victory over Djokovic in the final. He then reached the Indian Wells final, which he lost to defending champion Djokovic. In May, Federer won the inaugural Istanbul Open clay-court tournament, ending a title drought on red clay since the 2009 French Open. He then reached the Italian Open final, but was unable to win his first title there, losing to Djokovic in the final. In the French Open, he lost in the quarterfinals by the eventual champion Stan Wawrinka. As the new expanded grass season began, Federer won his record eighth Gerry Weber Open and became only the third man in the Open Era to win a title eight times. At Wimbledon, Federer defeated Murray in straight sets in the semifinals to advance to his tenth Wimbledon final, which he lost to Djokovic in four sets in a rematch of the previous year's final. Federer defeated Murray and Djokovic in straight sets to win the Cincinnati Masters for the seventh time. This marked the first time that Federer defeated the top two players in the world at the same event. At the US Open, he advanced to his first final there since 2009 without dropping a set, including a win over Stan Wawrinka in the semifinals. In the final, he was once again beaten by top seed Djokovic in four sets. Federer then won the Swiss Indoors, defeating Nadal in the final. In December, Federer announced that Stefan Edberg would be replaced by Croatian former world No. 3 player Ivan Ljubičić, with countryman Severin Lüthi remaining his head coach. Federer revealed that Edberg originally signed on to the coaching team for one season only in 2014 but agreed to stay on in 2015. Federer started his season in the Brisbane International as the defending champion. However, in a rematch of the previous year's final, he lost in the final to Milos Raonic in straight sets. At the Australian Open, he lost in the semifinals to eventual champion Novak Djokovic in four sets. The day after his loss to Djokovic, Federer sustained a knee injury and in early February, he underwent arthroscopic surgery to repair a torn meniscus in his knee and missed the tournaments in Rotterdam, Dubai, and Indian Wells in February and March. Due to a stomach virus, he had to withdraw from the Miami Open, thus prolonging his time on the sidelines. Federer made his comeback at the Monte-Carlo Masters, losing in the quarterfinals to Tsonga in three sets. He then participated in the Italian Open where he lost in the third round to Dominic Thiem. His withdrawal from the French Open broke a record run of 65 consecutive participations in the main draw of Grand Slam tournaments, stretching back to the 2000 Australian Open. Still suffering from recurring knee pain during the grass season, he lost in the semifinals of Stuttgart and Halle. In Wimbledon, Federer came back from two sets down to defeat Marin Čilić in the quarterfinals, equalling Jimmy Connors's all-time records of 11 Wimbledon semifinals and 84 match wins. He then suffered his first defeat in a Wimbledon semifinal in a five-set loss to Raonic, re-injuring his knee in the fifth set. On 26 July, Federer announced that he would miss the Summer Olympics and the remainder of the 2016 season to recover fully from his knee injury. The sudden withdrawal not only implied that 2016 would be Federer's first season since 2000 in which he failed to win a title, but it also meant that he would have to drop out of the top ten for the first time in fourteen years. This, combined with a grand slam drought spanning over four years, led to many analysts believing that his outstanding career was finally coming to an end and that he would never win any major titles again. Federer's 2017 season marked a return to Grand Slam wins since 2012, the most titles since 2007, and the highest win percentage since 2006. Statistically, this season was his best since 2007. His withdrawal from most of the 2016 season led his ranking to slip to No. 17 at the start of the season, his lowest in over fifteen years. At the Australian Open, Federer defeated top-10 players Tomáš Berdych and Kei Nishikori on his way to the semifinals, making Federer the oldest man to compete in a grand slam semifinal since Jimmy Connors in 1991. There, he defeated Wawrinka in five sets, making him the oldest player to compete in a Grand Slam final since Ken Rosewall in 1974. Coming back from a break down in the fifth set, Federer defeated Rafael Nadal to win his first major since 2012. The final also marked Federer's 100th match at the Australian Open, and Federer's first-ever Grand Slam victory over Nadal outside of the grass courts. With this victory, he also re-entered the top ten. In March, Federer won his 90th career title at Indian Wells, defeating Wawrinka in the final. In Miami, Federer defeated Nadal in the final in straight sets and climbed to No. 4 in the ATP rankings. This marked the third time Federer had won the Sunshine Double. Due to concerns about his longevity, Federer decided that he would skip the entire clay-court season. He returned to the tour at Stuttgart, where he suffered a shock defeat to Tommy Haas in the second round despite holding match points, the lowest-ranked player (No. 302) to beat him since No. 407 Bjoern Phau in 1999. He rebounded the following week by winning a record-extending ninth title at the Gerry Weber Open in Halle, doing so without the loss of a set. Federer then won Wimbledon without dropping a set, defeating Marin Čilić in the final to win a record-breaking eighth Wimbledon title and his record-extending 19th major title overall, becoming the oldest male player to win Wimbledon in the Open era. Federer became the second man in the Open era to win Wimbledon without dropping a set after Björn Borg in 1976. At the opening of the summer hard court swing, Federer lost the final of the Canada Masters to Alexander Zverev after injuring his back during the match. Due to the injury, he opted to withdraw from the Cincinnati Masters to be fit for the US Open. However, Federer lost to Juan Martín del Potro in the quarterfinals at the US Open. In September, Federer represented Team Europe in the inaugural Laver Cup, a tournament that he had founded. Federer won both his singles matches against Sam Querrey and Nick Kyrgios, defeating the latter in the champion's tiebreak (saving a match point) to seal the cup for Europe. The tournament was also notable for Federer playing doubles with long-time rival Rafael Nadal for the first time, defeating the Team World duo of Querrey and Jack Sock. With three wins and seven points, Federer was the most accomplished player of the tournament. At the Shanghai Masters Federer captured his third Masters title of the season, defeating No. 1 Rafael Nadal in the final. This was Federer's fifth straight victory over Nadal in their rivalry and his 94th career title, drawing him level with 2nd-placed Ivan Lendl. Federer then defeated Juan Martín del Potro in the final of the Swiss Indoors to surpass Ivan Lendl in number of career titles. Federer qualified for the 2017 ATP Finals, but was beaten by David Goffin in the semifinals in three sets. Federer started his season by winning his second Hopman Cup title, this time partnering with Belinda Bencic, after having won previously in 2001 with Martina Hingis. The Swiss team won all its ties and Federer won every match he played, defeating the German pair, Alexander Zverev and Angelique Kerber, in the final 2–1. At the Australian Open, Federer reached the final without dropping a set, and successfully defended his title beating Marin Čilić in a five-set final. It was Federer's sixth title at the Australian Open, equaling the then record held by Roy Emerson and Novak Djokovic, which was surpassed by Djokovic in 2019. He also became the first man to win twenty Grand Slam titles. It was also the first time since the 2008 US Open that Federer successfully defended a major title. In mid-February, Federer defeated Grigor Dimitrov to win his third Rotterdam Open title and return to No. 1 in the ATP rankings. At 36 years and 195 days of age, he became the oldest ATP world No. 1 by more than three years. He also broke the ATP record for the longest span between two successive reigns at No. 1 at 5 years and 106 days. In March, Federer entered the Indian Wells Masters, where he defeated Chung Hyeon in the semifinals for a career-best start to a season at 17–0, beating his previous best start at 16–0 in 2006. Despite holding three championship points, Federer was defeated by Juan Martín del Potro in a close three-set final. After a second-round exit to Thanasi Kokkinakis in Miami, Federer announced that he would miss the clay court season, including the French Open, for the second consecutive season, thus allowing Nadal to regain his No. 1 ranking. In June, Federer regained the No. 1 ranking at the Stuttgart Open, which he won after defeating Milos Raonic in the final. However, he lost his No. 1 ranking for the last time in the following week when he failed to defend his Halle Open title, losing in the final to Borna Ćorić in three sets. At Wimbledon, Federer was seeded first at a Grand Slam for the first time since the 2012 US Open, but he lost in the quarterfinals to Kevin Anderson in five sets, despite being two sets up and having a match point in the third. Federer next played in Cincinnati, where he lost in the final to Novak Djokovic, who won a record Career Golden Masters. The loss ended Federer's run of 100 consecutive service holds and 14-match winning streak in Cincinnati. At the US Open, Federer was upset by John Millman in the 4th round, citing extreme conditions of heat and humidity that took a toll on his body. Federer then played at the Laver Cup where he successfully helped Team Europe defend their title, winning both his singles matches against Nick Kyrgios and John Isner. He also paired up with Djokovic in doubles for the first time in his career, losing their match against Jack Sock and Kevin Anderson in three sets. At the Swiss Indoors in October, Federer defended his title with a straight-sets win over Marius Copil in the final, winning his 9th title at the event and his 99th career singles title. At the Paris Masters, Federer lost in the semifinals to Djokovic. At the ATP Finals, Federer lost in straight sets to Alexander Zverev in the semifinal. Federer opened his campaign by retaining the Hopman Cup alongside Belinda Bencic, becoming the first player to win the mixed-gender event three times. They again defeated Zverev and Kerber of Germany in the final and won the final tie by a tiebreak in the decisive set (5–4). At the Australian Open, Federer was upset by Stefanos Tsitsipas in four close sets. After the match, Federer announced he would play the clay court season for the first time since 2016. At the Dubai Championships, Federer defeated Tsitsipas in straight sets in the final to win his 100th career singles title, thus becoming only the second man after Jimmy Connors to reach the three figure mark in the Open Era. Federer then reached the finals of both Indian Wells, where he lost to Dominic Thiem, and Miami, where he defeated John Isner. Federer played his first clay court tournament in three years at the Madrid Open, where after securing his 1200th career win in the third round against Gaël Monfils, he lost in the quarterfinals to Dominic Thiem, despite having two match points in the second set. Federer played at the French Open for the first time in 4 years. In the quarterfinals, he avenged his loss to Wawrinka at the same stage of the tournament 4 years ago, but then lost in the semifinals to defending and 11-time champion Nadal. Federer began his grass court season at the Halle Open where he won his tenth title at the event, defeating David Goffin in the final in straight sets. This marked the first time Federer had won a singles tournament ten times or more. At Wimbledon, Federer defeated Nadal in their 40th and final professional meeting to reach his record 12th final at the tournament. This was also the first time Federer played Nadal at Wimbledon since the 2008 Wimbledon final, and at 37 years, 11 months and 6 days, Federer became the oldest man to reach a major final since Ken Rosewall in the 1974 US Open. Federer then faced Djokovic in the final, against whom he lost in a five-set thriller lasting 4 hours and 57 minutes, despite having two championship points on serve in the fifth set. The match also marked the first time a fifth set tiebreaker was played at 12 games all and was the longest final in Wimbledon history. Federer next played at the Cincinnati Masters and reached the third round where he lost in straight sets to Andrey Rublev. This was his quickest defeat in 16 years, taking just 62 minutes. At the US Open, Federer lost in the quarterfinals to No. 78 Grigor Dimitrov in five sets. At the Laver Cup in Geneva, Federer won singles matches against Kyrgios and Isner to help the European team capture their third consecutive title. At the Shanghai Masters, Federer lost in the quarterfinals to Alexander Zverev. At the Swiss Indoors, Federer played the 1500th match of his career in the first round, beating Peter Gojowczyk in less than an hour. In the final, he defeated Alex de Minaur in straight sets for a record-extending tenth Swiss Indoors title. At the ATP Finals, Federer rebounded from a opening match loss to Dominic Thiem to defeat Matteo Berrettini and Djokovic (his first win over Djokovic since 2015) in straight sets to qualify for the semifinals. He then lost the semifinal to Stefanos Tsitsipas in straight sets. Federer began his 2020 season at the Australian Open, where he reached the semifinals after saving seven match points in his five-set quarterfinal win over Tennys Sandgren. Federer then lost his semifinal match to Djokovic in straight sets, having sustained a groin injury earlier in the tournament. In February, Federer underwent arthroscopic surgery for a right knee injury and subsequently withdrew from the Dubai Championships, Indian Wells, Miami Open and the French Open to give time for his knee to recover for the grass season. On 10 June, due to a setback from his initial rehabilitation from the knee injury, Federer announced that he had to have an additional arthroscopic procedure on his right knee, vowing to return in 2021. This was only the second year in Federer's career since he won his first title that he finished without a title. In January 2021, Federer withdrew from the Australian Open due to still recovering from knee surgery and strict COVID-19 quarantine measures in Australia. On 8 March, Novak Djokovic surpassed him for the most career weeks spent as the ATP number 1 ranked player. On 10 March, he made his return to the ATP Tour at the Qatar Open, where he won his first ATP match in 14 months against Dan Evans before losing to Nikoloz Basilashvili in the quarterfinals. At the French Open, Federer withdrew from the tournament before his fourth-round match citing knee problems, giving a walkover to Matteo Berrettini. In Halle, he lost in the second round to Félix Auger-Aliassime, with their 19-year age difference being the biggest in Federer's 1,521 career matches. At Wimbledon, the nearly 40-year-old Federer became the oldest Wimbledon quarterfinalist in the Open Era, breaking the record held by Ken Rosewall, but he was then upset by 14th seed Hubert Hurkacz in straight sets. This was the first time in 19 years at Wimbledon he had lost in straight sets, and only the second time he had lost a set 6–0 in the 21st century (the previous occasion was against Nadal in the 2008 French Open final). On 15 August, Federer announced that he underwent another knee surgery after a further injury during the grass-court season. He withdrew from the US Open, but he hoped to make a return to the tour in 2022. Federer did not play in a singles tournament after Wimbledon 2021, and dropped out of the top 50 on 13 June 2022. On 11 July 2022, he became unranked for the first time since his professional debut. However, Federer announced that he was set to return to the tour at the 2022 Laver Cup in September. On 15 September 2022, he announced his impending retirement from professional tennis on the ATP Tour, noting that the Laver Cup would be his final ATP event. He stated that he "will play more tennis in the future, of course, but just not in Grand Slams or on the tour." His final match resulted in a three-set loss in doubles partnering long-time rival and friend Rafael Nadal against Jack Sock and Frances Tiafoe. The match was his 1750th on the tour. Federer and Rafael Nadal played each other 40 times, with Nadal winning 24 of their matches and Federer winning 16. Federer performed better than Nadal on grass (winning three matches to Nadal's one) and on hard courts (winning 11 matches to Nadal's nine), while Nadal dominated the matchup on clay (winning 14 matches to Federer's two). Because tournament seedings are based on rankings, 24 of their matches were in tournament finals, included an all-time record nine major finals (tied with Djokovic–Nadal matches). Federer and Nadal played each other from 2004 to 2019, and their rivalry is a significant part of both men's careers. The last encounter was at the 2019 Wimbledon Championships, where Federer won to reach the final. Federer and Nadal held the top two rankings on the ATP Tour from July 2005 until 17 August 2009, when Nadal fell to No. 3 (Andy Murray became the new No. 2), and again from 11 September 2017 until 15 October 2018 (Novak Djokovic became the new No. 2). They are the only pair of men to have ever finished six consecutive calendar years at the top. Federer was ranked No. 1 for a record 237 consecutive weeks beginning in February 2004. Nadal, who is five years younger, ascended to No. 2 in July 2005 and held it for 160 consecutive weeks, before surpassing Federer in August 2008. From 2006 to 2008, Federer and Nadal played each other in every French Open final and every Wimbledon final. They then met in the 2009 Australian Open final, the 2011 French Open final and the 2017 Australian Open final. Nadal won six of the nine, losing the first two Wimbledon finals and the second Australian Open final. Four of these finals were five-set matches (2007 and 2008 Wimbledon, 2009 and 2017 Australian Open), with the 2008 Wimbledon final being lauded as the greatest match ever by many long-time tennis analysts. Federer and Novak Djokovic played one another 50 times, with Djokovic winning 27 matches and Federer winning 23. They are tied 4–4 on clay, while Federer trails 18–20 on hard-courts and 1–3 on grass. The Federer–Djokovic rivalry is tied for being the most prolific rivalry in men's major history; Federer and Djokovic played each other 17 times at Grand Slam tournaments, and Djokovic and Nadal have played each other 17 times at Grand Slam tournaments as well.[citation needed] Federer and Djokovic first played each other in a Grand Slam final at the 2007 US Open where No. 1 Federer emerged victorious in straight sets. Federer ended Djokovic's 28 straight wins in China at the 2014 Shanghai Open, and he also ended Djokovic's perfect 41–0 start to the 2011 season in the semifinals of the French Open, but Djokovic avenged this loss at the 2011 US Open in five sets after saving two match points against Federer for the second straight year. In the semifinals of the 2012 Wimbledon, Federer beat defending champion and No. 1 Djokovic in four sets. The two played three Wimbledon finals in 2014, 2015, and 2019, with Djokovic emerging victorious in all of them and even saving two match points in the latter final, which lasted almost 5 hours. The pair also met in the final of the 2015 US Open and once more Djokovic prevailed in four sets. Some experts have included the rivalry between Federer and Djokovic as one of the best rivalries in the Open Era. Federer and Andy Murray played each other 25 times, with Federer winning 14 matches and Murray winning 11. Federer leads 12–10 on hard courts and 2–1 on grass; the two never met on clay. After Federer won the first professional match they played, Murray dominated the first half of the rivalry, leading 8–5 in 2010, while the second half of the rivalry was dominated by Federer, who leads 9–3 from 2011 onwards. The two have met six times at the majors, with Federer leading 5–1. Their first three major matches were finals, with Federer winning all three of these matches; at the 2008 US Open and the 2010 Australian Open, both of which he won in straight sets, and at the 2012 Wimbledon Championships in which Murray took the opening set, but went on to lose in four sets. Federer and Murray met in the final of the 2012 Summer Olympics, in which Murray defeated Federer in straight sets, denying Federer a career Golden Slam. Murray also leads 6–3 in ATP 1000 tournaments, 2–0 in finals. They have also met five times at the ATP Finals, with Murray winning in Shanghai in 2008, and Federer in London in 2009, 2010, 2012, and 2014. Federer and Andy Roddick played each other 24 times, and Federer won their head-to-head matchup 21 matches to three. Roddick lost his No. 1 ranking to Federer after Federer won his first Australian Open in 2004. Their rivalry included four Grand Slam event finals (three at Wimbledon and one at the US Open), all of which were won by Federer. Roddick himself said that the Federer-Roddick rivalry was not much of a rivalry because it was so one-sided. Federer and Lleyton Hewitt played 27 times, with Federer winning 18 of their matches and Hewitt winning nine. Other head-to-head matchups include Federer-David Nalbandian (Federer won 11 matches to Nalbandian's eight) Federer-Marat Safin (Federer won 10 matches to Safin's two), Federer-Andre Agassi (Federer won eight matches to Agassi's three), Federer-Stan Wawrinka (Federer won 23 matches to Wawrinka's three), Federer-Juan Martín del Potro (Federer won 18 matches to del Potro's seven), Federer-Tomáš Berdych (Federer won 20 matches to Berdych's six), and Federer-Jo-Wilfried Tsonga (Federer won 12 matches to Tsonga's six). Federer has won the third most Grand Slam tournament titles (20), trailing Rafael Nadal (22) and Novak Djokovic (24). He has been in 31 major finals (the second most after Djokovic), including a record ten consecutive Grand Slam tournament finals. He has earned a men's doubles gold medal, and a men's singles silver medal at the Olympics in 2008 and 2012, respectively. He won a record eight Wimbledon titles, including a joint-record five in a row, and he won an Open Era joint-record five US Open titles, including a record five in a row. He has held the world No. 1 spot in the ATP rankings for the second-longest amount of time for a male player (310 weeks). Federer was ranked among the top eight players in the world continuously for 14 years and two weeks — from 14 October 2002 until 31 October 2016, when injuries forced him to skip much of the 2016 season. Federer has won the ATP Player of the Year five times (2004–07, 2009), and has been named the ITF World Champion five times (2004–07, 2009). He has been voted by his peers to receive the tour Sportsmanship Award a record 13 times (2004–09, 2011–17) and voted by tennis fans to receive the ATP Fans' Favorite award for 19 consecutive years (2003–21). — both indicative of respect and popularity. He also won the Arthur Ashe Humanitarian of the Year Award twice (2006, 2013), the Laureus World Sportsman of the Year award five times (2005–08, 2018), the BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year a record four times, and the Laureus World Comeback of the Year award once, following his 2017 comeback season. He has been named the Swiss Sports Personality of the Year a record seven times. Federer has huge popularity in the world of sport, and is considered by many to be the greatest tennis player of all time. Between 2009 and 2018, many players and analysts considered him to be the greatest player ever. He was also called the greatest athlete of his generation by some sports reporters after he won his 19th and 20th major titles. In 2005, Rod Laver described Federer as an "unbelievable talent", "capable of anything", and that "he could be the greatest tennis player of all time". When he finally won the French Open in 2009, former world No. 1s Björn Borg and Pete Sampras both hailed him as "the greatest player that played the game". Federer himself has downplayed these claims, stating in 2012 that it is impossible to compare tennis players from different eras and that past champions are needed to pave the way for future champions. In 2014, Frank Sedgman ranked Federer number two, behind Jack Kramer, in his greatest male tennis players of all-time list in his autobiography 'Game, Sedge and Match'. In 2018, Tennis.com listed him as the greatest male player of the Open Era. In May 2020, the Tennis Channel ranked Federer as the greatest male tennis player of all time. In May 2021, Serena Williams described Federer as a "genius" and the "greatest". In July 2021, BBC Sport users picked Federer as the greatest male tennis player of all time. During an interview with L'Équipe in July 2021, Richard Gasquet said 'aesthetics and grace' are more important than the number of Grand Slam titles when it comes to deciding who is the greatest. He named Federer, Djokovic and Nadal as the three best players in history, but singled out Roger Federer as the greatest. I see tennis differently, I've always said that for me it's not just the number of Grand Slam titles that matters. One at 21, the other at 22 or 23. I don't just see the Grand Slam winner, I look at the aesthetics, what you give off on the court. I often hear the race to the highest, it is a pointless subject. For me, Roger Federer is irreplaceable, he's the greatest player of all time when I see the aesthetics, the grace he has on the court. — Richard Gasquet, on Federer's lasting legacy in July 2021, Federer helped to lead a revival in tennis known by many as the Golden Age, leading to increased interest in the sport and higher revenues for many tennis venues. Rising revenues led to exploding prize money: When Federer first won the Australian Open in 2004, he earned $985,000. When he won in 2018, the prize had increased to AUD 4 million. Federer's versatility has been described by Jimmy Connors as follows: "In an era of specialists, you're either a clay court specialist, a grass court specialist, or a hard court specialist... or you're Roger Federer." An elite athlete, Federer was an all-court, all-around player known for his speed, fluid style of play, and exceptional shot-making. Federer mainly played from the baseline but was also comfortable at the net, being one of the best volleyers in the game. He had a powerful, accurate smash, very effectively performed rare elements of professional tennis, such as the backhand smash and skyhook, half-volley, jump smash (slam dunk) and an aggressive serve return known affectionately as SABR (Sneak Attack By Roger, a half-volley attack on an opponent's second serve). The writer, David Foster Wallace, compared the brute force of Federer's forehand motion with that of "a great liquid whip", while John McEnroe referred to Federer's forehand as "the greatest shot in our sport". Federer played with a single-handed backhand, which gave him great variety. He employed the slice, occasionally using it to lure his opponent to the net and deliver a passing shot. Federer could also fire topspin winners and possessed a "flick" backhand with which he could generate pace with his wrist; the "flick" backhand was usually used to pass opponents who came to the net. He averaged 90% of service games won throughout his career, often coming up victorious in clutch or pressure service games. His serve was difficult to read, as he always used a similar ball toss regardless of what type of serve he was going to hit and where he aimed to hit it. He was often able to produce big serves on key points in a match. His first serve averaged about 200 km/h (125 mph), but he was capable of serving at 220 km/h (137 mph). Federer was also accomplished at serve and volleying, and employed this tactic frequently in his early career. Later in his career, Federer added the drop shot to his arsenal and could perform a well-disguised drop shot off both wings. He sometimes used a between-the-legs shot, which is colloquially referred to as a "tweener" or "hotdog". His most notable use of the tweener was in the semifinals of the 2008 US Open against Novak Djokovic, bringing him triple match point. Federer is one of the top players who successfully employed the "squash shot". After Stefan Edberg joined his coaching team at the start of the 2014 season, Federer played a more offensive game, attacking the net more often and improving his volleys. In the lead-up to the 2015 US Open, Federer successfully added a new unique shot to his arsenal called SABR (Sneak Attack by Roger), in which he charged forward to receive a second serve and his a return on the service line. With the switch to a bigger 97-inch racket from a 90-inch racquet, Federer gained easier serving and better defense on both wings with fewer shanks; however, he experienced diminished control and power on his forehand, slice backhand and dropshot. Federer was noted for his cool demeanor and emotional control on the court. Most of his professional game has been characterized by a lack of outbursts or emotional frustration at errors, giving him an advantage over less controlled opponents. In 2016, Federer declared: I don't get the anxiety during a match so much anymore. You know, to throw racquets, to toss balls out of the court, scream and stuff. I almost laugh [on the inside] about it a little bit today when an opponent does it. But that's something for me that's not a problem anymore. Originally lacking self-control as a junior, he transformed his on-court demeanor to become well-liked for his graciousness. Despite clearly possessing talent from a young age, Federer tended to allow his emotions to get the best of him, causing his game to falter. On some occasions, this emotional state escalated into counter-productive actions such as racket abuse. Rarely a day went by when he would not throw his racquet against the fence in his search to play the "perfect game". Federer later confessed to having been a hot head at a young age as he often erupted if he hit a dumb shot. Despite this fragile temperament, Federer still impressed his then-coach Adolf Kacovsky, who said that during defeats he never gave up and was willing to learn from his mistakes afterwards. By the time he became professional, Federer had learned to temper his emotions, but still, he struggled to adapt to the work ethic and compromising mindset needed to be a competitive professional player. In 2007, Rod Laver described him as follows: "One thing is for sure: he's the best player of his time and one of the most admirable champions on the planet. That's certainly something worth crowing over. The beauty is, Roger Federer won't". From ages 8 to 10, Federer received group and individual training from veteran Czech coach Adolf Kacovsky. Reflecting on Federer, Kacovsky said “The private lessons, which were partly funded by the club. Roger was a quick learner. When you wanted to teach him something new, he was able to pick it up after three or four tries, while others in the group needed weeks”. At age 10, Federer began working with Peter Carter. Between the ages of 10 and 14, Federer spent more time with Carter than with his own family, working daily on all aspects of his game. Building on the work done earlier by Kacovsky, Carter helped perfect Federer's technique, along with teaching him the strategy and psychology required to play the game to a high level. Federer has credited Carter for his "entire technique and coolness". In 1999, when Federer decided to play full-time on the ATP tour, he chose Peter Lundgren rather than Carter as his traveling coach, and they worked together until the end of 2003 before eventually splitting. On 1 August 2002, Carter died in a car crash in South Africa. According to his autobiography, when Federer learned of Carter’s death "he was never so upset in his life", while an Australian newspaper reported when Federer heard the news, he "left his hotel and ran through the streets, bawling and hysterical". About Carter's funeral, Federer stated: "Any defeat in tennis is nothing compared to such a moment". His death had a deep impact on Federer, who would even call it "a wake-up call", before winning his first major in the following year, Wimbledon, which he dedicated to Carter. Federer's playing style has been greatly influenced by his coaches over the years. For instance, he has credited his infamous SABR technique to his coach Severin Lüthi, who encouraged him to develop it and use it in big matches. His other coaches were Tony Roche (2005–2007), Severin Lüthi (2007–2022), José Higueras (2008), Paul Annacone (2010–2013), Stefan Edberg (2014–2015), and Ivan Ljubičić (2016–2022). Federer then began the 2014 season by changing rackets for the first time in his career. He switched from his longtime frame of 90 square inches to one measured at 97 square inches. He had long been at a comparative disadvantage in equipment as almost the entire tour, including his top rivals Nadal and Djokovic, used more powerful frames of between 95 and 100 square inches. Since then, Federer played with his signature Wilson Pro Staff RF97 Autograph racquet. It has a 97 square inch head, 16x19 string pattern, 366 gram strung weight, 340 gram swing weight, 68 RA stiffness, and 9 point head light balance. Federer strings his racquets using Wilson Natural Gut 16 gauge for his main strings and Luxilon ALU Power Rough 17 gauge (polyester) for his cross strings. In an interview in November 2017, Federer stated his favorite stringing tension is 26.5 kilograms (58.4 lb) mains & 25 kilograms (55.1 lb) crosses. As a junior player, Federer played with a Wilson Pro Staff 6.0 85 square inch head racquet. He switched to a bigger custom-built Wilson 90 square inch head racquet in 2003. His grip size was 4+3⁄8 inches (L3). When asked about string tensions, Federer stated "this depends on how warm the days are and with what kind of balls I play and against who I play. So you can see – it depends on several factors and not just the surface; the feeling I have is most important." Federer first signed with Nike footwear and apparel in 1994. For the 2006 championships at Wimbledon, Nike designed a jacket emblazoned with a crest of three tennis racquets, symbolising the three Wimbledon Championships he had previously won, and which was updated the next year with four racquets after he won the Championship in 2006. At Wimbledon 2008, and again in 2009, Nike continued this trend by making him a personalised cardigan that also had his own logo, an R and an F joined, which was originally designed by his wife, Mirka. Federer's contract with Nike expired in March 2018, and he later signed a deal with Uniqlo. It was reported that Uniqlo signed Federer for roughly $300 million for 10 years ($30 million per year), as opposed to Nike's previous deal with Federer, which was for roughly $10 million per year. Since 2021, Federer has worn tennis shoes produced by On, a Swiss-based athletic shoe and sports apparel manufacturer in which he became a shareholder in November 2019. A limited edition lifestyle shoe named "The Roger" was released by On in July 2020. Federer has been nicknamed the "Federer Express" (shortened to "Fed Express" or "FedEx"), and the "Swiss Maestro." He has also been referred to as "King Roger" on occasion. Federer is also known as “The Swiss Perfection”, “The Master”, “His Majesty”, among other. Throughout the 2007 US Open, the American press nicknamed him Darth Federer for his all-black attire (which included tuxedo-striped shorts) and the tournament played "The Imperial March" from Star Wars when he was announced onto the court for each of his matches. Due to his performance on the court and off-court personality, Time magazine named Federer as one of the 100 most influential persons in the world in 2007 and 2010. In May 2009, Federer placed 22 positions ahead of US President Barack Obama on Forbes magazine's most powerful celebrities list. On winning the 2009 French Open and completing the career Grand Slam, Federer became the first male tennis player to grace the cover of Sports Illustrated since Andre Agassi in 1999. He was also the first non-American player to appear on the cover of the magazine since Stefan Edberg in 1992. He again made the cover of Sports Illustrated following his record-breaking 8th Wimbledon title and second Grand Slam of 2017, becoming the first male tennis player to be featured on the cover since himself in 2009. In 2011, on the Reputation Institute's study of the World's most respected, admired, and trusted personalities, Federer ranked No. 2 just behind Nelson Mandela but ahead of Bill Gates, Steve Jobs, Oprah Winfrey and Bono. In July 2016, Federer ranked No. 1 in the list for the most recognizable people in Switzerland, surpassing personalities such as Albert Einstein and William Tell. In a poll of more than 9,000 people from 15 countries, Federer topped the list with 916 votes, 600 more votes than the country's national hero, William Tell, who came up second with 316 and Einstein ranked third with 204. Throughout his career, Federer has been featured in several memorable TV ads, such as the one for Switzerland's largest telecommunications company Sunrise in 2015, where he is seen indulging in a variety of activities and enjoying a day off amid his tight schedule; for the Italian pasta-maker Barilla in 2019, where he is seen donning the chef's hat and whipping up elegant dishes, and for German car giant Mercedes-Benz, which was released ahead of the 2016 US Open and featured Federer playing the role of various tennis legends, namely Rod Laver, John McEnroe, Andre Agassi and Borg, thus appearing with fake chest hair, golden hair extensions, smashing his racquet and having meltdowns on the court. In January 2017, Federer was named the Most Marketable Sports Person for 2016 by researchers at the London School of Marketing. He earned £49.2 million in endorsements and sponsorships. At the 2017 Indian Wells Masters, the trio of Federer, Grigor Dimitrov, and Tommy Haas made headlines for performing the classic 80s song by American pop group Chicago, "Hard to Say I'm Sorry". Due to all of them being one-handed backhand players, the trio become popularly known as the "Backhand Boys". The rendition also featured a cameo from Novak Djokovic, along with Haas' father-in-law and world-renowned record producer David Foster, playing the piano. Federer can also play the piano, having taken lessons as a child. In 2018, Federer teamed up with DJ Money Mark and Wilson Tennis for the vinyl release of Federer's first non-charting, non-single "Play Your Heart Out", a song that lays miscellaneous tennis-related sounds over an electronic track. It was all recorded in the Mojave Desert and reportedly with Federer's new Wilson ProStaff RF97 as the sole instrument involved. In December 2019, Federer was voted by GQ readers as the Most Stylish Man of the Decade (2010–2019), ahead of celebrities including Timothée Chalamet, LeBron James, Harry Styles, David Beckham, Justin Bieber, Kanye West and Ryan Gosling. In May 2020, Federer became the first tennis player to reach the top of Forbes's list of highest-paid athletes in the world, with $106.3 million in total earnings from salary, winnings and endorsements. As of the 2021 list, he has also appeared in the top-10 every year since 2012. On 31 October 2022, a book titled "The Roger Federer Effect, Rivals, Friends, Fans and How the Maestro Changed their Lives", written by Simon Cambers and Simon Graf, was published by Pitch. It consists of a compilation of more than 40 exclusive interviews with players, coaches, rivals, fans, friends, and people from outside tennis, including the world of music, film, and even politics. Federer is a big outdoors fan and has posted many of his hiking ventures through the Swiss Alps on social media. During the Covid-19 pandemic, Federer took the opportunity to rediscover and reflect on how much his country meant to him, so he became an unpaid spokesman for Switzerland Tourism. As such, Federer starred in several advertisements for Switzerland Tourism alongside many Hollywood stars, such as Robert de Niro in 2021 and Anne Hathaway in 2022, which are meant to accelerate tourism growth in Switzerland. The advert with de Niro, titled "No Drama", ended up winning Gold at 2022 Effie Awards in Switzerland, winning the laurel in the "Highlight" category. In 2023, Federer starred alongside South African comedian Trevor Noah in another film for Switzerland Tourism, this one titled "The Grand Train Tour of Switzerland: The Ride of a Lifetime". Federer has been honored for a multitude of reasons several times throughout his career: In 2012, the city of Halle, in Germany, unveiled "Roger-Federer-Allee" in recognition of Federer's success on the grass at the Gerry Weber Open. In 2016, the city of Biel renamed the street in which the national centre for Swiss Tennis where Federer trained as a junior is located, in his honour as "1 Allée Roger Federer". In October 2021, Basel, the city of his birth, honored Federer with the launch of a new tram named "The Federer Express", which is adorned with pictures representing iconic moments from his career. On 24 November 2017, Federer received an honorary doctorate from his home university, the University of Basel, in recognition of his role in increasing the international reputation of Basel and Switzerland, and for his work for children in Africa through his charitable foundation. In December 2019, Federer became the first living person to be celebrated on Swiss coins. His face will be on the 20-franc coin and in May 2020, Swissmint issued a Federer 50-franc gold coin featuring a different design. This was actually the second time that his image was put on an item of frequent circulation in Switzerland, since in 2007, the Swiss Post in Basel released a special edition stamp for Federer, and three years later, in 2010, Federer was awarded a special edition stamp by Austria's Postal Service. On 20 July 2020, Federer was featured by Swiss National Museum in their 100-part chronicle of Swiss history and culture. In 2003, he established the Roger Federer Foundation to help disadvantaged children and to promote their access to education and sport. Since May 2004, citing his close ties with South Africa (his mother is South African) he has been supporting the South Africa-Swiss charity IMBEWU, which helps children better connect to sports as well as social and health awareness. In 2005, he visited South Africa to meet children who had benefited from his support. He was appointed a Goodwill Ambassador by UNICEF in April 2006 and has appeared in UNICEF public messages to raise public awareness of AIDS. At the 2005 Pacific Life Open in Indian Wells, Federer arranged an exhibition with several top players from the ATP and WTA tour called Rally for Relief, whose proceeds went to the victims of the tsunami caused by the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake. In December 2006, he visited Tamil Nadu, one of the areas in India most affected by the tsunami. Also in 2005, he auctioned his racquet from his US Open championship to aid victims of Hurricane Katrina. In response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake, Federer arranged a collaboration with fellow top tennis players for a special charity event during the 2010 Australian Open called 'Hit for Haiti', whose proceeds went to Haiti earthquake victims. He participated in a follow-up charity exhibition during the 2010 Indian Wells Masters, which raised $1 million. The Nadal vs. Federer "Match for Africa" in 2010 in Zürich and Madrid raised more than $4 million for the Roger Federer Foundation and Fundación Rafa Nadal. In January 2011, Federer took part in Rally for Relief, an exhibition to raise money for the victims of the Queensland floods. In 2014, the "Match for Africa 2" between Federer and Stan Wawrinka, again in Zürich, raised £850,000 for education projects in Southern Africa. In the 2018 "Match for Africa" in San Jose, California, Federer paired up with Microsoft billionaire Bill Gates in a doubles clash against Jack Sock and NBC Today show host Savannah Guthrie. He and Gates won, and notably, Federer even won one point on his knees after returning two shots while on the ground. He is endorsed by Japanese clothing company Uniqlo and Swiss companies Nationale Suisse [de; fr; nl], Credit Suisse, On, Rolex, Lindt, Sunrise, and Jura Elektroapparate. In 2008, Federer partnered with German car giant Mercedes-Benz, and in 2010, this endorsement was extended into a global partnership deal. Federer, who has been the brand ambassador for Lindt since 2009, gelled perfectly with the brand's fundamental values of Swissness, premiumness, and quality. Federer joined hands with Sunrise, Switzerland's largest telecommunications company, in 2014, and since then, they have regularly collaborated to create a slew of interesting campaigns harping on Swiss values of excellence and precision. His other sponsors include Gillette, Wilson, Barilla, and Moët & Chandon. Previously, he was an ambassador for Nike, NetJets, Emmi AG, and Maurice Lacroix. He grew up supporting FC Basel and the Swiss national team. In May 2022, when the Swiss national team was preparing to begin their UEFA Nations League campaign against the Czech Republic, Federer made a surprise visit to meet every member of the team, including head coach Murat Yakin at Bad Ragaz, and to unveil Puma’s new jersey for the team ahead of the 2022 FIFA World Cup. Federer is married to former Women's Tennis Association player Miroslava Federer (née Vavrinec), whom he met while they were both competing for Switzerland at the 2000 Sydney Olympics. Usually called Mirka, she retired from the tour in 2002 because of a foot injury. They were married at Wenkenhof Villa in Riehen near Basel on 11 April 2009, surrounded by a small group of close friends and family. In 2009, she gave birth to identical twin girls. They had another pair of twins in 2014, this time fraternal twin boys. Their children were baptized in the Catholic faith by Federer's distant cousin Monsignor Urban Federer, who is the Abbot of Einsiedeln Abbey. When they met, Mirka's dedication to training far out-stripped his own, since she was training for up to six hours and day while Federer was unable to do the same because he would “lose interest within an hour”. At the time, Federer used to watch her training, but “more just admiring it rather than thinking I could do the same one day, to be quite honest”. It was quite some time until he developed a similar mentality to that of Mirka's. Federer owns an apartment in Dubai. A major factor in his decision to purchase this property was the hot weather in Dubai, since training at high temperatures would help him in getting accustomed to playing in extreme heat. He also owns two properties in his native country of Switzerland, of which one is a modern ski chalet in the Swiss Alps, with the other being a penthouse apartment in Zürich. Federer is sponsored by Mercedes-Benz and has said that his favourite vehicle is the Mercedes-Benz SLS AMG Roadster. Like all male Swiss citizens, Federer was subject to compulsory military service in the Swiss Armed Forces, which was mandatory for all able-bodied male citizens when they reached the age of majority, and Federer was drafted in too when he turned 18 in 1999. However, he was soon discharged due to a chronic back problem. In 2003, he was ruled "unsuitable" and was subsequently not required to fulfill his military obligation. Instead, he served in the civil protection force and was required to pay 3% of his taxable income as an alternative. Federer was raised as a Roman Catholic and met Pope Benedict XVI while playing the 2006 Italian Open tournament in Rome and was quoted as saying "This was just the perfect day". Growing up in nearby Birsfelden, Riehen, and then Münchenstein, close to the French and German borders, Swiss German is thus his native language, but he also speaks Standard German, French and English fluently as well as functional Italian and a few phrases of Swedish. Federer frequently conducts press conferences in German, French and English. Federer follows a more flexible diet than most of the other players on tour, with pizza being Federer's favorite dish. Federer's personalized pizza from Player's Restaurant was created by Chef Yan Dilie and has fresh figs, Parma ham, arugula, and white truffle cheese cream. He also reportedly enjoys chocolate. Federer is a self-confessed lover of pasta, and he has frequently expressed that his personal favourite is the classic spaghetti pomodoro, which he ordered before every match during the 2020 Australian Open. Federer employs a multi-layered programme that makes use of every muscle. That includes everything from medicine ball throws to racquet drills. Like Federer's eating habits, variation is an important component of his training routine. In 1999, the then-18-year-old Federer was discharged from compulsory military service due to a chronic back problem. Throughout his 20-year career, Federer only conceded three singles walkovers, all due to back injury. In March 2008, Federer revealed that he had recently been diagnosed with mononucleosis and that he may have suffered from it as early as December 2007. Despite being cleared to compete, Federer suffered a significant dip in fitness due to his struggle with mononucleosis. Federer underwent three procedures on his knees, the first two on his left knee, in 2016 and 2020, and the third on his right knee in 2022. When he injured his knee in 2016, Federer underwent knee surgery where a key portion of tissue was removed. He was able to return to top-level play for years. However, trimming the meniscus changes the loading on the tibia, which often leads to eventual pain, more surgery, more pain, and retirement. Though it often takes a few years to fully manifest, the surfaces may eventually erode and arthritis sets in. In Federer’s case, different injuries over the years may have combined to take their toll. (W) winner; (F) finalist; (SF) semifinalist; (QF) quarterfinalist; (#R) rounds 4, 3, 2, 1; (RR) round-robin stage; (Q#) qualification round; (DNQ) did not qualify; (A) absent; (NH) not held; (SR) strike rate (events won / competed); (W–L) win–loss record. To avoid confusion and double counting, these charts are updated at the conclusion of a tournament or when the player's participation has ended. Federer received fourth-round walkovers at the US Open (2004 and 2012) and the Wimbledon Championships (2007), and a second-round walkover at the Australian Open (2012); these are not counted as wins. Federer withdrew before the fourth round of the 2021 French Open; this is not counted as a loss. As of 2019, Federer holds the third highest number of Guinness World Records within one discipline, a total of 30, which include 18 performance based records. These records were attained in the Open Era of tennis. Records in bold indicate peerless achievements. Tennis portal Biography portal Switzerland portal Roger Federer career statistics List of career achievements by Roger Federer List of Grand Slam men's singles champions Tennis Masters Series records and statistics List of ATP number 1 ranked singles tennis players (since 1973) World number 1 ranked male tennis players (all time, based on recognized tennis authorities) All-time tennis records – Men's singles Open Era tennis records – Men's singles (since 1968) ATP Tour records (since 1990) ATP Awards 2004 Summer Olympics national flag bearers 2008 Summer Olympics national flag bearers In ATP Tour and Grand Slam main draw matches, Summer Olympics, Davis Cup and Laver Cup; 4th in the Open Era In ATP Tour and Grand Slam main draw matches, Summer Olympics, Davis Cup and Laver Cup Then known as the Tennis Masters Cup See: See also: 100 Greatest of All Time. The existing major champions Federer defeated were Marat Safin (2004 Australian Open), Andy Roddick (2004, 2005 & 2009 Wimbledon and 2006 US Open), Lleyton Hewitt (2004 US Open), Andre Agassi (2005 US Open), Rafael Nadal (2006 & 2007 Wimbledon and 2017 Australian Open) and Marin Čilić (2017 Wimbledon and 2018 Australian Open). Known as "Tennis Masters Cup" (2000–2008), "ATP World Tour Finals" (2009–2016) and "ATP Finals" (2017–present). "Player profile – Roger Federer". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 5 February 2010. Retrieved 1 July 2009. "ATP Prize Money Leaders" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 12 July 2021. "How a ballboy became a legend". The Guardian. 15 September 2022. Archived from the original on 18 September 2022. Retrieved 17 September 2022. Kaufman, Sarah. "Why Roger Federer is the most graceful athlete of our time". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 15 September 2022. Retrieved 23 July 2023. Ingle, Sean (8 July 2020). "The greatest: Roger Federer – balletic grace that makes the outrageous appear effortless". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 23 July 2023. Retrieved 23 July 2023. Gatto, Luigi (1 April 2019). "Roger Federer: 'I was an angry person on the court as a teenager'". Tennis World USA. Archived from the original on 18 August 2023. Retrieved 18 August 2023. "'My parents were ashamed of me' - Roger Federer on how difficult he was as a teenager". Sportskeeda. 9 July 2020. Archived from the original on 18 August 2023. Retrieved 18 August 2023. Conner, Caira (24 May 2021). "Roger Federer on Retirement, Wimbledon, and Becoming Switzerland's New Tourism Ambassador". GQ. Archived from the original on 25 May 2021. Retrieved 25 May 2021. "Credit Suisse – Roger Federer, a Basel Boy Forever". Sponsorship.credit-suisse.com. Archived from the original on 30 May 2013. Retrieved 22 January 2013. Boren, Cindy. "A timeline of Roger Federer's glorious tennis career". Washington Post. Archived from the original on 23 December 2022. Retrieved 17 September 2022. "Roger Federer [2021 Update]: Early Life, Family & Net Worth". Players Bio. 2 June 2021. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Dwyre, Bill (12 March 2009). "Roger Federer wants to show he can go from two to one". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 11 November 2013. Retrieved 11 August 2013. Briggs, Simon (13 May 2014). "Roger Federer: Birth of twins makes this time of my life". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. "Für wen schlägt Federers Fussball-Herz?" [Who does Federer's football heart beat for?]. www.blick.ch (in German). 11 September 2009. Archived from the original on 14 September 2009. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Stauffer, René (2007). The Roger Federer Story: Quest for Perfection. New Chapter Press. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-942257-39-7. "Roger Federer: The Making of a Champion, Part 1". bleacherreport.com. 27 June 2012. Archived from the original on 27 December 2012. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Fanletter September 2004" (PDF). www.rogerfederer.com. 13 September 2004. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 September 2009. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "BBC Wimbledon: Roger Federer looks almost unrecognisable on first appearance at home of tennis 23 years ago". www.mylondon.news. 7 July 2021. Archived from the original on 8 March 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Lin, Thomas (29 May 2009). "How Badminton Helped Federer's Game". Straight Sets. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 29 July 2011. "Roger Federer opens up: 'I was quite lonely at National Tennis Centre'". www.tennisworldusa.org. 24 December 2021. Archived from the original on 20 May 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Blast From The Past: Roger Federer as Ball Boy at Swiss Indoors". Tennis World USA. 17 June 2015. Archived from the original on 22 February 2021. Retrieved 26 July 2019. Isabelle Musy (21 December 2012). ""En classe, Roger Federer était un instinctif"". Le Temps. Archived from the original on 9 December 2017. Retrieved 17 January 2024. "Roger Federer - History and Biography". history-biography.com. 11 June 2018. Archived from the original on 28 May 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer Junior Activity". www.itftennis.com. Archived from the original on 31 December 2019. Retrieved 29 December 2014. "Cómo eran Nadal, Djokovic, Federer, Serena Williams y Venus con 15 años?" [What were Nadal, Djokovic, Federer, Serena Williams and Venus like when they were 15 years old?]. as.com (in Spanish). 2 July 2019. Archived from the original on 15 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Federer's special memories of Hewitt". www.sbs.com.au. 16 January 2016. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer As A 16 Year Old". www.worldtennismagazine.com. 22 September 2009. Archived from the original on 20 December 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "Roger Federer wins his first ITF title: This day, that year". www.sportskeeda.com. 11 May 2020. Archived from the original on 20 December 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "22 September 1997: The day Roger Federer earned his first ranking points". www.tennismajors.com. 22 September 2023. Archived from the original on 20 December 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "Boys' Singles Finals 1947–2011". The Championships, Wimbledon. Archived from the original on 8 December 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "Boys' Doubles Finals 1947–2011". The Championships, Wimbledon. Archived from the original on 8 December 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "Roger Federer: The Making of a Champion, Part 2". bleacherreport.com. 9 July 2012. Archived from the original on 9 May 2015. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer junior overview". ITF Tennis. Archived from the original on 31 December 2019. Retrieved 21 August 2020. "7 July 1998: Roger Federer makes a debut on the ATP Tour in Gstaad". Tennis World USA. 7 July 2017. Archived from the original on 8 June 2020. Retrieved 8 June 2020. "17-year-old Federer makes his debut in a tennis world almost unrecognisable compared with today". www.tennismajors.com. 15 September 2022. Archived from the original on 10 February 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "The Transformation Of Roger Federer". www.thelist.com. 10 March 2023. Archived from the original on 9 June 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer loses to Andre Agassi in Basel debut". www.tennisworldusa.org. 6 October 2018. Archived from the original on 15 January 2024. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer makes successful Davis Cup debut". www.tennisworldusa.org. 2 April 2018. Archived from the original on 5 June 2018. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Federer won eerste titel met Nederlandse tennisnomade: 'Hij was nog een kind'" [Federer won first title with Dutch tennis nomad: 'He was still a child']. nos.nl (in Dutch). 19 September 2022. Archived from the original on 3 January 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "A teenage Federer wins sole ATP Challenger in France". www.tennis.com. 24 October 2019. Archived from the original on 15 January 2024. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "ESPN.com: Federer PlayerCard". ESPN. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer - biography". www.britannica.com. 19 November 2023. Archived from the original on 30 June 2019. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "BBC World Service – Sportshour – Federer on his fading hopes of Olympic singles gold". BBC. Archived from the original on 8 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Hingis, Federer win Hopman Cup title over U.S." Sports Illustrated. 6 January 2001. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 12 July 2012. Daniel, Owen (7 January 2001). "Hopman Cup: Hingis ends jinx". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 12 July 2012. "Roger Federer, Belinda Bencic claim the Hopman Cup for Switzerland with victory over Germany". Perth Now. 6 January 2018. Archived from the original on 8 January 2018. Retrieved 7 January 2018. "Federer beats Boutter in Milan for first title". Hürriyet Daily News. 6 February 2001. Archived from the original on 3 November 2014. Retrieved 3 November 2014. "Looking back at each step of Roger Federer's 65-Slam run (Part 1)". Tennis.com. Archived from the original on 8 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Roger Federer's list of achievements". www.rnz.co.nz. 16 September 2022. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Roberts, Selena (3 July 2001). "Sampras, King of Wimbledon, Is Dethroned". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 November 2019. Retrieved 2 November 2017. "Miami 2002, Roger Federer recalls best second win ever". Tennis World USA. April 2018. Archived from the original on 8 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Hamburg 2002: Roger Federer beats Marat Safin for first Masters 1000 title". Tennis World USA. 22 November 2017. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "The day Federer's former coach Peter Carter passed away tragically". www.tennismajors.com. 1 August 2023. Archived from the original on 12 November 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Federer overpowers Novak to capture Vienna title". m.rediff.com. 14 October 2002. Archived from the original on 15 October 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "ATP Finals Flashback: Roger Federer falls to Lleyton Hewitt". www.tennisworldusa.org. 26 November 2022. Archived from the original on 5 February 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Inspired Federer wins Wimbledon". BBC Sport. 6 July 2003. Archived from the original on 25 April 2014. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "The big interview: Roger Federer". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Archived from the original on 13 June 2021. Retrieved 13 June 2021. "Rankings | Singles | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 22 March 2020. Retrieved 26 July 2019. Meadows, Stephen Bierley at Flushing (6 September 2003). "Federer departs amid charges of American favouritism". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Paes, Rikl beaten in final". m.rediff.com. 30 March 2003. Archived from the original on 20 December 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "Mantilla masters Federer in Rome". news.bbc.co.uk. 11 May 2003. Archived from the original on 20 December 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "Roger Federer – 2003 Singles Playing Activity". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 12 January 2012. Retrieved 8 December 2014. "Heritage". Nitto ATP Finals. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Majestic Federer takes title". BBC Sport. 1 February 2004. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Federer ends Coria run". news.bbc.co.uk. 16 May 2004. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Newbery, Piers (4 July 2004). "Federer fights back to retain title". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 2 October 2013. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Federer crashes out". BBC Sport. 17 August 2004. Archived from the original on 28 August 2004. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Canada Flashback: Roger Federer wins first Canada Masters over Andy Roddick". www.tennisworldusa.org. 4 August 2004. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Federer proves a class apart in demolition job". www.theguardian.com. 13 September 2004. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Federer is master of the world". www.theguardian.com. 22 November 2004. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Most Titles in Single Season". www.ultimatetennisstatistics.com. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Bierley, Stephen (3 June 2005). "Tennis: Nadal beats Federer in battle of wills". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Federer seals Wimbledon hat-trick". 3 July 2005. Archived from the original on 2 October 2013. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Roger Federer – 2005 Singles Playing Activity". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 9 July 2009. Retrieved 8 December 2014. York, Stephen Bierley in New (13 September 2005). "Federer beats Agassi to claim US crown". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 21 October 2018. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Federer suffers ligament injury". BBC Sport. 13 October 2005. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 4 February 2018. "Best Seasons - winning percentage". www.ultimatetennisstatistics.com. Archived from the original on 8 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Tignor, Steve (28 November 2011). "Final thoughts". Tennis.com. Archived from the original on 29 June 2017. Retrieved 1 February 2017. VAVEL.com (28 December 2015). "Greatest Seasons: Roger Federer 2006". VAVEL. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Roger Federer – 2006 Singles Playing Activity". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 9 February 2012. Retrieved 8 December 2014. Bierley, Steve (24 May 2006). "Tennis: Nadal blocks Federer's record hunting". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 21 April 2018. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "August 16, 2006: Murray snaps Federer's 55-match winning streak at." Tennis World USA. 16 August 2017. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Why Roger Federer's 2006 season beats Novak Djokovic's 2015 season". 4 March 2020. Archived from the original on 27 May 2021. Retrieved 10 November 2020. "Basel 2006: Roger Federer wins first title at home to start the supremacy". Tennis World USA. 30 October 2018. Archived from the original on 7 August 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Federer defeats Gonzalez for 10th Grand Slam title". ESPN. 28 January 2007. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 13 April 2017. DeSimone, Bonnie (5 April 2007). "Canas keeps the ball in court in doping case". ESPN. Archived from the original on 26 September 2018. Retrieved 22 October 2016. "Federer stunned by Canas on day of upsets". Reuters. 12 March 2007. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Federer ends Nadal's clay streak in Hamburg". Reuters. 20 May 2007. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Rafael Nadal VS. Roger Federer – Paris 2007". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 24 April 2018. Retrieved 29 October 2017. "Wimbledon: Roger Federer beats Rafael Nadal to win the men's singles final". The Guardian. 8 July 2007. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Federer's fifth and finest draws level with Borg". www.theguardian.com. 9 July 2007. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Federer wins fourth US Open title". 9 September 2007. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Supreme Federer destroys Ferrer". 18 November 2007. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Roger Federer". ausopen.com. 30 January 2017. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Allen, J. A. "10 Records Roger Federer Will Never Equal or Break". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. Clarey, Christopher (7 March 2008). "Federer battles off-court foe – mononucleosis". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 25 October 2014. "Tennis – ATP World Tour – Tennis Players – Roger Federer". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 8 July 2009. Retrieved 8 December 2014. Almeida, Henrique (20 April 2008). "Federer ends title drought with Estoril win". Reuters. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Federer wins fifth Halle title". SWI swissinfo.ch. 15 June 2008. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Federer Beats Nalbandian in Swiss Final". The New York Times. The Associated Press. 26 October 2008. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Federer and Wawrinka golden together". Archived from the original on 29 April 2014. Retrieved 16 August 2008. "Tennis – ATP World Tour – Tennis Players – Roger Federer". Archived from the original on 22 February 2012. Retrieved 16 February 2010. "Courageous Murray blown away as Federer claims his 13th major". The Guardian. 9 September 2008. Archived from the original on 17 April 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "Federer ousted from Masters". www.theage.com.au. 10 November 2008. Archived from the original on 20 December 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. Singh, Gaurav (2 November 2018). "2008: The year that first poked holes in Roger Federer's aura of invincibility". www.sportskeeda.com. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. Bierley, Steve (1 February 2009). "Australian Open: Rafael Nadal beats Roger Federer in five sets". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 1 February 2009. Bierley, Steve (16 April 2009). "Tennis: Roger Federer in shock early exit from the Monte Carlo Masters". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Federer Wins Madrid Open, Defeating a Run-Down Nadal". The New York Times. Associated Press. 17 May 2009. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 18 September 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "How a French Open win over Tommy Haas cemented Federer's legacy". ESPN. 30 May 2019. Archived from the original on 20 December 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "Roger Federer beats Juan Martín del Potro to make French Open final". The Guardian. 5 June 2009. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. Clarey, Christopher (7 June 2009). "The Greatest? Federer's Victory Fills Last Hole on His Résumé". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 23 June 2019. Retrieved 26 February 2017. "Flashback: Federer Completes Career Grand Slam In Paris | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Roger Federer wins Wimbledon after epic Andy Roddick battle". The Guardian. 5 July 2009. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Federer triumphs in another English epic". ESPN. 5 July 2009. Archived from the original on 20 November 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "Roger Federer beats Novak Djokovic to win Cincinnati Masters". www.theguardian.com. 24 August 2009. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Novak Djokovic recalls Roger Federer's 2009 US Open tweener". www.tennisworldusa.org. 16 October 2018. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Juan Martín del Potro shocks Roger Federer to win US Open title". www.theguardian.com. 15 September 2009. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Federer Will Finish 2009 Number One". www.cbsnews.com. Associated Press. 25 November 2009. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Aussie Open: Federer Claims 16th Grand Slam Despite Murray's Will To Win". bleacherreport.com. 31 January 2010. Archived from the original on 20 December 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "Andy Murray falls to brilliant Roger Federer in Australian Open final". www.theguardian.com. 31 January 2010. Archived from the original on 30 June 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. Drape, Joe (31 January 2010). "With Australian Title, Federer Returns From Vulnerable to Invincible". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 19 September 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Tennis – ATP World Tour – Roland Garros Friday – Federer Joins 700 Match Wins Club". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 1 June 2010. Retrieved 22 January 2013. Mitchell, Kevin (1 June 2010). "Roger Federer beaten by Robin Söderling in French Open". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. Buddell, James. "Tennis – ATP World Tour – The Championships – Berdych Sends Federer Spinning Out". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 22 January 2013. Retrieved 22 January 2013. "Federer joins an elite club – Rediff Sports". Rediff.com. 21 June 2010. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 22 January 2013. "Roger Federer hires Paul Annacone as coach to help revive career". The Guardian. Associated Press. 26 July 2010. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 19 November 2013. "Novak Djokovic stuns Roger Federer in US Open semi-final". www.theguardian.com. 12 September 2010. Archived from the original on 25 September 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "Federer back to winning ways with fourth Cincinnati crown". ATP. 22 August 2010. Archived from the original on 25 October 2014. Retrieved 22 August 2010. "Federer beats Djokovic to win back Swiss Indoors title". edition.cnn.com. 7 November 2010. Archived from the original on 20 December 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. Mitchell, Kevin (28 November 2010). "Roger Federer surges to victory over Rafa Nadal at World Tour Finals". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 24 July 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Results". Nitto ATP Finals. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "2010 Flashback: Roger Federer Draws Level With Pete Sampras, Ivan Lendl | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. 6 November 2018. Archived from the original on 15 September 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Australian Open 2011: Novak Djokovic beats Roger Federer to reach final". www.theguardian.com. 27 January 2011. Archived from the original on 11 October 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. Garros, Kevin Mitchell at Roland (3 June 2011). "Roger Federer shocks French Open by beating Novak Djokovic". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Nadal outlasts Federer, wins sixth French Open". ESPN.com. 5 June 2011. Archived from the original on 3 February 2016. Retrieved 7 June 2020. Wimbledon, Owen Gibson at (29 June 2011). "Wimbledon 2011: Jo-Wilfried Tsonga stuns Roger Federer over five sets". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Novak Djokovic reaches US Open final after stunning Roger Federer". The Guardian. UK. 10 September 2011. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "Two sets down, Novak Djokovic rallies to beat Roger Federer". ESPN. 10 September 2011. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. Buddell, James. "Tennis – ATP World Tour – Barclays ATP World Tour Finals 2011 Final – Federer Wins Record Sixth Title". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 14 December 2014. Retrieved 24 January 2012. Park, Kevin Mitchell at Melbourne (26 January 2012). "Rafael Nadal triumphs over Roger Federer in epic Australian Open semi". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Roger Federer beats Juan Martín del Potro in Rotterdam final-gb". BBC Sport. 19 February 2012. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Roger Federer beats Andy Murray to win Dubai Championships-gb". BBC Sport. 3 March 2012. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Roger Federer beats John Isner to take Indian Wells title-gb". BBC Sport. 19 March 2012. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "From the vault: Roger Federer's spectacular run at the 2012 Madrid Masters". www.sportskeeda.com. 2 May 2019. Archived from the original on 20 December 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "French Open: Novak Djokovic beats Roger Federer to reach final". BBC Sport. 8 June 2012. Archived from the original on 1 July 2019. Retrieved 1 July 2019. Dupont, Kevin Paul (9 July 2012). "Roger Federer wins 7th Wimbledon title". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 11 September 2017. Fendrich, Howard (8 July 2012). "Federer beats Murray for 7th Wimbledon, 17th major". Yahoo! Sports. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 5 December 2014. Mitchell, Kevin (3 August 2012). "Roger Federer beats Juan Martín del Potro to reach Olympic final". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 9 January 2013. Killion, Ann (5 August 2012). "Despite loss to Murray, silver medal meaningful for Federer in London". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 9 January 2013. "Roger Federer beats Novak Djokovic to win Cincinnati Open". BBC Sport. 19 August 2012. Archived from the original on 24 May 2019. Retrieved 19 August 2012. "Roger Federer loses to Tomas Berdych in US Open quarters". BBC Sport. 6 September 2012. Archived from the original on 15 July 2019. Retrieved 6 September 2012. "Djokovic beats Federer to win World Tour Finals title". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 19 November 2012. Retrieved 13 November 2012. "Rafael Nadal powers to win over Roger Federer at Indian Wells". BBC Sport. 15 March 2013. Archived from the original on 15 July 2019. Retrieved 4 July 2014. "Federer reflects on mistakes of playing injured". Tennis.com. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 7 June 2020. Clarke, Patrick. "Analyzing Roger Federer's Slow Start to 2013 Tennis Season". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Roger Federer Ties John McEnroe With 77th Career Title In Halle". 16 June 2013. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 18 June 2013. "Roger Federer loses at Wimbledon, snapping greatest streak in tennis". USA Today. Archived from the original on 2 July 2013. Retrieved 6 July 2013. "Roger Federer's ranking history". Atp Tour. ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 11 May 2015. Retrieved 6 July 2013. Newman, Paul (13 October 2013). "The fading Roger Federer puts coach Paul Annacone out to grass". The Independent. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 4 July 2014. "Federer reflects on mistakes of playing injured". Tennis.com. 20 October 2013. Archived from the original on 2 April 2020. Retrieved 1 February 2017. "Stefan Edberg to join Roger Federer's coaching team at Australian Open". www.theguardian.com. 27 December 2013. Archived from the original on 20 December 2023. Retrieved 19 December 2023. "Australian Open 2014: Nadal beats Federer to reach final-gb". BBC Sport. 24 January 2014. Archived from the original on 13 February 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Roger Federer fights back to beat Tomáš Berdych in Dubai". BBC Sport. 1 March 2014. Archived from the original on 8 August 2019. Retrieved 4 July 2014. "Indian Wells: Novak Djokovic beats Roger Federer in final-gb". BBC Sport. 16 March 2014. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Davis Cup – Swiss battle to victory over Kazakhstan". www.daviscup.com. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Switzerland 3:2 Italy". Davis Cup. Archived from the original on 22 March 2016. Retrieved 17 September 2014. "Stanislas Wawrinka beats Roger Federer in Monte Carlo final-gb". BBC Sport. 20 April 2014. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Roger Federer wins seventh Gerry Weber Open title in Halle-gb". BBC Sport. 15 June 2014. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Novak Djokovic beats Roger Federer to win Wimbledon title-gb". BBC Sport. 6 July 2014. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. Steinberg, Jacob (6 July 2014). "Novak Djokovic beats Roger Federer to win Wimbledon final – as it happened". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Rogers Cup: Jo-Wilfried Tsonga beats Roger Federer to win title-gb". BBC Sport. 10 August 2014. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "August 17, 2014: Roger Federer downs David Ferrer to win Cincinnati crown". Tennis World USA. 17 August 2018. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. Meadows, Kevin Mitchell at Flushing (7 September 2014). "US Open: Cilic demolishes Federer after Nishikori shocks Djokovic". The Observer. ISSN 0029-7712. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Roger Federer defeats Novak Djokovic to reach Shanghai Masters final". www.theguardian.com. 11 October 2014. Archived from the original on 20 December 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "Roger Federer beats Gilles Simon to win Shanghai Masters-gb". BBC Sport. 12 October 2014. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Roger Federer wins 6th Swiss title". ESPN. 26 October 2014. Archived from the original on 20 December 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. O2, Kevin Mitchell at the (16 November 2014). "Roger Federer pulls out of ATP Tour Finals with back injury". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Roger Federer, Switzerland win first Davis Cup title". USA Today. 23 November 2014. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 25 November 2014. "Davis Cup final attracts record crowd". Reuters. 21 November 2014. Archived from the original on 27 February 2015. Retrieved 29 March 2017. Sharko, Greg (11 January 2015). "By the numbers: Federer's 1000 match wins". Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP). Archived from the original on 18 July 2015. Retrieved 11 January 2015. "Roger Federer beats Novak Djokovic to win Dubai title". BBC Sport. 28 February 2015. Archived from the original on 15 July 2019. Retrieved 28 February 2015. "Novak Djokovic beats Roger Federer in Indian Wells final". BBC Sport. 22 March 2015. Archived from the original on 2 April 2020. Retrieved 24 March 2015. "Roger Federer wins inaugural Istanbul Open against Pablo Cuevas". www.theguardian.com. 3 May 2015. Archived from the original on 20 December 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "Djokovic Wins Fourth Rome Crown; Fourth Masters 1000 Title Of 2015". Archived from the original on 19 May 2015. Retrieved 3 June 2015. "Stanislas Wawrinka knocks out Roger Federer at French Open – as it happened". www.theguardian.com. 2 June 2015. Archived from the original on 20 December 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "Roger Federer beats Andreas Seppi to claim record eighth title at Gerry Weber Open". ESPN. 21 June 2015. Archived from the original on 9 April 2016. Retrieved 22 June 2015. Newbery, Piers (12 July 2015). "Wimbledon 2015: Novak Djokovic beats Roger Federer in final". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 9 September 2019. Retrieved 17 July 2015. "Roger Federer wins seventh Cincinnati Masters title". BBC Sport. 23 August 2015. Archived from the original on 15 July 2019. Retrieved 24 August 2015. Mitchell, Kevin (12 September 2015). "US Open 2015: Roger Federer swats aside Stan Wawrinka to reach final". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 September 2015. Retrieved 14 September 2015. Newbery, Piers (14 September 2015). "US Open 2015: Novak Djokovic beats Roger Federer in final". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 26 June 2019. Retrieved 14 September 2015. "Roger Federer beats Rafael Nadal to win Swiss Indoors title". BBC Sport. 1 November 2015. Archived from the original on 15 July 2019. Retrieved 2 November 2015. "Federer To Begin 2016 With New-Look Team | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 18 July 2019. Retrieved 26 July 2019. "Brisbane International: Milos Raonic beats Roger Federer". BBC Sport. 10 January 2016. Archived from the original on 29 June 2019. Retrieved 18 April 2016. "Australian Open 2016: Novak Djokovic beats Roger Federer". BBC Sport. 28 January 2016. Archived from the original on 27 April 2020. Retrieved 18 April 2016. "Roger Federer faces a month on sidelines after knee surgery". The Guardian. 3 February 2016. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 3 February 2016. "Roger Federer pulls out of comeback match at Miami Open". BBC Sport. 25 March 2016. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 25 March 2016. "Roger Federer eliminated from Monte Carlo Masters 2016". www.sportskeeda.com. 15 April 2016. Archived from the original on 20 December 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "Roger Federer: Former world number one withdraws from French Open". BBC Sport. 19 May 2016. Archived from the original on 2 April 2020. Retrieved 19 May 2016. "Roger Federer loses in semi-final of Wimbledon warm-up event". www.bbc.com. 18 June 2016. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Garber, Greg (6 July 2016). "The comeback king: Roger Federer still has the capacity to surprise". ESPN. Archived from the original on 17 July 2016. Retrieved 8 July 2016. Newbery, Piers (8 July 2016). "Wimbledon 2016: Milos Raonic beats Roger Federer to reach first Grand Slam final". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 8 July 2016. "Roger Federer to miss Rio 2016 Olympics and rest of season with knee injury". BBC Sport. 26 July 2016. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 26 July 2016. "Is this the end for Roger Federer?". FOX Sports. 27 July 2016. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 13 February 2018. Eccleshare, Charlie (3 May 2016). "Why Roger Federer will never win another grand slam". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. "Federer's comeback season 'off the charts', says pundits". Reuters. 24 August 2017. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Think You Missed Roger Federer At His Peak? Think Again | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. Gleeson, Michael (22 January 2017). "Australian Open 2017: Roger Federer beats Kei Nishikori in enthralling five-set battle". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 23 January 2017. Retrieved 23 January 2017. "Australian Open: Roger Federer outlasts Stan Wawrinka in five sets to make Melbourne Park final". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 26 January 2017. Archived from the original on 29 December 2017. Retrieved 26 January 2017. "Roger Federer beats Stan Wawrinka to reach Australian Open final". BBC Sport. 26 January 2017. Archived from the original on 31 December 2018. Retrieved 26 January 2017. "Australian Open: Roger Federer beats Rafael Nadal to win 18th Grand Slam title". BBC Sport. 30 January 2017. Archived from the original on 10 November 2019. Retrieved 30 January 2017. "Federer Tops Nadal In Epic For 18th Major Crown". ATP World Tour. 30 January 2017. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 30 January 2017. Trollope, Matt (30 January 2017). "Federer's high five". ausopen.com. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017. Retrieved 30 January 2017. "Federer reassesses goals after Indian Wells triumph". ATP World Tour. 20 March 2017. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 20 March 2017. "Federer Completes Third Sunshine Double With Miami Title". ATP World Tour. 2 April 2017. Archived from the original on 3 April 2017. Retrieved 7 April 2017. "Roger Federer will skip French Open, eyes grass-court season". ESPN. Associated Press. 15 May 2017. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 15 May 2017. "Roger Federer stunned by Tommy Haas in first game back". Eurosport. 14 June 2017. Archived from the original on 26 June 2019. Retrieved 31 July 2017. "Roger Federer warms up for Wimbledon with 92nd career title". ESPN. Associated Press. 25 June 2017. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 26 June 2017. "How the 2017 Wimbledon Final Was Won". ATP World Tour. 17 July 2017. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 17 July 2017. Streeter, Kurt (17 July 2017). "Somehow, Roger Federer keeps pushing the boundaries of greatness". ESPN. Archived from the original on 17 November 2018. Retrieved 17 July 2017. "Rogers Cup: Alexander Zverev beats Roger Federer in Montreal final-gb". BBC Sport. 14 August 2017. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "US Open 2017: Juan Martin del Potro beats Roger Federer to make semi-finals-gb". BBC Sport. 7 September 2017. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Team Europe wins Laver Cup after epic Federer victory – Laver Cup". 24 September 2017. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 24 September 2017. "Fedal pairing nominated for Sporting Moment of the Year | News". Laver Cup. 11 December 2017. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Laver Cup 2017: Team Europe beat Team World 15–9 in inaugural competition-gb". BBC Sport. 24 September 2017. Archived from the original on 14 September 2019. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Laver Cup 2017: Europe v The World – results & standings-gb". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 17 September 2019. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Federer wins Shanghai Masters with straight sets victory over Nadal". enca.com. Archived from the original on 26 April 2019. Retrieved 15 October 2017. "Swiss Indoors: Roger Federer beats Juan Martín del Potro to win eighth Basel title-gb". BBC Sport. 29 October 2017. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Goffin Shocks Federer In London | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Swiss precision lands third Hopman Cup title – Hopman Cup". Hopman Cup. 6 January 2018. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 6 January 2018. "Roger Federer in fine form as Switzerland seal third Hopman Cup victory". The Observer. Reuters. 6 January 2018. ISSN 0029-7712. Archived from the original on 14 May 2021. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Roger Federer wins sixth Australian Open and 20th Grand Slam title". BBC Sport. 28 January 2018. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 4 February 2018. "Roger Federer, 36, to become oldest No. 1 ever in ATP rankings". ESPN. 16 February 2018. Archived from the original on 30 January 2020. Retrieved 19 February 2018. "Roger Federer wins Rotterdam Open two days after becoming world No 1". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 19 February 2018. Retrieved 19 February 2018. "Federer Outlasts Coric, Completes Best Start To A Season | ATP World Tour | Tennis". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 21 March 2018. Retrieved 17 March 2018. "Miami Open: Roger Federer to lose top spot and miss French Open after defeat". BBC Sport. 25 March 2018. Archived from the original on 4 March 2019. Retrieved 27 March 2018. "Roger Federer beats Milos Raonic to win Mercedes Cup in Stuttgart". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 26 August 2018. Retrieved 19 June 2018. "Borna Coric defeats Roger Federer in absorbing Gerry Weber Open final in Halle". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 30 July 2018. Retrieved 24 June 2018. "Roger Federer squanders huge lead at Wimbledon". ESPN. 11 July 2018. Archived from the original on 20 December 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "Djokovic clinches career golden Masters". Sport24. 20 August 2018. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 20 August 2018. Barry, Jamie (4 September 2018). "Australia's John Millman victorious against Roger Federer at US Open". Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 7 May 2019. Retrieved 4 September 2018. "Laver Cup 2018 results: Team Europe WIN – Roger Federer and Zverev seal Chicago glory". Express. 24 September 2018. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 14 October 2018. "The Federer-Djokovic doubles combo a work in progress". ESPN. 21 September 2018. Archived from the original on 20 December 2023. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "Roger Federer wins Swiss Indoors to claim 99th career ATP title". ESPN. 28 October 2018. Archived from the original on 13 April 2019. Retrieved 28 October 2018. "Zverev Beats Federer To Reach Final In London | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Hopman Cup: Roger Federer & Belinda Bencic retain title for Switzerland". BBC Sport. 5 January 2019. Archived from the original on 26 April 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2019. "Federer wins record third Hopman Cup crown". www.abc.net.au. 5 January 2019. Archived from the original on 11 January 2019. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Roger Federer plans to play clay-court season after Australian Open exit". BBC Sport. 20 January 2019. Archived from the original on 13 May 2019. Retrieved 1 July 2019. "Roger Federer beaten by Stefanos Tsitsipas in Australian Open fourth round". BBC Sport. 20 January 2019. Archived from the original on 27 April 2020. Retrieved 22 January 2019. "Roger Federer wins 100th ATP title in Dubai with victory over Stefanos Tsitsipas". BBC Sport. 2 March 2019. Archived from the original on 15 July 2019. Retrieved 3 March 2019. "Dominic Thiem upsets Roger Federer at Indian Wells for first Masters title". The Guardian. Associated Press. 18 March 2019. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 19 March 2019. "Roger Federer beats hobbled John Isner at Miami Open for 101st career title". The Guardian. Associated Press. 31 March 2019. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 1 April 2019. "Federer drops two match points, falls to Thiem". ESPN. 10 May 2019. Archived from the original on 20 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer to face Rafael Nadal in French Open semi-finals". BBC Sport. 4 June 2019. Archived from the original on 25 August 2019. Retrieved 4 June 2019. "Federer Win 10th Halle Title, Sends Wimbledon Warning". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 23 June 2019. "Wimbledon 2019 result: Roger Federer beats Rafael Nadal in four-set classic to reach 12th final". www.independent.co.uk. 14 July 2019. Archived from the original on 15 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Mitchell, Kevin (12 July 2019). "Roger Federer beats Rafael Nadal in four sets to reach Wimbledon men's final". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 14 July 2019. "Novak Djokovic beats Roger Federer in Wimbledon final-set tie-break thriller". BBC Sport. 14 July 2019. Archived from the original on 20 March 2020. Retrieved 14 July 2019. "Roger Federer suffers his fastest defeat in 16 years at the Cincinnati Masters". CNN. 16 August 2019. Archived from the original on 16 August 2019. Retrieved 16 August 2019. "Ailing Roger Federer's US Open run ended as Grigor Dimitrov springs upset". www.theguardian.com. 4 September 2019. Archived from the original on 26 April 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Federer, Zverev win as Europe retains Laver Cup title". www.sportsnet.ca. 22 September 2019. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Federer handed point penalty in surprise defeat to Zverev at the Shanghai Masters". Live Tennis. Archived from the original on 12 October 2019. Retrieved 11 October 2019. "Rodger Federer wins easily at Basel in 1,500th tour singles match". ESPN. 28 October 2019. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer claims 10th Basel crown with victory over Alex de Minaur". ESPN. 28 October 2019. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 28 October 2019. "Roger Federer beats Novak Djokovic at 2019 ATP Finals in London". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 15 November 2019. Retrieved 17 November 2019. "Stefanos Tsitsipas beats Roger Federer & faces Dominic Thiem for title at ATP Finals". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 16 November 2019. Retrieved 17 November 2019. "Roger Federer Saves Seven Match Points And Beats Tennys Sandgren At Australian Open". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 29 January 2020. Retrieved 28 January 2020. "Brilliant Djokovic Beats Federer, Reaches Australian Open Final". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 30 January 2020. Retrieved 30 January 2020. "Federer Undergoes Right Knee Surgery, Set To Return In June". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 21 February 2020. Retrieved 22 February 2020. "Federer Announces Right Knee Procedure, To Return In 2021". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 10 June 2020. Retrieved 3 August 2020. "Roger Federer Withdraws From The Australian Open". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 10 January 2021. Retrieved 18 January 2021. "Roger Federer's Australian Open Withdrawal due to Family not Injury – Tennis Australia Official". Eurosport. 7 January 2021. Archived from the original on 20 January 2021. Retrieved 18 January 2021. "Djokovic Sets New All-Time Record For Weeks At No. 1 In FedEx ATP Rankings". atptour.com. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 8 March 2021. "Roger Federer's comeback at Qatar Open ended by Nikoloz Basilashvili". The Guardian. 11 March 2021. Archived from the original on 12 March 2021. Retrieved 12 March 2021. "Roger Federer withdraws from French Open over knee concerns". CNN. 6 June 2021. Archived from the original on 6 June 2021. Retrieved 6 June 2021. "Felix Auger-Aliassime Stuns 'Idol' Roger Federer to Reach Halle QF | ATP Tour | Tennis". Archived from the original on 31 May 2022. Retrieved 22 June 2021. "ATP Halle: Roger Federer experiences earliest exit to Felix Auger-Aliassime". 16 June 2021. Archived from the original on 16 June 2021. Retrieved 22 June 2021. "Roger Federer breaks age record for men in Open era, reaching Wimbledon quarters". 5 July 2021. Archived from the original on 5 July 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2021. "Roger Federer Upset by Hubert Hurkacz in 2021 Wimbledon Quarterfinals". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 7 July 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2021. "In stunning, straight-set defeat to Hubert Hurkacz, Roger Federer suffers first 6–0 set loss at Wimbledon". Archived from the original on 7 July 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2021. "Federer Announces Knee Surgery, US Open Withdrawal". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 15 August 2021. Retrieved 15 August 2021. "Roger Federer Rankings History ATP Tour Tennis". ATP Tour. 20 June 2022. Archived from the original on 3 June 2022. Retrieved 20 June 2022. "Federer out of ATP rankings for 1st time in 25 yrs". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on 11 July 2022. Retrieved 11 July 2022. "Roger Federer set to to[sic] play Laver Cup followed by Basel with Rafael Nadal ready for his return in Madrid". Sky Sports News. 26 April 2022. Archived from the original on 20 June 2022. Retrieved 20 June 2022. "Roger Federer Announces End Of Historic Career | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 1 October 2022. Retrieved 15 September 2022. "Tennis legend Roger Federer announces retirement". ABC News. 15 September 2022. Archived from the original on 15 September 2022. Retrieved 15 September 2022. Walsh, Erin (23 September 2022). "Roger Federer Loses Farewell Doubles Match with Rafael Nadal at 2022 Laver Cup". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 24 September 2022. Retrieved 30 June 2023. Swiss tennis legend Roger Federer played his final match alongside Rafael Nadal in the Laver Cup on Friday at O2 Arena in London, and the duo fell 6–4, 6(2)–7, 9–11 loss to American duo Frances Tiafoe and Jack Sock. Clarey, Christopher (23 September 2022). "Laver Cup Live: Federer Loses Doubles Showdown to End Career". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 23 September 2022. Retrieved 23 September 2022. "Roger Federer VS Rafael Nadal". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 28 January 2017. Retrieved 16 April 2018. "Rafa & Roger: The Rivalry". ATP World Tour. 29 January 2009. Archived from the original on 31 August 2013. Retrieved 14 February 2009. Fendrich, Howard (7 July 2008). "Federer-Nadal rivalry as good as it gets". ESPN. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 28 March 2013. Retrieved 4 December 2014. Weaver, Paul (7 July 2008). "Move over McEnroe and Borg, this one will run and run in the memory". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 11 June 2013. Retrieved 14 February 2009. Flanagan, Martin (12 July 2008). "Federer v Nadal as good as sport gets". The Age. Melbourne. Archived from the original on 4 February 2009. Retrieved 14 February 2009. Bodo, Peter (30 January 2009). "Rivalry!". Peter Bodo's Tennisworld. Tennis.com. Archived from the original on 22 May 2019. Retrieved 14 February 2009. MacGregor, Jeff (3 February 2009). "Greatest rivalry of the 21st century?". ESPN. Archived from the original on 12 February 2009. Retrieved 14 February 2009. Jago, Richard (15 August 2009). "Andy Murray reaches world No2 rank after beating Jo-Wilfried Tsonga". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 July 2013. Retrieved 16 August 2010. "It's official: Nadal will pass Federer for No. 1". NBC Sports (Associated Press). 1 August 2008. Archived from the original on 19 October 2008. Retrieved 14 February 2009. Jenkins, Bruce (7 July 2008). "The Greatest Match Ever". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on 4 March 2012. Retrieved 14 February 2009. Alleyne, Richard (7 July 2008). "Wimbledon 2008: John McEnroe hails Rafael Nadal victory as greatest final ever". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 14 June 2018. Retrieved 14 February 2009. Wertheim, Jon (9 July 2008). "Without a doubt, it's the greatest". Tennis Mailbag. Archived from the original on 13 August 2013. Retrieved 14 February 2009. Tignor, Steve (8 July 2008). "W: Report Cards". Concrete Elbow. Tennis.com. Archived from the original on 19 August 2013. Retrieved 14 February 2009. "Roger Federer VS Novak Djokovic - Head 2 Head". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 10 February 2024. Retrieved 16 April 2018. "Novak & Roger: The Rivalry". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 21 May 2013. Retrieved 24 April 2013. "Djokovic Snatches Monumental Victory from Federer". Tennis Now. Retrieved 14 September 2011. Skuzinski, Thomas (28 August 2011). "Roger Federer vs. Novak Djokovic: The Best Hard Court Rivalry". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 24 January 2012. "Roger Federer VS Andy Murray". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 16 April 2018. "Superb Federer ends Murray dream". BBC Sport. 8 September 2008. Retrieved 27 April 2010. "Andy Murray falls to brilliant Roger Federer in Australian Open final". The Guardian. 31 January 2010. Retrieved 23 November 2014. Bierley, Steve (14 November 2008). "Murray beats Federer in 3 sets". The Guardian. Retrieved 27 April 2010. Ornstein, David (23 November 2010). "Roger Federer crushes lacklustre Andy Murray in London". BBC Sport. "Roger Federer VS Andy Roddick". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 16 April 2018. "WTA big three one step away from a major rivalry". ESPN. 9 October 2012. Retrieved 29 April 2015. "Roger Federer VS Lleyton Hewitt". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 16 April 2018. "Roger Federer VS David Nalbandian". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 16 April 2018. "Roger Federer VS Marat Safin". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 16 April 2018. "Roger Federer VS Andre Agassi". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 16 April 2018. "Roger Federer VS Stan Wawrinka". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 22 September 2016. "Roger Federer VS Juan Martin Del Potro". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 18 August 2018. Retrieved 19 March 2018. "Roger Federer VS Tomas Berdych". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 16 April 2018. "Roger Federer VS Jo-Wilfried Tsonga". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 16 April 2018. Flory, Kate. "Wimbledon Final – Federer Makes History With 15th Grand Slam Title – Tennis". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 4 July 2014. "Roger Federer's Grand Slam Titles". CNN. "Rafael Nadal: 22 stats for his 22nd Grand Slam title". Tennis.com. Retrieved 17 June 2022. Pentony, Luke (31 January 2022). "Rafael Nadal wins record 21st major with five-set defeat of Daniil Medvedev in Australian Open final". ABC News. Retrieved 31 January 2022. Alexander, Paul (9 February 2008). "Federer's streak of 10 straight Grand Slam finals ended by Djokovic". Coastal Courier. Retrieved 27 June 2019. Harwitt, Sandra (26 January 2018). "Roger Federer reaches Australian Open final, his 30th Grand Slam singles finals appearance". USA Today. Retrieved 27 June 2019. "Roger FEDERER – Olympic Tennis | Switzerland". International Olympic Committee. 19 July 2017. Retrieved 15 September 2017. "Rankings history". ATP Tour. 11 October 2015. "Roger Federer Voted As Fans' Favourite For 19th Time In ATP Awards". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 8 May 2023. "Federer, Del Potro, Bryans Honoured In 2016 ATP World Tour Awards". ATP Tour. 10 November 2016. "BBC Sports Personality 2017: Roger Federer wins BBC overseas award for record fourth time". BBC Sport. 15 December 2017. Retrieved 17 January 2023. "Winners Archive Roger Federer". Laureus World Sports Awards. Archived from the original on 13 July 2018. Retrieved 10 July 2009. "Federer named greatest player by Tennis Channel". Fox Sports. 23 March 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2017. "Australian tennis great Rod Laver says Roger Federer is the greatest player of all time". The Advertiser (Adelaide). 5 July 2012. Archived from the original on 27 May 2020. Retrieved 3 May 2017. Evans, Richard (24 June 2007). "Jack the Lad". The Observer. Retrieved 15 February 2009. Jack Kramer 'is ready to anoint Roger Federer as the best he has seen'. "Federer the greatest ever – Lloyd". BBC Sport. 7 June 2009. Retrieved 7 June 2009. Jago, Richard (5 June 2009). "'Roger Federer is the greatest' says Pete Sampras after record broken". The Guardian. Retrieved 9 November 2010. Barnes, Simon (8 June 2009). "Roger Federer, greatest of all time, ensures statistics back up unrivalled artistry". The Times. Retrieved 3 May 2017. "Top 10 Men's Tennis Players of All Time". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved 3 May 2017. Federer the best of all time, says Agassi. The Age. Retrieved 20 July 2012 "Federer cemented himself as greatest of all time". ESPN. 30 January 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017. Federer greatest of all time, says Laver". tennis.com/au. Retrieved 20 July 2012 "Borg: Federer a True Artist". NOS. 9 July 2012. Retrieved 25 July 2012. "Tennis' top 20 of all time". ESPN. 23 June 2016. Retrieved 29 January 2017. "Hewitt: Federer is the greatest tennis player of all time". The New Paper. 19 March 2015. Retrieved 3 May 2017. "Federer 'is the greatest ever tennis player'". CNN. 9 July 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2017. "Roger Federer is the greatest athlete of his generation". USA Today. 28 January 2018. Retrieved 3 February 2018. "Forget tennis: Federer now the greatest athlete of them all". ABC News. 17 July 2017. Retrieved 3 February 2018. "Greatness beckons for Federer". timesofmalta.com. 4 July 2005. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Borg makes U-turn and backs Federer for Wimbledon title". www.reuters.com. 16 June 2009. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Pete Sampras calls Roger Federer 'greatest ever'". www.tennis.com. 23 November 2009. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer: 'I'm not the greatest'". Sports Mole. 10 July 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2020. "Frank Sedgman names Jack Kramer and Roger Federer in front of Rod Laver in best-ever list". heraldsun.com. Tignor, Steve (2 March 2018). "The 50 greatest players of the Open Era (m): No. 1, Roger Federer". Tennis.com. Bhargav (12 May 2020). "Tennis Channel has picked Federer as the GOAT, with Nadal just behind him in the top 10 list". www.sportskeeda.com. Retrieved 15 July 2021. "'He's a genius and the greatest' – Roger Federer gets Serena Williams' vote in GOAT debate". Eurosport. 18 May 2021. Retrieved 31 January 2022. Oldham, Steven (12 July 2021). "Tennis fans have voted for the GOAT of the sport – Roger Federer takes 55% of the vote". GiveMeSport. Retrieved 15 July 2021. Banerjee, Soham (13 July 2021). "Novak Djokovic is an amazing player but for me Roger Federer is irreplaceable: Richard Gasquet". www.sportskeeda.com. Retrieved 10 August 2021. "'Novak Djokovic is the best, but Roger Federer is the greatest,' says ATP veteran". tennishead.net. 13 July 2021. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer – Player Activity – ATP World Tour – Tennis". ATP World Tour. sportsfeelgoodstories.com (20 February 2009). "Roger Federer, a class act on and off the court, leads tennis revival". Retrieved 16 February 2010. Saiyid, Aamna. "Hall of Fame: Roger Federer – the Swiss Maestro". The Express Tribune. Retrieved 16 April 2014. David Foster Wallace (20 August 2006). "Roger Federer as Religious Experience". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2 February 2018. "Roger or Rafa: Clash of the Wimbledon sex symbols". The Independent. 5 July 2008. Retrieved 23 November 2014. Australianopen.com. "Match Statistics: Federer vs. Murray". Archived from the original on 25 February 2010. Retrieved 16 February 2010. Wimbledon.org. "Match Statistics:Federer vs. Roddick". Archived from the original on 12 June 2010. Retrieved 16 February 2010. Ubha, Ravi (2 July 2008). "Federer's serve allowing him to manufacture easy points". ESPN. Retrieved 16 February 2010. Bierley, Stephen (8 July 2003). "Serve-volley dead? No one told Federer". The Guardian. Retrieved 19 November 2010. "Best Serve and Volleyer in the World". Essential Tennis. 11 July 2010. Archived from the original on 23 May 2011. Retrieved 19 November 2010. Tandon, Kamakshi (25 June 2014). "Federer looks for 'that little extra' with return to serve-and-volley roots". Tennis.com. Naderi, Nima (30 September 2009). "The Tale of Two Tweeners: Federer vs. Llodra". bleacherreport.com. Archived from the original on 7 December 2011. Tignor, Steve (3 December 2014). "No. 8: The Roger Resurgence". Tennis.com. Bodo, Peter (17 August 2014). "The Reliables". Tennis.com. "The SABR: Federer's new bravado". USOpen.org. Tandon, Kamashi (16 March 2017). "Roger Federer Credits Switch To Bigger Racquet For Improved Backhand". Tennis.com. Retrieved 25 June 2019. Peele, Stanton (28 August 2016). "Why Roger Federer is Great". Psychology Today. psychologytoday.com. Waldstein, David (28 August 2016). "Cool Federer Image Was Forged in a Hot Head". The New York Times. "Roger Federer: 'I do not know if I will be playing in three or five years'". Tennis World USA. 8 October 2019. Retrieved 9 October 2019. Cohn, Patrick (28 August 2016). "Federer's Mental Toughness and Maturity". sportspsychologytennis.com. "Federer: The Artistry of the World's Top Tennis Ace". content.time.com. 3 May 2007. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer's tears for former coach: 'Never broke down like this'". edition.cnn.com. 8 January 2019. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer moved to tears in emotional tribute to former coach Peter Carter". The Telegraph. Retrieved 6 November 2023. Sokolowski, Alexandre (1 August 2022). "The day Federer's former coach Peter Carter passed away tragically". Tennis Majors. Retrieved 31 October 2022. "Sneak Attack By Roger: 17-time Grand Slam champion reveals origins of new tactical return". www.express.co.uk. 6 September 2015. Retrieved 6 November 2023. Mittal, Bhavishya (1 April 2021). "An Insight Into Roger Federer's Illustrious Career: The Coaches Behind the Tennis Maestro". Essentially Sports. Retrieved 18 July 2023. Cronin, Matt (16 July 2013). "Federer playing with new, larger racquet in Hamburg". Tennis.com. Archived from the original on 15 March 2020. Retrieved 4 December 2014. Bishop, Greg (16 January 2014). "Seeking Bigger Sweet Spot, Roger Federer Hopes His Racket Will Grow on Him". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 July 2019. Retrieved 23 February 2017. "Roger Federer's Tennis Racquet". tennis nerd. 26 January 2018. "Roger Federer locker room interview with Anabelle Croft – O2 Finals 2017". Archived from the original on 12 December 2021 – via YouTube. "Wilson Sports". Wilson Sporting Goods. Archived from the original on 22 January 2010. Retrieved 29 January 2010. Necwomb, Tim (15 October 2014). "Designing with Federer: How a superstar shapes his signature gear". Sports Illustrated. "Ask Roger — Equipment". Roger Federer Official Website. Archived from the original on 25 July 2009. Retrieved 29 January 2010. "Ask Roger; Official website". Roger Federer Official Website. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 2 March 2007. "Roger Federer Sponsors". Roger Federer Official Website. Archived from the original on 6 February 2015. Retrieved 5 February 2012. Hodgkinson, Mark (27 June 2006). "More than a jacket for Federer". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 14 June 2009. Hodgkinson, Mark (27 June 2006). "More jacket than racket for Federer". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 21 July 2006. Retrieved 5 September 2007. Bruback, Holly (29 August 2009). "The Main Characters of Tennis, and Style". The New York Times. Retrieved 6 February 2011. Brubach, Holly (29 August 2009). "RF: Tennis's Main Characters". The New York Times. Retrieved 13 June 2018. "Roger Federer drops decades-old Nike partnership for Uniqlo". BBC News. 2 July 2018. Retrieved 3 July 2018. Binlot, Ann (28 August 2018). "Roger Federer On Why He Ditched Nike For A $300 Million Uniqlo Deal". Forbes. Retrieved 7 January 2019. Farra, Emily (6 July 2020). "I Hope It's a Shoe You Can Wear Every Day'—Roger Federer Debuts His First Sneaker With Swiss Label On". Vogue. Retrieved 9 June 2021. "Why FedEx won't tie Pete Sampras' Wimbledon record". Bleacher Report. 23 June 2012. Retrieved 21 October 2019. "The first airplane with RF Brand". 19 December 2015. Retrieved 21 October 2019. "Federer Express Cruises To 16th Grand Slam Title, Tops Murray in Australia". All Headline News. 31 January 2010. Archived from the original on 5 November 2011. Retrieved 3 February 2010. "Five of the Swiss Maestro's greatest triumphs". Bein Sports. 2 March 2019. Retrieved 21 October 2019. "King Roger". The Times. 29 January 2018. Retrieved 12 November 2019. Tennis-X.com. "Darth Federer Eyes 12th Slam Today Against Djokovic". tennis-x.com. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 22 May 2017. "Roger Federer: Tennis God and man of the people". sportstar.thehindu.com. 28 September 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Sports Illustrated: Suddenly Andre". Retrieved 27 January 2020. "Search Results". sicovers.com. Archived from the original on 12 March 2017. Retrieved 9 March 2017. "Federer most trusted, respected after Mandela in the world". Firstpost. 21 September 2011. Retrieved 27 January 2020. "Federer, Mandela are world's most respected & trusted". ATP World Tour. 19 September 2011. Archived from the original on 12 May 2015. Retrieved 2 October 2011. "Mandela pips Federer". Times LIVE South Africa. 21 September 2011. Archived from the original on 13 June 2016. Retrieved 23 September 2011. "Roger Federer is the celebrity who best represents Switzerland!". www.tennisworldusa.org. 16 July 2016. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "5 best Roger Federer ads of all time". www.sportskeeda.com. 20 July 2020. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Mercedes-Benz Casts Roger Federer in the Role he was Björn to Play". media.mbusa.com. 23 August 2016. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Federer Named World's Most Marketable Sports Person In 2016 | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Retrieved 27 January 2020. "Roger Federer reunites with 'boyband buddies' Tommy Haas, Grigor Dimitrov and Novak Djokovic". www.foxsports.com.au. 19 March 2017. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Ridiculous Roger Federer facts that you probably didn't know". www.tennis365.com. 28 April 2013. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Federer makes music video in the Mojave Desert". www.tennis.com. 23 July 2018. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Profile of Roger Federer". www.topendsports.com. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "See Who GQ Readers Voted as the Most Stylish Man of the Decade". GQ. 16 December 2019. Retrieved 27 January 2020. Daniels, Tim (29 May 2020). "Roger Federer Tops Forbes' 2020 Highest-Paid Athlete List over Messi, Ronaldo". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 8 December 2020. "#5 Roger Federer". Forbes. 10 June 2019. Retrieved 14 July 2019. "Roger Federer becomes world's highest-paid athlete says Forbes". BBC website. 30 May 2020. "New Roger Federer book explores impact he had on people in all walks of life". www.tennismajors.com. 31 October 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer on His New Gig: Swiss Tourism Spokesman". www.nytimes.com. 8 May 2021. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer impressed us with his acting, he is "valued very much" by Robert de Niro". www.sportskeeda.com. 5 May 2021. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Hilarious commercial for Swiss tourism starring Roger Federer and Anne Hathaway". www.sportskeeda.com. 13 December 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer's advert with Robert de Niro wins Gold at 2022 Effie Awards". www.sportskeeda.com. 5 November 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer and Trevor Noah star in hilarious new commercial where they take the 'Grand Train Tour of Switzerland'". www.sportskeeda.com. 31 March 2023. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "halle names street after federer | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Retrieved 27 January 2020. "Federer gets his own street in Biel | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Retrieved 27 January 2020. "All aboard the Federer Express: New tram named after Roger Federer launched in Basel". www.sportskeeda.com. 22 October 2021. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "15 Amazing Facts About Roger Federer". www.thestyleinspiration.com. 26 November 2019. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer honoured by his home university". www.thelocal.ch. 24 November 2017. Ubha, Ravi (3 December 2019). "Roger Federer gets own Swiss coin...and you can buy it". CNN. Retrieved 27 January 2020. Bradley, Simon (10 April 2007). "Federer honoured on postage stamp". SWI swissinfo.ch. Retrieved 27 January 2020. "Bild: Federer-Briefmarke ab 8. Februar 2010 erhältlich". OTS.at (in German). 3 February 2010. Retrieved 23 August 2021. Mittal, Bhavishya. ""A Historic Stroke of Luck for Switzerland" – Roger Federer Honored With 100-Part Series at National Museum". Essentially Sports. Retrieved 8 December 2020. Banerjee, Soham (20 July 2020). "Roger Federer to be immortalized by Swiss National Museum as part of historical series". Sportskeeda. Retrieved 8 December 2020. "Roger Federer Foundation To Support Children And Young People in South Africa". Roger Federer Official Website. 28 May 2004. Archived from the original on 11 August 2012. Retrieved 5 January 2015. "Roger Federer Foundation Mission". Roger Federer Foundation. Archived from the original on 15 April 2013. Retrieved 5 February 2012. Roopanarine, Les (30 November 2012). "Roger Federer Foundation aiming for maximum impact with minimum spin". The Guardian. "Foundation – Roger Federer Foundation To Support Children And Young People In South Africa" (Press release). Roger Federer Foundation. 28 May 2004. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 23 September 2015. "Solid foundation improves children's lives". swissinfo.ch. 11 June 2009. Retrieved 23 September 2015. Stauffer, Rene (2007). The Roger Federer Story: Question for Perfection. New Chapter Press. p. 226. ISBN 978-0-942257-39-7. Retrieved 23 September 2015. "UNICEF's newest Goodwill Ambassador, tennis star Roger Federer, hits an ace for children". UNICEF. 3 April 2006. Retrieved 15 October 2009. Koch, David (26 November 2007). "Roger Federer to speak out on World AIDS Day". UNICEF. Archived from the original on 26 September 2018. Retrieved 4 January 2015. "Federer visits tsunami victims in India". SwissInfo. 23 December 2006. Archived from the original on 26 May 2020. Retrieved 15 October 2009. "Off Court – Racquets Net $40,000 For Victims of Hurricane". Roger Federer Official Website. 20 September 2005. Archived from the original on 24 October 2006. Retrieved 15 October 2009. "Roger Federer leads Haiti earthquake fundraiser in Melbourne". The Guardian. 17 January 2010. Retrieved 6 December 2014. Gecker, Jocelyn (18 January 2010). "Tennis stars revel in 'Hit for Haiti' fundraiser". Stuff.co.nz. Retrieved 6 December 2014. "Hit for Haiti Raises $1 Million on a Night to Remember". ATP World Tour. 12 March 2010. Retrieved 6 December 2014. "Tennis stars rally for relief". Tennis Australia. 13 January 2011. Quayle, Emma (17 January 2011). "Tennis aces serve it up for the flood victims". The Sydney Morning Herald. "Lynette Federer: 'South Africans accompany Roger intensely in his career'". Tennis World USA. 18 May 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "Roger Federer plays tennis on his KNEES in Match for Africa victory with Bill Gates". www.express.co.uk. 6 March 2018. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Federer Grinding It Out". Tennis.com. 20 May 2009. Retrieved 10 September 2014. "Mercedes-Benz Announces Global Partnership with Roger Federer" (Press release). Mercedes-Benz USA. 27 May 2010. Retrieved 6 January 2011. Soshnick, Scott; Rossingh, Danielle (1 June 2012). "Roger Federer, Agent Tony Godsick Leaving Management Company IMG". Bloomberg.com. Bloomberg. Retrieved 4 July 2014. "Roger Federer Moët & Chandon Ambassador". Moet.com. 2 January 2012. Archived from the original on 26 December 2013. Retrieved 4 July 2014. "Top-Ranked Player Wants Top-Shelf Endorsements". The New York Times. Bloomberg News. 29 January 2006. Retrieved 9 September 2014. "Roger Federer Chronometer". Europa Star. 2 April 2005. Archived from the original on 12 November 2006. Retrieved 14 June 2009. "Roger Federer – Celebrity fans – Interviews". FourFourTwo. 31 July 2009. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 22 January 2013. "Roger Federer pays a quick visit to the Switzerland national football team". www.sportskeeda.com. 31 May 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer Pays a Surprise Visit to the Swiss National Football Team To Unveil New Jersey". www.essentiallysports.com. 30 May 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Viner, Brian (2 July 2005). "Roger Federer: A Smashing Guy". The Independent. Archived from the original on 17 April 2019. Retrieved 6 December 2014. "Off Court — Mr. and Mrs. Federer". Roger Federer Official Website. 11 April 2010. Archived from the original on 20 May 2010. Retrieved 7 June 2009. "Roger Federer and wife are proud parents of twins". OneIndia. 24 July 2009. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 3 October 2009. "Roger Federer's wife gives birth to second set of twins". BBC Sport. 6 May 2014. Archived from the original on 8 August 2019. Retrieved 6 May 2014. "Roger Federer: Mirka and I couldn't be happier with twin boys – and now we know how to cope with babies on tour". The Guardian. 13 May 2014. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 13 May 2014. ""Roger Federer in Switzerland would be equivalent to the royal family in the UK" – Swiss abbot who is related to the tennis superstar". sportskeeda.com. 26 March 2021. Archived from the original on 3 October 2022. Retrieved 3 September 2022. "Roger Federer vs Mirka Federer: 'I could not do what she was doing!'". www.express.co.uk. 12 August 2018. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer reveals why he was discharged from the Swiss military when he was 18". www.sportskeeda.com. 4 August 2020. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Muhieddine, Fabian (13 July 2009). "Roger Federer: le voici exempté de PC..." Le Matin (in French). Archived from the original on 18 October 2009. Retrieved 14 October 2009. "Federer to serve in Swiss civil force, not army". USA Today. 6 February 2004. Archived from the original on 22 July 2017. Retrieved 25 March 2016. "Roger Federer on the brink of history". aleteia.org. 16 July 2017. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer recalls meeting with Pope in Rome". www.tennisworldusa.org. 7 November 2018. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Ask Roger". Roger Federer Official Website. Archived from the original on 25 February 2007. Retrieved 2 March 2007. Federer, Roger. "Ask Roger". Roger Federer Official Website. Archived from the original on 6 March 2009. Retrieved 30 June 2009. "What is Roger Federer's Matchday Diet and Workout Plan?". www.sportskeeda.com. 16 September 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Christopher Clarey (8 March 2008). "Federer's Weakness Might Have Been an Illness". The New York Times. Retrieved 16 December 2023. "Roger Federer and the End of Athlete's Knee". www.stoneclinic.com. 25 September 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Macpherson, Paul (12 January 2010). "Roger's Records To Stand Test of Time". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 12 February 2012. "Federer tops Tsonga, setting up Aussie Open QF with Murray". Tennis.com. 20 January 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "Vintage Federer Takes Out Tsonga". ATP World Tour. 20 January 2014. Retrieved 22 January 2014. Tandon, Kamakshi (9 June 2009). "Federer's numbers speak volumes". ESPN. Retrieved 12 June 2012. Lilley, Drew. "Wimbledon Legends – Roger Federer". The Championships, Wimbledon. Archived from the original on 26 August 2011. Retrieved 5 February 2012. Ford, Bonnie D. (21 January 2013). "Federer, again, silences the young". ESPN. Retrieved 21 January 2013. "Federer Moves Clear of Connors For Most Major Match Wins". ATP World Tour. 30 May 2012. Retrieved 30 May 2012. Sharko, Greg (19 January 2013). "Shark Bites: Federer's 250 Major Match Wins". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 22 January 2013. "Guinness Records online registry, requires signing in, lists higher number of records due to Federer being mentioned in the description of many records that don't belong to him". Guinness World Records. Retrieved 21 May 2018. "Federer never doubted Paris win". BBC Sport. 7 June 2009. Retrieved 9 July 2012. Clarey, Christopher (7 June 2009). "The Greatest? Federer's Victory Fills Last Hole on His Résumé". The New York Times. Retrieved 9 July 2012. Tandon, Kamakshi (17 June 2011). "Nadal eyes another Channel Slam". ESPN. Retrieved 10 June 2012. Sharp, Alex (29 June 2018). ""Channel Slam" For Rafa And Simona". Roland Garros. Retrieved 26 June 2019. Garber, Greg (13 September 2004). "Federer unbeatable right now". ESPN. Retrieved 31 August 2012. Federer also became the first man in the Open Era to win his first four Grand Slam finals. Hinds, Richard (30 January 2006). "Federer takes new leap towards history". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 31 August 2012. Federer's perfect record in seven grand slam finals. Tandon, Kamakshi (24 December 2009). "What's your tennis IQ? – 2009 tennis holiday quiz". ESPN. Retrieved 18 June 2012. [Nadal's] Australian Open title made him the first man to simultaneously hold majors on clay, grass and hard courts. "Roger Federer Bio". Tennis Magazine. Archived from the original on 26 December 2013. Retrieved 5 September 2012. In 2006, Federer became the first man since Rod Laver in 1969 to make all four Grand Slam finals in a calendar year, winning three of them; he repeated that feat in 2007. He also made all four finals in 2009, winning two. Garber, Greg (29 January 2017). "Roger Federer beats longtime rival Rafael Nadal, wins 18th Grand Slam". ESPN. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017. Retrieved 29 January 2017. Petkovski, Suzi (26 January 2012). "Top 10: Fed's feats and streaks". Australian Open. Archived from the original on 27 December 2012. Retrieved 26 January 2012. Walsh, Courtney (24 January 2013). "Roger Federer forced to dig deep over five sets by Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in Australian Open". The Australian. Retrieved 24 January 2013. [H]e threatened to end another of Federer's streaks...a tenth straight semi-final in Melbourne. Cambers, Simon (19 January 2008). "Federer survives massive scare in Melbourne". Reuters. Retrieved 12 February 2012. It was the first set he had dropped at the Australian Open since 2006. "Federer Claims Historic Eighth Wimbledon Title". ATP World Tour. 16 July 2017. Archived from the original on 18 July 2017. Retrieved 18 July 2017. Bhagavatula, Manoj (16 July 2017). "The numbers behind Roger Federer's Wimbledon win". ESPN. Archived from the original on 18 July 2017. Retrieved 18 July 2017. "Wimbledon – Championships History". The Championships, Wimbledon. Archived from the original on 1 June 2012. Retrieved 4 February 2012. Newbery, Piers (4 July 2017). "Wimbledon 2017: Roger Federer & Novak Djokovic through after opponents quit". BBC Sport. Retrieved 4 July 2017. Lewis, Aimee (6 July 2012). "Federer beats Djokovic to reach final". BBC Sport. Retrieved 6 July 2012. Garber, Greg (6 July 2012). "Just like old times for Roger Federer". ESPN. Retrieved 7 July 2012. Elser, Christopher (3 July 2009). "Roddick Beats Murray for Wimbledon Final With Federer". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 29 December 2013. Retrieved 26 August 2012. Federer is the first man to reach the Wimbledon final seven years in a row since 1922, when the system of automatically putting the defending champion into the title match was dropped. 2005 Wimbledon Championships on ATPWorldTour.com"2006 Wimbledon draws and results". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 10 April 2013. "US Open Most Championship Titles Record Book" (PDF). US Open. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 September 2011. Retrieved 26 August 2012. "US Open Singles Record Book" (PDF). US Open. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 September 2012. Retrieved 26 August 2012. "Nishikori wins, Federer advances". ESPN. Associated Press. 13 November 2014. Retrieved 14 November 2014. "Barcays ATP World Tour Finals – Historical Stats". ATP Tour. Retrieved 6 December 2014. "Federer To Return To Barclays ATP World Tour Finals For Record 13th Straight Year". ATP World Tour. 18 August 2014. Retrieved 18 August 2014. "Federer Wins Fifth Indian Wells Title". ATP World Tour. 19 March 2012. Retrieved 22 March 2012. "Federer Wins Record Fifth Cincinnati Crown; Ties Nadal's Masters 1000 Mark". ATP World Tour. 19 August 2012. Retrieved 20 August 2012. "Federer Holds Off Ferrer for 80th Title, Sixth in Cincinnati". ATP World Tour. 17 August 2014. Retrieved 18 August 2014. "Roger Federer beats Robin Haase to become oldest world number one". BBC Sport. 16 February 2018. Retrieved 16 February 2018. "Federer Smashes Records In Return To No. 1". ATP World Tour. 19 February 2018. Archived from the original on 19 February 2018. Retrieved 19 February 2018. "Roger Federer overcomes Connors to beat an historical record". Tennis World USA. 19 September 2017. "Roger Federer da 17 anni in top 50. Superato il record di Jimmy Connors". www.livetennis.it. "Roger Federer celebrates jaw-dropping 1000 consecutive weeks in Top 100!". Tennis World USA. 3 December 2018. "ATP ANALYSIS: Breaking down Roger Federer's 200 victories against top 10 rivals". Tennis World USA. 25 January 2017. Retrieved 27 September 2018. "FedEx ATP Reliability Index – Winning percentage on Grass". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 2 February 2012. Retrieved 11 February 2012. "FedEx ATP Reliability Index – Winning percentage on Hard". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 31 December 2011. Retrieved 11 February 2012. "Team – Switzerland (SUI)". Davis Cup. 6 April 2014. Retrieved 4 July 2014. Bowers, Chris (2007). Fantastic Federer: The Biography of the World's Greatest Tennis Player. John Blake. ISBN 978-1-84454-407-3. Stauffer, René (2007). The Roger Federer Story: Quest for Perfection. New York: New Chapter Press. ISBN 978-0-942257-39-7. Publications by and about Roger Federer in the catalogue Helveticat of the Swiss National Library Wimbledon Classic Match: Federer vs Sampras. Standing Room Only, DVD release date: 31 October 2006, run time: 233 minutes, ASIN B000ICLR98. Wimbledon 2007 Final: Federer vs. Nadal (2007). Kultur White Star, DVD release date: 30 October 2007, run time: 180 minutes, ASIN B000V02CU0. Wimbledon–The 2008 Finals: Nadal vs. Federer. Standing Room Only, DVD release date: 19 August 2008, run time: 300 minutes, ASIN B001CWYUBU. Roger Federer at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Official website Roger Federer at the Association of Tennis Professionals Roger Federer at the International Tennis Federation Roger Federer at the Davis Cup Roger Federer at IMDb 