David Robert Joseph Beckham OBE (/ˈbɛkəm/ BEK-əm; born 2 May 1975) is an English former professional footballer, the president and co-owner of Inter Miami CF and co-owner of Salford City. Primarily a right winger and known for his range of passing, crossing ability and free-kick taking, Beckham has been hailed as one of the greatest and most recognisable midfielders of his generation, as well as one of the best free-kick takers of all time. He won 19 major trophies in his career, and is the first English player to win league titles in four different countries: England, Spain, the United States and France. Beckham's professional club career began with Manchester United, where he made his first-team debut in 1992 at age 17. With United, he won the Premier League title six times, the FA Cup twice, the FA Charity Shield twice, the Intercontinental Cup and the UEFA Champions League in 1999. He then played four seasons with Real Madrid, winning the La Liga championship in his final season with the club. In July 2007, Beckham signed a five-year contract with Major League Soccer club LA Galaxy. While a Galaxy player, he spent two loan spells in Italy with AC Milan in 2009 and 2010. He became the first British footballer to play 100 UEFA Champions League games. He retired in May 2013 after a 20-year career. In international football, Beckham made his England debut on 1 September 1996, at the age of 21. He was captain for six years, earning 58 caps during his tenure. He made 115 career appearances in total, appearing at three FIFA World Cups in 1998, 2002 and 2006 as well as two UEFA European Championships in 2000 and 2004. Beckham held the England appearance record for an outfield player until 2016. A global ambassador of football, Beckham is considered to be a British cultural icon. He has been in a well publicised marriage to Victoria Beckham since 1999 and was consistently ranked among the highest earners in football, in 2013 being listed as the highest-paid player in the world having earned over $50 million in the previous twelve months. Beckham was runner-up in the Ballon d'Or in 1999, twice runner-up for FIFA World Player of the Year (1999 and 2001) and in 2004 was named by Pelé in the FIFA 100 list of the world's greatest living players. He was inducted into the English Football Hall of Fame in 2008, and the Premier League Hall of Fame in 2021. He has been a UNICEF ambassador since 2005, and in 2015 he launched 7: The David Beckham UNICEF Fund. In 2014, MLS announced that Beckham and a group of investors would own Inter Miami, which began playing in 2020. David Robert Joseph Beckham was born on 2 May 1975 at Whipps Cross University Hospital in Leytonstone, London, England. He is the son of Sandra Georgina (née West; b. 1949), a hairdresser, and David Edward Alan "Ted" Beckham (b. Edmonton, London, 1948), a kitchen fitter; the couple married in 1969 in the London Borough of Hackney. He was given the middle name Robert in honour of Bobby Charlton, his father's favourite footballer. He has an older sister, Lynne Georgina, and a younger sister, Joanne Louise. He attended Chingford County High School in Nevin Drive, Chingford. In a 2007 interview, Beckham said that, "At school whenever the teachers asked, 'What do you want to do when you're older?' I'd say, 'I want to be a footballer.' And they'd say, 'No, what do you really want to do, for a job?' But that was the only thing I ever wanted to do." Beckham's maternal grandfather was Jewish, and Beckham has referred to himself as "half Jewish" and wrote in his autobiography "I've probably had more contact with Judaism than with any other religion". In his book Both Feet on the Ground, Beckham stated that growing up he attended church every week with his parents, because that was the only way he could play football for their team. His parents were fanatical Manchester United supporters who frequently travelled 200 miles (320 km) to Old Trafford from London to attend the team's home matches. David inherited his parents' love of Manchester United, and his main sporting passion was football. He attended one of Bobby Charlton's Soccer Schools in Manchester and won the chance to take part in a training session with Barcelona, as part of a talent competition. He played for a local youth team called Ridgeway Rovers, which was coached by his father, Stuart Underwood, and Steve Kirby. Beckham was a Manchester United mascot for a match against West Ham United in 1986. Young Beckham had trials with his local club Leyton Orient, Norwich City and attended Tottenham Hotspur's school of excellence, though never represented the club in a match. During a two-year period in which Beckham played for Brimsdown Rovers' youth team, he was named Under-15 Player of the Year in 1990. He also attended Bradenton Preparatory Academy, but signed schoolboy forms at Manchester United on his 14th birthday, and subsequently signed a Youth Training Scheme contract on 8 July 1991. Beckham was a late developer and not selected to represent the England Schoolboys' team primarily on account of his small size. Having signed for Manchester United as a trainee on 8 July 1991, Beckham was part of a group of young players, including Ryan Giggs, Gary Neville, Phil Neville, Nicky Butt and Paul Scholes, who were coached by Eric Harrison, and helped the club win the FA Youth Cup in May 1992. Beckham scored Manchester United's second goal in the 30th minute of their 3–1 first-leg win of the final against Crystal Palace on 14 April 1992. In the second leg on 15 May, Beckham played a full 90-minutes of the fixture which ended 3–2 in favour of Manchester United and 6–3 on aggregate. Beckham's impact led to a first-team debut on 23 September 1992, as a substitute for Andrei Kanchelskis in a League Cup match against Brighton & Hove Albion. Shortly afterwards, Beckham signed as a professional on 23 January 1993. Manchester United again reached the final of the FA Youth Cup, where they faced Leeds United. The first leg was played on 10 May 1993, where Beckham started in Manchester United's 2–0 home loss but was replaced by substitute Robbie Savage. In the second leg on 13 May 1993, Beckham played the full 90 minutes of Manchester United's 2–1 defeat, which gave Leeds United a 4–1 aggregate score. Beckham also received honours with the club's reserve team when the squad won the league in 1994. In September 1994, Beckham made his first full appearance in the club's first team against Port Vale in a League Cup fixture. On 7 December 1994, Beckham made his UEFA Champions League debut, scoring a goal in a 4–0 victory at home to Galatasaray in the final game of the group stage. Despite the victory, however, they finished third out of four in their group, behind Barcelona. Beckham then went to Preston North End, on loan for part of the 1994–95 season, to get some first-team experience. I arrived thinking that Manchester United didn't want me anymore. You had to perform because, if not, you're going to get let go. So you're constantly thinking you're not safe. – Beckham in 2023. He scored two goals in five appearances, notably directly from a corner kick. Beckham returned to Manchester and made his Premier League debut for Manchester United on 2 April 1995 in a goalless draw against Leeds United. He played four times for United in the league that season, as they finished second behind Blackburn Rovers, missing out on a third successive Premier League title by a single point. He was not in the squad for the FA Cup final with Everton on 20 May, which United lost 1–0, leaving the club without a major trophy for the first time since 1989. United manager Sir Alex Ferguson had a great deal of confidence in the club's young players. Beckham was part of a group of young talents Ferguson brought into United in the 1990s (known as "Fergie's Fledglings"), which included Nicky Butt and Gary and Phil Neville. When experienced players Paul Ince, Mark Hughes and Andrei Kanchelskis left the club after the end of the 1994–95 season, his decision to let youth team players replace them instead of buying star players from other clubs (United had been linked with moves for players including Darren Anderton, Marc Overmars and Roberto Baggio, but no major signings were made that summer), drew a great deal of criticism. The criticism increased when United started the season with a 3–1 defeat at Aston Villa, with Beckham scoring United's only goal of the game. However, United recovered from this early-season defeat and the young players performed well. Beckham swiftly established himself as United's right-sided midfielder (rather than a right-winger in the style of his predecessor Andrei Kanchelskis) and helped them to win the Premier League title and FA Cup double that season, scoring the winner in the semi-final against Chelsea and also providing the corner from which Eric Cantona scored in the FA Cup Final. Beckham's first title medal had, for a while, looked like it would not be coming that season, as United were still 10 points adrift of leaders Newcastle United at the turn of the new year, but Beckham and his teammates had overhauled the Tynesiders at the top of the league by mid March and they remained top until the end of the season. Despite playing regularly and to a consistently high standard for Manchester United, Beckham did not break into the England squad before Euro 1996. "It changed my life. The ball seemed to be in the air for hours and it all went quiet. Then the ball went in and it just erupted. I was on cloud nine." —Beckham on the goal from the half-way line against Wimbledon in August 1996 that made him a household name. It was ranked number 18 on Channel 4's poll of the 100 Greatest Sporting Moments. At the beginning of the 1996–97 season, Beckham was given the number 10 shirt that had most recently been worn by Mark Hughes. On 17 August 1996 (the first day of the Premier League season), Beckham became something of a household name when he scored a spectacular goal in a match against Wimbledon. With United leading 2–0, Beckham noticed that Wimbledon's goalkeeper Neil Sullivan was standing a long way out of his goal, and hit a shot from the halfway line – 57 yards out – that floated over the goalkeeper and into the net. His goal celebration saw him raise his arms and walk away smiling rather than run as he often would. In a UK poll conducted by Channel 4 in 2002, the British public voted the goal No.18 in the list of the 100 Greatest Sporting Moments. In a 2016 Sky Sports poll, it was ranked the best opening day goal in Premier League history. During the 1996–97 season, Beckham became an automatic first-choice player at Manchester United, helping them to retain the Premier League title, and was voted PFA Young Player of the Year by his peers. Prior to the 1997–98 season, Beckham inherited the number 7 shirt, a number previously worn by such United greats as George Best and Eric Cantona. Manchester United started the season well but erratic performances in the second half of the season saw United finish second behind Arsenal. Beckham had the most assists in the league with 13, while his nine Premier League goals included a free kick from the edge of the 18-yard box against Manchester United's arch rivals Liverpool at Anfield. In the 1998–99 season, he was part of the United team that won the treble of the Premier League, FA Cup and Champions League, a unique feat in English football until Manchester City's 2022–23 season. There had been speculation that the criticism that he had received after being sent off in the World Cup would lead to him leaving England, but Beckham decided to stay at Manchester United. To ensure they would win the Premier League title, United needed to win their final league match of the season, at home to Tottenham. There were reports suggesting that the opposition would allow themselves to be beaten to prevent their local rivals Arsenal from retaining the title, but Tottenham took an early lead in the match. Beckham scored the equaliser with a curling strike from twelve yards out, after receiving the ball on the right side of the penalty area, placing the ball into the top left corner of the goal; United went on to win the match 2–1 and the league. Beckham played in central midfield in United's win over Bayern Munich in the 1999 UEFA Champions League Final, as United's first-choice centre-midfielders Paul Scholes and Roy Keane were suspended for the match. United were losing the match 1–0 at the end of normal time, but won the trophy by scoring two goals in injury time. Both of the goals came from corners taken by Beckham. Those crucial assists, coupled with great performances over the rest of the season, led to him finishing runner up to Rivaldo for 1999's European Footballer of the Year and FIFA World Player of the Year awards. Despite Beckham's achievements in the 1998–99 season, he was still unpopular among some opposition fans and journalists, and he was criticised after being sent off for a deliberate foul in Manchester United's World Club Championship match against Necaxa. It was suggested in the press that his wife was a bad influence on him, and that it might be in United's interests to sell him, but his manager publicly backed him, and he stayed at the club. During the 1999–2000 season, there was a talk of a transfer to Juventus in Italy, but this never happened. Beckham helped United retain the Premier League title in 1999–2000 by an 18-point margin, after being pushed by Arsenal and Leeds United for much of the season. United won their final 11 league games of the season, with Beckham scoring five goals during this run, with his last goal coming from a swerving shot from the edge of the penalty area in their final home game against Tottenham Hotspur. By the early-2000s, the relationship between Ferguson and Beckham had begun to deteriorate, possibly as a result of Beckham's fame and commitments away from football. In 2000, Beckham was given permission to miss training to look after his son Brooklyn, who had gastroenteritis, but Ferguson was furious when Victoria Beckham was photographed at a London Fashion Week event on the same night, claiming that Beckham would have been able to train if Victoria had looked after Brooklyn that day. He responded by fining Beckham the maximum amount that was permitted (two weeks' wages – then £50,000) and dropping him for a crucial match against United's rivals Leeds United. He later criticised Beckham for this in his autobiography, claiming he had not been "fair to his teammates" Beckham had a good season for his club, though, and helped United to win the Premier League by a record margin. He was never a problem until he got married. He used to go into work with the academy coaches at night time, he was a fantastic young lad. Getting married into that entertainment scene was a difficult thing – from that moment, his life was never going to be the same. He is such a big celebrity, football is only a small part. – Alex Ferguson speaking about Beckham's marriage in 2007. He was a key player in United's third successive league title in 2000–01, only the fourth time that any club had achieved three league titles in a row. He scored nine Premier League goals, and had the most assists in the league with 12. On 10 April 2002, Beckham was injured during a Champions League match against Deportivo de La Coruña, breaking the second metatarsal bone in his left foot. There was speculation in the British media that the injury might have been caused deliberately, as the player who had injured Beckham was Argentine Aldo Duscher, and England and Argentina were due to meet in that year's World Cup. The injury prevented Beckham from playing for United for the rest of the season and they missed out on the Premier League title to Arsenal (also being knocked out of the Champions League by Bayer Leverkusen on away goals in the semi-finals), but he signed a three-year contract in May, following months of negotiations with the club, mostly concerning extra payments for his image rights. The income from his new contract, and his many endorsement deals, made him the highest-paid player in the world at the time. Despite the season being curtailed with injury, 2001–02 was one of Beckham's best seasons as a United player; he scored 16 goals in all competitions, the best of his career. Following an injury early in the 2002–03 season, Beckham was unable to regain his place on the Manchester United team, with Ole Gunnar Solskjær having replaced him on the right side of midfield. His relationship with his manager deteriorated further on 15 February 2003 when, in the changing room following an FA Cup defeat to Arsenal, a furious Alex Ferguson threw or kicked a boot that struck Beckham over the eye, causing a cut that required stitches. The incident led to a great deal of transfer speculation involving Beckham, with bookmakers offering odds on whether he or Ferguson would be first to leave the club. Although the team had started the season badly, their results improved greatly from December onwards and they won the league, with Beckham managing a total of eleven goals. He was still a first-choice player for England, however, and in the Queen's Birthday Honours List he was appointed an OBE for services to football on 13 June 2003. Beckham had made 265 Premier league appearances for United and scored 61 goals. He also made 81 Champions league appearances, scoring 15 goals. Beckham won six Premier League titles, two FA Cups, two FA Charity Shields, one European Cup, one Intercontinental Cup and one FA Youth Cup in the space of twelve years. By this stage, he was their joint second longest serving player behind Ryan Giggs (having joined them at the same time as Nicky Butt, Gary Neville and Paul Scholes). "He is a great player who is going to become part of the club's great history. He is a man of our times and a symbol of modern-day stardom and what is certain is Real Madrid have signed Beckham because he's a great footballer and a very dedicated professional. His team spirit is unsurpassed and he is one of the best English players of all-time and if only because of that he is with us." —Real Madrid President Florentino Pérez during Beckham's unveiling. As the summer 2003 transfer window approached, Manchester United appeared keen to sell Beckham to Barcelona and the two clubs even announced that they reached a deal for Beckham's transfer, but instead he joined reigning Spanish champions Real Madrid for €37 million on a four-year contract. Beckham was the latest signing in the Galácticos era of global stars signed by club president Florentino Pérez every summer. The news came as a bitter blow to the newly elected Barcelona president Joan Laporta, who based much of his presidential campaign on signing Beckham. The transfer to Real Madrid was announced in mid-June and formally completed on 1 July 2003, making Beckham the third Englishman to play for the club, after Laurie Cunningham and Steve McManaman, the latter of whom he succeeded in his position. Following a successful medical on 2 July, Beckham was unveiled in front of 500 accredited journalists from 25 countries at the club's basketball facility, where he was handed the famous white shirt by former Real Madrid player Alfredo Di Stéfano. Although Beckham had worn the number seven shirt for Manchester United and England, he was unable to wear it at Madrid as it was assigned to club captain Raúl. Beckham decided to wear number 23 instead, citing his admiration of basketball player Michael Jordan, who also wore the number 23 shirt, as the reason behind his decision. On sales of Beckham-related merchandise following his arrival at Real, an Adidas spokesman stated: "Put Beckham's name on any product and Real Madrid didn't stop selling". In the week before Beckham's presentation, Real named Carlos Queiroz as their new head coach, meaning that Beckham was reunited with a familiar face upon arriving to Madrid, since Queiroz had spent the previous season as Ferguson's assistant at Manchester United. In late-July 2003, the club went on a tour of the Far East as part of pre-season training, but also to cash in on Beckham's huge marketing appeal in Asia, where he enjoyed tremendous following. Comparing his reception upon arriving at Kunming Airport in south China to Beatlemania, Marca ran the headline, "Beckham-mania in China". After the opening game in Beijing the tour featured games in Hong Kong, Tokyo and Bangkok. Real's brand recognition in that part of the globe was already well established as the club made financially successful trips to Asia during previous off-seasons. The presence of a global marketing icon such as Beckham, however, made this particular tour a financial smash for los Merengues. Shortly after his transfer to Real, Beckham also ended his relationship with agent Tony Stephens of SFX Europe, who had guided him through his career until that point, including helping to engineer Beckham's move from Manchester to Madrid. Beckham signed on with Simon Fuller and his company 19 Entertainment, which already managed the career of Victoria. Beckham also appointed close friend Terry Byrne to be his personal manager. "We knew before he was a good player, but we did not expect him to be such an influential player, to show such commitment to the team spirit. The way he runs for everything, the way he tries his best. He has everyone's respect." —Ronaldo speaking about Beckham in October 2003. In late-August 2003, Real Madrid won the Spanish Super Cup over two legs versus Mallorca, with Beckham scoring the final goal in a 3–0 return leg win at home, thus setting the stage for the start of the league season. Playing in a star-laden team which included three former FIFA World Player of the Year recipients, Zinedine Zidane, Ronaldo and Luís Figo, in addition to Roberto Carlos, Raúl and Iker Casillas, Beckham did not require much time to settle in, scoring five times in his first 16 matches (including a goal less than three minutes into his La Liga debut). Queiroz mostly favoured the adaptable 5–3–2 formation, with two fullbacks Míchel Salgado and Roberto Carlos, often joining the attack down the wings, while Beckham played on the right of the three-man midfield, alongside Zidane and Figo. Real Madrid were runners-up in the Copa del Rey, were knocked out of the UEFA Champions League at the quarter-final stage and finished the league season in fourth place, meaning the team, whose president Pérez expected them to win either the Spanish league or the Champions League each season, did not match expectations. In July 2004, while Beckham was in pre-season training in Spain, an intruder scaled a wall at the Beckham home while carrying a can of petrol. Victoria and their children were in the house at the time, but security guards apprehended the man before he reached the house. The league season began with new head coach José Antonio Camacho at the helm, but he ended up lasting only three matches, handing in his resignation as Real dropped to eighth spot in the La Liga standings. Camacho's assistant Mariano García Remón took over on temporary basis as Real's leadership scrambled to find a permanent replacement. Beckham made more headlines on 9 October 2004 when he admitted intentionally fouling Ben Thatcher in an England match against Wales to get himself booked. Beckham was due to receive a one-match suspension for his next caution, and had picked up an injury which he knew would keep him out of England's next match, so he deliberately fouled Thatcher to serve his suspension in a match that he would have had to miss anyway. The Football Association asked Beckham for an explanation of his actions and he admitted that he had "made a mistake" and apologised. He was sent off shortly afterwards, this time in a league match for Real Madrid against Valencia. Having received a yellow card, he was judged to have sarcastically applauded the referee and was given a second yellow card, causing an automatic dismissal, although the suspension was cancelled on appeal. By Christmas 2004, with the team sitting in second position in the league, García Remón was dismissed, and Vanderlei Luxemburgo became the new head coach. However, the well-travelled Brazilian failed to inspire the team to the title as Real again finished the season in second position. On 3 December 2005, Beckham was sent off for the third time that season in a league match against Getafe. A day later Luxemburgo was sacked and was replaced by Juan Ramón López Caro. By the end of that season, Beckham was third in La Liga in number of assists. During the season, Beckham established football academies in Los Angeles and east London and was named a judge for the 2006 British Book Awards. Real Madrid finished second to Barcelona in the 2005–06 La Liga, albeit with a large twelve-point gap, and only reached the last 16 in the Champions League after losing to Arsenal. The season also marked the end of an era for the club as Pérez resigned his post as president in January 2006, with Vicente Boluda named as replacement on an interim basis until the end of the season. The summer 2006 off-season marked a turbulent time as the club's presidential elections were held. Ramón Calderón became the new Real president. As expected, none of the club officials who served under the previous president was kept, including head coach López Caro. Initially out of favour with newly arrived head coach Fabio Capello, Beckham started only a few games at the beginning of the season, as the speedier José Antonio Reyes was normally preferred on the right wing. Of the first nine matches Beckham started, Real lost seven. On 10 January 2007, after prolonged contractual negotiations, Real Madrid's sporting director Predrag Mijatović announced that Beckham would not remain at Real Madrid after the end of the season. However, he later claimed that he was mistranslated and that he actually said that Beckham's contract had not yet been renewed. On 11 January 2007, Beckham announced that he had signed a five-year deal to play for the LA Galaxy, beginning 1 July 2007. On 13 January 2007, Fabio Capello said that Beckham had played his last game for Real Madrid, although he continued to train with the team. A few days later, while speaking to the students at Villanueva University Center in Madrid, Calderón said that Beckham is "going to Hollywood to be half a film star", adding "our technical staff were right not to extend his contract, which has been proved by the fact that no other technical staff in the world wanted him except Los Angeles". About a month later, however, Capello backtracked on his earlier statement, allowing Beckham to rejoin the team for the match against Real Sociedad on 10 February 2007. The player immediately repaid his head coach's trust by scoring the equalising goal from a 27-yard free kick, as Real Madrid eventually recorded a 2–1 victory. In his final UEFA Champions League appearance for the club, Real Madrid were knocked out of the competition by Bayern Munich at the round-of-16 stage (on the away goals rule) on 7 March 2007. Beckham played a pivotal role in all three Madrid goals in the home game, with Bayern goalkeeper Oliver Kahn describing his performance as "world class". On 17 June 2007, the last day of the La Liga season, Beckham started in his final match for the club, a 3–1 win over Mallorca which saw them clinch the title from Barcelona. With Real down 0–1, Beckham limped off the field and was replaced by José Antonio Reyes, who scored two goals, leading the team to that season's La Liga title, their first since Beckham had signed with them and 30th overall in the club's history. Although Real and Barçelona both finished level on points, Madrid took the title because of their superior head-to-head record, capping a remarkable six-month turnaround for Beckham. With his wife and children, along with celebrity friends Tom Cruise and Katie Holmes, watching from a luxury box at the Santiago Bernabéu, it was only Beckham's second piece of silverware since he joined the famous club. Towards the end of the season, as Beckham was getting back into Capello's good books after successfully fighting his way back into the first team, Real Madrid announced they would try to untie his transfer to LA Galaxy, but were ultimately unsuccessful. Several weeks before Beckham's scheduled arrival in the United States, Real's management contacted LA Galaxy's ownership group about reacquiring the player, but were quickly turned down. A month after the conclusion of Beckham's Real career, Forbes magazine reported that he had been the party primarily responsible for the team's huge increase in merchandise sales, a total reported to top US$600 million during Beckham's four years at the club. "I'm coming there not to be a superstar. I'm coming there to be part of the team, to work hard and to hopefully win things. With me, it's about football. I'm coming there to make a difference. I'm coming there to play football ... I'm not saying me coming over to the States is going to make soccer the biggest sport in America. That would be difficult to achieve. Baseball, basketball, American football, they've been around. But I wouldn't be doing this if I didn't think I could make a difference." Beckham on going to America Beckham's involvement with Major League Soccer (MLS) began while he was still a Real Madrid player when it was confirmed on 11 January 2007 that he would be leaving Madrid in six months to join MLS side LA Galaxy. The speculation about his new contract in Madrid was thus put to an end and the following day Beckham's official press conference was held in conjunction with the 2007 MLS SuperDraft. The announcement made global headlines and elevated the league's profile. Though many worldwide media outlets reported the deal to be worth US$250 million, the astronomical figure was soon revealed to be something of a PR stunt engineered by Beckham's media handlers (British representative agency 19 Entertainment). To maximise the media effect, in the press release they decided to list the potential sum that Beckham could make over the five-year period from all his revenue sources, which in addition to his Galaxy pay, also include his personal endorsements. Beckham's actual deal with the Galaxy was a five-year contract worth US$32.5 million in total or $6.5 million per year. The high-profile acquisition paid immediate financial dividends for Galaxy long before Beckham joined the team. On the strength of the signing and the media frenzy it created, the club was able to pull off a new five-year shirt sponsorship deal with the Herbalife nutrition company worth US$20 million. The gate revenue peaked as well with 11,000 new season tickets holders and sold-out luxury suites (each one of the 42 inside the team's home stadium, the Home Depot Center). LA Galaxy owners Anschutz Entertainment Group (AEG) also reported an immediate spike in business. Involved on many business fronts worldwide, AEG was already leveraging its Beckham association in places such as Shanghai and Beijing, where the company had been working aggressively for years to receive clearance to build arenas and stadiums. The company's CEO Tim Leiweke put it as follows: "Suddenly, we're known as the company that owns the team that David Beckham is going to play for, so our world changed". In the months following the announcement, the additional terms of Beckham's contract became public knowledge. One unique contract provision was giving him the option of buying an MLS expansion franchise in any market except New York City at the fixed price of $25 million whenever he stopped playing in the league – an allowance that the league's owners had never given to a player before. Another provision was the opt-out clause after the 2009 season, meaning that should he decide so, Beckham was free to leave the club after completing year three of his five-year contract. The league had a salary cap in place, requiring the creation of the Designated Player Rule for Beckham to bypass the cap; the rule was later nicknamed in his honor. In April 2007, he and wife Victoria bought an $18.2 million home on San Ysidro Drive in Beverly Hills. Beckham's contract with LA Galaxy took effect on 11 July, and on 13 July, he was officially unveiled as a Galaxy player at the Home Depot Center, to much fanfare and world media interest, in front of more than 5,000 gathered fans and some 700 accredited media members. Beckham chose to wear number 23. It was announced that Galaxy jersey sales had already reached a record figure of over 250,000 prior to this formal introduction. In parallel, Beckham's handlers at 19 Entertainment succeeded in putting together an unprecedented US media rollout designed to expand his carefully crafted personal brand in America. He made the cover of Sports Illustrated, a few weeks earlier Adidas launched the extensive 13-part ad campaign "Fútbol meets Football" starring Beckham and NFL running back Reggie Bush, and W magazine published a racy photo spread featuring David and wife Victoria photographed by Steven Klein. Meanwhile, ESPN sports network was running a promotional campaign and it also agreed to air the David Beckham: New Beginnings documentary produced by 19 Entertainment before the friendly match versus Chelsea, which was expected to be Beckham's American debut. In addition to popularising soccer, Beckham's arrival was used as platform for entertainment industry endeavours. Since both Beckham's and his wife's often overlapping careers were handled by 19 Entertainment, which is owned by Simon Fuller, who in turn has a business relationship with the Creative Artists Agency (CAA), one of Hollywood's most powerful talent agencies, it was important also for CAA that the Beckhams made as big an impact as possible upon their arrival in the United States. On 16 July, CAA had hosted a welcoming bash for David at its new eight-storey, $400 million headquarters in Century City, with CAA employees reportedly instructed beforehand to line the staircase and clap for Beckham upon his arrival. That night Victoria's reality show prime-time special Victoria Beckham: Coming to America aired on NBC, drawing negative reviews in the press and poor viewership ratings. On Saturday afternoon, 21 July, despite still nursing the injured left ankle that he picked up a month earlier during the final match of La Liga's season, Beckham made his Galaxy debut, coming on for Alan Gordon in the 78th minute of a 0–1 friendly loss to Chelsea as part of the World Series of Soccer. With a capacity crowd, along with a long Hollywood celebrity list featuring Tom Cruise, Katie Holmes, Eva Longoria, Governor of California Arnold Schwarzenegger and Drew Carey among others, present at the Home Depot Center, the match was broadcast live on ESPN's main network. However, the proceedings on the field of play took a back seat to the Beckham spectacle, and despite the presence of worldwide football stars such as Andriy Shevchenko, Didier Drogba, Michael Ballack and Frank Lampard, the US television cameras were firmly focused on Beckham, who spent most of the match on the bench. The match's added time featured a scare for already injured Beckham when he got tackled by Steve Sidwell, whose cleats struck Beckham's right foot, sending him airborne before he crumpled hard to the ground. Though the existing injury was not aggravated too much, Beckham's recovery process was set back by about a week. ESPN's presentation of Beckham's debut earned a 1.0 TV rating, meaning it was seen in an average of 947,000 television homes in the US – a disappointing figure given the national media buzz and two weeks of constant promotion by ESPN. As far as sporting events that were televised that weekend in the United States, Beckham's much publicised debut drew fewer TV viewers than the British Open golf tournament, a regular-season Major League Baseball game, and even the Indy Racing League's Honda 200 motor race. The day after the made-for-TV debut was reserved for the welcoming party for the Beckhams at LA's Museum of Contemporary Art, formally billed as being hosted by Tom Cruise, Katie Holmes, Will Smith and Jada Pinkett Smith, though in actuality a CAA-organized event. Attended by many Hollywood A-listers, the lavish event was well-covered in the US celebrity tabloid media, including daily entertainment TV magazines such as Entertainment Tonight and Access Hollywood. Beckham missed the next four LA Galaxy matches – three in the North American SuperLiga and an MLS game away at Toronto FC - though he still made the trip with his teammates, sitting on the bench in street clothes. It was in Toronto on 5 August that the team got its first taste of what life would be like on the road with Beckham on the roster. Due to security concerns, it was the first time the team flew on a charter for a road match, rather than flying commercial; MLS normally forbids charter flights for away matches, claiming they provide competitive advantage, but in this case they made an exception due to the frenzy created around Beckham and resulting security issues. Also, instead of the usual MLS-mandated modest hotels, LA Galaxy stayed at the five-star Le Méridien King Edward in downtown Toronto (an expense paid for by the local Toronto promoter), while the glitz and glamour continued with the velvet rope, red carpet party at the Ultra Supper Club with Beckham as the centerpiece guest. Two weeks after his twelve-minute appearance against Chelsea, Beckham made his league debut as a substitute on 9 August away versus D.C. United in front of the sellout crowd of 46,686 (nearly three times the average D.C. United home crowd) at the RFK Stadium, coming on for Quavas Kirk in the 71st minute. Coming into the nationally televised match on ESPN, played under a heavy downpour with his team down a man and down a goal, Beckham left a mark during the remaining 20-plus minutes. He hit a long free kick that Carlos Pavón failed to finish on for the equaliser, and then in the final minutes Beckham served a weighted through ball into Landon Donovan's path that United's keeper Troy Perkins managed to break up in the last moment – the Galaxy lost 1–0. The next match on the road trip was at New England Revolution and Beckham decided to sit it out, fearing further aggravating his ankle injury on the Gillette Stadium's artificial surface. Beckham returned to the pitch the following week, again facing D.C. United, in the SuperLiga semi-final on 15 August. During this game, he had many firsts with the Galaxy; his first start, first yellow card and first game as team captain. He also scored his first goal for the team, from a free kick, and also made his first assist, for Landon Donovan in the second half. These goals gave the team a 2–0 victory, and a place in the North American SuperLiga final versus Pachuca on 29 August. During the SuperLiga final against Pachuca, Beckham injured his right knee, with an MRI scan revealing that he had sprained his medial collateral ligament and would be out for six weeks. He returned to play in the final home match of the season. The Galaxy were eliminated from playoff contention on 21 October, in the final MLS match of the season, a 1–0 loss to the Chicago Fire. Beckham played as a substitute in the match, bringing his season totals to eight matches played (5 league); one goal scored (0 league); and three assists (2 league). Beckham trained with Arsenal from 4 January 2008 for three weeks, until he returned to the Galaxy for pre-season training. Beckham scored his first league goal with the Galaxy on 3 April, against the San Jose Earthquakes in the ninth minute. On 24 May 2008, the Galaxy defeated the Kansas City Wizards 3–1, giving the Galaxy their first winning record in two years and moving the club into first place in the Western Conference. In the match, Beckham scored an empty-net goal from 70 yards out. The goal marked the second time in Beckham's career that he had scored from his own half, the other being a 1996-goal from the half-way line against Wimbledon at Selhurst Park. Overall, however, the Galaxy had a disappointing year, failing to qualify for the end-of-season play-offs. In 2008, Beckham's success in the England national team under Fabio Capello led to speculation that he might return to Europe to retain match fitness for the World Cup qualifying matches in 2009. On 30 October 2008, AC Milan announced that Beckham was to join them on loan from 7 January 2009. Despite this and other speculation, Beckham made it clear that the move in no way signalled his intent to leave MLS and announced his intent to return to the Galaxy in time for the start of the 2009 season in March. Many at Milan both within and outside of the club expressed serious reservations about the transfer, with it considered by some players no more than a marketing move. Beckham was unveiled at Milan's training facility by the club's chief executive Adriano Galliani on 20 December 2008. The player chose the number 32 shirt previously worn by Christian Vieri, as both the number 7 and 23 shirts were already used by Alexandre Pato and club vice captain Massimo Ambrosini, respectively. The day after his unveiling, Beckham was brought to the San Siro, where he was introduced to the home fans by walking out on the pitch before the league match versus Udinese and proclaiming "Forza Milan" over the public address system. Afterwards, he and wife Victoria watched from a luxury box as Milan won 5–1. "On the pitch, Beckham sees everything before everyone else. His vision of play is better now than during his time in Manchester. He is slower but much stronger tactically and technically. He is very intelligent and works a lot." —AC Milan coach Carlo Ancelotti on Beckham's condition at 33 years old. Playing on the squad led by the 26-year-old superstar Kaká, in addition to several other world-class players at or near the peak of their careers – such as 28-year-old Ronaldinho and 29-year-old Andrea Pirlo – as well as club veterans Paolo Maldini, Clarence Seedorf, Massimo Ambrosini, Giuseppe Favalli, Gianluca Zambrotta, Filippo Inzaghi and Andriy Shevchenko, Beckham made his competitive debut for the rossoneri in Serie A as a starter away at Roma on 11 January 2009, playing 89 minutes of the 2–2 draw in front of 53,444 at the Stadio Olimpico. Playing his first competitive match in almost three months, Beckham gave a decent performance in right midfield alongside Pirlo. Though clearly lacking match fitness, occasionally struggling to keep up in a high-tempo match, Beckham put in enough useful crosses and corners to justify the coach Carlo Ancelotti's decision to play him from the start. In Beckham's home debut against Fiorentina a week later, he turned in another understated performance on the right side of midfield before advancing into a more active central role in the second half thus effectively taking over Seedorf's role after the Dutchman was subbed off. Milan won 1–0 courtesy of Pato, but the 65,000+ San Siro crowd mostly focused on Kaká, imploring him to stay. A noticeably older team, the Ancelotti-coached Milan was proving a good fit for the 33-year-old Englishman. He scored his first goal in Serie A for Milan in a 4–1 victory over Bologna on 25 January, his third appearance for the club. Though Beckham was expected to return to Los Angeles in March, after impressing at the Italian club, scoring two goals in his first four matches and assisting on several more, rumours began to swirl that Beckham would stay in Milan, with the Italian club reportedly offering to pay a multi-million-dollar fee for him. The rumours were confirmed on 4 February, when Beckham stated that he was seeking a permanent transfer to Milan, in a bid to sustain his England career through the 2010 World Cup. Milan, however, failed to match Galaxy's valuation of Beckham, in the US$10–15 million range. Still, negotiations continued during a month of speculation. On 2 March, the Los Angeles Times reported that Beckham's loan had been extended through mid-July. This was later confirmed by Beckham, revealing what was described as a unique "timeshare" deal, in which Beckham would play with L.A. from mid-July until the end of the 2009 MLS season. After his return from Milan, many LA fans showed dislike and anger towards him as he missed the first half of the season, and several held up signs saying "Go home fraud", and "Part-time player". The Galaxy, however, had a much more successful season than in previous years, rising from third to first in the Western Conference during Beckham's time with them. He remained a key part of the squad which saw Galaxy win the 2009 Western Conference final after a 2–0 overtime victory over the Houston Dynamo. In the MLS Cup final on 22 November 2009, the Galaxy lost to Real Salt Lake by 5–4 in a penalty shoot-out after a 1–1 draw. Beckham also scored in the shootout. In November 2009, after the end of 2009 MLS season, it was confirmed that Beckham would return to Milan for a second loan period, beginning in January 2010. On 6 January 2010, Beckham made a winning return in a Milan shirt, playing 75 minutes of a 5–2 victory over Genoa. On 16 February 2010, Beckham played against Manchester United for the first time since he left the club in 2003. He played 76 minutes of the match at the San Siro – which ended 3–2 to Manchester United – before being substituted for Clarence Seedorf. Beckham returned to Old Trafford for the second leg of the tie on 10 March 2010; he did not start the match, but was brought on for Ignazio Abate in the 64th minute to a positive reception from the Manchester United fans. The score was 3–0 for United at that point and the tie was all but decided. The match was the first time Beckham had played against Manchester United at Old Trafford, and saw him create several scoring opportunities via crosses and corner kicks, but Manchester United dominated Milan and beat them 4–0, winning the tie 7–2. Following the final whistle, he aroused a bit of controversy by draping the green-and-gold scarf around his neck that was given to him by the Manchester United supporters protesting against club owner Malcolm Glazer. As the fan protests against Glazer by the people gathered around Manchester United Supporters' Trust gained steam in 2010, the green-and-gold scarf had come to be seen as an anti-Glazer symbol, and by extension many saw Beckham's decision to publicly put it on as gesture of support. When asked about it later, however, Beckham responded that protests are not his business. In Milan's next game, against Chievo, Beckham suffered a torn left Achilles tendon, causing him to miss the World Cup as well as the MLS season due to the injury, which took him out of action for the next five months. Doctor Sakari Orava performed surgery on Beckham's tendon in Turku, Finland, on 15 March 2010. After the operation, Orava confirmed: "it went quite fine. The prognosis is he needs a rehabilitation for the next few months, and the plaster cast is the next six to eight weeks. I would say that [it will be] maybe four months before he's running, but six months before he's jumping and kicking." On 11 September 2010, after recovering from his Achilles tendon injury, Beckham returned to the game as a substitute in the 70th minute in the Galaxy's 3–1 win over Columbus Crew. On 4 October, Beckham scored a trademark free kick in a 2–1 win over Chivas USA to mark his first goal in 2010. On 24 October, Beckham scored his second goal of the season in the Galaxy's 2–1 win over FC Dallas which secured them their second successive Western Conference title and first MLS Supporters' Shield since 2002. During January and February 2011, ahead of the 2011 MLS season, Beckham trained with Tottenham Hotspur. Rumours in the media claimed that the club were in talks with the Galaxy to sign the player on loan, but, according to Spurs manager Harry Redknapp, the move was blocked by Galaxy, who wanted a full final season from their number 23. As a result, he ended up only training with the club as he had done with Arsenal three years earlier. With Beckham playing in the centre of midfield, the Galaxy won the 2011 MLS cup. On 15 May, Beckham scored his first goal of the season for the Galaxy from a 30-yard free kick, in a 4–1 victory over Sporting Kansas City. On 9 July, Beckham scored directly from a corner in a 2–1 win over Chicago Fire, repeating a feat he also achieved while playing for Preston North End. After having his best season with the Galaxy to date, and finishing second in the league in assists, Beckham finished his fifth MLS season on a high. On 20 November 2011, he joined an elite group of players to have won league titles in three countries, when Los Angeles won their third MLS Cup against the Houston Dynamo, winning 1–0 on a goal by captain Landon Donovan, with assists from Beckham and fellow designated player Robbie Keane. Following the 2011 season, in which the Galaxy won their second consecutive Supporters' Shield, having the second most points in MLS history, Beckham's five-year contract with the Galaxy expired on 31 December 2011. Despite being 36, he stated that he did not intend to retire. Beckham was heavily linked with Paris Saint-Germain, but on 18 January 2012, Galaxy announced Beckham had signed a new two-year contract to remain in Los Angeles. In May 2012, Beckham and his victorious teammates were received by President of the United States Barack Obama at the White House. Beckham helped the Galaxy to a fourth-place finish in the Western Conference during the 2012 regular season, with Beckham scoring seven goals and adding nine assists. The Galaxy defeated Vancouver Whitecaps FC, the San Jose Earthquakes and Seattle Sounders FC on their way to the MLS Cup final, where they defeated the Houston Dynamo 3–1 to retain the cup. He was subbed off in the 89th minute for Marcelo Sarvas, and was given a standing ovation at their home venue. Beckham had earlier announced that the 2012 MLS Cup Final would be his final game with the Galaxy, despite having another year remaining on his contract. On 31 January 2013, ahead of the transfer deadline it was announced that Beckham would be undergoing a medical with Paris Saint-Germain, ahead of a potential move to the Ligue 1 side. Beckham signed a five-month deal with the club later that afternoon, and confirmed that his entire salary during his time in Paris would be donated to a local children's charity. His PSG debut came on 24 February 2013, when he came off the bench in the 76th minute in a Ligue 1 home match against Marseille. This made him the 400th player in the history of the club. On 12 May 2013, Beckham won a fourth different top flight winners' medal, after PSG beat Lyon 1–0 to claim the Ligue 1 title. On 16 May 2013, Beckham announced that he would retire from professional football at the end of that year's French football season. Following his decision to retire at the end of the 2012–13 season, Beckham was given specially designed boots in the colours of the Union Jack to wear in his final game. These boots had the names of his wife and children stitched on to them. On 18 May 2013, Beckham was made captain in his final home game against Brest. In this game, Beckham assisted a goal by Matuidi from a corner. Beckham was subbed off after 80 minutes, receiving hugs from his fellow players and manager, as well as a standing ovation from fans. PSG went on to win the game 3–1. Beckham made his first appearance for England on 1 September 1996, in a FIFA World Cup qualifying match against Moldova. In June 1997, he participated in the Tournoi de France, the friendly international football tournament held in France as a warm-up to the 1998 FIFA World Cup. Beckham played in all of England's qualifying matches for the 1998 FIFA World Cup and was part of the 23-man squad for the finals in France, but the team's manager Glenn Hoddle publicly accused him of not concentrating on the tournament, and he did not start in either of England's first two games. He was picked for the third game against Colombia and scored with a bending 30-yard free kick in a 2–0 victory, which was his first goal for England. In the second round (last 16) of that competition, he received a red card in England's match against Argentina. Beckham, after having been fouled by Diego Simeone, kicked Simeone while lying on the ground, striking him on the calf muscle. Sports Illustrated was critical of the Argentinian's theatrics in that incident, stating that Simeone first delivered a "heavy-handed challenge" on Beckham, and then "fell like a ton of bricks" when Beckham retaliated. Simeone later admitted to trying to get Beckham sent off by over-reacting to the kick and then, along with other members of his team, urging the referee to send Beckham off. The match finished in a draw, and England were eliminated in a penalty shootout. Many supporters and journalists blamed Beckham for England's elimination and he became the target of criticism and abuse, including the hanging of an effigy outside a London pub, and the Daily Mirror printing a dartboard with a picture of him centred on the bullseye. He also received death threats after the World Cup. The abuse that Beckham was receiving from English supporters peaked during England's 3–2 defeat by Portugal in Euro 2000, a match where Beckham set up two goals, when a group of England supporters taunted him throughout the match. Beckham responded by raising his middle finger and, while the gesture attracted some criticism, many of the newspapers that had previously encouraged his vilification asked their readers to stop abusing him. "We've played two and a half minutes of stoppage time. England trail by 2 goals to 1. Beckham could raise the roof here with a goal ... I don't believe it! David Beckham scores the goal to take England all the way to the World Cup Finals! ... Give that man a Knighthood!" —Television commentary on Beckham's stoppage time 30-yard curling free-kick against Greece in the 2002 World Cup qualifying game in October 2001. On 15 November 2000, following Kevin Keegan's resignation as England manager in October, Beckham was promoted to team captain by the caretaker manager Peter Taylor, and then kept the role under new manager Sven-Göran Eriksson. Beckham played a major role in helping England qualify for the 2002 FIFA World Cup, starring in an impressive 5–1 victory over Germany in Munich. The final step in Beckham's conversion from villain to national hero happened in England's final qualifying game against Greece on 6 October 2001. England needed to win or draw the match to qualify outright for the World Cup, but were losing 2–1 with little time remaining. When Teddy Sheringham was fouled eight yards outside the Greek penalty area, England were awarded a free-kick and Beckham ensured England's qualification with a curling strike of the kind that had become his trademark. Beckham was voted the BBC Sports Personality of the Year for 2001, and finished runner-up to Luís Figo of Portugal, for the FIFA World Player of the Year award. Beckham was partially fit by the time of the 2002 World Cup held in Japan and South Korea, and played in the first match against Sweden. After the events of four years earlier, Beckham achieved a degree of revenge over Argentina by scoring the winning goal with a penalty. England defeated Denmark in the second round with Beckham providing an assist in a 3–0 win. England were knocked out in the quarter-finals by eventual winners Brazil after Ronaldinho scored the winner. The following month, at the opening ceremony of the 2002 Commonwealth Games in Manchester, Beckham escorted Kirsty Howard as she presented the Jubilee Baton to the Queen. Beckham played in all of England's matches at Euro 2004. He had a penalty saved in England's 2–1 defeat to France and missed another in a penalty shootout in the quarter-final match against Portugal. England lost the shootout, thus going out of the competition. Beckham became a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador in January 2005 and was involved in promoting London's successful bid for the 2012 Olympic Games. In October 2005, Beckham's sending off against Austria made him the first England captain to be sent off and the first player to be sent off twice while playing for England. He captained England for the 50th time in a friendly international against Argentina the following month. In England's opening game at the 2006 World Cup, against Paraguay on 10 June 2006, Beckham's free kick led to an own-goal by Carlos Gamarra as England won 1–0. In England's next match, played against Trinidad and Tobago on 15 June 2006, Beckham's cross in the 83rd minute led to a Peter Crouch goal, which put England into the lead 1–0. Beckham gave another assist to Steven Gerrard. In the end they won 2–0. He was named Man of the Match by tournament sponsor Budweiser. During England's second round match against Ecuador, Beckham scored from a free kick in the 59th minute, becoming the first English player to score in three separate World Cups, and giving England a 1–0 victory and a place in the quarter-finals. He was sick before the game and vomited several times as a result of dehydration and illness that he got after having scored the winning goal for England. In the quarter-final against Portugal, Beckham was substituted following an injury shortly after half time and the England team went on to lose the match on penalties (3–1), the score having been 0–0 after extra time. After his substitution, Beckham was visibly shaken and emotional for not being able to play, being in tears at one point. A day after England were knocked out of the World Cup, an emotional Beckham made a statement in a news conference that he had stepped down as England captain, stating: "It has been an honour and privilege to captain my country but, having been captain for 58 of my 95 games, I feel the time is right to pass on the armband as we enter a new era under Steve McClaren." (Beckham had won 94 caps up to that point.) He was succeeded by Chelsea captain John Terry. Having stepped down as captain after the World Cup, Beckham was dropped completely from the England national team selected by new coach Steve McClaren on 11 August 2006. McClaren said that he was "looking to go in a different direction" with the team, and that Beckham "wasn't included within that." McClaren said Beckham could be recalled in future. Shaun Wright-Phillips, Kieran Richardson and the World Cup alternative to Beckham, Aaron Lennon, were all included, although McClaren eventually opted to employ Steven Gerrard in that role. On 26 May 2007, McClaren announced that Beckham would be recalled to the England squad for the first time since stepping down as their captain. Beckham started against Brazil in England's first match at the new Wembley Stadium and put in a positive performance. In the second half, he set up England's goal converted by captain John Terry. It looked as though England would claim victory over Brazil, but newcomer Diego equalised in the dying seconds. In England's next match, a Euro 2008 qualifier against Estonia, Beckham sent two trademark assists for Michael Owen and Peter Crouch, helping England to prevail 3–0. Beckham had assisted in three of England's four total goals in those two games, and he stated his desire to continue to play for England after his move to Major League Soccer. On 22 August 2007, Beckham played in a friendly for England against Germany, becoming the first to play for England while with a non-European club team. On 21 November 2007, Beckham earned his 99th cap against Croatia, setting up a goal for Peter Crouch to tie the game at 2–2. Following the 2–3 loss, England failed to qualify for the Euro 2008 Finals. Despite this, Beckham said that he had no plans to retire from international football and wanted to continue playing for the national team. After being passed over by new England coach and Beckham's former manager at Real Madrid, Fabio Capello, for a friendly against Switzerland which would have given him his hundredth cap; Beckham admitted that he was not in shape at the time, as he had not played a competitive match in three months. On 20 March 2008, Beckham was recalled to the England squad by Capello for the friendly against France in Paris on 26 March. Beckham became only the fifth Englishman to win 100 caps. Capello had hinted on 25 March 2008 that Beckham had a long-term future in his side, ahead of crucial qualifiers for the 2010 World Cup. On 11 May 2008, Capello included an in-form Beckham in his 31-man England squad to face the United States at Wembley on 28 May before the away fixture with Trinidad and Tobago on 1 June. Beckham – who wore a pair of golden boots to mark the occasion – was honoured before the match by receiving an honorary gold cap representing his 100th cap from Bobby Charlton, and was given a standing ovation from the crowd. He played well and assisted John Terry on the match-winning goal. When substituted at half-time for David Bentley, the pro-Beckham crowd booed the decision. In a surprise move, Capello handed Beckham the captaincy for England's friendly against Trinidad and Tobago on 1 June 2008. The match was the first time since the 2006 World Cup that Beckham had skippered England and marked a dramatic turnaround for Beckham. In two years, he had gone from being dropped completely from the England squad to being reinstated (though temporarily) as England captain. During the 2010 World Cup Qualifier against Belarus, which England won 3–1 in Minsk, Beckham came off the bench in the 87th minute to earn his 107th cap making him England's third-most-capped player in history, overtaking Bobby Charlton in the process. On 11 February 2009, Beckham drew level with Bobby Moore's record of 108 caps for an English outfield player, coming on as a substitute for Stewart Downing in a friendly match against Spain. On 28 March 2009, Beckham surpassed Moore to hold the record outright when he came on as a substitute in a friendly against Slovakia, providing the assist for a goal from Wayne Rooney in the process. In all, Beckham had made 16 appearances out of a possible 20 for England under Capello until his ruptured Achilles tendon of March 2010 ruled him out of selection for the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa. His last game for England before injury had been on 14 October 2009 as a substitute in England's last World Cup qualifying game, which ended England 3–0 Belarus. After a poor performance from England at the World Cup, Capello remained as manager but was under pressure to revamp the England squad for the imminent UEFA Euro 2012 qualification campaign. He unveiled a new team at the next England match, a home friendly game against Hungary on 11 August 2010, with Beckham still unavailable for selection but aiming for a return to playing in MLS by the following month. In the post-match interview, Capello said of the prospect of the now 35-year-old Beckham playing any future competitive matches for England, that: "I need to change it. David is a fantastic player but I think we need new players for the future", referring to the new players that play in Beckham's right midfield position, including Theo Walcott and Adam Johnson, adding: "This is the future of the team under Fabio Capello or another manager." He said that Beckham may be selected for one last friendly game, stating, "If he is fit, I hope we will play one more game here at Wembley so the fans can say goodbye." In response to the comments, Beckham's agent released a statement reiterating Beckham's position that he had no desire to retire from international football, and would always make himself available for selection for England if fit and if needed. Beckham remained ten caps short of the record number of 125 caps by goalkeeper Peter Shilton, for a player of any position. Beckham was named in the provisional squad to represent the Great Britain Olympic football team at the 2012 Olympics. He was not included in the final selection by manager Stuart Pearce, while Andy Hunt, the head the British Olympic Association, contacted Beckham's representatives for him to be related to Team GB more broadly. Throughout his career, Beckham was considered one of the best and most recognisable players of his generation, as well as one of the greatest free-kick exponents of all time. As of September 2023, Beckham ranks joint-5th all time (alongside Lionel Messi) in goals scored from direct free kicks with 65. Moreover, Beckham has been rated by some pundits as one of the greatest wide midfielders of all time. Predominantly right-footed, his range of passing, vision, crossing ability and bending free-kicks enabled him to create chances for teammates or score goals, attributes that saw him excel as a right winger, despite his lack of significant pace. Unlike his Manchester United teammate Ryan Giggs on the opposite wing, Beckham preferred to beat players through his movement and passing, rather than going at opponents directly with the ball. He formed a strong partnership on the right side of the pitch with full-back Gary Neville during his time with the club, due to their understanding, as well as Neville's ability to get forward with his overlapping runs, get on the end of Beckham's passes, and deliver crosses into the box whenever the latter was heavily marked. Although Beckham primarily played on the right flank, he was also used as a central midfielder throughout his career (occasionally with Manchester United, but in particular with Real Madrid and AC Milan), and on rare instances as a deep-lying playmaker, in particular in his later career, in order to compensate for his physical decline with his advancing age. Beckham felt that his best role was on the right, although he personally preferred playing in the centre. In addition to his passing, crossing, and prowess from set-pieces, Beckham also stood out for his stamina and defensive work-rate on the pitch, having played both as an attacking midfielder and as a box-to-box midfielder in his youth; he was also occasionally deployed as a wing-back. Moreover, he was also an accurate striker of the ball from distance, as well as being a competent penalty taker. He also drew praise in the media for his ball control and ability to create space for himself on the pitch, as well as his anticipation, composure, determination, athleticism, dedication, and intelligence as a footballer. "David Beckham is Britain's finest striker of a football not because of God-given talent but because he practises with a relentless application that the vast majority of less gifted players wouldn't contemplate." —Former Manchester United manager Alex Ferguson. Beckham was a product of Sir Alex Ferguson's hard-working approach at Manchester United. Ferguson said that Beckham "practised with a discipline to achieve an accuracy that other players wouldn't care about." Beckham reportedly spent hours practising his free kicks after training sessions had ended. Beckham maintained his training routine at Real Madrid and even when his relationship with management was strained in early 2007, Real Madrid president Ramón Calderón and manager Fabio Capello praised Beckham for maintaining his professionalism and commitment to the club. Beckham's Real Madrid teammate Roberto Carlos regarded Beckham to be the best free-kick exponent he had ever seen. One of the other best free kick exponents of their generation, Roberto Carlos, commented on the dilemma the team faced when they won a free kick on the edge of the penalty area: "I would stand on one side and Beckham on the other but I wanted to see Beckham take the free-kick because it's beautiful how he hits the ball." During Beckham's time with Milan, his manager Carlo Ancelotti praised the Englishman for his intelligence and work-rate, in particular the improvements he demonstrated to the technical and tactical aspects of his game, which allowed him to compensate for his loss of pace. His former England manager Steve McClaren stated: "I've been very fortunate to work with some great players and he [Beckham] was one of them. He was a great player, he made the very most of his talents and that was through sheer hard work, professionalism, always doing extra on the training field. He inspired his team-mates through his performances, he was a winner. He was a leader, people followed him." Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger stated, "What remains in your memory is his genuine commitment and dedication, his natural humility which he always had, that will stay forever." In May 2013, asked about how he wanted to be remembered in his retirement, Beckham said, "I just want people to see me as a hardworking footballer, someone that's passionate about the game, someone that – every time I stepped on the pitch – I've given everything that I have, because that's how I feel. That's how I look back on it and hope people will see me." Earlier in his career, Beckham's discipline during matches was brought into question on occasion in the media, due to his temper, as well as his tendency to commit rash challenges and pick up unnecessary bookings. Beckham was the first England player ever to collect two red cards, and the first England captain to be sent off. Beckham's most notorious red card was during the 1998 World Cup after Argentina's Diego Simeone had fouled him: Beckham, lying face down on the pitch, kicked out at the Argentine midfielder, who fell dramatically. Along with Wayne Rooney, he holds the record for the most red cards for England at international level. His second red card for England came on 8 October 2005, in a 2006 World Cup qualifier against Austria in Manchester. His only red card with Manchester United came on 6 January 2000, in the 2000 FIFA Club World Championship against Necaxa. During his time at Real Madrid, he amassed 41 yellow cards and four red cards in La Liga; he also received a red card in a Copa del Rey match against Valencia on 21 January 2004, in Madrid. His only red card with LA Galaxy came on 15 August 2009, in a 2–0 home defeat to the Seattle Sounders in MLS. He received one red card while at Paris Saint-Germain – picked up in injury time – in a match against Evian on 28 April 2013. Between 2000 and 2013, Beckham played 572 competitive games for England, Milan, LA Galaxy, Manchester United, Real Madrid and PSG, and he received nine red cards – one every 63–64 matches, on average. Despite his success, popularity, and playing ability, critical reception of Beckham was often divided among sporting figures and fans throughout his career, in part – as Subhankar Mondal of Goal notes – due to his ventures off the pitch, and the widespread coverage that his personal life received. His former Manchester United manager, Alex Ferguson, speculated in 2007 that Beckham's increasing celebrity status, in particular following his highly publicised relationship with his future wife Victoria, had actually had a negative impact on his playing career. In 2015, moreover, he claimed he had only coached four world class players throughout his time at United, excluding Beckham from the list, commenting: "I don't mean to demean or criticise any of the great or very good footballers who played for me during my 26-year career at United, but there were only four who were world class: Cantona, Giggs, Cristiano Ronaldo and Scholes." Upon his departure to LA Galaxy, El País reflected on the dichotomy of Beckham's playing career and his status off the pitch, describing him as "the great paradox of world football", also adding: "He is the greatest icon on the planet and the cause of such delirium in the media and on the streets, the greatest catwalk model there is. And yet he has been an anti-diva. He was the most galactic of the galacticos off the pitch, but the greatest of earthlings when he walked on to the field." Regarding Beckham's crossing ability, Rob Smyth of The Guardian said in 2014: "he was a great crosser and perhaps the greatest of all time," also noting that "he was a dead-ball specialist and also a dying-ball specialist: [...] his signature crosses in open play involved a ball that was barely moving, which allowed him to use the same technique as with corners and free-kicks." Nigel Reed of CBC Sports commented on Beckham's career and celebrity status, stating: "His brand is global, his appeal universal. He sparked debate and polarized opinion. But underneath the gloss he was, first and foremost, a very good footballer." He also added that while he felt that "Beckham was not the greatest player of his generation," he believed he had the ability to change games, describing him as "master of his art and a deadly opponent", whose "talent was only topped by his passion." In 2005, Beckham founded the David Beckham Academy football school, operating from two sites, in London and Los Angeles. It was announced in late-2009 that both would close. A mobile academy is being developed by Beckham, to travel around the UK and further afield. On 5 February 2014, MLS announced that Beckham had exercised his option to buy a MLS expansion team for $25 million, which he had received as part of the contract he signed with the LA Galaxy in 2007. The ownership group, led by Beckham, originally hoped the Miami-based team would begin play in 2016 or 2017. After delays getting a stadium deal completed, MLS announced in January 2018 that the team had been approved, and would likely begin play in 2020. The team name and crest were revealed on 5 September. Club Internacional de Futbol Miami – more commonly known as, Inter Miami – is represented by a black crest with neon pink trimmings and herons whose legs clasp to form an "M" for Miami. The club made its MLS debut on 1 March 2020 with a 1–0 away loss to Los Angeles. In January 2019 it was announced that Beckham was set to join his Class of '92 teammates as part owner of English non-league club Salford City, taking 10% of the club previously held by Peter Lim, with the deal being subject to Football Association approval. On 31 January, the club announced that the FA had approved him to become a director of the club. In 1997, Beckham started dating Victoria Adams after she attended a Manchester United match. She was famously known as "Posh Spice" of the pop music group Spice Girls, one of the world's top pop groups at the time, and his team was also enjoying a great run of success. Therefore, their relationship instantly attracted a great deal of media attention. The couple were dubbed "Posh and Becks" by the media. He proposed to her on 24 January 1998 in a restaurant in Cheshunt, England. Their first child was born fourteen months later. On 4 July 1999, they married at Luttrellstown Castle in Ireland. Beckham's teammate Gary Neville was the best man, and the couple's four-month-old son, Brooklyn, was the ring bearer. The media were kept away from the ceremony, as the Beckhams had an exclusive deal with OK! Magazine, but newspapers were still able to obtain photographs showing them sitting on golden thrones. 437 staff were employed for the wedding reception, which was estimated to have cost £500,000. David and Victoria Beckham have four children: sons Brooklyn Joseph (born 4 March 1999 at Portland Hospital, London), Romeo James (born 1 September 2002 at Portland Hospital, London), Cruz David (born 20 February 2005 at Ruber International Hospital, Madrid), and daughter Harper Seven (born 10 July 2011 at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles). Elton John is godfather to Brooklyn and Romeo Beckham; their godmother is Elizabeth Hurley. Harper and Cruz were baptized Catholic at Holy Trinity, Chipping Norton; among their godparents were Eva Longoria and Marc Anthony. Beckham's three sons have all played football in the Arsenal academy. Brooklyn played football for Arsenal U16, through the end of the 2014–15 season. Like their father, Brooklyn and Romeo have both done modelling work and been named among GQ's best dressed British men. In his early-Manchester United career, Beckham lived in a four-bedroom house in Worsley that he bought directly from the property developer as a 20-year-old in 1995. In 1999, shortly after his wedding, he and Victoria bought a country house set in 24 acres (10 hectares) in Sawbridgeworth, Hertfordshire, which the media nicknamed "Beckingham Palace". Known by the nickname "Golden Balls", Beckham acquired the name from Victoria, who revealed it on national TV in 2008 while praising him for rebuilding his reputation after the 1998 World Cup. Beckham has obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), which he says makes him "have everything in a straight line or everything has to be in pairs." Victoria claimed: "If you open our fridge, it's all co-ordinated down either side. We've got three fridges – food in one, salad in another and drinks in the third. In the drinks one, everything is symmetrical. If there's three cans, he'll throw one away because it has to be an even number." A staunch monarchist, Beckham queued for 13 hours in September 2022 to see Queen Elizabeth ll lying in state at Westminster Hall following her death, after refusing opportunities to skip ahead. In April 2004, the British tabloid News of the World carried claims by Beckham's former personal assistant Rebecca Loos that she and Beckham had engaged in an extramarital affair. A week later, the Malaysian-born Australian model Sarah Marbeck claimed that she had slept with Beckham on two occasions. Beckham dismissed both claims as "ludicrous". In September 2010, Beckham announced that he was making a court application against prostitute Irma Nici and several others over claims in the magazine In Touch that he had sex with her. His court application was dismissed under US freedom of speech laws, and the magazine later accepted that the allegations against Beckham were untrue. On 9 May 2019, at Bromley Magistrates Court, Beckham was banned from driving for six months. He previously pleaded guilty to using a mobile phone while driving his Bentley in central London on 21 November 2018. The court heard he was photographed by a member of the public holding a phone as he drove in "slowly moving" traffic. Beckham received six points on his licence, to add to the six he already had for previous speeding matters. He was also fined £750, and ordered to pay £100 in prosecution costs and a £75 surcharge fee within seven days. As of 2021[update], Beckham has more than 65 tattoos covering a large part of his body, including tattoos on his hands, neck and head. There are names of his sons Romeo, Cruz and Brooklyn, and of his wife Victoria. His wife's name, tattooed on his left forearm, is in the Devanagari script (used for the Hindi and Sanskrit languages, among others) because Beckham thought it would be "tacky" to have it in English. However, this was misspelt as the equivalent of "Vhictoria". In his autobiography David Beckham: My Side, he said that the idea of having tattoos came to him in 1999 after his son Brooklyn was born, following a conversation on the subject of tattoos with Mel B and her then-husband, Jimmy Gulzar. Beckham said: "When you see me, you see the tattoos. You see an expression of how I feel about Victoria and the boys. They're part of me." He has also added several tattoos that pay tribute to his daughter, Harper, as well as several tattoos with religious significance. In 2018, Beckham added to his collection with a tattoo of a solar system covering the left side of his scalp. Many of Beckham's tattoos were completed by the Manchester-based tattoo artist Louis Molloy. Beckham's relationship and marriage to Victoria, who has been famous in her own right as part of the Spice Girls, contributed to his celebrity beyond football. Beckham became known as a fashion icon, and together with Victoria, the couple became lucrative spokespeople sought after by clothing designers, health and fitness specialists, fashion magazines, and perfume and cosmetics manufacturers. Early endorsements included the British hair styling brand Brylcreem for £4 million in 1997, which saw him appear in UK commercials. In 2002 he was hailed as the ultimate "metrosexual" by the man who invented the term and has been described as such by numerous other articles since. The various iconic hairstyles he sported throughout his career – including a buzz cut, a Mohawk, and a ponytail – were widely covered in the media. While heterosexual, Beckham actively courted a gay fanbase and openly supported gay media, preferring to give interviews to publications that supported the LGBTQ community. He came to be called a "gay icon" – a term he embraces – for his popularity and support among the gay community. This honorific has been in dispute, however, since Beckham signed a deal with Qatar to become a brand ambassador for the 2022 FIFA World Cup. Qatar persecutes LGBT people, causing many gay fans of Beckham and public LGBTQ figures such as Joe Lycett and Josh Cavallo to demand his status as a gay icon be rescinded. Beckham defended his status as a brand ambassador in a statement on 18 November, saying that the World Cup will be "[a platform for] progress, inclusivity and tolerance". On 20 November, Lycett responded on a livestream by appearing to shred £10,000 that he had promised would be given to charity had Beckham pulled out of the deal, which Lycett later revealed to have faked. The Beckhams were paid $13.7 million in 2007 to launch his fragrance line in the United States In the world of fashion, David has appeared on the covers of many magazines. US covers have included the men's magazine Details, and with Victoria for the August 2007 issue of W. According to Google, "David Beckham" was searched for more than any other sports topic on their site in 2003 and 2004. According to Ask Jeeves, Beckham ranked third, after Britney Spears and Osama bin Laden, among subjects most searched for by British users of that site in the first decade of the 2000s. Upon their arrival in Los Angeles on 12 July 2007, the night before Beckham's formal introduction, Los Angeles International Airport was filled with paparazzi and news reporters. On the next night, Victoria appeared on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno to talk about their move to LA, and presented Leno with a number 23 Galaxy jersey with his own name on the back. Victoria also talked about her NBC TV show Victoria Beckham: Coming to America. On 22 July, a private welcoming party was held for the couple at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles. A-list celebrities attending included Steven Spielberg, Jim Carrey, George Clooney, Tom Cruise, Katie Holmes, Will Smith, Jada Pinkett Smith, and Oprah Winfrey. Beckham's many endorsement deals make him one of the most recognisable athletes throughout the world. Having worn Adidas football boots from the start of his career (notably Adidas Predator), in 2003 he signed a $160 million lifetime contract with Adidas, earning nearly half the money upfront, and would continue to earn percentages of profits on all of his branded Adidas products. His 2004 Adidas television commercial "Kicking it", in which he appears with England Rugby World Cup winner Jonny Wilkinson, was voted among the best British commercials of the year, and also featured as one of the Great Ads of the 21st Century in Channel 4's 2004 update of The 100 Greatest TV Ads. He had a 10-year collaboration with PepsiCo that expired in 2009. He has also promoted The Walt Disney Company theme parks. In April 2021, he became a global ambassador for Maserati. In 2023, as part of Maserati's new personalisation program, "Fuoriserie Essentials", the Italian brand unveils its first collection with its ambassador David Beckham. Beckham has several eponymous video games, including Go! Go! Beckham! Adventure on Soccer Island, a platform game for the Game Boy Advance, and David Beckham Soccer, a football game for a number of platforms, and he was brand ambassador for exercise video game EA Sports Active 2. Beckham featured in EA Sports' FIFA video game series; he was on the cover for the UK edition of FIFA 98. During his playing career (which ended in May 2013), Beckham generated an estimated £1 billion in shirt and boot sales. In 2006, Lloyd's of London insured his legs for £100m, at the time he was playing for Real Madrid. Beckham played a critical part in bringing the Olympics to London in 2012, travelling with the British delegation to Singapore in 2005 for the host city selection. At the 2008 Beijing Olympics closing ceremony, Beckham, Jimmy Page, and Leona Lewis represented Britain during the handover segment for the 2012 Olympics. Beckham rode a London double-decker bus into the stadium and Page and Lewis performed "Whole Lotta Love". He also featured at the Opening Ceremony of the 2012 London Olympics, carrying the Olympic flame to the stadium by speedboat. Beckham visited Afghanistan in May 2010 for a morale-boosting visit to British troops fighting the Taliban insurgency. The appearance of Beckham as well as British Foreign Secretary William Hague and Defence Secretary Liam Fox was believed to have prompted a Taliban attack on Kandahar airfield. Chinese authorities appointed Beckham as global ambassador for Chinese football in March 2013. After numerous officials had been banned for match-fixing, and the Chinese Super League had failed to retain the services of well-known international names, Beckham's role was to help improve the image of the game and raise its profile both in China and abroad. From 14 July 2013, Beckham started appearing in adverts for BSkyB, advertising their Sky Sports coverage via the Sky Go app. In January 2014, Beckham appeared on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon on NBC in the U.S., and in March he made a guest appearance in the BBC's Sport Relief special of Only Fools and Horses. He was named one of GQ's 50 best dressed British men in 2015. In March 2015 Beckham had the third highest social media rank in the world among sportspeople, behind Cristiano Ronaldo and Lionel Messi, with over 52 million Facebook fans. He also has over 80 million Instagram followers, the fifth highest for a footballer, behind Cristiano Ronaldo, Messi, Neymar and Kylian Mbappé, and the second most for a person from the UK, after Dua Lipa. During the 2016 EU referendum, Beckham voiced his opposition to Brexit (the United Kingdom leaving the European Union) stating: "For our children and their children we should be facing the problems of the world together and not alone. For these reasons, I am voting to remain." Beckham was announced as the new Ambassadorial president of the British Fashion Council on 11 May 2018. Prior to the June 2018 vote by FIFA member nations for selecting the hosts of the 2026 FIFA World Cup, Beckham endorsed the North American bid (Canada, Mexico and the United States). Beckham's former club LA Galaxy unveiled a statue of him outside of their stadium in March 2019, the first of its kind in the MLS. He was subject of prank by his friend James Corden, who presented a 'hideous' fake statue before the real one was unveiled. In February 2020, Beckham mentioned that he enjoys spending hours assembling Lego pieces. In June 2020, Beckham became a minority owner of the London-based esports organisation Guild Esports. In November 2020, EA Sports had an agreement with Beckham to feature him in FIFA 21, in which he would earn £40m from a three-year deal. In June 2021, Beckham bought 10% stake of vehicle electrification firm, Lunaz. Beckham has supported UNICEF since his days at Manchester United and in January 2005, the English national team captain became a Goodwill Ambassador with a special focus on UNICEF's Sports for Development program. In 2012, he met with UK Prime Minister David Cameron at 10 Downing Street to call for more action to help children affected by malnutrition around the world. In 2015, his tenth year as a UNICEF Ambassador, Beckham launched 7: The David Beckham UNICEF Fund to help protect children in danger. In June 2015 he visited Siem Reap in Cambodia, where he met with child victims of violence. Beckham has pledged his support for the Unite for Children, Unite Against AIDS campaign. He is a former patron of the Elton John AIDS Foundation. In 2013, he also donated all his £3.4 million salary taken from Paris Saint-Germain to two children's charities in France. Beckham has been supporting the charity named Help For Heroes for many years whose aim is to help soldiers injured in Iraq and Afghan wars. On 17 January 2007, Rebecca Johnstone, a 19-year-old cancer patient from Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, received a surprise phone call from Beckham. After the conversation, he sent her a Real Madrid jersey with his signature on it. Rebecca died on 29 January 2007. On 1 July 2007, Beckham appeared as a speaker at the Concert for Diana held at Wembley Stadium, London to celebrate the life of Princess Diana almost 10 years after her death. Proceeds from the concert went to Diana's charities as well as to charities of which her sons Princes William and Harry are patrons. Beckham is a founding member of the Malaria No More UK Leadership Council and helped launch the charity in 2009 with Andy Murray at Wembley Stadium. Beckham also appeared in a 2007 public service announcement for Malaria No More U.S., advertising the need for inexpensive bed nets. The TV spot aired in the United States on Fox Networks, including Fox Soccer Channel. In November 2014, Beckham designed a Paddington Bear statue, one of fifty created by various celebrities (including Emma Watson and Kate Moss) which were located around London prior to the release of the film Paddington. The statues were auctioned to raise funds for the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC). Since joining Major League Soccer, Beckham has been a very public advocate in the United States for related charities such as "MLS W.O.R.K.S." On 17 August 2007, he conducted a youth clinic in Harlem, along with other current and former MLS players. This was in advance of his first New York City area match the following day against the New York Red Bulls. That team's Jozy Altidore and Juan Pablo Ángel were also with Beckham, teaching skills to disadvantaged youth to benefit FC Harlem Lions. "We may be a small country, but we're a great one, too. The country of Shakespeare, Churchill, the Beatles, Sean Connery, Harry Potter. David Beckham's right foot. David Beckham's left foot, come to that." —Hugh Grant's character in the 2003 film Love Actually. Beckham never personally appeared in the 2002 film Bend It Like Beckham, except in archive footage. He and his wife wanted to make cameo appearances, but scheduling proved difficult, so the director used lookalike Andy Harmer instead. Beckham makes a cameo appearance with Zinedine Zidane and Raúl, in the 2005 film Goal!. Harmer also doubled for him in the party scene. Beckham himself appears in the sequel Goal II: Living the Dream in a larger role, when the film's lead character gets transferred to Real Madrid. This time, the story centres on the Real Madrid team, with other Madrid players also appearing on and off the pitch, alongside the fictional characters. Through the use of stock footage from the 2006 FIFA World Cup, Beckham appeared in Goal III: Taking on the World, which was released straight to DVD on 15 June 2009. In 2013, British business magazine Marketing Week wrote of his "somewhat limited acting skills". Through his friendship with Guy Ritchie, he has made two cameo appearances in Ritchie's films: as a projectionist in The Man from U.N.C.L.E. (based on the 1964 MGM television series of the same name), and as Trigger in King Arthur: Legend of the Sword. Beckham has played along to jokes about his voice. In a 2018 promo for Deadpool 2, Beckham is seen watching the first instalment of the film franchise in which Ryan Reynolds' character compares Beckham's voice to inhaling helium. Beckham is seen rolling his eyes at the voice jibe before receiving an apology text from Deadpool. Beckham answers his door to the antihero who presents him with milk and cookies, before Deadpool knocks again and has a bunch of helium-filled red balloons. Artist Sam Taylor-Johnson recorded Beckham sleeping in a hotel room in Madrid in January 2004 following a morning's training session with Real Madrid. The film was commissioned by the National Portrait Gallery in London. Includes FA Cup, Copa del Rey, Coppa Italia, Coupe de France Includes Football League Cup Appearances in UEFA Champions League Appearances in UEFA Cup Appearance in FA Charity Shield One appearance in UEFA Super Cup, one appearance in Intercontinental Cup, three appearances in FIFA Club World Championship Appearances in Supercopa de España Appearances in North American SuperLiga Appearances in MLS Cup Playoffs Appearance in CONCACAF Champions League Scores and results list England's goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Beckham goal. Manchester United Premier League: 1995–96, 1996–97, 1998–99, 1999–2000, 2000–01, 2002–03 FA Cup: 1995–96, 1998–99 FA Charity Shield: 1996, 1997 UEFA Champions League: 1998–99 Intercontinental Cup: 1999 Real Madrid La Liga: 2006–07 Supercopa de España: 2003 LA Galaxy MLS Cup: 2011, 2012 Western Conference (regular season): 2009, 2010, 2011 Western Conference (playoffs): 2009, 2011, 2012 Supporters' Shield: 2010, 2011 Paris Saint-Germain Ligue 1: 2012–13 England Tournoi de France: 1997 Individual FIFA World Player of the Year – Silver Award: 1999, 2001 Most assists in the Premier League: 1997–98, 1999–2000 (shared), 2000–01 Premier League Player of the Month: August 1996 PFA Young Player of the Year: 1996–97 FWA Tribute Award: 2008 Sir Matt Busby Player of the Year: 1996–97 England Player of the Year: 2003 ESM Team of the Year: 1998–99 UEFA Club Footballer of the Year: 1998–99 UEFA Club Midfielder of the Year: 1998–99 UEFA Team of the Year: 2001, 2003 Premier League 10 Seasons Awards (1992–93 to 2001–02): Domestic & Overall Team of the Decade Goal of the Decade (vs. Wimbledon, 17 August 1996) BBC Sports Personality of the Year: 2001 BBC Sports Personality of the Year Lifetime Achievement Award: 2010 Real Madrid Player of the Year: 2005–06 PFA Team of the Year: 1996–97 Premier League, 1997–98 Premier League, 1998–99 Premier League, 1999–2000 Premier League FIFA 100 ESPY Awards: Best Male Soccer Player: 2004 Best MLS Player: 2008, 2012 English Football Hall of Fame: 2008 Premier League Hall of Fame: 2021 MLS Comeback Player of the Year Award: 2011 PFA Team of the Century (1997–2007): 2007 International Federation of Football History & Statistics (IFFHS) Legends UEFA President's Award: 2018 Orders and special awards Officer of the Order of the British Empire by Queen Elizabeth II: 2003 United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) Goodwill Ambassador (2005–present) "Britain's Greatest Ambassador" – 100 Greatest Britons awards The Celebrity 100, number 15 – Forbes, 2007 Number 1 on the list of the 40 most influential men under the age of 40 in the UK – Arena, 2007 Time 100: 2008 Gold Blue Peter Badge winner, 2001 Do Something Athlete Award, 2011 AC Milan Hall of Fame Records First Englishman to win league titles in four countries (England, Spain, United States, France). First England player to score at three FIFA World Cups. First British footballer to play 100 UEFA Champions League games. Most free-kicks scored in the Premier League: 18. Most free-kicks scored in a Premier League season: 5 in 2000-01 Association football portal English football portal List of footballers with 100 or more UEFA Champions League appearances List of men's footballers with 100 or more international caps Designated Player Rule (Beckham Rule) List of select Jewish footballers Beckham, David (2002). David Beckham: My Side. HarperCollinsWillow. ISBN 978-0-00-715732-7. Beckham, David; Freeman, Dean (2001). Beckham: My World. Hodder & Stoughton. ISBN 978-0-340-79270-4. Beckham, David; Watt, Tom (2003). Beckham: Both Feet on the Ground. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-057093-4. Crick, Michael (2003). The Boss – The Many Sides of Alex Ferguson. Pocket Books. ISBN 978-0-7434-2991-7. Ferguson, Alex; McIlvanney, Hugh (1999). Managing My Life – My Autobiography. Hodder & Stoughton. ISBN 978-0-340-72855-0. Wahl, Grant (2009). The Beckham Experiment: How the World's Most Famous Athlete Tried to Conquer America. Crown. ISBN 978-0-307-40859-4. "Malaria No More". malarianomore.org.uk. Archived from the original on 19 December 2016. Retrieved 13 May 2015. "David Beckham". Paris Saint-Germain F.C. Archived from the original on 23 April 2013. "David Beckham: Overview". Premier League. Archived from the original on 15 April 2018. Retrieved 16 July 2022. "David Beckham". Major League Soccer. Archived from the original on 16 July 2022. Retrieved 16 July 2022. Wells, John C. (2008), Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.), Longman, ISBN 9781405881180 "David Beckham: Salford City directorship approved by Football Association". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 22 October 2020. Retrieved 24 June 2019. Hughes, Matt (16 May 2013). "David Beckham was one of best and most significant footballers of his generation". The Times. Archived from the original on 1 September 2019. Retrieved 1 September 2019. Lara, Lorenzo; Mogollo, Álvaro; Wilson, Emily (20 September 2018). "Messi and the other best freekick takers in football history". Marca. Spain. Archived from the original on 10 June 2020. Retrieved 1 September 2019. "Ranked! The 101 greatest football players of the last 25 years: full list". FourFourTwo (253 ed.). 13 February 2018. Archived from the original on 28 September 2021. Retrieved 22 December 2023. "David Beckham: his club and international career in stats". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 August 2017. Retrieved 20 September 2015. "Los Angeles Galaxy: Player bio". LA Galaxy. 9 September 2008. Archived from the original on 28 October 2008. Retrieved 9 September 2008. "Beckham joins Real Madrid". BBC Sport. 18 September 2003. Archived from the original on 26 February 2008. Retrieved 9 September 2008. "Beckham bows out with Liga title". BBC Sport. 17 June 2007. Archived from the original on 17 February 2021. Retrieved 9 September 2008. Bandini, Paolo (11 January 2007). "Beckham confirms LA Galaxy move". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 24 July 2008. Retrieved 10 May 2007. "David Beckham wears captain's armband, adds assist for PSG in likely career finale – Yahoo! Sports". Yahoo!. 18 May 2013. Archived from the original on 9 June 2013. Retrieved 3 October 2013. "Beckham's England dream realised". BBC Sport. 10 November 2000. Archived from the original on 17 February 2021. Retrieved 9 September 2008. "Beckham quits as England captain". BBC Sport. 2 July 2006. Archived from the original on 10 February 2009. Retrieved 9 September 2008. "Shakespeare 'a cultural icon' abroad". BBC News. 14 November 2016. Archived from the original on 13 September 2014. Retrieved 21 June 2018. Savell Reavis, Tracey (2014). The Life and Career of David Beckham: Football Legend, Cultural Icon. Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 158, 175. "The World's Best-Paid Soccer Players". Forbes. 17 April 2013. Archived from the original on 18 September 2014. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "David Beckham kids named most stylish celebrity children in the world – BelfastTelegraph.co.uk". The Belfast Telegraph. 9 April 2014. Archived from the original on 6 August 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2014. Daniel, Taylor (16 May 2013). "David Beckham exits as gracefully as one of his arcing crosses". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 September 2017. Retrieved 18 December 2014. "Pele's list of the greatest". BBC Sport. 4 March 2004. Archived from the original on 3 March 2015. Retrieved 13 November 2013. "David Beckham, Great Britain". ESPN. Archived from the original on 4 November 2014. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "2021 Inductees". Premier League. 20 May 2021. Archived from the original on 2 October 2022. Retrieved 21 May 2021. "David Beckham OBE, Goodwill Ambassador". UNICEF. 16 September 2015. Mazzei, Patricia (5 February 2014). "Soccer star David Beckham to bring MLS team to Miami". The Miami Herald. Archived from the original on 5 February 2014. Retrieved 5 February 2014. Hugman, Barry J., ed. (2003). The PFA Footballers' Who's Who 2003/2004. Harpenden: Queen Anne Press. p. 42. ISBN 978-1-85291-651-0. Culpepper, Chuck (9 July 2007). "BECKHAM – Working-class boy to Man U". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 7 February 2009. Retrieved 9 September 2008. Julie Burchill (2012). On Beckham". Random House, David Beckham's 29 Questions With Gary Neville | Overlap Xtra, archived from the original on 9 June 2022, retrieved 9 June 2022 Arts Council England, School puts the arts at the heart of learning, 21 October 2008 "American Idols". W magazine. 1 August 2007. Archived from the original on 14 February 2009. Retrieved 24 February 2009. Shukert, Rachel (17 April 2012). "David Beckham: I Consider Myself To Be Jewish". Tablet Magazine. Archived from the original on 7 March 2018. Retrieved 7 March 2018. Fifield, Dominic (14 July 2007). "Beckham launches into the Galaxy". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 27 January 2008. Retrieved 14 July 2007. Elgot, Jessica. "Jewish funeral for Beckham's grandfather". The Jewish Chronicle. Archived from the original on 6 November 2021. Retrieved 6 November 2021. Beckham, David; Watt, Tom (21 October 2004). Beckham: Both Feet on the Ground. Harper Collins. ISBN 978-0-06-057094-1. Archived from the original on 8 November 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2020. 20 Soccer Superstars. The Rosen Publishing Group. 2010. p. 8. Robinson, Tom (2008). David Beckham: Soccer's Superstar. Enslow Publishing, LLC. p. 20. "Becks' Brimsdown boost, article from 24 September 2004". The Football Association. Archived from the original on 11 October 2004. Retrieved 7 July 2007. "David Beckham – Rise of a Footballer". Archived from the original on 21 July 2014. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Why David Beckham Didn't Play for England Schoolboys..." YouTube. 21 April 2021. Retrieved 27 April 2021. Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine "David Beckham – Rise of a Footballer". The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy: Earth Edition. Not Panicking. 19 August 2003. Archived from the original on 27 September 2017. Retrieved 14 May 2016. "Champions League 1994/95 Standings". UEFA. Archived from the original on 25 August 2017. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Career in Shirts with David Beckham | Classic Football Shirts". YouTube. UK. 4 November 2023. Archived from the original on 10 November 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. "Beckham's pride at OBE". BBC Sport. 13 June 2003. Archived from the original on 5 August 2017. Retrieved 9 September 2008. Graham Hart (1995). "The Guinness football encyclopedia". p. 69. Guinness The most famous comment was Alan Hansen's "You can't win anything with kids", quoted in The Boss. Beckham scored United's goal (his first for them in the league) from a distance of around 30 metres. "Man Utd season review 1995/96". Archived from the original on 25 May 2014. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Euro 96 stars going strong". The Football Association. 21 January 2005. Archived from the original on 26 March 2005. Retrieved 16 July 2007. Gwen Russell (2011). "Arise Sir David Beckham: Footballer, Celebrity, Legend – The Biography of Britain's Best Loved Sporting Icon". John Blake Publishing, "100 Greatest Sporting Moments – Results". London: Channel 4. 2002. Archived from the original on 4 February 2002. Retrieved 8 August 2019. "David Beckham profile". ManUtd.com. Archived from the original on 21 October 2020. Retrieved 14 October 2020. "Remembering that David Beckham wonder goal 20 years on..." Archived from the original on 11 October 2018. Retrieved 10 October 2018. "English PFA Young Player of the Year Award". napit.co.uk. Archived from the original on 30 April 2015. Retrieved 16 July 2007. "7 great Manchester United number sevens". Independent. Archived from the original on 9 August 2019. Retrieved 9 August 2019. "Fixture List for 1997/98 Season". geocities.com. Archived from the original on 31 July 2009. Retrieved 16 July 2007. "Statistical Leaders – 1998". Premier League. Archived from the original on 24 June 2017. Retrieved 5 May 2018. "The Kings of Europe". BBC News. Archived from the original on 2 September 2017. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Manchester United Legends: David Beckham". Archived from the original on 7 October 2014. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Glorious United crowned champions". BBC Sport. 27 May 1999. Archived from the original on 3 April 2020. Retrieved 20 April 2020. "Rivaldo on top of the world". FIFA. Archived from the original on 2 December 2013. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Man Utd's flawed genius?". BBC News. 7 January 2000. Archived from the original on 18 April 2003. Retrieved 6 October 2005. "Man Utd celebrate in style". Archived from the original on 17 March 2004. Retrieved 12 September 2014. The Boss 469. Harris, Nick (6 September 2007). "Ferguson will never talk to the BBC again". The Independent. UK. Archived from the original on 28 May 2012. Retrieved 30 April 2009. "Statistical Leaders – 2001". Premier League. Archived from the original on 24 June 2017. Retrieved 5 May 2018. "Man Utd beats Deportivo 3–2 to make semifinals". Sports Illustrated. 10 April 2002. Archived from the original on 23 October 2012. "Did 'hatchet man' target Beckham?". ESPN Soccernet. 2 April 2002. Archived from the original on 16 July 2006. Retrieved 7 October 2005. "Beckham signs new contract". BBC Sport. 12 May 2002. Archived from the original on 19 July 2017. Retrieved 7 October 2005. "David Beckham profile". Premier League. Archived from the original on 15 April 2018. Retrieved 14 October 2020. "Man Utd play down Arsenal rift". BBC Sport. 19 February 2003. Archived from the original on 29 October 2017. Retrieved 27 August 2009. "Silvestre Reminisces About Ferguson's Infamous Boot-Throwing at Beckham Incident". Goal.com. 28 April 2009. Archived from the original on 2 October 2017. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "Revealed: What happened when Beckham was hit by a boot in the face". Metro. 28 April 2009. Archived from the original on 3 September 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2012. Bodinger, Katie (28 July 2008). "Why Ryan Giggs is more scared of his mum than Fergie". WalesOnline. Archived from the original on 13 October 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2012. Roach, Stuart (18 February 2003). "Will Becks give Man Utd the boot?". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 31 May 2006. Retrieved 6 October 2005. "Real unveil Beckham". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 9 February 2009. Retrieved 12 September 2014. Taylor, Daniel (11 June 2003). "Beckham to stay in Spain". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 3 January 2008. Retrieved 24 May 2006. Marcotti, Gabriele (12 June 2003). "Barcelona's bid for Man Utd star begs questions". CNNSI.com. Archived from the original on 9 July 2004. Retrieved 3 March 2011. Equivalent to, at the time, £25 million or US$41 million. "2001 – present – Real Madrid surpasses the century mark". Real Madrid CF. Archived from the original on 22 November 2019. Retrieved 5 November 2015. "Beckham joins Real Madrid". BBC Sport. 18 June 2003. Archived from the original on 25 July 2018. Retrieved 25 July 2010. "Real unveil Beckham". BBC Sport. 2 July 2003. Archived from the original on 2 October 2017. Retrieved 25 July 2010. Bolton, Sally (3 June 2003). "The number 23". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on 8 November 2023. Retrieved 9 June 2007. "Beckham-mania in China on Real Madrid's 2003 Asia tour". Marca. Archived from the original on 3 October 2021. Retrieved 3 October 2021. The Beckham Experiment, Grant Wahl, Three Rivers Press, New York, 2010 paperback edition, p.77 Wallace, Sam (12 January 2007). "Beckham rejected Milan and Inter to take Galaxy millions". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 5 December 2008. Retrieved 9 September 2008. "Beckham bags Watford man". BBC Sport. 31 October 2003. Archived from the original on 2 February 2009. Retrieved 13 August 2010. "'Beckham has won everyone's respect'". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 6 September 2018. "2003–04 Real Madrid". Bdfutbol.com. Archived from the original on 17 October 2017. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "Intruder alert for Victoria Beckham". Manchester Online. 20 July 2004. Archived from the original on 22 February 2006. Retrieved 9 October 2005. "FA wants explanation from Beckham". BBC Sport. 14 October 2004. Archived from the original on 31 May 2006. Retrieved 6 October 2005. "2005–2006 La Liga Stats". FBRef. Archived from the original on 10 October 2021. Retrieved 3 October 2021. Maul, Kimberly (11 January 2006). "David Beckham: Soccer Star and Book Judge". The Book Standard. Archived from the original on 12 December 2007. "Uncertainty over Beckham's future at Real Madrid". International Herald Tribune. 10 January 2007. Archived from the original on 20 February 2008. Retrieved 10 May 2007. "Real coach calls time on Beckham". BBC Sport. 13 January 2007. Archived from the original on 5 June 2009. Retrieved 13 January 2007. Bell, Jack (17 February 2007). "Real Madrid Club President Says a Mouthful". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2008. Retrieved 2 August 2010. "Beckham scores on Madrid return". BBC Sport. 10 February 2007. Archived from the original on 8 February 2012. Retrieved 10 February 2007. Talbot, Simon (21 February 2007). "Beckham shines to give Real a slight advantage". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2 October 2017. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Beckham bows out with Liga title". Archived from the original on 17 February 2021. Retrieved 12 September 2014. Millward, Robert (10 June 2007). "Agent: Beckham Sticking to Galaxy Deal". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 10 December 2012. Retrieved 14 August 2008. The Beckham Experiment, Grant Wahl, Three Rivers Press, New York, 2010 paperback edition, p.36 Maidment, Paul (7 July 2007). "Becks And Bucks". Forbes. Archived from the original on 1 November 2008. Retrieved 14 August 2008. "Beckham set to invade America". ESPN. Associated Press. 12 January 2007. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 16 January 2007. Halpin, Jason (1 October 2007). "Events surround MLS SuperDraft". MLSnet.com. Archived from the original on 27 May 2008. "Beckham will play for MLS' L.A. Galaxy in $250M deal". Sports Illustrated. 11 January 2007. Archived from the original on 25 July 2013. The Beckham Experiment, Grant Wahl, Three Rivers Press, New York, 2010 paperback edition, p.43 The Beckham Experiment, Grant Wahl, Three Rivers Press, New York, 2010 paperback edition, p.42 The Beckham Experiment, Grant Wahl, Three Rivers Press, New York, 2010 paperback edition, p.44 The Beckham Experiment, Grant Wahl, Three Rivers Press, New York, 2010 paperback edition, p.45 Kennedy, Paul (20 May 2013). "Beckham is MLS expansion story du jour". Soccer Business Insider. Archived from the original on 29 June 2017. Retrieved 21 May 2013. The Beckham Experiment, Grant Wahl, Three Rivers Press, New York, 2010 paperback edition, p.66 The Beckham Experiment, Grant Wahl, Three Rivers Press, New York, 2010 paperback edition, p.16 "Soccer Player Beckham Sparks $13M in Sales for Galaxy". New York Sun. 20 April 2007. Archived from the original on 17 August 2019. Retrieved 17 August 2019. The Beckham Experiment, Grant Wahl, Three Rivers Press, New York, 2010 paperback edition, p.67 The Beckham Experiment, Grant Wahl, Three Rivers Press, New York, 2010 paperback edition, pp.69–70 "David Beckham's First Match in Major League Soccer Live on ESPN Saturday, 21 July". ESPN. 5 July 2007. Archived from the original on 24 December 2008. Retrieved 14 July 2007. The Beckham Experiment, Grant Wahl, Three Rivers Press, New York, 2010 paperback edition, Pp.68–70 The Beckham Experiment, Grant Wahl, Three Rivers Press, New York, 2010 paperback edition, Pp.85–87 Dure, Beau (12 August 2007). "Beckham makes MLS debut but Galaxy stumbles in D.C." USA Today. Archived from the original on 20 January 2008. Retrieved 15 August 2007. "Beckham takes captain's armband to great effect". ESPN Soccernet. 16 August 2007. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 17 August 2007. "Beckham begins Arsenal training". BBC Sport. 4 January 2008. Archived from the original on 7 January 2008. Retrieved 4 May 2009. "Beckham, Donovan propel L.A. past Quakes". ESPN Soccernet. 4 April 2008. Archived from the original on 8 April 2008. Retrieved 4 April 2008. Canales, Andrea. "ESPNsoccernet – MLS – Canales: Beckham shows scoring touch against Wizards". ESPN Soccernet. Archived from the original on 17 March 2009. Retrieved 13 November 2008. "Beckham to join Milan in January". BBC Sport. 30 October 2008. Archived from the original on 23 December 2008. Retrieved 30 October 2008. "Beckham Milan Update". Major League Soccer. 25 October 2008. Archived from the original on 28 October 2008. Retrieved 25 October 2008. Stevenson, Jonathan (14 February 2009). "How Beckham Conquered Milan". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 30 January 2022. Retrieved 10 March 2009. Bright, Richard (22 December 2008). "David Beckham officially unveiled in Milan". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 2 December 2012. "Intervista Sky Sport a Beckham all'intervallo di Milan-Udinese". Sky Sport 24. 21 December 2008. Retrieved 2 December 2012. Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine Agencies, Emily Benammar and (3 March 2009). "Milan never intended to play David Beckham". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "AS Roma 2–2 AC Milan". ESPN Soccernet. 11 January 2009. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 29 January 2009. Kington, Tom (12 January 2009). "Beckham proves a big draw but fails to make major impression on debut for Milan". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 24 May 2014. Retrieved 2 December 2012. Kington, Tom (18 January 2009). "Fans beg Kaka to stay but Pato is the hero in Milan victory". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 24 May 2014. Retrieved 2 December 2012. "Beckham scores first goal for AC Milan". ESPN Soccernet. 25 January 2009. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 8 March 2009. "Galaxy reject AC Milan's opening gambit for Becks". ESPN Soccernet. 7 February 2009. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 8 March 2009. "Beckham's future to be resolved on Friday?". ESPN Soccernet. 17 February 2009. Archived from the original on 19 February 2009. Retrieved 8 March 2009. Jones, Grahame L. (2 March 2009). "Beckham agrees to return to Galaxy in mid-July". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 3 March 2009. Retrieved 8 March 2009. Szczepanik, Nick (9 March 2009). "David Beckham 'dream' deal". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 9 March 2009. "Beckham booed by furious fans". BBC Sport. 20 July 2009. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 2 January 2010. "Two Blackouts and Two Goals Send Galaxy to M.L.S. Final". The New York Times. 14 November 2009. Archived from the original on 13 May 2011. Retrieved 17 November 2009. "Salt Lake beat L.A. Galaxy to MLS title". ESPN Soccernet. 23 November 2009. Archived from the original on 20 October 2012. Retrieved 23 November 2009. "David Beckham's loan move to Milan from LA Galaxy is confirmed". The Guardian. London. 2 November 2009. Archived from the original on 13 February 2014. Retrieved 1 May 2010. "David Beckham makes winning return for AC Milan". BBC Sport. 6 January 2010. Archived from the original on 30 January 2022. Retrieved 6 January 2010. Lyon, Sam (16 February 2010). "AC Milan 2–3 Man Utd". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 23 August 2017. Retrieved 14 March 2010. McNulty, Phil (10 March 2010). "Man Utd 4–0 AC Milan (agg 7–2)". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 22 May 2013. Retrieved 14 March 2010. McNulty, Phil (11 March 2010). "Beckham shows true colours". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 3 May 2021. Retrieved 13 March 2010. "England's David Beckham is injured playing for AC Milan". BBC Sport. 14 March 2010. Archived from the original on 15 March 2010. Retrieved 14 March 2010. "Beckham, stagione finita È sicuro: salta il Mondiale – Risultati e ultime notizie calcio e calciomercato". La Gazzetta dello Sport. 13 October 2010. Archived from the original on 20 April 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "Dr Sakari Orava Confirms David Beckham Will Make A Full Recovery From Achilles Tendon Injury". Goal.com. 15 March 2010. Archived from the original on 14 August 2011. Retrieved 21 January 2012. "David Beckham returns to action after Achilles injury". BBC Sport. 12 September 2010. Archived from the original on 8 November 2023. Retrieved 12 September 2010. "Beckham goal sends Galaxy top of Western Conference". ESPN Soccernet. 4 October 2010. Archived from the original on 16 February 2011. Retrieved 4 October 2010. "David Beckham helps LA Galaxy win Supporters' Shield". BBC Sport. 25 October 2010. Archived from the original on 28 October 2010. Retrieved 25 October 2010. "AEG blocked Becks switch". Sky Sports. 9 February 2011. Archived from the original on 14 March 2011. Retrieved 8 March 2011. "MLS Cup – Landon Donovan's goal powers Galaxy to third MLS title". ESPN. 21 November 2011. Archived from the original on 31 December 2011. Retrieved 21 January 2012. "Donovan, possession spark big win". ESPN Los Angeles. 15 May 2011. Archived from the original on 18 May 2011. Retrieved 15 May 2011. "Beckham scores from corner to give Galaxy victory". USA Today. 10 July 2011. Archived from the original on 10 September 2011. Retrieved 2 October 2011. Wahl, Grant (28 November 2011). "Hollywood Ending: If this was indeed David Beckham's final game in MLS, he went out in style, carrying the Galaxy to a championship and affirming the value of star power in America". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on 25 November 2011. Retrieved 25 November 2011. "David Beckham re-signs with LA Galaxy, LA Galaxy official website". Lagalaxy.com. 18 January 2012. Archived from the original on 9 February 2014. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "Beckham stays with LA Galaxy and signs two-year deal". BBC. 19 January 2012. Archived from the original on 22 January 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "Beckham Signs New 2-Year-Deal With LA Galaxy". ABC News. Archived from the original on 22 January 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2012. Kay, Simon (18 January 2012). "David Beckham signs new two-year LA Galaxy deal". Metro. Archived from the original on 21 June 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "President Obama teases David Beckham at White House". BBC Sport. 15 May 2012. Archived from the original on 18 May 2012. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "L.A. Galaxy Win MLS Cup 2012: Landon Donovan, Robbie Keane Score Goals in Win Over Dynamo". HuffPost. 2 December 2012. Archived from the original on 2 December 2012. Retrieved 3 December 2012. "David Beckham wins MLS Cup in final LA Galaxy match". BBC Sport. 2 December 2012. Archived from the original on 3 December 2012. Retrieved 3 December 2012. "David Beckham says MLS Cup will be his last match with L.A. Galaxy". 20 November 2012. Archived from the original on 23 November 2012. Retrieved 20 November 2012. Christenson, Marcus (20 November 2012). "David Beckham: MLS Cup final will be my last game for LA Galaxy". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 5 October 2013. Retrieved 22 November 2012. Smith, Ben (31 January 2013). "David Beckham set for Paris St Germain move". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 10 February 2014. Retrieved 3 October 2013. "David Beckham joins Paris St-Germain and will play for free". BBC Sport. 31 January 2013. Archived from the original on 1 February 2013. Retrieved 1 February 2013. "David Beckham calls his Paris St Germain debut 'perfect' as he helps to set up their win over Marseille". The Telegraph Sport. London. 25 February 2013. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 3 March 2013. Brassell, Andy (12 May 2013). "David Beckham's Paris St-Germain clinch French title". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 9 January 2016. Retrieved 12 September 2014. Chick, Alex (16 May 2013). "Football – David Beckham retires from football". Yahoo! Sport. Archived from the original on 16 May 2013. Retrieved 16 May 2013. "David Beckham to retire from football at end of season". BBC Sport. 16 May 2013. Archived from the original on 16 May 2013. Retrieved 16 May 2013. Sport, Telegraph (19 May 2013). "David Beckham, PSG's captain for his final match, bows out as a winner". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Beckham stands down". 2 July 2006. Archived from the original on 29 October 2007. Retrieved 14 July 2007. "Moldova 0 – England 3". englandstats.com. Archived from the original on 15 June 2011. Retrieved 16 June 2007. "From the Vault: recalling how England won Le Tournoi de France in 1997". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 10 June 2020. Retrieved 24 November 2019. "England in World Cup 1998 Squad Records". englandfootballonline.com. Archived from the original on 5 December 2017. Retrieved 10 June 2007. "Beckham Blasts Hoddle". Daily Dispatch. 29 June 1998. Archived from the original on 14 May 2009. Retrieved 5 October 2005. "England wins 2–0 to gain 2nd-round match with Argentina". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on 29 May 2008. Retrieved 25 May 2014. Winter, Henry (1 July 1998). "World Cup 1998; Argentina 2 England 2, Argentina win 4–3 on pens: match report". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 25 March 2013. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Long-awaited revenge: The Netherlands pay back controversial loss to Argentina". Sports Illustrated. 4 July 1998. Archived from the original on 1 January 2012. Retrieved 9 June 2012. "Simeone admits trying to get Beckham sent off". Rediff Sports. 19 May 2002. Archived from the original on 19 February 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2005. "Beckham's Darkest Hour". Article on official UEFA website. Archived from the original on 12 January 2006. Retrieved 6 October 2005. A reference to Brooklyn "Leader – Play games behind closed doors". New Statesman. 26 June 2000. Archived from the original on 27 November 2011. Retrieved 4 October 2005. "Media sympathy for Beckham's gesture". BBC Sport. 14 June 2000. Archived from the original on 31 May 2006. Retrieved 4 October 2005. "The Amazing David Beckham Goal That Sent England to the 2002 World Cup". The Atlantic. Retrieved 23 May 2014 "Beckham quits as England captain". BBC Sport. 2 July 2006. Archived from the original on 10 February 2009. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "England reach World Cup finals". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 27 December 2007. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Figo best in world". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 2 February 2003. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "England's revenge". BBC Sport. 7 June 2002. Archived from the original on 6 January 2018. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Brazil end England's dream". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 12 December 2017. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Portugal break England hearts". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 17 April 2009. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "David Beckham, Goodwill Ambassador". UNICEF official website. Archived from the original on 1 November 2010. Retrieved 9 October 2005. "England 1–0 Ecuador". BBC Sport. 25 June 2006. Archived from the original on 8 March 2008. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "England 0–0 Portugal". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 31 December 2008. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Portugal sink England on Penalties". CNN. 1 July 2006. Archived from the original on 6 April 2023. Retrieved 12 September 2014. This was an error on Beckham's part – he had played 94 times for England by this stage. "Terry named new England skipper". BBC Sport. 10 August 2006. Archived from the original on 23 August 2006. Retrieved 10 August 2006. "McLaren ends Beckham England era". Archived from the original on 13 September 2007. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Three's the magic number". The Football Association. 6 June 2007. Archived from the original on 9 May 2008. Retrieved 9 June 2007. "Becks and England suffer Wembley woe". ESPN Soccernet. 22 August 2007. Archived from the original on 23 October 2012. Retrieved 4 May 2009. "Beckham dismisses retirement talk". BBC Sport. 21 November 2007. Archived from the original on 4 May 2010. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "Beckham acknowledges lack of fitness". Fox Sports. 28 February 2008. Archived from the original on 2 March 2008. Retrieved 1 March 2008. "Beckham to start in Paris for 100th cap". CNN. 26 March 2008. Archived from the original on 29 March 2008. Retrieved 26 March 2008. "Hart & Jagielka in England Squad". BBC Sport. 11 May 2008. Archived from the original on 8 June 2009. Retrieved 11 May 2008. Veal, Jonathan (26 March 2020). "From Golden Generation to golden boots, remembering David Beckham's 100th England cap". The Independent. Archived from the original on 1 April 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2020. "Capello names Beckham as captain for T&T friendly". Fox Sports. 31 May 2008. Archived from the original on 12 July 2008. Retrieved 31 May 2008. "Report: Spain vs England – International Friendly". ESPN Soccernet. 11 February 2009. Archived from the original on 15 February 2009. Retrieved 4 May 2009. Fletcher, Paul (28 March 2009). "International football as it happened". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 4 April 2009. Retrieved 4 May 2009. "David Beckham has no England future, says Fabio Capello". BBC Sport. 11 August 2010. Archived from the original on 9 April 2022. Retrieved 12 August 2010. "David Beckham set to be included in provisional Team GB Olympic squad". The Independent. Archived from the original on 4 October 2017. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Team GB: David Beckham left out for football reasons – Stuart Pearce". BBC Sport. 2 July 2012. Archived from the original on 13 April 2015. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Ranking the 16 Greatest Free-Kick Takers of All Time". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 14 October 2020. "Most goals via free-kicks in football history". Sports Adda. 7 September 2023. Archived from the original on 25 March 2023. Retrieved 8 September 2023. "Greatest Ever: Football: Top 10 Right-Midfielders of All Time". BleacherReport. Archived from the original on 10 May 2023. Retrieved 10 May 2023. "Kings of the free-kick". FIFA. Archived from the original on 17 June 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2014. "Manchester United Legends – David Beckham". manutdzone.com. Archived from the original on 18 August 2008. Retrieved 28 May 2007. "England – Who's Who: David Beckham". ESPN FC. 3 September 2002. Archived from the original on 10 June 2020. Retrieved 10 April 2020. Atkinson, Ron; Campbell, Sol (23 February 2001). "Famous five for the heart of Eriksson's new England". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 5 June 2020. Welch, Ben (11 June 2013). "Gary Neville: Forge a menacing full-back and winger partnership". FourFourTwo. Archived from the original on 10 February 2016. Retrieved 18 January 2016. Williams, Richard (2 February 2011). "Farewell to Gary Neville, the finest right-back of his generation". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 25 June 2016. Retrieved 19 May 2016. Taylor, Daniel (18 February 2010). "Milan wrong to play David Beckham in central midfield says Sir Alex Ferguson". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 24 November 2021. Retrieved 2 April 2020. Smyth, Rob (19 August 2016). "Golden Goal: David Beckham for Man Utd against Wimbledon (1996)". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 10 June 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2020. Okwonga, Musa (19 March 2013). "Could Beckham have played in the middle?". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 11 June 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2020. Tighe, Sam (27 November 2012). "David Beckham: Tactical Evolution of Man Utd, Real Madrid and L.A. Galaxy Star". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 10 June 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2020. Marshall, Adam. "Becks nominates best position". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 10 June 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2020. "Becks' defending masterclass". BBC Sport. 2 March 2004. Archived from the original on 15 April 2021. Retrieved 2 April 2020. "David Beckham: 50 interesting facts you might not know about the ex-Man Utd & Real Madrid midfielder". Goal.com. 21 June 2019. Archived from the original on 11 June 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2020. Holt, Oliver (13 June 1998). "Beckham faces axe for England's Cup opener". The Irish independent. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 30 June 2021. "Hit the net with David Beckham". BBC Sport. 5 March 2004. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 2 April 2020. O'Keefe, Jamie (23 September 2012). "Manchester United's 7 Most Spot-on Penalty Takers Under Alex Ferguson". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 10 June 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2020. "Improve your control with Becks". BBC Sport. 12 October 2004. Archived from the original on 15 April 2021. Retrieved 2 April 2020. "How to find space with Becks". BBC Sport. 2 March 2004. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 2 April 2020. Reed, Nigel (17 May 2013). "David Beckham: Soccer and Spice". CBC Sports. Archived from the original on 16 June 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2020. "The Top 20". The Telegraph. 10 March 2004. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Campbell, Paul (17 May 2013). "David Beckham: product of Sir Alex Ferguson's school of hard graft". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 5 October 2013. Retrieved 3 October 2013. Barclay, Patrick (30 December 2000). "Ferguson happy as Beckham takes a great leap forward". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 18 December 2014. Hayward, Paul (26 April 2003). "Zidane still the master". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 25 October 2019. "Coach says Beckham won't play again for Real Madrid". International Herald Time. 13 January 2007. Archived from the original on 20 June 2007. Retrieved 28 May 2007. "Beckham is best says Roberto Carlos". UEFA.com. 9 January 2009. Archived from the original on 11 March 2022. Retrieved 17 September 2022. Jackson, Jamie (16 May 2013). "David Beckham retires: 'He was a leader, people followed him'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 11 March 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2020. "David Beckham in 40 quotes". The Telegraph. 6 September 2018. "Beckham: Help or hindrance?". BBC Sport. 11 January 2000. Archived from the original on 28 January 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2020. Harris, Nick (28 September 1999). "Football: FA summons Beckham over poor discipline". The Independent. Archived from the original on 18 April 2023. Retrieved 2 April 2020. "Beckham red card but joy for Sven". The Times. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Wayne Rooney's controversial foul vs. West Ham not his first gaffe". ESPN FC. 27 September 2014. Archived from the original on 11 June 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2020. "STATBOX-David Beckham's career red cards". Reuters. 17 February 2007. Archived from the original on 11 June 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2020. "ESPN player statistics: David Beckham". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 2 June 2013. Retrieved 29 April 2013. "David Beckham hits new low at LA Galaxy with red card in 17th minute". The Gusrdian. 16 August 2009. Archived from the original on 10 June 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2020. "David Beckham's only MLS Red Card – LA Galaxy vs Seattle Sounders 2009". MLS Soccer. 29 April 2013. Archived from the original on 30 July 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2020. "David Beckham sent off after six minutes in PSG victory". BBC Sport. 29 April 2013. Archived from the original on 16 October 2013. Retrieved 3 October 2013. Mondal, Subhankar (10 August 2008). "Debate: Is David Beckham Truly Great?". Goal.com. Archived from the original on 11 June 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2020. Richman, Darren (2 May 2015). "David Beckham in 40 quotes". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 June 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2020. Rice, Simon (22 September 2015). "Sir Alex Ferguson claims he managed just four world class players in 26 years at Manchester United". The Independent. Archived from the original on 2 January 2018. Retrieved 13 April 2020. Lowe, Sid (19 June 2007). "Spain bids farewell to Beckham". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 2 April 2020. Smyth, Rob (14 February 2014). "The Joy of Six: football crosses". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 April 2020. Retrieved 3 April 2020. "California Branch of David Beckham Academy Closes". Goal. 28 November 2010. Archived from the original on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 28 November 2010. "Beckham academy 'likely to close'". BBC Sport. 27 November 2009. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 27 November 2009. "David Beckham launches Miami Major League Soccer team". BBC Sport. 29 January 2018. Archived from the original on 5 May 2020. Retrieved 12 February 2018. Lerner, Keven; Phillips, Doug. "Inter Miami: David Beckham's MLS team unveils name and crest". Sun-Sentinel. Archived from the original on 12 October 2018. Retrieved 5 September 2018. "Inter Miami: David Beckham's MLS team is called Club Internacional de Futbol Miami". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 6 September 2018. Retrieved 5 September 2018. "LAFC vs. Inter Miami CF – Football Match Report – March 1, 2020 – ESPN". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on 2 March 2020. Retrieved 2 March 2020. "David Beckham to become shareholder of National League club Salford". BBC Sport. 23 January 2019. Archived from the original on 1 March 2021. Retrieved 23 January 2019. "David Beckham: Salford City directorship approved by Football Association". BBC Sport. 31 January 2019. Archived from the original on 22 October 2020. Retrieved 1 February 2019. Roberts, Alison (11 April 2005). "David and Victoria Beckham: Can they mend it like Beckhams?". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 28 December 2007. Retrieved 3 September 2018. Wills, Juliette (21 July 2013). "Victoria Beckham owes me everything". La Monda. Archived from the original on 3 September 2018. Retrieved 3 September 2018. "American Idols". W. 1 January 2010. Archived from the original on 14 February 2009. Retrieved 3 September 2018. Pryor, Fiona (12 July 2007). "Will Brand Beckham break America?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 11 March 2009. Retrieved 3 September 2018. "David and Victoria tie the knot". BBC News. 5 July 1999. Archived from the original on 3 March 2008. Retrieved 3 September 2018. "Sun pips OK! to Posh wedding photos". BBC News. 6 July 1999. Archived from the original on 6 July 2006. Retrieved 25 May 2006. "Wedded spice". BBC News. 5 July 1999. Archived from the original on 7 September 2017. Retrieved 2 December 2005. "David Beckham Biography: Soccer Player (1975–)". Biography.com (FYI / A&E Networks). Archived from the original on 11 September 2016. Retrieved 1 September 2016. "Beckhams name their new son Romeo". The Telegraph. 11 December 2016. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. "Beckhams celebrate birth of Cruz". BBC News. Archived from the original on 17 October 2007. Retrieved 11 December 2016. Byrne, Alla and Perry, Simon "Victoria and David Beckham Welcome a Daughter". People. 10 July 2011. Archived from the original on 17 September 2016. Retrieved 10 July 2011. "Victoria and David Beckham Marriage Profile". Marriage.about.com. Archived from the original on 5 February 2012. Retrieved 13 November 2008. "Victoria Beckham Shares Photos From Cruz And Harper's Star-Studded Christening". HuffPost UK. 22 December 2019. Archived from the original on 27 October 2022. Retrieved 27 October 2022. "David Beckham and son Brooklyn 'shaken' after car crash following Arsenal training session". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 29 November 2014. "Brooklyn Beckham set to be released by Arsenal already". Eurosport. Archived from the original on 8 November 2023. Retrieved 14 November 2015. "50 Best Dressed Men in Britain 2015". GQ. 5 January 2015. Archived from the original on 7 January 2015. Bartlett, Nicola (7 March 2014). "Beckham's first home up for sale". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 18 June 2015. Retrieved 18 June 2015. Stuart, Julia (31 July 2001). "Beckingham Palace, our lovely home". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 28 December 2007. Retrieved 3 September 2018. Hill, Patrick (15 March 2014). "Inside 'Beckingham Palace': David and Victoria's mansion bought by insurance tycoon for £11.3million". Daily Mirror. UK. Archived from the original on 5 August 2018. Retrieved 27 August 2018. Smout, Alistair (6 February 2017). "Beckileaks' email furor puts brand Beckham on the back foot". Reuters. Archived from the original on 8 July 2019. Retrieved 8 July 2019. Known by the nickname 'Golden Balls', the east-London born midfielder shot to fame with Manchester United thanks to his expert free-kick taking and crossing ability. Paterniti (17 March 2016). "David Beckham on Retirement, Family Life, and Protecting His Kids". GQ. Archived from the original on 8 July 2019. Retrieved 8 July 2019. That's the way it's always been with Posh and Golden Balls, as the British press is fond of calling Beckham, after Victoria revealed the nickname in a long-ago interview. Hewett, Emily (22 March 2014). "Victoria Beckham at her finest: Why is David Beckham affectionately known as Golden Balls?". Metro. Archived from the original on 8 July 2019. Retrieved 8 July 2019. Praising her hubby on how he'd managed to turn his reputation around following the 1998 World Cup, which saw him forfeit England's chances after he was sent off for kicking an Argentinian footballer, she added: 'I call him Golden Balls now.' Frith, Maxine (3 April 2006). "Beckham reveals his battle with obsessive disorder". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 5 June 2008. Retrieved 28 August 2012. "David Beckham on his wait to see the Queen lying in state". BBC News. Archived from the original on 16 September 2022. Retrieved 16 September 2022. Sansome, Jessica (16 September 2022). "David Beckham dons flat cap and suit as he queues for Queen lying in state". Manchester Evening News. Archived from the original on 16 September 2022. Retrieved 16 September 2022. "Beckham story is tabloids' dream". BBC News. 9 April 2004. Archived from the original on 22 April 2009. Retrieved 4 May 2009. "Beckham flies back to Madrid from holiday". The Times. London. 7 April 2004. Archived from the original on 8 November 2023. Retrieved 4 May 2009. "Beckham to stay in Spain". BBC Sport. 20 May 2004. Archived from the original on 25 March 2006. Retrieved 7 October 2005. "David Beckham's lawyers serve $25 million writ on prostitute Irma Nici". The Daily Telegraph. 27 September 2010. Archived from the original on 26 September 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "David Beckham loses In Touch, Irma Nici lawsuit: Judge says cheating story is of public interest". Daily News. New York. 14 February 2011. Archived from the original on 22 February 2016. Retrieved 11 January 2016. "David Beckham loses appeal to sue magazine over prostitute Irma Nici's false claims". news.com.au. 17 March 2013. Archived from the original on 7 February 2016. Retrieved 11 January 2016. "Beckham banned for using phone in Bentley". BBC News. 9 May 2019. Archived from the original on 9 May 2019. Retrieved 9 May 2019. "A Guide to David Beckham's 60 Plus Tattoos". menshealth.com. 6 May 2021. Archived from the original on 2 June 2021. Retrieved 30 May 2021. "Beckham's tattoo misspelt". BBC News. 28 November 2000. Archived from the original on 15 August 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2013. Beckham, David (2010). "David Beckham: My Side". HarperCollins Jenkins, John (22 June 2018). "Every David Beckham tattoo explained – from Victoria's to the mistake". Daily Mirror. Archived from the original on 11 June 2020. Retrieved 30 March 2020. Haynes, Gavin (1 May 2018). "Hooked on ink: is it possible to be 'addicted' to tattoos?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 19 October 2018. Retrieved 19 October 2018. Murray, Tom. "David Beckham 'feels absolutely no pain,' according to his tattoo artist". Insider. Retrieved 30 March 2020. "David Beckham: a history in ads". Marketing Week. Archived from the original on 11 July 2021. Retrieved 10 July 2021. "Meet the metrosexual". Salon. Archived from the original on 13 November 2008. Retrieved 13 November 2008. "America – meet David Beckham". Marksimpson.com. 13 July 2007. Retrieved 13 November 2008. Hogan, Michael (17 May 2013). "David Beckham: a career in hairstyles – in pictures". The Guardian. Retrieved 4 April 2020. Kilbane, Brennan (23 August 2018). "How to Get Every David Beckham Haircut". GQ. Retrieved 4 April 2020. Masters, James (17 May 2013). "Beckham: The man who broke football's gay taboo?". CNN. Retrieved 24 May 2021. "'A gay icon no more': will David Beckham's Qatar role kill his brand?". The Guardian. 18 November 2022. Retrieved 19 November 2022. "'A gay icon no more': will David Beckham's Qatar role kill his brand?". The Guardian. 18 November 2022. Retrieved 19 November 2022. Mngqosini, Sammy; Nabbi, Zayn (14 November 2022). "David Beckham's 'status as a gay icon will be shredded' if he continues as Qatar World Cup ambassador says British comedian". CNN. Retrieved 20 November 2022. Armstrong, Jeremy (18 November 2022). "David Beckham breaks silence on £150m Qatar ambassador role as criticism grows". The Mirror. Retrieved 19 November 2022. "Joe Lycett video appears to show him shred £10,000". BBC News. Retrieved 20 November 2022. Lewis, Isobel (20 November 2022). "Joe Lycett 'shreds £10,000' following David Beckham ultimatum – live". The Independent. Retrieved 20 November 2022. Glynn, Paul (21 November 2022). "Joe Lycett did not shred £10k in David Beckham Qatar protest". BBC News. Retrieved 21 November 2022. "David Beckham's career by the numbers". E!. 16 May 2013. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "The Beckhams: American Idols: W Feature Story on Style.com". Style.com. Archived from the original on 18 July 2008. "2003 Year-End Google Zeitgeist". Retrieved 9 October 2005. "2004 Year-End Google Zeitgeist". Retrieved 9 October 2005. "Britney Spears tops Noughties web search list". The Telegraph. 21 December 2009. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 17 May 2014. "The Beckhams go to Hollywood". The Scotsman. "NBC.com – Victoria Beckham Coming To America". NBC.com. Archived from the original on 14 July 2007. Eller, Claudia (19 July 2007). "Hollywood breathlessly awaits Beckhams". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 3 April 2009. Retrieved 4 May 2009. "The face of ... Ten celebrities who have earned big bucks from endorsements". The Irish Independent. 28 January 2014. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Adidas 'Kicking it' ad sails into top 50". The Guardian. Retrieved 2 November 2022. "The 100 Greatest TV Ads". Channel 4. 29 August 2004. Retrieved 2 November 2022. "Pepsi, Looking for Economies, Splits With the Expensive David Beckham". CBS News. 3 January 2009. "David Beckham Endorsing Disney". CBS News. 26 January 2007. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Maserati and David Beckham: Global Ambassador | Maserati". www.maserati.com. Archived from the original on 6 April 2022. Retrieved 18 September 2021. "Maserati et David Beckham inaugurent la collection Fuoriserie Essentials". Motor Legend. Retrieved 23 June 2023. "Maserati dévoile sa première collection automobile avec David Beckham". BFM TV. Retrieved 23 June 2023. Bramwell, Tom (12 September 2002). "Go!Go! Beckham! Adventure on Soccer Island Review". Eurogamer. Retrieved 8 June 2009. Varanini, Giancarlo (14 August 2002). "David Beckham Soccer Review". GameSpot. Archived from the original on 28 August 2009. Retrieved 8 June 2010. Reynolds, John (18 August 2010). "EA lands Beckham for brand ambassador role". Marketing. Retrieved 17 May 2014. "David Beckham: his club and international career in stats". The Guardian. 1 July 2015. Grant, Katie; Papasian, John (2 July 2015). Duff, Oliver (ed.). "Premium cover". The i. No. 1435. p. 2. "GOING OUT ON A LIMB – BODY PARTS AND OTHERS". Lloyd's.com. Archived from the original on 4 July 2015. Retrieved 3 July 2015. Hart, Simon (16 May 2013). "David Beckham retires: key role in London 2012 Olympic bid is praised by Lord Coe". The Daily Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 7 September 2018. Knight, Tom (17 June 2008). "London rap troupe fly flag at Beijing Olympics". The Daily Telegraph. London. ISSN 0307-1235. OCLC 49632006. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 5 December 2017. "David Beckham 'proud' of Olympics 2012 role". BBC Sport. 28 July 2012. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Beckham flies to Afghanistan to boost British troops' morale". Sports.gaeatimes.com. 22 May 2010. Archived from the original on 23 July 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "Beckham visits British troops in Afghanistan". Sports.gaeatimes.com. 23 May 2010. Archived from the original on 23 July 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "Beckham targetted by Taliban in Afghanistan?". Rediff.com. 24 May 2010. Retrieved 10 June 2012. Kumar, Anoop (24 May 2010). "Taliban targeted Beckham in Afghanistan!". MyNews Interactive Media Co. Archived from the original on 1 March 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "David Beckham named as global ambassador for Chinese football". The Independent. Reuters. 4 March 2013. Retrieved 17 May 2014. "David Beckham stars in Sky Sports TV advert – video – Showbiz News". Digital Spy. 14 July 2013. Retrieved 3 October 2013. "Sport Relief 2014: Watch David Beckham in Peckham in Only Fools and Horses special". The Independent. Retrieved 12 September 2014. "Cristiano Ronaldo overtakes Shakira as Facebook's most 'liked' person". Yahoo!. 10 February 2017. "The Most Followed Instagram Profiles". Trackalytics.com. Archived from the original on 1 February 2020. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Top 100 Instagram Users by Followers- Socialblade Instagram Stats – Instagram Statistics". Socialblade. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Why David Beckham backing Remain could spark a constitutional crisis". The Independent. 21 June 2016. Retrieved 27 November 2018. "David Beckham appointed Ambassadorial President of British Fashion Council". Sky News. Retrieved 14 May 2018. "David Beckham: 2026 World Cup in North America would be 'very special". ESPN. 13 June 2018. "David Beckham: LA Galaxy unveil statue before MLS season opener". 3 March 2019. Retrieved 5 March 2019. "James Corden pranks David Beckham with hideous fake statue before official LA Galaxy unveiling". London Evening Standard. Retrieved 27 March 2019. "Please Enjoy David Beckham Adorably Defending His Lego Obsession: "I Am a Little Kid"". popsugar.com. 27 February 2020. Seck, Tobias (25 June 2020). "David Beckham Co-Owned Guild Esports Launches, Seeks $31M Investment". The Esports Observer. Retrieved 3 April 2021. "Beckham will earn more from FIFA 2021 than he did at Man Utd and PSG". as.com. 22 November 2020. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 23 November 2020. "David Beckham buys stake in vehicle electrification firm". The Guardian. 3 June 2021. "David Beckham Calls for Action on Child Stunting". UNICEF. 16 September 2015. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. "Elton John AIDS Foundation patrons". Ejaf.com. Archived from the original on 12 October 2013. Retrieved 3 December 2012. "David Beckham". The Independent. Independent. 14 June 2013. "Brand David Beckham". LinkedIn.com. LinkedIn Corporation. Radley, Scott (26 January 2007). "To Rebecca, with love". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on 5 February 2007. Retrieved 2 February 2007. Davies, Caroline (July 2007). "Princes open Wembley Diana concert with joke". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 18 May 2015. "What is the Concert for Diana?". BBC. 13 August 2015. "Diana concert a 'perfect tribute'". BBC News. Retrieved 12 April 2012. "David Beckham: Fight Malaria by Donating a $10 Bed Net". (25 April 2007). Retrieved 4 May 2009 "Why Paddington Bear Statues Have Taken Over London". Condé Nast. Retrieved 9 June 2022. Murphy, Shaunna (3 November 2014). "Emma Watson Designed A Paddington Bear For Charity And It's Freaking Adorable". MTV. Retrieved 9 June 2022. "Video: Juan Pablo Angel, David Beckham to Assist MLS W.O.R.K.S." paddocktalk.com. 18 August 2007. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 21 August 2007. Fitch, Rachel (30 April 2007). "Posh and Becks look-alikes try their luck in LA". The Argus. Campbell, Denis (3 March 2002). "There's only two David Beckhams". The Guardian. "Andy Harmer ~ BeckhamLookalike.com". BeckhamLookalike.com. Archived from the original on 1 May 2007. Goal! 2: Living the Dream ... at IMDb "David Beckham". IMDb. Retrieved 13 November 2008. "Guy Ritchie Backs David Beckham As An Actor". HuffPost. 24 May 2016. "David Beckham's Film Career Takes Another Step With First Clip Of Him In 'King Arthur: Legend Of The Sword'". HuffPost. 9 May 2017. "Deadpool sorry for joking about Beckham's voice". Sky News. 13 June 2018. Higgins, Charlotte (27 April 2004). "Video portrait captures Beckham asleep". The Guardian. Retrieved 8 November 2023. "Five things we learned from Beckham documentary". BBC Sport. Retrieved 8 October 2023. "Watch Beckham". www.netflix.com. Retrieved 8 October 2023. "David Beckham". Stretfordend.co.uk. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "David Beckham". MLSsoccer.com. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "David Beckham". National Football Teams. Benjamin Strack-Zimmermann. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "David Robert Joseph Beckham – Century of International Appearances". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. 29 October 2009. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "David Beckham Bio, Stats, News – Football/Soccer –". ESPN Soccernet. Archived from the original on 28 November 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "David Beckham". Englandstats.com. Retrieved 19 June 2018. "D.Beckham". Soccerway. Retrieved 19 June 2018. "David Beckham: Overview". Premier League. Retrieved 27 September 2018. "Career Statistics". Genius.com. 18 July 2018. Campbell, Paul & Lacey, David (25 June 2013). "From the Vault: Recalling How England Won Le Tournoi de France in 1997". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 3 December 2022. Pierrend, José Luis. "FIFA Awards". Rec.Sports.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016. Retrieved 2 August 2015. "Premier League Player Stats - Assists". premierleague.com. Retrieved 19 May 2022. Select season in the "Filter by season" drop-down menu. "Gerrard named player of the year". BBC Sport. 23 April 2006. Retrieved 2 August 2015. "Football writers honour United duo". Football Writers' Association. 14 October 2011. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 2 August 2015. "Sir Matt Busby Player of the Year Award". MUFCInfo.com. Retrieved 2 August 2015. "Past Winners: David Beckham". The Football Association. 12 December 2012. Retrieved 2 August 2015. "David Beckham". UEFA. 5 March 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2015. Davies, Christopher (15 April 2003). "The Premiership elite selection 1993–2003". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 12 November 2012. Retrieved 2 October 2009. "David Beckham receives Lifetime Achievement award". BBC Sport. 18 December 2010. Retrieved 2 August 2015. Hugman, Barry J., ed. (1997). The 1997–98 Official PFA Footballers Factfile. Queen Anne Press. p. 317. ISBN 978-1-85291-581-0. Hugman, Barry J., ed. (1998). The 1998–99 Official PFA Footballers Factfile. Queen Anne Press. p. 352. ISBN 978-1-85291-588-9. Hugman, Barry J., ed. (1999). The 1999–2000 Official PFA Footballers Factfile. AFS. p. 352. ISBN 978-1-85291-607-7. Hugman, Barry J., ed. (2000). The 2000–2001 Official PFA Footballers Factfile. AFS. p. 384. ISBN 978-1-85291-626-8. "FIFA's top 100 list". Rediff.com. Retrieved 13 November 2008. "ESPYS 2008". ESPN. Retrieved 13 November 2008. "Robbie Keane wins Best MLS Player at 2015 ESPY Awards". LAGalaxy.com. MLS. 16 July 2015. Retrieved 2 August 2015. "David Beckham". National Football Museum. Archived from the original on 29 May 2015. Retrieved 2 August 2015. "Beckham voted into Premier League Hall of Fame". Premier League. 20 May 2021. Retrieved 20 May 2021. "LA's Beckham named Comeback Player of the Year". Major League Soccer. 14 November 2011. Archived from the original on 14 July 2015. Retrieved 14 November 2011. "Team of the Century: 1997–2007 – the Premiership's finest of the last decade". GiveMeFootball.com. Give Me Football. 5 September 2007. Archived from the original on 21 October 2008. Retrieved 17 May 2016. "IFFHS announce the 48 football legend players". IFFHS. 25 January 2016. Retrieved 14 September 2016. "David Beckham: Uefa to honour former England captain with President's Award". UEFA. Retrieved 21 August 2018. "100 great British heroes". BBC News. Retrieved 21 March 2014. "The Celebrity 100". Forbes. 14 June 2007. Retrieved 17 July 2007. "Britain's original style magazine – for men". Arena. Archived from the original on 21 May 2008. Retrieved 13 November 2008. "David Beckham: Soccer's Metrosexual". Time. Archived from the original on 22 January 2007. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "David Beckham: Do Something Athlete Award Winner!". Archived from the original on 3 October 2011. Retrieved 12 June 2012. "A.C. Milan Hall of Fame: David Beckham". A.C. Milan. Retrieved 12 May 2017. "Beckham, Ronaldo, Ward-Prowse & most Premier League free kick goals". Goal. 25 April 2022. "Tyler's stats: Mohamed Salah scores 50th Premier League for Liverpool". Sky Sports. 12 April 2019. Wahl, Grant (31 October 2011). "Beckham's Last Stand: In the fifth and final year of his MLS contract, he's back at the top of his game at last. Now, as the 2011 playoffs begin, he and the Galaxy look to stamp his American experiment a success by winning a championship". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved 28 October 2011. 'In [Major League Soccer] his ability to hold the ball in that position and pass makes him unique,' says [coach Bruce] Arena. 'He's right in the middle of things. In every game, he touches the ball the most of any player.' Wikimedia Commons has media related to David Beckham. Wikiquote has quotations related to David Beckham. Official website David Beckham on Instagram David Beckham on TikTok David Beckham on Facebook David Beckham at ManUtd.com David Beckham at RealMadrid.com David Beckham at Major League Soccer David Beckham at National-Football-Teams.com David Beckham – UEFA competition record (archived)  David Beckham – FIFA competition record (archived) David Beckham at Englandstats.com David Beckham – French league stats at Ligue 1 – also available in French David Beckham at Premier League Portals:  Association football  England