Year 101 (CI) was a common year starting on Friday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Traianus and Paetus (or, less frequently, year 854 Ab urbe condita). The denomination 101 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years. Trajan begins his fourth consulship. Emperor Trajan starts an expedition against Dacia, exceeding the limits of the Roman Empire set by Augustus. Second Battle of Tapae: Roman forces, led by Trajan, defeat the Dacian king Decebalus in Transylvania. Epictetus writes and publishes The Discourses of Epictetus (approximate date). January 13 – Lucius Aelius Caesar, Roman politician (d. 138) Felicitas of Rome, Christian female martyr (d. 165) Herodes Atticus, Greek rhetoritician (d. 177) Clement I, bishop of Rome (epistle to the Corinthians) (or 102 according to Roman Catholic tradition) Gan Ying, Chinese ambassador of the Han Dynasty Jia Kui, Chinese scholar and philosopher (b. AD 30) Silius Italicus, Roman politician and author of the Punica (annals of Hannibal during the Second Punic War) (b. c. AD 28) LeGlay, Marcel; Voisin, Jean-Louis; Le Bohec, Yann (2001). A History of Rome (Second ed.). Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell. p. 271. ISBN 0-631-21858-0. "De Imperatoribus Romanis". An Online Encyclopedia of Roman Emperors. Retrieved November 8, 2007. Because the Dacians represented an obstacle against Roman expansion in the east, in the year 101 the emperor Trajan decided to begin a new campaign against them. The first war began on 25 March 101 and the Roman troops, consisting of four principal legions (X Gemina, XI Claudia, II Traiana Fortis, and XXX Ulpia Victrix), defeated the Dacians. "Battle of Sarmizegetusa (Sarmizegetuza), A.D. 105: De Imperatoribus Romanis". An Online Encyclopedia of Roman Emperors. Retrieved November 8, 2007. Although the Dacians had been defeated, the emperor postponed the final siege for the conquering of Sarmizegetuza because his armies needed reorganization. Trajan imposed on the Dacians very hard peace conditions: Decebalus had to renounce claim to part of his kingdom, including the Banat, Tara Hategului, Oltenia, and Muntenia in the area south-west of Transylvania. He had also to surrender all the Roman deserters and all his war machines. At Rome, Trajan was received as a winner and he took the name of Dacicus, a title that appears on his coinage of this period. At the beginning of the year 103 A.D., there were minted coins with the inscription: IMP NERVA TRAIANVS AVG GER DACICVS. Jackson, Nicholas (2022). "First Dacian War". Trajan: Rome's Last Conqueror (1st ed.). UK: GreenHill Books. ISBN 978-1784387075.