An acronym, a type of abbreviation, is a word or name consisting of parts of the full name's words. Some authorities add that an acronym must be pronounced as a single word rather than individual letters, so considering NASA an acronym but not USA; the latter they instead call an initialism or alphabetism, for a string of initial letters which are pronounced individually. Acronyms commonly are formed from initials alone, such as NATO, FBI, YMCA, GIF, EMT, and PIN, but sometimes use syllables instead, as in Benelux (short for Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg), NAPOCOR (National Power Corporation), and TRANSCO (National Transmission Corporation). They can also be a mixture, as in radar (Radio Detection And Ranging) and MIDAS (Missile Defense Alarm System). Acronyms pronounced as words include SWAT and UNESCO, while ones pronounced as individual letters include CIA, TNT, NPC, BLM, and ATM. Some use elements of both, such as JPEG (JAY-peg), CSIS (SEE-sis), and IUPAC (I-U-pak). Some are not universally pronounced either way, but by speaker's preference or by context, such as SQL (either "see-kwel" or "ess-cue-el"). The broader sense of acronym, which includes terms pronounced as individual letters, is the word's original meaning and still in common use. Dictionary and style-guide editors dispute whether the term acronym can be legitimately applied to abbreviations which are not pronounced "as words," nor do they agree on acronyms' spacing, casing, and punctuation. The word acronym is formed from the Greek roots akro-, meaning 'height, summit, or tip', and -nym, 'name'.[unreliable source] This neoclassical compound appears to have originated in German, with attestations for the German form Akronym appearing as early as 1921. Citations in English date to a 1940 translation of a novel by the German writer Lion Feuchtwanger. Whereas an abbreviation may be any type of shortened form, such as words with the middle omitted (for example, Rd. for Road or Dr. for Doctor) or the end cut off (as in Prof. for Professor), an acronym or initialism is—in the broad sense—formed from the first letter or first few letters of each important word in a phrase (such as AIDS, from acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, and scuba from self-contained underwater breathing apparatus). However, this is only a loose rule of thumb, as some acronyms are built in part from the first letters of morphemes (word components; as in the i and d in immuno-deficiency) or using a letter from the middle or end of a word, or from only a few key words in a long phrase or name. Less significant words such as in, of, and the are usually dropped (NYT for The New York Times, DMV for Department of Motor Vehicles), but not always (TICA for The International Cat Association, DOJ for Department of Justice). Abbreviations formed from a string of initials and usually pronounced as individual letters (as in FBI from Federal Bureau of Investigation, and e.g. from Latin exempli gratia) are sometimes more specifically called initialisms or alphabetisms. Occasionally, some letter other than the first is chosen, most often when the pronunciation of the name of the letter coincides with the pronunciation of the beginning of the word (example: BX from base exchange). Acronyms that are usually pronounced as words, such as AIDS and scuba, are sometimes called word acronyms; this is done to differentiate them more clearly from initialisms, especially since some users of the term "initialism" use "acronym" in a narrow sense meaning only the type sounded out as letters. Another sub-type of acronym (or a related form) is the syllabic abbreviation, which is composed specifically of multi-letter syllabic (even multi-syllabic) fragments of the shortened words such as Interpol from international + police, though its full proper name in English is the International Criminal Police Organization. Usually the first syllable (or two) is used from each major component word, but there are exceptions, such as the U.S. Navy term DESRON or DesRon from destroyer squadron. There is no special term for abbreviations whose pronunciation involves the combination of letter names with words, or with word-like pronunciations of strings of letters, such as JPEG (/ˈdʒeɪpɛɡ/ JAY-peg) and MS-DOS (/ˌɛmɛsˈdɒs/ em-ess-DOSS). Similarly, there is no unique name for those that are a mixture of syllabic abbreviations and initialisms; these are usually pronounced as words (e.g., radar from radio detection and ranging, consisting of one syllabic abbreviation and three single letters, and sonar from sound navigation ranging, consisting of two syllabic abbreviations followed by a single acronymic letter for ranging); these would generally qualify as word acronyms among those who use that term. There is also some disagreement as to what to call an abbreviation that some speakers pronounce as letters but others pronounce as a word. For example, the terms URL and IRA (for individual retirement account) can be pronounced as individual letters: /ˌjuːˌɑːrˈɛl/ ew-ar-EL and /ˌaɪˌɑːrˈeɪ/ eye-ar-AY, respectively; or as a single word: /ɜːrl/ URL and /ˈaɪrə/ EYE-rə, respectively. The same character string may be pronounced differently when the meaning is different; IRA is always sounded out as I-R-A when standing for Irish Republican Army. The spelled-out form of an acronym, initialism, or syllabic abbreviation (that is, what that abbreviation stands for) is called its expansion. It is an unsettled question in English lexicography and style guides whether it is legitimate to use the word acronym to describe forms that use initials but are not pronounced as a word. While there is plenty of evidence that acronym is used widely in this way, some sources do not acknowledge this usage, reserving the term acronym only for forms pronounced as a word, and using initialism or abbreviation for those that are not. Some sources acknowledge the usage, but vary in whether they criticize or forbid it, allow it without comment, or explicitly advocate it. Some mainstream English dictionaries from across the English-speaking world affirm a sense of acronym which does not require being pronounced as a word. American English dictionaries such as Merriam-Webster, Dictionary.com's Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary and the American Heritage Dictionary as well as the British Oxford English Dictionary and the Australian Macquarie Dictionary all include a sense in their entries for acronym equating it with initialism, although The American Heritage Dictionary criticizes it with the label "usage problem". However, many English language dictionaries, such as the Collins COBUILD Advanced Dictionary, Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dictionary, Macmillan Dictionary, Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English, New Oxford American Dictionary, Webster's New World Dictionary, and Lexico from Oxford University Press do not acknowledge such a sense. Most of the dictionary entries and style guide recommendations regarding the term acronym through the twentieth century did not explicitly acknowledge or support the expansive sense. The Merriam–Webster's Dictionary of English Usage from 1994 is one of the earliest publications to advocate for the expansive sense, and all the major dictionary editions that include a sense of acronym equating it with initialism were first published in the twenty-first century. The trend among dictionary editors appears to be towards including a sense defining acronym as initialism: the Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary added such a sense in its 11th edition in 2003, and both the Oxford English Dictionary and The American Heritage Dictionary added such senses in their 2011 editions. The 1989 edition of the Oxford English Dictionary only included the exclusive sense for acronym and its earliest citation was from 1943. In early December 2010, Duke University researcher Stephen Goranson published a citation for acronym to the American Dialect Society e-mail discussion list which refers to PGN being pronounced "pee-gee-enn", antedating English language usage of the word to 1940. Linguist Ben Zimmer then mentioned this citation in his December 16, 2010 "On Language" column about acronyms in The New York Times Magazine. By 2011, the publication of the 3rd edition of the Oxford English Dictionary added the expansive sense to its entry for acronym and included the 1940 citation. As the Oxford English Dictionary structures the senses in order of chronological development, it now gives the "initialism" sense first. English language usage and style guides which have entries for acronym generally criticize the usage that refers to forms that are not pronounceable words. Fowler's Dictionary of Modern English Usage says that acronym "denotes abbreviations formed from initial letters of other words and pronounced as a single word, such as NATO (as distinct from B-B-C)" but adds later "In everyday use, acronym is often applied to abbreviations that are technically initialisms, since they are pronounced as separate letters." The Chicago Manual of Style acknowledges the complexity ("Furthermore, an acronym and initialism are occasionally combined (JPEG), and the line between initialism and acronym is not always clear") but still defines the terms as mutually exclusive. Other guides outright deny any legitimacy to the usage: Bryson's Dictionary of Troublesome Words says "Abbreviations that are not pronounced as words (IBM, ABC, NFL) are not acronyms; they are just abbreviations." Garner's Modern American Usage says "An acronym is made from the first letters or parts of a compound term. It's read or spoken as a single word, not letter by letter." The New York Times Manual of Style and Usage says "Unless pronounced as a word, an abbreviation is not an acronym." In contrast, some style guides do support it, whether explicitly or implicitly. The 1994 edition of Merriam-Webster's Dictionary of English Usage defends the usage on the basis of a claim that dictionaries do not make a distinction. The BuzzFeed style guide describes CBS and PBS as "acronyms ending in S". Pronounced as a word, containing only initial letters NATO: "North Atlantic Treaty Organization" Scuba: "self-contained underwater breathing apparatus" Laser: "light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation" GIF: "graphics interchange format" Pronounced as a word, containing a mixture of initial and non-initial letters Amphetamine: "alpha-methyl-phenethylamine" Gestapo: German Geheime Staatspolizei ('secret state police') Radar: "radio detection and ranging" Lidar: "light detection and ranging" Pronounced as a combination of spelling out and a word CD-ROM: (cee-dee-/rɒm/) "compact disc read-only memory" IUPAC: (i-u-/pæk/ or i-u-pee-a-cee) "International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry" JPEG: (jay-/pɛɡ/ or jay-pee-e-gee) "Joint Photographic Experts Group" SFMOMA: (ess-ef-/ˈmoʊmə/ or ess-ef-em-o-em-a) "San Francisco Museum of Modern Art" Pronounced only as a string of letters BBC: "British Broadcasting Corporation" OEM: "original equipment manufacturer" USA: "United States of America" VHF: "very high frequency" Pronounced as a string of letters, but with a shortcut AAA: (Triple-A) "American Automobile Association"; "abdominal aortic aneurysm"; "anti-aircraft artillery"; "Asistencia, Asesoría y Administración" (Three-As) "Amateur Athletic Association" IEEE: (I triple-E) "Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" NAACP: (N double-A C P or N A A C P) "National Association for the Advancement of Colored People" NCAA: (N C double-A or N C two-A or N C A A) "National Collegiate Athletic Association" Shortcut incorporated into name 3M: (three M) originally "Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company" W3C: (W-three C) "World Wide Web Consortium" A2DP: (A-two D P) "Advanced Audio Distribution Profile" I18N: ("18" stands in for the word's middle eighteen letters, "nternationalizatio") "Internationalization" C4ISTAR: (C-four Istar) "Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition, and Reconnaissance" Mnemonic acronyms, an abbreviation that is used to remember phrases or principles KISS (Kiss) "Keep it simple, stupid", a design principle preferring simplicity SMART (Smart) "Specific, Measurable, Assignable, Realistic, Time-related", A principle of setting of goals and objectives FAST (Fast) "Facial drooping, Arm weakness, Speech difficulties, Time", helps detect and enhance responsiveness to the needs of a person having a stroke DRY (Dry) "Don't repeat yourself", A principle of software development aimed at reducing repetition of software patterns Multi-layered acronyms AIM: "AOL Instant Messenger", in which "AOL" originally stood for "America Online" AFTA: "ASEAN Free Trade Area", where ASEAN stands for "Association of Southeast Asian Nations" NAC Breda: (Dutch football club) "NOAD ADVENDO Combinatie" ("NOAD ADVENDO Combination"), formed by the 1912 merger of two clubs from Breda: NOAD: (Dutch Nooit Opgeven Altijd Doorgaan 'Never give up, always persevere') ADVENDO: (Dutch Aangenaam Door Vermaak En Nuttig Door Ontspanning 'Pleasant by entertainment and useful by relaxation') GIMP: "GNU image manipulation program" Recursive acronyms, in which the abbreviation refers to itself GNU: "GNU's not Unix!" Wine: "Wine is not an emulator" (originally, "Windows emulator") These may go through multiple layers before the self-reference is found: HURD: "HIRD of Unix-replacing daemons", where "HIRD" stands for "HURD of interfaces representing depth" Pseudo-acronyms, which consist of a sequence of characters that, when pronounced as intended, invoke other, longer words with less typing This makes them gramograms. CQ: cee-cue for "seek you", a code used by radio operators IOU: i-o-u for "I owe you" K9: kay-nine for "canine", used to designate police units using dogs Abbreviations whose last abbreviated word is often redundantly included anyway ATM machine: "automated teller machine" (machine) HIV virus: "human immunodeficiency virus" (virus) LCD display: "liquid-crystal display" (display) PIN number: "personal identification number" (number) Pronounced as a word, containing letters as a word in itself PAYGO: "pay-as-you-go" Acronymy, like retronymy, is a linguistic process that has existed throughout history but for which there was little to no naming, conscious attention, or systematic analysis until relatively recent times. Like retronymy, it became much more common in the twentieth century than it had formerly been. Ancient examples of acronymy (before the term "acronym" was invented) include the following: Acronyms were used in Rome before the Christian era. For example, the official name for the Roman Empire, and the Republic before it, was abbreviated as SPQR (Senatus Populusque Romanus). Inscriptions dating from antiquity, both on stone and on coins, use many abbreviations and acronyms to save space and work. For example, Roman first names, of which there was only a small set, were almost always abbreviated. Common terms were abbreviated too, such as writing just "F" for filius, meaning "son", a very common part of memorial inscriptions mentioning people. Grammatical markers were abbreviated or left out entirely if they could be inferred from the rest of the text. So-called nomina sacra ('sacred names') were used in many Greek biblical manuscripts. The common words God (Θεός), Jesus (Ιησούς), Christ (Χριστός), and some others, would be abbreviated by their first and last letters, marked with an overline. This was just one of many kinds of conventional scribal abbreviation, used to reduce the time-consuming workload of the scribe and save on valuable writing materials. The same convention is still commonly used in the inscriptions on religious icons and the stamps used to mark the eucharistic bread in Eastern Churches. The early Christians in Rome, most of whom were Greek rather than Latin speakers, used the image of a fish as a symbol for Jesus in part because of an acronym (or backronym): 'fish' in Greek is ichthys (ΙΧΘΥΣ), which was construed to stand for Ἰησοῦς Χριστός Θεοῦ Υἱός Σωτήρ (Iesous Christos Theou huios Soter: 'Jesus Christ, God's Son, Savior'). This interpretation dates from the second and third centuries and is preserved in the catacombs of Rome. Another ancient acronym for Jesus is the inscription INRI over the crucifix, for the Latin Iesus Nazarenus Rex Iudaeorum ('Jesus the Nazarene, King of the Jews'). The Hebrew language has a centuries-long history of acronyms pronounced as words. The Hebrew Bible is known as Tanakh, an acronym composed from the Hebrew initial letters of its three major sections: Torah (five books of Moses), Nevi'im (prophets), and K'tuvim (writings). Many rabbinical figures from the Middle Ages onward are referred to in rabbinical literature by their pronounced acronyms, such as Rambam and Rashi from the initial letters of their full Hebrew names: Rabbi Moshe ben Maimon and Rabbi Shlomo Yitzkhaki. During the mid- to late nineteenth century, acronyms became a trend among American and European businessmen: abbreviating corporation names, such as on the sides of railroad cars (e.g., "Richmond, Fredericksburg and Potomac Railroad" → "RF&P"); on the sides of barrels and crates; and on ticker tape and newspaper stock listings (e.g. American Telephone and Telegraph Company → AT&T). Some well-known commercial examples dating from the 1890s through 1920s include "Nabisco" ("National Biscuit Company"), "Esso" (from "S.O.", from "Standard Oil"), and "Sunoco" ("Sun Oil Company"). Another field for the adoption of acronyms was modern warfare, with its many highly technical terms. While there is no recorded use of military acronyms dating from the American Civil War (acronyms such as "ANV" for "Army of Northern Virginia" post-date the war itself), they became somewhat common in World War I, and by World War II they were widespread even in the slang of soldiers, who referred to themselves as G.I.s. The widespread, frequent use of acronyms across the whole range of linguistic registers is relatively new in most languages, becoming increasingly evident since the mid-twentieth century. As literacy spread and technology produced a constant stream of new and complex terms, abbreviations became increasingly convenient. The Oxford English Dictionary (OED) records the first printed use of the word initialism as occurring in 1899, but it did not come into general use until 1965, well after acronym had become common. In English, acronyms pronounced as words may be a twentieth-century phenomenon. Linguist David Wilton in Word Myths: Debunking Linguistic Urban Legends claims that "forming words from acronyms is a distinctly twentieth- (and now twenty-first-) century phenomenon. There is only one known pre-twentieth-century [English] word with an acronymic origin and it was in vogue for only a short time in 1886. The word is colinderies or colinda, an acronym for the Colonial and Indian Exposition held in London in that year." However, although acronymic words seem not to have been employed in general vocabulary before the twentieth century (as Wilton points out), the concept of their formation is treated as effortlessly understood (and evidently not novel) in an Edgar Allan Poe story of the 1830s, "How to Write a Blackwood Article", which includes the contrived acronym "P.R.E.T.T.Y.B.L.U.E.B.A.T.C.H." The use of Latin and Neo-Latin terms in vernaculars has been pan-European and pre-dates modern English. Some examples of acronyms in this class are: A.M. (from Latin ante meridiem, 'before noon') and P.M. (from Latin post meridiem, 'after noon') A.D. (from Latin Anno Domini, 'in the year of our Lord'), whose complement in English, B.C. (Before Christ), is English-sourced The earliest example of a word derived from an acronym listed by the OED is "abjud" (now "abjad"), formed from the original first four letters of the Arabic alphabet in the late eighteenth century. Some acrostics pre-date this, however, such as the Restoration witticism arranging the names of some members of Charles II's Committee for Foreign Affairs to produce the "CABAL" ministry. OK, a term of disputed origin, dates back at least to the early nineteenth century and is now used around the world. Acronyms are used most often to abbreviate names of organizations and long or frequently referenced terms. The armed forces and government agencies frequently employ acronyms; some well-known examples from the United States are among the "alphabet agencies" (jokingly referred to as "alphabet soup") created under the New Deal by Franklin D. Roosevelt (himself known as "FDR"). Business and industry also coin acronyms prolifically. The rapid advance of science and technology also drives the usage, as new inventions and concepts with multiword names create a demand for shorter, more pronounceable names.[citation needed] One representative example, from the U.S. Navy, is "COMCRUDESPAC", which stands for "commander, cruisers destroyers Pacific"; it is also seen as "ComCruDesPac". Inventors are encouraged to anticipate the formation of acronyms by making new terms "YABA-compatible" ("yet another bloody acronym"), meaning the term's acronym can be pronounced and is not an offensive word: "When choosing a new name, be sure it is 'YABA-compatible'." Acronym use has been further popularized by text messaging on mobile phones with short message service (SMS), and instant messenger (IM). To fit messages into the 160-character SMS limit, and to save time, acronyms such as "GF" ("girlfriend"), "LOL" ("laughing out loud"), and "DL" ("download" or "down low") have become popular. Some prescriptivists disdain texting acronyms and abbreviations as decreasing clarity, or as failure to use "pure" or "proper" English. Others point out that languages have always continually changed, and argue that acronyms should be embraced as inevitable, or as innovation that adapts the language to changing circumstances. In this view, the modern practice is just the "proper" English of the current generation of speakers, much like the earlier abbreviation of corporation names on ticker tape or newspapers. Exact pronunciation of "word acronyms" (those pronounced as words rather than sounded out as individual letters) often vary by speaker population. These may be regional, occupational, or generational differences, or simply personal preference. For instance, there have been decades of online debate about how to pronounce GIF (/ɡɪf/ or /dʒɪf/) and BIOS (/ˈbaɪoʊs/, /ˈbaɪoʊz/, or /ˈbaɪɒs/). Similarly, some letter-by-letter initialisms may become word acronyms over time, especially in combining forms: IP for Internet Protocol is generally said as two letters, but IPsec for Internet Protocol Security is usually pronounced as /ˌaɪˈpiːsɛk/ or /ˈɪpsɛk/, along with variant capitalization like "IPSEC" and "Ipsec". Pronunciation may even vary within a single speaker's vocabulary, depending on narrow contexts. As an example, the database programming language SQL is usually said as three letters, but in reference to Microsoft's implementation is traditionally pronounced like the word sequel. In writing for a broad audience, the words of an acronym are typically written out in full at its first occurrence within a given text. Expansion At First Use (EAFU) benefits readers unfamiliar with the acronym. Another text aid is an abbreviation key which lists and expands all acronyms used, a reference for readers who skipped past the first use. (This is especially important for paper media, where no search utility is available to find the first use.) It also gives students a convenient review list to memorize the important acronyms introduced in a textbook chapter. Expansion at first use and abbreviation keys originated in the print era, but they are equally useful for electronic text. While acronyms provide convenience and succinctness for specialists, they often degenerate into confusing jargon. This may be intentional, to exclude readers without domain-specific knowledge. New acronyms may also confuse when they coincide with an already existing acronym having a different meaning. Medical literature has been struggling to control the proliferation of acronyms, including efforts by the American Academy of Dermatology. Acronyms are often taught as mnemonic devices: for example the colors of the rainbow are ROY G. BIV (red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet). They are also used as mental checklists: in aviation GUMPS stands for gas-undercarriage-mixture-propeller-seat belts. Other mnemonic acronyms include CAN SLIM in finance, PAVPANIC in English grammar, and PEMDAS in mathematics. It is not uncommon for acronyms to be cited in a kind of false etymology, called a folk etymology, for a word. Such etymologies persist in popular culture but have no factual basis in historical linguistics, and are examples of language-related urban legends. For example, "cop" is commonly cited as being derived, it is presumed, from "constable on patrol", and "posh" from "port outward, starboard home". With some of these specious expansions, the "belief" that the etymology is acronymic has clearly been tongue-in-cheek among many citers, as with "gentlemen only, ladies forbidden" for "golf", although many other (more credulous) people have uncritically taken it for fact. Taboo words in particular commonly have such false etymologies: "shit" from "ship/store high in transit" or "special high-intensity training" and "fuck" from "for unlawful carnal knowledge", or "fornication under consent/command of the king". In English, abbreviations have previously been marked by a wide variety of punctuation. Obsolete forms include using an overbar or colon to show the ellipsis of letters following the initial part. The forward slash is still common in many dialects for some fixed expressions—such as w/ for "with" or A/C for "air conditioning"—while only infrequently being used to abbreviate new terms. The apostrophe is common for grammatical contractions (e.g. don't, y'all, and ain't) and for contractions marking unusual pronunciations (e.g. a'ight, cap'n, and fo'c'sle for "all right", "captain", and "forecastle"). By the early twentieth century, it was standard to use a full stop/period/point, especially in the cases of initialisms and acronyms. Previously, especially for Latin abbreviations, this was done with a full space between every full word (e.g. A. D., i. e., and e. g. for "Anno Domini", "id est", and "exempli gratia"). This even included punctuation after both Roman and Arabic numerals to indicate their use in place of the full names of each number (e.g. LII. or 52. in place of "fifty-two" and "1/4." or "1./4." to indicate "one-fourth"). Both conventions have fallen out of common use in all dialects of English, except in places where an Arabic decimal includes a medial decimal point. Particularly in British and Commonwealth English, all such punctuation marking acronyms and other capitalized abbreviations is now uncommon and considered either unnecessary or incorrect. The presence of all-capital letters is now thought sufficient to indicate the nature of the UK, the EU, and the UN. Forms such as the U.S.A. for "the United States of America" are now considered to indicate American or North American English. Even within those dialects, such punctuation is becoming increasingly uncommon. Some style guides, such as that of the BBC, no longer require punctuation to show ellipsis; some even proscribe it. Larry Trask, American author of The Penguin Guide to Punctuation, states categorically that, in British English, "this tiresome and unnecessary practice is now obsolete." Nevertheless, some influential style guides, many of them American, still require periods in certain instances. For example, The New York Times Manual of Style and Usage recommends following each segment with a period when the letters are pronounced individually, as in "K.G.B.", but not when pronounced as a word, as in "NATO". The logic of this style is that the pronunciation is reflected graphically by the punctuation scheme. When a multiple-letter abbreviation is formed from a single word, periods are in general not used, although they may be common in informal usage. "TV", for example, may stand for a single word ("television" or "transvestite", for instance), and is in general spelled without punctuation (except in the plural). Although "PS" stands for the single English word "postscript" or the Latin postscriptum, it is often spelled with periods ("P.S.") as if parsed as Latin post scriptum instead. The slash ('/', or solidus) is sometimes used to separate the letters in an acronym, as in "N/A" ("not applicable, not available") and "c/o" ("care of"). Inconveniently long words used frequently in related contexts can be represented according to their letter count as a numeronym. For example, "i18n" abbreviates "internationalization", a computer-science term for adapting software for worldwide use. The "18" represents the 18 letters that come between the first and the last in "internationalization". "Localization" can be abbreviated "l10n", "multilingualization" "m17n", and "accessibility" "a11y". In addition to the use of a specific number replacing that many letters, the more general "x" can be used to replace an unspecified number of letters. Examples include "Crxn" for "crystallization" and the series familiar to physicians for history, diagnosis, and treatment ("hx", "dx", "tx"). Terms relating to a command structure may also sometimes use this formatting, for example gold, silver, and bronze levels of command in UK policing being referred to as Gx, Sx, and Bx. There is a question about how to pluralize acronyms. Often a writer will add an 's' following an apostrophe, as in "PC's". However, Kate L. Turabian's A Manual for Writers of Research Papers, Theses, and Dissertations, writing about style in academic writings, allows for an apostrophe to form plural acronyms "only when an abbreviation contains internal periods or both capital and lowercase letters". Turabian would therefore prefer "DVDs" and "URLs" but "Ph.D.'s". The style guides of the Modern Language Association and American Psychological Association prohibit apostrophes from being used to pluralize acronyms regardless of periods (so "compact discs" would be "CDs" or "C.D.s"), whereas The New York Times Manual of Style and Usage requires an apostrophe when pluralizing all abbreviations regardless of periods (preferring "PC's, TV's and VCR's"). Possessive plurals that also include apostrophes for mere pluralization and periods appear especially complex: for example, "the C.D.'s' labels" (the labels of the compact discs). In some instances, however, an apostrophe may increase clarity: for example, if the final letter of an abbreviation is "S", as in "SOS's" (although abbreviations ending with S can also take "-es", e.g. "SOSes"), or when pluralizing an abbreviation that has periods. A particularly rich source of options arises when the plural of an acronym would normally be indicated in a word other than the final word if spelled out in full. A classic example is "Member of Parliament", which in plural is "Members of Parliament". It is possible then to abbreviate this as "M's P", which was fairly common in mid-twentieth-century Australian news writing (or similar), and used by former Australian Prime Minister Ben Chifley. This usage is less common than forms with "s" at the end, such as "MPs", and may appear dated or pedantic. In common usage, therefore, "weapons of mass destruction" becomes "WMDs", "prisoners of war" becomes "POWs", and "runs batted in" becomes "RBIs". The argument that acronyms should have no different plural form (for example, "If D can stand for disc, it can also stand for discs") is in general disregarded because of the practicality in distinguishing singulars and plurals. This is not the case, however, when the abbreviation is understood to describe a plural noun already: For example, "U.S." is short for "United States", but not "United State". In this case, the options for making a possessive form of an abbreviation that is already in its plural form without a final "s" may seem awkward: for example, "U.S.", "U.S.'s", etc. In such instances, possessive abbreviations are often forgone in favor of simple attributive usage (for example, "the U.S. economy") or expanding the abbreviation to its full form and then making the possessive (for example, "the United States' economy"). On the other hand, in speech, the pronunciation "United States's" is sometimes used. Abbreviations that come from single, rather than multiple, words – such as "TV" ("television") – are usually pluralized without apostrophes ("two TVs"); most writers feel that the apostrophe should be reserved for the possessive ("the TV's antenna"). In some languages, the convention of doubling the letters in the acronym is used to indicate plural words: for example, the Spanish EE.UU., for Estados Unidos ('United States'). This old convention is still followed for a limited number of English abbreviations, such as SS. for Saints, pp. for the Latin plural of 'pages', paginae, or mss. for manuscripts. The most common capitalization scheme seen with acronyms is all-uppercase (all caps). Small caps are sometimes used to make the run of capital letters seem less jarring to the reader. For example, the style of some American publications, including the Atlantic Monthly and USA Today, is to use small caps for acronyms longer than three letters;[citation needed] thus "U.S." and "FDR" in normal caps, but "nato" in small caps. The acronyms "AD" and "BC" are often smallcapped as well, as in: "From 4004 bc to ad 525". Where an acronym has linguistically taken on an identity as regular word, the acronym may use normal case rules, e.g. it would appear generally in lower case, but with an initial capital when starting a sentence or when in a title. Once knowledge of the words underlying such an acronym has faded from common recall, the acronym may be termed an anacronym. Examples of anacronyms are the words "scuba", "radar", and "laser". The word "anacronym" should not be confused with the word "anachronym", which is a type of misnomer. Words derived from an acronym by affixing are typically expressed in mixed case, so the root acronym is clear. For example, "pre-WWII politics", "post-NATO world", "DNase". In some cases a derived acronym may also be expressed in mixed case. For example, "messenger RNA" and "transfer RNA" become "mRNA" and "tRNA". Some publications choose to capitalize only the first letter of acronyms, reserving all-caps styling for initialisms, writing the pronounced acronyms "Nato" and "Aids" in mixed case, but the initialisms "USA" and "FBI" in all caps. For example, this is the style used in The Guardian, and BBC News typically edits to this style (though its official style guide, dating from 2003, still recommends all-caps). The logic of this style is that the pronunciation is reflected graphically by the capitalization scheme. However, it conflicts with conventional English usage of first-letter upper-casing as a marker of proper names in many cases; e.g. AIDS stands for acquired immuno-deficiency syndrome which is not a proper name, while Aids is in the style of one. Some style manuals also base the letters' case on their number. The New York Times, for example, keeps "NATO" in all capitals (while several guides in the British press may render it "Nato"), but uses lower case in "Unicef" (from "United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund") because it is more than four letters, and to style it in caps might look ungainly (flirting with the appearance of "shouting capitals"). While abbreviations typically exclude the initials of short function words (such as "and", "or", "of", or "to"), this is not always the case. Sometimes function words are included to make a pronounceable acronym, such as CORE (Congress of Racial Equality). Sometimes the letters representing these words are written in lower case, such as in the cases of "TfL" ("Transport for London") and LotR (The Lord of the Rings); this usually occurs when the acronym represents a multi-word proper noun. Numbers (both cardinal and ordinal) in names are often represented by digits rather than initial letters, as in "4GL" ("fourth generation language") or "G77" ("Group of 77"). Large numbers may use metric prefixes, as with "Y2K" for "Year 2000". Exceptions using initials for numbers include "TLA" ("three-letter acronym/abbreviation") and "GoF" ("Gang of Four"). Abbreviations using numbers for other purposes include repetitions, such as "A2DP" ("Advanced Audio Distribution Profile"), "W3C" ("World Wide Web Consortium"), and T3 (Trends, Tips & Tools for Everyday Living); pronunciation, such as "B2B" ("business to business"); and numeronyms, such as "i18n" ("internationalization"; "18" represents the 18 letters between the initial "i" and the final "n"). Authors of expository writing will sometimes capitalize or otherwise distinctively format the initials of the expansion for pedagogical emphasis (for example, writing: "the onset of Congestive Heart Failure (CHF)" or "the onset of congestive heart failure (CHF)"). Capitalization like this, however, conflicts with the convention of English orthography, which generally reserves capitals in the middle of sentences for proper nouns; when following the AMA Manual of Style, this would instead be rendered as "the onset of congestive heart failure (CHF)". Some apparent acronyms or other abbreviations do not stand for anything and cannot be expanded to some meaning. Such pseudo-acronyms may be pronunciation-based, such as "BBQ" (bee-bee-cue), for "barbecue", and "K9" (kay-nine) for "canine". Pseudo-acronyms also frequently develop as "orphan initialisms"; an existing acronym is redefined as a non-acronymous name, severing its link to its previous meaning. For example, the letters of the "SAT", a US college entrance test originally dubbed "Scholastic Aptitude Test", no longer officially stand for anything. The US-based abortion-rights organization "NARAL" is another example of this; in that case, the organization changed its name three times, with the long-form of the name always corresponding to the letters "NARAL", before eventually opting to simply be known by the short-form, without being connected to a long-form. This is common with companies that want to retain brand recognition while moving away from an outdated image: American Telephone and Telegraph became AT&T and British Petroleum became BP. Russia Today has rebranded itself as RT. American Movie Classics has simply rebranded itself as AMC. Genzyme Transgenics Corporation became GTC Biotherapeutics, Inc.; The Learning Channel became TLC; MTV dropped the name Music Television out of its brand; and American District Telegraph became simply known as ADT. "Kentucky Fried Chicken" went partway, re-branding itself with its acronym "KFC" to de-emphasize the role of frying in the preparation of its signature dishes, although in this case, "KFC" remains a true acronym which still officially stands for "Kentucky Fried Chicken". Pseudo-acronyms may have advantages in international markets:[according to whom?] for example, some national affiliates of International Business Machines are legally incorporated with "IBM" in their names (for example, IBM Canada) to avoid translating the full name into local languages.[citation needed] Likewise, UBS is the name of the merged Union Bank of Switzerland and Swiss Bank Corporation, and HSBC has replaced the long name Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation. Some companies which have a name giving a clear indication of their place of origin will choose to use acronyms when expanding to foreign markets: for example, Toronto-Dominion Bank continues to operate under the full name in Canada, but its U.S. subsidiary is known as TD Bank, just as Royal Bank of Canada used its full name in Canada (a constitutional monarchy), but its U.S. subsidiary is called RBC Bank. The India-based JSW Group of companies is another example of the original name (Jindal South West Group) being re-branded into a pseudo-acronym while expanding into other geographical areas in and outside of India. Rebranding can lead to redundant acronym syndrome, as when Trustee Savings Bank became TSB Bank, or when Railway Express Agency became REA Express. A few high-tech companies have taken the redundant acronym to the extreme: for example, ISM Information Systems Management Corp. and SHL Systemhouse Ltd. Examples in entertainment include the television shows CSI: Crime Scene Investigation and Navy: NCIS ("Navy" was dropped in the second season), where the redundancy was likely designed to educate new viewers as to what the initials stood for. The same reasoning was in evidence when the Royal Bank of Canada's Canadian operations rebranded to RBC Royal Bank, or when Bank of Montreal rebranded their retail banking subsidiary BMO Bank of Montreal. Another common example is "RAM memory", which is redundant because "RAM" ("random-access memory") includes the initial of the word "memory". "PIN" stands for "personal identification number", obviating the second word in "PIN number"; in this case its retention may be motivated to avoid ambiguity with the homophonous word "pin". Other examples include "ATM machine", "EAB bank", "HIV virus", Microsoft's NT Technology, and the formerly redundant "SAT test", now simply "SAT Reasoning Test"). TNN (The Nashville/National Network) also renamed itself "The New TNN" for a brief interlude. In some cases, while the initials in an acronym may stay the same, for what those letters stand may change. Examples include the following: DVD was originally an acronym for the unofficial term "digital video disc", but is now stated by the DVD Forum as standing for "Digital Versatile Disc"[citation needed] GAO changed the full form of its name from "General Accounting Office" to "Government Accountability Office" GPO changed the full form of its name from "Government Printing Office" to "Government Publishing Office" RAID was originally an acronym for "Redundant Array of Inexpensive Disks" but has since been redefined as "Redundant Array of Independent Disks" The UICC was founded as the "International Union Against Cancer", and its initials originally came from the Romance-language versions of that name (such as French Union Internationale Contre le Cancer). The English expansion of its name has since been changed to "Union for International Cancer Control" so that it would also correspond to the UICC acronym. WWF was originally an acronym for "World Wildlife Fund", but now stands for "World Wide Fund for Nature" (although the organization's branches in the U.S. and Canada still use the original name) A backronym (or bacronym) is a phrase that is constructed "after the fact" from a previously existing word. For example, the novelist and critic Anthony Burgess once proposed that the word "book" ought to stand for "box of organized knowledge". A classic real-world example of this is the name of the predecessor to the Apple Macintosh, the Apple Lisa, which was said to refer to "Local Integrated Software Architecture", but was actually named after Steve Jobs's daughter, born in 1978. Backronyms are oftentimes used for comedic effect[citation needed]. An example of creating a backronym for comedic effect would be in naming a group or organization, the name "A.C.R.O.N.Y.M." stands for (among other things) "a clever regiment of nerdy young men". Acronyms are sometimes contrived, that is, deliberately designed to be especially apt for the thing being named (by having a dual meaning or by borrowing the positive connotations of an existing word). Some examples of contrived acronyms are USA PATRIOT, CAN SPAM, CAPTCHA and ACT UP.[citation needed] The clothing company French Connection began referring to itself as fcuk, standing for "French Connection United Kingdom". The company then created T-shirts and several advertising campaigns that exploit the acronym's similarity to the taboo word "fuck". Contrived acronyms find frequent use as names of fictional agencies, with a famous example being frequent James Bond antagonist organization SPECTRE (SPecial Executive for Counterintelligence, Terrorism, Revenge and Extortion). The U.S. Department of Defense's Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) is known for developing contrived acronyms to name projects, including RESURRECT, NIRVANA, and DUDE. In July 2010, Wired magazine reported that DARPA announced programs to "transform biology from a descriptive to a predictive field of science" named BATMAN and ROBIN for "Biochronicity and Temporal Mechanisms Arising in Nature" and "Robustness of Biologically-Inspired Networks", a reference to the Batman and Robin comic-book superheroes. The short-form names of clinical trials and other scientific studies constitute a large class of acronyms that includes many contrived examples, as well as many with a partial rather than complete correspondence of letters to expansion components. These trials tend to have full names that are accurately descriptive of what the trial is about but are thus also too long to serve practically as names within the syntax of a sentence, so a short name is also developed, which can serve as a syntactically useful handle and also provide at least a degree of mnemonic reminder as to the full name. Examples widely known in medicine include the ALLHAT trial (Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial) and the CHARM trial (Candesartan in Heart Failure: Assessment of Reduction in Mortality and Morbidity). The fact that RAS syndrome is often involved, as well as that the letters often do not entirely match, have sometimes been pointed out by annoyed researchers preoccupied by the idea that because the archetypal form of acronyms originated with one-to-one letter matching, there must be some impropriety in their ever deviating from that form. However, the raison d'être of clinical trial acronyms, as with gene and protein symbols, is simply to have a syntactically usable and easily recalled short name to complement the long name that is often syntactically unusable and not memorized. It is useful for the short name to give a reminder of the long name, which supports the reasonable censure of "cutesy" examples that provide little to no hint of it. But beyond that reasonably close correspondence, the short name's chief utility is in functioning cognitively as a name, rather than being a cryptic and forgettable string, albeit faithful to the matching of letters. However, other reasonable critiques have been (1) that it is irresponsible to mention trial acronyms without explaining them at least once by providing the long names somewhere in the document, and (2) that the proliferation of trial acronyms has resulted in ambiguity, such as three different trials all called ASPECT, which is another reason why failing to explain them somewhere in the document is irresponsible in scientific communication. At least one study has evaluated the citation impact and other traits of acronym-named trials compared with others, finding both good aspects (mnemonic help, name recall) and potential flaws (connotatively driven bias). Some acronyms are chosen deliberately to avoid a name considered undesirable: For example, Verliebt in Berlin (ViB), a German telenovela, was first intended to be Alles nur aus Liebe ('All for Love'), but was changed to avoid the resultant acronym ANAL. Likewise, the Computer Literacy and Internet Technology qualification is known as CLaIT, rather than CLIT. In Canada, the Canadian Conservative Reform Alliance (Party) was quickly renamed to the "Canadian Reform Conservative Alliance" when its opponents pointed out that its initials spelled CCRAP (pronounced "see crap"). Two Irish institutes of technology (Galway and Tralee) chose different acronyms from other institutes when they were upgraded from regional technical colleges. Tralee RTC became the Institute of Technology Tralee (ITT), as opposed to Tralee Institute of Technology (TIT). Galway RTC became Galway-Mayo Institute of Technology (GMIT), as opposed to Galway Institute of Technology (GIT). The charity sports organization Team in Training is known as "TNT" and not "TIT". Technological Institute of Textile & Sciences, however, is still known as "TITS". George Mason University was planning to name their law school the "Antonin Scalia School of Law" (ASSOL) in honor of the late Antonin Scalia, only to change it to the "Antonin Scalia Law School" later. A macronym, or nested acronym, is an acronym in which one or more letters stand for acronyms (or abbreviations) themselves. The word "macronym" is a portmanteau of "macro-" and "acronym". Some examples of macronyms are: XHR stands for "XML HTTP Request", in which "XML" is "Extensible Markup Language", and HTTP stands for "HyperText Transfer Protocol" POWER stands for "Performance Optimization With Enhanced RISC", in which "RISC" stands for "reduced instruction set computer" VHDL stands for "VHSIC Hardware Description Language", in which "VHSIC" stands for "Very High Speed Integrated Circuit" XSD stands for "XML Schema Definition", in which "XML" stands for "Extensible Markup Language" AIM stands for "AOL Instant Messenger", in which "AOL" originally stood for "America Online" HASP stood for "Houston Automatic Spooling Priority", but "spooling" itself was an acronym: "simultaneous peripheral operations on-line" VORTAC stands for "VOR+TACAN", in which "VOR" is "VHF omnidirectional range" (where VHF = very high frequency radio) and "TAC" is short for TACAN, which stands for "tactical air navigation" Global Information Assurance Certification has a number of nested acronyms for its certifications, e.g. "GSEC" is an acronym for "GIAC Security Essentials" RBD stands for "REM Behavior Disorder", in which "REM" stands for "rapid eye movement" Some macronyms can be multiply nested: the second-order acronym points to another one further down a hierarchy. In an informal competition run by the magazine New Scientist, a fully documented specimen was discovered that may be the most deeply nested of all: RARS is the "Regional ATOVS Retransmission Service"; ATOVS is "Advanced TOVS"; TOVS is "TIROS operational vertical sounder"; and TIROS is "Television infrared observational satellite". Fully expanded, "RARS" might thus become "Regional Advanced Television Infrared Observational Satellite Operational Vertical Sounder Retransmission Service", which would produce the much more unwieldy acronym "RATIOSOVSRS". Another example is VITAL, which expands to "VHDL Initiative Towards ASIC Libraries" (a total of 15 words when fully expanded). However, to say that "RARS" stands directly for that string of words, or can be interchanged with it in syntax (in the same way that "CHF" can be usefully interchanged with "congestive heart failure"), is a prescriptive misapprehension rather than a linguistically accurate description; the true nature of such a term is closer to anacronymic than to being interchangeable like simpler acronyms are. The latter are fully reducible in an attempt to "spell everything out and avoid all abbreviations", but the former are irreducible in that respect; they can be annotated with parenthetical explanations, but they cannot be eliminated from speech or writing in any useful or practical way. Just as the words laser and radar function as words in syntax and cognition without a need to focus on their acronymic origins, terms such as "RARS" and "CHA2DS2–VASc score" are irreducible in natural language; if they are purged, the form of language that is left may conform to some imposed rule, but it cannot be described as remaining natural. Similarly, protein and gene nomenclature, which uses symbols extensively, includes such terms as the name of the NACHT protein domain, which reflects the symbols of some proteins that contain the domain – NAIP (NLR family apoptosis inhibitor protein), C2TA (major histocompatibility complex class II transcription activator), HET-E (incompatibility locus protein from Podospora anserine), and TP1 (telomerase-associated protein) – but is not syntactically reducible to them. The name is thus itself more symbol than acronym, and its expansion cannot replace it while preserving its function in natural syntax as a name within a clause clearly parsable by human readers or listeners. A special type of macronym, the recursive acronym, has letters whose expansion refers back to the macronym itself. One of the earliest examples appears in The Hacker's Dictionary as MUNG, which stands for "MUNG Until No Good". Some examples of recursive acronyms are: GNU stands for "GNU's Not Unix!" LAME stands for "LAME Ain't an MP3 Encoder" PHP stands for "PHP: Hypertext Preprocessor" WINE stands for "WINE Is Not an Emulator" HURD stands for "HIRD of Unix-replacing daemons", where HIRD itself stands for "HURD of interfaces representing depth" (a "mutually recursive" acronym) In English language discussions of languages with syllabic or logographic writing systems (such as Chinese, Japanese, and Korean), "acronyms" describe the short forms that take selected characters from a multi-character word. For example, in Chinese, 'university' (大學/大学, lit. 'great learning') is usually abbreviated simply as 大 ('great') when used with the name of the institute. So 'Peking University' (北京大学) is commonly shortened to 北大 (lit. 'north-great') by also only taking the first character of Peking, the "northern capital" (北京; Beijing). In some cases, however, other characters than the first can be selected. For example, the local short form of 'Hong Kong University' (香港大學) uses Kong (港大) rather than Hong. There are also cases where some longer phrases are abbreviated drastically, especially in Chinese politics, where proper nouns were initially translated from Soviet Leninist terms. For instance, the full name of China's highest ruling council, the Politburo Standing Committee (PSC), is 'Standing Committee of the Central Political Bureau of the Communist Party of China' (中国共产党中央政治局常务委员会). The term then reduced the 'Communist Party of China' part of its name through acronyms, then the 'Standing Committee' part, again through acronyms, to create 中共中央政治局常委. Alternatively, it omitted the 'Communist Party' part altogether, creating 'Politburo Standing Committee' (政治局常委会), and eventually just 'Standing Committee' (常委会). The PSC's members full designations are 'Member of the Standing Committee of the Central Political Bureau of the Communist Party of China' (中国共产党中央政治局常务委员会委员); this was eventually drastically reduced to simply Changwei (常委), with the term Ruchang (入常) used increasingly for officials destined for a future seat on the PSC. In another example, the word 全国人民代表大会 ('National People's Congress') can be broken into four parts: 全国 = 'the whole nation', 人民 = 'people', 代表 = 'representatives', 大会 = 'conference'. Yet, in its short form 人大 (literally 'man/people big'), only the first characters from the second and the fourth parts are selected; the first part (全国) and the third part (代表) are simply dropped. Many proper nouns become shorter and shorter over time. For example, the CCTV New Year's Gala, whose full name is literally read as 'China Central Television Spring Festival Joint Celebration Evening Gala' (中国中央电视台春节联欢晚会) was first shortened to 'Spring Festival Joint Celebration Evening Gala' (春节联欢晚会), but eventually referred to as simply Chunwan (春晚). In the same vein, CCTV or Zhongguo Zhongyang Dianshi Tai (中国中央电视台) was reduced to Yangshi (央视) in the mid-2000s. Many aspects of academics in Korea follow similar acronym patterns as Chinese, owing to the two languages' commonalities, like using the word for 'big' or 'great' i.e. dae (대), to refer to universities (대학; daehak, literally 'great learning' although 'big school' is an acceptable alternate). They can be interpreted similarly to American university appellations, such as "UPenn" or "Texas Tech". Some acronyms are shortened forms of the school's name, like how Hongik University (홍익대학교, Hongik Daehakgyo) is shortened to Hongdae (홍대, 'Hong, the big [school]' or 'Hong-U') Other acronyms can refer to the university's main subject, e.g. Korea National University of Education (한국교원대학교, Hanguk Gyowon Daehakgyo) is shortened to Gyowondae (교원대, 'Big Ed.' or 'Ed.-U'). Other schools use a Koreanized version of their English acronym. The Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (한국과학기술원, Hanguk Gwahak Gisulwon) is referred to as KAIST (카이스트, Kaiseuteu) in both English and Korean. The 3 most prestigious schools in Korea are known as SKY (스카이, seukai), combining the first letter of their English names (Seoul National, Korea, and Yonsei Universities). In addition, the College Scholastic Ability Test (대학수학능력시험, Daehak Suhang Neungryeok Siheom) is shortened to Suneung (수능, 'S.A.'). The Japanese language makes extensive use of abbreviations, but only some of these are acronyms. Chinese-based words (Sino-Japanese vocabulary) uses similar acronym formation to Chinese, like Tōdai (東大) for Tōkyō Daigaku (東京大学, Tokyo University). In some cases alternative pronunciations are used, as in Saikyō for 埼京, from Saitama + Tōkyō (埼玉＋東京), rather than Saitō. Non-Chinese foreign borrowings (gairaigo) are instead frequently abbreviated as clipped compounds, rather than acronyms, using several initial sounds. This is visible in katakana transcriptions of foreign words, but is also found with native words (written in hiragana). For example, the Pokémon media franchise's name originally stood for "pocket monsters" (ポケット·モンスター [po-ke-tto-mon-su-tā] → ポケモン), which is still the long-form of the name in Japanese, and "wāpuro" stands for "word processor" (ワード·プロセッサー [wā-do-pu-ro-se-ssā]→ ワープロ). To a greater degree than English does, German tends toward acronyms that use initial syllables rather than initial single letters, although it uses many of the latter type as well. Some examples of the syllabic type are Gestapo rather than GSP (for Geheime Staatspolizei, 'Secret State Police'); Flak rather than FAK (for Fliegerabwehrkanone, 'anti-aircraft gun'); Kripo rather than KP (for Kriminalpolizei, 'detective division police'). The extension of such contraction to a pervasive or whimsical degree has been mockingly labeled Aküfi (for Abkürzungsfimmel, 'strange habit of abbreviating'). Examples of Aküfi include Vokuhila (for vorne kurz, hinten lang, 'short in the front, long in the back', i.e., a mullet haircut) and the mocking of Adolf Hitler's title as Gröfaz (Größter Feldherr aller Zeiten, 'Greatest General of all Time'). It is common to take more than just one initial letter from each of the words composing the acronym; regardless of this, the abbreviation sign gershayim ⟨״⟩ is always written between the second-last and last letters of the non-inflected form of the acronym, even if by this it separates letters of the same original word. Examples (keep in mind Hebrew reads right-to-left): ארה״ב (for ארצות הברית, the United States); ברה״מ (for ברית המועצות, the Soviet Union); ראשל״צ (for ראשון לציון, Rishon LeZion); ביה״ס (for בית הספר, the school). An example that takes only the initial letters from its component words is צה״ל (Tzahal, for צבא הגנה לישראל, Israel Defense Forces). In inflected forms, the abbreviation sign gershayim remains between the second-last and last letters of the non-inflected form of the acronym (e.g. 'report', singular: דו״ח, plural: דו״חות; 'squad commander', masculine: מ״כ, feminine: מ״כית). There is also a widespread use of acronyms in Indonesia in every aspect of social life. For example, the Golkar political party stands for Partai Golongan Karya, Monas stands for Monumen Nasional ('National Monument'), the Angkot public transport stands for Angkutan Kota ('city public transportation'), warnet stands for warung internet ('internet cafe'), and many others. Some acronyms are considered formal (or officially adopted), while many more are considered informal, slang, or colloquial. The capital's metropolitan area (Jakarta and its surrounding satellite regions), Jabodetabek, is another acronym. This stands for Jakarta-Bogor-Depok-Tangerang-Bekasi. Many highways are also named by the acronym method; e.g. Jalan Tol ('Toll Road') Jagorawi (Jakarta-Bogor-Ciawi), Purbaleunyi (Purwakarta-Bandung-Cileunyi), and Joglo Semar (Jogja-Solo-Semarang). In some languages, especially those that use certain alphabets, many acronyms come from the governmental use, particularly in the military and law enforcement services. The Indonesian military (TNI – Tentara Nasional Indonesia) and Indonesian police (POLRI – Kepolisian Republik Indonesia) are known for heavy acronyms use. Examples include the Kopassus (Komando Pasukan Khusus; 'Special Forces Command'), Kopaska (Komando Pasukan Katak; 'Frogmen Command'), Kodim (Komando Distrik Militer; 'Military District Command' – one of the Indonesian army's administrative divisions), Serka (Sersan Kepala; 'Head Sergeant'), Akmil (Akademi Militer; 'Military Academy' – in Magelang), and many other terms regarding ranks, units, divisions, procedures, etc. Although not as common as in Indonesian, a number of Malay words are formed by merging two words, such as tadika from taman didikan kanak-kanak ('kindergarten') and pawagam from panggung wayang gambar. This, however, has been less prevalent in the modern era, in contrary to Indonesian. It is still often for names such as organisation names, among the most famous being MARA from Majlis Amanah Rakyat ('People's Trust Council'), a government agency in Malaysia. Some acronyms are developed from the Jawi (Malay in Arabic script) spelling of the name and may not reflect its Latin counterpart such as PAS from Parti Islam Se-Malaysia ('Malaysian Islamic Party') which originated from the Jawi acronym ڤاس from ڤرتي إسلام سمليسيا, with the same pronunciation, since the first letter of the word 'Islam' in Jawi uses the letter Aleph, which is pronounced like the letter A when in such position as in the acronym. Rules in writing initialisms in Malay differ based on its script. In its Latin form, the initialism would be spelt much like in English, using capitals written without any spacing, such as TNB for Tenaga Nasional Berhad. In Jawi, however, the way initialisms are different depending on the source language. For Malay initialisms, the initial Jawi letters would be written separated by a period such as د.ب.ڤ for ديوان بهاس دان ڤوستاک. If the initialism is from a different language, however, it would be written by transliterating each letter from the original language, such as عيم.سي.عيم.سي. for MCMC, or الفا.ڤي.ثيتا for Α.Π.Θ. Acronyms that use parts of words (not necessarily syllables) are commonplace in Russian as well, e.g. Газпром (Gazprom), for Газовая промышленность (Gazovaya promyshlennost, 'gas industry'). There are also initialisms, such as СМИ ('SMI', for средства массовой информации sredstva massovoy informatsii, 'means of mass informing'; ГУЛаг (GULag) combines two initials and three letters of the final word: it stands for Главное управление лагерей (Glavnoe upravlenie lagerey, 'Chief Administration of Camps'). Historically, OTMA was an acronym sometimes used by the daughters of Emperor Nicholas II of Russia and his consort, Alexandra Feodorovna, as a group nickname for themselves, built from the first letter of each girl's name in the order of their births: Olga, Tatiana, Maria, and Anastasia. In Swahili, acronyms are common for naming organizations such as TUKI, which stands for Taasisi ya Uchunguzi wa Kiswahili ('Institute for Swahili Research'). Multiple initial letters (often the initial syllable of words) are often drawn together, as seen more in some languages than others. In Vietnamese, which has an abundance of compound words, initialisms are very commonly used for both proper and common nouns. Examples include TP.HCM (Thành phố Hồ Chí Minh, 'Ho Chi Minh City'), THPT (trung học phổ thông, 'high school'), CLB (câu lạc bộ, 'club'), CSDL (cơ sở dữ liệu, 'database'), NXB (nhà xuất bản, 'publisher'), ÔBACE (ông bà anh chị em, a general form of address), and CTTĐVN (các Thánh tử đạo Việt Nam, 'Vietnamese Martyrs'). Longer examples include CHXHCNVN (Cộng hòa Xã hội chủ nghĩa Việt Nam, 'Socialist Republic of Vietnam') and MTDTGPMNVN (Mặt trận Dân tộc Giải phóng miền Nam Việt Nam, 'Liberation Army of South Vietnam or the National Liberation Front of South Vietnam'). Long initialisms have become widespread in legal contexts in Vietnam, for example TTLT-VKSNDTC-TANDTC. It is also common for a writer to coin an ad hoc initialism for repeated use in an article. Each letter in an initialism corresponds to one morpheme, that is, one syllable. When the first letter of a syllable has a tone mark or other diacritic, the diacritic may be omitted from the initialism, for example ĐNA or ĐNÁ for Đông Nam Á ('Southeast Asia') and LMCA or LMCÂ for Liên minh châu Âu ('European Union'). The letter Ư is often replaced by W in initialisms to avoid confusion with U, for example UBTWMTTQVN or UBTƯMTTQVN for Ủy ban Trung ương Mặt trận Tổ quốc Việt Nam ('Central Committee of the Vietnamese Fatherland Front'). Initialisms are purely a written convenience, being pronounced the same way as their expansions. As the names of many Vietnamese letters are disyllabic, it would be less convenient to pronounce an initialism by its individual letters. Acronyms pronounced as words are rare in Vietnamese, occurring when an acronym itself is borrowed from another language. Examples include SIĐA (pronounced [s̪i˧ ˀɗaː˧]), a respelling of the French acronym SIDA ('AIDS'); VOA (pronounced [vwaː˧]), a literal reading of the English initialism for 'Voice of America'; and NASA (pronounced [naː˧ zaː˧]), borrowed directly from the English acronym. As in Chinese, many compound words can be shortened to the first syllable when forming a longer word. For example, the term Việt Cộng is derived from the first syllables of Việt Nam ('Vietnam') and Cộng sản ('communist'). This mechanism is limited to Sino-Vietnamese vocabulary. Unlike with Chinese, such clipped compounds are considered to be portmanteau words or blend words rather than acronyms or initialisms, because the Vietnamese alphabet still requires each component word to be written as more than one character. In languages where nouns are declined, various methods are used. An example is Finnish, where a colon is used to separate inflection from the letters: An acronym is pronounced as a word: NATO or Nato [ˈnɑto] – Natoon [ˈnɑtoːn] 'into Nato'; another example is Nasalta 'from NASA' An acronym is pronounced as letters: EU [ˈeːˌʔuː] – EU:hun [ˈeːˌʔuːhun] 'into [the] EU' An acronym is interpreted as words: EU [euroːpan unioni] – EU:iin [ˈeu̯roːpɑnˌunioniːn] 'into [the] EU' The process above is similar to the way that hyphens are used for clarity in English when prefixes are added to acronyms: thus pre-NATO policy (rather than preNATO). In languages such as Scottish Gaelic and Irish, where lenition (initial consonant mutation) is commonplace, acronyms must also be modified in situations where case and context dictate it. In the case of Scottish Gaelic, a lower-case h is often added after the initial consonant; for example, 'BBC Scotland' in the genitive case would be written as BhBC Alba, with the acronym pronounced VBC. Likewise, the Gaelic acronym for telebhisean 'television' is TBh, pronounced TV, as in English. Abbreviation – Shortened form of a word or phrase Acrostic Amalgamation (names) – Name formed by combining several previously existing names Initialized sign List of acronyms One-letter word Syllabic abbreviation – Shortened form of a word or phrasePages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets examples are ABS-CBN from Alto Broadcasting System – Chronicle Broadcasting Network, GMA from Global Media Arts, NPC from National Power Corporation, NGCP from National Grid Corporation of the Philippines, GD from General Dynamics, and e.g. from Latin exempli gratia. This change was also applied to other languages, with Poulet Frit Kentucky becoming PFK in French Canada. McMahon, Mary (December 30, 2023). "What is the Difference Between an Acronym, Alphabetism, and Initialism?". LanguageHumanities. Retrieved February 9, 2024. "Acronyms vs. Initialisms: What's the Difference?". Proofed. April 3, 2022. Retrieved January 24, 2024. Brinton, Laurel J.; Brinton, Donna M. (2010). The Linguistic Structure of Modern English. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company. p. 110. ISBN 978-90-272-8824-0. Retrieved April 3, 2022. "acronym, n." Oxford English Dictionary (Third ed.). Oxford University Press. December 2011. Archived from the original on January 22, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2020. acronym, n. Pronunciation: Brit. /ˈakrənɪm/, U.S. /ˈækrəˌnɪm/ Origin: Formed within English, by compounding; modelled on a German lexical item. Etymons: acro- comb. form, -onym comb. form. Etymology: < acro- comb. form + -onym comb. form, after German Akronym (1921 or earlier). Originally U.S. 1. A group of initial letters used as an abbreviation for a name or expression, each letter or part being pronounced separately; an initialism (such as ATM, TLS). In the O.E.D. the term initialism is used for this phenomenon. (See sense 2 for O.E.D. use of the word.) 1940 W. Muir & E. Muir tr. L. Feuchtwanger Paris Gaz. iii. xlvii. 518     Pee-gee-enn. It's an acronym [Ger. Akronym], that's what it is. That's what they call words made up of initials. 1947 T. M. Pearce in Word Study May 8/2     The acronym DDT..trips pleasantly on the tongue and is already a household byword. 1959 Rotarian May 43/1     DDD, an acronym that sounds more like a cattle brand. 1975 Jet 24 July 9/1     The puns on the acronym, 'CIA', were spawned by recent disclosures about the intelligence agency. 1985 C. Jencks Mod. Movements in Archit. (ed. 2) i. 75     Called by the acronym SCSD (Schools Construction System Development). 2008 Atlantic Monthly June 104/2     The acronym TSS—Tout Sauf Sarkozy ('Anything But Sarkozy'). 2. A word formed from the initial letters of other words or (occasionally) from the initial parts of syllables taken from other words, the whole being pronounced as a single word (such as NATO, RADA). 1943 Amer. Notes & Queries Feb. 167/1     Words made up of the initial letters or syllables of other words..I have seen..called by the name acronym. 1947 Word Study 6(title)     Acronym Talk, or 'Tomorrow's English'. 1950 S. Potter Our Lang. 163     Acronyms or telescoped names like nabisco from National Biscuit Company. 1959 Times 1 Sept. 22/3     New words which are constructed out of initial letters are called, I understand, acronyms. 1961 Electronics 21 Apr. 51/2     Colidar, an acronym from coherent light detecting and ranging. 1976 P. R. Hutt in IBA Techn. Rev. ix. 4/2     The author hit on the idea of the name 'oracle'..and it was not long before it was made into an acronym for 'Optional Reception of Announcements by Coded Line Electronics'. 2009 N.Y. Times (National ed.) 16 Apr. a2/2     Turning tea into an acronym for Taxed Enough Already, demonstrators were expected to attend more than 750 rallies to protest government spending. "Acronym". The Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary. Merriam-Webster Inc. January 22, 2020. Archived from the original on January 22, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2020. Some people feel strongly that acronym should only be used for terms like NATO, which is pronounced as a single word, and that initialism should be used if the individual letters are all pronounced distinctly, as with FBI. Our research shows that acronym is commonly used to refer to both types of abbreviations. "acronym". en.wiktionary.org. Archived from the original on January 17, 2020. Retrieved January 28, 2020. "Akronym". Brockhaus Handbuch des Wissens in vier Bänden (in German). Vol. 1. Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus AG. 1921. p. 37. Retrieved February 22, 2020 – via Google Books. Agfa (Aktien-Gesellschaft für Anilinfabrikation) Feuchtwanger, Lion (1940). "Chapter 47: Beasts of Prey". Paris Gazette (in German). Translated by Muir, Willa; Muir, Edwin. New York: Viking Press. pp. 665–66. ISBN 1-135-37010-9. His first glance at the Paris German News told Wiesener that this new paper was nothing like the old P.G.. 'They can call it the P.G.N. if they like', he thought, 'but that's the only difference. Pee-gee-enn; what's the word for words like that, made out of initials? My memory is beginning to fail me. Just the other day there was a technical expression I couldn't remember. I must be growing old. P.G. or P.G.N., it's six of one and half a dozen of the other. ... Pee-gee-enn. It's an acronym, that's what it is. That's what they call words made up of initials. So I remember it after all; that's at least something. Brinton, Laurel J.; Brinton, Donna M. (2010). The Linguistic Structure of Modern English. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company. p. 109. ISBN 978-90-272-8824-0. Retrieved April 3, 2022. "Acronym". The Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary. Merriam-Webster Inc. January 22, 2020. Archived from the original on January 22, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2020. acronym noun ac·​ro·​nym | \ˈa-krə-ˌnim\ Definition of acronym : a word (such as NATO, radar, or laser) formed from the initial letter or letters of each of the successive parts or major parts of a compound term also : an abbreviation (such as FBI) formed from initial letters : initialism "Acronym". Dictionary.com. January 22, 2020. Archived from the original on January 22, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2020. 2. a set of initials representing a name, organization, or the like, with each letter pronounced separately; an initialism. "Acronym". The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (Fifth ed.). Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. November 2011. Archived from the original on January 22, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2020. ac·ro·nym (ăk′rə-nĭm′) n. 1. A word formed by combining the initial letters of a multipart name, such as NATO from North Atlantic Treaty Organization or by combining the initial letters or parts of a series of words, such as radar from radio detecting and ranging. 2. Usage Problem An initialism. [acr(o)- + -onym.] ac′ro·nym′ic, a·cron′y·mous (ə-krŏn′ə-məs) adj. Usage Note: In strict usage, the term acronym refers to a word made from the initial letters or parts of other words, such as sonar from so(und) na(vigation and) r(anging). The distinguishing feature of an acronym is that it is pronounced as if it were a single word, in the manner of NATO and NASA. Acronyms are often distinguished from initialisms like FBI and NIH, whose individual letters are pronounced as separate syllables. While observing this distinction has some virtue in precision, it may be lost on many people, for whom the term acronym refers to both kinds of abbreviations. "acronym". Macquarie Dictionary. Macmillan Publishers Australia. Archived from the original on March 3, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2020. acronym /ˈækrənɪm/ ('say' 'akruhnim) noun 1. a word formed from the initial letters of a sequence of words, as radar (from radio detection and ranging) or ANZAC (from Australian and New Zealand Army Corps). Compare initialism. 2. an initialism. [acro- + -(o)nym; modelled on synonym] "acronym". Collins COBUILD Advanced English Dictionary. HarperCollins Publishers. Archived from the original on February 8, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2020. An acronym is a word composed of the first letters of the words in a phrase, especially when this is used as a name. An example of an acronym is 'NATO', which is made up of the first letters of the 'North Atlantic Treaty Organization'. "acronym". Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dictionary & Thesaurus. Cambridge University Press. Archived from the original on February 8, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2020. an abbreviation consisting of the first letters of each word in the name of something, pronounced as a word "acronym". Macmillan Dictionary. Macmillan Education Limited. Archived from the original on April 5, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2020. an abbreviation consisting of letters that form a word. For example, NATO is an acronym for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. "acronym". Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English. Pearson Longman. Archived from the original on April 5, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2020. a word made up from the first letters of the name of something such as an organization. For example, NATO is an acronym for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. New Oxford American dictionary (3rd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2010. p. 15. ISBN 978-0-19-539288-3. OCLC 614990378. ac·ro·nym /ˈakrəˌnim/ ▸ n. an abbreviation formed from the initial letters of other words and pronounced as a word (e.g. ASCII, NASA). —origin 1940s: from Greek akron 'end, tip' + onoma 'name,' on the pattern of homonym. "acronym". Webster's New World College Dictionary, Fifth Edition. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company. 2014. Archived from the original on April 5, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2020. a word formed from the first (or first few) letters of a series of words, as radar, from radio detecting and ranging "acronym". Lexico. Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on December 22, 2019. Retrieved January 22, 2020. An abbreviation formed from the initial letters of other words and pronounced as a word (e.g. ASCII, NASA). Merriam-Webster, Inc. Merriam-Webster's Dictionary of English Usage, 1994. ISBN 0-87779-132-5. pp. 21–22: acronyms  A number of commentators (as Copperud 1970, Janis 1984, Howard 1984) believe that acronyms can be differentiated from other abbreviations in being pronounceable as words. Dictionaries, however, do not make this distinction because writers in general do not: "The powder metallurgy industry has officially adopted the acronym 'P/M Parts'"—Precision Metal Molding, January 1966. "Users of the term acronym make no distinction between those pronounced as words ... and those pronounced as a series of characters" —Jean Praninskas, Trade Name Creation, 1968. "It is not J.C.B.'s fault that its name, let alone its acronym, is not a household word among European scholars"—Times Literary Supp. 5 February 1970. "... the confusion in the Pentagon about abbreviations and acronyms—words formed from the first letters of other words"—Bernard Weinraub, N.Y. Times, 11 December 1978. Pyles & Algeo 1970 divide acronyms into "initialisms", which consists of initial letters pronounced with the letter names, and "word acronyms", which are pronounced as words. Initialism, an older word than acronym, seems to be too little known to the general public to serve as the customary term standing in contrast with acronym in a narrow sense. Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary (10th ed.). Springfield, Massachusetts: Merriam-Webster. 1993. p. 11. ISBN 0-87779-708-0. OCLC 27432416. ac·ro·nym ˈa-krə-ˌnim n [acr- + -onym] (1943) : a word (as NATO, radar, or snafu) formed from the initial letter or letters of each of the successive parts or major parts of a compound term— ac·ro·nym·ic ˌa-krə-ˈni-mik adj — ac·ro·nym·i·c·al·ly -mi-k(ə-)lē adv Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary (11th ed.). Springfield, Massachusetts: Merriam-Webster. 2003. p. 12. ISBN 0-87779-809-5. OCLC 51764057 – via Internet Archive. ac·ro·nym ˈa-krə-ˌnim n [acr- + -onym] (1943) : a word (such as NATO, radar, or laser) formed from the initial letter or letters of each of the successive parts or major parts of a compound term; also : an abbreviation (such as FBI) formed from initial letters : initialism— ac·ro·nym·ic ˌa-krə-ˈni-mik adj — ac·ro·nym·i·c·al·ly -mi-k(ə-)lē adv "acronym". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). 1989. Archived from the original on March 25, 2019. Retrieved January 28, 2020. A word formed from the initial letters of other words. "acronym". The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (4th ed.). Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 2000. p. 16. ISBN 0-395-82517-2. OCLC 43499541. ac·ro·nym (ăk′rə-nĭm′) n. A word formed from the initial letters of a name, such as WAC for Women's Army Corps, or by combining initial letters or parts of a series of words, such as radar for radio detecting and ranging. [acr(o)- + -onym.]—ac′ro·nym′ic, a·cron′y·mous (ə-krŏn′ə-məs) adj. Goranson, Stephen (December 5, 2010). "acronym antedated to 1940". American Dialect Society E-Mail Discussion List Archive. Archived from the original on April 5, 2020. Retrieved March 5, 2020. Zimmer, Ben (December 16, 2010). "On Language: Acronym". The New York Times Magazine. Archived from the original on April 5, 2020. Retrieved March 4, 2020. "OED terminology". Oxford English Dictionary (3rd ed.). Archived from the original on March 27, 2020. Retrieved January 28, 2020. Fowler, Henry Watson (June 1, 2015). Jeremy Butterfield (ed.). Fowler's Dictionary of Modern English Usage (4th ed.). Oxford University Press. p. 16. ISBN 978-0-19-966135-0. "10.2 Acronyms, initialisms, contractions". The Chicago Manual of Style (16th ed.). University of Chicago Press. 2010. ISBN 978-0-226-10420-1. Bryson, Bill (September 17, 2002). Bryson's Dictionary of Troublesome Words. Crown. p. 9. ISBN 978-0-7679-1047-7. Retrieved March 11, 2020. Garner, Bryan (July 28, 2009). Garner's Modern American Usage. Oxford University Press. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-19-987462-0. Siegal, Allan M.; Connoly, William G. (2015). The New York Times Manual of Style and Usage: The Official Style Guide Used by the Writers and Editors of the World's Most Authoritative News Organization (5th ed.). Three Rivers Press. p. 5. ISBN 978-1-101-90544-9. Favilla, Emmy (December 27, 2019). "BuzzFeed Style Guide". BuzzFeed.com. BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on April 5, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2020. Robinson, Paul (2008). "C4ISR". Dictionary of international security. Polity. p. 31. ISBN 978-0-7456-4028-0. "Nooit opgegeven, al 95 jaar doorgezet!" (in Dutch). NAC Breda. September 19, 2007. Archived from the original on March 26, 2012. Precies 95 jaar terug smolten NOAD (Nooit Opgeven Altijd Doorzetten) en Advendo (Aangenaam Door Vermaak en Nuttig Door Ontspanning) samen in de NOAD-ADVENDO Combinatie, kortom NAC. Dart, James (December 14, 2005). "What is the longest team name in the world?". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on September 30, 2013. Retrieved May 19, 2009. "Acronyms (and other forms of abbreviation)". US Department of Homeland Security. November 12, 2008. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved June 10, 2014. Davenport, Basil (February 1943). "Initials into Words". American Notes and Queries. 2: 167 – via Internet Archive. Your correspondent who asks about words made up of the initial letters or syllables of other words may be interested in knowing that I have seen such words called by the name acronym, which is useful and clear to anyone who knows a little Greek. Harper, Douglas. "Baloney". Online Etymology Dictionary. Archived from the original on April 17, 2022. Retrieved August 31, 2009. Wilton, David (2004). Word myths: debunking linguistic urban legends. Oxford University Press, USA. p. 79. ISBN 978-0-19-517284-3. Retrieved September 16, 2010. Word Myths: Debunking Linguistic Urban Legends. "Urban Legends Reference Pages: Language (Acronyms)". Snopes.com. Retrieved September 16, 2010. "abjad, n.", Oxford English Dictionary. "cabal, n.", Oxford English Dictionary. K. D. Nilsen & A. P. Nilsen (1995) The English Journal Vol. 84, No. 6., "Literary Metaphors and Other Linguistic Innovations in Computer Language" Crystal, David (2008). Txtng: The Gr8 Db8. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-954490-5. Lee, Chelsea. "An Abbreviations FAQ". Archived from the original on June 3, 2020. Retrieved June 3, 2020. Patel, C. B.; Rashid, R. M. (February 2009). "Averting the proliferation of acronymophilia in dermatology: effectively avoiding ADCOMSUBORDCOMPHIBSPAC". Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology. 60 (2): 340–344. doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2008.10.035. PMID 19150279. "Does Cop = 'Constable on Patrol'?". May 3, 2007. Quinion, Michael (2005). Port Out, Starboard Home: And Other Language Myths. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-101223-0.; published in the US as Quinion, Michael (2006). Ballyhoo, Buckaroo, and Spuds. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-085153-8. Retrieved March 4, 2020 – via Internet Archive. "See article at Snopes". Snopes.com. February 20, 2002. Archived from the original on May 6, 2022. Retrieved September 16, 2010. "Etymonline.com". Etymonline.com. Archived from the original on April 17, 2022. Retrieved September 16, 2010. Oxford English Dictionary: initialism. "Globe & Mail (Toronto) 22 May 10/4 Americanization has also largely done away with periods in acronyms and initialisms." "Abbreviations". Informatics.Susx.ac.uk. Archived from the original on April 10, 2007. Retrieved September 16, 2010. Kristoff, Nicholas D. (February 7, 2004). "Secret Obsessions at the Top". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 28, 2015. Retrieved October 10, 2015. Turabian, Kate L.; Booth, Wayne C.; Colomb, Gregory G.; Williams, Joseph M. (2007). A Manual for Writers of Research Papers, Theses, and Dissertations (7th ed.). University of Chicago Press. § 20.1.2. ISBN 978-0-226-82337-9. MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers (7th ed.). Modern Language Association. 2009. § 3.2.7.g. Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association (5th ed.). American Psychological Association. 2001. § 3.28. Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association (6th ed.). American Psychological Association. 2010. § 4.29. Siegal, Allan M.; Connolly, William G. (1999). The New York Times Manual of Style and Usage. Three Rivers Press. p. 263 – via Google Books. "Writer's Block – Writing Tips – Plural and Possessive Abbreviations". WritersBlock.ca. Archived from the original on July 26, 2010. Retrieved September 16, 2010. "EditFast Grammar Resource: Apostrophes: Forming Plurals". Editfast.com. Archived from the original on October 27, 2010. Retrieved September 16, 2010. "Libraries Australia – T.H. McWilliam, Charles Kingsford Smith, Prime Minister of New Zealand Joseph Coates, Charles Ulm and H.A. Litchfield in front row with Members of Parliament on steps of Parliament House, Wellington, New Zealand, September 1928". NLA.gov.au. National Library of Australia. Notes. Archived from the original on June 22, 2008. Retrieved September 16, 2010. Hyde, Robin. "Chapter III. — The House is in Session". NZETC. Archived from the original on April 30, 2011. Retrieved September 16, 2010. Dennis, C. J. (January 18, 1912). "Under the party plan". The Bulletin. p. 43. Archived from the original on August 22, 2010. Retrieved September 16, 2010 – via Middlemiss.org. "M's.P. Suffer Loss and Insecurity". Townsville Daily Bulletin. December 2, 1948. p. 1 – via Trove.NLA.gov.au. "Prime Minister Asserts M's.P. Have No Immunity from 'Official Approaches'". The Mercury. October 14, 1948. p. 2 – via Trove.NLA.gov.au. "The Royal Caledonian Society of Melbourne". Archived from the original on July 15, 2012. Retrieved January 21, 2013 – via ElectricScotland.com. Garner, Bryan (August 27, 2009). Garner's Modern American Usage. Oxford / New York: Oxford University Press. p. 638. ISBN 978-0-19-538275-4. Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (6th ed.), Oxford University Press, 2007, ISBN 978-0-19-920687-2 "Styleguide". The Guardian. London. December 19, 2008. Use all capitals if an abbreviation is pronounced as the individual letters (an initialism): BBC, CEO, US, VAT, etc; if it is an acronym (pronounced as a word) spell out with initial capital, eg Nasa, Nato, Unicef, unless it can be considered to have entered the language as an everyday word, such as awol, laser and, more recently, asbo, pin number and sim card. Note that pdf and plc are lowercase. "BBC News Style Guide" (PDF). BBCTraining.com. BBC. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 7, 2011. Iverson, Cheryl; et al., eds. (2007), AMA Manual of Style (10th ed.), Oxford, Oxfordshire: Oxford University Press, p. 442, ISBN 978-0-19-517633-9 Zwicky, Arnold (September 7, 2006). Liberman, Mark (ed.). "Orphan Initialisms". Language Log. University of Pennsylvania. Archived from the original on June 21, 2010. Retrieved September 27, 2010. What Does "BP" Stand For? Archived November 18, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Applebome, Peter (April 2, 1997). "Insisting It's Nothing, Creator Says SAT, Not S.A.T." The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 17, 2017. Retrieved February 14, 2017. Komarek, Dan (July 29, 2003). "Changes to SAT Make Test More Coachable". Daily Californian. "BP plc History". Archived from the original on June 15, 2010. Retrieved September 29, 2010. Keegan, Peter O. (February 21, 1991). "KFC shuns 'fried' image with new name – Kentucky Fried Chicken has changed its name to KFC". Nation's Restaurant News. Archived from the original on November 4, 2007. Retrieved August 24, 2007. UBS means RIP for Warburg Archived May 4, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. The Daily Telegraph, November 13, 2002 "100 Years of GAO". U.S. Government Accountability Office. Retrieved August 7, 2022. "History". U.S. Government Publishing Office. Retrieved August 7, 2022. "Originally referred to as Redundant Array of Inexpensive Disks, the term RAID was first published in the late 1980s by Patterson, Gibson, and Katz of the University of California at Berkeley. (The RAID Advisory Board has since substituted the term Inexpensive with Independent.)" Storage Area Network Fundamentals; Meeta Gupta; Cisco Press; ISBN 978-1-58705-065-7; Appendix A. "History of UICC (up to late 1960s)" (PDF). UICC. Retrieved August 7, 2022. "World Wide Fund for Nature". World Wildlife Fund. 2018. Retrieved August 7, 2022. 99 Novels: The Best in English Since 1939 (New York: Summit Books, 1984). Drummond, Katie (July 6, 2010). "Holy Acronym, Darpa! 'Batman & Robin' to Master Biology, Outdo Evolution". Wired. Archived from the original on July 2, 2013. Retrieved March 5, 2017. Cheng, Tsung O (2003), "No more unexplained trial acronyms please. Trial Acronyms: Better Obvious than Obscure (TABOO)", Int J Cardiol, 89 (2–3): 303, doi:10.1016/S0167-5273(02)00411-4, PMID 12767559 Stanbrook, M. B.; Austin, P. C.; Redelmeier, D. A. (2006). "Acronym-named randomized trials in medicine—the ART in medicine study". New England Journal of Medicine. 355 (1): 101–102. doi:10.1056/NEJMc053420. PMID 16823008. "CLAiT–International". CIE.org. University of Cambridge. Archived from the original on January 14, 2012. "Unfortunate Acronym Forces Law School Name Change". Morning Edition. NPR. April 7, 2016. Archived from the original on December 19, 2018. Retrieved April 4, 2018. "Very deep multiply nested acronyms". New Scientist. July 7, 2010. Archived from the original on September 14, 2010. Retrieved September 16, 2010. bin Dahaman, Ismail; Ahmad, Manshoor bin Haji (2001). Daftar Kata Bahasa Melayu: Rumi-Sebutan-Jawi (Jilid 1) [Malay Language Word Directory: Rumi-Pronunciation-Jawi (Book 1)] (in Malay). Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka. p. 129. ISBN 978-983-62-4672-1. "Report for Malaysia's Internationalized Domain Name: Jawi Language Issues". MYNIC Berhad. December 3, 2009 – via FDocuments.in. "Từ viết tắt" [Abbreviations] (in Vietnamese). BBC Academy. Archived from the original on November 20, 2017. Retrieved September 4, 2017. Chưa kể cách viết này còn dễ bị cho là lười biếng hoặc tỏ ra quan trọng, vì đây là cách chép nguyên xi, máy móc các cụm từ viết tắt từ văn bản pháp quy của chính quyền, như TTLT-VKSNDTC-TANDTC, khá phổ biến ở Việt Nam hiện nay. Look up acronym, initialism, or alphabetism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Acronyms at Curlie