Charles III (Charles Philip Arthur George; born 14 November 1948) is King of the United Kingdom and the 14 other Commonwealth realms. Charles was born in Buckingham Palace during the reign of his maternal grandfather, King George VI, and became heir apparent when his mother, Queen Elizabeth II, acceded to the throne in 1952. He was created Prince of Wales in 1958 and his investiture was held in 1969. He was educated at Cheam School and Gordonstoun, and later spent six months at the Timbertop campus of Geelong Grammar School in Victoria, Australia. After completing a history degree from the University of Cambridge, Charles served in the Royal Air Force and the Royal Navy from 1971 to 1976. In 1981, he married Lady Diana Spencer. They had two sons, William and Harry. Charles and Diana divorced in 1996, after they had each engaged in well-publicised extramarital affairs. Diana died as a result of injuries sustained in a car crash the following year. In 2005, Charles married his long-term partner, Camilla Parker Bowles. As heir apparent, Charles undertook official duties and engagements on behalf of his mother. He founded the Prince's Trust in 1976, sponsored the Prince's Charities, and became patron or president of more than 800 other charities and organisations. He advocated for the conservation of historic buildings and the importance of architecture in society. In that vein, he generated the experimental new town of Poundbury. An environmentalist, Charles supported organic farming and action to prevent climate change during his time as the manager of the Duchy of Cornwall estates, earning him awards and recognition as well as criticism; he is also a prominent critic of the adoption of genetically modified food, while his support for alternative medicine has been criticised. He has authored or co-authored 17 books. Charles became king upon his mother's death in 2022. At the age of 73 he was the oldest person to accede to the British throne, after having been the longest-serving heir apparent and Prince of Wales in British history. Significant events in his reign have included his coronation in 2023 and his cancer diagnosis the following year, the latter of which temporarily suspended planned public engagements. Charles was born at 21:14 (GMT) on 14 November 1948, during the reign of his maternal grandfather, King George VI, as the first child of Princess Elizabeth, Duchess of Edinburgh (later Queen Elizabeth II), and Philip, Duke of Edinburgh. He was delivered by Caesarean section at Buckingham Palace. His parents had three more children, Anne (born 1950), Andrew (born 1960) and Edward (born 1964). On 15 December 1948, at four weeks old, he was christened Charles Philip Arthur George in the Music Room of Buckingham Palace by the Archbishop of Canterbury, Geoffrey Fisher. George VI died on 6 February 1952 and Charles's mother acceded to the throne as Elizabeth II; Charles immediately became the heir apparent. Under a charter of Edward III in 1337, and as the monarch's eldest son, he automatically assumed the traditional titles of Duke of Cornwall and, in the Scottish peerage, the titles Duke of Rothesay, Earl of Carrick, Baron of Renfrew, Lord of the Isles, and Prince and Great Steward of Scotland. On 2 June the following year, Charles attended his mother's coronation at Westminster Abbey. When Charles turned five, a governess known as Catherine Peebles, was appointed to oversee his education at Buckingham Palace. Charles then commenced classes at Hill House School in west London in November 1956. He was the first heir apparent to attend school, rather than be educated by a private tutor. He did not receive preferential treatment from the school's founder and headmaster, Stuart Townend, who advised the Queen to have Charles train in football, because the boys were never deferential to anyone on the football field. Charles subsequently attended two of his father's former schools: Cheam School in Hampshire, from 1958, followed by Gordonstoun, in the north-east of Scotland, beginning classes there in April 1962. In his 1994 authorised biography by Jonathan Dimbleby, Charles's parents were described as physically and emotionally distant and Philip was blamed for his disregard of Charles's sensitive nature, including forcing him to attend Gordonstoun, where he was bullied. Though Charles reportedly described Gordonstoun, noted for its especially rigorous curriculum, as "Colditz in kilts", he later praised the school, stating it had taught him "a great deal about myself and my own abilities and disabilities". He said in a 1975 interview he was "glad" he had attended Gordonstoun and that the "toughness of the place" was "much exaggerated". In 1966, Charles spent two terms at the Timbertop campus of Geelong Grammar School in Victoria, Australia, during which time he visited Papua New Guinea on a school trip with his history tutor, Michael Collins Persse. In 1973, Charles described his time at Timbertop as the most enjoyable part of his whole education. Upon his return to Gordonstoun, he emulated his father in becoming head boy, and left in 1967 with six GCE O-levels and two A-levels in history and French, at grades B and C respectively. On his education, Charles later remarked, "I didn't enjoy school as much as I might have; but, that was only because I'm happier at home than anywhere else". Charles broke royal tradition when he proceeded straight to university after his A-levels, rather than joining the British Armed Forces. In October 1967, he was admitted to Trinity College, Cambridge, where he studied archaeology and anthropology for the first part of the Tripos and then switched to history for the second part. During his second year, he attended the University College of Wales in Aberystwyth, studying Welsh history and the Welsh language for one term. Charles became the first British heir apparent to earn a university degree, graduating in June 1970 from the University of Cambridge with a 2:2 Bachelor of Arts (BA) degree. Following standard practice, in August 1975, his Bachelor of Arts was promoted to a Master of Arts (MA Cantab) degree. Charles was created Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester on 26 July 1958, though his investiture was not held until 1 July 1969, when he was crowned by his mother in a televised ceremony held at Caernarfon Castle; the investiture was controversial in Wales owing to growing Welsh nationalist sentiment. He took his seat in the House of Lords the following year and he delivered his maiden speech on 13 June 1974, the first royal to speak from the floor since the future Edward VII in 1884. He spoke again in 1975. Charles began to take on more public duties, founding the Prince's Trust in 1976 and travelling to the United States in 1981. In the mid-1970s, he expressed an interest in serving as governor-general of Australia, at the suggestion of Australian prime minister Malcolm Fraser; however, because of a lack of public enthusiasm, nothing came of the proposal. In reaction, Charles commented, "so, what are you supposed to think when you are prepared to do something to help and you are just told you're not wanted?" Charles served in the Royal Air Force (RAF) and the Royal Navy. During his second year at Cambridge, he received Royal Air Force training, learning to fly the Chipmunk aircraft with the Cambridge University Air Squadron, and was presented with his RAF wings in August 1971. After the passing-out parade that September, Charles embarked on a naval career and enrolled in a six-week course at the Royal Naval College Dartmouth. He then served from 1971 to 1972 on the guided-missile destroyer HMS Norfolk and the frigates HMS Minerva, from 1972 to 1973, and HMS Jupiter in 1974. That same year, he also qualified as a helicopter pilot at RNAS Yeovilton and subsequently joined 845 Naval Air Squadron, operating from HMS Hermes. Charles spent his last 10 months of active service in the Navy commanding the coastal minehunter HMS Bronington, beginning on 9 February 1976. He took part in a parachute training course at RAF Brize Norton two years later, after being appointed colonel-in-chief of the Parachute Regiment in 1977. Charles gave up flying after crash-landing a BAe 146 in Islay in 1994, as a passenger who was invited to fly the aircraft; the crew was found negligent by a board of inquiry. In his youth, Charles was amorously linked to a number of women. His girlfriends included Georgiana Russell, the daughter of Sir John Russell, who was the British ambassador to Spain; Lady Jane Wellesley, the daughter of the 8th Duke of Wellington; Davina Sheffield; Lady Sarah Spencer; and Camilla Shand, who later became his second wife. Charles's great-uncle Lord Mountbatten advised him to "sow his wild oats and have as many affairs as he can before settling down", but, for a wife, he "should choose a suitable, attractive, and sweet-charactered girl before she has met anyone else she might fall for ... It is disturbing for women to have experiences if they have to remain on a pedestal after marriage". Early in 1974, Mountbatten began corresponding with 25-year-old Charles about a potential marriage to Amanda Knatchbull, Mountbatten's granddaughter. Charles wrote to Amanda's mother, Lady Brabourne, who was also his godmother, expressing interest in her daughter. Lady Brabourne replied approvingly, but suggested that a courtship with a 16-year-old was premature. Four years later, Mountbatten arranged for Amanda and himself to accompany Charles on his 1980 visit to India. Both fathers, however, objected; Prince Philip feared that his famous uncle would eclipse Charles, while Lord Brabourne warned that a joint visit would concentrate media attention on the cousins before they could decide on becoming a couple. In August 1979, before Charles would depart alone for India, Mountbatten was assassinated by the Irish Republican Army. When Charles returned, he proposed to Amanda. But in addition to her grandfather, she had lost her paternal grandmother and younger brother in the bomb attack and was now reluctant to join the royal family. Charles first met Lady Diana Spencer in 1977, while he was visiting her home, Althorp. He was then the companion of her elder sister Sarah and did not consider Diana romantically until mid-1980. While Charles and Diana were sitting together on a bale of hay at a friend's barbecue in July, she mentioned that he had looked forlorn and in need of care at the funeral of his great-uncle Lord Mountbatten. Soon, according to Dimbleby, "without any apparent surge in feeling, he began to think seriously of her as a potential bride" and she accompanied Charles on visits to Balmoral Castle and Sandringham House. Charles's cousin Norton Knatchbull and his wife told Charles that Diana appeared awestruck by his position and that he did not seem to be in love with her. Meanwhile, the couple's continuing courtship attracted intense attention from the press and paparazzi. When Philip told him that the media speculation would injure Diana's reputation if Charles did not come to a decision about marrying her soon, and realising that she was a suitable royal bride (according to Mountbatten's criteria), Charles construed his father's advice as a warning to proceed without further delay. He proposed to Diana in February 1981, with their engagement becoming official on 24 February; the wedding took place in St Paul's Cathedral on 29 July. Upon his marriage, Charles reduced his voluntary tax contribution from the profits of the Duchy of Cornwall from 50 per cent to 25 per cent. The couple lived at Kensington Palace and Highgrove House, near Tetbury, and had two children: William, in 1982, and Harry, in 1984. Within five years, the marriage was in trouble due to the couple's incompatibility and near 13-year age difference. By November 1986, Charles had fully resumed his affair with Camilla Parker Bowles. In a videotape recorded by Peter Settelen in 1992, Diana admitted that she had been "deeply in love with someone who worked in this environment." It was assumed that she was referring to Barry Mannakee, who had been transferred to the Diplomatic Protection Squad in 1986, after his managers determined his relationship with Diana had been inappropriate. Diana later commenced a relationship with Major James Hewitt, the family's former riding instructor. Charles and Diana's evident discomfort in each other's company led to them being dubbed "The Glums" by the press. Diana exposed Charles's affair with Parker Bowles in a book by Andrew Morton, Diana: Her True Story. Audio tapes of her own extramarital flirtations also surfaced, as did persistent suggestions that Hewitt is Prince Harry's father, based on a physical similarity between Hewitt and Harry. However, Harry had already been born by the time Diana's affair with Hewitt began. In December 1992, John Major announced the couple's legal separation in the House of Commons. Early the following year, the British press published transcripts of a passionate, bugged telephone conversation between Charles and Parker Bowles that had taken place in 1989, which was dubbed "Camillagate" and "Tampongate". Charles subsequently sought public understanding in a television film with Dimbleby, Charles: The Private Man, the Public Role, broadcast in June 1994. In an interview in the film, Charles confirmed his own extramarital affair with Parker Bowles, saying that he had rekindled their association in 1986, only after his marriage to Diana had "irretrievably broken down". This was followed by Diana's own admission of marital troubles in an interview on the BBC current affairs show Panorama, broadcast in November 1995. Referring to Charles's relationship with Parker Bowles, she said, "well, there were three of us in this marriage. So, it was a bit crowded." She also expressed doubt about her husband's suitability for kingship. Charles and Diana divorced on 28 August 1996, after being advised by the Queen in December 1995 to end the marriage. The couple shared custody of their children. Diana was killed in a car crash in Paris on 31 August 1997. Charles flew to Paris with Diana's sisters to accompany her body back to Britain. In 2003, Diana's butler Paul Burrell published a note that he claimed had been written by Diana in 1995, in which there were allegations that Charles was "planning 'an accident' in [Diana's] car, brake failure and serious head injury", so that he could remarry. When questioned by the Metropolitan Police inquiry team as a part of Operation Paget, Charles told the authorities that he did not know about his former wife's note from 1995 and could not understand why she had those feelings. The engagement of the Prince of Wales and Camilla Parker Bowles was announced on 10 February 2005. The Queen's consent to the marriage – as required by the Royal Marriages Act 1772 – was recorded in a Privy Council meeting on 2 March. In Canada, the Department of Justice determined the consent of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada was not required, as the union would not produce any heirs to the Canadian throne. Charles was the only member of the royal family to have a civil, rather than a church, wedding in England. British government documents from the 1950s and 1960s, published by the BBC, stated that such a marriage was illegal; these claims were dismissed by Charles's spokesman and explained by the sitting government to have been repealed by the Registration Service Act 1953. The union was scheduled to take place in a civil ceremony at Windsor Castle, with a subsequent religious blessing at the castle's St George's Chapel. The wedding venue was changed to Windsor Guildhall after it was realised a civil marriage at Windsor Castle would oblige the venue to be available to anyone who wished to be married there. Four days before the event, it was postponed from the originally scheduled date of 8 April until the following day in order to allow Charles and some of the invited dignitaries to attend the funeral of Pope John Paul II. Charles's parents did not attend the marriage ceremony; the Queen's reluctance to attend possibly arose from her position as Supreme Governor of the Church of England. The Queen and Duke of Edinburgh did attend the service of blessing and held a reception for the newlyweds at Windsor Castle. The blessing by Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams was televised. In 1965, Charles undertook his first public engagement by attending a student garden party at the Palace of Holyroodhouse. During his time as Prince of Wales, he undertook official duties on behalf of the Queen, completing 10,934 engagements between 2002 and 2022. He officiated at investitures and attended the funerals of foreign dignitaries. Charles made regular tours of Wales, fulfilling a week of engagements each summer, and attending important national occasions, such as opening the Senedd. The six trustees of the Royal Collection Trust met three times a year under his chairmanship. Charles also represented his mother at the independence celebrations in Fiji in 1970, the Bahamas in 1973, Papua New Guinea in 1975, Zimbabwe in 1980, and Brunei in 1984. In 1983, Christopher John Lewis, who had fired a shot with a .22 rifle at the Queen in 1981, attempted to escape a psychiatric hospital in order to assassinate Charles, who was visiting New Zealand with Diana and William. While Charles was visiting Australia on Australia Day in January 1994, David Kang fired two shots at him from a starting pistol in protest of the treatment of several hundred Cambodian asylum seekers held in detention camps. In 1995, Charles became the first member of the royal family to visit the Republic of Ireland in an official capacity. In 1997, Charles represented the Queen at the Hong Kong handover ceremony. In March 1998 Charles had laser keyhole surgery on his right knee. In March 2003 he underwent surgery at King Edward VII's Hospital to treat a hernia injury. At the funeral of Pope John Paul II in 2005, he caused controversy when he shook hands with the president of Zimbabwe, Robert Mugabe, who had been seated next to him. Charles's office subsequently released a statement saying that he could not avoid shaking Mugabe's hand and that he "finds the current Zimbabwean regime abhorrent". In 2008 a non-cancerous growth was removed from his nasal bridge. Charles represented the Queen at the opening ceremony of the 2010 Commonwealth Games in Delhi, India. In November 2010, he and Camilla were indirectly involved in student protests when their car was attacked by protesters. In November 2013, he represented the Queen for the first time at a Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, in Colombo, Sri Lanka. Charles and Camilla made their first joint trip to the Republic of Ireland in May 2015. The trip was called an important step in "promoting peace and reconciliation" by the British Embassy. During the trip, Charles shook hands in Galway with Gerry Adams, leader of Sinn Féin and widely believed to be the leader of the IRA, the militant group that had assassinated Lord Mountbatten in 1979. The event was described by the media as a "historic handshake" and a "significant moment for Anglo-Irish relations". Commonwealth heads of government decided at their 2018 meeting that Charles would be the next Head of the Commonwealth after the Queen. The head is chosen and therefore not hereditary. In March 2019, at the request of the British government, Charles and Camilla went on an official tour of Cuba, making them the first British royals to visit the country. The tour was seen as an effort to form a closer relationship between Cuba and the United Kingdom. Charles contracted COVID-19 during the pandemic in March 2020. Several newspapers were critical that Charles and Camilla were tested promptly at a time when many NHS doctors, nurses and patients had been unable to be tested expeditiously. He tested positive for COVID-19 for a second time in February 2022. He and Camilla, who also tested positive, had received doses of a COVID-19 vaccine in February 2021. Charles attended the November 2021 ceremonies to mark Barbados's transition into a parliamentary republic, abolishing the position of monarch of Barbados. He was invited by Prime Minister Mia Mottley as the future Head of the Commonwealth; it was the first time that a member of the royal family attended the transition of a realm to a republic. In May of the following year, Charles attended the State Opening of the British Parliament, delivering the Queen's Speech on behalf of his mother, as a counsellor of state. Charles acceded to the British throne on his mother's death on 8 September 2022. He was the longest-serving British heir apparent, having surpassed Edward VII's record of 59 years on 20 April 2011. Charles was the oldest person to succeed to the British throne, at the age of 73. The previous record holder, William IV, was 64 when he became king in 1830. Charles gave his first speech to the nation at 6 pm on 9 September, in which he paid tribute to his mother and announced the appointment of his elder son, William, as Prince of Wales. The following day, the Accession Council publicly proclaimed Charles as king, the ceremony being televised for the first time. Attendees included Queen Camilla, Prince William, and the British prime minister, Liz Truss, along with her six living predecessors. The proclamation was also read out by local authorities around the United Kingdom. Other realms signed and read their own proclamations, as did Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland, British Overseas Territories, Crown Dependencies, Canadian provinces, and Australian states. Charles and Camilla's coronation took place at Westminster Abbey on 6 May 2023. Plans had been made for many years, under the code name Operation Golden Orb. Reports before his accession suggested that Charles's coronation would be simpler than his mother's in 1953, with the ceremony expected to be "shorter, smaller, less expensive, and more representative of different faiths and community groups – falling in line with the King's wish to reflect the ethnic diversity of modern Britain". Nonetheless, the coronation was a Church of England rite, including the coronation oath, the anointment, delivery of the orb, and enthronement. In July they attended a national service of thanksgiving where Charles was presented with the Honours of Scotland in St Giles' Cathedral. Charles and Camilla have engaged in three state visits and received two. In November 2022 they hosted the South African president, Cyril Ramaphosa, during the first official state visit to Britain of Charles's reign. In March the following year, the King and Queen embarked on a state visit to Germany; Charles became the first British monarch to address the Bundestag. Similarly, in September, he became the first British monarch to give a speech from France's Senate chamber during his state visit to the country. The following month, the King visited Kenya where he faced pressure to apologise for British colonial actions. In a speech at the state banquet, he acknowledged "abhorrent and unjustifiable acts of violence", but did not formally apologise. In January 2024, Charles underwent a "corrective procedure" at the London Clinic to treat benign prostate enlargement, which resulted in the postponement of some of his public engagements. In February, Buckingham Palace announced that cancer had been discovered during the treatment, but that it was not prostate cancer. Although his public duties were postponed, it was reported Charles would continue to fulfil his constitutional functions during his outpatient treatment. He released a statement espousing his support for cancer charities and that he "remain[ed] positive" on making a full recovery. In March, Camilla deputised for him in his absence at the Commonwealth Day service at Westminster Abbey and at the Royal Maundy at Worcester Cathedral. He made his first major public appearance since his cancer diagnosis at the Easter service held at St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle, on 31 March. Since founding the Prince's Trust in 1976, using his £7,500 of severance pay from the Navy, Charles has established 16 more charitable organisations and now serves as president of each. Together, they form a loose alliance, the Prince's Charities, which describes itself as "the largest multi-cause charitable enterprise in the United Kingdom, raising over £100 million annually ... [and is] active across a broad range of areas including education and young people, environmental sustainability, the built environment, responsible business and enterprise, and international". As Prince of Wales, Charles became patron or president of over 800 other charities and organisations. The Prince's Charities Canada was established in 2010, in a similar fashion to its namesake in Britain. Charles uses his tours of Canada as a way to help draw attention to youth, the disabled, the environment, the arts, medicine, the elderly, heritage conservation, and education. He has also set up the Prince's Charities Australia, based in Melbourne, to provide a coordinating presence for his Australian and international charitable endeavours. Charles has supported humanitarian projects; for example, he and his sons took part in ceremonies that marked the 1998 International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. Charles was one of the first public figures to express strong concerns about the human rights record of the Romanian dictator Nicolae Ceaușescu, initiating objections in the international arena, and subsequently supported the FARA Foundation, a charity for Romanian orphans and abandoned children. Two of Charles's charities, the Prince's Foundation and the Prince of Wales's Charitable Fund (later renamed the King's Foundation and King Charles III Charitable Fund, respectively), came under scrutiny in 2021 and 2022 for accepting donations the media deemed inappropriate. In August 2021, it was announced that the Prince's Foundation was launching an investigation into the reports, with Charles's support. The Charity Commission also launched an investigation into allegations that the donations meant for the Prince's Foundation had been instead sent to the Mahfouz Foundation. In February 2022, the Metropolitan Police launched an investigation into the cash-for-honours allegations linked to the foundation, passing their evidence to the Crown Prosecution Service for deliberation in October. In August 2023, the Metropolitan Police announced that they had concluded their investigations and no further actions would be taken. The Times reported in June 2022 that, between 2011 and 2015, Charles accepted €3 million in cash from Qatari prime minister Hamad bin Jassim bin Jaber Al Thani. There was no evidence that the payments were illegal or that it was not intended for the money to go to the charity, although, the Charity Commission stated it would review the information and announced in July 2022 that there would be no further investigation. In the same month, The Times reported that the Prince of Wales's Charitable Fund received a donation of £1 million from Bakr bin Laden and Shafiq bin Laden – both half-brothers of Osama bin Laden – during a private meeting in 2013. The Charity Commission described the decision to accept donations as a "matter for trustees" and added that no investigation was required. From young adulthood, Charles encouraged understanding of Indigenous voices, claiming they held crucial messages about preservation of the land, respecting community and shared values, resolving conflict, and recognising and making good on past iniquities. Charles dovetailed this view with his efforts against climate change, as well as reconciliation between Indigenous and non-Indigenous peoples and his charitable work in Canada. At CHOGM 2022, Charles, who was representing the Queen, raised that reconciliation process as an example for dealing with the history of slavery in the British Empire, for which he expressed his sorrow. Letters sent by Charles to government ministers in 2004 and 2005 expressing his concerns over various policy issues – the so-called black spider memos – presented potential embarrassment following a challenge by The Guardian newspaper to release the letters under the Freedom of Information Act 2000. In March 2015, the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom decided that Charles's letters must be released. The Cabinet Office published the letters in May 2015. The reaction was largely supportive of Charles, with little criticism of him; the press variously described the memos as "underwhelming" and "harmless", and concluded that their release had "backfired on those who seek to belittle him". It was revealed in the same year that Charles had access to confidential Cabinet papers. In October 2020, a letter sent by Charles to the governor-general of Australia, Sir John Kerr, after Kerr's dismissal of Prime Minister Gough Whitlam in 1975, was released as part of the collection of palace letters regarding the Australian constitutional crisis. In the letter, Charles was supportive of Kerr's decision, writing that what Kerr "did last year was right and the courageous thing to do". The Times reported in June 2022 that Charles had privately described the British government's Rwanda asylum plan as "appalling" and he feared that it would overshadow the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Rwanda that same month. It was later claimed that Cabinet ministers had warned Charles to avoid making political comments, as they feared a constitutional crisis could arise if he continued to make such statements once he became king. Charles has openly expressed his views on architecture and urban planning; he fostered the advancement of New Classical architecture and asserted that he "care[s] deeply about issues such as the environment, architecture, inner-city renewal, and the quality of life." In a speech given for the 150th anniversary of the Royal Institute of British Architects in May 1984, he described a proposed extension to the National Gallery in London as a "monstrous carbuncle on the face of a much-loved friend" and deplored the "glass stumps and concrete towers" of modern architecture. Charles called for local community involvement in architectural choices and asked, "why has everything got to be vertical, straight, unbending, only at right angles – and functional?" Charles has "a deep understanding of Islamic art and architecture" and has been involved in the construction of a building and garden at the Oxford Centre for Islamic Studies, which combine Islamic and Oxford architectural styles. In Charles's 1989 book A Vision of Britain, and in speeches and essays, he has been critical of modern architecture, arguing that traditional designs and methods should guide contemporary ones. He has continued to campaign for traditional urbanism, human scale, restoration of historic buildings, and sustainable design despite criticism in the press. Two of his charities – the Prince's Regeneration Trust and the Prince's Foundation for Building Community, which were later merged into one charity – promote his views. The village of Poundbury was built on land owned by the Duchy of Cornwall to a master plan by Léon Krier, under the guidance of Charles and in line with his philosophy. In 2013, developments for the suburb of Nansledan began on the estate of the Duchy of Cornwall with Charles's endorsement. Charles helped purchase Dumfries House and its complete collection of 18th century furnishings in 2007, taking a £20m loan from his charitable trust to contribute toward the £45m cost. The house and gardens remain property of the Prince's Foundation and serve as a museum and community and skills training centre. This led to the development of Knockroon, called the "Scottish Poundbury". After lamenting in 1996 the unbridled destruction of many of Canada's historic urban cores, Charles offered his assistance to the Department of Canadian Heritage in creating a trust modelled on Britain's National Trust, a plan that was implemented with the passage of the federal budget in 2007. In 1999, Charles agreed to the use of his title for the Prince of Wales Prize for Municipal Heritage Leadership, awarded by the National Trust for Canada to municipal governments that have committed to the conservation of historic places. Whilst visiting the US and surveying the damage caused by Hurricane Katrina, Charles received the National Building Museum's Vincent Scully Prize in 2005 for his efforts in regard to architecture; he donated $25,000 of the prize money towards restoring storm-damaged communities. For his work as patron of New Classical architecture, Charles was awarded the 2012 Driehaus Architecture Prize from the University of Notre Dame. The Worshipful Company of Carpenters installed Charles as an Honorary Liveryman "in recognition of his interest in London's architecture." Charles has occasionally intervened in projects that employ architectural styles such as modernism and functionalism. In 2009, Charles wrote to the Qatari royal family – the financier of the redevelopment of the Chelsea Barracks site – labelling Lord Rogers's design for the site "unsuitable". Rogers claimed that Charles had also intervened to block his designs for the Royal Opera House and Paternoster Square. CPC Group, the project developer, took a case against Qatari Diar to the High Court. After the suit was settled, the CPC Group apologised to Charles "for any offence caused ... during the course of the proceedings". Since the 1970s, Charles has promoted environmental awareness. At the age of 21, he delivered his first speech on environmental issues in his capacity as the chairman of the Welsh Countryside Committee. An avid gardener, Charles has also emphasised the importance of talking to plants, stating that "I happily talk to the plants and trees, and listen to them. I think it's absolutely crucial". His interest in gardening began in 1980 when he took over the Highgrove estate. His "healing garden", based on sacred geometry and ancient religious symbolism, went on display at the Chelsea Flower Show in 2002. Upon moving into Highgrove House, Charles developed an interest in organic farming, which culminated in the 1990 launch of his own organic brand, Duchy Originals, which sells more than 200 different sustainably produced products; the profits (over £6 million by 2010) are donated to the Prince's Charities. Charles became involved with farming and various industries within it, regularly meeting with farmers to discuss their trade. A prominent critic of the practice, Charles has also spoken against the use of GM crops, and in a letter to Tony Blair in 1998, Charles criticised the development of genetically modified foods. The Sustainable Markets Initiative – a project that encourages putting sustainability at the centre of all activities – was launched by Charles at the World Economic Forum's annual meeting in Davos in January 2020. In May of the same year, the initiative and the World Economic Forum initiated the Great Reset project, a five-point plan concerned with enhancing sustainable economic growth following the global recession caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. As early as 1985, Charles was questioning meat consumption. In the 1985 Royal Special television programme, he told host Alastair Burnet that "I actually now don't eat as much meat as I used to. I eat more fish." He also pointed out the societal double standard whereby eating meat is not questioned but eating less meat means "all hell seems to break loose." In 2021, Charles spoke to the BBC about the environment and revealed that, two days per week, he eats no meat nor fish and, one day per week, he eats no dairy products. In 2022, it was reported that he eats a breakfast of fruit salad, seeds, and tea. He does not eat lunch, but takes a break for tea at 5:00 p.m. and eats dinner at 8:30 p.m., returning to work until midnight or after. Ahead of Christmas dinner in 2022, Charles confirmed to animal rights group PETA that foie gras would not be served at any royal residences; he had stopped the use of foie gras at his own properties for more than a decade before becoming king. During a September 2023 state banquet at the Palace of Versailles, it was reported that Charles did not want foie gras or out-of-season asparagus on the menu. Instead he was served lobster. Charles does not like chocolate, coffee, or garlic. The holy chrism oil used at Charles's coronation was vegan, made from oils of olive, sesame, rose, jasmine, cinnamon, neroli, and benzoin, along with amber and orange blossom. His mother's chrism oil contained animal-based oils. Charles delivered a speech at the 2021 G20 Rome summit, describing COP26 as "the last chance saloon" for preventing climate change and asking for actions that would lead to a green-led, sustainable economy. In his speech at the opening ceremony for COP26, he repeated his sentiments from the previous year, stating that "a vast military-style campaign" was needed "to marshal the strength of the global private sector" for tackling climate change. In 2022, the media alleged that Liz Truss had advised Charles against attending COP27, to which advice he agreed. Charles delivered the opening speech at COP28, saying among others he prayed "with all my heart that COP28 will be a critical turning point towards genuine transformational action." Charles, who is patron of the Cambridge Institute for Sustainability Leadership, introduced the Climate Action Scholarships for students from small island nations in partnership with University of Cambridge, University of Toronto, University of Melbourne, McMaster University, and University of Montreal in March 2022. In 2010 he funded The Prince's Countryside Fund (renamed The Royal Countryside Fund in 2023), a charity which aims for a "confident, robust and sustainable agricultural and rural community". Charles has controversially championed alternative medicine, including homeopathy. He first publicly expressed his interest in the topic in December 1982, in an address to the British Medical Association. This speech was seen as "combative" and "critical" of modern medicine and was met with anger by some medical professionals. Similarly, the Prince's Foundation for Integrated Health (FIH) attracted opposition from the scientific and medical community over its campaign encouraging general practitioners to offer herbal and other alternative treatments to NHS patients. In April 2008, The Times published a letter from Edzard Ernst, Professor of Complementary Medicine at the University of Exeter, which asked the FIH to recall two guides promoting alternative medicine. That year, Ernst published a book with Simon Singh called Trick or Treatment: Alternative Medicine on Trial and mockingly dedicated to "HRH the Prince of Wales". The last chapter is highly critical of Charles's advocacy of complementary and alternative treatments. Charles's Duchy Originals produced a variety of complementary medicinal products, including a "Detox Tincture" that Ernst denounced as "financially exploiting the vulnerable" and "outright quackery". Charles personally wrote at least seven letters to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency shortly before it relaxed the rules governing labelling of such herbal products, a move that was widely condemned by scientists and medical bodies. It was reported in October 2009 that Charles had lobbied the health secretary, Andy Burnham, regarding greater provision of alternative treatments in the NHS. Following accounting irregularities, the FIH announced its closure in April 2010. The FIH was re-branded and re-launched later in the year as the College of Medicine, of which Charles became a patron in 2019. From his youth until 2005, Charles was an avid player of competitive polo. Charles also frequently took part in fox hunting until the sport was banned in the United Kingdom in 2005. By the late 1990s, opposition to the activity was growing when Charles's participation was viewed as a "political statement" by those who were opposed to it. Charles suffered several polo and hunting-related injuries throughout the years, including a two-inch scar on his left cheek in 1980, a broken arm in 1990, a torn cartilage in his left knee in 1992, a broken rib in 1998, and a fractured shoulder in 2001. Charles has been a keen salmon angler since youth and supported Orri Vigfússon's efforts to protect the North Atlantic salmon. He frequently fishes the River Dee in Aberdeenshire, Scotland, and claims his most special angling memories are from his time spent in Vopnafjörður, Iceland. Charles is a supporter of Burnley F.C. Apart from hunting, Charles has also participated in target rifle competitions, representing the House of Lords in the Vizianagram Match (Lords vs. Commons) at Bisley. He became President of the British National Rifle Association in 1977. Charles has been involved in performance since his youth, and appeared in sketches and revues while studying at Cambridge. Charles is president or patron of more than 20 performing arts organisations, including the Royal College of Music, Royal Opera, English Chamber Orchestra, Philharmonia Orchestra, Welsh National Opera, Royal Shakespeare Company (attending performances in Stratford-Upon-Avon, supporting fundraising events, and attending the company's annual general meeting), British Film Institute, and Purcell School. In 2000, he revived the tradition of appointing an official harpist to the Prince of Wales, in order to foster Welsh talent at playing the national instrument of Wales. Charles is a keen watercolourist, having published books on the subject and exhibited and sold a number of his works to raise money for charity; in 2016, it was estimated that he had sold lithographs of his watercolours for a total of £2 million from a shop at his Highgrove House residence. For his 50th birthday, 50 of his watercolours were exhibited at Hampton Court Palace and, for his 70th birthday, his works were exhibited at the National Gallery of Australia. In 2001, 20 lithographs of his watercolour paintings illustrating his country estates were exhibited at the Florence International Biennale of Contemporary Art and 79 of his paintings were put on display in London in 2022. To mark the 25th anniversary of his investiture as Prince of Wales in 1994, the Royal Mail issued a series of postage stamps that featured his paintings. Charles is Honorary President of the Royal Academy of Arts Development Trust and, in 2015, 2022, and 2023, commissioned paintings of 12 D-Day veterans, seven Holocaust survivors, and ten members of the Windrush generation, respectively, which went on display at the Queen's Gallery in Buckingham Palace. Charles is the author of several books and has contributed a foreword or preface to numerous books by others. He has also been featured in a variety of documentary films. Shortly after his accession to the throne, Charles publicly described himself as "a committed Anglican Christian"; at age 16, during Easter 1965, he had been confirmed into the Anglican communion by Archbishop of Canterbury Michael Ramsey in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle. The King is the Supreme Governor of the Church of England and a member of the Church of Scotland; he swore an oath to uphold that church immediately after he was proclaimed king. He attends services at various Anglican churches close to Highgrove and attends the Church of Scotland's Crathie Kirk with the rest of the royal family when staying at Balmoral Castle. Laurens van der Post became a friend of Charles in 1977; he was dubbed the prince's "spiritual guru" and was godfather to Prince William. From van der Post, Charles developed a focus on philosophy and an interest in other religions. Charles expressed his philosophical views in his 2010 book, Harmony: A New Way of Looking at Our World, which won a Nautilus Book Award. He has also visited Eastern Orthodox monasteries on Mount Athos, in Romania, and in Serbia, and met with Eastern Church leaders in Jerusalem in 2020, during a visit that culminated in an ecumenical service in the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem and a walk through the city accompanied by Christian and Muslim dignitaries. Charles also attended the consecration of Britain's first Syriac Orthodox cathedral, St Thomas Cathedral, Acton. Charles is patron of the Oxford Centre for Islamic Studies at the University of Oxford and attended the inauguration of the Markfield Institute of Higher Education, which is dedicated to Islamic studies in a multicultural context. In his 1994 documentary with Dimbleby, Charles said that, when king, he wished to be seen as a "defender of faith", rather than the British monarch's traditional title of Defender of the Faith, "preferr[ing] to embrace all religious traditions and 'the pattern of the divine, which I think is in all of us.'" This attracted controversy at the time, as well as speculation that the coronation oath might be altered. He stated in 2015 that he would retain the title of Defender of the Faith, whilst "ensuring that other people's faiths can also be practised", which he sees as a duty of the Church of England. Charles reaffirmed this theme shortly after his accession and declared that his duties as sovereign included "the duty to protect the diversity of our country, including by protecting the space for faith itself and its practice through the religions, cultures, traditions, and beliefs to which our hearts and minds direct us as individuals." His inclusive, multi-faith approach and his own Christian beliefs were expressed in his first Christmas message as king. Since his birth, Charles has received close media attention, which increased as he matured. It has been an ambivalent relationship, largely impacted by his marriages to Diana and Camilla and their aftermath, but also centred on his future conduct as king. Described as the "world's most eligible bachelor" in the late 1970s, Charles was subsequently overshadowed by Diana. After her death, the media regularly breached Charles's privacy and printed exposés. Known for expressing his opinions, when asked during an interview to mark his 70th birthday whether this would continue in the same way once he is king, he responded "No. It won't. I'm not that stupid. I do realise that it is a separate exercise being sovereign. So, of course, you know, I understand entirely how that should operate." In 2023, the New Statesman named Charles as the fourth most powerful right-wing figure of the year, describing him as a "romantic traditionalist" and "the very last reactionary in public life" for his support of various traditionalist think-tanks and previous writings. A 2018 BMG Research poll found that 46 per cent of Britons wanted Charles to abdicate immediately on his mother's death, in favour of William. However, a 2021 opinion poll reported that 60 per cent of the British public had a favourable opinion of him. On his accession to the throne, The Statesman reported an opinion poll that put Charles's popularity with the British people at 42 per cent. More recent polling suggested that his popularity increased sharply after he became king. According to YouGov, as of April 2023, Charles had an approval rating of 55 per cent. In 1994, German tabloid Bild published nude photos of Charles that were taken while he was vacationing in Le Barroux; they had reportedly been put up for sale for £30,000. Buckingham Palace reacted by stating that it was "unjustifiable for anybody to suffer this sort of intrusion". Charles, "so often a target of the press, got his chance to return fire" in 2002, when addressing "scores of editors, publishers, and other media executives" gathered at St Bride's Fleet Street to celebrate 300 years of journalism. Defending public servants from "the corrosive drip of constant criticism", he noted that the press had been "awkward, cantankerous, cynical, bloody-minded, at times intrusive, at times inaccurate, and at times deeply unfair and harmful to individuals and to institutions." But, he concluded, regarding his own relations with the press, "from time to time we are probably both a bit hard on each other, exaggerating the downsides and ignoring the good points in each." In 2006, Charles filed a court case against The Mail on Sunday, after excerpts of his personal journals were published, revealing his opinions on matters such as the transfer of sovereignty over Hong Kong to China in 1997, in which Charles described the Chinese government officials as "appalling old waxworks". Charles and Camilla were named in 2011 as individuals whose confidential information was reportedly targeted or actually acquired in conjunction with the news media phone hacking scandal. The Independent noted in 2015 that Charles would only speak to broadcasters "on the condition they have signed a 15-page contract, demanding that Clarence House attends both the 'rough cut' and 'fine cut' edits of films and, if it is unhappy with the final product, can 'remove the contribution in its entirety from the programme'." This contract stipulated that all questions directed at Charles must be pre-approved and vetted by his representatives. In 2023, The Guardian estimated Charles's personal wealth at £1.8 billion. This estimate includes the assets of the Duchy of Lancaster worth £653 million (and paying Charles an annual income of £20 million), jewels worth £533 million, real estate worth £330 million, shares and investments worth £142 million, a stamp collection worth at least £100 million, racehorses worth £27 million, artworks worth £24 million, and cars worth £6.3 million. Most of this wealth which he inherited from his mother is exempt from inheritance tax. Clarence House, previously the residence of the Queen Mother, was Charles's official London residence from 2003, after being renovated at a cost of £4.5 million. He previously shared apartments eight and nine at Kensington Palace with Diana before moving to York House at St James's Palace, which remained his principal residence until 2003. Highgrove House in Gloucestershire is owned by the Duchy of Cornwall, having been purchased for Charles's use in 1980, and which he rented for £336,000 per annum. Since William became Duke of Cornwall, Charles is expected to pay £700,000 per annum for use of the property. Charles also owns a property near the village of Viscri in Romania. As Prince of Wales, Charles's primary source of income was generated from the Duchy of Cornwall, which owns 133,658 acres of land (around 54,090 hectares), including farming, residential, and commercial properties, as well as an investment portfolio. Since 1993, Charles has paid tax voluntarily under the Memorandum of Understanding on Royal Taxation, updated in 2013. Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs were asked in December 2012 to investigate alleged tax avoidance by the Duchy of Cornwall. The Duchy is named in the Paradise Papers, a set of confidential electronic documents relating to offshore investment that were leaked to the German newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung. Charles has held many titles and honorary military positions throughout the Commonwealth, is sovereign of many orders in his own countries and has received honours and awards from around the world. In each of his realms, he has a distinct title that follows a similar formula: King of Saint Lucia and of His other Realms and Territories in Saint Lucia, King of Australia and His other Realms and Territories in Australia, etc. In the Isle of Man, which is a Crown Dependency rather than a separate realm, he is known as Lord of Mann. Charles is also styled Defender of the Faith. There had been speculation throughout Elizabeth II's reign as to what regnal name Charles would choose upon his accession; instead of Charles III, he could have chosen to reign as George VII or used one of his other given names. It was reported that he might use George in honour of his grandfather George VI and to avoid associations with previous controversial kings named Charles. Charles's office asserted in 2005 that no decision had yet been made. Speculation continued for a few hours following his mother's death, until Liz Truss announced and Clarence House confirmed that Charles had chosen the regnal name Charles III. Charles, who left active military service in 1976, was awarded the highest rank in all three armed services in 2012 by Queen Elizabeth II: Admiral of the Fleet, Field Marshal, and Marshal of the Royal Air Force. As Prince of Wales, Charles's coat of arms was based on the arms of the United Kingdom, differenced with a white label and an inescutcheon of the Principality of Wales, surmounted by the heir apparent's crown, and with the motto Ich dien (German: [ɪç ˈdiːn], "I serve") instead of Dieu et mon droit. When Charles became king, he inherited the royal coats of arms of the United Kingdom and of Canada. The design of his royal cypher, featuring a depiction of the Tudor crown instead of St Edward's Crown, was revealed on 27 September 2022. According to the College of Arms, the Tudor crown will now be used in representations of the royal arms of the United Kingdom and on uniforms and crown badges. The banners used by Charles as Prince of Wales varied depending upon location. His personal standard for the United Kingdom was the Royal Standard of the United Kingdom differenced as in his arms, with a label of three points argent and the escutcheon of the arms of the Principality of Wales in the centre. It was used outside Wales, Scotland, Cornwall, and Canada, and throughout the entire United Kingdom when Charles was acting in an official capacity associated with the British Armed Forces. The personal flag for use in Wales was based upon the Royal Badge of Wales. In Scotland, the personal banner used between 1974 and 2022 was based upon three ancient Scottish titles: Duke of Rothesay (heir apparent to the King of Scots), High Steward of Scotland, and Lord of the Isles. In Cornwall, the banner was the arms of the Duke of Cornwall. In 2011, the Canadian Heraldic Authority introduced a personal heraldic banner for the Prince of Wales for Canada, consisting of the shield of the Royal Coat of Arms of Canada defaced with both a blue roundel of the Prince of Wales's feathers surrounded by a wreath of gold maple leaves and a white label of three points. Banners of arms The royal standard of the United Kingdom is used to represent the King in the United Kingdom and on official visits overseas, except in Canada. It is the royal arms in banner form undifferentiated, having been used by successive British monarchs since 1702. The royal standard of Canada is used by the King in Canada and while acting on behalf of Canada overseas. It is the escutcheon of the Royal Coat of Arms of Canada in banner form undifferentiated. Royal Standards List of current monarchs of sovereign states List of covers of Time magazine (1960s), (1970s), (1980s), (2010s), (2020s) In addition to the United Kingdom, the fourteen other realms are Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, The Bahamas, Belize, Canada, Grenada, Jamaica, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, the Solomon Islands, and Tuvalu. As the reigning monarch, Charles does not usually use a family name, but when one is needed, it is Mountbatten-Windsor. As monarch, Charles is Supreme Governor of the Church of England. He is also a member of the Church of Scotland. He was reportedly named "Charles" after his godfather Haakon VII of Norway, who was called "Uncle Charles" by Elizabeth II. Prince Charles's godparents were: the King of the United Kingdom (his maternal grandfather); the King of Norway (his paternal cousin twice removed and maternal great-great-uncle by marriage, for whom Charles's great-great-uncle the Earl of Athlone stood proxy); Queen Mary (his maternal great-grandmother); Princess Margaret (his maternal aunt); Prince George of Greece and Denmark (his paternal great-uncle, for whom the Duke of Edinburgh stood proxy); the Dowager Marchioness of Milford Haven (his paternal great-grandmother); the Lady Brabourne (his cousin); and the Hon David Bowes-Lyon (his maternal great-uncle). Mountbatten had served as the last British viceroy and first governor-general of India. London's first daily newspaper, the Daily Courant, was published in 1702. Namely, the Stuart kings Charles I, who was beheaded, and Charles II, who was known for his promiscuous lifestyle. Charles Edward Stuart, once a Stuart pretender to the English and Scottish thrones, was called Charles III by his supporters. "The Royal Family name". Official website of the British monarchy. Archived from the original on 15 February 2009. Retrieved 3 February 2009. "No. 38455". The London Gazette. 15 November 1948. p. 1. Brandreth 2007, p. 120. Bland, Archie (1 May 2023). "King Charles: 71 facts about his long road to the throne". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 February 2024. Retrieved 5 March 2024. Holden, Anthony (1980). Charles, Prince of Wales. p. 68. ISBN 978-0-330-26167-8. "Close ties through the generations". The Royal House of Norway. 8 September 2022. Archived from the original on 23 September 2023. Retrieved 23 September 2023. "The Christening of Prince Charles". Royal Collection Trust. Archived from the original on 17 December 2021. Retrieved 17 December 2021. "HRH The Prince of Wales | Prince of Wales". Clarence House. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Retrieved 13 September 2022. "The Book of the Baptism Service of Prince Charles". Royal Collection Trust. Archived from the original on 20 April 2023. Retrieved 25 April 2023. Brandreth 2007, p. 127. "50 facts about the Queen's Coronation". The Royal Family. Archived from the original on 7 February 2021. Retrieved 3 January 2019. Gordon, Peter; Lawton, Denis (2003). Royal Education: Past, Present, and Future. F. Cass. p. 215. ISBN 978-0-7146-8386-7. Retrieved 18 September 2022. "About the Prince of Wales". Royal Household. 26 December 2018. Archived from the original on 9 May 2016. Johnson, Bonnie; Healy, Laura Sanderson; Thorpe-Tracey, Rosemary; Nolan, Cathy (25 April 1988). "Growing Up Royal". Time. Archived from the original on 31 March 2005. Retrieved 4 June 2009. "Lieutenant Colonel H. Stuart Townend". The Times. 30 October 2002. ISSN 0140-0460. Archived from the original on 22 June 2018. Retrieved 29 May 2009. "HRH The Prince of Wales". Debrett's. Archived from the original on 4 July 2012. Retrieved 27 August 2012. Brandreth 2007, p. 139. Rocco, Fiammetta (18 October 1994). "Flawed Family: This week the Prince of Wales disclosed still powerful resentments against his mother and father". The Independent (UK). Independent Digital News & Media Ltd. ISSN 1741-9743. OCLC 185201487. Archived from the original on 16 February 2022. Retrieved 15 February 2022. Rudgard, Olivia (10 December 2017). "Colditz in kilts? Charles loved it, says old school as Gordonstoun hits back at The Crown". The Daily Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. OCLC 49632006. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 13 December 2017. "The Prince of Wales – Education". Clarence House. Archived from the original on 13 November 2012. Retrieved 8 December 2012. "The New Boy at Timbertop". The Australian Women's Weekly. Vol. 33, no. 37. 9 February 1966. p. 7. Archived from the original on 1 April 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2018 – via National Library of Australia.; "Timbertop – Prince Charles Australia" (Video with audio, 1 min 28 secs). British Pathé. 1966. Archived from the original on 11 March 2021. Retrieved 12 January 2018 – via YouTube. "Prince had happy time at Timbertop". Australian Associated Press. Vol. 47, no. 13, 346. The Canberra Times. 31 January 1973. p. 11. Archived from the original on 1 April 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2018 – via National Library of Australia. Brandreth 2007, p. 145. Brandreth 2007, p. 151 Holland, Fiona (10 September 2022). "God Save The King!". Trinity College Cambridge. Archived from the original on 14 September 2022. Retrieved 14 September 2022. "No. 41460". The London Gazette. 29 July 1958. p. 4733.; "The Prince of Wales – Previous Princes of Wales". Prince of Wales. Archived from the original on 11 October 2008. Retrieved 12 October 2008. "The Prince of Wales – Investiture". Clarence House. Archived from the original on 20 October 2008. Retrieved 12 October 2008. Jones, Craig Owen (2013). "Songs of Malice and Spite"?: Wales, Prince Charles, and an Anti-Investiture Ballad of Dafydd Iwan (PDF) (7th ed.). Michigan Publishing. p. 1. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 December 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2023. "H.R.H. The Prince of Wales Introduced". Hansard. 11 February 1970. HL Deb vol 307 c871. Archived from the original on 19 October 2020. Retrieved 16 October 2019.; "The Prince of Wales – Biography". Prince of Wales. Archived from the original on 9 November 2012. Retrieved 12 October 2008. "Sport and Leisure". Hansard. 13 June 1974. HL Deb vol 352 cc624–630. Archived from the original on 18 October 2020. Retrieved 16 October 2019. Shuster, Alvin (14 June 1974). "Prince Charles Speaks in Lords". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. OCLC 1645522. Archived from the original on 29 April 2020. Retrieved 12 June 2018. "Voluntary Service in the Community". Hansard. 25 June 1975. HL Deb vol 361 cc1418–1423. Archived from the original on 27 July 2020. Retrieved 16 October 2019. "The Prince's Trust". The Prince's Charities. Archived from the original on 21 September 2008. Retrieved 12 October 2008. Ferretti, Fred (18 June 1981). "Prince Charles pays a quick visit to city". The New York Times. OCLC 1645522. Archived from the original on 29 April 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2013. Daley, Paul (9 November 2015). "Long to reign over Aus? Prince Charles and Australia go way back". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 13 June 2018. Retrieved 13 June 2018. David Murray (24 November 2009). "Next governor-general could be Prince Harry, William". The Australian. Archived from the original on 29 April 2020. Retrieved 12 June 2018. Brandreth 2007, pp. 169–170 "Military Career of the Prince of Wales". Prince of Wales. Archived from the original on 14 May 2013. Retrieved 19 April 2013. "Prince Charles after receiving his wings 20 August 1971". Royal Collection Trust. Archived from the original on 5 October 2022. Retrieved 5 October 2022.; "Prince Charles attends RAF Cranwell ceremony". BBC News. 16 July 2020. Archived from the original on 5 October 2022. Retrieved 5 October 2022. Brandreth 2007, p. 170. "Prince Charles: Video shows 'upside down' parachute jump". BBC News. 15 July 2021. Archived from the original on 8 October 2022. Retrieved 5 October 2022. "Occurrence # 187927". Flight Safety Foundation. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 3 May 2023.; Boggan, Steve (20 July 1995). "Prince gives up flying royal aircraft after Hebrides crash". The Independent (UK). Archived from the original on 24 March 2017. Brandreth 2007, p. 192. Brandreth 2007, p. 193. Brandreth 2007, p. 194. Brandreth 2007, p. 195. Brandreth 2007, pp. 15–17, 178. Junor 2005, p. 72. Dimbleby 1994, pp. 204–206; Brandreth 2007, p. 200 Dimbleby 1994, p. 263. Dimbleby 1994, pp. 263–265. Dimbleby 1994, p. 279. Dimbleby 1994, pp. 280–282. Dimbleby 1994, pp. 281–283. "Royally Minted: What we give them and how they spend it". New Statesman. Vol. 138, no. 4956–4968. London. 13 July 2009. Retrieved 7 May 2023. Brown 2007, p. 720. Smith 2000, p. 561. Griffiths, Eleanor Bley (1 January 2020). "The truth behind Charles and Camilla's affair storyline in The Crown". Radio Times. Archived from the original on 8 September 2022. Retrieved 9 September 2022. "Diana 'wanted to live with guard'". BBC News. 7 December 2004. Archived from the original on 31 July 2017. Retrieved 31 July 2017. Langley, William (12 December 2004). "The Mannakee file". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 31 July 2017. Retrieved 31 July 2017. Lawson, Mark (7 August 2017). "Diana: In Her Own Words – admirers have nothing to fear from the Channel 4 tapes". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 September 2017. Retrieved 22 October 2017. Milmo, Cahal (8 December 2004). "Conspiracy theorists feast on inquiry into death of Diana's minder". The Independent (UK). Independent Digital News & Media Ltd. ISSN 1741-9743. OCLC 185201487. Archived from the original on 1 August 2017. Retrieved 31 July 2017. Duboff, Josh (13 March 2017). "Princess Diana's Former Lover Maintains He Is Not Prince Harry's Father". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 26 June 2019. Retrieved 25 November 2018. Quest, Richard (3 June 2002). "Royals, Part 3: Troubled times". CNN. Archived from the original on 15 July 2016. Retrieved 22 January 2023. "Hewitt denies Prince Harry link". BBC News. 21 September 2002. Archived from the original on 15 February 2009. Retrieved 24 April 2011. "The Camillagate Tapes". Textfiles.com (phone transcript). Phone Phreaking. 18 December 1989. Archived from the original on 1 July 2010.; "Royals caught out by interceptions". BBC News. 29 November 2006. Archived from the original on 28 August 2017. Retrieved 27 April 2012.; Dockterman, Eliana (9 November 2022). "The True Story Behind Charles and Camilla's Phone Sex Leak on The Crown". Time. Archived from the original on 16 November 2022. Retrieved 17 November 2022. "The Princess and the Press". PBS. Archived from the original on 10 March 2017. Retrieved 7 January 2017.; "Timeline: Charles and Camilla's romance". BBC. 6 April 2005. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 7 January 2017. Dimbleby 1994, p. 395. "1995: Diana admits adultery in TV interview". BBC News. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 1 August 2018. "The Panorama Interview with the Princess of Wales". BBC News. 20 November 1995. Archived from the original on 4 March 2011. Retrieved 8 January 2010. "'Divorce': Queen to Charles and Diana". BBC News. 20 December 1995. Archived from the original on 23 December 2010. Retrieved 12 October 2008. "Charles and Diana to divorce". Associated Press. 21 December 1995. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 23 July 2013. Neville, Sarah (13 July 1996). "Charles and Diana Agree to Terms of Divorce". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 12 November 2022. Whitney, Craig R. (31 August 1997). "Prince Charles Arrives in Paris to Take Diana's Body Home". The New York Times. OCLC 1645522. Archived from the original on 6 December 2013. Retrieved 5 May 2014. "Diana letter 'warned of car plot'". CNN. 20 October 2003. Archived from the original on 12 December 2003. Retrieved 14 April 2019.; Eleftheriou-Smith, Loulla-Mae (30 August 2017). "Princess Diana letter claims Prince Charles was 'planning an accident' in her car just 10 months before fatal crash". The Independent (UK). Archived from the original on 12 October 2019. Retrieved 14 April 2019.; Rayner, Gordon (20 December 2007). "Princess Diana letter: 'Charles plans to kill me'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 28 November 2020. Badshah, Nadeem (19 June 2021). "Police interviewed Prince Charles over 'plot to kill Diana'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 19 June 2021. Retrieved 8 September 2021. "Profile: Duchess of Cornwall". BBC News. 9 April 2012. Archived from the original on 3 May 2023. Retrieved 3 May 2023. "Order in Council". The National Archives. 2 March 2005. Archived from the original on 3 November 2010. Retrieved 20 February 2012. Valpy, Michael (2 November 2005). "Scholars scurry to find implications of royal wedding". The Globe and Mail. Toronto. Archived from the original on 27 July 2020. Retrieved 4 March 2009. "Panorama Lawful impediment?". BBC News. 14 February 2005. Archived from the original on 29 September 2009. Retrieved 25 February 2009. The Secretary of State for Constitutional Affairs and Lord Chancellor (Lord Falconer of Thoroton) (24 February 2005). "Royal Marriage; Lords Hansard Written Statements 24 Feb 2005 : Column WS87 (50224-51)". Publications.parliament.uk. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 12 October 2008. "Pope funeral delays royal wedding". BBC News. 4 April 2005. Archived from the original on 20 October 2013. Retrieved 22 August 2013. "Q&A: Queen's wedding decision". BBC News. 23 February 2005. Archived from the original on 11 January 2009. Retrieved 17 September 2012. "Charles And Camilla Finally Wed, After 30 Years Of Waiting, Prince Charles Weds His True Love". CBS News. 9 April 2005. Archived from the original on 12 November 2010. Retrieved 12 October 2008. Oliver, Mark (9 April 2005). "Charles and Camilla wed". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 22 August 2013. Retrieved 22 August 2013. "100 Coronation Facts". Royal Household. Archived from the original on 1 May 2023. Retrieved 1 May 2023. Landler, Mark (8 September 2022). "Long an Uneasy Prince, King Charles III Takes On a Role He Was Born To". The New York Times. OCLC 1645522. Archived from the original on 20 September 2022. Retrieved 19 September 2022. "The royal clan: who's who, what do they do and how much money do they get?". The Guardian. 7 April 2023. Archived from the original on 7 April 2023. Retrieved 8 April 2023. Brandreth 2007, p. 325. "Opening of the Senedd". National Assembly for Wales. Archived from the original on 10 August 2014. Retrieved 8 August 2014. "Administration". The Royal Collection Trust. Archived from the original on 6 October 2012. Retrieved 19 April 2013. Trumbull, Robert (10 October 1970). "Fiji Raises the Flag of Independence After 96 Years of Rule by British". The New York Times. OCLC 1645522. Archived from the original on 10 September 2022. Retrieved 3 May 2023. "1973: Bahamas' sun sets on British Empire". BBC News. 9 July 1973. Archived from the original on 1 February 2008. Retrieved 3 May 2023. "Papua New Guinea Celebrates Independence". The New York Times. 16 September 1975. OCLC 1645522. Archived from the original on 10 September 2022. Retrieved 3 May 2023. Ross, Jay (18 April 1980). "Zimbabwe Gains Independence". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 4 February 2021. Retrieved 3 May 2023. Wedel, Paul (22 February 1984). "Brunei celebrated its independence from Britain Thursday with traditional..." UPI. Archived from the original on 19 February 2022. Retrieved 3 May 2023. Ainge Roy, Eleanor (13 January 2018). "'Damn ... I missed': the incredible story of the day the Queen was nearly shot". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 1 March 2018. Retrieved 1 March 2018. Newman, John (12 May 1994). "Cambodian Refugees". New South Wales Legislative Assembly Hansard. Parliament of New South Wales. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007.; "Student fires 2 blanks at Prince Charles". Los Angeles Times. 27 January 1994. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 13 April 2018. "Archive: Prince Charles visits Ireland in 1995". BBC News. 21 April 2015. Archived from the original on 11 May 2018. Retrieved 14 April 2018.; McCullagh, David; Milner, Cathy. "Prince Charles Makes First Royal Visit to Ireland 1995". Raidió Teilifís Éireann. Archived from the original on 15 April 2018. Retrieved 14 April 2018. Brendon 2007, p. 660. Brown 1998, p. 594. "King Charles cancer diagnosis: Health issues monarch has faced over the years". Sky News. 5 February 2024. Archived from the original on 5 February 2024. Retrieved 5 February 2024. "Charles has hernia operation". BBC News. 29 March 2003. Archived from the original on 21 January 2024. Retrieved 22 January 2024. "Charles shakes hands with Mugabe at Pope's funeral". The Times. 8 April 2005. Archived from the original on 22 June 2018. Retrieved 8 July 2007. (subscription required) "The Prince of Wales opens the Commonwealth Games". Clarence House. 3 October 2010. Archived from the original on 21 May 2015. Retrieved 28 August 2013. "Prince Charles, Camilla's Car Attacked By Student Protesters in London". huffingtonpost. 9 December 2010. Archived from the original on 23 March 2013. Retrieved 8 October 2012.; "Royal car attacked in protest after MPs' fee vote". BBC News. Archived from the original on 10 December 2010. Retrieved 10 December 2010.; "Prince Charles and Duchess of Cornwall unhurt in attack". BBC News. 9 December 2010. Archived from the original on 23 February 2012. Retrieved 16 September 2012. Suroor, Hasan (8 May 2013). "Queen to miss Colombo CHOGM". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 9 August 2013. Retrieved 7 August 2013.; "Queen to miss Commonwealth meeting for first time since 1973". The Guardian. 7 May 2013. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 7 August 2013. Urquart, Conal (13 May 2015). "Prince Charles Shakes the Hand of Irish Republican Leader Gerry Adams". Time. Archived from the original on 21 May 2015. Retrieved 21 May 2015. McDonald, Henry (19 May 2015). "Prince Charles and Gerry Adams share historic handshake". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 21 May 2015. Retrieved 20 May 2015.; "Historic handshake between Prince Charles and Gerry Adams". The Independent (UK). Archived from the original on 19 May 2015. Retrieved 21 May 2015.; Adam, Karla (19 May 2015). "Prince Charles, in Ireland, meets with Sinn Fein party leader Gerry Adams". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 22 May 2015. Retrieved 21 May 2015. "Queen's Funeral Set for Sept. 19 at Westminster Abbey". The New York Times. 10 September 2022. OCLC 1645522. Archived from the original on 20 September 2022. Retrieved 20 September 2022. The state funeral for Queen Elizabeth II will be held at 11 a.m. Monday, Sept. 19, at Westminster Abbey, Buckingham Palace announced on Saturday. Adam, Karla (20 April 2018). "Commonwealth backs Prince Charles as its next leader". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 6 August 2018. Retrieved 5 July 2018. "Prince Charles and Camilla make history in Cuba". BBC News. 25 March 2019. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 10 May 2019. Reynolds, Emma; Foster, Max; Wilkinson, David (25 March 2020). "Prince Charles tests positive for novel coronavirus". CNN. Archived from the original on 25 March 2020. Retrieved 25 March 2020.; Furness, Hannah; Johnson, Simon (25 March 2020). "Prince Charles tests positive for coronavirus: These are his most recent engagements". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 25 March 2020. Retrieved 25 March 2020. "Coronavirus: Prince Charles tests positive but 'remains in good health'". BBC News. 25 March 2020. Archived from the original on 25 March 2020. Retrieved 25 March 2020. "Warning to all as Prince Charles catches coronavirus amid 'queue jump' claims – The Yorkshire Post says". The Yorkshire Post. 15 March 2020. Archived from the original on 26 March 2020. Retrieved 26 March 2020. Ott, Haley (10 February 2022). "Britain's Prince Charles tests positive for COVID-19 for the 2nd time". CBS News. Archived from the original on 6 June 2022. Retrieved 10 February 2022. "Covid: Prince Charles and Camilla get first vaccine". BBC News. 10 February 2021. Archived from the original on 21 April 2022. Retrieved 29 May 2021. Mills, Rhiannon (30 November 2021). "Barbados: Prince Charles acknowledges 'appalling' history of slavery as island becomes a republic". Sky News. Archived from the original on 30 November 2021. Retrieved 30 November 2021. Murphy, Victoria (28 November 2021). "All About Prince Charles's Visit to Barbados as the Country Cuts Ties with the Monarchy". Town & Country. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 3 May 2023. Nikkhah, Roya (28 November 2021). "Regretful Prince Charles flies to Barbados to watch his realm become a republic". Sunday Times. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 3 May 2023. Davies, Caroline (10 May 2022). "Queen remains 'very much in charge' even as Charles makes speech". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 10 May 2022. Retrieved 10 May 2022. "Prince Charles becomes longest-serving heir apparent". BBC News. 20 April 2011. Archived from the original on 18 July 2015. Retrieved 30 November 2011. Rayner, Gordon (19 September 2013). "Prince of Wales will be oldest monarch crowned". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 20 September 2013. Retrieved 19 September 2013. "King Charles III pays tribute to his 'darling mama' in first address". BBC News. 9 September 2022. Archived from the original on 10 September 2022. Retrieved 9 September 2022. "Charles formally confirmed as king in ceremony televised for first time". BBC News. 10 September 2022. Archived from the original on 10 September 2022. Retrieved 10 September 2022. Ratcliffe, Rebecca (10 September 2022). "Charles III is proclaimed King". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 10 September 2022. Retrieved 10 September 2022. Torrance, David (29 September 2022). The Accession of King Charles III (PDF). House of Commons Library. p. 21. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 April 2023. Retrieved 25 April 2023. "Coronation on 6 May for King Charles and Camilla, Queen Consort". BBC News. 11 October 2022. Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. Mahler, Kevin (14 February 2022). "Ghosts? Here's the true tale of things that go bump in the night". The Times. Archived from the original on 28 October 2022. Retrieved 9 September 2022. Pepinster 2022. Hyde, Nathan; Field, Becca (17 February 2022). "Prince of Wales plans for a 'scaled back' coronation ceremony with Camilla". CambridgeshireLive. Archived from the original on 8 March 2022. Retrieved 8 March 2022. Arasteh, Amira (23 September 2022). "King Charles III coronation: When is he officially crowned and what happens next?". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 23 September 2022. Retrieved 23 September 2022.; Dixon, Hayley; Gurpreet, Narwan (13 September 2022). "Coronation for the cost of living crisis as King expresses wish for 'good value'". The Times. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 14 September 2022. "King Charles III, the new monarch". BBC News. 18 September 2022. Archived from the original on 20 September 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2022. "King Charles III: Special Edinburgh day ends with gun salute and flypast". BBC News. 5 July 2023. Archived from the original on 1 August 2023. Retrieved 5 July 2023. Kirka, Danica (22 November 2022). "King Charles III welcomes S. African leader for state visit". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 25 March 2023. Retrieved 21 September 2023. Said-Moorhouse, Lauren; Foster, Max (30 March 2023). "King Charles becomes first British monarch to address German parliament". CNN. Archived from the original on 27 September 2023. Retrieved 21 September 2023. Said-Moorhouse, Lauren (1 September 2023). "King Charles makes historic speech at French senate as he hails 'indispensable' UK-France relationship". CNN. Archived from the original on 21 September 2023. Retrieved 21 September 2023. Foster, Max; Feleke, Bethlehem; Said-Moorhouse, Lauren (November 2023). "King Charles acknowledges Kenya's colonial-era suffering but stops short of apologizing". CNN. Archived from the original on 1 December 2023. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Coughlan, Sean (26 January 2024). "King Charles in hospital for prostate treatment". BBC News. Archived from the original on 26 January 2024. Retrieved 26 January 2024. Coughlan, Sean (5 February 2024). "King Charles III diagnosed with cancer, Buckingham Palace says". BBC News. Archived from the original on 5 February 2024. Retrieved 5 February 2024. Trapper, James (10 February 2024). "King Charles expresses 'lifelong admiration' for cancer charities". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 February 2024. Holden, Michael (11 March 2024). "King Charles hails Commonwealth but misses annual celebrations". Reuters. Retrieved 11 March 2024. "Queen Camilla steps in for King at Royal Maundy Service in Worcester". ITV News. 28 March 2024. Retrieved 28 March 2024. Leigh, Suzanne; Gallagher, Charlotte (31 March 2024). "King Charles appears in public at Easter Sunday church service". BBC News. Retrieved 31 March 2024. Smout, Alistair; Mills, Sarah; Gumuchian, Marie-louise (16 September 2022). "With Charles king, his Prince's Trust youth charity goes on". Reuters. Archived from the original on 26 November 2022. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "The Prince's Charities". Clarence House. Archived from the original on 26 September 2010. Retrieved 16 October 2012. Mackreal, Kim (18 May 2012). "Prince Charles rallies top-level support for his Canadian causes". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 20 May 2012. Retrieved 22 May 2012. "His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales". Department of Canadian Heritage. Government of Canada. Archived from the original on 22 September 2008. Retrieved 12 October 2008. "Contact Us". The Prince's Charities Australia. Archived from the original on 9 August 2014. Retrieved 22 January 2013. Dimbleby 1994, p. 250. "Welcome". FARA Enterprises. Archived from the original on 12 October 2010. Retrieved 25 September 2012. Quinn, Ben (29 August 2021). "Prince of Wales charity launches inquiry into 'cash for access' claims". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 August 2021. Retrieved 30 August 2021. Foster, Max; Said-Moorhouse, Lauren (6 September 2021). "Former aide to Prince Charles steps down over cash-for-honors scandal". CNN. Archived from the original on 7 September 2021. Retrieved 7 September 2021. Butler, Patrick (18 November 2021). "Inquiry into foundation linked to Prince of Wales launched". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 18 November 2021. Retrieved 18 November 2021. Montebello, Leah (16 February 2022). "Breaking: Met Police investigate cash-for-honours allegations against Prince Charles' charity". City A.M. Archived from the original on 16 February 2022. Retrieved 16 February 2022.; O'Connor, Mary (16 February 2022). "Police to investigate Prince Charles' charity". BBC News. Archived from the original on 16 February 2022. Retrieved 17 February 2022. Gadher, Dipesh; Gabriel Pogrund; Megan Agnew (19 November 2022). "Cash-for-honours police pass file on King's aide Michael Fawcett to prosecutors". The Sunday Times. Archived from the original on 28 March 2023. Retrieved 28 March 2023. Ward, Victoria (21 August 2023). "Cash-for-honours investigation into King Charles's charity dropped". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 21 August 2023. Retrieved 21 August 2023. Pogrund, Gabriel; Keidan, Charles; Faulkner, Katherine (25 June 2022). "Prince Charles accepted €1m cash in suitcase from sheikh". The Times. Archived from the original on 25 June 2022. Retrieved 25 June 2022. Connett, David (25 June 2022). "Prince Charles is said to have been given €3m in Qatari cash". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 25 June 2022. Retrieved 25 June 2022. "Prince Charles: Charity watchdog reviewing information over reports royal accepted carrier bag full of cash as a charity donation from Qatar ex-PM". Sky News. 27 June 2022. Archived from the original on 27 June 2022. Retrieved 27 June 2022. Coughlan, Sean (20 July 2022). "Prince Charles: No inquiry into £2.5m cash donation to his charity". BBC News. Archived from the original on 20 July 2022. Retrieved 21 July 2022. Pogrund, Gabriel; Charles Keidan (30 July 2022). "Prince Charles accepted £1m from family of Osama bin Laden". The Times. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Prince Charles dined with Bin Laden's brother". The Guardian. 13 October 2001. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. The Prince of Wales had dinner with a brother of Osama bin Laden two weeks after the September 11th attacks, St James' Palace said today. Furness, Hannah (1 August 2022). "Prince Charles's charity won't be investigated for accepting bin Laden family £1m donation". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 1 August 2022. Retrieved 1 August 2022. Fraser, John (26 April 2023). "What the reign of King Charles III means for Canada". Canadian Geographic. Royal Canadian Geographical Society. Archived from the original on 27 April 2023. Retrieved 29 April 2023. Dulcie, Lee (20 May 2022). "Prince Charles: We must learn from indigenous people on climate change". BBC News. Archived from the original on 29 April 2023. Retrieved 29 April 2023. "Prince Charles commits to 'listening' to Indigenous peoples as Canadian royal tour begins". Global News. 17 May 2022. Archived from the original on 29 April 2023. Retrieved 29 April 2023. Katawazi, Miriam (27 June 2017). "Prince Charles's charities work to undo past wrongs against Indigenous people through reconciliation". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 29 April 2023. Retrieved 29 April 2023. Brewster, Murray (24 June 2022). "Commonwealth countries could learn from Canada's reconciliation efforts, Prince Charles says". CBC News. Archived from the original on 29 April 2023. Retrieved 29 April 2023. "Prince Charles tells Commonwealth of sorrow over slavery". BBC News. 24 June 2022. Archived from the original on 24 June 2022. Retrieved 29 April 2023. Evans, Rob (26 March 2015). "Supreme court clears way for release of secret Prince Charles letters". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 March 2015. Retrieved 26 March 2015. "Cabinet Office". www.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 18 December 2020. Retrieved 15 May 2015.; "Prince Charles's black spider memos in 60 seconds". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 16 May 2015. Retrieved 15 May 2015. "Prince Charles, the toothfish and the toothless 'black spider' letters". The Washington Post. 14 May 2015. Archived from the original on 6 April 2018. Retrieved 23 May 2015. Spector, Dina (13 May 2015). "There are 3 reasons why Britain might be completely underwhelmed by Prince Charles' black spider memos". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 23 April 2019. Retrieved 23 May 2015. Jenkins, Simon (13 May 2015). "The black spider memos: a royal sigh of woe at a world gone to the dogs". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 June 2018. Retrieved 23 May 2015. Roberts, Andrew (13 May 2015). "All the 'black spider memos' expose is the passion and dignity of Prince Charles". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 15 May 2015. Retrieved 23 May 2015. Booth, Robert (15 December 2015). "Revealed: Prince Charles has received confidential cabinet papers for decades". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 10 January 2017. Retrieved 22 December 2016. Boseley, Matilda (24 October 2020). "Prince Charles's letter to John Kerr reportedly endorsing sacking of Whitlam condemned". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 13 February 2022. Retrieved 12 February 2022. Dathan, Matt; Low, Valentine (10 June 2022). "Prince Charles: Flying migrants to Rwanda is 'appalling'". The Times. Archived from the original on 9 July 2022. Retrieved 11 June 2022.(subscription required); "Rwanda deportation plan: Prince Charles 'says policy is appalling' as court rules first asylum seekers can be sent away". Sky News. 11 June 2022. Archived from the original on 11 June 2022. Retrieved 11 June 2022. Wheeler, Caroline; Shipman, Tim; Nikkah, Roya (12 June 2022). "Charles won't be Prince Charming if he keeps on meddling, say ministers". The Times. Archived from the original on 2 July 2022. Retrieved 3 July 2022.(subscription required) "Charles, Prince of Wales". Planetizen. 13 September 2009. Archived from the original on 16 March 2012. Retrieved 31 March 2012. "A speech by HRH The Prince of Wales at the 150th anniversary of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA), Royal Gala Evening at Hampton Court Palace". Prince of Wales. 30 May 1984. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 17 June 2012. "HRH visits the Oxford Centre for Islamic Studies new building". The Prince of Wales. 9 February 2005. Archived from the original on 19 June 2007. Retrieved 15 December 2008. Capps, Kriston (9 September 2022). "King Charles III, City Maker". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 16 May 2023. Retrieved 19 May 2023. "The Prince of Wales Accepts Vincent Scully Prize". artdaily.com. Archived from the original on 23 May 2013. Retrieved 19 April 2013. Harper, Phineas (21 September 2022). "King Charles's endless meddling in architectural politics has accomplished nothing". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 October 2022. Retrieved 5 May 2023. Graham, Hugh (30 June 2019). "Exclusive: Prince Charles, the new Poundbury and his manifesto to solve the housing crisis". The Times. Archived from the original on 6 August 2021. Retrieved 22 June 2023. Cramb, Auslan (28 June 2007). "Charles saves Dumfries House at 11th hour". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 13 June 2008. Retrieved 28 June 2007. Foyle, Johnathan (27 June 2014). "Dumfries House: training the unemployed". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 13 December 2022. Retrieved 4 May 2023. "Prince Charles to build wellbeing centre at Dumfries House". The Scotsman. 12 September 2017. Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. Retrieved 4 May 2023. Freyberg, Annabel (27 May 2011). "Dumfries House: a Sleeping Beauty brought back to life by the Prince of Wales". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 30 May 2011. Marrs, Colin (16 September 2016). "Prince Charles's stalled 'Scottish Poundbury' under scrutiny". Architect's Journal. Archived from the original on 6 February 2024. Retrieved 4 May 2023. The Budget Plan 2007: Aspire to a Stronger, Safer, Better Canada (PDF). Department of Finance. Queen's Printer for Canada. 19 March 2007. p. 99. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 June 2009. Retrieved 1 May 2012. "Heritage Services". Heritage Canada Foundation. Archived from the original on 14 September 2008. Retrieved 12 October 2008. Hales, Linda (26 October 2005). "Prince Charles to Accept Scully Prize at Building Museum". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 19 April 2013.; "The Prince of Wales Accepts Vincent Scully Prize". artdaily.com. Archived from the original on 23 May 2013. Retrieved 19 April 2013. "Prince Charles honored for his architectural patronage". Notre Dame News. 7 February 2012. Archived from the original on 24 August 2020. Retrieved 4 October 2017. "About Us". Carpenters' Company website. Archived from the original on 17 July 2012. Retrieved 17 June 2012. "Prince Charles Faces Opponents, Slams Modern Architecture". Bloomberg L.P. 12 May 2009. Retrieved 20 June 2009. "Architects urge boycott of Prince Charles speech". NBC News. 11 May 2009. Archived from the original on 2 January 2014. Retrieved 20 June 2009.; "Architects to hear Prince appeal". BBC News. 12 May 2009. Archived from the original on 2 December 2010. Retrieved 20 June 2009. Booth, Robert (15 June 2009). "Prince Charles's meddling in planning 'unconstitutional', says Richard Rogers". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 24 December 2013. Retrieved 20 June 2009. "Chelsea Barracks developer apologises to Prince Charles". BBC News. 24 July 2010. Archived from the original on 26 June 2022. Retrieved 26 June 2022. "Prince Charles honored with HMS's Global Environmental Citizen Award". The Harvard Gazette. 1 February 2007. Archived from the original on 10 March 2021. Retrieved 11 October 2021. Low, Valentine (19 February 2020). "No one is calling my fears over the climate dotty now, says Prince Charles". The Times. Archived from the original on 8 August 2022. Retrieved 31 May 2022. Ferran, Lee (20 September 2010). "Prince Charles Eavesdrops on Tourists, Speaks to Plants". ABC News. Archived from the original on 1 June 2022. Retrieved 31 May 2022. Vidal, John (15 May 2002). "Charles designs 'healing garden'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 December 2022. Retrieved 15 December 2022. "Our Story". Duchyoriginals.com. Archived from the original on 5 October 2012. Retrieved 22 September 2012. Rainey, Sarah (12 November 2013). "Why Prince Charles's Duchy Originals takes the biscuit". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 1 April 2021. Retrieved 30 July 2014. Spandenburg and Moser 2004, p. 32 Rosenbaum, Martin (23 January 2019). "Prince Charles warned Tony Blair against GM foods". BBC News. Archived from the original on 10 May 2022. Retrieved 10 May 2022. Myers, Joe (22 January 2020). "This member of the British Royal Family has a vital message if we are to save the planet". World Economic Forum. Archived from the original on 2 November 2021. Retrieved 2 November 2021. Inman, Phillip (3 June 2020). "Pandemic is chance to reset global economy, says Prince Charles". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 17 November 2020. Retrieved 3 June 2020. Emma Dooney (6 June 2023). "King Charles hailed 'ahead of his time' for passionate statement on his dietary preferences". Woman and Home Magazine. Archived from the original on 4 July 2023. Retrieved 4 July 2023. Prince Charles and His Battle for Our Planet. BBC World News. Archived from the original on 8 December 2021. Retrieved 8 December 2021.; Garlick, Hattie (11 October 2021). "How to do the Prince Charles diet – and eat the perfect amount of meat and dairy". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 8 December 2021. White, Stephen; Tetzlaff-Deas, Benedict; Munday, David (12 September 2022). "King Charles doesn't eat lunch and works until midnight". CornwallLive. Archived from the original on 5 October 2022. Retrieved 5 October 2022. "King Charles: Foie gras banned at royal residences". BBC News. 18 November 2022. Archived from the original on 15 December 2022. Retrieved 15 December 2022. Burchfield, Rachel (20 September 2023). "King Charles Has "A Strict List of Culinary Demands" for Banquet Tonight at Palace of Versailles During State Visit to France". Marie Claire Magazine. Archived from the original on 29 October 2023. Retrieved 22 October 2023. "Holy oil to be used to anoint King during Coronation is vegan friendly". The Independent (UK). 4 March 2023. Archived from the original on 28 March 2023. Retrieved 28 March 2023. Walker, Peter (31 October 2021). "Cop26 'literally the last chance saloon' to save planet – Prince Charles". The Guardian. OCLC 60623878. Archived from the original on 31 October 2021. Retrieved 31 October 2021. Elbaum, Rachel (1 November 2021). "Prince Charles calls for 'warlike footing' in climate fight as world leaders gather". NBC. Archived from the original on 2 November 2021. Retrieved 2 November 2021. "King Charles will not attend climate summit on Truss advice". BBC News. 1 October 2022. Archived from the original on 13 December 2022. Retrieved 1 October 2022. Paddison, Laura (1 December 2023). "King Charles says world heading for 'dangerous uncharted territory' at global leaders summit". CNN. Archived from the original on 19 December 2023. Retrieved 19 December 2023. "The Prince of Wales launches climate action scholarships for small island nation students". Prince of Wales. 14 March 2022. Archived from the original on 14 March 2022. Retrieved 1 April 2022. about-us Archived 17 May 2021 at the Wayback Machine The Prince's Countryside Fund – 26 December 2018 Feder, Barnaby J. (9 January 1985). "More Britons Trying Holistic Medicine". The New York Times. OCLC 1645522. Archived from the original on 1 June 2013. Retrieved 12 October 2008. Rawlins, Richard (March 2013). "Response to HRH". Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine. 106 (3): 79–80. doi:10.1177/0141076813478789. PMC 3595413. PMID 23481428.; Ernst, Edzard (2022). Charles, the alternative prince an unauthorised biography. Imprint Academic. ISBN 978-1-78836-070-8.; Weissmann, Gerald (September 2006). "Homeopathy: Holmes, Hogwarts, and the Prince of Wales". The FASEB Journal. 20 (11): 1755–1758. doi:10.1096/fj.06-0901ufm. PMID 16940145. S2CID 9305843. Bower, Tom (2018). ""Chapter 6"". The Rebel Prince, The Power, Passion and Defiance of Prince Charles. London: William Collins. ISBN 978-0-00-829173-0. The Prince of Wales (December 2012). "Integrated health and post modern medicine". Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine. 105 (12): 496–498. doi:10.1258/jrsm.2012.12k095. PMC 3536513. PMID 23263785.; Hamilton-Smith, Anthony (9 April 1990). "Medicine: Complementary and Conventional Treatments". Archived from the original on 13 September 2022. Retrieved 13 September 2022.; Rainey, Sarah (12 November 2013). "Prince Charles and homeopathy: crank or revolutionary?". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 14 February 2021. Retrieved 22 June 2022. Carr-Brown, Jonathon (14 August 2005). "Charles's 'alternative GP' campaign stirs anger". The Times. Archived from the original on 22 June 2018. Retrieved 11 March 2009. (subscription required) Revill, Jo (27 June 2004). "Now Charles backs coffee cure for cancer". The Observer. Archived from the original on 27 September 2013. Retrieved 19 June 2007. Singh, Simon; Ernst, Edzard (2008). Trick or Treatment: Alternative Medicine on Trial. Bantam Press. Walker, Tim (31 October 2009). "Prince Charles lobbies Andy Burnham on complementary medicine for NHS". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 27 March 2010. Retrieved 1 April 2010. Colquhoun, David (12 March 2007). "HRH 'meddling in politics'". DC's Improbable Science. Archived from the original on 15 November 2010. Retrieved 6 November 2009. Hawkes, Nigel; Henderson, Mark (1 September 2006). "Doctors attack natural remedy claims". The Times. Archived from the original on 22 June 2018. Retrieved 22 June 2018. (subscription required) "Statement from the Prince's Foundation for Integrated Health". FIH. 30 April 2010. Archived from the original on 2 February 2013. Sample, Ian (2 August 2010). "College of Medicine born from ashes of Prince Charles's holistic health charity". The Guardian. OCLC 60623878. Archived from the original on 3 August 2010. Retrieved 24 September 2012. Colquhoun, David (29 October 2010). "Don't be deceived. The new "College of Medicine" is a fraud and delusion". Archived from the original on 11 September 2012. Retrieved 24 September 2012.; Hawkes, Nigel (29 October 2010). "Prince's foundation metamorphoses into new College of Medicine". British Medical Journal. 341 (1): 6126. doi:10.1136/bmj.c6126. ISSN 0959-8138. S2CID 72649598. Archived from the original on 2 December 2010. Retrieved 17 December 2010. "HRH The Prince of Wales is announced as College of Medicine Patron". College of Medicine. 17 December 2019. Archived from the original on 25 June 2022. Retrieved 22 June 2022. "Charles decides to retire from polo playing at 57". The Guardian. 17 November 2005. OCLC 60623878. Archived from the original on 14 May 2023. Retrieved 14 May 2023. Revesz, Rachel (24 July 2017). "Prince Charles secret letters to Tony Blair over fox hunting get information commissioner's green light for publishing". The Independent (UK). Archived from the original on 21 April 2023. Retrieved 21 April 2023. "Prince Charles takes sons hunting". BBC News. 30 October 1999. Archived from the original on 26 July 2008. Retrieved 21 April 2023. Ashton, John B.; Latimer, Adrian, eds. (2007). A Celebration of Salmon Rivers: The World's Finest Atlantic Salmon Rivers. Stackpole Books. p. 7. ISBN 978-1-873674-27-7. "Prince of Wales supports Burnley football club". The Daily Telegraph. 15 February 2012. Archived from the original on 6 April 2012. Retrieved 29 September 2012. "History". National Rifle Association. Archived from the original on 1 September 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2022. "National Rifle Association". Prince of Wales. Archived from the original on 4 August 2020. Retrieved 13 October 2022. Hallemann, Caroline (5 November 2019). "Vintage Photos of Prince Charles at Cambridge Prove Meghan Markle Isn't the Only Actor in the Royal Family". Town & Country. Archived from the original on 23 May 2022. Retrieved 22 June 2022. "Performing Arts". Prince of Wales official website. Archived from the original on 21 June 2012. Retrieved 17 June 2012. "The Prince of Wales visits the BFI Southbank". Prince of Wales official website. 6 December 2018. Archived from the original on 29 September 2021. Retrieved 28 September 2021. "TRH continue their annual tour of Wales". Prince of Wales website. Archived from the original on 19 November 2007. Retrieved 19 April 2013. Holland, Oscar (12 January 2022). "Prince Charles exhibits dozens of his watercolors, saying painting 'refreshes the soul'". CNN. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 13 January 2022. "Prince Charles wins art award". BBC News. 12 December 2001. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013. Retrieved 22 September 2013. "The Royal Academy Development Trust". Royal Academy. Archived from the original on 21 March 2019. Retrieved 25 January 2019. "D-Day portraits commissioned by Prince Charles go on display". BBC News. 6 June 2015. Archived from the original on 22 November 2022. Retrieved 22 November 2022. Coughlan, Sean (10 January 2022). "Prince Charles commissions Holocaust survivor portraits". BBC News. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 11 January 2022. "The King commissions 'Windrush: Portraits of a Pioneering Generation'". The Royal Family. 6 June 2023. Archived from the original on 6 June 2023. Retrieved 6 June 2023. "HRH the Prince of Wales : A Vision of Britain". BFI. Archived from the original on 10 September 2011. Retrieved 1 May 2012.; "Harmony Movie Website". The Harmony Movie. Archived from the original on 1 May 2012. Retrieved 1 May 2012.; The Prince and the Composer. BBC Four. 1 May 2012.; "Modern TV: The Princes Welsh Village". Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Davies, Caroline (16 September 2022). "King tells faith leaders he has personal 'duty to protect diversity of our country'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 30 December 2022.. Holden 1979, pp. 141–142. "The Queen, the Church and other faiths". Official website of the British monarchy. Archived from the original on 10 August 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2022. "King Charles vows to protect the security of the Church of Scotland" (Press release). The Church of Scotland. 10 September 2022. Archived from the original on 14 September 2022. Retrieved 14 September 2022. "Prince and Camilla attend church". BBC News. 13 February 2005. Archived from the original on 4 August 2017. Retrieved 25 September 2012. Garner, Clare (17 December 1996). "Prince's guru dies aged 90". The Independent (UK). Archived from the original on 20 December 2012. Retrieved 31 March 2012. "African author Laurens van der Post dies in London". Irish Times. 17 December 1996. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 8 February 2020. "Review: In Harmony with a Philosopher King". philosophyinwessex.org. 4 January 2012. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 30 July 2014.; "It's time for harmony between science and spirituality". positivenews.org.uk. 29 March 2013. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 30 July 2014.; "Books of the Year – Harmony and Farundell". 6 December 2010. Archived from the original on 5 August 2014. Retrieved 30 July 2014. "2011 Nautilus Awards Gold Winners". Nautilus Book Awards. Archived from the original on 19 December 2011. Retrieved 11 May 2013. Smith, Helena (12 May 2004). "Has Prince Charles found his true spiritual home on a Greek rock?". The Guardian. ISSN 1756-3224. OCLC 60623878. Archived from the original on 1 April 2021. Retrieved 25 September 2012. "Prinţul Charles, fermier de Fălticeni" [Prince Charles, farm owner in Fălticeni]. Evenimentul Zilei (in Romanian). 13 May 2003. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. "Princ Čarls u manastiru Kovilj" [Prince Charles in the Kovilj monastery]. Ekspres.net (in Serbian (Latin script)). Archived from the original on 26 September 2017. Retrieved 9 September 2022. "Prince Charles wishes Palestinians 'freedom, justice and equality'". The Guardian. 24 January 2020. Archived from the original on 26 March 2020. Retrieved 27 March 2020. "Charles arrives in Bethlehem during historic Palestinian visit". ITV News. 24 January 2020. Archived from the original on 27 March 2020. Retrieved 27 March 2020. "Britain's first Syriac Orthodox Cathedral consecrated". Anglican Communion News Service. 25 November 2016. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 9 April 2021. "About OCIS". Oxford Centre for Islamic Studies. Archived from the original on 28 October 2007. "Introduction to MIHE". MarkfieldInstitute. 29 January 2009. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 29 April 2017. Sullivan, Kevin; Boorstein, Michelle (13 September 2022). "King Charles III may bring new approach to 'Defender of the Faith'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 13 September 2022. Retrieved 13 September 2022. Sherwood, Harriet (9 September 2022). "King Charles to be Defender of the Faith but also a defender of faiths". The Guardian. ISSN 1756-3224. OCLC 60623878. Archived from the original on 12 September 2022. Retrieved 13 September 2022. "Charles vows to keep "Defender of the Faith" title as King". secularism.org.uk. Archived from the original on 15 July 2015. Retrieved 24 July 2015. Coughlan, Sean (26 December 2022). "King Charles' first Christmas speech reflects cost-of-living crisis". BBC News. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2022. Bartlett, Mike. "King Charles III". Almeida Theatre. Archived from the original on 5 August 2014. Retrieved 27 July 2014. "The Man Who Will Be King". The Milwaukee Journal. Google News. 1 October 1979. Archived from the original on 23 April 2016. Retrieved 30 July 2014. "Patrick Jephson: Prince Charles Was Unable to Reconcile with Princess Diana's Extraordinary Popularity". The Independent (UK). Independent Digital News & Media Ltd. 31 August 2016. ISSN 1741-9743. OCLC 185201487. Archived from the original on 21 February 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017. Davies, Caroline (7 November 2018). "Prince Charles: 'Me, meddle as a king? I'm not that stupid'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 8 November 2018. Retrieved 22 June 2022. "The New Statesman's right power list". New Statesman. 27 September 2023. Archived from the original on 14 December 2023. Retrieved 14 December 2023. Barnes, Tom (2 January 2019). "Almost half of British public want Prince Charles to give throne to William upon Queen's death, survey finds". The Independent (UK). Independent Digital News & Media Ltd. ISSN 1741-9743. OCLC 185201487. Archived from the original on 8 September 2022. Retrieved 8 September 2022. Kirk, Isabelle. "Public opinion of Prince Charles improves in latest royal favourability poll". YouGov. Archived from the original on 2 December 2021. Retrieved 8 September 2022. "Queen Elizabeth II passes away, Prince Charles succeeds as king". The Statesman (India). 8 September 2022. Archived from the original on 8 September 2022. Retrieved 8 September 2022. Smith, Matthew (13 September 2022). "Britons' first impressions of King Charles III". yougov.co.uk. Archived from the original on 14 December 2022. Retrieved 14 December 2022. "King Charles III popularity and fame". YouGov. Archived from the original on 16 April 2023. Retrieved 16 April 2023. Williams, Rhys (7 September 1994). "'Hunky' Prince is exposed to public gaze". The Independent (UK). Independent Digital News & Media Ltd. ISSN 1741-9743. OCLC 185201487. Archived from the original on 18 July 2022. Retrieved 18 July 2022. "German Tabloid Publishes Photo of Nude Prince Charles". Los Angeles Times. 8 September 1994. Archived from the original on 18 July 2022. Retrieved 18 July 2022. Woods, Audrey (11 March 2002). "Prince Charles Addresses Editors". AP News Archive. Archived from the original on 18 September 2012. Retrieved 17 June 2012. "Charles 'adopted dissident role'". BBC News. 21 February 2006. Archived from the original on 2 December 2010. Retrieved 2 October 2012. Rainey, Sarah; Blenkinsop, Andrew (13 July 2011). "Phone hacking: who's who in the News International scandal". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 19 December 2022. Retrieved 19 December 2022. Burrell, Ian (2 December 2015). "The 15-page contract that reveals how Charles tries to control the media". The Independent (UK). Independent Digital News & Media Ltd. ISSN 1741-9743. OCLC 185201487. Archived from the original on 21 April 2022. Retrieved 21 April 2022. The Independent has learnt that the Prince of Wales will only speak to broadcasters on the condition they have signed a 15-page contract, demanding that Clarence House attends both the "rough cut" and "fine cut" edits of films and, if it is unhappy with the final product, can "remove the contribution in its entirety from the programme". Pegg, David. "Revealed: King Charles's private fortune estimated at £1.8bn". The Guardian. OCLC 60623878. Archived from the original on 20 April 2023. Retrieved 20 April 2023. Boffey, Daniel (13 September 2022). "King Charles will not pay tax on inheritance from the Queen". The Guardian. ISSN 1756-3224. OCLC 60623878. Archived from the original on 23 April 2023. Retrieved 6 May 2023. "Clarence House - History". The Royal Household. Archived from the original on 13 June 2013. Retrieved 1 May 2014. "Prince Charles moves into Clarence House". BBC News. 2 August 2003. Archived from the original on 20 August 2022. Retrieved 20 August 2022. Temple 2012. Bates, Stephen (28 July 2005). "MPs tell Prince of Wales: Open up". The Guardian. ISSN 1756-3224. OCLC 60623878. Archived from the original on 23 May 2023. Retrieved 19 May 2023. Bonner, Mehera. "King Charles Has to Pay Prince William £700,000 in Rent to Keep His Highgrove Home" Archived 19 May 2023 at the Wayback Machine, Cosmopolitan, 9 September 2022 Muir, Ellie (31 May 2023). "A fireplace, CD player and a 'little wooden bed': Inside King Charles's Romanian hideaway that you can rent". The Independent. Independent Digital News & Media Ltd. ISSN 1741-9743. OCLC 185201487. Archived from the original on 1 June 2023. Retrieved 3 June 2023. "King Charles owns a Romanian guest house, and you can stay there for less than £100 a night". House & Garden. 14 September 2022. Archived from the original on 3 June 2023. Retrieved 3 June 2023. "Sovereign Grant Act 2011: guidance". www.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 27 January 2016. Retrieved 3 December 2017. Booth, Robert (14 December 2012). "Prince Charles's £700m estate accused of tax avoidance". The Guardian. OCLC 60623878. Archived from the original on 12 November 2013. Retrieved 18 April 2013. Munzinger, Hannes; Osborne, Hilary (8 November 2017). "Prinz Charles und seine Offshore-Geschäfte". Süddeutsche Zeitung (in German). Archived from the original on 21 April 2023. Retrieved 21 April 2023. Washington, Stuart (8 November 2017). "Paradise Papers: Prince Charles's estate, the Duchy of Cornwall, invested through Caribbean tax havens". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 21 April 2023. Retrieved 21 April 2023. "King Charles: New royal cypher revealed". BBC News. 26 September 2022. Archived from the original on 26 September 2022. Retrieved 26 September 2022. "The Prince of Wales visits the Royal Gurkha Rifles and Knole House". Prince of Wales. Archived from the original on 2 May 2014. Retrieved 1 May 2014. "The Queen Appoints the Prince of Wales to Honorary Five-Star rank". The Prince of Wales website. 16 June 2012. Archived from the original on 29 June 2012. Retrieved 27 June 2012.; "Prince Charles awarded highest rank in all three armed forces". The Daily Telegraph. 16 June 2012. Archived from the original on 16 June 2012. Retrieved 7 June 2012.; "No. 60350". The London Gazette. 7 December 2012. p. 23557. "The London Gazette, Issue 38452, Page 5889". 9 November 1948. Archived from the original on 12 September 2022. Retrieved 15 April 2022. "HRH The Duke of Edinburgh". College of Arms. 9 April 2021. Archived from the original on 11 April 2021. Retrieved 7 May 2021. Malloch, Russell (24 April 2023). "King Charles III and The Gazette: Commonwealth awards". The Gazette. Archived from the original on 9 May 2023. Retrieved 9 May 2023. Guy Jones (28 November 1958). "Motto may be more to Charles than to any of predecessors". Newspapers.com. p. 15. Archived from the original on 1 March 2023. Retrieved 1 March 2023. David Gaddis Smith (3 May 1981). "Prince seeks to uphold popularity of monarchy". Newport News. Archived from the original on 1 March 2023. Retrieved 1 March 2023 – via Newspapers.com. "Londoner's Diary: Princely glove is not picked up". Evening Standard. 29 April 1987. Archived from the original on 1 March 2023. Retrieved 1 March 2023 – via Newspapers.com. Christopher Morgan (13 February 2000). "Charles prefers George VII for his kingly title". Calgary Herald. Archived from the original on 1 March 2023. Retrieved 1 March 2023 – via Newspapers.com. Phil Boucher (15 August 2018). "Here's Why Prince Charles Could Be Called George VII When He's King". People. Archived from the original on 1 March 2023. Retrieved 1 March 2023. Pierce, Andrew (24 December 2005). "Call me George, suggests Charles". The Times. Archived from the original on 22 June 2018. Retrieved 13 July 2009. Cruse, Beth (23 May 2021). "The 4 names Prince Charles could choose when he becomes king". Nottingham Post. ISSN 2044-3331. OCLC 749994959. Archived from the original on 28 February 2023. Retrieved 28 February 2023. White, Michael (27 December 2005). "Charles denies planning to reign as King George". The Guardian. ISSN 1756-3224. OCLC 60623878. Archived from the original on 2 October 2013. Retrieved 2 October 2012. Clarence House yesterday issued a pained denial of claims that the Prince of Wales has held private discussions with "trusted friends" about the possibility of reigning as George VII rather than risk the negative connotations attached to the name King Charles. "Accession of Charles III: 'A monarch's choice of name is not a trivial thing'". Le Monde. 8 September 2022. Archived from the original on 1 March 2023. Retrieved 1 March 2023. "Charles chooses Charles III for his title as King". The Independent (UK). 9 September 2022. ISSN 1741-9743. OCLC 185201487. Archived from the original on 9 September 2022. Retrieved 16 April 2023. Charles has become King Charles III – with his title as monarch a personal choice that was entirely his own. "Britain's new monarch to be known as King Charles III". Reuters. 8 September 2022. Archived from the original on 8 September 2022. Retrieved 8 September 2022. Clarence House confirmed on Thursday that Britain's new monarch will be known as King Charles III, following the death of Queen Elizabeth, PA Media reported on Thursday. Ward, EJ (5 May 2023). "King Charles military service and career: What medals does he have?". LBC. Archived from the original on 12 December 2023. Retrieved 7 December 2023. "Coats of Arms". The Royal Family. 2022. Archived from the original on 22 September 2020. Retrieved 18 May 2023. "Royal Cypher". College of Arms. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "Standards". Prince of Wales. Archived from the original on 7 June 2016. Retrieved 31 August 2016. "The Prince of Wales". Public Register of Arms, Flags and Badges. Office of the Governor General of Canada: Canadian Heraldic Authority. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 4 January 2016. Paget 1977. Brandreth, Gyles (2007). Charles and Camilla: Portrait of a Love Affair. Random House. ISBN 978-0-09-949087-6. Brendon, Piers (2007). The Decline and Fall of the British Empire, 1781–1997. Random House. ISBN 978-0-224-06222-0. Brown, Judith (1998). The Twentieth Century, The Oxford History of the British Empire Volume IV. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-924679-3. Brown, Tina (2007). The Diana Chronicles. London: Century Random House. ISBN 978-1-84605-312-2. Dimbleby, Jonathan (1994). The Prince of Wales: A Biography. William Morrow and Company. ISBN 0-6881-2996-X. Holden, Anthony (1979). Prince Charles. Atheneum. ISBN 978-0-593-02470-6. Junor, Penny (2005). The Firm: The Troubled Life of the House of Windsor. St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-35274-5. OCLC 59360110. Paget, Gerald (1977). The Lineage and Ancestry of H.R.H. Prince Charles, Prince of Wales (2 vols). Edinburgh: Charles Skilton. ISBN 978-0-284-40016-1. Pepinster, Catherine (2022). Defenders of the Faith: Queen Elizabeth II's funeral will see Christianity take centre stage. London: Hodder & Stoughton. ISBN 978-1-3998-0006-8. Retrieved 26 October 2022. Smith, Sally Bedell (2000). Diana in Search of Herself: Portrait of a Troubled Princess. Signet. ISBN 978-0-451-20108-9. Temple, Jon (2012). Living off the State: A Critical Guide to UK Royal Finance (2nd ed.). Progress Books. ISBN 978-0-9558311-1-9. Benson, Ross (1994). Charles: The Untold Story. St Martins Press. ISBN 978-0-312-10950-9. Brown, Michèle (1980). Prince Charles. Crown. ISBN 978-0-517-54019-0. Campbell, J. (1981). Charles: Prince of Our Times. Smithmark. ISBN 978-0-7064-0968-0. Cathcart, Helen (1977). Prince Charles: The biography (illustrated ed.). Taplinger Pub. Co; Ltd. ISBN 978-0-8008-6555-9. Fisher, Graham; Fisher, Heather (1977). Charles: The Man and the Prince. Robert Hale. ISBN 978-0-7091-6095-3. Gilleo, Alma (1978). Prince Charles: Growing Up in Buckingham Palace. Childs World. ISBN 978-0-89565-029-0. Graham, Caroline (2005). Camilla and Charles: The Love Story. John Blake. ISBN 978-1-84454-195-9. Heald, Tim; Mohrs, Mayo (1979). The Man Who Will Be King H.R.H. (Prince of Wales Charles). New York: Arbor House. Hedley, Olwen (1969). Charles, 21st Prince of Wales. Pitkin Pictorials. ISBN 978-0-85372-027-0. Hodgson, Howard (2007). Charles: The Man Who Will Be King (illustrated ed.). John Blake Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84454-306-9. Holden, Anthony (1988). King Charles III: A Biography. Grove. ISBN 978-1-55584-309-0. — (1998). Charles at Fifty. Random House. ISBN 978-0-375-50175-3. — (1999). Charles: A Biography. Corgi Books. ISBN 978-0-552-99744-7. Jencks, Charles (1988). Prince, Architects & New Wave Monarchy. Rizzoli. ISBN 978-0-8478-1010-9. Jobson, Robert (2018). Charles at Seventy – Thoughts, Hopes & Dreams: Thoughts, Hopes and Dreams. John Blake. ISBN 978-1-78606-887-3. Junor, Penny (1998). Charles: Victim or Villain?. Harper Collins. ISBN 978-0-00-255900-3. Lacey, Robert (2008). Monarch: The Life and Reign of Elizabeth II. Free Press. ISBN 978-1-4391-0839-0. Lane, Peter (1988). Prince Charles: a study in development. Robert Hale. ISBN 978-0-7090-3320-2. Liversidge, Douglas (1975). Prince Charles: monarch in the making. A. Barker. ISBN 978-0-213-16568-0. Martin, Christopher (1990). Prince Charles and the Architectural Debate (Architectural Design Profile). St Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-04048-2. Mayer, Catherine (2015). Born to Be King: Prince Charles on Planet Windsor. Henry Holt and Co. ISBN 978-1-62779-438-1. — (2015). Charles: The Heart of a King. Random House. ISBN 978-0-7535-5593-4. Nugent, Jean (1982). Prince Charles, England's Future King. Dillon. ISBN 978-0-87518-226-1. Regan, Simon (1977). Charles, the Clown Prince. Everest Books. ISBN 978-0-905018-50-8. Smith, Sally Bedell (2017). Prince Charles: The Passions and Paradoxes of an Improbable Life. Random House Trade Paperbacks. ISBN 978-0-8129-7980-0. Spangenburg, Ray; Moser, Diane (2004). Open For Debate: Genetic Engineering. Benchmark Books. ISBN 978-0-8129-7980-0. Veon, Joan M. (1997). Prince Charles: The Sustainable Prince. Hearthstone. ISBN 978-1-57558-021-0. Wakeford, Geoffrey (1962). Charles, Prince of Wales. Associated Newspapers. The King at the Royal Family website King Charles III at the website of the Government of Canada Charles III at the website of the Royal Collection Trust Portraits of King Charles III at the National Portrait Gallery, London King Charles III at IMDb Appearances on C-SPAN Portals:  Monarchy  United Kingdom  England  Cornwall  London  Scotland  Wales  Northern Ireland  Australia  Belize  Canada  Jamaica  New Zealand  Tuvalu Charles III at Wikipedia's sister projects: Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote