Rafael Nadal Parera (born 3 June 1986) is a Spanish professional tennis player. Nadal has been ranked world No. 1 in singles by the Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP) for 209 weeks, and has finished as the year-end No. 1 five times. Nadal has won 22 Grand Slam men's singles titles, including a record 14 French Open titles. He has won 92 ATP-level singles titles, including 36 Masters titles and an Olympic gold medal, with 63 of these on clay courts. Nadal is one of only two men to complete the Career Golden Slam in singles. His 81 consecutive wins on clay constitute the longest single-surface win streak in the Open Era. For over a decade, Nadal has led men's tennis along with Roger Federer and Novak Djokovic as the Big Three. At the start of his professional career, Nadal became one of the most successful teenagers in ATP Tour history, reaching the world No. 2 ranking and winning 16 titles before turning 20, including his first French Open and six Masters events. Nadal became the world No. 1 for the first time in 2008 after defeating Federer in a historic Wimbledon final, his first major victory off clay. He followed up his win with an Olympic singles gold at the 2008 Beijing Olympics. After defeating Djokovic in the 2010 US Open final, then-24-year-old Nadal became the youngest man in the Open Era to achieve the Career Grand Slam, and the first man to win majors on three different surfaces (hard, grass, and clay) in the same year (Surface Slam). After two injury-plagued seasons, Nadal returned to the Tour in 2013, reaching 14 finals, winning two majors and five Masters events including the US Open Series sweep (Summer Slam). He continued his dominance at the French Open, securing six titles, two US Open titles, an Australian Open title, and an Olympic doubles gold at the 2016 Rio Olympics with Marc López. Nadal surpassed his joint-record with Djokovic and Federer for the most Grand Slam men's singles titles at the 2022 Australian Open, and became one of four men in history to complete the double Career Grand Slam in singles. As a left-handed player, one of Nadal's main strengths is his forehand, which he hits with a high degree of topspin. He also regularly places among the Tour leaders in percentage of return games, return points, and break points won. Nadal has won the Stefan Edberg Sportsmanship Award five times and was the Laureus World Sportsman of the Year in 2011 and 2021. Time named Nadal one of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2022. He is a recipient of the Grand Cross of Royal Order of Sports Merit, Grand Cross of Order of the Second of May, the Grand Cross of Naval Merit, and the Medal of the City of Paris. Representing Spain, he has won two Olympic gold medals, and led the nation to four Davis Cup titles. Nadal has also opened a tennis academy in Mallorca, and is an active philanthropist. Rafael Nadal Parera was born on 3 June 1986 in Manacor, a town on the island of Mallorca in the Balearic Islands, Spain, to parents Ana María Parera Femenías and Sebastián Nadal Homar. His father is a businessman who owns an insurance company, a glass and window company (Vidres Mallorca), and the restaurant Sa Punta. His mother once owned a perfume shop, but gave it up to raise Nadal and his younger sister, María Isabel. One of his uncles, Miguel Ángel Nadal, is a retired professional footballer who played for RCD Mallorca, FC Barcelona and the Spanish national team. As a child, he idolized Barcelona striker Ronaldo, and through his uncle was given access to the Barcelona team dressing room to have a photo taken with the Brazilian. Another of his uncles, tennis coach Toni Nadal, introduced him to that game when he was three years old. Nadal started to play tennis at the Manacor Tennis Club, where Toni worked as a coach, hitting his first few shots with his uncle. Nadal initially found tennis boring compared with football, which he often played on the streets of Manacor with his friends. He began to play tennis more consistently when he was five, and Toni quickly realized that his young nephew had both the passion and talent to be a serious player. Nadal usually played tennis in a group, but Toni deliberately picked on him during the sessions, shouting at him rather than the other kids, and making him be the one who picked up the balls and swept the courts afterwards. In his 2011 autobiography, he admitted being afraid of Toni and dreaded having solo practice sessions with him. Nadal even admitted that he would sometimes return home from tennis lessons crying and spoke with his mother about what he was being put through. His father had expressed concern too, but the family decided it was best for Nadal to continue training with his uncle. At age 8, Nadal won an under-12 regional tennis championship; at the time he was also a promising football player. This win inspired Toni to train Nadal more intensively, and his uncle, after studying Nadal's then-two-handed forehand stroke, encouraged him to play left-handed, as it would give him a natural advantage on the tennis court. The transition was difficult for Nadal, but Toni helped him make the change, getting him to try it for just 20 minutes per day before gradually increasing that time until he fully adjusted himself to it. Nadal won the Spanish junior championships in 1997 and 1998, beating Ricardo Villacorta and Marcel Granollers respectively. In 1998 he completed the double as a junior, winning the Spanish championship in doubles with his great friend Tomeu Salvá, beating Diáz and Granollers in the final. Nadal then reached the final of the U14 Spanish championship at the age of 12, a feat that remains unmatched, losing to Juan Sanchez de Luna in straight sets. In late 1998, Nadal won the season-ending U12 Junior Masters at Stuttgart, beating future world No. 5 Kevin Anderson in the final. In February 1998, Nadal won the Open Super 12, an unofficial world championship for U12 players held in Auray. It was the first time that Nadal competed outside of Spain and he beat the 1997 winner Jamie Murray in the final. At the time, Nadal was still hesitating between football and tennis, partly because his uncle Miguel Ángel was preparing to compete in the 1998 FIFA World Cup with Spain, but in the end it was Auray who decided it. In a letter in French that he sent to the organizers in 2010, Nadal stated that winning this tournament helped him make the decision to "opt for tennis and try an international career". Latter in 1998, when Nadal was runner-up in the U14 event Spanish championship, he was still playing football. Nadal's father told him he had to choose between football and tennis so that his schoolwork would not deteriorate entirely. Nadal said: "I chose tennis. Football had to stop straight away." In 1999, the 12-year-old Nadal was already playing in the U14 circuit of the ETA Junior Tour, currently known as the Tennis Europe Junior Tour, winning the prestigious Tim Essonne, and finishing the year at No. 69. Nadal then dominated the U14 circuit in 2000, collecting two of the most prestigious trophies of the year at Les Petits As in Tarbes, beating home favourite Julien Gely in the final, and the European Junior Masters in Prato. On the same day he turned 14, Nadal won the Sport Goofy Trophy, held in Getxo, beating Granollers in the final. In July, Nadal finally won the U14 Spanish championships, beating his friend and training partner Tomeu Salvá in the final. He broke a finger on his left hand during the first round, but still won the tournament anyways despite gripping the racquet with his four good fingers, his pinkie dangling. As a member of the Spanish national team, Nadal won the 2000 ITF World Junior Championship for players under 14, winning his matches in both singles and doubles (paired with Marcel Granollers) in a 3–0 win over Russia. Nadal ended 2000 at No. 5 of the ETA rankings for U14s. By the time Nadal was 14, he had made a name for himself in the Spanish junior circuit by winning multiple age group titles. Those achievements earned him a tennis scholarship in Barcelona, and the Spanish tennis federation requested that Nadal leave Mallorca and move to Barcelona to continue his tennis training. His family turned down this request, partly because they feared his education would suffer, but also because Toni said, "I don't want to believe that you have to go to America or other places to be a good athlete. You can do it from your home." Furthermore, Nadal already was by then practicing three times a week at Palma with his childhood idol and fellow Majorcan, the former World No. 1 Carlos Moyá, who later became Nadal’s mentor and confidant, and whom Nadal beat in 2000, at the time still a Top-10 player, in an exhibition match. The decision to stay home meant less financial support from the federation; instead, Nadal's father covered the costs. Nadal turned professional at the beginning of 2001, at the age of 14. While most of his contemporaries were making their first steps on the ITF Junior Circuit, Nadal took a different approach and played just two events on the ITF junior Tour, both after turning 16 in 2002, reaching the semifinals of the junior singles event at Wimbledon, and then helping Spain defeat the US in the final of the Junior Davis Cup in his second and final appearance on the ITF Junior Circuit. He thus posted a 9–1 career junior record in singles, 4–1 on grass and 5–0 on clay. He had a career-high juniors singles ranking of world No. 145, attained on 30 December 2002. In early 2001, at age 14, Nadal began playing the qualifying draws of professional tournaments. Although he managed to win some matches, he failed to qualify for the main draws in any of the 10 Spanish Futures he played between January and September. He also competed in the qualifying round of the ATP 250 event at home in Mallorca, but failed to qualify. In May 2001, he defeated former Grand Slam tournament champion Pat Cash in a clay-court exhibition match. Nadal finally made his pro debut in the main draws at the Futures in Madrid on 11 September 2001, wasting no less than 13 match points against Guillermo Platel-Varas in the opening round. A week later he received a wild card into the main draw of the Challenger in Seville, his first Challenger tournament, and he ousted world No. 751 Israel Matos Gil 6–4 6–4 to claim his first pro win and earn the first five ATP points of his career to become world No. 1002. At age 15, Nadal ended 2001 as the world No. 811. In 2002, Nadal, then ranked No. 762, received a wild card to the ATP 250 event on his home island of Mallorca, where on 29 April, at 15 years and 10 months of age, Nadal won his first ATP match by defeating No. 81 Ramón Delgado, and became the ninth player in the Open Era to do so before the age of 16. He proceeded not to compete for two months as he had to study for school exams, which was a very important thing for his family, thus missing the junior French Open in June. He made his return to the tour in the aforementioned Wimbledon junior event, where he was the only non-English speaking player to receive a wildcard and reaching the semifinals after winning four matches against rivals with much more experience on grass, such as second seed Brian Dabul in the first round and eight seed Philipp Petzschner, who was also two years older than him, in the quarterfinals, before being eliminated by Lamine Ouahab. Nadal then won six of the nine Futures events he entered from July until December, including 5 on clay and 1 on hard courts, but he did not reach any doubles finals. Nadal finished 2002 with a Futures record of 40–9 in singles and 10–9 in doubles. In October, Nadal achieved his first victory over a top-100 by defeating No. 76 Albert Montañés in the quarterfinals of a Challenger at Barcelona, before losing to Albert Portas in the semifinals. Nadal ended 2002 as the world No. 199. Nadal continued his incredible ascent in early 2003, reaching the finals of Challengers at Hamburg, Cherbourg and Cagliari, and winning at Barletta. He scored a total of 19 Challenger wins in the first three months of the season to find himself inside the Top 150. He then qualified for his second career ATP event, the Monte Carlo Masters, where in the second round he beat the 2002 French Open champion Albert Costa, then ranked No. 7, thus getting his first top 10 career win and entering the world’s top 100. In his next ATP event, the Torneo Godó in Barcelona, Nadal scored his first ATP bagel in a first round win over Juan Antonio Marín. Nadal then reached his fifth Challenger final of the year in Aix-en-Provence, which he lost to Mariano Puerta. In May, the 16-year-old Nadal entered his second Masters event at Hamburg, where he upset No. 4 Carlos Moyá before losing to future French Open Champion Gaston Gaudio in the third round. Nadal was then forced to postpone his French Open debut after injuring his elbow in a fall while training. He then qualified directly to Wimbledon, thus having never contested in a major qualifying event before. In his major main draw debut in Wimbledon, Nadal defeated Mario Ančić, who at the time was the most recent player to defeat Roger Federer on grass, and then reached the third round to became the youngest man to do so since Boris Becker in 1984. In July, Nadal reached the first national final of his career at the Spanish Championship in Majadahonda, where he beat the champion and finalist of the previous edition, Tommy Robredo and Fernando Verdasco, en route to the final, which he lost to Feliciano López. Nadal then participated at Umag, where he lost to Moyá in the semifinals. This remained Nadal's only loss at a clay-court semifinal for the next 12 years, as he then began a streak of 52 consecutive wins in semifinal matches on clay that only ended at the 2015 Rio Open. Nadal also competed in seven doubles tournaments in 2003, and won his first ATP title (doubles or singles) at Umag, partnering Álex López Morón to defeat Todd Perry and Thomas Shimada in the final. Nadal won his second Challenger title of the year in August at Segovia, thus entering the top 50 and winning the ATP Newcomer of the Year Award. At the US Open, Nadal won the first round to became one of the youngest players with a victory at the US Open, but then lost in the second round to Younes El Aynaoui. In September, Nadal entered the final Challenger event of his career, on hard courts in Saint-Jean-de-Luz, retiring with an injury against Richard Gasquet, who never defeated Nadal again. Nadal then reached another national final in the Albacete Tournament after overcoming three match points and a headache in the semifinals against Ferrán Ventura to set up another final with López, this time winning comfortably. Nadal finished the year ranked as the world No. 49. 2004 started with a doubles title alongside Tommy Robredo at the Chennai Open, defeating Israeli pair Jonathan Erlich and Andy Ram in the final; Nadal’s second doubles title and first on hard courts. In singles, however, Nadal piled up his 5th consecutive loss after a first round exit to Thierry Ascione; this remains the worst losing streak of his career. He bounced back in the very next tournament in Auckland as he reached the first ATP final of his career, which he lost to Dominik Hrbatý. Nadal then reached the third round of the Australian Open, where he lost in straight sets to former world No. 1 and Australian native Lleyton Hewitt. Later that year, Nadal, then ranked No. 34, played the first match of his historic rivalry with Roger Federer, then ranked No. 1, in the third round of the Miami Open, winning in straight sets before a loss to Fernando González in the fourth round. In the first tournament of the clay court season at Estoril, Nadal suffered a stress fracture in his left ankle during his round of 16 victory over Richard Gasquet, causing him to miss 3 months of play and 2 majors, the French Open and Wimbledon. On his return in July, he struggled to regain his form, and although he won his first ATP singles title at the Prokom Open by defeating No. 105 José Acasuso in the final, Nadal won hardly any other match on the tour. At the US Open, Nadal lost to defending champion Andy Roddick in the second round, but he also entered the tournament's doubles event partnering Robredo, where they upset the No. 4 seed in the third round and reached the semifinals; Nadal's best performance in a grand slam doubles event. In the 2004 Davis Cup final, the 18-year-old Nadal beat world No. 2 Andy Roddick on clay in Spain to help his nation clinch the title over the United States, and in doing so at 18 years and six months of age, he became the youngest player to register a singles victory in a Davis Cup final for a winning nation. Nadal finished the year ranked as the world No. 51, two places worse than the prior year, mainly because he missed most of the clay court season. 2005 started with a doubles title alongside Albert Costa at the Qatar Open, defeating pair Andrei Pavel and Mikhail Youzhny in the final. At the 2005 Australian Open, Nadal lost in the fourth round to eventual runner-up Lleyton Hewitt. Two months later, he reached the final of the 2005 Miami Masters, and despite being two points from a straight-sets victory, he was defeated in five sets by No. 1 Roger Federer. Both performances were considered breakthroughs for Nadal. He then dominated the spring clay-court season. He won 24 consecutive singles matches, breaking Andre Agassi's Open Era record of consecutive match wins for a male teenager. Nadal won the Torneo Conde de Godó in Barcelona after defeating the former world No. 1 Juan Carlos Ferrero in the final; a triumph that propelled him into the top 10 for the first time in his career. He then beat 2004 French Open runner-up Guillermo Coria in the finals of the 2005 Monte Carlo Masters and the 2005 Italian Open. These victories raised his ranking to world No. 5 and made him one of the favorites at his career-first French Open. On his 19th birthday, Nadal defeated Federer in the French Open semifinals, being one of only four players to defeat him that year (along with Marat Safin, Richard Gasquet, and David Nalbandian). Two days later he defeated Mariano Puerta in the final, becoming the second man, after Mats Wilander in 1982, to win the French Open on his first attempt. He also became the first male teenager to win a major singles title since Pete Sampras won the 1990 US Open at age 19. Winning improved his ranking to No. 3. Three days after his victory in Paris, Nadal's 24-match winning streak was snapped in the first round of the grass court Gerry Weber Open in Halle, Germany, where he lost to No. 147 Alexander Waske, the second lowest-ranked defeat of his career. He then lost in the second round of 2005 Wimbledon to No. 69 Gilles Müller of Luxembourg. Nadal then played at the Copa del Rey de Tenis in Huelva, the oldest tournament in Spain on clay, beating Carlos Moyá in the final. Following his Wimbledon loss, Nadal won 16 consecutive matches and three consecutive tournaments, the Swedish Open, Stuttgart Open, and the Canada Masters, defeating Agassi in the final of the latter to win the first hardcourt title of his career and to bring his ranking to No. 2 on 25 July 2005, where he remained for the next three years behind Roger Federer. His winning streak ended in the first round of the Cincinnati Open at the hands of Tomáš Berdych. Nadal was seeded second at the 2005 US Open, but was upset in the third round by No. 49 James Blake in four sets. In September, he defeated Coria in the final of the China Open in Beijing and won both of his Davis Cup matches against Italy. In October, he won his fourth Masters title of the year, coming back from two sets down to prevail against Ivan Ljubičić in the final of the 2005 Madrid Masters, his biggest indoor title to this day. He then suffered a foot injury that prevented him from competing in the year-ending Tennis Masters Cup. Both Nadal and Federer won eleven singles titles and four Masters titles in 2005. Nadal broke Mats Wilander's previous teenage record of nine in 1983. Eight of Nadal's titles were on clay, and the remainder were on hard courts. Nadal won 79 matches, second only to Federer's 81. Also, he earned the highest year-end ranking ever by a Spaniard and the ATP Most Improved Player of the Year award. Nadal missed the Australian Open because of a foot injury. In February, he lost in the semifinals of the first tournament he played, the Open 13 tournament in Marseille. Two weeks later, he handed Roger Federer his first loss of the year in the final of the Dubai Open (in 2006, Nadal and Andy Murray were the only two men who defeated Federer), thus ending Federer’s 56-match winning streak on hard courts. Nadal was then upset in both the semifinals of the Indian Wells Open by James Blake, and in the second round of the Miami Masters by Carlos Moyá, who thus ended Nadal's 22-match win streak over fellow Spaniard players. On European clay, Nadal won all four tournaments he entered and 24 consecutive matches. He defeated Federer in the final of the Monte Carlo Masters in four sets. The following week, he defeated Tommy Robredo in the final of the Torneo Godó tournament in Barcelona. After a one-week break, Nadal won Italian Open title defeating Federer in a fifth-set tiebreaker in the final, after saving two match points and equaling Björn Borg's tally of 16 ATP titles won as a teenager. At five hours and five minutes, this is the longest match Federer and Nadal have ever contested and it is considered to be where the Federer–Nadal rivalry began in earnest, with The New York Times comparing it to the Muhammad Ali–Joe Frazier rivalry in boxing on the following day. Nadal then broke Argentinian Guillermo Vilas's 29-year male record of 53 consecutive clay-court match victories by beating Robin Söderling in the first round of the French Open. Vilas presented Nadal with a trophy, but commented later that Nadal's feat was less impressive than his own because Nadal's winning streak covered two years and was accomplished by adding easy tournaments to his schedule. Nadal went on to face Novak Djokovic in the quarterfinals, the first-ever meeting of their historic rivalry, which Nadal won via a retirement from Djokovic after Nadal took the first two sets. He then beat Ivan Ljubičić to set up a final against Federer. The first two sets of the match were hardly competitive, as the rivals traded 6–1 sets. Nadal won the third set easily and won the fourth in a tiebreaker to become the first player to defeat Federer in a Grand Slam tournament final. Nadal injured his shoulder during a quarterfinal match against Lleyton Hewitt at the Artois Championships, played on grass at the Queen's Club in London. Nadal was unable to complete the match, which ended his 26-match winning streak. Nadal was seeded second at Wimbledon, and was two points from defeat against American qualifier Robert Kendrick in the second round before coming back to win in five sets. In the third round, Nadal defeated No. 20 Andre Agassi in straight sets in Agassi's last career match at Wimbledon. Nadal also won his next three matches in straight sets, which set up his first Wimbledon final, which was against Federer, who had won this tournament the three previous years. Nadal was the first Spanish man since Manuel Santana in 1966, to reach the Wimbledon final, but Federer won the match in four sets to win his fourth consecutive Wimbledon title. During the lead up to the US Open, Nadal played the two Masters tournaments in North America. He was upset in the third round of the Rogers Cup in Toronto and in the quarterfinals of the Cincinnati Open by Juan Carlos Ferrero. Nadal was seeded second at the US Open, but lost in the quarterfinals to No. 54 Mikhail Youzhny in four sets. Nadal played only three tournaments for the remainder of the year. Joachim Johansson, ranked No. 690, upset Nadal in the second round of the Stockholm Open. The following week, Nadal lost to Tomáš Berdych in the quarterfinals of the Madrid Masters. During the round-robin stage of the year-ending Tennis Masters Cup, Nadal lost to James Blake but defeated Nikolay Davydenko and Robredo. Because of those two victories, Nadal qualified for the semifinals, where he lost to Federer. This was Nadal's third loss in nine career matches with Federer. Nadal went on to become the first player since Andre Agassi in 1994–95 to finish the year ranked No. 2 in consecutive years. At the Australian Open, Nadal lost in the quarterfinals to eventual runner-up Fernando González. After another quarterfinal loss at the Dubai Tennis Championships, he won the Indian Wells Open after beating Novak Djokovic in the final, before losing to Djokovic in the quarterfinals of the 2007 Miami Masters. He had comparatively more success after returning to Europe to play five clay-court tournaments. He won the titles at the Monte-Carlo Masters, the Torneo Godó in Barcelona, and the Italian Open, before losing to Roger Federer in the final of the Hamburg Masters. This defeat ended his 81-match winning streak on clay, which is the male Open Era record for consecutive wins on a single surface. He bounced back quickly in the French Open, not dropping a set en route to the final where he faced Federer once again, this time winning in four sets to join Björn Borg as the only man to win three French Open titles in a row since Anthony Wilding in 1914. Between the tournaments in Barcelona and Rome, Nadal defeated Federer in the "Battle of Surfaces" exhibition match in Mallorca, with the tennis court being half grass and half clay. Nadal was upset in the quarterfinals of the Artois Championships at the Queen's Club in London for the second consecutive year. Nadal then won consecutive five-set matches during the third and fourth rounds of Wimbledon before being beaten by Federer in the five-set final. This was Federer's first five-set match at Wimbledon since 2001. In July, Nadal beat the unseeded Stan Wawrinka in the final of the clay-court Stuttgart Open, which proved to be his last title of the year. In the North American summer hard court season, Nadal was a semifinalist at the Canadian Masters in Montreal before losing his first match at the Cincinnati Open. He was the second-seeded player at the US Open, but was defeated in the fourth round by David Ferrer. After a month-long break, Nadal played Madrid Masters and Paris Masters, but David Nalbandian beat him in straight sets in the quarterfinals and final of those tournaments. To end the year, Nadal won two of his three-round robin matches to advance to the semifinals of the Tennis Masters Cup in Shanghai, where Federer defeated him in straight sets. During the second half of the year, Nadal battled a knee injury suffered during the Wimbledon final. In addition, there were rumors at the end of the year that the foot injury he suffered during 2005, caused long-term damage, which were given credence by coach Toni Nadal's claim that the problem was "serious". Nadal and his spokesman strongly denied this, however, with Nadal himself calling the story "totally false". Nadal began the year in India, where he was comprehensively beaten by Mikhail Youzhny in the final of the Chennai Open. Nadal then reached the semifinals of the Australian Open for the first time; Jo-Wilfried Tsonga defeated him in the semifinals in straight sets. Nadal also reached the final of the Miami Masters for the second time, which he lost to Nikolay Davydenko. During the spring clay-court season, Nadal won four singles titles and defeated Roger Federer in three finals. At the Monte Carlo Masters, he beat Federer in the final for the third year in a row to become the first player to win four consecutive titles there since Anthony Wilding in 1914. Furthermore, he also won the tournament's doubles event paired with Tommy Robredo, thus becoming the first player since Jim Courier in 1991 to win the singles and doubles titles at a Masters Series event. Nadal then won his fourth consecutive title at the Open Sabadell Atlántico tournament in Barcelona. A few weeks later, Nadal won his first Masters Hamburg title defeating Federer in a three-set final, thus becoming only the third player to have won all three clay-court Masters Series titles, in Rome, Monte Carlo and Hamburg. He then won the French Open, becoming the fifth man in the Open Era to win a Grand Slam singles title without losing a set. He defeated Federer in the final for the third straight year, but this was the most lopsided of all their matches, as Nadal only lost four games and gave Federer his first bagel since 1999. This was Nadal's fourth consecutive French title, tying Björn Borg's all-time record. Nadal became the fourth male player during Open era to win the same Grand Slam singles tournament for four consecutive years (the others being Borg, Pete Sampras, and Federer). Nadal then played Federer in the final of Wimbledon for the third consecutive year, in the most anticipated match of their rivalry. Nadal entered the final on a 23-match winning streak, including his first career grass-court title at the Stella Artois Championships staged at the Queen's Club in London prior to Wimbledon, while Federer had won his record fifth grass-court title at the Gerry Weber Open in Halle, and then reached the Wimbledon final without losing a set. Unlike their previous two Wimbledon finals, though, Federer was not the prohibitive favorite, and many analysts picked Nadal to win. At 4 hours and 48 minutes, they played the longest (in terms of time on court, not in terms of numbers of games) final in Wimbledon history, and because of rain delays, Nadal won the fifth set 9–7 in near-darkness (The 2019 final later broke the record for the longest Wimbledon final). The match was widely lauded as the greatest Wimbledon final ever, with some tennis critics even calling it the greatest match in tennis history. By winning his first Wimbledon title, Nadal became the third man in the open era to win both the French Open and Wimbledon in the same year, after Rod Laver in 1969, and Borg in 1978–1980, (Federer later accomplished this the following year) as well as the second Spaniard to win Wimbledon after Manolo Santana in 1966. He also ended Federer's record streak of five consecutive Wimbledon titles and 65 straight wins on grass courts. This was also the first time that Nadal won two Grand Slam tournaments back-to-back. After Wimbledon, Nadal extended his winning streak to a career-best 32 matches by winning his second Canada Masters title in Toronto, thus becoming the third youngest player to accumulate 30 titles behind Borg and Jimmy Connors, and then reaching the semifinals of the Cincinnati Open, in which his winning streak was snapped by Djokovic. Nadal then played at the 2008 Beijing Olympics, where he defeated Serbia's Novak Djokovic in the semifinals and Chile's Fernando González in the final to win the gold medal. With the win, Nadal finally clinched the world No. 1 ranking on 18 August, ending Federer's record four-and-a-half-year reign at the top. At the US Open, Nadal was the top-seeded player for the first time at a major. He did not lose a set during his first three matches, but lost in the semifinals to Andy Murray. Later in the year in Madrid, Nadal helped Spain defeat the United States in the Davis Cup semifinals. At the Madrid Masters, Nadal lost in the semifinals to Gilles Simon. However, his performance at the event guaranteed him the year-end No. 1 ranking, making him the first Spaniard to finish a season as such in the Open Era. Two weeks later at the Paris Masters, Nadal reached the quarterfinals, where he withdrew because of a knee injury. The following week, Nadal announced his withdrawal from the year-ending Tennis Masters Cup in Shanghai, citing tendinitis of the knee. On 10 November, Nadal withdrew from Spain's Davis Cup final against Argentina, as his knee injury had not healed completely. Nadal's first ATP Tour event for the season was the Qatar Open, where he lost in the quarterfinals to Gaël Monfils. Nadal also entered and won the tournament's doubles event partnering Marc López, where they defeated the No. 1-ranked doubles team of Daniel Nestor and Nenad Zimonjić in the final. At the Australian Open, Nadal won his first five matches without dropping a set, before defeating Fernando Verdasco in the semifinals in the fifth-longest match in Australian Open history at 5 hours and 14 minutes. This set up a championship match with Roger Federer, their first meeting in a hard-court major. Nadal defeated Federer in a five-set final to earn his first hard-court major singles title, and become the first Spaniard to win the Australian Open. At the ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament in Rotterdam, Nadal sustained a knee injury during the final, which he lost to Andy Murray. Although this knee problem was not associated with Nadal's right-knee tendonitis, it was serious enough to cause him to withdraw from the Dubai Championships a week later. In March, Nadal defeated Janko Tipsarević and Novak Djokovic to help Spain beat Serbia in a Davis Cup World Group first-round tie on clay in Benidorm, Spain. At the Indian Wells Open, Nadal won his 13th Masters tournament after saving five match points in the fourth round to beat David Nalbandian for the first time, and then beating three top-10 players in a row, Juan Martín del Potro, Andy Roddick, and Murray in the final, all in straight set victories. At the Miami Masters, Nadal again faced del Potro in the quarterfinals, this time losing the match. Nadal began his European clay court season at the Monte Carlo Masters, where he defeated Djokovic in the final to win a record fifth consecutive singles title there. He then won back to back titles in Barcelona and Italian Open, defeating Ferrer and Djokovic respectively. In the semifinals of the Madrid Open, Nadal saved three match points to defeat Djokovic in a deciding set tiebreaker to take his career record over Djokovic to 14–4 as well as his clay record since 2005 to an impresive 150–4. The match, at 4 hours and 3 minutes, was at the time the longest three-set singles match on the ATP Tour in the Open Era, and was voted as the best match in the history of the Madrid Open in 2022. Despite this, his exhaustion from his clash with Djokovic led Nadal to then surprisingly lose the final to Roger Federer. This was Nadal's first defeat on clay in 33 matches and ended his hopes of being the first man to take all three clay Masters events in the same season. This was also the first time that Nadal had lost to Federer since the semifinals of the 2007 Tennis Masters Cup. By beating Marcos Daniel in the first round of the French Open, Nadal broke Björn Borg's 28-year male record of 28 consecutive victories at the French Open, and he then broke Chris Evert's overall record of 29 by beating Teymuraz Gabashvili in the second round. This run came to an end on 31 May 2009, when Nadal was upset by the eventual runner-up, Robin Söderling in the 4th round. This was Nadal's first and, until 2015, only loss at the French Open. The former three-time French Open champion Mats Wilander stated after the match that "Everybody's in a state of shock, I would think. At some point, Nadal was going to lose. But nobody expected it to happen today, and maybe not this year." Nadal then withdrew from the AEGON Championships. It was then confirmed that he was suffering from tendinitis in both of his knees. On 19 June, Nadal withdrew from Wimbledon, citing his recurring knee injury. Roger Federer went on to win the title, and Nadal consequently dropped back to No. 2 on 6 July 2009. Nadal returned to the tour at the Rogers Cup in Montreal, where he lost in the quarterfinals to del Potro. With this loss, he relinquished the No. 2 spot to Andy Murray on 17 August 2009, ranking outside the top two for the first time since 25 July 2005. Nadal then reached the semifinals of the Cincinnati Open, which he lost to Djokovic in straight sets. At the US Open Nadal fell in the semifinals, losing to eventual champion Juan Martín del Potro. At the ATP Finals, Nadal lost all three of his matches against Robin Söderling, Nikolay Davydenko, and Djokovic respectively without winning a set. In December, Nadal participated in the second Davis Cup final of his career, defeating Tomáš Berdych in his first singles rubber to give the Spanish Davis Cup Team their first point in the tie. After Spain had secured its fourth Davis Cup victory, Nadal defeated Jan Hájek in the first Davis Cup dead rubber of his career. Nadal finished the year as No. 2 for the fourth time in five years. Nadal began the year by participating in the Capitala World Tennis Championship in Abu Dhabi, an exhibition event, where he defeated Robin Söderling in the final in straight sets. In his first competitive tournament of the year, Nadal reached the final of the Qatar Open, which he lost to Nikolay Davydenko. In the Australian Open, Nadal reached the quarterfinals, where he had to pull out at 3–0 down in the third set against Andy Murray. After examining Nadal's knees, doctors told him that he should take two weeks of rest, and then two weeks of rehabilitation. Nadal then reached the semifinals of both the Indian Wells Open and the Miami Masters, where on both occasions he was defeated by the eventual champion in three sets, Ivan Ljubičić and Andy Roddick respectively. Nadal then won the Monte-Carlo Masters, beating Fernando Verdasco in the final, 6–0, 6–1. It was his first title in 11 months, and he lost only 14 games and no sets en route to the title. With this win, Nadal became the first player in the Open Era to win the same tournament for six straight years. Nadal next chose to skip the Barcelona tournament, and his next tournament was the Italian Open, where he defeated David Ferrer in the final for his fifth title at Rome. At the Madrid Masters, Nadal reached the final where he faced the defending champion Roger Federer in a rematch of the previous year's final, this time winning in straight sets to become the first man to complete a clean sweep of the three clay-court Masters 1000 titles. The win gave him his 18th Masters title, breaking Andre Agassi's all-time record and moving two Masters titles ahead of Federer. Nadal moved back to No. 2 the following day. At the French Open, Nadal advanced to the final where he faced Söderling, the man who beat him the previous year. He avenged that defeat by beating Söderling in straight sets to win his fifth French Open championship. This marked the second time that Nadal won the title without dropping a set. By winning the title, Nadal regained the world No. 1 ranking from Federer, who was in contention to break Pete Sampras' all-time record of 286 weeks spent at No. 1. Nadal then entered the Aegon Championships, where his 24-match winning streak was snapped by compatriot Feliciano López in the quarterfinals. In Wimbledon, Nadal needed five sets to defeat Philipp Petzschner in the third round. During the match Nadal was warned twice for allegedly receiving coaching from his coach and uncle, Toni Nadal, resulting in a $2,000 fine by Wimbledon officials. He then defeated Andy Murray in the semifinals and Tomáš Berdych in the final to win his second Wimbledon title and his eighth career major title. In Canada, Nadal lost in the semifinals to Murray. Nadal also competed in the doubles with Djokovic in a one-time, high-profile partnership. This had not happened since 1976, when Jimmy Connors and Arthur Ashe as No. 1 and No. 2 paired together as a doubles team. The pair lost in the first round to Milos Raonic and Vasek Pospisil. The next week, Nadal was the top seed at the Cincinnati Open, losing in the quarterfinals to Marcos Baghdatis. At the 2010 US Open, Nadal reached his first final without dropping a set. In the final, he defeated Novak Djokovic in four sets to complete his first Career Grand Slam while also becoming the second male after Andre Agassi to complete a Career Golden Slam. Nadal's US Open victory meant that he also became the first man to win majors on clay, grass, and hard courts in the same year, and the first to win the French Open, Wimbledon, and the US Open in the same year since Rod Laver in 1969. Nadal's victory also clinched him the year-end No. 1 ranking for 2010. Nadal began his Asian tour at the 2010 PTT Thailand Open in Bangkok where he was upset by compatriot Guillermo García-López in the semifinals despite creating 26 break points. Nadal then won the Japan Open in Tokyo after surviving two match points against Viktor Troicki in the semifinals and then defeating Gaël Monfils in the final for his seventh title of the season. Nadal next played in the Shanghai Masters, where he lost to Jürgen Melzer in the third round. On 5 November, Nadal announced that he was pulling out of the Paris Masters owing to tendinitis in his left shoulder. On 21 November 2010, in London, Nadal won the Stefan Edberg Sportsmanship Award for the first time. At the 2010 ATP Finals in London, Nadal won all of his round-robin matches for the first time in his career. In the semifinals, he defeated Murray in three sets, before losing to Roger Federer in the final. Nadal has called 2010 his best year as a professional tennis player. Former world No. 1 Novak Djokovic, who lost to Nadal in the 2010 US Open final, stated that Nadal had "the capabilities already to become the best player ever", and added that "he has the game now for each surface, and he has won each major. He has proven to the world that he is the best in this moment". Nadal started 2011 by participating in the Mubadala World Tennis Championship in Abu Dhabi, an exhibition event, where he defeated Roger Federer in the final. At the Qatar Open, he fell in straight sets to Nikolay Davydenko in the semifinals. He also entered and won the tournament's doubles event partnering López, defeating Daniele Bracciali and Andreas Seppi in the final. In the quarterfinals of the Australian Open, Nadal suffered a hamstring injury against David Ferrer early in the pair's quarterfinal match and ultimately lost in straight sets, thus ending his effort to win four major tournaments in a row. In March, Nadal helped Spain defeat Belgium in a 2011 Davis Cup World Group first-round tie in the Spiroudome in Charleroi, Belgium. Nadal defeated Ruben Bemelmans and Olivier Rochus. At both the Indian Wells Open and the Miami Masters, Nadal reached the final and lost to Novak Djokovic in three sets. This was the first time Nadal reached the finals of Indian Wells and Miami in the same year. Nadal began his clay-court season by winning the Monte-Carlo Masters with the loss of just one set. In the final, he avenged his defeat by David Ferrer in the quarterfinals of the Australian Open. Just a week later, Nadal won his sixth Barcelona Open crown, again defeating Ferrer in straight sets. This was also the 31st clay court title of his career, thus breaking a tie that he jointly held with Björn Borg and Manuel Orantes for the third most clay titles in the Open era. He then lost to Novak Djokovic in the finals of the Italian Open and Madrid Open, which ended his 37-match winning streak on clay. However, Nadal retained his No. 1 ranking during the clay-court season and won his sixth French Open title by defeating Roger Federer. At Wimbledon, Nadal won three four-set matches to set up a final against No. 2 Novak Djokovic, whose victory in the semifinals meant that he was going to replace Nadal as the world No. 1 at the end of the tournament, regardless of the result at the final, which Nadal lost in four sets. This was Nadal's first defeat in Wimbledon since the 2007 final and ended his 20-match winning streak there. After resting for a month from a foot injury sustained during Wimbledon, he contested the Canadian Open, where he loses a deciding set tiebreaker to No. 41 Ivan Dodig in the quarterfinals. He next played in the Cincinnati Open, where he defeated Fernando Verdasco in a third round clash that lasted three hours and 38 minutes with three tiebreaks. This was the fifth time that Nadal played in a three tiebreak game, winning on all five occasions. In the quarterfinals, Nadal was hampered by burns to his right hand after an accident at a Japanese restaurant and lost to Mardy Fish in straight sets. At the 2011 US Open, Nadal made headlines when after defeating David Nalbandian in the fourth round, he collapsed in his post-match press conference because of severe cramps. Nadal then played Djokovic in their second successive major final, losing the match in four sets. After the US Open, Nadal reached the final of the Japan Open, where he was defeated by Andy Murray. At the Shanghai Masters, he was upset in the third round by No. 23 ranked Florian Mayer. At the ATP Finals, Nadal was defeated by Roger Federer and Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in the round-robin stage, and was subsequently eliminated from the tournament. In the Davis Cup final in December, he helped Spain win the title with victories over Juan Mónaco and Juan Martín del Potro. Nadal began his ATP Tour season at the Qatar Open, where he lost to Gaël Monfils in the semifinals. In the Australian Open, Nadal won his semifinal match against Roger Federer to set up a third successive major final against Novak Djokovic, which he lost in a five-set epic that lasted 5 hours and 53 minutes, the longest Grand Slam final match (by duration) in history. It is considered to be one of the greatest tennis matches of all time. It remains the longest match of both Nadal and Djokovic's careers, and it also remains the only time that Nadal has lost a major final after winning the first set. Nadal called it "the toughest loss in his career", but also "the best match he ever played". Nadal then reached the semifinals of both the Indian Wells Open, where he was beaten by Federer, and the Miami Masters, where he withdrew because of knee problems in order to risk no further injury given the Olympic-tightened 2012 schedule and the upcoming clay swing. At the Monte-Carlo Masters, Nadal did not lose a single set en route to the title to become the first man in the Open Era to win the same tournament eight consecutive times. In the final, he defeated No. 1 Novak Djokovic to end a streak of seven straight final losses to him, but unexpectedly, this was the most lopsided of all their matches, as Nadal only lost four games in a 6–3, 6–1 win. Nadal then beat compatriot David Ferrer in a three-set final to clinch his seventh title in eight years at the Barcelona Open. At the Madrid Open, Nadal surprisingly lost to Fernando Verdasco, whom he held a 13–0 record against. He heavily criticized the new blue-colored clay and threatened not to attend in the future if the surface was not changed back to red clay. Several other players such as Novak Djokovic voiced similar criticism. His tremendous record on clay continued as he defeated Djokovic in a tight straight-set final at the Italian Open. This was his second victory over Novak Djokovic in 2012 and his third title of the season, as well as his 6th Rome title overall. At the French Open, Nadal won his semifinal match against Ferrer to set up another final against Novak Djokovic. This marked only the second time in tennis history (after Serena and Venus Williams between the 2002 French Open and the 2003 Australian Open), two opposing tennis players played four consecutive major finals against each other. This was a match of historic proportions as either Nadal would break Björn Borg's record of six French Open titles, or Djokovic would become the first man since Rod Laver in 1969 to win four majors in a row. Nadal eventually emerged victorious in four sets after multiple rain delays that forced the final to be concluded on the following afternoon. With this victory, Nadal became the most successful male player at the French Open, winning seven French Open titles. Nadal lost a total of only three sets in the 2012 clay court season. As a warm-up ahead of Wimbledon, Nadal played in Halle, losing to Philipp Kohlschreiber in the quarterfinals. At Wimbledon, Nadal was upset in the second round by Lukáš Rosol in a close five-set match. This was the first time since the 2005 Wimbledon championships that Nadal had failed to progress past the second round of a Grand Slam tournament. In July 2012, Nadal withdrew from the 2012 Olympics owing to tendinitis in his knee, which subsequently led to him pulling out of both the Canadian Masters and the Cincinnati Open. He later withdrew from the rest of the 2012 season, as he felt he still was not healthy enough to compete. Nadal ended 2012 ranked No. 4 in the world, the first time in eight years that he has not been ranked 1st or 2nd at the end of the year. Two weeks prior to the Australian Open, Nadal officially withdrew from the tournament citing a stomach virus. Nadal's withdrawal saw him drop out of the ATP's Top Four for the first time since 2005. Playing in his first tournaments in South America since 2005, Nadal made his comeback at the VTR Open in Chile, where he was upset by Argentine No. 73 Horacio Zeballos in the final. At the Brasil Open, Nadal reached the final, where he defeated David Nalbandian. In the title match of the Abierto Mexicano Telcel in Acapulco, Nadal defeated David Ferrer, losing just two games in the match. Nadal then returned to the American hard courts, playing the Indian Wells Open as the fifth seed. He lost only one set en route to the title, defeating No. 2 Roger Federer and No. 6 Tomáš Berdych before beating Juan Martín del Potro in the final. After withdrawing from Miami, Nadal attempted to defend his title at the Monte-Carlo Masters, but was beaten by Djokovic in straight sets to end his eight-year reign at the tournament. He then won his eighth title at the Barcelona Open after beating Nicolás Almagro in the final. Nadal went on to win the Madrid Open, beating Stan Wawrinka in the final. This was the 40th clay court title of his career, equal second in the Open era with Thomas Muster. Nadal then overtook him when he defeated Federer for his 7th title at the Italian Open. These victories raised his ranking to No. 4. Nadal won the French Open after beating Novak Djokovic in the semifinal and David Ferrer in the final, breaking the record for the most match wins in the tournament in the process with his 59th match victory, surpassing the previous record held by Guillermo Vilas and Roger Federer (who equaled Vilas' record with his fourth round win but lost in the quarterfinals). Nadal also became the first man in history to win any major eight times, and tied Roy Emerson for the third-most major titles in history. He also equaled Max Decugis, who won eight titles at this event when it was only open to French club members. His semifinal match with Djokovic is widely considered one of the greatest clay court matches ever played, as Nadal came back from down a break in the fifth set to take out a hard-fought 4-hour, 37-minute victory. This was only the second time Nadal had been pushed to five sets at the French Open (the first being against John Isner in the first round of the 2011 French Open). This victory meant that since returning from seven months out due to a left knee injury, Nadal had reached eight consecutive finals, won 7 titles, and compiled a 43–2 record in 2013. However, Nadal then lost his first-round match at Wimbledon in straight sets to unseeded Belgian Steve Darcis (ranked No. 135), the first time he had ever lost in the first round of a major. At the time, he was the lowest-ranked player ever to beat Nadal in a Grand Slam tournament. In August, Nadal won a close semifinal match in Montreal, denying Djokovic his fourth Canadian Open title. Nadal proceeded to win the title after beating Milos Raonic in the final in straight sets. He then won his 26th Masters title in Cincinnati after beating John Isner in the final. Nadal concluded a brilliant North American hard court season with his 4th hard court title of the year, defeating Djokovic at the 2013 US Open final in four sets to achieve the Summer Slam and clinch the US Open Series. He became only the third player in history, after Patrick Rafter and Andy Roddick, to win all three events in succession. This granted him $3.6 million in prize money, the most money earned by a male tennis player at a single tournament. Later in September, Nadal helped Spain secure their Davis Cup World Group Playoff spot for 2014, with a victory against Sergiy Stakhovsky and a doubles win with Marc Lopez. In October, he reached the final of the China Open, helping him regain the No. 1 ranking. In the final, he was beaten by Djokovic in straight sets. At the Shanghai Masters, he reached the semifinals but was defeated by Del Potro. In November, Nadal played his final event of the season in London at the ATP Finals where he secured the year-end No. 1 spot. He beat David Ferrer, Stan Wawrinka, and Tomáš Berdych in the round-robin stage to set up a semifinal victory over Roger Federer before losing in straight sets to Djokovic in the final. Rafael Nadal began his 2014 season at the Qatar Open in Doha, defeating Lukáš Rosol in the first round and he won the title after defeating Gaël Monfils in the final. At the Australian Open, he defeated Roger Federer to reach his third Australian Open final. This marked Nadal's 11th consecutive victory in a major semifinal, second only to Borg's all-time record of 14. In the final, he faced Stanislas Wawrinka, against whom he entered the match with a 12–0 record. However, Nadal suffered a back injury during the warm-up, which progressively worsened as the match wore on. Nadal lost the first two sets, and although he won the third set, he ultimately lost the match in four sets. The first tournament he played after that was the inaugural Rio Open which he won after defeating Alexandr Dolgopolov in the final. However, at the Indian Wells Open, Dolgopolov would avenge his loss, defeating Nadal in three sets in the third round. He reached the final of the Miami Masters, falling to Novak Djokovic in straight sets. Nadal began his clay court season with a quarterfinal loss to David Ferrer in the Monte-Carlo Masters. He was stunned by Nicolas Almagro in the quarterfinals of the Barcelona Open. Nadal then won his 27th masters title at the Madrid Open after Kei Nishikori retired in the third set of the final. On 8 June 2014, Nadal defeated Novak Djokovic in the Men's Singles French Open final to win his 9th French Open title and a 5th straight win. Nadal equaled Pete Sampras' total of 14 Grand Slam wins. Nadal then lost in the second round of the Halle Open to Dustin Brown the following week. Nadal entered the Wimbledon Championships in a bid to win the tournament for the third time. In the fourth round he was upset by Australian teenager Nick Kyrgios in four sets. Nadal withdrew from the American swing owing to a wrist injury. He made his return at the 2014 China Open but was defeated in the quarterfinals by Martin Klizan in three sets. At the 2014 Shanghai Rolex Masters, he was suffering from appendicitis. He lost his opening match to Feliciano Lopez in straight sets. Later, he was upset by Borna Ćorić at the quarterfinals of the 2014 Swiss Indoors. After the loss, he announced that he would skip the rest of the season to undergo surgery for his appendix. Nadal began the year as the defending Champion at the Qatar Open, but suffered a shocking three set defeat to Michael Berrer in the first round. He won the doubles title with Juan Mónaco. At the Australian Open, Nadal lost in straight sets to Tomáš Berdych in the quarterfinal, thus ending a 17-match winning streak against the seventh-seeded Czech. In February, Nadal lost in the semifinals to Fabio Fognini at the Rio Open, before going on to win his 46th career clay-court title against Juan Mónaco at the Argentina Open. Nadal then participated at the Indian Wells and Miami Open but suffered early defeats to Milos Raonic and Fernando Verdasco, in the quarterfinals and third round respectively. Nadal then began his spring clay season at the Monte Carlo Masters and reached the semifinals where he lost to Novak Djokovic in straight sets. After losing to Fognini again at the Barcelona Open quarterfinals, Nadal entered the Madrid Open as the two-time defending champion but lost in the final to Andy Murray in straight sets, resulting in his dropping out of the top five for the first time since 2005. He then lost in the quarterfinals of the Italian Open to Stan Wawrinka in straight sets. Nadal lost to eventual runner-up Djokovic in the quarterfinals of the French Open, ending his winning streak of 39 consecutive victories in Paris since his defeat by Robin Söderling in 2009. Nadal went on to win the 2015 Mercedes Cup against Serbian Viktor Troicki, his first grass court title since he won at Wimbledon in 2010. He was unable to continue his good form on grass as he lost in the first round of the Aegon Championships to Alexandr Dolgopolov in three sets. Nadal's struggles continued when he lost in the second round of Wimbledon to Dustin Brown. In the third round of the 2015 US Open, Nadal once again lost to Fognini, despite having won the first two sets. This early exit ended Nadal's record 10-year streak of winning at least one major. Nadal started the year winning the Mubadala Title defeating Milos Raonic in straight sets. After that, he entered the Doha, Qatar, where he reached the finals, losing to Djokovic in straight sets. This was their 47th match, after which Djokovic led their head-to-head rivalry with 24 matches won. At the Australian Open, Nadal was defeated in five sets by compatriot Fernando Verdasco in the first round. The defeat marked his first opening round exit at the Australian Open. In April he won his 28th Masters title in Monte Carlo. He went on to win his 17th ATP 500 in Barcelona, winning the trophy for the ninth time in his career. He continued the clay court season in Madrid, falling to Murray in the semifinal. The following week, Nadal played in Italian Open where he reached the quarterfinal. Nadal was again defeated by Djokovic in straight sets, although he had a break advantage in both sets and served to win the second. Following Federer's withdrawal due to injury, Nadal was named the fourth seed at the French Open. On 26 May, he became the eighth male player in tennis history to record 200 Grand Slam match wins, as he defeated Facundo Bagnis in straight sets in the second round of the Slam. Following the victory, however, Nadal had to withdraw from competition owing to a left wrist injury initially suffered during the Madrid Open, handing Marcel Granollers a walkover into the fourth round. On 9 June, Nadal announced that the same wrist injury that forced him to withdraw from the French Open needed more time to heal, and that he would not play at the 2016 Wimbledon Championships. At the Rio 2016 Olympics, Nadal achieved 800 career wins with his quarterfinal victory over the Brazilian Thomaz Bellucci. Partnering Marc López, he won the gold medal in men's doubles event for Spain by defeating Romania's Florin Mergea and Horia Tecau in the finals. This made Nadal the second man in the Open Era to have won gold medals in both singles and doubles. Nadal also advanced to the bronze medal match in the men's singles but was defeated by Kei Nishikori. At the US Open Nadal was seeded 4th and advanced to the fourth round but was defeated by 24th seed Lucas Pouille in 5 sets. The defeat meant that 2016 was the first year since 2004 in which Nadal had failed to reach a Grand Slam quarter-final. He played the Shanghai Masters and was upset in the second round by Viktor Troicki. He subsequently ended his 2016 season to let his wrist recover. Nadal opened his season by playing at the Brisbane International for the first time, where he reached the quarterfinals before losing to Milos Raonic in three sets. In the second round of the tournament, he defeated Mischa Zverev for the loss of just two games; Nadal began the Australian Open with straight-set wins over Florian Mayer and Marcos Baghdatis, before more difficult wins over Alexander Zverev and Gaël Monfils, which set up his first quarterfinal berth at a Grand Slam since the 2015 French Open. Nadal defeated Raonic and Grigor Dimitrov in the quarterfinal and semifinal, respectively (the latter lasting for five sets over five hours), to set up a final against Roger Federer, his first Grand Slam final since he won the 2014 French Open. Nadal went on to lose to Federer in five sets; this was the first time that Nadal had lost to Federer in a Grand Slam since the final of the 2007 Wimbledon Championships. Nadal made it to the final of Acapulco without dropping a set, but was defeated by big-serving Sam Querrey. In a rematch of the Australian Open final Nadal took on Roger Federer in the fourth round at Indian Wells but again lost to his old rival, this time in straight sets; it was their earliest meeting in a tournament in over a decade. In the Miami Masters, Nadal reached the final to again play Federer, and was once again defeated in straight sets. Nadal then won his 29th Masters title in Monte Carlo; it was his tenth victory in the principality, the most wins by any player at a single tournament in the Open era. Nadal won his 18th ATP 500 title in Barcelona without dropping a set, also marking his tenth victory in Barcelona. Nadal next played in the Madrid Open, where he defeated Dominic Thiem to tie Novak Djokovic's all-time Masters record of 30 titles. Nadal went on to beat Stan Wawrinka in straight sets and win a record tenth French Open title. This marked his first Grand Slam title since 2014, ending his three-year drought in Grand Slams. Nadal won every set that he played in the tournament, dropping a total of only 35 games in seven matches, which is the second-fewest by any male player (second only to Björn Borg's 32 dropped games at the 1978 French Open) en route to a major title in the Open Era.[citation needed] The title "La Décima" ("the tenth" in Spanish) was used to proclaim Nadal's achievement in becoming the first player, male or female, to win 10 titles at a single major in the Open Era, following similar feats at Monte Carlo and Barcelona. Nadal also climbed to second on the all-time major singles titles list, with 15, placing him one ahead of Pete Sampras. Nadal lost in the round of 16 at Wimbledon, 13–15 in the fifth set, to Gilles Müller. He returned to competition in Montreal. He won his first match against Coric in straight sets but fell in the Round of 16 to Canadian teenager Denis Shapovalov. By 21 August, he retook the ATP No. 1 ranking from Andy Murray. Nadal earned his third US Open title against first-time Grand Slam finalist Kevin Anderson, winning the final in straight sets. This marked the first time that Nadal had captured two Grand Slam tournaments in a year since 2013, and the second time since 2010. Nadal extended his winning streak by winning the China Open, winning the final against Nick Kyrgios in straight sets. On 11 September 2017, Nadal and Garbiñe Muguruza made Spain the first country since the United States 14 years ago to simultaneously top both the ATP and the WTA rankings, with Muguruza making her debut in the No. 1 spot. After defeating Hyeon Chung in the second round of the Paris Masters Nadal secured the year-end No. 1. He became year-end No. 1 for the fourth time in his career, tying him for fourth all-time with Novak Djokovic, Ivan Lendl and John McEnroe, behind Pete Sampras (6), and Roger Federer and Jimmy Connors (5). By securing the year-end no. 1 ranking, Nadal became the first player aged over 30 to finish as year-end No. 1 and the first to finish in the top spot four years since he last achieved the feat; he also broke a number of other historical records, all of which he broke again in 2019. Nadal began his 2018 season at the Kooyong Classic, where he lost to Richard Gasquet in the first round. He then played at the Tie Break Tens exhibition tournament in Melbourne, losing in the final to Tomáš Berdych. At the Australian Open, Nadal recorded straight-sets wins in the first three rounds, before notching a tougher four-set win against Diego Schwartzman in the fourth round. He faced Marin Čilić in the quarterfinal, but retired in the fifth set due to a hip injury. On 16 February, Nadal dropped to the No. 2 ranking after 26 weeks at the top when his rival Roger Federer overtook him in points. Nadal withdrew from the Mexican Open, Indian Wells Open, and Miami Open due to an injury. Despite his absence in Miami, he regained the No. 1 ranking on 2 April due to Federer's second-round loss. After recovering from injury, Nadal helped secure the Spanish Davis Cup team a victory over Germany in the quarterfinal of the World Group. He beat Philipp Kohlschreiber and Alexander Zverev in straight sets. At the Monte Carlo Masters, Nadal successfully defended his title and won a then-record-breaking 31st Masters title, thus becoming the player with the most Masters titles in tennis history. It also marked his 11th title in Monte Carlo, as well as the 76th title in his career. Because he defended the points won the previous year, he kept his No. 1 ranking and began his 171st week as the world No. 1. Nadal won in Monte Carlo without dropping a set, beating Kei Nishikori in the final. Nadal went on to win his 11th title in Barcelona, defeating Stefanos Tsitsipas in straight sets, becoming the first player in the open era to win 400 matches on both clay and hard. The win marked his 20th ATP 500 series title, which put him back atop the list of most ATP 500 titles, tied with Roger Federer. It also marked his 14th consecutive season with at least one ATP 500 title. Fresh after achieving the "Undecima" at Monte Carlo and Barcelona, Nadal had to defend yet another title at Madrid. He reached the quarterfinals, defeating Gaël Monfils and Diego Schwartzman in straight sets, to extend his record to 50 consecutive sets won on clay, starting from the 2017 French Open. His win over Schwartzman broke John McEnroe's record of 49 straight sets won on a single surface. McEnroe had previously achieved the record on carpet in 1984. In a surprise, Nadal lost in straight sets to Dominic Thiem in the quarterfinals, ending his 21-match and record 50-set winning streaks on clay. He also relinquished his world No. 1 ranking to Federer in the process. At the Italian Open, Nadal captured his 8th title in the Italian capital as well as his 78th career title, defeating Alexander Zverev in three sets, thus overtaking John McEnroe in the fourth place on the list of most titles won in the Open Era. It was Nadal's 32nd Masters title – most of any player in the Open Era. With his victory in Rome, Nadal also regained the No. 1 spot from Federer. Then at the French Open, Nadal won his 17th Grand Slam title. This tied Margaret Court's record for singles titles at a Grand Slam event (Court won 11 Australian Opens, but seven came when it was the Australian Championships, an amateur event). En route to the title, Nadal dropped only one set, beating Dominic Thiem in the final in three sets. Nadal became just the fourth man in the Open Era to win three or more major titles after turning 30. Going into Wimbledon, Nadal was ranked world number one, but was seeded second due to Wimbledon's seeding algorithm. He made it to the quarterfinals without dropping set. He then faced #5 seed Juan Martín del Potro, who he defeated in five sets. In the semifinals he faced long-time rival Novak Djokovic, who was aiming to reach his first major final since the 2016 US Open. This match lasted 5 hours and 17 minutes, spread over two days, becoming the second-longest Wimbledon semifinal in history, second only to the match between Kevin Anderson and John Isner held earlier on the same day. Djokovic defeated Nadal in five sets with the fifth set being 10–8. This was Nadal's first defeat in the semifinals of a major since the 2009 US Open, and his first-ever defeat in the semifinals of Wimbledon. Despite this, Nadal achieved his best results at Wimbledon since 2011. This performance, combined with Roger Federer's unsuccessful title defence, ensured that Nadal retained the world number one ranking after the grass season. He then won the Rogers Cup, a record-extending 33rd Masters title. This was Nadal's first Masters title win on hard court since 2013. He then withdrew from the Cincinnati Open to prepare for the US Open. Nadal was the top seed during his title defence at the US Open. He first faced David Ferrer in Ferrer's last Grand Slam match, who retired due to injury during the second set. In his semi-final matchup against Juan Martin del Potro, Nadal retired after losing the second set 6–2 due to knee pain. On 31 October, he announced his withdrawal from the Paris Masters due to an abdominal injury and as a result Novak Djokovic replaced him as world No. 1. Nadal was due to start his season at the Brisbane International, but withdrew shortly before due to an injury. He was seeded second at the 2019 Australian Open, where he progressed to his fifth Australian Open final, and did so without losing a set. Nadal then lost in straight sets to Novak Djokovic, winning only eight games for the match and marking Nadal's first straight-sets defeat in a major final. Nadal next played at the Mexico Open, where he lost to Nick Kyrgios in the second round despite holding three match points. He withdrew from both Indian Wells and Miami due to a right hip injury. Rafael Nadal began the clay season at the Monte Carlo Masters, reaching the semifinals, where he was upset by Fabio Fognini in straight sets. He then competed in Barcelona, reaching the semifinals where he lost to Dominic Thiem in straight sets. In Madrid, he reached his third clay-court semifinal of the year, but lost to Stefanos Tsitsipas in three sets. He won his first tournament of the year in Rome, with a three-set win over Djokovic in the final. At the 2019 French Open, Nadal defeated Kei Nishikori and Roger Federer (their first meeting at the tournament since 2011) en route to the final, dropping only one set en route. In a rematch of the previous year's final, Nadal prevailed in four sets against Thiem to claim his record-extending twelfth French Open title. In doing so, he broke Margaret Court's all-time record of singles titles won at the same major. Nadal next played at Wimbledon and, like the previous year, reached the semifinals, where he faced Federer for the first time at Wimbledon since the 2008 final. Nadal lost the match in four sets. At the Rogers Cup, Nadal was the defending champion and top seed. By defeating Fabio Fognini in the quarterfinals, he surpassed Roger Federer's record of 378 victories at Masters tournaments. In the final, Nadal yielded just three games to Daniil Medvedev, winning in straight sets. This victory marked the first time he defended a title on a surface other than clay. At the US Open, Nadal lost only one set (against Marin Čilić) en route to the final, where he won against Medvedev in five sets. In doing so, Nadal claimed his fourth US Open title and 19th major title overall (placing him only one behind Roger Federer in overall standings), and completed his second-best season in terms of Grand Slam singles results. At the Paris Masters, Nadal reached the semifinals, but withdrew due to an abdominal injury. At the ATP Finals, Nadal defeated Tsitsipas and Medvedev in the round-robin stage, but failed to progress to the semifinals. Despite his elimination, Nadal secured the year-end No. 1 ranking when Djokovic was also eliminated in the round-robin stage. This was Nadal's fifth time as the year-end No. 1 player, drawing level with Jimmy Connors, Federer and Djokovic behind Pete Sampras (six), and in doing so, he surpassed a number of the records he set in 2017, becoming (at the time) the oldest person to finish as the year-end No. 1 player, and creating a record eleven-year gap between his first and last year-end No. 1 seasons (2008 and 2019, respectively). At the 2019 Davis Cup Finals, Nadal helped Spain win its sixth Davis Cup title, defeating Canada in the final. Nadal won all eight of his matches in singles and doubles, extending his winning streak in Davis Cup singles matches to 29 (29–1 record overall), without dropping a set or having his serve broken; he also won the tournament's Most Valuable Player award. Nadal began his 2020 season by playing at the inaugural 2020 ATP Cup and helped Spain reach the final where they lost to Serbia, with Nadal losing to Djokovic in straight sets. Nadal then played at the 2020 Australian Open and won his first three matches in straight sets against Hugo Dellien, Federico Delbonis and Pablo Carreño Busta. In the fourth round, he defeated Nick Kyrgios in four sets and reached the quarterfinals, where he lost to eventual runner-up Dominic Thiem in four sets. Afterwards, Nadal went on to win his third Mexican Open title, defeating Taylor Fritz in straights sets in the final. Nadal lost in the quarter-final of the Italian Open after Diego Schwartzman beat him in straight sets. Nadal won his 13th French Open title, beating Novak Djokovic in straight sets in the tournament's final, only losing seven games. In doing so, he won his 20th Grand Slam title, equalling Roger Federer's record as the man with the most Grand Slam titles. It also marked his 100th win at the tournament, losing only twice in 16 years. His straight-sets victory over Djokovic marked also the 4th time that he won a Grand Slam without losing a set, all at the French Open, doing it also in 2008, 2010 and 2017. At the Paris Masters, Nadal defeated compatriot Feliciano López in the second round to get his 1,000 victory in the ATP Tour, becoming the fourth man in the Open Era to achieve that milestone. He then reached the semifinals where he lost to Alexander Zverev in straight sets. On 9 November 2020, Nadal reached his 790th back to back week as one of the ten highest placed players on the ATP rankings and surpassed the record held by Jimmy Connors. At the 2020 ATP Finals, Nadal played in the London 2020 group. He defeated Rublev and defending champion Tsitsipas progressing to the semifinals and securing ending the year as no. 2. It was the first time since 2015 that Nadal reached the semifinals. Nadal then lost his semifinal match to eventual champion Daniil Medvedev in three sets. This was the seventh time that Nadal had finished Year-end No. 2 and now leads the "Big Three" with 12 Top 2 finishes. At the 2021 Australian Open, Nadal lost in the quarterfinals to world No. 5 Stefanos Tsitsipas, despite being two sets to love up. This marked only the second time Nadal had lost a Grand Slam match after being two sets up. Nadal next played at the Monte Carlo Masters and defeated Federico Delbonis and Grigor Dimitrov in straight sets to reach the quarterfinals, where he lost to Andrey Rublev in three sets. On 25 April, Nadal won a record-extending twelfth Barcelona Open trophy with a three-set victory over Stefanos Tsitsipas in the final, saving a championship point in the third set. At 3 hours and 38 minutes, this was the longest best-of-three-set ATP Tour final since statistics started being tracked in 1991. He followed up in May by making the quarterfinals at the Madrid Open and winning his record-extending tenth Italian Open title. In the latter, he saved two match points against Denis Shapovalov and defeated Novak Djokovic in the final. At the French Open, Nadal entered as the heavy favorite seeking to become the first man to win 21 majors. He reached the semifinals after wins over Jannik Sinner and Diego Schwartzman, where he encountered Novak Djokovic in a rematch of the previous year's final. There, Nadal was upset by eventual champion Djokovic in four sets, in only his third-ever loss at the French Open and his first loss in the semifinals. Following his loss, Nadal withdrew from both Wimbledon and the Olympics, citing schedule reasons. Nadal returned to action at the 2021 Citi Open, revealing that his recent withdrawals were actually due to a recurring left foot injury that returned at the 2021 French Open. He defeated home favorite Jack Sock in a tight 3 set match before being upset by 50th ranked Lloyd Harris in the 3rd round. He was then set to defend his title at the National Bank Open, but withdrew from the tournament before his first match, citing the same foot injury. He also withdrew from the Cincinnati Open. On 20 August 2021, just 10 days out from the US Open, Nadal announced that would be ending his 2021 season due to the left foot issue that had been troubling him for most of the year. Therefore, his ranking fell to No.6, due to his injury. Nadal returned to the court on 17 December 2021, in an exhibition match at the Mubadala World Tennis Championship in Abu Dhabi. Receiving a bye in the quarterfinals, Nadal lost to Andy Murray in the semifinals in straight sets. In the third place play-off, he lost to Denis Shapovalov in three sets. In January, Nadal won his 89th ATP singles title at Melbourne Summer Set 1, defeating first time finalist Maxime Cressy in the final. Following wins over Karen Khachanov, Denis Shapovalov, and Matteo Berrettini, Nadal won his second Australian Open title and a 21st major title overall by defeating Daniil Medvedev in a five-set final, coming back from two sets down. With the win, Nadal surpassed a tie held with Novak Djokovic and Roger Federer for the most men's singles major titles of all time. Nadal also became the second man in the Open Era, after Djokovic, to complete the double Career Grand Slam. At the Mexican Open, Nadal won the title without dropping a set, which included a win over Medvedev, who that week had clinched the world No. 1 ranking. He also extended his winning streak to 15 matches, his best start to a season in his career. Nadal next entered the 2022 Indian Wells Open as the fourth seed. After seeing off a final set tie-break from Sebastian Korda in the second round, Nadal beat Dan Evans, Reilly Opelka, Nick Kyrgios, and Carlos Alcaraz to reach his fourth final of the season and extend his winning streak to 20 matches. Nadal was beaten by Taylor Fritz in straight sets in the final, ending his winning streak. On 22 March, it was reported that Nadal will be unable to play for between four and six weeks, due to a rib stress fracture that occurred during Indian Wells. Nadal returned at the Madrid Open, where he defeated Miomir Kecmanovic, David Goffin in the second and third rounds respectively. He then lost to Carlos Alcaraz in a rematch of their Indian Wells semifinal. Nadal then entered Rome, where he was the defending champion. He defeated John Isner in straight sets, but then lost to Denis Shapovalov in three sets despite leading by a set and a break. At the French Open, Nadal recorded his 106th win defeating Jordan Thompson in the first round. With a 106–3 record at the French Open, he became the player with the most wins at a single major. He recorded his 300th career major win by defeating Corentin Moutet in the second round. He defeated Botic van de Zandschulp in the third round and faced Felix Auger Aliassime (coached by Nadal's uncle Toni) in the fourth round, winning the encounter after being taken to five sets for only the third time in his career at the French Open. Nadal met Djokovic for a record-extending 59th time in the quarterfinals – the first singles match in tennis history to feature two players each holding at least 20 Grand Slam titles and 1000 career match wins. Nadal emerged victorious in four sets to advance to his 15th French Open semifinal. He faced Alexander Zverev in a grueling battle lasting over three hours with only two sets played, and ended with Zverev's retirement due to an ankle injury. As a result, Nadal advanced to his record-extending 14th French Open final. There, he defeated Casper Ruud in three dominant sets to win his 14th French Open title and 22nd major title overall. In doing so, he became the then-oldest French Open champion ever, and the third man to earn four Top-10 wins en route to a major title since the ATP rankings started in 1973, after Mats Wilander (1982 French Open) and Roger Federer (2017 Australian Open). He ascended to world No. 4 on 6 June 2022. After treating his foot injury, Nadal returned to Wimbledon for the first time in three years, however he tore an abdominal muscle during the tournament. Following wins over Francisco Cerúndolo, Ričardas Berankis, Lorenzo Sonego, and Botic van de Zandschulp, he faced Taylor Fritz in the quarterfinal, which aggravated his abdominal injury. Despite winning the encounter, Nadal withdrew from the tournament the following day. After a six-week layoff following Wimbledon, Nadal lost in the opening round at the Cincinnati Open to eventual champion Borna Ćorić. Despite this setback, Nadal was the first to qualify for the 2022 Nitto ATP Finals. Nadal returned to the US Open after three years, where he won the tournament the last time he competed. He defeated Rinky Hijikata, Fabio Fognini and Richard Gasquet, before losing to American Frances Tiafoe. His fourth round loss to Tiafoe became his first and only loss at a major in 2022, and also resulted in his earliest major defeat since the 2017 Wimbledon Championships. At the Laver Cup, Nadal competed for Team Europe alongside his fellow Big Four members Roger Federer, Novak Djokovic and Andy Murray. He played one match on Day 1, where he partnered in doubles with long-time rival Federer, for Federer's final professional match. They lost to Jack Sock and Frances Tiafoe. Nadal withdrew from the tournament the following day, citing "personal reasons". At the 2022 ATP Finals, Nadal won his last match of the year against Casper Ruud after losing his first two matches against Taylor Fritz and Felix Auger Aliassime. Nadal finished the 2022 season with a year-end ranking of world No. 2, becoming the oldest year-end top-2 player in the history of the ATP rankings. Nadal was the defending champion at the 2023 Australian Open, but lost in straight sets to Mackenzie McDonald in the second round. During the match, Nadal was severely hampered by a hip injury for which he received treatment. In late February, Nadal officially announced his withdrawal from the Indian Wells and Miami Masters to recuperate from the injury he sustained at the Australian Open. As a result, he exited the Top 10 for the first time since 25 April 2005 (after 18 years, 912 consecutive weeks) on 20 March 2023, ending the longest Top-10 streak in ATP rankings history. According to tournament organizers, Nadal was aiming to make a comeback despite the injury at the 2023 Monte-Carlo Masters but withdrew in April. He later declined to enter the French Open as well, meaning he missed the entire clay court season. Nadal's withdrawal from the French Open meant he dropped out of the top 100 for the first time since 2003. He did not return for the grass-court season, including Wimbledon, nor the American hard-court season, including the US Open. As a result he failed to qualify for the world tour finals. In September, he hinted he would like to return in 2024 and that next year might be his last year in professional tennis. Nadal began his season at the 2024 Brisbane International, after defeating former 2020 US Open champion Dominic Thiem 7–5, 6–1. He went on to defeat reigning 2023 Australian Open doubles champion Jason Kubler 6–1, 6–2. His run would be cut short in the quarterfinals after being defeated by Australian Jordan Thompson, who saved three match points against Nadal. During the match, he sustained a muscle injury, which forced him to miss the Australian Open. Nadal played Carlos Alcaraz in the Netflix Slam, a televised exhibition match on March 3, 2024, in Las Vegas. "It's true that with Novak I played more matches than with Roger, but I started it with him (Federer). Someone I have admired, whom I have rivaled and also with whom I have shared many beautiful things on and off the court. A part of my life left with him." –Nadal, on his rivalry with Roger Federer following his retirement in November 2022. Roger Federer and Nadal have been playing each other since 2004, and their rivalry is a significant part of both men's careers. They held the top two rankings on the ATP Tour from July 2005 to 14 August 2009, and again from 11 September 2017 to 15 October 2018. They are the only pair of men to be consistently ranked in the Top 2 for four years continuously (from July 2005 to August 2009). Nadal ascended to No. 2 in July 2005 and held this spot for a record 160 consecutive weeks before surpassing Federer in August 2008. Nadal and Federer are also the only pair of men to have ever finished six consecutive calendar years at the top 2 positions (from 2005 to 2010). They have played 40 times. Nadal leads 24–16 overall and 10–4 in Grand Slam tournaments. Nadal has a winning record on clay (14–2) and outdoor hard courts (8–6), while Federer leads the indoor hard courts 5–1 and grass 3–1. As tournament seedings are based on rankings, 24 of their matches have been in tournament finals, including a joint-record nine Grand Slam tournament finals (tied with Djokovic–Nadal). From 2006 to 2008, they played in every French Open and Wimbledon final, and also met in the title match of the 2009 Australian Open, the 2011 French Open and the 2017 Australian Open. Nadal won six of the nine, losing the first two Wimbledon finals. Four of these matches were five-set matches (2007 and 2008 Wimbledon, 2009 and 2017 Australian Open), and the 2008 Wimbledon final has been lauded as the greatest match ever by many long-time tennis analysts. Nadal is the only player who has competed and won against Federer in the final of a Grand Slam on all three surfaces (grass, hard, and clay). Novak Djokovic and Nadal have met 59 times (more than any other pair in the Open Era). Nadal leads 11–7 at Grand Slam events but trails 29–30 overall. They have played a record 18 Grand Slam matches and a joint-record nine Grand Slam tournament finals (tied with Nadal–Federer). Nadal leads on clay 20–8, while Djokovic leads on hard courts 20–7, and they are tied on grass 2–2. In 2009, this rivalry was listed as the third greatest of the previous 10 years by ATPworldtour.com. Djokovic is one of only two players to have at least ten match wins against Nadal (the other being Federer) and the only person to defeat Nadal seven consecutive times, doing so twice. They have also played in a record 14 ATP Masters finals. In their first ever meeting in a Grand Slam final at the 2010 US Open Nadal prevailed over Djokovic in four sets. Nadal achieved a Career Grand Slam with this victory. In 2011–12, they played four consecutive major finals against each other, with Djokovic winning the first three, Wimbledon, US Open, and the Australian Open, the latter being the longest Grand Slam final in history at 5 hours and 53 minutes. It remains the longest match of both Nadal and Djokovic's careers, and it also remains the only time that Nadal has lost a major final after winning the first set. In 2013, Djokovic defeated Nadal in straight sets in the final at Monte Carlo, ending Nadal's record eight consecutive titles there, but Nadal got revenge at the French Open semifinals in an epic five-setter. In August 2013, Nadal defeated Djokovic in the 2013 US Open Final to complete the Summer Slam. Tennis pundits have classified many of their matches as some of the greatest contests ever, such as 2009 Madrid Masters semifinal, 2011 Miami Masters final, the 2012 Australian Open final, the 2013 French Open semifinal, 2018 Wimbledon semifinal, and the 2021 French Open semifinal. Nadal and Andy Murray have met on 24 occasions since 2007, with Nadal leading 17–7. Nadal leads 7–2 on clay, 3–0 on grass, and 7–5 on hard courts (including 4–4 on outdoor courts, but Nadal leads 3–1 on indoor hard courts), but trails 1–3 in finals. The pair once met regularly at Grand Slam level, with nine out of their 23 meetings coming in Grand Slams, with Nadal leading 7–2. Seven of these nine appearances have been in quarterfinals and semifinals, making the rivalry an important part of both men's careers. Nadal defeated Murray in three consecutive Grand Slam semifinals in 2011 from the French Open to the US Open. They have never met in a Grand Slam final, but Murray leads 3–1 in ATP finals, with Nadal winning at Indian Wells in 2009 and Murray winning in Rotterdam the same year, Tokyo in 2011, and Madrid in 2015. Nadal and Stan Wawrinka have met 20 times, with Nadal leading 17–3 (85.0%). Although this rivalry has less significance than rivalries with the other members of the Big Four, the pair have met in several prestigious tournaments. The rivalry saw Nadal winning the first 12 encounters, all in straight sets, including 2 finals, one of which was a Masters final in Madrid in 2013. However, since Wawrinka's breakthrough season in 2013 the pair has won an almost equal number of matches against each other (3–4) from 2014 onward. Wawrinka scored his first win against Nadal in their most important encounter, the 2014 Australian Open final in 4 sets, denying Nadal's double career slam. It was also the only match between them that did end in a straight-set win for either player. Nadal then won their second Grand Slam final, at the 2017 French Open. Nadal and Juan Martin del Potro met 17 times, with Nadal leading 11–6 (64.7%). Outside the Big Four, no active player has more wins against Nadal than del Potro. The two met in many prestigious tournaments, including at three of the four majors and the Olympics. Nadal won their first four meetings between 2007 and 2009, before del Potro went on to win the next three, including a straight-sets victory at the 2009 US Open semifinals. Their next significant meeting came during the 2011 Davis Cup final. Nadal beat del Potro in four sets to claim the Davis Cup for Spain. In 2013, Nadal denied del Potro his first Masters title, with a victory in the final of the Indian Wells Open. However, del Potro sought revenge in the semifinals of the 2016 Rio Olympics, narrowly beating Nadal via a third-set tiebreak. They then played a further four matches, all of which in majors, first at the 2017 US Open, which Nadal won in four sets, and then they met in three of the four majors in 2018, including a memorable match in the Wimbledon quarterfinals that lasted nearly five hours, with Nadal winning. The pair met for the last time at the 2018 US Open, where Nadal retired against del Potro in the semifinals. Nadal and Tomáš Berdych met a total of 24 times, with Nadal leading 20–4 (83.3%). Although this rivalry is lopsided in favor of Nadal, the two had several close matches in prestigious tournaments. Their first match was a final in Båstad, which Nadal won. They then met four times in 2005–06, all in Masters tournaments, with Berdych winning in three. Their biggest meeting came in the 2010 Wimbledon final, which Nadal won in straight sets. Their next most significant meeting was in the opening round of the 2009 Davis Cup Final, where Nadal again defeated Berdych in straight sets en route to the title. At the 2015 Australian Open quarterfinal, following 18 straight losses over 9 years, Berdych was able to claim his only win over Nadal in a Grand Slam, winning in straight sets, including a "bagel" (6–0) in the second. Nadal and compatriot David Ferrer met a total of 32 times, with Nadal leading 26–6 (81.3%). They have faced each other in finals on eight occasions, including two pairs of consecutive finals in Barcelona (2008–09 and 2011–12), with Nadal winning all of them. Their biggest meeting came in the 2013 French Open final, which Nadal won in straight sets. Nadal is, without a doubt, the best athlete in the history of Spain. Spain has to pay him a tribute for many, many years. Nadal is the king of Roland Garros and of world tennis. He has achieved a record that is very difficult to beat. — Felipe VI, on Nadal's legacy after he won his 22nd Grand Slam at the French Open in 2022. Nadal has won the second-most major men's singles titles in tennis history (22) and the second-most Big titles (59). He appeared in the Top 10 of the ATP rankings consecutively from April 2005 to March 2023 – a record spanning 912 weeks. He stands alone in the Open Era as the player with the most clay court titles (63), consisting of an all-time record 14 French Open titles, 12 Barcelona Open titles, 11 Monte-Carlo Masters titles, and 10 Italian Open titles. His 14 French Open titles are a record at any single tournament, and he holds the record for the longest single-surface win streak in matches (81 on clay) and in sets (50 on clay) in the history of the Open Era. Nadal holds the all-time records for the most majors won without losing a set (4), the most match wins at a single major (112 at the French Open), and the highest match-winning percentage at clay court majors (97.4%), among many others. Nadal's dominance on clay is reflected by his honorific title as the "King of Clay", and he is widely regarded as the greatest clay-court player in history. Nadal is considered by many to be the greatest player in tennis history because of his record and evolution into an all-court champion. Nadal played an instrumental role in taking Spain to four Davis Cup crowns, and is the winner of two Olympic gold medals. He is one of two men, along with Agassi, to win the Olympic gold medal as well as the four majors in singles in his career, a feat known as a Career Golden Slam. He is the only male player in history to complete the Career Grand Slam and win an Olympic gold medal in both singles and doubles. He is one of four men in history, along with Roy Emerson, Rod Laver and Djokovic, to complete the double Career Grand Slam in singles. Among his numerous career accolades, Nadal was named the Laureus World Sportsman of the Year in 2011 and 2021, and for winning three majors in 2010 he was named that year's BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year. He is an honorary recipient of the Grand Cross of Royal Order of Sports Merit, Grand Cross of Order of the Second of May, the Grand Cross of Naval Merit, the Princess of Asturias Award, and the Medal of the City of Paris. He was ranked as one of the world's highest-paid athletes by Forbes magazine in 2014. He was also named among the 100 most influential people in the world by Time magazine in 2022. In 2014, former tennis player and eight-time Grand Slam champion Andre Agassi picked Nadal as the greatest of all time because of the way the Spaniard "had to deal with Federer, Djokovic, and Murray in a golden age of tennis". In 2019, former world No. 1 and 1995 French Open champion Thomas Muster stated: “Rafael Nadal is the best clay-court player ever”. Former world No. 1 Carlos Moyá stated in 2010 that Nadal was "one of the greatest ever. But he is on his way to become, who knows, maybe the greatest". Former world No. 1 Juan Carlos Ferrero: "Rafa is the king of knowing how to adapt to any situation in the match". Former world No. 1 and career rival Novak Djokovic: "Our encounters have made me the player I am today". Former world No. 1 and career rival Roger Federer: "I have always had the utmost respect for my friend Rafa as a person and as a champion. I believe we have pushed each other to become better players". Nadal helped to lead a revival in tennis known by many as the Golden Age, leading to increased interest in the sport and higher revenues for many tennis venues. Rising revenues led to exploding prize money: When Nadal first won his first French Open in 2005, he earned $880,000. When he won in last in 2022, the prize had increased to AUD 2.2 million. The Djokovic–Nadal rivalry is widely considered by players, coaches, and pundits to be among the greatest rivalries in tennis history. It is important to have true inner humility, not false humility, accepting that it's not always good, bad moments are better tolerated. People sometimes exaggerate this business of humility. It's simply a question of knowing who you are, where you are, and that the world will continue exactly as it is without you. Nadal, speaking to the press at the 2008 US Open. Nadal generally plays an aggressive, behind-the-baseline game founded on heavy topspin groundstrokes, consistency, speedy footwork and tenacious court coverage, thus making him an aggressive counterpuncher. Known for his athleticism and speed around the court, Nadal is an excellent defender who hits well on the run, constructing winning plays from seemingly defensive positions. He also plays very fine dropshots, which work especially well because his heavy topspin often forces opponents to the back of the court. Nadal employs a semi-western grip forehand, often with a "lasso-whip" follow-through, where his left arm hits through the ball and finishes above his left shoulder – as opposed to a more traditional finish across the body or around his opposite shoulder. Nadal's forehand groundstroke form allows him to hit shots with heavy topspin – more so than many of his contemporaries. San Francisco tennis researcher John Yandell used a high-speed video camera and special software to count the average number of revolutions of a tennis ball hit full force by Nadal. Yandell concluded: The first guys we did were Sampras and Agassi. They were hitting forehands that in general were spinning about 1,800 to 1,900 revolutions per minute. Federer is hitting with an amazing amount of spin, too, right? 2,700 revolutions per minute. Well, we measured one forehand Nadal hit at 4,900. His average was 3,200. While Nadal's shots tend to land short of the baseline, the characteristically high bounces his forehands achieve tend to mitigate the advantage an opponent would normally gain from capitalizing on a short ball. Although his forehand is based on heavy topspin, he can hit the ball deep and flat with a more orthodox follow through for clean winners, but instead of being admired for his finesse and angles, it was the brutality of his groundstrokes that caught the public eye; Nadal carried this stigma for most of his career. Nadal's serve was initially considered a weak point in his game, although his improvements in both first-serve points won and break points saved since 2005 have allowed him to consistently compete for and win major titles on faster surfaces. Nadal relies on the consistency of his serve to gain a strategic advantage in points, rather than going for service winners. However, before the 2010 US Open, he altered his service motion, arriving in the trophy pose earlier and pulling the racket lower during the trophy pose. Moreover, he also modified his service grip to a more continental one, swiveling his iron left wrist a few millimeters on the racket. These two changes in his serve increased his average speed by around 10 mph during the 2010 US Open, maxing out at 135 mph (217 km/h), allowing him to win more free points on his serve. Since the 2010 US Open, Nadal's serve speed dropped to previous levels and was again cited as in need of improvement. From 2019 onwards, several analysts praised Nadal's improvement on the serve, noting the speed of his serve had increased. Nadal is a clay court specialist, in the sense that he has been extremely successful on that surface. He has won 14 times at the French Open, 12 at Barcelona, 11 at Monte Carlo, and 10 at Rome. However, Nadal has shed that label owing to his success on other surfaces, including holding simultaneous Grand Slam tournament titles on grass, hard courts, and clay on two separate occasions, winning ten Masters titles on hard court, and winning an Olympic gold medal on hard court. Even though he has been successful on hard courts, Nadal himself admitted that playing a lot on them is tiring and takes a physical toll on ATP Tour players, so he has repeatedly requested for a reevaluated tour schedule featuring fewer hard court tournaments and increasing the weeks of rest. Despite praise for Nadal's talent and skill, in the past, some had questioned his longevity in the sport, citing his build and playing style as conducive to injury. For instance, after winning the 2010 US Open, former world No. 1 Pete Sampras stated: "The only question with Rafa is physically how much his body can handle the pounding with how hard he works for every point. You just watch him play, the kid is relentless". This "longevity" narrative has proven inaccurate, and pundits today admire his resilience to come back from devastating injuries and his ability to play with physical pain. Freezing cold water. I do this before every match. It's the point before the point of no return. Under the cold shower I enter a new space in which I feel my power and resilience grow. I'm a different man when I emerge. I'm activated. I'm in "the flow"... Nothing else exists but the battle ahead. –Nadal, on his pre-match rituals. Despite his success, his uncle Toni ensured that Nadal remained as normal, modest, and down to earth as possible, as he believed these qualities to have a tremendous impact on results and motivation. He rarely if ever touts his achievements, refuses to put down his rivals, travels in public without a large entourage, and lingers after matches and practices to sign autographs. For instance, in 2007, Nadal would often interrupt his training sessions on the public courts of Manacor, just to hit a few balls with fans and foreign tourists that had asked him to, even though they were not very good, and even against his uncle Toni’s wishes, who had to tell him that he "cannot do this all the time". Former world No. 6 Gilles Simon has stressed that more than being grounded and simple off the court, what separates Nadal from the rest in contemporary tennis is his on-court humility, stating "Do not tell me that Rafael Nadal is not humble because he said in a press conference that he is not favorite in the first round of Roland-Garros". Nadal is also noted for his visceral delight in competing, whether he wins or loses. He also has a rare philosophical approach to tennis and life that one sportswriter described as a “model of humility, empathy, and perspective”. Nadal is known for a host of on-court rituals including specific bodily movements and the positioning of items courtside. At changeovers, he always waits until his opponent first crosses the net, refuses to step on the lines, and devotedly lines up his drinks bottles in precise positions near his chair, labels always facing out, before stepping back into action. His water-bottle routine is so well-known that when they fell over during a match at the 2015 Australian Open, a ball boy dashed over to return the bottles to their upright position, with the labels facing the court as Nadal had intended. Nadal himself has explained that such rituals do not stem from an obsessive–compulsive disorder complex or are based on superstition; they are instead meant to work as an almost therapeutic, psychological mechanism to help him stay calm in incredibly stressful situations. There is also a pattern to the way he approaches a serve. He usually takes three balls, examines them, discards one, shakes the strands of hair that have not been corralled by his headband out of his eyes, and then serves. Nadal constantly picks at the rear of his shorts, wipes sweat from his brow and pushes hair back behind his ears before every serve. Nadal's extensive time taken between points has received criticism from other players including Roger Federer and Denis Shapovalov, with the later wanting Nadal to be given a code violation for pushing the 25-second serve clock to the limit, stating that he was being given preferential treatment because of his status in the game. Nadal's personality has been described by Jimmy Connors: "He's built out of a mold that I think I came from also, that you walk out there, you give everything you have from the first point to the end no matter what the score. And you're willing to lay it all out on the line and you're not afraid to let the people see that". Nadal's first and most important coach was his uncle Toni Nadal, who coached him from 1990 to 2017, from age 4 to 31. Though strong physically as a player, Toni Nadal had struggled to be aggressive with his forehand and possessed no big shots. Along with working on the mental and physical sides, as Nadal improved, he ensured that his nephew developed a good technical, all-round aggressive game, became competent at the net, and developed his forehand into a weapon. At age 12, Nadal began attending the Balearic Islands training centre 50 kilometers and a one-hour car journey away from Manacor in Palma. He and his uncle came to train there three times a week, so that Nadal could train with the best boys in the Balearic Islands. There, he was trained along with his uncle Toni, by Toni Colom, who became Nadal’s traveling coach for the next four years, between 1999 and 2003, mainly for Futures tournaments. Colom later explained that "I was traveling to those tournaments because I had a bigger availability of traveling [than Toni] and not because I was more experienced". After 2005, Nadal left the structure of the Balearic School and little by little he created his own team. Unlike most of his contemporaries, Nadal remained loyal and rarely made changes to it. For instance, he worked with the exact same team for 11 years between 2006 and 2017. Nadal’s team consists of members from his family and professional staff, whom Nadal also considers his family. Besides Toni, the first members of his team were Joan Forcades, Nadal's instructor since childhood, and doctor Ángel Ruiz Cotorro, who had a crucial participation in his professional tennis career. Cotorro, who has also worked with Juan Martín del Potro and Arantxa Sánchez Vicario, helped him play after facing injuries and his suggestions have been pivotal to his game. Nadal has said of his doctor that: "I trust Dr. Cotorro with my life. He was my doctor then, he remains my doctor today, and if I have anything to do with it he will remain my doctor till the day I retire". Forcades is the lead fitness expert for Nadal and develops his training program that is further implemented by the other experts who work with Nadal. Toni has described his coaching style as 'hard', saying that he occasionally puts too much pressure on Nadal, but that he does so because he wants him to succeed. Together, they won 16 major titles between 2005 and 2016, making them the second most successful tennis coach-player partnership only behind Marián Vajda and Novak Djokovic. In 2005, Nadal was signed by Spanish agent Carlo Costa, who oversees the huge operation that runs around him, such as managing everything related to advertising, sponsorship or social events. In 2006, Costa and Nadal's father convinced Benito Pérez Barbadillo, who had been working as the press officer of the ATP since the late 1990s, to open his own company (B1PR) to work with them as Nadal's communications director (PR manager). Nadal then hired physiotherapist Rafael Maymó, who also designs his physical preparation together with Forcades and who is one of Nadal's closest friends, thus also acting as a psychologist. Nadal has stated that Maymó "has been almost my shadow since 2006” and that they spend more time with each other than they do with their wives. After signing his new coach Carlos Moyá in December 2016, Nadal's game style acquired a more offensive approach. Under Moyá's direction, Nadal improved his serve, and incorporated serve-and-volley as a surprise tactic in some of his matches. Moyá, who has known Nadal since he was 12, has always been more a friend than a coach for his pupil, and when he realizes that Nadal is going through a bad time, he leaves his duty as a coach and acts like a friend with whom Nadal can speak to. Nadal is currently working with two coaches, Moyá, his head coach, and Francisco Roig, who was hired by Nadal in 2005, and who sometimes acts as the alternate coach. Nike serves as Nadal's clothing and shoe sponsor. Nadal's signature on-court attire entailed a variety of sleeveless shirts paired with 3/4 length capri pants. For the 2009 season, Nadal adopted more-traditional on-court apparel. Nike encouraged Nadal to update his look in order to reflect his new status as the sport's top player at that time and associate Nadal with a style that, while less distinctive than his "pirate" look, would be more widely emulated by consumers. At warmup tournaments in Abu Dhabi and Doha, Nadal played matches in a polo shirt specifically designed for him by Nike, paired with shorts cut above the knee. Nadal's new, more conventional style carried over to the 2009 Australian Open, where he was outfitted with Nike's Bold Crew Men's Tee and Nadal Long Check Shorts. Nadal wears Nike's Air CourtBallistec 2.3 tennis shoes, bearing various customizations throughout the season, including his nickname "Rafa" on the right shoe and a stylized bull logo on the left. Nadal uses an AeroPro Drive racquet with a 4+1⁄4-inch L2 grip. As of the 2010 season[update], Nadal's racquets are painted to resemble the new Babolat AeroPro Drive with Cortex GT racquet in order to market a current model that Babolat sells. Nadal uses no replacement grip, and instead wraps two overgrips around the handle. He used Duralast 15L strings until the 2010 season, when he switched to Babolat's new, black-colored, RPM Blast string. Nadal's rackets are always strung at 55 lb (25 kg), regardless of which surface or conditions he is playing on.[citation needed] Nadal's autobiography, Rafa (Hyperion, 2012, ISBN 1-4013-1092-3), written with assistance from John Carlin, was published in August 2011. In February 2010, Rafael Nadal was featured in the music video of Shakira's "Gypsy", filmed in Barcelona. The chemistry between them was such that denials were released by both parties to quash rumors of a possible romantic relationship. In explaining why she chose Nadal for the video, Shakira was quoted as saying in an interview with the Latin American Herald Tribune: "I thought that maybe I needed someone I could in some way identify with. And Rafael Nadal is a person who has been totally committed to his career since he was very young. Since he was 17, I believe." In 2016, Nadal made a five-second cameo in the music video of RedOne's "Don't You Need Somebody", which featured many other sporting stars, such as Cristiano Ronaldo and James Rodriguez. In 2018, Nadal was featured in a new ad for the 2018 tennis game Mario Tennis Aces, the latest entry in the Mario Tennis series. In the ad, Nadal is serving for the win against a stubborn Mario before finally overcoming him in a climatic final shot. In April 2017, the centre court of the Barcelona Open was named Pista Rafa Nadal. In 2021, prior to the start of the tournament, the French Open paid tribute to Nadal with the installation of a 3-meters tall steel statue at Stade Roland Garros. It was created by Jordi Díez Fernández, one of Spain's most renowned sculptors. 128036 Rafaelnadal is a main belt asteroid discovered in 2003 at the Observatorio Astronómico de Mallorca and named after Nadal. The decision to name the asteroid after Nadal was made by the International Astronomical Union in response to a request by the observatory. The asteroid is four kilometers in diameter and travels through space at a speed of 20 km per second. At both the London and Rio Olympic Games, Nadal was chosen as the country's flag bearer, and although he had to give up carrying Spain's red and yellow banner in 2012 due to his ongoing injuries, Nadal was the flagbearer for Spain in the opening ceremony of the 2016 edition; Nadal later described this experience as an "unforgettable moment". After countless philanthropic efforts in the early part of his career, he launched the nonprofit Fundación Rafa Nadal in November 2007, and its official presentation was in February 2008, at the Manacor Tennis Club in Mallorca, created to help disadvantaged children and teenagers, offering them opportunities through the practice of sports. Two months earlier, in December 2007, Nadal and Real Madrid goalkeeper Iker Casillas teamed up to stage a charity sports event in Madrid, aptly named "Friends of Iker v Friends of Rafa", to raise money to buy vaccines for children infected by Malaria as a means to help the Red Cross in its fight against the disease. This charity event was a huge success overnight, raising well over £100,000, which inspired Nadal to set up his own foundation, stating, "We raised an amount of money that we would never have imagined. [...] That is why the time has come to set up my own foundation and determine the destination of the money". On deciding why to start a foundation, Nadal said "This can be the beginning of my future, when I retire and have more time, [...] I am doing very well and I owe society, [...] A month-and-a-half ago I was in Chennai, in India. The truth is we live great here... I can contribute something with my image..." Even though poverty in India struck him particularly hard, Nadal wants to start by helping "people close by, in the Balearic Islands, in Spain, and then, if possible, abroad". Nadal's mother, Ana María Parera, chairs the charitable organization and father Sebastian is vice-chairman. His wife Maria Perello also works for the foundation as the Project Director of Strategy and Relations with Institutions. On 16 October 2010, Nadal traveled to India for the first time to visit his tennis academy for underprivileged children at Anantapur Sports Village, in the Anantapur City, Andhra Pradesh. His foundation has also worked in the Anantapur Educational Center project, in collaboration with the Vicente Ferrer Foundation. Nadal took part in Thailand's "A Million Trees for the King" project, planting a tree in honour of King Bhumibol Adulyadej on a visit to Hua Hin during his Thailand Open 2010. Nadal stated: "I want to congratulate the Thai people and congratulate the King for this unbelievable day. I wish all the best for this idea. It's very, very nice." In 2020, his foundation joined hands with Endesa, the largest electrical utility company in Spain and one of the most recognizable brands for Spanish citizens. Endesa donated €400,000, which was used to help people who survived the pandemic, but also to add personnel and increase the capabilities of different services offered by the centers, with special focus on setting up a psychotherapy sector in Valencia. In 2023, on the occasion of the International Day of Sport on 6 April, the Fundación Rafa Nadal announced that they had decided to partner with UNESCO through its Fit for Life project, a sport-based flagship program designed to tackle physical inactivity, such as accelerating the recovery from Covid-19, mental health issues, and inequality. In response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake, Nadal played in a special charity event alongside fellow top tennis players during the 2010 Australian Open called 'Hit for Haiti', whose proceeds went to Haiti earthquake victims. He participated in a follow-up charity exhibition during the 2010 Indian Wells Open, pairing with Andre Agassi in an eventual loss to Roger Federer and Pete Sampras; it raised $1 million. In late 2010, Nadal played his perceived career rival Roger Federer in the two-match exhibition Match for Africa for the Roger Federer Foundation and the Rafa Nadal Foundation. The first match took place in Zürich on 21 December, and was won by Federer, while the following match was played in Madrid, and it was won by Nadal. His foundation and academy have frequently come to the aid of those in need, especially in Spain. During the Majorca flood in October 2018, Nadal, who was recovering at home in Majorca after having to leave the US Open due to injury, opened his tennis academy centre to the victims. One day after the flood he worked personally with some friends to help the victims, being photographed lending his hand in the cleaning up process once the flood waters had receded. Later, Nadal donated €1 million for rebuilding Sant Llorenç des Cardassar, the most affected town by the floods in the island. Nadal also organized other charitable activities to help repair the damage of the disaster, such as the Olazábal & Nadal charity golf tournament and a charity tennis match in which he was going to participate and that had to be suspended because he had to have an operation on an ankle injury, later identified as Mueller-Weiss Syndrome. To combat the ill-effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, Nadal joined hands with Pau Gasol in June to help raise upwards of 14 million euros. The proceeds in their entirety were directed towards the people suffering from the effects of the deadly virus. In 2020, the Fundación Rafa Nadal pledged to support the Food Bank of Mallorca, announcing that it would aim to collect 3,000 kg of food to support 25,000 individuals in Mallorca. In 2020, Nelson Monfort, one of the most renowned and well-respected French sports journalists in the world, claimed that Nadal was the most charitable athlete he had come across during his career. Monfort, who has interviewed Nadal for well over a decade, further stated that he had never declined to help for any charitable cause, and that he always responded to his requests promptly. Nadal supports or has supported other charities, such as City Harvest, Elton John AIDS Foundation, Laureus Sport for Good Foundation and Small Steps Project. As a result of his various charitable contributions through the Rafa Nadal Foundation, Nadal was awarded the Arthur Ashe Humanitarian of the Year award for 2011. Nadal has been sponsored by Kia Motors since 2006. He has appeared in advertising campaigns for Kia as a global ambassador for the company. In May 2008, Kia released a claymation viral ad featuring Nadal in a tennis match with an alien. In May 2015, Nadal extended his partnership with Kia for another five years. He became the face of Lanvin's L'Homme Sport cologne in April 2009. As of January 2010[update], Nadal is the international ambassador for Quely, a company from his native Mallorca that manufactures biscuits, bakery and chocolate-coated products; he has consumed their products ever since he was a young child. In 2010, luxury watchmaker Richard Mille announced that he had developed an ultra-light wristwatch in collaboration with Nadal called the Richard Mille RM027 Tourbillon watch. The watch is made of titanium and lithium and is valued at US$525,000; Nadal was involved in the design and testing of the watch on the tennis court. During the 2010 French Open, Men's Fitness reported that Nadal wore the Richard Mille watch on the court as part of a sponsorship deal with the Swiss watchmaker. Nadal replaced Cristiano Ronaldo as the new face of Emporio Armani Underwear and Armani Jeans for the spring/summer 2011 collection. This was the first time that the label has chosen a tennis player for the job; association football has ruled lately prior to Ronaldo, David Beckham graced the ads since 2008. Armani said that he selected Nadal as his latest male underwear model because "...he is ideal as he represents a healthy and positive model for youngsters". In June 2012, Nadal joined the group of sports endorsers of the PokerStars online poker cardroom. Nadal won a charity poker tournament against retired Brazilian football player Ronaldo in 2014. In August 2023, Nadal signed up as the brand ambassador for the Indian IT major Infosys. Rafael said: "I’m very happy to work closely with Infosys, as they work to not only evolve the experience of tennis to the times, but also empower people in our communities to be part of a brighter future." Nadal owns and trains at the Rafa Nadal Sports Centre (40,000 m2, 430,000 sq ft) in his hometown of Manacor, Mallorca. The centre houses the Rafa Nadal Academy, where the American International School of Mallorca is located, making it easier for the players to handle school and tennis while still getting a good education. Also located in the centre is a sports residence, a Rafael Nadal museum, a health clinic, a fitness centre with spa and a café. The facility has 26 tennis courts among its sporting areas, as well as padel and squash courts, football fields, swimming pools, and multi-sports areas. The academy is not only used by a lot of young talented Spanish tennis players, but also from across the world. For instance, in 2017, the Australian tennis federation even agreed on a partnership with Nadal's Academy to let their players use it as their European training base. Coach and uncle Toni Nadal is the Head of the academy, his agent Carlos Costa is the Head of business development, and his childhood idol and fellow Majorcan Carlos Moyá is also involved as a technical director. In 2021, a four-episode series about the Rafa Nadal Academy was aired on both Amazon Prime and Movistar and broadcast in 244 countries around the world. The docuseries features several young tennis talents who tell their stories, testimonies, and experiences at the academy. Nadal also owns and operates three other similar Rafa Nadal Academy/Centre facilities in Al Zahra, Kuwait (called the Rafa Nadal Academy Kuwait), Cancún, Mexico (called the Rafa Nadal Tennis Centre Mexico), and Chalkidiki, Greece (called the Rafa Nadal Tennis Centre Greece). The Mexico and Greece Centres started operations in 2019 while the Kuwait Academy opened in 2020. In his new role, the former world No. 1 and 22-time Grand Slam champion will promote tennis in Saudi Arabia and open a Rafa Nadal Academy there. Nadal is an avid football fan and his favorite clubs are RCD Mallorca and Real Madrid CF, stating "when my uncle (Miguel Ángel) was playing for Barcelona, we wanted Barcelona to win. Before that, my whole family was for Real Madrid. After my uncle left the Barcelona team, then we’re all for the Real Madrid again. I have got nothing against Barcelona, but I prefer Real Madrid to win". According to his uncle Toni, Nadal is "a mad fan of Real Madrid", and regards French football player Zinedine Zidane as an athlete who is "as high as any man can get". In 2005, Nadal received the Coupe des Mousquetaires from the hands of Zidane, who called him "a phenomenon". In December 2007, in the "Friends of Iker v Friends of Rafa" charity sports event, the two teams contested a tennis match and a football match, in which Nadal showed his football skills by scoring six goals against Casillas. With the teams tied at 14–14, the combined scores from the football and tennis matches, the event had to be decided in a penalty shoot-out, which was won by Nadal's squad. In December 2008, Nadal and Casillas staged a similar event, this time including an indoor football match, a tennis match, and a go-kart race. Casillas’ team won the kart race, mainly thanks to the experienced driving abilities of Spanish former Formula One world champion Fernando Alonso, while Nadal’s squad, which included Barcelona football star Samuel Eto'o and Novak Djokovic, then hit back to win the tennis event. The deciding football match ended in defeat for Nadal by a score of 9–12 loss. On 8 July 2010, it was reported that he had become a shareholder of RCD Mallorca, his local club by birth, in an attempt to assist the club from debt. Nadal reportedly owns 10 percent and was offered the role of vice president, which he rejected. His uncle Miguel Ángel Nadal became assistant coach under Michael Laudrup. Shortly after acquiring his interest in Mallorca, Nadal called out UEFA for apparent hypocrisy in ejecting the club from the 2010–11 UEFA Europa League for excessive debts, saying through a club spokesperson, "Well, if those are the criteria upon which UEFA is operating, then European competition will only comprise two or three clubs because all the rest are in debt, too." He is a fervent supporter of the Spanish national team, and he was one of six people not affiliated with the team or the national federation allowed to enter the team's locker room following Spain's victory in the 2010 FIFA World Cup Final. Nadal has made several honorary kick-offs, such as in the Parc des Princes between PSG and Stade de Reims for a Ligue 1 match in 2012, swapping his racket for the shirt of Zlatan Ibrahimovic, and in Rio's local football derby between CR Vasco da Gama and CR Flamengo at the Maracanã Stadium in 2014. In 2022, Nadal was invited to take the symbolic kick-off between Real Madrid and RCD Espanyol for a La Liga match at the Santiago Bernabéu Stadium and was greeted by a heartfelt standing ovation from Real Madrid supporters and from Carlos Alcaraz, who was also present in the stands. In 2023, Nadal kicked-off a Copa del Rey match between his hometown club CE Manacor and UD Las Palmas. Manacor's vice-president, Joan Gonzalez, then presented Nadal with a Manacor team’s red and white-striped T-shirt for his baby son, who had just turned a year old. In addition to tennis and football, Nadal enjoys playing golf and poker. In April 2014, he played the world's No. 1 female poker player, Vanessa Selbst, in a poker game in Monaco. In October 2020, Nadal competed in the professional-level Balearic Golf Championship, obtaining a World Amateur Golf Ranking in the process. Nadal plays golf even more determinedly than tennis, stating "I am decidedly unfriendly during a golf game, from the first hole to the last". I love fishing for three reasons: the calm and tranquillity, the beauty of the sea –- and, of course, the satisfaction of catching your dinner. I can forget about everything. No one can call me, because I keep my mobile switched off, so I can relax and not think about tennis. — Nadal, on his love for fishing in his leisure time to the Daily Mail in 2007. In June 2009, the Spanish newspaper La Vanguardia, and then The New York Times, reported that his parents, Ana María and Sebastián, had separated. This news came after weeks of speculation in Internet posts and message boards over Nadal's personal issues as the cause of his setback. Nadal later stated "My parents' divorce made an important change in my life. It affected me. After that, I couldn't play Wimbledon, it was tough. For one month I was outside the world." Nadal met his future wife, María Francisca (Mery) Perelló Pascual (often mistakenly referred to as Xisca in the press), through his younger sister, María Isabel, and began dating her in 2005, when he was 19 and she was 17; but they only formalized their relationship to the public in 2007. After dating for more than 14 years, their engagement was reported in January 2019. In October 2019, the couple was married at the La Fortaleza castle in Port de Pollença, Majorca, in a wedding ceremony that had 350 guests, including prominent personalities like Tom Hiddleston, Olivia Colman and Hugh Laurie. On 8 October 2022, they welcomed their first child, a son named Rafael. Unlike most of his contemporaries, Nadal decided to delay having children with his wife only towards the end of his sporting career because he would otherwise not be able to allocate his complete attention to his kids. Perelló took her first job as a sports marketer in London, but later, as she saw Nadal’s career getting bigger, she decided to help his off-court business. Currently, she is the Project Director of Strategy and Relations with Institutions for the Fundación Rafa Nadal. Perelló rarely appears as a spectator at Nadal's competitions not only because of her reserved nature and unwillingness to be amongst the hot news and glamour of the celebrity world, but also because she is very susceptible to stress; for instance, during the 2021 Italian Open final, Perelló yelled from her box when Nadal took a bad fall after stumbling off a protruding sideline. Furthermore, Perelló believes that staying away from the tours keeps their relationship stronger, stating that “It would asphyxiate me. And then he would have to be worrying about me”. When Nadal was aged 10 to 21, the entire extended Nadal family shared a five-storey, family-owned apartment building in their hometown of Manacor, proving just how close-knit a group they are. For instance, in 2008, the 21-year-old Nadal was still living with his parents despite already being a superstar with a prize money close to $16 million and off-court endorsements beyond that. Later in his career, when Nadal won a Mercedes at a tournament, Toni insisted that he put the car in the garage, and drive around in a cheaper sponsor car so that he would remain humble, and with his feet planted firmly on the ground. In 2012, Nadal purchased a house in Porto Cristo for about 4 million euros, with his family home being right around the corner. Around the time he won the 2012 French Open, Nadal acquired a vacation home, a two-story villa in Playa Nueva Romana, in the Dominican Republic, for about 2 million euros. Nadal was raised a Catholic, but now identifies himself as an agnostic atheist. In a Sports Illustrated interview in 2010, Nadal was asked whether he believed in God or not, to which he replied that it was "a very difficult thing for me to believe". In an interview for the Spanish newspaper Información, Nadal stated on the context of his view on wars that "You can be religious, or atheist, Christian, Muslim... whatever, but I think the atrocities that people committed in the name of religion are too much. For me, religion is the main cause of mortality in history". Nadal speaks Spanish, Balearic Catalan and English. As a young boy, he would run home from school to watch Goku in his favorite Japanese anime, Dragon Ball. CNN released an article about Nadal's childhood inspiration, and called him "the Dragon Ball of tennis" owing to his unorthodox style "from another planet". Nadal is known for his fearless competitive nature on the court. However, off the court, Nadal has always been "a bit of a scaredy cat", as his sister put it. In fact, he has had a fear of the dark since he was a young boy. Nadal has always preferred sleeping with at least one light or television screen switched on, and turns up the TV volume in order not to hear other noises coming from outside his home. Furthermore, Nadal is afraid of deep water, dogs, and thunderstorms, hiding under cushions each time there is one, and is nervous about riding a bicycle. Despite playing tennis left-handed, Nadal is known for being right-handed while doing things in everyday life such as eating, writing, and playing golf and darts. During his leisure time, Nadal loves his PlayStation, going to the cinema with friends, and spending a lot of time reading and surfing the internet. He also goes to Broadway every year to see a musical, claiming that he has seen "Mamma Mia, Les Miserables, Phantom of the Opera like six, seven times". Nadal loves fishing due to its relaxing nature. During the Covid-19 pandemic, Nadal took the opportunity of the break to explore newer interests and learn new things, notably building on his hobby of cooking, which already was one of his favorite pastimes. Nadal has often said that he owes his power and agility to his strict routine, which includes training, nutrition, and conditioning. Nadal centres the bulk of his entire diet around seafood since at least 2007. He has often promoted the importance of a seafood-rich diet to the media, which includes steamed fish and shrimp dumplings, along with pasta and white rice. Nadal is not overly restrictive, however, since he has frequently expressed that his personal favourites include paella and chocolate, but he does understand the need for self-control, stating: "You eat paella every day, you cannot play tennis". According to Vigour Fact, he is working with a daily consumption of around 4,700 calories per day. He has also revealed that on average, he consumes 172kg of fruit every year. During gameplay, Nadal stays hydrated by drinking lots of water, as well as hypotonic beverages. After grueling matches, Nadal's drinks of choice to recover are protein shakes because they assist with muscle regeneration, and filtered seawater because of its efficiency in getting important minerals back into the body. He typically hits the court just after breakfast and does not leave until early afternoon, in between performing rigorous tennis-related exercises like footwork drills, racket swings, ball drills, and short sprints. Throughout his career, Nadal expressed a lot of concern over his knee injuries, which were long-lasting and chronic, sidelining him for years. In late 2012, Nadal received over six months of physical therapy, along with Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) therapy, an innovative non-surgical treatment option for people with sprained knees and chronic tendon injuries that had been legalized in 2011. The PRP therapy proved to be successful as 2013 was one of Nadal's best years and he has since had much fewer knee injuries. In 2021, Nadal announced that he had a rare chronic disorder of his left ankle, Mueller-Weiss syndrome. He was diagnosed at the age of 19 and held off surgery as long as he could. After surgery in 2021, he returned to tennis in early 2022, winning the Australian Open. He later received two numbing injections and anti-inflammatories before each of his seven matches en route to winning the 2022 French Open. Nadal stated that he was not willing to do this again. In an open statement regarding his injury, he said, "I am not injured, I am a player living with an injury." (W) winner; (F) finalist; (SF) semifinalist; (QF) quarterfinalist; (#R) rounds 4, 3, 2, 1; (RR) round-robin stage; (Q#) qualification round; (DNQ) did not qualify; (A) absent; (NH) not held; (SR) strike rate (events won / competed); (W–L) win–loss record. To avoid confusion and double counting, these charts are updated at the conclusion of a tournament or when the player's participation has ended. Current through the 2023 Australian Open. Nadal withdrew before the third round of the 2016 French Open due to a wrist injury, and before the semi-finals of 2022 Wimbledon due to an abdominal tear which do not officially count as losses. Nadal's 22 Grand Slam singles titles place him second in the men's all-time rankings, behind Djokovic's 24 titles. His 30 Grand Slam singles finals place him 3rd in the men's all-time rankings, behind Djokovic's 36 and Federer's 31 finals, respectively. He has won 14 French Open titles, an all-time record at any tournament. He is the youngest player in the Open Era to win all four majors (24 years old). These records were attained in the Open Era of tennis. Records in bold indicate peer-less achievements. Records in italics are currently active streaks. ^ Denotes consecutive streak. ITF World Champion (5): 2008, 2010, 2017, 2019, 2022 ATP Player of the Year (5): 2008, 2010, 2013, 2017, 2019 Laureus World Sports Award for Breakthrough of the Year: 2006 Laureus World Sports Award for Sportsman of the Year (2): 2011, 2021 Laureus World Sports Award for Comeback of the Year: 2014 BBC Sports Personality World Sport Star of the Year: 2010 ATP Newcomer of the Year: 2003 ATP Most Improved Player of the Year: 2005 Stefan Edberg Sportsmanship Award (5): 2010, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021 ATP Arthur Ashe Humanitarian of the Year: 2011 ATP Comeback Player of the Year: 2013 ATP Fan's Favourite Award: 2022 Biography portal Spain portal Tennis portal Sports portal List of career achievements by Rafael Nadal Forbes list of the world's top-10 highest-paid athletes All-time tennis records – Men's singles (since 1877) Open Era tennis records – Men's singles (since 1968) List of Grand Slam–related tennis records (since 1877) List of Grand Slam men's singles champions (since 1877) List of Olympic medalists in tennis (since 1896) List of ATP Tour top-level tournament singles champions (since 1990) Tennis Masters Series singles records and statistics (since 1990) ATP Tour records (since 1990) List of ATP number 1 ranked singles tennis players (since 1973) World number 1 ranked male tennis players (all-time) 2016 Summer Olympics national flag bearers Sport in Spain Tennis in Spain In ATP Tour and Grand Slam main draw matches, Summer Olympics, Davis Cup, Laver Cup, ATP Cup and United Cup; 2nd in the Open Era The other being Andre Agassi. The group of Federer, Nadal, Djokovic, and Andy Murray has also been called the Big Four in reference to their place as the four most accomplished players of their era. See: See: See: Laurence Doherty, Charles Winslow, Vincent Richards, and Nicolás Massú are the only other male players in history who have won an Olympic gold medal in both singles and doubles in their careers, however, they never completed the Career Grand Slam. Between 1928 and 1984, tennis was not included in the official Olympic program. Also referred to as the "North American Hardcourt Slam". The finals Nadal reached without losing a set were the 2007, 2008, 2010, 2012, 2017, and 2020 French Opens, the 2010 US Open, and the 2019 Australian Open. The world No. 1 players who Nadal defeated were Roger Federer (13 times) and Novak Djokovic (10 times). Catalan: [rəf(ə)ˈɛl nəˈðal pəˈɾeɾə], Spanish: [rafaˈel naˈðal paˈɾeɾa]; "Rafael Nadal". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 13 December 2018. Retrieved 13 September 2021. "Marc Lopez joins Rafael Nadal's coaching team". Tennis.com. Archived from the original on 17 December 2021. Retrieved 17 December 2021. "Rafael Nadal reveals new Argentine coach after Roig exit". uk.sports.yahoo.com. 19 December 2022. Archived from the original on 19 December 2022. Retrieved 19 December 2022. "ATP Prize Money Leaders" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 12 July 2021. "Champions". The Davis Cup. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 23 January 2023. "The pronunciation by Rafael Nadal himself". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 13 December 2018. Retrieved 22 October 2017. "Rafael Nadal – Biography, Titles, & Facts". www.britannica.com. 25 October 2023. Archived from the original on 16 April 2019. Retrieved 10 November 2023. "Rafael Nadal: The Making of a Champion, Part 1". bleacherreport.com. 25 June 2012. Archived from the original on 10 November 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. Clarey, Christopher (6 June 2005). "Rafael Nadal, Barely 19, He's Got Game, Looks and Remarkably Good Manners". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 October 2014. Retrieved 5 April 2010. "Planet football hails O Fenômeno". FIFA.com. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. Retrieved 3 October 2018. Rajaraman, Aarthi (1 June 2008). "At Home with Humble yet Ambitious Nadal". Inside Tennis. Archived from the original on 9 June 2010. Retrieved 5 April 2010. Bliss 2022, p. chapter one. "Rafael Nadal: Uncle Toni terrified me but without him I would be nothing". Telegraph.co.uk. 18 August 2011. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Great beginnings: The big events that helped shape Rafael Nadal's early genius". scroll.in. 28 May 2021. Archived from the original on 11 November 2023. Retrieved 11 November 2023. Kervin, Alison (23 April 2006). "The Big Interview: Rafael Nadal". The Sunday Times. Archived from the original on 7 September 2011. Retrieved 5 April 2010. "Rafa Nadal: lo que casi nadie conoce" [Rafa Nadal: what almost no one knows]. www.mediavida.com (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 12 September 2017. Retrieved 10 November 2023. "El torneo que ganó Nadal con 11 años" [The tournament that Nadal won when he was 11 years old]. www.abc.es (in Spanish). 27 June 2013. Archived from the original on 4 November 2013. Retrieved 30 November 2023. ""Arrebatarle el título a Nadal fue un logro importante", admite José Sánchez de Luna" ["Taking the title away from Nadal was an important achievement," admits José Sánchez de Luna]. www.granadadigital.es (in Spanish). 21 December 2020. Archived from the original on 22 April 2021. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Anderson and Nadal, a story that has lasted since 1998". www.eurosport.fr. 10 September 2017. Archived from the original on 13 December 2017. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "La evolución de Rafa Nadal en Francia: de las lágrimas en 1998 a la sonrisa de 2019" [The evolution of Rafa Nadal in France: from tears in 1998 to the smile of 2019]. www.elmundo.es (in Spanish). 10 June 2019. Archived from the original on 10 November 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. "Yoann Gourcuff-Rafael Nadal, échange de balles" [Yoann Gourcuff-Rafael Nadal, exchange of balls]. www.sofoot.com (in French). 8 June 2018. Archived from the original on 10 November 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. "1999 Tim Essonne vainqueur" [1999 Tim Essonne winner]. tournoi.fft.fr (in French). Archived from the original on 10 November 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. "25 years of the Tennis Europe Junior Tour by Tennis Europe". issuu.com. 18 December 2015. Archived from the original on 27 October 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. "The winners of Les Petits As". www.lespetitsas.com. Archived from the original on 26 October 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. "A young Rafa Nadal won the Tennis Europe 14&U Junior Masters title". www.pinterest.es. Archived from the original on 10 November 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. "Se cumplen 18 años de la victoria vasca de Rafa Nadal" [18 years have passed since Rafa Nadal's Basque victory]. www.mundodeportivo.com (in Spanish). 30 May 2018. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Trofeo Sport Goofy" (PDF). www.tenispain.com. Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Rafael Nadal supera a Tomeu Salvà y se proclama campeón de España infantil" [Rafael Nadal surpasses Tomeu Salvà and is proclaimed Spanish children's champion]. www.ultimahora.es (in Spanish). 17 July 2000. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Nadal At 1000: The Fearless Teen Who Won A Junior Tournament With A Broken Finger Has Become A Timeless Legend". www.ubitennis.net. 11 September 2020. Archived from the original on 11 November 2023. Retrieved 11 November 2023. "Junior team competitions rolls of honour" (PDF). www.itftennis.com. Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 October 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. "Nadal among the great teenage athletes". ESPN. 9 June 2006. Archived from the original on 11 November 2023. Retrieved 11 November 2023. "24 September 2001: Rafael Nadal appears in the rankings for the first time". www.tennisworldusa.org. 24 September 2018. Archived from the original on 9 May 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. "Rafael Nadal Tennis Player Profile". Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 15 June 2012. BNP Paribas. "Junior Davis Cup and Junior Fed Cup" (PDF). International Tennis Federation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 11 August 2016. "Rafael Nadal: The Making of a Champion, Part 2". bleacherreport.com. 20 July 2012. Archived from the original on 10 November 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. "Rafa Nadal antes de ser Rafa Nadal, fotos de los inicios del campeón mallorquín" [Rafa Nadal before being Rafa Nadal, photos of the beginnings of the Mallorcan champion]. www.menshealth.com (in Spanish). 9 March 2022. Archived from the original on 3 September 2022. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "15-year-old Rafael Nadal wastes 13 match points in his first Futures match!". www.tennisworldusa.org. 11 September 2017. Archived from the original on 10 November 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. "29 April 2002: The day a 15-year-old Rafael Nadal made a stunning ATP Tour debut". www.tennismajors.com. 29 April 2023. Archived from the original on 11 November 2023. Retrieved 11 November 2023. "29 April 2002 – Rafael Nadal wins his first ATP match at home in Mallorca". tennisworldusa.org. 30 April 2017. Archived from the original on 4 May 2017. Retrieved 1 May 2017. Tignor, Stephen (20 June 2006). "Wimbledon 2006: The Duel". Tennis Magazine. Archived from the original on 5 June 2008. Retrieved 8 November 2008. "Nadal recalls 2002 Wimbledon: 'I had not been having dinner for four days'". www.tennisworldusa.org. 3 July 2017. Archived from the original on 11 September 2017. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "El español Rafael Nadal cae ante el argelino Lamine Ouahab en el torneo junior de Wimbledon" [The Spanish Rafael Nadal falls to the Algerian Lamine Ouahab in the Wimbledon junior tournament]. www.libertaddigital.com (in Spanish). 6 July 2002. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Nadal official ITF activity". Archived from the original on 1 August 2018. Retrieved 9 August 2018. "Tennis Abstract: Rafael Nadal ATP Match Results, Splits, and Analysis – Singles". www.tennisabstract.com. Archived from the original on 9 July 2018. Retrieved 9 August 2018. "Tennis Abstract: Rafael Nadal ATP Match Results, Splits, and Analysis – Doubles". www.tennisabstract.com. Archived from the original on 9 July 2018. Retrieved 9 August 2018. "Barcelona Challenger 2002 Tennis Tournament". www.itftennis.com. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "23 June 2003: Rafael Nadal makes historic Wimbledon debut". www.tennisworldusa.org. 24 June 2018. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Looking back at Nadal's Monte Carlo debut in 2003". www.tennis.com. 18 April 2019. Archived from the original on 11 November 2023. Retrieved 11 November 2023. "Nadal destroys Marín in his debut". as.com. 22 April 2003. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "The Big Four: It all started on the Challenger Tour". www.rafanadalacademy.com. Archived from the original on 1 June 2023. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Hamburg Flashback: Rafael Nadal's Impressive Run at 16". www.tennisworldusa.org. 9 May 2023. Archived from the original on 9 May 2023. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Nadal's injuries affecting his participation at Grand Slams". www.reuters.com. 18 May 2023. Archived from the original on 10 November 2023. Retrieved 10 November 2023. Clarey, Christopher (26 June 2003). "Wimbledon Tennis: An unusual comfort zone". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 13 June 2016. Retrieved 5 April 2010. Drucker, Joel (18 May 2010). "The Rafa Renaissance". atpworldtour. Archived from the original on 30 March 2015. Retrieved 22 December 2010. "Feliciano López, nuevo campeón de España" [Feliciano López, new champion of Spain]. cadenaser.com (in Spanish). 5 July 2003. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "10 Things That Happened While Rafael Nadal Was Winning 52 Straight Clay-Court Semifinals". www.tennisnow.com. Archived from the original on 22 August 2019. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "2003 UMAG results". Archived from the original on 10 August 2018. Retrieved 9 August 2018. "Rafael Nadal's Unrelenting Determination in 2003". www.tennisworldusa.org. 13 June 2023. Archived from the original on 13 June 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "St. Jean de Luz Challenger 2003 Tennis Tournament". www.itftennis.com. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Rafael Nadal humilla a Feliciano López" [Rafael Nadal humiliates Feliciano López]. www.ultimahora.es (in Spanish). 14 September 2003. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "ATP Chennai doubles info". Archived from the original on 10 August 2018. Retrieved 10 August 2018. "Rafa Nadal: his worst streak in 14 years". en.as.com. 16 November 2022. Archived from the original on 1 April 2023. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Hrbaty beats Nadal in Auckland final". ESPN. 16 January 2004. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Hewitt survives test against Nadal". edition.cnn.com. 24 January 2004. Archived from the original on 13 September 2019. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Rafael Nadal's 2004 Ranking History". ATP's official site. Archived from the original on 25 March 2009. Retrieved 14 February 2009. "Rafael Nadal vs. Roger Federer: 10 Years And Counting". 28 March 2014. Archived from the original on 28 March 2014. Retrieved 2 January 2023. "Rafael Nadal won the first title of his career in Sopot". 15 August 2014. Archived from the original on 9 July 2018. Retrieved 10 August 2018. "2004 US Open men's doubles info". www.itftennis.com. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. Benammar, Emily (8 July 2008). "Rafael Nadal: All you need to know". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 23 May 2019. Retrieved 5 April 2010. "Doha doubles info". www.atptour.com. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Brave Hewitt battles past Nadal". BBC Sport. 24 January 2005. Archived from the original on 21 September 2006. Retrieved 6 April 2010. "Nadal proves to be the real deal". BBC Sport. 5 April 2005. Archived from the original on 21 August 2017. Retrieved 6 April 2010. "Teen Nadal gives Spain reign over French Open". USA Today. Associated Press. 5 June 2006. Archived from the original on 22 January 2011. Retrieved 6 April 2010. "24 April 2005: The day Rafael Nadal won Barcelona to break into the top 10 for the first time". www.tennismajors.com. 24 April 2023. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "ATP Rankings History: Rafael Nadal". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 8 February 2010. Retrieved 6 April 2010. "Rafael Nadal's 5 biggest titles as a teenager". www.sportskeeda.com. 6 March 2020. Archived from the original on 12 September 2022. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Waske snaps Nadal's winning streak". Associated Press. 10 June 2005. Archived from the original on 14 July 2018. Retrieved 6 April 2010. "5 lowest-ranked players to defeat Rafael Nadal ft. Lukas Rosol and Nicolas Mahut". www.sportskeeda.com. 16 April 2023. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Nadal out of place in the wrong setting". www.theguardian.com. 24 June 2005. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Nadal gana la Copa del Rey de Tenis ante Moyà" [Nadal wins the King's Tennis Cup against Moyà]. www.elmundo.es. 30 June 2005. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Nadal's streak ends with 3-hour marathon vs. Berdych". ESPN. 16 August 2005. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Blake shocks Nadal with four-set victory". ESPN. 3 September 2005. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Nadal wins China Open". www.eurosport.com. 18 September 2005. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "23 October 2005: The day Nadal came back from two sets down to triumph in Madrid". www.tennismajors.com. 23 October 2023. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. Linden, Julian (5 January 2006). "Foot injury delays Rafael Nadal's comeback". Reuters. Archived from the original on 7 June 2011. Retrieved 6 April 2010. "Rafael Nadal No. 1 Tribute". ATP World Tour. 18 August 2008. Archived from the original on 18 August 2018. Retrieved 7 July 2009. "Champion Safin out of Aussie Open". BBC Sport. 10 January 2006. Archived from the original on 17 September 2018. Retrieved 13 November 2008. "4 March 2006: The day Rafael Nadal ended Roger Federer's 56-match hard court streak". www.tennismajors.com. 4 March 2023. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Moya Snaps Nadal 22-Match Spanish Win Streak at Miami". www.tennis-x.com. 25 March 2006. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Return Winners: the 2006 Monte Carlo final". www.tennis.com. 21 April 2018. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Nadal beats Robredo in Open Seat Godo final". ESPN. 30 April 2006. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Nadal refuses to lose in five-hour, five-setter against Federer in Rome". www.tennis.com. 21 April 2023. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Nadal wins record 54th straight on clay". ESPN. 29 May 2006. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Nadal Forms a Feat of Clay". www.latimes.com. 30 May 2006. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. Garber, Greg (31 May 2006). "With Vilas in stands, Nadal makes history". ESPN Tennis/French06. ESPN. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 13 November 2008. "Nadal v Djokovic, Roland Garros, 2006: Chapter One in 15-year rivalry". www.theaustralian.com.au. 25 May 2021. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. Garber, Greg (12 June 2006). "Roger's reign on hold with Nadal's dominance". ESPN Tennis/French06. ESPN. Archived from the original on 13 August 2013. Retrieved 13 November 2008. "Shoulder Forces Nadal To Quit London Match". The New York Times. Associated Press. 17 June 2006. Archived from the original on 21 August 2017. Retrieved 13 November 2008. "Nadal survives scare to set up tie with Agassi". www.theguardian.com. 29 June 2006. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Nadal and a final match at Wimbledon for Agassi". www.rafanadalacademy.com. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Federer takes crown for a fourth year but Nadal leaves his nerves in shreds". www.theguardian.com. 10 July 2006. Archived from the original on 10 February 2018. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Youzhny shocks Nadal". www.eurosport.com. 7 September 2006. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Johansson upsets Nadal". www.theage.com.au. 12 October 2006. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Federer beats Nadal again". www.eurosport.com. 21 November 2006. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Gonzalez makes light work of Nadal". www.theguardian.com. 24 January 2007. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Rafa tastes victory again". www.eurosport.com. 18 March 2007. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "20 May 2007: Roger Federer breaks Rafael Nadal's 81-match winning streak on clay". www.tennismajors.com. 20 May 2023. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Nadal's key serving leads to French Open three-peat". www.tennis.com. 28 May 2020. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "The Battle of Surfaces". Archived from the original on 24 January 2019. Retrieved 4 April 2007. "Rafael Nadal vs Roger Federer on a 50–50 court of clay and grass in 2007". www.givemesport.com. 25 May 2023. Archived from the original on 25 May 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. Cheese, Caroline (7 July 2007). "Wimbledon 2007". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 11 August 2007. Retrieved 13 November 2008. "Nadal wins Stuttgart title". www.eurosport.com. 22 July 2007. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Nadal withdraws from Cincinnati Masters". www.reuters.com. 15 August 2007. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Nadal shown the door by Ferrer". www.theguardian.com. 5 September 2007. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Nalbandian destroys Nadal's perfect Paris record". www.independent.co.uk. 5 November 2007. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Federer crushes Nadal to reach Shanghai final". www.reuters.com. 17 November 2007. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. Newbury, Piers (28 November 2007). "Nadal plays down foot injury fear". BBC Sport Tennis. Archived from the original on 11 February 2021. Retrieved 11 February 2009. "Tsonga blows Nadal away with a force of irresistible joy". www.theguardian.com. 25 January 2008. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Miami Flashback: Rafael Nadal blows another chance to win missing title". www.tennisworldusa.org. 22 March 2023. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Nadal beats Federer in Monte Carlo final". www.abc.net.au. 28 April 2008. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Nadal defeats Federer in three sets for Hamburg Masters title". ESPN. 18 May 2008. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Men's Grand Slam Titles Without Losing A Set". International Herald Tribune. Sports. Associated Press. 9 June 2008. Archived from the original on 2 December 2008. Retrieved 9 August 2008. "Roger & Rafa: The Rivalry". ATPtennis.com. 14 March 2013. Archived from the original on 31 August 2013. Retrieved 11 April 2013. "Nadal goes into Borg mode to hand Federer his worst humiliation". www.theguardian.com. 9 June 2008. Archived from the original on 2 October 2022. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Federer, Nadal set for Wimbledon showdown". CBCSport. Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Associated Press. 5 June 2008. Archived from the original on 12 August 2013. Retrieved 11 February 2009. Ubha, Ravi (5 June 2008). "Nadal enters Wimbledon final with clear mental edge". ESPN. Archived from the original on 10 January 2016. Retrieved 11 February 2009. Peter, Bodo (5 June 2008). "Karma on Nadal's side". ESPN. Archived from the original on 10 February 2009. Retrieved 11 February 2009. "Federer-Nadal rivalry as good as it gets". International Herald Tribune. Associated Press. 7 July 2008. Archived from the original on 23 August 2008. Retrieved 14 February 2009. Jenkins, Bruce (7 July 2008). "The Greatest Match Ever". The San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on 4 March 2012. Retrieved 7 August 2008. Alleyne, Richard (7 July 2008). "Wimbledon 2008: John McEnroe hails Rafael Nadal victory as greatest final ever". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 15 February 2014. Retrieved 7 August 2008. Wertheim, Jon (9 July 2008). "Without a doubt, it's the greatest". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on 13 August 2013. Retrieved 4 April 2009. Alistair Magowan (7 July 2008). "Roger v Rafa – the best final ever?". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 21 September 2008. Retrieved 8 July 2008. "Rafael Nadal Wins Epic Wimbledon Match". www.cbsnews.com. 6 July 2008. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Nadal wins in Toronto". www.eurosport.com. 27 July 2008. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Djokovic snaps Nadal's 32-match win streak at Cincinnati ATP". www.smh.com.au. 3 August 2008. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Olympics: Nadal strikes precious gold and wakes up on top of the world". www.theguardian.com. 18 August 2008. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "On This Day, 2008: Rafael Nadal captures gold medal at Beijing Olympics". www.tennis.com. 17 August 2023. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Nadal wins Olympic gold over Gonzalez". Tennis.com. 17 August 2008. Archived from the original on 15 June 2009. Retrieved 5 April 2009. "Murray trumps Nadal to reach US Open final". www.theguardian.com. 8 September 2008. Archived from the original on 25 April 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Nadal Clinches Year End No. 1 For First Time". ATPtennis.com. 18 August 2008. Archived from the original on 22 October 2008. Retrieved 20 October 2008. Pretot, Julien (31 October 2008). "UPDATE 2-Tennis-Knee injury forces Nadal to retire in Paris". Reuters. Archived from the original on 22 August 2019. Retrieved 5 April 2009. "Nadal withdraws from Masters Cup". Tennis.com. 3 November 2008. Archived from the original on 15 June 2009. Retrieved 4 November 2008. "Doha 2009 Doubles info". www.itftennis.com. Archived from the original on 15 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. Ubha, Ravi (30 January 2009). "One for the record books". ESPN. Archived from the original on 30 January 2012. Retrieved 20 June 2012. Shitole, Sarthak (9 December 2022). "Top 5 longest matches at Australian Open". FirstSportz. Archived from the original on 1 February 2024. Retrieved 1 February 2024. "Rafael Nadal Completed Matches, 2009 Australian Open". Tennis Australia. 30 January 2009. Archived from the original on 2 February 2009. Retrieved 30 January 2009. "Record-breaking Rafa Notches Up Another First". Tennishead. 4 February 2009. Archived from the original on 9 April 2009. Retrieved 4 February 2009. Cambers, Simon (16 February 2009). "Murray takes title to complete hat-trick over crocked Nadal". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 23 March 2013. Retrieved 16 February 2009. "Injured Nadal pulls out of Dubai". BBC Sport. 19 February 2009. Archived from the original on 21 February 2009. Retrieved 19 February 2009. "Nadal beats Djokovic to help Spain clinch win". NBC Sports. Associated Press. 8 March 2009. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 13 June 2010. Rogers, Iain (8 March 2009). "Nadal beats Djokovic to put Spain through". Reuters. Archived from the original on 25 May 2012. Retrieved 13 June 2010. "Looking back at Rafael Nadal's Indian Wells triumphs in 2007, 2009 and 2013". www.sportskeeda.com. 6 March 2022. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Players". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 5 April 2009. Retrieved 4 April 2009. "Nadal seals fifth Monte Carlo win". BBC Sport. 19 April 2009. Archived from the original on 8 September 2018. Retrieved 20 April 2009. "Nadal storms to Barcelona victory". BBC Sport. 26 April 2009. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 26 April 2009. "Nadal regains Rome Masters title". BBC Sport. 3 May 2009. Archived from the original on 20 July 2018. Retrieved 6 May 2009. "Rafael Nadal defeats Novak Djokovic in four-hour epic to reach Madrid Masters final". www.telegraph.co.uk. 16 May 2009. Archived from the original on 29 July 2019. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "The 2009 semi-final between Nadal and Djokovic, voted the best match in Mutua Madrid Open history". mutuamadridopen.com. 14 March 2022. Archived from the original on 8 June 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Roger Federer takes Madrid Open to end losing streak against Rafael Nadal". www.theguardian.com. 17 May 2009. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Nadal sets French Open consecutive wins record". www.cbc.ca. 27 May 2009. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Nadal wins 30th straight at French Open". ESPN. 27 May 2009. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Rafael Nadal: A Look Back at His 2009 French Open Loss to Robin Soderling". bleacherreport.com. 6 May 2013. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "4-time French Open champ Nadal upset by Soderling". www.sandiegouniontribune.com. 31 May 2009. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Rafael Nadal has problems in both knees, will try to rehab in time for Wimbledon". ESPN. 9 June 2009. Archived from the original on 10 January 2016. Retrieved 6 June 2010. "Champion Nadal out of Wimbledon". BBC News. 19 June 2009. Archived from the original on 9 June 2009. Retrieved 22 May 2010. "Murray deposes Nadal as number two". archive.nytimes.com. 6 July 2009. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Nadal Suffers Montreal Setback". Sporting Life. 15 August 2009. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 15 August 2009. "Murray deposes Nadal as number two". www.abc.net.au. 16 August 2009. Archived from the original on 29 January 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Novak Djokovic sees off Rafael Nadal to reach Cincinnati final". www.theguardian.com. 23 August 2009. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Del Potro thrashes Nadal in semis". BBC Sport. 13 September 2009. Archived from the original on 30 August 2017. Retrieved 13 September 2009. "Davydenko ends Nadal's London hopes". edition.cnn.com. 26 November 2009. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Nadal gives Spain Davis Cup advantage". edition.cnn.com. 4 December 2009. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Nadal beats Hajek for 4–0 Spain lead in final". www.sandiegouniontribune.com. 6 December 2009. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Rafael Nadal wins Abu Dhabi exhibition title". BBC Sport. 2 January 2010. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 4 January 2010. "Davydenko shocks Nadal in final". The British Broadcasting Corporation. 9 January 2010. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 9 January 2010. "Murray through after Nadal injury". BBC News. 26 January 2010. Archived from the original on 8 March 2020. Retrieved 22 May 2010. "Ljubicic Shows Heart in semi-final Win Over Nadal". BNP Paribas Open. 20 March 2010. Archived from the original on 23 March 2010. Retrieved 6 June 2010. "Roddick edges Nadal in three sets". ESPN News. Associated Press. 3 April 2010. Archived from the original on 6 April 2010. Retrieved 5 April 2010. "Unstoppable Nadal Captures Sixth Straight Title". James Buddell. ATP World Tour. 18 April 2010. Archived from the original on 21 April 2010. Retrieved 18 April 2010. "Rafael Nadal beats David Ferrer to claim a fifth Rome Masters". www.theguardian.com. 2 May 2010. Archived from the original on 19 July 2018. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Rafael Nadal beats Roger Federer to win Madrid Masters". www.theguardian.com. 17 May 2010. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "The day Nadal surpassed Agassi title". www.rafanadalacademy.com. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Nadal beats Federer for 18th Masters title". eu.theledger.com. 17 May 2010. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Nadal wins fifth French Open title". ESPN. 6 June 2010. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Rafael Nadal Claims the Crown With a Roar". bleacherreport.com. 7 June 2010. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Lopez ends Nadal run". www.eurosport.com. 11 June 2010. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Nadal fined for receiving coaching". ESPN. Associated Press. 28 June 2010. Archived from the original on 3 March 2013. Retrieved 15 June 2012. Brooks, Xan (4 July 2010). "Wimbledon 2010: Rafael Nadal v Tomáš Berdych – as it happened". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 23 March 2013. Retrieved 6 June 2010. During the final match at Wimbledon 2010 between Nadal and Tomáš Berdych, someone, allegedly Toni Nadal, yelled "I love you, Rafa!" Newbery, Piers (4 July 2010). "Wimbledon 2010: Rafael Nadal beats Berdych in final". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 26 March 2019. Retrieved 4 July 2010. "Tennis News: Nadal is Champion Again!". The Tennis Times. 22 January 2010. Archived from the original on 7 July 2010. Retrieved 22 May 2010. "Murray upsets Nadal in Rogers Cup semifinal". CBS Sports. 14 August 2010. Archived from the original on 11 September 2011. Retrieved 14 August 2010. "Nadal and Djokovic to play double together". News.tennisty.com. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011. Retrieved 11 December 2010. "Baghdatis upsets Nadal in Cincinnati". www.tennis.com. 21 August 2010. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Nadal Captures U.S. Open To Complete Career Grand Slam". The Sports Network (TSN). 14 September 2010. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 12 June 2012. Nadal...also owns an Olympic gold medal, which makes him one of only two men to corral the Career Golden Slam, with the great Agassi being the other. "Rafael Nadal wins US Open to seal Career Grand Slam". BBC Sport. 14 September 2010. Archived from the original on 25 July 2018. Retrieved 14 September 2010. "Nadal Clinches Year-End No. 1 For Second Time". Atpworldtour.com. 16 September 2010. Archived from the original on 18 September 2010. Retrieved 11 December 2010. "Nadal defeated despite creating 26 break points". ESPN. 2 October 2010. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Nadal thrashes Monfils to claim Japan Open crown". edition.cnn.com. 10 October 2010. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Nadal withdraws from fatigue at the Paris". Atpworldtour.com. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 11 December 2010. "Nadal wins Stefan Edberg Sportsmanship Award". Tennis.com. Associated Press. 20 November 2010. Retrieved 20 June 2012. "Nadal after end of the ATP World Tour Finals final "I tried my best, but Roger was better than me"". Rafaelnadal.com. Archived from the original on 18 December 2010. Retrieved 11 December 2010. "Beaten Novak Djokovic says Rafael Nadal can be 'best player ever'". www.theguardian.com. 14 September 2010. Archived from the original on 22 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023. "Nadal beats Federer in Abu Dhabi final". www.tennis.com. 1 January 2011. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Rafael Nadal – Nadal struggles with fever in Doha". Live-tennis.com. 8 January 2011. Archived from the original on 9 October 2011. Retrieved 3 June 2011. "Rafa wins doubles will delay trip australia". The official nadal website. 7 January 2011. Archived from the original on 10 January 2011. Retrieved 7 January 2011. Gleeson, Michael (27 January 2011). "Rafa slammed: run at history falls short as Ferrer KOs ailing ace". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 13 September 2017. Retrieved 27 January 2011. "Rafael Nadal Wins in Davis Cup in Belgium, Gives Spain Lead". Fox News Channel. Associated Press. 4 March 2011. Archived from the original on 7 March 2011. Retrieved 4 March 2011. "Rafael Nadal Wins Second Match in Davis Cup, Helps Spain Dominate Belgium". Fox News Channel. Associated Press. 6 March 2011. Archived from the original on 26 July 2011. Retrieved 6 March 2011. "Djokovic sinks Nadal in thrilling Miami final". Reuters. 3 April 2011. Archived from the original on 11 May 2023. Retrieved 1 August 2022. Fitzgerald, Matt (3 April 2011). "Djokovic Denies Nadal Again To Take Pulsating Final". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 20 September 2022. Retrieved 18 September 2022. "Nadal won seven tournaments in a row at the ATP". Associated Press. 17 April 2011. Archived from the original on 20 April 2011. Retrieved 17 April 2011. "Nadal powers to sixth Barcelona title". edition.cnn.com. 24 April 2011. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. Mitchell, Kevin (15 May 2011). "Novak Djokovic rolls on with defeat of Rafael Nadal in Rome final". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 23 March 2013. Retrieved 7 June 2011. "Rafael Nadal wins sixth French Open". ESPN. 6 June 2011. Archived from the original on 8 June 2011. Retrieved 7 June 2011. "Novak Djokovic beats Rafael Nadal to win Wimbledon men's title". www.theguardian.com. 3 July 2011. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Ivan Dodig of Croatia shocks Rafael Nadal in Montreal Rogers Cup". www.theguardian.com. 12 August 2011. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Nadal scrapes into Cincinnati quarters". www.reuters.com. 19 August 2011. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Suffering Nadal surprised by Fish as Federer also loses". en.espn.co.uk. 19 August 2011. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Nadal collapses in front of media". BBC News. 4 September 2011. Archived from the original on 8 March 2020. Retrieved 5 September 2011. "2011 U.S. Open: Novak Djokovic overcomes back pain, Rafael Nadal to win marathon match". The Washington Post. 12 September 2011. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Andy Murray stuns Rafael Nadal to win Japan Open". www.theguardian.com. 9 October 2011. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Rafael Nadal feels pain as Jo-Wilfried Tsonga knocks him out of ATP finals". www.theguardian.com. 25 November 2011. Archived from the original on 6 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Davis Cup site". Daviscup.com. Archived from the original on 8 June 2012. Retrieved 8 June 2012. "Gael Monfils upends Rafael Nadal in Qatar Open semifinals". www.espn.co.uk. 6 January 2012. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Longest Men's Singles Championship Final". ESPN Sports. 30 January 2012. "Men's Australian Open Final Hailed as Best Match in Tennis History". www.pedestrian.tv. 30 January 2012. Archived from the original on 29 August 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. Eckstein, Jeremy (17 February 2012). "Novak Djokovic vs. Rafael Nadal: Why Aussie Open Final Is Greatest Match Ever". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 11 May 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. Tignor, Steve (5 December 2019). "Men's Match of the Decade No. 2: Djokovic d. Nadal, 2012 Aussie Open". Tennis.com. Archived from the original on 6 June 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. Tignor, Steve (28 June 2023). "Moment 6: At 1:37 a.m., Djokovic topples Nadal in grandiose, grunt-filled Australian Open epic". Tennis.com. Archived from the original on 28 August 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Novak Djokovic Beats Rafael Nadal In Epic 2012 Australian Open Final". ATP Tour. 29 January 2012. Archived from the original on 27 August 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "The Relentless Rafael Nadal – The Spaniard's top 5-set matches". www.sportskeeda.com. 14 December 2013. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Nadal withdrawal puts Murray into Miami final". en.espn.co.uk. 30 March 2012. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Rafael Nadal thrashes Novak Djokovic to win eighth Monte Carlo Masters". www.theguardian.com. 22 April 2012. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Most Dominant Big 3 Victories: Nadal Def. Djokovic, Monte Carlo 2012". lastwordonsports.com. 11 April 2020. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Nadal beats Ferrer for 7th Barcelona Open win". eu.theledger.com. Archived from the original on 30 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Stars not happy with Madrid". Incyprus.com.cy. 11 May 2012. Archived from the original on 23 November 2012. Retrieved 24 November 2012. "Rafael Nadal beats Novak Djokovic in straight sets at Rome Masters". www.theguardian.com. 21 May 2012. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. Davis, Toby (11 June 2012). "Nadal wins record seventh French Open". Reuters. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 11 June 2012. "Rafael Nadal beats Novak Djokovic to win record seventh French Open title". The Times of India. 11 June 2012. Archived from the original on 12 June 2012. Retrieved 11 June 2012. Henson, Mike (11 June 2012). "Rafael Nadal beats Novak Djokovic to win seventh French Open". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 3 September 2012. Retrieved 11 June 2012. "Rafael Nadal bombs out in quarterfinals at Halle". The Times of India. 15 June 2012. Archived from the original on 27 March 2020. Retrieved 15 June 2012. "Rafael Nadal falls to shock Wimbledon defeat by Lukas Rosol". BBC News. 28 June 2012. Archived from the original on 24 June 2014. Retrieved 28 June 2012. "Nadal withdraws from Paris and London tournaments". 26 October 2012. Archived from the original on 27 October 2012. Retrieved 26 October 2012. "Reigning Champion Nadal Withdraws From London Olympics". Archived from the original on 20 July 2012. Retrieved 19 July 2012. "Rafael Nadal out of Aussie Open". ESPN. 28 December 2012. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 29 December 2012. "Nadal Out of Top Four, Serena Williams Rises on Rankings". Business Week. 28 January 2013. Archived from the original on 8 July 2013. Clarke, Patrice. "Rafael Nadal Smart to Make Long-Awaited Return on Clay at 2013 ATP VTR Open". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 3 February 2013. Retrieved 1 February 2013. "Rafael Nadal to make comeback from knee injury at Brazil Open". BBC Sport. 15 January 2013. Archived from the original on 9 February 2013. Retrieved 27 January 2013. "Rafael Nadal beats David Ferrer to win Mexican Open title in Acapulco". www.bbc.com. 3 March 2013. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Comeback maestro Nadal wins at Indian Wells". www.reuters.com. 18 March 2013. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Djokovic dethrones Nadal in Monte Carlo". www.abc.net.au. 21 April 2013. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Barcelona Open 2013: Rafael Nadal Defeats Nicolas Almagro to Win Title". bleacherreport.com. 28 April 2013. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Rafael Nadal downs Stanislas Wawrinka in Madrid for fifth 2013 title". www.theguardian.com. 12 May 2013. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Rafael Nadal crushes Roger Federer to show clay supremacy in Rome final". www.theguardian.com. 19 May 2013. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Ruthless Nadal breaks records at French Open". ESPN. 9 June 2013. Archived from the original on 14 September 2016. Retrieved 8 July 2016. "Nadal beats Ferrer for record 8th French Open win". www.chinadaily.com.cn. 10 June 2013. Archived from the original on 7 July 2022. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "A Century Ago, a French Title Collection to Rival Rafael Nadal's". www.nytimes.com. 22 May 2014. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "The 10 best French Open men's matches of the century: Nadal-Djokovic, semi-final, 2013". tennishead.net. 16 September 2020. Archived from the original on 27 August 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "3 times Rafael Nadal was pushed to 5 sets at Roland Garros". www.sportskeeda.com. 31 May 2022. Archived from the original on 15 July 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Rafael Nadal knocked out of Wimbledon by Belgian Steve Darcis". The Guardian. 25 June 2013. Archived from the original on 10 November 2013. Retrieved 24 November 2013. "Nadal Edges Djokovic In Montreal Thriller, Faces Raonic in Final". ATP World Tour. 30 September 2011. Archived from the original on 21 April 2015. Retrieved 31 July 2014. Canada (11 August 2013). "Rafael Nadal dominates Milos Raonic in Rogers Cup final". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 25 September 2016. Retrieved 31 July 2014. "Rafael Nadal beats John Isner to win Cincinnati Open". BBC Sport. 18 August 2013. Archived from the original on 28 November 2018. Retrieved 15 October 2018. Newbery, Piers (10 September 2013). "Rafael Nadal beats Novak Djokovic to win second US Open title". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 18 August 2014. Retrieved 19 July 2014. "Not the real prizemoney: Rafael Nadal and Serena Williams lament tax impact on record purse". The Sydney Morning Herald. 10 September 2013. Archived from the original on 13 September 2017. Retrieved 19 July 2014. "Rafael Nadal reaches China Open final to become world number one". BBC Sport. 5 October 2013. Archived from the original on 9 October 2013. Retrieved 10 June 2014. "Novak Djokovic beats Rafael Nadal in China Open final". BBC Sport. 6 October 2013. Archived from the original on 1 October 2014. Retrieved 10 June 2014. "Djokovic denies Nadal last word in the World Tour Finals". The Guardian. 12 November 2013. Archived from the original on 18 November 2013. Retrieved 24 November 2013. "Nadal evens the ledger against Rosol in Doha". ABC News. 31 December 2013. Archived from the original on 2 January 2023. Retrieved 2 January 2023. "Rafael Nadal beats Gael Monfils to win Qatar title". BBC Sport. 4 January 2014. Archived from the original on 13 January 2014. Retrieved 19 July 2014. "Australian Open 2014: Rafael Nadal "sorry to finish this way" as injury jinx strikes again at his unlucky slam". 26 January 2014. Archived from the original on 8 November 2023. Retrieved 13 June 2017. "Rafael Nadal wins Madrid Masters after Kei Nishikori retires". BBC Sport. 11 May 2014. Archived from the original on 21 May 2014. Retrieved 24 June 2014. Newbery, Piers (8 June 2014). "Rafael Nadal beats Novak Djokovic to win ninth French Open title". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 24 October 2015. Retrieved 12 February 2018. "Rafael Nadal ousted in Halle". ESPN. 12 June 2014. Archived from the original on 14 June 2014. Retrieved 14 June 2014. Newbery, Piers (1 July 2014). "Rafael Nadal beaten by Nick Kyrgios at Wimbledon". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 1 July 2014. Retrieved 1 July 2014. "Nadal Withdraws From US Open". Archived from the original on 24 June 2015. Retrieved 5 June 2015. "Klizan Stuns Nadal To Set Berdych SF Clash". Archived from the original on 17 July 2015. Retrieved 5 June 2015. "Lopez Takes His Chance Against Nadal". Archived from the original on 17 July 2015. Retrieved 5 June 2015. "Rafael Nadal: 14-time Grand Slam winner confirms his season is over". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 1 November 2014. Retrieved 5 June 2015. "Rafael Nadal suffers shock defeat by Michael Berrer in Doha". BBC Sport. 6 January 2015. Archived from the original on 6 April 2015. Retrieved 12 February 2018. Newbery, Piers (27 January 2015). "Rafael Nadal beaten by Tomas Berdych at Australian Open". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 7 July 2015. Retrieved 24 May 2015. "Rio Stunner! Fognini Hands Nadal First SF Loss On Clay In 12 Years". Archived from the original on 11 May 2015. Retrieved 5 June 2015. "Rafael Nadal: Argentina Open win equals clay-court title record". BBC Sport. 1 March 2015. Archived from the original on 3 March 2015. Retrieved 12 February 2018. "Raonic Saves 3 M.P. To Upset Nadal In Indian Wells". Archived from the original on 12 May 2015. Retrieved 5 June 2015. "Rafael Nadal shocked by Fernando Verdasco at Miami Open". TheGuardian.com. 29 March 2015. Archived from the original on 6 June 2015. Retrieved 5 June 2015. "Novak Djokovic beats Rafael Nadal to reach Monte Carlo Open final". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 23 April 2015. Retrieved 5 June 2015. "Rafael Nadal loses in straight sets to Fabio Fognini in Barcelona as "King of Clay" is dethroned once again". 23 April 2015. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 5 June 2015. "Andy Murray beats Rafael Nadal to win Madrid Masters final". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 23 June 2015. Retrieved 5 June 2015. "Nadal falls outside Top 5 for the First Time in a Decade". Archived from the original on 19 May 2015. Retrieved 5 June 2015. "Wawrinka Denies Nadal In Rome To Set Federer Clash". Archived from the original on 19 May 2015. Retrieved 5 June 2015. "Novak Djokovic beats Rafael Nadal in French Open quarter-finals". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 5 June 2015. Retrieved 5 June 2015. "Nadal Reigns In Stuttgart". ATP Tour, Inc. 13 June 2015. Archived from the original on 17 June 2015. Retrieved 17 June 2015. Newbery, Piers (16 June 2015). "Queen's: Rafael Nadal knocked out by Alexandr Dolgopolov". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 16 June 2015. Retrieved 17 June 2015. "Wimbledon 2015: Rafael Nadal beaten by Dustin Brown". BBC Sport. 2 July 2015. Archived from the original on 4 July 2015. Retrieved 5 July 2015. "Italian Fabio Fognini wins a late-night epic at the US Open". ATP Tour. 5 September 2015. Archived from the original on 6 September 2015. Retrieved 5 September 2015. "Australian Open: Rafael Nadal loses to Fernando Verdasco in first round at Melbourne Park". ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation). 19 January 2016. Archived from the original on 19 January 2016. Retrieved 19 January 2016. "Nadal Beats Monfils, Wins Ninth Monte-Carlo Title". ATP World Tour. 17 April 2016. Archived from the original on 21 April 2016. Retrieved 3 May 2016. "Nadal Notches Record-Tying 49th Clay-Court Title In Barcelona". ATP World Tour. 24 April 2016. Archived from the original on 4 May 2016. Retrieved 3 May 2016. "Andy Murray beats Rafa Nadal despite awful troubles with serve in Madrid Masters semi-final". 7 May 2016. Archived from the original on 8 November 2023. Retrieved 16 May 2016. "Novak Djokovic beats Rafael Nadal at the Rome Masters – as it happened". The Guardian. 13 May 2016. Archived from the original on 21 May 2016. Retrieved 27 May 2016. "Injured Federer to miss French Open". Reuters. 19 May 2016. Archived from the original on 25 June 2016. Retrieved 27 May 2016. "Nadal Records 200th Grand Slam Match Win". ATP World Tour. 26 May 2016. Archived from the original on 29 May 2016. Retrieved 27 May 2016. Garros, Kevin Mitchell at Roland (27 May 2016). "Rafael Nadal pulls out of French Open with wrist problem before third round". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 1 June 2017. Retrieved 13 June 2017. "Rafael Nadal pulls out of French Open with wrist injury". BBC Sport. 27 May 2016. Archived from the original on 30 May 2016. Retrieved 27 May 2016. "Rafael Nadal Withdraws From Wimbledon". The New York Times. 9 June 2016. Archived from the original on 2 July 2019. Retrieved 1 July 2019. "Rio 2016 | Phelps comes second; Rafael Nadal wins gold in doubles on day 7". 13 August 2016. Archived from the original on 17 September 2016. Retrieved 13 August 2016. "US Open 2016: Lucas Pouille beats Rafael Nadal in five sets". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 7 September 2016. Retrieved 5 September 2016. "Nadal to make Brisbane debut". ATP World Tour. 23 August 2016. Archived from the original on 2 December 2016. Retrieved 2 December 2016. Burton, Alex (5 January 2017). "Rafael Nadal produces ruthless display to dismiss Mischa Zverev in Brisbane second round". UBITENNIS. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 23 January 2017. "Nadal Talks About Reaching Fifth Miami Final | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 7 August 2019. Retrieved 7 August 2019. "Monte Carlo Masters: Rafael Nadal beats Albert Ramos-Vinolas for record 10th title". BBC Sport. 23 April 2017. Archived from the original on 23 May 2017. Retrieved 12 February 2018. "Nadal Notches 10th Barcelona Title – ATP World Tour – Tennis". 30 April 2017. Archived from the original on 1 May 2017. Retrieved 30 April 2017. "Rafael Nadal Beats Dominic Thiem To Win Mutua Madrid Open Title | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 7 August 2019. Retrieved 7 August 2019. Gray, James (11 June 2017). "French Open 2017 Final AS IT HAPPENED: Rafael Nadal beats Stan Wawrinka in stunning win". Archived from the original on 12 June 2017. Retrieved 11 June 2017. "Nadal dominant in winning 10th French Open title". ATP. Archived from the original on 14 June 2017. Retrieved 11 June 2017. Sunderland, Tom. "Rafael Nadal Shocked by Gilles Muller in 5-Set Thriller at 2017 Wimbledon". bleacherreport.com. Archived from the original on 4 October 2017. Retrieved 10 September 2017. "Nadal Storms To 75th Career Title In Beijing". ATP. 8 October 2017. Retrieved 14 October 2017. "Garbine Muguruza joins Rafael Nadal as world No 1". The Indian Express. 11 September 2017. Archived from the original on 27 September 2017. Retrieved 26 September 2017. "Nadal Clinches Year-End No. 1 Emirates ATP Ranking For Fourth Time | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 7 August 2019. Retrieved 7 August 2019. Imhoff, Dan (23 January 2018). "Cilic back in semis after Nadal's retirement". ausopen.com. Archived from the original on 24 January 2018. Retrieved 23 January 2018. "Davis Cup: Rafael Nadal and David Ferrer put Spain into semi-finals". BBC Sport. 8 April 2018. Archived from the original on 19 June 2018. Retrieved 1 July 2019. "Nadal Clinches La Undécima". ATP Tour. 22 April 2018. Archived from the original on 2 January 2023. Retrieved 2 January 2023. "Rafa Romps To 11th Barcelona Title". ATP Tour. 29 April 2018. Archived from the original on 2 January 2023. Retrieved 2 January 2023. "Tribute: Rafael Nadal Records 400th Match Win On Clay Courts". ATP Tour. 29 April 2018. Archived from the original on 2 January 2023. Retrieved 2 January 2023. "50 And Counting... – ATP World Tour – Tennis". Archived from the original on 12 May 2018. Retrieved 12 May 2018. "Rafa Reigns In Rome, Returns To No. 1 – ATP World Tour – Tennis". 20 May 2018. Archived from the original on 21 May 2018. Retrieved 20 May 2018. "Rafa Rolls To 'La Undécima' At Roland Garros". ATP Tour. 10 June 2018. Archived from the original on 2 January 2023. Retrieved 2 January 2023. "Novak Djokovic outlasts Rafael Nadal in epic Wimbledon semi-final". The Guardian. 14 July 2018. Archived from the original on 16 July 2018. Retrieved 16 July 2018. "Rafael Nadal and Simona Halep win Rogers Cup titles". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 17 August 2018. Retrieved 17 August 2018. "Paris Masters: Rafael Nadal out with injury & Roger Federer through". BBC Sport. 31 October 2018. Archived from the original on 1 November 2018. Retrieved 2 November 2018. "Nadal's familiar sinking feeling". ausopen.com. 27 January 2019. Archived from the original on 7 July 2019. Retrieved 5 June 2022. "Kyrgios saves three match points, beats Nadal in Acapulco". Reuters. Reuters. 28 February 2019. Archived from the original on 7 March 2019. Retrieved 6 March 2019. "Rafael Nadal Withdraws From Indian Wells & Miami". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 24 April 2019. Retrieved 24 April 2019. "Monte Carlo Masters: Rafael Nadal loses to Fabio Fognini in semi-finals". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 24 April 2019. "Stefanos Tsitsipas stuns Rafael Nadal in Madrid". News.com.au. Archived from the original on 9 June 2019. Retrieved 10 June 2019. "Nadal Beats Djokovic To Win Ninth Rome Title". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 20 May 2019. Retrieved 10 June 2019. "Rafa's Dozen: Nadal Claims 12th Roland Garros Crown". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 10 June 2019. Retrieved 10 June 2019. "Australian Open Tennis Tournament". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 12 July 2022. Retrieved 9 July 2019. "Roger Federer beats Rafael Nadal in four sets to reach Wimbledon men's final". The Guardian. 12 July 2019. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 14 July 2019. "Rafael Nadal tops Roger Federer's Masters 1000 record, becoming". Tennis World. 9 August 2019. Archived from the original on 9 August 2019. Retrieved 10 August 2019. "Nadal Adds To All-Time Masters 1000 Titles Record". www.atptour.com. ATP tour. 11 August 2019. Archived from the original on 12 August 2019. Retrieved 12 August 2019. "US Open 2019: Rafael Nadal beats Daniil Medvedev to win 19th Grand Slam title". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 10 September 2019. Retrieved 10 September 2019. "Injury blights Nadal at Paris Masters; Djokovic into final". Spectrum News1. Archived from the original on 3 November 2019. Retrieved 2 November 2019. Crooks, Eleanor (15 November 2019). "Rafa Nadal exits ATP finals but ends the year as world No 1". The Scotsman. Archived from the original on 16 November 2019. Retrieved 17 November 2019. "Nadal Clinches Year-End No. 1 ATP Ranking For Fifth Time". ATP Tour. 14 November 2019. Archived from the original on 14 November 2019. Retrieved 15 November 2019. "Nadal Clinches Davis Cup Title For Spain With Win Against Shapovalov". ATP Tour. 24 November 2019. Archived from the original on 25 November 2019. Retrieved 25 November 2019. "Spain seal sixth Davis Cup crown as Nadal and Bautista Agut down Canada in final". daviscupfinals.com. 25 November 2019. Archived from the original on 5 January 2020. Retrieved 25 November 2019. "Spain wins new-look Davis Cup after Rafael Nadal, Roberto Bautista Agut record wins". ABC News (Australia). 25 November 2019. Archived from the original on 24 November 2019. Retrieved 25 November 2019. "Serbia wins atp cup". ABC News. 12 January 2020. Archived from the original on 14 January 2020. Retrieved 14 January 2020. "Thiem Stuns Nadal To Reach First Semi-final In Melbourne". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 29 January 2020. Retrieved 30 January 2020. "Mexican Open: Rafael Nadal wins third title after beating Taylor Fritz". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 2 March 2020. Retrieved 2 March 2020. "Schwartzman Stuns Nadal In Rome". atptour.com. Archived from the original on 20 September 2020. Retrieved 20 September 2020. "King Nadal continues Paris reign with record-equalling 20th Slam". uk.sports.yahoo.com. 11 October 2020. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020. Retrieved 13 December 2020. Robinson, Joshua (11 October 2020). "Rafael Nadal Wins His 20th Grand Slam Title With French Open Victory". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 22 October 2020. Retrieved 13 December 2020 – via www.wsj.com. Wallace, Ava. "Rafael Nadal, with a marvel of a French Open final, claims his 20th Grand Slam title". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 17 October 2020. Retrieved 20 October 2020. "Nadal wins 1,000th ATP Tour match". BBC Sport. 4 November 2020. Archived from the original on 4 November 2020. Retrieved 5 November 2020. "Alexander Zverev beats Rafael Nadal to reach Paris final". BBC Sport. 7 November 2020. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 11 November 2020. "Rafael Nadal Breaks Jimmy Connors' Record For Most Consecutive Weeks In Top 10 | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 4 June 2021. Retrieved 4 June 2021. "Nadal Battles Past Tsitsipas For London Semi-final Spot". www.atptour.com. 19 November 2020. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 20 November 2020. "Nadal and Djokovic on course for ATP Finals semi clash". AS.com. 20 November 2020. Archived from the original on 20 November 2020. Retrieved 20 November 2020. "Daniil Medvedev beats Rafael Nadal to set up ATP Finals clash with Dominic Thiem". Evening Standard. 21 November 2020. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2020. "Novak Djokovic & Rafael Nadal Finish Inside Top 2 For Third Straight Year | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 4 June 2021. Futterman, Matthew (17 February 2021). "Rafael Nadal Is Out of the Australian Open". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Retrieved 21 February 2021. "Andrey Rublev "in shock" with Rafael Nadal after Monte-Carlo Masters thriller". Express. 16 April 2021. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 18 April 2021. "Tennis-Nadal outlasts Tsitsipas to claim 12th Barcelona Open title". uk.news.yahoo.com. 25 April 2021. Archived from the original on 26 April 2021. Retrieved 25 April 2021. "Rafael Nadal Saves M.P., Beats Stefanos Tsitsipas For 12th Barcelona Title | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 28 April 2021. Retrieved 4 June 2021. "Rafael Nadal Fights Past Novak Djokovic For Record-Extending 10th Rome Crown | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 2 October 2021. Retrieved 4 June 2021. "Rafael Nadal pulls out of Wimbledon and Tokyo 2020 Olympics Games". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 17 June 2021. Retrieved 19 June 2021. "Nadal withdraws from Toronto Masters with persistent foot injury". Reuters. 10 August 2021. Archived from the original on 11 August 2021. Retrieved 11 August 2021. "Harris Stuns Nadal In Washington Thriller". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 11 August 2021. Retrieved 11 August 2021. "Nadal Withdraws From Toronto". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 11 August 2021. Retrieved 11 August 2021. "Rafael Nadal withdraws from Cincinnati". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 11 August 2021. Retrieved 11 August 2021. "Rafael Nadal ends 2021 tennis season early because of niggling foot injury". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 20 August 2021. Archived from the original on 20 August 2021. Retrieved 20 August 2021. "Summary and highlights of Rafael Nadal 0–2 Andy Murray IN Abu Dhabi semifinals". Vavel. 17 December 2021. Archived from the original on 17 December 2021. Retrieved 17 December 2021. "Mubadala World Tennis Championship 2021 – Denis Shapovalov downs Rafael Nadal to claim third in Abu Dhabi – Eurosport". Eurosport. 18 December 2021. Archived from the original on 8 November 2023. Retrieved 18 December 2021. Braidwood, Jamie (30 January 2022). "Rafael Nadal produces epic comeback to defeat Daniil Medvedev and win record-breaking Australian Open title". The Independent. Archived from the original on 30 January 2022. Retrieved 30 January 2022. "Nadal beats Medvedev in Melbourne classic". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 30 January 2022. Retrieved 30 January 2022. "Rafael Nadal defeats Sebastian Korda after forcing final set tie-break". The Independent. 13 March 2022. Archived from the original on 21 March 2022. Retrieved 21 March 2022. "Rafael Nadal wins battle of generations to beat Alcaraz, 18, to Indian Wells final". The Guardian. 20 March 2022. Archived from the original on 20 March 2022. Retrieved 21 March 2022. "Rafael Nadal beaten by Taylor Fritz in Indian Wells final". BBC News. 21 March 2022. Archived from the original on 21 March 2022. Retrieved 21 March 2022. Fuller, Russell (22 March 2022). "Rafael Nadal out for up to six weeks with rib injury". BBC News. Archived from the original on 22 March 2022. Retrieved 22 March 2022. "Nadal reaches 300 career Grand Slam match wins". 25 May 2022. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. Retrieved 25 May 2022. @ATPMediaInfo (25 May 2022). "[5] @RafaelNadal earns his 300th #GrandSlam win by defeating [WC] Moutet 6–3 6–1 6–4 and advances to 3R @rolandgarros for the 18th year in a row. #Nadal broke 7 times and hit 27 winners en route to his 107th #RolandGarros victory" (Tweet). Retrieved 25 May 2022 – via Twitter. "Nadal beats Djokovic in late-night Paris thriller". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 2 June 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2022. "Fantastic 14! Nadal Defeats Ruud For Another Roland Garros Title". ATPTour. Archived from the original on 26 May 2023. Retrieved 5 June 2022. "Rafael Nadal Withdraws From Wimbledon Ahead of Semifinal Match". The New York Times. 7 July 2022. Archived from the original on 8 November 2023. Retrieved 7 July 2022. "Nadal loses in first match since Wimbledon exit". 18 August 2022. Archived from the original on 18 August 2022. Retrieved 18 August 2022. "'Rafael Nadal certainly can be dangerous again at...', says expert". 23 August 2022. Archived from the original on 25 August 2022. Retrieved 25 August 2022. Clarey, Christopher (5 September 2022). "Rafael Nadal Loses His Serve and His Way at the U.S. Open". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 6 September 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2022. "The Big Four Reunion: Federer, Nadal, Djokovic & Murray Take The Laver Cup". Association of Tennis Professionals. 23 September 2022. Archived from the original on 4 October 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2022. Carayol, Tumaini (24 September 2022). "Roger Federer bids emotional farewell in doubles defeat alongside Rafael Nadal". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 16 January 2023. Retrieved 9 October 2022. Cambers, Simon (24 September 2022). "Rafael Nadal withdraws from Laver Cup for personal reasons". ESPN. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2022. "Rafael Nadal: 'It's a gift'". Tennis World USA. 26 November 2022. Archived from the original on 26 November 2022. Retrieved 26 November 2022. Ransom, Ian (18 January 2023). "Injured champion Nadal crashes out of Australian Open". Reuters. Archived from the original on 18 January 2023. Retrieved 23 January 2023. "McDonald Upsets Hobbled Nadal At Australian Open". ATP Tour. 18 January 2023. Archived from the original on 22 January 2023. Retrieved 23 January 2023. "'I didn't want to retire': Nadal driven by pride as he plays through injury in Australian Open loss". ABC News. 18 January 2023. Archived from the original on 18 January 2023. Retrieved 18 January 2023. "Rafael Nadal to fall out of Top 10 for first time since 2005 on March 20th after Indian Wells". Archived from the original on 5 March 2023. Retrieved 5 March 2023. "Rafael Nadal eyes Monte Carlo as 1st event since Aussie Open". ESPN. 15 March 2023. Archived from the original on 18 March 2023. Retrieved 18 March 2023. "Nadal, Alcaraz & Auger-Aliassime Withdraw From Monte Carlo". ATPTour. 4 April 2023. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 4 April 2023. "Rafael Nadal Set to Leave Top 100 for First Time in 20 Years". 19 May 2023. Archived from the original on 22 May 2023. Retrieved 22 May 2023. "Rafael Nadal: 'My Hope is to Play Again and to be Competitive' | ATP Tour | Tennis". Archived from the original on 29 September 2023. Retrieved 23 September 2023. Ramsay, George (5 January 2024). "Rafael Nadal squanders three match points in Brisbane International defeat against Jordan Thompson". CNN. Retrieved 2 February 2024. "Rafael Nadal and Carlos Alcaraz face off at the Netflix slam". "Rafael Nadal in quotes". www.france24.com. 18 May 2023. Retrieved 5 December 2023. Weaver, Paul (7 July 2008). "Move over McEnroe and Borg, this one will run and run in the memory". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 23 January 2009. Retrieved 14 February 2009. Flanagan, Martin. "Federer v Nadal as good as sport gets". The Age. Melbourne. Archived from the original on 14 August 2013. Jago, Richard (15 August 2009). "Murray reaches world No. 2". The Observer. Archived from the original on 14 July 2013. Retrieved 16 August 2010. "Roger Federer Ranking History". Association of Tennis Professionals. Archived from the original on 11 May 2015. Retrieved 9 February 2013. "Rafael Nadal". Associate of Tennis Professionals. Archived from the original on 8 February 2010. Retrieved 9 February 2013. "It's official: Nadal will pass Federer for No. 1". NBC Sports. Associated Press. 1 August 2008. Archived from the original on 19 October 2008. Retrieved 14 February 2009. "ATP Rankings: Year-End Top 10 History" (PDF). ATP. p. 6. Retrieved 24 May 2021. "Rafael Nadal VS Roger Federer". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 28 March 2018. Retrieved 11 April 2018. Alleyne, Richard (7 July 2008). "Wimbledon 2008: John McEnroe hails Rafael Nadal victory as greatest final ever". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 15 February 2014. Retrieved 14 February 2009. Wertheim, Jon (9 July 2008). "Without a doubt, it's the greatest". Tennis Mailbag. Archived from the original on 13 August 2013. Retrieved 14 February 2009. Tignor, Steve (8 July 2008). "W: Report Cards". Concrete Elbow. Tennis.com. Archived from the original on 19 August 2013. Retrieved 14 February 2009. "Rafael Nadal VS Novak Djokovic". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 12 April 2018. Retrieved 11 April 2018. "Rivalries Of The Decade". Archived from the original on 12 May 2015. Retrieved 23 February 2020. Vecsey, George (14 September 2010). "A Champion's March to Greatness". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 31 December 2022. Retrieved 2 January 2023. Clarey, Christopher (3 July 2011). "Djokovic's Dream Made Real With Wimbledon Conquest". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 4 July 2011. Retrieved 3 July 2011. "A Titanic Clash In Novak Djokovic & Rafael Nadal's Record Rivalry". ATP Tour. 9 July 2020. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Novak Djokovic Dethrones Rafael Nadal After Roland Garos Epic". ATP Tour. 11 June 2021. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Rafael Nadal VS Andy Murray". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 12 April 2018. Retrieved 11 April 2018. "Rafael Nadal VS Stan Wawrinka". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 20 April 2018. Retrieved 11 April 2018. "Juan Martin del Potro VS Rafael Nadal – Head 2 Head". www.atptour.com. Retrieved 13 December 2023. "Tomas Berdych VS Rafael Nadal – Head 2 Head". www.atptour.com. Retrieved 13 December 2023. "Rafael Nadal VS David Ferrer – Head 2 Head". www.atptour.com. Retrieved 13 December 2023. Mirza, Raz (6 June 2022). "The King of Slams". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 5 June 2022. "'King of Clay' Rafael Nadal outlasts Novak Djokovic in stirring French Open semifinal". The Plain Dealer. Associated Press. 7 June 2013. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 11 June 2013. McMahon, James (8 June 2013). "French Open 2013: Breaking Down Why Rafael Nadal is so Dominant on Clay". Los Angeles Times. Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 13 June 2013. Retrieved 11 June 2013. Sarkar, Pritha (9 June 2013). "Nadal Shakes Off Protesters, Ferrer to Win French Open". NBC Sports. Reuters. Archived from the original on 12 June 2013. Retrieved 11 June 2013. Robson, Douglas (7 June 2013). "Nadal takes down Djokovic, reaches French Open final". USA Today. Archived from the original on 13 June 2018. Retrieved 11 June 2013. "Rafael Nadal overcomes doubts to win 8th French title". Boston Herald. Associated Press. 10 June 2013. Archived from the original on 8 November 2013. Retrieved 11 June 2013. Evans, Richard (6 June 2010). "Nadal roars back to King of Clay throne". Fox Sports. Archived from the original on 4 July 2010. Retrieved 11 June 2013. Dodds, Eric (7 June 2013). "Why Djokovic's French Open Loss Is A Win for Men's Tennis". Time. Archived from the original on 10 June 2013. Retrieved 11 June 2013. Chu, Henry (9 June 2013). "Rafael Nadal wins a record eighth French Open tennis title". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 11 June 2013. Retrieved 11 June 2013. "The king and his court". The Hindu. 11 June 2013. Archived from the original on 19 December 2013. Retrieved 11 June 2013. Rothstein, Ethan (7 June 2013). "French Open results 2013: Rafael Nadal advances to final with 5-set victory over Novak Djokovic". SB Nation. Archived from the original on 25 July 2018. Retrieved 11 June 2013. Bishop, Greg (11 June 2012). "Nadal Embraces History With a Record Seventh Title on the Clay of Roland Garros". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 25 July 2018. Retrieved 11 June 2013. Jason Le Miere (22 May 2015). "French Open 2015 Draw: Can Rafael Nadal Beat Novak Djokovic, Andy Murray And Roger Federer To Win 10th Title?". IB Times. Archived from the original on 7 September 2015. Retrieved 14 September 2015. Chris Chase (3 June 2015). "The king is dead: Rafael Nadal blown out at French Open". USA Today Sports. Archived from the original on 6 September 2015. Retrieved 14 September 2015. "Le jury de l'Équipe vote Nadal" [Le jury of l'Équipe vote Nadal] (in French). L'Équipe. 24 May 2010. Archived from the original on 3 July 2015. Retrieved 14 September 2015. Matt Cronin (9 November 2012). "McEnroe: Federer the best ever". Tennis.com. Archived from the original on 28 September 2015. Retrieved 14 September 2015. Douglas Robson (30 May 2015). "How one court at Roland Garros helps Rafael Nadal dominate French Open". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 28 September 2015. Retrieved 14 September 2015. St. John, Allen (7 June 2012). "The Greatest Men's Tennis Player of All Time Is at the French Open". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 25 July 2018. Retrieved 11 June 2013. Eckstein, Jeremy (9 June 2013). "Where Rafael Nadal Fits in the Greatest of All Time Debate". Los Angeles Times. Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 13 June 2013. Retrieved 11 June 2013. Goldring, Fred (6 June 2011). "Could Rafa Nadal Be the Greatest Tennis Player of All Time?". HuffPost. Archived from the original on 30 August 2017. Retrieved 11 June 2013. Bowen, Fred (31 August 2011). "Who's the best tennis player of all time?". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 13 June 2013. Retrieved 11 June 2013. Gaines, Cork (10 June 2013). "Rafael Nadal Is Challenging Roger Federer for the Title Of 'Greatest of All Time'". Business Insider. Retrieved 11 June 2013. "Tennis' top 20 of all time". ESPN. 23 June 2016. Retrieved 2 January 2017. "Tennis podcast: "Rafael Nadal and Roger Federer are the greatest of all time", says John McEnroe". The Daily Telegraph. 28 January 2017. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 12 February 2017. J.S. (13 September 2017). "Sorry, Roger: Rafael Nadal is not just the king of clay". The Economist. Retrieved 14 September 2017. Mahesh Bhupathi (11 September 2017). "Rafael Nadal's third US Open title win sparks "greatest ever" Twitter debate". Hindustan Times. Retrieved 15 September 2017. Charlie Eccleshare (16 June 2017). "Tennis Debate: Is Rafael Nadal not Roger Federer the greatest ever?". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 15 September 2017. Will Swanton (12 June 2017). "Nadal v Federer, who is the greatest of all time?". The Australian. Retrieved 15 September 2017. The Economist (13 September 2017). "Sorry, Roger: Rafael Nadal is not just the king of clay". The Economist. Retrieved 13 September 2017. Himanshu Shekhar Mishra (31 January 2017). "Rafa -the other greatest". Pragativadi. Retrieved 31 January 2017. "Lopez and Nadal win gold for Spain at Rio 2016". International Tennis Federation. 13 August 2016. "Nadal receives BBC Overseas award". BBC. Retrieved 29 August 2023. "The 100 Most Influential People of 2022 — Rafael Nadal". Time. 23 May 2022. "Andre Agassi picks Rafael Nadal ahead of Roger Federer as tennis's greatest all-time player". The Daily Telegraph. London. 8 May 2014. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 8 June 2014. "Rafael Nadal is the best clay-court player ever, says Thomas Muster". www.tennisworldusa.org. 20 March 2019. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Moya says Nadal on way to being best ever player". www.reuters.com. 21 November 2010. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "French Open Prize Money 2023 [Confirmed] – Roland Garros". www.perfect-tennis.com. Retrieved 24 November 2023. Kapetanakis, Arthur. "10 Defining Rivalries In ATP History". ATP Tour. Retrieved 24 November 2023. Snowball, Ben (31 May 2022). "Rafael Nadal v Novak Djokovic is 'biggest' rivalry in tennis history – Corretja ahead of French Open clash". Eurosport. Retrieved 24 November 2023. Schlecht, Neil (5 September 2022). "Rafael Nadal, the Zen Master at the 2022 US Open". US Open. Archived from the original on 5 September 2022. Retrieved 14 October 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "Nadal Has Improved Virtually Every Aspect of His Game". ESPN. 3 July 2008. Retrieved 30 January 2009. Cooper, Jeff. "Rafael Nadal – Game Profile". Archived from the original on 7 November 2016. Retrieved 30 July 2007. "Rafael Nadal's Drop Volley". Tennis Magazine. 27 March 2008. Archived from the original on 26 October 2009. Retrieved 30 January 2009. "How To Hold A Tennis Racket". Retrieved 19 January 2015. "Essential Tennis – Rafael Nadal's Forehand Grip Revealed". Retrieved 19 January 2015. Clarey, Christopher (27 June 2006). "More and More Players Deliver Slap to Classic Forehand". The New York Times. Retrieved 30 January 2009. Gorney, Cynthia (17 June 2009). "Ripped. (Or Torn Up?)". The New York Times. Retrieved 22 May 2010. "The Forehand of Rafael Nadal". Tennis Magazine. 15 December 2006. Archived from the original on 4 March 2009. Retrieved 30 January 2009. White, Clive (6 July 2008). "Rafael Nadal Determined to Keep One Step Ahead of Roger Federer". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 30 January 2009. Tony Kurdzuk/The Star-Ledger (12 September 2010). "12 September 2010". The Star-Ledger. Retrieved 3 June 2011. Timothy Rapp (30 January 2012). "Rafael Nadal: Rafa Must Improve Serve to Beat Novak Djokovic". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 3 May 2012. Thomas Skuzinski (22 August 2011). "Rafael Nadal's Serve, and 7 Other Weak Shots Among the Top 8 Men". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 3 May 2012. Naharnet Newsdesk (13 September 2011). "Beaten Nadal Vows to Turn Tables on Djokovic". Naharnet. Retrieved 3 May 2012. Plaza, Rafael (25 January 2019). "2010 or 2019: Which Rafa Serve Is More Potent?". ATP staff (8 July 2019). "Nadal Ruthless On Serve To Reach Wimbledon Quarter-finals". Jeff (26 January 2019). "The Impact of Rafael Nadal's New Serve". ATP staff (10 January 2019). "Rafa Ready To Unveil Revamped Serve". "No limit to what Nadal can accomplish". ESPN. 1 February 2009. Retrieved 1 February 2009. "Oz Champ Nadal Wants Changes in Tennis Schedule". Tennis Magazine. 2 February 2009. Archived from the original on 15 June 2009. Retrieved 2 February 2009. "Style of play catching up with Rafa?". ESPN. 30 August 2007. Retrieved 30 January 2009. "Sampras: Nadal a beast". www.eurosport.com. 23 September 2010. Retrieved 22 November 2023. Brown, Oliver (5 September 2019). "Rafael Nadal's astonishing resilience". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 14 September 2019. Chase, Chris (5 June 2014). "The definitive guide to Rafael Nadal's 19 bizarre tennis rituals". USA Today. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "This world-class athlete talks like Aristotle and acts like Confucius. We can all learn from him". edition.cnn.com. 27 May 2022. Retrieved 5 December 2023. ""That's Humility" – Gilles Simon Reveals What Makes Rafael Nadal Humble". www.essentiallysports.com. 11 January 2020. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Rafael Nadal's obsessive nature stretches from the tennis court into the gym". Fox Sports. 14 February 2020. Retrieved 26 January 2022. Khanna, Varun (3 February 2020). "Rafael Nadal's Rituals: The Mechanism Behind the Rhythm". Essentially Sports. Retrieved 26 January 2022. "Mannerisms make the man: Obsessive Nadal on cusp of history". www.deccanherald.com. 29 January 2022. Retrieved 5 December 2023. Sourav, D (2 March 2020). "Rafael Nadal's tennis rituals, superstitions or obsessions?". Tennis World. Retrieved 26 January 2022. "Nadal has no time for Childs play". www.theguardian.com. 26 June 2003. Retrieved 5 December 2023. Cambers, Simon (28 June 2014). "Roger Federer criticises Rafael Nadal again over Wimbledon slow play". The Guardian. Retrieved 26 January 2022. Jackson, Andrew (25 January 2022). "'He is wrong': Nadal hits back after Shapovalov accuses him of getting "unfair" advantages". Fox Sports. Retrieved 26 January 2022. "'Rafael Nadal is a real charm', says Spanish actress". www.tennisworldusa.org. 12 August 2020. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Report: Toni Nadal to stop traveling with Rafa at the end of '17". Tennis.com. 11 February 2017. "Rafael Nadal hit the ball in a different way than other kids, says Colom". www.tennisworldusa.org. 4 June 2019. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "Conociendo al Rafael Nadal niño, por Toni Colom" [Getting to know Rafael Nadal as a child, by Toni Colom]. www.puntodebreak.com (in Spanish). 1 June 2019. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "The team behind world's no. 1 tennis player". mba-esg.in. 11 February 2022. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "Rafael Nadal Delineates His Faith in His Doctor – 'I Trust Dr. Cotorro With My Life.'". www.essentiallysports.com. 10 June 2022. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "Who Are Rafael Nadal's Current Coaches and What is History with Toni Nadal?". www.essentiallysports.com. 30 December 2019. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Los protagonistas que acompañan a Nadal" [The protagonists who accompany Nadal]. www.lavanguardia.com (in Spanish). 13 June 2017. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "Carlos Costa on Rafael Nadal's unprecedented success:No one expects this from anybody". www.tennisworldusa.org. 23 May 2020. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "Benito Barbadillo: 'From Jerez circuit to becoming Nadal's agent, here is my life'". www.tennisworldusa.org. 6 January 2017. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "'We spend more time with each other than we do with our wives,' Rafael Nadal on his physio". firstsportz.com. 16 April 2021. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "Rafael Nadal hires Carlos Moya as he bids to revive injury-hit career". CNN. 17 December 2016. Retrieved 19 December 2016. Karthikeyan, Rishi (20 May 2020). "Carlos Moya On Rafael Nadal Improving Serve". O'Shannessy, Craig (4 June 2020). "Is serve and volley dead? Not so according to the world's leading tennis strategy expert". "Francisco Roig: "In Some Ways, This Is Our Biggest Goal"". atpworldtour.com. Retrieved 10 September 2017. "The Beefcake in the Backcourt". New York. 17 August 2008. Retrieved 30 January 2009. "Rafa Needs More Than a New Look". ESPN. 17 January 2009. Retrieved 30 January 2009. "Rafael Nadal to Launch New, More Traditional Image at US Open". Sports Business Daily. 1 August 2008. Archived from the original on 2 December 2008. Retrieved 30 January 2009. "Nadal's Wardrobe Malfunction". CNBC. 26 January 2009. Retrieved 30 January 2009. "Fashion Focus: Rafael Nadal". Tennis Served Fresh. 20 January 2009. Retrieved 30 January 2009. "Nike Bold New Tennis Crew". Nike Store. 30 January 2009. Retrieved 30 January 2009. "Nadal Long Check Shortsbhnu". Nike Store. 30 January 2009. Retrieved 30 January 2009. "Rafa's Costume Change". Tennis Served Fresh. 24 January 2009. Retrieved 30 January 2009. "Emperor's New Clothes". Tennis Magazine. 24 January 2009. Archived from the original on 5 February 2009. Retrieved 30 January 2009. "Nike Air CourtBallistec 1.3". Archived from the original on 24 February 2009. Retrieved 5 September 2007. "Nadal Doesn't Use an APDC". Talk Tennis. 1 September 2007. Archived from the original on 26 August 2009. Retrieved 30 January 2009. "The Tennis Racket". ESPN. 2 September 2004. Retrieved 30 January 2009. Tandon, Kamakshi (26 August 2011). "U.S. Open – Twenty things we learn in Rafael Nadal's autobiography". ESPN. Retrieved 31 May 2013. "Rafael Nadal". ffrf.org. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "Music video for "Gypsy" by Shakira featuring Rafael Nadal". Archived from the original on 12 December 2021. Retrieved 6 June 2010 – via YouTube. "Ace actors serve up their film cameos". www.sportskeeda.com. 22 March 2010. Retrieved 6 December 2023. "Shakira: I Chose Nadal for Video Because I "Identify with Him"". Latin American Herald Tribune. Archived from the original on 19 May 2019. Retrieved 6 June 2010. Source: Penny Newton (24 February 2010). "Shakira's Sexy New Video Gypsy". MTV. Archived from the original on 12 April 2012. Retrieved 6 June 2010. "Cristiano Ronaldo, Rafael Nadal, James Rodriguez and other stars appear in RedOne's music video". www.sportskeeda.com. 11 June 2016. Retrieved 6 December 2023. "Nadal cameos in new ad for Mario Tennis Aces". www.tennis.com. 28 June 2018. Retrieved 6 December 2023. "Nadal Has Barcelona Centre Court Named After Him". "Statue in honour of Rafa unveiled at RG – The 2021 Roland-Garros Tournament official site". Roland-Garros. Retrieved 7 June 2021. "Asteroid Named After Rafael Nadal". ATP World Tour. 13 July 2012. Retrieved 12 June 2012. "Asteroid named after tennis star Nadal". India Today. 13 July 2008. Retrieved 25 July 2019. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) "Nadal, Spain's flag bearer at Rio Olympics". www.seemallorca.com. 5 August 2016. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "Being flag-bearer at Rio Olympics was an 'unforgettable moment', says Rafael Nadal". www.sportskeeda.com. 26 July 2020. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "Rafa Nadal Foundation". Fundacionrafanadal.com. Retrieved 3 June 2011. "Friends of Rafa vs Friends of Iker". www.hcfoo.asia. 23 December 2007. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Facts about Rafael Nadal, the king of clay". sportmob.com. 8 September 2021. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "I did much more than what I ever dreamt in my tennis career: Rafael Nadal". gulfnews.com. 28 January 2021. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Rafa and his foundation in India". The Official Rafa Nadal Website. Archived from the original on 11 July 2011. Retrieved 3 June 2011. Janyala, Sreenivas (18 October 2010). "Rafa in India to promote tennis school". The Indian Express. Mumbai. "Nadal Lends Hand To Million Trees Project". ATP World Tour. 28 September 2010. Retrieved 11 December 2010. "Rafael Nadal's foundation receives donation of 400,000 euros from Spanish corporate giant". www.majorcadailybulletin.com. 7 July 2020. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "UNESCO and the Rafa Nadal Foundation launch their partnership on the International Day of Sport for Development and Peace". www.unesco.org. 20 April 2023. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Tennis stars revel in 'Hit for Haiti' fundraiser". Stuff.co.nz. 18 January 2010. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "When Roger Federer and Pete Sampras played doubles match against Rafael Nadal and Andre Agassi at Indian Wells for Haiti". www.sportskeeda.com. 3 March 2023. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Federer vs Nadal Exhibition Match, Contributed R17Millions at Zurich". www.livetennisguide.com. 21 December 2010. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Every time I've asked Rafael Nadal for a charity contribution, he has said yes: Renowned French journalist". www.sportskeeda.com. 7 November 2020. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Rafael Nadal opens his tennis academy centre to Majorca flood victims". BBC Sport. 11 October 2018. Retrieved 24 January 2019. "Nadal joins Majorca clean-up effort". BBC News. Retrieved 25 January 2019. Bohórquez, Lucía (20 December 2018). "Tennis star Rafael Nadal donates €1m to victims of Mallorca flash floods". El País. ISSN 1134-6582. Retrieved 25 January 2019. "Rafa Nadal donates €1 million for Rebuilding Sant Llorenç des Cardassar". Tennis World USA. 21 December 2018. Retrieved 24 January 2019. Sobot, Rita (20 December 2018). "Rafael Nadal donates â'¬1million to Mallorca flood victims". mirror. Retrieved 24 January 2019. "PHOTOS/VIDEO: Olazábal & Nadal Invitational 2018 charity golf tournament – 15 Декабря 2018 – RAFA NADAL – KING OF TENNIS". rafanadal-kingoftennis.ru. Retrieved 25 January 2019. "Nadal donates one million to Sant LlorenÃ§". Majorca Daily Bulletin. 20 December 2018. Retrieved 25 January 2019. "Nadal donates $1.1 million to victims of flash floods in Spain's Mallorca". www.efe.com. Retrieved 25 January 2019. Roy, Neelabhra (13 May 2022). "What is Mueller-Weiss Syndrome, the foot injury Rafael Nadal suffers from?". www.sportskeeda.com. Retrieved 5 June 2022. "Rafael Nadal: Charity Work & Causes". Look to the Stars. Retrieved 24 January 2019. "Rafa Nadal wins Arthur Ashe Humanitarian Award". www.tennisworldusa.org. 24 November 2011. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Rafael Nadal and Kia Motors double up for another five years". Hyundai Motor Group. Archived from the original on 25 May 2015. Retrieved 25 May 2015. Marie-Helene Wagner (3 March 2009). "Lanvin L'Homme Sport (2009): Fronted by Rafael Nadal". Mimifroufrou.com. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 3 June 2011. "Rafa Nadal is Quely's embassador [sic]". Rafaelnadal.com. 21 December 2009. Archived from the original on 24 June 2011. Retrieved 3 June 2011. Corder, Rob (5 April 2010). "Rafael Nadal to wear $525,000 Richard Mille watch". Professional Jeweller. "Nadal Wears $525K Watch at French Open". Men's Journal. mensfitness.com. 27 May 2010. Retrieved 6 July 2010. "Rafael Nadal strips to his undies for Armani". Typicallyspanish.com. 20 January 2011. Archived from the original on 31 August 2011. Retrieved 3 June 2011. Cowles, Charlotte (10 December 2010). "Rafael Nadal Replaces Cristiano Ronaldo as the New Face of Emporio Armani Underwear". New York. Retrieved 3 June 2011. "Tennis Champion Rafael Nadal Joins Team PokerStars". Poker News. 21 June 2012. Retrieved 19 July 2014. "Daily Bagel: Nadal accepts Ronaldo's poker game challenge". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved 31 August 2018. "Infosys Onboards Tennis Icon Rafael Nadal as Ambassador for the Brand and Infosys' Digital Innovation". www.infosys.com. Retrieved 24 August 2023. "The Brand Rafael Nadal: Businesses (Part 2)". Score and Change. 5 March 2019. Retrieved 10 June 2019. "Tennis Australia teams up with Rafa Nadal Academy". www.tennis.com.au. 27 January 2017. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "The Rafa Nadal Academy Documentary goes around the world". www.rafanadalacademy.com. Retrieved 6 December 2023. "Home". rafanadalacademykuwait.com. Retrieved 25 May 2021. "Home". rafanadaltenniscentre.com. Retrieved 25 May 2021. "Rafa Nadal Tennis Centre Grecia". rafanadalacademy.com. Retrieved 25 May 2021. "Rafa Nadal and David Ferrer Officially Open the Rafa Nadal Academy Kuwait". rafanadalacademy.com. Retrieved 25 May 2021. Adam Zagoria (16 January 2024). "Rafael Nadal Becomes Ambassador For Saudi Tennis Amid Criticism". Forbes. "Here's what Rafael Nadal said after his Wimbledon debut in 2003". rafaelnadalfans.com. 23 June 2018. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Nadal becomes king of clay". www.taipeitimes.com. 7 June 2005. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "MotoGP stars help Red Cross". www.motorcyclenews.com. 18 December 2008. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Casillas denies Eto'o again in 'Iker Vs Nadal' charity game". www.news18.com. 18 December 2008. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Soccer-Rafa Nadal becomes shareholder at troubled Real Mallorca". Reuters. 9 July 2010. "Sale of the club completed". Real Mallorca. 7 September 2010. Archived from the original on 11 September 2012. Hunter, Graham (9 September 2010). "Rafa to the rescue". ESPN. Retrieved 21 December 2010. "King Nadal takes kick-off in the Parc des Princes". www.marca.com. 21 October 2012. Retrieved 6 December 2023. "Nadal 'honoured' by Maracana kick-off". www.thehindu.com. 18 February 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Rafael Nadal guest of honor of Real Madrid". www.tennisworldusa.org. 1 May 2022. Retrieved 6 December 2023. "Rafael Nadal presented with CE Manacor football jersey for his baby son following his honorary kick-off". www.sportskeeda.com. 3 November 2023. Retrieved 5 December 2023. Smith, Bill (28 March 2012). "Away from tennis court, Rafael Nadal seeks a golf course". The Miami Herald. Rafa Nadal [@RafaelNadal] (11 April 2014). "Great experience playing with the world's number 1 female poker player Vanessa and very happy to have learned a lot" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Morse, Ben (26 October 2020). "Rafael Nadal swaps tennis rackets for golf clubs and finishes sixth in professional event". CNN. "From Court To Course: Rafael Nadal Shines In Balearic Golf Championship | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. "U.S. Open – Twenty things we learn in Rafael Nadal's autobiography". ESPN. 26 August 2011. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "Personal woes affecting Rafa?". ESPN. 23 July 2009. "Así es Mery Perelló, la mujer de Rafa Nadal" (in Spanish). ABC. 21 October 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2020. "¿Por qué Xisca Perelló se llama ahora Mery?" (in Spanish). Diario de Mallorca. 30 January 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2020. "La mujer de Nadal nunca fue Xisca, sino Mery Perelló" (in Spanish). Diario AS. 19 October 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2020. "What does Rafael Nadal's Wife Xisca Perello Do?". www.essentiallysports.com. 6 October 2021. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Rafael Nadal engaged to girlfriend of 14 years Mery Perello". CNN. 31 January 2019. Retrieved 31 January 2019. Boyle, Kelli (19 October 2019). "Tennis Star Rafael Nadal Marries Maria Francisca Perello In Spain". E! Online. Retrieved 19 October 2019. Morse, Ben (14 October 2022). "Rafael Nadal says he and his family are "very well" after birth of first child". CNN. Retrieved 7 November 2022. "Este es el nombre que le han puesto Rafa Nadal y Mery Perelló a su hijo" (in Spanish). Mundo Deportivo. 10 October 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022. "'My commitment is to tennis' Rafael Nadal speaks out on family delay with wife". www.express.co.uk. 17 January 2022. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Rafael Nadal's House Porto Cristo, Spain". virtualglobetrotting.com. 5 April 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Inside Rafael Nadal's $2 million beach home, with photos". clutchpoints.com. 2 May 2023. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "What are the political views and Religious Beliefs of Rafael Nadal?". hollowverse.com. Retrieved 12 December 2023. Wertheim, Jon (16 July 2010). "Q&A with Rafael Nadal". Sports Illustrated. "Rafael Nadal – Celebrity Atheist List". www.celebatheists.com. 2 July 2011. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "Ask Rafa: send a question to Rafael Nadal". The Sydney Morning Herald. 30 January 2012. Retrieved 2 January 2023. Johnson, Christopher (8 October 2010). "Rafael Nadal: The "Dragon Ball" of tennis". CNN. Archived from the original on 31 January 2012. Retrieved 31 December 2011. "Seven things you don´t know about Rafael Nadal". www.tennisworldusa.org. 10 December 2015. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "'I am a bit strange,' admits Rafael Nadal as he discusses rare talent". Tennishead. 9 November 2020. Retrieved 1 September 2021. "Rafa Nadal on Mallorca". www.abc-mallorca.com. 8 April 2020. Retrieved 6 December 2023. "Pasta, white rice, fish: Rafael Nadal on how he avoids 'risks' with his pre-match meals". www.sportskeeda.com. 24 July 2020. Retrieved 6 December 2023. "Rafael Nadal Explains Why Fish Is His Quiet-Time Favorite Cuisine". www.essentiallysports.com. 18 March 2021. Retrieved 6 December 2023. "Rafael Nadal's Diet & Workout Plan". www.bosshunting.com.au. 16 February 2022. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Rafael Nadal's Tennis Diet & Workout Plan". manofmany.com. 16 October 2023. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "Rafael Nadal Overcomes Knee Injury With PRP Therapy To Win The US Open 2017". nyboneandjoint.com. 11 September 2017. Retrieved 12 December 2023. "Rafael Nadal Has Returned from Injury Stronger Than Ever in 2013". bleacherreport.com. 11 October 2013. Retrieved 12 December 2023. Dorfman, Steve. "Inside the rare disease tennis champ Rafael Nadal battles to maintain solid footing". The Palm Beach Post. Retrieved 7 September 2022. Train, Rob (5 June 2022). "What is Müller-Weiss syndrome, Rafa Nadal's chronic injury in his left foot?". Diario AS. Retrieved 7 June 2022. Roy, Neelabhra (13 May 2022). "What is Mueller-Weiss Syndrome, the foot injury Rafael Nadal suffers from?". www.sportskeeda.com. Archived from the original on 13 May 2022. Retrieved 5 June 2022. "Most Grand Slam singles titles defended". Guinness World Records. 14 November 2019. "Rafa's Record Career in Numbers". Roland-Garros. "With Acapulco triumph Rafael Nadal has won at least 3 consecutive titles in 9 seasons, moving further ahead of Roger Federer and Novak Djokovic". sportskeeda. 28 February 2022. "5 Rafael Nadal records you probably don't know of". sportskeeda. 22 September 2018. "Rafael Nadal has the most wins against world No. 1s on the ATP tour". sportskeeda. 28 March 2022. "Rafael Nadal beats world No. 1 18 years after doing that for the first time". tennisworldusa. 9 June 2022. The world No. 1 players who Nadal has defeated in his career are Roger Federer (13 times) and Novak Djokovic (10 times). "Historical Stats". Nitto ATP Finals. Retrieved 2 March 2022. "STAT OF THE DAY: RAFAEL NADAL REACHES 53RD MASTERS 1000 FINAL, 20TH ON HARD COURTS". tennis.com. 20 March 2022. "Rafael Nadal moves closer to his own record after 18th consecutive Masters 1000 QF". tennisworldusa. 21 May 2021. "ATP 500/CS Titles Won W/O Losing Set". Ultimate Tennis Statistics. 18 June 2022. "Most Matches Won at Single ATP 500/CS Tournament". Ultimate Tennis Statistics. 18 June 2022. "Winning Streak at Single ATP 500/CS Tournament". Ultimate Tennis Statistics. 18 June 2022. "Most Matches Played at Single ATP 500/CS Tournament". Ultimate Tennis Statistics. 18 June 2022. "Nadal Completes Career Grand Slam With US Open Title". ATP World Tour. 13 September 2010. Retrieved 28 April 2012. Clarey, Christopher (13 September 2010). "Nadal Caps Career Grand Slam". The New York Times. Retrieved 28 April 2012. Garber, Greg (13 September 2010). "Nadal's three-peat no small feat". ESPN. Retrieved 14 June 2012. [W]inning on three different surfaces in that narrow time frame is unprecedented. Tandon, Kamakshi (17 June 2011). "Nadal eyes another Channel Slam". ESPN. Retrieved 10 June 2012. Tandon, Kamakshi (24 December 2009). "What's your tennis IQ? – 2009 tennis holiday quiz". ESPN. Retrieved 18 June 2012. [Nadal's] Australian Open title made him the first man to simultaneously hold majors on clay, grass and hard courts. Zagoria, Adam (5 June 2022). "Rafael Nadal Wins 14th French Open, 22nd Major Championship To Extend Lead Over Rivals Federer, Djokovic". Forbes. Retrieved 6 June 2022. "History – Past Tournaments – 2007: Hat-trick for Nadal and Henin". RolandGarros.com. 11 September 2010. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 7 June 2012. Hodgkinson, Mark (11 September 2010). "Rafael Nadal reaches first final in New York after win over Mikhail Youzhny". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 7 June 2012. "Nadal Tops Djokovic To Break Borg's Paris Record". ATP World Tour. 11 June 2012. Retrieved 11 June 2012. Sarkar, Pritha (9 June 2012). "Djokovic faces ultimate challenge against Nadal". Reuters. Retrieved 9 June 2012. Cheese, Caroline (29 January 2012). "Australian Open: Djokovic outlasts Nadal in longest Grand Slam singles final ever". The Washington Post. Retrieved 28 April 2012. Nadal became the first man in the Open Era to lose three straight major finals. Garber, Greg (29 January 2012). "Djokovic now on the brink of history". ESPN. Retrieved 28 April 2012. [Nadal] became the first man in the Open era to lose three consecutive finals. "Longest Grand Slam First Title to Last Title". Ultimate Tennis Statistics. "Longest Grand Slam First Final to Last Final". Ultimate Tennis Statistics. "Records and milestones Rafael Nadal achieved at Australian Open 2022". sportskeeda. 31 January 2022. Retrieved 12 March 2022. "Look Back At Nadal's Four Comebacks From Two Sets Down". ATP Tour. Retrieved 21 March 2022. Bhagavatula, Manoj (12 June 2017). "Nadal's quest to reach La Décima". ESPN. Archived from the original on 18 July 2017. Retrieved 18 July 2017. "Record Breakers". Roland-Garros. Archived from the original on 10 May 2012. Retrieved 28 April 2012. Sarkar, Pritha (8 June 2012). "Djokovic, Nadal looking to become record collectors". Reuters. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "Grand Slam History". ATP World Tour. Archived from the original on 14 May 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "Djokovic: 'I lost to a better player today'". Roland-Garros. Retrieved 1 June 2022. "Rafael Nadal captures eighth French Open crown". USA Today. Associated Press. 9 June 2013. Retrieved 9 June 2013. Pells, Eddie (11 June 2012). "Rafael Nadal tops Novak Djokovic for record seventh French Open title". National Post. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 29 January 2013. Retrieved 11 June 2012. Clarey, Christopher (6 June 2005). "French Open: Nadal triumphs at first attempt". The New York Times. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "Rafael Nadal – FedEx ATP Win/Loss – ATP Tour". ATP Tour. Retrieved 21 March 2022. Macur, Juliet (8 June 2007). "Tennis: Federer vs. Nadal to meet again in French Open final". The New York Times. Retrieved 11 June 2012. "Federer ends Nadal's clay streak". BBC Sport. 20 May 2007. Retrieved 11 June 2012. "10 Things That Happened While Rafael Nadal Was Winning 52 Straight Clay-Court Semifinals". www.tennisnow.com. Retrieved 21 August 2019. "50 And Counting..." Atp Tour. ATP World Tour. Retrieved 10 May 2018. Vicki Hodges; Charlie Eccleshare (14 April 2017). "Monte Carlo Masters: Seven talking points as the clay-court swing begins in earnest". The Telegraph. "With Acapulco triumph, Rafael Nadal has won 11 finals in a row on the ATP tour". sportskeeda. 4 March 2022. "Outdoor Titles Won W/O Losing Set". Ultimate Tennis Statistics. 18 June 2022. "Clay Titles Won W/O Losing Set". Ultimate Tennis Statistics. 18 June 2022. Briggs, Simon (22 April 2012). "Rafael Nadal beats Novak Djokovic to win eighth consecutive Monte Carlo Masters title". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 23 April 2012. "Rafael Nadal – Career Highlights". ATP World Tour. Retrieved 14 June 2012. 2006 – Tied Borg with his 16th career teenage title in Rome, most in Open Era. "Nadal–Federer Head to Head". ATP Tour. Retrieved 9 June 2022. "Nadal–Djokovic Head to Head". ATP Tour. Retrieved 9 June 2022. "Rafael Nadal Clinches Year-End No. 1 ATP Ranking for Fifth Time | ATP Tour | Tennis". www.atptour.com. Retrieved 14 November 2019. Bliss, Dominic (2022). Rafa Nadal: The King of the Court. The Quarto Group. ISBN 978-0-71127-613-0. Carlin, John (2011). Rafa - Mi Historia. Indicios. ISBN 978-1-4013-1092-9. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Rafael Nadal. Wikiquote has quotations related to Rafael Nadal. Official website (in Spanish) Rafael Nadal at the Association of Tennis Professionals Rafael Nadal at the International Tennis Federation Rafael Nadal at the Davis Cup Rafael Nadal at Olympedia Rafael Nadal at Olympics.com Rafael Nadal at the Olympic games winners profile Rafael Nadal at ESPN.com Rafael Nadal at IMDb  Rafael Nadal on Instagram Rafael Nadal on Facebook