Jawaharlal Nehru (/ˈneɪru/ NAY-roo or /ˈnɛru/ NEH-roo; Hindi: [ˈdʒəʋɑːɦəɾˈlɑːl ˈneːɦɾuː] ; juh-WAH-hurr-LAHL NE-hǝ-ROO; 14 November 1889 – 27 May 1964) was an Indian anti-colonial nationalist, statesman, secular humanist, social democrat, and author who was a central figure in India during the middle of the 20th century. Nehru was a principal leader of the Indian nationalist movement in the 1930s and 1940s. Upon India's independence in 1947, he served as the country's first prime minister for 16 years. Nehru promoted parliamentary democracy, secularism, and science and technology during the 1950s, powerfully influencing India's arc as a modern nation. In international affairs, he steered India clear of the two blocs of the Cold War. A well-regarded author, his books written in prison, such as Letters from a Father to His Daughter (1929), An Autobiography (1936) and The Discovery of India (1946), have been read around the world. The son of Motilal Nehru, a prominent lawyer and Indian nationalist, Jawaharlal Nehru was educated in England—at Harrow School and Trinity College, Cambridge, and trained in the law at the Inner Temple. He became a barrister, returned to India, enrolled at the Allahabad High Court and gradually began to take an interest in national politics, which eventually became a full-time occupation. He joined the Indian National Congress, rose to become the leader of a progressive faction during the 1920s, and eventually of the Congress, receiving the support of Mahatma Gandhi who was to designate Nehru as his political heir. As Congress president in 1929, Nehru called for complete independence from the British Raj. Nehru and the Congress dominated Indian politics during the 1930s. Nehru promoted the idea of the secular nation-state in the 1937 provincial elections, allowing the Congress to sweep the elections, and to form governments in several provinces. In September 1939, the Congress ministries resigned to protest Viceroy Lord Linlithgow's decision to join the war without consulting them. After the All India Congress Committee's Quit India Resolution of 8 August 1942, senior Congress leaders were imprisoned and for a time the organisation was suppressed. Nehru, who had reluctantly heeded Gandhi's call for immediate independence, and had desired instead to support the Allied war effort during World War II, came out of a lengthy prison term to a much altered political landscape. The Muslim League, under Muhammad Ali Jinnah, had come to dominate Muslim politics in the interim. In the 1946 provincial elections, Congress won the elections but the League won all the seats reserved for Muslims, which the British interpreted to be a clear mandate for Pakistan in some form. Nehru became the interim prime minister of India in September 1946, with the League joining his government with some hesitancy in October 1946. Upon India's independence on 15 August 1947, Nehru gave a critically acclaimed speech, "Tryst with Destiny"; he was sworn in as the Dominion of India's prime minister and raised the Indian flag at the Red Fort in Delhi. On 26 January 1950, when India became a republic within the Commonwealth of Nations, Nehru became the Republic of India's first prime minister. He embarked on an ambitious program of economic, social, and political reforms. Nehru promoted a pluralistic multi-party democracy. In foreign affairs, he played a leading role in establishing Non-Aligned Movement, a group of nations that did not seek membership in the two main ideological blocs of the Cold War. Under Nehru's leadership, the Congress emerged as a catch-all party, dominating national and state-level politics and winning elections in 1951, 1957 and 1962. His premiership, spanning 16 years and 286 days—which is, to date, the longest in India—ended with his death in 1964 from a heart attack. Hailed as the "architect of Modern India", his birthday is celebrated as Children's Day in India. Jawaharlal Nehru was born on 14 November 1889 in Allahabad in British India. His father, Motilal Nehru (1861–1931), a self-made wealthy barrister who was born into to the Kashmiri Pandit community, served twice as president of the Indian National Congress, in 1919 and 1928. His mother, Swarup Rani Thussu (1868–1938), who came from a well-known Kashmiri Brahmin family settled in Lahore, was Motilal's second wife, his first having died in childbirth. Jawaharlal was the eldest of three children. The elder of his two sisters, Vijaya Lakshmi, later became the first female president of the United Nations General Assembly. His youngest sister, Krishna Hutheesing, became a noted writer and authored several books on her brother. Nehru described his childhood as a "sheltered and uneventful one". He grew up in an atmosphere of privilege in wealthy homes, including a palatial estate called the Anand Bhavan. His father had him educated at home by private governesses and tutors. Influenced by the Irish theosophist Ferdinand T. Brooks' teaching, Nehru became interested in science and theosophy. A family friend, Annie Besant subsequently initiated him into the Theosophical Society at age thirteen. However, his interest in theosophy did not prove to be enduring, and he left the society shortly after Brooks departed as his tutor. He wrote: "For nearly three years [Brooks] was with me and in many ways, he influenced me greatly". Nehru's theosophical interests induced him to study the Buddhist and Hindu scriptures. According to B. R. Nanda, these scriptures were Nehru's "first introduction to the religious and cultural heritage of [India]....[They] provided Nehru the initial impulse for [his] long intellectual quest which culminated…in The Discovery of India." Nehru became an ardent nationalist during his youth. The Second Boer War and the Russo-Japanese War intensified his feelings. Of the latter he wrote, "[The] Japanese victories [had] stirred up my enthusiasm. ...Nationalistic ideas filled my mind. ... I mused of Indian freedom and Asiatic freedom from the thraldom of Europe." Later, in 1905, when he had begun his institutional schooling at Harrow, a leading school in England where he was nicknamed "Joe", G. M. Trevelyan's Garibaldi books, which he had received as prizes for academic merit, influenced him greatly. He viewed Garibaldi as a revolutionary hero. He wrote: "Visions of similar deeds in India came before, of [my] gallant fight for [Indian] freedom and in my mind, India and Italy got strangely mixed together." Nehru went to Trinity College, Cambridge, in October 1907 and graduated with an honours degree in natural science in 1910. During this period, he studied politics, economics, history and literature with interest. The writings of Bernard Shaw, H. G. Wells, John Maynard Keynes, Bertrand Russell, Lowes Dickinson and Meredith Townsend moulded much of his political and economic thinking. After completing his degree in 1910, Nehru moved to London and studied law at the Inner Temple (one of the four Inns of Court to which English barristers must belong). During this time, he continued to study Fabian Society scholars including Beatrice Webb. He was called to the Bar in 1912. After returning to India in August 1912, Nehru enrolled as an advocate of the Allahabad High Court and tried to settle down as a barrister. But, unlike his father, he had very little interest in his profession and relished neither the practice of law nor the company of lawyers: "Decidedly the atmosphere was not intellectually stimulating and a sense of the utter insipidity of life grew upon me." His involvement in nationalist politics was to gradually replace his legal practice. Nehru had developed an interest in Indian politics during his time in Britain as a student and a barrister. Within months of his return to India in 1912, Nehru attended an annual session of the Indian National Congress in Patna. Congress in 1912 was the party of moderates and elites, and he was disconcerted by what he saw as "very much an English-knowing upper-class affair". Nehru doubted the effectiveness of Congress but agreed to work for the party in support of the Indian civil rights movement led by Mahatma Gandhi in South Africa, collecting funds for the movement in 1913. Later, he campaigned against indentured labour and other such discrimination faced by Indians in the British colonies. When World War I broke out, sympathy in India was divided. Although educated Indians "by and large took a vicarious pleasure" in seeing the British rulers humbled, the ruling upper classes sided with the Allies. Nehru confessed he viewed the war with mixed feelings. As Frank Moraes writes, "if [Nehru's] sympathy was with any country it was with France, whose culture he greatly admired". During the war, Nehru volunteered for the St. John Ambulance and worked as one of the organisation's provincial secretaries Allahabad. He also spoke out against the censorship acts passed by the British government in India. Nehru emerged from the war years as a leader whose political views were considered radical. Although the political discourse at the time had been dominated by the moderate, Gopal Krishna Gokhale, who said that it was "madness to think of independence," Nehru had spoken, "openly of the politics of non-cooperation, of the need of resigning from honorary positions under the government and of not continuing the futile politics of representation". He ridiculed the Indian Civil Service for supporting British policies. He noted someone had once defined the Indian Civil Service, "with which we are unfortunately still afflicted in this country, as neither Indian, nor civil, nor a service". Motilal Nehru, a prominent moderate leader, acknowledged the limits of constitutional agitation but counselled his son that there was no other "practical alternative" to it. Nehru, however, was dissatisfied with the pace of the national movement. He became involved with aggressive nationalists leaders demanding Home Rule for Indians. The influence of moderates on Congress' politics waned after Gokhale died in 1915. Anti-moderate leaders like Annie Besant and Bal Gangadhar Tilak took the opportunity to call for a national movement for Home Rule. However, in 1915, the proposal was rejected because of the reluctance of the moderates to commit to such a radical course of action. Nehru married Kamala Kaul in 1916. Their only daughter Indira was born a year later in 1917. Kamala gave birth to a boy in November 1924, but he lived for only a week. Nevertheless, Besant formed a league for advocating Home Rule in 1916. Tilak, after releasing from a term in prison, had formed his own league in April 1916. Nehru joined both leagues, but worked primarily for the former. He remarked later that "[Besant] had a very powerful influence on me in my childhood  ... even later when I entered political life her influence continued." Another development that brought about a radical change in Indian politics was the espousal of Hindu-Muslim unity with the Lucknow Pact at the annual meeting of the Congress in December 1916. The pact had been initiated earlier in the year at Allahabad at a meeting of the All India Congress Committee, which was held at the Nehru residence at Anand Bhawan. Nehru welcomed and encouraged the rapprochement between the two Indian communities. Several nationalist leaders banded together in 1916 under the leadership of Annie Besant to voice a demand for self-governance, and to obtain the status of a Dominion within the British Empire as enjoyed at the time by Australia, Canada, South Africa, New Zealand and Newfoundland. Nehru joined the movement and rose to become secretary of Besant's Home Rule League. In June 1917, the British government arrested and interned Besant. The Congress and other Indian organisations threatened to launch protests if she was not freed. Subsequently, the British government was forced to release Besant and make significant concessions after a period of intense protest. Nehru's first big national involvement came at the onset of the non-co-operation movement in 1920. He led the movement in the United Provinces (now Uttar Pradesh). Nehru was arrested on charges of anti-governmental activities in 1921 and released a few months later. In the rift that formed within the Congress following Gandhi's sudden halting of the non-Cooperation movement after the Chauri Chaura incident, Nehru remained loyal to him and did not join the Swaraj Party formed by his father Motilal Nehru and CR Das. In 1923, Nehru was imprisoned in Nabha, a princely state, when he went there to see the struggle that was being waged by the Sikhs against the corrupt Mahants. He was released after his sentence was unconditonally suspended by the British administration under the criminal procedure code. Nehru played a leading role in the development of the internationalist outlook of the Indian independence struggle. He sought foreign allies for India and forged links with movements for independence and democracy around the world. In 1927, his efforts paid off, and the Congress was invited to attend the Congress of oppressed nationalities in Brussels, Belgium. The meeting was called to coordinate and plan a common struggle against imperialism. Nehru represented India and was elected to the Executive Council of the League against Imperialism which was born at this meeting. Increasingly, Nehru saw the struggle for independence from British imperialism as a multinational effort by the various colonies and dominions of the Empire; some of his statements on this matter, however, were interpreted as complicity with the rise of Hitler and his espoused intentions. Faced with these allegations, Nehru responded: We have sympathy for the national movement of Arabs in Palestine because it is directed against British Imperialism. Our sympathies cannot be weakened by the fact that the national movement coincides with Hitler's interests. Nehru drafted the policies of the Congress and a future Indian nation in 1929. He declared the aims of the congress were freedom of religion; right to form associations; freedom of expression of thought; equality before the law for every individual without distinction of caste, colour, creed, or religion; protection of regional languages and cultures, safeguarding the interests of the peasants and labour; abolition of untouchability; introduction of the adult franchise; imposition of prohibition, nationalisation of industries; socialism; and the establishment of a secular India. All these aims formed the core of the "Fundamental Rights and Economic Policy" resolution drafted by Nehru in 1929–1931 and were ratified in 1931 by the Congress party session at Karachi chaired by Vallabhbhai Patel. Nehru was one of the first leaders to demand that the Congress Party should resolve to make a complete and explicit break from all ties with the British Empire. The Madras session of Congress in 1927, approved his resolution for independence despite Gandhi's criticism. At that time, he formed the Independence for India League, a pressure group within the Congress. In 1928, Gandhi agreed to Nehru's demands and proposed a resolution that called for the British to grant Dominion status to India within two years. If the British failed to meet the deadline, the Congress would call upon all Indians to fight for complete independence. Nehru was one of the leaders who objected to the time given to the British—he pressed Gandhi to demand immediate actions from the British. Gandhi brokered a further compromise by reducing the time given from two years to one. The British rejected demands for Dominion status in 1929. Nehru assumed the presidency of the Congress party during the Lahore session on 29 December 1929 and introduced a successful resolution calling for complete independence. Nehru drafted the Indian Declaration of Independence, which stated: We believe that it is the inalienable right of the Indian people, as of any other people, to have freedom and to enjoy the fruits of their toil and have the necessities of life, so that they may have full opportunities for growth. We believe also that if any government deprives a people of these rights and oppresses them the people have a further right to alter it or abolish it. The British government in India has not only deprived the Indian people of their freedom but has based itself on the exploitation of the masses, and has ruined India economically, politically, culturally, and spiritually. We believe, therefore, that India must sever the British connection and attain Purna Swaraj or complete independence. At midnight on New Year's Eve 1929, Nehru hoisted the tricolour flag of India upon the banks of the Ravi in Lahore. A pledge of independence was read out, which included a readiness to withhold taxes. The massive gathering of the public attending the ceremony was asked if they agreed with it, and the majority of people were witnessed raising their hands in approval. 172 Indian members of central and provincial legislatures resigned in support of the resolution and in accordance with Indian public sentiment. The Congress asked the people of India to observe 26 January as Independence Day. Congress volunteers, nationalists, and the public hoisted the flag of India publicly across India. Plans for mass civil disobedience were also underway. After the Lahore session of the Congress in 1929, Nehru gradually emerged as the paramount leader of the Indian independence movement. Gandhi stepped back into a more spiritual role. Although Gandhi did not explicitly designate Nehru as his political heir until 1942, as early as the mid-1930s, the country saw Nehru as the natural successor to Gandhi. Nehru and most of the Congress leaders were ambivalent initially about Gandhi's plan to begin civil disobedience with a satyagraha aimed at the British salt tax. After the protest had gathered steam, they realised the power of salt as a symbol. Nehru remarked about the unprecedented popular response, "It seemed as though a spring had been suddenly released". He was arrested on 14 April 1930 while on a train from Allahabad to Raipur. Earlier, after addressing a huge meeting and leading a vast procession, he had ceremoniously manufactured some contraband salt. He was charged with breach of the salt law and sentenced to six months of imprisonment at Central Jail. He nominated Gandhi to succeed him as the Congress president during his absence in jail, but Gandhi declined, and Nehru nominated his father as his successor. With Nehru's arrest, the civil disobedience acquired a new tempo, and arrests, firing on crowds and lathi charges grew to be ordinary occurrences. The salt satyagraha ("pressure for reform through passive resistance") succeeded in attracting world attention. Indian, British, and world opinion increasingly recognised the legitimacy of the claims by the Congress party for independence. Nehru considered the salt satyagraha the high-water mark of his association with Gandhi, and felt its lasting importance was in changing the attitudes of Indians: Of course these movements exercised tremendous pressure on the British Government and shook the government machinery. But the real importance, to my mind, lay in the effect they had on our own people, and especially the village masses. ... Non-cooperation dragged them out of the mire and gave them self-respect and self-reliance. ... They acted courageously and did not submit so easily to unjust oppression; their outlook widened and they began to think a little in terms of India as a whole. ... It was a remarkable transformation and the Congress, under Gandhi's leadership, must have the credit for it. Nehru's trip to Europe in 1936 happened to be the turning point in his political and economic mindset. The visit sparked his interest in Marxism and his socialist thought pattern. Time later spent incarcerated enabled him to research Marxism more deeply. Appealed by its ideas but repelled by some of its tactics, he never completely agreed with Karl Marx's ideas. However, from that time on, the benchmark of his economic view remained Marxist, adapted, where necessary, to Indian circumstances. Nehru spent the early months of 1936 in Switzerland visiting his ailing wife in Lausanne, where she died in March. While in Europe, he became very concerned with the possibility of another world war. At that time, he emphasised that, in the event of war, India's place was alongside the democracies, though he insisted India could only fight in support of Great Britain and France as a free country. At its 1936 Lucknow session, despite opposition from the newly elected Nehru as the party president, the Congress party agreed to contest the provincial elections to be held in 1937 under the Government of India Act 1935. The elections brought the Congress party to power in a majority of the provinces with increased popularity and power for Nehru. Since the Muslim League under Muhammad Ali Jinnah (who was to become the creator of Pakistan) had fared badly at the polls, Nehru declared that the only two parties that mattered in India were the British colonial authorities and the Congress. Jinnah's statements that the Muslim League was the third and "equal partner" within Indian politics were widely rejected. In the 1930s, under the leadership of Jayaprakash Narayan, Narendra Deo, and others, the Congress Socialist Party group was formed within the INC. Though Nehru never joined the group, he acted as a bridge between them and Gandhi. He had the support of left-wing Congressmen Maulana Azad and Subhas Chandra Bose. The trio combined to oust Rajendra Prasad as the Congress president in 1936. Nehru was elected in his place and held the presidency for two years (1936–37). His socialist colleagues Bose (1938–39) and Azad (1940–46) succeeded him. During Nehru's second term as general secretary of the Congress, he proposed certain resolutions concerning the foreign policy of India. From then on, he was given carte blanche ("blank cheque") in framing the foreign policy of any future Indian nation. Nehru worked closely with Bose in developing good relations with governments of free countries all over the world. Nehru was one of the first nationalist leaders to realise the sufferings of the people in the states ruled by Indian princes. The nationalist movement had been confined to the territories under direct British rule. He helped to make the struggle of the people in the princely states a part of the nationalist movement for independence. Nehru was also given the responsibility of planning the economy of a future India and appointed the National Planning Commission in 1938 to help frame such policies. However, many of the plans framed by Nehru and his colleagues would come undone with the unexpected partition of India in 1947. The All India States Peoples Conference (AISPC) was formed in 1927 and Nehru, who had supported the cause of the people of the princely states for many years, was made the organisation's president in 1939. He opened up its ranks to membership from across the political spectrum. AISPC was to play an important role during the political integration of India, helping Indian leaders Vallabhbhai Patel and V. P. Menon (to whom Nehru had delegated integrating the princely states into India) negotiate with hundreds of princes. When World War II began, Viceroy Linlithgow unilaterally declared India a belligerent on the side of Britain, without consulting the elected Indian representatives. Nehru hurried back from a visit to China, announcing that, in a conflict between democracy and fascism, "our sympathies must inevitably be on the side of democracy, ... I should like India to play its full part and throw all her resources into the struggle for a new order". After much deliberation, the Congress under Nehru informed the government that it would co-operate with the British but on certain conditions. First, Britain must give an assurance of full independence for India after the war and allow the election of a constituent assembly to frame a new constitution; second, although the Indian armed forces would remain under the British Commander-in-chief, Indians must be included immediately in the central government and given a chance to share power and responsibility. When Nehru presented Lord Linlithgow with these demands, he chose to reject them. A deadlock was reached: "The same old game is played again," Nehru wrote bitterly to Gandhi, "the background is the same, the various epithets are the same and the actors are the same and the results must be the same". On 23 October 1939, the Congress condemned the Viceroy's attitude and called upon the Congress ministries in the various provinces to resign in protest. Before this crucial announcement, Nehru urged Jinnah and the Muslim League to join the protest, but Jinnah declined. As Nehru had firmly placed India on the path of democracy and freedom at a time when the world was under the threat of Fascism, he and Bose split in the late 1930s when the latter agreed to seek the help of Fascists in driving the British out of India. At the same time, Nehru supported the Republicans who were fighting against Francisco Franco's forces in the Spanish Civil War. Nehru and his aide V. K. Krishna Menon visited Spain and declared support for the Republicans. When Benito Mussolini, dictator of Italy, expressed his desire to meet, Nehru refused him. In March 1940, Muhammad Ali Jinnah passed what came to be known as the Pakistan Resolution, declaring that, "Muslims are a nation according to any definition of a nation, and they must have their homelands, their territory and their State." This state was to be known as Pakistan, meaning 'Land of the Pure'. Nehru angrily declared that "all the old problems ... pale into insignificance before the latest stand taken by the Muslim League leader in Lahore". Linlithgow made Nehru an offer on 8 October 1940, which stated that Dominion status for India was the objective of the British government. However, it referred neither to a date nor a method to accomplish this. Only Jinnah received something more precise: "The British would not contemplate transferring power to a Congress-dominated national government, the authority of which was denied by various elements in India's national life". In October 1940, Gandhi and Nehru, abandoning their original stand of supporting Britain, decided to launch a limited civil disobedience campaign in which leading advocates of Indian independence were selected to participate one by one. Nehru was arrested and sentenced to four years imprisonment. On 15 January 1941, Gandhi stated: Some say Jawaharlal and I were estranged. It will require much more than a difference of opinion to estrange us. We had differences from the time we became co-workers and yet I have said for some years and say so now that not Rajaji but Jawaharlal will be my successor. After spending a little more than a year in jail, Nehru was released, along with other Congress prisoners, three days before the bombing of Pearl Harbor in Hawaii. When the Japanese carried their attack through Burma (now Myanmar) to the borders of India in the spring of 1942, the British government, faced with this new military threat, decided to make some overtures to India, as Nehru had originally desired. Prime Minister Winston Churchill dispatched Sir Stafford Cripps, a member of the War Cabinet who was known to be politically close to Nehru and knew Jinnah, with proposals for a settlement of the constitutional problem. As soon as he arrived, he discovered that India was more deeply divided than he had imagined. Nehru, eager for a compromise, was hopeful; Gandhi was not. Jinnah had continued opposing the Congress: "Pakistan is our only demand, and by God, we will have it," he declared in the Muslim League newspaper Dawn. Cripps' mission failed as Gandhi would accept nothing less than independence. Relations between Nehru and Gandhi cooled over the latter's refusal to co-operate with Cripps, but the two later reconciled. In 1942, Gandhi called on the British to leave India; Nehru, though reluctant to embarrass the allied war effort, had no alternative but to join Gandhi. Following the Quit India resolution passed by the Congress party in Bombay on 8 August 1942, the entire Congress working committee, including Gandhi and Nehru, was arrested and imprisoned. Most of the Congress working committee including Nehru, Abdul Kalam Azad, and Sardar Patel were incarcerated at the Ahmednagar Fort until 15 June 1945. During the period when all the Congress leaders were in jail, the Muslim League under Jinnah grew in power. In April 1943, the League captured the governments of Bengal and, a month later, that of the North-West Frontier Province. In none of these provinces had the League previously had a majority—only the arrest of Congress members made it possible. With all the Muslim-dominated provinces except Punjab under Jinnah's control, the concept of a separate Muslim State was turning into a reality. However, by 1944, Jinnah's power and prestige were waning. A general sympathy towards the jailed Congress leaders was developing among Muslims, and much of the blame for the disastrous Bengal famine of 1943–44 during which two million died had been laid on the shoulders of the province's Muslim League government. The numbers at Jinnah's meetings, once counted in thousands, soon numbered only a few hundred. In despair, Jinnah left the political scene for a stay in Kashmir. His prestige was restored unwittingly by Gandhi, who had been released from prison on medical grounds in May 1944 and had met Jinnah in Bombay in September. There, he offered the Muslim leader a plebiscite in the Muslim areas after the war to see whether they wanted to separate from the rest of India. Essentially, it was an acceptance of the principle of Pakistan—but not in so many words. Jinnah demanded that the exact words be used. Gandhi refused and the talks broke down. Jinnah, however, had greatly strengthened his own position and that of the League. The most influential member of the Congress had been seen to negotiate with him on equal terms. Nehru and his colleagues were released prior to the arrival of the British 1946 Cabinet Mission to India to propose plans for the transfer of power. The agreed plan in 1946 led to elections to the provincial assemblies. In turn, the members of the assemblies elected members of the Constituent Assembly. Congress won the majority of seats in the assembly and headed the interim government, with Nehru as the prime minister. The Muslim League joined the government later with Liaquat Ali Khan as the Finance member. Nehru served as prime minister for 16 years, initially as the interim prime minister, then from 1947 as the prime minister of the Dominion of India and then from 1950 as the prime minister of the Republic of India. In July 1946, Nehru pointedly observed that no princely state could prevail militarily against the army of independent India. In January 1947, he said that independent India would not accept the divine right of kings. In May 1947, he declared that any princely state which refused to join the Constituent Assembly would be treated as an enemy state. Vallabhbhai Patel and V. P. Menon were more conciliatory towards the princes, and as the men charged with integrating the states, were successful in the task. During the drafting of the Indian constitution, many Indian leaders (except Nehru) were in favour of allowing each princely state or covenanting state to be independent as a federal state along the lines suggested originally by the Government of India Act 1935. But as the drafting of the constitution progressed, and the idea of forming a republic took concrete shape, it was decided that all the princely states/covenanting states would merge with the Indian republic. In 1963, Nehru brought in legislation making it illegal to demand secession and introduced the Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution which makes it necessary for those running for office to take an oath that says "I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India". The period before independence in early 1947 was impaired by outbreaks of communal violence and political disorder, and the opposition of the Muslim League led by Muhammad Ali Jinnah, who were demanding a separate Muslim state of Pakistan. He took office as the prime minister of India on 15 August and delivered his inaugural address titled "Tryst with Destiny". Long years ago we made a tryst with destiny, and now the time comes when we shall redeem our pledge, not wholly or in full measure, but very substantially. At the stroke of the midnight hour, when the world sleeps, India will awake to life and freedom. A moment comes, which comes but rarely in history when we step out from the old to the new when an age ends, and when the soul of a nation, long suppressed, finds utterance. It is fitting that at this solemn moment we take the pledge of dedication to the service of India and her people and to the still larger cause of humanity. On 30 January 1948, Gandhi was shot while he was walking in the garden of Birla House on his way to address a prayer meeting. The assassin, Nathuram Godse, was a Hindu nationalist with links to the extremist Hindu Mahasabha party, who held Gandhi responsible for weakening India by insisting upon a payment to Pakistan. Nehru addressed the nation by radio: Friends and comrades, the light has gone out of our lives, and there is darkness everywhere, and I do not quite know what to tell you or how to say it. Our beloved leader, Bapu as we called him, the father of the nation, is no more. Perhaps I am wrong to say that; nevertheless, we will not see him again, as we have seen him for these many years, we will not run to him for advice or seek solace from him, and that is a terrible blow, not only for me but for millions and millions in this country. Yasmin Khan argued that Gandhi's death and funeral helped consolidate the authority of the new Indian state under Nehru and Patel. The Congress tightly controlled the epic public displays of grief over a two-week period—the funeral, mortuary rituals and distribution of the martyr's ashes with millions participating in different events. The goal was to assert the power of the government, legitimise the Congress party's control and suppress all religious paramilitary groups. Nehru and Patel suppressed the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), the Muslim National Guards, and the Khaksars, with some 200,000 arrests. Gandhi's death and funeral linked the distant state with the Indian people and helped them to understand the need to suppress religious parties during the transition to independence for the Indian people. In later years, there emerged a revisionist school of history which sought to blame Nehru for the partition of India, mostly referring to his highly centralised policies for an independent India in 1947, which Jinnah opposed in favour of a more decentralised India. The British Indian Empire, which included present-day India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh, was divided into two types of territories: the provinces of British India, which were governed directly by British officials responsible to the Viceroy of India; and princely states, under the rule of local hereditary rulers who recognised British suzerainty in return for local autonomy, in most cases as established by a treaty. Between 1947 and about 1950, the territories of the princely states were politically integrated into the Indian Union under Nehru and Sardar Patel. Most were merged into existing provinces; others were organised into new provinces, such as Rajputana, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Bharat, and Vindhya Pradesh, made up of multiple princely states; a few, including Mysore, Hyderabad, Bhopal and Bilaspur, became separate provinces. The Government of India Act 1935 remained the constitutional law of India the pending adoption of a new Constitution. In December 1946, Nehru moved the Objectives Resolution. This resolution, upon Nehru's suggestion, ultimately turned into the Preamble to the Constitution of India. The preamble is considered to be the spirit of the constitution. The new Constitution of India, which came into force on 26 January 1950 (Republic Day), made India a sovereign democratic republic. The new republic was declared to be a "Union of States". After the adoption of the constitution on 26 November 1949, the Constituent Assembly continued to act as the interim parliament until new elections. Nehru's interim cabinet consisted of 15 members from diverse communities and parties. The first elections to Indian legislative bodies (National parliament and State assemblies ) under the new constitution of India were held in 1952. The Congress party under Nehru's leadership won a large majority at both state and national levels. In December 1953, Nehru appointed the States Reorganisation Commission to prepare for the creation of states on linguistic lines. Headed by Justice Fazal Ali, the commission itself was also known as the Fazal Ali Commission. Govind Ballabh Pant, who served as Nehru's home minister from December 1954, oversaw the commission's efforts. The commission created a report in 1955 recommending the reorganisation of India's states. Under the Seventh Amendment, the existing distinction between Part A, Part B, Part C, and Part D states was abolished. The distinction between Part A and Part B states was removed, becoming known simply as states'. A new type of entity, the union territory, replaced the classification as a Part C or Part D state. Nehru stressed commonality among Indians and promoted pan-Indianism, refusing to reorganise states on either religious or ethnic lines. In the 1957 elections, under Nehru's leadership, the Indian National Congress easily won a second term in power, taking 371 of the 494 seats. They gained an extra seven seats (the size of the Lok Sabha had been increased by five) and their vote share increased from 45.0% to 47.8%. The INC won nearly five times more votes than the Communist Party, the second-largest party. In 1962, Nehru led the Congress to victory with a diminished majority. The numbers who voted for the Communist and socialist parties grew, although some right-wing groups like Bharatiya Jana Sangh also did well. After years of failed negotiations, Krishna Menon ordered the Indian Army to invade Portuguese-controlled Portuguese India (Goa) in 1961, after which Nehru formally annexed it to India. It increased the popularity of both in India, but he was criticised by the communist opposition in India for the use of military force. From 1959, in a process that accelerated in 1961, Nehru adopted the "Forward Policy" of setting up military outposts in disputed areas of the Sino-Indian border, including 43 outposts in territory not previously controlled by India. China attacked some of these outposts, and the Sino-Indian War began, which India lost. The war ended with China announcing a unilateral ceasefire and with its forces withdrawing to 20 kilometers behind the line of actual control of 1959. The war exposed the unpreparedness of India's military, which could send only 14,000 troops to the war zone in opposition to the much larger Chinese Army, and Nehru was widely criticised for his government's insufficient attention to defence. In response, defence minister V. K. Krishna Menon resigned and Nehru sought US military aid. Nehru's improved relations with the US under John F. Kennedy proved useful during the war, as in 1962, the president of Pakistan (then closely aligned with the Americans) Ayub Khan was made to guarantee his neutrality regarding India, threatened by "communist aggression from Red China". India's relationship with the Soviet Union, criticised by right-wing groups supporting free-market policies, was also seemingly validated. Nehru would continue to maintain his commitment to the non-aligned movement, despite calls from some to settle down on one permanent ally. The unpreparedness of the army was blamed on Defence Minister Menon, who "resigned" from his government post to allow for someone who might modernise India's military further. India's policy of weaponisation using indigenous sources and self-sufficiency began in earnest under Nehru, completed by his daughter Indira Gandhi, who later led India to a crushing military victory over rival Pakistan in 1971. Toward the end of the war, India had increased her support for Tibetan refugees and revolutionaries, some of them having settled in India, as they were fighting the same common enemy in the region. Nehru ordered the raising of an elite Indian-trained "Tibetan Armed Force" composed of Tibetan refugees, which served with distinction in future wars against Pakistan in 1965 and 1971. To date, Nehru is considered the most popular prime minister winning three consecutive elections with around 45% of the vote. A Pathé News archive video reporting Nehru's death remarks "Neither on the political stage nor in moral stature was his leadership ever challenged". In his book Verdicts on Nehru, Ramachandra Guha cited a contemporary account that described what Nehru's 1951–52 Indian general election campaign looked like: Almost at every place, city, town, village or wayside halt, people had waited overnight to welcome the nation's leader. Schools and shops closed; milkmaids and cowherds had taken a holiday; the kisan and his helpmate took a temporary respite from their dawn-to-dusk programme of hard work in field and home. In Nehru's name, stocks of soda and lemonade sold out; even water became scarce . . . Special trains were run from out-of-the-way places to carry people to Nehru's meetings, enthusiasts travelling not only on footboards but also on top of carriages. Scores of people fainted in milling crowds. In the 1950s, Nehru was admired by world leaders such as British prime minister Winston Churchill, and US President Dwight D. Eisenhower. A letter from Eisenhower to Nehru, dated 27 November 1958, read: Universally you are recognised as one of the most powerful influences for peace and conciliation in the world. I believe that because you are a world leader for peace in your individual capacity, as well as a representative of the largest neutral nation.... In 1955, Churchill called Nehru, the light of Asia, and a greater light than Gautama Buddha. Nehru is time and again described as a charismatic leader with a rare charm. According to Bhikhu Parekh, Nehru can be regarded as the founder of the modern Indian state. Parekh attributes this to the national philosophy Nehru formulated for India. For him, modernisation was the national philosophy, with seven goals: national unity, parliamentary democracy, industrialisation, socialism, development of the scientific temper, and non-alignment. In Parekh's opinion, the philosophy and the policies that resulted from this benefited a large section of society such as public sector workers, industrial houses, and middle and upper peasantry. However, it failed to benefit the urban and rural poor, the unemployed and the Hindu fundamentalists. Nehru is credited with having prevented civil wars in India. Nehru convincingly succeeded in secularism and religious harmony, increasing the representation of minorities in government. Nehru implemented policies based on import substitution industrialisation and advocated a mixed economy where the government-controlled public sector would co-exist with the private sector. He believed the establishment of basic and heavy industry was fundamental to the development and modernisation of the Indian economy. The government, therefore, directed investment primarily into key public sector industries—steel, iron, coal, and power—promoting their development with subsidies and protectionist policies. The policy of non-alignment during the Cold War meant that Nehru received financial and technical support from both power blocs in building India's industrial base from scratch. Steel mill complexes were built at Bokaro and Rourkela with assistance from the Soviet Union and West Germany. There was substantial industrial development. The industry grew 7.0% annually between 1950 and 1965—almost trebling industrial output and making India the world's seventh-largest industrial country. Nehru's critics, however, contended that India's import substitution industrialisation, which continued long after the Nehru era, weakened the international competitiveness of its manufacturing industries. India's share of world trade fell from 1.4% in 1951–1960 to 0.5% between 1981 and 1990. However, India's export performance is argued to have shown actual sustained improvement over the period. The volume of exports grew at an annual rate of 2.9% in 1951–1960 to 7.6% in 1971–1980. GDP and GNP grew 3.9 and 4.0% annually between 1950 and 1951 and 1964–1965. It was a radical break from the British colonial period, but the growth rates were considered anaemic at best compared to other industrial powers in Europe and East Asia. India lagged behind the miracle economies (Japan, West Germany, France, and Italy). State planning, controls, and regulations were argued to have impaired economic growth. While India's economy grew faster than both the United Kingdom and the United States, low initial income and rapid population increase meant that growth was inadequate for any sort of catch-up with rich income nations. Under Nehru's leadership, the government attempted to develop India quickly by embarking on agrarian reform and rapid industrialisation. A successful land reform was introduced that abolished giant landholdings, but efforts to redistribute land by placing limits on landownership failed. Attempts to introduce large-scale cooperative farming were frustrated by landowning rural elites, who formed the core of the powerful right-wing of the Congress and had considerable political support in opposing Nehru's efforts. Agricultural production expanded until the early 1960s, as additional land was brought under cultivation and some irrigation projects began to have an effect. The establishment of agricultural universities, modelled after land-grant colleges in the United States, contributed to the development of the economy. These universities worked with high-yielding varieties of wheat and rice, initially developed in Mexico and the Philippines, that in the 1960s began the Green Revolution, an effort to diversify and increase crop production. At the same time, a series of failed monsoons would cause serious food shortages, despite the steady progress and an increase in agricultural production. Nehru was a passionate advocate of education for India's children and youth, believing it essential for India's future progress. His government oversaw the establishment of many institutions of higher learning, including the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, the Indian Institutes of Technology, the Indian Institutes of Management and the National Institutes of Technology. Nehru also outlined a commitment in his five-year plans to guarantee free and compulsory primary education to all of India's children. For this purpose, Nehru oversaw the creation of mass village enrolment programs and the construction of thousands of schools. Nehru also launched initiatives such as the provision of free milk and meals to children to fight malnutrition. Adult education centres and vocational and technical schools were also organised for adults, especially in the rural areas. Under Nehru, the Indian Parliament enacted many changes to Hindu law through the Hindu code bills to criminalise caste discrimination and increase the legal rights and social freedoms of women. The Nehru administration saw such codification as necessary to unify the Hindu community, which ideally would be a first step towards unifying the nation. They succeeded in passing four Hindu code bills in 1955–56: the Hindu Marriage Act, Hindu Succession Act, Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, and Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act. Those who practise Sikhism, Jainism, and Buddhism are categorised as Hindus under the jurisdiction of the Code Bill. Nehru specifically wrote Article 44 of the Indian constitution under the Directive Principles of State Policy which states: "The State shall endeavor to secure for the citizens a uniform civil code throughout the territory of India." The article has formed the basis of secularism in India. However, Nehru has been criticised for the inconsistent application of the law. Most notably, he allowed Muslims to keep their personal law in matters relating to marriage and inheritance. In the small state of Goa, a civil code based on the old Portuguese Family Laws was allowed to continue, and Nehru prohibited Muslim personal law. This resulted from the annexation of Goa in 1961 by India, when Nehru promised the people that their laws would be left intact. This has led to accusations of selective secularism. While Nehru exempted Muslim law from legislation and they remained unreformed, he passed the Special Marriage Act in 1954. The idea behind this act was to give everyone in India the ability to marry outside the personal law under a civil marriage. In many respects, the act was almost identical to the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, demonstrating how secularised the law regarding Hindus had become. The Special Marriage Act allowed Muslims to marry under it and keep the protections, generally beneficial to Muslim women, that could not be found in the personal law. Under the act, polygamy was illegal, and inheritance and succession would be governed by the Indian Succession Act, rather than the respective Muslim personal law. Divorce would be governed by secular law, and maintenance of a divorced wife would be along the lines set down in civil law. Nehru led the faction of the Congress party, which promoted Hindi as the lingua franca of the Indian nation. After an exhaustive and divisive debate with the non-Hindi speakers, Hindi was adopted as the official language of India in 1950, with English continuing as an associate official language for 15 years, after which Hindi would become the sole official language. Efforts by the Indian Government to make Hindi the sole official language after 1965 were unacceptable to many non-Hindi Indian states, which wanted the continued use of English. The Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK), a descendant of Dravidar Kazhagam, led the opposition to Hindi. To allay their fears, Nehru enacted the Official Languages Act in 1963 to ensure the continuing use of English beyond 1965. The text of the Act did not satisfy the DMK and increased their scepticism that future administrations might not honour his assurances. Throughout his long tenure as the prime minister, Nehru also held the portfolio of External Affairs. His idealistic approach focused on giving India a leadership position in nonalignment. He sought to build support among the newly independent nations of Asia and Africa in opposition to the two hostile superpowers contesting the Cold War. After independence, Nehru wanted to maintain good relations with Britain and other British Commonwealth countries. As prime minister of the Dominion of India, he acquiesced only after Krishna Menon's redrafting of the 1949 London Declaration, under which India agreed to remain within the Commonwealth of Nations after becoming a republic in January 1950, and to recognise the British monarch as a "symbol of the free association of its independent member nations and as such the Head of the Commonwealth". The other nations of the Commonwealth recognised India's continuing membership of the association. On the international scene, Nehru was an opponent of military action and military alliances. He was a strong supporter of the United Nations, except when it tried to resolve the Kashmir question. He pioneered the policy of non-alignment and co-founded the Non-Aligned Movement of nations professing neutrality between the rival blocs of nations led by the US and the USSR. The term "non-alignment" was coined earlier by V. K. Krishna Menon at the United Nations in 1953-54. India recognised the People's Republic of China soon after its founding (while most of the Western bloc continued relations with Taiwan). Nehru argued for its inclusion in the United Nations and refused to brand the Chinese as the aggressors in the west's conflict with Korea. He sought to establish warm and friendly relations with China in 1950 and hoped to act as an intermediary to bridge the gulf and tensions between the communist states and the Western bloc. Nehru was a key organiser of the Bandung Conference of April 1955, which brought 29 newly independent nations together from Asia and Africa, and was designed to galvanise the nonalignment movement under Nehru's leadership. He envisioned it as his key leadership opportunity on the world stage, where he would bring together emerging nations. He was one of the key participants of the 1st Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement in 1961 in Belgrade, FPR Yugoslavia. While averse to war, Nehru led the campaigns against Pakistan in Kashmir. He used military force to annex Hyderabad in 1948 and Goa in 1961. While laying the foundation stone of the National Defence Academy in 1949, he stated: We, who for generations had talked about and attempted in everything a peaceful way and practised non-violence, should now be, in a sense, glorifying our army, navy and air force. It means a lot. Though it is odd, yet it simply reflects the oddness of life. Though life is logical, we have to face all contingencies, and unless we are prepared to face them, we will go under. There was no greater prince of peace and apostle of non-violence than Mahatma Gandhi...but yet, he said it was better to take the sword than to surrender, fail or run away. We cannot live carefree assuming that we are safe. Human nature is such. We cannot take the risks and risk our hard-won freedom. We have to be prepared with all modern defence methods and a well-equipped army, navy, and air force." Nehru entrusted Homi J. Bhabha, a nuclear physicist, with complete authority over all nuclear-related affairs and programs and answerable only to the prime minister. Many hailed Nehru for working to defuse global tensions and the threat of nuclear weapons after the Korean War (1950–1953). He commissioned the first study of the effects of nuclear explosions on human health and campaigned ceaselessly for the abolition of what he called "these frightful engines of destruction". He also had pragmatic reasons for promoting de-nuclearization, fearing a nuclear arms race would lead to over-militarisation that would be unaffordable for developing countries such as his own. At Lord Mountbatten's urging, in 1948, Nehru had promised to hold a plebiscite in Kashmir under the auspices of the UN. Kashmir was a disputed territory between India and Pakistan, the two have gone to war over it in 1947. However, as Pakistan failed to pull back troops in accordance with the UN resolution, and as Nehru grew increasingly wary of the UN, he declined to hold a plebiscite in 1953. His policies on Kashmir and the integration of the state into India were frequently defended before the United Nations by his aide, V. K. Krishna Menon, who earned a reputation in India for his passionate speeches. In 1953, Nehru orchestrated the ouster and arrest of Sheikh Abdullah, the prime minister of Kashmir, whom he had previously supported but was now suspected of harbouring separatist ambitions; Bakshi Ghulam Mohammad replaced him. Menon was instructed to deliver an unprecedented eight-hour speech defending India's stand on Kashmir in 1957; to date, the speech is the longest ever delivered in the United Nations Security Council, covering five hours of the 762nd meeting on 23 January, and two hours and forty-eight minutes on the 24th, reportedly concluding with Menon's collapse on the Security Council floor. During the filibuster, Nehru moved swiftly and successfully to consolidate Indian power in Kashmir (then under great unrest). Menon's passionate defence of Indian sovereignty in Kashmir enlarged his base of support in India and led to the Indian press temporarily dubbing him the "Hero of Kashmir". Nehru was then at the peak of his popularity in India; the only (minor) criticism came from the far right. In 1954, Nehru signed with China the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, known in India as the Panchsheel (from the Sanskrit words, panch: five, sheel: virtues), a set of principles to govern relations between the two states. Their first formal codification in treaty form was in an agreement between China and India in 1954, which recognised Chinese sovereignty over Tibet. They were enunciated in the preamble to the "Agreement (with the exchange of notes) on Trade and Intercourse between Tibet Region of China and India", which was signed at Peking on 29 April 1954. Negotiations took place in Delhi from December 1953 to April 1954 between the Delegation of the People's Republic of China (PRC) Government and the Delegation of the Indian Government on the relations between the two countries regarding the disputed territories of Aksai Chin and South Tibet. By 1957, Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai had also persuaded Nehru to accept the Chinese position on Tibet, thus depriving Tibet of a possible ally, and of the possibility of receiving military aid from India. The treaty was disregarded in the 1960s, but in the 1970s, the Five Principles again came to be seen as important in China–India relations, and more generally as norms of relations between states. They became widely recognised and accepted throughout the region during the premiership of Indira Gandhi and the three-year rule of the Janata Party (1977–1980). Although the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence were the basis of the 1954 Sino-Indian border treaty, in later years, Nehru's foreign policy suffered from increasing Chinese assertiveness over border disputes and his decision to grant asylum to the 14th Dalai Lama. In 1956, Nehru criticised the joint invasion of the Suez Canal by the British, French, and Israelis. His role, both as Indian prime minister and a leader of the Non-Aligned Movement, was significant; he tried to be even-handed between the two sides while vigorously denouncing Anthony Eden and co-sponsors of the invasion. Nehru had a powerful ally in the US President Dwight Eisenhower who, if relatively silent publicly, went to the extent of using America's clout at the International Monetary Fund to make Britain and France back down. During the Suez crisis, Nehru's right-hand man, Menon attempted to persuade a recalcitrant Gamal Nasser to compromise with the West and was instrumental in moving Western powers towards an awareness that Nasser might prove willing to compromise. There were various assassination attempts on Nehru. The first attempt was made during partition in 1947 while he was visiting the North-West Frontier Province (now in Pakistan) in a car. Second attempt was came from Baburao Laxman Kochale, a knife-wielding rickshaw-puller, near Nagpur in 1955. The third attempt was a plot by Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) in 1955. The fourth attempt took place in Bombay in 1956, and the fifth was a failed bombing attempt on train tracks in Maharashtra in 1961. Despite threats to his life, Nehru despised having too much security around him and did not like to disrupt traffic because of his movements. Nehru's health began declining steadily in 1962. In the spring of 1962, he was affected with a viral infection over which he spent most of April in bed. In the next year, through 1963, he spent months recuperating in Kashmir. Some writers attribute this dramatic decline to his surprise and chagrin over the Sino-Indian War, which he perceived as a betrayal of trust. Upon his return from Dehradun on 26 May 1964, he was feeling quite comfortable and went to bed at about 23:30 as usual. He had a restful night until about 06:30. Soon after he returned from the bathroom, Nehru complained of pain in the back. He spoke to the doctors who attended to him for a brief while, and almost immediately he collapsed. He remained unconscious until he died at 13:44. His death was announced in the Lok Sabha at 14:00 local time on 27 May 1964; the cause of death was believed to be a heart attack. Draped in the Indian national Tri-colour flag, the body of Jawaharlal Nehru was placed for public viewing. "Raghupati Raghava Rajaram" was chanted as the body was placed on the platform. On 28 May, Nehru was cremated in accordance with Hindu rites at the Shantivan on the banks of the Yamuna, witnessed by 1.5 million mourners who had flocked into the streets of Delhi and the cremation grounds. US President Lyndon B. Johnson remarked on his death:- History has already recorded his monumental contribution to the molding of a strong and independent India. And yet, it is not just as a leader of India that he has served humanity. Perhaps more than any other world leader he has given expression to man's yearning for peace. This is the issue of our age. In his fearless pursuit of a world free from war he has served all humanity. Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev and the future Soviet Premier Leonid Brezhnev remarked:- The name of Jawaharal Nehru enjoyed the tremendous respect and love of the Soviet people, who knew him as a tested and wise leader of the Indian people's struggle for national independence and the rebirth of their country, and as an active fighter against colonialism. Jawaharal Nehru is known as an outstanding statesman of modern times who devoted his entire life to the struggle for strengthening friendship and cooperation among peoples and for the progress of humanity. He was a passionate fighter for peace in the world and an ardent champion of principles of peaceful coexistence of states. He was the inspirer of the nonalignment policy promoted by the Indian Government. This reasonable policy won India respect and, due to it, India is now occupying a worthy place in the international arena. Countries such as Egypt, Cambodia, Nepal, Kuwait, Bhutan, Kingdom of Sikkim, Nepal, Pakistan, Syria, Iraq, Uganda, Malaysia, Yugoslavia, Ceylon (now Sri Lanka), India and others declared national mourning over the death of Nehru. Nehru's death left India with no clear political heir to his leadership. Lal Bahadur Shastri later succeeded Nehru as the prime minister. The death was announced to the Indian parliament in words similar to Nehru's own at the time of Gandhi's assassination: "The light is out." India's future prime minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee famously delivered Nehru an acclaimed eulogy. He hailed Nehru as Bharat Mata's "favourite prince" and likened him to the Hindu god Rama. Nehru served as the prime minister for eighteen years, first as interim prime minister during 1946–1947 during the last year of the British Raj and then as prime minister of independent India from 15 August 1947 to 27 May 1964. V. K. Krishna Menon (1896–1974) was a close associate of Nehru, and was described as the second most powerful man in India during Nehru's tenure as prime minister. From the inception of Nehru's prime ministry, Menon carefully selected Lord Mountbatten as the only suitable candidate and presented him as such to Labour through Sir Stafford Cripps and Clement Attlee, who promptly appointed him the last Viceroy. the early governance and partition ultimately reduced to Mountbatten, Nehru, Menon, V.P. Menon, Sardar Patel, and an adamant Jinnah. Under Nehru, he served as India's high commissioner to the UK, ambassador to Ireland, ambassador-at-large and plenipotentiary, UN ambassador, minister without portfolio, de facto Foreign minister, and Union minister of defence. He was significantly involved in the annexation of Goa. He resigned after the debacle of the 1962 China War but remain a close friend of Nehru. B. R. Ambedkar, the law minister in the interim cabinet, also chaired the Constitution Drafting Committee. Vallabhbhai Patel served as home minister in the interim government. He was instrumental in getting the Congress party working committee to vote for partition. He is also credited with integrating many princely states of India. Patel was a long-time comrade to Nehru but died in 1950, leaving Nehru as the unchallenged leader of India until his own death in 1964. Maulana Azad was the First Minister of Education in the Indian government Minister of Human Resource Development (until 25 September 1958, Ministry of Education). His contribution to establishing the education foundation in India is recognised by celebrating his birthday as National Education Day across India. Jagjivan Ram became the youngest minister in Nehru's Interim Government of India, a labour minister and also a member of the Constituent Assembly of India, where, as a member of the Dalit caste, he ensured that social justice was enshrined in the Constitution. He went on to serve as a minister with various portfolios during Nehru's tenure and in Shastri and Indira Gandhi governments. Morarji Desai was a nationalist with anti-corruption leanings but was socially conservative, pro-business, and in favour of free enterprise reforms, as opposed to Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru's socialistic policies. After serving as chief minister of Bombay State, he joined Nehru's cabinet in 1956 as the finance minister of India. he held that position until 1963 when he along with other senior ministers in the Nehru cabinet resigned under the Kamaraj plan.The plan, as proposed by Madras Chief Minister K.Kamaraj, was to revert government ministers to party positions after a certain tenure and vice versa. With Nehru's age and health failing in the early 1960s, Desai was considered a possible contender for the position of Prime Minister. Later Desai alleged that Nehru used the Kamaraj Plan to remove all possible contenders 'from the path of his daughter, Indira Gandhi. Desai succeeded Indira Gandhi as the prime minister in 1977 when he was selected by the victorious Janata alliance as their parliamentary leader. Govind Ballabh Pant (1887–1961) was a key figure in the Indian independence movement and later a pivotal figure in the politics of Uttar Pradesh (UP) and in the Indian Government. Pant served in Nehru's cabinet as Union home minister from 1955 until his death in 1961. As home minister, his chief achievement was the re-organisation of states along linguistic lines. He was also responsible for the establishment of Hindi as the official language of the central government and a few states. During his tenure as the home minister, Pant was awarded the Bharat Ratna. C. D. Deshmukh was one of five members of the Planning Commission when it was constituted in 1950 by a cabinet resolution. Deshmukh succeeded John Mathai as the Union Finance Minister in 1950 after Mathai resigned in protest over the transfer of certain powers to the Planning Commission. As finance minister, Deshmukh remained a member of the Planning Commission. Deshmukh's tenure—during which he delivered six budgets and an interim budget—is noted for the effective management of the Indian economy and its steady growth which saw it recover from the impacts of the events of the 1940s. During Deshmukh's tenure, the State Bank of India was formed in 1955 through the nationalisation and amalgamation of the Imperial Bank with several smaller banks. He accomplished the nationalisation of insurance companies and the formation of the Life Insurance Corporation of India through the Life Insurance Corporation of India Act, 1956. Deshmukh resigned over the Government's proposal to move a bill in Parliament bifurcating Bombay State into Gujarat and Maharashtra while designating the city of Bombay a Union territory. In the years following independence, Nehru frequently turned to his daughter Indira Gandhi for managing his personal affairs. Indira moved into Nehru's official residence to attend to him and became his constant companion in his travels across India and the world. She would virtually become Nehru's chief of staff. Towards the end of the 1950s, Indira Gandhi served as the president of the Congress. In that capacity, she was instrumental in getting the Communist-led Kerala State Government dismissed in 1959. Indira was elected as Congress party president in 1959, which aroused criticism for alleged nepotism, although Nehru had actually disapproved of her election, partly because he considered that it smacked of "dynasticism"; he said, indeed it was "wholly undemocratic and an undesirable thing", and refused her a position in his cabinet. Indira herself was at loggerheads with her father over policy; most notably, she used his oft-stated personal deference to the Congress Working Committee to push through the dismissal of the Communist Party of India government in the state of Kerala, over his own objections. Nehru began to be embarrassed by her ruthlessness and disregard for parliamentary tradition and was "hurt" by what he saw as an assertiveness with no purpose other than to stake out an identity independent of her father. After Kamala's death in 1936, Nehru was rumoured to have relationships with several women. These included Shraddha Mata, Padmaja Naidu and Edwina Mountbatten. Countess Mountbatten's daughter Lady Pamela Hicks acknowledged Nehru's platonic relationship with Lady Mountbatten. British historian Philip Ziegler, with access to the private letters and diaries, concludes the relationship: was to endure until Edwina Mountbatten's death: intensely loving, romantic, trusting, generous, idealistic, even spiritual. If there was any physical element it can only have been of minor importance to either party. [India's Governor-General] Mountbatten's reaction was one of pleasure....He liked and admired Nehru, it was useful to him that the Prime Minister should find such attractions in the Governor-General's home, it was agreeable to find Edwina almost permanently in good temper: the advantages of the alliance were obvious. Nehru's sister, Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit told Pupul Jayakar, Indira Gandhi's friend and biographer, that Padmaja Naidu and Nehru lived together for many years. Described as a Hindu agnostic, and styling himself as a "scientific humanist", Nehru thought that religious taboos were preventing India from moving forward and adapting to modern conditions: "No country or people who are slaves to dogma and dogmatic mentality can progress, and unhappily our country and people have become extraordinarily dogmatic and little-minded." The spectacle of what is called religion, or at any rate organised religion, in India and elsewhere, has filled me with horror and I have frequently condemned it and wished to make a clean sweep of it. Almost always it seemed to stand for blind belief and reaction, dogma and bigotry, superstition, exploitation and the preservation of vested interests. — Toward Freedom: The Autobiography of Jawaharlal Nehru (1936); pp. 240–241. As a humanist, Nehru considered that his afterlife was not in some mystical heaven or reincarnation but in the practical achievements of a life lived fully with and for his fellow human beings: "…Nor am I greatly interested in life after death. I find the problems of this life sufficiently absorbing to fill my mind," he wrote. In his Last Will and Testament, he wrote: "I wish to declare with all earnestness that I do not want any religious ceremonies performed for me after my death. I do not believe in such ceremonies, and to submit to them, even as a matter of form, would be hypocrisy and an attempt to delude ourselves and others." In his autobiography, he analysed Abrahamic and Indian religions and their impact on India. He wanted to model India as a secular country; his secularist policies remain a subject of debate. Jawaharlal Nehru, next to Mahatma Gandhi, is regarded as the most significant figure of the Indian independence movement that successfully ended British rule over the Indian subcontinent. As India's first Prime minister and external affairs minister, Nehru played a major role in shaping modern India's government and political culture along with the sound foreign policy. He is praised for creating a system providing universal primary education, reaching children in the farthest corners of rural India. Nehru's education policy is also credited for the development of world-class educational institutions like the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Indian Institutes of Technology, and the Indian Institutes of Management. Following the independence, Nehru popularized the credo of 'unity in diversity' and implemented it as state policy. This proved particularly important as post-Independence differences surfaced since British withdrawal from the subcontinent prompted regional leaders to no longer relate to one another as allies against a common adversary. While differences in culture and, especially, language threatened the unity of the new nation, Nehru established programs such as the National Book Trust and the National Literary Academy which promoted the translation of regional works of literatures between languages and organised the transfer of materials between regions. In pursuit of a single, unified India, Nehru warned, "Integrate or perish." Called an "architect of Modern India", he is widely recognized as the greatest figure of modern India after Mahatma Gandhi. On the occasion of his first death anniversary in 1965, Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, Lal Bahadur Shastri and others described Nehru as the greatest figure of India after Gandhi. Writing in 2005, Ramachandra Guha wrote that while no other Indian prime minister was ever close to the challenges that Nehru dealt with and if Nehru had died in 1958 then he would be remembered as the greatest statesman of the 20th century. However, in recent years, Nehru's reputation has seen re-emergence and he is credited for keeping India together contrary to predictions of many that the country was bound to fall apart. In his lifetime, Jawaharlal Nehru enjoyed an iconic status in India and was generally admired across the world for his idealism and statesmanship. The honorific Pandit, meaning Wise one, has been applied before his name since his lifetime. Nehru's ideals and policies continue shaping the Congress Party's manifesto and core political philosophy. His birthday, 14 November is celebrated in India as Bal Divas ("Children's Day") in recognition of his lifelong passion and work for the welfare, education and development of children and young people. Children across India remember him as Chacha Nehru ("Uncle Nehru"). Nehru remains a popular symbol of the Congress Party which frequently celebrates his memory. People often emulate his style of clothing, especially the Gandhi cap and the Nehru jacket. Nehru's preference for the sherwani ensured it continues to be considered formal wear in North India today. Many public institutions and memorials across India are dedicated to Nehru's memory. The Jawaharlal Nehru University in Delhi is among the most prestigious universities in India. The Jawaharlal Nehru Port near the city of Mumbai is a modern port and dock designed to handle a huge cargo and traffic load. Nehru's residence in Delhi is preserved as the Teen Murti House now has the Nehru Memorial Museum & Library, and one of five Nehru Planetariums that were set in Mumbai, Delhi, Bangalore, Allahabad and Pune. The complex also houses the offices of the Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fund, established in 1964 under the chairmanship of Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, then president of India. The foundation also gives away the prestigious Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fellowship, established in 1968. The Nehru family homes at Anand Bhavan and Swaraj Bhavan are also preserved to commemorate Nehru and his family's legacy. In 1997, Nehru was voted as the greatest Indian since independence in India Today's poll. In 2012, he ranked number four in Outlook's poll of The Greatest Indian. There have been many documentaries about Nehru's life, and he has been portrayed in fictionalised films. The canonical performance is probably that of Roshan Seth, who played him three times: in Richard Attenborough's 1982 film Gandhi, Shyam Benegal's 1988 television series Bharat Ek Khoj, based on Nehru's The Discovery of India, and in a 2007 TV film entitled The Last Days of the Raj. Benegal directed the 1984 documentary film, Nehru, covering his political career. Indian film director Kiran Kumar made a film about Nehru titled Nehru: The Jewel of India in 1990 starring Partap Sharma in the titular role. In Ketan Mehta's film Sardar, Benjamin Gilani portrayed Nehru. Naunihal (lit. 'Young man'), a 1967 Indian Hindi-language drama film by Raj Marbros, follows Raju, an orphan, who believes that Jawaharlal Nehru is his relative and sets out to meet him. Similarly, in the 1957 film Ab Dilli Dur Nahin (lit. 'Now Delhi is not far away') by Amar Kumar, Rattan, a young boy, travels to Delhi and seeks to avert the death sentence of his wrongly convicted father by asking Prime Minister Nehru for help. Another 1957 English language short documentary Our Prime Minister was produced, compiled and directed by Ezra Mir, who also directed Three weeks in the life of Prime Minister Nehru in 1962. Girish Karnad's historical play, Tughlaq (1962) is an allegory about the Nehruvian era. It was staged by Ebrahim Alkazi with the National School of Drama Repertory at Purana Qila, Delhi in the 1970s and later at the Festival of India, London in 1982. Nehru was a prolific writer in English who wrote The Discovery of India, Glimpses of World History, An Autobiography (released in the United States as "Toward Freedom,") and Letters from a Father to His Daughter, all written in jail. Letters comprised 30 letters written to his daughter Indira Priyadarshani Nehru (later Gandhi) who was then 10 years old and studying at a boarding school in Mussoorie. It attempted to instruct her about natural history and world civilisations. Nehru's books have been widely read. An Autobiography, in particular, has been critically acclaimed. John Gunther, writing in Inside Asia, contrasted it with Gandhi's autobiography: The Mahatma's placid story compares to Nehru's as a cornflower to an orchid, a rhyming couplet to a sonnet by MacLeish or Auden, a water pistol to a machine gun. Nehru's autobiography is subtle, complex, discriminating, infinitely cultivated, steeped in doubt, suffused with intellectual passion. Lord Halifax once said that no one could understand India without reading it; it is a kind of 'Education of Henry Adams,' written in superlative prose—hardly a dozen men alive write English as well as Nehru ... Michael Brecher, who considered Nehru to be an intellectual for whom ideas were important aspects of Indian nationalism, wrote in Political Leadership and Charisma: Nehru, Ben-Gurion, and Other 20th-Century Political Leaders: Nehru's books were not scholarly, nor were they intended to be. He was not a trained historian, but his feel for the flow of events and his capacity to weave together a wide range of knowledge in a meaningful pattern give to his books qualities of a high order. In these works, he also revealed a sensitive literary style. ... Glimpses of World History is the most illuminating on Nehru as an intellectual. The first of the trilogy, Glimpses, was a series of thinly connected sketches of the story of mankind in the form of letters to his teenage daughter, Indira, later prime minister of India. ... Despite its polemical character in many sections and its shortcomings as an impartial history, Glimpses is a work of great artistic value, a worthy precursor of his noble and magnanimous Autobiography. Michael Crocker thought An Autobiography would have given Nehru literary fame had the political fame eluded him: It is to his years in prison that we owe his three main books, ... Nehru's writings illustrate a cerebral life, and a power of self-discipline, altogether out of the ordinary. Words by the million bubbled up out of his fullness of mind and spirit. Had he never been prime minister of India he would have been famous as the author of the Autobiography and the autobiographical parts of The Discovery of India. An Autobiography, at least with some excisions here and there, is likely to be read for generations. ... There are, for instance, the characteristic touches of truism and anticlimax, strange in a man who could both think and, at his best, write so well ... Nehru's speech A Tryst With Destiny was rated by the British newspaper The Guardian to be among the great speeches of the 20th-century. Ian Jack wrote in his introduction to the speech: Dressed in a golden silk jacket with a red rose in the buttonhole, Nehru rose to speak. His sentences were finely made and memorable – Nehru was a good writer; his Discovery of India stands well above the level reached by most politician-writers. ... The nobility of Nehru's words – their sheer sweep – provided the new India with a lodestone that was ambitious and humane. Post-colonialism began here as well as Indian democracy, which has since outlived many expectations of its death. In 1948, Nehru was conferred an honorary doctorate by the University of Mysore. He later received honorary doctorates from the University of Madras, Columbia University, and Keio University. The Hamburg University had awarded Nehru two honorary degrees of the Faculties of Law and Agriculture. In 1955, he was awarded with Honorary citizen of Belgrade by the Yugoslavian government. In 1955, Nehru was awarded the Bharat Ratna, India's highest civilian honour. President Rajendra Prasad awarded him the honour without taking advice from the Prime Minister and added that "I am taking this step on my own initiative". In 1970, he was posthumously awarded with the World Peace Council prize. He was posthumously awarded the Order of the Companions of O. R. Tambo by the Government of South Africa in 2005. Biography portal Politics portal India portal Foreign relations of India List of political families List of Indian writers Scientific temper, a phrase popularised by Nehru Gulzarilal Nanda served as acting prime minister in the interim for 13 days. "Nehru". Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary. 2020. Archived 5 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine — Ganguly, Sumit; Mukherji, Rahul (2011). India Since 1980. Cambridge University Press. p. 64. ISBN 978-1-139-49866-1. Nehru was a social democrat who believed that liberal political and economic institutions could deliver economic growth with redistribution. The 1950s witnessed greater state control over industrial activity and the birth of the industrial licensing system, which made it necessary for companies to seek the permission of the government before initiating business in permitted areas. Schenk, Hans (2020). Housing India's Urban Poor 1800–1965: Colonial and Post-colonial Studies. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-00-019185-1. The idea that the state should actively and in a planned and 'rational' and 'modern' manner promote development originated abroad. Inspiration came to some extent from the Soviet Russian planned economic development, and for some, including Nehru, from the—at that time still a bit remote—concept of the West European and largely social-democrat idea of the 'Welfare' state. Winiecki, Jan (2016). Shortcut or Piecemeal: Economic Development Strategies and Structural Change. Central European University Press. p. 41. ISBN 9789633860632. Nehru, a Fabian socialist, or social-democrat in modern parlance, either did not read Mill or disregarded the (minimal) institutional requirements outlined by that classical writer. In Nehru's view, it was the state that should direct the economy from the center, as well as decide about the allocation of scarce resources. Chalam, K. S. (2017). Social Economy of Development in India. Sage. p. 325. ISBN 9789385985126. Social democrats advocate peaceful transition from capitalism to socialism. While Jawaharlal Nehru was considered as a social democrat, his colleague in the Constituent Assembly, B. R. Ambedkar, was emphatic about state socialism. It appears that the compromise between these two ideas has been reflected in the Directive Principles of State Policy. The principles of social democracy and/or democratic socialism can be interrogated in the context of the present situation in India. "PANDIT JAWAHARLAL NEHRU". Indian National Congress. "Jawaharlal Nehru: Architect of modern India". Hindustan Times. 14 November 2019. Babu, D. Shyam (11 July 2019). "Nehru and the Kashmir quandary". The Hindu. Retrieved 15 November 2021. Nanda, B.R. (1963). The Nehrus: Motilal and Jawaharlal. Oxford University Presss. p. 38-40. Moraes 2007, p. 21. Nanda, B. R. (15 October 2007). The Nehrus: Motilal and Jawaharlal. Oxford University Press. p. 25. ISBN 978-0-19-908793-8. Smith, Bonnie G. 2008.The Oxford Encyclopedia of Women in World History. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-514890-9. pp. 406–07. "Jawaharlal Nehru: Freedom struggle icon, maker of modern India". Hindustan Times. 2 December 2020. Retrieved 15 November 2021. "Mrs. Krishna Hutheesing, an Author and a Sister of Nehru, Dies". The New York Times. 10 November 1967. Retrieved 2 July 2021. Moraes 2007, p. 22. Gokhale, Balkrishna Govind (1978). "Nehru and History". History and Theory. 17 (3): 311–322. doi:10.2307/2504742. JSTOR 2504742 – via JSTOR. Misra, Om Prakash. 1995. Economic Thought of Gandhi and Nehru: A Comparative Analysis. M.D. Publications. ISBN 978-81-85880-71-6. pp. 49–65. Moraes 2007, p. 23. Nanda, B. R. (2007) [1962], The Nehrus: Motilal and Jawaharlal, Delhi, orig. London: Oxford University Press, orig. George Allen and Unwin Ltd, p. 65, ISBN 978-0-19-569343-0 Bharathi, K. S. (1998). Encyclopaedia of eminent thinkers. Concept Publishing Company Pvt. Ltd. ISBN 978-81-7022-684-0. Tharoor, Shashi (27 November 2018). Nehru: The Invention of India. Penguin Random House India Private Limited. ISBN 978-93-5305-355-0. Moraes 2007, p. 36. Moraes 2007, p. 43. Sen, Zoë Keshap C. 1964. "Jawaharlal Nehru." Civilisations 14(1/2):25–39. JSTOR 41230788. Moraes 2007, p. 47. Moraes 2007, p. 37. Ghose 1993, p. 25. Moraes 2007, p. 49. Moraes 2007, p. 50. In Jawaharlal Nehru's autobiography, An Autobiography (1936) p. 33. Moraes 2007, p. 52. Moraes 2007, p. 53. Ghose 1993, p. 26. Nehru, Jawaharlal Glimpses of world history: being further letters to his daughter (Lindsay Drummond Ltd., 1949), p. 94 Moraes 2007, p. 56. Argov, Daniel (June 1964). The Ideological Differences between Moderates and Extremists in the Indian National Movement with Special Reference to Surendranath Banerjea and Lajpat Rai 1885–1919 (PDF) (PhD thesis). University of London School of Oriental and African Studies. p. 11. "Nehru Gave Up Life Of Ease, Wealth". The Windsor Star. 27 May 1964. p. 24. Retrieved 19 January 2013. Moraes 2007, p. 55. "Jawaharlal Nehru – a chronological account". Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fund (JNMF). Archived from the original on 4 June 2012. Retrieved 23 June 2012. Remya, K. (2017). War in City Scape Popular Responses in Kozhikode 1914 1918 (PhD thesis). University of Calicut, Department of History. hdl:10603/208789. Krishnan, Madhuvanti S. (12 November 2015). "Man for All seasons". thehindu. "Jawaharlal Nehru: Freedom struggle icon, maker of modern India". Hindustan Times. 2 December 2020. Pratiyogita Darpan Editorial Board. Indian National Movement & Constitutional Development. Pratiyogita Darpan Extra Issue Series, Volume 12. Upkar Prakashan. Retrieved 2 October 2018. Moraes 2007, p. 106. Dube, Rajendra Prasad (1988). Jawaharlal Nehru: A Study in Ideology and Social Change. Mittal Publications. ISBN 978-81-7099-071-0. Keenleyside, T. A. (1983). "The Indian Nationalist Movement and the League of Nations: Prologue to the United Nations". India Quarterly. 39 (3): 281–298. doi:10.1177/097492848303900303. JSTOR 45071841. S2CID 150520531. Roland, Joan G. (1998). The Jewish Communities of India: Identity in a Colonial Era (Second ed.). Routledge. p. 193. ISBN 978-0-7658-0439-6. Maheshwari, Neerja (1997). Economic Policy of Jawaharlal Nehru. Deep & Deep. p. 41. ISBN 978-81-7100-850-6. Retrieved 9 November 2018. Kochar, R. C. (1997). Congress and Socialism: Economic Programmes and Policies. Anamika Publishers & Distributors. p. 22. ISBN 978-81-86565-24-7. Pandey, BN, ed. (2015). The Indian Nationalist Movement 1885–1947: Select Documents. Springer Publishing. p. 45. ISBN 978-1-349-86215-3. Dutt, R.C. (1981). Socialism of Jawaharlal Nehru. New Delhi: Shakti Malik, Abhinav Publications. pp. 54–55. ISBN 978-81-7017-128-7. Retrieved 8 September 2017. Gandhi, Rajmohan (28 November 1991). "Patel: A Life". Navajivan Publishing House. p. 171 – via Internet Archive. Nag, Kingshuk (2015). Netaji: Living Dangerously. Paranjoy Guha Thakurta. ISBN 978-93-84439-70-5. "Purna Swaraj: The Demand for Full Independence 26 January 1930". indiaofthepast.org. Archived from the original on 8 November 2018. Retrieved 6 July 2015. Office, Public Record. "Learning Curve British Empire". Public Record Office, The National Archives. Khalid, Haroon (26 January 2018). "Republic Day story: On Ravi's banks, a pledge that shaped the course of modern India 88 years ago". Scroll.in. Retrieved 16 August 2021. "Explained: Why India celebrates January 26 as Republic Day". 30 January 2021. Education, Pearson. SSC topic-wise Previous Years Solved Papers General Awareness. Pearson Education India. ISBN 978-93-5286-640-3. Davar, Praveen (15 November 2018). "The greatest Indian after the Mahatma? Why Gandhi chose Nehru to lead India". Deccan Chronicle. Gandhi, Gopalkrishna. "The Great Dandi March – eighty years after" Archived 17 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine, The Hindu, 5 April 2010 Khanal, Vinod (13 November 2014). "Mahatma Gandhi describes Nehru's arrest in 1930 as 'rest'". Times of India. Retrieved 16 August 2021. "Telegram Post No. 90, dated (and read) 14th April, 1930". Civil Disobedience Movement in the United Provinces. Arrest of Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru. New Delhi: United Provinces Government. 1930. p. 71. Retrieved 9 September 2022 – via National Archives of India. For breaking Salt Law Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru was arrested at Allahabad this morning. Moraes 2007, p. 167. Moraes 2007, p. 168. Fisher, Margaret W. June 1967. "India's Jawaharlal Nehru." Asian Survey 7(6):363–73. doi:10.2307/2642611. JSTOR 2642611. p. 368. Johnson, Richard L. 2005. Gandhi's Experiments With Truth: Essential Writings By And About Mahatma Gandhi. Lexington Books. ISBN 978-0-7391-1142-0. p. 37. Hoiberg, Dale (2000). Students' Britannica India. Popular Prakashan. p. 107. ISBN 978-0-85229-760-5. Metcalf, Barbara D.; Metcalf, Thomas R. (2006). A Concise History of Modern India. Cambridge University Press. p. 176. ISBN 978-1-139-45887-0. Hoiberg, Dale; Ramchandani, Indu (21 November 2000). "Students' Britannica India". New Delhi : Encyclopaedia Britannica (India) – via Internet Archive. Hoiberg, Dale (2000). Students' Britannica India. Popular Prakashan. pp. 108–. ISBN 978-0-85229-760-5. B. R. Tomlinson (1976). The Indian National Congress and the Raj, 1929–1942: The Penultimate Phase. Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp. 57–60. ISBN 978-1-349-02873-3. Pandey, Deepak (1978). "Congress-Muslim League Relations 1937–39: 'The Parting of the Ways'". Modern Asian Studies. 12 (4): 629–654. doi:10.1017/S0026749X00006351. JSTOR 312372. S2CID 143450107 – via JSTOR. Arshad Syed Karim (1985). Pakistan: From Community to Nation. Saad Publications. Ayoob, Mohammed (25 May 2018). "Remembering Maulana Azad". The Hindu. Paul, Santosh (21 May 2019). "Triumph of Nehruvianism – Part 2". The Economic Times. Rabindra Chandra Dutt (1981). Socialism of Jawaharlal Nehru. Abhinav Publications. p. 178. ISBN 978-81-7017-128-7. Soni, Mallika (23 January 2021). "On Parakram Diwas, a look at Bose's Indian National Army". Hindustan Times. "Indian National Congress Presidents over the ages: The ones who changed course of history". The New Indian Express. 5 December 2017. Moraes 2007, pp. 234–38. Moraes 2007, p. 129. Sharma, Rinkal. 2016. "Nehru: a passionate advocate of education for India's children and youth, believing it essential for India's future progress." International Research Journal of Management Sociology & Humanity 7(7):256–59. "Jawaharlal Nehru Birth Anniversary: Pandit Nehru and His Freedom Struggle". News18. 14 November 2019. Modern India: A Textbook of History for Middle Schools. National Council of Educational Research and Training. 1973. "3rd Five Year Plan (Chapter 1)". Government of India. Archived from the original on 26 March 2012. Retrieved 16 June 2012. Mukhopadhyay, Nilanjan (14 November 2018). "Past Continuous: Those Who Think Nehru Was Power Hungry Should Review Events Leading to Independence". The Wire. Śekhara Bandyopādhyāẏa (2004). From Plassey to Partition: A History of Modern India. Orient Blackswan. p. 410. ISBN 978-81-250-2596-2. Lumby 1954, p. 232 Brown 1984, p. 667 Saraf, Nandini (2012). The Life and Times of Lokmanya Tilak. Ocean Books. p. 119. ISBN 978-81-84301-52-6. Menon, Vapal Pangunni (8 December 2015). Transfer of Power in India. Princeton University Press. p. 60. ISBN 978-1-4008-7937-3. Bandyopadhyay, Sekhara (2004). From Plassey to Partition: A History of Modern India. India: Orient Longman. p. 412. ISBN 978-81-250-2596-2. Moraes, Frank R. "Jawaharlal Nehru". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 2 October 2018. W. Sears, Stephen (1973). The Horizon History of the British Empire Volume 2. American Heritage Publishing Company. p. 465. ISBN 978-0-07-030354-6 – via Google Books. Wolpert, Stanley (2001). Gandhi's Passion: The Life and Legacy of Mahatma Gandhi. Oxford University Press. pp. 192–193. ISBN 0-19-515634-X. Retrieved 4 December 2007. Anderson, Ken. "Gandhi – The Great Soul". The British Empire: Fall of the Empire. Archived from the original on 23 July 2018. Retrieved 4 December 2007. Mukherjee, Mridula (9 April 2015). "Unlike Nehru, Netaji believed that authoritarian rule was essential for achieving radical social goals". India Today. Retrieved 16 August 2021. Dasgupta, Shirsho (22 May 2016). "Eighty Years Later, A Homage to Catalonia: Indians and the Spanish Civil War". The Wire. Retrieved 16 August 2021. Nakazato, Nariaki (27 April 2016). Neonationalist Mythology in Postwar Japan: Pal's Dissenting Judgment at the Tokyo War Crimes Tribunal. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-4985-2836-8 – via Google Books. Prasannan, R. (2 August 2020). "Birth of a nation". The Week. Retrieved 16 August 2021. Kermani, Secunder (18 August 2017). "How Jinnah's ideology shapes Pakistan's identity". BBC. Chand, Attar (21 May 2010). India and Asia-Pacific Security Volume 2. Amar Prakashan. p. 223. ISBN 978-81-8542-031-8 – via Google Books. Radhey Shyam Chaurasia (2002). History of Modern India, 1707 A. D. to 2000 A. Atlantic Publishers. pp. 281–283 Sears, Stephen W. (10 September 2014). The British Empire. New Word City. ISBN 978-1-61230-809-8 – via Google Books. Science & culture, Volume 30. Indian Science News Association. 1964. Aditit De (8 September 2009). Jawaharlal Nehruh – The Jewel of India. Puffin Books. ISBN 978-81-8475-866-5 – via Google Books. Hoiberg, Dale (19 December 2018). Students' Britannica India. Popular Prakashan. ISBN 978-0-85229-760-5 – via Google Books. Amy McKenna, ed. (20 December 2009). The 100 Most Influential World Leaders of All Time. The Rosen Publishing Group|pages=223, Inc. ISBN 978-1-61530-015-0 – via Google Books. Hoiberg, Dale (19 December 2018). Students' Britannica India. Vol. 4. Popular Prakashan. pp. 108–109. ISBN 978-0-85229-760-5 – via Google Books. Mansergh, Nicholas (21 August 2013). Survey of British Commonwealth Affairs: Problems of Wartime Cooperation and Post-War Change 1939–1952. Routledge. p. 145. ISBN 978-1-136-24289-2 – via Google Books. "The National Archives – Homepage". nationalarchives.gov.uk. Archived from the original on 1 December 2021. Retrieved 16 August 2021. "1942 Quit India Movement". open.ac.uk. Aamir R. Mufti (10 January 2009). Enlightenment in the Colony: The Jewish Question and the Crisis of Postcolonial Culture. Princeton University Press. pp. 129–131. ISBN 978-1-4008-2766-4. Amy McKenna, ed. (20 December 2009). The 100 Most Influential World Leaders of All Time. The Rosen Publishing Group, Inc. p. 224. ISBN 978-1-61530-015-0 – via Google Books. Kher, N. N. Civics & History. Pitambar Publishing. ISBN 978-81-209-1088-1 – via Google Books. Sears, Stephen W. (10 September 2014). The British Empire. New Word City. ISBN 978-1-61230-809-8 – via Google Books. B. N, Pandey (May 1969). Break Up of British India. Macmillan Education UK. p. 169. ISBN 978-1-349-15307-7 – via Google Books.[permanent dead link] Sears, Stephen W. (10 September 2014). The British Empire. NewWord City. ISBN 978-1-61230-809-8. Kasniyal, BD (13 November 2015). "Nehru's belongings still intact in Almora jail". Tribuneindia News Service. Marathe, Om (3 September 2019). "Explained: When India's interim government was formed in 1946". The Indian Express. V. Krishna Ananth. India Since Independence: Making Sense of Indian Politics. Pearson Education India. 2010. pp 28–30. ">Menon, Shivshankar (20 April 2021). India and Asian Geopolitics: The Past, Present. Brookings Institution Press. p. 34. ISBN 978-0-670-09129-4. Lumby, E. W. R. 1954. The Transfer of Power in India, 1945–1947. London: George Allen & Unwin. p. 228 Tiwari, Aaditya (30 October 2017). "Sardar Patel – Man who United India". pib.gov.in. "How Vallabhbhai Patel, V P Menon and Mountbatten unified India". 31 October 2017. Furber, Holden (1951). "The Unification of India, 1947–1951". Pacific Affairs. 24 (4): 352–371. doi:10.2307/2753451. JSTOR 2753451 – via JSTOR. C. A. Chandraprema (1991). Sri Lanka, the Years of Terror: The J.V.P. Insurrection, 1987-1989. Lake House Bookshop. p. 81. ISBN 9789559029038. Nehru brought in legislation making illegal the demand for secession in 1963. Thereafter, the DMK dropped its demand for a "Dravida Nadu". Jayantha Dhanapala, United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (1999). Small Arms Control: Old Weapons, New Issues. Ashgate Publishing. ISBN 9780754620761. Although the campaign for secession has reached its apex in Kashmir, the first Indian state to agitate for separatism was Tamil Nadu. In 1963, in response to the vociferous campaign for a Dravidastan, Premier Nehru introduced the Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution, making it mandatory for those running for office to take an oath stating, "I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India". Encyclopaedia Indica: Independent India and wars – I. Anmol Publications. 1996. ISBN 978-81-7041-859-7. Encyclopaedia of Indian War of Independence, 1857–1947: Gandhi era : Jawahar Lal Nehru and Sardar Patel. Anmol Publications. 2009. ISBN 978-81-261-3745-9. Nehru, Jawaharlal (30 April 2007). "A Tryst with Destiny". TheGuardian.com. Archived from the original on 24 May 2014. Retrieved 16 August 2021. Saha, Abhishek (15 August 2015). "The politics of an assassination: Who killed Gandhi and why?". Hindustan Times. Janak Raj Jai (1996). 1947–1980. Regency Publications. pp. 45–47. ISBN 978-81-86030-23-3. Ansari, Sarah; Gould, William (31 October 2019). "'Performing the State' in Post-1947 India and Pakistan". Boundaries of Belonging. Cambridge University Press. pp. 23–66. doi:10.1017/9781108164511.003. ISBN 978-1-107-19605-6. S2CID 211394653. Khan, Yasmin. "Performing Peace: Gandhi's assassination as a critical moment in the consolidation of the Nehruvian state" (PDF). core.ac.uk. Khan, Yasmin (2011). "Performing Peace: Gandhi's assassination as a critical moment in the consolidation of the Nehruvian state". Modern Asian Studies. 45 (1): 57–80. doi:10.1017/S0026749X10000223. S2CID 144894540. (subscription required) Khan, Yasmin (12 January 2011). "Performing Peace: Gandhi's assassination as a critical moment in the consolidation of the Nehruvian state". Modern Asian Studies. 45 (1): 57–80. doi:10.1017/S0026749X10000223. S2CID 144894540. Thapar, Karan (17 August 2009). "Gandhi, Jinnah both failed: Jaswant". ibnlive.in.com. Archived from the original on 3 July 2014. "After Advani, Jaswant turns Jinnah admirer". The Economic Times. India. 17 August 2009. Archived from the original on 20 October 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2021. Ghosh, Bishwanath (17 March 2016). "Maps are malleable. Even Bharat Mata's". The Hindu. Retrieved 15 August 2021. Roychowdhury, Adrija (17 August 2017). "Five states that refused to join India after Independence". The Indian Express. Retrieved 15 August 2021. S., Mohamed Imranullah (1 February 2016). "Time to recall efforts made to create the Constitution". The Hindu. Retrieved 15 August 2021. Bhaskar, Anurag (25 November 2022). "Republic at 70: Preamble embodies Constitution's vision". Hindustan Times. Retrieved 12 March 2024. Chauhan, Dinesh. "Preamble the Spirit of Constitution of India". Retrieved 12 March 2024. Sinha, Shakti; Roy, Himanshu (5 November 2018). Patel: Political Ideas and Policies. SAGE Publications. ISBN 978-93-5280-854-0. Marathe, Om (3 September 2019). "Explained: When India's interim government was formed in 1946". The Indian Express. Retrieved 15 August 2021. Park, Richard Leonard (1952). "India's General Elections". Far Eastern Survey. 21 (1): 1–8. doi:10.2307/3024683. JSTOR 3024683 – via JSTOR. "Indian and Foreign Review". Publications Division of the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India. 1969. Guha, Ramachandra (2002). "Democracy's Biggest Gamble: India's First Free Elections in 1952". World Policy Journal. 19 (1): 95–103. doi:10.1215/07402775-2002-2005. JSTOR 40209795 – via JSTOR. Koshi, Luke (2 November 2016). "Explainer: The reorganization of states in India and why it happened". The News Minute. Retrieved 3 April 2019. "Govind Ballabh Pant's Death Anniversary: Remembering the First Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh". News18. 7 March 2021. Retrieved 15 August 2021. "State of the Nation". The Indian Express. 11 May 2008. Retrieved 15 August 2021. Chaudhary, Suraj Surjit (15 March 2021). Critical Commentary on the Banning of Unregulated Deposit Schemes Act, 2019 and Allied Laws. Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 978-93-90252-05-3. "1957 India General (2nd Lok Sabha) Elections Results". www.elections.in. Retrieved 31 August 2020. Chakravarty, Shubhodeep (6 March 2019). "INKredible India: The story of 1962 Lok Sabha election – All you need to know". Zee News. Davar, Praveen (31 December 2017). "The liberation of Goa". The Hindu. Retrieved 15 August 2021. Noorani, A.G. (29 August 2003). "Perseverance in the peace process". Frontline. hinduonnet.com. Archived from the original on 26 March 2005. Retrieved 15 August 2021. Klintworth, G. (1987). China's India War: A Question of Confidence. Working paper (Australian National University. Strategic and Defence Studies Centre). Strategic and Defence Studies Centre, Research School of Pacific Studies, Australian National University. p. 10. ISBN 978-0-7315-0087-1. China declared a unilateral ceasefire and by December it had withdrawn its forces to positions 20 km behind the line of actual control that had existed in 1959 Michele L. Louro (2018). Comrades against Imperialism: Nehru, India, and Interwar Internationalism. Cambridge University Press. p. 195. ISBN 9781108419307. Menon resigned under India's military preparedness failed to prevent a Chinese invasion during the Sino-Indian war of 1962 "Asia: Ending the Suspense". Time. 17 September 1965. Archived from the original on 21 May 2013. Retrieved 15 August 2021. Lüthi, Lorenz M., ed. (14 July 2020). Alternative World Visions. Cambridge University Press. pp. 261–328. ISBN 978-1-108-41833-1. Sehgal, Saransh (7 May 2014). "Tibetans-in-exile divided over right to vote in Indian elections". The Guardian. "After Nehru and Indira, Modi is only PM to come back to power with full majority". The Economic Times. 23 May 2019. World Mourns Nehru (1964), archived from the original on 31 July 2021, retrieved 31 July 2021 Guha, Ramachandra (26 May 2013). Verdicts on Nehru. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-93-5118-757-8. "Letter From President Eisenhower to Prime Minister Nehru". history.state.gov. Foreign Relations of the United States, 1958–1960, South and Southeast Asia, Volume XV – Office of the Historian. 27 November 1958. Retrieved 31 July 2021. Nayantara Sahgal (2010). Jawaharlal Nehru: Civilizing a Savage World. Penguin Books India. p. 59. ISBN 978-0-670-08357-2. Ian Hall, The Conversation (22 August 2021). "Nehru, the architect of modern India, also helped discredit European imperialism". Scroll.in. Retrieved 15 November 2021. "How the ANC could fade away – OPINION | Politicsweb". www.politicsweb.co.za. Retrieved 15 November 2021. "UP Next: How Nehru, Swami Prabhu Dutt Brahmachari's ideas of India resonate in 2022 polls". Firstpost. 15 November 2021. Retrieved 15 November 2021. "PM Modi is A 'Charismatic' Leader Like Jawaharlal Nehru, Rajiv Gandhi: Rajinikanth". outlookindia. Retrieved 15 November 2015. Service, Tribune News. "A thousand lies can't dwarf the giant Nehru was". Tribuneindia News Service. Retrieved 15 November 2021. Parekh, Bhiku (1991). "Nehru and the National Philosophy of India". Economic and Political Weekly. 26 (5–12 Jan 1991): 35–48. JSTOR 4397189. Puri, S. (2020). The Great Imperial Hangover: How Empires Have Shaped the World. Atlantic Books. p. 206. ISBN 978-1-78649-834-2. Heller, P. (1999). The Labor of Development: Workers and the Transformation of Capitalism in Kerala, India. Cornell paperbacks. Cornell University Press. p. 75. ISBN 978-0-8014-8624-1. Retrieved 23 February 2024. Singh, Ravi Ranjan & M. K. (14 August 2021). "Pt. Jawaharlal Nehru". K.K. Publications. p. 20 – via Google Books. Ghose 1993, p. 243. Kopstein 2005, p. 364. Walsh, Judith E. (2006). A Brief History of India. Infobase Publishing. p. 190. ISBN 978-1-4381-0825-4. Yokokawa, Nobuharu; Jayati Ghosh; Bob Rowthorn (2013). Industrialization of China and India: Their Impacts on the World Economy. Routledge. p. 213. ISBN 978-1-134-09387-8. Grabowski, Richard; Sharmistha Self; Michael P. Shields (2007). Economic Development: A Regional, Institutional, And Historical Approach. M.E. Sharpe. p. 161. ISBN 978-1-134-09387-8. Shand, R. Richard Tregurtha; K. P. Kalirajan; Ulaganathan Sankar (2003). Economic Reform and the Liberalisation of the Indian Economy: Essays in Honour of Richard T. Shand; papers Presented at a Major Conference on Second Generation Reforms in Chennai from 8 – 10 December 1999. Edward Elgar Publishing. p. 39. ISBN 978-1-78195-943-5. Thakur, Anil Khumar; Debes Mukhopadhayay (2010). Economic Philosophy of Jawaharlal Nehru. Deep and Deep Publications. p. 14. ISBN 978-81-8450-272-5. Chandra, Bipan; Aditya Mukherjee; Mridula Mukherjee (2008). India Since Independence. Penguin Books India. p. 449. ISBN 978-0-14-310409-4. Kapila, Uma (2009). Indian Economic Developments Since 1947 (3Rd Ed.). Academic Foundation. p. 132. ISBN 978-81-7188-711-8. Kapila, Uma (2009). Indian Economic Developments Sinc 1947 (3Rd Ed.). Academic Foundation. p. 66. ISBN 978-81-7188-711-8. Giersch, Herbert; Karl-Heinz Paqué; Holger Schmieding (1994). The Fading Miracle: Four Decades of Market Economy in Germany. Cambridge University Press. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-521-35869-9. Kopstein 2005, p. 366. Parker, Randall E.; Robert M. Whaples (2013). The Routledge Handbook of Major Events in Economic History. Routledge. p. 306. ISBN 978-0-415-67703-5. Brown, Judith M. (17 June 2014). Nehru. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-87476-8. Ashutosh Varshney (18 September 1998). Democracy, Development, and the Countryside: Urban-Rural Struggles in India. Cambridge University Press. pp. 30–31. ISBN 978-0-521-64625-3. India Today. New Horizons. 1963. Farmer, B. H. (1993). An Introduction to South Asia. Routledge. p. 120. ISBN 978-0-415-05695-3. "Children's Day 2021: Here's Why Jawaharlal Nehru's Birthday Celebrated as Bal Diwas". News18. 14 November 2021. Lion M.G. Agrawal (2008). Freedom Fighters of India. Vol. 2. Isha Books. p. 132. ISBN 978-81-8205-470-7 – via Google Books. Som, Reba (February 1994). "Jawaharlal Nehru and the Hindu Code: A Victory of Symbol over Substance?". Modern Asian Studies. 28 (1): 165–194. doi:10.1017/S0026749X00011732. JSTOR 312925. S2CID 145393171. Basu, Srimati (2005). She Comes to Take Her Rights: Indian Women, Property, and Propriety. SUNY Press. p. 3. ISBN 978-81-86706-49-7. The Hindu Code Bill was visualised by Ambedkar and Nehru as the flagship of modernisation and a radical revision of Hindu law ... it is widely regarded as dramatic benchmark legislation giving Hindu women equitable if not superior entitlements as legal subjects. Williams, p. 107. Williams, p. 106. Uppal, N. (2021). Narcissus or Machiavelli?: Learning Leadership from Indian Prime Ministers. Taylor & Francis. p. 48. ISBN 978-1-000-41480-6. Erckel, Sebastian (2011). India and the European Union – Two Models of Integration, GRIN Verlag, ISBN 978-3-656-01048-7, p. 128 Merchant, Minhaz (27 August 2020). "Nehru's noble intent of treating Muslims fairly put India on slippery slope of faux secularism". ThePrint. Retrieved 15 August 2021. Kulke, Hermann; Dietmar Rothermund (2004). A History of India. Routledge. p. 328. ISBN 978-0-415-32919-4. One subject that particularly interested Nehru was the reform of Hindu law, particularly with regard to the rights of Hindu women ... Purandare, Vaibhav (23 August 2017). "triple talaq: Uniform code: Nehru okayed principle, but didn't make it a directive". The Times of India. Retrieved 15 August 2021. Soman, Zakia; Niaz, Noorjehan (17 June 2016). "Why Triple Talaq Needs to Be Abolished". The Wire. Retrieved 15 August 2021. Gusain, Lakhan (2012). "The Effectiveness of Establishing Hindi as a National Language". Georgetown Journal of International Affairs. 13 (1): 43–50. JSTOR 43134213 – via JSTOR. Rathi, Nandini (15 September 2017). "Hindi Diwas: Journey of Hindi from pre-Partition India to post-independence language politics". The Indian Express. Retrieved 15 August 2021. Viswanathan, S. (6 December 2009). "Language issue again: The need for a clear-headed policy". The Hindu. Retrieved 15 August 2021. Ghosh, P.E.U (3 September 2012). Indian Government and Politics. PHI Learning. ISBN 978-81-203-4649-9. Sorensen, Clark W.; Baker, Donald (10 December 2013). The Journal of Korean Studies, Volume 18, Number 2 (Fall 2013). Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-4422-3336-2. K. Srinivasan (7 November 2005). The Rise, Decline and Future of the British Commonwealth. Palgrave Macmillan UK. p. 11. ISBN 978-0-230-24843-4. "London Declaration". 16 May 2019. Archived from the original on 4 July 2021. Retrieved 22 August 2021. Haque, Affanul (20 May 2017). "Non-Aligned Movement: Jawaharlal Nehru – The architect of India's foreign policy". The Times of India. Ali, H.M.W. (2004). India and the Non-aligned Movement. Adam Pub. p. 7. ISBN 978-81-7435-367-2. Robert Sherrod (19 January 1963). "Nehru:The Great Awakening". The Saturday Evening Post. 236 (2): 60–67. Shashi, Shyam Singh (1996). Encyclopaedia Indica: Great political personalities of Post Colonial Era-I. Anmol Publications. p. 81. ISBN 9788170418597. Sarvepalli Gopal,"Jawaharlal Nehru: A Biography" Vol.2, 2:232–35. Indian Express, 6 October 1949 at Pune at the time of lying of the foundation stone of National Defence Academy. Mahatma Gandhi's relevant quotes, "My non-violence does not admit of running away from danger and leaving dear ones unprotected. Between violence and cowardly flight, I can only prefer violence to cowardice. Non-violence is the summit of bravery." "I do believe that, where there is only a choice between cowardice and violence, I would advise violence." "I would rather have India resort to arms in order to defend her honour than that she should in a cowardly manner become or remain a helpless witness to her own dishonour." – All Men Are Brothers Life and Thoughts of Mahatma Gandhi as told in his own words. UNESCO. pp. 85–108. Sublet, Carrie. "Dr. Homi Jehangir Bhabha". nuclearweaponarchive.org. Archived from the original on 7 August 2011. Retrieved 8 August 2011. Bhatia, Vinod (1989). Jawaharlal Nehru, as Scholars of Socialist Countries See Him. Panchsheel Publishers. p. 131. Dua, B. D.; James Manor (1994). Nehru to the Nineties: The Changing Office of Prime Minister in India. C. Hurst & Co. Publishers. pp. 141, 261. ISBN 978-1-85065-180-2. Mihir Bose (2004). Raj, Secrets, Revolution: A Life of Subhas Chandra Bose. Grice Chapman Publishing. p. 291. ISBN 978-0-9545726-4-8. "V.K. Krishna Menon, India Defense Minister, U.N. Aide, Dies". The New York Times. 6 October 1974. Guha, Ramachandra (2 August 2008). "A fateful arrest". The Hindu. Retrieved 15 August 2021. Sankar Ghose (1993). Jawaharlal Nehru, a Biography. Allied Publishers. pp. 1888–190. ISBN 978-81-7023-369-5. "A short history of long speeches". BBC News. 25 September 2009. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Majid, Amir A. (2007). "Can Self Determination Solve the Kashmir Dispute?" (PDF). Romanian Journal of European Affairs. 7 (3): 38. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 March 2012. Sankar Ghose (1993). Jawaharlal Nehru, a Biography. Allied Publishers. pp. 266–268. ISBN 978-81-7023-369-5. Li, Jianglin; Wilf, Susan (2016). Tibet in agony : Lhasa 1959. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. pp. 40–41. ISBN 978-0-674-08889-4. OCLC 946579956. The full text of this agreement (which entered into force on 3 June 1954): "Treaties and international agreements registered or filed and recorded with the Secretariat of the United Nations" (PDF). United Nations Treaty Series. New York: United Nations. 1958. pp. 57–81. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 March 2012. Retrieved 14 August 2012. "Nehru's India". Mint. 23 May 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2021. Nayudu, Swapna Kona (8 November 2016). "India's moment in the Suez Canal crisis". Business Line. Retrieved 15 August 2021. Mathai (1978). Reminiscences of the Nehru Age. "Assassination Attempt on Nehru Made in Car". Gettysburg Times. 22 March 1955. Retrieved 14 August 2021. "Rickshaw Boy Arrested for Nehru Attack". Sarasota Herald Tribune. 14 March 1955. Retrieved 14 August 2021. "Rickshaw Boy Arrested for Attempting to Kill Nehru". The Victoria Advocate. 14 March 1955. Retrieved 14 August 2021. "Knife Wielder Jumps on Car of Indian Premier". The Telegraph. 12 March 1955. Retrieved 14 August 2021. Covertaction Quarterly. Covert Action Publications. 1992. p. 9. William Blum (2006). Rogue State: A Guide to the Worlds Only Superpower. Zed Books. p. 50. ISBN 9781842778272. "Police Say Nehru's Assassination Plot is Thwarted". Altus Times-Democrat. 4 June 1956. Retrieved 14 August 2021. "Bombay Police Thwart Attempt on Nehru's Life". Oxnard Press-Courier. 4 June 1956. Retrieved 14 August 2021. "Bomb Explodes on Nehru's Route". Toledo Blade. 30 September 1961. Retrieved 14 August 2021. Mathai, M.O. (1979). My Days with Nehru. Vikas Publishing House. Roberts, Elizabeth Mauchline (2017) [1974], Gandhi, Nehru and Modern India, Routledge Library Editions:British in India, Routledge, ISBN 978-1-00-063959-9 Sarvepalli Gopal (2014). Jawaharlal Nehru: A Biography Volume 3 1956-1964. Random House. p. 293. ISBN 978-1-4735-2189-6. Asia Society (1988). "Jawaharlal Nehru". In Embree, Ainslie T. (ed.). Encyclopedia of Asian History. Vol. 3. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. pp. 98–100. ISBN 978-0-684-18899-7. Kanwar Raj. "The evening 58 years ago when I saw off Nehru on his last flight". Deccan Herald. Retrieved 27 May 2022. BBC ON THIS DAY | 27 | 1964: Light goes out in India as Nehru dies Archived 11 August 2013 at the Wayback Machine. BBC News. Retrieved 17 March 2011. Brady, Thomas F. (29 May 1964). "1.5 Million View Rites for Nehrus; Procession Route Jammed as Indians and Foreigners Pay Last Respects". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 18 May 2017. "Letter to the President of India on the Death of Prime Minister Nehru". The American Presidency Project. 27 May 1964. Retrieved 21 February 2023. Daily Report, Foreign Radio Broadcasts. 1964. p. 2. Retrieved 21 March 2024. Mideast Mirror. Arab News Agency. 1964. p. 18. Iran Society (Calcutta, India) (10 March 2024). Indo-iranica. Iran Society. p. 12. Pandey, B.N. (1976). Nehru. Palgrave Macmillan UK. p. 436. ISBN 978-1-349-00792-9. Pakistan. Safārah (U.S.) (10 March 1963). Pakistan Affairs. Information Division, Embassy of Pakistan. p. 37. West Bengal. Director of Information. 1964. p. 137. "From the archive, 28 May 1964: The death of Mr Nehru, hero and architect of modern India". The Guardian. 28 May 2014. Retrieved 14 August 2021. "A Man Who, with All His Mind and Heart, Loved India". Life Magazine. Time Inc. 5 June 1964. p. 32. "India Mourning Nehru, 74, Dead of a Heart Attack; World Leaders Honor Him". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 22 March 2017. Retrieved 28 March 2017. Pathak, Vikas (17 August 2018). "Atal Bihari Vajpayee, the orator: Speech that sounded like poetry". The Hindu. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 7 January 2022. "Vajpayee on Nehru's death: Bharat Mata has lost her favourite prince". ThePrint. 16 August 2018. Retrieved 7 January 2022. In the Ramayana, Maharashi Valmiki has said of Lord Rama that he brought the impossible together. In Panditji's life, we see a glimpse of what the great poet said. He was a devotee of peace and yet the harbinger of revolution, he was a devotee of non-violence but advocated every weapon to defend freedom and honour. Palmer, Norman D. (12 January 2007). "The 1962 Election in North Bombay" (PDF). cs.nyu.edu. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 March 2012. Retrieved 14 August 2021. Fuller, C. J. (30 December 1976). The Nayars today – Christopher John Fuller. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-29091-3. Retrieved 11 July 2012 – via Google Books. Michael Brecher, and Janice Gross Stein, eds., India and world politics: Krishna Menon's view of the world (Praeger Publishing, 1968). Chaudhuri, R. (2014). Forged in Crisis: India and the United States Since 1947. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. p. 108. ISBN 978-0-19-935486-3. "We ensured B R Ambedkar was chairman of drafting committee of Constitution: Congress". The Economic Times. 30 November 2015. Retrieved 14 August 2021. Jivanta Schoettli (2011). Vision and Strategy in Indian Politics: Jawaharlal Nehru's Policy Choices and the Designing of Political Institutions. Routledge. p. 88. ISBN 978-1-136-62787-3. "International Urdu conference from Nov. 10". The Hindu. 7 November 2010. Archived from the original on 11 November 2010. Retrieved 13 April 2012. Chawla, Muhammad (2016). "Maulana Azad and the Demand for Pakistan: A Reappraisal". Journal of the Pakistan Historical Society. 64 (3): 7–24. Archived from the original on 17 November 2020. Retrieved 11 August 2020. Singh, Pradyuman (19 January 2021). Bihar General Knowledge Digest. Prabhat Prakashan. ISBN 978-93-5266-769-7. Anwarul Haque Haqqi; Indian Political Science Association (1986). Indian Democracy at the Crossroads. Mittal Publications. p. 123. GGKEY:X2U27GYQ2L1. Mahendra Prasad Singh (1981). Split in a Predominant Party: The Indian National Congress in 1969. Abhinav Publications. p. 50. ISBN 978-81-7017-140-9. Da, S (2001). "The Nehru years in Indian politics" (PDF). Edinburgh Papers in South Asian Studies. 16: 24. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 September 2021. Retrieved 10 September 2021. G.G. Mirchandani (June 2003). 320 Million Judges. Abhinav Publications. pp. 177–178. ISBN 978-81-7017-061-7. "Nation pays homage to Govind Ballabh Pant". The Times of India. 10 September 2006. Archived from the original on 1 July 2012. "Govind Ballabh Pant Engineering College, Pauri Garhwal, Uttarakhand". Gbpec.net. Archived from the original on 25 December 2012. Retrieved 1 January 2013. "Padma Awards Directory (1954–2007)" (PDF). Ministry of Home Affairs. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 April 2009. Retrieved 26 November 2010. Jivanta Schoettli (2012). Vision and Strategy in Indian Politics: Jawaharlal Nehru's Policy Choices and the Designing of Political Institutions. Oxon: Routledge. p. 106. ISBN 978-1-136-62787-3. S. A. Palekar (2012). Development Administration. New Delhi: PHI Learning. p. 74. ISBN 978-81-203-4582-9. Malhotra, Inder (26 September 2014). "Once upon a plan". The Indian Express. Retrieved 11 July 2016. "Reference Material 2010 Notes of the Functioning of Various DiviionsI" (PDF). Planning Commission of India. 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 December 2016. Retrieved 11 July 2016. M M Sury (2003). "India: Central Government Budgets – 1947–48 to 2003–04". New Century Publications. Retrieved 20 July 2016. "North Block Mavericks". Business Standard. 1 March 1997. Retrieved 11 July 2016. D K Rangnekar (2012). The Politics of Poverty: Planning India's Development. New Delhi: SAGE Publications. p. 134. ISBN 978-81-321-0902-0. "dated December 21, 1954: State Bank of India". The Hindu. 21 December 2004. Archived from the original on 21 December 2016. Retrieved 12 July 2016. Thaur, B. S. (20 April 2003). "Tracing history of the SBI". The Tribune. Retrieved 12 July 2016. Arvind Panagariya (2008). India: The Emerging Giant. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-989014-9. P S Palande; R S Shah (2003). Insurance in India: Changing Policies and Emerging Opportunities. New Delhi: Response Books. p. 31. ISBN 978-0-7619-9747-4. Ziaul Hasan Faruqi (1999). Dr. Zakir Hussain, Quest for Truth. Delhi: APH Publishing. p. 280. ISBN 978-81-7648-056-7. Niranjan Rajadhyaksha (7 December 2012). "The anxiety that lingers". Mint. Retrieved 11 July 2016. Steinberg, Blema S. (2008). Women in power : the personalities and leadership styles of Indira Gandhi, Golda Meir, and Margaret Thatcher. Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press. p. 20. ISBN 978-0-7735-3356-1. Retrieved 2 December 2015. Steinberg, Blema S. (2008). Women in power : the personalities and leadership styles of Indira Gandhi, Golda Meir, and Margaret Thatcher. Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press. p. 20. ISBN 978-0-7735-3356-1. Retrieved 2 December 2015. Upadhyaya, Prakash Chandra (1989). "Review of Marxist State Governments in India, Politics, Economics and Society by T. J. Nossiter". Social Scientist. 17 (1/2 January – February 1989): 84–91. doi:10.2307/3520112. JSTOR 3520112. Frank, Katherine (2002). Indira: The Life of Indira Nehru Gandhi. Houghton Mifflin Books. p. 250. ISBN 978-0-395-73097-3.[permanent dead link] Marlay, Ross; Clark D. Neher (1999). Patriots and Tyrants: Ten Asian Leaders. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 368. ISBN 978-0-8476-8442-7. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021. Retrieved 19 August 2021. Reddy, Sheela (23 February 2004). "If I Weren't A Sanyasin, He Would Have Married Me". Outlook. Archived from the original on 8 August 2015. Retrieved 14 August 2021. Srinivasan, Rajeev. "The Rediff Interview / Stanley Wolpert 'I have tried to tell Nehru's story as honestly as possible'". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 6 August 2015. Wolpert, Stanley (1996). Nehru: A Tryst with Destiny. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-510073-0. Retrieved 6 August 2015. "Nehru-Edwina were in deep love, says daughter". The Indian Express. 15 July 2007. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 13 August 2021. "Love, longing & politics!". The Times of India. 21 April 2010. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. Retrieved 2 September 2012. Philip Ziegler, Mountbatten (1985) p. 473. Jayakar, Pupul (1995). Indira Gandhi, a biography (Rev. ed.). New Delhi, India: Penguin. pp. 90–92. ISBN 978-0-14-011462-1. Bose, Mihir (2004). Raj, secrets, revolution : a life of Subhas Chandra Bose. Norwich: Grice Chapman. pp. 137, 160. ISBN 978-0-9545726-4-8. Sarvepalii, Gopal. Jawaharlal Nehru: A Biography, Volume 3; Volumes 1956–1964. Oxford University Press. p. 17. Nehru was still an agnostic, but a Hindu agnostic. "The death of Nehru: From the archive, 28 May 1964". TheGuardian.com. 28 May 2013. Vohra, Ashok (27 May 2011). "Nehru's Scientific Humanism". Times of India. Retrieved 18 August 2017. Sarvepalli Gopal (8 January 2015). Jawaharlal Nehru;a Biography Volume 1 1889–1947. Random House. ISBN 978-1-4735-2187-2. Thursby, Gene R. (1975). Hindu-Muslim Relations in British India: A Study of Controversy, Conflict, and Communal Movements in Northern India 1923–1928. BRILL. p. 1. ISBN 978-90-04-04380-0. A. A. Parvathy (1994). Secularism and Hindutva, a Discursive Study. Codewood Process & Printing. p. 42. Mohammad Jamil Akhtar. Babri Masjid: a tale untold. Genuine Publications. p. 359. Ram Puniyani (1999). Communal Threat to Secular Democracy. Kalpaz Publications. p. 113. Sankar Ghose (1993). Jawaharlal Nehru, a Biography. Alied Publishers. p. 210. Jahanbegloo, Ramin Conversations with Isaiah Berlin (London 2000), ISBN 978-1-84212-164-1 pp. 201–202 Gail Omvedt (1980). We Will Smash this Prison!.: Indian Women in Struggle. Women in the Third World series. Zed Press. p. 124. ISBN 978-0-905762-44-9. Jawaharlal Nehru was the most famous leader, next to Mahatma Gandhi, of the Indian independence movement Wiatr, J.J. (2022). Political Leadership Between Democracy and Authoritarianism: Comparative and Historical Perspectives. Verlag Barbara Budrich. p. 71. ISBN 978-3-8474-1693-7. scholars underline the importance of demographic political culture and its roots in the decades of peaceful struggle for independence (Vidyarthi 1967). Next to Gandhi himself, it was Nehru who deserved credit for such development. Patil, V.T. (1987). Studies on Nehru. Facet Books International. p. 117. ISBN 978-0-932377-14-2. Among the many giants of the freedom movement, next to Gandhi, Nehru was the tallest Cannon, P.G.; Cannon, G.; Brine, K. (1995). Objects of Enquiry: The Life, Contributions, and Influences of Sir William Jones, 1746-1794. New York University Press. p. 158. ISBN 978-0-8147-1517-8. "In the generation that won independence for India and the one following it [...] Jawaharlal Nehru, the second most important Indian nationalist next to Gandhi Madan, Karuna (13 November 2014). "The relevance of Jawaharlal Nehru". gulfnews.com. Retrieved 13 August 2021. Pal, R. M. (September 1997). "Universal primary education first on the Prime Minster's agenda". pucl.org. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 13 August 2021. "Introduction". AIIMS. Archived from the original on 25 June 2014. "Institute History". Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur. Archived from the original on 13 August 2007. Retrieved 13 August 2021. "Nehru, a 'Queer Mixture of East and West,' Led the Struggle for a, Modern India; Devoted His Life to Nation's Cause; Blended Skill in Politics With the Spiritualism of His Mentor, Gandhi". The New York Times. 28 May 1964. Vertovec, Steven (2014). Routledge International Handbook of Diversity Studies. Routledge International Handbooks. Taylor & Francis. p. 140. ISBN 978-1-317-60069-5. Harrison, Selig S. (July 1956). "The Challenge to Indian Nationalism". Foreign Affairs. 34 (2): 620–636. doi:10.2307/20031191. JSTOR 20031191. "Architect of modern India". Frontline. 8 November 2018. Retrieved 4 December 2021. "'Architect of modern India': Congress pays tributes to Jawaharlal Nehru on death anniversary". The New Indian Express. 27 May 2021. Retrieved 4 December 2021. "Jawaharlal Nehru: Architect of modern India". Hindustan Times. 14 November 2019. Retrieved 4 December 2021. Ian Hall, The Conversation (22 August 2021). "Nehru, the architect of modern India, also helped discredit European imperialism". Scroll.in. Retrieved 4 December 2021. Dixit, J. N. (14 November 2021). "From the archives: How Jawaharlal Nehru shaped India in the 20th century". India Today. Retrieved 4 December 2021. "Editorial: Master's voice". www.telegraphindia.com. Retrieved 4 December 2021. "Opinion: Nehruvian legacy is his idea of India". The Siasat Daily. 26 May 2021. Retrieved 4 December 2021. Service, Tribune News. "A thousand lies can't dwarf the giant Nehru was". Tribuneindia News Service. Retrieved 4 December 2021. "Nehru, the real architect of modern India". Deccan Chronicle. 16 November 2014. Retrieved 4 December 2021. Subramanian, V.K. (2003). The Great Ones Vol. IV. Abhinav Publications. p. 161. ISBN 978-81-7017-472-1. He was the greatest figure after Gandhi in the history of modern India. Inder Malhotra (2014). Indira Gandhi: A Personal and Political Biography. Hay House. p. 124. ISBN 978-93-84544-16-4. Jawaharlal Nehru, the greatest of all Indians after Gandhi and free India's first prime minister Bhatia, V. (1989). Jawaharlal Nehru, as Scholars of Socialist Countries See Him. Panchsheel Publishers. p. 105. Jawaharlal Nehru was incomparably the greatest figure after Gandhi in our history - a man of dynamic force, intellectual power and profound vision. Lok Rajya. Directorate-General of Information and Public Relations. 1965. p. 40. Nehru was the greatest man produced by the nation after Mahatma Gandhi and the torch he lit must remain burning forever. Guha, Ramachandra (2005). "Verdicts on Nehru: Rise and Fall of a Reputation". Economic and Political Weekly. 40 (19): 1958–1962. eISSN 2349-8846. ISSN 0012-9976. JSTOR 4416605. Retrieved 21 February 2023. Craig Jeffrey, John Harriss (2014). Keywords for Modern India. Oxford University Press. p. 134. ISBN 978-0-19-966563-1. Retrieved 21 February 2023. Kaur, Navtej (2008). "Nehru as a prophet of world peace". The Indian Journal of Political Science. 69 (1). Indian Political Science Association: 203–222. ISSN 0019-5510. JSTOR 41856405. He was generally praised and supported for his statesmanship. Nehru did a commendable job in promoting world peace. As a statesman, committed to world peace, he strive hard to promote international understanding and co-operation Finck, L.; Hayes, J.P. (1987). Jawaharlal Nehru. World leaders past & present. Chelsea House Publishers. p. 95. ISBN 978-0-87754-543-9. Nehru was now given a special title of respect by the people of India. They called him Pandit, or Wise One. Thakur, Harish (2010). Gandhi Nehru and Globalization. Concept Publishing. ISBN 978-81-8069-684-8. "Remembering Jawaharlal Nehru". Deccan Chronicle. 29 May 2019. "Modish Designs". outlookindia. 4 February 2022. Lahiri, Tripti (20 January 2012). "A Profile of the Nehru Jacket". blogs.wsj.com. Archived from the original on 3 March 2015. Retrieved 13 August 2021. "Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fund". Archived from the original on 7 November 2015. Retrieved 13 August 2021. "The relevance of Jawaharlal Nehru". gulfnews.com. 13 November 2014. India Today, Volume 22. Thomson Living Media India Limited. 1997. p. 77. on the choice of the greatest Indian since 1947. Jawaharlal Nehru was the clear choice of 42 percent Sengupta, Uttam (20 August 2012). "A Measure Of The Man". Outlook. Retrieved 13 August 2021. Suman Bhuchar (2002). "Seth, Roshan". In Alison Donnell (ed.). Companion to Contemporary Black British Culture. Routledge. p. 276. ISBN 978-1-134-70025-7. "What makes Shyam special..." The Hindu. 17 January 2003. Archived from the original on 27 June 2003. Retrieved 6 June 2013. "Universal Studio Scraps Nehru-Edwina Film". Sharma, Garima (7 March 2010). "Shyam Benegal on his film Nehru". The Times of India. Retrieved 13 August 2021. Documentary Today. Films Division, Government of India. 2010. p. 7. "Jawaharlal Nehru Biography – Childhood, Facts & Achievements of India's First Prime Minister". culturalindia.net. Archived from the original on 13 August 2017. Retrieved 25 August 2017. "Naunihal". Shemaroo. YouTube. 22 February 2016. Archived from the original on 9 June 2021. "Ab Dilli Dur Nahin (1957)". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved 13 August 2021. Ashish Rajadhyaksha; Paul Willemen (10 July 2014). "Mir, Ezra". Encyclopedia of Indian Cinema. Taylor & Francis. pp. 9–. ISBN 978-1-135-94325-7. Retrieved 17 August 2015. Richard Meran Barsam (1992). Nonfiction Film: A Critical History. Indiana University Press. p. 271. ISBN 978-0-253-20706-7. Retrieved 26 February 2013. "India, 1951–1960". Movie Movie. 2009–2012. Archived from the original on 13 January 2018. Retrieved 29 September 2022. AWARDS: The multi-faceted playwright[usurped] Frontline, Vol. 16, No. 3, 30 January – 12 February 1999. Sachindananda (2006). "Girish Karnad". Authors speak. Sahitya Akademi. p. 58. ISBN 978-81-260-1945-8. "Children's Day: Popular Books On and By Jawaharlal Nehru". The Times of India. 13 November 2020. Balakrishnan, Anima (4 August 2006). "Young World : From dad with love". The Hindu. Chennai, India. Archived from the original on 12 November 2009. Retrieved 31 October 2008. Roberts, Adam; Willis, Michael J.; McCarthy, Rory; Garton Ash, Timothy (2016). Civil Resistance in the Arab Spring: Triumphs and Disasters. OUP Oxford. p. 44. ISBN 978-0-19-108833-9. Nehru's books were translated into Arabic and widely read Rana, A.P. (1994). Four Decades of Indo-U.S. Relations: A Commemorative Retrospective. Har-Anand Publications. p. 203. ISBN 978-81-241-0156-8. Nehru's books were widely read and reviewed. Gunther, John (1942), Inside Asia, New York and London: Harper and Brothers, p. 429 Brecher, Michael (23 September 2016), Political Leadership and Charisma: Nehru, Ben-Gurion, and Other 20th-Century Political Leaders, Intellectual Odyssey I, London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 80–81, ISBN 978-3-319-32627-6 Crocker, Walter (2008), Nehru: A Contemporary's Estimate, Penguin Random House India, ISBN 9788184002133 Jack, Ian (1 May 2007), Noble words, Great speeches of the 20th-century: Nehru, Guardian Khan, Laiqh A. (18 October 2020). "Nehru's address at UoM convocation in 1948 remains untraceable". The Hindu. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 21 July 2021. "Who We Are". globalcenters.columbia.edu. Retrieved 5 July 2021. "Conferment of Honorary Degree of Doctor". Keio University. Retrieved 21 July 2021. Girija Kanta Mookerjee (1972). Nehru, the Humanist. Trimurti Publications. p. 8. Diwanchand Institute of National Affairs; Indian Council of World Affairs (1955). Indian Recorder & Digest (in German). p. 23. Retrieved 11 November 2023. "Padma Awards Directory (1954–2007)" (PDF). Ministry of Home affairs. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 April 2009. Retrieved 26 November 2010. Prasad, Rajendra (1958). Speeches of President Rajendra Prasad 1952–1956. The Publication Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, GOI. pp. 340–341.: "In doing so, for once, I may be said to be acting unconstitutionally, as I am taking this step on my own initiative and without any recommendation or advice from my Prime Minister; but I know that my action will be endorsed most enthusiastically not only by my Cabinet and other Ministers but by the country as a whole." "Peace Laureates – Living Humanity". livinghumanity. 2 September 1996. Retrieved 21 March 2024. "The Order of the Companions of O.R. Tambo". The Presidency. 25 April 2019. Archived from the original on 4 August 2023. Retrieved 25 June 2023. "Decoration Ceremony of the First Class Star of the Republic of Indonesia and the First Class Star of Services Awarded by the Government of Indonesia" (PDF). Government of the Republic Indonesia. 12 December 1995. Retrieved 11 January 2021. Ghose, Sankar (1993). Jawaharlal Nehru. Allied Publishers. ISBN 978-81-7023-369-5. Kopstein, Jeffrey (2005). Comparative Politics: Interests, Identities, and Institutions in a Changing Global Order. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-139-44604-4. Moraes, Frank (2007). Jawaharlal Nehru. Jaico Publishing House. ISBN 978-81-7992-695-6. Gopal, S. and Uma Iyengar, eds The Essential Writings of Jawaharlal Nehru (Oxford University Press, 2003) ISBN 978-0-19-565324-3 Autobiography: Toward freedom, Oxford University Press Letters for a Nation: From Jawaharlal Nehru to His Chief Ministers 1947–1963 (Penguin UK, 2015). Letters from a father to his daughter by Jawaharlal Nehru, Children's Book Trust Independence and After: A collection of the more important speeches of Jawaharlal Nehru from September 1946 to May 1949 (1949). Delhi: The Publications Division, Government of India. A Tryst With Destiny historic speech made by Jawaharlal Nehru on 14 August 1947 Baru, Sanjaya (12 April 2021). India's Power Elite: Class, Caste and Cultural Revolution. Penguin Random House India Private Limited. ISBN 978-93-90914-76-0. Prime Minister Modi decided to alter the character of the premises as part of his campaign to liberate India from the Nehruvian intellectual inheritance. Brown, Judith M. (1984), "The Mountbatten Viceroyalty. Announcement and Reception of the 3 June Plan, 31 May-7 July 1947", The English Historical Review, 99 (392): 667–668, doi:10.1093/ehr/XCIX.CCCXCII.667 Lumby, E.W.R. (1954), The Transfer of Power in India, 1945–1947, London: George Allen and Unwin Bayly, C. A. "The Ends of Liberalism and the Political Thought of Nehru's India." Modern Intellectual History 12.3 (2015): 605–626. Nehru: A Political Biography by Michael Brecher (1959). London:Oxford University Press. "Nehru, Jawaharlal." in Ainslie T. Embree, ed., Encyclopedia of Asian History. Vol. 3. Charles Scribner's Sons. New York. (1988): 98–100. Fonseca, Rena. "Nehru and the Diplomacy of Nonalignment." The Diplomats, 1939–1979 (Princeton University Press, 2019) pp. 371–397. online Gopal, Sarvapelli. "Nehru and minorities." Economic and Political Weekly (1988): 2463–2466. online Gopal, Sarvepalli. "The Formative Ideology of Jawaharlal Nehru." Economic and Political Weekly (1976): 787–792 online. Gopal, Sarvepalli. Jawaharlal Nehru: A Biography Volume 1 1889–1947 (1975); Jawaharlal Nehru Vol.2 1947–1956 (1979); Jawaharlal Nehru: A Biography Volume 3 1956–1964 (2014), a major scholarly biography; excerpt vol 1 Guha, Ramachandra. "Jawaharlal Nehru." in Makers of Modern Asia (Harvard University Press, 2014) pp. 117–146. Heimsath, C.H. and Surjit Mansingh. A diplomatic history of modern India (1971) online Louro, Michele L. Comrades against imperialism: Nehru, India, and interwar internationalism (Cambridge UP, 2018). Malone, David et al. eds. The Oxford Handbook of Indian Foreign Policy. (2015) excerpt; a comprehensive overview by over 50 leading experts. Purushotham, Sunil. "World history in the atomic age: Past, present and future in the political thought of Jawaharlal Nehru." Modern Intellectual History 14.3 (2017): 837–867. Raghavan, Srinath. War and peace in modern India (Springer, 2016); focus on Nehru's foreign policy Raghavan, Srinath. The Most Dangerous Place: A History of the United States in South Asia. (Penguin Random House India, 2018); also published as Fierce Enigmas: A History of the United States in South Asia.(2018). online review Joseph Stanislaw and Daniel A. Yergin (1988). "Commanding Heights" (PDF). New York: Simon & Schuster, Inc. Tharoor, Shashi. Nehru: The Invention of India (2003) Arcade Books ISBN 978-1-55970-697-1 Tyson, Geoffrey. Nehru: The Years of Power (1966). London: Pall Mall Press. Zachariah, Benjamin. Nehru (2004) excerpt Jawaharlal Nehru at official website of Indian National Congress Jawaharlal Nehru at Encyclopædia Britannica Jawaharlal Nehru at official website of Prime Minister's Office (India) 70th Anniversary of Indian Independence – Nehru's Birthday Dinner Programme – UK Parliament Living Heritage Profile of Nehru in India Today Nehru on Communalism Jawaharlal Nehru materials in the South Asian American Digital Archive (SAADA) Works by Jawaharlal Nehru at Open Library Jawaharlal Nehru at IMDb Jawaharlal Nehru at BBC Portals:  Biography  India  Literature  Politics  Society Jawaharlal Nehru at Wikipedia's sister projects: Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata