Novak Djokovic (Serbian: Новак Ђоковић, Novak Đoković, pronounced [nôʋaːk dʑôːkoʋitɕ] ; born 22 May 1987) is a Serbian professional tennis player who is currently ranked world No. 1 in singles by the Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP). Djokovic has been ranked No. 1 for a record total of 419 weeks in a record 13 different years, and finished as the year-end No. 1 a record eight times. Djokovic has won a record 24 Grand Slam men's singles titles, including a record ten Australian Open titles. Overall, he has won 98 singles titles, including a record 71 Big Titles: 24 majors, a record 40 Masters, and a record seven ATP Finals. Djokovic is the only man in tennis history to be the reigning champion of all four majors at once across three different surfaces. In singles, he is the only man to achieve a triple Career Grand Slam, and the only player to complete a career Golden Masters, a feat he has achieved twice. Djokovic began his professional career in 2003. In 2008, at age 20, he disrupted Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal's streak of 11 consecutive majors by winning his first major title at the Australian Open. By 2010, Djokovic had begun to separate himself from the rest of the field and, as a result, the trio of Federer, Nadal and Djokovic was referred to as the "Big Three" among fans and commentators. In 2011, Djokovic ascended to No. 1 for the first time, winning three majors and a then-record five Masters titles while going 10–1 against Nadal and Federer. He remained the most successful player in men's tennis for the rest of the decade. In 2015, Djokovic had his most successful season, reaching a single-season record 15 consecutive finals, winning a season-record 10 Big Titles while having a record 31 victories over the top-10 players. His dominant run extended through to the 2016 French Open, where he completed his first Career Grand Slam and a non-calendar year Grand Slam, becoming the first man since Rod Laver in 1969 to hold all four majors simultaneously and setting a rankings points record of 16,950. In 2017, Djokovic suffered from an elbow injury that weakened his results until the 2018 Wimbledon Championships, where he won the title while ranked No. 21 in the world. Djokovic has continued to be a dominant force on the tour since then, winning 12 major titles and completing his second and third Career Grand Slams. Due to his opposition to COVID-19 vaccine, Djokovic was forced to skip many tournaments in 2022, notably the Australian Open and the US Open; two major events he was the favourite to win. One year after the Australian visa controversy, Djokovic made a successful comeback to reclaim the 2023 Australian Open trophy, and shortly after he claimed the French Open to take the outright record for most men's singles majors won in history. Representing Serbia, Djokovic led the national tennis team to its first Davis Cup title in 2010, and to the inaugural ATP Cup title in 2020. He also won the bronze medal for his country at the 2008 Beijing Olympics. Djokovic is a recipient of the Order of Karađorđe's Star, Order of St. Sava, and the Order of the Republika Srpska. His other awards include being named the Laureus World Sportsman of the Year four times (2012, 2015, 2016 and 2019) and the 2011 BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year. Beyond competition, Djokovic was elected as the president of the ATP Player Council in 2016. He stepped down in 2020 to front a new player-only tennis association; the Professional Tennis Players Association (PTPA) founded by him and Vasek Pospisil, citing the need for players to have more influence on the tour and advocating better prize money structure for lower ranked players. Djokovic is an active philanthropist. He is the founder of Novak Djokovic Foundation, which is committed to supporting children from disadvantaged communities. Djokovic was appointed a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador in 2015. Novak Djokovic was born on 22 May 1987 in Belgrade, SR Serbia, SFR Yugoslavia, to Dijana (née Žagar) and Srdjan Djokovic. He is of paternal Serbian and maternal Croatian descent. His two younger brothers, Marko and Djordje, have also played professional tennis. Djokovic began playing tennis at the age of four, after his parents gave him a mini-racket and a soft foam ball, which his father said became "the most beloved toy in his life". His parents then sent him to a tennis camp in Novi Sad. In the summer of 1993, as a six-year-old, he was sent to a tennis camp organized by the Teniski Klub Partizan and overseen by Yugoslav tennis player Jelena Genčić at Mount Kopaonik, where Djokovic's parents ran a fast-food parlour. Genčić worked with Djokovic over the following six years, convincing him to hit his backhand with two hands instead of the single hand used by his idol, Pete Sampras. Djokovic has credited Genčić for "shaping my mind as a human being, but also as a professional". During the Yugoslav Wars in the late 1990s, Serbia had to endure embargoes and NATO bombings because of the Kosovo War. but that fear and exhaustion made him tougher and drove him to pursue tennis with greater determination. At one point he had to train inside a disused swimming pool converted into a tennis court. Due to his rapid development, Genčić contacted Nikola Pilić and in September 1999 Djokovic moved to the Pilić tennis academy in Oberschleißheim, Germany, spending four years there. Pilić made him serve against a wall for several months to improve his technique, and he had him working with a rubber exercise band for a year to improve flexibility in his wrist. One of the players he trained with at the Niki Pilić academy was future world No. 10 Ernests Gulbis, with whom he allegedly had a fiery rivalry. His father also took him to train at academies in the United States, Italy and Germany. Because of the high cost of traveling and training his father took out high-interest loans to help pay for his son's tennis education, putting Djokovic under immense pressure to deliver. He believes the impact this had on him could be the reason behind his prowess under pressure. He met his future wife, Jelena Ristić, in high school, and began dating her in 2005. The two became engaged in September 2013, and on 10 July 2014 the couple were married on Sveti Stefan in Montenegro. He and Ristić had their first child, a boy, in October 2014. Their daughter was born in 2017. Djokovic is a self-described fan of languages, speaking Serbian, English, French, German, Italian, Portuguese, Chinese, Russian, Arabic, Japanese and Spanish. In 2001, Djokovic dominated the U14 circuit in the ETA Junior Tour, currently known as the Tennis Europe Junior Tour, winning his first ETA title in a second category tournament in Messina, defeating his compatriot Bojan Božović in the final, and his second in Livorno after beating the top seed and future rival Andy Murray in the semifinals, and the second seed Aljoscha Thron in the final, 5–7, 7–5, 6–4. In July, Djokovic was the top seed at the U14 European championship, held in Sanremo, where he won the singles tournament over Lukáš Lacko, and the doubles with Božović over the Russian pair of Alexandre Krasnoroutskiy and Mikhail Bekker. Djokovic also led the Serbian team to victory in the European Summer Cup, thus ending the year as a European champion in singles, doubles and in team competition, while also winning the silver medal at the ITF World Junior Championship for players under 14 in a team competition for Yugoslavia. Djokovic ended 2001 at the top of the ETA rankings for U14s, one place ahead of Murray at No. 2. In 2002, Djokovic continued his dominance, now in the U16 circuit. In June, Djokovic won two prestigious tournaments in France, the Derby Cadets in La Boule, where he beat future world No. 6 Gaël Monfils in the final, and Le Pontet in Avignon. In September, Djokovic won his first ITF tournament in Pančevo after winning all of his matches in straight sets, some of which against rivals three years older than him, including the No. 1 seed David Savić in the final. In November, Djokovic participated in the prestigious Prince Cup and Junior Orange Bowl in Miami, defeating home favourite Stephen Bass to win the former despite having to play the final just a few hours after winning a qualifier round for the Orange Bowl, where he beat two Americans in the main draw before losing in the third round to Marcos Baghdatis. In juniors, he compiled a singles win-loss record of 40–11 (and 23–6 in doubles), reaching a combined junior world ranking of No. 24 in February 2004. At the junior Grand Slam events, his best showing was at the Australian Open where he reached the semifinals in 2004. He also played at the French Open and US Open junior events in 2003. In January 2003, at age 15, Djokovic played his first match in a professional tournament after receiving a wildcard from Pilić to enter a Futures event in Oberschleißheim, the suburb of Munich where Pilić had his academy, but despite knowing the court where he played very well, Djokovic still lost to Alex Rădulescu in two tight sets, 7–5, 7–6. Pilić also had influence outside of Germany and requested a wildcard for Djokovic to play in a Futures in Belgrade in June, where he beat the No. 4 seed in the first round and then Cesar Ferrer-Victoria in the final, gaining him his first world ranking of No. 767. At age 16, he finished 2003 ranked world No. 687. On 11 April 2004, the 16-year-old Djokovic earned his first official ATP victory when he defeated No. 1340 Janis Skroderis 6–2, 6–2 in a dead rubber held in Belgrade during a Davis Cup tie between Serbia & Montenegro and Latvia. He won his first ATP Challenger tournament in Budapest, where he started as a qualifier. In the final, played on the day of his 17th birthday, Djokovic dominated No. 232 Daniele Bracciali 6–1, 6–2. Djokovic then qualified for his first ATP Tour event, the Croatia Open Umag in July 2004, where he lost to Filippo Volandri in the first round. His success in Futures and Challenger events saw him rise into the world's Top 200 and finish 2004 as the world No. 186. In January 2005, Djokovic made his Grand Slam debut at the Australian Open, where he defeated future rival Stan Wawrinka in the second round of the qualifying competition. In the first round of the main draw, he was defeated by eventual champion Marat Safin in straight sets. Later that year, Djokovic won his first Grand Slam match at the French Open, and went on to reach the third round of both Wimbledon and the US Open, coming back from two sets down and saving multiple match points to defeat Guillermo García López in the former, and beating Gaël Monfils and Mario Ančić in the latter. Djokovic participated in four Masters events and qualified for two of them, his best performance coming in Paris, where he reached the third round and defeated fourth seed Mariano Puerta along the way. He finished the year ranked No. 78, the youngest player in the top 100. On 9 April 2006, Djokovic clinched a decisive Davis Cup win against Great Britain by defeating Greg Rusedski in four sets in the fourth match of the tie, giving Serbia and Montenegro an insurmountable 3–1 lead in their best-of-five series, thus keeping the country in the Group One Euro/African Zone of Davis Cup. Afterwards, Djokovic briefly considered moving from Serbia to play for Great Britain. The British media spoke of Djokovic's family negotiating with the Lawn Tennis Association about changing his international loyalty by joining British tennis ranks. The 18-year-old Djokovic, who was ranked 64th in the world, initially dismissed the story by saying that the talks were not serious, describing them as "the British being very kind to us after the Davis Cup." However, more than three years later, in October 2009, Djokovic confirmed that the talks between his family and the LTA throughout April and May 2006 were indeed serious: Britain was offering me a lot of opportunities and they needed someone because Andy [Murray] was the only one, and still is. That had to be a disappointment for all the money they invest. But I didn't need the money as much as I had done. I had begun to make some for myself, enough to afford to travel with a coach, and I said, "Why the heck?" I am Serbian, I am proud of being a Serbian, I didn't want to spoil that just because another country had better conditions. If I had played for Great Britain, of course I would have played exactly as I do for my country but deep inside, I would never have felt that I belonged. I was the one who took the decision. Djokovic reached his first Grand Slam quarterfinal at the French Open as the world No. 63, after upsetting ninth-ranked Fernando González in the second round. In the quarterfinals, he faced Rafael Nadal, the first-ever meeting of their historic rivalry, which Nadal won via a retirement from Djokovic after Nadal took the first two sets. This deep run at the French Open saw him reach the top 40 in the world singles rankings. At Wimbledon, he reached the fourth round, losing to seventh seed Mario Ančić in five sets. Three weeks after Wimbledon, Djokovic won his maiden ATP title at the Dutch Open in Amersfoort without losing a set, defeating Nicolás Massú in the final. He won his second career title at the Moselle Open in Metz, France, defeating Jürgen Melzer in the final, and moved into the top 20. He also reached his first career Masters quarterfinal at Madrid during the indoor hardcourt season. Djokovic finished the year ranked No. 16, the youngest player in the top 20. Djokovic began 2007 by defeating Australian Chris Guccione in the Adelaide final, before losing in the fourth round of the Australian Open to eventual champion Roger Federer in straight sets. His performances at the Masters Series events in Indian Wells, and Miami, where he was the runner-up and champion respectively, pushed him into the world's top 10. Djokovic lost the Indian Wells final to Rafael Nadal, but defeated Nadal in Key Biscayne in the quarterfinals before going on to defeat Guillermo Cañas in the final to win his maiden Masters Series title. In doing so, he became the youngest player to ever win the tournament and the first teenager to win the event since Andre Agassi in 1990. Djokovic then returned to Serbia to help his country enter the Davis Cup World Group in a match against Georgia. He won a point by defeating Georgia's George Chanturia. Later, he played in the Monte-Carlo Masters, where he was defeated by David Ferrer in the third round, and at the Estoril Open, where he defeated Richard Gasquet in the final. Djokovic then reached the quarterfinals of both the Italian Open in Rome, where he lost to Nadal, and the Hamburg Masters, where he was defeated by Carlos Moyá. At the French Open, Djokovic reached his first major semifinal, losing to eventual champion Nadal. At Wimbledon, Djokovic won a five-hour quarterfinal against Marcos Baghdatis to reach his first Wimbledon semi-final. At the time, the match had lasted just 5 minutes shy of the longest Wimbledon match played in a single day. After the match, Baghdatis stated that playing against Djokovic was “a bit like facing Andre Agassi. He is just making you move from one place to another”. Djokovic started his semifinal match against Nadal with nearly 17 hours on court, and ended up retiring with elbow problems in the third set, after winning the first and losing the second set. Djokovic's next tournament was the Canadian Open in Montreal, and he defeated No. 3 Andy Roddick in the quarterfinals, No. 2 Nadal in the semifinals, and No. 1 Federer in the final. This was the first time a player had defeated the top three ranked players in one tournament since Boris Becker in 1994. Djokovic was also only the second player, after Tomáš Berdych, to have defeated both Federer and Nadal since they became the top two players in the world. After this tournament, Björn Borg stated that Djokovic "is definitely a contender to win a Grand Slam (tournament)." The following week at the Cincinnati Masters, Djokovic lost in the second round to Moyà in straight sets. Nevertheless, he went on to reach the final of the US Open, where he had five set points in the first set and two in the second set, but lost them all before losing the match in straight sets to the top-seeded Federer. Djokovic won his fifth title of the year at the BA-CA TennisTrophy in Vienna, defeating Stanislas Wawrinka in the final. His next tournament was the Madrid Masters, where he lost to David Nalbandian in the semifinals. Djokovic, assured of finishing the year ranked No. 3, qualified for the year-ending championships, but did not advance beyond the round robin matches. He received the Golden Badge award for the best athlete in Serbia, and the Olympic Committee of Serbia declared him the best athlete in the country. Djokovic played a key role in the 2007 play-off win over Australia by winning all his matches and helping promote the Serbia Davis Cup team to the 2008 World Group. In Serbia's tie against Russia in Moscow in early 2008, Djokovic was sidelined due to influenza and missed his first singles match. He returned to win his doubles match, teaming with Nenad Zimonjić, before retiring during his singles match with Nikolay Davydenko. Djokovic started his preparations for the season by playing the Hopman Cup with fellow Serbian world No. 3 Jelena Janković where he won all of his four singles matches, including in the final against the United States, where he beat Mardy Fish in a deciding set tiebreak to level the tie, but then losing the decisive mixed doubles rubber, in which he faced former WTA No. 1 Serena Williams in a competitive event for the first time. At the Australian Open, Djokovic reached his second consecutive Grand Slam final, this time without dropping a set, including a victory over two-time defending champion Federer in the semifinals. By reaching the semifinals, Djokovic became the youngest player in the Open Era to have reached the semifinals in all four Grand Slam events. In the final, Djokovic defeated unseeded Frenchman Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in four sets to earn his first Grand Slam singles title. This marked the first time since the 2005 Australian Open that a Grand Slam singles title was not won by Federer or Nadal. Djokovic's next tournament was the Dubai Championships, where he lost in the semifinals to Roddick. At the Indian Wells Masters, Djokovic won his ninth career singles title, defeating Mardy Fish in the final. Djokovic won his tenth career singles title and fourth Master Series singles crown at the Italian Open in Rome after defeating Wawrinka in the final. The following week he lost to Nadal in the semifinals at the Hamburg Masters. At the French Open, Djokovic was the third-seeded player behind Federer and Nadal. He lost to Nadal in the semifinals in straight sets. On grass, Djokovic once again played Nadal, this time in the Artois Championships final in Queen's Club, where he lost in two sets. Djokovic entered Wimbledon seeded third but lost in the second round to Marat Safin, ending a streak of five consecutive majors where he had reached at least the semifinals. Djokovic then failed to defend his 2007 singles title at the Rogers Cup in Toronto, where he was eliminated in the quarterfinals by Andy Murray. The following week at the Cincinnati Masters, Djokovic advanced to the final, beating Nadal in the semifinals, which not only ended the Spaniard's 32-match winning streak, but also delayed Nadal's first ascension to world No. 1 by a week. In the final, he again lost to Murray in straight sets. His next tournament was the 2008 Summer Olympics, his first Olympics. He and Nenad Zimonjić, seeded second in men's doubles, were eliminated in the first round by the Czech pairing of Martin Damm and Pavel Vízner. Seeded third in singles, Djokovic lost in the semifinals to Nadal. Djokovic then defeated James Blake, the loser of the other semifinal, in the bronze medal match. After the Olympics, Djokovic entered the US Open seeded third, where he defeated Roddick in the quarterfinals. To a smattering of boos in a post-match interview, Djokovic criticized Roddick for accusing him of making excessive use of the trainer during matches and for suggesting that he was faking his injuries. His run at the US Open ended in the semifinals when he lost to Federer in four sets, in a rematch of the previous year's final. In November, Djokovic was the second seed at the year-ending Tennis Masters Cup in Shanghai, beating Juan Martín del Potro and Nikolay Davydenko in the round-robin stage, and Gilles Simon in the semifinals. In the final, Djokovic defeated Davydenko to win his first title at the year-end championship. Djokovic started the year at the Brisbane International, where he was upset by fellow Pilić academy trainee Ernests Gulbis in the first round. As defending champion at the Australian Open, Djokovic retired from his quarterfinal match with former world No. 1 Andy Roddick, primarily due to heat illness that generated muscle aches and cramps. After losing in the semifinals of the Open 13 tournament in Marseille to Tsonga, Djokovic won the singles title at the Dubai Championships, defeating Ferrer to claim his twelfth career title. The following week, Djokovic was the defending champion at the Indian Wells Masters but lost to Roddick in the quarterfinals. At the Miami Open in Key Biscayne, Djokovic beat Federer in the semifinals, before losing to Murray in the final. Djokovic reached the final of the next Masters event, the Monte-Carlo Masters on clay, losing to Nadal in the final. At the Italian Open in Rome, Djokovic failed to defend the title he had won the previous year, losing to Nadal in the final again. Djokovic was the top seed at his hometown tournament, the Serbia Open in Belgrade, beating Łukasz Kubot in the final to win his second title of the year. Djokovic then reached the semifinals of the Madrid Open without dropping a set, where he lost to Nadal despite holding three match points. The match, at 4 hours and 3 minutes, was at the time the longest three-set singles match on the ATP Tour in the Open Era. At the French Open, he lost in the third round to German Philipp Kohlschreiber. Djokovic began his grass court season at the Gerry Weber Open where after the withdrawal of Federer, he competed as the top seed. He advanced to the final, where he lost to Tommy Haas. Djokovic then lost to Haas again, this time in the quarterfinals of Wimbledon. During the US Open Series, Djokovic made the quarterfinals of the Canadian Open in Montreal before losing to Roddick. At the Cincinnati Masters, Djokovic defeated Nadal in the semifinals before losing in the final to Federer. At the US Open, Djokovic reached the semifinals, where he was defeated by Federer. Djokovic then won his third title of the year at the China Open in Beijing, beating Marin Čilić in the final. Djokovic then lost in the semifinals of the inaugural Shanghai Masters to Davydenko. At the Swiss Indoors in Basel, Djokovic recorded his first 6–0, 6–0 win at an elite event when he defeated Jan Hernych in the second round. He then defeat home player Wawrinka in the quarterfinals before saving three match to win his semifinal against Radek Štěpánek. In the final, he defeated home favourite and three-time defending champion Federer to win his fourth title of the year. Djokovic won his first Masters title of the year at the Paris Masters after defeating Nadal in the semifinals, and outlasting Gaël Monfils in a decisive set tiebreak in the final. Even though he came into the year-ending ATP Finals in London on a 10-match winning streak and as the defending champion, Djokovic failed to make it out from the round-robin stage despite beating both Davydenko and Nadal due to having fewer sets. Djokovic ended the year as the No. 3 for the third consecutive year, having played 97 matches, the most of any player on the ATP Tour, which earned him the Ironman nickname, with a 78–19 win–loss record. In addition to leading the ATP Tour in match wins, he reached a career-best ten finals, winning five titles. After playing nearly a hundred matches in 2009, Djokovic stated that he was "fed up with matches", so he decided not to play any ranking tournaments before the Australian Open, thus starting his year by playing in the AAMI Classic, an exhibition event, where he beat Tommy Haas, but lost to Fernando Verdasco and teenager Bernard Tomic. At the Australian Open, Djokovic lost a five-setter to Tsonga in the quarterfinals. Despite the loss, he attained a career-high ranking of No. 2 and went on to reach the semifinals in Rotterdam, where he lost to Mikhail Youzhny. At the Dubai Championships, Djokovic reached the final, this time defeating Youzhny to win his first title of the year and to successfully defend a title for the first time in his career. On 6–8 March 2010, Djokovic then took part in Serbia's Davis Cup tie against the United States on clay in Belgrade, where he played a key role in helping his country reach the quarterfinal in the Davis Cup for the first time in its independent history, winning both singles matches against Sam Querrey and John Isner in a 3–2 victory. After early exits at the Indian Wells and Miami Masters, Djokovic announced that he had ceased working with Todd Martin as his coach. In his first clay-court tournament of the year at the Monte-Carlo Masters, top-seeded Djokovic reached the semifinals with wins over Wawrinka and David Nalbandian before losing to Verdasco. Djokovic again lost to Verdasco at the Italian Open in Rome, this time in the quarterfinals. As the defending champion at his hometown event, the Serbia Open in Belgrade, he withdrew in the quarterfinals while trailing No. 319 Filip Krajinović, the lowest-ranked player to ever beat Djokovic as well as the only time that Djokovic lost to a player outside the Top 200. Djokovic entered the French Open seeded third, where he lost to Jürgen Melzer in five sets, marking the only time he lost a match at a major after leading two sets to love. Djokovic then won the first ATP doubles titles of his career at the Aegon Championships, pairing with Jonathan Erlich to beat Karol Beck and David Škoch in the final. In Wimbledon, he lost in the semifinals to Tomáš Berdych in straight sets. Djokovic then competed at the Canadian Open in Toronto, where he lost to Federer in the semifinals. Djokovic also competed in doubles with Nadal in a one-time, high-profile partnership. This had not happened since 1976, when Jimmy Connors and Arthur Ashe as No. 1 and No. 2 paired together as a doubles team. They lost in the first round to Canadians Milos Raonic and Vasek Pospisil. Djokovic then lost to Roddick in the quarterfinals of the Cincinnati Masters. As the third seed at the US Open, Djokovic came very close to losing in his opening round against Viktor Troicki in extreme heat. He then defeated Philipp Petzschner, James Blake, Mardy Fish, and Gaël Monfils, all in straight sets, to reach the US Open semifinals for the fourth consecutive year. There, he defeated Federer in five sets after saving two match points with forehand winners while serving to stay in the match at 4–5 in the fifth set. It was Djokovic's first victory over Federer at the US Open in four attempts, and his first victory over Federer in a Major since the 2008 Australian Open. Djokovic went on to lose to Nadal in the final, a match that saw Nadal complete his career Grand Slam. After helping Serbia defeat the Czech Republic 3–2 to make it to the Davis Cup final, Djokovic competed at the China Open as the top seed and defending champion. He won the title for the second successive year after defeating David Ferrer in the final. At the Shanghai Masters, Djokovic made a semifinal appearance, losing to Federer. Djokovic played his final tournament of the year at the ATP Finals in London, where he lost to Federer in the semifinals. Serbia progressed to the Davis Cup final, following the victories over Croatia (4–1) and the Czech Republic (3–2). Serbia came from 1–2 down to defeat France in the final tie 3–2 in Belgrade to win the nation's first Davis Cup Championship. In the final, Djokovic scored two singles points for Serbia, defeating Gilles Simon and Gaël Monfils. He was the backbone of the Serbian squad, going 7–0 in singles rubbers to lead the nation to the title, although the honour of winning the deciding rubber in the final went to compatriot Viktor Troicki. This two singles rubbers wins started a long unbeaten run that went on into 2011. Djokovic finished the year ranked No. 3, his fourth successive finish at this position. He was awarded the title "Serbian Sportsman of the year" by the Olympic Committee of Serbia and "Serbian Athlete of the year" by DSL Sport. Djokovic began his season by winning the Australian Open. He only dropped one set en route to the title, beating Federer in the semifinals and Murray in the final to capture his second Australian Open title and his first grand slam in three years. He next competed at the Dubai Championships and beat Federer in the final in straight sets. Two weeks later, Djokovic won his second Indian Wells title after beating Federer in the semifinals and Nadal in the final, both in three sets, thus becoming only the third player to beat Nadal and Federer in the same tournament twice, joining Nikolay Davydenko and David Nalbandian. In Miami, Djokovic once again beat Nadal in the finals in three sets, with the final set being decided in a tiebreak. After winning the Serbia Open, Djokovic won the Madrid and Italian Opens, beating Nadal in straight sets in both finals. Beating Nadal in back-to-back matches on clay was a notable reversal due to the fact that he had previously lost all nine matches played against Nadal on clay. He continued his good form on clay at the French Open by dropping only one set en route to the semifinal, which he lost to Federer. This loss marked Djokovic's first defeat of the season (with Federer also being the last man to defeat Djokovic in 2010), ending a 43-match win streak, which included a 41–0 start to 2011. Five weeks later at Wimbledon, Djokovic replaced Nadal as the world No. 1 and then defeated him in a four set final to take his first Wimbledon title. In Canada, Djokovic won his single-season record-breaking fifth Masters title with a three-set win over Mardy Fish in the final. At the US Open, Djokovic beat Federer and Nadal on the way to the title, thus becoming only the second player to defeat both of them in the same Major event after Juan Martín del Potro in the 2009 US Open. Djokovic saved match points en route to the title, saving two against Federer in the semifinals to complete a comeback from two sets down, thus becoming just the second player to beat Federer from two sets down after Tsonga a few months earlier in Wimbledon. Djokovic's crosscourt forehand return winner to save the first match point is widely regarded as one of the greatest shots in US Open history as well as one of the greatest returns in tennis history. This was the second consecutive US Open where Djokovic saved two match points against Federer to reach the final, and the fifth consecutive US Open where Djokovic and Federer played each other. Djokovic played Nadal in their second successive major final, winning the match in four sets and taking his first US Open title. With the victory, Djokovic extended his season record to an impressive 64–2. However, his level dropped toward the season's end, beginning with a back injury sustained during the US Open which caused him to retire from the Davis Cup, and ending with a poor showing at the ATP Finals, in which he lost to David Ferrer and Janko Tipsarević, but saved match point against Tomáš Berdych to seal his 70th and final win of the year. Djokovic concluded the season with a 70–6 record and a year-end ranking of No. 1. He was named the 2011 ITF World Champion. In total, Djokovic won ten tournaments in 2011, including three Grand Slam tournament victories at the Australian Open, Wimbledon, and the US Open. He also captured a then-record-breaking five ATP Masters titles, and won $12.6 million on the ATP Tour. Djokovic lost only two matches from the start of the season until the final match of the US Open in September, going 10–1 against Nadal and Federer, the other two best players of the year, including 6–0 against Nadal, all in Big Title finals. Djokovic also had the most dominant record versus a world No. 1 for a single season, going 5–0 against Nadal before overtaking him as the world No. 1. Pete Sampras declared Djokovic's 2011 season as the best he had seen in his lifetime, calling it "one of the best achievements in all of the sports." Boris Becker called Djokovic's season "one of the very best years in tennis of all time", noting that it "may not be the best statistically, but he's beaten Federer, he's beaten Nadal, he's beaten everybody that came around to challenge him in the biggest tournaments in the world." Rafael Nadal, who lost to Djokovic in six finals on hard, clay and grass courts, described Djokovic's performances as "probably the highest level of tennis that I ever saw." Djokovic began his season by winning the Australian Open. In the quarterfinals, he defeated David Ferrer in three sets. In the semifinal, Djokovic beat Andy Murray in five sets after 4 hours and 50 minutes, recovering from a two-sets-to-one deficit and fending off break points at 5-all in the fifth set, in a rematch of the previous year's final. In the final, Djokovic beat Rafael Nadal in five sets, recovering from losing the first set and then a break down in the final set to win 7–5. At 5 hours and 53 minutes, the match was the longest Grand Slam final in Open Era history, as well as the longest match in Australian Open history, surpassing the 5-hour and 14-minute 2009 semifinal between Nadal and Fernando Verdasco. Djokovic was beaten by John Isner in the semifinals at Indian Wells. He successfully defended his title in Miami after beating Murray in the final. In the Monte Carlo final, he lost in straight sets to Nadal. Djokovic also lost in straight sets to Nadal at the 2012 Rome Masters final. Djokovic reached his maiden French Open final by defeating Roger Federer, reaching the final of all four majors consecutively. Djokovic had the chance to become the first man since Rod Laver in 1969 to hold all four major titles at once, having won last year's Wimbledon and US Open titles as well as this year's Australian Open, but was beaten by Nadal in the final in four sets. Following the French Open, Djokovic failed to defend his title in Wimbledon, losing to Roger Federer in four sets in the semifinals. At the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, Djokovic was chosen as the flag bearer for Serbia. On 2 August 2012, Djokovic defeated French fifth seed Jo-Wilfried Tsonga and advanced to the semifinals, where he was beaten by Murray in straight sets. In the bronze medal match he lost to Juan Martín del Potro, finishing fourth. He successively defended his Rogers Cup title, dropping just a single set to Tommy Haas. Following the Rogers Cup, Djokovic made the final of the Cincinnati Masters but lost to Federer in straight sets. At the US Open, Djokovic reached his third consecutive final by beating fourth-seeded David Ferrer in a match suspended a day due to rain. He then lost to Murray in a five set final that lasted 4 hours and 54 minutes, the joint-longest US Open in history. This final also set the records for both the longest tiebreak (24 minutes) and the longest rally (54 shots) in a major final, won by Murray and Djokovic respectively. Djokovic went on to defend his China Open title, defeating Tsonga in straight sets. The following week he won the Shanghai Masters by defeating Murray in the final. With Federer's withdrawal from the Paris Masters, Djokovic regained the No. 1 ranking. On 12 November 2012, Djokovic won the 2012 ATP Finals by defeating Federer in the final. Because of his achievements in the 2012 season, Djokovic was named the 2012 ITF World Champion in men's singles by the International Tennis Federation. Djokovic started his preparations for the 2013 season by playing the Hopman Cup with Ana Ivanovic, winning three of his four singles matches, including in the final against Fernando Verdasco of Spain in an eventual 1–2 loss. In his first competitive tournament of the year, Djokovic beat Stan Wawrinka in a five-set epic in the fourth round of the Australian Open, lasting over five hours, and being deemed to be one of the best matches ever played, with Wawrinka deeming it to have been the best match that he ever played. He later defeated Andy Murray in the final of the to win a record third consecutive Australian Open trophy and the sixth major of his career. A week later, he participated in a Davis Cup match against Belgium, where he defeated Olivier Rochus to give the Serbian team a 2–0 lead. On 2 March 2013, Djokovic defeated Tomáš Berdych in the final of the Dubai Championships. Another solid week of tennis saw Djokovic reach the semifinals at the Indian Wells Masters, before losing to Juan Martín del Potro, ending his 22-match winning streak. The following week, Djokovic entered the Miami Masters as the defending champion, but lost in the fourth round to Tommy Haas in straight sets. In April, Djokovic played for Serbia against the United States in the Davis Cup quarterfinals. Djokovic clinched a tie for his team by defeating John Isner and Sam Querrey. Later that month, he defeated eight-time champion Rafael Nadal in straight sets in the final of the Monte-Carlo Masters to clinch his first title in Monte Carlo. In May, he was defeated by Grigor Dimitrov in three sets in the second round of the Madrid Open in Madrid. The following week, he lost to Berdych at the quarterfinal stage of the Rome Masters. Djokovic began his French Open campaign with wins over David Goffin, Guido Pella, and Dimitrov in straight sets. In the fourth round he recovered from a set down and defeated Philipp Kohlschreiber of Germany in four sets. In the process, he reached a 16th consecutive Grand Slam quarterfinal, which he won over Tommy Haas. Djokovic then lost to Nadal in the semifinal in a five-set epic. At Wimbledon, Djokovic defeated Juan Martín del Potro in a five-set epic that lasted 4 hours and 44 minutes, which at the time was the longest Wimbledon semifinal in history. Djokovic then lost the final to Murray in straight sets. At the Canadian Open, he lost to Nadal in the semifinal in three sets. Later, Djokovic lost to Isner in the quarterfinals in Cincinnati. Djokovic went on to reach the US Open final, where he met Nadal for the 37th time in his career (a new Open Era record). He went on to lose in four sets. In early October, Djokovic collected his fourth Beijing title by defeating Nadal in the final in straight sets. He also collected his second Shanghai Masters title, extending his winning streak to 20–0 over the last two seasons at the hard-court Asian swing of the tour. Djokovic won his 16th Masters title in Paris at the end of the season, beating David Ferrer in the final. At the 2013 ATP Finals Djokovic retained his trophy, beating Nadal in straight sets. At the end of the season, Boris Becker joined his staff as head coach. Djokovic began the year with a warmup tournament win, the 2013 Mubadala Championship. At the Australian Open, he won his first four matches in straight sets against Lukáš Lacko, Leonardo Mayer, Denis Istomin, and No. 15 seed Fabio Fognini respectively. He met Wawrinka in the quarterfinals of the tournament, the second consecutive year the two had met at the event. Despite coming back from two sets to one down, Djokovic fell 9–7 in the fifth set, ending his 25–match winning streak in Melbourne, as well as his streak of 14 consecutive Grand Slam tournament semifinals. Djokovic won his third Indian Wells Masters title, defeating Federer in the final. Continuing his good run, he beat No. 1 Nadal in the final of the Miami Masters in straight sets. Suffering from a wrist injury which hampered him throughout the Monte-Carlo Masters, Djokovic lost the semifinals to Federer in straight sets. After returning from injury, Djokovic won his third Rome title by beating Nadal in the final of the Italian Open. He subsequently donated the $500,000 in prize money that he had received to the victims of the 2014 Southeast Europe floods. Djokovic reached the final of the French Open losing only two sets in six matches but lost in the final to Nadal in four sets. It was Djokovic's first defeat in the last 5 matches between both. At the Wimbledon Championships Djokovic defeated Roger Federer in the final in five sets, winning with a scoreline of 6–7, 6–4, 7–6, 5–7, 6–4. With this victory he replaced Rafael Nadal again as the world No. 1. Djokovic played at the Canadian Open, losing to eventual first-time champion Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in straight sets. He followed that with a loss to Tommy Robredo at the Cincinnati Masters. At the US Open, Djokovic reached the semifinals, where he lost in four sets to Kei Nishikori. Djokovic returned to Beijing with a fifth trophy in six years, defeating Murray in the semifinal and Berdych in the final. The following week he was beaten by Federer in the semifinal of Shanghai Masters. He then won the Paris Masters title, without losing a single set, beating Raonic in the final. In the ATP Finals, Djokovic created a record by winning three round-robin matches with a loss of just nine games. By reaching the semifinal, he also secured the year-end No. 1 ranking for the third time, tying him with Nadal in the fifth position. He was awarded the ATP Finals trophy after Federer withdrew before the final. This marked the seventh title of the season for him and the fourth title at the year-end event. Djokovic began the season at the Qatar Open in Doha, where he won his first two rounds for the loss of just 6 games, however, lost in the quarterfinals against Ivo Karlović in three tight sets. He rebounded from this defeat well at the Australian Open, where he made it through the first five rounds without dropping a set. In the semifinals, he faced defending champion Stan Wawrinka, the man who beat him the previous year. He twice lost a set lead, however, came roaring back in the fifth to take it to love, and set up a third final against Andy Murray. After splitting the first two sets in tiebreakers, Djokovic found his form after dropping his serve at the start of the third set, going on to win 12 of the last 13 games to record a four-set victory over the Scot, and win an Open Era record-breaking fifth title in Melbourne, overtaking Roger Federer and Andre Agassi. He moved into equal eighth on the all-time list of men with the most Major titles, tying Agassi, Ivan Lendl, Jimmy Connors, Ken Rosewall and Fred Perry. He next competed at the Dubai Championships and lost to Federer in the final. After 2 weeks, Djokovic defeated John Isner and Andy Murray en route to his 21st Masters title, beating Federer in three sets in Indian Wells. In Miami, he defeated David Ferrer and John Isner en route to winning his fifth title defeating Andy Murray in three sets. With his 22nd Masters title, Djokovic became the first player to complete the Indian Wells – Miami title double three times. In April, Djokovic clinched his second Monte-Carlo Masters by beating Tomáš Berdych in the final. Therefore, Djokovic became the first man to win the first three ATP Masters 1000 titles of the season. Djokovic withdrew from the 2015 Madrid Masters. He won the title for the fourth time at the Rome Masters, making it 4 out of 4 titles in Masters events entered by Djokovic in the season. He continued his good form on clay at the French Open by reaching the final without dropping a set in the first five rounds, including a quarterfinal clash with Nadal and a five-set semifinal victory over No. 3 seed Andy Murray which took two days to complete. This meant he became only the second man to have won against Nadal at the French Open. However, he lost the next match and the tournament to No. 8 seed Stan Wawrinka in four sets. Five weeks later, he rebounded again from the tough loss in Paris, just like 2014, coming from two sets down to beat Kevin Anderson in the fourth round, and then going on to claim his third Wimbledon title, with a four-set win over Roger Federer. Prior to the final Grand Slam event of the year, Djokovic had the chance to become the first man in history to complete the full set of Masters titles in Cincinnati, achieving the Career Golden Masters, but he lost the final to Federer (Djokovic would accomplish the feat at the 2018 and 2020 events). At the US Open, Djokovic reached the final for the sixth time in his career, achieving the feat of reaching all four Grand Slam finals in a single calendar year. In the final, he faced Federer once again, defeating him in four sets to win his third Grand Slam title of the year, his second title at Flushing Meadows, and his tenth Grand Slam singles title overall, becoming the fifth man in the Open Era to win double-digit Grand Slam singles titles, as well as only the third man to reach all four Major finals in a calendar year. He returned to China Open in October, winning the title for the sixth time, defeating Nadal in straight sets in the final to bring his overall record at the tournament to 29–0. Djokovic then reached the final of the Paris Masters, where he defeated Murray in straight sets, taking his fourth title there and a record sixth ATP Masters tournament in one year. After losing to Federer in the round-robin stage of the ATP Finals he took on the third seed again in the final. He beat Federer in straight sets winning his fifth ATP Finals title and becoming the first player to win the Year-end Championships four consecutive times. By the end of the season, Djokovic made a season-record 15 consecutive finals, reaching the championship match of every top-level tournament he played (four in Majors, eight in Masters, and the final at the Year-end Championships). He won 11 titles including a season-record 10 Big Titles (three Majors, six Masters, and the Year-end Championships) on all court surfaces and conditions (hard, clay, grass and indoors). Djokovic set a season-record of 16,585 for most ranking points accumulated as world No. 1. and had a season-record 31 victories over top-10 players, including a remarkable 15–4 winning record against the other members of the Big Four, Federer, Nadal, and Murray. The 2015 season is Djokovic's most successful season as of 2022, and it is considered one of the greatest seasons in tennis history. Djokovic collected his 60th career title in Doha, defeating Rafael Nadal in two sets in a final that lasted 73 minutes. He broke his own ATP ranking points record, bringing it up to 16,790. Djokovic then proceeded to win his sixth Australian Open. On his road to his Open Era record sixth title in Melbourne, he defeated Roger Federer in four sets in the semifinals, and in a rematch of the 2015 final, he defeated Andy Murray, in three straight sets. He quickly rebounded from an eye infection at the Dubai Championships to collect a fifth Indian Wells Masters title, defeating Rafael Nadal in the semifinals, and Milos Raonic in the final. Djokovic's run was so dominant that the world no. 2 and 3 (Andy Murray and Roger Federer) could have combined their points and still not have had enough to pass him in the rankings. On 3 April 2016, Djokovic won the Miami Open for the third consecutive year, and did so without dropping a set en route to his sixth career Miami Open title, tying him with Andre Agassi for most ever Miami Open men's singles titles. In addition, the victory marked the fourth year Djokovic completed the Sunshine Double in his career, the most Sunshine Doubles out of any player in history, and 2016 being the third consecutive year that Djokovic completed it. His win in Miami also saw Djokovic surpass Roger Federer to become the all-time leading prize money winner on the ATP tour with career earnings of $98.2 million. After an early round exit at the Monte-Carlo Masters, Djokovic quickly bounced back by winning the Madrid title for the second time in his career, with a three-set victory over Murray. They met again in the Rome Masters final one week later with Murray as the victor; despite a sluggish performance, Djokovic defeated Nadal and Kei Nishikori in two long quarterfinals and semifinals. Djokovic defeated Andy Murray in the final of the French Open in four sets, making him the reigning champion of all four major tournaments, a historic feat the media dubbed the Nole Slam. With his French Open triumph, Djokovic became the eighth player in history to achieve a Career Grand Slam, the third player in history after Don Budge and Rod Laver to hold all four Grand Slam titles at the same time, and the first player to win $100 million in prize money. The victory at the French Open brought his ATP ranking points up to a new record of 16,950. At Wimbledon, his major win streak came to an end in the third-round when he lost to American Sam Querrey in four sets. It was his earliest exit in a Grand Slam since the 2009 French Open. In late July, Djokovic returned to form by winning his fourth Canadian Open title, and 30th Masters title overall, without dropping a set. In August, Djokovic was beaten in the first round of the Olympic men's singles in Rio de Janeiro by Juan Martín del Potro. It was Djokovic's first opening round defeat since January 2009, when Ernest Gulbis defeated him at the 2009 Brisbane International. In the final slam of the year, the US Open, Djokovic advanced to the final but was defeated by Stan Wawrinka in four sets. Djokovic was defeated by Roberto Bautista Agut and Marin Čilić in the semifinals and quarterfinals of Shanghai and Paris. Due to this result, he lost the No. 1 ranking to Andy Murray. However, a runner-up finish at the ATP Finals indicated his best performances in nearly three months. After the season, he parted ways with his coach of three years, Boris Becker. In January, Djokovic defended his title in Doha after defeating the new world No. 1 Andy Murray. At the Australian Open, he was upset in the second round by world No. 117 Denis Istomin. This was the first time since 2007 that Djokovic failed to reach the quarterfinals at the Australian Open, and the first time in his career that he lost to a player ranked outside of the top 100 at a major. In February and March, Djokovic played at the Mexican Open and Indian Wells Masters, but was eliminated by Nick Kyrgios in both events before the semifinals. In April, Djokovic reached the quarterfinals of the Monte-Carlo Masters, losing to David Goffin. After the tournament, he chose to split with his long-time coach Marián Vajda, fitness specialist Gebhard Phil-Gritsch, and physiotherapist Miljan Amanović, citing the need to find a winning spark. A better showing at the Madrid Masters saw Djokovic reach the semifinals, losing to Nadal in straight sets. A runner-up result at the Rome Masters indicated improvement in his form. On 21 May 2017, Djokovic announced that Andre Agassi would become his new coach, starting at the French Open. However, as the defending champion, he lost in the quarterfinals to Dominic Thiem. He began the grass court season at the Eastbourne International, playing his first non-Wimbledon tournament on grass since 2010. He won the title by beating Gaël Monfils in the final. This was also the only tournament that Djokovic won without his coach being Marián Vajda until the duo split in 2022. He made it to the quarterfinals at Wimbledon before retiring against Tomáš Berdych due to an elbow injury. On 26 July, Djokovic announced he would miss the US Open and the rest of the 2017 season to recover from his elbow injury. This was the first time that he missed a major tournament since he entered his first, the 2005 Australian Open, thus ending his streak of participating in 51 consecutive Grand Slam tournaments, the seventh-longest run in history. In January, Djokovic defeated Dominic Thiem at the Kooyong Classic exhibition tournament. At the 2018 Australian Open, he reached the fourth round, where he was upset by Chung Hyeon. In late January, he underwent surgery on his elbow. On 3 March, Djokovic returned to the practice courts, and surprisingly played at Indian Wells only a week later, losing in the second round to Taro Daniel. He then lost to Benoît Paire in the second round of the Miami Open. Reuniting with longtime coach Marián Vajda at the Monte-Carlo Masters, Djokovic collected victories over Dušan Lajović and Borna Ćorić, followed by a loss to Dominic Thiem. In a press conference, he stated, "After two years finally I can play without pain." After another early exit in Barcelona to Martin Kližan, Djokovic's gradual return to form would appear at the Madrid Masters. With a first round win over Kei Nishikori, Djokovic achieved his first victory over a top 20 player in 10 months; however, he lost in the second round to Kyle Edmund. Going into the Rome Masters with a 6–6 season record, he reached the semifinals before losing to long-time rival Rafael Nadal. He then reached the quarterfinals of the French Open before losing to Marco Cecchinato. Djokovic began the grass court season at Queen's Club, securing his first win over a top 5 player in almost 18 months by defeating Grigor Dimitrov in the second round. He reached the final where, despite holding a championship point, he lost to Marin Čilić. He also played doubles partnering with longtime friend and rival Stan Wawrinka. Djokovic then entered Wimbledon as the 12th seed, where he reached the semifinals to face Rafael Nadal. Djokovic defeated Nadal in a 5-hour and 17-minute, five-set epic spread over two days, becoming the second-longest Wimbledon semifinal in history, second only to the match between Kevin Anderson and John Isner held earlier on the same day. In the final, he claimed his fourth Wimbledon title and 13th major title overall by defeating Kevin Anderson in straight sets. With the win, he rose 11 ranking spots and re-entered the top 10 for the first time since October 2017. At No. 21, he was the lowest ranked Wimbledon titlist since Goran Ivanišević in 2001. After a triumphant grass season, Djokovic started his North American hardcourt swing with a third-round showing at the Canadian Open, losing to Stefanos Tsitsipas. Afterwards, he returned to play the Cincinnati Masters for the first time in three years. In an event plagued by suspended play due to rain, Djokovic defeated the defending champion Grigor Dimitrov, Milos Raonic, and Marin Čilić to reach his sixth final at the tournament and fourth final against Roger Federer. Although Federer was riding a streak of 100 consecutive holds of serve at the tournament, dating back to the 2014 final, Djokovic broke his serve three times to win his first Cincinnati Masters title. With this victory, Djokovic became the first (and, as of 2022, only) player in tennis history to complete the Career Golden Masters — winning all nine ATP Masters events at least once in one's career. Djokovic was the sixth seed at the US Open. He advanced to his eleventh US Open semifinal in as many appearances, where he overcame Kei Nishikori. Djokovic then defeated Juan Martín del Potro to win his third US Open title and 14th major title overall, tying Pete Sampras' tally. With the win, Djokovic returned to the top 3 in the world rankings for the first time since the 2017 French Open. At the Shanghai Masters, Djokovic defeated Kevin Anderson and Alexander Zverev en route to the title, not dropping a set nor having his serve broken throughout. The win marked his fourth Shanghai title, and his ranking rose to No. 2. On 31 October, Rafael Nadal announced his withdrawal from the Paris Masters due to an abdominal injury, and Djokovic reclaimed the world No. 1 ranking. There, Djokovic defeated Roger Federer in a tight three-set semifinal, but was upset by the unseeded Karen Khachanov in the final. At the ATP Finals, Djokovic was guaranteed a fifth year-end No. 1 ranking following the withdrawal of Rafael Nadal from the event. In the round-robin stage, he defeated Alexander Zverev, Marin Čilić, and John Isner without dropping a set. In the semifinals, he defeated Kevin Anderson to reach his seventh final at the tournament but was upset by Zverev. At the 2018 Mubadala Championship, he scored victories over Karen Khachanov & Kevin Anderson to win the title. Djokovic's first tournament of the year was at the Qatar Open, where he lost to Roberto Bautista Agut in the semifinals. He then entered the Australian Open as the top seed, and defeated Rafael Nadal in the final to win his record seventh Australian Open and 15th major title overall. Djokovic then played at the Indian Wells Masters, where he was upset by Philipp Kohlschreiber in the third round, and lost in the fourth round of the Miami Open to Bautista Agut. Djokovic then began his clay court season at the Monte-Carlo Masters, losing in the quarterfinals to Daniil Medvedev. During the Madrid Open, Novak Djokovic celebrated his 250th week at world number 1 in ATP rankings. By beating Stefanos Tsitsipas in the final, Djokovic claimed his third Madrid Open title and record-equaling 33rd ATP Masters title overall. At the Italian Open, he reached the final after a brutal victory over long time rival Juan Martín del Potro, where he lost to Rafael Nadal. Djokovic competed in the French Open, reaching the semifinals without dropping a set. His fourth-round win made him the first man to reach 10 consecutive quarterfinals at the French Open. In the semifinals, he lost to Dominic Thiem in a four-hour, five-set match stretched across two days, in one of the matches of the year, ending his 26-match winning streak in majors and his search for a second 'Nole Slam". At Wimbledon, Djokovic defended his title to win his fifth Wimbledon title and 16th major title overall, defeating Roger Federer in an epic five-set final that lasted a record four hours and fifty-seven minutes. Djokovic, who won fewer points overall than Federer, saved two championship points in the fifth set to win the title. Djokovic next played at the Cincinnati Open as the defending champion, but lost to eventual champion Daniil Medvedev in the semifinals. As the defending champion at the 2019 US Open, Djokovic lost to Stan Wawrinka in the fourth round, retiring due to injury whilst trailing by 2 sets and a break. In October, Djokovic defeated John Millman in straight sets to win the Japan Open. At the Shanghai Masters, Djokovic reached the quarterfinal stage, but lost to Stefanos Tsitsipas. In November, Djokovic won his fifth Paris Masters title over Denis Shapovalov. Djokovic then played at the 2019 ATP Finals but was eliminated in the round robin stage after losses to Dominic Thiem and Federer (his first loss to Federer since 2015). At the inaugural 2020 ATP Cup, Djokovic led Serbia to the title by scoring six victories, including wins over Daniil Medvedev in the semifinals and Rafael Nadal in the final. At the Australian Open, he defeated longtime rival Roger Federer in straight sets en route to the final where he overcame Dominic Thiem in five sets. This marked Djokovic's eighth win at the Australian Open and 17th Grand Slam title. With the win, Djokovic regained the world No. 1 spot in the ATP rankings, and became the first player since Ken Rosewall to win major titles in three different decades, and the first to do so in the Open Era. The match also marked the first time Djokovic came back to win a major final after trailing two sets to one, having lost each of the last seven times this happened. Djokovic then won the title at Dubai Championships for the fifth time, defeating Stefanos Tsitsipas in the final. In June, Djokovic tested positive for COVID-19 during the Adria Tour, a series of charity exhibition games in Balkans that he helped organize. Djokovic was criticized for holding the event with a lack of social distancing and other precautions taken against COVID-19. The last match of the tour was cancelled after several players, their partners, and coaches tested positive for the virus. Djokovic stated he was "deeply sorry", admitting he and organisers "were wrong" to go ahead with the event and that they believed the tournament met all health protocols. He also said that many of the criticisms were malicious, adding: "It's obviously more than just criticism, it's like an agenda and a witch hunt". With the resumption of the ATP Tour, Djokovic defeated Milos Raonic to win his second Cincinnati Masters title. By doing so, he won his 35th Masters title, completing his second career Golden Masters. In the fourth round of the US Open, Djokovic was defaulted after accidentally hitting a line official in the throat with a tennis ball during his fourth round match against Pablo Carreño Busta. The United States Tennis Association docked Djokovic all ranking points he would have earned at the tournament and fined him the prize money that he would have won had the incident not occurred. On 21 September, Djokovic moved past Pete Sampras for the second most weeks spent as the world number 1 player. Djokovic next won a record 36th Masters title and his fifth in Rome, defeating Diego Schwartzman in the final. At the rescheduled French Open, Djokovic lost in straight sets to Rafael Nadal in the final. Djokovic then played at the Vienna Open, where he was upset in the quarterfinals by Lorenzo Sonego in straight sets. In the ATP Finals, Djokovic lost to Daniil Medvedev in the round robin, but defeated Alexander Zverev and Diego Schwartzman. He then lost his semifinal match to Dominic Thiem. On 21 December, Djokovic reached his 300th career week as the number 1 singles tennis player. Djokovic began his 2021 season by playing for Serbia as the defending champions in the ATP Cup, but the nation was eliminated in the group stage despite Djokovic winning both his singles matches. He then went on to win his 18th major title and record-extending ninth title at the Australian Open, over Daniil Medvedev in the final. On 1 March, Djokovic equaled Federer's Open Era record of 310 weeks at world No. 1, and subsequently surpassed it. As of 23 May 2022 the weeks at number one stands at 371. Djokovic next played at the Monte-Carlo Masters, where he lost his third round match to Dan Evans. Djokovic then played at the Serbia Open, losing a lengthy three-set semifinal to Aslan Karatsev. At the Italian Open, Djokovic defeated Stefanos Tsitsipas in a three-set epic played over two days in the quarterfinals, and Lorenzo Sonego in the semifinals, but lost in a three-set final to Rafael Nadal. At the French Open, Djokovic advanced to the final after defeating Rafael Nadal in a four-set semifinal epic. It marked only Nadal's second loss to Djokovic (and third loss overall) at the event. In the final, Djokovic came back from two sets down to defeat Stefanos Tsitsipas in five sets. He became the first player in the Open Era to win a Major after coming back from a two-set deficit in two separate matches; Djokovic also became only the third man to win all four singles majors at least twice, and the first to do so in the Open Era. At the 2021 Wimbledon Championships, Djokovic recorded the 100th grass-court win by reaching the semifinals, and defeated Matteo Berrettini in the final to claim his sixth Wimbledon title and equal Federer and Nadal's all-time record of 20 men's singles major titles. Djokovic became the second player to win Majors on three different surfaces in the same year achieving a "Surface Slam" and the fifth man in the Open Era to achieve the "Channel Slam", winning the French Open and Wimbledon in the same year. Djokovic opened his summer hard court season at the Tokyo Olympics, where he sought to improve on his bronze medal result from Beijing 2008. However, he lost in the semifinals to Alexander Zverev, and then to Pablo Carreño Busta in the bronze medal match. Djokovic also competed in mixed doubles partnering Nina Stojanović; the pair lost in the semifinals to Aslan Karatsev and Elena Vesnina, then withdrew from their bronze medal match against WTA singles No. 1 Ashleigh Barty and John Peers, with Djokovic citing a shoulder injury. Djokovic then entered the US Open vying to be the third man in history to achieve the Grand Slam in men's singles. In the third round, Djokovic faced Kei Nishikori and lost the first set, but won the next three sets to advance; he repeated this pattern against Jenson Brooksby and Matteo Berrettini. In the semifinals, he defeated Alexander Zverev in five sets, to advance to his record-equaling 31st major final. There, he faced Daniil Medvedev but lost in straight sets, ending his chances of achieving the Grand Slam. At the Paris Masters, Djokovic defeated Hubert Hurkacz to reach the final, which secured the year-end No. 1 ranking for the seventh time, breaking Pete Sampras' all-time record. In the final, he avenged his US Open loss to Daniil Medvedev to win his sixth Paris Masters title and record 37th ATP Masters title overall. At the 2021 ATP Finals, Djokovic was defeated in the semifinals by Zverev. Djokovic finished the season by leading Serbia to the semifinals of 2021 Davis Cup Finals, where they lost to Croatia. Djokovic was set to begin his 2022 season by participating in the ATP Cup in Sydney but pulled out. In order to play at the Australian Open, where he was a three-time defending champion, the Victorian Government required all players to be vaccinated against COVID-19 or have a medical exemption. Djokovic was one of "a handful" of players and staff to be granted a medical exemption by Tennis Australia and the Department of Health in Victoria. It was later revealed that Djokovic tested positive for COVID-19 on 16 December 2021 which was used as the basis for his exemption. Djokovic had been granted a visa to enter Australia on 18 November 2021. He travelled to Melbourne on 5 January but was detained by the Australian Border Force after they determined that he did not meet the entry requirements for an unvaccinated traveller. Djokovic disclosed that a member of his support team ticked a box on his application form stating he had not travelled abroad two weeks before he left for Australia; however, he had been to Spain at that time. His visa was cancelled and he was held in an immigration detention hotel for several days awaiting a court hearing. On 10 January, the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia ordered his release and awarded costs, ruling that the visa cancelation process undertaken by Australian border officials was flawed on the basis that they did not give Djokovic sufficient time to contact his lawyers and tennis authorities before his official interview. The Australian Government conceded that the cancelation was "unreasonable in [the] circumstances". On 14 January 2022, Alex Hawke, Australia's Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs, exercised his ministerial powers under sections 133C(3) and 116(1)(e)(i) of the Migration Act 1958 to cancel Djokovic's visa, citing "health and good order grounds, on the basis that it was in the public interest to do so". Djokovic applied for a judicial review, but three Federal Court of Australia judges unanimously dismissed his application on 16 January, preventing his participation in the 2022 Australian Open. Djokovic said he was "extremely disappointed" with the decision but accepted the ruling, and flew out of Australia to Dubai that night. Because he was removed using ministerial powers under the Migration Act, he is now barred from returning to Australia for three years, although each visa application is reviewed on its merits. As of November 2022, this visa ban has been overturned by the recently elected Immigration Minister Andrew Giles. In February, Djokovic gave an interview to the BBC regarding his deportation from Australia, stating he is willing to forego career records by sticking to his principles of free choice and not having the COVID-19 vaccine. In May, he admitted that the court battle and his deportation from Australia "took a major toll" on him. He said: "The amount of pressure and everything that I was feeling in the first few months of the year, as much as I've felt pressure in my life and my career, that was something really on a whole different level". Djokovic entered the Dubai Championships in February, where vaccination was not required for entry. He was upset in the quarterfinals by eventual finalist Jiří Veselý, resulting in him conceding his world No. 1 ranking to Daniil Medvedev. This marked the first time a man outside of the Big Four was ranked singles world No. 1 since Andy Roddick in February 2004. Djokovic withdrew from both the Indian Wells Masters and the Miami Open, due to the United States forbidding unvaccinated foreign travellers. Despite being unable to play, Djokovic regained the world No. 1 ranking after Medvedev's third-round defeat at Indian Wells. After being unable to play in March, Djokovic began his clay court season at the Monte-Carlo Masters in April. Seeded first, he received a bye in the first round and lost to eventual finalist Davidovich Fokina in the second, his first opening match loss since the 2018 Barcelona Open. Later that month, he reached the final of the Serbia Open and lost to Andrey Rublev in three sets. At the Madrid Open in May, Djokovic made it to the semifinals where he was beaten in three sets by 19-year-old Carlos Alcaraz, the eventual champion. At the Italian Open a week later, he reached the twelfth final of his career at this Masters. In the semifinals, he defeated Casper Ruud for his 1,000th career win, becoming only the fifth man in the Open Era to reach this milestone. In the final, he defeated Stefanos Tsitsipas in straight sets to win his sixth Italian Open and record-extending 38th Masters title. Djokovic entered the French Open in May as the defending champion. After defeating Yoshihito Nishioka, Alex Molčan, Aljaž Bedene and Diego Schwartzman in straight sets, he faced Rafael Nadal in the quarterfinals for their record-extending 59th meeting. He lost in four sets, ending his French Open title defense. As a result of his quarterfinals defeat, he conceded the No. 1 ranking to Daniil Medvedev for the second time in 2022. With his first-round win at the Wimbledon Championships against Kwon Soon-woo, Djokovic became the first player in history (male or female) to win 80 matches at all four Grand Slams. With his semifinal win over Cameron Norrie, Djokovic reached a record 32nd Grand Slam final, one ahead of Roger Federer. Djokovic went on to defeat Nick Kyrgios in the final in four sets for his fourth consecutive and seventh overall Wimbledon trophy. With this victory, he reached a total of 21 major titles, which broke his tie of 20 majors with Federer and put him one Grand Slam title behind Nadal. Due to Djokovic's unvaccinated status against COVID-19, he was unable to compete in the US Open as the US government did not allow unvaccinated non-US citizens to enter the country. As a result, he withdrew from the tournament on 25 August. At the Astana Open in October, he defeated Medvedev in the semifinals and Stefanos Tsitsipas in the final to win his 90th singles title. Djokovic then competed at the Paris Masters, where he defeated Stefanos Tsitsipas in the semifinals to reach his third straight final of the season. It was also the 650th hard-court win of his career, making him just the third male player in the Open Era to record 650 or more career wins on any single surface. He then lost in the final to 19-year-old Holger Rune, which marked the first time Djokovic lost a Masters finals after winning the first set. Seeded seventh at the ATP Finals, Djokovic won his first round robin match over second seed Stefanos Tsitsipas to record his 60th career victory over a Top 3 player, making him the first player to accomplish this milestone since the ATP rankings began in 1973. Djokovic then defeated sixth seed Andrey Rublev and fourth seed Daniil Medvedev to reach the semifinals, where he defeated Taylor Fritz to reach his eighth final at this event and secured his 15th year-end top-5 finish in the rankings. He defeated Casper Ruud to win a record-equaling sixth ATP Finals title. He is also the first player ever to win the ATP Finals in three different decades—the 2000s, 2010s and 2020s. Djokovic, at the age of 35, also became the oldest champion in the ATP Finals' 53-year history. Djokovic started his season by winning his 92nd career title at the 2023 Adelaide International, where he defeated Sebastian Korda in three sets in the final after saving a championship point. At the Australian Open, Djokovic overcame hamstring injury concerns to reach the final, where he defeated Stefanos Tsitsipas in straight sets to claim his record-extending 10th Australian Open title while tying Nadal for the record of 22 men's singles major titles and reclaiming the world No. 1 ranking from Carlos Alcaraz. On 27 February 2023, Djokovic broke Steffi Graf's record of 377 weeks that she set back 25 years ago for most weeks as world No. 1 in women's tennis, thus he became the player with most weeks at No. 1 on both the men's and women's tours. In March, Djokovic withdrew from the Indian Wells Masters and Miami Open after being denied a visa into the United States due to being unvaccinated. Afterwards, Djokovic struggled in the clay court season, suffering early defeats at the Monte-Carlo Masters and the Banja Luka Open. At the Italian Open, Djokovic was defeated in the quarterfinals by Holger Rune. At the French Open, he returned to form, reaching the semifinals to face world No. 1 Carlos Alcaraz, whom he defeated in four sets to reach a record-extending 34th major final. Moreover, he became the only player to contest at least seven finals at each Grand Slam tournament. Djokovic would go on to beat Casper Ruud in the final, securing a record-breaking 23rd major title and becoming the first man in tennis history to achieve a triple Career Grand Slam. By winning the title, Djokovic reclaimed the world No. 1 position from Alcaraz. Djokovic then played at the 2023 Wimbledon Championships where he was bidding to win a fifth consecutive title and a record-equalling eighth title. He reached the semifinals with straight set victories over Pedro Cachin, Jordan Thompson and Stan Wawrinka, and four set victories over Hubert Hurkacz and Andrey Rublev. In the semifinals, he faced Jannik Sinner in a rematch of their quarterfinal match the previous year, and Djokovic won in straight sets to reach his 5th consecutive and 9th overall Wimbledon final, as well as his record-extending 35th major final, where he faced Carlos Alcaraz. He subsequently lost an epic final to Alcaraz in five sets, ending his 34-match winning streak at Wimbledon since 2018 and his unbeaten run in both Wimbledon finals and Centre Court since his 2013 defeat to Andy Murray. He proceeded to win his third Cincinnati Masters title and a record-extending 39th Masters title. He beat Alcaraz in a rematch of their Wimbledon final, in what was the longest best-of-three-sets ATP final and the longest match in the tournament's history, at 3 hours and 49 minutes, and was immediately praised as one of the best matches of all time. He won the match from a set down and down a break in the second set, along with saving a championship point in the second-set tiebreaker. Djokovic called it one of his toughest matches, and said "It did feel like a Grand Slam final, even more than that to be honest". He compared the intensity and toughness of the match to his match against Rafael Nadal in the 2012 Australian Open final. Djokovic then played at the US Open where he dropped only two sets en route to the title, both to his fellow countryman Laslo Djere in a win from two sets down in the third round. By reaching a 47th men's singles major semifinal, Djokovic surpassed Roger Federer's Open Era record. By reaching the final, Djokovic matched Federer's record of reaching all major finals in a season three times. In the final, he faced Daniil Medvedev in a rematch of their 2021 US Open final. Djokovic defeated Medvedev in straight sets to win his fourth US Open title and a record-extending 24th men's singles major title overall, also equaling Margaret Court's all-time record of major singles titles by either sex. Djokovic became the oldest US Open men's singles champion in the Open Era, at 36 years and 111 days, and became the first man to win three majors in a season four times. By winning his first-round match, Djokovic guaranteed that he would reclaim the world No. 1 position from Alcaraz at the end of the tournament. With Djokovic reaching the final and winning, at the time, he had won one-third of all Grand Slams he played in and reached the final in half of the Grand Slams he played in. After a six-week break, Djokovic returned to the tour at the Paris Masters, where he won his second round match over Tomás Martín Etcheverry in his 1289th career match, surpassing Rafael Nadal for the fourth most in the Open Era. He went on to defeat Grigor Dimitrov in the final to win his record-extending seventh Paris Masters title and 40th Masters overall. By winning his first round robin match over Holger Rune at the 2023 ATP Finals, he secured the Year-end world No. 1 for a record-extending eighth time. Djokovic then defeated second seed Alcaraz to reach his ninth final at this event, where he beat home favourite Jannik Sinner to win a record-breaking seventh ATP Finals title. This victory saw him become the first World No. 1 to win this event since Andy Murray in 2016. Despite playing in only 12 tournaments, Djokovic led the tour in titles won with seven, the most he has claimed in a season since 2016. On 20 November, Djokovic became the first player in singles to reach 400 weeks at No. 1. In a bid to win his 25th major title at the Australian Open, Djokovic reached the semifinals against world No. 4 Jannik Sinner. There he lost in four sets for his first loss at the Australian Open since 2018, his first-ever Australian Open semifinal loss, and his third loss to Sinner in a three-month span, ending his consecutive win streak of 33 wins. By reaching a 58th major singles quarterfinal, Djokovic equaled Roger Federer's all-time record. Despite the loss, he retained the world No. 1 ranking. Djokovic has a winning record against all of his top contemporaries, including his fellow Big Three counterparts, Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal. Djokovic and Rafael Nadal rivalry is the most prolific in men's tennis in the Open Era. The two have faced each other 59 times, including in all four major finals, with Djokovic leading 30–29 overall. Djokovic leads on hard courts 20–7 while Nadal leads on clay 20–8, and they are tied on grass 2–2. Djokovic is the only player to have beaten Nadal in all four majors. He is also the player with the most victories over Nadal on clay, beating him twice at the French Open and all three claycourt Masters events, notably in 2013 Monte-Carlo Masters where he ended Nadal's run of 8 consecutive titles. Djokovic has two streaks of seven victories against Nadal, in 2011–2012 and 2015–2016. The two contested in the longest major finals match ever played at the 2012 Australian Open where Djokovic won in five sets lasting 5 hours and 53 minutes. Other classics they played include the 2009 Madrid Masters semifinal, 2011 Miami Masters final, the 2013 French Open semifinal, 2018 Wimbledon semifinal, and the 2021 French Open semifinal. Djokovic and Roger Federer rivalry is considered to be one of the greatest rivalries in tennis history. They faced each other 50 times, with Djokovic leading 27–23, including 13–6 in finals (not including a 2014 walkover in favour of Djokovic). Djokovic leads on hard courts 20–18 as well as on grass 3–1 and they are split 4–4 on clay. Djokovic is the player with the most victories over Federer and the only player to beat Federer multiple times at his most successful major tournaments, four times at the Australian Open, three times at the US Open, three times at the Year-end Championship and most notably, three times at the final of Wimbledon Championships. Their most recent final was at the 2019 Wimbledon where Djokovic won in five sets in what became the longest final in Wimbledon history. Other notable matches they contested are the 2014 Wimbledon and 2015 Wimbledon finals, along with semifinals at the 2010 US Open, 2011 US Open, 2011 French Open, and 2018 Paris Masters. Djokovic and Andy Murray have met 36 times, with Djokovic leading 25–11. Djokovic leads on hard courts 20–8 and 5–1 on clay, while Murray has won the two matches played on grass. Djokovic and Murray are one of two pairs to have met in each of the four major finals (other pair being Djokovic and Nadal). The two are almost exactly the same age, with Murray being a week older than Djokovic, so they progressed through the ranks of the junior circuit together, and Murray was the winner of the first match they ever played as teenagers at Les Petits As in 2001. They were the 2015 and 2016 year-end top two players in the world, with the battle for the 2016 year-end No. 1 only being decided in the final of the World Tour Finals, which was won by Murray in straight sets. One of their most notable matches was a three-set thriller at the final of the 2012 Shanghai Masters, in which Djokovic saved five championship points to win his first Shanghai Masters title and end Murray's 12–0 winning streak at the event. Tennis pundits have classified many more of their matches as instant classics, such as the 2011 Italian Open semifinals, the 2012 Australian Open semifinal, 2012 US Open final, the 2015 semifinal and 2016 final at the French Open, and the 2017 Qatar Open final. Djokovic and Stan Wawrinka have met 27 times with Djokovic leading 21–6. Although this rivalry is lopsided in favor of Djokovic, the two have contested numerous close matches, including four five-setters at the majors. Wawrinka and Djokovic have met in three consecutive Australian Opens – with each match going to five sets – and a five-setter in the US Open. In the 2013 Australian Open fourth round, Djokovic won 12–10 in a fifth set, with the match being considered one of the best ever played; at the 2013 US Open semifinals Djokovic won 6–4 in the fifth set; at the 2014 Australian Open quarterfinals, Wawrinka won 9–7 in the fifth. Wawrinka's win broke Djokovic's run of 14 consecutive major semifinals, and ended a 28-match winning streak; and Wawrinka went on to win his first major title at the tournament. Djokovic got revenge the next year at the 2015 Australian Open, winning 6–0 in the fifth set. At the 2015 French Open final, Wawrinka defeated Djokovic in four sets to claim his second major title. Later that year, Djokovic beat Wawrinka at the Cincinnati Masters and Paris Masters. At the 2016 US Open, Wawrinka beat Djokovic in a major final for a second time. Despite Djokovic's 21–6 overall record against Wawrinka, Wawrinka leads Djokovic 3–2 in ATP finals, two of which in major finals. During Djokovic's run of 13 major finals from the 2014 Wimbledon Championships through the 2020 Australian Open, his only two losses were to Wawrinka. Contrary to most high-profile rivalries, the pair have also played doubles together. Djokovic and Juan Martín del Potro met 20 times, with Djokovic leading 16–4. Djokovic won their first four meetings, before back-to-back victories for del Potro at the 2011 Davis Cup and their Bronze medal match at the 2012 Summer Olympics in straight sets. Djokovic won the next four matches before he lost to del Potro at the 2013 Indian Wells Masters, where the Argentine made his second career Masters final. Djokovic got the upper hand on the rivalry once again by winning two of the most important matches between them to date; an epic five-setter at the 2013 Wimbledon Championships semifinals (which was the longest Wimbledon semifinal at the time), and a thrilling three-setter at the 2013 Shanghai Masters final. Del Potro upset Djokovic in the first round at the 2016 Rio Olympics in Rio en route to the final. In 2018, Djokovic defeated del Potro in three close sets in the final of the US Open, which was the first Grand Slam final for del Potro since his 2009 US Open victory. They played their last match at the 2019 Italian Open quarterfinal which Djokovic won in a dramatic three-setter after saving two match points. Djokovic and Jo-Wilfried Tsonga met 23 times, with Djokovic leading 17–6. Their first meeting was in the final of the 2008 Australian Open, which Djokovic won in four sets to win his first major singles title. Tsonga got revenge in their next meeting at the majors, the 2010 Australian Open quarterfinals, winning in five sets after Djokovic fell ill during the match. Djokovic then won their next match at the 2011 Wimbledon semifinals to advance to his first final there, claiming the world No. 1 ranking for the first time in the process. They met again in the quarterfinals of the 2012 French Open, which Djokovic won in five sets after over four hours. They then played a further three matches in 2012, in the quarterfinals of the Olympics, the final of the China Open, and in the round robin stage of the ATP Finals, with Djokovic winning all of them in straight sets. Their final major meeting was in the second round of the 2019 Australian Open, which Djokovic won in straight sets. Djokovic and Dominic Thiem have met 12 times, with Djokovic leading 7–5. They have met four times at the grand slams, splitting it evenly 2–2, and three times at the ATP finals, with Thiem leading 2–1. The two have contested numerous close matches, with each of their last four meetings ending with a deciding set, including two five-setters at the majors. This streak started with a grueling four-hour, five-set epic stretched across two days in the semifinals of the 2019 French Open, which Thiem won to end Djokovic's quest for a second "Nole Slam". They then played in the round robin stage of the 2019 ATP Finals, which Thiem won in a deciding set tiebreaker. This was followed by the 2020 Australian Open final, which Djokovic won in five sets, while their last match, the semifinals of the 2020 ATP Finals, was won by Thiem in three sets. Djokovic and Daniil Medvedev have met 15 times, with Djokovic leading 10–5. They have contested 4 Grand Slam matches, with Djokovic leading 3–1. Their first Grand Slam match came at the 2019 Australian Open 4th round, which Djokovic won in 4 sets. Their next 3 encounters at the Majors came in finals, with Djokovic winning the 2021 Australian Open and the 2023 US Open finals, and Medvedev winning his first major title at the 2021 US Open against Djokovic in the final, also ending Djokovic's quest for a calendar-year Grand Slam. Medvedev replaced Djokovic as the world No. 1 player when he rose to the top ranking for the first time in February 2022. All 3 Grand Slam finals between Djokovic and Medvedev were straight set wins. The second set of the 2023 US Open, which Djokovic eventually won in a tiebreaker after a grueling 104-minute battle, was one of the longest sets in US Open history. Djokovic and Stefanos Tsitsipas have met 13 times, with Djokovic leading 11–2. Their first meeting took place in the third round of the 2018 Rogers Cup, with the then 19-year-old Tsitsipas, ranked No. 27, pulling an upset over Djokovic in three sets. Djokovic avenged this loss by beating Tsitsipas in the 2019 Madrid Open, but Tstisipas then won their next match in the quarterfinals of the 2019 Shanghai Masters to bring their head-to-head to 2–1 in his favor. Djokovic then won all of their next ten matches, among them are the 2020 French Open semifinal; the 2021 Italian Open quarterfinal spread over two days; the 2021 French Open final which saw Djokovic coming back from 2 sets to 0 down to win his second French Open title; the 2022 Italian Open final; and the 2023 Australian Open final, where the two were competing for the world No. 1 ranking. Djokovic and Carlos Alcaraz have met five times, with Djokovic leading 3–2. Both have won once at a Grand Slam tournament and once at a Masters tournament, and Djokovic defeated Alcaraz in the semifinals of 2023 ATP Finals. Their first meeting was at the 2022 Madrid Masters semifinals, in which Alcaraz prevailed in a deciding set tiebreaker. Their next meeting would not be until the 2023 French Open semifinals, in which Djokovic won in four sets. The match was competitive until Alcaraz faltered due to cramps from mental pressure and physical intensity. They would meet again soon after in the 2023 Wimbledon final, in which Alcaraz would defeat Djokovic in a five-setter that lasted 4 hours and 42 minutes, ending his hopes for a calendar Grand Slam and his record 45-match Centre Court win streak. They would meet soon again in another epic at the 2023 Cincinnati Masters final, with Djokovic prevailing in three tightly contested sets after saving a match point. The match was the longest best-of-three-sets ATP Tour final and the longest match in the tournament's history, at 3 hours and 49 minutes, and was immediately praised as one of the best matches ever. Djokovic won despite being a set down and down a break in the second set, along with saving a championship point in the second-set tiebreaker. I believe that numbers are numbers and statistics are statistics and, in that sense, I think he [Djokovic] has better numbers than mine and that is indisputable. It is not beneath me nor do I have an ego big enough to try and disguise a reality that is not. This is the truth. The rest are tastes, inspiration, sensations that one player or the other may transmit to you, that you may like one or the other more. I think that with respect to titles, Djokovic is the best in history and there is nothing to discuss in that. — Rafael Nadal, on Djokovic's legacy shortly after he won the 2023 US Open for his 24th Grand Slam. Djokovic is regarded by many observers, tennis players and coaches as the greatest tennis player of all time, primarily for his achievements across all top-level tournaments of the men's professional tour in addition to his time spent with the world No. 1 ranking. Many media outlets, including Forbes, Reuters, Sports Illustrated, ESPN, Marca, Tennis World USA, Australian Broadcasting Corporation, and Sporting News have named Djokovic the greatest male tennis player in history. Djokovic has won a record 71 Big Titles, including an all-time record of 24 Grand Slam titles, and holds the most weeks at No. 1, the most wins over top 5 and top 10-ranked players, has won all major and Masters events and the year-end championships at least twice (which has not been done by another player once) and has a winning head-to-head record over his greatest rivals in one of the strongest eras of tennis. Former world No. 1 Daniil Medvedev labelled Djokovic the "greatest tennis player in history" after winning his first major title at the 2021 US Open over Djokovic. Pat Cash emphasized that Djokovic is one of two players who beat Rafael Nadal at the French Open, which he considers to be "the biggest challenge in tennis". Richard Krajicek and The Roar, sports opinion website, said that Djokovic should be considered for the greatest player of all time because he is the only one among his rivals who has won all four majors consecutively. Patrick Mouratoglou stated, "Novak is the most complete player of all times. That enables him to find the solution to most of the problems on court and this, on every surface. It explains why he is now in the best position to become the GOAT". Rafael Nadal has praised Djokovic's peak level of performance, stating in 2011 (when he went 0–6 against Djokovic for the season) that "[Djokovic's level is] probably the highest level of tennis that I ever saw." Nadal reiterated this after a one-sided loss in the 2016 Qatar Open final, stating that "I played against a player who did everything perfectly. I don't know anybody who's ever played tennis like this. Since I know this sport I've never seen somebody playing at this level." In 2017, Nadal stated that "at a technical level, when Djokovic has been at the top of his game, I have to say that I’ve been up against an invincible player." In 2023, former world No. 7 Mardy Fish also declared that Djokovic in 2011 was "the best player of all time". In 2023, Boris Becker compared Djokovic to Lionel Messi, Tom Brady and LeBron James in their respective sports, saying that "For me, he is the lion king". Tennis coach Nick Bollettieri praised Djokovic as the "most complete player ever", and the "most perfect player of all time": When you look at match players in the history of tennis, I don't believe that anybody can equal everything on the court that Djokovic does. I don't think you can find a weakness in his game. His movement, personality, his return of serve, his serve, excellent touch, not hesitant in coming to the net, great serve. Overall, almost every player has a downfall; to me, he doesn't have one. He's perhaps the best put-together player that I've seen over 60 years. Andre Agassi, stated in an interview in 2019 with the Times of India that: The highest standard of tennis that I've ever seen is when Novak is playing his best tennis. The single level, for whatever my tennis IQ is worth, is an unmistakable standard to which everybody will strive to be. Pete Sampras, who at the time of his retirement in 2003 was considered by some to be the greatest male tennis player of all time, stated after Djokovic earned a record-breaking seventh year-end No. 1 finish in 2021: Seven years for him, I'm sure he sees it as a bonus to all the majors that he's won, but I think he'll appreciate it more as he gets older. He did it at a time where he dominated two of the greats, in Roger and Rafa, and he handled the next generation of players very well – all at the same time. I do think what Novak's done over the past 10 years, winning the majors, being consistent, finishing number one for seven years, to me it's a clear sign that he is the greatest of all time. Tennis pundits have classified many of Djokovic's matches as some of the greatest contests ever, such as the 2012 Australian Open final, in which he beat Nadal in five long and gruelling sets. Other matches include the five-set 2013 Australian Open fourth round against Stan Wawrinka, the 2018 Wimbledon semifinal against Nadal, which lasted five brutal sets played over two days, the five-set 2019 Wimbledon final against Roger Federer, the longest Wimbledon final in history, and the 2023 Cincinnati Masters final against Carlos Alcaraz, the longest best-of-three-sets final in ATP Tour history. Some analysts claim that the Djokovic–Nadal rivalry ranks as the best rivalry in tennis history because of the quality of matches they produce. Djokovic is an aggressive baseline player. His groundstrokes from both wings are consistent, deep, and penetrating. His backhand is widely regarded as the greatest two-handed backhand of all time, due to its effectiveness on both sides of the court and its accuracy. His best shot is his backhand down the line, with great pace and precision. He excels at returning serve in particular, and regularly ranks among the tour leaders in return points, return games, and break points won. His forehand is deemed to be underrated, yet one of the best, due to its versatility. After great technical difficulties during the 2009 season (coinciding with his switch to the Head racket series), his serve is one of his major weapons again, winning him many free points; his first serve is typically hit flat, while he prefers to slice and kick his second serves wide. He has also led the ATP Tour in their career "Under Pressure Rating" statistic, in part because of his prowess at winning deciding sets. Djokovic has been described as one of the fittest and most complete athletes in sports history, with high agility, court coverage and mobility, which allows him to hit winners from seemingly indefensible positions. Because of this, coupled with flexibility and length, he rarely gets aced. Todd Martin, who coached Djokovic between 2009 and 2010, noted that: His athleticism is from another world. His return of serve is way better than any other return of serve ever and I mean way better. Nobody has gotten so many balls back and neutralized so many good serves. Djokovic's return of serve is a big weapon for him, with which he can be both offensive and defensive. He is highly efficient off both the forehand and backhand return, often getting the return in play deep with pace, neutralizing the advantage the server usually has in a point. Andre Agassi described Djokovic's return of serve as "the precedent-setting standard for the return". Occasionally, Djokovic employs a well-disguised backhand underspin drop shot and sliced backhand. Djokovic commented on the modern style of play, including his own, in an interview with Jim Courier after his semifinal win against Andy Murray in the 2012 Australian Open tournament: I had a big privilege and honour to meet personally today Mr. Laver, and he is one of the biggest, and greatest players ever to play the game, thank you for staying this late, sir, thank you ... even though it would actually be better if we played a couple times serve and volley, but we don't know to play ... we are mostly around here [points to the area near the baseline], we are running, you know, around the baseline ... In assessing Djokovic's 2011 season, Jimmy Connors said that Djokovic gives his opponents problems by playing "a little bit old-school, taking the ball earlier, catching the ball on the rise, (and) driving the ball flat." Connors adds that a lot of the topspin that Djokovic's opponents drive at him comes right into his zone, thus his ability to turn defense into offense well. Entering the pro circuit, Djokovic used the Head Liquidmetal Radical, but changed sponsors to Wilson in 2005. He could not find a Wilson racquet he liked, so Wilson agreed to make him a custom racquet to match his previous one with Head. After the 2008 season, Djokovic re-signed with Head, and debuted a new paint job of the Head YouTek Speed Pro at the 2009 Australian Open. He then switched to the Head YouTek IG Speed (18x20) paint job in 2011, and in 2013, he again updated his paint job to the Head Graphene Speed Pro, which included an extensive promotional campaign. Djokovic uses a hybrid of Head Natural Gut (gauge 16) in the mains and Luxilon Big Banger ALU Power Rough (gauge 16L) in the crosses. He also uses Head Synthetic Leather Grip as a replacement grip. In 2012, Djokovic appeared in a television commercial with Maria Sharapova promoting the use of Head rackets for many techniques such as golf and ten-pin bowling. Djokovic had several coaches, trainers, and advisors throughout his life, and each of them has helped Djokovic become and stay a champion. He has learned from all them and picked up at least something good from everyone. Djokovic's most important coaches when he was growing up were Jelena Genčić, who he has called his “tennis mother”, and Nikola Pilić, the “tennis father”, both of which were major influences on his young life. Genčić worked with Djokovic for six years between 1993 and 1999, from ages six to 12, mainly at Belgrade's Teniski Klub Partizan, while Pilić worked with him between 1999 and 2003, coaching him in his academy in Munich. In the period 2004 and 2005, Djokovic was coached by Dejan Petrović. Under the mentoring of Petrović, Djokovic went from being ranked outside the top 300 to breaking into the top 100 in less than a year. From fall 2005 until June 2006, he was coached by Riccardo Piatti, who divided his time between the 18-year-old and Ivan Ljubičić. Player and coach reportedly parted ways over the latter's refusal to work full-time with Djokovic. From June 2006 until May 2017, Djokovic was coached by former professional Slovakian tennis player Marián Vajda. They met for the first time during that year's French Open, after which Vajda was hired to be the 19-year-old's coach. On occasion Djokovic employed additional coaches on a part-time basis: in 2007, during the spring hardcourt season, he worked with Australian doubles ace Mark Woodforde with specific emphasis on volleys and net play while from August 2009 until April 2010 American Todd Martin joined the coaching team, a period marked by his ill-fated attempt to change Djokovic's serve motion. From early 2007 until 2017, Djokovic worked with physiotherapist Miljan Amanović, who had previously worked with football team Red Star Belgrade, and NBA players, such as Vladimir Radmanović. From the fall of 2006, Djokovic had an Israeli fitness coach, Ronen Bega, but the two parted ways during the spring of 2009. Djokovic decided to make a change after identifying his conditioning as a weakness in his game following continual losses to Nadal. In April 2009, ahead of the Rome Masters, Djokovic hired Austrian Gebhard Phil-Gritsch (formerly worked with Thomas Muster) to join the team in fitness coach capacity. In 2008, Djokovic hired Italian agent Edoardo Artaldi and his management team, which includes his wife, Elena Capellaro, to oversee the huge operation that runs around him. They met when Djokovic signed a contract with the Italian clothing brand Sergio Tacchini, where Artaldi was working at the time. Despite taking a lead role as an agent and business manager, Artaldi has acted like a father figure in Djokovic's camp. During an interview with Italian outlet SBS in 2019, Artaldi explained that, together with his wife, they have tried to “create the atmosphere” that Djokovic needed while on tour because he missed his family while traveling. Djokovic's relationship with Artaldi has had its challenging moments, as he screamed at Artaldi and brother Marko to leave his box during the final of the 2023 Adelaide Open. In July 2010, before the Davis Cup clash away at Croatia, Djokovic made another addition to his team – Igor Četojević, a Serbian nutritionist and proponent of traditional medicine living in Cyprus, who influenced Djokovic's diet. A gluten-free diet appeared to have worked as Djokovic began feeling stronger, quicker, and much more fit. After Djokovic's Wimbledon win in July 2011, Četojević left the team. After retiring from professional tennis in August 2011, Serbian player Dušan Vemić joined Djokovic's team as the assistant coach and hitting partner for Novak. The collaboration ended before the 2013 US Open. Likewise, Djokovic's childhood friend and former junior doubles partner Bojan Božović also briefly served as a hitting partner for Novak in late 2014, shortly after Božović had opened his academy. Due to Božović's height and strong serve, Djokovic specifically practiced his returns with him, most notably for the 2014 Paris Masters final against Milos Raonic, a player with a powerful serve. Six-time major champion and former world No. 1 Boris Becker, who had mostly worked as a television pundit for BBC Sport and Sky Sports since retiring from playing in 1999, was announced as Djokovic's new head coach in December 2013. According to Djokovic, the Becker appointment was done with input from the player's existing head coach Marián Vajda who reportedly wanted to spend more time with his family and was looking to have his coaching workload somewhat reduced. For Becker, in addition to working alongside Vajda, the job entailed special emphasis on Grand Slam tournaments as Djokovic felt he missed out on winning a couple of majors over the previous two seasons due to a lack of mental edge in the final stages of those tournaments. Becker's first tournament coaching Djokovic was the 2014 Australian Open. On 5 May 2017, Djokovic confirmed that he had come to a mutual agreement to terminate his coaching relationship with Vajda, as well as Phil-Gritsch and Amanović. In a statement on his website, Djokovic cited the reasons for the personnel shakeup: "Novak and the team members decided to part ways after a detailed analysis of the game, achieved results in the previous period, and also after discussing private plans of each team member. Despite the fantastic cooperation so far, Djokovic felt he needed to make a change, and to introduce new energy in order to raise his level of play." Djokovic reunited with Marián Vajda in April 2018 for the Monte-Carlo Masters. On 30 June 2019, Djokovic confirmed that he also added former world No. 2 and Wimbledon champion Goran Ivanišević to his coaching team. In late 2021, Djokovic decided to play fewer tournaments due to both his age and his desire to mainly focus his energy on the Grand Slam championships, and as such, he decided to be with a smaller team that had only one coach, and he chose Ivanišević due to Vajda's reluctance to coach just one player only on Grand Slams. Djokovic and Vajda thus parted ways for a second time in December 2021, but it was only made public in March 2022, when both announced that Vajda would no longer coach Djokovic and that it was an amicable and mutual decision. Vajda promised to remain his 'biggest support' on and off the court. Djokovic said on Twitter "What a journey Marian. 15 years!" In addition to Ivanišević as his new coach, Djokovic also added fitness trainer Marco Panichi and hitting partner Carlos Gómez-Herrera, a retired tennis player with whom he had been friends for around 15 years, while also keeping physiotherapist Miljan Amanović. In late 2023, Djokovic decided to end his professional long-term association with Edoardo Artaldi's management team, who had been with him since 2008, stating that “I’m now at a stage where I'm entering a new chapter about the off-court approach”. In a heartfelt message of gratitude for them, Djokovic stated: "My appreciation and love for you two personally goes beyond any professional relationship. What you did for me and my family privately and the amount of care and empathy you had all these years, especially towards my wife and kids is something very special for me and I will never forget that". In 2007, Djokovic founded the Novak Djokovic Foundation. The organization's mission is to help children from disadvantaged communities grow up and develop in stimulating and safe environments. The foundation partnered with the World Bank in August 2015 to promote early childhood education in Serbia. His foundation has built 50 schools as of April 2022 and are building their 51st, and supported more than 20,800 children and over a thousand families. Djokovic participated in charity matches to raise funds for the reconstruction of the Avala Tower, as well as to aid victims of the 2010 Haiti earthquake and 2010–11 Queensland floods. Starting in 2007, he has established a tradition of hosting and socializing with hundreds of Kosovo Serb children during Davis Cup matches organized in Serbia. Djokovic was selected as the 2012 Arthur Ashe Humanitarian of the Year, for his contributions through the foundation, his role as a UNICEF national ambassador and other charitable projects. In August 2015, he was appointed a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador. During the 2014 Balkans floods, Djokovic sparked worldwide financial and media support for victims in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia. After winning the 2014 Rome Masters, Djokovic donated his prize money to the flood victims in Serbia, while his foundation collected another $600,000. Following his 2016 Australian Open victory, Djokovic donated $20,000 to Melbourne City Mission's early childhood education programm to help disadvantaged children. After the COVID-19 pandemic spread to Serbia in March 2020, he and his wife announced that they will donate €1 million for the purchase of ventilators and medical equipment to support hospitals and other medical institutions. He also made a donation to Bergamo, Italy‚ one of the worst-affected Italian provinces, as well as to Novi Pazar, Serbia and North Mitrovica, Kosovo. Djokovic endorses Serbian telecommunications company Telekom Srbija and German nutritional supplement brand FitLine. On turning professional in 2003, Djokovic began wearing Adidas clothing. At the end of 2009, Djokovic signed a 10-year deal with the Italian clothing company Sergio Tacchini after Adidas refused to extend his clothing contract (choosing instead to sign Andy Murray). Tacchini doesn't make shoes so Djokovic continued with Adidas as his choice of footwear. His sponsorship contract with Tacchini was incentive-heavy, and Djokovic's disproportionate success and dominance in 2011 caused the company to fall behind on bonus payments, leading to the termination of the sponsorship contract. From 2011, Djokovic began to wear custom Red and Blue Adidas Barricade 6.0's shoes, referring to the colours of the Serbian national flag. By April 2012, the Tacchini deal had fallen first short and then apart. At that point, he was set to join forces with Nike, Inc., but instead, on 23 May 2012, Uniqlo appointed Djokovic as its global brand ambassador. The five-year sponsorship, reportedly worth €8 million per year, began on 27 May 2012 in Paris' French Open tennis tournament. A year later, Djokovic's long-term footwear deal with Adidas was announced ahead of 2013 French Open. In August 2011, Djokovic became the brand ambassador of Swiss watch manufacturer Audemars Piguet. Less than a month later, Djokovic signed a sponsorship deal with German car company Mercedes-Benz. In March 2012, Djokovic was announced by Bombardier Aerospace as its latest Learjet brand ambassador, thus joining the likes of actor and pilot John Travolta, architect Frank Gehry, maestro Valery Gergiev, and classical pianist Lang Lang. From January 2014 Djokovic has been endorsing French car manufacturer Peugeot. At the same time he entered into an endorsement deal with Japanese watch manufacturer Seiko, having just ended his affiliation with their rivals Audemars Piguet. In early 2015, ahead of the Australian Open, Djokovic teamed up with Australian banking corporation ANZ for a social media campaign to raise money for local communities across the Asia Pacific region. At the same time his partnership with Jacob's Creek, an Australian wine brand owned by Orlando Wines, was announced in regards to the production and distribution of 'Made By' film series, a documentary style content meant to "show a side of Novak not seen before as he recounts never before told life stories from Belgrade, Serbia, celebrating what has made him the champion he is today". Since 2004, the business end of Djokovic's career has been handled by Israeli managers Amit Naor (former pro tennis player turned sports agent) and Allon Khakshouri, a duo which also had Marat Safin and Dinara Safina as its clients. In June 2008, after the duo entered into a partnership with CAA Sports, the sports division of Hollywood talent firm Creative Artists Agency, meaning that the famous company started representing tennis players for the first time, Djokovic formally signed with CAA Sports. After Djokovic's contract with CAA Sports expired during summer 2012, he decided to switch representation, announcing IMG Worldwide as his new representatives in December 2012. On 22 May 2017, Djokovic was unveiled as a brand ambassador of Lacoste after a five-year partnership with Uniqlo. During the 2021 US Open, some people in Djokovic's player box wore hats and shirts bearing the logo of Raiffeisen Bank International, the central back of one of the two largest banking cooperatives in Austria. In April 2021, Djokovic became a brand ambassador for RBI and its subsidiaries in Central and Eastern Europe. The bank will help to support Djokovic's tennis academy in Belgrade. Djokovic did not wear the RBI logo, but he did wear on his shirt the logo of UKG, an American workforce management and human resource management company. People in his box wore the logo on hats as well. UKG lists Djokovic as one of their sponsored athletes. In 2005, as Djokovic moved up the tennis rankings, he began venturing into the business world. Most of his activities in the business arena have been channeled through Family Sport, a legal entity in Serbia established and run by members of his immediate family. Registered as a limited liability company, Family Sport initially focused on hospitality, specifically the restaurant business, by launching Novak Café & Restaurant, a franchise developed on the theme of Djokovic's tennis success. Over time, the company, whose day-to-day operations are mostly handled by Novak's father Srdjan and uncle Goran, expanded its activities into real estate, sports/entertainment event organization, and sports apparel distribution. The company launched Novak Café & Restaurant in 2008 in the Belgrade municipality of Novi Beograd, the flagship location in a franchised chain of theme café-restaurants. During 2009, two more locations were added—one in Kragujevac and the other in Belgrade, the city's second, in September at the neighbourhood of Dorćol overlooking the playing courts of Serbia Open whose inaugural edition took place several months earlier. On 16 December 2011 a location in Novi Sad was opened, however, it operated just over three years before closing in late March 2015. Banja Luka in neighbouring Bosnia got its Novak Café & Restaurant location on 16 October 2015 within Hotel Trešnja on Banj hill. In 2009, the company bought a 250-series ATP tournament known as the Dutch Open and moved it to Serbia where it was renamed the Serbia Open. With the help of Belgrade city authorities, the tournament's inaugural edition was held in May 2009 at the city-owned "Milan Gale Muškatirović" courts, located at an attractive spot in Dorćol neighbourhood. The tournament folded in 2012 after four editions and its place in the ATP calendar got taken over by the Düsseldorf Open. In May 2015, right after winning his fourth Rome Masters title, Djokovic launched a line of nutritional food products, called Djokolife. On 10 April 2016, while in town for the Monte-Carlo Masters, Djokovic opened a vegan restaurant called Eqvita in Monte Carlo. The restaurant reportedly closed in March 2019. Djokovic has 80% stake in biotech firm QuantBioRes which claims to be developing a drug to treat patients who have contracted COVID-19. Their research is based on electromagnetic frequency; one biomedical scientist likened it to homeopathy and argued that it "does not reflect a contemporary understanding of how biochemistry works", while Peter Collignon commented that their website "describes a way of finding a new molecule without providing any evidence of success". In August 2020, Djokovic resigned from the Players Council of the Association of Tennis Professionals and formed the Professional Tennis Players Association (PTPA) with Vasek Pospisil. The pair will serve as co-presidents of the new organisation to promote the interests of male and female tennis players above a ranking of 500 in singles and 200 in doubles. Throughout the latter part of the 2007 season, including before Wimbledon and during US Open, his comedic impressions of fellow contemporary tennis players received much media play. It began when a BBC camera crew recorded some footage of the twenty-year-old impersonating Maria Sharapova, Rafael Nadal, Goran Ivanišević, and Lleyton Hewitt on a practice court at London's Queen's Club Championships just before Wimbledon. The material — consisting of Djokovic imitating the said players by exaggerating their trademark physical gestures or nervous tics for the entertainment of his coaching team Marián Vajda and Mark Woodforde — aired during BBC's coverage of the tournament and subsequently became popular online. Two months later at the US Open, a phone video shot by Argentine players of Djokovic doing locker room impressions of players such as Andy Roddick, Roger Federer, Filippo Volandri and Nadal made its way online, becoming viral. A few days later, after beating Carlos Moyá in the quarterfinals, USA Network's on-court interviewer Michael Barkann asked Djokovic to perform some impressions and the player obliged by doing Sharapova and Nadal to the delight of the crowd. In addition to Djokovic, the national surge in the popularity of tennis was also inspired by three other up-and-coming young players: twenty-year-old Ana Ivanovic, twenty-two-year-old Jelena Janković, and twenty-three-year-old Janko Tipsarević as evidenced in early December 2007 when a sports-entertainment show named NAJJ Srbije (The Best of Serbia), put together in honour of the four players' respective successes in the 2007 season, drew a capacity crowd to Belgrade's Kombank Arena. In May 2008, he was a special guest during the first semifinal of the Eurovision Song Contest, held in Belgrade that year. He threw a big tennis ball into the crowd, announcing the start of the voting and together with one of the show's co-presenters, Željko Joksimović, Djokovic sang Đorđe Marjanović's song "Beograde". Throughout late April and early May 2009, during ATP Master Series tournaments in Rome and Madrid, respectively, the Serb was a guest on the Fiorello Show on Sky Uno hosted by Italian comedian Rosario Fiorello followed by an appearance on Pablo Motos' show El Hormiguero. Djokovic is also featured in the music video for the song "Hello" by Martin Solveig and Dragonette. The video, filmed at Stade Roland Garros, shows Solveig facing off against Bob Sinclar, another DJ, in a tennis match. When the referee calls a crucial ball "Out", Djokovic enters the arena and convinces the referee otherwise. In 2010, the Serbian blues-rock band Zona B recorded the song "The Joker", dedicating it to Djokovic. On 25 June 2011, at the Serbian National Defense Council's seventieth congress in Chicago, Djokovic was unanimously awarded the Order of Serbian National Defense in America I class – the highest decoration of the SND. The order was given to the twenty-four-year-old for his merits on the international sports scene and his contributions to the reputation of Serbs and Serbia around the world. The day after winning his first Wimbledon title and reaching the No. 1 ranking for the first time in his career, Djokovic went home to Belgrade for a homecoming celebration in front of the Serbian National Assembly, an event attended by close to 100,000 people. On 28 November 2011, after returning from London where he finished early due to failing to progress out of his round-robin group, Djokovic visited his childhood tennis coach Jelena Genčić at her Belgrade home, bringing the Wimbledon trophy along. The meeting, reportedly their first in more than four years, was recorded by two television crews – a Serbian one shooting for Aleksandar Gajšek's show Agape on Studio B television and an American one from CBS television network filming material for Djokovic's upcoming piece on 60 Minutes. The next day, 29 November 2011, on invitation from film producer Avi Lerner, Djokovic was part of the high-budget Hollywood movie production The Expendables 2 in a cameo playing himself that was shot in a warehouse in the Bulgarian capital of Sofia. However, his bit part was later cut out of the final version of the movie. In March 2012, he was profiled on the CBS show 60 Minutes by their correspondent Bob Simon. He was named amongst the 100 most influential people of 2012 by TIME magazine. Djokovic has been a guest on late-night talk shows, such as The Tonight Show with Jay Leno, Veče sa Ivanom Ivanovićem, Conan, Late Night with Jimmy Fallon, Late Show with David Letterman, The Late Show with Stephen Colbert, The Jonathan Ross Show and The Ellen DeGeneres Show. In April 2021, a team of Balkan biospeleologists named a recently discovered freshwater snail species Travunijana djokovici after Djokovic. In 2022, a book titled Facing Novak Djokovic, a compilation of interviews with ATP players who described in detail what it's like to compete against Djokovic, was published. In 2022, Nikola Vesović, a research associate at the University of Belgrade, announced that a new species of beetle in the genus Duvalius recently discovered near the town of Ljubovija, Serbia, had been named Duvalius djokovici after Djokovic. Since 2010, he has been connected with the nutritionist Igor Četojević who additionally focuses on Chinese medicine and performs acupuncture. He allegedly discovered that Djokovic suffers from gluten intolerance, using applied kinesiology, and that he should not eat gluten, removing it from his diet. He eventually settled on a vegan diet, while later sometimes eating fish. He also claims this vegan, plant-based diet cured his persistent allergies and mild asthma. The gluten-free diet has been credited for improving his endurance on the court and playing a role in his subsequent success. Following his elbow surgery in 2018, he stated that he "cried for three days" after it, feeling guilty, because he was "not a fan of surgeries or medications" and wanted "to be as natural as possible". He further stated that his belief that human "bodies are self-healing mechanisms". In his 2013 autobiography, Serve to Win, he wrote of a "researcher" who directed "anger, fear, hostility" at a glass of water, which turned "slightly green" after a few days, while also directing "love, joy" at another glass of water, which remained "bright and crystal clear" in the same period. In 2020, Djokovic spoke of his belief that "some people" used "prayer" and "gratitude" to "turn the most toxic food, or maybe most polluted water into the most healing water." He also stated that "scientists [have] proven" that "molecules in the water react to our emotions" and speech. Such claims are scientifically dubious, and generally regarded as superstitious beliefs. During the ATP Tour's shutdown due to the COVID-19 pandemic, in a Facebook live stream with other Serbian athletes hosted in April 2020, Djokovic indicated he opposes vaccination and would not be forced to take a COVID vaccine just to be able to return to the Тour. He later clarified his remarks by stating that he is not against all kinds of vaccines, but that he is against forced vaccination. He added that he was extremely careful about what he puts into his body. Djokovic's views came under increased scrutiny in late 2021, in the run-up to the 2022 Australian Open, after comments made by Australian government officials indicated that tennis players would need to be vaccinated to enter the tournament. Prior to the tournament, Djokovic had refused to state publicly whether he was vaccinated or not, but had made comments stating his concern over the possibility of a hotel quarantine in Australia. However, while being interviewed by the Australian Border Force in January 2022, Djokovic confirmed to the officer interviewing him that he was unvaccinated. "The principles of decision making on my body are more important than any title or anything else." —Djokovic, on why he is willing to forgo playing major tournaments. Several commentators feel that Djokovic's stance against the COVID-19 vaccine could damage his placement among the all-time great tennis players as he would not be able to participate in the major tournaments where vaccination is required for entry while others have applauded his view of having a choice. He was unable to play the 2022 Australian Open, where he was the defending champion and the favourite to win. Shortly thereafter, he lost the No. 1 ranking he had held for a record 373 weeks. Due to the federal government's vaccination policy for non-US citizens, Djokovic was unable to enter the United States to play the 2022 US Open, another major tournament he was the favorite to win. In an interview with the BBC on 15 February 2022, a few weeks after the tournament, Djokovic stated he does not associate with the wider anti-vax movement. However, he believes in personal freedom of choice and supports an individual's right to choose whether or not they receive a vaccine. He re-affirmed sticking to his principles and refusal to receive a vaccine, saying that he would be willing to forego entry into tournaments which are held in countries mandating the vaccine even if it cost him his career records and placement among the all-time great players. Djokovic is a member of the Serbian Orthodox Church. On 28 April 2011, Patriarch Irinej of Serbia awarded Djokovic the Order of St. Sava I class, the highest decoration of the Serbian Orthodox Church, for his contributions to monasteries of the Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo and charitable work in Serbia. He has said that he admired and held in high regard Bishop Amfilohije, who played a key part in helping him through a tough time during the Yugoslav Wars. Djokovic has been reported to meditate for up to an hour a day at the Buddhist Buddhapadipa Temple in Wimbledon as he appreciates the natural setting and serenity, and is close to monks in the complex. He has spoken of the positive power of meditation. He is a frequent visitor of the Bosnian town of Visoko and its park that is host to several meditation platforms. Djokovic is a fan of Serbian football club Red Star, Italian club Milan, and Portuguese club Benfica, as well as Serbian basketball club Red Star. He has also shown public support for Croatia at the 2018 FIFA World Cup and when faced with criticism from some within his native country of Serbia, Djokovic replied that "sports have their 'universal language,' they erase boundaries between people, [and] overcome differences in religion, race and nationality." Djokovic has expressed admiration for Croatian football player Luka Modrić, who plays for Real Madrid. He is a friend of former Serbian tennis player Ana Ivanovic, whom he has known since the two were children growing up in Serbia. Djokovic is a member of the "Champions for Peace" club, a group of elite athletes committed to serving peace in the world through sport. It was created by Peace and Sport, a Monaco-based international organization. Following Djokovic's victory over Aleksandar Kovacevic in the first round of the 2023 French Open, Djokovic wrote "Kosovo is the heart of Serbia. Stop the violence" on the lens of a camera, in response to the recent clashes in Kosovo. The political statement was criticized as inappropriate by France's minister of sports Amélie Oudéa-Castéra. (W) winner; (F) finalist; (SF) semifinalist; (QF) quarterfinalist; (#R) rounds 4, 3, 2, 1; (RR) round-robin stage; (Q#) qualification round; (DNQ) did not qualify; (A) absent; (NH) not held; (SR) strike rate (events won / competed); (W–L) win–loss record. To avoid confusion and double counting, these charts are updated at the conclusion of a tournament or when the player's participation has ended. Current through the 2024 Australian Open. Djokovic was scheduled to play the 2022 Australian Open, but his visa was cancelled for being unvaccinated against COVID-19. Djokovic had a walkover at the 2011 French Open and another one at the 2016 US Open; hence, these are not counted as wins. The event of 2020 Wimbledon was not held due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Djokovic was disqualified from the 2020 US Open after accidentally hitting a line official with a ball that was not in play. Djokovic withdrew from the 2022 US Open due to the federal government's COVID-19 vaccination policy for non-US citizens. These records were attained in the Open Era of tennis and in ATP Masters series since 1990. Records in bold indicate peerless achievements. ITF World Champion (8): 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2018, 2021, 2023. ATP Player of the Year (8): 2011, 2012, 2014, 2015, 2018, 2020, 2021, 2023. Biography portal Serbia portal Tennis portal Sports portal Sport in Serbia List of career achievements by Novak Djokovic List of UNICEF Goodwill Ambassadors 2012 Summer Olympics Parade of Nations List of ATP number 1 ranked singles tennis players (since 1973) List of Grand Slam men's singles champions Tennis Masters Series records and statistics In ATP Tour and Grand Slam main draw matches, Summer Olympics, Davis Cup; 1st in the Open Era In ATP Tour and Grand Slam main draw matches, Summer Olympics, Davis Cup; All different Masters event titles. Australian Open, Italian Open, Wimbledon, and the Year-end Championship respectively. Djokovic did not play in the ninth tournament (Madrid). Djokovic proceeded to defeat Nadal at the 2011 US Open and 2012 Australian Open, where their rankings were by then reversed. "Novak Djokovic". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 29 January 2023. Retrieved 1 April 2019. "Djokovic, Novak". novakdjokovic.com. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. Retrieved 13 July 2015. "ATP Prize Money Leaders" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 10 July 2021. "Rankings Singles". atptour.com. Archived from the original on 1 January 2023. Retrieved 7 December 2020. "Rankings Doubles". atptour.com. Archived from the original on 6 May 2019. Retrieved 25 April 2019. "The pronunciation by Novak Djokovic himself". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 15 June 2017. Retrieved 9 January 2018. "Djokovic Clinches Record-Extending Eighth Year-End No. 1 Presented By Pepperstone". www.nittoatpfinals.com. 12 November 2023. Archived from the original on 13 November 2023. Retrieved 13 November 2023. "Novak Djokovic | Biography, Grand Slams, & Facts | Britannica". www.britannica.com. 28 January 2024. Archived from the original on 24 January 2024. Retrieved 3 February 2024. The Men's Player of the Decade: Novak Djokovic Archived 23 July 2023 at the Wayback Machine, Tennis magazine "Uncovered: The Best Seasons Of Novak Djokovic's Career". ATP Tour. 31 March 2020. Archived from the original on 14 September 2023. Retrieved 14 September 2023. "GOAT: Why Novak Djokovic is the Greatest Of All Time". Sydney Unleashed. 1 December 2019. Archived from the original on 30 January 2024. Retrieved 30 January 2024. Rajan, Amol (15 February 2022). "Novak Djokovic willing to miss tournaments over vaccine". BBC News. Archived from the original on 7 April 2022. There's 10 key Aus Open contenders. Fox Sports, 16 January 2020 "US Open 2022: Djokovic, Medvedev Early Favorites but Will the Serb Be Allowed to Compete?". UBITENNIS. 4 August 2022. Retrieved 1 September 2022. "Novak Djokovic's triumph was the ultimate revenge against those who villainised him". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 2 May 2023. "Djokovic Wins Roland Garros For Historic 23rd Major Title". ATP. Retrieved 11 June 2023. "Still learning, still winning: Djokovic enjoys Laureus success". Laureus. Archived from the original on 29 August 2023. Retrieved 29 August 2023. "Sports Personality of the Year 2011: Novak Djokovic wins overseas award". BBC News. 22 December 2011. Archived from the original on 1 June 2022. Retrieved 29 August 2023. JohnWallStreet (3 September 2020). "Djokovic Forms New Professional Tennis Players Association, Lacks Support to Command Change". Sportico.com. Archived from the original on 2 August 2021. Retrieved 12 July 2021. "Djokovic resigns from player council". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 25 March 2021. "Novak Djokovic Doubling Donations In His Foundation's Season Of Giving". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 18 March 2021. "Novak Djokovic appointed as UNICEF's Goodwill Ambassador". www.unicef.cn. 28 August 2015. Archived from the original on 4 June 2023. Retrieved 4 June 2023. Bowers, Chris (2017). Novak Djokovic – The Biography. Kings Road Publishing. Chapter 1. ISBN 978-1-78606-550-6. Archived from the original on 31 October 2023. Retrieved 30 October 2023. "Novak Djokovic: Biography, Tennis Player, Grand Slam Champion". www.biography.com. 11 September 2023. Archived from the original on 16 October 2023. Retrieved 10 October 2023. EDT, Teddy Cutler On 03/13/16 at 9:46 AM (13 March 2016). "Exclusive: Novak Djokovic's father talks Andy Murray, Roger Federer and his son's career". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 16 January 2021. Retrieved 21 February 2021.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Medić, Jelena. "MAJKE ŠAMPIONI! Dijana Đoković kroz suze otkrila sve tajne: "OSTALA SAM ŽELJNA NOVAKA. Bilo je teško, Srđan pozajmi od zelenaša i ode sa Noletom, a ja sa dvoje dece NEMAM NI ZA HLEB"". Blic.rs (in Serbian). Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 21 February 2021. Drucker, Joel (14 February 2008). "Behind every good man is an even better woman coach". ESPN. Archived from the original on 7 November 2012. Retrieved 8 July 2011. Grossekathöfer, Maik (7 October 2011). "Street Fighter, Artist and Patriot: Tennis Star Djokovic Is the Pride of New Serbia". Der Spiegel. Archived from the original on 16 October 2023. Retrieved 11 October 2023. Clarey, Cristopher (1 December 2010). "Behind Serbia's Rise in Tennis, a Star and His Family". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2 December 2010. Retrieved 9 July 2011. "Novak Djokovic: The Making of a Champion: Part 1". bleacherreport.com. 25 June 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "From a Ski Resort, Djokovic Emerges as a Serbian Tennis Groundbreaker". www.nytimes.com. 3 December 2010. Archived from the original on 16 October 2023. Retrieved 10 October 2023. "Novak Djokovic: Writing his own history". ausopen.com. 18 August 2023. Archived from the original on 16 October 2023. Retrieved 10 October 2023. "Shaped by hardship, Djokovic grateful for 'tennis mother' and 'tennis father'". www.reuters.com. 12 June 2023. Archived from the original on 16 October 2023. Retrieved 10 October 2023. "The story of Novak Djokovic child waking up to the sound of bombers". www.mamamia.com.au. 27 January 2019. Archived from the original on 16 October 2023. Retrieved 10 October 2023. "Tennis-Doing things the hard way made Djokovic tougher". www.reuters.com. 11 September 2021. Archived from the original on 16 October 2023. Retrieved 10 October 2023. Clarey, Christopher (26 May 2007). "Djokovic Is on the Rise, Just as He Expects to Be". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 28 May 2007. Retrieved 28 July 2019. "Novak Djokovic accused of 'punching' fellow star as tense training session surfaces". www.express.co.uk. 24 July 2023. Archived from the original on 16 October 2023. Retrieved 11 October 2023. "Novak, Gulbis will keep friendship aside in duel". www.hindustantimes.com. 3 June 2008. Archived from the original on 16 October 2023. Retrieved 11 October 2023. "Novak Djokovic's Girlfriend Jelena Ristic Watches Him Win 1st US Open Title – Jelena Ristic". Zimbio. 12 September 2011. Archived from the original on 15 November 2011. Retrieved 29 October 2011. "Novak Djokovic engaged to long time girlfriend". Balkan Inside. Archived from the original on 2 October 2013. "Novak Djokovic wedding Jelena Ristic". USA Today. 10 July 2014. Archived from the original on 11 July 2014. Retrieved 10 July 2014. "Završeno crkveno vjenčanje Novaka i Jelene Đoković" (in Serbian). nezavisne. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 12 July 2014. "Novak Djokovic to become a father for the first time". CNN. 24 April 2014. Archived from the original on 13 August 2016. Retrieved 29 June 2016. "Novak Djokovic's wife gives birth to baby boy". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 22 October 2014. Retrieved 21 October 2014. "Novak i Jelena Đoković dobili ćerku". b92. 2 September 2017. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 3 September 2017. "Hot Shot: Novak Djokovic – Vogue". Archived from the original on 22 May 2011. Retrieved 6 June 2011. Bevis, Marianne (22 December 2010). "Bleacherreport: Has the Djoker in the Pack Come of Age?". novakdjokovic.com. Archived from the original on 14 September 2023. Retrieved 17 September 2023. "Novak Djokovic Interview". Archived from the original on 24 July 2011. Retrieved 6 June 2011. Meyer, Luke (11 September 2023). "SPEAKING FLUENT SPANISH. Novak Djokovic confirms he will the Davis Cup in Spain, While Carlos Alcaraz..." Tennis Tonic – News, Predictions, H2H, Live Scores, stats. Archived from the original on 14 September 2023. Retrieved 12 September 2023. "25 years of the Tennis Europe Junior Tour by Tennis Europe – 2001". issuu.com. 18 December 2015. Archived from the original on 27 October 2023. Retrieved 31 October 2023. "Vincitori del Trofeo Carlo Stagno d'Alcontres" [Winners of the Carlo Stagno d'Alcontres trophy] (PDF). www.ctvmessina.it (in Italian). Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 April 2017. Retrieved 31 October 2023. "Nole-Murray, quando Livorno era Wimbledon" [Nole-Murray, when Livorno was Wimbledon]. www.iltirreno.it (in Italian). 19 July 2012. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 31 October 2023. "Tenis: Lacko prehral na ME14 až vo finále" [Tennis: Lacko lost at EC14 only in the final]. sportnet.sme.sk. 29 July 2001. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 31 October 2023. "European Junior Championships 14 & Under". www.tenniseurope.org. Archived from the original on 27 October 2023. Retrieved 31 October 2023. "Djokovic practices returns with Bozovic, pays off against Raonic". www.tennis.com. 3 November 2014. Archived from the original on 27 October 2023. Retrieved 31 October 2023. "Junior team competitions rolls of honour" (PDF). www.itftennis.com. Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 October 2023. Retrieved 31 October 2023. "La première fois que Novak Djokovic, 15 ans, a battu Gaël Monfils, 16 ans, c'était à La Baule" [The first time 15-year-old Novak Djokovic beat 16-year-old Gaël Monfils was in La Baule]. www.ouest-france.fr (in French). 20 August 2023. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "L'empreinte Djokovic" [The Djokovic imprint]. www.ouest-france.fr (in French). 2 July 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Novak Djokovic player details – Activity in singles". International Tennis Federation. Retrieved 14 December 2023. "Novak Djokovic player details". International Tennis Federation. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 24 October 2013. "Novak Djokovic player details – overview". International Tennis Federation. Archived from the original on 6 September 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021. Bowers 2014, p. chapter five. "A timeline of Novak Djokovic's path to ultimate greatness". www.tennis.com. 29 August 2021. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Novak Djokovic, the Making of a Champion, Part 2". bleacherreport.com. 24 July 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Ranking Novak Djokovic's 24 Grand Slam tennis titles". ESPN. 12 September 2023. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Djokovic arrives with a bang and a new era begins". The Guardian. 28 January 2008. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "'I wanted to repeat what Rafael Nadal, Roger Federer did,' Novak Djokovic said". www.tennisworldusa.org. 18 May 2022. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "A Short History of Novak Djokovic". tennisreviewer.com. 24 March 2021. Retrieved 1 December 2023. "Le jour de la naissance d'Arthur Fils, en 2004, que se passait-il dans le tennis?" [On the day Arthur Fils was born, in 2004, what was happening in tennis?]. www.lequipe.fr. 25 February 2023. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "N.Djokovic beats D.Bracciali – Budapest Challenger – Budapest 2004". tennistonic.com. 22 May 2004. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Wawrinka v Djokovic: An epic third serve of Stanimal and the Djoker". www.smh.com.au. 29 January 2015. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Impressive Safin opens Melbourne account". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 17 January 2005. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 27 January 2013. "Đoković pobedio i Puertu!". b92.net (in Serbian). 11 February 2005. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 24 October 2013. Hodgkinson, Mark (17 May 2006). "Serb may join British ranks". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007. Retrieved 13 August 2007. "Djokovic dismisses British links". BBC. 4 June 2006. Archived from the original on 30 April 2008. Retrieved 16 October 2009. Harman, Neil. "Why Novak Djokovic said no to Great Britain". The Times. London, UK. Archived from the original on 5 August 2011. Retrieved 16 October 2009.(subscription required) "The day Novak Djokovic became the youngest men's champion in the history of the Miami Open". www.tennismajors.com. 1 April 2023. Archived from the original on 4 November 2023. Retrieved 4 November 2023. "Ancic snuffs out Djokovic threat". BBC Sport. 3 July 2006. Archived from the original on 4 November 2013. Retrieved 3 November 2013. "Djokovic titles at Metz, France". www.upi.com. 8 October 2006. Retrieved 4 November 2023. "F. Gonzalez und N. Djokovic Year up to 2013". Tennis Wettpoint. 20 October 2006. Archived from the original on 27 April 2015. Retrieved 3 November 2013. "Serbian teenager Djokovic is thinking big". Reuters. 20 January 2007. Archived from the original on 29 September 2023. Retrieved 17 September 2023. "Federer eyes the ultimate prize with No10 in the bag". The Guardian. London, UK. 29 January 2007. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 26 October 2013. "Djokovic dumps Nadal". Eurosport. 29 March 2007. Archived from the original on 13 November 2023. Retrieved 14 November 2021. "Djokovic cruises to Miami title". BBC Sport. 1 April 2007. Archived from the original on 14 November 2021. Retrieved 14 November 2021. "Match: Serbia – Georgia 5:0". Davis Cup. 6 April 2007. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 26 October 2013. "Đoković wins Estoril Open". B92 News. 7 May 2007. Archived from the original on 4 November 2013. Retrieved 31 October 2013. "2007: Hat-trick for Nadal and Henin". Roland Garros. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 26 October 2013. "Djokovic wins five-hour battle against Baghdatis". Rediff India Abroad. 6 July 2007. Archived from the original on 19 October 2023. Retrieved 17 October 2023. "UPDATE 1-Tennis-Djokovic wins five-hour battle against Baghdatis". www.reuters.com. 6 July 2007. Archived from the original on 12 November 2023. Retrieved 12 November 2023. "Nadal in final after Djokovic retires". Rediff India Abroad. 7 July 2007. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 26 October 2013. "After topping Nadal, Djokovic put away Federer to win Rogers Cup". ESPN. 13 August 2007. Archived from the original on 7 August 2013. Retrieved 10 July 2011. "Borg: 'Djokovic can win a Grand Slam'". BlackRock Tour of Champions. 13 August 2007. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007. Retrieved 13 August 2007. Newbery, Piers (20 October 2006). "US Open 2007". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 3 November 2013. "Najuspešniji u izboru OKS". Olympic Committee of Serbia. 7 July 2016. Archived from the original on 25 July 2018. Retrieved 7 July 2016. "Dejvis kup: Srbija – Australija 4:1" (in Serbian). Radio Televizija Vojvodine. 23 September 2007. Archived from the original on 23 June 2015. Retrieved 26 October 2013. "Serbia's Djokovic retires from Davis Cup match to hand Russians victory". ESPN Tennis. 10 February 2008. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 26 October 2013. "U.S. edge out Serbia to win Hopman Cup". www.reuters.com. 4 January 2008. Archived from the original on 17 May 2021. Retrieved 6 November 2013. "Watch When Serena Williams Slammed Aces Against Novak Djokovic". www.essentiallysports.com. 4 May 2020. Archived from the original on 10 May 2020. Retrieved 6 November 2013. "Djokovic crushes Federer to seal final spot". The Guardian. London, UK. 25 January 2008. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 31 October 2013. "Novak Djokovic". The Times of India. 14 May 2010. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 31 October 2013. Hodgkinson, Mark (27 January 2008). "Novak Djokovic wins Australian Open". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. "Djokovic sinks Fish to seal Indian Wells title". Reuters. 24 March 2008. Archived from the original on 7 April 2022. Retrieved 7 April 2022. "Djokovic defeats Wawrinka in Rome". BBC Sport. 11 May 2008. Archived from the original on 4 November 2013. Retrieved 31 October 2013. "French Open: Ruthless Nadal crushes Djokovic to reach final". The Guardian. London. 6 June 2008. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 26 October 2013. "Djokovic sent home by Safin in Wimbledon's second round". ESPN. 25 June 2008. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 3 November 2013. "Djokovic ends Nadal's winning streak". The Independent. 3 August 2008. Archived from the original on 7 November 2023. Retrieved 6 November 2023. "Djokovic wins Men's Singles bronze medal". The Official Website of the Beijing 2008 Olympic Games. 24 August 2008. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 26 October 2013. "Angry Djokovic exacts revenge on Roddick". CNN. 5 September 2008. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 26 October 2013. Newbery, Piers (16 November 2008). "Superb Djokovic wins Masters Cup". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 26 October 2013. "Djokovic Upset in First Round Match at Brisbane". The Sports Network. Canadian Press. 6 January 2009. Archived from the original on 20 October 2012. Retrieved 17 September 2011. "Federer and Roddick into semis after champion Djokovic pulls out". TheGuardian. 31 January 2022. Archived from the original on 1 February 2022. Retrieved 31 January 2022. "Djokovic melts in the Australian heat". Independent. 31 January 2022. Archived from the original on 1 February 2022. Retrieved 31 January 2022. "Djokovic tops Ferrer in Dubai final". ESPN. 28 February 2009. Archived from the original on 11 November 2013. Retrieved 11 November 2013. "Murray wins Miami Masters title". BBC. 5 April 2009. Archived from the original on 8 April 2009. Retrieved 11 November 2013. "Nadal rolls past Djokovic to win Rome Masters for fourth time". USA Today. 3 May 2009. Archived from the original on 23 June 2015. Retrieved 3 November 2013. "Djokovic wins Serbia Open final". BBC Sport. 10 May 2009. Archived from the original on 13 May 2009. Retrieved 11 May 2009. "Best Matches of the Year". ATP World Tour. 9 December 2009. Archived from the original on 2 August 2013. Retrieved 15 May 2011. "Haas beats Djokovic to win title". BBC Sport. 14 June 2009. Archived from the original on 17 June 2009. Retrieved 20 June 2009. Westbrook, Ian (1 July 2009). "Haas stuns Djokovic to make semis". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 2 July 2009. Retrieved 1 July 2009. "Federer secures Cincinnati title". BBC Sport. 23 August 2009. Archived from the original on 24 August 2009. Retrieved 28 September 2009. "Federer & Del Potro into US final". BBC Sport. 13 September 2009. Archived from the original on 24 September 2009. Retrieved 28 September 2009. "Djokovic beats Cilic in Beijing". BBC Sport. 11 October 2009. Archived from the original on 12 October 2009. Retrieved 12 October 2009. "Djokovic bagels Hernych 6–0, 6–0 at Swiss Indoors". tennis.com. 5 November 2009. Archived from the original on 18 May 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2009. "Djokovic beats Federer in final". BBC Sport. 8 November 2009. Archived from the original on 10 November 2009. Retrieved 9 November 2009. "Djokovic wins superb Paris final". BBC Sport. 8 November 2009. Archived from the original on 19 November 2009. Retrieved 28 November 2009. "Djokovic out of ATP finals despite win". www.sportsnet.ca. 27 November 2009. Archived from the original on 7 November 2023. Retrieved 6 November 2023. "Ironman Djokovic fed up with matches". www.reuters.com. 23 January 2010. Archived from the original on 7 November 2023. Retrieved 6 November 2023. "Djokovic blames illness". 28 January 2010. Archived from the original on 29 January 2010. Retrieved 28 January 2010. "Djokovic wins a war of attrition". www.thenationalnews.com. 1 March 2010. Archived from the original on 4 November 2023. Retrieved 4 November 2023. "Serbia Beats U.S. in First Round of Davis Cup". The New York Times. 8 March 2010. Archived from the original on 11 March 2010. Retrieved 11 November 2013. "Djokovic Admits That Martin Messed Up His Serve". 12 April 2010. Archived from the original on 16 April 2010. Retrieved 8 May 2010. "Novak Djokovic beaten in Rome by Fernando Verdasco". BBC News. 30 April 2010. Archived from the original on 3 May 2010. Retrieved 8 May 2010. "Djokovic retires in Belgrade with breathing problems". www.tennis.com. 7 May 2010. Archived from the original on 4 November 2023. Retrieved 4 November 2023. "What have been the toughest defeats of Novak Djokovic career?". www.tennisworldusa.org. 26 April 2018. Archived from the original on 7 November 2023. Retrieved 6 November 2023. "209-1: On this day, Novak Djokovic took his only loss from two sets up". www.tennis.com. 2 June 2020. Archived from the original on 4 November 2023. Retrieved 4 November 2023. "Novak clinches his first ATP doubles title!". novakdjokovic.com. 13 June 2010. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Wimbledon 2010: Tomas Berdych into final after beating Novak Djokovic". The Guardian. 2 July 2010. Archived from the original on 26 August 2016. Retrieved 7 July 2016. "Toronto spectacle: Nole and Rafa to play doubles together!". novakdjokovic.com. 6 August 2010. Archived from the original on 7 November 2023. Retrieved 6 November 2023. "Rodik bolji od Đokovića u Sinsinatiju". Politika. 20 August 2010. Archived from the original on 9 August 2016. Retrieved 7 July 2016. "Rafael Nadal wins US Open to seal career Grand Slam". BBC. 14 September 2010. Archived from the original on 4 November 2013. Retrieved 3 November 2013. "Roger Federer beats Djokovic to set up Nadal final". BBC. 27 November 2010. Archived from the original on 6 March 2016. Retrieved 22 June 2016. "Serbia wins first Davis Cup title". ESPN. 6 December 2010. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016. Retrieved 6 December 2010. "OCS: Nole declared the best athlete of Serbia in 2010!". novakdjokovic.com. 17 December 2010. Archived from the original on 20 September 2013. Retrieved 6 November 2010. Schlink, Leo (30 January 2011). "Novak Djokovic wins in straight sets". heraldsun.com.au. Archived from the original on 25 July 2020. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Schlink, Leo (28 January 2011). "Novak Djokovic upsets Roger Federer in Australian Open semi-final". The Herald and Weekly Times. Archived from the original on 25 July 2020. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Novak Djokovic defeats Roger Federer to win Dubai title". BBC. 26 February 2011. Archived from the original on 31 May 2011. Retrieved 12 November 2023. "Hot Djokovic denies No. 1 Nadal in epic Indian Wells final". CNN. 21 March 2011. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Dwyre, Bill (20 March 2011). "Novak Djokovic finds a secret to tennis success and a dent in Rafael Nadal's armor". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 6 April 2011. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Fodens, Eve (4 April 2011). "Novak Djokovic hot streak rolls on as Rafael Nadal is edged out". The Scotsman. UK. Archived from the original on 23 July 2020. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Newbery, Piers (8 May 2011). "Novak Djokovic ends Nadal's run on clay in Madrid". BBC Sports. Archived from the original on 31 May 2011. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Hudson, Elizabeth (15 May 2011). "Novak Djokovic beats Rafael Nadal to win Rome Masters". BBC Sports. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Federer ends Djokovic's 41-match streak". www.spokesman.com. 4 June 2011. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "5 best starts to a tennis season in the Open era". www.spokesman.com. 1 May 2015. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. "Djokovic Clinches Year-End No. 1 For First Time". ATP. 13 October 2011. Archived from the original on 14 October 2011. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Novak Djokovic wins Wimbledon title". ESPN. Associated Press. 3 July 2011. Archived from the original on 4 January 2014. Retrieved 7 October 2023. BBC Sports staff (14 August 2011). "Novak Djokovic beats Mardy Fish to win Rogers Cup". BBC Sports. Archived from the original on 22 August 2011. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Novak Djokovic claims U.S. Open crown". ESPN. 13 September 2011. Archived from the original on 11 September 2023. Retrieved 12 November 2023. "US Open 2011: Roger Federer struggles to accept Novak Djokovic defeat". The Guardian. 10 September 2011. Archived from the original on 28 January 2017. Retrieved 24 January 2017. Mitchell, Kevin (10 September 2011). "Novak Djokovic reaches US Open final after stunning Roger Federer". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Two sets down, Novak Djokovic rallies to beat Roger Federer". ESPN. 10 September 2011. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Novak Djokovic and the greatest shot in US Open history". www.usopen.org. 8 September 2021. Archived from the original on 9 October 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Moment 5: Novak Djokovic hits the all-or-nothing forehand return heard 'round the world". www.tennis.com. 27 June 2023. Archived from the original on 2 October 2023. Retrieved 12 November 2023. The Washington Post and The New York Times (12 September 2011). "Novak Djokovic beats Rafael Nadal in U.S. Open men's final". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on 9 December 2012. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "2011 U.S. Open: Novak Djokovic overcomes back pain, Rafael Nadal to win marathon match". The Washington Post. 12 September 2011. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Pucin, Diane (12 September 2011). "Novak Djokovic's U.S. Open title is epic in scale". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 5 November 2011. Retrieved 7 October 2023. "Djokovic saves match point vs. Berdych for 70th win". www.tennis.com. 21 November 2011. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Djokovic and Kvitova named 2011 ITF World Champions". ITF. 13 December 2011. Archived from the original on 5 January 2012. "Djokovic Makes Masters 1000 History in Montreal". ATP World Tour. 14 August 2011. Archived from the original on 31 July 2013. Retrieved 14 October 2011. Ackerman, McCarton (2020). "For Novak Djokovic, Banner 2011 Season Remains Benchmark To Eclipse". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 12 March 2020. Retrieved 5 March 2020. Hal Habib (21 September 2011). "After putting on 'couch potato' weight in retirement, Pete Sampras is fit again and playing competitively". The Palm Beach Post. Archived from the original on 21 February 2014. Retrieved 23 September 2011. Danielle Rossingh (19 November 2011). "Djokovic's Season Ranks Among Greatest Ever, Becker Says". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 23 August 2013. Retrieved 10 March 2017. "Nadal returns in unfamiliar role of underdog". Yahoo! News. 19 November 2011. Archived from the original on 8 August 2013. Retrieved 13 December 2011. Fisher, Jon. "Andy Murray defeated by Novak Djokovic in epic semi-final". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 27 January 2012. Retrieved 27 January 2012. "Djokovic has that unbeatable feeling". 30 January 2012. Archived from the original on 18 May 2023. Retrieved 30 January 2012. "Djokovic retains Miami title with straight sets win over Murray". CNN. 1 April 2012. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Rafael Nadal beats Novak Djokovic to win Italian Open". BBC. 21 May 2012. Archived from the original on 21 May 2012. Retrieved 10 September 2012. "French Open men's semi-finals". BBC. 8 June 2012. Archived from the original on 9 June 2012. Retrieved 10 September 2012. Henson, Mike (11 June 2012). "Rafael Nadal beats Novak Djokovic to win seventh French Open". BBC. Archived from the original on 3 September 2012. Retrieved 10 September 2012. "Nadal tops Djokovic for record seventh French". Tennis.com. 11 June 2012. Archived from the original on 5 November 2014. Retrieved 11 September 2012. "Wimbledon 2012: Roger Federer beats Novak Djokovic to reach final". www.theguardian.com. 6 July 2012. Archived from the original on 30 August 2017. Retrieved 12 November 2023. "Novak Djokovic will be Serbia's flag bearer at Olympics". 8 June 2012. Archived from the original on 14 June 2012. Retrieved 8 June 2012. "Djokovic sets up Murray showdown". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 3 August 2012. Retrieved 2 August 2012. "Del Potro beats Djokovic to take bronze". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 6 August 2012. Retrieved 5 August 2012. "Federer sweeps aside Djokovic in Cincinnati to underline No. 1 status". CNN. 19 August 2012. Archived from the original on 26 December 2014. Retrieved 3 November 2013. "Djokovic Beats Ferrer To Reach 3rd US Open Final". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 9 September 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2012. "Novak Djokovic sets up Andy Murray US Open final". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 10 September 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2012. "Andy Murray: US Open success 'means the world to me'". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 11 September 2012. Retrieved 11 September 2012. "My favourite game: Andy Murray v Novak Djokovic, 2012 US Open final". The Guardian. 21 April 2020. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Novak Djokovic and Victoria Azarenka win the China Open". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 8 October 2012. Retrieved 7 October 2012. "Novak Djokovic beats Andy Murray to win Shanghai Masters". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 15 October 2012. Retrieved 14 October 2012. "Novak Djokovic to finish year as No. 1". USA Today. 29 October 2012. Archived from the original on 29 October 2012. Retrieved 29 October 2012. Briggs, Simon (12 November 2012). "ATP World Tour Final 2012: world No 1 Novak Djokovic seals season with defeat of Roger Federer in fitting finale". The Telegraph. London, UK. Archived from the original on 13 November 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. "Djokovic beats Federer to win World Tour Finals title". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 19 November 2012. Retrieved 13 November 2012. "Novak Djokovic, Serena Williams crowned ITF world champions". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 12 December 2012. Retrieved 11 December 2012. "Spain beats Serbia in Hopman Cup final". Sports Illustrated. 6 January 2013. Retrieved 15 November 2023. Morris, Clay (20 January 2013). "Novak Djokovic Narrowly Eludes Stan the Man in 5 Epic Sets at Australian Open". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 5 September 2023. Nguyen, Courtney (2 December 2013). "2013 BTB Awards: Top men's matches". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved 8 July 2023. Tignor, Steve (4 December 2019). "Men's Match of Decade No. 3: Djokovic d. Wawrinka, 2013 Aussie Open". Tennis.com. Retrieved 8 July 2023. Nguyen, Courtney (20 January 2013). "Djokovic outlasts Wawrinka in five-hour thriller at Australian Open". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on 5 September 2023. Retrieved 5 September 2023. Curtis, Jake (21 January 2015). "Ranking the Most Exciting Matches in Australian Open History". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 8 July 2023. "Novak piše istoriju Melburna!". B92. 27 January 2013. Archived from the original on 28 January 2013. Retrieved 27 January 2013. "Surefooted Djokovic gives Serbia 2–0 lead in Davis Cup tie against Belgium". CNN. 1 February 2013. Archived from the original on 2 February 2013. Retrieved 2 February 2013. "Novak pokorio Dubai". RTS. Archived from the original on 4 March 2013. Retrieved 2 March 2013. "Juan Martín del Potro beats Novak Djokovic in Indian Wells semis". BBC. 17 March 2013. Archived from the original on 27 March 2013. Retrieved 27 March 2013. "Novak Djokovic loses to Tommy Haas at Sony Open in Miami". BBC. 27 March 2013. Archived from the original on 10 April 2013. Retrieved 21 April 2013. "Djokovic Stars for Serbia; Raonic Levels Canadians". ATP. 5 April 2013. Archived from the original on 8 April 2013. Retrieved 21 April 2013. Craig Gabriel (7 April 2013). "Djokovic ends American hopes". Davis Cup. Archived from the original on 30 June 2013. Retrieved 21 April 2013. "Novak Djokovic beats Rafael Nadal to win Monte-Carlo Masters title". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 18 April 2014. Retrieved 21 April 2013. "Novak Djokovic beaten by Grigor Dimitrov at Madrid Open". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 9 May 2013. Retrieved 7 May 2013. "Djokovic crumbles to defeat against Berdych in Rome". ABC CBN. 18 May 2013. Archived from the original on 18 May 2013. Retrieved 3 November 2013. "Novak Djokovic thrashes Grigor Dimitrov in French Open". BBC. 1 June 2013. Archived from the original on 9 September 2013. Retrieved 13 February 2018. "Novak Djokovic fights back to reach French Open quarters". BBC. 3 June 2013. Archived from the original on 19 September 2013. Retrieved 13 February 2018. Howard Fendrich (7 June 2013). "French Open 2013: Rafael Nadal ousts Novak Djokovic to reach final". The Washington Times. Archived from the original on 9 November 2013. Retrieved 6 July 2013. "Novak Djokovic beats Del Potro to reach Wimbledon final". BBC Sport. 5 July 2013. Retrieved 15 November 2023. Christopher Clarey (9 September 2013). "Nadal Beats Djokovic to Win U.S. Open". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 10 September 2013. Retrieved 15 November 2020. "Djokovic beats del Potro to win Shanghai Masters". USA Today. 13 October 2013. Archived from the original on 19 October 2013. Retrieved 3 November 2013. "Djokovic Beats Ferrer to Win Paris Masters Title". Bloomberg BusinessWeek. 3 November 2013. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 5 November 2013. "Djokovic denies Nadal last word in the World Tour Finals". The Guardian. 12 November 2013. Archived from the original on 18 November 2013. Retrieved 18 November 2013. "Stanislas Wawrinka Ousts Djokovic". ESPN. 21 January 2014. Archived from the original on 24 January 2014. Retrieved 21 January 2014. "Novak Djokovic rolls Rafael Nadal win fourth Sony Open title". ESPN. 30 March 2014. Archived from the original on 12 April 2014. Retrieved 15 July 2014. "Novak Djokovic beats Rafael Nadal to win Italian Open in Rome". BBC. 18 May 2014. Archived from the original on 19 May 2014. Retrieved 18 May 2014. "Đoković donirao 500.000 dolara!". B92. 19 May 2014. Archived from the original on 19 May 2014. Retrieved 19 May 2014. "Rafael Nadal overcomes Novak Djokovic to win ninth French Open title". www.theguardian.com. 8 June 2014. Archived from the original on 25 April 2023. Retrieved 12 November 2023. "Djokovic returns to No. 1 with Wimbledon victory". ATP. 6 July 2014. Archived from the original on 7 July 2014. Retrieved 7 July 2014. "ATP Toronto Masters: Top seed Novak Djokovic beaten by Jo-Wilfried Tsonga". ATP. 8 August 2014. Archived from the original on 11 August 2014. Retrieved 12 August 2014. "Nishikori register historic victory over Djokovic". 6 September 2014. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 6 September 2014. "Novak Djokovic beats Tomas Berdych to win fifth China Open". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 6 October 2014. "Novak Djokovic beats Milos Raonic to retain Paris Masters title". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 August 2016. Retrieved 7 July 2016. "Roger Federer out of ATP World Tour final v Novak Djokovic". BBC Sport. 16 November 2014. Archived from the original on 16 November 2014. Retrieved 16 November 2014. Briggs, Simon (1 February 2015). "Andy Murray beaten by Novak Djokovic in Australian Open final". The Daily Telegraph. London, UK. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 2 February 2015. "DJOKOVC MAKES HISTORY AT AUSTRALIAN OPEN". Archived from the original on 2 February 2015. Retrieved 1 February 2015. Ђоковић изгубио од Федерера у финалу Дубаија. Dnevnik (in Serbian). 28 February 2015. Archived from the original on 3 April 2015. Retrieved 28 February 2015. "Novak Djokovic battles past Roger Federer for Indian Wells title". CNN. 23 March 2015. Archived from the original on 26 March 2015. Retrieved 27 March 2015. "Djokovic Makes History With Fifth Miami Title". ATP World Tour. 5 April 2015. Archived from the original on 7 April 2015. Retrieved 6 April 2015. "Dominant Djokovic: How The Miami Final Was Won". ATP World Tour. 5 April 2015. Archived from the original on 6 April 2015. Retrieved 6 April 2015. "Novak Djokovic beats Tomas Berdych to win Monte Carlo title". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 20 April 2015. Retrieved 19 April 2015. Nguyen, Courtney (19 April 2015). "Djokovic defeats Berdych to win second Monte Carlo Masters title". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on 18 September 2023. Retrieved 14 September 2023. "Novak Djokovic withdraws from Mutua Madrid Open". 30 April 2015. Archived from the original on 4 May 2015. Retrieved 10 May 2015. Newbery, Piers (7 June 2015). "Stanislas Wawrinka stuns Novak Djokovic to win French Open". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 8 June 2015. Retrieved 8 June 2015. Atkin, Ron (12 July 2015). "Djokovic sweeps to third Wimbledon title". Wimbledon. Archived from the original on 14 August 2015. Retrieved 12 July 2015. Wolfond, Joe (23 August 2015). "Federer defeats Djokovic in straight sets to win Cincinnati Masters". thescore.com. Archived from the original on 13 November 2023. Retrieved 25 November 2015. Piers Newbery (14 September 2015). "US Open 2015: Novak Djokovic beats Roger Federer in final". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 27 October 2015. Retrieved 14 September 2015. "Djokovic Defeats Nadal". The New York Times. 12 October 2015. Archived from the original on 15 October 2015. Retrieved 13 October 2015. "Djokovic battles Murray for Paris 2015 title". atpworldtour.com. 12 November 2015. Archived from the original on 23 November 2015. Retrieved 22 November 2015. "ATP World Tour Finals: Novak Djokovic dominates Roger Federer to claim record fourth straight title". International Business Times. 12 November 2015. Archived from the original on 22 November 2015. Retrieved 22 November 2015. "Novak sets gold standard in record-breaking 2015 season". Novak Djokovic. Archived from the original on 2 October 2022. Retrieved 2 October 2022. Ubha, Ravi (31 January 2016). "Australian Open 2016: Novak Djokovic eases past Andy Murray for historic title". CNN. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 31 January 2016. "Novak Djokovic grand slam ranking points Roger Federer Andy Murray". Fox Sports. 31 January 2016. Archived from the original on 12 April 2016. Retrieved 31 January 2016. "Serb notches sixth Miami title". atpworldtour.com. 3 April 2016. Archived from the original on 4 April 2016. Retrieved 11 June 2016. "Djokovic wins 6th Key Biscayne title by beating Nishikori". m.tennis.com. 3 April 2016. Archived from the original on 16 April 2016. Retrieved 3 April 2016. "World No. 1 reflects on his three-set loss to Vesely". atpworldtour.com. 13 April 2016. Archived from the original on 30 May 2016. Retrieved 11 June 2016. "Serb wins 29th Masters 1000 title". atpworldtour.com. 8 May 2016. Archived from the original on 11 May 2016. Retrieved 11 June 2016. "Serb reflects on challenging week in Rome". atpworldtour.com. 15 May 2016. Retrieved 11 June 2016. "FRENCH OPEN: Djokovic eyes Nole Slam; Serena bids for No. 22". Associated Press. 5 June 2016. Archived from the original on 7 October 2016. Retrieved 13 June 2016. "Avec le 'Nole Slam', Novak Djokovic signe une vraie page d'histoire". Eurosport. 5 June 2016. Archived from the original on 8 June 2016. Retrieved 13 June 2016. Meiseles, Josh (5 June 2016). "Djokovic Outlasts Murray For Historic Roland Garros Crown". Association of Tennis Professionals. Archived from the original on 6 June 2016. Retrieved 5 June 2016. Arjun (19 September 2018). "7 Novak Djokovic records which may never be broken". www.sportskeeda.com. Archived from the original on 5 June 2022. Retrieved 9 September 2022. "Nole sets new absolute ATP ranking record!". novakdjokovic.com. Archived from the original on 9 August 2022. Retrieved 9 September 2022. McCarvel, Nick (2 July 2016). "Novak Djokovic upset by American Sam Querrey at Wimbledon". USA Today. Archived from the original on 2 July 2016. Retrieved 2 July 2016. "How The Toronto Final Was Won: Djokovic Takes Title". atpworldtour.com. 31 July 2016. Archived from the original on 3 August 2016. Retrieved 1 August 2016. "Rio Olympics 2016: Novak Djokovic beaten by Juan Martín del Potro in first round". BBC Sport. 8 August 2016. Archived from the original on 8 August 2016. Retrieved 9 August 2016. "Novak Djokovic cries on the court after losing to Juan Martín Del Potro at Rio Olympics 2016". The Daily Telegraph. 8 August 2016. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 10 August 2016. "Stan Reigns in New York: How The US Open Final Was Won". atpworldtour.com. 11 September 2016. Archived from the original on 13 September 2016. Retrieved 12 September 2016. "Djokovic: If Murray Gets To No. 1, He Deserves It". atpworldtour.com. 4 November 2016. Archived from the original on 7 November 2016. Retrieved 7 November 2016. "Novak Djokovic splits with coach Boris Becker after three years". The Guardian. 6 December 2016. Archived from the original on 26 May 2017. Retrieved 12 July 2017. "SENZACIJA: Ispao Novak Đoković!". mondo.rs. 19 January 2017. Archived from the original on 26 January 2017. Retrieved 25 January 2017. "Nadal Claims Emphatic Win To Book Madrid Final". atptour.com. 13 May 2017. Archived from the original on 13 April 2021. Retrieved 15 November 2020. "Thiem Takes Out Defending Champ Djokovic". ATP. 7 June 2017. Archived from the original on 22 June 2017. Retrieved 19 June 2017. "Novak Djokovic retires from Wimbledon quarterfinal match with injury". USA Today. 12 July 2017. Archived from the original on 14 July 2017. Retrieved 13 July 2017. "Novak Djokovic will miss the rest of 2017 season with elbow injury". The Guardian. 16 July 2017. Archived from the original on 26 July 2017. Retrieved 26 July 2017. "Novak Djokovic to miss rest of 2017, including US Open". eu.usatoday.com. 16 July 2017. Retrieved 15 November 2023. "Djokovic undergoes surgery to cure troublesome elbow". Reuters. 3 February 2018. Archived from the original on 5 May 2019. Retrieved 26 July 2019 – via uk.reuters.com. @DjokerNole (3 March 2018). "Feels good to be outdoors in the sun and hitting the ball again. Day by day..." (Tweet). Archived from the original on 11 March 2021. Retrieved 5 June 2018 – via Twitter. "In Indian Wells Defeat, Novak Djokovic Shows Just How Far He Has To Go". Tennis.com. Archived from the original on 31 May 2018. Retrieved 5 June 2018. "Novak Djokovic loses to Benoit Paire at Miami Open". ESPN. 23 March 2018. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 5 June 2018. "Djokovic Monte Carlo 2018". atpworldtour.com. ATP. Retrieved 5 June 2018. "Novak Djokovic's woes worsen with defeat by qualifier at Barcelona Open". The Guardian. 25 April 2018. Archived from the original on 2 June 2018. Retrieved 5 June 2018. "Madrid Open: Novak Djokovic beats Kei Nishikori in round one". BBC Sport. 7 May 2018. Archived from the original on 8 May 2018. Retrieved 14 May 2018. "Madrid Open: Britain's Kyle Edmund beats Novak Djokovic". BBC Sport. 9 May 2018. Archived from the original on 12 May 2018. Retrieved 14 May 2018. Eccleshare, Charlie (19 May 2018). "Novak Djokovic produces best performance of the year but is outlasted by Rafael Nadal in Rome". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 5 June 2018. "Novak Djokovic loses to Marco Cecchinato in stunning French Open quarter-final upset". Eurosport. 5 June 2018. Archived from the original on 13 November 2023. Retrieved 5 June 2018. "Wimbledon 2018: Marin Cilic beats Novak Djokovic in close final to claim second Queen's title". Independent. 24 June 2018. Archived from the original on 16 July 2018. Retrieved 16 July 2018. "Novak Djokovic outlasts Rafael Nadal in epic Wimbledon semi-final". The Guardian. 14 July 2018. Archived from the original on 16 July 2018. Retrieved 16 July 2018. "Novak Djokovic wins fourth Wimbledon by beating Kevin Anderson". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 14 February 2019. Retrieved 15 July 2018. "Wimbledon: Novak Djokovic wins fourth championship, beating Kevin Anderson – CBS News". www.cbsnews.com. 15 July 2018. Archived from the original on 28 January 2024. Retrieved 28 January 2024. Roy, Neelabhra (22 June 2022). "5 lowest-ranked players to win Wimbledon ft. Novak Djokovic and Venus Williams". www.sportskeeda.com. Archived from the original on 28 January 2024. Retrieved 28 January 2024. Lutz, Tom (19 August 2018). "Roger Federer v Novak Djokovic: Cincinnati Masters men's final – live!". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 19 August 2018. Retrieved 19 August 2018. Ilic, Jovica (22 August 2018). "Roger Federer rattles off 100 consecutive holds in Cincinnati!". Tennis World USA. Archived from the original on 18 September 2023. Retrieved 14 September 2023. "NOVAK DJOKOVIC IS A WIN AWAY FROM MAKING MASTERS HISTORY IN CINCINNATI". Tennis.com. Archived from the original on 20 August 2018. Retrieved 19 August 2018. "Novak Djokovic powers past Juan Martín del Potro to win third US Open". The Guardian. 10 September 2018. Archived from the original on 22 September 2018. Retrieved 10 September 2018. "Read & Watch: Djokovic Wins Record Fourth Shanghai Title, 32nd Masters 1000 Crown". ATP World Tour. 14 October 2018. Archived from the original on 15 October 2018. Retrieved 14 October 2018. "Paris Masters: Rafael Nadal out with injury & Roger Federer through". BBC Sport. 31 October 2018. Archived from the original on 1 November 2018. Retrieved 2 November 2018. "Paris Masters final: Karen Khachanov beats Novak Djokovic– as it happened". The Guardian. 4 November 2018. Archived from the original on 11 November 2018. Retrieved 12 November 2018. "Djokovic, Zverev Set Championship Clash In London". Association of Tennis Professionals. 18 November 2018. Archived from the original on 18 November 2018. Retrieved 19 November 2018. "Australian Open 2019: Novak Djokovic beats Rafael Nadal to win record seventh title". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 28 January 2019. Retrieved 28 January 2019. "Indian Wells: Novak Djokovic beaten by Philipp Kohlschreiber in third round". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 16 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. "Miami Open: Novak Djokovic & Kyle Edmund lose in fourth round". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 1 April 2019. Retrieved 1 April 2019. "Monte-Carlo Masters: Novak Djokovic loses to Daniil Medvedev, Rafael Nadal into semi-finals". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 20 April 2019. Retrieved 23 April 2019. "Djokovic Celebrates 250 Weeks At No. 1 In ATP Rankings". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 6 May 2019. Retrieved 6 May 2019. "Djokovic Beats Tsitsipas For Madrid Title, Tying Nadal's Masters 1000 Record". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 12 May 2019. Retrieved 13 May 2019. "Djokovic beats Del Potro in three-set thriller in Rome". eurosport.co.uk. Eurosport. 18 May 2019. Archived from the original on 18 May 2019. Retrieved 18 May 2019. "Nadal Beats Djokovic To Win Ninth Rome Title". atptour.com. 19 May 2019. Archived from the original on 20 May 2019. Retrieved 19 May 2019. Tignor, Steve (19 December 2019). "2019 Top Matches, No. 7: Thiem d. Djokovic, Roland Garros semifinals". Tennis.com. Archived from the original on 4 February 2024. Retrieved 4 February 2024. Cambers, Simon (8 June 2019). "Dominic Thiem ends Novak Djokovic's slam streak to reach French Open final". The Observer. ISSN 0029-7712. Archived from the original on 8 June 2019. Retrieved 8 June 2019. "Novak Djokovic Wins Wimbledon". The New York Times. 14 July 2019. Archived from the original on 14 July 2019. Retrieved 14 July 2019. "Djokovic tops Federer in epic Wimbledon final". espn.com. 14 July 2019. Archived from the original on 14 July 2019. Retrieved 14 July 2019. "Daniil Medvedev stuns Novak Djokovic to set up Cincinnati final with Goffin". The Guardian. 18 August 2019. Archived from the original on 18 August 2019. Retrieved 19 August 2019. "US Open: Novak Djokovic pulls out injured against Stan Wawrinka". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 15 September 2019. Retrieved 10 September 2019. "Novak Djokovic Crushes John Millman To Win Japan Open". Headlinez pro. Archived from the original on 6 October 2019. Retrieved 6 October 2019. "Irate Federer loses to join Djokovic through Shanghai Masters exit door". County Press. 11 October 2019. Archived from the original on 13 October 2019. Retrieved 11 October 2019. "Novak Djokovic beats Denis Shapovalov to win fifth Paris Masters title". BBC Sport. 3 November 2019. Archived from the original on 4 November 2019. Retrieved 4 November 2019. "Roger Federer beats Novak Djokovic at 2019 ATP Finals in London". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 15 November 2019. Retrieved 17 November 2019. "Serbia wins atp cup". abc.net.au. ABC news. 12 January 2020. Archived from the original on 14 January 2020. Retrieved 13 January 2020. Bellshaw, George (2 February 2020). "Novak Djokovic makes history by beating Dominic Thiem to win eighth Australian Open". Metro. Archived from the original on 15 June 2020. Retrieved 2 February 2020. Zeitung, Süddeutsche (2 February 2020). "Djokovic zum achten Mal Australian-Open-Champion". Süddeutsche.de (in German). Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 2 February 2020. "Australian Open: Novak Djokovic beats Dominic Thiem to win 17th Grand Slam". BBC Sport. 2 February 2020. Archived from the original on 6 December 2022. Retrieved 6 November 2023. "Novak Djokovic defeats Stefanos Tsitsipas for Dubai title". Los Angeles Times. 29 February 2020. Archived from the original on 1 March 2020. Retrieved 1 March 2020. "Dubai Tennis Championships: Novak Djokovic beats Stefanos Tsitsipas in final". BBC. 29 February 2020. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 1 March 2020. "Novak Djokovic tests positive for Covid-19 amid Adria Tour fiasco". The Guardian. 23 June 2020. Archived from the original on 24 August 2020. Retrieved 30 June 2020. "Novak Djokovic's canceled Adria Tour a cautionary tale during coronavirus pandemic". espn.com. 30 June 2020. Archived from the original on 1 July 2020. Retrieved 30 June 2020. Clarey, Christopher (22 June 2020). "After Virus Tests, Djokovic Is Criticized for Holding Exhibition". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 23 June 2020. Retrieved 23 June 2020. Shapiro, Emily (23 June 2020). "Tennis champ Novak Djokovic tests positive for COVID-19, apologizes for holding tournament: 'We were wrong'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 23 July 2020. Retrieved 23 July 2020. "Novak Djokovic says he's been subject of 'witch hunt'". 8 July 2020. Archived from the original on 14 July 2020. Retrieved 14 July 2020. "Novak Djokovic constantly criticised because he annoys Rafa Nadal and Roger Federer, says grandfather". India Today. 21 July 2020. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 18 June 2021. "Djokovic's Golden Rule: A Grandmaster Twice Over!". Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 29 August 2020. "Novak Djokovic defaulted from US Open after hitting line judge in throat". Sportingnews.com. 6 September 2020. Archived from the original on 25 November 2020. Retrieved 7 September 2020. "Novak Djokovic out of US Open after accidentally hitting line judge with ball". ABC News. 6 September 2020. Archived from the original on 6 September 2020. Retrieved 6 September 2020. "Djokovic Makes Masters 1000 History, Clinches Fifth Rome Crown". atptour.com. 21 September 2020. Retrieved 21 September 2020. Briggs, Simon; Wilcox, Greg (11 October 2020). "Rafael Nadal beats Novak Djokovic in straight sets to go level with Roger Federer on 20 grand slam titles". The Telegraph. Retrieved 11 October 2020. "Sonego Stuns Djokovic In Vienna". ATP Tour. Retrieved 31 October 2020. "Dominic Thiem edges Novak Djokovic in thriller to advance to final of ATP Final". CNN. 21 November 2020. Retrieved 26 November 2020. "Djokovic hits 300 weeks at No. 1, just 10 away from Federer's record". tennis.com. Retrieved 22 December 2020. "Djokovic Becomes Second Player To Reach 300 Weeks At No. 1". atptour.com. Retrieved 22 December 2020. "Novak Djokovic sensationally loses it during dramatic upset". Yahoo Sport. 5 February 2021. Retrieved 21 February 2021. "Novak Djokovic wins ninth Australian Open by beating Daniil Medvedev". BBC Sport. Retrieved 21 February 2021. Zagoria, Adam. "Novak Djokovic Equals Roger Federer's Record For Most Weeks At World No. 1". Forbes. Retrieved 6 March 2021. "Novak Djokovic equals Roger Federer's world number one record". BBC Sport. Retrieved 8 March 2021. "How Djokovic Became The Longest-Reigning Champ In ATP History". ATP. Retrieved 8 March 2021. "Djokovic Sets New All-Time Record For Weeks At No. 1 In FedEx ATP Rankings". atptour.com. Retrieved 8 March 2021. "Dan Evans stuns Novak Djokovic with straight-sets win at Monte-Carlo Masters". The Guardian. 15 April 2021. Retrieved 18 April 2021. "'I'm not Happy' – Novak Djokovic Livid at loss to Aslan Karatsev, 'Must Play Better' for French Open". Eurosport. 25 April 2021. Retrieved 26 April 2021. "Novak Djokovic Clinches Comeback Tsitsipas Win In Rome". ATP Tour. 15 May 2021. Retrieved 28 August 2023. Tignor, Steve (15 May 2021). "Djokovic regains control to pass tricky test against Tsitsipas in Rome". Tennis.com. Retrieved 28 August 2023. "Djokovic fights back to win French Open". BBC Sport. Retrieved 13 June 2021. "How Novak Djokovic Rallied From The Brink To Beat Stefanos Tsitsipas | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Petrequin, Samuel (13 June 2021). "Comeback! Djokovic tops Tsitsipas at French Open for Slam 19". AP NEWS. Retrieved 13 June 2021. "Mission complete: Djokovic secures rare feat". Roland-Garros. Retrieved 21 June 2021. "Djokovic Completes Historic Two-Set Comeback In Roland Garros Final". Association of Tennis Professionals. 13 June 2021. Retrieved 15 June 2021. Carayol, Tumaini (13 June 2021). "Novak Djokovic rallies to beat Stefanos Tsitsipas in epic French Open final". the Guardian. Retrieved 13 June 2021. "Djokovic Records 100th Grass-Court Match Win, Reaches Wimbledon Semi-finals". ATP Tour. 7 July 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2021. Bhagavatula, Manoj (11 July 2021). "Stats: Djokovic ties Federer, Nadal's 20 Grand Slams with 6th Wimbledon title". ESPN.com. Retrieved 11 July 2021. Sportstar, Team (11 July 2021). "Novak Djokovic joins Federer, Nadal in rare Channel Slam triumph after Wimbledon win". Sportstar. Retrieved 11 July 2021. "Novak Djokovic tweets that he is in for Tokyo Olympics". Espn.com. 15 July 2021. "Tennis fans erupt over Barty and Djokovic development at Olympics". au.sports.yahoo.com. 30 July 2021. Retrieved 31 July 2021. "Tokyo Olympics: Belinda Bencic wins gold but Novak Djokovic leaves with no medals". BBC News. 31 July 2021. Retrieved 31 July 2021. "Novak Djokovic Targets Grand Slam At The US Open; When Is The Draw | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Retrieved 5 September 2021. Rennert, Rick (4 September 2021). "Novak Djokovic poised to be crowned king of Arthur Ashe Stadium". US Open. Retrieved 5 September 2021. "US Open stats: Djokovic ties Federer by making 31st major final". ESPN.com. 11 September 2021. "Medvedev beats Djokovic to win US Open". BBC Sport. Retrieved 12 September 2021. "Djokovic Wins Record 37th Masters 1000 Crown". ATP Tour. "Novak Djokovic 2021 season ends with Nitto ATP Finals defeat to Alexander Zverev". Express. 21 November 2021. Retrieved 27 November 2021. T., M. (3 December 2021). "Đoković ne može sâm – Srbija bez finala Dejvis kupa". b92.net (in Serbian). Retrieved 3 December 2021. Sanford, Jordaan. "Djokovic decides to withdraw from ATP Cup". Tennis.com. Retrieved 6 January 2022. Kurmelovs, Royce; Knaus, Christopher (7 January 2022). "Novak Djokovic visa cancelled: why is the tennis star being kicked out of Australia?". The Guardian. Callanan, Tim (5 January 2022). "How did Novak Djokovic get a COVID-19 vaccination exemption to play at the Australian Open?". ABC News. Reuters. Retrieved 4 January 2022. AFP (5 January 2022). "Australia: Questions surround Djokovic COVID exemption". Deutsche Welle. Reuters. Retrieved 8 January 2022. Sakkal, Paul; Galloway, Anthony (6 January 2022). "Letters from federal government cast doubt on Djokovic exemption". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 6 January 2022. "Novak Djokovic: Having Covid gave tennis star vaccine exemption – lawyers". BBC News. 9 January 2022. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Karp, Paul (16 January 2022). "Novak Djokovic leaves Australia after court upholds visa cancellation". The Guardian. Greene, Andrew (6 January 2022). "ABF investigates two more Tennis Australia medical exemptions after Novak Djokovic's visa cancellation". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 6 January 2022. Walsh, Courtney; Kaye, Byron (8 January 2022). "Djokovic prepares Australian visa challenge as COVID vaccine furore mounts". Reuters. Melbourne. Retrieved 8 January 2022. Paul, Sonali; Walsh, Courtney (12 January 2022). "Djokovic sorry for COVID errors, Australian Open visa still in doubt". Reuters. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Djokovic Detention Draws Focus to Australia's Asylum-Seekers". VOA. 9 January 2022. Retrieved 9 January 2022. "Order of JUDGE A KELLY dated 10 January 2022" (PDF). Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia. Retrieved 19 December 2023. Mills, Tammy; Cooper, Adam (10 January 2022). "Court overturns decision to cancel Novak Djokovic's visa". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 10 January 2022. Novak Djokovic v Minister for Home Affairs Archived 19 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine docket MLG35/2022 at the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Mao, Frances. "Novak Djokovic: How tennis player won visa row court case". BBC News. Retrieved 11 January 2022. Neaverson, Georgia. "Federal Court wins match point in Djokovic visa showdown". Australasian Lawyer. Retrieved 21 January 2023. "Immigration Minister Alex Hawke cancels Novak Djokovic's visa". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 14 January 2022. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Hayne, Jordan (16 January 2022). "Novak Djokovic live updates: Tennis star loses his bid to stay in Australia". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 15 January 2022. "Djokovic loses deportation appeal in Australia". Associated Press News. 16 January 2022. Retrieved 16 January 2022. Allsop, James; Besanko, Anthony; O'Callaghan, David (16 January 2022). Novak Djokovic v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs. Federal Court of Australia – via YouTube. "Novak Djokovic: Tennis star deported after losing Australia visa battle". BBC News. 16 January 2022. Retrieved 16 January 2022. Jurejko, Jonathan (16 January 2022). "Novak Djokovic 'extremely disappointed' with Australia court decision". BBC Sport. Retrieved 16 January 2022. "Djokovic lands in Dubai after Australia deportation". Agence France-Presse. 17 January 2022. Retrieved 17 January 2022 – via YouTube. "Scott Morrison leaves door open for Novak Djokovic to return within three-year ban". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 17 January 2022. Retrieved 17 January 2022. "Novak Djokovic responds after being granted visa to play in Australian Open". ABC News. 16 November 2022. Retrieved 18 November 2022. Young, Chris (19 May 2022). "Novak Djokovic's big confession about Australian deportation saga". Yahoo! Sport Australia. Retrieved 5 December 2022. "Fired-up Djokovic braced for Alcaraz and Nadal challenge at French Open". Yahoo! Sports. 18 May 2022. Archived from the original on 20 June 2022. Retrieved 5 December 2022. "Novak Djokovic set for return to action in Dubai after missing Australian Open". BBC News. 27 January 2022. Retrieved 30 January 2022. "Novak Djokovic to lose number one ranking after defeat to Jiří Veselý in Dubai". BBC News. 24 February 2022. Retrieved 24 February 2022. Carayol, Tumaini (9 March 2022). "Novak Djokovic pulls out of Indian Wells as vaccine stance derails US trip". The Guardian. Retrieved 20 March 2022. "Indian Wells: Daniil Medvedev loses No 1 spot to Novak Djokovic after third-round defeat". Sky News. 14 March 2022. Retrieved 15 March 2022. "Undercooked Djokovic loses to Davidovich Fokina in Monte Carlo". The Guardian. 12 April 2022. Retrieved 12 April 2022. Goodwin, Sam (12 April 2022). "Novak Djokovic suffers shocking career first in Monte Carlo disaster". Yahoo! Sport Australia. Retrieved 12 April 2022. "Novak Djokovic loses to Andrey Rublev in Serbia Open final". The Guardian. PA Media. 24 April 2022. Retrieved 24 April 2022. "Djokovic Praises Alcaraz Following Madrid Defeat". ATP Tour. 7 May 2022. "Novak Djokovic Scores 1,000th Career Win to Reach Rome Final". ATP Tour. "Djokovic enters French defense with Italian title". ESPN. 15 May 2022. Retrieved 15 May 2022. "Nadal Downs Djokovic In Classic Roland Garros QF". ATP Tour. Retrieved 9 June 2022. Majumdar, Aayush (27 June 2022). "Novak Djokovic becomes the first player in history to win 80 matches at all the Grand Slams with first-round win at 2022 Wimbledon". sportskeeda.com. Retrieved 5 December 2022. "Novak Djokovic Defeats Cameron Norrie, Into Wimbledon Final". ATP Tour. Retrieved 8 July 2022. Trollope, Matt (11 July 2022). "Djokovic's longevity could prove greatest triumph of all". ausopen.com. Retrieved 2 September 2022. "Djokovic Defeats Kyrgios For Seventh Wimbledon Title". ATP Tour. Retrieved 10 July 2022. "How Novak Djokovic came back to win Wimbledon final over Nick Kyrgios". ESPN. 10 July 2022. Retrieved 11 July 2022. "U.S. Open confirms Djokovic can't play unless he gets Covid vaccine". NBC News. 21 July 2022. Retrieved 22 July 2022. Morse, Ben; Foster, Matt (25 August 2022). "Novak Djokovic withdraws from the US Open. He is unvaccinated against Covid-19 and not allowed to receive a visa and enter the country". CNN. "Novak Djokovic Defeats Stefanos Tsitsipas, Triumphs in Astana". ATP Tour. 9 October 2022. "Djokovic Wins Decisive TB to Continue Dominance of Tsitsipas in Paris". ATP Tour. 5 November 2022. Berkok, John (5 November 2022). "Stat of the Day: Novak Djokovic records milestone 650th hard-court win of career". tennis.com. "Holger Rune Rules in Paris! Dane Stuns Novak Djokovic". ATP Tour. 6 November 2022. "Stat of the Day: Novak Djokovic defeats Stefanos Tsitsipas for 60th career win over a Top 3 player". tennis.com. "Stat of the Day: Novak Djokovic secures milestone 15th year-end Top 5 finish of career". tennis.com. "Novak Djokovic: Inside a Champion's Mentality". ATP Tour. "Djokovic Ruud Turin 2022 Sunday Final". Nitto ATP Finals. Retrieved 20 November 2022. "Novak Djokovic wins record-tying sixth ATP Finals crown, record-breaking $4,740,300 pay-out". tennis.com. "Novak Djokovic Claims Nitto ATP Finals Crown". ATP Tour. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "Djokovic Saves Championship Point, Beats Korda For Adelaide Title". "Djokovic back in Australia a year after deportation". ESPN.com. 27 December 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2023. "Novak Djokovic seemingly pain free in entertaining exhibition match against Nick Kyrgios ahead of the Australian Open". Eurosport. 13 January 2023. Retrieved 29 January 2023. "Perfect 10: Djokovic Returns To No. 1 With 22nd Major At AO". atptour.com. 29 January 2023. Retrieved 27 February 2023. "Australian Open: Djokovic wins 10th title there, 22nd major". AP NEWS. 29 January 2023. Retrieved 29 January 2023. "Novak Djokovic surpasses Steffi Graf with 378th career week at No. 1". tennis.com. 27 February 2023. Retrieved 27 February 2023. "Lorenzo Musetti Stuns Novak Djokovic In Monte-Carlo". ATP Tour. Retrieved 16 April 2023. "DJOKOVIC DUMPED OUT AT SRPSKA OPEN BANJA LUKA IN SHOCK EXIT TO LAJOVIC". 21 April 2023. "Novak Djokovic's Rome conqueror gives verdict on his French Open chances in Nadal absence". 22 May 2023. "Novak Djokovic Stands Alone With 23 Grand Slam Titles". ATP. Retrieved 11 June 2023. "Djokovic returns to world number one, Nadal out of top 100". Reuters. 13 June 2023. "Wimbledon 2023: Novak Djokovic swats aside Jannik Sinner to reach final and continue bid for fifth straight title". eurosport. 14 July 2023. Retrieved 17 October 2023. "Carlos Alcaraz beats Novak Djokovic to win Wimbledon title in final for the ages". The Guardian. 16 July 2023. Retrieved 17 October 2023. "Novak Djokovic Saves MP, Stuns Carlos Alcaraz For Cincinnati Title". ATP Tour. Retrieved 21 August 2023. Zagoria, Adam. "In Heavyweight Slugfest, Novak Djokovic Edges Carlos Alcaraz for Cincinnati Title". Forbes. Retrieved 21 August 2023. Gray, Bren (21 August 2023). ""The feeling that I have on the court reminds me a little bit when I was facing Nadal"". Tennis Majors. Retrieved 21 August 2023. "Novak Djokovic fights back from two sets down at US Open to win an epic match". BBC Sport. 2 September 2023. Retrieved 12 September 2023. "Djokovic Extends Domination Against Americans, Reaches US Open SFs". Association of Tennis Professionals. 5 September 2023. Retrieved 12 September 2023. "US Open 2023 results: Novak Djokovic wins 24th major by beating Daniil Medvedev". BBC Sport. 10 September 2023. Retrieved 12 September 2023. "Ageless Djokovic dismantles Medvedev in US Open final to win 24th grand slam title". The Guardian. 11 September 2023. Retrieved 12 September 2023. Fendrich, Howard (10 September 2023). "Novak Djokovic wins the US Open for his 24th Grand Slam title by beating Daniil Medvedev". AP News. Retrieved 12 September 2023. "Novak Djokovic Continues Big Titles Dominance With US Open Victory". ATP Tour. 10 September 2023. Retrieved 11 September 2023. "Djokovic becomes first player with 390 weeks as World No.1 since Rankings began, pulls away towards 400". tennisuptodate.com. 11 September 2023. Retrieved 20 September 2023. "Djokovic begins record 390th week as world No 1, targets year-end No 1 again". tennismajors.com. 11 September 2023. Retrieved 20 September 2023. Berkok, John (14 September 2023). "Novak Djokovic: 24 stats for his 24th Grand Slam title". Tennis.com. Retrieved 17 January 2024. "Djokovic Surpasses Nadal For Fourth-Most Matches Played In Open Era". www.yardbarker.com. 2 November 2023. Retrieved 3 November 2023. "Djokovic Adds To Big Titles Supremacy With 40th ATP Masters 1000 Trophy". ATP Tour. 5 November 2023. "Djokovic repels Rune charge, secures year-end No. 1". www.nittoatpfinals.com. 12 November 2023. Retrieved 13 November 2023. "Ruthless Djokovic Claims Record Seventh Nitto ATP Finals Title". www.nittoatpfinals.com. 19 November 2023. Retrieved 20 November 2023. "Novak Djokovic: Seven stunning stats following ATP Finals success". tennishead.net. 20 November 2023. Retrieved 20 November 2023. "Djokovic Secures Another Record With Turin 'Big Title'". www.atptour.com. 19 November 2023. Retrieved 20 November 2023. "Novak Djokovic Celebrates 400 Weeks As World No. 1". www.atptour.com. 19 November 2023. Retrieved 20 November 2023. "ATP Singles World Rankings: Novak Djokovic reaches 400 weeks as No. 1". 20 November 2023. "Novak Djokovic equals record with 58th grand slam quarter-final". The Independent. 21 January 2024. Retrieved 22 January 2024. "ATP World Tour: Novak Claims Blockbuster". Retrieved 18 April 2015. "Novak Djokovic VS Rafael Nadal | Head 2 Head | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Retrieved 11 April 2018. "FEDEX ATP HEAD 2 HEADs". Archived from the original on 19 August 2011. Retrieved 19 August 2011. "Novak Djokovic v Rafael Nadal: Players & pundits hail 'greatest' match". BBC Sport. 29 January 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2013. Mitchell, Kevin (29 January 2012). "Australian Open: Novak Djokovic says final was his greatest match". The Guardian. Retrieved 21 May 2022. Eckstein, Jeremy (17 February 2012). "Novak Djokovic vs. Rafael Nadal: Why Aussie Open Final Is Greatest Match Ever". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 21 May 2022. "The 2009 semi-final between Nadal and Djokovic, voted the best match in Mutua Madrid Open history". Mutua Madrid Open. 14 March 2022. Retrieved 21 May 2022. "Djokovic sinks Nadal in thrilling Miami final". Reuters. 3 April 2011. Retrieved 1 August 2022. Fitzgerald, Matt (3 April 2011). "Djokovic Denies Nadal Again To Take Pulsating Final". ATP Tour. Retrieved 18 September 2022. "Flashback: Nadal Outlasts Djokovic In 2013 Semi-Final Thriller". ATP Tour. 4 June 2020. Retrieved 21 May 2022. "Djokovic Outlasts Nadal In Wimbledon SF Epic". ATP Tour. 14 July 2018. Retrieved 21 May 2022. "A Titanic Clash In Novak Djokovic & Rafael Nadal's Record Rivalry". ATP Tour. 9 July 2020. Retrieved 21 May 2022. "Novak Djokovic Dethrones Rafael Nadal After Roland Garos Epic". ATP Tour. 11 June 2021. Retrieved 21 May 2022. "Novak Djokovic VS Roger Federer | Head 2 Head | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Retrieved 11 April 2018. "Novak Djokovic Saves 2 M.P. To Beat Roger Federer In Historic Final". ATP Tour. 14 July 2019. Retrieved 21 May 2022. "Federer does everything right but falls short on match points". Reuters. 15 July 2019. Retrieved 2 October 2022. "Djokovic Snatches Monumental Victory from Federer". Tennis Now. Retrieved 14 September 2011. Chadband, Ian (3 June 2011). "French Open 2011: Roger Federer destroys Novak Djokovic's run of victories to surge into final". Telegraph. Retrieved 29 October 2011. "Novak Djokovic VS Andy Murray | Head 2 Head | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Retrieved 11 April 2018. "Andy Murray beats Novak Djokovic to win ATP World Tour Finals, tops men's rankings". ABC News. 21 November 2016. Retrieved 14 December 2023. "Djokovic masters Murray in Shanghai". radioaustralia.net.au. 14 October 2012. "The 2 Best ATP World Tour matches of 2011". ATP. Retrieved 5 February 2013. "Best ATP World Tour matches of the Year – Nos. 1–2". ATP. Retrieved 5 February 2013. "Novak Djokovic VS Stan Wawrinka | Head 2 Head | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Retrieved 11 April 2018. Clarey, Christopher (20 January 2013). "Djokovic-Wawrinka Joins List of Recent Tennis Epics". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 3 September 2023. Jonas (24 November 2013). "The best men's matches of 2013". www.sportskeeda.com. Retrieved 5 February 2024. Farthing, Tim (10 October 2020). "Revealed: The 10 greatest Novak Djokovic victories, Part 2". Tennishead. Retrieved 8 July 2023. "Stanislas Wawrinka beats Novak Djokovic: as it happened". The Guardian. London, UK. Retrieved 12 February 2014. "Novak Djokovic beats Stanislas Wawrinka to reach Australian Open final – as it happened". The Guardian. 30 January 2015. Retrieved 6 June 2015. "Novak Djokovic vs Stan Wawrinka Head To Head". SteveGTennis.com. Retrieved 22 November 2015. "Stan Wawrinka Solves Top-Seeded Novak Djokovic to Win Third Major Title". The New York Times. 11 September 2016. Archived from the original on 12 September 2016. Retrieved 16 September 2016. "NOVAK DJOKOVIC VS STAN WAWRINKA". atpworldtour.com. Retrieved 16 September 2016. "Djokovic on playing doubles with Wawrinka in Beijing: I miss it". tennis.com. 30 September 2013. Retrieved 12 September 2015. "Novak Djokovic VS Juan Martín del Potro | Head 2 Head". ATP Tour. Retrieved 29 January 2019. "Novak Djokovic beats Juan Martín del Potro in epic Wimbledon semi-final". The Guardian. 5 July 2013. Retrieved 29 January 2019. "Jo-Wilfried Tsonga VS Novak Djokovic – Head 2 Head". www.atptour.com. Retrieved 14 December 2023. "Ill Djokovic hands Tsonga victory". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 28 January 2010. Retrieved 27 January 2013. "Nadal, Djokovic to face off in final". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 2 July 2011. Retrieved 27 January 2013. "French Open 2012: Novak Djokovic reaches semi-finals with thrilling victory over Jo-Wilfried Tsonga". The Daily Telegraph. London, UK. 5 June 2012. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 27 January 2013. "Novak Djokovic VS Dominic Thiem – Head 2 Head". ATP Tour. Retrieved 14 December 2023. "Daniil Medvedev VS Novak Djokovic | Head 2 Head | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Retrieved 29 January 2023. "Djokovic and Medvedev rivalry". Tennis Majors. 7 January 2023. Retrieved 29 January 2023. Keating, Steve (13 September 2021). "Medvedev wins U.S. Open to end Djokovic calendar Grand Slam bid". Reuters. Retrieved 29 January 2023. Tennis.com. "Daniil Medvedev to become new world No. 1 after Novak Djokovic loses Dubai quarterfinal to Jiri Veselý". Tennis.com. Retrieved 29 January 2023. "Novak Djokovic Defeats Daniil Medvedev For US Open Title, 24th Major". ATP Tour. 10 September 2023. Retrieved 6 November 2023. "Stefanos Tsitsipas VS Novak Djokovic | Head 2 Head | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Retrieved 29 January 2023. "Djokovic vs Tsitsipas: all you need to know about the rivalry". Tennis Majors. 27 January 2023. Retrieved 29 January 2023. "Stefanos Tsitsipas' 2018 Toronto Run: 'It Was The Week Of My Life' | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Retrieved 29 January 2023. "Stefanos Tsitsipas After Stunning Novak Djokovic: 'It's The Best Comeback I've Ever Had' | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Retrieved 29 January 2023. Netherton, Alexander (15 May 2021). "NOVAK DJOKOVIC THROUGH TO ROME SEMIS AFTER EXHAUSTING STEFANOS TSITSIPAS FIGHT". www.eurosport.com. Retrieved 25 January 2024. "Novak Djokovic VS Carlos Alcaraz | Head 2 Head | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Retrieved 4 November 2023. "Djokovic beats cramping Alcaraz, into French final". ESPN.com. 9 June 2023. Retrieved 23 August 2023. Futterman, Matthew (16 July 2023). "Alcaraz Wins Wimbledon in a Thrilling Comeback Against Djokovic". The New York Times. Retrieved 23 August 2023. "Djokovic outlasts Alcaraz to win instant-classic final in Cincinnati". theScore.com. 21 August 2023. Retrieved 23 August 2023. Malinowski, Scoop (21 August 2023). "Djokovic and Carlos Produce the Highest Level of Tennis Ever Witnessed In Cincy – Tennis-Prose.com". Retrieved 2 February 2024. "Djokovic defeats Alcaraz to win Cincinnati Open". BBC Sport. 21 August 2023. Retrieved 23 August 2023. Tignor, Steve (21 August 2023). "In Novak Djokovic and Carlos Alcaraz's second classic in as many months, the legend, rather than the phenom, had the final word". Tennis.com. Retrieved 23 August 2023. Grez, Matias (20 September 2023). "Rafael Nadal says Novak Djokovic is the best tennis player 'in history'". CNN. Retrieved 22 September 2023. "Majors record makes Novak Djokovic best in history, Nadal says". ESPN. 20 September 2023. Retrieved 22 September 2023. "Nadal concedes Djokovic is 'best in history' in terms of numbers". The Guardian. 20 September 2023. Retrieved 22 September 2023. "Novak Djokovic's French Open win cements GOAT status – Sports Illustrated". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved 11 September 2023. "Who is sport's all-time male GOAT?". MARCA. 11 September 2023. Retrieved 11 September 2023. "The 14 reasons why Djokovic is the best tennis player in history". MARCA. 11 September 2023. Retrieved 11 September 2023. "Tennis GOAT Novak Djokovic destroys 4 big records by winning the US Open". Tennis World USA. 11 September 2023. Retrieved 11 September 2023. "The ominous sentence that shows newly crowned US Open champion Novak Djokovic is not done yet". ABC News. 11 September 2023. Retrieved 11 September 2023. "Undesirable No.1: Why Novak Djokovic is the GOAT of men's tennis, whether you like it or not". www.sportingnews.com. 10 September 2023. Retrieved 11 September 2023. "Novak Djokovic Is the Greatest Player of the 'Big Three'". The Atlantic. 14 July 2019. Retrieved 15 July 2019. "Why Novak Djokovic has overtaken Roger Federer as the greatest tennis player of all time". Metro. 28 January 2016. Retrieved 15 July 2019. "Pat Cash: Novak Djokovic has beaten top guys over and over, in their prime". tennisworldusa.org. 14 July 2019. Retrieved 5 July 2019. "Patrick Mouratoglou explains why Novak Djokovic is the GOAT – not Roger Federer or Rafael Nadal". Metro. 13 July 2016. Retrieved 15 July 2019. "Why we should no longer doubt Novak Djokovic's place among tennis' GOATs". ESPN. 15 July 2019. Retrieved 15 July 2019. "Pete Sampras calls Novak Djokovic the "Greatest Of All Time"". Tennis.com. 31 January 2022. Retrieved 31 January 2022. "Novak Djokovic Solidifies GOAT Status With Men's Record 23rd Major Title". Forbes. Retrieved 12 June 2023. "Djokovic cements status in GOAT debate after scaling men's Grand Slam peak". Reuters. Retrieved 12 June 2023. "Advantage, Novak Djokovic in the race to be tennis' GOAT". 29 January 2023. "The revealing numbers behind Federer, Nadal and Djokovic's battle to be the GOAT". The Hindu. 12 January 2018. Retrieved 15 July 2019. "US Open: Medvedev labels Djokovic 'greatest tennis player in history' after conquering 20-time slam champ". Sports Max. 12 September 2021. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "Richard Krajicek explains why Novak Djokovic is the GOAT over Roger Federer". tennisworldusa.org. Retrieved 16 July 2019. "Why Novak Djokovic is now the GOAT". The Roar. Retrieved 16 July 2019. "On this day: Roger Federer downs Novak Djokovic to reach Shanghai final". Tennis World USA. 17 October 2019. Retrieved 18 October 2019. Ashtakoula, Sagar (11 July 2021). ""Most Complete Player": Serena Williams' Coach Calls Novak Djokovic the 'Goat' After Wimbledon Victory". EssentiallySports. Retrieved 13 July 2021. Herman, Martyn (19 November 2011). "Nadal returns in unfamiliar role of underdog". Reuters. Retrieved 28 August 2023. "Nadal Lauds Djokovic Performance In Doha 2016 Final". ATP Tour. 9 January 2016. Retrieved 28 August 2023. Bednall, Jai (7 December 2017). "Rafael Nadal says prime Novak Djokovic was his toughest foe". Fox Sports. Retrieved 17 January 2024. West, Ewan (5 August 2023). "'2011 Novak Djokovic was the best player of all time', asserts former world No 7". Tennis365. Retrieved 12 September 2023. Southby, Ben (24 November 2023). "NOVAK DJOKOVIC LIKENED TO LIONEL MESSI, TOM BRADY AND LEBRON JAMES BY BORIS BECKER – 'HE IS THE LION KING'". www.eurosport.com. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "Bollettieri: Djokovic is the most complete player of all time". Novakdjokovic.rs. Retrieved 29 October 2011. Nick Bollettieri (12 July 2015). "Wimbledon 2015 – Nick Bollettieri: Novak Djokovic really is the game's most perfect player". The Independent. London. Retrieved 8 August 2015. Cox, David (24 June 2013). "Bollettieri Calls Djokovic the Game's Most Complete Player, Ever". The New York Times. Retrieved 8 August 2015. "No one better than Novak Djokovic at his best: Andre Agassi". Times of India. 21 February 2019. Retrieved 6 November 2023. Garber, Greg (17 November 2021). "At Tennis' Summit, Novak Stands Alone". ATP Tour. Retrieved 25 July 2022. "Novak Djokovic v Rafael Nadal: Players & pundits hail 'greatest' match". BBC Sport. 29 January 2012. Retrieved 16 April 2014. Steve Flink (2012). The Greatest Tennis Matches of All Time. New Chapter Press. p. 452. ISBN 978-0-942257-93-9. Tignor, Steve (14 December 2018). "Top 10 of '18, No. 1: Djokovic tops Nadal in two-day Wimbledon classic". Tennis.com. Retrieved 28 August 2023. Tignor, Steve (1 July 2023). "Moment 9: With one forehand, Djokovic ends Roger and Rafa's Indian Summer". Tennis.com. Retrieved 28 August 2023. "Novak Djokovic v Roger Federer 'quality wise, the best ever match,' says Grand Slam legend". TennisBuzz. 10 July 2022. Retrieved 20 September 2023. "How Djokovic beat Federer in one of the greatest ever Wimbledon finals". The Independent. 14 July 2019. Retrieved 20 September 2023. "Rivalstva XXI veka: Da li je Rafole već srušio Fedala?". B92 – Saša Ozmo. 8 January 2014. Retrieved 18 January 2014. "Djole's Frames of Mind". Retrieved 3 March 2009. Nemeroff, Nick (9 December 2012). "Player Analysis: The Backhand of Novak Djokovic". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 21 June 2023. Demajo, Alexei (13 September 2020). "Top 5 Best Backhands of All Time and What We Can Learn From Their Technique". FD Tennis. Retrieved 21 June 2023. West, Ewan (8 April 2022). "Patrick Mouratoglou breaks down why Novak Djokovic's backhand has "no limits"". www.sportskeeda.com. Retrieved 21 June 2023. Tignor, Steve (7 May 2020). "Underrated Traits of the Greats: Novak Djokovic's forehand versatility". Tennis.com. Retrieved 21 June 2023. "Novak Djokovic is one of the best athletes on the planet ever". essentiallysports.com. 3 June 2020. Retrieved 28 February 2021. "Is Novak Djokovic the fittest athlete of all time?". menshealth.com. 11 September 2015. Retrieved 28 February 2021. "Novak Djokovic′s athleticism is from another world says ATP legend". tennisworldusa.org. 15 January 2021. Retrieved 28 February 2021. "Andre Agassi: I raised the stakes but Djokovic is off the scale". sport360.com. Retrieved 17 June 2023. "McEnroe Hails Djokovic, Tennis' Golden Era". ATP. 2 February 2012. Retrieved 16 April 2014. Djokovic as interviewed by Jim Courier on the court after his semi-final win against Andy Murray in the 2012 Australian Open, Eurosport broadcast, 27/28 January 2012. Sandra Harwitt (27 September 2011). "Past greats awed by Novak Djokovic". ESPN. "Djokovic Signs With Wilson". Pro Tennis Fan. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "HEAD Graphene™ Speed Racquet Promo". NovakDjokovic.com. Archived from the original on 20 December 2014. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "Head Djokovic Backpack". PicClick. Retrieved 24 October 2013. "Đoković i Šarapova snimili novu reklamu" (in Serbian). Vesti.rs. Retrieved 11 November 2013. "TKK Puma personal team, Dejan Petrović". TKK Puma. Kragujevac. 6 January 2015. Archived from the original on 6 January 2015. Retrieved 6 January 2015. "Djokovic discoverer is Woodville bound". Weekly Times Messenger. 2 November 2011. Archived from the original on 5 January 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2023. Harman, Neil (8 June 2006). "Djokovic unable to take the strain in battle with Nadal". The Times. London, UK. Retrieved 9 July 2011. "No. 2 Djokovic parts ways with Martin". ESPN. 12 April 2010. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Amanović: Nole se kupa u ledu posle meča" [Amanović: Nole takes an ice bath after the match]. www.pressonline.rs (in Serbian). 11 March 2010. Archived from the original on 6 August 2013. Retrieved 6 August 2013. Sagui, Miki (12 July 2011). "Novak Djokovic's Israeli connection". Ynetnews. "Svedok Novak Djokovic 2 8". RTS via YouTube.com. 4 May 2009. "Nole Hires Muster Fitness Coach". tennisconnected.com. 26 April 2009. "Novak Djokovic: The man who met his match with Murray". The Independent. 25 October 2009. "Meet Novak Djokovic's chief-of-staff who has helped to mastermind his success". www.tennis365.com. 13 September 2023. Retrieved 19 November 2023. "'We Decided To Go Different Ways': Djokovic Confirms Split From Longtime Agent". tennis-infinity.com. 2 November 2023. Retrieved 19 November 2023. "Ko je sedi čovek u Novakovoj loži?" [Who is the gray man in Novak's lodge?]. www.b92.net (in Serbian). 31 January 2011. Perrotta, Tom (31 July 2013). "Djokovic Opens the Refrigerator". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 27 April 2016. Retrieved 7 January 2022. Geddes, Linda (16 August 2015). "Leave it out: are food intolerances fact or fad?". The Guardian. "Razišli se Đoković i dr Četojević" [Đoković and Dr. Četojević parted ways]. www.b92.net (in Serbian). 30 August 2011. "Đoković više ne radi s Vemićem!". telegraf.rs. 22 August 2011. Retrieved 11 November 2013. "Boris Becker new Head Coach of Novak Djokovic!". Novak Djokovic Official Website. Crooks, Eleanor (12 January 2014). "Novak Djokovic admits Boris Becker link-up is a 'risk'". The Independent. London. Retrieved 16 August 2015. Rizvi, Ahmed (23 February 2014). "Novak Djokovic hopes having Boris Becker on board results in more grand slam titles". The National. Retrieved 16 August 2015. "I want to find the winning spark on the court again". PRpepper production. Retrieved 5 May 2017. "Djokovic reunites with former coach Marian Vajda". tennis.com. 10 April 2018. Retrieved 18 June 2021. "Novak Djokovic Reunites With an Old Coach and Rediscovers His Game". The New York Times. 10 April 2018. Archived from the original on 4 June 2018. Retrieved 18 June 2021. "Djokovic adds Ivanisevic to coaching team at Wimbledon". ATP Tour. 30 June 2019. Retrieved 1 July 2019. "'He chose Goran Ivanisevic,' says former coach Marian Vajda about split". www.tennis365.com. 4 May 2022. Retrieved 19 November 2023. "Djokovic & Longtime Coach Vajda Split". atptour.com. Archived from the original on 4 May 2022. Retrieved 10 July 2022. "Watch: Novak Djokovic makes fun of Carlos Gomez-Herrera in Monte Carlo". www.sportskeeda.com. 6 April 2023. Retrieved 19 November 2023. "Novak Djokovic pens heartfelt letter to agents after parting ways with them". www.sportskeeda.com. 16 November 2023. Retrieved 20 November 2023. ""Školica života" otvorena u Jaloviku". Radio Television of Serbia. 17 May 2017. Retrieved 28 March 2020. "Novak Djokovic Foundation | Believe in their dreams". Novak Djokovic Foundation. "Novak Djokovic Foundation raises $1,400,000 for children at inaugural dinner". 13 September 2012. Retrieved 21 December 2015. "World Bank, Novak Djokovic Foundation Partner to Promote Early Childhood Development in Serbia and Globally". 25 August 2015. Retrieved 21 December 2015. "World Bank, Novak Djokovic Foundation – Education". 25 August 2015. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 21 December 2015. "Douglas Doman about Child Development Methods". 12 March 2015. Archived from the original on 20 February 2022. Retrieved 21 December 2015. "Novak Djokovic Foundation: About Us". Retrieved 27 March 2020. "3 Tennis Legends and Their Charitable Endeavours". 17 January 2020. Retrieved 27 March 2020. "Nole i Ana za toranj na Avali". atpworldtour.com. 14 November 2005. Retrieved 27 March 2020. "Top Players to Raise Funds for Haiti Earthquake Victims". atpworldtour.com. 16 January 2010. Retrieved 27 March 2020. "Players To Rally For Relief at Australian Open". atpworldtour.com. 13 January 2011. Retrieved 27 March 2020. "Druženje Đokovića i dece sa Kosova". B92. 5 March 2016. Retrieved 23 July 2020. "Novak Djokovic: Arhur Ashe Humanitarian of the Year". 7 November 2012. Archived from the original on 27 March 2020. Retrieved 27 March 2020. "Djokovic reunites Yugoslavia in flood aid campaign". 22 May 2014. Retrieved 27 March 2020. "Novak Djokovic Foundation donates $20,000 to Melbourne City Mission early childhood learning program". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 1 February 2016. Retrieved 29 June 2016. "Djokovic Family Donating €1 Million Of Ventilators To Serbia". 27 March 2020. Retrieved 27 March 2020. "Novak Djokovic praised by Italian health authority for donation". 15 April 2020. Retrieved 16 April 2020. "Making amends: Djokovic's whopping donation to coronavirus-ravaged town". 2 July 2020. Retrieved 20 July 2020. "Donation to the Clinical and Hospital Centre in Kosovska Mitrovica together with the "Delije" Foundation". 16 July 2020. Archived from the original on 20 February 2022. Retrieved 20 July 2020. Rob Gloster; Mason Levinson (13 September 2011). "Djokovic Charms U.S. Open Crowds to Win More Than Third Grand Slam of 2011". Bloomberg. Mamudi, Sam, "Djokovic dominance boosts Sergio Tacchini", MarketWatch, 27 July/11 September 2011. Retrieved 27 January 2012. Badenhausen, Kurt (18 June 2012). "#61 Novak Djokovic – Kurt Badenhausen". Forbes. Retrieved 10 September 2012. Rovell, Darren (22 May 2012). "Sergio Tacchini, Djokovic Shockingly Part Ways". CNBC. Retrieved 10 September 2014. Novak Djokovic to join Nike, after Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal Archived 12 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine, Live Tennis Guide, 16 April 2012 Eurosport (30 December 2014). "Confirmed! Andy Murray signs £15 million kit deal with Under Armour". Yahoo! Eurosport. Archived from the original on 13 July 2015. Retrieved 12 April 2015. "adidas and Novak Djokovic partner in long-term footwear deal". adidas press release. 31 May 2013. Archived from the original on 10 June 2016. Retrieved 11 June 2016. "Novak Djokovic newly appointed ambassador". Audemars Piguet. 29 August 2011. Archived from the original on 8 December 2011. "Nole signs up with Mercedes". 20 September 2011. Archived from the original on 6 May 2012. Retrieved 20 September 2011. "Bombardier Serves Novak Djokovic as Learjet Brand Ambassador". Reuters. 8 March 2012. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. "Novak Djokovic, new ambassador for the brand". Peugeot.com. 8 January 2014. Archived from the original on 13 July 2015. Retrieved 13 July 2015. "Novak Djokovic Signs with Seiko". International Watch. 10 January 2014. Doerr, Elizabeth (5 July 2014). "Wimbledon 2014 Showdown: Roger Federer's Rolex vs. Novak Djokovic's Seiko And More". Forbes. Terlato, Peter (12 January 2015). "Novak Djokovic Has Launched A Social Media Campaign That Will Donate $2 To Charity For Every Post". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 22 July 2015. Retrieved 13 July 2015. "Join in the #HeadbandForGood". rallyforgood.anz.com. Archived from the original on 13 July 2015. Retrieved 13 July 2015. "Novak's Next Hit: Novak Djokovic and Jacob's Creek Release 'Made By' Films Series #MADEBY". Jacob's Creek press release. 13 January 2015. Retrieved 11 June 2016. CAA Sports teams with tennis;SportsBusinessDaily.com, 23 June 2008. Djokovic Signs With CAA Sports;OnTennis, 24 June 2008 "Djokovic Hires IMG to Manage Career After Leaving CAA". Bloomberg. 21 December 2012. "Novak Djokovic Just Became Lacoste's 'New Crocodile'". Yahoo. Retrieved 29 May 2017. "Novak Djokovic and Raiffeisen Bank International sign partnership" Novak Djokovic website "UKG Athletes" UKG website "Family Sport". Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 24 October 2013. "Svečano otvoren NOVAK CAFE & RESTAURANT na Dorćolu!". Djokovic press release. 21 September 2009. Retrieved 12 June 2016. "Novak Café & Restaurant opened in Novi Sad". Djokovic press release. 18 December 2011. Retrieved 12 June 2016. "Đokovići zatvorili restoran u Novom Sadu" (in Serbian). blic.rs. 28 March 2015. Retrieved 15 November 2020. Mirjana Despot (16 October 2015). "Banjaluka dobila Novak Café na Banj brdu". PressRS.ba. Archived from the original on 9 August 2016. Retrieved 12 June 2016. T. Č. (17 October 2015). "U Banjoj Luci otvoren restoran Novaka Đokovića". Klix.ba. Retrieved 12 June 2016. "Novak Tennis Center". Teniskicentarnovak.com. Archived from the original on 26 June 2013. Retrieved 29 October 2011. "Novak introduces DJOKOlife project". Djokovic press release. 18 May 2015. Retrieved 13 June 2016. Siegel, Emily (30 August 2016). "Novak Djokovic Opens Vegan Restaurant, Eqvita, In Monte Carlo". Forbes.com. Retrieved 16 July 2019. "Eqvita". HappyCow. Retrieved 16 July 2019. "Djokovic has 80% stake in biotech firm developing Covid drug". the Guardian. 19 January 2022. Retrieved 20 January 2022. "Djokovic-backed 'biotech' firm's approach likened to homeopathy". the Guardian. 20 January 2022. Retrieved 20 January 2022. Ben Rothenberg (28 August 2020). "Djokovic and Other Top Men Are Creating a Players' Association". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 30 August 2020. Retrieved 29 August 2020. "Nole na pragu deset miliona" (in Serbian). Vesti online. Retrieved 11 November 2013. Bowers, Chris (2017). Novak Djokovic – The Biography. Kings Road Publishing. Chapter 7. ISBN 978-1-78606-550-6. "Novak Djokovic imitating Nadal & Sharapova". June 2007. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021. Retrieved 23 February 2020. "Novak Djokovic doing impressions at US Open locker room". September 2007. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021. Retrieved 23 February 2020. Zinser, Lynn (7 September 2007). "Djokovic Wins to Reach Another Semifinal, but Has to Work For it". The New York Times. The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 September 2007. Retrieved 23 February 2020. "Djokovic advances to US Open semi-finals". ABC. 7 September 2007. Retrieved 23 February 2020. "Djokovic imitates Sharapova and Nadal at US Open quareterfinal". September 2007. Retrieved 23 February 2020. "Teniski NAJJ Srbije". Press. 8 December 2007. Archived from the original on 23 February 2020. Retrieved 23 February 2020. "NAJJBOLJI u Areni". Danas. 7 December 2007. Retrieved 23 February 2020. "Počeo Eurosong: Đoković otvorio glasanje". RTV. 21 May 2008. Retrieved 11 November 2013. "Fiorello Show, Djokovic imita Nadal e la Sharapova". televisionando.it. Retrieved 11 November 2013. "Novak Djokovic y Ana Ivanović vistan 'El Hormiguero'" (in Spanish). europapress.es. Retrieved 11 November 2013. "Martin Solveig & Dragonette – "Hello"". allthingsgomusic.com. 4 June 2011. Archived from the original on 11 November 2013. Retrieved 11 November 2013. Novak Djokovic Official Website Archived 20 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Novakdjokovic.rs. Retrieved 9 March 2011.(in Serbian) Zdenko Kolar: "Svirati bluz je privilegija" Archived 25 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine. Balkanrock.com. Retrieved 9 March 2011.(in Serbian) "Орден СНО Новаку Ђоковићу". Snd-us.com. Retrieved 29 October 2011. Brooks, Matt (6 July 2011). "Wimbledon champion Novak Djokovic boogies at Belgrade homecoming". The Washington Post. The Washington Post. Retrieved 13 February 2020. J., D. (29 November 2011). "Novak i Jelena Genčić ponovo zajedno". Večernje novosti. Retrieved 15 February 2020. "Novak Đoković donio pehar Jeleni Genčić" (in Serbian). Nezavisne.com. 29 November 2011. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 24 October 2013. "Novak Djokovic on Agape in 2011". Agape (in Serbian). 28 November 2011. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021. Retrieved 15 February 2020. Andreeva, Nellie (29 November 2011). "Tennis Ace Novak Djokovic To Do Cameo In 'Expendables 2'". Deadline.com. Retrieved 29 November 2011. Tennis ace Djokovic gets Expendables role Archived 4 December 2011 at the Wayback Machine;OMG! from Yahoo UK, 30 November 2011 Z. N. (27 July 2012). "Nole izbačen iz "Plaćenika"". mondo.rs. Retrieved 28 July 2012. Bill Saporito (18 April 2012). "Novak Djokovic profile". Time. Archived from the original on 19 April 2012. Retrieved 21 April 2013. "Đoković oduševio američku publiku". novimagazin.rs. 4 August 2011. Retrieved 11 November 2013. Chase, Chris (3 August 2011). "Novak Djokovic high fives Jay Leno, dances with Katie Holmes". Yahoo!. Retrieved 11 November 2013. "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno: Season 20: Episode 147: Katie Holmes; Novak Djokovic; Mat Kearney". Metacritic. 2 August 2011. Retrieved 24 February 2020. "Nole a special guest on Evening with Ivan Ivanovic show". NovakDjokovic.com. 16 February 2011. Retrieved 9 February 2020. "Conan: Season 1: Episode 125 "The Gentile's Bar Mitzvah": Olivia Wilde; Novak Djokovic; Russel Howard". Metacritic. 3 August 2011. Retrieved 24 February 2020. Biographies, Belmont Belcourt (13 September 2013). "Novak Djokovic: An Unauthorized Biography". books.google.rs. ISBN 978-1-61984-179-6. Retrieved 11 November 2013. Courtney Nguyen (20 August 2014). "Novak Djokovic appears on Late Show With David Letterman". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved 10 July 2015. "Serbian Tennis Player Novak Djokovic Now Has a Tiny New Snail Species Named After Him". SciTech Daily. Pensoft. 15 April 2021. Retrieved 18 April 2021. "Book Excerpt: Facing Novak Djokovic – Tennis Now". www.tennisnow.com. 4 March 2022. "For Novak Djokovic, the most unexpected recognition". 7 October 2022. Perrotta, Tom (26 May 2016). "Djokovic: 'Vegan with a Little Fish Here and There'". The Wall Street Journal. Welch, Hailey (4 June 2020). "Novak Djokovic Helped Clear his Allergies with a Plant-Based Diet". The Beet. Retrieved 4 September 2021. "Going gluten-free has made Novak Djokovic the world's number 1 tennis player". News24. 8 July 2015. "Novak Djokovic's Gluten-Free Success". tennisnow.com. 27 May 2011. Briggs, Simon (9 November 2018). "Novak Djokovic exclusive: 'I cried for three days after I had surgery – I felt guilty'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Clarey, Christopher (20 April 2020). "Novak Djokovic Expresses Resistance to Coronavirus Vaccine". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 20 April 2020. Retrieved 20 April 2020. Briggs, Simon (6 January 2022). "How science sceptic Novak Djokovic became a pin-up for the anti-vaxx movement". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 7 January 2022. Sriram, Arvind (23 June 2020). "Quotes from Djokovic on tennis amid a pandemic, vaccinations and COVID-19". Reuters. Retrieved 6 January 2022. "Five Novak Djokovic controversies". France 24. Agence France-Presse. 5 January 2022. Retrieved 6 January 2022. "What has Novak Djokovic actually said about vaccines?". BBC Sport. 6 January 2022. Retrieved 7 January 2022. Ramzy, Austin (6 January 2022). "Why Novak Djokovic Was Blocked From Entering Australia". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 6 January 2022. Retrieved 7 January 2022. Sympathy for an Icon of Free Choice, National Review, 17 January 2022. Briggs, Simon (20 April 2020). "How Novak Djokovic's anti-vaxxer views could stop his return to tennis". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 14 July 2020. "Novak Djokovic clarifies anti-vax stance ahead of US Open appearance". The Independent. 21 August 2020. Retrieved 21 February 2021. Valencich, Glenn (27 October 2021). "'Not fair for Victorians': Daniel Andrews shuts door on unvaccinated tennis players". 7 News. Retrieved 28 October 2021. "'Bad memory for everyone': Djokovic uneasy about Australian Open quarantine". The Guardian. 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021. "Parties jointly agreed transcript of interviews conducted by the ABF" (PDF). Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia. Retrieved 19 December 2023. Rumsby, Ben (10 January 2022). "'I'm not vaccinated': What Novak Djokovic told Australian border official — full transcript". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 10 January 2022. Novak Djokovic insists he is not an anti-vaxxer but his refusal to get the jab will do immeasurable damage to his legacy ABC News, 16 February 2022 Former World No. 1 labels Novak Djokovic 'king of stupidity' ahead of tennis return, Fox Sport 11 April 2022 Jenkins, Sally (17 January 2022). "Novak Djokovic is driven by an obsession, but that always has a cost". The Washington Post. The favourites for the Men's Australian Open 2022 Tennis Connected, 10 January 2020 Novak Djokovic's Legacy 'May Become A Bit Messy' Due To Visa Fiasco, Says Mats Wilander, EuroSport, 8 January 2022 Novak Djokovic's legacy in question after disqualification from Australian Open, The Daily Californian, 27 January 2022 Dougherty, Michael Brendan (17 January 2022). "Sympathy for an Icon of Free Choice". National Review. Retrieved 7 May 2022. "Responding to Kyrgios". Reuters. 18 November 2021. Retrieved 7 May 2022. "Stefanos Tsitsipas believes most players respect Novak Djokovic's vaccine choice". Tennishead. 31 December 2021. Retrieved 7 May 2022. McLean, Scott; Bashir, Nada; Bajic, Tihana (20 January 2022). "Novak Djokovic remains a national idol". CNN. Retrieved 8 May 2022. Novak Djokovic awarded with the highest distinction of the Serbian Orthodox Church Archived 4 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine, spc.rs, 28 April 2011. Retrieved 10 May 2011. Bartosz Gębicz (1 November 2020). "Śmierć biskupa Amfilochiusza przyczyną klęski Djokovicia w Wiedniu. "Nie miałem ochoty na grę"" (in Polish). onet.pl on behalf of Przegląd Sportowy. Davis, Scott. "Novak Djokovic goes to a Buddhist temple to meditate between matches at Wimbledon". Business Insider. "Telegraph: Novak Djokovic". The Telegraph. 28 September 2012. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 27 January 2013. "Novak Djokovic how to be a champion". The New York Times. 28 September 2012. Archived from the original on 10 September 2015. Retrieved 27 January 2013. "Wimbledon Novak Djokovic". espn.com. 28 September 2012. Retrieved 27 January 2013. "Gurus and 'pyramids': Djokovic's fondness for quirky remedies". France 24. 10 January 2022. Retrieved 21 October 2022. "Tennis stars' favourite football teams". Yahoo!. Retrieved 29 October 2011. "Djokovic: "I Am A Big Milan Fan"". A.C. Milan. 11 April 2011. Retrieved 29 October 2011. "Have a Nice Day, Nole!". tennis.com. Retrieved 9 May 2007. "Djokovic's craziest reactions from Red Star v. Barcelona: He cheered, threw himself on the floor..." telegraf.rs. 15 December 2021. Retrieved 6 January 2022. "Djokovic, Leclerc, and other worldwide celebrities who are in love with EuroLeague basketball". basketnews.com. Retrieved 6 January 2022. "Serbs upset at Djokovic Croatia World Cup support". amp.dw.com. Retrieved 21 February 2021. "Home grief for Djokovic for backing for Croatia". Sport. 22 March 2018. Retrieved 22 February 2021. "Serbian Tennis Star Đoković Defends His Support for Croatian World Cup Team". www.total-croatia-news.com. 10 July 2018. Archived from the original on 21 June 2021. Retrieved 22 February 2021. "Sportske novosti – Đoković se iznenadio kad je čuo da je Zadar Modrićev grad, a onda napravio nešto što mogu samo najveći!". sportske.jutarnji.hr (in Croatian). 17 June 2020. Retrieved 22 February 2021. "Đoković iskreno priznao da nije znao da je Modrić rođen u Zadru, a potom mu se duboko naklonio". Gol.hr (in Croatian). Retrieved 22 February 2021. "Luka Modric Is One of the Best Footballers in the World – Novak Djokovic". EssentiallySports. 17 June 2020. Retrieved 22 February 2021. "Novak Djokovic and Ana Ivanovic hit it off since young". The Australian. 28 September 2012. Retrieved 27 January 2013. "Novak Djokovic makes 55th Champion for Peace". Sportsfeatures.com. 18 April 2011. Archived from the original on 6 August 2013. Retrieved 29 October 2011. "French Open 2023: Novak Djokovic criticised for message about Kosovo after first-round win". BBC News. 31 May 2023. Retrieved 31 May 2023. "Most Matches Won at Each Grand Slam Tournament". Ultimate Tennis Statistics. Retrieved 28 August 2022. "Nine To Shine: Djokovic Claims Historic Cincy Crown", ATP, 19 August 2018. Novak Completes Career Golden Masters, ATP, 20 August 2018 Novak Djokovic Stands Alone With Big Titles Sweep, ATP. 22 August 2018 "The rules of tennis simply do not apply to Novak Djokovic". eurosport.com. 5 June 2016. Retrieved 16 July 2016. "Novak Djokovic is the Third Male to Ever Hold All Four Major Grand Slam Titles at the Same Time". scout.com. Retrieved 16 July 2016. Meyers, Naila-Jean (29 June 2016). "Novak Djokovic Nets 30th Consecutive Victory in Grand Slams". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 June 2016. Retrieved 16 July 2016. Rizvi, Ahmed (9 November 2015). "Exceptional season for Novak Djokovic among best ever". The National. Abu Dhabi: The National Newspaper, UAE, 9 November 2015. Retrieved 17 July 2016. "Djokovic Claims Slice of Masters 1000 History With Paris Crown". ATP. 8 November 2015. Retrieved 9 November 2015. "Novak Djokovic ends spectacular year with record ATP World Tour Finals title". The Indian Express. 23 November 2015. Retrieved 16 July 2016. "Novak sets gold standard in record-breaking 2015 season", 25 November 2016. Badenhausen, Kurt (8 June 2012). "Federer, Nadal And Djokovic Represent Golden Age For Men's Tennis". Forbes. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "Djokovic Wins Record 28th Masters 1000 Crown In Miami", ATP, 3 April 2016. "Djokovic Passes $100 Million Prize Money Milestone", ATP, 1 June 2016. Bowers, Chris (2014). Novak Djokovic and the Rise of Serbia: The Sporting Statesman. John Blake. ISBN 978-1-78219-770-6. Price, S.L. (23 May 2011). "Staring Down History". Sports Illustrated. Vol. 114, no. 21. Retrieved 9 June 2011. Scocca, Tom (29 November 2011). "Novak Djokovic: GQ Men of the Year 2011". GQ. Retrieved 30 November 2011. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Novak Đoković. Wikiquote has quotations related to Novak Djokovic. Official website Novak Djokovic at the Association of Tennis Professionals Novak Djokovic at the International Tennis Federation Novak Djokovic at the Davis Cup Novak Djokovic at Olympedia Novak Djokovic at Olympics.com Novak Đoković at the Olimpijski Komitet Srbije (in Serbian) Novak Djokovic Foundation Novak Djokovic v Minister for Home Affairs Archived 19 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine docket MLG35/2022 at the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Djokovic v Minister for Immigration at the Federal Court of Australia