Major League Baseball (MLB) is a professional baseball league and the highest level of organized baseball in the United States and Canada. One of the big four major leagues, MLB comprises 30 teams, divided equally between the National League (NL) and the American League (AL), with 29 in the United States and 1 in Canada. Formed in 1876 and 1901, respectively, the NL and AL cemented their cooperation with the National Agreement in 1903, making MLB the oldest major professional sports league in the world. They remained legally separate entities until 2000, when they merged into a single organization led by the Commissioner of Baseball. MLB is headquartered in Midtown Manhattan. Baseball's first all-professional team, the Cincinnati Red Stockings, was founded in 1869. The first few decades of professional baseball saw rivalries between leagues, and players often jumped from one team or league to another. The period before 1920 was the dead-ball era, when home runs were rarely hit. Professional baseball survived the Black Sox Scandal, a conspiracy to fix the 1919 World Series, then rose in popularity in the following decade. It survived the Great Depression and World War II. Shortly after the war, Jackie Robinson broke baseball's color barrier. The 1950s and 1960s saw the AL and NL add clubs; some moved around the country. Modern stadiums with artificial turf surfaces began to change the game in the 1970s and 1980s. Home runs dominated the game during the 1990s. In the mid-2000s, media reports disclosed the use of anabolic steroids among MLB players; a 2006–07 investigation produced the Mitchell Report, which found that many players had used steroids and other performance-enhancing substances, including at least one player from each team. Each team plays 162 games per season, with Opening Day traditionally held during the first week of April. Six teams in each league then advance to a four-round postseason tournament in October, culminating in the World Series, a best-of-seven championship series between the two league champions first played in 1903. The New York Yankees have the most championships with 27. The reigning champions are the Texas Rangers, who defeated the Arizona Diamondbacks in the 2023 World Series. MLB is the second-wealthiest professional sport league by revenue after the National Football League (NFL). Baseball games are broadcast on television, radio, and the internet throughout North America and in several other countries. MLB has the highest total season attendance of any sports league in the world; in 2018, it drew more than 69.6 million spectators. MLB also oversees Minor League Baseball, which comprises lower-tier teams affiliated with the major league clubs. MLB and the World Baseball Softball Confederation jointly manage the international World Baseball Classic tournament. MLB is governed by the Major League Baseball Constitution. This document has undergone several incarnations since its creation in 1876. Under the direction of the Commissioner of Baseball, MLB hires and maintains the sport's umpiring crews, and negotiates marketing, labor, and television contracts. MLB maintains a unique, controlling relationship over the sport, including most aspects of Minor League Baseball. This is due in large part to the 1922 U.S. Supreme Court ruling in Federal Baseball Club v. National League, which held that baseball is not interstate commerce and therefore not subject to federal antitrust law; MLB is the only league that has such a status, and has not faced any competition since this case. This ruling has been weakened only slightly in subsequent years. The weakened ruling granted more stability to the owners of teams and has resulted in values increasing at double-digit rates. There were several challenges to MLB's primacy in the sport, with notable attempts to establish competing leagues occurring during the late 1800s, from 1913 to 1915 with the short-lived Federal League, and in 1960 with the aborted Continental League. The chief executive of MLB is the commissioner, Rob Manfred. The deputy commissioner of baseball administration and chief legal officer is Dan Halem. There are seven other executives: executive vice president and general counsel, chief operations and strategy officer, chief communications officer, chief financial officer and senior advisor, executive vice president and chief marketing officer, chief revenue officer, and chief baseball development officer. The multimedia branch of MLB is MLB Advanced Media, which is based in New York City. This branch oversees MLB.com and each of the 30 teams' websites. Its charter states that MLB Advanced Media holds editorial independence from the league, but it is under the same ownership group and revenue-sharing plan. MLB Productions is a similarly structured wing of the league, focusing on video and traditional broadcast media. MLB also owns 67 percent of MLB Network, with the other 33 percent split between several cable operators and satellite provider DirecTV. It operates out of studios in Secaucus, New Jersey, and also has editorial independence from the league. In 1920, the weak National Commission, created to manage relationships between the two leagues, was replaced with the much more powerful Commissioner of Baseball, who had the power to make decisions for all of professional baseball unilaterally. From 1901 to 1960, the American and National Leagues fielded eight teams apiece. In the 1960s, MLB expansion added eight teams, including the first non-U.S. team (the Montreal Expos). Two teams (the Seattle Mariners and the Toronto Blue Jays) were also added in the 1970s. From 1969 through 1993, each league consisted of an East and West Division. In 1993, the National League expanded with two teams, the Florida Marlins and the Colorado Rockies, to even up the number of teams in both leagues. A third division, the Central Division, was formed in each league in 1994. Until 1996, the two leagues met on the field only during the World Series and the All-Star Game. Regular-season interleague play was introduced in 1997. In March 1995, two new franchises, the Arizona Diamondbacks and Tampa Bay Devil Rays (now known as the Tampa Bay Rays), were awarded by MLB, which began play in 1998. This addition brought the total number of franchises to 30. In early 1997, MLB decided to assign one new team to each league: Tampa Bay joined the AL and Arizona joined the NL. The original plan was to have an odd number of teams in each league (15 per league, with five in each division), but in order for every team to be able to play daily, this would have required interleague play to be scheduled throughout the entire season. However, it was unclear at the time if the interleague play would continue after the 1998 season, as it had to be approved by the players' union. For this and other reasons, it was decided that both leagues should continue to have an even number of teams, and therefore, one existing club would have to switch leagues. The Milwaukee Brewers agreed in November 1997 to move from the AL to the NL, thereby making the NL a 16-team league. At the same time, the Detroit Tigers agreed to move from the AL East to the AL Central (to replace Milwaukee), with the expansion Tampa Bay Devil Rays joining the AL East. Later, when the Houston Astros changed ownership prior to the 2013 season, the team moved from the NL Central to the AL West, resulting in both leagues having three divisions of five teams each and allowing all teams to have a more balanced schedule. Interleague play is now held throughout the season. In 2000, the AL and NL were dissolved as legal entities, and MLB became a single, overall league de jure, similar to the National Football League (NFL), National Basketball Association (NBA) and National Hockey League (NHL)—albeit with two components called "leagues" instead of "conferences". The same rules and regulations are used in both leagues, with one former exception: the AL operated under the designated hitter (DH) rule, while the NL did not. This difference in rules between leagues was unique to MLB, as the other major professional sports leagues in the U.S. and Canada have one set of rules for all teams.[citation needed] In 2020, the National League (NL) used the designated hitter (DH) rule for the first time. As part of the settlement of the 2021–22 Major League Baseball lockout, this change was made permanent thus making the rules in the two leagues identical. Braves Marlins Mets Phillies Nationals Cubs Reds Brewers Pirates Cardinals Diamondbacks Rockies Dodgers Padres Giants Orioles Red Sox Yankees Rays Blue Jays White Sox Guardians Tigers Royals Twins Astros Angels Athletics Mariners Rangers Map all coordinates using OpenStreetMap Download coordinates as: KML GPX (all coordinates) GPX (primary coordinates) GPX (secondary coordinates) An asterisk (*) denotes a relocation of a franchise. See respective team articles for more information. In the 1860s, aided by soldiers playing the game in camp during the Civil War, "New York"-style baseball expanded into a national game and spawned baseball's first governing body, the National Association of Base Ball Players (NABBP). The NABBP existed as an amateur league for 12 years. By 1867, more than 400 clubs were members. Most of the strongest clubs remained those based in the Northeastern United States. For professional baseball's founding year, MLB uses the year 1869—when the first professional team, the Cincinnati Red Stockings, was established. A schism developed between professional and amateur ballplayers after the founding of the Cincinnati club. The NABBP split into an amateur organization and a professional organization. The National Association of Professional Base Ball Players, often known as the National Association (NA), was formed in 1871. Its amateur counterpart disappeared after only a few years. The modern Chicago Cubs and Atlanta Braves franchises trace their histories back to the National Association of Professional Base Ball Players in the 1870s. In 1876, the National League of Professional Base Ball Clubs (later known as the National League or NL) was established after the NA proved ineffective. The league placed its emphasis on clubs rather than on players. Clubs could now enforce player contracts, preventing players from jumping to higher-paying clubs. Clubs were required to play the full schedule of games instead of forfeiting scheduled games when the club was no longer in the running for the league championship, which happened frequently under the NA. A concerted effort was made to curb gambling on games, which was leaving the validity of results in doubt. The first game in the NL—on Saturday, April 22, 1876 (at Jefferson Street Grounds in Philadelphia)—is often pointed to as the beginning of MLB. The early years of the NL were tumultuous, with threats from rival leagues and a rebellion by players against the hated "reserve clause", which restricted the free movement of players between clubs. Teams came and went; 1882 was the first season where the league's membership was the same as the preceding season's, and only four franchises survived to see 1900. Competitor leagues formed regularly and also disbanded regularly. The most successful was the American Association (1882–1891), sometimes called the "beer and whiskey league" for its tolerance of the sale of alcoholic beverages to spectators. For several years, the NL and American Association champions met in a postseason championship series—the first attempt at a World Series. The two leagues merged in 1892 as a single 12-team NL, but the NL dropped four teams after the 1899 season. This led to the formation of the American League in 1901 under AL president Ban Johnson, and the resulting bidding war for players led to widespread contract-breaking and legal disputes.[citation needed] The war between the AL and NL caused shock waves throughout the baseball world. At a meeting at the Leland Hotel in Chicago in 1901, the other baseball leagues negotiated a plan to maintain their independence. A new National Association was formed to oversee these minor leagues. After 1902, the NL, AL, and NA signed a new National Agreement which tied independent contracts to the reserve-clause contracts. The agreement also set up a formal classification system for minor leagues, the forerunner of today's system that was refined by Branch Rickey. Several other early defunct baseball leagues are considered major leagues, and their statistics and records are included with those of the two modern major leagues. In 1969, the Special Baseball Records Committee of Major League Baseball officially recognized six major leagues: the National League, American League, American Association, Union Association (1884), Players' League (1890), and Federal League (1914–1915). The status of the National Association as a major league has been a point of dispute among baseball researchers; while its statistics are not recognized by Major League Baseball, its statistics are included with those of other major leagues by some baseball reference websites, such as Retrosheet. Some researchers, including Nate Silver, dispute the major-league status of the Union Association by pointing out that franchises came and went and that the St. Louis club was deliberately "stacked"; the St. Louis club was owned by the league's president and it was the only club that was close to major-league caliber. In December 2020, Major League Baseball announced its recognition of seven leagues within Negro league baseball as major leagues: the first and second Negro National Leagues (1920–1931 and 1933–1948), the Eastern Colored League (1923–1928), the American Negro League (1929), the East–West League (1932), the Negro Southern League (1932), and the Negro American League (1937–1948). In 2021, baseball reference website Baseball-Reference.com began to include statistics from those seven leagues into their major-league statistics. The period between 1900 and 1919 is commonly referred to as the "dead-ball era". Games of this era tended to be low-scoring and were often dominated by pitchers, such as Walter Johnson, Cy Young, Christy Mathewson, Mordecai Brown, and Grover Cleveland Alexander. The term also accurately describes the condition of the baseball itself. The baseball used American rather than the modern Australian wool yarn and was not wound as tightly, affecting the distance that it would travel. More significantly, balls were kept in play until they were mangled, soft and sometimes lopsided. During this era, a baseball cost three dollars, equal to $52.72 today (in inflation-adjusted USD), and owners were reluctant to purchase new balls. Fans were expected to throw back fouls and (rare) home runs. Baseballs also became stained with tobacco juice, grass, and mud, and sometimes the juice of licorice, which some players would chew for the purpose of discoloring the ball. Also, pitchers could manipulate the ball through the use of the spitball (In 1921, use of this pitch was restricted to a few pitchers with a grandfather clause). Additionally, many ballparks had large dimensions, such as the West Side Grounds of the Chicago Cubs, which was 560 feet (170 m) to the center field fence, and the Huntington Avenue Grounds of the Boston Red Sox, which was 635 feet (194 m) to the center field fence, thus home runs were rare, and "small ball" tactics such as singles, bunts, stolen bases, and the hit-and-run play dominated the strategies of the time. Hitting methods like the Baltimore chop were used to increase the number of infield singles. On a successful Baltimore chop, the batter hits the ball forcefully into the ground, causing it to bounce so high that the batter reaches first base before the ball can be fielded and thrown to the first baseman. The adoption of the foul strike rule—in the NL in 1901, in the AL two years later—quickly sent baseball from a high-scoring game to one where scoring runs became a struggle. Before this rule, foul balls were not counted as strikes: a batter could foul off any number of pitches with no strikes counted against him; this gave an enormous advantage to the batter. After the 1919 World Series between the Chicago White Sox and Cincinnati Reds, baseball was rocked by allegations of a game-fixing scheme known as the Black Sox Scandal. Eight players—"Shoeless" Joe Jackson, Eddie Cicotte, Claude "Lefty" Williams, George "Buck" Weaver, Arnold "Chick" Gandil, Fred McMullin, Charles "Swede" Risberg, and Oscar "Happy" Felsch—intentionally lost the World Series in exchange for a ring worth $100,000 ($1,712,780.35 in 2022 dollars). Despite being acquitted, all were permanently banned from Major League Baseball. Baseball's popularity increased in the 1920s and 1930s. The 1920 season was notable for the death of Ray Chapman of the Cleveland Indians. Chapman, who was struck in the head by a pitch and died a few hours later, became the only MLB player to die of an on-field injury. Both leagues quickly began to require the use of new, white baseballs whenever a ball became scuffed or dirty, helping bring the "dead-ball" era to an end. The following year, the New York Yankees made their first World Series appearance. By the end of the 1930s, the team had appeared in 11 World Series, winning eight of them. Yankees slugger Babe Ruth had set the single-season home run record in 1927, hitting 60 home runs; breaking his own record of 29 home runs. Afflicted by the Great Depression, baseball's popularity had begun a downward turn in the early 1930s. By 1932, only two MLB teams turned a profit. Attendance had fallen, due at least in part to a 10% federal amusement tax added to baseball ticket prices. Baseball owners cut their rosters from 25 men to 23, and even the best players took pay cuts. Team executives were innovative in their attempts to survive, creating night games, broadcasting games live by radio, and rolling out promotions such as free admission for women. Throughout the Great Depression, no MLB teams moved or folded. The onset of World War II created a shortage of professional baseball players, as more than 500 men left MLB teams to serve in the military. Many of them played on service baseball teams that entertained military personnel in the US or in the Pacific. MLB teams of this time largely consisted of young men, older players, and those with a military classification of 4F, indicating mental, physical, or moral unsuitability for service. Men like Pete Gray, a one-armed outfielder, got the chance to advance to the major leagues. However, MLB rosters did not include any black players through the end of the war. Black players, many of whom served in the war, were still restricted to playing Negro league baseball. Wartime blackout restrictions, designed to keep outdoor lighting at low levels, caused another problem for baseball. These rules limited traveling and night games to the point that the 1942 season was nearly canceled. On January 14, 1942, MLB Commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis wrote to U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt, pleading for the continuation of baseball during the war. Roosevelt responded, "I honestly feel that it would be best for the country to keep baseball going. There will be fewer people unemployed and everybody will work longer hours and harder than ever before. And that means that they ought to have a chance for recreation and for taking their minds off their work even more than before." With the approval of President Roosevelt, spring training began in 1942 with few repercussions. The war interrupted the careers of stars including Stan Musial, Bob Feller, Ted Williams, and Joe DiMaggio, but baseball clubs continued to field their teams. Branch Rickey, president and general manager of the Brooklyn Dodgers, began making efforts to introduce a black baseball player to the previously all-white professional baseball leagues in the mid-1940s. He selected Jackie Robinson from a list of promising Negro league players. After obtaining a commitment from Robinson to "turn the other cheek" to any racial antagonism directed at him, Rickey agreed to sign him to a contract for $600 a month. In what was later referred to as "The Noble Experiment", Robinson was the first black baseball player in the International League since the 1880s, joining the Dodgers' farm club, the Montreal Royals, for the 1946 season. The following year, the Dodgers called up Robinson to the major leagues. On April 15, 1947, Robinson made his major league debut at Ebbets Field before a crowd of 26,623 spectators, including more than 14,000 black patrons. Black baseball fans began flocking to see the Dodgers when they came to town, abandoning the Negro league teams that they had followed exclusively. Robinson's promotion met a generally positive, although mixed, reception among newspaper writers and white major league players. Manager Leo Durocher informed his team, "I don't care if he is yellow or black or has stripes like a fucking zebra. I'm his manager and I say he plays." After a strike threat by some players, NL President Ford Frick and Baseball Commissioner Happy Chandler let it be known that any striking players would be suspended. Robinson received significant encouragement from several major-league players, including Dodgers teammate Pee Wee Reese who said, "You can hate a man for many reasons. Color is not one of them." That year, Robinson won the inaugural Major League Baseball Rookie of the Year Award (separate NL and AL Rookie of the Year honors were not awarded until 1949). Less than three months later, Larry Doby became the first African-American to break the color barrier in the American League with the Cleveland Indians. The next year, a number of other black players entered the major leagues. Satchel Paige was signed by the Indians and the Dodgers added star catcher Roy Campanella and Don Newcombe, who was later the first winner of the Cy Young Award for his outstanding pitching. MLB banned the signing of women to contracts in 1952, but that ban was lifted in 1992. There have been no female MLB players. From 1903 to 1952, the major leagues consisted of two eight-team leagues whose 16 teams were located in ten cities, all in the northeastern and midwestern United States: New York City had three teams and Boston, Chicago, Philadelphia, and St. Louis each had two teams. St. Louis was the southernmost and westernmost city with a major league team. The longest possible road trip, from Boston to St. Louis, took about 24 hours by railroad. After a half-century of stability, starting in the 1950s, teams began to move out of cities with multiple teams into cities that had not had them before. From 1953 to 1955, three teams moved to new cities: the Boston Braves became the Milwaukee Braves, the St. Louis Browns became the Baltimore Orioles, and the Philadelphia Athletics became the Kansas City Athletics. The 1958 Major League Baseball season began to turn Major League Baseball into a nationwide league. Walter O'Malley, owner of the Brooklyn Dodgers and "perhaps the most influential owner of baseball's early expansion era," moved his team to Los Angeles, marking the first major league franchise on the West Coast. O'Malley also helped persuade the rival New York Giants to move west to become the San Francisco Giants. Giants owner Horace Stoneham had been contemplating a move to Minnesota amid slumping attendance at the aging Polo Grounds ballpark when O'Malley invited him to meet San Francisco Mayor George Christopher in New York. After Stoneham was persuaded to move to California, Time magazine put O'Malley on its cover. MLB Commissioner Ford Frick had opposed the meeting, but the dual moves proved successful for both franchises—and for MLB. Had the Dodgers moved out west alone, the St. Louis Cardinals—1,600 mi (2,575 km) away—would have been the closest NL team. Instead, the joint move made West Coast road trips economical for visiting teams. The Dodgers set a single-game MLB attendance record in their first home appearance with 78,672 fans. In 1961, the first Washington Senators franchise moved to Minneapolis–St. Paul to become the Minnesota Twins. Two new teams were added to the American League at the same time: the Los Angeles Angels (who soon moved from downtown L.A. to nearby Anaheim) and a new Washington Senators franchise. The NL added the Houston Astros and the New York Mets in 1962. The Astros (known as the "Colt .45s" during their first three seasons) became the first southern major league franchise since the Louisville Colonels folded in 1899 and the first franchise to be located along the Gulf Coast. The Mets established a reputation for futility by going 40–120 during their first season of play in the nation's media capital—and by playing only a little better in subsequent campaigns—but in their eighth season (1969) the Mets became the first of the 1960s expansion teams to play in the postseason, culminating in a World Series title over the heavily favored Baltimore Orioles. In 1966, the major leagues moved to the "Deep South" when the Braves moved to Atlanta. In 1968, the Kansas City Athletics moved west to become the Oakland Athletics. In 1969, the American and National Leagues both added two expansion franchises. The American League added the Seattle Pilots (who became the Milwaukee Brewers after one disastrous season in Seattle) and the Kansas City Royals. The NL added the first Canadian franchise, the Montreal Expos, as well as the San Diego Padres. In 1972, the second Washington Senators moved to the Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex to become the Texas Rangers. In 1977, baseball expanded again, adding a second Canadian team, the Toronto Blue Jays, as well as the Seattle Mariners. Subsequently, no new teams were added until the 1990s and no teams moved until 2005. By the late 1960s, the balance between pitching and hitting had swung in favor of the pitchers. In 1968—later nicknamed "the year of the pitcher"—Boston Red Sox player Carl Yastrzemski won the American League batting title with an average of just .301, the lowest in the history of Major League Baseball. Detroit Tigers pitcher Denny McLain won 31 games, making him the only pitcher to win 30 games in a season since Dizzy Dean in 1934. St. Louis Cardinals starting pitcher Bob Gibson achieved an equally remarkable feat by allowing an ERA of just 1.12. Following these pitching performances, in December 1968 the MLB Playing Rules Committee voted to reduce the strike zone from knees to shoulders to top of knees to armpits and lower the pitcher's mound from 15 to 10 inches, beginning in the 1969 season. In 1973, the American League, which had been suffering from much lower attendance than the National League, sought to increase scoring even further by initiating the designated hitter (DH) rule. Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, as baseball expanded, NFL football had been surging in popularity, making it economical for many of these cities to build multi-purpose stadiums instead of single-purpose baseball fields. Because of climate and economic issues, many of these facilities had playing surfaces made from artificial turf, as well as the oval designs characteristic of stadiums designed to house both baseball and football. This often resulted in baseball fields with relatively more foul territory than older stadiums. These characteristics changed the nature of professional baseball, putting a higher premium on speed and defense over home-run hitting power since the fields were often too big for teams to expect to hit many home runs and foul balls hit in the air could more easily be caught for outs.[citation needed] Teams began to be built around pitching—particularly their bullpens—and speed on the basepaths. Artificial surfaces meant balls traveled quicker and bounced higher, so it became easier to hit ground balls "in the hole" between the corner and middle infielders. Starting pitchers were no longer expected to throw complete games; it was enough for a starter to pitch 6–7 innings and turn the game over to the team's closer, a position which grew in importance over these decades. As stolen bases increased, home run totals dropped. After Willie Mays hit 52 home runs in 1965, only one player (George Foster) reached that mark until the 1990s.[citation needed] During the 1980s, baseball experienced a number of significant changes the game had not seen in years. Home runs were on the decline throughout the decade, with players hitting only 40 home runs just 13 times and no one hitting more than 50 home runs in a season for the first time since the Dead-ball era (1900–1919). The 1981 Major League Baseball strike from June 12 until July 31 forced the cancellation of 713 total games and resulted in a split-season format. In 1985, Pete Rose broke Ty Cobb's all-time hits record with his 4,192nd hit, and in 1989 Rose received a lifetime ban from baseball as a result of betting on baseball games while manager of the Cincinnati Reds. Rose was the first person to receive a lifetime ban from baseball since 1943. 1985 also saw the Pittsburgh drug trials which involved players who were called to testify before a grand jury in Pittsburgh related to cocaine trafficking. The 1994–95 Major League Baseball strike from August 12, 1994, to April 25, 1995, caused the cancellation of over 900 games and the forfeit of the entire 1994 postseason. Routinely in the late 1990s and early 2000s, baseball players hit 40 or 50 home runs in a season, a feat that was considered rare even in the 1980s. It later became apparent that at least some of this power surge was a result of players using steroids and other performance-enhancing drugs. In 1993, the NL added the Florida Marlins in Miami and the Colorado Rockies in Denver. In 1998, the Brewers switched leagues by joining the National League, and two new teams were added: the NL's Arizona Diamondbacks in Phoenix and the AL's Tampa Bay Devil Rays in Tampa Bay. After the 2001 season, the team owners voted in favor of contraction. Several MLB teams had been considered for elimination in early talks about contraction, but the Montreal Expos and the Minnesota Twins were the two teams that came closest to folding under the plan. Plans for MLB contraction were halted when the Twins landlord was awarded a court injunction that required the team to play its 2002 home games at their stadium. MLB owners agreed to hold off on reducing the league's size until at least 2006. The Montreal Expos became the first franchise in over three decades to move when they became the Washington Nationals in 2005. This move left Canada with just one team, but it also returned baseball to Washington after a 33-year absence. This franchise shift, like many previous ones, involved baseball's return to a city that had been previously abandoned. Not counting the short-lived Federal League, Montreal is the only city to host an MLB franchise since 1901 that, as of December 2023[update], does not have a team. In recent years, with the advent of technologies such as Statcast and its use of Hawk-Eye starting in 2020 as well as with advanced statistics as provided by sites such as FanGraphs and Baseball Savant, MLB has evolved. With the ability to see precise movements of pitchers and batters, teams can assess the mechanics of a player and help them improve. Statcast also provides some features such as tracking the paths of most batted balls, tracking the speed of most batted balls, and tracking the exit velocity of most batted balls. Statcast has allowed for advanced defensive analytics that have not been possible before tracking of players due to how subjective fielding can be. The rate of teams using a defensive shift has gone up from 13.7% in 2016 to 33.6% in 2022 because advanced statistics support this as an effective way to stop hitters from getting hits. Because the shift reduces the amount of balls in play that result in hits and MLB wishes to increase interest in baseball, MLB announced in September 2022 that extreme infield defensive shifts would be banned starting in 2023. In order to be compliant, there must be two fielders on each side of second base, and those fielders must have both of their feet on the infield dirt at the time the pitch is thrown. If this rule is not followed, the choice of an automatic ball or the outcome of the play is given to the batting team. The game of baseball has also slowed down significantly due to an increased number of strikeouts and walks—two outcomes that generally take many pitches to complete—and an increased amount of time taken for a pitcher to pitch. In 2020, it took an average of three hours and six minutes to complete a 9 inning game, a number which has steadily ticked up for years. Along with the restrictions on defensive shifts, MLB announced the introduction of a pitch clock for the 2023 season and beyond, which is something that has been an experiment in MiLB for a few years. The pitch clock starts at 15 seconds. By the time the clock reaches 10 seconds, the catcher must be in their crouch behind home plate. When the clock reaches 8 seconds, the batter must be in the batter's box and be "alert". Before the 15 second timer reaches 0 seconds, the pitcher must have started their "motion to pitch". If any of these deadlines are violated, the count of the batter will be increased by one ball if the defending team violated the pitch clock or one strike if it is the offensive team who violated the pitch clock. Additionally, in order to prevent circumventing these rules pickoffs and step-offs which reset the pitch clock are only allowed two times total per plate appearance and, if a pitcher attempts a third pickoff and fails to get the runner out, a balk will be called. Similarly, a batter is restricted to calling a timeout (an action which resets the pitch clock) just once per plate appearance. In 2019, Major League Baseball opened an investigation into allegations that members of the 2017 World Series champion Houston Astros stole signs from opposing teams using technology during the 2017 and 2018 seasons. The Astros were found guilty in January 2020 and while no active players faced any repercussions due to an immunity agreement in exchange for testimony, Astros general manager Jeff Luhnow and field manager A. J. Hinch were suspended for the entire 2020 season. The Astros were fined the maximum allowable $5 million and forfeited their first- and second-round picks in the 2020 and 2021 drafts. The Boston Red Sox were also found guilty of stealing signs during the 2017 and 2018 seasons, with the latter season ending in a World Series victory. Red Sox manager Alex Cora was suspended for a year and the team was fined with the loss of a second round draft pick in the 2020 draft as a result. In November 2023, the Oakland Athletics relocation to Las Vegas was approved by MLB owners. As of early 2024, MLB has discussed preparations for another round of expansion, and several investment groups are vying for an MLB franchise. A baseball uniform is a type of uniform worn by baseball players, and by some non-playing personnel, such as field managers and coaches. It is worn to indicate the person's role in the game and—through the use of logos, colors, and numbers—to identify the teams and their players, managers, and coaches. Traditionally, home uniforms display the team name on the front, while away uniforms display the team's home location. In modern times, however, exceptions to this pattern have become common, with teams using their team name on both uniforms. Most teams also have one or more alternate uniforms, usually consisting of the primary or secondary team color on the vest instead of the usual white or gray. In the past few decades throwback uniforms have become popular. The New York Knickerbockers were the first baseball team to use uniforms, taking the field on April 4, 1849, in pants made of blue wool, white flannel shirts (jerseys) and straw hats. Caps and other types of headgear have been a part of baseball uniforms from the beginning. Baseball teams often wore full-brimmed straw hats or no cap at all since there was no official rule regarding headgear. Under the 1882 uniform rules, players on the same team wore uniforms of different colors and patterns that indicated which position they played. This rule was soon abandoned as impractical. In the late 1880s, Detroit and Washington of the National League and Brooklyn of the American Association were the first to wear striped uniforms. By the end of the 19th century, teams began the practice of having two different uniforms, one for when they played at home in their own baseball stadium and a different one for when they played away (on the road) at the other team's ballpark. It became common to wear white pants with a white color vest at home and gray pants with a gray or solid (dark) colored vest when away. By 1900, both home and away uniforms were standard across the major leagues. In June 2021, MLB announced a long-term deal with cryptocurrency exchange FTX, which includes the FTX logo appearing on umpire uniforms during all games. FTX is MLB's first-ever umpire uniform patch partner. On November 11, 2022, FTX filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. MLB removed the FTX patches from umpires' uniforms before the 2023 season. Spring training is a series of practices and exhibition games preceding the start of the regular season. Teams hold training camps in the states of Arizona and Florida, where the early warm weather allows teams to practice and play without worrying about the late winter cold. Spring training allows new players to compete for roster and position spots and gives existing team players practice time prior to competitive play. The teams that hold spring training in Arizona are grouped into the Cactus League, while teams that hold camp in Florida are known as the Grapefruit League. Spring training has always attracted fan attention, drawing crowds who travel to the warmer climates to enjoy the weather and watch their favorite teams play, and spring training usually coincides with spring break for many students. Autograph seekers also find greater access to players during spring training.[citation needed] Spring training typically lasts almost two months, starting in mid-February and running until just before the season-opening day, traditionally the first week of April. As pitchers benefit from a longer training period, pitchers and catchers begin spring training several days before the rest of the team. Each team plays 162 games per season. A team's schedule is typically organized into three-game series, sets of consecutive games against the same opponent, with occasional two- or four-game series. Postponed games or continuations of suspended games can result in an ad hoc one-game or five-game series. All games of a series are usually hosted by the same team and multiple series are typically grouped together. I.e, a team usually hosts several series in a row, called a homestand, and follows that by going on several road series in a row. Teams generally play games five to seven days per week. Most games are scheduled at night, although teams will often play day games on Opening Day, holidays, and for the last game of a series to allow teams extra time to travel to their next opponent. Sunday games are generally played during the afternoon, allowing teams to travel to their next destination prior to a Monday night game. In the current three-division structure, each team plays 19 games against each of its four divisional opponents. It plays one home series and one away series, amounting to six or seven games, against the 10 other teams in its league. A team also plays one of the divisions in the other league, rotating each year, with two opponents in a three-game home series, two in a three-game away series, and one with four games split between home and away. Furthermore, each team has an interleague "natural rival" (in many cases its counterpart in the same metro area) with which it plays two home games and two away games each year. With an odd number of teams in each league (15), it is necessary to have two teams participate in interleague play for most days in the season, except when two or more teams have a day off. Each team plays 20 interleague games throughout the season, usually with just one interleague game per day, but for one weekend in late May, all teams will participate in an interleague series. Before 2013, interleague play was structured differently: there would be one weekend in mid-May and another period consisting typically of the last two-thirds of June in which all teams played interleague games (save for two NL teams each day), and no interleague games were scheduled outside those dates. (Before 2013, season-long interleague play was not necessary, because each league had an even number of teams. In 2013, the Houston Astros moved to the American League, so that each league would have 15 teams.) Prior to the adoption of the universal designated hitter in 2022, whether the DH was in use depended on whether the home team was from the AL, where the DH was used, or the NL, where it was not. Starting with the 2023 season, the scheduling formula is set to change, with each team playing at least one series against every other team every year. Each team will play 14 games against teams in the same division, with one 3-game and one 4-game series at each park, six games against teams within the same league but in other divisions, with one 3-game series at each park, and one 3-game series against teams in the other league, alternating home teams each year, except for each team's designated interleague rival, which will continue to consist of two 2-game series at each of the teams' home parks. Beginning with the 2022 season, teams compete for the six playoff berths in their respective leagues. To secure a berth, a team must either win its division or capture a wild card spot by having one of the three best records among the non-winners in its entire league. With the adoption of a third wild card, the former practice of breaking ties with an additional regular-season game, known as game 163, was dropped in favor of a tie-breaker formula. In early-to-mid July, just after the midway point of the season, the Major League Baseball All-Star Game is held during a four-day break from the regular-season schedule. The All-Star Game features a team of players from the American League (AL)—led by the manager of the previous AL World Series team—and a team of players from the National League (NL), similarly managed, in an exhibition game. From 1959 to 1962, two games were held each season, one was held in July and one was held in August. The designated-hitter rule was used in the All-Star Game for the first time in 1989. Following games used a DH when the game was played in an AL ballpark. Since 2010, the DH rule has been in effect regardless of venue. The first official All-Star Game was held as part of the 1933 World's Fair in Chicago, Illinois, and was the idea of Arch Ward, then sports editor for The Chicago Tribune. Initially intended to be a one-time event, its great success resulted in making the game an annual one. Ward's contribution was recognized by Major League Baseball in 1962 with the creation of the "Arch Ward Trophy", given to the All-Star Game's Most Valuable Player each year. (In 1970, it was renamed the Commissioner's Trophy, until 1985, when the name change was reversed. In 2002, it was renamed the Ted Williams Most Valuable Player Award.)[citation needed] Beginning in 1947, the eight position players in each team's starting lineup have been voted into the game by fans. The fan voting was discontinued after a 1957 ballot-box-stuffing scandal in Cincinnati: seven of the eight slots originally went to Reds players, two of whom were subsequently removed from the lineup to make room for Willie Mays and Hank Aaron. Fan voting was reinstated in 1970 and has continued ever since, including Internet voting in recent years.[citation needed] The 2002 contest in Milwaukee controversially ended in an 11-inning tie when both managers ran out of pitchers. In response, starting in 2003 the league which wins the All-Star game received home-field advantage in the World Series: the league champion hosted the first two games at its own ballpark as well as the last two (if necessary). The National League did not win an All-Star game and thus gain a home-field advantage until 2010; it was able to overcome this disadvantage and win in three of the seven World Series from 2003 to 2009. This was discontinued after the 2016 season.[citation needed] MLB All-Stars from both leagues have worn uniforms from their respective teams at the game with one exception. In the 1933 All-Star Game, the National League All-Star Team members wore special gray uniforms with "National League" written in navy blue letters across the front of the jersey. On July 3, 2020, it was announced that the 2020 Major League Baseball All-Star Game scheduled to be held in Los Angeles would not be played due to the COVID-19 pandemic. As compensation, Los Angeles was awarded the next available All-Star Game in 2022. The regular season ends after the first Sunday in October (or the last Sunday in September), after which twelve teams enter the postseason playoffs. These twelve teams consist of the six division champions and six "wild-card" teams: the team with the best overall win–loss record in each of the six divisions, and the three teams in each league with the best records other than the division champions. Four rounds of series of games are played to determine the champion:[citation needed] Wild Card Series, a best of three games playoff between the lowest seeded division champion and three "wild-card teams", the higher seeds will host all three games American League Division Series and National League Division Series, each a best-of-five-games series. American League Championship Series and National League Championship Series, each a best-of-seven-games series played between the winning teams from the Division Series. The league champions are referred to as the pennant winners. World Series, a best-of-seven-games series played between the pennant winners of each league. Within each league, the division winners are the 1, 2, and 3-seeds, based on win–loss records. The teams with the first, second, and third best records among non-division winners will be seeded 4, 5, and 6 respectively. Throughout the postseason, home-field advantage is awarded to the team with the higher win-loss record, with tiebreakers being applied if necessary. In the Wild Card Series, the 3-seed will host the 6-seed, and the 4-seed will host the 5-seed, with the winners advancing to the Division Series. Unlike the NFL, there is no reseeding between each series. In the Division Series, the 1-seed goes up against the 3/6-seed and the 2-seed goes up against the 4/5-seed. The winners of those matches will compete in their respective League Championship Series for their League Pennant, and the Pennant winners will advance to the World Series. Since 2017, home-field advantage in the World Series is determined by regular-season records of the two league champions, replacing a system used for the prior 14 seasons where the champion of the league that won the All-Star Game would receive home-field advantage.[citation needed] The team with home-field advantage in the Wild Card Series will host all three games, and subsequent series' will split home fields between the two teams in a 2-3-2 format, with the advantaged team hosting games 1 and 2, as well as 6 and 7 (if necessary). With this format, the home-field advantage does not usually play a large role in the postseason unless the series goes to its maximum number of games. However, because the first two games of a postseason series are hosted by the same team, a team starting with two wins will likely have momentum heading into the venue switch. Since 1986 an All-Star team from MLB is sent to a biennial end-of-the-season tour of Japan, dubbed as MLB Japan All-Star Series, playing exhibition games in a best-of format against the All-Stars from Nippon Professional Baseball (NPB) or recently as of 2014 their national team Samurai Japan. In 2008, MLB played the MLB China Series in the People's Republic of China. It was a series of two spring-training games between the San Diego Padres and Los Angeles Dodgers. The games were an effort to popularize baseball in China. MLB played the MLB Taiwan All-Star Series in Taiwan in November 2011. It was a series of five exhibition games played by a team made up of MLB players called the MLB All-Stars and the Chinese Taipei national baseball team. The MLB All-Stars swept the series, five games to zero. At the end of the 2011 season, it was announced that the Seattle Mariners and the Oakland Athletics would play their season openers in Japan. In October 2013, Phil Rogers of the Chicago Tribune wrote that MLB was considering postseason all-star tours in Taiwan and Korea; baseball is increasing in popularity in both countries. The Arizona Diamondbacks opened the 2014 season against Los Angeles Dodgers on March 22–23 in Australia. The teams played each other at the historic Sydney Cricket Ground, which has a seating capacity of 46,000. The two games represented the first MLB regular-season play held in that country. The games counted as home games for the Diamondbacks, so they played 79 home games at Chase Field. In 2019, the Red Sox were the home team in a regular-season two-game series against the Yankees. The games, which were the first regular-season MLB games held in Europe, were played on June 29–30 at London Stadium with the Yankees winning both games. The San Diego Padres and Los Angeles Dodgers opened the 2024 regular season on March 20–21 at Gocheok Sky Dome in Seoul, South Korea. The ceremonial first pitch of the opening game was thrown by the first Korean-born MLB player Chan Ho Park, who made his debut with the LA Dodgers in 1994. The two-game Seoul Series resulted in a split between the two teams. There were also four exhibition games played during March 17–18, where the Dodgers took on the Kiwoom Heroes and Team Korea, and the Padres faced the LG Twins and Team Korea. Together with the World Baseball Softball Confederation, MLB sponsors the World Baseball Classic, an international baseball tournament contested by national teams.[citation needed] In 1998, both Mark McGwire and Sammy Sosa hit more home runs than the record of 61 set by Yankees right fielder Roger Maris in 1961. Barry Bonds topped the record in 2001 with 73 home runs. McGwire, Bonds, and Sosa became the subjects of speculation regarding the use of performance-enhancing substances. McGwire later admitted that he used a steroid hormone that was still legal in baseball during the 1998 season. Baseball's original steroid testing policy, in effect from 2002 to 2005, provided for penalties ranging from a ten-game suspension for a first positive test to a one-year suspension for a fourth positive test. Players were tested at least once per year, with the chance that several players could be tested many times per year. A 2006 book, Game of Shadows by San Francisco Chronicle investigative reporters Lance Williams and Mark Fainaru-Wada, chronicled alleged extensive use of performance enhancers, including several types of steroids and growth hormone by baseball superstars Barry Bonds, Gary Sheffield, and Jason Giambi. Former Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell was appointed by Selig on March 30, 2006 to investigate the use of performance-enhancing drugs in MLB. The appointment was made after several influential members of the U.S. Congress made negative comments about both the effectiveness and honesty of MLB's drug policies and Commissioner Selig. The day before the Mitchell Report was to be released in 2007, Selig said, "I haven't seen the report yet, but I'm proud I did it." The report said that after mandatory random testing began in 2004, HGH treatment for athletic enhancement became popular among players, as HGH is not detectable in tests. It pointed out that HGH is likely a placebo with no performance-enhancing effects. The report included substance use allegations against at least one player from each MLB team. According to ESPN, some people questioned whether Mitchell's director role with the Boston Red Sox created a conflict of interest, especially because no "prime [Sox] players were in the report". The report named several prominent Yankees who were parts of World Series clubs; there is a long-running and fierce Yankees–Red Sox rivalry. Former U.S. prosecutor John M. Dowd brought up Mitchell's conflict of interest, but he later said that the former senator had done a good job. Mitchell acknowledged that his "tight relationship with Major League Baseball left him open to criticism", but he said that readers who examine the report closely "will not find any evidence of bias, of special treatment of the Red Sox". On January 10, 2013, MLB and the players union reached an agreement to add random, in-season HGH testing. They also agreed to implement a new test to reveal the use of testosterone for the 2013 season. The current MLB drug policy provides for an 80-game suspension for a first positive test, a 162-game suspension for a second positive test, and a lifetime suspension for a third positive test. In 2009, allegations surfaced against Alex Rodriguez and David Ortiz, and Manny Ramirez received a 50-game suspension after testing positive for banned substances. In early April 2011, Ramirez retired from baseball rather than face a 100-game suspension for his second positive steroid test. He would later unretire, having the suspension dropped to 50 games, and would serve those in 2012.[citation needed] Several networks televise baseball games, including Fox, ESPN, TBS, and MLB Network. Since 2008, Fox Sports has broadcast MLB games on Saturdays throughout the entire season; Fox previously only broadcast games from May to September. Fox also holds rights to the All-Star Game each season. Fox also alternates League Championship Series broadcasts, broadcasting the American League Championship Series (ALCS) in odd-numbered years and the National League Championship Series (NLCS) in even-numbered years. Fox broadcasts all games of the World Series. ESPN continues to broadcast MLB games as well, beginning with national Opening Day coverage. The network airs the program Baseball Tonight prior to its weekly regular season game titled: Sunday Night Baseball. ESPN also has the rights to the Home Run Derby every July and in the postseason broadcasts the Wild Card Series exclusively.. TBS has aired Sunday afternoon regular season games (non-exclusive) nationally, but beginning in 2022 this will be replaced by Tuesday night games. In 2007, TBS began its exclusive rights to any tiebreaker games that determine division or wild card champions. It also airs exclusive coverage of the Division Series round of the playoffs. TBS carries the League Championship Series that are not included under Fox's television agreement; TBS shows the NLCS in odd-numbered years and the ALCS in even-numbered years. In January 2009, MLB launched the MLB Network, featuring news and coverage from around the league, and airing 26 live games in the 2009 season. Each team also has local broadcasts for all games not carried by Fox on Saturdays or ESPN on Sunday nights. These games are typically split between a local broadcast television station and a local or regional sports network (RSN), though some teams only air local games through RSNs or through their own team networks. As Canada only contains one team, Sportsnet broadcasts Toronto Blue Jays games nationally. The channel is owned by Rogers Communications, who is also the parent company of the Blue Jays. Sportsnet also televises Fox's Saturday afternoon games, the All-Star Game, playoff games, and the World Series. In April 2011, TSN2 began carrying ESPN Sunday Night Baseball in Canada. TVA Sports airs Blue Jays games in French. Several MLB games are broadcast exclusively on Internet television. After a year of exclusive games on Facebook, MLB partnered with YouTube to stream weekly games on the service beginning in the 2019 season, and extending until 2022. In 2022, MLB made a deal with Apple Inc. to launch Friday Night Baseball on its Apple TV+ streaming service, and NBC Sports to broadcast MLB Sunday Leadoff, a package of early Sunday afternoon games on Peacock. ESPN+ broadcasts one out-of-market game per day throughout the whole regular season. Since the 2023 season Division Series the streaming service Max began to simulcast the games broadcast by its sister channel TBS (both owned by Warner Bros. Discovery). MLB has several blackout rules. A local broadcaster has priority to televise games of the team in their market over national broadcasters if the game is not exclusive to the national broadcaster. A market that has a local team playing in a non-exclusive game will receive an alternative programming feed on the national broadcaster. MLB's streaming internet video service is also subject to the same blackout rules. Commissioner Robert Manfred has expressed interest in changing the blackout policy to loosen the rules for streaming options. The first baseball game ever broadcast on radio was a Pittsburgh Pirates versus Philadelphia Phillies game on August 5, 1921. The game was broadcast by KDKA of Pittsburgh, and the Pirates defeated the Phillies 8–5. It was broadcast by KDKA staff announcer Harold Arlin.[1] That year, KDKA and WJZ of Newark broadcast the first World Series on the radio, between the New York Giants and the New York Yankees, with Grantland Rice and Tommy Cowan calling the games for KDKA and WJZ, respectively. However, the broadcasters were not actually present at the game, but simply gave reports from a telegraph wire. In 1922, WJZ broadcast the entire series, with Rice doing play-by-play. For the 1923 World Series, Rice was joined on Westinghouse for the first time by Graham McNamee. During the 1923 World Series, Rice was the main broadcaster, but during the fourth inning of Game 3, he turned the microphone over to McNamee. This was the start of McNamee's career, and McNamee became the first color commentator. Although frequently criticized for his lack of expertise, McNamee helped popularize baseball. In 1998, national radio broadcasts moved to ESPN Radio. ESPN Radio currently broadcasts Sunday Night Baseball games during the regular season, as well as Saturday and occasional weekday games, along with the All-Star Game and all postseason contests. Since 2021, TUDN Radio airs Spanish-language coverage of select regular season and postseason games, including the World Series. In addition, each team employs its own announcers, who broadcast during the regular season. Most teams operate regional networks to cover their fan bases; some of these supposedly regional networks (such as the New York Yankees Radio Network) have a national reach with affiliates located across the United States. Major League Baseball has an exclusive rights deal with XM Satellite Radio, which includes the channel MLB Network Radio and live play-by-play of all games. Many teams also maintain a network of stations that broadcast their games in Spanish; as of 2022[update], the Los Angeles Dodgers are the only team that produces radio broadcasts in a third language, with selected games broadcast in Korean. Both Canadian teams (the Montreal Expos before their move to Washington, DC in 2005, and the Toronto Blue Jays) have produced radio broadcasts in French. MLB games are also broadcast live on the internet. All television and radio broadcasts of games are available via subscription to MLB.tv at Major League Baseball's website, MLB.com, and radio-only broadcasts are also available via subscription to MLB.com Gameday Audio. Radio station affiliates are officially forbidden from streaming games through their Internet feeds. Blackout rules are still applied for live television broadcasts, but not radio broadcasts.[citation needed] Since 2005, Major League Baseball has a partnership with XM Satellite Radio, launching a 24-7 channel MLB Home Plate which carries every major league game. Games are also carried on MLB Gameday Audio. While all teams maintain a network of stations carrying their games in English, many teams also maintain a Spanish-language network as well. In addition, when the Washington Nationals were based in Montreal as the Montreal Expos, their games were broadcast in both English and French. Selected games of the Los Angeles Dodgers are broadcast in Korean by KMPC. Disney Media Networks Latin America through its linear channels (ESPN, ESPN Caribbean, ESPN Brazil) and Star+ owns the broadcast rights to more than 180 regular season games (at least 1 game per day), the Home Run Derby, the All Star Game and the post season including: the Wild Card Series, the Division Series, the Championship Series and the World Series for all of Latin America and the Caribbean. In Mexico, as of 2022, Fox Sports airs five regular season games per week and post-season games that belong to the league that broadcasts its American namesake (including the Wild Card Series). Likewise, TUDN carries 4 matches a week until 2022: through the pay television signal, games were broadcast on Tuesdays and Thursdays, while on Saturdays (generally at 12:00 pm) and Sundays (rotating between NBA games, until the start of the NFL season) games were broadcast on Canal 9. Starting with the Championship Series, it only broadcast one division and the whole World Series, these were broadcast on free-to-air television for 59 years. Starting with the 2023 season, it was confirmed that Imagen Televisión would begin broadcasting a regular season game every Saturday and Sunday as well as the playoffs and the World Series on open television and its website for all of Mexico. In Argentina, Fox Sports carries 5 regular season games per week and post-season games that belong to the league that broadcasts its American namesake (including the Wild Card Series). In Venezuela, since the 2016 season the cable channel IVC has the broadcast rights, they currently air 7 games per week. Starting with the 2022 season, Televen broadcasts two games a week and the postseason on free-to-air TV While Venevisión, starting with the 2023 season, would return with the space "El Juego de la Semana" that carries a game every Sunday and non-working days on free-to-air television. In the Dominican Republic since 2009 Grupo Altice has broadcast the entire regular season, playoffs and World Series through pay TV while on free-to-air television and radio Grupo Corripio airs 7 games per week and the entire postseason. In Spain, Movistar Plus+ has the rights to broadcast the entire season, including one game daily, and the postseason, covering all games in the championship series and all games in the World Series. Channel 5 in the United Kingdom previously screened MLB games, including the All-Star Game and the postseason games, on Sunday and Wednesday usually starting at 1 a.m. BST. Most recently, Johnny Gould and Josh Chetwynd presented MLB on Five on that station. The channel covered baseball beginning on its opening night in 1997, but for financial reasons, the decision was made not to pick up MLB for the 2009 season. BT Sport ESPN show live and recorded games several times a week—it is available with BT Sport and (on a subscriber-basis) Virgin Media in the UK. ESPN America televised many games in the UK and dozens of other countries; in May 2013, ESPN announced that it would shut down the channel on July 31, 2013. In Australia, MLB games are regularly shown on ESPN Australia (subscription). In the Middle East, North Africa and France, MLB games are broadcast on beIN Sports channels. In Germany, Austria and Switzerland as many as 500 MLB games will be broadcast from 2022 exclusively on the Sport1 platforms until 2026. In Hungary, MLB games are broadcast on Sport1 as of 2020. Baseball portal Australian Baseball League Baseball Assistance Team (B.A.T.) Baseball in Canada Baseball in the United States Bob Feller Act of Valor Award Comparison of Major League Baseball and Nippon Professional Baseball KBO League List of all-time Major League Baseball win–loss records List of American and Canadian cities by number of major professional sports franchises List of current Major League Baseball stadiums List of former Major League Baseball stadiums List of Major League Baseball awards List of Major League Baseball managers List of Major League Baseball retired numbers List of Major League Baseball spring training ballparks List of professional sports leagues List of professional sports teams in the United States and Canada Major League Baseball attendance records Major League Baseball draft MLB Industry Growth Fund Nippon Professional Baseball Reviving Baseball in Inner Cities In this context, "major leagues" narrowly refers to the National League and American League; for other leagues considered major at various times, see discussion of other recognized leagues. ABC does not regularly broadcast MLB regular season games on TV, though it does carry some postseason games The Oakland Athletics plan to move from Oakland, California to Las Vegas, Nevada. The Athletics' lease for Oakland Coliseum expires after the 2024 Major League Baseball season. Langs, Sarah (May 29, 2021). "Donaldson scores MLB's 2 millionth run". MLB.com. MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on June 2, 2021. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Official MLB history dates to 1876, when the National League began play. According to research by MLB's official historian, John Thorn, the first run came on April 22 of that year – in the first game of the season, between the Boston Red Stockings, now the Braves, and the Philadelphia Athletics. "Franchise Timeline". WhiteSox.com. MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "The Commissionership: A Historical Perspective". MLB.com. MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on July 28, 2016. Retrieved March 11, 2016. The strength of the American League grew as an increasing number of National League players opted for the higher salaries offered by the new association. Faced with the prospect of losing many of its best players, the NL chose peace and declared the AL its equal in 1903. This led to a new National Agreement and the birth of the World Series. The American and National Leagues were established as major leagues and all other associations comprised the minor leagues, which fell under the jurisdiction of the National Association of Professional Baseball Leagues. Chass, Murray (September 16, 1999). "BASEBALL; League Presidents Out As Baseball Centralizes". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 6, 2021. Retrieved January 7, 2022. "Robert D. Manfred Jr., 10th Commissioner of Baseball, Elected: Jan. 25, 2015". MLB.com. MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on March 11, 2021. Retrieved June 14, 2020. "MLB Team Contact Information". MLB.com. MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on October 11, 2018. Retrieved October 10, 2018. "About MLB". MLB.com. MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on July 10, 2022. Retrieved June 11, 2020. "World Series History: Championships by Club". MLB.com. MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on June 21, 2008. Retrieved March 11, 2016. Hughes, Katie (May 13, 2021). "The Walt Disney Company, ESPN and Major League Baseball Reach Long-Term Rights Extension for Fully Exclusive, Marquee Schedule". ESPNPressroom.com (Press release). Retrieved June 5, 2022. "MLB announces 2022 postseason schedule". MLB.com (Press release). MLB Advanced Media. August 15, 2022. Retrieved October 4, 2022. "2022 National Broadcast Schedule". MLB.com. MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved April 11, 2022. "Apple and Major League Baseball announce first 12 weeks of "Friday Night Baseball" doubleheader schedule beginning April 8". MLB.com (Press release). MLB Advanced Media. March 29, 2022. Retrieved April 3, 2022. "Apple and Major League Baseball to offer "Friday Night Baseball"" (Press release). Apple Inc. Retrieved March 8, 2022. "Max will start offering a live sports tier in October". The Verge. September 19, 2023. Retrieved September 19, 2023. "Year In Review: 2000 National League". Baseball-Almanac.com. Archived from the original on October 9, 2018. Retrieved September 5, 2008. Chass, Murray (September 16, 1999). "BASEBALL; League Presidents Out As Baseball Centralizes". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 19, 2018. Retrieved May 29, 2018. Young, Jabari (December 22, 2019). "Major League Baseball revenue for 2019 season hits a record $10.7 billion". CNBC. Archived from the original on June 18, 2020. Retrieved June 18, 2020. "11 Most Profitable Sports Leagues – Their Value Will Surprise You – Athletic Panda Sports Editors". Archived from the original on June 18, 2020. "www.sap.com" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on June 25, 2020. Brown, Maury (October 3, 2018). "Why MLB Attendance Dropped Below 70 Million For The First Time In 15 Years". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 6, 2018. Retrieved April 19, 2016. Berg, Ted (April 21, 2017). "Someone is selling MLB's original 1876 constitution, and it's expected to fetch millions". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 22, 2017. Retrieved August 22, 2017. Belth, Alex (November 26, 2001). "Ending Baseball's Antitrust Exemption: What Would It Mean?". Baseball Prospectus. Archived from the original on November 10, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2021. Baseball is the only major sport that has an exemption from antitrust law. Calcaterra, Craig (May 29, 2019). "Happy birthday to baseball's antitrust exemption". NBC Sports. Archived from the original on November 10, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2021. What is still in place, firmly, is Major League Baseball's ability to work to thwart competitors, if any ever arise, and its ability to carve out protected geographic territories for its clubs and anti-competitive contract rights for its clubs. "Policy Debate: Should the antitrust exemption for baseball be eliminated?". www.swlearning.com. Archived from the original on October 6, 2008. Retrieved September 4, 2008. "The Role of Antitrust Laws in the Professional Sports Industry From a Financial Perspective". Howard Bartee, Jr. The Sport Journal. Archived from the original on June 7, 2008. Retrieved September 4, 2008. "Manfred promoted; Jimmie Lee Solomon resigns". ESPN. June 7, 2012. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved November 29, 2013. "MLB Executives". MLB.com. 2013. Archived from the original on March 21, 2021. Retrieved February 23, 2017. "MLB Network". MLB.com. Archived from the original on October 31, 2013. Retrieved October 30, 2013. "About MLB Network". MLB.com. Archived from the original on October 12, 2018. Retrieved October 30, 2013. "Interleague play ho-hum to some". Spartanburg Herald-Journal. June 4, 2000. Archived from the original on April 19, 2021. Retrieved November 24, 2013. "Brewers switch leagues, join Reds in NL Central". The Kentucky Post (Associated Press). November 6, 1997. Archived from the original on May 5, 2005. Bloom, Barry M. (November 17, 2011). "Sale of Astros to Jim Crane, move to American League in 2013 approved". Astros.com. MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on September 12, 2015. Retrieved August 9, 2015. MLB required the Astros to accept this move as a condition of approving their sale to Jim Crane."Astros' sale finalized; 2 more for playoffs". ESPN. Associated Press. November 17, 2011. Archived from the original on April 10, 2012. Retrieved November 17, 2011. "Designated Hitter Rule". MLB.com. MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on February 22, 2018. Retrieved February 22, 2018. Adamson, Scott. "Nothing more irritating than playing by one set of rules in one park and a different set in another". The Anderson Independent-Mail. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved November 24, 2013. Feinsand, Mark (July 6, 2020). "Play Ball: MLB announces 2020 regular season". MLB.com. MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on July 23, 2020. Retrieved September 9, 2020. "New rules for '22 to affect 2-way players, extra innings". MLB.com (Press release). MLB Advanced Media. March 31, 2022. Retrieved May 5, 2022. "Oriole Park at Camden Yards". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on February 24, 2011. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Fenway Park". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on February 26, 2011. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Yankee Stadium". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on October 20, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Tropicana Field". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on October 22, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Rogers Centre". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on August 1, 2015. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "U.S. Cellular Field". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on December 3, 2016. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Progressive Field". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on February 1, 2011. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Comerica Park". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on December 17, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Kauffman Stadium". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on August 1, 2015. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Target Field". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on December 18, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Minute Maid Park". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on September 5, 2015. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Angel Stadium of Anaheim". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on December 16, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "O.co Coliseum". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on December 16, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2015. Cwik, Chris (November 16, 2023). "MLB owners unanimously vote to approve Athletics' move to Las Vegas". Yahoo!. Retrieved November 16, 2023. "Safeco Field". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on December 17, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Globe Life Park in Arlington". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on December 18, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Turner Field". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on February 7, 2011. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Marlins Park Information". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on December 17, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Citi Field". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on December 16, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Citizens Bank Park". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on October 8, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Nationals Park". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on October 31, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Wrigley Field". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on September 22, 2008. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Great American Ball Park". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on August 10, 2011. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "American Family Field". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on November 8, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "PNC Park". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on December 18, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Busch Stadium". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on December 17, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Chase Field". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on February 3, 2011. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Coors Field". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on August 14, 2011. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Dodger Stadium". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on December 17, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Petco Park". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "AT&T Park". Major League Baseball Advanced Media, LP. July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on October 27, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2015. "Legend of the Cincinnati Red Stockings". 1869 Cincinnati Red Stockings Vintage Base Ball Team. 2007. Archived from the original on July 24, 2008. "National Association of Professional Base Ball Players". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on January 16, 2009. Retrieved September 10, 2008. Rader, Benjamin (2008). Baseball: A History of America's Game. University of Illinois Press. p. 29. ISBN 978-0-252-07550-6. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved November 16, 2020. Spatz, Lyle (2012). Historical Dictionary of Baseball. Scarecrow Press. p. 236. ISBN 978-0-8108-7954-6. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved November 16, 2020. Events of Saturday, April 22, 1876 Archived July 13, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. Retrosheet. Retrieved September 30, 2011. "Minor League Baseball History". MiLB.com. Archived from the original on September 27, 2018. Retrieved September 10, 2008. "1903 National Agreement". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on February 1, 2018. Retrieved September 10, 2008. "Major League Baseball finally elevates the Negro Leagues to "Major League" officially recognizing their statistical records". artvoice.com. December 16, 2020. Archived from the original on July 9, 2021. Retrieved July 4, 2021. "Team Chronology". Retrosheet. Archived from the original on July 9, 2021. Retrieved July 4, 2021. Silver, Nate (2007). "NerdFight: League Quality Adjustments". Baseball Prospectus. Archived from the original on December 12, 2007. Retrieved September 8, 2008. "MLB officially designates the Negro Leagues as 'Major League'". MLB.com (Press release). Major League Baseball. December 16, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2021. "The Negro Leagues Are Major Leagues". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on March 1, 2023. Retrieved July 4, 2021. McNeil, William (2006). The Evolution of Pitching in Major League Baseball. McFarland. p. 60. ISBN 0-7864-2468-0. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved November 16, 2020. Keating, Peter. "The game that Ruth built". Boston.com. Archived from the original on September 18, 2011. Retrieved November 24, 2013. Daniel Okrent, Harris Lewine, David Nemec (2000) "The Ultimate Baseball Book", Houghton Mifflin Books, ISBN 0-618-05668-8 "inside+baseball" p. 33 Archived July 1, 2023, at the Wayback Machine. Solomon, Burt (1999). Where They Ain't: The Fabled Life And Untimely Death Of The Original Baltimore Orioles. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 0-684-85917-3. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved April 8, 2019.. Lieb, Fred (1955). The Baltimore Orioles: The History of a Colorful Team in Baltimore and St. Louis. SIU Press. p. 46. ISBN 0-8093-8972-X. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved November 16, 2020. "MLB Rule Changes | Baseball Almanac". www.baseball-almanac.com. Archived from the original on February 22, 2021. Retrieved June 21, 2022. "History Files – Chicago Black Sox: The Fix". Chicago History Museum. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved October 26, 2013. "History Files – Chicago Black Sox". Chicago History Museum. Archived from the original on August 15, 2014. Retrieved October 26, 2013. "Injury Report". MLB.com. December 22, 2019. Archived from the original on February 21, 2021. Retrieved June 16, 2016. "Indians uncover lost Chapman plaque". ESPN.com. March 29, 2007. Archived from the original on November 2, 2013. Retrieved October 31, 2013. "New York Yankees: Team History and Encyclopedia". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2011. Retrieved October 31, 2013. McNeil, William (1997). The King of Swat: An Analysis of Baseball's Home Run Hitters from the Major, Minor, Negro, and Japanese Leagues. McFarland. p. 32. ISBN 0-7864-0362-4. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved November 16, 2020. Belson, Ken (January 6, 2009). "Apples for a Nickel, and Plenty of Empty Seats". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 8, 2016. Retrieved October 31, 2013. Todd Anton; Bill Nowlin, eds. (2008). When Baseball Went to War. Triumph Books. pp. 7–9. ISBN 978-1-60078-126-1. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved November 16, 2020. Martin, Alfred (2008). The Negro Leagues in New Jersey: A History. McFarland. pp. 104–105. ISBN 978-0-7864-5192-0. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved November 16, 2020. Roosevelt, Franklin. "Green Light Letter". January 15, 1942. Weintraub, Robert (April 2, 2013). "Three Reichs, You're Out". Slate.com. Archived from the original on November 20, 2013. Retrieved November 24, 2013. "The Jackie Robinson Foundation". Jackie Robinson Foundation. Archived from the original on June 28, 2013. Retrieved July 4, 2013. "Leo Durocher". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on May 26, 2013. Retrieved July 4, 2013. Newman, Mark (April 13, 2007). "1947: A time for change". MLB.com. Archived from the original on April 7, 2009. Retrieved September 12, 2009. Rookie of the Year Awards & Rolaids Relief Award Winners. Baseball-Reference.com. Retrieved November 24, 2013. Doby was AL's first African-American player. ESPN Classic. June 26, 2003. Retrieved November 24, 2013. Finkelman, Paul, ed. (2008). Encyclopedia of African American History, 1896 to the Present: From the Age of Segregation to the Twenty-First Century, Volume 1. Oxford University Press. p. 145. ISBN 978-0-19-516779-5. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved November 16, 2020. "Are Women the Next Demographic to Integrate into Major League Baseball?". Bleacher Report. September 13, 2011. Archived from the original on February 13, 2015. Retrieved February 13, 2015. "Veterans elect five into Hall of Fame: Two managers, three executives comprise Class of 2008". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. December 3, 2007. Archived from the original on December 4, 2007. Retrieved January 19, 2008. Murphy, Robert (2009). After many a summer: the passing of the Giants and Dodgers and a golden age in New York baseball. New York: Sterling. ISBN 978-1-4027-6068-6. "Metropolitan Stadium / Minnesota Twins / 1961–1981". Ballpark Digest. Archived from the original on May 12, 2008. Retrieved May 16, 2008. "Walter in Wonderland". Time. April 28, 1958. Archived from the original on January 14, 2009. "Walter O'Malley". Time. April 28, 1958. Archived from the original on January 17, 2008. Retrieved April 28, 2008. "Scoreboard". Time. May 20, 1957. Archived from the original on January 14, 2009. "Worldwide Timetable" (PDF). American Airlines. November 1, 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 12, 2007. Retrieved November 24, 2007. "Identifying Locations". colostate.edu. Archived from the original on February 8, 2008. Retrieved November 24, 2007. "1968 – The Year of the Pitcher" Sports Illustrated, August 4, 1998. Archived May 21, 2013, at the Wayback Machine "Year by Year Leaders for Batting Average". baseball-almanac.com. Archived from the original on January 2, 2021. Retrieved September 8, 2008. Bailey, Mary (2000). "When Denny McLain stood baseball on its ear". The Detroit News. Archived from the original on January 13, 2009. Retrieved September 8, 2008. "Bob Gibson Statistics". baseball-reference.com. Archived from the original on September 6, 2008. Retrieved September 8, 2008. William Leggett (March 24, 1969). "From Mountain To Molehill". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on August 26, 2012. Retrieved March 9, 2009. Merron, Jeff (2003). "Blomberg first permanent pinch-hitter". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved September 8, 2008. "Timeline: Artificial turf in Major League Baseball". Bleacher Report. September 24, 2009. Archived from the original on October 24, 2013. Retrieved October 13, 2013. Gammons, Peter (July 3, 2015). "1980s: The Decade Baseball's Innocence Ended". Parade Magazine. Archived from the original on February 27, 2019. Retrieved February 26, 2019. D'Addona, Dan. "1Baseball's Forgotten Era: The '80s". Society for American Baseball Research (SABR). Archived from the original on February 27, 2019. Retrieved February 26, 2019. "Pete Rose Banned for Life : Giamatti Says He Bet on Games; Appeal Possible in Year". Los Angeles Times. August 24, 1989. Archived from the original on December 18, 2013. Retrieved February 26, 2019. Corcoran, Cliff (August 12, 2014). "The Strike: Who was right, who was wrong, and how it helped baseball". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved February 27, 2020. "Plans involving Angels and A's never seriously considered". ESPN. Archived from the original on December 2, 2013. Retrieved November 24, 2013. Jedlovec, Ben (July 21, 2020). "Introducing Statcast 2020: Hawk-Eye and Google Cloud". MLB Technology Blog. Archived from the original on June 11, 2022. Retrieved October 28, 2022. "MLB Team Fielder Positioning". baseballsavant.com. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved October 28, 2022. "MLB approves sweeping set of rules changes". ESPN.com. September 9, 2022. Archived from the original on October 28, 2022. Retrieved October 28, 2022. Verducci, Tom. "MLB Can't Wait Any Longer to Fix Its Pace of Play Crisis". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved October 28, 2022. Diamond, Jared (January 22, 2020). "Astros Players Cheated. Baseball Wanted Answers. So It Made a Deal". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on February 12, 2020. Retrieved February 9, 2020. "MLB Reveals Red Sox' Cheating, Tainting Another Title Team". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved August 21, 2023. Kepner, Tyler (April 22, 2020). "Red Sox' Alex Cora Suspended Through 2020 in Sign-Stealing Scandal (Published 2020)". The New York Times. Retrieved August 21, 2023. Feinsand, Mark (November 16, 2023). "Owners' vote approves A's relocation to Las Vegas for 2028". MLB.com. MLB Advanced Media. Retrieved November 16, 2023. Riles, Robert (April 8, 2008). "History of Baseball Uniforms". Americanchronicle.com. Archived from the original on August 16, 2013. Retrieved June 13, 2011. "MLB Logos". SportsLogos.net. Archived from the original on February 25, 2011. Retrieved November 30, 2013. "MLB tems wear throwback uniforms for select games in 2011". FOX Sports. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved December 1, 2013. "Date when the New York Knickerbockers wore the first baseball uniforms and what they were made of". iterpret.co.za. Archived from the original on May 22, 2020. Retrieved June 30, 2008. "History Of Baseball Uniforms In The Major Leagues". interpret.co.za. Archived from the original on January 16, 2009. Retrieved May 2, 2008. "The history of the baseball uniform at the National Baseball Hall of Fame". exhibits.baseballhalloffame.org. Archived from the original on July 24, 2008. Retrieved June 14, 2008. "A short history of the baseball cap.(The Home Forum) – The Christian Science Monitor — HighBeam Research". www.highbeam.com. Archived from the original on October 19, 2012. Retrieved May 2, 2008. "Happy 50th, baseball caps". BBC News. April 27, 2004. Archived from the original on August 27, 2019. Retrieved May 2, 2008. "Celebrating the rich history of baseball caps". mlb.mlb.com. Archived from the original on May 26, 2020. Retrieved June 29, 2008. "The history of the baseball uniform at the National Baseball Hall of Fame". exhibits.baseballhalloffame.org. Archived from the original on April 5, 2008. Retrieved May 11, 2008. "National Baseball Hall of Fame — Dressed to the Nines — Uniform Database". exhibits.baseballhalloffame.org. Archived from the original on April 11, 2008. Retrieved May 2, 2008. "Baseball Uniforms". Baseball Almanac. Archived from the original on May 9, 2008. Retrieved November 30, 2013. "MLB claims crypto first with FTX sponsorship deal – SportsPro Media". www.sportspromedia.com. June 24, 2021. Archived from the original on July 28, 2021. Retrieved July 28, 2021. "MLB, FTX cryptocurrency exchange partner". MLB.com. Archived from the original on November 19, 2022. Retrieved July 28, 2021. Byers, Justin (December 29, 2022). "You're Out! MLB Umps Drop FTX Patches". Front Office Sports. Retrieved August 18, 2023. "Cactus League". Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Retrieved October 13, 2013. "Florida's Grapefruit League". Archived from the original on October 14, 2013. Retrieved October 13, 2013. "MLB: Spring Training". Archived from the original on October 12, 2013. Retrieved October 13, 2013. "MLB Schedule". MLB.com. Archived from the original on April 23, 2019. Retrieved October 14, 2013. "MLB: Regular Season". MLB.com. Archived from the original on June 2, 2018. Retrieved October 14, 2013. "Rosters Expanded For the All-Star Game". The New York Times. April 28, 2010. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved May 12, 2010. "All-Star Game History". Baseball Almanac. Archived from the original on August 15, 2000. Retrieved September 7, 2008. Newman, Mark (July 10, 2006). "All-Star MVP Awaits Your Vote". MLB.com. Archived from the original on March 26, 2014. Retrieved June 13, 2011. "2003 World Series (4–2): Florida Marlins (91–71) over New York Yankees (101–61)". baseball-reference.com. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved September 6, 2008. "2006 World Series: St. Louis Cardinals over Detroit Tigers (4–1)". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 29, 2022. Retrieved September 24, 2020. Lamont, Buchanan (1951). The World Series and Highlights of Baseball. E. P. Dutton & Co. p. 120. Okkonen, Marc (1991). Baseball uniforms of the 20th century: The official major league baseball guide. Sterling Pub. Co. p. 7. ISBN 978-0-8069-8490-2. "Dodger Stadium to host 2020 All-Star Game". MLB.com. Archived from the original on June 16, 2018. Retrieved July 3, 2020. Shaikin (July 3, 2020). "Dodgers awarded the 2022 All-Star game after this year's event is canceled". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 4, 2020. Retrieved July 1, 2023. "MLB Playoff Format 2013: Tiebreaker Scenarios, Wild Card Games and Seedings". Bleacher Report. September 23, 2013. Archived from the original on October 1, 2013. Retrieved October 13, 2013. World Series, sec. 3.2.2 (Game-by-Game), note 2; as of 2008, the 1981 Los Angeles Dodgers are the last team to win a World Series after losing the first two games on the road. "Major League Baseball announces revamped postseason schedule". MLB.com. 2007. Archived from the original on April 7, 2008. Retrieved September 7, 2008. "MLB, China Baseball League Team to Tour China", Mar. 3, 2005. Voice of America. Archived October 4, 2005, at the Wayback Machine "Resilient Taiwan drop All-Stars series finale 6–4" Archived July 25, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, Taipei Times, November 7, 2011 "Seattle Mariners open 2012 season in Japan vs. Oakland Athletics". MLB.com. September 28, 2011. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved July 4, 2013. Jarosh, Noah (October 13, 2013). "MLB exploring possible All-Star tour in Korea after 2014". SBNation.com. Archived from the original on December 6, 2013. Retrieved November 30, 2013. Burton, Rick (March 9, 2014). "Australia, Baseball's Diamond in Rough". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 23, 2014. Retrieved March 10, 2014. "D-backs' trip Down Under highlights '14 schedule: Arizona opens next season against Los Angeles at Sydney Cricket Ground". MLB.com. September 10, 2013. Archived from the original on October 22, 2013. Retrieved September 19, 2013. Wagner, James (June 30, 2019). "Yankees Leave London With 'Eye-Opening' Wins Over Red Sox". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 27, 2022. Retrieved October 27, 2022. https://www.mlb.com/international/events/seoul-series "Players suspended under baseball's steroids policy". ESPN.com. June 7, 2006. Archived from the original on January 5, 2016. Retrieved July 20, 2007. "The Steroids Era". Espn.com. ESPN. Archived from the original on December 8, 2013. Retrieved December 8, 2013. "MLB Owners, Players Reach Deal On Steroid Testing". wnbc.com. 2005. Archived from the original on October 9, 2008. Retrieved September 6, 2008. Bloom, Barry (December 13, 2007). "Mitchell Report to be released today". MLB.com. Retrieved June 13, 2011. Wilson, Duff; Schmidt, Michael (December 13, 2007). "Baseball Braces for Steroid Report From Mitchell". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 14, 2007. Retrieved June 13, 2011. Phil Rogers (December 12, 2007). "Mitchell report will assess the damage done". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on December 16, 2007. Retrieved December 13, 2007. Quinn, T.J.; Mark Fainaru-Wada (December 13, 2007). "Sources: Players, owners to share blame in Mitchell report". ESPN. Archived from the original on December 15, 2007. Retrieved December 13, 2007. "Mitchell Report" (PDF). p. SR2. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 14, 2007. Retrieved December 13, 2007. "Mitchell report: Baseball slow to react to players' steroid use". ESPN. December 13, 2007. Archived from the original on January 28, 2016. Retrieved December 13, 2007. "Mitchell Report" (PDF). p. A1. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 14, 2007. Retrieved December 31, 2007. Mike Dodd (March 31, 2006). "Is George Mitchell independent enough?". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 25, 2011. Retrieved December 24, 2007. Childs Walker (December 11, 2007). "Some question Mitchell as report draws near". Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on July 21, 2012. Retrieved December 24, 2007. Greg Johnson (December 14, 2007). "Mitchell cites unbiased history". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 21, 2007. Retrieved December 19, 2007. Schmidt, Michael S. (January 10, 2013). "Baseball to Expand Drug-Testing Program". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 12, 2013. Retrieved January 10, 2013. "MLB, union increase penalties for drug use". ESPN. March 31, 2014. Archived from the original on April 23, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. "Rays' Manny Ramirez to retire". ESPN.com. April 10, 2011. Archived from the original on October 12, 2013. Retrieved October 11, 2013. "Fox, THS have seven-year, $3 billion TV deal with MLB". ESPN.com. 2006. Archived from the original on January 20, 2012. Retrieved September 6, 2008. "MLB, FOX complete multiyear agreement". MLB.com. Retrieved January 30, 2024. "MLB extends TV agreement with ESPN through 2013". Yahoo! Sports. Archived from the original on August 17, 2003. Retrieved September 6, 2008. "MLB, ESPN extend deal through 2028". MLB.com. May 13, 2021. Retrieved September 10, 2022. Martin, Katie Hughes (May 13, 2021). "The Walt Disney Company, ESPN and Major League Baseball Reach Long-Term Rights Extension for Fully Exclusive, Marquee Schedule". ESPN Press Room U.S. Retrieved November 23, 2023. "Turner Sports, MLB officially agree to new seven-year media rights deal Turner Sports, MLB officially agree to new seven-year media rights deal". Awful Announcing. September 24, 2020. Archived from the original on September 26, 2020. Retrieved September 24, 2020. Hayes, Dade (September 24, 2020). "WarnerMedia, Major League Baseball Reach 7-Year Rights Extension At Reported $3.75B; Will HBO Max Benefit?". Deadline. Archived from the original on October 29, 2021. Retrieved October 29, 2021. Michael Hiestand (July 11, 2006). "TBS drops Braves games, joins Fox in rich TV deal". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 9, 2008. Retrieved September 6, 2008. Barry M. Bloom (2006). "TBS signs on to air LCS games". MLB.com. Archived from the original on June 21, 2008. Retrieved September 6, 2008. Dave Sheinin (May 18, 2007). "MLB Network Closer to Fruition". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved December 21, 2007. "Sportsnet will carry all 162 games for Blue Jays". MLB.com. March 22, 2013. Archived from the original on October 22, 2013. Retrieved October 13, 2013. "Company Information". Sportsnet. Archived from the original on November 17, 2013. Retrieved November 30, 2013. "ESPN's Sunday Night Baseball airs on TSN 2". Digitalhome.ca. April 2011. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved November 30, 2013. "Broadcasters | Toronto Blue Jays". MLB.com. Archived from the original on June 29, 2017. Retrieved March 18, 2022. "MLB and Facebook partner to debut exclusive national weekly game package in 2018". MLB.com. Archived from the original on March 11, 2022. Retrieved March 11, 2022. Spangler, Todd (April 30, 2019). "YouTube Scores MLB 13-Game Package With Exclusive Rights in U.S., Canada". Variety. Archived from the original on March 11, 2022. Retrieved March 11, 2022. MLB Game of the Week Live on YouTube is back this September!, archived from the original on March 11, 2022, retrieved March 11, 2022 Spangler, Todd (March 15, 2021). "YouTube Will Stream 21 MLB Games for Free Worldwide During 2021 Season". Variety. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved March 11, 2022. "Apple and Major League Baseball to offer "Friday Night Baseball"". Apple Newsroom. Archived from the original on March 8, 2022. Retrieved March 11, 2022. "PEACOCK BECOMES EXCLUSIVE HOME OF NEW SUNDAY MORNING MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL GAME PACKAGE, TO BE PRODUCED BY NBC SPORTS, BEGINNING IN MAY". NBC Sports Pressbox. April 6, 2022. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved April 6, 2022. Reilly, Liam (September 19, 2023). "Live sports is coming to Max streaming service in time for the MLB playoffs | CNN Business". CNN. Retrieved October 10, 2023. "Blackouts FAQ". MLB.com. Retrieved October 13, 2013. Helyar, John (May 15, 2007). "Singin' the 'Baseball Blackout Blues'". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved September 25, 2012. "MLB.TV | Blackout Policy". MLB.com. Archived from the original on March 18, 2022. Retrieved March 18, 2022. Drellich, Evan. "The future of MLB TV blackouts: Is an all-30 team streaming service possible?". The Athletic. Retrieved October 4, 2023. KDKA Firsts On the Air "TSB Heritage". Archived from the original on September 28, 2007. Retrieved October 14, 2023. Radio and its Impact on the Sports World "First Radio Broadcast of a Baseball Game". Archived from the original on January 5, 2016. Retrieved October 14, 2023. RW Special Report[usurped] Frick winner to be announced[permanent dead link] Voices – TIME, October 3, 1927 Major League Baseball CBS Radio History MLB on ESPN Radio "TUDN Adds National Spanish Language Rights To MLB". RadioInsight. October 5, 2021. Retrieved October 11, 2021. "New York Yankees Radio Network". Archived from the original on August 7, 2013. Retrieved October 13, 2013. "MLB Network Radio". Sirius XM Radio. Archived from the original on October 19, 2013. Retrieved October 14, 2013. "Radio Network | Los Angeles Dodgers". MLB.com. Archived from the original on March 18, 2022. Retrieved March 18, 2022. "Blue Jays president open to playing in Montreal". ESPN.com. April 6, 2011. Archived from the original on March 18, 2022. Retrieved March 18, 2022. "MLB.tv". MLB.com. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved October 13, 2013. "JOSE CANSECO CLAIMS SAMMY SOSA AND MARK McGWIRE TOOK STEROIDS DURING 1998 HOME RUN CHASE ON XM SATELLITE RADIO'S MLB HOME PLATE CHANNEL; PETE ROSE TELLS XM HE SUSPECTS CANSECO MOTIVATED BY MONEY". Archived from the original on October 9, 2007. Retrieved October 14, 2023. "MLB Home Plate FAQs". Archived from the original on September 26, 2007. Retrieved October 14, 2023. "MLB.TV Out-Of-Market Packages". MLB.com. Archived from the original on October 14, 2023. Retrieved October 14, 2023. "OPS Meaning and Definition in Baseball". Suzitee. Retrieved October 14, 2023. "Radio Network". MLB.com. Canseco, Daniella (March 29, 2023). "Vuelve el béisbol de MLB en VIVO por Star+ & ESPN". ESPN MediaZone Latin America North. Retrieved October 14, 2023. Welschen, Dario (March 30, 2023). "Vuelve la emoción de las Grandes Ligas de béisbol MLB por Star+ & ESPN". ESPN Press Room Latin America South (in Spanish). Retrieved October 14, 2023. Francischini, Guto (March 30, 2023). "Com mais de 200 jogos na temporada, MLB é atração da ESPN a partir desta quinta-feira". ESPN MediaZone Brasil (in Brazilian Portuguese). Retrieved October 14, 2023. Welschen, Dario (March 30, 2023). "ESPN Announces Major League Baseball Opening Weekend Schedule for Caribbean fans". ESPN Press Room Caribbean. Retrieved October 14, 2023. @eleonbaz (March 30, 2022). "Esta campaña '22 de MLB llegará con + acción a través" (Tweet). Retrieved October 14, 2023 – via Twitter. araguilar (October 25, 2022). "Serie Mundial: Televisa se despide del Clásico de Otoño tras 59 años". Record.com.mx (in Spanish). Retrieved October 14, 2023. "Imagen Televisión será la Casa del Beisbol". Imagen Radio 90.5 (in Spanish). March 6, 2023. Retrieved October 14, 2023. Serrano, Ignacio (April 12, 2016). "Canales definen con IVC los derechos de transmisión de MLB en Venezuela". El Emergente (in Spanish). Retrieved October 14, 2023. "TELEVEN te trae la transmisión del Béisbol de Grandes Ligas". Televen (in Spanish). August 5, 2022. Retrieved October 9, 2023. "Este jueves llegará a TELEVEN la pasión del Béisbol de Grandes Ligas". televen.com. March 27, 2023. Retrieved April 1, 2023. "TELEVEN te lleva la emoción de la postemporada de la MLB". Televen (in Spanish). October 3, 2023. Retrieved October 9, 2023. "Grandes Ligas a la carta en la pantalla de Venevision". CORPORACIÓN VENEZOLANA DE TELEVISIÓN, C.A. (VENEVISION) (in Spanish). Retrieved October 14, 2023. Libre, Diario (March 25, 2018). "Altice y MLB firman acuerdo multianual para derechos exclusivos de transmisión y patrocinador oficial". Diario Libre (in Spanish). Retrieved October 14, 2023. Diario, El Nuevo (December 10, 2019). "Altice firma acuerdo con Grupo Corripio para la transmisión juegos MLB". El Nuevo Diario (República Dominicana) (in Spanish). Retrieved October 14, 2023. Redacción (March 18, 2022). "Grupo Corripio renueva con MLB para transmitir Grandes Ligas en 2022". Periódico EL JAYA (in Spanish). Retrieved October 14, 2023. "Arranca la MLB | Con el béisbol, Movistar Plus+ reúne las cuatro grandes ligas del deporte americano en su estadio infinito – Movistar Plus+ Comunicación". comunicacion.movistarplus.es. Retrieved October 14, 2023. Gould, Jonny (August 8, 2008). "Jonny Gould". baseballfan.co.uk. Archived from the original on January 16, 2009. Retrieved September 8, 2008. "Customer Services FAQ — Major League Baseball". June 30, 2009. Archived from the original on August 17, 2009. Retrieved July 7, 2009. "ESPN UK: Baseball". Archived from the original on November 21, 2013. Retrieved November 21, 2013. Laughlin, Andrew (August 29, 2012). "ESPN agrees $5.6 billion MLB baseball deal". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved November 30, 2013. "ESPN America To Suspend Broadcasts In Europe, N. Africa, The Middle East On July 31". Sports Business Daily. May 13, 2013. Archived from the original on December 4, 2013. Retrieved November 30, 2013. "ESPN Australia: Baseball". ESPN Australia. Archived from the original on June 3, 2013. Retrieved November 21, 2013. "MLB – beIN SPORTS". beIN SPORTS France (in French). Archived from the original on June 29, 2021. Retrieved June 27, 2021. "Baseball news, Baseball Live scores and fixtures. Baseball video Highlights". beIN SPORTS. Archived from the original on June 27, 2021. Retrieved June 27, 2021. "Next home run for SPORT1: Long-term partnership concluded with Major League Baseball – live on SPORT1+, SPORT1 Extra and free-TV until 2026". Sport1 (Germany). Archived from the original on May 3, 2022. Retrieved May 3, 2021. "Televízió: megvan, kik közvetítik az MLB-t a Sport Tv-n". Nemzeti Sport. Archived from the original on July 25, 2020. Banner, Stuart. The Baseball Trust: A History of Baseball's Antitrust Exemption. New York: Oxford University Press, 2013. Bouton, Jim. Ball Four: My Life and Hard Times Throwing the Knuckleball in the Major Leagues. World Publishing Company, 1970. Buchanan, Lamont, The World Series and Highlights of Baseball, E. P. Dutton & Company, 1951. Cohen, Richard M., Neft, David, Johnson, Roland T., Deutsch, Jordan A., The World Series, 1976, Dial Press. Deutsch, Jordan A., Cohen, Richard M., Neft, David, Johnson, Roland T., The Scrapbook History of Baseball, Bobbs-Merrill Company, 1975. King, Corretta. Jackie Robinson. New York: Chelsea House Publishers, 1987. James, Bill. The Historical Baseball Abstract. New York: Villard, 1985 (with many subsequent editions). Lanigan, Ernest, Baseball Cyclopedia, 1922, originally published by Baseball Magazine. Lansch, Jerry, Glory Fades Away: The Nineteenth Century World Series Rediscovered, Taylor Publishing, 1991. ISBN 0-87833-726-1. Murphy, Cait. Crazy '08: How a Cast of Cranks, Rogues, Boneheads, and Magnates Created the Greatest Year in Baseball History. New York: Smithsonian Books, 2007. ISBN 978-0-06-088937-1. Okkonen, Marc. Baseball Uniforms of the 20th Century: The Official Major League Baseball Guide, 1991. Ritter, Lawrence. The Glory of their Times. New York: MacMillan, 1966. Revised edition, New York: William Morrow, 1984. Ross, Brian. "Band of Brothers". Minor League News, April 6, 2005. Available at Minor League News. Seymour, Harold. Baseball: The Early Years. 2v. New York: Oxford University Press, 1960. ISBN 0-19-500100-1. Turkin, Hy, and Thompson, S. C., The Official Encyclopedia of Baseball, 1951, A.S. Barnes and Company Tygiel, Jules. Past Time: Baseball as History. New York: Oxford University Press, 2000. ISBN 0-19-514604-2. The New York Times, The Complete Book of Baseball: A Scrapbook History, 1980, Bobbs Merrill. Major League Baseball at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Travel information from Wikivoyage Official website