D. B. Cooper is a media epithet for an unidentified man who hijacked Northwest Orient Airlines Flight 305, a Boeing 727 aircraft, in United States airspace on November 24, 1971. During the flight from Portland, Oregon, to Seattle, Washington, the hijacker told a flight attendant he was armed with a bomb, demanded $200,000 in ransom (equivalent to approximately $1,500,000 in 2024) and requested four parachutes upon landing in Seattle. After releasing the passengers in Seattle, the hijacker instructed the flight crew to refuel the aircraft and begin a second flight to Mexico City, with a refueling stop in Reno, Nevada. About 30 minutes after taking off from Seattle, the hijacker opened the aircraft's aft door, deployed the staircase, and parachuted into the night over southwestern Washington. The hijacker has never been found or conclusively identified. The hijacker had identified himself as Dan Cooper in order to buy his one-way ticket in Portland, Oregon, but a reporter confused his name with another suspect and the hijacker subsequently became known as "D. B. Cooper". In 1980, a small portion of the ransom money was found along the banks of the Columbia River near Vancouver, Washington. The discovery of the money renewed public interest in the mystery, but yielded no additional information about the hijacker's identity or fate, and the remaining money was never recovered. For 45 years after the hijacking, the Federal Bureau of Investigation maintained an active investigation and built an extensive case file, but ultimately did not reach any definitive conclusions. The crime remains the only unsolved case of air piracy in the history of commercial aviation. The FBI speculates Cooper did not survive his jump, for several reasons: the inclement weather on the night of the hijacking, Cooper's unsuitable clothing and lack of proper skydiving equipment, the heavily wooded area into which he jumped, his apparent lack of detailed knowledge of his landing area, and the disappearance of the remaining ransom money, suggesting it was never spent. In July 2016, the FBI officially suspended active investigation of the NORJAK (Northwest hijacking) case, although reporters, enthusiasts, professional investigators, and amateur sleuths continue to pursue numerous theories for Cooper's identity, success, and fate. Cooper's hijacking—and several imitators in the following year—immediately prompted major upgrades to security measures for airports and commercial aviation. Metal detectors were installed at airports, baggage inspection became mandatory, and passengers who paid cash for tickets on the day of departure were selected for additional scrutiny. Boeing 727s were retrofitted with eponymous "Cooper vanes", specifically designed to prevent the aft staircase from being lowered in-flight. By 1973, aircraft hijacking incidents had decreased, as the new security measures dissuaded would-be hijackers whose only motive was money. On Thanksgiving Eve, November 24, 1971, a man carrying a black attaché case approached the flight counter of Northwest Orient Airlines at Portland International Airport. Using cash, the man bought a one-way ticket on Flight 305, a thirty-minute trip north to "Sea-Tac" (Seattle–Tacoma International Airport). On his ticket, the man listed his name as "Dan Cooper". Eyewitnesses described Cooper as a white male in his mid-40s, with dark hair and brown eyes, wearing a black or brown business suit, a white shirt, a thin black tie, a black raincoat, and brown shoes. Carrying a briefcase and a brown paper bag, Cooper boarded Flight 305, a Boeing 727-100 (FAA registration N467US). Cooper took seat 18-E in the last row and ordered a drink, a bourbon and 7-Up, from the flight attendant. With a crew of six (consisting of Captain William A. Scott, First Officer William "Bill" J. Rataczak, Flight Engineer Harold E. Anderson, and flight attendants Alice Hancock, Tina Mucklow and Florence Schaffner) and 36 passengers aboard, including the hijacker, Flight 305 left Portland on-schedule at 2:50 pm PST. Shortly after takeoff, Cooper handed a note to flight attendant Schaffner, who was sitting in the jump seat at the rear of the plane, directly behind Cooper. Assuming the note was a lonely businessman's phone number, Schaffner dropped the note unopened into her purse. Cooper then leaned toward her and whispered, "Miss, you'd better look at that note. I have a bomb." Schaffner opened the note. In neat, all-capital letters printed with a felt-tip pen, Cooper had written, "Miss—I have a bomb in my briefcase and want you to sit by me." Schaffner returned the note to Cooper, sat down as he requested, and quietly asked to see the bomb. He opened his briefcase, and she saw two rows of four red cylinders, which she assumed was dynamite. Attached to the cylinders were a wire and a large, cylindrical battery, which appeared to resemble a bomb. Cooper closed the briefcase, and told Schaffner his demands. She wrote a note with Cooper's demands, brought it to the cockpit, and informed the flight crew of the situation. Captain Scott directed her to remain in the cockpit for the remainder of the flight and take notes of events as they unfolded. He then contacted Northwest flight operations in Minnesota, and relayed the hijacker's demands: "[Cooper] requests $200,000 in a knapsack by 5:00 pm. He wants two front parachutes, two back parachutes. He wants the money in negotiable American currency." By requesting two sets of parachutes, Cooper implied that he planned to take a hostage with him, thereby discouraging authorities from supplying non-functional equipment. With Schaffner in the cockpit, flight attendant Mucklow sat next to Cooper to act as a liaison between him and the flight crew in the cockpit. He then made additional demands: upon landing in Seattle, the fuel trucks must meet the plane and all passengers must remain seated while she brought the money aboard. He said he would release the passengers after he had the money. The last items brought aboard would be the four parachutes. Captain Scott informed Seattle–Tacoma Airport air traffic control (ATC) of the situation, who contacted local police and the FBI. The passengers were told their arrival in Seattle would be delayed because of a "minor mechanical difficulty". Donald Nyrop, the president of Northwest Orient, authorized payment of the ransom and ordered all employees to cooperate with the hijacker and comply with his demands. For approximately two hours, Flight 305 circled Puget Sound to give Seattle police and the FBI sufficient time to assemble Cooper's ransom money and parachutes, and to mobilize emergency personnel. During the flight from Portland to Seattle, Cooper demanded that Mucklow remain by his side at all times. She later said that he appeared familiar with the local terrain; while looking out the window, he remarked, "Looks like Tacoma down there", as the aircraft flew above it. He also correctly noted McChord Air Force Base was only a 20-minute drive from Sea-Tac Airport. She later described the hijacker's demeanor: "[Cooper] was not nervous. He seemed rather nice and he was not cruel or nasty." While the plane circled Seattle, Mucklow chatted with Cooper and asked why he picked Northwest Airlines to hijack. He laughed and replied, "It's not because I have a grudge against your airlines, it's just because I have a grudge," then explained that this flight simply suited his needs. He asked where she was from; she answered that she was originally from Pennsylvania, but was living in Minneapolis at the time. Cooper responded that Minnesota was "very nice country." She asked where he was from, but he became upset and refused to answer. He asked if she smoked and offered her a cigarette. She replied that she had quit, but accepted the cigarette. FBI records note Cooper briefly spoke to an unidentified passenger while the plane maintained its holding pattern over Seattle. In his interview with FBI agents, passenger George Labissoniere said he visited the restroom directly behind Cooper on several occasions. After one visit, Labissoniere said the path to his seat was blocked by a passenger wearing a cowboy hat, questioning Mucklow about the supposed mechanical issue delaying them. Labissoniere said Cooper was initially amused by the interaction, then became irritated and told the man to return to his seat, but "the cowboy" ignored Cooper and continued to question her. Labissoniere claimed he eventually persuaded "the cowboy" to return to his seat. Mucklow's version of the interaction differed from Labissoniere's. She said a passenger approached her, and asked for a sports magazine to read because he was bored. She and the passenger moved to an area directly behind Cooper, where the passenger and she looked for magazines. The passenger took a copy of The New Yorker and returned to his seat. When Mucklow returned to sit with Cooper, he said, "If that is a sky marshal, I don't want any more of that." Despite his brief interaction with Cooper, "the cowboy" was not interviewed by the FBI and was never identified. The $200,000 ransom was received from Seattle First National Bank in a bag weighing approximately nineteen pounds. The money—10,000 unmarked $20 bills, most of which had serial numbers beginning with "L" (indicating issuance by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco)—was photographed on microfilm by the FBI. Seattle police obtained the two front (reserve) parachutes from a local skydiving school and the two back (main) parachutes from a local stunt pilot. Around 5:24 PST, Captain Scott was informed the parachutes had been delivered to the airport, and notified Cooper they would be landing soon. At 5:46 PST, Flight 305 landed at Seattle-Tacoma Airport. With Cooper's permission Scott parked the aircraft on a partially-lit runway, away from the main terminal. Cooper demanded that only one representative of the airline approach the plane with the parachutes and money, and the only entrance and exit would be through the aircraft's front door via the mobile air stairs. Northwest Orient's Seattle operations manager, Al Lee, was designated to be the courier. To avoid the possibility that Cooper might mistake Lee's airline uniform for that of a law enforcement officer, he changed into civilian clothes for the task. With the passengers remaining seated, a ground crew attached the mobile staircase. Per Cooper's directive, Mucklow exited the aircraft through the front door, and retrieved the ransom money. When she returned, she carried the money bag past the seated passengers to Cooper in the last row. Cooper then agreed to release the passengers. As they debarked, Cooper inspected the money. In an attempt to break the tension, Mucklow jokingly asked Cooper if she could have some of the money. Cooper readily agreed, and handed her a packet of bills, but she immediately returned the money and explained accepting gratuities was against company policy. She said Cooper had tried to tip her and the other two flight attendants earlier in the flight with money from his own pocket, but they had each declined, citing the policy. With the passengers safely debarked, only Cooper and the six crew members remained on board. In accordance with Cooper's demands, Mucklow made three trips outside the aircraft to retrieve the parachutes, which she brought to him in the rear of the plane. While Mucklow brought aboard the parachutes, Schaffner asked Cooper if she could retrieve her purse, stored in a compartment behind his seat. Cooper agreed and told her, "I won't bite you." Flight attendant Hancock then asked Cooper if the flight attendants could leave, to which Cooper replied, "Whatever you girls would like," so Hancock and Schaffner debarked. When Mucklow brought the final parachute to Cooper, she gave him printed instructions for using the parachutes, but Cooper said he didn't need them. A problem with the refueling process caused a delay, so a second truck and then a third were brought to the aircraft to complete the refueling. During the delay, Mucklow said Cooper complained the money was delivered in a cloth bag instead of a knapsack as he had directed, and he now had to improvise a new way to transport the money. Using a pocketknife, Cooper cut the canopy from one of the reserve parachutes, and stuffed some of the money into the empty parachute bag. An FAA official requested a face-to-face meeting with Cooper aboard the aircraft, but Cooper denied the request. Cooper became impatient, saying, "This shouldn't take so long", and, "Let's get this show on the road." He then gave the cockpit crew his flight plan and directives: a southeast course toward Mexico City at the minimum airspeed possible without stalling the aircraft—approximately 100 knots (185 km/h; 115 mph)—at a maximum 10,000-foot (3,000 m) altitude. Cooper also specified the landing gear must remain deployed, the wing flaps must be lowered 15 degrees, and the cabin must remain unpressurized. First Officer Rataczak informed Cooper that this configuration limited the aircraft's range to about 1,000 miles (1,600 km), so a second refueling would be necessary before entering Mexico. Cooper and the crew discussed options, and agreed on Reno–Tahoe International Airport as the refueling stop. Cooper further directed the aircraft take off with the rear exit door open and its airstair extended. Northwest's home office objected that this was unsafe. Cooper countered saying, "It can be done, do it," but did not argue the point and said he would lower the staircase once they were airborne. He demanded Mucklow remain aboard to assist the operation. Around 7:40 pm, Flight 305 took off, with only Cooper, Mucklow, Captain Scott, First Officer Rataczak, and Flight Engineer Anderson aboard. Two F-106 fighters from McChord Air Force Base and a Lockheed T-33 trainer—diverted from an unrelated Air National Guard mission—followed the 727. All three jets maintained "S" flight patterns to stay behind the slow-moving 727 and out of Cooper's view. After takeoff, Cooper told Mucklow to lower the aft staircase. She told him and the flight crew she feared being sucked out of the aircraft. The flight crew suggested she come to the cockpit and retrieve an emergency rope with which she could tie herself to a seat. Cooper rejected the suggestion, stating he did not want her going up front or the flight crew coming back to the cabin. She continued to express her fear to him, and asked him to cut some cord from one of the parachutes to create a safety line for her. He said he would lower the stairs himself, instructed her to go to the cockpit, close the curtain partition between the Coach and First Class sections, and not return. Before she left, Mucklow begged Cooper, "Please, please take the bomb with you." Cooper responded he would either disarm it or take it with him. As she walked to the cockpit and turned to close the curtain partition, she saw Cooper standing in the aisle tying what appeared to be the money bag around his waist. From takeoff to when Mucklow entered the cockpit, four to five minutes had elapsed. For the rest of the flight to Reno, Mucklow remained in the cockpit, and was the last person to see the hijacker. Around 8:00 pm, a cockpit warning light flashed, indicating the aft staircase had been deployed. The pilot used the cabin intercom to ask Cooper if he needed assistance, but Cooper's last message was a one-word reply: "No." The crew's ears popped from the drop in cabin air pressure from the stairs being opened. At approximately 8:13 p.m., the aircraft's tail section suddenly pitched upward, forcing the pilots to trim and return the aircraft to level flight. In his interview with the FBI, Co-pilot Bill Rataczak said the sudden upward pitch occurred while the flight was near the suburbs north of Portland. With the aft cabin door open and the staircase deployed, the flight crew remained in the cockpit, unsure if Cooper was still aboard. Mucklow used the cabin intercom to inform Cooper they were approaching Reno, and he needed to raise the stairs so the plane could land safely. She repeated her requests as the pilots made the final approach to land, but neither Mucklow nor the flight crew received a reply from the hijacker. At 11:02 pm, with the aft staircase still deployed, Flight 305 landed at Reno–Tahoe International Airport. FBI agents, state troopers, sheriff's deputies, and Reno police established a perimeter around the aircraft, but fearing the hijacker and the bomb were still aboard, did not approach the plane. Captain Scott searched the cabin, confirmed Cooper was no longer aboard, and after a 30-minute search, an FBI bomb squad declared the cabin safe. In addition to 66 latent fingerprints aboard the airliner, FBI agents recovered Cooper's black clip-on tie, tie clip, and two of the four parachutes, one of which had been opened and had three shroud lines cut from the canopy. FBI agents interviewed eyewitnesses in Portland, Seattle, and Reno, and developed a series of composite sketches. Local police and FBI agents immediately began questioning possible suspects. Acting on the possibility the hijacker may have used his real name (or the same alias in a previous crime), Portland police discovered and interviewed a Portland citizen named D. B. Cooper. The Portland Cooper had a minor police record, but was quickly eliminated as a suspect. In his rush to meet a deadline, reporter James Long confused the man with the name used by the hijacker. United Press International wire service reporter Clyde Jabin republished Long's error, and as other media sources repeated the error, the hijacker's pseudonym became "D. B. Cooper." Due to the number of variables and parameters, precisely defining the area to search was difficult. The jet's airspeed estimates varied, the environmental conditions along the flight path varied with the aircraft's location and altitude, and only Cooper knew how long he remained in free-fall before pulling his ripcord. The Air Force F-106 pilots neither saw anyone jumping from the airliner, nor did their radar detect a deployed parachute. Moreover, a black-clad individual jumping into the moonless night would be difficult to see, especially given the limited visibility, cloud cover, and lack of ground lighting. The T-33 pilots did not make visual contact with the 727. On December 6, 1971, FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover approved the use of an Air Force SR-71 Blackbird to retrace and photograph Flight 305's flightpath, and attempt to locate the items Cooper carried during his jump. The SR-71 made five flights to retrace Flight 305's route, but due to poor visibility, the photography attempts were unsuccessful. In an experimental recreation, flying the same aircraft used in the hijacking in the same flight configuration, FBI agents pushed a 200-pound (91 kg) sled out of the open airstair and were able to reproduce the upward motion of the tail section and brief change in cabin pressure described by the flight crew at 8:13 pm. Initial extrapolations placed Cooper's landing zone within an area on the southernmost outreach of Mount St. Helens, a few miles southeast of Ariel, Washington, near Lake Merwin, an artificial lake formed by a dam on the Lewis River. Search efforts focused on Clark and Cowlitz counties, encompassing the terrain immediately south and north of the Lewis River in southwest Washington. FBI agents and sheriff's deputies searched large areas of the heavily wooded terrain on foot and by helicopter. Door-to-door searches of local farmhouses were also carried out. Other search parties ran patrol boats along Lake Merwin and Yale Lake, the reservoir immediately to its east. Neither Cooper nor any of the equipment he presumably carried was found. Using fixed-wing aircraft and helicopters from the Oregon Army National Guard, the FBI coordinated an aerial search along the entire flight path (known as Victor 23 in U.S. aviation terminology but "Vector 23" in most Cooper literature) from Seattle to Reno. Although numerous broken treetops and several pieces of plastic and other objects resembling parachute canopies were sighted and investigated, nothing relevant to the hijacking was found. Shortly after the spring thaw in early 1972, teams of FBI agents aided by some 200 soldiers from Fort Lewis, along with United States Air Force personnel, National Guardsmen, and civilian volunteers, conducted another thorough ground search of Clark and Cowlitz Counties for 18 days in March, and then another 18 days in April. Electronic Explorations Company, a marine-salvage firm, used a submarine to search the 200-foot (61 m) depths of Lake Merwin. Two local women stumbled upon a skeleton in an abandoned structure in Clark County; it was later identified as the remains of Barbara Ann Derry, a teenaged girl who had been abducted and murdered several weeks before. Ultimately, the extensive search and recovery operation uncovered no significant material evidence related to the hijacking. Based on early computer projections produced for the FBI, Cooper's drop zone was first estimated to be between Ariel dam to the north and the town of Battle Ground, Washington, to the south. In March 1972, after a joint investigation with Northwest Orient Airlines and the Air Force, the FBI determined Cooper probably jumped over the town of La Center, Washington. In 2019, the FBI released a report detailing the burglary of a grocery store, about three hours after Cooper jumped, near Heisson, Washington. Heisson, an unincorporated community, was within the calculated drop zone Northwest Airlines presented to the FBI. In the report, the FBI noted the burglar took only survival items, such as beef jerky and gloves. A month after the hijacking, the FBI distributed lists of the ransom serial numbers to financial institutions, casinos, racetracks, and other businesses that routinely conducted large cash transactions, and to law-enforcement agencies around the world. Northwest Orient offered a reward of 15% of the recovered money, to a maximum of $25,000. In early 1972, U.S. Attorney General John N. Mitchell released the serial numbers to the general public. Two men used counterfeit $20 bills printed with Cooper serial numbers to swindle $30,000 from a Newsweek reporter named Karl Fleming in exchange for an interview with a man they falsely claimed was the hijacker. In early 1973, with the ransom money still missing, The Oregon Journal republished the serial numbers and offered $1,000 to the first person to turn in a ransom bill to the newspaper or any FBI field office. In Seattle, the Post-Intelligencer made a similar offer with a $5,000 reward. The offers remained in effect until Thanksgiving 1974, and though several near matches were reported, no genuine bills were found. In 1975, Northwest Orient's insurer, Global Indemnity Co., complied with an order from the Minnesota Supreme Court and paid the airline's $180,000 (equivalent to $1,019,221 in 2023) claim on the ransom money. Later analysis indicated that the original landing zone estimate was inaccurate; Captain Scott, who was flying the aircraft manually because of Cooper's speed and altitude demands, later determined his flight path was farther east than initially thought. Additional data from a variety of sources—in particular Continental Airlines pilot Tom Bohan, who was flying four minutes behind Flight 305—indicated the wind direction factored into drop-zone calculations had been wrong, possibly by as much as 80°. This and other supplemental data suggested the actual drop zone was south-southeast of the original estimate, in the drainage area of the Washougal River. In 1986 FBI Agent Ralph Himmelsbach wrote, "I have to confess, if I were going to look for Cooper ... I would head for the Washougal." The Washougal Valley and its surroundings have been searched repeatedly in subsequent years; to date, no discoveries traceable to the hijacking have been reported. Some investigators have speculated that the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens could have obliterated any remaining physical clues. On July 8, 2016, the FBI announced active investigation of the Cooper case was suspended, citing the need to focus investigative resources and manpower on issues of higher and more urgent priority. Local field offices would continue to accept any legitimate physical evidence, related specifically to the parachutes or to the ransom money, that may emerge in the future. The 66-volume case file compiled over the 45-year course of the investigation would be preserved for historical purposes at FBI headquarters in Washington, DC, and on the FBI website. All of the evidence is open to the public. The crime remains the only unsolved case of air piracy in commercial aviation history. During their forensic search of the aircraft, FBI agents found four major pieces of evidence, each with a direct physical link to Cooper: a black clip-on tie, a mother-of-pearl tie clip, a hair from Cooper's headrest, and eight filter-tipped Raleigh cigarette butts from the armrest ashtray. FBI agents found a black clip-on necktie in seat 18-E, where Cooper had been seated. Attached to the tie was a gold tie-clip with a circular mother-of-pearl setting in the center of the clip. The FBI determined the tie had been sold exclusively at JCPenney department stores, but had been discontinued in 1968. By late 2007, the FBI had built a partial DNA profile from samples found on Cooper's tie in 2001. However, the FBI also acknowledged no evidence linked Cooper to the source of the DNA sample. Said FBI Special Agent Fred Gutt, "The tie had two small DNA samples, and one large sample ... it's difficult to draw firm conclusions from these samples." The FBI also made public a file of previously unreleased evidence, including Cooper's plane ticket, composite sketches, fact sheets, and posted a request for information about Cooper's identification. In March 2009, a group of "citizen sleuths" using GPS, satellite imagery, and other technologies unavailable in 1971, began reinvestigating components of the case. Known as the Cooper Research Team (CRT), the group included paleontologist Tom Kaye from the Burke Museum of Natural History and Culture in Seattle, scientific illustrator Carol Abraczinskas, and metallurgist Alan Stone. Although the CRT obtained little new information about the buried ransom money or Cooper's landing zone, they found, analyzed, and identified hundreds of organic and metallic particles on Cooper's tie. Using electron microscopy, the CRT identified Lycopodium spores, the source of which was likely pharmaceutical. The team also found minute particles of unalloyed titanium on the tie, along with particles of bismuth, antimony, cerium, strontium sulfide, aluminum, and titanium-antimony alloys. The metal and rare-earth particles suggested Cooper may have worked for Boeing or another aeronautical engineering firm, at a chemical manufacturing plant, or at a metal fabrication and production facility. The material with the most significance, explained Kaye, was the unalloyed titanium. In the 1970s, the use of pure titanium was rare and would only be used in aircraft fabrication facilities, or at chemical companies combining titanium and aluminum to store extremely corrosive substances. The cerium and strontium sulfide were used by Boeing's supersonic transport development project, and by Portland factories in which cathode ray tubes were manufactured, such as Teledyne and Tektronix. Cooper researcher Eric Ulis has speculated the titanium-antimony alloys are linked to Rem-Cru Titanium Inc., a metals manufacturer and Boeing contractor. FBI agents found two hair samples in Cooper's seat: a single strand of limb hair on the seat, and a single strand of brown Caucasian head hair on the headrest. The limb hair was destroyed after the FBI Crime Laboratory determined the sample lacked enough unique microscopic characteristics to be useful. However, the FBI Crime Laboratory determined the head hair was suitable for future comparison, and preserved the hair on a microscope slide. During their attempts to build Cooper's DNA profile in 2002, the FBI discovered the hair sample had been lost. In the armrest ashtray of seat 18-E, FBI agents found eight Raleigh filter-tipped cigarette butts. These were sent to the FBI Crime Laboratory to search for fingerprints, but investigators were unable to find fingerprints and returned the butts to the Las Vegas field office. In 1998, the FBI sought to extract DNA from the cigarette butts, but discovered the butts had been destroyed while in the custody of the Las Vegas field office. On February 10, 1980, eight-year-old Brian Ingram was vacationing with his family on the Columbia River at a beachfront known as Tina (or Tena) Bar, about 9 miles (14 km) downstream from Vancouver, Washington, and 20 miles (32 km) southwest of Ariel. As he raked the sandy riverbank to build a campfire, he uncovered three packets of the ransom cash, totaling around $5,800. The bills had disintegrated from lengthy exposure to the elements, but were still bundled in rubber bands. FBI technicians confirmed the money was indeed a portion of the ransom: two packets of 100 twenty-dollar bills each, and a third packet of 90, all arranged in the same order as when given to Cooper. The discovery launched several new rounds of conjecture, and ultimately raised more questions than it answered. Initial statements by investigators and scientific consultants were founded on the assumption the bundled bills washed freely into the Columbia River from one of its many connecting tributaries. An Army Corps of Engineers hydrologist noted the bills had disintegrated in a "rounded" fashion and were "matted together", indicating they "had been deposited by river action", as opposed to having been deliberately buried. The finding supported the hypothesis Cooper had landed near the Washougal River, which merges with the Columbia upstream from the discovery site, and not in or near Lake Merwin, the Lewis River, or any of its tributaries feeding the Columbia River downstream from Tina Bar. The "free-floating" hypothesis neither explained the ten bills missing from one packet, nor explained how the three packets remained together after separating from the rest of the money. Physical evidence was incompatible with geological evidence; Himmelsbach wrote free-floating bundles would have washed up on the bank "within a couple of years" of the hijacking; otherwise, the rubber bands would have long since deteriorated. Geological evidence suggested the bills arrived at Tina Bar after 1974, the year of a Corps of Engineers dredging operation on that stretch of the river. Geologist Leonard Palmer of Portland State University found two distinct layers of sand and sediment between the clay deposited on the riverbank by the dredge and the sand layer in which the bills were buried, indicating the bills arrived long after dredging had been completed. In late 2020, analysis of diatoms found on the bills suggests the bundles found at Tina Bar were not submerged in the river or buried dry at the time of the hijacking in November 1971. Only diatoms that bloom during springtime were found, indicating the money had entered the water at least several months after the hijacking. In 1986, after protracted negotiations, the recovered bills were divided equally between Brian Ingram and Northwest Orient's insurer Royal Globe Insurance; the FBI retained 14 examples as evidence. Ingram sold fifteen of his bills at auction in 2008 for about $37,000 (equivalent to $52,000 in 2023). The Columbia River ransom money remains the only confirmed physical evidence from the hijacking found outside the aircraft. During the hijacking, Cooper demanded and received two main chutes and two reserve chutes. The two reserve (front) chutes were supplied by a local skydiving school and the two main (back) chutes were supplied by a local pilot, Norman Hayden. Earl Cossey, the parachute rigger who packed all four parachutes brought to Cooper, described the two main chutes as emergency bailout parachutes (as opposed to sporting parachutes that skydivers would use). Cossey further described the main chutes as being like military chutes because they were rigged to open immediately upon the ripcord being pulled and were incapable of being steered. When the plane landed in Reno, FBI agents discovered two parachutes that Cooper left behind: one reserve (front) chute and one main (back) chute. The reserve chute had been opened and three shroud lines had been cut out, but the main chute left behind was still intact. The unused main chute was described by FBI agents as a Model NB6 (Navy Backpack 6) and is on display at the Washington State Historical Society Museum. One of the two reserve (front) chutes Cooper was given was an unusable training chute intended to only be used for classroom demonstrations. According to Cossey, the reserve chute's internal canopy was sewn together so skydiving students could get the feel of pulling a ripcord on a packed parachute without the canopy actually deploying. This nonfunctional reserve parachute was not found in the aircraft when it landed in Reno, leading FBI agents to speculate Cooper was not an experienced parachutist because someone with experience would have realized this reserve chute was a "dummy chute". However, within days of the hijacking, it was revealed that neither of the parachute harnesses Cooper was given had the necessary D-rings required to attach reserve parachutes. Although Cooper lacked the ability to attach this "dummy" chute to his main harness as a reserve parachute, it was not found in the plane, so what he did with it is unknown. Cossey speculated that Cooper removed the sewn-together canopy and used the empty reserve container as an extra money bag. Tina Mucklow's testimony was in line with Cossey's speculation, stating that she recalled Cooper attempting to pack money inside a parachute container. In November 1978, a deer hunter found a 727's instruction placard for lowering the aft airstair. The placard was found near a logging road about 13 miles (21 km) east of Castle Rock, Washington, north of Lake Merwin, but within Flight 305's basic flight path. Over the 45-year span of its active investigation, the FBI periodically made public some of its working hypotheses and tentative conclusions, drawn from witness testimony and the scarce physical evidence. During the first year of the investigation, the FBI used eyewitness testimony from the passengers and flight crew to develop sketches of Cooper. The first sketch, officially titled Composite A, was completed a few days after the hijacking and was released on November 28, 1971. According to witnesses, the Composite A sketch—jokingly known as "Bing Crosby"—was not an accurate likeness of Cooper. The Composite A sketch, said witnesses, showed a young man with a narrow face, and did not resemble Cooper or capture his disinterested, “let's get this over with" look. Flight attendant Florence Schaffner repeatedly told the FBI the Composite A sketch was a very poor likeness of Cooper. After multiple eyewitnesses said Composite A was not an accurate rendering, FBI artists developed a second composite sketch. Completed in late 1972, the second Composite B sketch was intended to more accurately depict Cooper's age, skin tone, and face shape. Eyewitnesses to whom Composite B was shown said the sketch was more accurate, but the Composite B Cooper looked too "angry" or "nasty". One flight attendant said the Composite B sketch looked like a "hoodlum" and remembered Cooper as "more refined in appearance". Moreover, said witnesses, the Composite B sketch depicted a man older than Cooper, with a lighter complexion. Using the criticisms of Composite B, FBI artists made adjustments and improvements to the Composite B sketch. On January 2, 1973, the FBI finalized revised Composite B, their third sketch of Cooper. Of the new sketch, one flight attendant said revised Composite B was, "a very close resemblance" to the hijacker. Opined another flight attendant, "the hijacker would be easily recognized from this sketch." In April 1973, the FBI concluded the revised Composite B sketch was the best likeness of Cooper they could develop, and should be considered the definitive sketch of Cooper. Composite Sketch A – November 1971 Composite Sketch B – late 1972 Revised Composite Sketch B – winter 1972–1973 Flight attendants Schaffner and Mucklow, who spent the most time interacting with Cooper, were interviewed on the same night in separate cities, and gave nearly identical descriptions: around 5 feet 10 inches (1.78 m) tall, mid-40s, short, black hair combed back, 170–180 lb, swarthy or olive skin tone, and with no discernible accent. The only person to recall his eye color was Schaffner, who described them as being brown. The FBI relied heavily on the testimony of University of Oregon student Bill Mitchell, who sat across from Cooper during the three hours between take off in Portland and landing in Seattle, repeatedly interviewing him for what would become known as Composite Sketch B. His descriptions of Cooper were mostly the same as those of the flight attendants, except that he described Cooper as being somewhat smaller, stating that he thought Cooper was 5 feet 9 inches (1.75 m) to 5 feet 10 inches (1.78 m) and that at 6 feet 2 inches (1.88 m) he was "way bigger" than Cooper and even referring to him as "slight". Robert Gregory, one of the only other passengers besides Mitchell who provided the FBI with a full description of Cooper, also provided a shorter impression of Cooper, describing him as 5 feet 9 inches (1.75 m). Gregory stated that he believed Cooper to be of Mexican-American or American Indian descent. Cooper appeared to be familiar with the Seattle area and may have been an Air Force veteran, based on testimony that he recognized the city of Tacoma from the air as the jet circled Puget Sound, and his accurate comment to Mucklow that McChord Air Force Base was about 20-minutes' driving time from Seattle-Tacoma Airport—a detail most civilians would not know or comment upon. His financial situation was very likely desperate. According to the FBI's retired chief investigator, Ralph Himmelsbach, extortionists and other criminals who steal large amounts of money nearly always do so because they need it urgently; otherwise, the crime is not worth the considerable risk. Alternatively, Cooper may have been "a thrill seeker" who made the jump "just to prove it could be done". In May 1973, the FBI internally released an eight-page suspect profile. The profile speculated that Cooper was a military-trained parachutist and not a sports skydiver, because, in addition to his apparent comfort level with the military-style parachutes he was provided, his age would have made him an outlier in the sport-skydiving community, thereby increasing the likelihood that he would have been quickly recognized by a member of that community. The profile also speculated that Cooper was someone who exercised regularly due to comments by multiple eyewitnesses regarding Cooper's athletic-looking frame despite his age. They also felt he was not a heavy drinker or an alcoholic because the only drink he was served was quickly spilled and he never requested another. The profile determined that an alcoholic would have likely been incapable of turning down further alcoholic beverages throughout the stressful and lengthy hijacking. By calculating the number of cigarettes he smoked throughout the hijacking, the FBI believed that he smoked around one pack of cigarettes a day. Cooper's mannerisms led the FBI to conclude that he was more intelligent than a common criminal, such as his vocabulary level and proper use of aviation-related terminology. Cooper's ability to quickly and competently adapt to various situations as they arose indicated to profilers that he was likely the type of person who would commit a crime without the need or desire for an accomplice. Agents theorized that Cooper took his alias from a popular French-language Belgian comics series featuring the fictional hero Dan Cooper, a Royal Canadian Air Force test pilot who took part in numerous heroic adventures, including parachuting. (One cover from the series, reproduced on the FBI website, depicts test pilot Cooper skydiving.) Because the Dan Cooper comics were never translated into English, nor imported to the U.S., they speculated that he had encountered them during a tour of duty in Europe. Based on the evidence and Cooper's tactics, the FBI speculated Cooper carefully planned the hijacking and had detailed, specific knowledge of aviation, the local terrain, and the 727's capabilities. Cooper chose a seat in the last row of the rear cabin for three reasons: to observe and respond to any action in front of him, to minimize the possibility of being approached or attacked by someone behind him, and to make himself less conspicuous to the rest of the passengers. To ensure he would not be deliberately supplied with sabotaged equipment, Cooper demanded four parachutes to force the assumption he might compel one or more hostages to jump with him. FBI agent Ralph Himmelsbach noted Cooper's choice of a bomb—instead of other weapons previously used by hijackers—thwarted any multidirectional attempts to rush him. Cooper was also careful to avoid leaving evidence. Before he jumped, he demanded Mucklow return to him all notes either written by him, or on his behalf. Mucklow said she used the last match in his paper matchbook to light one of his cigarettes, and when she attempted to dispose of the empty matchbook, he demanded she return it to him. Although he was methodical in his attempts to retrieve evidence, he was unsuccessful; he left his clip-on tie in his seat. Although Cooper was clearly familiar with the 727's capabilities and confidential features, its design was the primary reason Cooper chose the aircraft. With its aft airstair and the placement of its three engines, the 727 was one of the only passenger jets from which a parachute jump could be easily made. Cooper also appeared to be familiar with the 727's typical refueling time, with Mucklow telling the FBI that Cooper "seemed specifically well informed in refueling procedures". By specifying a 15° flap setting, Cooper displayed specific knowledge of aviation tactics and the 727's capabilities; unlike most commercial jet airliners, the 727 could remain in slow, low-altitude flight without stalling. Cooper's specific flap setting also allowed him to control the 727's airspeed and altitude without entering the cockpit, where Cooper could have been overpowered by the three pilots. First Officer Bill Rataczak, who spoke with Cooper on the intercom during the hijacking, told the FBI, "[Cooper] displayed a specific knowledge of flying and aircraft in general." The most significant knowledge Cooper displayed was a feature both secret and unique to the 727; the aft airstair could be operated during flight, and the single activation switch in the rear of the cabin could not be overridden from the cockpit. Cooper knew how to operate the aft staircase, and had clearly planned to use it for his escape. The FBI speculated Cooper knew the Central Intelligence Agency was using 727s to drop agents and supplies into enemy territory during the Vietnam War. Since no situation on a passenger flight would necessitate such an operation, civilian crews were neither informed the aft airstair could be lowered midflight, nor were they aware its operation could not be overridden from the cockpit. Cooper appeared to be familiar with parachutes, although his experience level is unknown. Mucklow said Cooper, "appeared to be completely familiar with the parachutes which had been furnished to him", and told a journalist, "Cooper put on [his] parachute as though he did so every day". Cooper's familiarity with the military-style parachutes he was given has led to speculation that Cooper was a military parachutist and not a civilian skydiver. Larry Carr, who led the investigative team from 2006 to 2009, does not believe Cooper was a paratrooper. Instead, Carr speculates Cooper had been an Air Force aircraft cargo loader. An aircraft cargo-loading assignment would provide him with aviation knowledge and experience: cargo loaders have basic jump training, wear emergency parachutes, and know how to dispatch items from planes in flight. As a cargo loader, Cooper would be familiar with parachutes, "but not necessarily sufficient knowledge to survive the jump he made". From the beginning of their investigation, FBI agents did not believe Cooper survived his jump. The FBI provided several reasons and facts to support their conclusion: Cooper's apparent lack of skydiving experience, his lack of proper equipment for his jump and survival, the temperature and inclement weather on the night of the hijacking, the wooded terrain into which Cooper jumped, his lack of knowledge of his landing area, and the unused ransom money. First, Cooper appeared to lack the necessary skydiving knowledge, skills, and experience for the type of jump he attempted. "We originally thought Cooper was an experienced jumper, perhaps even a paratrooper," said Carr.[citation needed] "We concluded after a few years this was simply not true. No experienced parachutist would have jumped in the pitch-black night, in the rain, with a 172 mph [77 m/s] wind in his face wearing loafers and a trench coat. It was simply too risky."[failed verification] Skydiving instructor Earl Cossey, who supplied the parachutes, testified Cooper did not need extensive experience to survive the jump and "anyone who had six or seven practice jumps could accomplish this." However, Cossey also noted jumping at night drastically increased the risk of injury, and without jump boots, Cooper probably would have suffered severe ankle or leg injuries upon landing. Second, Cooper did not appear to have the equipment necessary for either his jump or his survival in the wilderness. Cooper failed to bring or request a helmet, and jumped into a 15 °F (−9 °C) wind at 10,000 feet (3,000 m) in November over Washington State without proper protection against the extreme wind chill. Although the contents of Cooper's 4 in × 12 in × 14 in (10 cm × 30 cm × 36 cm) paper bag are unknown, Cooper did not use any of the bag's contents to assist him during any part of the hijacking, so the FBI speculated the bag contained items Cooper needed for his jump, such as boots, gloves, and goggles. Third, Cooper did not appear to have an accomplice waiting on the ground to help him escape. Such an arrangement would have required both a precisely timed jump and the flight crew's cooperation to follow a predetermined flight path, but Cooper did not give the flight crew a specific path. Moreover, the flight crew proposed—and Cooper agreed—to alter the flight path, and fly from Seattle to Reno for refueling, and Cooper had no way of keeping an accomplice apprised of his changed plans. The low cloud cover and lack of visibility to the ground further complicated Cooper's ability to determine his location, establish a bearing, or see his landing zone. Finally, the ransom money was never spent, and the recovered portion was found unused. "Diving into the wilderness without a plan, without the right equipment, in such terrible conditions, he probably never even got his chute open," said Carr. FBI agent Richard Tosaw theorized Cooper became incapacitated from hypothermia during his jump, landed in the Columbia River, and drowned. However, FBI agents were not unanimous in their assessments of Cooper's ultimate fate. A senior FBI agent anonymously opined in a 1976 article in The Seattle Times, "I think [Cooper] made it. I think he slept in his own bed that night. It was a clear night. A lot of the country is pretty flat ... he could have just walked out. Right down the road. Hell, they weren't even looking for him there at the time. They thought he was somewhere else. He could just walk down the road." Conclusive evidence of Cooper's death has not been found. In the months following the Cooper hijacking, five men attempted copycat hijackings, and all five survived their parachute escapes. The survival of the copycats—several of whom faced circumstances and conditions similar to Cooper's jump—forced FBI lead case agent Ralph Himmelsbach to reevaluate his opinions and theories regarding Cooper's chances for survival. Himmelsbach cited three examples of hijackers who survived jumps in conditions similar to Cooper's escape: Martin McNally, Frederick Hahneman, and Richard LaPoint. Hijacker Martin McNally jumped using only a reserve chute, without protective gear, at night, over Indiana. Unlike Cooper, who appeared to be familiar with parachutes, McNally had to be shown how to put on his parachute. Additionally, McNally's pilot increased the airspeed to 320 knots, nearly twice the airspeed of Flight 305 at the time of Cooper's jump. The increased windspeed caused a violent jump for McNally: The money bag was immediately torn from him, "yet he had landed unharmed except for some superficial scratches and bruises". 49-year-old Frederick Hahneman hijacked a 727 in Pennsylvania and survived after jumping at night into a Honduran jungle. A third copycat, Richard LaPoint, hijacked a 727 in Nevada. Wearing only trousers, a shirt, and cowboy boots, LaPoint jumped into the freezing January wind over northern Colorado and landed in the snow. In 2008, Himmelsbach admitted he originally thought Cooper had only a fifty-percent chance of survival, but subsequently revised his assessment. By 1976, most published legal analyses concurred the impending expiration of the statute of limitations for prosecution of the hijacker would make little difference: Since the statute's interpretation varies from case to case, and from court to court, a prosecutor could argue Cooper had forfeited legal immunity on any of several valid technical grounds. In November 1976, a Portland grand jury returned an indictment in absentia against "John Doe, a.k.a. Dan Cooper" for air piracy and violation of the Hobbs Act. The indictment formally enabled prosecution to be continued, should the hijacker be apprehended at any time in the future. Between 1971 and 2016, the FBI processed more than a thousand "serious suspects", including assorted publicity seekers and deathbed confessors. Theodore Burdette Braden Jr. (1928–2007) was a Special Forces commando during the Vietnam War, a master skydiver, and a convicted felon. He was believed by many within the Special Forces community, both at the time of the hijacking and in subsequent years, to have been Cooper. Born in Ohio, Braden first joined the military at the age of 16 in 1944, serving with the 101st Airborne during World War II. He eventually became one of the military's leading parachutists, often representing the Army in international skydiving tournaments, and his military records list him as having made 911 jumps. During the 1960s, Braden was a team leader within the MACVSOG, a classified commando unit of Green Berets which conducted unconventional warfare operations during the Vietnam War. He also served as a military skydiving instructor, teaching HALO jumping techniques to members of Project Delta. Braden spent 23 months in Vietnam, conducting classified operations within both North and South Vietnam, as well as Laos and Cambodia. In December 1966, Braden deserted his unit in Vietnam and made his way to the Congo to serve as a mercenary, but only served there a short time before being arrested by CIA agents and taken back to the United States for a court-martial. Despite having committed a capital offense by deserting in wartime, Braden was given an honorable discharge and barred from re-enlisting in the military in exchange for his continued secrecy about the MACVSOG program. Braden was profiled in the October 1967 issue of Ramparts Magazine, wherein he was described by fellow Special Forces veteran and journalist Don Duncan as being someone with a "secret death wish" who "continually places himself in unnecessary danger but always seems to get away with it", specifically referring to Braden's disregard for military skydiving safety regulations. Duncan also claimed that during Braden's time in Vietnam, he was "continuously involved in shady deals to make money." Following his military discharge in 1967, the details of Braden's life are largely unknown, but at the time of the hijacking he was a truck driver for Consolidated Freightways, which was headquartered in Vancouver, Washington, just across the Columbia River from Portland and not far from the suspected dropzone of Ariel, Washington. It is also known that at some point in the early 1970s he was investigated by the FBI for stealing $250,000 during a trucking scam he had allegedly devised, but he was never charged for this supposed crime. In 1980, Braden was indicted by a Federal grand jury for driving an 18-wheeler full of stolen goods from Arizona to Massachusetts, but it is unknown whether there was a conviction in that case. Two years later Braden was arrested in Pennsylvania for driving a stolen vehicle with fictitious plates and for having no driver's license. Braden eventually ended up being sent to Federal prison at some point during the late 1980s, serving time in Pennsylvania, but the precise crime is unknown. Despite his ability as a soldier, he was not well liked personally and was described by a family member as "the perfect combination of high intelligence and criminality". From his time working covert operations in Vietnam, he likely would have possessed the then-classified knowledge about the ability and proper specifications for jumping from a 727, perhaps having done it himself on MACVSOG missions. Physically, Braden's military records list him at 5 ft 8 in (173 cm), which is shorter than the height description of at least 5 ft 10 in (178 cm) given by the two flight attendants, but this military measurement would have been taken in his stocking feet and he may have appeared somewhat taller in shoes. However, he possessed a dark complexion from years of outdoor military service, had short dark hair, a medium athletic build, and was 43 years of age at the time of the hijacking, which are features all in line with the descriptions of Cooper. In 2003, Minnesota resident Lyle Christiansen watched a television documentary about the Cooper hijacking and became convinced that his late brother Kenneth (1926–1994) was Cooper. After repeated futile attempts to convince the FBI and author and film director Nora Ephron (whom he hoped would make a movie about the case), he contacted private investigator Skipp Porteous in New York City. In 2010, Porteous published a book postulating that Christiansen was the hijacker. The following year, an episode of the History series Brad Meltzer's Decoded also summarized the circumstantial evidence linking Christiansen to the Cooper case. Christiansen enlisted in the Army in 1944 and was trained as a paratrooper. World War II had ended by the time he was deployed in 1945, but he made occasional training jumps while stationed in Japan with occupation forces in the late 1940s. After leaving the Army, he joined Northwest Orient in 1954 as a laborer stationed at Northwest Airlines' Far East stopover on Shemya Island in the Aleutians. He subsequently became a flight attendant, and then a purser, based in Seattle. Christiansen was 45 years old at the time of the hijacking, but he was shorter (5 ft 8 in or 173 cm), thinner (150 pounds or 68 kg), than eyewitness descriptions of Cooper. Christiansen smoked (as did the hijacker) and displayed a fondness for bourbon (the drink Cooper had requested). Stewardess Florence Schaffner told author Geoffrey Gray that photos of Christiansen fit her memory of the hijacker's appearance more closely than those of other suspects she had been shown but could not conclusively identify him. Despite the publicity generated by Porteous's book and the 2011 television documentary, the FBI stands by its position that Christiansen cannot be considered a prime suspect. It cites the poor match to eyewitness physical descriptions and a complete absence of direct incriminating evidence. Bryant "Jack" Coffelt (1917–1975) was a con man, ex-convict, and purported government informant who claimed to have been the chauffeur and confidant of Abraham Lincoln's last undisputed descendant, great-grandson Robert Todd Lincoln Beckwith. In 1972, he began claiming he was Cooper and attempted through an intermediary – a former cellmate named James Brown – to sell his story to a Hollywood production company. He said he landed near Mount Hood, about 50 miles (80 km) southeast of Ariel, injuring himself and losing the ransom money in the process. Photos of Coffelt bear a resemblance to the composite drawings, although he was in his mid-fifties in 1971. He was reportedly in Portland on the day of the hijacking and sustained leg injuries around that time which were consistent with a skydiving mishap. Coffelt's account was reviewed by the FBI, which concluded that it differed in several details from information that had not been made public and was therefore a fabrication. Brown continued peddling the story long after Coffelt died in 1975. Multiple media venues, including the CBS news program 60 Minutes, considered and rejected it. Lynn Doyle "L. D." Cooper (1931–1999), a leather worker and Korean War veteran, was proposed as a suspect in July 2011 by his niece, Marla Cooper. As an eight-year-old, she recalled Cooper and another uncle planning something "very mischievous", involving the use of "expensive walkie-talkies", at her grandmother's house in Sisters, Oregon, 150 miles (240 km) southeast of Portland. The next day Flight 305 was hijacked; and though the uncles ostensibly were turkey hunting, L. D. Cooper came home wearing a bloody shirt—the result, he said, of an auto accident. Later, Marla claimed, her parents came to believe that L. D. was the hijacker. She also recalled that her uncle, who died in 1999, was obsessed with the Canadian comic book hero Dan Cooper and "had one of his comic books thumbtacked to his wall"—although he was not a skydiver or paratrooper. In August 2011, New York magazine published an alternative witness sketch, reportedly based on a description by Flight 305 eyewitness Robert Gregory, depicting horn-rimmed sunglasses, a "russet"-colored suit jacket with wide lapels, and marcelled hair. The article observed that L. D. Cooper had wavy hair that looked marcelled (as did Duane Weber, see below). The FBI announced that no fingerprints had been found on a guitar strap made by L. D. Cooper. One week later, they added that his DNA did not match the partial DNA profile obtained from the hijacker's tie, but acknowledged that there is no certainty that the hijacker was the source of the organic material obtained from the tie. Barbara Dayton (1926–2002), a recreational pilot and University of Washington librarian who was named Robert Dayton at birth, served in the U.S. Merchant Marine and then the Army during World War II. After discharge, Dayton worked with explosives in the construction field and aspired to a professional airline career, but could not obtain a commercial pilot's license. Dayton underwent gender reassignment surgery in 1969, and changed her name to Barbara; she is believed to be the first person to undergo this surgery in Washington State. She claimed to have staged the hijacking two years later, presenting as a man, in order to "get back" at the airline industry and the FAA, whose insurmountable rules and conditions had prevented her from becoming an airline pilot. Dayton said that the ransom money was hidden in a cistern near Woodburn, Oregon, a suburban area south of Portland. She eventually recanted the entire story, ostensibly after learning that hijacking charges could still be brought. She also did not match the physical description particularly closely. William Pratt Gossett (1930–2003) was a Marine Corps, Army, and Army Air Forces veteran who had military service in Korea and Vietnam. His military experience included jump training and wilderness survival. Gossett was known to be obsessed with the Cooper hijacking. According to Galen Cook, a lawyer who has collected information related to Gossett for years, he once showed his sons a key to a Vancouver, British Columbia, safe deposit box which, he claimed, contained the long-missing ransom money. The FBI has no direct evidence implicating Gossett and cannot even reliably place him in the Pacific Northwest at the time of the hijacking. "There is not one link to the D. B. Cooper case," said Special Agent Carr, "other than the statements [Gossett] made to someone." Joe Lakich (1921–2017) was a retired U.S. Army Major and Korean War veteran whose daughter Susan Giffe was killed less than two months before the hijacking, as a consequence of a botched hostage negotiation conducted by the FBI. The events culminating in the death of Lakich's daughter would be studied by hostage negotiators for decades as an example of what not to do during a hostage situation. He and his wife later sued the FBI, and ultimately an Appeals Court ruled in their favor, holding that the FBI acted negligently during the hostage negotiation. Lakich would become a Cooper suspect in large part due to the revelation that Cooper's tie contained microscopic particles of uncommon metals, such as unalloyed titanium. It is speculated that few people during that era would have contact with such materials, and that Cooper may have worked in a manufacturing environment working on electronics as engineer or manager. When the hijacking occurred, Lakich was working in Nashville as a production supervisor at an electronics capacitor factory and would have likely been exposed to the materials found on the tie. When Cooper was asked by Tina Mucklow why he was committing the hijacking, he replied: "It's not because I have a grudge against your airlines, it's just because I have a grudge." It is believed by some that this "grudge" was Lakich's anger toward the FBI for their failed efforts at rescuing his daughter less than two months earlier. John Emil List (1925–2008) was an accountant and war veteran who murdered his wife, three teenage children, and 85-year-old mother in Westfield, New Jersey, fifteen days before the Cooper hijacking, withdrew $200,000 from his mother's bank account, and disappeared. He came to the attention of the Cooper task force due to the timing of his disappearance, multiple matches to the hijacker's description, and the reasoning that "a fugitive accused of mass murder has nothing to lose". After his capture in 1989, List denied any involvement in the Cooper hijacking: no substantial evidence implicates him, and the FBI no longer considers him a suspect. List died in prison in 2008. Theodore Ernest Mayfield (1935–2015) was a Special Forces veteran, pilot, competitive skydiver, and skydiving instructor. He served time in 1994 for negligent homicide after two of his students died when their parachutes failed to open and was later found indirectly responsible for thirteen additional skydiving deaths due to faulty equipment and training. In 2010, he was sentenced to three years' probation for piloting a plane 26 years after losing his pilot's license and rigging certificates. He was suggested repeatedly as a suspect early in the investigation, according to FBI Agent Ralph Himmelsbach, who knew Mayfield from a prior dispute at a local airport. He was ruled out, based partly on the fact that he called Himmelsbach less than two hours after Flight 305 landed in Reno to volunteer advice on standard skydiving practices and possible landing zones, as well as information on local skydivers. Richard McCoy (1942–1974) was an Army veteran who served two tours of duty in Vietnam, first as a demolition expert and later with the Green Berets as a helicopter pilot. After his military service, he became a warrant officer in the Utah National Guard and an avid recreational skydiver, with aspirations of becoming a Utah State Trooper. On April 7, 1972, McCoy staged the best-known of the so-called "copycat" hijackings (see below). He boarded United Airlines' Flight 855 (a Boeing 727 with aft stairs) in Denver, Colorado, and, brandishing what later proved to be a paperweight resembling a hand grenade and an unloaded handgun, he demanded four parachutes and $500,000. After delivery of the money and parachutes at San Francisco International Airport, McCoy ordered the aircraft back into the sky and bailed out over Provo, Utah, leaving behind his handwritten hijacking instructions and his fingerprints on a magazine he had been reading. He was arrested on April 9 with the ransom cash in his possession and, after trial and conviction, received a 45-year sentence. Two years later, he escaped from Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary with several accomplices by crashing a garbage truck through the main gate. Tracked down three months later in Virginia Beach, McCoy was killed in a shootout with FBI agents. In their 1991 book, D.B. Cooper: The Real McCoy, parole officer Bernie Rhodes and former FBI agent Russell Calame asserted that they had identified McCoy as Cooper. They cited obvious similarities in the two hijackings, claims by McCoy's family that the tie and mother-of-pearl tie clip left on the plane belonged to McCoy, and McCoy's own refusal to admit or deny that he was Cooper. A proponent of their claim was the FBI agent who killed McCoy. "When I shot Richard McCoy," he said, "I shot D. B. Cooper at the same time." Although there is no reasonable doubt that McCoy committed the Denver hijacking, the FBI does not consider him a suspect in the Cooper case because of mismatches in age and description, a level of skydiving skill well above that thought to be possessed by the hijacker, and credible evidence that McCoy was in Las Vegas on the day of the Portland hijacking, and at home in Utah the day after, having Thanksgiving dinner with his family. On November 11, 2022, independent researcher Eric Ulis held a press conference putting forward Vincent C. Petersen as a person of interest. While researching the spectrum analysis that was done on Cooper's tie, Ulis discovered 3 particles that appeared to be a very rare titanium antimony alloy. Petersen worked at a company named Rem-Cru, based in Midland, Pennsylvania, and later in metro Pittsburgh, that manufactured titanium-antimony alloys. Sheridan Peterson (1926–2021) served in the Marine Corps during World War II and was later employed as a technical editor at Boeing, based in Seattle. Investigators took an interest in Peterson as a suspect soon after the skyjacking because of his experience as a smokejumper and love of taking physical risks, as well as his similar appearance and age (44) to the Cooper description. Peterson often teased the media about whether he was really Cooper. Entrepreneur Eric Ulis, who spent years investigating the crime, said he was "98% convinced" that Peterson was Cooper; when pressed by FBI agents, Peterson insisted he was in Nepal at the time of the hijacking. He died in 2021. In an episode of History Channel's History's Greatest Mysteries, analysis of DNA found on the tie worn by Cooper indicated that Peterson was not a match for Cooper when compared to a DNA sample from one of Peterson's living daughters. Eric Ulis has since withdrawn his allegation that Peterson could have been Cooper. Robert Wesley Rackstraw (1943–2019) was a retired pilot and ex-convict who served on an Army helicopter crew and other units during the Vietnam War. He came to the attention of the Cooper task force in February 1978, after he was arrested in Iran and deported to the U.S. to face explosives possession and check kiting charges. Several months later, while released on bail, Rackstraw attempted to fake his own death by radioing a false mayday call and telling controllers that he was bailing out of a rented plane over Monterey Bay. Police later arrested him in Fullerton, California, on an additional charge of forging federal pilot certificates; the plane he claimed to have ditched was found, repainted, in a nearby hangar. Cooper investigators noted his physical resemblance to Cooper composite sketches even though he was only 28 in 1971, military parachute training, and criminal record but eliminated him as a suspect in 1979 after no direct evidence of his involvement could be found. In 2016, Rackstraw re-emerged as a suspect in a History channel program, along with a book. On September 8, 2016, Thomas J. Colbert, the author of the book, and attorney Mark Zaid filed a lawsuit to compel the FBI to release its Cooper case file under the Freedom of Information Act. In 2017, Colbert and a group of volunteer investigators uncovered what they believed to be "a decades-old parachute strap" at an undisclosed location in the Pacific Northwest. This was followed later in 2017 with a piece of foam, which they suspected was part of Cooper's parachute backpack. In January 2018, Tom and Dawna Colbert reported that they had obtained a confession letter originally written in December 1971 containing codes that matched three units Rackstraw was a part of while in the Army. One of the Flight 305 flight attendants reportedly "did not find any similarities" between photos of Rackstraw from the 1970s and her recollection of Cooper's appearance. Rackstraw's attorney called the renewed allegations "the stupidest thing I've ever heard", and Rackstraw himself told People magazine, "It's a lot of [expletive], and they know it is." The FBI declined further comment. Rackstraw stated in a 2017 phone interview that he lost his job over the 2016 investigations. Rackstraw said to Colbert, "I told everybody I was [the hijacker]", before explaining the admission was a stunt. He died in 2019. Walter R. Reca (1933–2014) was a former military paratrooper and intelligence operative. He was proposed as a suspect by his friend Carl Laurin in 2018. In 2008, Reca told Laurin via a recorded phone call that he was the hijacker. Reca gave Laurin permission in a notarized letter to share his story after his death. He also allowed Laurin to tape their phone conversations about the crime over a six-week period in late 2008. In over three hours of recordings, Reca shared details about his version of the hijacking. He also confessed to his niece, Lisa Story. From Reca's description of the terrain on his way to the drop zone, Laurin concluded that he landed near Cle Elum, Washington. After Reca described an encounter with a dump truck driver at a roadside cafe after he landed, Laurin located Jeff Osiadacz, who was driving his dump truck near Cle Elum the night of the hijacking and met a stranger at the Teanaway Junction Café just outside of town. The man asked Osiadacz to give his friend directions to the café over the phone, presumably to be picked up, and he complied. Laurin convinced Joe Koenig, a former member of the Michigan State Police, of Reca's guilt. Koenig later published a book on Cooper, titled Getting the Truth: I Am D.B. Cooper. These claims have aroused skepticism. Cle Elum is well north and east of Flight 305's known flight path, more than 150 miles (240 km) north of the drop zone assumed by most analysts, and even further from Tena Bar, where a portion of the ransom money was found. Reca was a military paratrooper and private skydiver with hundreds of jumps to his credit, in contradiction to the FBI's publicized profile of an amateur skydiver at best. Reca also did not resemble the composite portrait the FBI assembled, which Laurin and Osiadacz used to explain why Osiadacz's suspicions were not aroused at the time. In response to the allegations against Reca, the FBI said that it would be inappropriate to comment on specific tips provided to them, and that no evidence to date had proved the culpability of any suspect beyond a reasonable doubt. In November 2018, The Oregonian published an article proposing William J. Smith (1928–2018), of Bloomfield, New Jersey, as a suspect. The article was based on research conducted by an Army data analyst who sent his findings to the FBI in mid-2018. Smith, a New Jersey native, was a World War II veteran. After high school, he enlisted in the United States Navy and volunteered for combat air crew training. After his discharge, he worked for the Lehigh Valley Railroad and was affected by the Penn Central Transportation Company's bankruptcy in 1970, the largest bankruptcy in U.S. history at that time. The article proposed that the loss of his pension created a grudge against the corporate establishment and transportation field, as well as a sudden need for money. Smith was 43 at the time of the hijacking. In his high school yearbook, a list of alumni killed in World War II lists an Ira Daniel Cooper, possibly the source for the hijacker's pseudonym. The analyst claimed that Smith's naval aviation experience would have given him knowledge of planes and parachutes, and his railroad experience would have helped him find railroad tracks and hop on a train to escape the area after landing. According to the analyst, aluminum spiral chips found on the clip-on tie could have come from a locomotive maintenance facility. Smith's information about the Seattle area may have come from his close friend Dan Clair, who was stationed at Fort Lewis during the war. The analyst noted that the man who claimed to be Cooper in Max Gunther's 1985 book identified himself as "Dan LeClair". Smith and Clair worked together for Conrail at Newark's Oak Island Yard. Smith retired from that facility as a yardmaster. The article noted that a picture of Smith on the Lehigh Valley Railroad website showed a "remarkable resemblance" to Cooper FBI sketches. The FBI said that it would be inappropriate to comment on tips related to Smith. Duane L. Weber (1924–1995) was a World War II Army veteran who served time in at least six prisons from 1945 to 1968 for burglary and forgery. He was proposed as a suspect by his widow, Jo, based primarily on a deathbed confession: three days before he died in 1995, Weber told his wife, "I am Dan Cooper." The name meant nothing to her, she said; but months later, a friend told her of its significance in the hijacking. She went to her local library to research Cooper, found Max Gunther's book, and discovered notations in the margins in her husband's handwriting. Like the hijacker, Weber drank bourbon and chain-smoked. Other circumstantial evidence included a 1979 trip to Seattle and the Columbia River, where his wife remembered him throwing a trash bag just upstream of Tina Bar. Himmelsbach said, "[Weber] does fit the physical description (and) does have the criminal background that I have always felt was associated with the case", but did not believe Weber was Cooper. The FBI eliminated Weber as an active suspect in July 1998 when his fingerprints did not match any of those processed in the hijacked plane, and no other direct evidence could be found to implicate him. Later, his DNA also failed to match the samples recovered from Cooper's tie. Cooper was among the first to attempt air piracy for personal gain, but merely eleven days prior to Cooper's hijack, Canadian Paul Joseph Cini hijacked an Air Canada DC-8 over Montana, but was overpowered by the crew when he put down his shotgun to strap on his parachute. Encouraged by Cooper's apparent success, fifteen similar hijackings—all unsuccessful—were attempted in 1972. Some notable examples from that year: Richard Charles LaPoint, an Army veteran from Boston, boarded Hughes Airwest Flight 800 at McCarran International Airport in Las Vegas on January 20. Brandishing what he claimed was a bomb while the DC-9 was on the taxiway, he demanded $50,000, two parachutes, and a helmet. After releasing the 51 passengers and two flight attendants, he ordered the plane on an eastward trajectory toward Denver, then bailed out over the treeless plains of northeastern Colorado. Authorities, tracking the locator-equipped parachute and his footprints in the snow and mud, apprehended him a few hours later. Richard McCoy Jr., a former Army Green Beret, hijacked a United Airlines 727-100 on April 7 after it left Denver, diverted it to San Francisco, then bailed out over Utah with $500,000 in ransom money. He landed safely and was arrested two days later. Frederick Hahneman used a handgun to hijack an Eastern Air Lines 727 in Allentown, Pennsylvania, on May 7, demanded $303,000, and eventually parachuted into his native Honduras. A month later, with the FBI in pursuit and a $25,000 bounty on his head, he surrendered at the American embassy in Tegucigalpa. After being given a life sentence in September 1972, he was paroled in 1984. Robb Heady, a 22-year-old former Army paratrooper hijacked United Airlines Flight 239 from Reno to San Francisco on June 2, 1972. Carrying his own parachute and using a .357 revolver, he demanded $200,000 in ransom money. He jumped from the plane and was captured the next morning. Martin McNally, an unemployed service-station attendant, used a submachine gun on June 23 to commandeer an American Airlines 727 en route from St. Louis, Missouri, to Tulsa, Oklahoma, then diverted it eastward to Indiana and bailed out with $500,000 in ransom. McNally lost the ransom money as he exited the aircraft, but landed safely near Peru, Indiana, and was apprehended a few days later in a Detroit suburb. When interviewed in a 2020 podcast retrospective, McNally said he had been inspired by Cooper. With the advent of universal luggage searches in 1973 (see Airport security), the general incidence of hijackings dropped dramatically. There were no further notable Cooper imitators until July 11, 1980, when Glenn K. Tripp seized Northwest Orient Flight 608 at Seattle-Tacoma Airport, demanding $600,000 ($100,000 by an independent account),[unreliable source?] two parachutes, and the assassination of his boss. A quick-thinking flight attendant drugged Tripp's alcoholic drink with Valium. After a ten-hour standoff, during which Tripp reduced his demands to three cheeseburgers and a ground vehicle in which to escape, he was apprehended.[unreliable source?] Tripp attempted to hijack the same Northwest flight on January 21, 1983, and this time demanded to be flown to Afghanistan. When the plane landed in Portland, he was shot and killed by FBI agents. Despite the initiation of the federal Sky Marshal Program the previous year, 31 hijackings were committed in U.S. airspace in 1972; 19 of them were for the specific purpose of extorting money. In 15 of the extortion cases, the hijackers also demanded parachutes. In early 1973, the FAA began requiring airlines to search all passengers and their bags. Amid multiple lawsuits charging that such searches violated Fourth Amendment protections against search and seizure, federal courts ruled that they were acceptable when applied universally and when limited to searches for weapons and explosives. Only two hijackings were attempted in 1973, both by psychiatric patients; one hijacker, Samuel Byck, intended to crash the airliner into the White House to kill President Nixon. Due to multiple "copycat" hijackings in 1972, the FAA required that the exterior of all Boeing 727 aircraft be fitted with a spring-loaded device, later dubbed the "Cooper vane", that prevents lowering of the aft airstair during flight. The device consists of a flat blade of aluminum mounted on a pivot, which is spring-loaded to stay out of the way of the door when the craft is at rest, but aerodynamically rotates into position to prevent the door from being opened when the plane is traveling at flight speeds. Operation of the vane is automatic and cannot be overridden from within the aircraft. As a direct result of the hijacking, the installation of peepholes was mandated in all cockpit doors; this enables the cockpit crew to observe passengers without opening the cockpit door. In 1978, the hijacked 727-100 aircraft was sold by Northwest Orient to Piedmont Airlines, where it was re-registered N838N and continued in domestic carrier service. In 1984, it was purchased by the charter company Key Airlines, re-registered N29KA, and incorporated into the Air Force's civilian charter fleet that shuttled workers between Nellis Air Force Base and the Tonopah Test Range during the F-117 Nighthawk development program. In 1996, the aircraft was scrapped for parts in a Memphis aircraft boneyard. On April 23, 2013, Earl J. Cossey, who packed the four parachutes that were given to Cooper, was found dead in his home in Woodinville, Washington, a suburb of Seattle. His death was ruled a homicide due to blunt-force trauma to the head. The perpetrator remains unknown. Some commenters alleged possible links to the Cooper case, but authorities responded that they had no reason to believe that any such link exists. Woodinville officials later announced that burglary was most likely the motive for the crime. Himmelsbach famously called Cooper a "rotten sleazy crook", but his bold and unusual crime inspired a cult following that was expressed in song, film, and literature. Novelty shops sold t-shirts emblazoned with "D. B. Cooper, Where Are You?" Restaurants and bowling alleys in the Pacific Northwest hold regular Cooper-themed promotions and sell tourist souvenirs. A "Cooper Day" celebration has been held at the Ariel General Store and Tavern each November since 1974 with the exception of 2015, the year its owner, Dona Elliot, died. Characters and situations inspired by Cooper have appeared in the story lines of the television series Prison Break, Justified, The Blacklist, NewsRadio, Leverage, Journeyman, Renegade, Numb3rs, Quincy, M.E., 30 Rock, Drunk History, Breaking Bad, and Loki, as well as the 1981 film The Pursuit of D. B. Cooper, the 2004 film Without a Paddle, and a book titled The Vesuvius Prophecy by Greg Cox, based on The 4400 TV series.[failed verification] An annual convention, known as CooperCon, is held every year in late November in Seattle, Washington.[citation needed] The event, founded by Cooper researcher Eric Ulis in 2018, is a multi-day gathering of Cooper researchers and enthusiasts. Originally held in Vancouver, Washington, it was moved to Seattle beginning in 2023.[citation needed] CooperCon took the place of the annual D. B. Cooper Days, which ended when the owner of the Ariel Store Pub died and the pub was forced to close. Aviation portal Oregon portal 1970s portal Cold case Gentleman thief List of aircraft hijackings List of fugitives from justice who disappeared Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, pp. 40–41. When Schaffner's description was relayed to the FBI command post in Portland, agents pointed out that dynamite sticks are typically brown or beige in color; the eight red cylinders were probably highway or railroad flares. But because they could not be certain, intervention could not be recommended. Earl Cossey, the skydiving instructor who supplied the parachutes, told some sources three of the four parachutes (one primary and both reserves) were returned to him. The FBI maintained only two parachutes, a primary and a cannibalized reserve, were found aboard the plane. Gunther 1985, p. 50. Retired FBI agent Richard Tosaw made a second career of searching for Cooper, telling his story in a book, D.B. Cooper, Dead or Alive? Tosaw came to the conclusion that Cooper landed in the Columbia River and that his body long ago decomposed. That theory is supported by Soderlind. Tosaw believes Cooper went down in the Columbia "like a greased anvil." As for the recovered money, he theorizes that those three packets had been in Cooper's pocket: That he had taken them from the bag before jumping because he had offered the flight attendants a 'tip', holding out some $20 bills. His offer was refused." Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 79: "The similarities to the Cooper case were striking, and immediately raised doubts about the basic premise I had held from early in the investigation: Cooper most likely died in the jump." Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 79: "Like Cooper, he had not asked for a jump suit or any other protective gear, yet had landed unharmed except for some superficial scratches and bruises." "$200,000 in 1971 → 2024 | Inflation Calculator". www.in2013dollars.com. Retrieved January 17, 2024. "Inflation Calculator | Cumulative to Month and Year". www.usinflationcalculator.com. July 2, 2022. Retrieved January 17, 2024. "Reporter who added some swagger to the D.B. Cooper legacy comes clean". Los Angeles Times. July 28, 2016. "D.B. Cooper Hijacking". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Retrieved May 6, 2022. "D.B. Cooper hijacking". History / famous cases. Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on November 5, 2016. Retrieved December 3, 2019. National Law Enforcement Bulletin Nov 28th, 1971 (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 28, 1971. p. 294. National Law Enforcement Bulletin Nov 28th, 1971 (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 28, 1971. p. 294. FBI Interview with Florence Schaffner, Nov 24, 1971 (Report). November 24, 1971. Acting Director Memo to Seattle SAC, June 27th, 1972 (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. June 27, 1972. p. 471. "Hijacked plane makes landing at Seattle airport". Spokesman-Review. Associated Press. November 25, 1971. p. 1. Archived from the original on March 23, 2020. Retrieved September 22, 2018. Northwest Airlines Flight Operations Memo from night of hijacking (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 24, 1971. p. 329. There are 36 passengers and a crew of 6[permanent dead link] 2nd FBI Interview with Tina Mucklow, Dec 3rd, 1971 (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 159. Bragg 2005, p. 2. Steven, Richard (November 24, 1996). "When D.B. Cooper Dropped From Sky: Where did the daring, He jumped off the plane. mysterious skyjacker go? Twenty-five years later, the search is still on for even a trace". The Philadelphia Inquirer. p. A20. "Unmasking D.B. Cooper". New York Magazine. October 18, 2007. Archived from the original on August 16, 2016. Retrieved June 28, 2016. FBI Interview with Florence Schaffner, Nov 24, 1971 (Report). November 24, 1971. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 19. "Transcript of Crew Communications" (PDF). n467us.com. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 21, 2013. Retrieved February 25, 2011. Gray 2011b, pp. 41. How Dan Cooper JUMPED from an aircraft and the end of aft Air-stairs!, retrieved April 28, 2023 Marks, Andrea (January 12, 2021). "The Missing Piece of the D.B. Cooper Story". Rolling Stone. Retrieved August 9, 2022. 2nd FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 160. Tina said 'do you want me to stay here?' and the man replied, 'yes'. 2nd FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 160. One of the specific demands [Cooper] made was the fuel truck is to come first and start fueling the plane immediately. After fueling is completed and the money is aboard, he indicated the passengers would be released, and the last item to be brought aboard the aircraft would be the chutes, and at that time only the crew members were to be aboard, and they must stay out of the aisle and remain in their seats. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 20. Gray 2011b, pp. 47. Edwards 2021, pp. 19. 1st FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Reno, Nevada (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 24, 1971. p. 150. the hijacker insisted she be physically present by his side at all times. She recalled she sat with him almost the entire time of the flight. FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Reno, Nevada (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 24, 1971. p. 156. She also recalled while they were in the holding pattern prior to landing, he at one time looked out the window and observed 'We're over Tacoma now' and '...she stated she recalled some conversation to the effect the parachutes were coming from McChord Air Force Base. The hijacker remarked that it was about 20 minutes from McChord to the Seattle-Tacoma Airport.' FBI clip of Seattle Times article (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 26, 1971. p. 174. He was not nervous. He seemed rather nice and he was not cruel or nasty. 2nd FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 161. She asked him why he picked Northwest Airlines to hijack and he laughed and said, 'It's not because I have a grudge against your airlines, it's just because I have a grudge.' He paused and said the flight suited his time, place, and plans. 2nd FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 161. He asked her where she was from and she told him that she was from Pennsylvania, but was living in Minneapolis, Minn. He indicated that Minneapolis, Minn., was very nice country. 2nd FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 160. 2nd FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 161. Other conversation centered around personal habits such as smoking and he asked her if she did and she said she used to, but had quit, and he offered her a cigarette, which she took and smoked. FBI Interview with George R. Labissoniere in Seattle, WA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 24, 1971. p. 170. The cowboy was hassling Tina for information about the mechanical difficulties and generally being a nuisance. The hijacker seemed to enjoy the situation at first but told the cowboy to go back to his seat. 2nd FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 161. After he was seated and Tina returned to seat 18 D, next to the hijacker, he said, 'If that is a Sky Marshal I don't want any more of that,' and she reassured him that it wasn't and further, that there were no sky marshals on that flight. Edwards 2021, pp. 18. Seattle Office to J. Edgar Hoover, Director (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 29, 1971. p. 123. Seattle First National Bank, Seattle, Washington, who provided the money paid on this case advises that the money in the bag weighed nineteen pounds and the contents measured eleven inches by twelve inches by six and one half inches "Please Check Your $20 Bills, FBI Says". Los Angeles Times. December 26, 1971. Retrieved August 4, 2022. FBI Memo (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 1, 1971. p. 101. microfilm upon which was record[ed] the serial number[s] of all the bills... Clever, Dick (November 26, 1971). "Hijacker Hunt Near Woodland". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. 2nd FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 163. The Flight landed at Seattle International Airport at 5:46 Pacific time. 2nd FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 163. Prior to landing, the captain wanted permission to park his aircraft away from the terminal and the hijacker said okay. FBI Memo (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 26, 1971. p. 15. He requested an unmarked car and a representative of the airline would be allowed to approach the aircraft from a ten o'clock relative position. The only other equipment to go near the aircraft was to be the air stairs and refueling equipment. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 28. Cord Zum Spreckel FBI Interview (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 26, 1971. p. 451. the blonde stewardess, who had been sitting next to the hijacker, got up and went forward and out of the forward exit of the plane. He said she returned through the same door after several minutes carrying a package which was made of off-white canvas. 2nd FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 163. [she] departed the aircraft through the forward door as soon as the stairs were put in place. FBI Memorandum Feb 8, 1973 (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. February 8, 1973. p. 471. 2nd FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 163. [Mucklow] recalled that she, in an attempt at being humorous, stated to the hijacker while the passengers were unloading that there was obviously a lot of money in the bag and she wondered if she could have some. The hijacker immediately agreed with her suggestion and_took one package of the money, denominations unrecalled by and handed it to her. She returned the money, stating to the hijacker that she was not permitted to accept gratuities or words to that effect. In this connection recalled that at one time during the flight the hijacker had pulled some single bills from his pocket and had attempted to tip all the girls on the crew. Again they declined in compliance with company policy. 1st FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 24, 1971. p. 153. She also recalled that at this time all hostesses and male crew members were still aboard the aircraft. 1st FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 24, 1971. pp. 152–153. FBI Interview with Alice Hancock, Nov 24, 1971 (Report). November 24, 1971. then Mrs. Hancock went to the back of the plane and approached the hijacker and asked if the stewardesses could go and he said 'whatever you girls would like.' 2nd FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 163. [Florence] came back to where the hijacker was seated and asked if she could get her purse and he said that she should come on back, he wouldn't bite her. 2nd FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 163. At this point she gave him a paper sheet giving instructions on how to jump and he said he didn't need that. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, pp. 35–36. 2nd FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 163. He appeared irritated that they did not give him a knapsack. 1st FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 24, 1971. p. 155. he was occupied with one of the parachute packs ... and attempting to in some way attach it to his body. 1st FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 24, 1971. p. 155. Her recollections in this regard were vague. Rothenberg, David; Ulvaeus, Marta (1999). The New Earth Reader: The Best of Terra Nova. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. p. 4. ISBN 978-0262181952. Elliott, Gina (December 6, 1971). "CRIME: The Bandit Who Went Out into the Cold". Time. Caldwell, Earl (November 26, 1971). "Hijacker collects ransom of $200,000; parachutes from jet and disappears". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 8, 2021. Retrieved January 13, 2022. Rothenberg & Ulvaeus 1999, p. 5. Buergin, Miles (October 14, 2020). "Knowing Nevada: Revisiting the Mystery of D.B. Cooper". KRNV. Archived from the original on January 13, 2022. Retrieved January 13, 2022. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, pp. 33–35. Gray 2011b, pp. 74–77. 1st FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 24, 1971. p. 153. It was finally agreed...that Mucklow would remain on board to lower the door and stairs after the aircraft was airborne. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 36. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, pp. 45–46. Seattle Times Article Clipping (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 27, 1971. p. 141. 1st FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 24, 1971. p. 156. She told him that she was fearful of being sucked out of the airplane. 2nd FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 164. The cockpit called and told her to use the escape rope to secure herself when they found out that she was going to lower the ladder once the aircraft is airborne. She related this to the hijacker and he said, 'no,' he didn't want her to go up front or them to come back. 2nd FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 164. She asked him to cut some nylon cord from the parachute for her to use as a safety line when she opened the rear ladder and the hijacker said, 'Nevermind,' that he would do it... 1st FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 24, 1971. p. 156. the hijacker suddenly told her to go forward of the aft compartment, to close the curtain behind her and not to return to the rear compartment again. Marks, Andrea (January 12, 2021e). "The Missing Piece of the D.B. Cooper Story". Rolling Stone. Retrieved August 9, 2022. 2nd FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 164. she pleaded with him to take the bomb with him and he said he would take it with him or disarm it before he leaves. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 42. 2nd FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 164. the last time she saw him he had a nylon cord tied around his waist and was standing in the isle. 2nd FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 164. Approximately four minutes after take off, he stood up, told her to go to the cockpit Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 44. Perry, Douglas (November 8, 2021). "D.B. Cooper at 50: Push to solve case gains steam, but much about famous skyjacking remains a mystery". The Oregonian. Archived from the original on January 13, 2022. Retrieved January 13, 2022. Bragg 2005, p. 4. FBI Interview with First Officer William Rataczack on night of hijacking (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 24, 1971. p. 322. Rataczak stated they had not yet reached Portland proper, but were definitely in the suburbs or the immediate vicinity thereof. 2nd FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 164. Before descending at Reno, Nev., she called repeatedly over the intercom system to the hijacker to cooperate, that the aircraft must land. The last message was, 'Sir, we are going to land now, please put up the stairs.' Edwards 2021, pp. 42. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 48. Pasternak, Douglas (July 24, 2000). "Skyjacker at large". U.S. News & World Report. Vol. 129, no. 4. pp. 72–73. ISSN 0041-5537. Cowan, James (January 3, 2008). "F.B.I. reheats cold case". National Post. Archived from the original on January 21, 2008. Retrieved January 9, 2008. "D.B. Cooper part 07 of 67". FBI Records: The Vault. FBI. Archived from the original on December 14, 2016. Retrieved December 1, 2016. Motaher, Maria. "D.B. Cooper hijacking". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on November 5, 2016. Retrieved December 7, 2018. Browning, W. (July 22, 2016). One mystery solved in 'D.B. Cooper' skyjacking fiasco. Columbia Journalism Review Archived September 30, 2020, at the Wayback Machine, retrieved July 29, 2016. Guzman, Monica (November 27, 2007). Update: Everyone wants a piece of the D. B. Cooper legend. Seattle Post-Intelligencer archive Archived March 3, 2016, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved February 25, 2011. Browning, William (July 18, 2016). "A reporter's role in the notorious unsolved mystery of 'D.B. Cooper'". Columbia Journalism Review. New York. Archived from the original on July 21, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Contemporary stories from the AP and the UPI using the name "D. B. Cooper": * Grossweiler, Ed (November 26, 1971). "Hijacker bails out with loot". Free Lance-Star. (Fredericksburg, Virginia). Associated Press. p. 1. Archived from the original on February 3, 2021. Retrieved September 22, 2018. * "Wilderness area combed for parachute skyjacker". The Bulletin. (Bend, Oregon). UPI. November 26, 1971. p. 1. Archived from the original on February 6, 2021. Retrieved September 22, 2018. Memo from Northwest Airlines, Inc to FBI (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 15, 1971. p. 300. Taylor, Michael (November 24, 1996). "D.B. Cooper legend still up in air 25 years after leap, hijackers prompts strong feelings". San Francisco Chronicle. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 47. J. Edgar Hoover authorization for SR-71 use (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 6, 1971. p. 348. SR 71 Flight (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 6, 1971. p. 340. Beale Air Force Base, California, had offered, free of charge to the Bureau, use of an SR-71 aircraft to photograph terrain over which the hijacked airplane had flown on its trip to Reno SR 71 Flight (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 6, 1971. p. 340. photographic over-flights using SR-71 aircraft were conducted on five separate occasions with no photographs_obtained due to limited visibility from very high altitude. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, pp. 80–81. Seattle SAC Letter to FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. January 14, 1972. p. 19. The reaction was instantaneous and was described by REDACTED as being the same reaction that they had in the airplane when they believe that the hijacker jumped. Skolnik, Sam (November 22, 2001). "30 years ago, D.B. Cooper's night leap began a legend". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Archived from the original on September 6, 2012. Retrieved January 9, 2008. (subscription required) Topographic map, northern half of primary search area Archived July 14, 2011, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved February 25, 2011. Topographic map, southern half of primary search area Archived July 14, 2011, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved February 25, 2011. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, pp. 67–68. "Aeronautical Information Manual". Federal Aviation Administration. Archived from the original on July 21, 2011. Retrieved August 10, 2011. Gray, Geoffrey (October 21, 2007). "Unmasking D.B. Cooper". New York. ISSN 0028-7369. Archived from the original on October 22, 2007. Retrieved April 24, 2011. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, pp. 70–71. Olson 2010, p. 34. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, pp. 101–104. "Body of Slain Girl Identified". No. Page 79 of FBI File. Seattle Post-Intelligencer. April 4, 1972. Retrieved August 4, 2022. Red, Rose (February 16, 2008). "Murder at Old Cedar Creek Grist Mill, Woodland, Washington – Infamous Crime Scenes". Waymarking. Retrieved September 27, 2020. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, pp. 87–89. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, pp. 67. Investigate Report sent to J. Edgar Hoover, Director, FBI (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. March 9, 1971. p. 122. "Hijack Probe Expands". Associated Press. Spokane Chronicle. February 14, 1980. ...in the area near LaCenter, into which Cooper apparently parachuted. Edwards 2021, pp. 140. Letter to SAC, Seattle (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 25, 1971. p. 124. At about 11:30 pm, there was a burglary of a grocery store located roughly 10 miles south of the Dam. Survival rations were taken including beef jerky, cigarettes, gloves, etc. "Timeline of D.B. Cooper". New York Magazine. October 2007. Archived from the original on July 6, 2018. Retrieved January 27, 2021. FBI files on Fleming case, released via Freedom of Information Act Archived December 14, 2016, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved February 15, 2011. Holles, Everett R. (November 26, 1972). "$200,000 hijacking by 'D. B. Cooper' is still a mystery". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 10, 2020. Retrieved February 3, 2022. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 95. "Northwest Airlines, Inc. v. Globe Indem. Co". Justia Law. Archived from the original on January 14, 2022. Retrieved January 14, 2022. Seven, Richard (November 17, 1996). "D.B. Cooper – perfect crime or perfect folly?". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on October 2, 2012. Retrieved April 24, 2011. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, pp. 111–113. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, pp. 114–116. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 115. Connolly, P. (November 24, 1981). D.B. Cooper: A stupid rascal. The Free Lance-Star Archived September 29, 2020, at the Wayback Machine, retrieved June 29, 2016. "DB Cooper Vault". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on July 27, 2018. Retrieved July 26, 2018. "Update on Investigation of 1971 Hijacking by D.B. Cooper". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on July 12, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016. Gulliver, Katrina (December 22, 2021). "D.B. Cooper's skyjacking continues to fascinate Americans half a century later". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 22, 2021. Retrieved February 3, 2022. Initial FBI Inspection of Remaining Evidence (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 21, 1971. p. 124. On the seat numbered 18E a black clip-on tie was observed. This black tie contained a tie clasp, yellow gold in color. with a white pearl circular stone in the center. Letter to Director of FBI (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. February 24, 1972. p. 355. "D.B. Cooper redux: Help us solve the enduring mystery". Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 31, 2007. Archived from the original on October 17, 2010. Retrieved April 24, 2011. Cloherty, Jack (August 9, 2011). "D.B. Cooper DNA results: "not a match"". ABCNews.com. Archived from the original on April 28, 2020. Retrieved August 9, 2011. Ingalls, Chris (November 1, 2007). "Investigators: F.B.I. unveils new evidence in D.B. Cooper case". King 5. Archived from the original on January 5, 2008. Retrieved March 11, 2008. "Interview with lead FBI Investigator Larry Carr". Steven Rinehart. February 2, 2008. Archived from the original on February 29, 2008. Retrieved February 2, 2008. "In search of D.B. Cooper: new developments in the unsolved case". FBI. March 17, 2009. Archived from the original on January 17, 2011. Retrieved January 22, 2011. "Citizen Sleuths analyze the D.B. Cooper case". citizensleuths.com. Archived from the original on November 25, 2011. Retrieved December 7, 2011. Ingalls, Chris (January 13, 2017). "Scientists say they may have new evidence in D.B. Cooper case". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 30, 2017. Retrieved January 16, 2017. "New evidence: Was DB Cooper a Boeing employee?". KING-5. January 13, 2017. Archived from the original on January 15, 2017. Retrieved January 16, 2017. Johnson, Gene (November 23, 2011). "40 years later, DB Cooper's identity a mystery". KGW. Associated Press. Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Retrieved November 23, 2011. Ingalls, C (November 23, 2011). "40 years later, new evidence unveiled in DB Cooper case". King5.com. Archived from the original on September 9, 2013. Retrieved May 29, 2013. Williams, Kale (January 17, 2017). "D.B. Cooper could have worked at Portland-area tech firm, scientists say". The Oregonian. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved December 11, 2020. "3 particles, 1 possible clue found in D.B. Cooper mystery". KING 5. July 20, 2022. Retrieved December 23, 2022. Gray 2011b, pp. 93. FBI Crime Laboratory Review (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 9, 1971. p. 233. the limb hair possesses too few unique microscopic characteristics to be of value... FBI Crime Laboratory Review (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 9, 1971. p. 233. The head hair clipping is suitable for significant comparison results. FBI Internal Communication (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. February 19, 2002. p. 62. FBI Crime Laboratory (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 3, 1971. p. 43. The Laboratory is also requested to examine the ashtray contents and specifically process any Raleigh filter tip cigarette butts for possible fingerprint identification or comparison. FBI Crime Laboratory Review (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 13, 1971. p. 228. No latent prints of value developed contents of ashtray. FBI Evidence Review (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 9, 1971. p. 196. The DNA Unit was contacted and agreed to perform an unknown subject analysis on the numerous cigarette butts left by COOPER on the aircraft that day. They believed it likely that DNA could be recovered. Unfortunately, it was discovered that this evidence had been destroyed years earlier in Las Vegas. "F.B.I. makes new bid to find 1971 skyjacker". sfgate.com. Associated Press. January 2, 2008. Archived from the original on January 2, 2008. Retrieved January 2, 2008. Orzano, M. (July 21, 2014). "D.B. Cooper skyjacking: Boy, 8, unearths ransom notes". Coin World. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved January 27, 2021. "FBI Freedom of Information Act documents, part 7, pp. 10–12" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on July 21, 2011. Retrieved April 23, 2011. "Boy to Split $5,520 of D. B. Cooper's Loot". Los Angeles Times. Associated Press. May 22, 1986. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved January 27, 2021. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 110. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, pp. 110–111. "FBI Freedom of Information Act documents, part 7, p. 15" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on July 21, 2011. Retrieved April 23, 2011. "Cash linked to 'D.B. Cooper' up for auction". NBC News. March 31, 2008. Archived from the original on February 4, 2014. Retrieved March 31, 2008. Ingalls, Chris (August 3, 2020). "Scientist uncovers new, minuscule clues on DB Cooper ransom money found in Washington". King 5. Archived from the original on January 8, 2022. Retrieved January 8, 2022. Kaye, Thomas G.; Meltzer, Mark (August 2020). "Diatoms constrain forensic burial timelines: case study with DB Cooper money". Scientific Reports. 10 (1): 13036. Bibcode:2020NatSR..1013036K. doi:10.1038/s41598-020-70015-z. PMC 7400570. PMID 32747687. Haitch, Richared (August 31, 1986). "FOLLOW-UP ON THE NEWS; D. B. Cooper: Undying Legend". The New York Times. "Six Years Later Brian Ingram Gets a Piece of D.b. Cooper's Hijack Haul". People Magazine. June 23, 1986. Archived from the original on February 4, 2021. Retrieved January 27, 2021. "D.B. Cooper Skyjacking Cash Sold in Dallas Auction". Fox News Channel. Associated Press. June 13, 2009. Archived from the original on October 20, 2018. Retrieved June 14, 2008. Clever, Dick (November 26, 1971). "Hijacker Hunt Near Woodland". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. p. 124. Along with the two chestpack chutes from Sky Sports, located in Issaquah, the hijacker was provided with two backpack chutes by Norman Hayden, of Renton Aviation. Hawkins, Robert (October 3, 1976). "D.B. Cooper, is he at the bottom of Lake Merwin or walking the streets?". The Seattle Times. They were just emergency backpacks. Really, they're just used for aerobatic pilots or glider pilots or someone who would use a single parachute for a lifesaving event only. It wouldn't be like a sport parachute. Initial FBI Inspection of Remaining Evidence (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 21, 1971. p. 95. Cossey further stated that the parachutes supplied to UNSUB were of non-steerable variety and therefore, had no steering devices whatever. Initial FBI Inspection of Remaining Evidence (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 21, 1971. p. 124. They both were like military chutes in that they did not have sleeves. FBI Evidence Report (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 21, 1971. p. 129. One (1) orange or salmon-pink chest parachute. This chute was found on board the hijacked Northwest Airlines 727 jet Flight #305, in an opened condition. It is salmon or orange-pink in color; has no pilot chute and the shrouds have been cut away from the canvas pack and three of the lines had been cut out. Initial FBI Inspection of Remaining Evidence (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 21, 1971. p. 292. On the floor directly in front of seat number 18D, the exterior canvas cover for a chest type parachute was observed...an opened parachute which apparently had been removed from the canvas parachute cover described above was found spread out over seats 17C and 17B. Initial FBI Evidence Identification (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 21, 1971. p. 130. One back parachute with a sage green nylon container Model NB6 (Navy back pack 6) with sage green nylon harness. Pulkkinen, Levi (August 21, 2013). "D.B. Cooper parachute displayed for first time". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved October 18, 2022. Clever, Dick (November 26, 1971). "Hijacker Hunt Near Woodland". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. p. 124. Emerick said the canopy had been sewn shut and the parachute was for ground demonstration only. FBI Interview with Earl Cossey (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. May 31, 1972. p. 110. Richards, Leverett (November 14, 1976). "Alive or dead, skyjack pioneer came out loser". The Sunday Oregonian. Retrieved August 16, 2022. If it had been usable he could not have attached it to his parachute harness, which had no D rings for use with a chest pack. UNSUB (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 26, 1971. p. 31. Missing back pack is a model NB-6 (Navy Back Pack Six). Container is sage-green, nylon, and parachute is twenty-eight feet nylon white flight circular (nonsteerable). Back pack equipped with special foam cushion and has sage-green nylon harness with no 'D' rings to mount chest pack Painter, John (November 27, 1971). "Weather frustrates hijacker hunt". The Oregonian. In Seattle, persons familiar with the chutes said the reserve chest chutes could not have attached to the main chute's harness. Initial FBI Inspection of Remaining Evidence (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 26, 1971. p. 125. Clever, Dick (November 26, 1971). "Hijacker Hunt Near Woodland". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved August 16, 2022. Emrick explained that in order to be able to use his chestpacks, the jumper must have two "D-rings" on the backpack harness to which the chestpack can be attached. The backpacks obtained from Renton Aviation did not have these "D-rings." Earl Cossey, 30, or Seattle, who made the backpack chutes, confirmed this. Authorities were unable to explain the absence of the unusable chestpack. FBI Interview with Earl Cossey (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. May 31, 1972. p. 202. Mr. Cossey said that if the hijacker opened of the chest packs on the airplane he probably would remove the parachute and put the money in the chest pack. 1st FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Philadelphia, PA (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 24, 1971. p. 155. she recalls that he was occupied with...attempting to in some way pack the money in a parachute container in order that he could in some way attach it to his body along with the regular parachute straps. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 108. Tedford, Deborah (January 2, 2008). "F.B.I. seeks help in solving skyjacking mystery". National Public Radio. Archived from the original on April 3, 2008. Retrieved March 11, 2008. Composite A Release (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 28, 1971. p. 296. Gray 2011b, pp. 114. Witness Reaction to Composite A (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 29, 1971. p. 284. sketch makes him look younger than he is Memo Regarding Composite A (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 2, 1971. p. 284. a sort of disinterested, let's get it over with look. Memo Regarding Composite A (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 2, 1971. p. 264. She was very adamant in her insistence that the artist's conception shown to her was not a good likeness of the hijacker. Memo Regarding Composite B (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. March 1, 1973. p. 215. The intent of this change to the artist's composite is to more clearly show [hijacker's] age and swarthy complexion. Reaction to Composite B (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. October 2, 1972. p. 233. She stated he was more refined in appearance than sketch B indicates Reaction to Composite B (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. September 14, 1972. pp. 242–245. Reaction to Revised Composite B (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. February 1, 1973. p. 212. She advised that Artist's Conception B bears a very close resemblance to the unsub. Reaction to Composite B (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. February 1, 1973. p. 284. She said she believes the hijacker would be easily recognized from this sketch. Memo to Director of FBI Regarding Composite B (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. April 19, 1973. p. 210. In view of the numerous contacts with the witnesses who supplied the descriptive data from which the sketch was prepared and the lapse of time since they observed the hijacker, it is felt no constructive purpose can be served by further attempts at modification based contact with these same witnesses. National Law Enforcement Bulletin Nov 28th, 1971 (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 28, 1971. p. 294. Bill Mitchell Composite B Revision (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 20, 1972. p. 227. Bill Mitchell Initial Description (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 30, 1971. p. 176. Edwards 2021, p. 12. Robert Gregory Initial Description (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 29, 1971. p. 183. Seven, Richard (November 17, 1996). "D.B. Cooper -- Perfect Crime Or Perfect Folly?". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved January 14, 2022. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 96. FBI Internal Memo (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. May 30, 1973. p. 282. FBI Internal Memo (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. May 30, 1973. p. 292. If Unsub [unidentified subject] was a member of a sport parachute club he would certainly be an unusual member, one that would be easily recognized by the other members FBI Internal Memo (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. May 30, 1973. p. 290. It is felt that unsub [unidentified subject] possibly maintains his physical well being through regular exercise FBI Internal Memo (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. May 30, 1973. p. 290. It is believed an alcoholic or former alcoholic who had just had one drink and was placed in a situation of similar stress would succumb to the pressure and imbibe in the free drinks offered him by the stewardesses. FBI Internal Memo (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. May 30, 1973. p. 290. It is felt Unsub [unidentified subject] may possibly smoke less than one pack a day. FBI Internal Memo (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. May 30, 1973. pp. 289–291. FBI Internal Memo (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. May 30, 1973. p. 290. Unsub [unidentified subject] was probably a 'loner' and carried out the hijacking by himself with no partners. Edwards 2021, pp. 13. Cheung, Kylie (June 10, 2021). "The ongoing mystique of D.B. Cooper, from documentaries to the Marvel Cinematic Universe". Salon. Archived from the original on January 14, 2022. Retrieved January 14, 2022. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 52. FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Reno, Nevada (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 24, 1971. p. 154. FBI SA Francis J. Schmidt's 302 describing evidentiary conditions within plane (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 24, 1971. p. 292. On the seat numbered 18E a black clip-on tie was observed. FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Reno, Nevada (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 24, 1971. p. 154. 'The hijacker displayed an extensive knowledge of the aircraft and specifically well informed in refueling procedures' "50 years on, the unsolved D.B. Cooper skyjacking is the stuff of legends". Portland Monthly. Archived from the original on January 14, 2022. Retrieved January 14, 2022. DK (February 2, 2021). The Crime Book: Big ideas simply explained. Penguin. p. 41. ISBN 978-1-4654-6667-9. FBI Interview with Co-Pilot Bill Rataczak in Reno, Nov 24, 1971 (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 24, 1971. p. 321. '... the hijacker displayed a specific knowledge of flying and aircraft in general.' Wood, Richard (November 24, 2019). "DB Cooper mystery: The most intriguing hijacking case in history". Nine News. Archived from the original on January 14, 2022. Retrieved January 14, 2022. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 43. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 43: "That the Boeing 727 could be flown with the after stair down was not known to the crew". FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Reno, Nevada (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 24, 1971. p. 156. 'She also commented that he appeared to be completely familiar with the parachutes which had been furnished to him.' Colbert & Szollosi 2016, p. 73: "Tina said he put the chute on as if he'd done it every day." Edwards 2021, pp. 27. "FBI No Longer Looking for DB Cooper". The Seattle Times. July 12, 2016. Retrieved October 13, 2022. In Search of D.B. Cooper: New developments in the unsolved case. FBI.gov (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. March 17, 2009. Archived from the original on November 9, 2016. Retrieved November 9, 2016. FBI interview with Early Cossey in Seattle, Washington (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 26, 1971. p. 203. 'He said that anyone who had six or seven practice jumps could accomplish this as the first five jumps would be on a static line and the subsequent jumps would be free fall.' FBI interview with Early Cossey in Seattle, Washington (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 26, 1971. p. 203. 'It was his opinion that the skyjacker would suffer severe ankle and or leg injuries from this jump. Mr. Cossey said the fact the hijacker wore street shoes would also increase the chance that he would be injured on landing as the most experienced jumpers wear jump boots or some rigid ankle support.' Evans, Tim (August 3, 2018). "Here are 11 possible suspects in the D.B. Cooper mystery, including some who falsely confessed". The Indianapolis Star. Archived from the original on April 11, 2021. Retrieved January 13, 2022. Gunther 1985, p. 15. Johnson, Gene (November 25, 2011). "D.B. Cooper enigma still fascinates". USA Today. Associated Press. Archived from the original on July 23, 2012. Retrieved August 27, 2012. Letter to FBI Director from SAC, Seattle (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. December 8, 1971. p. 9. Internal Memo dated Nov 30, 1971 (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 30, 1971. p. 270. He wonders if this paper bag could have contained a jump suit and a pair of boots. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 35. "Cooper's brazen crime still celebrated". Tampa Bay. November 27, 1994. "D.B. Cooper: Undying legend". Follow-up on the news. The New York Times. August 31, 1986. "Parachute found, but packer doubts it was D.B. Cooper's". AP News. Retrieved August 13, 2022. Hawkins, Robert (October 3, 1976). "D.B. Cooper, is he at the bottom of Lake Merwin or walking the streets?". The Seattle Times. Seattle Times Article (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. October 6, 1976. p. 203. Colbert & Szollosi 2016, p. 186. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 83. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 79. FBI interview with Tina Mucklow in Reno, Nevada (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. November 24, 1971. p. 156. She also commented that he appeared to be completely familiar with the parachutes which had been furnished to him. Wicentowski, Danny (January 31, 2017). "The final flight of Martin McNally". Detroit Metro Times. Retrieved July 26, 2022. "Hijacker gets life, with ransom still hidden". The Commercial Appeal. September 30, 1972. Miniclier, Kit (January 21, 2001). "Skyjacker a Colorado oddity?". Denver Post. Retrieved July 25, 2022. Frazier, Joseph B. (March 27, 2008). "Skyjacker mystery resurfaces". The Daily Herald. Arlington Heights, IL. Associated Press. Retrieved August 21, 2022. 'The night it happened, I thought he had a 50 percent chance,' he said. '... It has gone down since then.' "D.B. Cooper, if he's alive, has one more year to go". Walla Walla Union Bulletin. Associated Press. November 24, 1975. 'My personal guess is that there is no better than a 50 percent chance that he's alive.' Frazier, Joe (November 13, 1976). "Sky thief: Bandit who stole $200,000 in 1971 still being sought". Post-Gazette. Pittsburgh, PA. p. B-1. Statutes of Limitation in Federal Criminal Cases: An overview (PDF). FAS.org (Report). CRS Report for Congress. Congressional Research Service. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 24, 2015. Retrieved March 6, 2011. Denson, Bryan (November 24, 1996). "D.B. Cooper legend lives". Oregonlive.com. Portland Oregonian. Archived from the original on September 20, 2003. Retrieved March 6, 2011. Evans, Tim. "Here are 11 possible suspects in the D.B. Cooper mystery, including some who falsely confessed". The Indianapolis Star. Archived from the original on April 11, 2021. Retrieved January 13, 2022. Perry, Douglas (January 10, 2018). "The (un)usual suspects in D.B. Cooper case continue to fuel interest". The Oregonian. Archived from the original on December 5, 2021. Retrieved January 14, 2022. Beeson, Drew (2020). Paratrooper of Fortune. The Woodlands, Texas: Fort Necessity Press. p. 242. ISBN 9798657525144. Practically all ex-special forces I know Moore, Stephen L. (2018). Uncommon Valor: The Recon Company that Earned Five Medals of Honor and Included America's Most Decorated Green Beret (1st ed.). Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press. p. 33. ISBN 9781682473122. "Some of his comrades later heard, and believed, that he was the legendary D.B. Cooper "Scottish Parachuting". Flight International. 82, Part I: 529. 1962. A U.S. Army parachutist, Allen Tyre, won the Scottish Open Championships at Perth on September 15. Runner up was Sgt. Ted Braden, also of the U.S. Army Beeson 2020, pp. 51. Moore 2018, pp. 33. Duncan, Don (October 1967). "Mercenary Job Wanted". Ramparts Magazine. 6 (3): 22–23. Duncan 1967, pp. 22. Dingeman, James (1977). U.S Military Involvement in Southern Africa (1st ed.). Boston, MA: South End Press. p. 97. ISBN 9780896080416. Moore 2018, pp. 63: "Congressional hearings were beginning regarding SOG activities. Seeing Braden as a potential embarrassment, he was offered an honorable discharge in return for swearing not to disclose anything about SOG activities." Duncan 1967, pp. 22–23:"Braden is among those professionals who appear to have a secret death wish, coupled with well-trained instincts for survival. He continually places himself in unnecessary danger but always manages to get away with it." At one time he was forbidden to free-fall for violating safety regulations. The rules state a jumper must pull and be in the saddle before he reaches 2000 feet. Braden makes a habit of waiting until he is well below 1000 feet." Duncan 1967, pp. 22–23"he 'played the margin' in town as well. He was continuously involved in shady deals to make money.." Beeson 2020, pp. 252. Beeson 2020, pp. 220. "Man Indicted in Fish, Meat Thefts". The Boston Herald. June 6, 1980. "Stolen Car Stopped on Turnpike". Sandusky Register. March 4, 1982. Beeson 2020, pp. 225. Beeson 2020, pp. 9. Beeson 2020, pp. 235. Porteous, Skipp; Blevins, Robert M. (2010). Into the Blast – The True Story of D.B. Cooper. Seattle, Washington: Adventure Books of Seattle. ISBN 978-0982327180. "D.B. Cooper". Brad Meltzer's Decoded. Season 1. Episode 6. January 6, 2011. History. Gray 2011b, p. 118: "Kenny drank bourbon so much, he collected his own bourbon bottles.". Gray 2011b, pp. 180–190. "FBI working new lead in D.B. Cooper hijacking case". CNN. August 1, 2011. Archived from the original on November 10, 2012. Retrieved August 1, 2011. "F.B.I. rejects latest D.B. Cooper suspect". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Associated Press. October 26, 2007. Archived from the original on June 5, 2020. Retrieved March 11, 2008. "Has The Mystery of D.B. Cooper Been Solved?". InsideEdition.com. October 6, 2008. Archived from the original on March 8, 2012. Retrieved March 8, 2011. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, pp. 83–84. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, pp. 121–122. [dead link] Provano, Joel (August 3, 2011): Woman claims D.B. Cooper was her uncle. AJC.com Retrieved August 3, 2011. Hannaford, Alex (July 30, 2011). "The 40-year mystery of America's greatest skyjacking". Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on July 30, 2011. Retrieved July 30, 2011. Berkes, Howard (2011). "FBI Says It Has 'A New Suspect' In D.B. Cooper Skyjacking Case: The Two-Way : NPR". NPR. Archived from the original on August 2, 2011. Retrieved August 1, 2011. Thomas, P and Cloherty, J (August 3, 2011): "D.B. Cooper Exclusive: Did Niece Provide Key Evidence?" ABCNews.com Archived May 27, 2020, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved August 3, 2011. Gray, Geoffrey (August 9, 2011). "DNA test negative for D.B. Cooper suspect; a new sketch emerges". New York Magazine. Archived from the original on December 17, 2013. Retrieved December 31, 2012. McNerthney, Casey (August 1, 2011). "No fingerprints found on item in D.B. Cooper case". seattlepi.com. Archived from the original on December 27, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011. McNerthney, Casey (November 22, 2007). "D.B. Cooper, where are you?". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Archived from the original on January 25, 2013. Retrieved February 16, 2011. (subscription required) Gray 2011b, pp. 57, 95. McNerthney, Casey (November 25, 2007). "The mystery of D.B. Cooper still endures". HeraldNet.com. Retrieved August 13, 2022. Olson 2010, pp. 72–73. Gray 2011b, pp. 242–243. "Jet hijacker's payoff may be in Vancouver bank: U.S. lawyer". cbc.ca. Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved August 7, 2022. Spencer, Kent (November 21, 2011): Skyjacker D.B. Cooper 'enjoyed the Grey Cup game,' according to 1971 letter attributed to him. National Post archive Retrieved December 1, 2011 "Was D.B. Cooper an Ogden Resident? Archived February 7, 2016, at the Wayback Machine" (July 28, 2008) Deseret News (Salt Lake City) via Associated Press. Retrieved February 1, 2011. "Hijacker kills wife, pilot, and himself". The New York Times. October 5, 1971. Retrieved August 5, 2022. Hargrove, Brantley (August 27, 2009). "A Nashville hijacking 38 years ago set the standard on how not to handle hostage negotiations". Retrieved August 5, 2022. "Titanium particles from Cooper's tie". citizensleuths.com. Retrieved August 5, 2022. Couch, Scott (May 3, 2018). "Infamous skyjacker D.B. Cooper could have Nashville ties, used Army expertise during crime". Fox 17 WZTV. Nashville, TN. Retrieved August 5, 2022. Perry, Douglas (November 8, 2021). "D.B. Cooper at 50: Push to solve case gains steam, but much about famous skyjacking remains a mystery". Oregonlive.com. The Portland Oregonian. Retrieved August 5, 2022. "Suspect in Family-Slaying May Be Famed D.B. Cooper". Los Angeles Times. June 30, 1989. p. A1. Coreno, Catherine (October 22, 2007). "D.B. Cooper: A Timeline". New York. Archived from the original on July 6, 2018. Retrieved January 10, 2008. McCracken, Elizabeth (December 28, 2008). "Wanted: A Killer Disappears Into Another Life". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 5, 2018. Retrieved September 9, 2014. Stout, David (March 25, 2008). "John E. List, 82, Killer of 5 Family Members, Dies". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 18, 2018. Retrieved May 30, 2008. Skydiving Operator Faces Charges Over Deaths of 2 Jumpers (February 13, 1995). Seattle Times archive Archived May 21, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved October 10, 2012 McCowan, Karen (January 20, 2010). Illegal flight lands pilot in trouble once again. Register-Guard archive Archived July 15, 2011, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved February 24, 2011. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 51. "The Real McCoy". Time. April 24, 1972. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved July 26, 2007. "Skydiver Held as Hijacker; $500,000 Is Still Missing". The New York Times. Associated Press. April 10, 1972. p. 1. Archived from the original on August 5, 2018. Retrieved August 4, 2018. Gray 2011b, pp. 60–64. Krajicek, David. "The D.B. Cooper Story: The Copycats". Crime Library. Archived from the original on January 2, 2008. Retrieved January 3, 2008. Famous Cases & Criminals. FBI.gov Archived May 16, 2016, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved May 29, 2013 Motaher, Maria. "Richard Floyd McCoy, Jr". Federal Bureau of Investigation. Archived from the original on December 7, 2018. Retrieved December 7, 2018. "Widow of Man Linked in Book to Skyjacker D.B. Cooper Sues Authors, Provo Attorney". Associated Press. January 18, 1992. p. B5. Funk, Marianne (February 21, 1992). McCoy's Widow Admits Helping in '72 Hijacking. Deseret News Archive Archived October 22, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved February 21, 2011. Rhodes, Bernie; Calame, Russell (1991). D.B. Cooper: The Real McCoy. University of Utah Press. ISBN 0874803772.[page needed] Schindler, Harold (November 24, 1996). "25 Years Later, 'D.B' Remains Tied to Utah; Skyjacker Took Story To His Grave". The Salt Lake Tribune. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 82. NORJAK Memo (Report). Federal Bureau of Investigation. July 29, 2004. p. 192. Some notable examples, cited by Rhodes and Calame: Cooper's age was estimated by all witnesses as mid-40s, McCoy was 29; most witnesses, including all three flight attendants, said Cooper had "dark brown, piercing" eyes, McCoy's eyes were light blue; Cooper's ears had no distinguishing characteristics, McCoy's ears stuck out so prominently that his nickname was "Dumbo", and he wore a scarf to conceal them during the Denver hijacking; Cooper drank bourbon and chain-smoked cigarettes, McCoy was an observant Mormon who did not smoke or drink alcohol; Cooper was described as having a raspy voice with no particular accent, McCoy had a noticeable southern accent, and a marked lisp due to surgical correction of a cleft palate in childhood. Rhodes & Calame (1991), pp. 86, 94, 96, 134, 145. Hamilton, Don (January 1, 2008). "F.B.I. makes new plea in D.B. Cooper case". The Seattle Times. "D.B. Cooper expert says he's discovered new suspect in decades-old mystery". KPTV. November 11, 2022. Retrieved December 23, 2022. Perry, Douglas (January 28, 2021). "'Charming' D.B. Cooper suspect Sheridan Peterson dies at 94, spent years dedicated to political causes". Archived from the original on January 30, 2021. Retrieved January 30, 2021. D.B. Cooper investigation focuses on California 'off-the-books genius' Robert Rackstraw. Archived September 16, 2016, at the Wayback Machine San Jose Mercury News (July 12, 2016), retrieved September 8, 2016. Sharon, K. (October 7, 2017). California man accused of being D.B. Cooper: A life ruined or a case solved? Archived November 30, 2018, at the Wayback Machine San Jose Mercury News, retrieved November 29, 2018. Fitzgerald, M. (July 12, 2016). Fitzgerald: Was D.B. Cooper in Stockton? Archived November 30, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. Recordnet, retrieved November 29, 2018. Dodd, J. (July 12, 2016). Man Identified in History Channel Show as Notorious Skyjacker D.B. Cooper Denies Accusation Archived December 20, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. People.com, retrieved December 13, 2016. "Rackstraw Says He's Not Cooper Of Skyjack Fame". Google. Eugene Register-Guard. February 7, 1979. Archived from the original on September 29, 2020. Retrieved July 16, 2016. "In Search Of... D. B. Cooper". YouTube. In Search Of. December 6, 1979. Archived from the original on January 19, 2014. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Baxter, Stephen (July 12, 2016). "TV investigation links Santa Cruz County native to 1971 D.B. Cooper 'skyjacking' case". Santa Cruz Sentinel. Archived from the original on August 22, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016. Colbert & Szollosi 2016, p. 330. Lawsuit filed against FBI to make D.B. Cooper investigation file public Archived September 23, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. The Oregonian (September 8, 2016), retrieved September 22, 2016. Chamberlain, Samuel (August 9, 2017). "DB Cooper mystery: 'Potential' physical evidence uncovered in search". Fox News. Archived from the original on August 11, 2017. Retrieved August 11, 2017. Cerullo, Megan. "FBI accepts new evidence in D.B. Cooper hijacking cold case". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on August 24, 2017. Retrieved August 21, 2017. "Investigators think letter confirms ID of D.B. Cooper". Seattle Times. January 5, 2018. Archived from the original on January 7, 2018. Retrieved January 7, 2018. Perry, Douglas (June 28, 2018). "Skyjacker D.B. Cooper revealed real identity in 1972 letter to The Oregonian, code-breaker claims". The Oregonian. Archived from the original on June 12, 2023. Retrieved June 12, 2023. "The search for D.B. Cooper: Investigators say they've confirmed skyjacker's identity by decoding long-lost 'confession'". Msn.com. Archived from the original on June 28, 2018. Retrieved June 28, 2018. FBI Closes Case On D.B. Cooper Skyjacking Mystery Archived September 17, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. CBS Miami (July 13, 2016), retrieved September 8, 2016. "California man accused of being D.B. Cooper: A…". MercuryNews. October 7, 2017. Archived from the original on October 8, 2017. Retrieved October 8, 2017. "San Diegan featured in program about notorious D.B. Cooper skyjacking case dies in Bankers Hill home". San Diego Union-Tribune. July 10, 2019. Archived from the original on July 10, 2019. Retrieved July 10, 2019. Shapira, Ian (May 26, 2018). "Is This Man D. B. Cooper? Yet another suspect surfaces in 47-year old puzzle". The Ottawa Citizen. Ottawa. "A new 'D.B. Cooper' suspect? Yet another possible identity for the elusive hijacker". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 20, 2018. Retrieved July 19, 2018. La Furgey, Joe (May 17, 2018). "Book claims to solve D.B. Cooper mystery". Wood TV. Archived from the original on July 20, 2018. Retrieved July 19, 2018. "D.B. Cooper case drops another surprising suspect into the spotlight". OregonLive.com. Archived from the original on July 20, 2018. Retrieved July 19, 2018. "D.B. Cooper author unveils evidence he says identifies infamous skyjacker". MLive.com. Archived from the original on July 20, 2018. Retrieved July 19, 2018. "Forensic investigator explains why he believes Walter Reca is D.B. Cooper". KING. Archived from the original on July 20, 2018. Retrieved July 19, 2018. Koenig, Joe (2018). Getting the Truth: I Am D.B. Cooper. Principia Media LLC. ISBN 978-1614853268. OCLC 1090800628. Archived from the original on January 12, 2019. Retrieved January 11, 2019. Ingalls, Chris. "Here are discrepancies in D.B. Cooper identity story from publisher". K5. Archived from the original on August 28, 2021. Retrieved March 22, 2021. "William Smith Obituary – Bloomfield, NJ | The Star-Ledger". Obits.nj.com. Archived from the original on December 18, 2018. Retrieved December 18, 2018. Perry, Douglas (November 15, 2018). "New suspect in D.B. Cooper skyjacking case unearthed by Army data analyst; FBI stays mum". OregonLive.com. Archived from the original on November 24, 2018. Retrieved November 22, 2018. Gaydos, Ryan (November 15, 2018). "DB Cooper revealed? New suspect emerges years after infamous hijacking". Fox News. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2018. "Jersey City Employees". Lvrr.com. Archived from the original on June 29, 2019. Retrieved November 30, 2018. "D. B. Cooper – found at last?". CBS News. August 22, 2000. Archived from the original on October 8, 2021. Retrieved October 21, 2021. Krajicek, David. "The D.B. Cooper Story: 'I'm Dan Cooper. So Am I.'". Crime Library. Archived from the original on April 6, 2008. Retrieved March 12, 2008. Koerner, B (June 14, 2013). "Skyjacker of the day". slate.com. Archived from the original on September 15, 2015. Retrieved September 4, 2015. Gladwell, Malcolm (October 1, 2001). "Safety in the skies". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on December 18, 2014. Retrieved February 14, 2011. Miniclier, Kit (January 21, 2001). "Skyjacker a Colorado oddity?". Denver Post. Archived from the original on April 24, 2014. Retrieved February 16, 2013. "Hijacker caught after parachuting over Colorado with $50,000 in cash". Lewiston Daily Sun. Associated Press. January 21, 1972. p. 1. Archived from the original on September 30, 2020. Retrieved September 22, 2018. Taylor, Daniel L. (January 21, 1972). "Parachutist hijacker captured". Eugene Register Guard. UPI. p. 3A. Archived from the original on February 3, 2021. Retrieved September 22, 2018. "Chuting hijacker caught by police". Spokesman-Review. Associated Press. January 21, 1972. p. 1. Archived from the original on September 29, 2020. Retrieved September 22, 2018. "Hijacker with $50,000 loot captured after bailing out". Milwaukee Journal. January 21, 1972. p. 1.[permanent dead link] "Hijacker foiled; tracked by jets". Spokane Daily Chronicle. Associated Press. January 21, 1972. p. 19. Archived from the original on March 23, 2020. Retrieved September 22, 2018. Whelan, Frank (June 30, 1985): "A-B-E Hijacker Who Parachuted into Jungle Is Free From Prison Air Piracy" Morning Call Archive Archived January 20, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved August 3, 2011. Whelan, Frank (September 17, 2019). "History's Headlines: Skyjack of 1972". WFMZ-TV. Retrieved March 2, 2022. Newton, Michael (2002). The Encyclopedia of Kidnappings. New York, New York: Facts On File, Inc. p. 129. ISBN 0-8160-4486-4. Frank, Whelan (June 30, 1985). "A-B-E hijacker who parachuted in". The Morning Call. "$155,000 Recovered in Reno Jet Hijacking". The New York Times. June 6, 1972. O'Neil, Tim (June 25, 2011). "A Look Back • Airline hijacking at Lambert in 1972 turns bizarre". St. Louis Post-Dispatch. Archived from the original on May 29, 2020. Retrieved April 20, 2019. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 79–80. Hemphill, Evie (July 27, 2020). "'American Skyjacker' Podcast Details 1972 High-Flying Drama At Lambert Airport". St. Louis Public Radio. Retrieved March 2, 2022.. The Cooper connection is in the trailer video & podcast (rather than article text). Wu, Annie. "The history of airport security". savvytraveler.publicradio.org. American Public Media. Archived from the original on December 6, 2010. Retrieved February 14, 2011. [unreliable source?] Codename: Norjak The Skyjacking of Northwest Flight 305. Check-Six.com Archived August 15, 2013, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved March 4, 2013. [unreliable source?] "Codename: Norjak The Skyjacking of Northwest Flight 305 – The 1980 Copycat". Check-Six.com. Archived from the original on September 2, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018. Mickolus, E.F. and Simmons, S.L. (2011): The Terrorist List. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers, p. 273. ISBN 0313374716. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 120. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 77. Gilmore, Susan (November 22, 2001). "D.B. Cooper puzzle: the legend turns 30". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on January 6, 2008. Retrieved January 2, 2008. Kaminski-Morrow, David. "FBI revives hunt for 727 parachute hijacker 'DB Cooper'". www.flightglobal.com. Retrieved August 7, 2022. Hengi 2000, pp. 56–57. Baumann, L (May 7, 2013). "Man who packed DB Cooper's parachutes ID'd as Woodinville homicide victim". Woodinville.Patch.com. Archived from the original on September 6, 2013. Retrieved May 29, 2013. Smith, BA (May 4, 2013). "Update on the murder of Earl Cossey, an analysis of his role in the DB Cooper case". themountainnewswa.net. Archived from the original on June 23, 2013. Retrieved May 29, 2013. Johnson, G (April 30, 2013). "Earl Cossey, DB Cooper parachute packer, ID'd as homicide victim". HuffingtonPost.com. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved May 29, 2013. Bauman, L (May 12, 2013). "Cossey murder: Woodinville police chief classifies it as burglary". Woodinville.patch.com. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved October 28, 2013. Himmelsbach & Worcester 1986, p. 116. "Death in the DB Cooper "family" – Dona Elliott". Themountainnewswa.net. November 17, 2015. Archived from the original on February 16, 2017. Retrieved February 12, 2017. Slatta, Richard W. (2001). The Mythical West: An Encyclopedia of Legend, Lore and Popular Culture. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1576071519. Littman, Adam (November 24, 2019). "Cooper Theories Captivate". Longview Daily News. Williams, Allison (November 12, 2021). "D.B. Cooper Con Convenes to Solve the 50-Year-Old Mystery". SeattleMet. Retrieved October 14, 2022. Bragg, Lynn E. (2005). Myths and Mysteries of Washington. Guilford, Connecticut: Globe Pequot. ISBN 978-0762734276. Colbert, Thomas J.; Szollosi, Tom (2016). The Last Master Outlaw: How He Outfoxed the FBI Six Times – but Not a Cold Case Team (1st ed.). Jacaranda Roots Publishing. ISBN 978-0997740431. Edwards, Robert H. (2021). D. B. Cooper and Flight 305. Atglen, PA: Schiffer Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7643-6256-9. Gray, Geoffrey (2011b). Skyjack: The Hunt for D.B. Cooper. Crown. ISBN 978-0307451293. Gunther, Max (1985). D. B. Cooper: What Really Happened. Chicago: Contemporary Books. ISBN 978-0809251803. OCLC 12103370. — Disclaimer: Large amounts of Gunther's content based on alleged interviews with a woman known as "Clara", who claimed to have discovered an injured Cooper two days after the hijacking and lived with him until he died a decade later. This material is considered by the FBI and others as a hoax or fabrication, whether by Gunther or "Clara". For critical analysis, see Perry, Douglas (November 15, 2018). "New suspect in D.B. Cooper skyjacking case unearthed by Army data analyst; FBI stays mum". OregonLive.com. The Portland Oregonian. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved September 12, 2022. Others called it straight-up fiction, and for good reason. A key subplot of the book – LeClair and Clara's meet-cute experience in a small, unnamed Northwest town the day after the skyjacking – is obviously untrue. ... Another interpretation: Gunther just made it all up. Hengi, B.I. (2000). Airlines Remembered. Midland. ISBN 978-1857800913. Himmelsbach, Ralph P.; Worcester, Thomas K. (1986). Norjak: The Investigation of D. B. Cooper. West Linn, Oregon: Norjak Project. ISBN 978-0961741501. (Himmelsbach was the FBI's chief investigator on the case until his retirement in 1980; "Norjak" is FBI shorthand for the Cooper hijacking.) Olson, Kay Melchisedech (2010). D.B. Cooper Hijacking: Vanishing Act. Compass Point Books. ISBN 978-0756543594. (Straightforward accounting of official information and evidence.) Wigger, John (2023). The Hijacking of American Flight 119: How D. B. Cooper Inspired a Skyjacking Craze and the FBI's Battle to Stop It. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-769575-3. Wikimedia Commons has media related to D. B. Cooper. FBI Reading Room Files of the D.B. Cooper Case