Sir Andrew Barron Murray OBE (born 15 May 1987) is a British professional tennis player. He was ranked world No. 1 in singles by the Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP) for 41 weeks, and finished as the year-end No. 1 in 2016. Murray has won three Grand Slam singles titles, two at Wimbledon (in 2013 and 2016) and one at the US Open (in 2012), and has reached eleven major finals. Murray was ranked in the top 10 for all but one month from July 2008 through to October 2017, and was no lower than world No. 4 in eight of the nine year-end rankings during that span. Murray has won 46 ATP Tour singles titles, including 14 Masters 1000 events and two gold medals at the Summer Olympics. Originally coached by his mother Judy alongside his older brother Jamie, Murray moved to Barcelona at age 15 to train at the Sánchez-Casal Academy. He began his professional career around the time Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal established themselves as the two dominant players in men's tennis. Murray had immediate success on the ATP Tour, making his top 10 debut in 2007 at age 19. By 2010, Murray and Novak Djokovic had joined Federer and Nadal in the Big Four, the group of players who dominated men's tennis during the 2010s. Murray initially struggled against the rest of the Big Four, losing his first four major finals (three to Federer and one to Djokovic). He made his major breakthrough in 2012 by defeating Djokovic to win the US Open, becoming the first British major singles champion since Virginia Wade in 1977, and the first male champion since Fred Perry in 1936. A month earlier, he had won the men's singles gold medal against Federer at the 2012 London Olympics, and a silver medal in mixed doubles. From 2013 through 2016, Murray reached another six major finals. He won two of these encounters, at Wimbledon in 2013 and 2016. Murray had his career-best season in 2016. During that year, Murray made three major finals, winning Wimbledon. He also defended his title at the 2016 Rio Olympics to become the only player, male or female, to win two Olympic gold medals in singles. Murray also became world No. 1 for the first time that season, and clinched the year-end No. 1 ranking by winning his only Tour Finals title over Djokovic. Since 2016, he has struggled with various injuries and fell out of the top 100 in 2018 due to only seldom playing on tour, though he has since slowly risen back to the top 50. Murray is an all-court player who excels in particular at defence, returning serve and constructing points. He is generally regarded as having one of the best and most consistent two-handed backhands on the ATP Tour. Murray is considered a national hero in the United Kingdom for re-establishing the country as a leading force in men's tennis for the first time since the early 20th century. He and his brother led the Great Britain Davis Cup team to a title in 2015. Murray has been outspoken as a feminist, and became only the second top-10 player in the history of the ATP Tour to have a female coach when he hired Amélie Mauresmo. Andy Murray was born in Glasgow, Scotland, the son of Judy Murray (née Erskine) and Willie Murray. His maternal grandfather, Roy Erskine, was a professional footballer in the late 1950s. Murray is a supporter of Hibernian Football Club, one of the teams his grandfather represented, and Arsenal Football Club. Murray began playing tennis at the age of three when his mother Judy took him to play on the local courts. He played in his first competitive tournament at age five and by the time he was eight he was competing with adults in the Central District Tennis League. Murray's elder brother, Jamie, is also a professional tennis player, playing on the doubles circuit, and became a multiple Grand Slam winner in the discipline (both men's and mixed). Murray grew up in Dunblane and attended Dunblane Primary School. He and his brother were present during the 1996 Dunblane school massacre, when Thomas Hamilton killed 16 children and a teacher before shooting himself; Murray took cover in a classroom. Murray says he was too young to understand what was happening and is generally reluctant to talk about it in interviews, but in his autobiography Hitting Back he states that he attended a youth group run by Hamilton and his mother gave Hamilton lifts in her car. Murray later attended Dunblane High School. Murray's parents split up when he was 10, with the boys living with their father while being mentored in tennis by their mother. He believes the impact this had on him could be the reason behind his competitive spirit. At 15, he was asked to train with Rangers Football Club at their School of Excellence, but declined, opting to focus on his tennis career instead. He then decided to move to Barcelona, Spain. There he studied at the Schiller International School and trained on the clay courts of the Sánchez-Casal Academy, coached by Pato Alvarez. Murray described this time as "a big sacrifice". His parents had to find £40,000 to pay for his 18-month stay there. In Spain, he trained with Emilio Sánchez, former world No. 1 doubles player. Murray was born with a bipartite patella, a condition in which the kneecap remains as two separate bones instead of fusing together in early childhood, but was not diagnosed until the age of 16. He has been seen holding his knee due to the pain caused by the condition and has withdrawn from tournaments because of it. In February 2013, Murray bought Cromlix House hotel near Dunblane for £1.8 million. The hotel had been closed since 2012, but Murray reopened it in April 2014. Later that month Murray was awarded the freedom of Stirling and received an Honorary Doctorate from the University of Stirling in recognition of his services to tennis. Murray began dating Kim Sears, daughter of player-turned-coach Nigel Sears, in 2005. Their engagement was announced in November 2014, and they married on 11 April 2015 at Dunblane Cathedral in his home town, with the reception at his Cromlix House hotel. The couple previously lived in Oxshott, Surrey but in 2022, moved to nearby Leatherhead, to their newly constructed home that will accommodate their young family, consisting of their son and three daughters; the youngest, a girl was born in March 2021. He identifies himself as a feminist, and has been repeatedly vocal in his support for women players and coaches. He is also a vocal supporter of LGBT rights and supports same-sex marriage. In June 2020, he also lent his support to the Black Lives Matter movement; he and fellow players took a knee during the Schroders Battle of the Brits exhibition tournament. Just before the 2020 US Open, he said he was "fully supportive" of Naomi Osaka's decision to sit out her semifinal match at the Cincinnati Open in the wake of Jacob Blake's shooting in Wisconsin; Osaka ultimately played and won the match. Leon Smith, Murray's tennis coach from 11 to 17, described Murray as "unbelievably competitive", while Murray attributes his abilities to the motivation gained from losing to his older brother Jamie. Murray was a two-time champion in the Orange Bowl, a prestigious event for junior players, winning the tournament in the 12 and 14-year-old categories. In January 2001, Murray participated in the Petits As tournament, one of the most prestigious tournaments for players under 14, and it was here that he began his rivalry with Novak Djokovic, beating him 6–0, 6–1 in the quarterfinals. In the semis, Murray overcame Mischa Zverev, but lost the final to Russia’s Alexandre Krasnoroutskiy. He then led the British team to victory in the European Winter Cup and won a title in Telford, finishing the season as the No. 2 in the ETA ranking for U14s, only behind Djokovic. In July 2003, Murray started out on the Challenger and Futures circuit. In his first tournament, he reached the quarter-finals of the Manchester Challenger. In September, Murray won his first senior title by taking the Glasgow Futures event. He also reached the semi-finals of the Edinburgh Futures event. For the first six months of 2004, Murray had a knee injury and could not play. In July 2004, Murray played a Challenger event in Nottingham, where he lost to future Grand Slam finalist Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in the second round. Murray then went on to win Futures events in Xàtiva and Rome. In September 2004, he won the Junior US Open and was selected for the Davis Cup World Group play-off match against Austria later that month; however, he was not selected to play. Later that year, he won BBC Young Sports Personality of the Year. As a junior, Murray reached as high as No. 6 in the world in 2003 (and No. 8 in doubles). In the 2004-instated combined rankings, he reached No. 2 in the world. Australian Open: – French Open: SF (2005) Wimbledon: 3R (2004) US Open: W (2004) Murray began 2005 ranked No. 407, but when he was in South America in January, he hurt his back and had to take three months off. In March, he became the youngest Briton to play in the Davis Cup. Murray turned professional in April and was given a wild card entry to a clay-court tournament in Barcelona, the Open SEAT, where he lost in three sets to Jan Hernych. In April, Murray parted acrimoniously from his coach Pato Alvarez, complaining about his negative attitude. Murray then reached the semi-finals of the boys' French Open, where he lost in straight sets to Marin Čilić. Mark Petchey agreed to coach Murray for four weeks until the end of Wimbledon, but it metamorphosed into a full-time position. Given a wild card to Queen's, Murray progressed past Santiago Ventura in straight sets for his first ATP match win. Following a second-round win against Taylor Dent, he played former Australian Open champion Thomas Johansson in the third round, losing in three sets after cramping and twisting his ankle. Following his performance at Queen's, Murray received a wild card for Wimbledon. Ranked No. 312, Murray became the first Scot in the Open Era to reach the third round of the men's singles tournament at Wimbledon. In the third round, Murray lost to 2002 Wimbledon finalist David Nalbandian due to cramping and fatigue, having led two sets to love. Following Wimbledon, Murray won Challenger events on the hard courts of Aptos and Binghamton, New York. He then experienced his first Masters event at Cincinnati, where he beat Taylor Dent, before losing in three sets to then-No. 4, Marat Safin. With a wild card entry, Murray played Andrei Pavel in the opening round of the US Open, where he recovered from down two sets to one to win his first five-set match. However, he lost in the second round to Arnaud Clément in another five-set contest. Murray was again selected for the Davis Cup match against Switzerland. He was picked for the opening singles rubbers, losing in straight sets to Stanislas Wawrinka. Murray made his first ATP final at the Thailand Open where he faced No. 1 Roger Federer. Murray lost in straight sets. Murray beat Tim Henman in their first meeting, at the Basel Swiss Indoors in the first round, and eventually reached the quarter-finals. In November, Murray captained Scotland at the inaugural Aberdeen Cup against England led by Greg Rusedski. This was an exhibition tournament and the only event where Murray played Rusedski, they never met on the Tour. Rusedski beat Murray in the first match, but Murray won the second. This was also the first time that Andy and his brother Jamie Murray played doubles as seniors. Scotland defeated England 4½ – 2½. He completed the year ranked No. 64 and was named the 2005 BBC Scotland Sports Personality of the Year. The 2006 season saw Murray compete on the full circuit for the first time and split with his coach Mark Petchey and team up with Brad Gilbert. At the SAP Open in San Jose in February, Murray defeated a top ten player for the first time, Andy Roddick. Murray went on to claim the title defeating No. 11 Lleyton Hewitt. As a result, Murray became the British No. 1 later that month, ending Tim Henman's seven-year run. Murray was now world No. 42, Greg Rusedski No. 43, and Tim Henman No. 49. Rusedski regained his British No. 1 status on 15 May for eight weeks. Murray suffered a straight sets defeat at the Australian Open, to Argentine Juan Ignacio Chela in the first round and to Gaël Monfils at the French Open, in five sets. Murray did reach the fourth round for the first time at both Wimbledon (beating 3rd seed Andy Roddick in the 3rd round) and the US Open. Murray played in Davis Cup ties against Serbia, Israel and Ukraine. Murray missed the opening singles matches before losing the doubles as Britain lost their tie against Serbia. During the tie with Israel, Murray won his rubber and lost the doubles before pulling out with a neck injury before the reverse singles, as Britain lost the tie. Against Ukraine, Murray won both his singles rubbers, but lost the doubles, as Britain won the tie. At the Masters, Murray lost in the first round in Miami, Monte Carlo and Rome. Murray went out of the tournaments in Indian Wells and Hamburg in the second round. Murray reached his first Masters semi-final in Toronto at the Rogers Cup, losing to Richard Gasquet. At Cincinnati, Murray became only one of two players, alongside Rafael Nadal, to defeat Roger Federer in 2006, breaking the Swiss star's 55 match winning streak on hard courts. He lost two rounds later to Andy Roddick, but broke into the top 20 for the first time. In the final two Masters events in Madrid and Paris, Murray exited both tournaments at the last-16 stage ending his season, with losses to Novak Djokovic and Dominik Hrbatý. Murray was a finalist at the Legg Mason Tennis Classic. Playing doubles with his brother in Bangkok the pair reached the final. After the French Open, where Murray was injured again, he revealed that his bones hadn't fully grown, causing him to suffer from cramps and back problems. In November, the Aberdeen Cup was held for the second time, with Murray leading team Scotland and Greg Rusedski captaining England. Scotland won 6½–1. Murray reached the fourth round of the Australian Open, where he lost a five-set match against No. 2, Rafael Nadal. Following the Miami Masters, where he reached the semi-finals, Murray reached the No. 10 ranking on 16 April. The British No. 1 sustained tendon damage during his first round match at the German Open in Hamburg. Murray was up 5–1 when he hit a forehand from the back of the court and snapped the tendons in his wrist, leaving him out of action from 15 May until 7 August, thereby missing Wimbledon. During this rest period, Murray rose to No. 8, but by 7 August, he had dropped to No. 14. Murray suffered a third round loss at the US Open. At the Masters tournaments, Murray reached the semi-finals of Indian Wells and Miami. At Rome and Cincinnati, Murray exited in the first round whilst going out in the second in Canada. In the final two masters tournaments, Murray exited in the third round in Madrid and he went out in the quarter-finals of Paris. Murray won titles in San Jose and St. Petersburg. He also reached the final of tournaments in Doha and Metz, finishing the season ranked 11th in the world. In November, Murray split with his coach Brad Gilbert and added a team of experts along with Miles Maclagan, his main coach. In 2008, Murray suffered a first round loss at the Australian Open to eventual runner-up Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, and a third round loss at the French Open to Nicolás Almagro. Murray then made his first Grand Slam quarter-final at Wimbledon before making his first final at the US Open. During the tournament in New York, Murray claimed his first win over Nadal. That victory meant that he became the first player from Britain since Greg Rusedski in 1997 to reach a major final. In his first Grand Slam final Murray suffered a straight sets loss to Federer. At the Beijing Olympics, Murray suffered one of the worst defeats of his career, losing his first round singles match to No. 77 Yen-hsun Lu of Taiwan in straight sets. That abject defeat was still on his mind in a BBC interview five years later – despite an intervening Olympic gold medal and a head-to-head win – when he met the same player (now ranked No. 75) in the second round of Wimbledon 2013. In the Masters tournaments, Murray went out in round four in Indian Wells and the first round of Miami. In the clay Masters Murray made the third round of Monte Carlo and Hamburg and the second of Rome. On the American hard court swing Murray made the semi-finals of Toronto before winning his first Masters shield in Cincinnati. He added another shield to his collection in Madrid; before losing in the quarter-finals of Paris. Now at No. 4 in the world, Murray qualified for the first time for the Masters Cup. He played well in defeating an injured Federer but lost to Davydenko in the semi-finals. Murray ended 2008 ranked No. 4. Murray also won tournaments in Doha, Marseille and St Petersburg. Murray opened the 2009 season with a successful defence of his title at the Qatar Open in Doha, defeating Andy Roddick in straight sets. At the Australian Open, Murray made it to the fourth round, losing to Fernando Verdasco. Murray won his eleventh career title in Rotterdam, defeating No. 1, Nadal in three sets. Murray next went to Dubai but withdrew before the quarter-finals with a re-occurrence of a virus that had affected him at the Australian Open. The virus caused Murray to miss a Davis Cup tie in Glasgow. Murray then lost in the finals to Nadal at Indian Wells, but won a week later in Miami over Djokovic for another masters title. In the lead-up to the French Open, Murray beat No. 9, Nikolay Davydenko at the Monte Carlo Masters, the first time he had beaten a top ten player on clay, though he lost to Nadal in the semi-finals. Murray was upset in round two of the Rome Masters by qualifier Juan Mónaco, and he reached the quarter-finals of the Madrid Masters, losing to Juan Martín del Potro. During this time Murray achieved the highest ever ranking of a British male in the Open Era when he reached the No. 3 ranking on 11 May 2009. Murray reached the quarter-finals of the French Open, but was defeated by Fernando González in four sets. Murray won a title for the first time on grass at Queen's and became the first British winner of the tournament since 1938. In the final Murray defeated American James Blake. At Wimbledon, against Stanislas Wawrinka, Murray's fourth round match was the first match to be played entirely under Wimbledon's retractable roof. This also enabled it to be the then latest finishing match ever at Wimbledon, a record he would go on to eclipse three years later in a second round match against Marcos Baghdatis. However Murray lost a tight semi-final to Andy Roddick. Murray returned to action in Montreal, defeating del Potro in three sets to take the title. After this victory, he overtook Nadal in the rankings and held the number two position until the start of the US Open. Murray followed the Masters win playing at the Cincinnati Masters, where he lost to Federer. At the US Open, Murray was hampered by a wrist injury and suffered a straight-sets loss to Čilić. Murray won both his singles matches, and lost at doubles in the Davis Cup against Poland, but then missed six weeks with a wrist injury. In November, Murray won at Valencia, but bowed out in round two of the Paris Masters. To end the season, Murray did not make it out of the round robin at the World Tour Finals in London. He ended the year ranked #4 for the second consecutive year. Murray and Laura Robson represented Britain at the Hopman Cup. The pair progressed to the final, where they were beaten by Spain. At the Australian Open Murray beat Nadal and Čilić before losing in the final to Roger Federer. I can cry like Roger, it's just a shame I can't play like him. – Murray during his runner's up speech at the 2010 Australian Open. At the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, Murray reached the quarter-finals, losing to Robin Söderling in straight sets. Murray next played at the 2010 Sony Ericsson Open, but lost his first match of the tournament to Mardy Fish, afterwards saying that his mind hadn't been fully on tennis. At the Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters, Murray suffered another first match loss, this time to Philipp Kohlschreiber. He entered the doubles competition with Ross Hutchins; the duo lost to the Bryan brothers on a champions tie-breaker. Murray reached the third round in the Rome Masters, and the quarter-finals at the Madrid Masters, losing both times to David Ferrer. After playing an exhibition match, Murray started the French Open with three tough wins, before losing in straight sets to Tomáš Berdych in the fourth round. In London, Murray progressed to the third round, where he faced Mardy Fish. At 3–3 in the final set with momentum going Murray's way (he had just come back from 3–0 down), the match was called off for bad light, leaving Murray fuming. Coming back the next day, Murray was edged out by the eventual finalist in a tie-breaker for his second defeat by him in the year. At Wimbledon, Murray progressed to the semi-finals, losing to Nadal in straight sets. On 27 July 2010, Murray and his coach Maclagan split, and Murray replaced him with Àlex Corretja. Starting the US hard-court season with the 2010 Farmers Classic, Murray reached the final but lost against Sam Querrey in three sets. This was his first loss to Querrey in five career meetings. In Canada, Murray became the first player since Andre Agassi in 1995 to defend the Canadian Masters. Murray defeated Nadal and then Federer in straight sets, ending his eight-month title drought. At the Cincinnati Masters, Murray first complained about the speed of the court, and then in a quarter-final match with Fish, Murray complained that the organisers refused to put the match on later in the day With temperatures reaching 33 °C in the shade, Murray won the first set in a tie-breaker but began to feel ill. The doctor was called on court to actively cool Murray down. Murray said after the match that he had considered retiring. He lost the second set, but forced a final-set tie-breaker, before Fish won. After losing to Stanislas Wawrinka in the third round of the US Open, questions about Murray's conditioning arose, as he called the trainer out twice during the match. His next event was the China Open in Beijing, where Murray reached the quarter-finals, losing to Ivan Ljubičić. Murray then won the Shanghai Rolex Masters dismissing Roger Federer in straight sets. He did not drop a single set throughout the event. Murray returned to Spain to defend his title at the Valencia Open 500 but lost in the second round to Juan Mónaco. However, in doubles, Murray partnered his brother Jamie Murray to the final, where they defeated Mahesh Bhupathi and Max Mirnyi. The victory was Murray's first doubles title and the second time he had reached a final with his brother. Murray reached the quarter-finals at the BNP Paribas Masters losing to Gaël Monfils in three sets. Combined with his exit and Söderling's taking the title, Murray found himself pushed down a spot in the rankings, to No. 5 from No. 4. At the Tour finals in London, Murray went 2–1 in round robin play before facing Nadal in the semi-final. They battled for over three hours, before Murray fell to the Spaniard in a final-set tie-breaker, bringing an end to his season. He ended the year ranked #4 for the third consecutive year. Murray and Laura Robson lost in the round-robin stage 2011 Hopman Cup, losing all three ties even though Murray won all of his singles matches. Then Murray, along with other stars such as Federer, Nadal, and Djokovic, participated in the Rally for Relief event to help raise money for the flood victims in Queensland. Seeded fifth in the 2011 Australian Open, Murray met former champion Novak Djokovic in the final and was defeated in straight sets. In Rotterdam, he was defeated by Marcos Baghdatis in the first round. Murray reached the semi-finals of the doubles tournament with his brother Jamie. Murray lost to qualifiers in the first rounds at the Masters Series events in Indian Wells and Miami, after which he split with coach Àlex Corretja. Murray returned to form at the Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters, but lost to Nadal in the semi-finals. Murray sustained an elbow injury before the match and subsequently withdrew from the 2011 Barcelona Open Banco Sabadell due to the injury. Murray lost in the third round at the Mutua Madrileña Madrid Open, but made it to the semi-finals of the Rome Masters, where he lost to Novak Djokovic. At the French Open, Murray won two tough early matches, before losing in his first semi-final at Roland Garros, against Rafael Nadal. Murray defeated Jo-Wilfried Tsonga to win his second Queen's Club title. At Wimbledon, Murray lost in the semi-final to Nadal, despite taking the first set. At the Davis Cup tie between Great Britain and Luxembourg, Murray led the British team to victory. Murray was the two-time defending 2011 Rogers Cup champion, but lost in the second round to South African Kevin Anderson. However, the following week, he won the 2011 Western & Southern Open after Novak Djokovic retired due to injury. At the 2011 US Open, Murray battled from two sets down to win a five-set second-round encounter with Robin Haase, but lost in the semi-finals to Rafael Nadal in four sets. This was the first time in his career that Andy had reached the quarter-finals, or better, at all four slams in a calendar year. Murray easily won the small 250-class Thailand Open, and the following week he won his third title in four tournaments at the Rakuten Japan Open Tennis Championships. His opponent in the final was Rafael Nadal, whom he beat for the first time in the year in three sets. Murray then won the doubles with his brother Jamie Murray, becoming the first person in the 2011 season to capture both singles and doubles titles at the same tournament. Murray then successfully defended his Shanghai Masters crown with a straight-sets victory over David Ferrer in the final. At the ATP World Tour Finals, Murray lost to David Ferrer in straight sets and withdrew from the tournament after the loss with a groin pull. Murray ended the year ranked #4, behind Djokovic, Nadal, and Federer, for the fourth consecutive year. With Ivan Lendl as his new full-time coach, Murray began the season by playing in the 2012 Brisbane International. He overcame a slow start in his first two matches to win his 22nd title by beating Alexandr Dolgopolov in the final. In doubles, he lost in the quarter-finals against second seeds Jürgen Melzer and Philipp Petzschner in a tight match. After an exhibition tournament, Murray made it to the semi-finals of the 2012 Australian Open, where he was defeated by Djokovic in a four-hour-and 50-minute match. At the Dubai Duty Free Tennis Championships, Murray defeated Djokovic in the semi-finals, but lost in the final to Roger Federer. After an early defeat at the BNP Paribas Open, Murray made the final of the Miami Masters, losing to Djokovic. Murray then had quarter-final losses at the Monte Carlo Masters and Barcelona Open, and a third round loss at the Italian Open. Murray battled back spasms throughout the French Open, and in the quarter-finals, he was beaten by David Ferrer. Murray lost in the opening round of the Queen's Club Championships to No. 65 Nicolas Mahut. At Wimbledon, Murray set the then record for the latest finish at the championships when he completed a four-set victory over Marcos Baghdatis at 23:02 BST, which was eclipsed by the 2018 Wimbledon men's singles semi-finals which saw play being completed at 23:03 BST. Murray beat Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in the semi-final in four sets to become the first male British player to reach the final of Wimbledon since Bunny Austin in 1938. In the final, he faced Federer, but after taking the first set, he lost the match in four sets. Murray returned to Wimbledon within weeks, this time to compete in the London 2012 Summer Olympics in singles, doubles, and mixed doubles. He partnered his brother Jamie Murray in doubles and suffered a first-round exit to Austria (Jürgen Melzer and Alexander Peya) in three sets. In the mixed doubles, Murray was partnered by Laura Robson. They made it all the way to the finals where they lost to the Belarusian top seeds (Victoria Azarenka and Max Mirnyi) in three sets, settling for the silver medal. In singles, Murray lost only one set on his way to the finals where he met Federer, defeating him in straight sets, for the loss of just 7 games. By winning the Olympic gold medal, Murray became the first British man to win the Olympic singles gold medal in tennis since Josiah Ritchie in 1908, and only the 7th man in the open era to win two medals at the same Olympic Games. Murray retired early in the Rogers Cup due to a knee injury, and was beaten by unseeded Jérémy Chardy at the Cincinnati Masters in straight sets. He next competed in the final major of the season at the US Open. He cruised through his opening two rounds in straight sets against Alex Bogomolov and Ivan Dodig, before facing a tough four-set battle with Feliciano López, where Murray had to win three tie-breakers. In the fourth round, he defeated the Canadian Milos Raonic in straight sets, and then in the quarter-finals, had to come from a set and two breaks down against Marin Čilić to prevail in four. In the semi-finals, he defeated Tomáš Berdych in a long-fought match that lasted almost four hours, to reach his second consecutive Grand Slam final. Murray defeated Djokovic in five sets, becoming the first British man to win a Grand Slam final since Fred Perry in 1936, and the first Scottish-born player to win a Grand Slam final since Harold Mahony in 1896. The win would also set several records for Murray: it involved the longest tiebreak in US Open final history at 12–10 in the first set, it made Murray the first man ever to win an Olympic gold medal and the US Open in the same year, and it tied with the 1988 US Open final (in which Murray's coach Lendl competed) as the longest final in the tournament's history. By defeating Djokovic in the final, Murray achieved his 100th Grand Slam match win of his career. The victory made Murray part of the "Big Four" according to many pundits and contemporaries, including Novak Djokovic. In his first tournament after the US Open, Murray reached the semi-finals of the Rakuten Japan Open after entering as defending champion. He was beaten by Milos Raonic in a close three-set match. He was defending champion in the doubles with his brother Jamie. However, they were knocked out in the quarter-finals by top seeds Leander Paes and Radek Štěpánek. At the penultimate Masters 1000 tournament of the year in Shanghai, after receiving a bye into round two, Murray's first match was due to be played against Florian Mayer. However, Mayer had to pull out due to injury, giving Murray a walkover into round three. After beating Alexandr Dolgopolov in the third round, he then overcame Radek Štěpánek in a three-set quarter-final. Murray next faced Roger Federer in the semi-finals, whom he defeated in straight sets to set up a second consecutive final against Djokovic, and his third consecutive Shanghai final. After failing to capitalise on five match points, Murray eventually lost in three sets, bringing to an end his 12–0 winning streak at the competition. When Nadal pulled out of both the Paris Masters and the year-end championships, Murray finished the year at No. 3, after four years at No. 4. This was the first time Murray had finished the year higher than No. 4. At the BBC Sports Personality of the Year Murray found himself voted third overall, ahead of Mo Farah. Murray won the World Breakthrough of the Year at the Laureus World Sports Awards. Murray was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2013 New Year Honours for services to tennis. Murray began his 2013 season by retaining his Brisbane International title, defeating Grigor Dimitrov in the final in straight sets, and dedicating the victory to his friend Ross Hutchins who had been diagnosed with cancer in December 2012. Trying to win his second major in a row, he began the 2013 Australian Open well with a straight sets victory over Dutchman Robin Haase. He followed this up with straight set victories over João Sousa, practice partner Ričardas Berankis and French No. 14 seed Gilles Simon. In the quarter-finals he cruised past Jérémy Chardy in straight sets to set up a semi-final clash with Roger Federer. After exchanging sets, Murray eventually prevailed in 5 sets, recording his first Grand Slam tournament triumph over Federer. With this victory, each member of the ATP's most dominant quartet of the previous four years (Federer, Nadal, Djokovic and Murray) had beaten the other three at the majors. This victory set up Murray's third consecutive major final appearance, and second in a row against Djokovic. After taking the first set in a tiebreak, Murray was eventually defeated in four sets. His defeat in this final meant that Murray became only the second man in the Open Era to achieve three runner-up finishes at the Australian Open, the other being Stefan Edberg. At the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, Murray lost at the quarter-final stage to Juan Martín del Potro in three sets. At the Miami Masters, Murray made it through his first four matches without dropping a set, and after overcoming Richard Gasquet in the semi-finals, faced David Ferrer in the final. After losing the first set, and facing match point in the decider at 5–6, Murray eventually took the match in a third-set tiebreaker to win his second Miami Masters title, and leapfrog Roger Federer into second place in the rankings, ending a near-decade long time period in which either Federer or Rafael Nadal were ranked in the top two. Murray briefly fell back to No. 3, following a third round defeat by Stanislas Wawrinka in Monte-Carlo, but reclaimed the No. 2 ranking as a result of Federer failing to defend his title at the Mutua Madrid Open. Later, Murray lost at the quarter-final stage to Tomáš Berdych in straight sets. At the Rome Masters, Murray retired due to a hip injury during his second round match against Marcel Granollers on his 26th birthday. Murray had just battled back to tie the match at one set all after winning the second set on a tiebreak. This left Murray with only eleven days to be fit for the start of the French Open. Speaking at a press conference after the match, Murray said, "As it is, I'd be very surprised if I was playing in Paris. I need to make a plan as to what I do. I'll chat with the guys tonight and make a plan for the next few days then make a decision on Paris after the next five days." He would go on to withdraw from Roland Garros later, citing a back injury. After a four-week break due to injury, Murray made his comeback at the 2013 Aegon Championships, where he was the top seed. After a rain delayed first day, Murray had to complete his second round match against Nicolas Mahut, and his subsequent match against Marinko Matosevic on the same day, both of which he won in straight sets. After beating Benjamin Becker in the quarter-finals, Murray next faced his first top ten opponent since losing to Tomáš Berdych in Madrid, taking on Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in the semi-finals. After dropping the first set against the Frenchman, Murray eventually raised his level and won in three to set up a final against Marin Čilić of Croatia, his third consecutive final on grass courts. He came from behind again to beat Čilić in three sets to claim his third title at Queen's Club. Going into Wimbledon, Murray had not lost a match on grass since the previous year's final, and was on a winning streak of 11 matches on grass. In the first two rounds, Murray faced Benjamin Becker and Yen-hsun Lu respectively, defeating both in straight sets. His third round match was against 32nd seed Tommy Robredo, and despite a tour comeback over the past year, Murray overcame the Spaniard in straight sets to set up a clash with Mikhail Youzhny, the highest seed left in Murray's half following the unexpectedly early exits of Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal. Despite facing a fightback in the second set, Murray won in straight sets to make it through to his tenth consecutive Grand Slam quarter-final, in which he was to play Fernando Verdasco, the first left-handed player Murray had faced since the 2012 US Open. For the seventh time in his career, Murray had to come back from a deficit of two sets to ultimately come through in five, setting up a semi-final clash with 24th seed Jerzy Janowicz, the Polish player who beat Murray in their previous encounter. After Murray failed to break Janowicz's serve, the Pole took the opening set in the tiebreak, following a double fault from Murray. However, Murray managed to up his level of play, and won the next three sets, making it through to his second consecutive Wimbledon final, and third consecutive major final against Novak Djokovic. Despite the Serb being the favourite to win the title throughout the Championships, Murray overcame Djokovic in a straight sets match that lasted over three hours, to become the first British winner of the men's singles title since Fred Perry in 1936, the first Scot of either sex to win a Wimbledon singles title since Harold Mahony in 1896, and to extend his winning streak on grass to 18 matches. At the US Open, Murray entered a Grand Slam tournament as defending champion for the first time and started strongly with a straight sets win against Michaël Llodra. He backed this up with wins over Leonardo Mayer, Florian Mayer and Denis Istomin to reach the quarter-finals at a major for the 11th straight tournament. In the last 8, Murray faced Stanislas Wawrinka of Switzerland, but lost in straight sets, ending Murray's streak of four consecutive major finals. Following his disappointing run of form on hard courts, Murray next joined the Great Britain Davis Cup team in their World Group Play-off tie on clay against Croatia, where he played in two singles and the doubles rubbers. After defeating 16-year-old Borna Ćorić in straight sets, Murray teamed up with Colin Fleming to defeat Croatian number 1 Ivan Dodig and Mate Pavić in the doubles, and take a 2–1 lead in the tie. Murray then sealed Britain's return to the World Group by defeating Dodig in straight sets. Following the Davis Cup, Murray's season was cut short by his decision to undergo surgery, in order to sort out the lower back problems that had caused him problems since the early stages of the previous season. After being forced to withdraw from the French Open in May, the injury flared up again during the US Open and later during the Davis Cup World Group play-offs, Murray made the decision that surgery was the best way to sort the problem out for the long-term. Following the conclusion of the 2013 season, Murray was voted the 2013 BBC Sports Personality of the Year, after having been heavy favourite since the nominees were announced. Murray started his season at the Qatar Open in Doha. In the first round, he defeated Mousa Shanan Zayed in straight sets in 37 minutes without dropping a single game, but was defeated in three sets by No. 40 Florian Mayer in the second round, despite being a set and a break up three games into the second set. He then played a warm-up match at the 2014 AAMI Classic in Kooyong against No. 43 Lleyton Hewitt, losing in two close tiebreaks. He next headed to Melbourne for the 2014 Australian Open, where he drew the No. 112, Go Soeda of Japan. Despite worries that he was not match-fit, Murray got off to a strong start, dispatching the Japanese number 2 in under 90 minutes, losing just 5 games in the process. He next went on to defeat Vincent Millot and Feliciano López respectively in straight sets. In the fourth round, Murray dropped his first set of the tournament on his way to beating Stephane Robert in four sets to set up a meeting with long-standing rival Roger Federer in the quarter-finals. Despite saving two match points to take the third set, he ultimately went out in four, ending his streak of four consecutive Australian Open semi-finals. As a result of losing before the final, Murray fell to No. 6, falling out of the top 5 for the first time since 2008. He next headed to the United States to compete in the Davis Cup World Group first round with Great Britain, who went into the tie as outsiders. Murray won both of his ties against Donald Young and Sam Querrey respectively, helping Britain to their first Davis Cup quarter-final since 1986. Murray's next tournament was the Rotterdam Open after receiving a late wild card, however he lost to Marin Čilić in straight sets in the quarter-finals. His following competition, the Mexican Open in Acapulco, ended in a semi-final defeat by Grigor Dimitrov in a thrilling three-setter that required two tiebreakers to decide the final two sets. At Indian Wells, Murray struggled in his first two matches against Lukáš Rosol and Jiří Veselý respectively, overcoming both in close three-set encounters to set up a fourth round clash with Canadian Milos Raonic, which he lost in three sets. Murray offered to play with 2012 Wimbledon Doubles champion Jonathan Marray, because Marray was unable to convince anyone to join him on court. For Murray's and Marray's first competitive match together, they won a doubles clash against Gaël Monfils and Juan Mónaco only to lose in the second round to the No 2 seeds Alexander Peya and Bruno Soares. In March, Murray split with coach Ivan Lendl, who had been widely praised for helping Murray achieve his goal of winning Grand Slam titles. At the 2014 Miami Masters, Murray defeated Matthew Ebden, Feliciano López and Jo Wilfried Tsonga but lost to Djokovic in the quarter-finals. In the Davis Cup quarter-finals against Italy, he beat Andreas Seppi in his first rubber, then teamed up with Colin Fleming to win the doubles rubber. Murray had only beaten one top ten player on clay, Nikolay Davydenko, back in 2009, and so in his final singles match, was stunned by Fabio Fognini in straight sets, which took Great Britain to the deciding final rubber. However, in this match his compatriot, James Ward was defeated by Andreas Seppi, also in straight sets, knocking Murray and Great Britain out of the Davis Cup. Murray next competed at the Madrid Open and following his opening win, over Nicolas Almagro, he dedicated the victory to former player Elena Baltacha. He then lost to qualifier Santiago Giraldo in the following round. Murray then reached the quarter-finals of the Rome Masters where he lost to No. 1 Rafael Nadal in a tight match in which he had been up a break in the final set. At the French Open, Murray defeated Andrey Golubev and Marinko Matosevic before edging out 28th seed Philipp Kohlschreiber 12–10 in the final set. This was the first time Murray had ever gone beyond 7–5 in a deciding set. He followed this up with a straight sets win over Fernando Verdasco and then recorded a five set victory over Frenchman Gaël Monfils in the quarter-final, which saw Murray rise to No. 5 and equal his best ever French Open by reaching the semi-finals. However, he subsequently lost to Nadal in straight sets, winning only 6 games in the match. After losing the 2014 French Open semi-finals to Nadal, Murray appointed former women's world No. 1, and two-times slam titlist, Amélie Mauresmo as his coach in a 'historic move' which made Mauresmo the first woman to coach a top male tennis player. After strong grass court seasons in 2012 and 2013, Murray was seeded third for the 2014 Wimbledon Championship, behind Novak Djokovic and Rafael Nadal, who were seeded first and second respectively. He began his title defence with straight sets wins over David Goffin and Blaž Rola, defeating the latter for the loss of just two games. Murray continued his good form, defeating Roberto Bautista Agut and Kevin Anderson, the 27th and 20th seeds, again in straight sets to reach his seventh consecutive Wimbledon quarter-final. Murray's defence then came to a halt as Grigor Dimitrov ended his 17 match winning-streak on the grass of Wimbledon (this includes the 2012 Olympics) with a straight sets win, meaning Murray failed to reach the semi-finals for the first time since 2008. After his defeat at the Championships, Murray dropped to No. 10, his lowest ranking since 2008. Before the North American hard court swing, Murray announced he was extending his partnership with Amélie Mauresmo until the end of the US Open, but was ideally looking for a long-term deal. He also revealed he had only just returned to a full training schedule following his back surgery last September. Murray reached back-to-back quarter-finals at the Canadian Open and Cincinnati Masters, losing to eventual champions Jo Wilfried Tsonga, after being a break up in the decider, and Roger Federer, after being two breaks up in the second set, respectively. He made it to the quarter-finals of the 2014 US Open, losing to Novak Djokovic, after earning his first top ten win of the year in the previous round against Jo Wilfried Tsonga. This was the first season since 2009 where Murray failed to reach a grand slam final. As a consequence Murray fell outside of the top 10 ranking places for the first time since June 2008. Murray took a wildcard into the inaugural Shenzhen Open in China, entering as the number 2 seed. Victories over Somdev Devvarman, Lukáš Lacko and Juan Mónaco saw Murray reach his first final of the season, breaking a drought of 14 months following his title at Wimbledon. In the final, he faced Tommy Robredo of Spain, the second final between the two. After saving five championship points in the second set tie break, Murray went on to win the title in three sets, Robredo's drop in fitness ultimately proving decisive. He then took his good form into Beijing, where he reached the semi-finals before losing to Djokovic in straight sets, however he lost in the third round at the Shanghai Masters to David Ferrer despite being a set up. Following his early exit in Shanghai, Murray took a wildcard into the Vienna Open in an attempt to claim a place at the ATP World Tour Finals. He reached the final, where he once again faced Ferrer, and triumphed in three sets for his second title of the season, and the 30th of his career. Murray defeated Ferrer again in the semi-finals of the Valencia Open to move into his third final in five weeks, and further strengthen his bid for a place at the season finale in London. In a repeat of the Shenzhen Open final, Murray again saved five championship points as he overcame Tommy Robredo in three sets. Murray then went on to reach the quarter-finals of the Paris Masters, where he was eliminated by Djokovic in what was his 23rd match in the space of only 37 days. However, his win over Dimitrov in the third round had already guaranteed him a spot at the ATP World Tour Finals. At the ATP World Tour Finals, Murray lost his opening round robin match to Kei Nishikori but won his second match against Milos Raonic. However, he lost his final group match against Federer in straight sets and only managed to win one game against him, marking his worst defeat since losing to Djokovic in the 2007 Miami Masters, eliminating him from the tournament. Following the conclusion of the season, Murray mutually agreed on a split with long-term backroom staff, training partner Dani Vallverdu and fitness coach Jez Green. They had been with him for five and seven years respectively but were both reported to have been unhappy at the lack of consultation they had been given about the appointment of Mauresmo. Murray also took part in the inaugural season of the International Premier Tennis League, representing the Manila Mavericks, who had drafted him as an icon player in February. Murray took part in the first three matches of the tournament which were all played in Manila. Murray began his year by winning an exhibition event in Abu Dhabi. He then played the Hopman Cup with Heather Watson and, despite winning all his singles matches in straight sets, they finished second in their group behind Poland. His first competitive tournament of the year was the Australian Open. He won his opening three matches in straight sets before defeating 11th seed Grigor Dimitrov to reach the quarter-final. Wins over Nick Kyrgios and Tomáš Berdych followed as Murray reached his fourth final at the tournament (three of which were against Djokovic) and the eighth grand slam final of his career. He lost the final to Novak Djokovic in four sets, however his run to the final saw his return to the top four in the world rankings for the first time in 12 months. Murray next participated in the Rotterdam Open as the top seed, but he lost in the quarter-finals to Gilles Simon who ended a 12 match losing streak against Murray. Murray then played in the Dubai Championships but suffered another quarter-final defeat to 18-year-old Borna Ćorić, and the Davis Cup World Group in Glasgow against the United States where won both his matches against Donald Young and John Isner, allowing Great Britain to progress to the quarter-finals for the second consecutive time with a 3–2 lead over the United States. Murray then reached the semi-finals of the 2015 Indian Wells, overtaking Tim Henman's record of 496 career wins to have the most career wins for a British man in the Open Era. However, he suffered a 6th consecutive defeat to Djokovic in straight sets. Murray then reached the final of the 2015 Miami Open, recording his 500th career win along the way to become the first British player to have 500 or more wins in the Open Era. He went on to lose the final to Djokovic, this time in three sets. Murray added Jonas Björkman to his coaching staff in March initially on a five-week trial to help out in periods when Mauresmo was unavailable as she only agreed to work with him for 25 weeks. However, at the end of the Australian Open, Mauresmo had informed Murray that she was pregnant and he announced at the end of April, that Björkman would be his main coach for all of the grass court season and all of the US hard court swing, while Mauresmo would only be with the team for Wimbledon. Murray won his first ATP clay court title at the 2015 BMW Open, defeating Philipp Kohlschreiber to become the first Briton since Buster Mottram in 1976 to win a tour level clay court event. The following week he reached his second final on clay, at the Madrid Open after recording only his second and third victories over top 10 opposition on clay, against Raonic and Nishikori. In the final, he defeated Rafael Nadal in straight sets for his first Madrid title on clay, and first ever clay court Masters 1000 title. The win was Murray's first over Nadal, Federer or Djokovic since Wimbledon 2013, and his first over Nadal on a clay court. Murray continued his winning streak at the Italian Open, beating Jeremy Chardy in straight sets in his opening match, but then withdrew due to fatigue after having played nine matches in the space of 10 days. Murray then reached his third semi-final at the French Open, but lost to Djokovic in five sets after threatening a comeback from two sets to love down, ending his 15 match winning streak on clay. To start his grass court campaign, Murray went on to win a record-tying fourth Queen's Club title, defeating the big serving South African Kevin Anderson in straight sets in the final. At the third grand slam of the year, the 2015 Wimbledon Championships, Murray dropped only two sets on his way to setting up a semi-final clash with Roger Federer. Murray lost to the Swiss veteran in straight sets, gaining only one break point in the entire match. After Wimbledon, Murray returned to Queen's Club, to play for Great Britain against France in their Davis Cup quarter-final tie. Great Britain went 1–0 down when James Ward lost to Gilles Simon in straight sets, however Murray levelled the tie with a victory against Jo-Wilfried Tsonga. Murray then teamed up with his brother Jamie to win the doubles rubber, coming back from a set down to defeat Tsonga and Nicolas Mahut in four sets, giving Britain a crucial 2–1 lead going into the final day. He then faced Simon in the fourth rubber and after initially being a set and a break down, he suddenly found his form again towards the end of the second set and eventually won in four sets, winning 12 of the last 15 games in the process (with Simon struggling from an ankle injury). With a 3–1 lead over France, this resulted in Great Britain reaching their first Davis Cup semi-final since 1981. Murray next participated at the Citi Open (for the first time since 2006), as the top seed and favourite to win the tournament. However, he suffered a defeat in his first match, losing to No. 53 Teymuraz Gabashvili in a final set tiebreak, despite serving for the match. In doubles, he partnered Daniel Nestor, however they lost in the first round to the fourth seeds, Rohan Bopanna and Florin Mergea, also in three sets. He bounced back from this defeat by winning the Montreal Masters Rogers Cup, defeating Tsonga and Nishikori in the quarter-finals and semi-finals respectively. He then prevailed in the final against Djokovic in three sets. This broke his eight-match, two-year losing streak against Djokovic (his last win against him being in the final of Wimbledon in 2013). In winning the title he also surpassed Federer in terms of ranking, becoming the world No. 2 for the first time in over two years. In doubles, he partnered Leander Paes and they won their first match against Chardy and Anderson, but were then defeated by Murray's brother Jamie and John Peers in two sets – the first time the Murray brothers had competed against each other in a Tour-level match, a situation which Andy described as "awkward" and Jamie as "a bit weird". In the second Master Series tournament of the US Hard Court season, the Cincinnati Masters, Murray defeated veteran Mardy Fish in the second round, and then beat both Grigor Dimitrov and Richard Gasquet in three-set matches, having to come from a set down on both occasions, while Dimitrov had served for the match in the deciding set. In the semi-final, he lost to defending champion Roger Federer in straight sets, and after Federer went on to win the tournament, this result saw Murray return to the No. 3 ranking and seeding for the US Open. At the US Open, Murray beat Nick Kyrgios in four sets before beating Adrian Mannarino in five sets after being two sets down, equaling Federer for winning eight matches from two sets to love down. He then beat Thomaz Bellucci in straight sets but suffered a defeat in the fourth round to Kevin Anderson in four sets. This ended Murray's five-year run of 18 consecutive Grand Slam quarter-finals (not counting his withdrawal from the 2013 French Open) since his third round loss to Stan Wawrinka in the 2010 US Open. Playing against Australia in the semi-finals of the Davis Cup World Group in Glasgow, Murray won both his singles rubbers in straight sets, against Thanasi Kokkinakis and Bernard Tomic. He also partnered his brother Jamie, and they won in five sets against the pairing of Sam Groth and Lleyton Hewitt, the results guiding Great Britain to the Davis Cup final for the first time since 1978 with a 3–2 lead over Australia. After losing in the semi-finals of the Shanghai Masters to Djokovic in straight sets, Murray reached the finals of the Paris Masters for the loss of just one set, with victories against Borna Ćorić, David Goffin and David Ferrer. After a three set win over Richard Gasquet, he joined Novak Djokovic, Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal as the only players to reach the semi-finals (or better) at all nine of the ATP World Tour Masters 1000 tournaments, and also ensured that he compiled his best match record in a single season. He then lost the final to Djokovic again in straight sets. As the world No. 2, Murray participated in the ATP World Tour Finals in London, and was drawn into the Ilie Năstase group with David Ferrer, Rafael Nadal and Stan Wawrinka. He went out in the round-robin stage, after defeating Ferrer and losing to Nadal and Wawrinka. However, after Federer failed to win the tournament, he finished the season ranked No. 2 for the first time. In the Davis Cup final, Murray's victory over Ruben Bemelmans in straight sets pulled Great Britain level in the final after Kyle Edmund had lost the first singles rubber in five sets, played on indoor clay courts at Ghent. He then partnered his brother Jamie in a four-set victory over the pairing of Steve Darcis and David Goffin, before defeating Goffin again in the reverse singles on Sunday, thus ensuring a 3–1 victory for Great Britain, their first Davis Cup title since 1936 and their tenth overall. Murray also became only the third person since the current Davis Cup format was introduced to win all eight of his singles rubbers in a Davis Cup season, after John McEnroe and Mats Wilander. Murray played his first competitive tournament of 2016 at the Australian Open where he was aiming to win his first title there after four runner-up finishes. He went on to reach his fifth Australian Open final with victories over Alexander Zverev, Sam Groth, João Sousa, Bernard Tomic, David Ferrer and Milos Raonic, dropping four sets along the way. However, in a rematch of the previous year final, he was unable to win his first title as he lost in the final to an in-form Novak Djokovic (who won a record-equalling sixth title) in straight sets. He became the second man in the Open Era (after Ivan Lendl) to lose five Grand Slam finals at one event, and the only one not to have won the title. Subsequently, in February, Murray appointed Jamie Delgado as an assistant coach. Murray then played at 2016 Davis Cup defeating the Japanese Taro Daniel and Kei Nishikori in the first round before competing at the first Masters 1000 of the year at the 2016 Indian Wells Masters where he Marcel Granollers lost to Federico Delbonis in the third round. Murray then played at the 2016 Miami Open as the 2nd seed, losing to 26th seed Grigor Dimitrov in the third round. Murray began his clay court season at the 2016 Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters as the 2nd seed. Murray struggled in his second round match against Pierre-Hugues Herbert but Murray came through in 3 sets. Murray struggled again in his third round match against 16th seed Benoît Paire as Murray was down a set and two breaks. Paire also served for the match in the third set but Murray still came through in 3 sets. Murray then defeated 10th seed Milos Raonic in straight sets in the quarter-finals. In the semi-finals, Murray lost to 5th seed and eventual champion Rafael Nadal despite winning the first set. Murray then played at the 2016 Mutua Madrid Open as the 2nd seed and the defending champion. Murray defeated qualifier Radek Štěpánek in three sets. He then proceeded to the semi-finals after defeating 16th seed Gilles Simon and 8th seed Tomáš Berdych both in straight sets. In the semi-finals, Murray defeated Nadal in straight sets who Murray had lost to earlier in the year. In the final Murray lost to number 1 seed Novak Djokovic in three sets. This loss dropped Murray from second to third in the ATP rankings. Shortly afterwards Mauresmo and Murray issued a joint statement announcing that they had "mutually agreed" to end their coaching partnership. Murray regained his number two ranking after he won the 2016 Internazionali BNL d'Italia for his 1st title of the season and 36th overall. He defeated Mikhail Kukushkin, Jérémy Chardy, 12th seed David Goffin, Lucas Pouille, and number 1 seed Djokovic all in straight sets. This was his first win over Djokovic on clay and became the first British player since Virginia Wade in 1971 to win the title and the first British man since George Patrick Hughes in 1931. Murray then moved on to the French Open where he struggled in the opening rounds coming through two five-set matches against Štěpánek and French wildcard Mathias Bourgue. He came through in straight sets against big servers Ivo Karlović and John Isner to reach the quarter-finals where he beat home favourite Richard Gasquet in four sets to set up a semi-final clash against defending champion Stanislas Wawrinka. Murray defeated Wawrinka in four sets to become the first male British player since Bunny Austin in 1937, to reach a French Open final. He was unable to win his maiden French Open final, losing to Djokovic in four sets. In June 2016, Ivan Lendl agreed to return to his former role as Murray's coach. Murray started his grass season at the 2016 Aegon Championships as the 1st seed and the defending champion. Murray defeated Nicolas Mahut in straight sets despite facing a set point in the first set and three set points in the second set. He then defeated his countryman Aljaž Bedene in straight sets. He then had three set wins over Kyle Edmund, another countryman, and No. 5 seed Marin Čilić. In the final he was down a set and a break to 3rd seed Milos Raonic. Murray still managed to come back and win a record 5th Queen's Club Championships and it was also his 2nd title in 2016. Murray then played at the third major of the year at the 2016 Wimbledon Championships as the 2nd seed. Murray had straight set wins over Liam Broady, Lu Yen-hsun, John Millman, and Nick Kyrgios in the first four rounds. Murray then defeated 12th seed Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in five sets in the quarter-final and 10th seed Tomáš Berdych in straight sets to reach his third straight major final. In the final on 10 July, Murray defeated Raonic in straight sets to win his second Wimbledon title and third major title overall. His Wimbledon crown was his 3rd title of the season and 38th career Tour title. Murray next played at the Rio Olympic Games. He became the first player, male or female, to win two consecutive gold medals in the tennis singles events by defeating Juan Martín del Potro in the final, which lasted over four hours. The win was his 3rd consecutive title and 4th title of the season. Murray then entered the US Open and beat Lukas Rosol, Marcel Granollers, Paolo Lorenzi and Grigor Dimitrov in the first four rounds. However, his run came to an end when he lost to sixth seed Kei Nishikori in five sets despite holding a two sets to one lead. His next activity was the Davis Cup semi-final in Glasgow against Argentina. He lost the opening rubber against Juan Martín del Potro in five sets. After Great Britain lost the second rubber as well, he teamed up with his brother Jamie to beat del Potro and Leonardo Mayer in the third rubber in four sets. He then won the fourth rubber against Guido Pella in straight sets, though Great Britain eventually lost the tie. Murray then won the China Open for his fifth title of 2016 and 40th career tour title. He defeated Andreas Seppi, Andrey Kuznetsov, Kyle Edmund, David Ferrer, and Grigor Dimitrov all in straight sets. Murray then backed this up with a tournament win at the Shanghai Rolex Masters defeating Steve Johnson, Lucas Pouille, David Goffin, Gilles Simon, and Roberto Bautista Agut all in straight sets to capture his 13th masters title and 3rd title in Shanghai. This marked his 6th title of 2016 and drew him even with former No. 1 Stefan Edberg at No. 15 on the Open Era titles list with 41 Tour titles each. Murray brought his win streak to 15 consecutive match wins by winning the Erste Bank Open for his seventh tour title of the 2016 season. His tournament started slowly with three-set wins over Martin Klizan and Gilles Simon in the first two rounds. However, a decisive win over John Isner in the quarter-final and a walkover due to David Ferrer's withdrawal with a leg injury saw Murray reach the final. There he defeated Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, for his third title in succession. The result saw Murray win seven titles in a single season for the first time in his career, and move to solo 15th on the all-time list of singles titles in the Open Era, breaking a tie with former world No. 1 Stefan Edberg. Murray entered the Paris Masters knowing that in the event of Djokovic not reaching the final, winning the title would be enough to see him crowned world No. 1 for the first time. After reaching the quarter-finals, courtesy of wins over Fernando Verdasco and Lucas Pouille, Murray faced Berdych for a place in the semi-finals, winning in straight sets. Meanwhile, Djokovic lost to Marin Cilic, meaning that Murray would replace Djokovic at the top of the rankings should he reach the final. He was due to face Milos Raonic in the semi-finals. However, Raonic withdrew before the start of the match, giving Murray a walkover. As a result, Murray became the first British man to reach No. 1 since the introduction of the rankings in 1973. Murray then defeated John Isner in the final in 3 sets to win his fourth consecutive tournament and first Paris Masters title. In November 2016, Murray reached the final of the ATP World Tour Finals for the first time before winning against Novak Djokovic in two sets, thus reaching year-end No. 1 and in doing so, becoming the first player to win a Grand Slam, the ATP World Tour Finals, the men's singles at the Olympic Games and a Masters 1000 title in the same calendar year. The International Tennis Federation recognised Murray as their men's 2016 ITF men's world champion, the first time Murray had achieved this honour. Murray was knighted in the 2017 New Year Honours for services to tennis and charity, making him the UK's youngest knight, at 29. He opened the season with a loss in the semi-finals of the Mubadala World Tennis Championship to David Goffin, following which he won against Milos Raonic in the third-place play-off. Murray then reached the final of the Qatar Open, but lost to Novak Djokovic in three sets despite saving three championship points. At the 2017 Australian Open he lost in the fourth round against Mischa Zverev in four sets. Murray returned to action at the Dubai Duty Free Tennis Championships event in February. There he won his only tournament of the year, beating Fernando Verdasco in straight sets, despite almost losing in the quarter-finals to Philipp Kohlschreiber where Murray had to save seven match points. The next week, he suffered a shock defeat in the second round of the Indian Wells Masters to Vasek Pospisil. After missing a month due to an elbow injury, Murray returned to compete in the Monte-Carlo Masters in April, losing out in the third round to Albert Ramos-Vinolas. He then competed in Barcelona where he was beaten by Dominic Thiem in the semi-finals. Murray continued to struggle in his next two tournaments, losing to Borna Coric in the third round of Madrid, and to Fabio Fognini in second round of Rome, where he was defending champion. In both of these defeats, he failed to win a set. At the 2017 French Open, following tough four-set victories over Andrey Kuznetsov and Martin Kližan in the opening rounds, Murray defeated Juan Martín del Potro and Karen Khachanov in straight sets. In the quarter-finals he defeated Kei Nishikori in four sets, but lost in the semi-finals to Stan Wawrinka in five sets. As the five-time champion at Queens, Murray pledged his prize money to the victims of the Grenfell Tower fire, however he was defeated in straight sets by Jordan Thompson in the first round. Despite concerns over a lingering hip injury, he returned to Wimbledon as the defending champion and progressed to the third round with straight set wins against Alexander Bublik and Dustin Brown. He dropped his first set of the tournament to Fabio Fognini but proceeded to the fourth round in four sets. Murray continued to the quarter-final with a straight set victory against Benoit Paire. However, he was defeated in the quarter-final by Sam Querrey in five sets. Murray missed the Canadian Open and the Cincinnati Masters due to his hip injury, which led to him losing his No. 1 ranking to Rafael Nadal. His injury then forced him to withdraw from the 2017 US Open two days before the start of the tournament, making it the first Grand Slam tournament he had missed since the 2013 French Open, saying it was "most likely" that he would not play in a professional tournament again in 2017. Ultimately he did indeed not play again, withdrawing from Paris which left him unable to qualify for the 2017 ATP Finals; that November, as a result of his inactivity, his ranking fell sharply to No. 16, his lowest ranking since May 2008. Murray returned to the court to play a charity match against Federer in Glasgow and expressed his hope to return to the tour in Brisbane. The following week, he and Ivan Lendl announced that they had mutually ended their coaching arrangement for a second time. Murray withdrew from the Brisbane International and Australian Open due to hip injury. In a post on Instagram, Murray explained that rehab was one option for recovery. He added that hip surgery was also an option but that the chances of a successful outcome were not as high. On 8 January, Murray announced on Instagram he had undergone hip surgery. In March, Murray lost his British No. 1 ranking for the first time since 2006, to Kyle Edmund. Later that month, Murray said he was making progress after several days of playing at the Mouratoglou Academy in Nice after posting pictures of himself practising against Aidan McHugh, a British junior player, on Instagram. He then announced he would play his first ATP tournament since hip surgery at the Rosmalen Grass Court Championships in June, although he later withdrew saying he was not quite ready and wanted to be 100%. However, he later announced he would make his return at the Queen's Club Championships. He subsequently lost to Nick Kyrgios in the first round in three sets. He was given a wildcard for the Eastbourne International, where he beat Stan Wawrinka in the first round before losing to Kyle Edmund in the second. He withdrew from Wimbledon with a "heavy heart" a day before the tournament, saying it was too soon to play five-set matches. As a result of this withdrawal, he dropped to 839th in the ATP rankings, his newest low ranking since he first entered the ATP rankings on 21 July 2003. He then entered the Washington Open, where he won his first round match against Mackenzie McDonald in three sets. He then faced Kyle Edmund, who had dealt him his last defeat at Eastbourne, overcoming him in three sets. His next match, a dramatic three-set victory over Marius Copil in the third round, lasted until just past 3:00 AM local time; Murray wept after the conclusion of the match, overcome with emotion. He then withdrew from the tournament and the Canadian Open the following week to continue his recovery and to focus on the Cincinnati Masters for which he was awarded a wildcard. He eventually lost in the first round to France's Lucas Pouille in three sets. Murray made his grand slam return at the US Open where he defeated the Australian James Duckworth in four sets. However, he was unable to progress further, losing in the second round to Spain's Fernando Verdasco in four sets. Murray then withdrew from Great Britain's Davis Cup tie against Uzbekistan in Glasgow to continue his rehabilitation from his injury. He entered the Shenzhen Open as a wildcard. He advanced to the second round after Zhizhen Zhang retired in the third set of the first round. There, he faced defending champion and top seed David Goffin, who Murray upset in straight sets. He then faced Fernando Verdasco in the quarter-finals, but was defeated in straight sets. Murray had been due to play at the China Open the following week, but, after suffering a slight ankle problem, he decided to end his season early to ensure he would be fit for the following year. Murray travelled to Brisbane early in order to better prepare for the Brisbane International. He won his first round match against James Duckworth in straight sets but admitted post-match that he did not know how long he would be able to play top-class tennis. Murray was defeated in the next round by Daniil Medvedev, at that time ranked 16th in the world. On 11 January, at a press conference just before the 2019 Australian Open, an emotional Murray announced that he could possibly retire from professional tennis due to struggling physically for a "long time", particularly with his hip injury. He said that he had been suffering with hip pain on a daily basis, and that it caused him to struggle with tasks like putting his shoes and socks on. He spoke of the possibility of a second hip surgery, but expressed doubt this would be a viable option to prolong his career, merely allowing him to "have a better quality of life, and be out of pain". He hoped to make it through to Wimbledon, but that the Australian Open could be his final tournament if he was not able to last until the summer, stating: "I'm not sure I can play through the pain for another four or five months". Active and retired tennis players, including Juan Martín del Potro, Kyle Edmund, Bilie Jean King and the other members of the 'Big Four' paid tribute to Murray upon his announcement. Murray entered the singles of the Australian Open, however lost his opening match against 22nd seed Roberto Bautista Agut in a four-hour, five-set 'epic'. At its conclusion, a video montage of tributes featuring other top players Roger Federer, Novak Djokovic, Sloane Stephens and Caroline Wozniacki played in deference to his impending retirement. In his post-match interview, he stated that he was considering a second hip surgery, and had not yet ruled out a return to the sport upon recovering from the operation. Bob Bryan urged Murray to have the "Birmingham hip resurfacing (BHR)" operation he underwent in August 2018, involving a cobalt-chrome metal cap being placed over the femur with a matching metal cup in the acetabulum (a conservative bone-saving alternative to a traditional Total Hip Replacement). Bryan informed Murray that the BHR would improve his quality of life and may help him return to the professional tennis tour. On 29 January, Murray announced on Instagram that he had undergone hip resurfacing surgery in London and hoped that it would "be the end of my hip pain." On 4 February, in an interview with The Times, Professor Derek McMinn, who invented the BHR implant and procedure, gave the opinion that Murray's chances of returning to competitive tennis should be "in the high 90 per cent". On 7 March, Murray stated in an interview that he was now free of pain in his hip as a result of the surgery and may therefore return to playing competitive tennis, but that any potential Wimbledon return would be dependent on how his hip felt, and that he would not rush his comeback and may test his condition by playing doubles. On 16 May 2019, Murray received his knighthood from Prince Charles at Buckingham Palace, two years after he was awarded the honour. Murray returned to the professional tennis circuit in June, entering the doubles competition of the Queen's Club Championships alongside Feliciano Lopez. The duo won their first round match against the top seeds Juan Sebastián Cabal and Robert Farah in straight sets and then beat the defending champions John Peers and Henri Kontinen in the semi-finals. Murray and Lopez went on to win the tournament by defeating Rajeev Ram and Joe Salisbury in a final set champions tiebreak. Following the win, Murray stated that his "hip felt great" and that "there was no pain." Murray continued his comeback from injury by partnering Marcelo Melo in the doubles at the Eastbourne International where they lost in the first round against Cabal and Farah. At the 2019 Wimbledon Championships, Murray entered the men's doubles and mixed doubles events. In the men's doubles he partnered Pierre-Hugues Herbert and was eliminated in the second round, while his mixed doubles partnership with Serena Williams ended with a third round defeat to top seeds Bruno Soares and Nicole Melichar. After Murray's Wimbledon campaign, he and his brother Jamie participated in the Citi Open doubles, where they defeated Edouard Roger-Vasselin and Nicolas Mahut before losing to Michael Venus and Raven Klaasen in the round of 16. His next tournament at the Canadian Open renewed his partnership with Feliciano Lopez where they defeated Lukasz Kubot and Marcelo Melo and lost to Fabrice Martin and Jeremy Chardy. Following the conclusion of the tournament, Murray stated his return to the singles competition at the Western and Southern Open and revealed his plans to play in China in the autumn. In his first singles match since the 2019 Australian Open, Murray faced Richard Gasquet in the first round of the 2019 Cincinnati Masters, losing in straight sets. In the quarter-final of the Cincinnati doubles tournament, Andy Murray and Feliciano López met Jamie Murray and Neal Skupski in only the second match between the siblings in their senior careers; Jamie and Skupski won in three sets to progress, with Andy stating afterwards that he would now concentrate his efforts on returning to the singles tour. Murray then played at the 2019 Winston-Salem Open, where he faced Tennys Sandgren in the first round. Murray lost in straight sets, though the score was close. Murray then contemplated dropping down to Challenger level, skipping the US Open entirely to focus on two tournaments happening concurrently. Murray opted to play at the 2019 Rafa Nadal Open Banc Sabadell Challenger event, the first time he had competed on the second tier Challenger Tour since 2005. In the first round of the event, Murray defeated 17-year-old Imran Sibille in straight sets in under 43 minutes to record his first singles victory since his hip surgery. He lost to Matteo Viola in the third round. In September in China, Murray competed in the Zhuhai Championships, and the China Open and Shanghai Open in October. He then won the European Open in the same month, beating three-time Grand Slam winner Stan Wawrinka in the final. In November 2019, he represented Great Britain for the first time since 2016 after being named in the squad for the 2019 Davis Cup finals; however, he was only able to play one rubber in Great Britain's run to the semi-finals. At the end of November, a television documentary, Andy Murray: Resurfacing, was released on the Amazon Prime platform, detailing Murray's various attempts to overcome his hip injury over a two-year period from his defeat at Wimbledon in 2017 to his doubles victory at Queen's Club in 2019. In late December, Murray's team confirmed that the pelvic injury which had curtailed his involvement in the Davis Cup would also prevent him from entering the upcoming 2020 Australian Open and the inaugural ATP Cup. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, numerous tournaments on the 2020 ATP Tour were either cancelled or rescheduled for later in the year. Murray's first ATP tournament of 2020 was at the Western & Southern Open in August in which he entered as a wildcard. He beat Frances Tiafoe in the first round before beating world No. 7 Alexander Zverev in the second, his first victory over a top-10 player in over three years and the 102nd of his career. He lost his third round match to Milos Raonic in straight sets. In his first round match at the spectator-less US Open Murray came back from two down to narrowly defeat Yoshihito Nishioka of Japan in five sets. Then in the second round he lost in straight sets to the 15th seed Felix Auger-Aliassime of Canada. He then entered the French Open as a wildcard but was defeated in the first round in straight sets by Stan Wawrinka. Murray's last tournament of the year was the Bett1Hulks Indoors where he received a wildcard into the main draw and lost in the first round to Fernando Verdasco in straight sets. He did not enter the European Open and thus failed to defend his title. Murray was due to start his season at the 2021 Australian Open again as a wildcard but this was put in doubt after testing positive for COVID-19 on 14 January. On 22 January, it was confirmed that he would miss the Australian Open due to not being able to find a workable quarantine after his positive test. His first tournament of the season was the 2021 Open Sud de France where, as a wildcard, he lost in the first round. After that in March, he competed at the 2021 ABN AMRO World Tennis Tournament in Rotterdam as a wildcard where he lost in the second round against Andrey Rublev. Murray was largely inactive during the next three months due to a groin injury, managing only two match appearances in doubles at the Italian Open in May. This left his ranking too low for a direct entry for the French Open. He decided against entering qualifying or trying to earn a wild card in order to focus on the upcoming grass court season. He returned to singles play as a wildcard at the Queen's Club Championships where he defeated Benoît Paire in the first round but lost in the second to the 1st seed, Matteo Berrettini, in straight sets. At Wimbledon he received a wildcard. He lost in the third round to Denis Shapovalov, after defeating 24th seed Nikoloz Basilashvili and qualifier Oscar Otte. Murray entered into the men's singles and men's doubles at the 2020 Summer Olympics as the two-time defending champion. Murray was drawn against world no. 15 Canadian Félix Auger-Aliassime, but he withdrew before his first-round singles match due to a quadriceps strain, electing to remain in the doubles match. Murray was replaced by Australian Max Purcell, who went on to defeat Auger-Aliassime. Murray, along with partner Joe Salisbury, reached the quarter-finals of the men's doubles event before losing to the Croatian pair and eventual silver medallists Marin Čilić and Ivan Dodig, after defeating French pair Nicolas Mahut and Pierre-Hugues Herbert in the first round, and German pair Kevin Krawietz and Tim Pütz in the second. Murray played two events on the US circuit. At the 2021 Western & Southern Open, Murray won as a wildcard in straight sets against Richard Gasquet before losing to Hubert Hurkacz in the second round. At the 2021 Winston-Salem Open, Murray entered as a wildcard again and won in straight sets against Noah Rubin (a replacement for Nick Kyrgios who withdrew shortly before the start of the match), in the first round, before losing to Frances Tiafoe in the second. At the US Open, he lost to Stefanos Tsitsipas in five sets in the first round. The match was controversial, with Murray accusing Tsitsipas of cheating, in reference to an eight-minute bathroom break that was had by Tsitsipas during the match. Murray subsequently entered the 2021 Open de Rennes, an event on the ATP Challenger Tour after accepting a wildcard. He defeated Yannick Maden in the first round in straight sets, but lost in three sets to Roman Safiullin. Murray then reached the quarterfinal of the Moselle Open as a wildcard only losing out to the eventual champion and top seed, Poland's Hubert Hurkacz. Murray lost also as a wildcard in the round of 16 to the 2nd seed and eventual champion Casper Ruud at the 2021 San Diego Open. He received another wildcard for the Indian Wells Masters, where he reached the third round and was beaten by Alexander Zverev. He then reached the second round of the European Open as a wildcard after a 3-hour and 45 minute marathon win against Frances Tiafoe. He lost in the second round to Diego Schwartzman in straight sets. At the Vienna Open, Murray entered as a wildcard and upset 5th seed and world No. 10 Hubert Hurkacz in the first round in three sets to claim the 103rd top 10 victory of his career and the first of the year, but fell in straight sets to Carlos Alcaraz the following round. At the 2021 Stockholm Open, he reached the quarterfinals as a wildcard, defeating top seed and World No. 10 Jannik Sinner for his second top 10 win in two weeks and for the season and the 104th in his career. "Lots of people told me I wouldn't be able to play again, and lots of people told me I'd be able to hit tennis balls but not compete professionally again. That was nonsense, and I want to see how close I can get back to the top of the game." Murray, opening up about his struggles and recovery. Murray entered the 2021 Mubadala World Tennis Championship, an exhibition tournament held in Abu Dhabi in December. After defeating Dan Evans in straight sets, he met Rafael Nadal for their first match since the semi-finals of the 2016 Madrid Open. He beat Nadal in straight sets. Murray lost the final match in straight sets and a tiebreak to Andrey Rublev. After a first round loss as a wildcard at the Melbourne Summer Set to Facundo Bagnis, Murray reached the final as a wildcard at the Sydney Tennis Classic, beating Viktor Durasovic in the first round and second seed Nikoloz Basilashvili in the second round in a match lasting over 3 hours. After his quarterfinal opponent, eight seed David Goffin retired due to injury, he beat Reilly Opelka in the semifinals before falling to Aslan Karatsev in the final. Murray participated in the 2022 Australian Open as a wildcard . Murray met Nikoloz Basilashvili for the second time in the space of a week, and won the first round in five sets. He lost in the second round, in straight sets against Taro Daniel. Having decided to end his trial period with new coach Jan de Witt, Murray received a wildcard to play at the 2022 Rotterdam Open. He beat Alexander Bublik in the first round, and lost to Félix Auger-Aliassime in the second. He also hired Dani Vallverdu as his replacement coach. Murray entered the 2022 Qatar Open as a wildcard, and, in a rematch of the second round of the Australian open, met Taro Daniel, who he defeated in straight sets. Murray lost his second-round match to second seed Roberto Bautista Agut 6–0 6–1, being served a bagel for the first time since his loss to Novak Djokovic at the 2015 Miami Open final. After Qatar, Murray entered the 2022 Dubai Tennis Championships as a wildcard, looking to secure his first win at the event in five years. He beat Christopher O'Connell, but lost to Jannik Sinner in straight sets. After his stint with Vallverdu ended, Murray re-hired Ivan Lendl as his coach, who he had worked with twice before. In March, Murray entered the 2022 Indian Wells Masters as a wildcard, meeting Taro Daniel in the first round, in their third meeting in 2022. He beat Daniel in three sets, marking his 700th win overall, but lost in the second round to Alexander Bublik in straight sets. Moving onto the 2022 Miami Open as a wildcard, Murray beat Federico Delbonis in straight sets. He lost in straight sets to top seed and world No. 2 Daniil Medvedev in the second round. Although Murray had originally stated in February that he is planning to skip the Spring clay season, he later changed his mind and accepted a wildcard into the 2022 Madrid Open in April. At the 2022 Madrid Open Murray beat Dominic Thiem and Denis Shapovalov in the first two rounds to set up a clash against Novak Djokovic for the first time in five years. Murray later withdrew from the match due to a stomach illness, giving Djokovic a walkover. Murray's first tournament back was the challenger tournament in Surbiton, where he reached the semifinals before losing to Denis Kudla in three sets. Murray then played in Stuttgart, where after beating Chris O'Connell and 7th seed Alexander Bublik, Murray won his first match against a top 5 player since 2016 by beating top seed and world No. 5 Stefanos Tsitsipas in straight sets. He then beat Nick Kyrgios in straight sets to reach the final, where he lost to Matteo Berrettini in three sets. As a result, Murray's ranking rose to No. 47, entering the top 50 for the first time since 2018. However, an injury sustained during the final forced him to withdraw from the Queen's Club Championships. At Wimbledon, Murray beat James Duckworth in four sets in the first round, before losing in the second round to 20th seed John Isner, in four sets. After Wimbledon, he entered the Hall of Fame Open, where he reached the quarterfinal before losing in straight sets to the third seed, Alexander Bublik. Murray's American hard court swing began with a first-round loss at the Citi Open to Mikael Ymer, as well as another first-round loss to Taylor Fritz, at the Canadian Open as a wildcard. For the first time since 2005, Murray entered a qualifying tournament for the Cincinnati Masters.[citation needed] However, thanks to a Special Exempt spot being withdrawn from the tournament, Murray was moved to the main draw, where he entered the second round by defeating Stan Wawrinka in three sets. In the second round, Murray lost to Cameron Norrie in three sets. At the 2022 US Open he lost in the third round to Matteo Berrettini. At the 2023 Australian Open, Murray reached the third round after 5-set victories against 13th seed Matteo Berrettini and Thanasi Kokkinakis. His match against Kokkinakis lasted 5 hours and 45 minutes, the longest in Murray's career up until this point and the second longest in the tournament history. He lost to 24th seed Roberto Bautista Agut in the third round in 4 sets. He received wildcards for the 2023 Qatar ExxonMobil Open in Doha, in which he reached the final but was defeated by Daniil Medvedev in straight sets, and the 2023 Dubai Tennis Championships equaling the record of 53, for most wildcards received for a player since 1990, of former player Tommy Haas, who retired in 2017. At the Indian Wells Masters and Miami Open, Murray lost in the third and first rounds, respectively. In his European clay court season, Murray lost in the first rounds at the Monte-Carlo Masters and Madrid Masters. He next played the Aix-en-Provence Challenger in France, where he defeated first seed Tommy Paul in the final in three sets to clinch his first title since 2019. However, he withdrew from the French Open to begin his preparations for the grass season. Murray began his grass court season with the 2023 Surbiton Trophy Challenger 125 as a wildcard, where he clinched his second title of the season after defeating Jurij Rodionov in the final. His winning streak continued at the 2023 Nottingham Open, another home Challenger 125, where he won the final, beating Arthur Cazaux 6–4, 6–4. At Wimbledon, he lost in the second round to Stefanos Tsitsipas and at the US Open, he lost at the same stage to Grigor Dimitrov. At the 2024 Dubai Tennis Championships he recorded his 500th hardcourt win over Denis Shapovalov. Novak Djokovic and Murray have met 36 times with Djokovic leading 25–11. Djokovic leads 5–1 on clay, 20–8 on hard courts, and Murray leads 2–0 on grass. The two are almost exactly the same age, with Murray being only a week older than Djokovic. They went to training camp together, and Murray won the first match they ever played as teenagers. The pair have met 19 times in finals, with Djokovic leading 11–8. Ten of the finals were at ATP Masters 1000 events, and they are tied at 5–5. They have met in seven major finals: The 2011 Australian Open, the 2012 US Open, the 2013 Australian Open, the 2013 Wimbledon Championships, the 2015 Australian Open, the 2016 Australian Open, and the 2016 French Open. Djokovic won in Australia four times and at the French Open, Murray emerged as the victor at the US Open and Wimbledon. They also played a nearly five-hour-long semifinal match in the 2012 Australian Open, in which Djokovic won 7–5 in the fifth set after Murray led 2 sets to 1. Murray and Djokovic met again in 2012 at the London 2012 Olympic Games, with Murray winning in straight sets. During the final of the 2012 Shanghai Masters, Murray held five championship points in the second set, however Djokovic saved each of them and went on to win the title, ending Murray's 12–match winning streak at the event. The three set matches they played in Rome and Shanghai in 2011 and 2012 respectively were voted the ATP World Tour Match of the Year for each respective season. Due to the tight competition between 2008 and 2013, many saw this as the emerging rivalry. Djokovic went on to dominate the rivalry after the 2013 Wimbledon final, winning 13 of their last 16 matches. In 2016, Murray suffered his 4th loss (his 5th total) in the final of the Australian Open from Djokovic, followed by another defeat in the Roland Garros final, where Djokovic won his first Roland Garros title and completed the Career Grand Slam. Murray and Djokovic met in the final at the year's end final of the ATP World Tour Finals for the first time in their rivalry, where the winner would be granted the year-end No. 1 status. Djokovic dropped only one set en route to the final, but lost in straight sets to Murray, who finished the year at No. 1 and became the first British player to achieve this feat. Murray and Roger Federer have met 25 times with Federer leading 14–11. Federer leads 12–10 on hard courts and 2–1 on grass, having never met on clay. They have met six times at the Grand Slam tournament level, with Federer leading 5–1. After Federer won the first professional match they played, Murray dominated the first half of the rivalry, with an 8–5 lead in 2010. The second half of the rivalry has been dominated by Federer, who leads 9–3 since 2011, and has led their rivalry since the 2014 ATP World Tour Finals. Federer leads 5–3 in finals, having won each of their Grand Slam Final meetings at the 2008 US Open and 2010 Australian Open, both of which Federer won in straight sets, and the 2012 Wimbledon Championships, where Murray took the first set, but ended up losing in 4 sets. Murray leads 6–3 in ATP 1000 tournaments and 2–0 in finals. They have met five times at the ATP World Tour Finals, with Murray winning in Shanghai in 2008 and Federer coming out victorious in London in 2009, 2010, 2012, and in 2014. In August 2012, Murray met Federer in the final of the London 2012 Olympics at Wimbledon Centre Court, just four weeks after the 2012 Wimbledon Final, in which Federer had defeated Murray to win his record-tying 7th title at the All-England Club. Murray defeated Federer in straight sets to win the gold medal, denying Federer a Career Golden Slam. In 2013 Murray beat Federer for the first time in a major in the semi-finals of the Australian Open, prevailing in five sets after Federer had come back twice from a set down. Their last grand slam meeting was at the 2015 Wimbledon Championships semi-finals, where a dominant Federer defeated Murray in straight sets, earning a place in his 10th Wimbledon final. Murray is one of only three players to have recorded 10 or more victories over Federer, the other two being Nadal and Djokovic. Their most recent meeting took place at the 2015 Cincinnati Masters semi-finals, with Federer winning the match in two close sets, recording his fifth consecutive victory over Murray. Murray has played against Rafael Nadal on 24 occasions since 2007, with Nadal leading 17–7. Nadal leads 7–2 on clay, 3–0 on grass and 7–5 on hard courts. The pair regularly meet at Grand Slam level, with nine out of their twenty-four meetings coming in slams, with Nadal leading 7–2 (3–0 at Wimbledon, 2–0 at the French Open, 1–1 at the Australian Open and 1–1 at the US Open). Eight of these nine appearances have been at quarter-final and semi-final level. They have never met in a slam final, however, Murray leads 3–1 in ATP finals, with Nadal winning at Indian Wells in 2009 and Murray winning in Rotterdam the same year, Tokyo in 2011, and at Madrid in 2015. Murray lost three consecutive Grand Slam semi-finals to Nadal in 2011 from the French Open to the US Open. The pair had not met for three years since the final of the 2011 Japan Open until the quarter-finals of the 2014 Rome Masters, although they were scheduled to meet in the semi-final of the 2012 Miami Masters before Nadal withdrew injured. At the semi-final stage of the 2014 French Open, Nadal triumphed in a dominant straight sets win for the loss of just 6 games. In one of their most recent meetings, Murray beat Nadal for the first time on clay, and the first time in a Masters 1000 final, at the Madrid Open in 2015. Murray fell to Nadal in the semi-finals of the 2016 Monte Carlo Masters, despite taking the first set. Three weeks later they met again at the semi-final stage of the 2016 Madrid Open, this time Murray winning the match in straight sets. Murray and Stan Wawrinka have played 22 times with Murray leading 13–9. Murray leads 9–4 on hard courts and 3–0 on grass courts while Wawrinka leads 5–1 on clay courts. They have also met seven times in Grand Slam tournaments with Wawrinka holding a slight 4–3 edge. They have contested some close matches and one of their most notable meetings was in the 2009 Wimbledon fourth round, which Murray won in five sets; this was the first men's match to be played under the Wimbledon roof, having the latest finish for a Wimbledon match at the time. Wawrinka beat Murray in four sets at the 2010 US Open and ended Murray's title defence at the 2013 US Open quarter-finals with a straight sets victory, but lost as defending champion to Murray in the semi-final of the 2016 French Open. Murray plays an all-court game with an emphasis on defensive baseline play, and in 2009 professional tennis coach Paul Annacone stated that Murray "may be the best counterpuncher on tour today." His strengths include groundstrokes with low error rate, the ability to anticipate and react, and his transition from defence to offence with speed, which enables him to hit winners from defensive positions. Murray also has one of the best two-handed backhands on the tour, with dynamic stroke execution while he primarily uses his forehand, which is more passive, and a sliced backhand to let opponents play into his defensive game before playing more offensively. Tim Henman stated in 2013 that Murray may have the best lob in the game, succeeding Lleyton Hewitt. Murray's tactics often involve passive exchanges from the baseline. He is capable of injecting sudden pace into his groundstrokes to surprise his opponents who are used to the slow rally. Murray is also one of the top returners in the game, often able to block back fast serves with his excellent reach and ability to anticipate. For this reason, Murray is rarely aced. Murray is known for being one of the most intelligent tacticians on the court, often constructing points. Other strengths in his game, although not huge parts of his game, include his drop shot and net game. As he plays predominantly from the baseline, he usually approaches the net to volley when finishing points more quickly. Murray is most proficient on a fast surface, like grass, where he has won eight singles titles including the Wimbledon Championships and the 2012 Olympic Gold Medal, although hard courts are his preferred surface. He has worked hard since 2008 on improving his clay court game, ultimately winning his first clay titles during 2015 at Munich and Madrid, as well as reaching his first French Open final during 2016. While Murray's serve is a major weapon for him, with his first serve reaching speeds of 130 mph or higher on some occasions and winning him many free points, it can become inconsistent when hit under pressure, especially with a more vulnerable and slower second serve. Since the 2011 season, under Ivan Lendl's coaching, Murray has played a more offensive game and has also worked to improve his second serve, forehand, consistency and mental game which have all been crucial to his further success. In 2009, German manufacturer Adidas and Murray signed a five-year-deal worth £30 million. This included wearing their range of tennis shoes. The contract with Adidas allowed Murray to keep his shirt sleeve sponsors Shiatzy Chen, Royal Bank of Scotland and Highland Spring. Before he was signed by Adidas in late 2009, he wore Fred Perry apparel. At the end of their contract together Adidas decided not to re-sign with Murray, and he began a 4-year partnership with athletic apparel company Under Armour in December 2014, reportedly worth $25 million. Murray signed with Castore for the 2019 season which Murray called his last deal before announcing his retirement. Murray uses Head rackets, and has appeared in advertisements for the brand. Murray's coach has changed through the years, as follows: Leon Smith (1998–2004), Pato Álvarez (2003–2005), Mark Petchey (2005–2006), Brad Gilbert (2006–2007), Miles Maclagan (2007–2010), Àlex Corretja (2010–2011), Ivan Lendl (2011–2014, 2016–2017, 2022–2023), Amélie Mauresmo (2014–2016), Jonas Björkman (2015), Jamie Delgado (2016–2021). In 2022 he was coached for a short while by Dani Vallverdu; Ivan Lendl has been his coach since March 2022 until November 2023. Murray is a founding member of the Malaria No More UK Leadership Council and helped launch the charity in 2009 with David Beckham. Footage from the launch at Wembley Stadium can be seen on YouTube and the charity's website. Murray also made 'Nets Needed', a short public service announcement, for the charity to help raise awareness and funds to help in the fight against malaria. Murray has also taken part in several charity tennis events, including the Rally for Relief events that took place before the start of the 2011 Australian Open. In June 2013, Murray teamed up with former British No. 1 Tim Henman for a charity doubles match against Murray's coach and eight-time grand slam champion Ivan Lendl, and No. 6 Tomáš Berdych at the Queen's Club in London. The event named Rally Against Cancer was organised to raise money for Royal Marsden Cancer Charity after his best friend and fellow British player Ross Hutchins was diagnosed with Hodgkin's lymphoma. The event took place following the final day of competitive play at the AEGON Championships, on Sunday 16 June. Subsequently, following his victory at the tournament, Murray donated his entire prize money pot to The Royal Marsden Cancer Charity. In June 2014, following the death of Elena Baltacha due to liver cancer, Murray featured in an event known as 'Rally for Bally'. Murray played at Queen's Club alongside Victoria Azarenka, Martina Hingis, Heather Watson and his brother Jamie. The event raised money for the Royal Marsden Cancer Charity and the Elena Baltacha Academy of Tennis. Children from Baltacha's academy took to the court to play alongside Murray. As a result of his various charitable exploits, Murray was awarded the Arthur Ashe Humanitarian of the Year award for 2014. Murray identifies himself as "Scottish, but also British". His national identity has often been commented on by the media. Much of the discussion about Murray's national identity began before Wimbledon 2006, when he was quoted as saying he would "support whoever England is playing" at the 2006 World Cup. English ex-tennis player Tim Henman confirmed that the remarks had been made in jest and were only in response to Murray being teased by journalist Des Kelly and Henman about Scotland's failure to qualify. Murray initially refused to endorse either side of the debate in the 2014 referendum on Scottish independence, citing the abuse he had received after his 2006 World Cup comments. Just before the referendum, Murray tweeted a message that was considered by the media to be supportive of independence. He received online abuse for expressing his opinion, including messages that were described as "vile" by Police Scotland; one referred to the Dunblane massacre. A few days after the vote, in which a 55% majority opposed Scottish independence, Murray said that he did not regret stating his view, but said that it was out of character and that he would concentrate on his tennis career in the future. In 2006, there was controversy after a match with Kenneth Carlsen. Having been given a warning for racket abuse, Murray went on in the post-match interview to state that he and Carlsen had "played like women" during the first set. Murray was booed for the remark, but said later that the comment had been intended as a jocular response to what Svetlana Kuznetsova had said at the Hopman Cup. A few months later, Murray was fined for swearing at the umpire, Adel Aref during a Davis Cup doubles rubber with the Serbia and Montenegro Davis Cup team. Murray refused to shake hands with the umpire at the end of the match. In 2007, Murray suggested that tennis had a match-fixing problem, stating that everyone knows it goes on, in the wake of the investigation surrounding Nikolay Davydenko. Both Davydenko and Rafael Nadal questioned his comments, but Murray responded that his words had been taken out of context. In a June 2015 column written for the French sports newspaper L'Équipe, Murray criticised what he described as a double standard applied by many in their attitudes towards Amélie Mauresmo in her role as Murray's coach, highlighting how many observers attributed his poor performances during the early part of her tenure to her appointment, which Murray denied, before pointing out that his previous coaches had not been blamed by the media for other spells of poor form. He also lamented the lack of female coaches working in elite tennis, and concluded: "Have I become a feminist? Well, if being a feminist is about fighting so that a woman is treated like a man then yes, I suppose I have". Murray has corrected others a number of times on the subject of women's tennis. After BBC host John Inverdale indirectly suggested Murray was the first person to win more than one tennis Olympic gold medal, Murray interjected; "I think Venus and Serena have won about four each." Murray has also argued that male and female tennis players should receive equal amounts of prize money. Murray has not commented on his personal opinion on Britain's decision to leave the European Union. However, following his win at Wimbledon in 2016, he expressed his surprise at the outcome of the referendum in the UK and added that "it's important that everyone comes together to make the best of it." (W) winner; (F) finalist; (SF) semifinalist; (QF) quarterfinalist; (#R) rounds 4, 3, 2, 1; (RR) round-robin stage; (Q#) qualification round; (DNQ) did not qualify; (A) absent; (NH) not held; (SR) strike rate (events won / competed); (W–L) win–loss record. To avoid confusion and double counting, these charts are updated at the conclusion of a tournament or when the player's participation has ended. Current through the 2024 Australian Open. These records were attained in the Open Era. Records in bold indicate peerless achievements. Records in italics are currently active streaks. ITF World Champion: 2016. ATP Player of the Year: 2016. BBC Young Sports Personality of the Year: 2004 BBC Sports Personality Team of the Year: 2012, 2015 Most Titles in an ATP World Tour Season: 6 in 2009, 9 in 2016 US Open Series Champion: 2010, 2015 Best ATP World Tour Match of the Year (3): 2010, 2011, 2012 Officer of the Order of the British Empire: 2013 Laureus "World Breakthrough of the Year" Award: 2013 Glenfiddich Spirit of Scotland Award for Top Scot: 2013 Glenfiddich Spirit of Scotland Award for Sport: 2013 BBC Sports Personality of the Year: 2013, 2015, 2016 Doctor of the University of Stirling: 2014 Freeman of Stirling: 2014 Freeman of Merton: 2014 Arthur Ashe Humanitarian of the Year: 2014, 2022 ITF Player of the Year: 2016 Knight Bachelor: 2017 3rd Class Order of Merit of Ukraine: 2022 Tennis portal 2012 Summer Olympics and Paralympics gold post boxes List of Grand Slam men's singles champions Open Era tennis records – Men's singles In ATP Tour and Grand Slam main draw matches, Summer Olympics, and Davis Cup Murray tweeted "Huge day for Scotland today! no campaign negativity last few days totally swayed my view on it. excited to see the outcome. lets do this!" ATP World Tour Finals semi-final lost. Rafael Nadal 6–7(5), 6–3, 6–7(6) Rome semi-final lost. Novak Djokovic 1–6, 6–3, 6–7(2) Shanghai final lost. Novak Djokovic 7–5, 6–7(11), 3–6 "Andy Murray vows he will never be a 'tax exile'". The Scotsman. 6 June 2017. Archived from the original on 21 January 2018. Retrieved 19 January 2018. "MURRAY, Andrew". Who's Who. Vol. 2015 (online Oxford University Press ed.). A & C Black. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.) "Andy Murray Biography". A&E Television Networks. 2 April 2019. Archived from the original on 25 July 2018. Retrieved 12 July 2015. "Scottish Roots: Scottish Family Tree History: Andy Murray". Scottishroots.com. 15 May 1987. Archived from the original on 17 June 2013. Retrieved 20 April 2013. Hodgkinson, Mark (2013). Andy Murray Wimbledon Champion: The Full and Extraordinary Story. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4711-3275-9. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 19 September 2017. "Wimbledon Tennis Tournament official website". Archived from the original on 29 July 2021. Retrieved 8 October 2014. "Andy Murray". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 31 August 2020. Retrieved 11 January 2022. "Tournoi de Roland-Garros official website". Roland Garros. Archived from the original on 23 October 2014. Retrieved 8 October 2014. "Australian Open official website". Archived from the original on 16 October 2013. Retrieved 8 October 2014. "Andy Murray rolls back years to work with Ivan Lendl for third time". The Guardian. 4 March 2022. Archived from the original on 8 April 2023. Retrieved 4 March 2022. "ATP Prize Money Leaders" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 May 2019. Retrieved 12 July 2021. "Rankings Singles". ATP Tour. Archived from the original on 9 June 2016. Retrieved 4 October 2019. Peakin, Will (26 June 2005). "Dunblane tastes regret along with its new favourite son". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 9 August 2020. Retrieved 19 November 2019. Pope, Iain (21 May 2016). "Andy Murray's message of hope for Hibs in Scottish Cup final as he gears up for French Open". Daily Record. Archived from the original on 26 June 2016. Retrieved 17 July 2016. Clark, Alan (20 September 2016). "Hibs fans Andy Murray and Jamie Murray get their hands on the Scottish Cup". Daily Record. Archived from the original on 21 January 2023. Retrieved 21 January 2023. Pope, Iain (6 June 2019). "Andy Murray picks his ultimate Arsenal five-a-side team with 'Invincible' Robert Pires". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 28 November 2019. "Andy Murray's first steps in tennis". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 2 December 2006. Retrieved 5 January 2015. Newman, Paul (30 January 2012). "The making of Andy Murray". The Independent. Archived from the original on 7 May 2022. "Jelena Jankovic: 'We were treated like a couple. It was as though we were two lovebirds...'". The Independent. 18 June 2008. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved 6 November 2017. "Jamie Murray and Bruno Soares win Australian Open men's doubles final". Sky Sports. 31 January 2016. Archived from the original on 22 December 2019. Retrieved 6 November 2017. "US Open 2016: Jamie Murray & Bruno Soares win doubles title". BBC Sport. 10 September 2016. Archived from the original on 20 October 2018. Retrieved 6 November 2017. "Jamie Murray and Martina Hingis win Wimbledon mixed doubles crown". The Guardian. 16 July 2017. Archived from the original on 22 December 2019. Retrieved 6 November 2017. "Jamie Murray and Martina Hingis win US Open mixed doubles title". The Guardian. 9 September 2017. Archived from the original on 22 December 2019. Retrieved 6 November 2017. "Faultless young Scot who is all set to take on the tennis world". The Scotsman. 14 September 2004. Archived from the original on 28 July 2011. Retrieved 22 July 2018. Murray, Andy (2008). Hitting Back. Random House. p. 44. ISBN 978-1-84605-167-8. McLeman, Neil (25 November 2019). "Emotional Andy Murray opens up on Dunblane tragedy for the first time". Daily Record. Archived from the original on 21 January 2023. Retrieved 21 January 2023. Hodgson, Martin (5 June 2008). "Murray describes fight to cope with trauma of Dunblane school killings". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 June 2008. "The Big Interview: Andy Murray". The Sunday Times. 4 June 2006. Archived from the original on 30 May 2016. Hattenstone, Simon (9 June 2007). "Boy on the brink". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 17 September 2016. Retrieved 9 September 2020. Pukas, Anna; Carpenter, Julie (12 September 2012). "Andy Murray's secret fear... and 49 other facts you never knew about the tennis champion". Daily Express. Archived from the original on 28 December 2014. Retrieved 5 January 2015. Harrison, David (6 May 2007). "Murray: Parents' divorce fuels my aggression". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 5 January 2015. "Wimbledon 2012: All you need to know about Andy Murray and a bit more". The Guardian. London, UK. 7 July 2012. Archived from the original on 17 May 2014. Retrieved 9 July 2013. "The rise and rise of Andy Murray, a story in six chapters". The Guardian. 17 January 2009. Archived from the original on 17 September 2016. Retrieved 13 December 2016. Hodgkinson, Mark (31 January 2008). "Andy Murray to miss Argentina Davis Cup tie". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. "Andy Murray buys former country hotel in Perthshire". BBC News. 25 February 2013. Archived from the original on 26 September 2023. Retrieved 26 September 2023. "Hotel bought by Wimbledon champion Andy Murray opens". BBC News. 1 April 2014. Archived from the original on 2 September 2019. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "Honorary degree and freedom of Stirling for Andy Murray". BBC News. 23 April 2014. Archived from the original on 24 April 2014. Retrieved 24 April 2014. Hodgkinson, Mark (21 February 2006). "Andy Murray, the great romantic". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 14 May 2009. "Andy Murray gets engaged to Kim Sears". BBC News. Archived from the original on 27 November 2014. Retrieved 27 November 2014. "Andy Murray marries girlfriend Kim Sears in Dunblane". BBC News. 11 April 2015. Archived from the original on 24 January 2021. Retrieved 19 November 2019. White, Stephen (23 July 2022). "Sir Andy Murray nets whopping £5m for his old house with tennis court included". Daily Record. Archived from the original on 21 December 2022. Retrieved 21 December 2022. "Andy Murray's wife Kim Sears gives birth to baby girl". espn.com. 10 February 2019. Archived from the original on 29 March 2016. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "Andy Murray and Kim Sears 'name their daughter Sophia Olivia'". Daily Mirror. 17 February 2016. Archived from the original on 17 January 2021. Retrieved 2 April 2018. "Sir Andy Murray and wife Kim welcome second daughter". Sky Sports. 8 November 2017. Archived from the original on 9 November 2017. Retrieved 8 November 2017. "Andy Murray to miss Dubai Championships after birth of fourth child". BBC. 12 March 2021. Archived from the original on 12 March 2021. Retrieved 12 March 2021. Shahid, Sharnaz (21 June 2021). "Andy Murray reveals what kind of father he is as he rules out more children with wife Kim". Hello! Magazine. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 9 January 2022. "Watch Andy Murray correct a reporter's sexist question". 13 July 2017. Archived from the original on 14 August 2018. Retrieved 22 July 2018. Bolton, Doug (5 June 2015). "Andy Murray declares himself a feminist, after hitting back at sexist criticism of his coach Amélie Mauresmo". The Independent. Archived from the original on 7 May 2022. Retrieved 15 August 2016. Weldon, Shelby (18 September 2020). "Andy Murray voices support for renaming Margaret Court Arena". Outsports. Archived from the original on 5 February 2022. Retrieved 5 February 2022. Murray is a vocal supporter of women's rights and the LGBTQ community. He spoke out in 2017 against Margaret Court's anti-gay marriage stance. Pattle, Alex (28 June 2020). "Andy Murray and Battle Of The Brits opponents take the knee in support of Black Lives Matter". The Independent. Archived from the original on 7 May 2022. Retrieved 9 September 2020. "Andy Murray gives his full support to Black Lives Matter movement". 24 June 2020. Archived from the original on 12 August 2020. Retrieved 2 September 2020. "Andy Murray 'fully supportive' of Naomi Osaka's Black Lives Matter protest as he gears up for Grand Slam return". 30 August 2020. Archived from the original on 31 August 2020. Retrieved 2 September 2020. "What we do > Sports > Tennis testimonials". juniororangebowl.org. Archived from the original on 25 October 2020. Retrieved 9 September 2020. "Junior Orange Bowl Past Champions" (PDF). juniororangebowl.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 14 March 2016. "Open d'Australie: Murray face à Djokovic, 10 ans après" [Australian Open: Murray against Djokovic, 10 years later]. fr.tennistemple.com (in French). 30 January 2011. Archived from the original on 23 October 2023. Retrieved 31 October 2023. "25 years of the Tennis Europe Junior Tour by Tennis Europe – 2001". issuu.com. 18 December 2015. Archived from the original on 27 October 2023. Retrieved 31 October 2023. "Andy Murray timeline: from Florida to Flushing Meadows glory". The Guardian. 11 September 2012. Archived from the original on 8 October 2021. Retrieved 31 October 2023. "Manchester Challenger". atpworldtour.com. 20 July 2003. Archived from the original on 22 July 2018. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Glasgow GB Futures F10". itftennis.com. Archived from the original on 19 April 2021. Retrieved 9 September 2020. "Edinburgh GB Futures F11". itftennis.com. Archived from the original on 19 April 2021. Retrieved 9 September 2020. "Andy Murray: 'I always believed I was going to make it'". The Independent. 21 December 2005. Archived from the original on 7 May 2022. "Nottingham Challenger". atpworldtour.com. 11 July 2004. Archived from the original on 22 July 2018. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Xativa Spain Futures F17". itftennis.com. 8 August 2004. Archived from the original on 5 October 2016. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Rome Italy Futures F22". itftennis.com. 29 August 2004. Archived from the original on 5 October 2016. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Dunblane teenager takes US Open". BBC News. 13 September 2004. Archived from the original on 10 January 2008. Retrieved 17 March 2008. "BBC Scotland audiences serve ace result for Andrew Murray in Sports Personality poll". BBC. 9 December 2005. Archived from the original on 11 February 2007. Retrieved 17 March 2007. "Andy Murray". ITFTennis.com. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 12 July 2014. "ATP Singles Rankings". ATPTour.com. Archived from the original on 19 April 2021. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "GB pair take stunning doubles win". BBC Sport. 5 March 2005. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "ATP Player Overview – Andy Murray". ATPTour.com. Archived from the original on 22 October 2012. Retrieved 20 April 2013. "Mark Petchey: Serving Andy – harsh truths at the start of an epic journey". The Independent. 2 July 2005. Archived from the original on 7 May 2022. "Murray loses in French semi-final". BBC Sport. 3 June 2005. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray given wildcard for Queen's". BBC Sport. 2 June 2005. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 26 April 2010. "Tennis – ATP World Tour – Draws". ATPTour.com. Archived from the original on 23 October 2012. Retrieved 5 July 2012. "Murray excels in defeating Dent". BBC Sport. 8 June 2005. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Gallant Murray falls to Johansson". BBC Sport. 9 June 2005. Archived from the original on 9 October 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2018. Austin, Simon (27 June 2005). "Petchey makes Murray fitness vow". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 25 July 2018. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Andy Murray: Career highs and lows". The Daily Telegraph. London. 9 September 2008. Archived from the original on 11 September 2008. Cheese, Caroline (25 June 2005). "Brave Murray falls to Nalbandian". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 14 November 2006. "Brave Murray through in five sets". BBC Sport. 31 August 2005. Archived from the original on 1 November 2005. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Battling Murray crashes out in US". BBC Sport. 3 September 2005. Archived from the original on 6 May 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Tie Details". daviscup.com. 25 September 2005. Archived from the original on 26 December 2014. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Federer outguns impressive Murray". BBC Sport. 2 October 2005. Archived from the original on 5 December 2008. "Murray holds nerve to beat Henman". BBC Sport. 26 October 2005. Archived from the original on 5 May 2022. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray keen on patriot games with Rusedski". The Guardian. 22 November 2005. Archived from the original on 20 August 2016. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Murray out to please Scots crowd". BBC Sport. 25 November 2005. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray gains revenge on Rusedski". BBC Sport. 27 November 2005. Archived from the original on 27 February 2007. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "BBC Scotland audiences serve ace result for Andrew Murray in Sports Personality poll". BBC. 9 December 2005. Archived from the original on 11 February 2007. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray splits from coach Petchey". BBC Sport. 14 April 2006. Archived from the original on 11 September 2017. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Gilbert accepts Murray coach role". BBC Sport. 26 July 2006. Archived from the original on 19 March 2007. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray stuns Roddick in San Jose". BBC Sport. 19 February 2006. Archived from the original on 27 February 2007. Retrieved 25 May 2010. "Magic Murray claims maiden title". BBC Sport. 20 February 2006. Archived from the original on 24 February 2007. Retrieved 25 May 2010. "Murray is new British number one". BBC Sport. 27 February 2006. Archived from the original on 19 May 2009. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "British Rankings 2006.05.15". ATPTour.com. 15 May 2006. Archived from the original on 22 July 2018. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "British Rankings 2006.07.03". ATPTour.com. 3 July 2006. Archived from the original on 22 July 2018. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray suffers tame loss to Chela". BBC Sport. 17 January 2006. Archived from the original on 20 February 2006. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Injured Murray beaten by Monfils". BBC Sport. 30 May 2006. Archived from the original on 19 November 2006. "Tame Murray beaten by Baghdatis". BBC Sport. 3 July 2006. Archived from the original on 22 September 2022. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Davydenko swiftly ends Murray bid". BBC Sport. 5 September 2006. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "GB struggling after doubles loss". BBC Sport. 8 April 2006. Archived from the original on 21 November 2006. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray fights back to level tie". BBC Sport. 21 July 2006. Archived from the original on 22 August 2006. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Davis Cup doubles woe for Britain". BBC Sport. 22 July 2006. Archived from the original on 8 October 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Delgado loss spells woe for Brits". BBC Sport. 23 July 2006. Archived from the original on 15 December 2018. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Battling Brits boost survival bid". BBC Sport. 22 September 2006. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray & Delgado crash in doubles". BBC Sport. 23 September 2006. Archived from the original on 11 October 2021. Retrieved 20 April 2013. "Murray win seals British survival". BBC Sport. 24 September 2006. Archived from the original on 8 April 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray suffers early Miami exit". BBC Sport. 23 March 2006. Archived from the original on 13 November 2006. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray out as cramps strike again". BBC Sport. 18 April 2006. Archived from the original on 22 May 2007. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray out in Rome, Henman wins". BBC Sport. 9 May 2006. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray bows out of Indian Wells". BBC Sport. 12 March 2006. Archived from the original on 27 April 2006. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray falls to defeat by Blake". BBC Sport. 17 May 2006. Archived from the original on 9 October 2007. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray falls to guile of Gasquet". BBC Sport. 12 August 2006. Archived from the original on 26 August 2006. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Brilliant Murray outplays Federer". BBC Sport. 16 August 2006. Archived from the original on 17 September 2008. Retrieved 20 April 2013. "Roddick defeats exhausted Murray". BBC Sport. 19 August 2006. Archived from the original on 31 August 2006. Retrieved 20 April 2013. "Murray breaks into world top 20". BBC Sport. 21 August 2006. Archived from the original on 31 August 2006. Retrieved 20 April 2013. "Madrid losses for Murray & Henman". BBC Sport. 19 October 2006. Archived from the original on 27 November 2006. Retrieved 11 March 2011. "Hrbaty win ends Murray's season". BBC Sport. 2 November 2006. Archived from the original on 8 April 2023. Retrieved 11 March 2013. "Murray loses in Washington final". BBC Sport. 6 August 2006. Archived from the original on 29 August 2006. Retrieved 20 April 2013. "Blake blasts to Bangkok victory". BBC Sport. 1 October 2006. Archived from the original on 5 January 2007. Retrieved 20 April 2013. "Murray plays down injury worries". BBC Sport. 30 May 2006. Archived from the original on 29 December 2006. Retrieved 6 September 2010. "Murray to lead Scots in Aberdeen". BBC Sport. 23 June 2006. Archived from the original on 29 November 2006. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray defeats Rusedski to wrap up Scottish success". The Guardian. 27 November 2006. Archived from the original on 19 August 2016. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Valiant Murray succumbs to Nadal". BBC Sport. 22 January 2007. Archived from the original on 31 January 2009. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Djokovic thrashes Murray in Miami". BBC Sport. 31 March 2007. Archived from the original on 9 June 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Andy Murray – Singles Rankings". ATPTour.com. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 3 June 2016. "Beaten Murray looks to Davis Cup". BBC Sport. 2 September 2007. Archived from the original on 11 October 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray fights back to keep title". BBC Sport. 19 February 2007. Archived from the original on 9 September 2017. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray assembling team of experts". BBC Sport. 30 November 2007. Archived from the original on 18 November 2007. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Who are Team Murray?". BBC Sport. 27 August 2009. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. Hodgkinson, Mark; Hodges, Vicki (14 January 2008). "Andy Murray knocked out of Australian Open". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 27 April 2010. Newbery, Piers (7 September 2008). "Murray stuns Nadal to reach final". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 12 September 2008. Retrieved 27 April 2010. Newbery, Piers (9 September 2008). "Superb Federer ends Murray dream". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 20 February 2009. Retrieved 27 April 2010. "Andy Murray blames Olympic failure on 'unprofessional' attitude". The Times. London. 14 August 2008. Retrieved 27 April 2010.[permanent dead link] "Murray wary after Beijing loss to Lu". BBC Sport. 25 June 2013. Archived from the original on 5 May 2016. Retrieved 17 July 2013. Bierley, Steve (20 October 2008). "Murray masters Madrid on his path to grander ambitions". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 26 December 2013. Retrieved 27 April 2010. "Murray knocks out ailing Federer". BBC Sport. 14 November 2008. Archived from the original on 6 March 2012. Retrieved 21 October 2011. "Davydenko ends Murray's Cup run". BBC Sport. 15 November 2008. Archived from the original on 25 January 2009. Retrieved 27 April 2010. "Murray vs Roddick clash". BBC Sport. 10 January 2009. Archived from the original on 25 July 2018. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray Says 'No Disaster' in Australian Open Loss to Verdasco". Bloomberg. 26 January 2009. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 5 March 2017. "Murray v Nadal as it happened". BBC Sport. 15 February 2009. Archived from the original on 25 July 2018. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Andy Murray a Davis Cup doubt after withdrawing from Dubai tournament with virus". The Times. 26 February 2009. Archived from the original on 5 October 2016. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray v Nadal as it happened". BBC Sport. 22 March 2009. Archived from the original on 14 July 2018. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Italy bounce back to defeat Great Britain in Davis Cup quarter-final". The Guardian. 6 April 2014. Archived from the original on 29 September 2018. Retrieved 13 December 2016. "Murray to move third in rankings". BBC Sport. 3 May 2009. Archived from the original on 25 July 2018. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Classy Murray wins Queen's title". BBC Sport. 14 June 2009. Archived from the original on 14 July 2018. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray wins late-night thriller". BBC Sport. 29 June 2009. Archived from the original on 7 April 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray v Del Potro as it happened". BBC Sport. 16 August 2009. Archived from the original on 8 April 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray Overcomes Del Potro". ATPTour.com. 16 October 2009. Archived from the original on 19 August 2009. Retrieved 11 June 2010. "US Open 2009: Andy Murray refuses to blame injury for Marin Cilic defeat". The Daily Telegraph. London. 9 September 2009. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. "Andy Murray in Davis Cup dilemma over wrist injury with GB level 1–1 with Poland". The Daily Telegraph. London. 18 September 2009. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. "Andy Murray eases back into title-winning ways at Valencia Open". The Guardian. 8 November 2009. Archived from the original on 5 March 2017. Retrieved 13 December 2016. "Andy Murray admits beating Mikhail Youzhny at Valencia Masters was easier than expected". The Daily Telegraph. London. 9 November 2009. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. "Andy Murray knocked out of World Tour Finals at 02". BBC Sport. 27 November 2009. Archived from the original on 5 October 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Andy Murray and Laura Robson beaten in Hopman Cup final". BBC Sport. 9 January 2010. Archived from the original on 10 January 2010. Retrieved 9 January 2010. "2010 Australian open results". Archived from the original on 13 January 2013. Retrieved 17 August 2012. Newman, Paul (23 October 2011). "Murray left in tears by Federer's fireworks". The Independent. Archived from the original on 7 May 2022. "Andy Murray clears clouded mental state for fresh start in Monte Carlo". The Daily Telegraph. 14 April 2010. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Mitchell, Kevin (30 April 2010). "Andy Murray looks on bright side after defeat to David Ferrer in Rome". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 19 April 2021. Retrieved 20 November 2019. Rogers, Iain (15 May 2010). "Murray outslugged by Ferrer in Madrid". Reuters India. Archived from the original on 29 June 2018. Retrieved 20 November 2019. "Andy Murray says he was outplayed by Tomas Berdych". BBC Sport. 31 May 2010. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Bad light stops Andy Murray's clash with Mardy Fish". BBC Sport. 10 June 2010. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Champion Andy Murray defeated by Mardy Fish at Queen's". BBC Sport. 11 June 2010. Archived from the original on 27 September 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Nadal ends Murray's dream". Sky Sports. 2 July 2010. Archived from the original on 5 July 2010. Retrieved 2 July 2010. "Andy Murray looking ahead after sacking coach Maclagan". BBC Sport. 29 July 2010. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Querrey beats Murray to win 4th crown". ATP Tour. 1 August 2010. Archived from the original on 3 August 2010. Retrieved 2 August 2010. "Murray beats rain and Federer to defend title". ATP Tour. 15 August 2010. Archived from the original on 17 August 2010. Retrieved 16 August 2010. "Andy Murray beats Jeremy Chardy at Cincinnati Masters". BBC Sport. 18 August 2010. Archived from the original on 19 August 2010. Retrieved 21 August 2010. "Andy Murray to face Mardy Fish in midday heat again". BBC Sport. 20 August 2010. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 6 September 2010. "Mardy Fish beats Andy Murray in Cincinnati". BBC Sport. 20 August 2010. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Andy Murray baffled by US Open loss to Stan Wawrinka". BBC Sport. 6 September 2010. Archived from the original on 6 September 2010. Retrieved 6 September 2010. "Ivan Ljubicic beats Andy Murray in China Open". BBC Sport. 8 October 2010. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray Masters Federer To Claim Shanghai Title". ATP Tour. 17 October 2010. Archived from the original on 20 October 2010. Retrieved 10 November 2010. "Andy Murray loses to Juan Monaco at Valencia Open". BBC Sport. 3 November 2010. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray brothers seize first ATP Tour title in Valencia". BBC Sport. 7 November 2010. Archived from the original on 10 November 2010. Retrieved 10 November 2010. "Soderling's win pushes Murray down to No 5". The Independent. 15 November 2010. Archived from the original on 7 May 2022. "Rafael Nadal battles past Andy Murray to reach O2 final". BBC Sport. 27 November 2010. Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Sports stars pledge help for Queensland flood victims". BBC Sport. 13 January 2011. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Andy Murray loses to Marcos Baghdatis in Rotterdam". BBC Sport. 9 February 2011. Archived from the original on 19 March 2011. Retrieved 21 March 2011. "Andy Murray parts with coach Alex Corretja". BBC Sport. 29 March 2011. Archived from the original on 8 April 2011. Retrieved 13 April 2011. Newbery, Piers (16 April 2011). "Rafael Nadal beats Murray to reach Monte Carlo final". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 24 April 2011. Newbery, Piers (19 April 2011). "Andy Murray out of Barcelona Open with elbow injury". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 22 April 2011. Retrieved 24 April 2011. "2011 ATP stats". ATPTour.com. Archived from the original on 20 June 2012. Retrieved 17 August 2012. Newbery, Piers (28 May 2011). "French Open: Andy Murray beats Michael Berrer despite injury". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 29 May 2012. Retrieved 5 July 2012. Newbery, Piers (31 May 2011). "French Open: Andy Murray reaches Paris quarter-finals". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 18 August 2013. Retrieved 5 July 2012. Newbery, Piers (3 June 2011). "French Open: Rafael Nadal outclasses Andy Murray to reach final". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. Newbery, Piers (13 June 2011). "Andy Murray beats Jo-Wilfried Tsonga to win Queen's". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. Newbery, Piers (1 July 2011). "Wimbledon 2011: Rafael Nadal beats Andy Murray in semis". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. Overend, Jonathan (10 July 2011). "Andy Murray secures Great Britain Davis Cup victory". BBC Sport. Retrieved 3 July 2013. "Defending champ Murray takes early exit from Rogers Cup". Sports Illustrated. 8 September 2011. Archived from the original on 4 November 2012. Retrieved 5 July 2012. "Noval Djokovic injured". HuffPost. 21 August 2011. Archived from the original on 22 June 2012. Retrieved 17 August 2012. Ornstein, David (11 September 2011). "US Open 2011: Andy Murray loses to Rafael Nadal in semis". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 15 July 2019. Retrieved 20 November 2019. Overend, Jonathan (31 December 2011). "Andy Murray appoints Ivan Lendl as his new coach". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2018. Briggs, Simon (9 January 2012). "Andy Murray cruises to Brisbane title and pays tribute to sense of humour and work ethic of new coach Ivan Lendl". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 9 January 2012. Retrieved 25 January 2012. "Jurgen Melzer/Philipp Petzschner vs. Marcos Baghdatis/Andy Murray". tennislive.us. Archived from the original on 15 December 2018. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "Murray toasts success". skysports.com. 13 January 2012. Archived from the original on 27 October 2020. Retrieved 19 November 2019. Fisher, Jon (27 January 2012). "Andy Murray defeated by Novak Djokovic in epic semi-final". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 7 May 2022. Retrieved 27 January 2012. "Federer edges Murray to win Dubai Championships". Fox News Channel. 3 March 2012. Archived from the original on 5 March 2012. Retrieved 6 March 2012. "Novak Djokovic beats Andy Murray in Miami Masters final". BBC Sport. 2 April 2012. Archived from the original on 3 November 2020. Retrieved 19 November 2019. Briggs, Simon (20 April 2012). "Andy Murray suffers quarter-final exit to Tomas Berdych at Monte Carlo Masters". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "Andy Murray beaten by Milos Raonic at Barcelona Open". BBC Sport. 27 April 2012. Archived from the original on 21 September 2020. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "Andy Murray loses to Richard Gasquet at Italian Open". BBC Sport. 17 May 2012. Archived from the original on 19 April 2021. Retrieved 19 November 2019. Mitchell, Kevin (6 June 2012). "French Open 2012: Andy Murray runs out of steam against David Ferrer". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 5 January 2015. Retrieved 5 January 2015. Briggs, Simon (13 June 2012). "Andy Murray beaten by Nicolas Mahut in second round at Queens". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 13 June 2012. Ornstein, David (30 June 2012). "Wimbledon 2012: Andy Murray beats Marcos Baghdatis in thriller". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 5 September 2012. Retrieved 5 July 2012. "Andy Murray is first Brit to make Wimbledon finals in 74 years". Archived from the original on 2 February 2014. Retrieved 6 July 2012. "Federer Wins 7th Wimbledon". sportsillustrated.cnn.com. 8 July 2012. Archived from the original on 3 February 2014. Retrieved 17 August 2012. "Andy and Jamie Murray beaten in Olympic tennis doubles". BBC Sport. 28 July 2012. Archived from the original on 30 July 2012. Retrieved 12 February 2018. Ornstein, David (5 August 2012). "Andy Murray wins men's singles Olympics tennis gold". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 5 August 2012. Retrieved 6 August 2012. "Novak Djokovic sets up Andy Murray US Open final". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 9 September 2012. "Andy Murray becomes first Scottish-born slam winner since Harold Mahony". STV. 11 September 2012. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 11 September 2012. "Murray's Open win a first on multiple fronts". ESPN.com. 10 September 2012. Archived from the original on 14 September 2012. Retrieved 10 September 2012. Murrells, Katy (11 September 2012). "Andy Murray's US Open win, press review: 'The Big Three is the Big Four'". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 17 September 2016. Retrieved 11 September 2012. "Djokovic: Murray deserves 'big-four' tag". ESPN.com. 15 August 2012. Archived from the original on 30 October 2014. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Novak Djokovic beats Andy Murray to win Shanghai Masters". BBC Sport. 14 October 2012. Archived from the original on 26 August 2018. Retrieved 12 February 2018. Cambers, Simon (14 October 2012). "Novak Djokovic roars back to deny Andy Murray in epic Shanghai final". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 5 October 2016. Retrieved 13 December 2016. "Tennis – Nadal down and out of Paris and London". Yahoo Sport. 25 October 2012. Archived from the original on 30 October 2012. Retrieved 25 October 2012. Keogh, Frank (17 December 2012). "Bradley Wiggins claims BBC award is his 'greatest achievement'". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 31 December 2012. Retrieved 12 March 2013. "Laureus World Sports Awards: Jessica Ennis named Sportswoman of Year". London Evening Standard. 12 March 2013. Archived from the original on 22 December 2013. Retrieved 12 March 2013. "New Year honours 2013: the full list". The Guardian. London. 30 December 2012. Archived from the original on 1 December 2016. Retrieved 15 January 2013. "No. 60367". The London Gazette (Supplement). 29 December 2012. p. 24. "Honorary degree and freedom of Stirling for Andy Murray". BBC News. 23 April 2014. Archived from the original on 24 April 2014. Retrieved 24 April 2014. "Ross Hutchins diagnosed with Hodgkin's lymphoma". BBC Sport. 6 January 2013. Archived from the original on 14 January 2013. Retrieved 20 April 2013. "Match point: Murray victory salute decoded". The Times. 19 January 2014. Archived from the original on 15 December 2018. Retrieved 30 April 2017. "2013 Australian Open – Men's singles final preview". TheRoar.com. Archived from the original on 1 February 2013. Retrieved 20 April 2013. "Andy Murray v Novak Djokovic as it happened". BBC Sport. 27 January 2013. Archived from the original on 7 February 2013. Retrieved 20 April 2013. Overend, Jonathan (16 March 2013). "Juan Martin del Potro beats Andy Murray in Indian Wells". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 18 March 2013. Retrieved 18 March 2013. Newman, Paul (31 March 2013). "Andy Murray up to No. 2 in world after hard slog against David Ferrer in Miami heat". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 7 May 2022. "Andy Murray beaten by Tomas Berdych at Madrid Open". BBC Sport. 11 May 2013. Archived from the original on 11 May 2013. Retrieved 10 May 2013. Overend, Jonathan (21 May 2013). "Andy Murray pulls out of French Open with back injury". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 9 June 2013. Retrieved 15 May 2013. Overend, Jonathan (21 May 2013). "Andy Murray pulls out of French Open with back injury". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 9 June 2013. Retrieved 15 May 2013. "Murray withdraws from Roland Garros". ATPTour.com. 22 May 2013. Archived from the original on 27 July 2013. Retrieved 7 July 2013. Newbery, Piers (17 June 2013). "Andy Murray wins Aegon Championships at Queen's". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 24 June 2015. Retrieved 10 January 2015. Newbery, Piers (24 June 2013). "Andy Murray beats Benjamin Becker at Wimbledon 2013". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 26 December 2014. Retrieved 10 January 2015. Newbery, Piers (26 June 2013). "Andy Murray beats Yen-Hsun Lu at Wimbledon 2013". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 30 June 2013. Retrieved 10 January 2015. Newbery, Piers (28 June 2013). "Andy Murray beats Tommy Robredo at Wimbledon 2013". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 18 December 2014. Retrieved 10 January 2015. Newbery, Piers (1 July 2013). "Andy Murray beats Mikhail Youzhny at Wimbledon 2013". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 24 April 2014. Retrieved 10 January 2015. Newbery, Piers (3 July 2013). "Andy Murray beats Fernando Verdasco at Wimbledon". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 21 June 2015. Retrieved 10 January 2015. Newbery, Piers (5 July 2013). "Andy Murray beats Jerzy Janowicz in Wimbledon semi-final". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 10 May 2014. Retrieved 10 January 2015. Murrells, Katy (7 July 2013). "Andy Murray beats Novak Djokovic to win Wimbledon – as it happened". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 17 September 2016. Retrieved 8 July 2013. "US Open 2013: Andy Murray beaten by Stanislas Wawrinka". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 19 April 2014. Retrieved 8 October 2014. Fitzgerald, Matt (15 September 2013). "Andy Murray, Great Britain Advance to 2014 Davis Cup World Group". BleacherReport.com. Archived from the original on 21 June 2021. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "Back surgery set to end Murray's season". ESPN.com. 19 September 2013. Archived from the original on 11 November 2013. Retrieved 20 September 2013. "Andy Murray wins BBC Sports Personality of the Year 2013". BBC Sport. 15 December 2013. Archived from the original on 13 April 2015. Retrieved 8 June 2014. "Nadal, Murray start season at Qatar Open". Archived from the original on 13 December 2013. Retrieved 13 December 2013. "Andy Murray unable to stop Roger Federer who marches on to semi-final meeting with Rafael Nadal". The Independent. 22 January 2014. Archived from the original on 7 May 2022. "USA vs Great Britain". DavisCup.com. Archived from the original on 25 January 2014. Retrieved 3 February 2014. "Wimbledon 2014: Jonny Marray's doubles trouble ends in win as he makes second round with John-Patrick Smith". The Daily Telegraph. London. 26 June 2014. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. "Andy Murray and coach Ivan Lendl agree mutual split". BBC Sport. 19 March 2014. Archived from the original on 12 May 2015. Retrieved 12 February 2018. Newman, Paul (26 March 2014). "Miami Masters 2014: Brave Andy Murray let down by umpire error in defeat to Novak Djokovic". The Independent. Archived from the original on 7 May 2022. Retrieved 19 November 2019. Mitchell, Kevin (6 April 2014). "Italy bounce back to defeat Great Britain in Davis Cup quarter-final". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 September 2018. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "MURRAY EDGES ALMAGRO IN MADRID OPENER". ATPTour.com. Archived from the original on 11 May 2014. Retrieved 8 June 2014. Fuller, Russell (7 May 2014). "Andy Murray beats Nicolas Almagro at Madrid Masters". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 14 May 2014. Retrieved 8 June 2014. "Rafael Nadal beats Andy Murray in Italian Open quarter-final". BBC Sport. 16 May 2014. Archived from the original on 27 May 2014. Retrieved 8 June 2014. Newbery, Piers (1 June 2014). "Andy Murray beats Philipp Kohlschreiber at French Open". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 5 June 2014. Retrieved 8 June 2014. "Andy Murray beaten by Rafael Nadal in French Open semi-final". BBC Sport. 6 June 2014. Archived from the original on 29 May 2015. Retrieved 12 February 2018. Fuller, Russell. "Andy Murray appoints Amelie Mauresmo as coach". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 8 June 2014. Retrieved 8 June 2014. 'Andy Murray appoints Amélie Mauresmo as his new coach' Archived 5 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine, The Guardian (London), 8 June 2014. 'Wimbledon:Andy Murray third seed behind Djokovic & Nadal' Archived 21 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine, "BBC Sport", 19 June 2014. "Wimbledon 2014: Andy Murray beats David Goffin in round one". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 9 September 2014. Retrieved 8 October 2014. "Andy Murray beats Blaz Rola in Wimbledon second round". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 12 September 2014. Retrieved 8 October 2014. "Andy Murray beats Roberto Bautista Agut at Wimbledon". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 12 September 2014. Retrieved 8 October 2014. "Andy Murray beats Kevin Anderson under Wimbledon roof". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 13 September 2014. Retrieved 8 October 2014. "Andy Murray loses to Grigor Dimitrov in Wimbledon quarters". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 31 October 2014. Retrieved 8 October 2014. "Andy Murray: World ranking drops to 10th – lowest since 2008". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 12 September 2014. Retrieved 8 October 2014. Newman, Paul (4 August 2014). "Andy Murray looking for long-term deal with coach Amelie Mauresmo". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 10 August 2014. Retrieved 16 August 2014. "Andy Murray: British number one able to train fully again". BBC Sport. 5 August 2014. Archived from the original on 7 August 2014. Retrieved 16 August 2014. Nguyen, Courtney (10 August 2014). "Jo-Wilfried Tsonga beats Roger Federer to win Rogers Cup". SI.com. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 16 August 2014. "Rogers Cup: Andy Murray beaten by Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in Toronto". BBC Sport. 8 August 2014. Archived from the original on 11 August 2014. Retrieved 16 August 2014. "Andy Murray beaten by Roger Federer in Cincinnati". BBC Sport. 16 August 2014. Archived from the original on 16 August 2014. Retrieved 16 August 2014. Newbury, Piers (1 September 2014). "US Open: Andy Murray beats Tsonga to reach last eight". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 23 September 2014. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "Murray drops out of world's top 10". ESPN.com. 9 September 2014. Archived from the original on 14 October 2014. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "Murray Saves 5 Match Points for Shenzhen Crown". ATPTour.com. Archived from the original on 1 October 2014. Retrieved 28 September 2014. "Djokovic downs Murray in Beijing". sports.yahoo.com. 4 October 2014. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 20 October 2014. "Andy Murray loses to David Ferrer at Shanghai Masters". BBC Sport. 9 October 2014. Archived from the original on 19 October 2014. Retrieved 20 October 2014. "Andy Murray's ATP Tour Finals hopes boosted by win over David Ferrer". The Guardian. 20 October 2014. Archived from the original on 4 October 2021. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "Andy Murray beats David Ferrer to reach Valencia Open final". BBC Sport. 25 October 2014. Archived from the original on 27 October 2014. Retrieved 25 October 2014. "Murray outlasts Robredo to win Valencia title". Yahoo News. 26 October 2014. Archived from the original on 26 October 2014. Retrieved 26 October 2014. "Andy Murray loses to Novak Djokovic in Paris Masters". BBC Sport. 31 October 2014. Archived from the original on 3 November 2014. Retrieved 4 November 2014. Steinberg, Jacob (30 October 2014). "Andy Murray beats Grigor Dimitrov to qualify for ATP Tour Finals". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 4 November 2014. Retrieved 4 November 2014. Mitchell, Kevin (9 November 2014). "Andy Murray loses to Kei Nishikori in ATP Tour finals opener". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 13 November 2014. Retrieved 14 November 2014. Mitchell, Kevin (11 November 2014). "Andy Murray beats Milos Raonic in straight sets at ATP Tour Finals". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 14 November 2014. Retrieved 14 November 2014. Newbery, Piers (13 November 2014). "Andy Murray knocked out of World Tour Finals by Roger Federer". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 14 November 2014. Retrieved 14 November 2014. Mitchell, Kevin (26 November 2014). "Andy Murray splits with long-time allies Dani Vallverdu and Jez Green". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 7 December 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "Andy Murray joins International Premier Tennis League". BBC Sport. 28 February 2014. Archived from the original on 9 March 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "Andy Murray teams up with Maria Sharapova on IPTL debut". BBC Sport. 28 November 2014. Archived from the original on 1 December 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2014. "Andy Murray wins title after Novak Djokovic withdraws in Abu Dhabi". BBC Sport. 3 January 2015. Archived from the original on 5 January 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2015. "Hopman Cup: Great Britain too good for Australia as Andy Murray and Heather Watson score straight-sets wins over Marinko Matosevic and Casey Dellacqua". abc.net.au. 9 January 2015. Archived from the original on 26 January 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2015. Newbery, Piers (25 January 2015). "Andy Murray beats Grigor Dimitrov to make Australian Open quarters". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 29 January 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2015. Newbery, Piers (27 January 2015). "Australian Open: Andy Murray beats Nick Kyrgios in last eight". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 30 January 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2015. Newbery, Piers (29 January 2015). "Andy Murray in Australian Open final after beating Tomas Berdych". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 1 February 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2015. Newbery, Piers (1 February 2015). "Novak Djokovic beats Andy Murray to win fifth Australian Open title". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 3 February 2015. Retrieved 5 February 2015. Jones, Gareth Iwan (4 February 2015). "Andy Murray returns to top four". Daily Record. Archived from the original on 6 February 2015. Retrieved 5 February 2015. Oddo, Chris (13 February 2015). "Simon Snaps 12-Match Losing Streak vs. Murray in Rotterdam". TennisNow.com. Archived from the original on 15 February 2015. Retrieved 16 February 2015. "Andy Murray beaten in straight sets by teenager Borna Coric in Dubai". The Guardian. London. 26 February 2015. Archived from the original on 13 March 2015. Retrieved 2 March 2015. "Andy Murray slips behind Kei Nishikori in the latest world rankings". Sky Sports. 2 March 2015. Archived from the original on 3 March 2015. Retrieved 2 March 2015. "Davis Cup: Andy Murray wins to wrap up GB victory over USA". BBC Sport. 8 March 2015. Archived from the original on 9 March 2015. Retrieved 9 March 2015. "Tennis – Murray sets new milestone on way to Indian Wells semi-finals". Yahoo Sport. 19 March 2015. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 25 March 2015. "Andy Murray loses to Novak Djokovic in Indian Wells semi-final". BBC Sport. 21 March 2015. Archived from the original on 22 March 2015. Retrieved 23 March 2015. "Andy Murray beats Kevin Anderson to reach 500 career wins". BBC Sport. 31 March 2015. Archived from the original on 3 May 2015. Retrieved 30 April 2015. "Andy Murray loses Miami Open final to Novak Djokovic". The Daily Telegraph. London. 5 April 2015. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 30 April 2015. "Andy Murray to hire Jonas Bjorkman – when he's finished with Sweden's answer to 'Strictly Come Dancing'". The Daily Telegraph. London. 11 March 2015. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Cambers, Simon (27 April 2015). "Andy Murray adds to Bjorkman burden while Mauresmo prepares for birth". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 24 December 2019. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "Murray wins BMW Open for first clay-court title". tennis.com. 4 May 2015. Retrieved 4 May 2015. "ATP World Tour". ATPTour.com. 4 May 2015. Archived from the original on 17 July 2015. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray to Face Nishikori in Madrid SF". ATPTour.com. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray & Nadal Clash in Blockbuster Final". ATPTour.com. 10 May 2015. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Magical Murray Denies Nadal to Win Madrid Title". ATPTour.com. 10 May 2015. Archived from the original on 16 July 2015. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Andy Murray beats Rafael Nadal to win Madrid Masters final". BBC Sport. 10 May 2015. Retrieved 19 November 2019. Newbery, Piers (6 June 2015). "French Open: Novak Djokovic beats Andy Murray to reach final". BBC Sport. Retrieved 19 November 2019. Newbery, Piers (21 June 2015). "Andy Murray wins fourth Queen's Club title with two wins in a day". BBC Sport. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "Andy Murray vs Roger Federer, Wimbledon 2015 – as it happened: Swiss wins in straight sets". The Daily Telegraph. 10 July 2015. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 10 November 2017. "Andy Murray puts Great Britain into Davis Cup semi-finals". BBC Sport. 19 July 2015. Retrieved 10 November 2017. "Andy Murray stunned by Teymuraz Gabashvili at Citi Open in Washington". The Guardian. 6 August 2015. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "Bopanna-Mergea beat Murray-Nestor, enter Citi Open quarters". Hindustan Times. 4 August 2015. Retrieved 7 January 2020. "Jamie Murray beats Andy Murray in Rogers Cup doubles". BBC Sport. 14 August 2015. Retrieved 10 November 2017. "Andy Murray beaten by Kevin Anderson in US Open fourth round". BBC Sport. 8 September 2015. Retrieved 10 September 2015. "Andy Murray beats body and Bernard Tomic to put GB in Davis Cup final". The Guardian. London. 20 September 2015. Retrieved 22 September 2015. "Andy Murray puts Great Britain into Davis Cup final". BBC Sport. 19 September 2015. "Murray Ends French Hopes, Battles Into Paris SFs". ATPTour.com. 6 November 2015. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "ATP World Tour Finals – It's Novak Djokovic and the rest". ESPN.com. 23 November 2015. "murray davis cup preview 2015 final – ATP World Tour – Tennis". ATPTour.com. 25 November 2015. Retrieved 19 November 2019. Newbery, Piers (29 November 2015). "Andy Murray wins the Davis Cup for Great Britain". BBC Sport. Retrieved 10 November 2017. "Andy Murray beats Goffin to seal first Davis Cup for Great Britain in 79 years". The Guardian. London. 29 November 2015. Retrieved 29 November 2015. "Novak Djokovic beats Andy Murray to win sixth Australian Open title". BBC Sport. 31 January 2016. Retrieved 14 February 2016. "Andy Murray should stick with Jamie Delgado, says Tim Henman". skysports.com. 19 May 2016. Retrieved 15 August 2016. "Davis Cup: Andy Murray beats Kei Nishikori in five sets to give GB victory". BBC Sport. 6 March 2016. Retrieved 26 September 2023. "Andy Murray loses to Grigor Dimitrov in Miami Open, Johanna Konta through". BBC Sport. 29 March 2016. Retrieved 5 November 2016. Grez, Matias (9 May 2016). "Andy Murray and Amelie Mauresmo 'mutually agree' to end partnership". CNN. Retrieved 15 August 2016. "Andy Murray beats Novak Djokovic to win first Italian Open title". BBC Sport. 15 May 2016. Retrieved 7 June 2016. "Andy Murray beats Stan Wawrinka to reach his first French Open final". BBC Sport. 3 June 2016. Newbery, Piers (14 June 2016). "Andy Murray and Ivan Lendl reunited at Queen's Club". BBC Sport. Retrieved 15 August 2016. Mitchell, Kevin (4 July 2016). "Andy Murray beats Nick Kyrgios to set up Jo-Wilfried Tsonga quarter-final". The Guardian. Retrieved 5 July 2016. "Wimbledon 2016: Andy Murray beats Jo-Wilfried Tsonga to reach semis". BBC Sport. 5 July 2016. Garber, Greg (10 July 2016). "First-time favorite Andy Murray comes through in Wimbledon final". ESPN.com. Retrieved 10 July 2016. "Andy Murray tops Juan Martin del Potro in four-hour four-setter to win second straight singles gold". Tennis.com. 14 August 2016. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "Davis Cup 2016: Juan Martin del Potro beats Andy Murray". BBC Sport. 16 September 2016. Archived from the original on 16 September 2016. Retrieved 16 September 2016. "Davis Cup 2016: Andy & Jamie Murray win doubles to keep GB hopes alive". BBC Sport. 17 September 2016. Archived from the original on 18 September 2016. Retrieved 18 September 2016. "Davis Cup 2016: Dan Evans & Leonardo Mayer face decider after Andy Murray wins". BBC Sport. 18 September 2016. Archived from the original on 18 September 2016. Retrieved 18 September 2016. Fraser, Stuart (18 September 2016). "Argentine resist British fightback to reach Davis Cup final". daviscup.com. ITF Licensing. Archived from the original on 20 September 2016. Retrieved 20 September 2016. "Andy Murray to face Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in Erste Bank Open final after walkover". BBC Sport. 29 October 2016. Retrieved 31 October 2016. "Andy Murray beats Jo-Wilfried Tsonga in Vienna to win the Erste Bank Open". BBC Sport. 30 October 2016. Retrieved 31 October 2016. "Murray Wins Shanghai, Draws Closer To Novak". ATPTour.com. 16 October 2016. Retrieved 2 November 2016. "Murray Becomes 26th Player In History To Hold No. 1 In Emirates ATP Rankings". ATPTour.com. 5 November 2016. Retrieved 6 November 2016. "Murray Claims 14th Masters 1000 Crown In Paris | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATPTour.com. Retrieved 6 November 2016. "Historic ATP Season Finale Hits New Heights In Dramatic Finish To 2016 Season". ATPTour.com. 23 November 2016. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "No. 61803". The London Gazette (Supplement). 31 December 2016. p. N2. Littlejohn, Georgia (8 October 2020). "Queen's birthday honours list: the difference between an MBE, OBE and CBE – and how knighthoods and damehoods work". the i. Retrieved 27 July 2021. "Andy Murray loses to David Goffin in season opener". BBC Sport. 30 December 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016. "Sir Andy Murray ends 2016 with victory over Milos Raonic". BBC Sport. 31 December 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016. "Novak Djokovic Beats Andy Murray For Doha Title". ATPTour.com. 7 January 2017. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "Andy Murray to Face Novak Djokovic in Qatar Open Final". The New York Times. 6 January 2017. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 7 January 2017. Ramsey, Alix (22 January 2017). "No.1 goes down: Zverev stuns Murray". AusOpen.com. Tennis Australia. Archived from the original on 22 January 2017. "Andy Murray beats Fernando Verdasco to win first Dubai Championships title". BBC Sport. 4 March 2017. Retrieved 8 March 2017. "Murray Downs Kohlschreiber In Dubai Thriller". ATPTour.com. 2 March 2017. Retrieved 7 November 2018. Briggs, Simon (12 March 2017). "Andy Murray at a loss to explain shock Indian Wells exit to world number 129 Vasek Pospisil". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 7 November 2018. "Andy Murray beaten by Albert Ramos-Vinolas at Monte Carlo Masters". BBC Sport. 20 April 2017. Retrieved 20 April 2017. "Andy Murray beaten by Dominic Thiem in Barcelona Open semi-finals". BBC Sport. 29 April 2017. Retrieved 17 May 2017. "Andy Murray out in Madrid Open third round, beaten by Borna Coric". BBC Sport. 11 May 2017. Retrieved 17 May 2017. "Andy Murray beaten by Fabio Fognini in Rome Masters second round". BBC Sport. 16 May 2017. Retrieved 17 May 2017. Newbery, Piers (30 May 2017). "French Open 2017: Andy Murray beats Andrey Kuznetsov to reach second round". BBC Sport. Retrieved 7 November 2018. Mitchell, Kevin (1 June 2017). "Andy Murray made to work by Martin Klizan in French Open four-set win". The Guardian. Retrieved 7 November 2018. Piers, Newbery (3 June 2017). "French Open: Andy Murray beats Juan Martin del Potro, but Kyle Edmund loses". BBC Sport. Retrieved 7 November 2018. Eccleshare, Charlie; Briggs, Simon (5 June 2017). "Andy Murray crushes Karen Khachanov in straight sets to reach French Open quarter-final". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 7 November 2018. Newbery, Piers (7 June 2017). "French Open 2017: Andy Murray beats Kei Nishikori in quarter-finals". BBC Sport. Retrieved 7 November 2018. Briggs, Simon; Eccleshare, Charlie (9 June 2017). "Andy Murray loses epic French Open semi-final to Stan Wawrinka". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 7 November 2018. Roan, Dan (20 June 2017). "Andy Murray to make Grenfell fire donation from Queen's earnings". BBC Sport. Retrieved 7 November 2018. Newbery, Piers (20 June 2017). "Andy Murray stunned by Jordan Thompson at Queen's". BBC Sport. Retrieved 7 November 2018. "Wimbledon 2017: Andy Murray & Johanna Konta makes it four Britons in round three". BBC Sport. 5 July 2017. Retrieved 5 July 2017. "Wimbledon 2017: Andy Murray begins defence with win over Alexander Bublik". BBC Sport. 3 July 2017. Retrieved 5 July 2017. "Wimbledon 2017: Andy Murray wins thrilling contest against Fabio Fognini". BBC Sport. 7 July 2017. Retrieved 10 July 2017. "Wimbledon 2017: Andy Murray & Johanna Konta reach quarter-finals". BBC Sport. 10 July 2017. Retrieved 10 July 2017. Hodges, Vicki (12 July 2017). "Hobbling Andy Murray knocked out of Wimbledon as Sam Querrey books first semi-final spot with five-sets win". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 12 July 2017. "Andy Murray: British world number one pulls out of Cincinnati Masters". BBC Sport. 9 August 2017. "Rafael Nadal: Return to world number one ranking is 'special day'". BBC Sport. 21 August 2017. Retrieved 25 August 2017. "Andy Murray withdraws from US Open because of ongoing hip injury". BBC Sport. 26 August 2017. Retrieved 26 August 2017. "Andy Murray: World number two 'most likely' to miss rest of season with hip injury". BBC Sport. 6 September 2017. Retrieved 9 November 2017. "Andy Murray: Rankings history (all years)". ATP. 6 November 2017. Retrieved 9 November 2017. "Andy Murray falls to lowest ranking in nine years after injury-hit year". Evening Times. 6 November 2017. Retrieved 23 November 2017. "Andy Murray "hopes" to return from injury in January but only if 100% fit". BBC Sport. 7 November 2017. Retrieved 23 November 2017. "Andy Murray: British number one splits with coach Ivan Lendl". BBC Sport. 17 November 2017. Retrieved 23 November 2017. "Murray Withdraws From Australian Open". 4 January 2018. Retrieved 4 January 2018. "Instagram post by Andy Murray • Jan 2, 2018 at 9:23am UTC". Instagram.com. Archived from the original on 23 December 2021. Retrieved 8 January 2018. Mitchell, Kevin (2 January 2018). "Andy Murray considers hip surgery as career hangs in the balance". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 8 January 2018. "Instagram post by Andy Murray • Jan 8, 2018 at 4:06pm UTC". Instagram.com. Archived from the original on 23 December 2021. Retrieved 8 January 2018. "Kyle Edmund replaces Andy Murray to become British number one for first time". BBC Sport. 5 March 2018. Retrieved 31 March 2018. "Andy Murray: Former world number one says he is making 'progress'". BBC Sport. 28 March 2018. Retrieved 31 March 2018. "Andy Murray on Instagram: "Chasing down another @aidymchugh error today during practice #progress #hip #unforced #youngpup"". Instagram.com. Archived from the original on 23 December 2021. Retrieved 31 March 2018. "Andy Murray: Former world number one to play Libema Open before Wimbledon". BBC Sport. 29 March 2018. Retrieved 31 March 2018. "Murray chooses Rosmalen for comeback – Libéma Open". Libéma Open. 26 March 2018. Archived from the original on 1 April 2018. Retrieved 31 March 2018. "Andy Murray delays comeback but still has Wimbledon Hopes". BBC Sport. 5 June 2018. Retrieved 5 June 2018. "Andy Murray to play Fever-Tree Championships at Queen's Club". BBC Sport. 16 June 2018. Retrieved 16 June 2018. "Edmund Ends Murray's Eastbourne Comeback". 27 June 2018. Retrieved 28 June 2018. "Andy Murray: Two-time champion withdraws from Wimbledon". BBC Sport. 1 July 2018. Retrieved 1 July 2018. "Andy Murray drops to world number 839 in latest tennis rankings". BBC Sport. 16 July 2018. Retrieved 17 July 2018. "Andy Murray to play Mackenzie McDonald in Washington Open". BBC Sport. 28 July 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "Andy Murray suffers early defeat to Lucas Pouille at Cincinnati Masters". SkySports.com. Retrieved 15 August 2018. "US Open 2018: Andy Murray beats James Duckworth on Grand Slam return". BBC Sport. 27 August 2018. Retrieved 29 August 2018. "US Open 2018: Andy Murray loses to Fernando Verdasco in second round". BBC Sport. 30 August 2018. Retrieved 30 August 2018. "Andy Murray to skip Davis Cup, apologizes through emotional post". TennisWorldUSA.org. 6 September 2018. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "Shenzhen Open: Andy Murray through to second round after Zhang Zhizhen retires". BBC Sport. 25 September 2018. Retrieved 27 September 2018. "Andy Murray beats David Goffin to reach Shenzhen Open quarter-finals". BBC Sport. 27 September 2018. Retrieved 27 September 2018. "Andy Murray beaten by Fernando Verdasco at Shenzhen Open". BBC Sport. 28 September 2018. Retrieved 28 September 2018. Sport (29 September 2018). "Andy Murray ends season earlier than scheduled after straight sets defeat to Fernando Verdasco". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 29 September 2018. "Andy Murray ends season after loss to Fernando Verdasco at the Shenzhen Open". BBC Sport. 28 September 2018. Retrieved 29 September 2018. Idessane, Kheredine (20 December 2018). "Andy Murray will head early to Brisbane for latest planned return to action". BBC Sport. Retrieved 1 January 2019. Mitchell, Kevin (1 January 2019). "Andy Murray's class and vulnerability both on display in long-awaited return". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 1 January 2019. "Andy Murray and Kyle Edmund beaten at the Brisbane International". BBC Sport. 2 January 2019. Retrieved 2 January 2019. "Andy Murray makes surprise announcement ahead of the Australian Open". News.com.au. 11 January 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2019. "Andy Murray: Australian Open could be last tournament". BBC Sport. 11 January 2019. Retrieved 12 January 2019. "Andy Murray Announces he will Retire from Tennis at Wimbledon". lastwordontennis.com. 11 January 2019. "'A champion on and off the court': sport pays tribute to Andy Murray". The Guardian. 11 January 2019. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 13 January 2019. Jurejko, Jonathan (12 January 2019). "Andy Murray retirement: Rafael Nadal says former world number one is 'suffering'". BBC Sport. Retrieved 13 January 2019. Jonathan, Jurejko (13 January 2019). "Andy Murray: Roger Federer & Novak Djokovic pay tribute to Briton". BBC Sport. Retrieved 13 January 2019. Steinberg, Jacob (14 January 2019). "Australian Open: Andy Murray beaten by Roberto Bautista Agut in five sets – as it happened". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 14 January 2019. Harwitt, Sandra (14 January 2019). "Andy Murray fights, but it isn't enough in possible farewell match at Australian Open". USA Today. Retrieved 14 January 2019. Briggs, Simon (16 January 2019). "Andy Murray urged to press ahead with hip surgery, by Bob Bryan who underwent same operation". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2019. "Andy Murray undergoes hip resurfacing surgery in London". The Telegraph. 29 January 2019. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2019. Westerby, John (4 February 2019). "Andy Murray should be able to play at Wimbledon, says hip expert". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Retrieved 6 February 2019. "Andy Murray on rushing back for Wimbledon 2019 and possibly playing doubles". Tennis365.com. 7 March 2019. Retrieved 14 March 2019. "Sir Andy Murray receives knighthood at Buckingham Palace". BBC News. 16 May 2019. Retrieved 16 May 2019. "Andy Murray to make competitive return in doubles at Queen's Club". BBC Sport. 3 June 2019. Archived from the original on 13 June 2019. Eccleshare, Charlie (20 June 2019). "Andy Murray makes magnificent return as he and Feliciano Lopez storm to victory at Queen's". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 20 June 2019. Retrieved 20 June 2019. Mitchell, Kevin (23 June 2019). "Andy Murray wins Queen's doubles title in first tournament since hip surgery". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 23 June 2019. Jurejko, Jonathan (23 June 2019). "Andy Murray wins Queen's doubles title with Feliciano Lopez". BBC Sport. Retrieved 23 June 2019. "Andy Murray & Marcelo Melo beaten in doubles at Eastbourne International". BBC Sport. 25 June 2019. Retrieved 25 June 2019.. "Andy Murray and Serena Williams' run in the Wimbledon mixed doubles ends". BBC Sport. 10 July 2019. Retrieved 10 July 2019.. "Andy Murray to play Richard Gasquet at Cincinnati Masters on Monday". 12 August 2019. Retrieved 12 August 2019. "Andy Murray rules out US Open singles after losing to Richard Gasquet". BBC Sport. 13 August 2019. Retrieved 16 August 2019. "Andy Murray & Feliciano Lopez lose to Jamie Murray & Neal Skupski at Cincinnati Masters". BBC Sport. 17 August 2017. Retrieved 17 August 2019. "Andy Murray to play in Rafael Nadal's ATP Challenger event". BBC Sport. Retrieved 22 August 2019. "Rafa Nadal Open: Andy Murray beats teen Imran Sibille to seal first singles win since hip surgery". BBC Sport. 26 August 2019. Retrieved 26 August 2019. "Andy Murray loses in Rafa Nadal Open to Matteo Viola". BBC Sport. 29 August 2019. Retrieved 30 August 2019. "Andy Murray knocked out of Zhuhai Championships by Alex de Minaur". The Independent. 26 September 2019. Retrieved 27 September 2023. "China Open: Andy Murray loses to Dominic Thiem in quarter-final". BBC Sport. 4 October 2019. Retrieved 27 September 2019. Carayol, Tumaini (8 October 2019). "Andy Murray falls to fiery second-round defeat at Shanghai Masters". The Guardian. Retrieved 27 September 2023. Andy Murray tearful as he revels in European Open final victory over Stan Wawrinka, The Independent, 20 October 2019 "Andy Murray in Great Britain team for Davis Cup finals in Madrid". 21 October 2019. Retrieved 25 October 2019. Andy Murray documentary: Eight things we learned from Resurfacing, BBC Sport, 26 November 2019 Andy Murray documentary: when Resurfacing is released on Amazon Prime, and everything we know so far, iNews, 1 December 2019 Andy Murray to miss 2020 Australian Open and ATP Cup because of pelvic injury, BBC Sport, 28 December 2019 "Murray beats world number seven Zverev". BBC Sport. Retrieved 25 August 2020. "'It was poor, didn't play well, not a good day' – Andy Murray reflects on loss to Milos Raonic". The Scotsman. 26 August 2020. Retrieved 3 October 2020. "US Open 2020: Murray gets ice bath after 'pretty special' win". in.news.yahoo.com. Retrieved 17 April 2021. "Flawless Felix Auger-Aliassime ends Andy Murray's journey in straight sets". Eurosport. 4 September 2020. Retrieved 19 February 2021. "French Open: Andy Murray loses to Stan Wawrinka, Dan Evans beaten by Kei Nishikori". BBC Sport. Retrieved 3 October 2020. "Andy Murray, Thanasi Kokkinakis Headline Australian Open Wild Cards | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Retrieved 17 April 2021. "Andy Murray 'devastated' as he shelves Australian Open plans". theguardian.com. 22 January 2021. Retrieved 14 June 2021. "Andy Murray loses in Open Sud de France first round to Egor Gerasimov". bbc.com. 23 February 2021. Retrieved 14 June 2021. "Angry Andy Murray loses to world number eight Andrey Rublev in Rotterdam". guardian-series.co.uk. 3 March 2021. Retrieved 14 June 2021. "Andy Murray & Liam Broady lose in Italian Open doubles second round". bbc.co.uk. 13 May 2021. Retrieved 14 June 2021. "Big coup for Nottingham Open as Andy Murray signs up after French Open withdrawal". tennis365.com. 18 May 2021. Retrieved 14 June 2021. "Andy Murray's Queen's Club comeback halted by defeat to Matteo Berrettini". The Guardian. 17 June 2021. "Former Champ Murray, #NextGenATP Alcaraz Lead Wimbledon Wild Cards | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. "Andy Murray Player Profile – The Championships, Wimbledon 2021". Archived from the original on 29 July 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray (quad) out of Tokyo singles tournament". ESPN.com. 25 July 2021. "Australian Max Purcell beats world No.15 after late Tokyo Olympics tennis singles inclusion". Retrieved 29 July 2021. "Tokyo Olympics tennis: Andy Murray & Joe Salisbury out, Novak Djokovic wins". Retrieved 29 July 2021. Flood, George (18 August 2021). "Andy Murray out of Cincinnati Masters after second-round defeat by Hubert Hurkacz". Evening Standard. Retrieved 14 September 2021. "Andy Murray knocked out of Winston-Salem Open but Dan Evans makes it through to third round". Sky Sports. 25 August 2021. Retrieved 14 September 2021. "US Open: Andy Murray aims new jibe at Stefanos Tsitsipas in toilet break row". BBC News. 1 September 2021. Retrieved 14 September 2021. "Andy Murray set to return to action at ATP Challenger event". 8 September 2021. "Murray Returns To Challenger Tour With Win In Rennes". Tennis Tourtalk. 14 September 2021. Archived from the original on 14 September 2021. Retrieved 14 September 2021. "Andy Murray: Three-time Grand Slam winner loses in last 16 at Rennes Open". 15 September 2021. Walker-Roberts, James (14 September 2021). "Andy Murray Takes Wildcard Into MOselle Open in Metz, With Rennes and San Diego Also This Month". Eurosport. "Casper Ruud Beats 'Legend' Andy Murray In San Diego | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. "Andy Murray Headlines Indian Wells Wild Cards | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. "Murray Saves 2 MPs, Battles Past Tiafoe In 3-Hour, 45-Minute Classic". ATP Tour. Retrieved 25 October 2021. "Diego Schwartzman Downs Andy Murray In Antwerp | ATP Tour | Tennis". ATP Tour. Retrieved 22 October 2021. "Murray Beats Nitto ATP Finals Contender Hurkacz In Vienna". ATP Tour. Retrieved 25 October 2021. "Carlos Alcaraz Earns Revenge Against Andy Murray in Vienna | ATP Tour | Tennis". "Andy Murray stuns top seed Sinner to reach Stockholm Open quarter-final". TheGuardian.com. 10 November 2021. "US Open: Andy Murray goes down in four sets to Matteo Berrettini at Flushing Meadows in New York". SkySports. UK. 2 September 2022. Archived from the original on 3 September 2022. "Summary and highlights of Rafael Nadal 0–2 Andy Murray IN Abu Dhabi semifinals". Vavel. 17 December 2021. Retrieved 17 December 2021. "Andy Murray beaten by Andrey Rublev in Mubadala World Tennis Championship final". BBC News. 18 December 2021. Retrieved 18 December 2021. Imhoff, Dan (4 January 2022). "Melbourne Summer Set: Osaka makes winning return, Murray ousted". Ausopen.com. Tennis Australia. Sharp, Alex (13 January 2022). "Krejcikova, Karatsev soar as Sydney semis set". Ausopen.com. Tennis Australia. "Andy Murray fails to end drought as Karatsev wins Sydney Classic final". TheGuardian.com. 15 January 2022. "Andy Murray: Former world No. 1 suffers surprise Australian Open defeat to qualifier Taro Daniel". Sky Sports. Retrieved 25 January 2022. "Andy Murray beaten in Rotterdam by Felix Auger-Aliassime". BBC Sport. 10 February 2022. Retrieved 14 February 2022. "Andy Murray to miss French Open after opting to sit out entire clay court season". Sky News. Sky UK. 6 February 2022. Retrieved 6 February 2022. "Qatar Open: Andy Murray loses in straight sets to Roberto Bautista Agut". BBC News. BBC. 16 February 2022. Retrieved 16 February 2022. Berkok, John (21 February 2022). "Stat of the Day: Andy Murray battles to 699th career win in Dubai". Tennis.com. Retrieved 7 March 2023. "Murray goes out in Dubai second round". BBC Sport. "Indian Wells: Andy Murray loses to Alexander Bublik in second round". BBC Sport. 13 March 2022. Retrieved 14 March 2022. "Andy Murray's Milestone: Briton Reaches 700 Career Wins | ATP Tour | Tennis". "Andy Murray sets up meeting with top seed Daniil Medvedev in Miami". The Guardian. 25 March 2022. Retrieved 25 March 2022. "Miami Open: Andy Murray loses to Daniil Medvedev as Heather Watson also goes out". BBC News. 26 March 2022. Retrieved 26 March 2022. "Andy Murray accepts Madrid Open wildcard, reversing decision to skip clay-court season". BBC Sport. 20 April 2022. Retrieved 21 April 2022. "Murray Claws Past Shapovalov, Sets Djokovic Blockbuster In Madrid". ATP Tour. 3 May 2022. Retrieved 3 May 2022. "Andy Murray withdraws from Novak Djokovic clash at Madrid Open". ABC News. 5 May 2022. Retrieved 12 May 2022. "Andy Murray goes down fighting in last eight loss at Hall of Fame Open". Tennis 365. 15 July 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "Unbreakable Nick Kyrgios thunders into Citi Open final after defeating Mikael Ymer". The Guardian. 7 August 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Kyrgios didn't face a solitary break point against Ymer, who had ousted former world No. 1 Andy Murray in the first round. "Andy Murray out of Montreal Open but Cameron Norrie eases through". The Guardian. 10 August 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "Norrie Edges Murray In Cincinnati". atpworldtour.com. ATP. 17 August 2022. Retrieved 16 October 2022. Chiesa, Victoria (19 January 2023). "Andy Murray wins longest match of career against Thanasi Kokkinakis to reach Round 3 at Australian Open". US Open. Retrieved 19 January 2023. "Andy Murray's Australian Open run ends in battling defeat to Bautista Agut". the Guardian. 21 January 2023. Retrieved 22 January 2023. "Kokkinakis Ousted In Late-Night Australian Open Classic". Tennis Australia. 20 January 2023. Retrieved 17 June 2023. Jacobs, Shahida (9 February 2023). "Andy Murray equals record for most wildcards received as top analyst and Victoria Azarenka defend him". Tennis365. Retrieved 7 March 2023. Waite, Alex (8 February 2023). "Andy Murray receives record number of wildcards following Dubai Championship entry". Tennis Infinity. Retrieved 7 March 2023. "Begrudging Andy Murray wildcards is a cruel abandonment of appreciation". Tennishead. 8 February 2023. Retrieved 7 March 2023. "Jack Draper Wins First Andy Murray Meeting To Extend Indian Wells Debut Run". ATP Tour. 14 March 2023. Retrieved 28 March 2023. Poole, Harry (23 March 2023). "Murray loses to Lajovic in Miami Open first round". BBC Sport. Retrieved 28 March 2023. "Monte Carlo Masters: Andy Murray and Cameron Norrie lose in first round but Jack Draper through". BBC Sport. 10 April 2023. Retrieved 7 May 2023. Jurejko, Jonathan (27 April 2023). "Madrid Open: Andy Murray loses to Andrea Vavassori, Kyle Edmund beaten by Dominic Thiem". BBC Sport. Retrieved 7 May 2023. Falkingham, Katie (7 May 2023). "Andy Murray beats Tommy Paul in Aix-en-Provence final for first title since 2019". BBC Sport. Retrieved 7 May 2023. "Andy Murray withdraws from French Open to prioritise Wimbledon". BBC Sport. 21 May 2023. Retrieved 11 June 2023. "Surbiton Trophy 2023 results: Andy Murray beats Jurij Rodionov to claim grass-court title". BBC Sport. 11 June 2023. Retrieved 11 June 2023. "Murray Continues Winning Streak, Reaches Nottingham Final". ATP. 17 June 2023. Retrieved 17 June 2023. Oxley, Sonia (18 June 2023). "Nottingham Open 2023 results: Andy Murray beats Arthur Cazaux in final". BBC Sport. Retrieved 18 June 2023. Jurejko, Jonathan (7 July 2023). "Wimbledon 2023 results: Andy Murray loses to Stefanos Tsitsipas, Cameron Norrie and Liam Broady beaten". BBC Sport. Retrieved 26 September 2023. Jurejko, Jonathan (31 August 2023). "US Open 2023 results: Andy Murray loses to Grigor Dimitrov in New York". BBC Sport. Retrieved 26 September 2023. https://twitter.com/the_LTA/status/1762131222199754800 "Novak Djokovic VS Andy Murray". ATPTour.com. ATP. Retrieved 2 February 2018. "Novak & Andy: The Rivalry". ATP World Tour. 26 January 2013. Archived from the original on 27 May 2013. Retrieved 17 April 2013. "The 2 Best ATP World Tour Matches of 2011". ATPTour.com. ATP. Archived from the original on 20 March 2013. Retrieved 5 February 2013. "Best ATP World Tour Matches of the Year – Nos. 1–2". ATPTour.com. ATP. Archived from the original on 25 December 2012. Retrieved 5 February 2013. "Djokovic-Murray move away from pack". Eurosport. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 1 February 2013. "World number two Andy Murray determined to improve on clay". BBC Sport. 1 April 2013. Retrieved 16 June 2013. Mitchell, Kevin (31 January 2016). "Novak Djokovic beats Andy Murray to win the 2016 Australian Open final". The Guardian. Retrieved 20 November 2019. Mitchell, Kevin (6 June 2016). "Novak Djokovic beats Andy Murray to claim first French Open title". The Guardian. Retrieved 20 November 2019. "Roger Federer VS Andy Murray". ATPTour.com. ATP. Retrieved 11 April 2018. Bierley, Steve (14 November 2008). "Murray wins gruelling match to knock out defending champion Federer". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media. Retrieved 27 April 2010. Cronin, Matt (25 January 2013). "Murray makes it happen". australianopen.com. Archived from the original on 20 March 2013. Retrieved 16 June 2013. "Rafael Nadal VS Andy Murray". ATPTour.com. ATP. Retrieved 11 April 2018. "Nadal blows Murray away in final". BBC Sport. 22 March 2009. Retrieved 6 February 2012. Newbery, Piers (15 February 2009). "Murray beats Nadal to take title". BBC Sport. Retrieved 6 February 2012. Overend, Jonathan (9 October 2011). "Andy Murray defeats Rafael Nadal in Japan Open final". BBC Sport. Retrieved 6 February 2012. "Andy Murray to play Djokovic in Miami final after Nadal withdraws". BBC Sport. 1 April 2012. Retrieved 6 February 2012. Jennings, Patrick (10 May 2015). "Andy Murray beats Rafael Nadal to win Madrid Masters final". BBC Sport. Retrieved 14 June 2015. Smith, Alan (17 April 2016). "Rafael Nadal defeats Andy Murray in Monte Carlo Masters semi-final – as it happened!". The Guardian. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "Andy Murray defeats Rafael Nadal on clay to reach Madrid Open final". The Guardian. 8 May 2016. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "Murray v Wawrinka Head to Head". ATPTour.com. ATP. Retrieved 21 September 2016. "Murray wins late-night thriller". BBC Sport. 29 June 2009. Retrieved 21 September 2016. Mitchell, Kevin (6 September 2010). "Andy Murray exits US Open as Stanislas Wawrinka proves too strong". The Guardian. Retrieved 26 September 2023. "Andy Murray beaten by Stanislas Wawrinka at US Open". BBC Sport. 5 September 2013. Retrieved 21 September 2016. Steinberg, Jacob (3 June 2016). "Andy Murray beats Stan Wawrinka to reach French Open final – as it happened". The Guardian. Retrieved 26 September 2023. "Patience a virtue for Andy Murray?". ESPN. 30 August 2009. Retrieved 10 July 2013. Newman, Paul (12 April 2009). "No surface tension as Murray looks to shed his feet of clay". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 7 May 2022. Retrieved 26 June 2009. W. Smith, David. "Player tactics: The Andy Murray Backhand". Archived from the original on 18 April 2015. Retrieved 7 September 2016. "Player tactics". BBC Sport. Retrieved 28 March 2016. Thorp, Dan (9 June 2008). "Player tactics: Andy Murray is best described as a counter-puncher". BBC Sport. Retrieved 16 June 2013. Ramsay, Alix. "Murray has Indian sign over Fed". The Scotsman. Edinburgh. Archived from the original on 4 July 2009. Retrieved 26 June 2009. White, Clive (17 October 2008). "Andy Murray to take on Roger Federer in Madrid Masters semi-final". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 25 April 2010. "Andy Murray drop shot: What makes it one of the greatest shots in tennis?". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2016. "Paul Annacone: ´Andy Murray´s net game is one of the most underrated on tour´". TennisWorldUSA.org. 17 March 2016. Retrieved 21 September 2016. "Andy Murray needs more Tim Henman in his game, insists coach Jonas Bjorkman". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 21 September 2016. "Corretja to help Murray on clay". BBC Sport. 4 April 2008. Archived from the original on 22 July 2008. Retrieved 1 July 2008. "How Andy Murray turned a second serve into a lethal weapon". London Evening Standard. 4 July 2015. Retrieved 27 May 2015. "Murray bemoans inconsistent serve after shock defeat". ESPN. 26 March 2011. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 7 November 2015. "The making of Andy Murray, a modern-day champion – and the extra miles he has gone for Wimbledon glory". The Telegraph. 8 July 2013. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 12 October 2016. "Andy Murray must return to Ivan Lendl's aggressive style, claims Greg Rusedski". SkySports.com. 14 November 2014. Retrieved 27 May 2015. "US Open 2011: Andy Murray's consistency needs a trophy". The Telegraph. 10 September 2011. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 7 November 2015. Harman, Neil (4 November 2009). "Andy Murray's fashion sense goes into overdrive with £30 m deal with adidas". The Times. UK. Retrieved 25 January 2010.[permanent dead link] "Murray ends Fred Perry sponsorship deal". The Independent. London. Reuters. 4 November 2009. Archived from the original on 7 May 2022. Retrieved 7 July 2013. "Andy Murray's new deal with Under Armour slips out as tennis star fails to conceal t-shirt logo". The Telegraph. 12 December 2014. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. "Andy Murray signs £15m kit deal with US company Under Armour". The Guardian. 30 December 2014. "Murray signs four-year clothing deal with Under Armour". Tennis.com. 30 December 2014. Retrieved 25 September 2015. "Andy Murray & Castore". castore.com. 8 March 2019. Archived from the original on 2 July 2019. Retrieved 25 July 2019. "Murray Confirms Castore Partnership". sportindustry.biz. 11 January 2019. Archived from the original on 11 January 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2019. "HEAD – the most successful racquet on the tennis tour in 2012". HEAD. Archived from the original on 13 December 2013. Retrieved 16 June 2013. "Murray will leave Australian Open early if baby comes". Tennis.com. 16 December 2015. "Murray Splits With Coach Mauresmo". ATP. 9 May 2016. Archived from the original on 10 May 2016. "Andy Murray rolls back years to work with Ivan Lendl for third time". TheGuardian.com. 4 March 2022. "Murray splits with Lendl for third time". Reuters. 10 November 2023. Retrieved 15 January 2024. Sweney, Mark (28 October 2010). "David Beckham and Andy Murray back anti-malaria campaign". The Guardian. Retrieved 20 November 2019. "Andy Murray Supports Malaria No More UK and Comic Relief". ATP. Press Release. 15 March 2011. Retrieved 7 July 2013. "Rally for Relief Raises $1.8M for Queensland Flood Victims". ATPTour.com. 16 January 2011. Retrieved 7 January 2015. Murray called Hutchins his best friend in his speech to the crowd after winning the 2013 AEGON Championships, just before the charity match. Mitchell, Kevin (22 February 2013). "Andy Murray and Tim Henman double up in cancer research fundraiser". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 16 April 2013. "Rally Against Cancer". The Royal Marsden Cancer Charity. June 2013. Archived from the original on 16 July 2013. Retrieved 7 July 2013. After generously donating his £73,000 prize money from the Aegon Championships, Andy Murray is now sporting The Royal Marsden Cancer Charity name on his sleeve throughout Wimbledon. "Rally for Bally: Andy Murray leads Elena Baltacha tributes". BBC Sport. 16 June 2014. Retrieved 20 November 2019. "Tennis World Unites At Rally For Bally". ATPTour.com. 15 June 2016. Archived from the original on 21 April 2015. Retrieved 22 July 2018. "Murray recognised with humanitarian award". ESPN.co.uk. Retrieved 19 November 2018. Hodgkinson, Mark (23 June 2008). "Wimbledon: Andy Murray promises to focus". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 8 July 2013. Addley, Esther (8 July 2013). "Andy Murray: Scottish, British, who cares? Today he belongs to us all". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 6 September 2013. "Tim Henman talks about Andy Murray". Youtube.com. Retrieved 9 September 2008. "Scottish independence: Andy Murray stays quiet on vote". BBC News. 9 March 2014. Retrieved 15 April 2014. "Andy Murray on Scottish independence vote: 'Let's do this!'". The Guardian. London, UK. 18 September 2014. "Murray signals support for Scottish independence". Tennis.com. 18 September 2014. Retrieved 25 August 2015. "Scottish referendum: Andy Murray 'disappointed' by indyref tweet fallout". BBC News. 23 September 2014. Retrieved 13 July 2015. Harman, Neil (10 January 2006). "Auckland to double his luck with Murray plea". The Times. London.[permanent dead link] Roberts, John (10 January 2006). "Murray mars victory with verbal error". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 7 May 2022. "Britain fined for Murray outburst". BBC Sport. 9 April 2006. "Murray satisfied with ATP meeting". BBC Sport. 17 October 2007. "Davydenko faces betting inquiry". BBC Sport. 27 August 2007. "Tennis 'aware of fixing threat'". BBC Sport. 12 October 2007. "John Inverdale roasted by Andy Murray and Twitter after making BBC gaffe". YouTube.com. Retrieved 20 November 2019. Dickson, Andrew (22 March 2016). "Andy Murray says female tennis players should get equal pay to men". Sky Sports. Brinlee, Morgan. "Andy Murray Gets Cheeky About Brexit At Wimbledon". Bustle. Retrieved 19 November 2018. Roth, Carolin (12 July 2016). "Andy Murray surprised by Brexit, says time to unite". CNBC. Retrieved 19 November 2018. Clarey, Christopher (8 July 2012). "Federer Beats Murray, and Britain, for Seventh Wimbledon Title". The New York Times. Retrieved 9 July 2012. The only other man in the Open era to lose his first four major finals is Ivan Lendl ... "Australian Open Men's Final Open Thread: Novak Djokovic v Andy Murray". tennis-x.com. Retrieved 26 January 2013. Alleyne, Richard (11 September 2012). "Andy Murray's US Open victory hailed as perfect end to perfect summer of sport". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2013. "Murray "proud" after semi-final win over Berdych". Archived from the original on 4 February 2015. Retrieved 29 January 2015. Mitchell, Kevin (30 June 2012). "Wimbledon 2012: Andy Murray beats Marcos Baghdatis in latest finish". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 30 June 2012. "Andy Murray wins Open, first Slam". ESPN. 11 September 2012. Retrieved 11 September 2012. Mitchell, Kevin. "No respite for drained Andy Murray after claiming historic Olympic tennis gold". The Guardian. The Guardian London. Retrieved 15 August 2016. Newbery, Piers (29 November 2015). "Andy Murray wins the Davis Cup for Great Britain". BBC Sport. Retrieved 29 November 2015. "2010 Best Matches of the Year". atpworldtour.com. 7 December 2010. Archived from the original on 29 April 2015. Retrieved 7 December 2010. "2011 Best ATP World Tour match of the Year". atpworldtour.com. 13 December 2011. Archived from the original on 7 January 2012. Retrieved 13 December 2011. "2012 Best ATP World Tour match of the Year". atpworldtour.com. 21 November 2012. Archived from the original on 27 November 2012. Retrieved 21 November 2012. "BBC Sports Personality of the Year 2016: Andy Murray wins for a record third time". BBC Sport. 18 December 2016. Retrieved 18 December 2016. "Honorary degree and freedom of Stirling for Andy Murray". BBC News. 23 April 2014. "Murray Given Freedom of Merton". ATP. 20 June 2014. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 10 July 2014. "Andy Murray given Freedom of Merton". Merton Council. 20 June 2014. Retrieved 10 July 2014. "Andy Murray receives 2022 Arthur Ashe Humanitarian Award from ATP". Lawn Tennis Association. 16 December 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2022. "ATP 2022 awards". Archived from the original on 20 December 2022. "УКАЗ ПРЕЗИДЕНТА УКРАЇНИ №752/2022". www.president.gov.ua (in Ukrainian). 4 November 2022. Retrieved 3 January 2023. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Andy Murray. Wikiquote has quotations related to Andy Murray. Official website Andy Murray at the Association of Tennis Professionals Andy Murray at the International Tennis Federation Andy Murray at the Davis Cup Andy Murray at Team GB Andy Murray at Olympedia Andy Murray at ESPN.com Andy Murray at IMDb 