The men's field hockey tournament at the 2008 Summer Olympics was the 21st edition of the field hockey event for men at the Summer Olympic Games. It was held over a thirteen-day period beginning on 11 August, and culminating with the medal finals on 23 August. All games were played at the hockey field constructed on the Olympic Green in Beijing, China. Germany won the gold medal for the third time after defeating Spain 1–0 in the final. Defending champions Australia won the bronze medal by defeating Netherlands 6–2. This was the only edition India has missed out in its Olympic history. The twelve teams in the tournament were divided into two pools of six, with each team initially playing round-robin games within their pool. Following the completion of the round-robin, the top two teams from each pool advance to the semifinals. All other teams play classification matches to determine the final tournament rankings. The two semi-final winners meet for the gold medal match, while the semi-final losers play in the bronze medal match. Each of the continental champions from five federations and host received an automatic berth. The European and Asian federations received two and one extra quotas respectively based upon the FIH World Rankings at the completion of the 2006 World Cup. In addition to the three teams qualifying through the Olympic Qualifying Tournaments, the following twelve teams, shown with final pre-tournament rankings, competed in this tournament. Fifteen umpires for the men's event were appointed by the FIH. During each match, a video umpire was used to assist the on-field umpires in determining if a goal had been legally scored.  Xavier Adell (ESP)  Christian Blasch (GER)  Chen Dekang (CHN)  Henrik Ehlers (DEN)  David Gentles (AUS)  Murray Grime (AUS)  Kim Hong-lae (KOR)  Satinder Kumar (IND)  David Leiper (GBR)  Andy Mair (GBR)  Gary Simmonds (RSA)  Amarjit Singh (MAS)  Rob ten Cate (NED)  Roel van Eert (NED)  John Wright (RSA) All times are China Standard Time (UTC+08:00) Source: FIH (H) Hosts Source: FIH  Germany  Spain  Australia  Netherlands  Great Britain  South Korea  New Zealand  Pakistan  Belgium  Canada  China  South Africa There were 174 goals scored in 38 matches, for an average of 4.58 goals per match. 11 goals Taeke Taekema 7 goals Song Yi Hayden Shaw 6 goals Des Abbott Eddie Ockenden Jang Jong-hyun 5 goals Jérôme Dekeyser Santi Freixa 4 goals Jamie Dwyer Eli Matheson Na Yubo Simon Child Austin Smith 3 goals Grant Schubert Florian Keller Matthias Witthaus Christopher Zeller Matt Daly Shakeel Abbasi 2 goals Luke Doerner David Guest Fergus Kavanagh John-John Dohmen Jérôme Truyens Wayne Fernandes Connor Grimes Jonty Clarke Ashley Jackson Barry Middleton Rob Moore James Tindall Matthijs Brouwer Jeroen Hertzberger Gareth Brooks Shea McAleese Muhammad Imran Muhammad Waqas Lungile Tsolekile Seo Jong-ho You Hyo-sik Pol Amat Xavier Ribas Eduard Tubau 1 goal Travis Brooks Bevan George Robert Hammond Cédric Charlier Gregory Gucassoff Xavier Reckinger Ranjeev Deol Bindi Kullar Ken Pereira Peter Short Rob Short Moritz Fürste Carlos Nevado Timo Weß Philip Witte Philipp Zeller Glenn Kirkham Richard Mantell Teun de Nooijer Laurence Docherty Timme Hoyng Roderick Weusthof Rehan Butt Syed Abbas Haider Bilgrami Muhammad Javed Adnan Maqsood Shafqat Rasool Muhammad Saqlain Ian Symons Hyun Hye-sung Kang Seong-jung Lee Nam-yong Yeo Woon-kon Yoon Sung-hoon Víctor Sojo Source: FIH "Hockey at the 2008 Beijing Summer Games: Men's Hockey". Sports Reference. Archived from the original on 18 April 2020. Retrieved 21 October 2019. "Qualification System – Games of the XXIX Olympiad" (PDF). FIH. February 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-04-28. Retrieved 2012-11-13. "FIH releases pools for Men's Olympic Hockey Tournament". FIH. 2008-04-18. Retrieved 2014-01-27. FIH Outdoor Appointments 2008 XXIXth Olympic Games Tournament Regulations - Men's and Women's Hockey Competitions Official FIH website