Georgetown University is a private Jesuit research university in Georgetown neighborhood of Washington, D.C., United States. Founded by Bishop John Carroll in 1789 as Georgetown College, it is the oldest Catholic institution of higher education in the United States and the nation's first federally chartered university. The university has eleven undergraduate and graduate schools. The university's main campus is on a hill above the Potomac River and identifiable by Healy Hall, a National Historic Landmark. Georgetown is classified among R1: Doctoral Universities – Very high research activity and undergraduate admissions is considered highly selective. The university offers degree programs in forty-eight disciplines, enrolling an average of 7,500 undergraduate and 10,000 graduate students from more than 135 countries. The school's athletic teams are nicknamed the Hoyas and include a men's basketball team. Notable alumni include 32 Rhodes Scholars, 46 Marshall Scholars, 33 Truman Scholars, 543 Fulbright Scholars, eight living billionaires, two U.S. Supreme Court Justices, and two U.S. Presidents, as well as international royalty and more than a dozen foreign heads of state. Georgetown has educated more U.S. diplomats than any other university, as well as many American politicians and civil servants. Jesuit settlers from England founded the Province of Maryland in 1634. In 1646, the defeat of the Royalists in the English Civil War led to stringent laws against Catholic education and the extradition of known Jesuits from the colony, including missionary Andrew White, and the destruction of their school at Calverton Manor. During most of the remainder of Maryland's colonial period, Jesuits conducted Catholic schools clandestinely. It was not until after the end of the American Revolution that plans to establish a permanent Catholic institution for education in the United States were realized. Because of Benjamin Franklin's recommendation, Pope Pius VI appointed former Jesuit John Carroll as the first head of the Catholic Church in the United States, even though the papal suppression of the Jesuit order was still in effect. Carroll began meetings of local clergy in 1783 near Annapolis, Maryland, where they orchestrated the development of a new university. On January 23, 1789, Carroll finalized the purchase of the property in Georgetown on which Dahlgren Quadrangle was later built. Future Congressman William Gaston was enrolled as the school's first student on November 22, 1791, and instruction began on January 2, 1792. During its early years, Georgetown College suffered from considerable financial strain. The Maryland Society of Jesus began its restoration in 1805, and Jesuit affiliation, in the form of teachers and administrators, bolstered confidence in the college. The school relied on private sources of funding and the limited profits from local lands which had been donated to the Jesuits. To raise money for Georgetown and other schools in 1838, Maryland Jesuits conducted a mass sale of some 272 slaves to two Deep South plantations in Maringouin, Louisiana, from their six in Maryland, ending their slaveholding. President James Madison signed into law Georgetown's congressional charter on March 1, 1815, creating the first federal university charter, which allowed it to confer degrees, with the first bachelor's degrees being awarded two years later. In 1844, the school received a corporate charter, under the name "The President and Directors of Georgetown College", affording the growing school additional legal rights. In response to the demand for a local option for Catholic students, the Medical School was founded in 1851. The U.S. Civil War greatly affected Georgetown as 1,141 students and alumni enlisted in one army or the other, and the Union Army commandeered university buildings. By the time of President Abraham Lincoln's May 1861 visit to campus, 1,400 troops were living in temporary quarters there. Due to the number of lives lost in the war, enrollment levels remained low until well after the war. Only seven students graduated in 1869, down from over 300 in the previous decade. When the Georgetown College Boat Club, the school's rowing team, was founded in 1876 it adopted two colors: blue, used for Union uniforms, and gray, used for Confederate uniforms. These colors signified the peaceful unity among students. Enrollment did not recover until during the presidency of Patrick Francis Healy from 1873 to 1881. Born in Georgia as a slave by law and mixed-race by ancestry, Healy was the first head of a predominantly white American university of acknowledged African descent. He identified as Irish Catholic, like his father, and was educated in Catholic schools in the United States and France. He is credited with reforming the undergraduate curriculum, lengthening the medical and law programs, and creating the Alumni Association. One of his largest undertakings was the construction of a major new building, subsequently named Healy Hall in his honor. For his work, Healy is known as the school's "second founder." After the founding of the Law Department in 1870, Healy and his successors hoped to bind the professional schools into a university, and focus on higher education. The School of Medicine added a dental school in 1901 and the undergraduate School of Nursing in 1903. Georgetown Preparatory School relocated from campus in 1919 and fully separated from the university in 1927. The School of Foreign Service (SFS) was founded in 1919 by Edmund A. Walsh, to prepare students for leadership in diplomacy and foreign commerce. The School of Dentistry became independent of the School of Medicine in 1956. The School of Business was separated from the SFS in 1957. In 1998 it was renamed the McDonough School of Business in honor of alumnus Robert E. McDonough. Besides expansion of the university, Georgetown also aimed to expand its resources and student body. The School of Nursing has admitted female students since its founding, and most of the university classes were made available to women on a limited basis by 1952. With the College of Arts and Sciences welcoming its first female students in the 1969–1970 academic year, Georgetown became fully coeducational. In 1975, Georgetown established the Center for Contemporary Arab Studies, soliciting funds from the governments of the United States, Saudi Arabia, Oman, and Libya as well as American corporations with business interests in the Middle East. It later returned the money it received from Muammar Qaddafi's Libyan government, which had been used to fund a chair for Hisham Shirabi, and also returned further donations from Iraq. Georgetown ended its bicentennial year of 1989 by electing Leo J. O'Donovan, S.J. as president. He subsequently launched the Third Century Campaign to build the school's endowment. In December 2003, Georgetown completed the campaign after raising over $1 billion for financial aid, academic chair endowment, and new capital projects. In 2005, Georgetown received a $20 million gift from Alwaleed bin Talal bin Abdulaziz Alsaud, member of the Saudi Royal Family; at that time the second-largest donation ever to the university, it was used to expand the activities of the Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal Center for Muslim-Christian Understanding. In October 2002, Georgetown University began studying the feasibility of opening a campus of the Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service in Qatar, when the non-profit Qatar Foundation first proposed the idea. The School of Foreign Service in Qatar opened in 2005 along with four other U.S. universities in the Education City development. That same year, Georgetown began hosting a two-week workshop at Fudan University's School of International Relations and Public Affairs in Shanghai, China. This later developed into a more formal connection when Georgetown opened a liaison office at Fudan on January 12, 2008, to further collaboration. John J. DeGioia, Georgetown's first lay president, has led the school since 2001. DeGioia has continued its financial modernization and has sought to "expand opportunities for intercultural and interreligious dialogue." DeGioia also founded the annual Building Bridges Seminar in 2001, which brings global religious leaders together, and is part of Georgetown's effort to promote religious pluralism. The Berkley Center for Religion, Peace, and World Affairs was begun as an initiative in 2004, and after a grant from William R. Berkley, was launched as an independent organization in 2006. Additionally, The Center for International and Regional Studies opened in 2005 at the new Qatar campus. Between 2012 and 2018, Georgetown received more than $350 million from Gulf Cooperation Council countries including Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates. Georgetown University was founded by former Jesuits in the tradition of Ignatius of Loyola; it is a member of the Association of Jesuit Colleges and Universities. Georgetown is not a pontifical university, though seven Jesuits serve on the thirty-six member Board of Directors, the university's governing body. Catholic spaces at the university fall within the territorial jurisdiction of the Archdiocese of Washington, such as Dahlgren Chapel, the university's principal Catholic place of worship. Fifty-two members of the Society of Jesus live on campus, and are employed by Georgetown mostly as professors or administrators. Jesuit Heritage Week has been held every year since 2001 to celebrate the contributions of Jesuits to the Georgetown tradition. The role that Georgetown's Catholic heritage has played in its policies has been controversial at times, even as its influence is relatively limited. Stores in University-owned buildings are not allowed to sell or distribute birth control products. The university hosts the Cardinal O'Connor Conference on Life every January to discuss the pro-life movement. Georgetown University Medical Center and Georgetown University Hospital, operated by MedStar Health, are prohibited from performing abortions. However, as of 2004[update], the hospital did perform research using embryonic stem cells. Georgetown has been criticized by religious groups, such as the Cardinal Newman Society, for not following the teachings of the church. The school has come under criticism for hosting prominent pro-abortion rights speakers, such as John Kerry and Barack Obama. Washington's Archbishop, Donald Wuerl, also criticized the university for inviting pro-abortion rights Kathleen Sebelius to be a commencement speaker. Religious groups have likewise denounced Georgetown for being too LGBT-friendly and for allowing gay-themed events, including a performance, during which "a male student went as a high-heeled Mary and danced to Madonna's 'Like a Virgin' while Jesus (a woman) looked on." Between 1996 and 1999, the administration added crucifixes to many classroom walls, a change that attracted national attention. Before 1996, crucifixes had hung only in hospital rooms and historic classrooms. Some of these crucifixes are historic works of art, and are noted as such. According to a 2004 interview with Imam Yahya Hendi, the school's on-campus Muslim cleric, pressure to remove the crucifixes comes from within the Catholic community, while he and other campus faith leaders have defended their placement. The Intercultural Center is an exception to this controversy, rotating displays of various faith and culture symbols in the lobby. In 2009, Georgetown's religious symbols were brought back to national attention after the university administration covered-up the name of Jesus in preparation for President Barack Obama's speech on campus. As of 2017[update], the university had 7,463 undergraduate students and 11,542 graduate students. Bachelor's programs are offered through College of Arts & Sciences, the School of Nursing, the McDonough School of Business, the School of Continuing Studies, the School of Health, and the Walsh School of Foreign Service, which includes the Qatar campus.[citation needed] Some high school students from Georgetown Visitation are permitted to attend classes for Advanced Placement credit. Georgetown University offers undergraduate degrees in forty-eight majors in the five undergraduate schools and the opportunity for students to design their courses of study. All majors in the College of Arts & Sciences are open as minors to students in that school, the School of Nursing, the School of Health, and the School of Business. Students in the School of Foreign Service can complete select certificates that complement the school's focus on foreign affairs and attain a minor in one of twelve languages but do not have access to the same minor selection as the other four schools. All courses are on a credit hour system. Georgetown offers many opportunities to study abroad, and about half of the undergraduate student body spends time at an institution overseas. Master's and doctoral programs are offered through the Graduate School of Arts & Sciences, the Law Center, the School of Medicine, the McCourt School of Public Policy, and the School of Continuing Studies. Master's students occasionally share some advanced seminars with undergraduates, and most undergraduate schools offer abbreviated bachelor's and master's programs following completion of the undergraduate degree. The McDonough School of Business and the Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service both offer master's programs. The School of Foreign Service is renowned for its academic programs in international affairs. Its graduate program was ranked first in the world by Foreign Policy, and its undergraduate program was ranked fourth. The Center for Contemporary Arab Studies also offer a Master's of Arab Studies, as well as certificates. Each graduate school offers at least one double degree with another graduate school. Additionally, the Law Center offers a joint degree with the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. The School of Continuing Studies includes the Center for Continuing and Professional Education, and operates four types of degree programs, over thirty professional certificates and non-degree courses, undergraduate and graduate degrees in Liberal Studies, as well as summer courses for graduates, undergraduates, and high school students. The School of Dentistry closed in 1990 after 89 years in operation. Admission to Georgetown has been deemed "most selective" by U.S. News & World Report, with the university receiving 27,650 applications and admitting 11.7% of those who applied for the Class of 2025. As of 2011[update], Georgetown's graduate schools have acceptance rates of 3.6% to the School of Medicine, 21.2% to the Law Center, 25% to the MSFS, and 35% to the MBA program. In 2004, a National Bureau of Economic Research study on revealed preference of U.S. colleges showed Georgetown was the 16th most-preferred choice. The School of Foreign Service (SFS) has been ranked #1 in the United States for international affairs according to Niche, as well as #1 in the world according to Foreign Policy Magazine. The Medical School is ranked 44th in research and 87th in primary care, while the McDonough School of Business ranked 25th in MBA programs, second in international business, fifth in nonprofit management, and 13th in part-time business studies. Georgetown University Law Center is ranked 14th in the United States and 12th in the world, as well as first in clinical training and part-time law, second in tax law, third in international law, fifth in criminal law, seventh in health care law, ninth in constitutional law, and tenth in environmental law. The undergraduate schools maintain a restrictive Early Action admissions program, as students who have applied through an Early Decision process at another school are not permitted to apply early to Georgetown. 94% of students accepted for the class of 2017 were in the top 10% of their class and the interquartile range of SAT scores was 700–770 in Reading/Writing and 680–780 in Math. Georgetown accepts the SAT and ACT, though it does not consider the writing portion of either test. Over 55% of undergraduates receive financial aid, and the university meets 100% of demonstrated need, with an average financial aid package of $23,500 and about 70% of aid distributed in the form of grants or scholarships. Georgetown is need-blind for domestic applicants. As of 2017[update], Georgetown University employed 1,414 full-time and 1,196 part-time faculty members across its three Washington, D.C. campuses, with additional staff at SFS-Qatar. The faculty comprises leading academics and notable political and business leaders, and are predominantly male by a two-to-one margin. Politically, Georgetown University's faculty members give more support to liberal candidates, and while their donation patterns are generally consistent with those of other American university faculties, they gave more than average to Barack Obama's presidential campaign. The faculty includes scholars such as the former President of the American Philological Association James J. O'Donnell, theologian John Haught, social activists Sam Marullo and Chai Feldblum, Nobel laureate George Akerlof, writer and human rights advocate Carolyn Forché, award-winning literary critic Maureen Corrigan, linguist Deborah Tannen, business philosopher Jason Brennan, and preeminent hip-hop scholar Michael Eric Dyson. Many former politicians choose to teach at Georgetown, including former Secretaries of State Madeleine Albright and Henry Kissinger, former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Jeane Kirkpatrick, U.S. Agency for International Development administrator Andrew Natsios, National Security Advisor Anthony Lake, and CIA director George Tenet. Former Supreme Court Justices William J. Brennan, Jr., Antonin Scalia, and John Roberts have each taught at the university. Internationally, the school attracts numerous former ambassadors and heads of state, such as Prime Minister of Spain José María Aznar, Saudi Ambassador Prince Turki bin Faisal Al Saud, President Laura Chinchilla of Costa Rica, and President of Colombia Álvaro Uribe. Georgetown University is classified among "R1: Doctoral Universities – Very high research activity". As of 2014[update], Georgetown's libraries held over 3.5 million printed items, including 1.25 million e-books, in seven buildings, with most in Lauinger Library. The Blommer Science Library in the Reiss Science Building on campus, houses most of the Science collection. Additionally, the Law School campus includes the nation's fifth largest law library. Georgetown faculty conduct research in hundreds of subjects, but have priorities in the fields of religion, ethics, science, public policy, and cancer medicine. In 2019, Georgetown spent $240.9 million on research, ranking it 101st nationwide, with $94.0 million in federal funding. In 2007, it received about $14.8 million in federal funds for research, with 64% from the National Science Foundation, National Institutes of Health, the United States Department of Energy, and the Department of Defense. In 2010, the school received $5.6 million from the Department of Education to fund fellowships in several international studies fields. Georgetown's Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center is one of 41 research-intensive comprehensive cancer centers in the United States, and developed the breakthrough HPV vaccine for cervical cancer and Conditionally Reprogrammed Cells (CRC) technology. Centers that conduct and sponsor research at Georgetown include the Berkley Center for Religion, Peace, and World Affairs, the Prince Alwaleed Center for Muslim–Christian Understanding and the Woodstock Theological Center. Regular publications include the Georgetown Journal on Poverty Law and Policy, the Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal, the Georgetown Law Journal, the Georgetown Journal of International Affairs, and the Georgetown Public Policy Review.[citation needed] Georgetown University has four campuses in Washington, D.C.: the undergraduate campus located in the neighborhood of Georgetown, the Medical Center, the School of Continuing Studies (in Chinatown) and the Law Center. The undergraduate campus and Medical Center are together in the Georgetown neighborhood in the Northwest Quadrant of Washington and form the main campus. Other centers are located around Washington, D.C., including the Center for Continuing and Professional Education at Clarendon in Arlington, Virginia. Transit between these locations and the Washington Metro is supplied by a system of shuttles, known as GUTS buses. Georgetown also has a branch of the School of Foreign Service in Doha, Qatar, and villas in Alanya in Turkey and Fiesole in Italy. In their campus layout, Georgetown's administrators consistently used the traditional quadrangle design. Georgetown's undergraduate and medical school campuses are situated on an elevated site above the Potomac River overlooking Northern Virginia. Because of this, Georgetown University is often referred to as "The Hilltop." The main gates, known as the Healy Gates, are located at the intersection of 37th and O Streets NW, and lead directly to the heart of campus. The main campus is relatively compact, being 104 acres (0.4 km2) in area, but includes fifty-four buildings, student residences and apartments capable of accommodating 80% of undergraduates, and various athletic facilities. Most buildings employ collegiate Gothic architecture and Georgian brick architecture. Campus green areas include fountains, a cemetery, large clusters of flowers, groves of trees, and open quadrangles. New buildings and major renovations are required to meet LEED Silver criteria, and the campus was nominated for the District Sustainability People's Choice Award in 2018. Healy Hall, designed by Paul J. Pelz in Neo-Medieval style and built from 1877 to 1879, is the architectural gem of Georgetown's campus, and is a National Historic Landmark. Within Healy Hall are a number of notable rooms including Gaston Hall, Riggs Library, and the Bioethics Library Hirst Reading Room. Both Healy Hall and the Georgetown University Astronomical Observatory, built in 1844, are listed on the National Register of Historic Places. In addition to the front lawn, the main campus has traditionally centered on Dahlgren Quadrangle behind Healy Hall, which is home to Dahlgren Chapel; however, in recent decades, Red Square has replaced the Dahlgren Quadrangle as the focus of student life. North of Red Square is an extended pathway that is home to buildings such as the Intercultural Center (ICC), the Reiss Science building, the newly constructed dormitory named after Pedro Arrupe, and the large Leavey Student Center. The medical school is located in the northwestern part of the main campus on Reservoir Road. It is integrated with Georgetown University Hospital. In the 21st-century, the West side of the Hilltop has emerged as a newly developing area of the main campus. The university completed the Southwest Quadrangle Project in late 2003 and brought a new 907-bed upperclassmen residence hall, the Leo J. O'Donovan dining hall, a large underground parking facility, and a new Jesuit Residence to the campus. The school's first performing arts center, named for Royden B. Davis, was completed in November 2005. The new business school headquarters, named for Rafik Hariri, opened in Fall 2009, and Regents Hall, the new science building, opened in Fall 2012. Along with the adjacent Leavey Student Center, these two large buildings have become popular study spaces and overlook a newly developed scenic lawn space. Additionally, in the fall of 2014, the university opened a new student center, the Healey Family Student Center (HFSC) to complement the longstanding Leavey Center. The Healey Family Student Center is located on the first floor of New South Hall, a space that functioned as the university's main dining facility until the Leo J. O'Donovan dining hall opening in 2003. It features over 43,000 square feet including several study spaces, conference rooms, dance, and music studios, as well as a pub called Bulldog Tavern and a salad store Hilltoss, which is operated by The Corp. As a location, Georgetown is ranked nationally as the second-best college town by The Princeton Review. The Georgetown neighborhood west of Wisconsin Avenue NW is dominated by the presence of university students. Students have easy access to the M Street commercial area, the Georgetown Waterfront, and numerous trails that lead to the National Mall and other parks. Despite this, "town and gown" relations between the university communities and other Georgetown residents are often strained by facilities construction, enlargement of the student body, as well as noise and alcohol violations. More recently, several groups of neighborhood residents have attempted to slow University growth in Georgetown, creating friction between students and the surrounding neighborhood. Despite the relative safety of the neighborhood, crime is nonetheless a persistent issue, with campus security responding to 257 crimes in 2008, the majority of which were petty crimes. The Law Center campus is located in the Capitol Hill neighborhood on New Jersey Avenue, near Union Station, and consists of five buildings. First-year students at the Law Center can live in the single on-campus dormitory, the Gewirz Student Center. Most second- and third-year students, as well as some first-year students, live off-campus. As there is little housing near the Law Center, most are spread throughout the Washington metropolitan area. The "Campus Completion Project", finished in 2005, saw the addition of the Hotung International Building and the Sport and Fitness Center. G Street and F Street are closed off between 1st and 2nd Streets to create open lawns flanking McDonough Hall, the main building on the campus. In 2019, the university purchased $70 million of a building at 500 First St. NW to add to the Georgetown University Law Center. Opening in 2020, the 130,000-square-foot edifice will provide classrooms and offices for researchers in health, technology, law and other fields. The School of Continuing Studies (SCS) campus is located in a 95,000 square foot, state-of-the-art building in downtown Washington, D.C. The campus currently serves as the home for Georgetown's graduate programs in fields such as Applied Intelligence, Journalism, Public Relations, Real Estate, Sports Industry Management, and Urban & Regional Planning.[citation needed] The current building, which was completed in 2013, includes 30 classrooms, a 125-person auditorium, a digital media lab, a broadcast studio, an interfaith chapel, and a dedicated library. It is located in the Chinatown neighborhood of the city and is considered to be one of the most accessible locations in town, with a Transit Score of 100 and a Walk Score of 98. It is also located just a few blocks away from the Capital One Arena, the home court of the men's basketball team. In 2002, the Qatar Foundation for Education, Science and Community Development presented the School of Foreign Service with the resources and space to open a campus in Education City in Al Rayyan, Qatar. SFS-Qatar opened in 2005 as a liberal arts and international affairs undergraduate school for regional students. Georgetown University in Qatar (GU-Q; previously Georgetown University School of Foreign Service in Qatar) is an external campus of the Walsh School of Foreign Service in Education City, outside of Doha, Qatar. GU-Q (the abbreviation for Georgetown's campus in Qatar) is supported by a partnership between Qatar Foundation and Georgetown University. Georgetown's campus in Qatar offers a Bachelor of Science in Foreign Service (BSFS) and three certificates. Apart from language courses, including Arabic and French, all courses in GU-Q are taught in English and the curriculum and course materials in the specified majors are identical to those offered at Georgetown's main campus in Washington D.C.[citation needed] In December 1979, the Marquesa Margaret Rockefeller de Larrain, granddaughter of John D. Rockefeller, gave the Villa Le Balze to Georgetown University. The Villa is in Fiesole, Italy, on a hill above the city of Florence. The Villa is used year-round for study abroad programs focused on specialized interdisciplinary study of Italian culture and civilization. The main facility for the McGhee Center for Eastern Mediterranean Studies was donated to Georgetown in 1989 by alumnus and former United States Ambassador to Turkey George C. McGhee. The school is in the town of Alanya, Turkey within the Seljuq-era Alanya Castle, on the Mediterranean. The center operates study abroad programs one semester each year, concentrating on Turkish language, architectural history, and Islamic studies. In December 2007, Georgetown opened a liaison office in Shanghai, China to coordinate with Fudan University and others. In 2008, the Georgetown University Law Center in conjunction with an international consortium of law schools established the Center for Transnational Legal Studies in London, England. In November 2023, Indonesian President Joko Widodo announced Georgetown plans to open a satellite campus in Jakarta that will offer degree programs for present and future policymakers in the United States and Indonesia. The Georgetown undergraduate student body, at 6,926 as of 2016[update], is composed primarily of students from outside the District of Columbia area, with 33% of new 2016 students coming from the Mid-Atlantic states, 11% being international students, and the remainder coming from other areas of the U.S. The student body also represented 129 countries, with 11% being international, including over 330 undergraduate and 1,050 graduate students who chose to come to Georgetown as a study abroad destination in 2009–10. In 2014–2015, the racial diversity of the undergraduate student body was 57.0% white, 8.8% Asian, 6.2% black, and 7.5% Hispanic. The median family income of Georgetown students is $229,100, with 51% of students coming from the top 5% highest-earning families and 13.5% from the bottom 60%. 55.1% of undergraduates are female. Although it is a Jesuit university, only 41% of the student body identify as Catholic, while 22% identify as Protestant as of 2009[update]. Georgetown employs a full-time rabbi, as 6.5% of undergraduates are Jewish. It was the first U.S. college to have a full-time imam, to serve the over four hundred Muslims on campus, and in 2014, they appointed their first Hindu priest to serve a weekly community of around one hundred. Georgetown also sponsors student groups for Baháʼí, Buddhist, and Mormon traditions. The student body consists of both religious and non-religious students, and more than four-hundred freshmen and transfer students attend a nonreligious Ignatian retreat, called ESCAPE, annually. A 2007 survey of undergraduates also suggests that 62.8% are sexually active, while 6.2% identify as LGBTQ. Discrimination can be an issue on campus, and three quarters of a 2009 survey considered homophobia a campus problem. Newsweek, however, rated Georgetown among its top "Gay-Friendly Schools" in 2010. A survey by the school in 2016 showed that 31% of females undergraduates reported experiencing unwanted sexual contact, and 86% of LGBTQ students reported some form of sexual harassment at the college. In 2011, College Magazine ranked Georgetown as the tenth most hipster U.S. college, while People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals considered it the third most vegan friendly small U.S. school. Almost all undergraduates attend full-time. A majority of undergraduates, 76%, live on-campus in several dormitories and apartment complexes, including all underclassmen. As of 2011[update], 1255 undergraduates and 339 graduate students live off-campus, mostly in the Georgetown, Glover Park, Burleith, and Foxhall neighborhoods. Although many of the university's hall directors and area coordinators attend graduate level courses, on-campus housing is not available for main campus graduate students. The school hopes to build such housing by 2020. All students in the Medical School live off-campus, most in the surrounding neighborhoods, with some in Northern Virginia and elsewhere through the region. As of 2012[update], 92.9% of Georgetown University undergraduates are involved in at least one of the 179 registered student organizations which cover a variety of interests: student government, club sports, media and publications, performing arts, religion, and volunteer and service. Students also operate campus stores, banks, and medical services. Students often find their interests at the Student Activities Commission Club Fair, where both official and unofficial organizations set up tables. The Georgetown University Student Association is the student government organization for undergraduates. There are also elected student representatives within the schools that serve on Academic councils, as well as to the university Board of Directors, and, since 1996, to the Georgetown Advisory Neighborhood Commission. Georgetown's student organizations include one of the nation's oldest debating clubs, the Philodemic Society, founded in 1830, and the oldest university theater group, the Mask and Bauble Dramatic Society. Nomadic Theatre, founded in 1982 as an alternative troupe without an on-campus home, produces "plays which educate and challenge all members of the university community through thought-provoking theatre." The Georgetown Improv Association, founded in 1995, performs monthly long-form improvisational shows on-campus at Bulldog Alley in addition to hosting "Improvfest", one of the oldest improv festivals in the country. The Model United Nations team that is run by the Georgetown International Relations Club, the largest club on campus, and its affiliate, Georgetown International Relations Association, has attained the status of best in the world on several occasions. There is a total of seven a cappella groups on campus, including The Georgetown Saxatones, The Georgetown Chimes, the Phantoms, Superfood, The GraceNotes, the Chamber Singers, Essence, Harmony, and the Capitol G's. These groups perform annually at the "D.C. A Cappella Festival", held since 1991; the "Cherry Tree Massacre" concert series, held since 1974; and "Spring Sing", held since 2011. The Georgetown University Band is composed of the Georgetown Pep Band and the Georgetown Wind Ensemble, and performs on campus, in Washington, D.C., and at post-season basketball tournaments. In addition to student organizations and clubs, Georgetown University is home to the nation's largest entirely student-owned and -operated corporation, Students of Georgetown, Inc. Founded in 1972, "The Corp" operates three coffee shops, two grocery stores, the Hilltoss (a concept much like Sweetgreen), catering services, as well as running seasonal storage for students. The business has annual revenues of about $5 million, and surpluses are directly re-invested into the Georgetown student body through Corp Philanthropy, which gave out over $85,000 in scholarships and donations to Georgetown groups in 2014–2015. Georgetown University Alumni & Student Federal Credit Union is the largest all student-run credit union in the United States, with over $17 million in assets and 12,000 members. The Georgetown University Student Investment Fund is one of a few undergraduate-run investment funds in the United States, and hosted CNBC's Jim Cramer to tape Mad Money in September 2006. Hilltop Consultants is a student-run nonprofit consulting agency that works with local and international organizations including Teach For America, Habitat for Humanity, and Special Olympics. The Hilltop Microfinance Initiative is a student-run micro-finance organization, aiming to empower underserved communities in DC, Maryland, and Virginia through small business loans and financial coaching. Another student-run group, the Georgetown Emergency Response Medical Service, "GERMS", is an all-volunteer ambulance service founded in 1982 that serves campus and the surrounding communities. Georgetown's Army Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC) unit, the Hoya Battalion, is the oldest military unit native to the District of Columbia, and was awarded the top ranking among ROTC programs in 2012. The proportion of ROTC students at Georgetown was the 79th highest among universities in the United States as of 2010[update]. GUGS, the Georgetown University Grilling Society, has been a Georgetown tradition since 2002, selling half-pound hamburgers in Red Square on most Fridays. Georgetown University student organizations include a diverse array of groups focused on social justice issues, including organizations run through both Student Affairs and the Center for Social Justice Research, Teaching, & Service. This last organization, founded in 2001, works to integrate into their education Georgetown's founding mission of education in service for justice and the common good.[citation needed] Oriented against gender violence, Take Back the Night coordinates an annual rally and march to protest against rape and other forms of violence against women. Georgetown Solidarity Committee is a workers' rights organization whose successes include ending use of sweatshops in producing Georgetown-logoed apparel, and garnering pay raises for both university cleaning staff and police. Georgetown Students for Fair Trade successfully advocated for all coffee in campus cafeterias to be Fair Trade Certified. Georgetown has many additional groups representing national, ethnic, and linguistic interests. Georgetown has the second most politically active student body in the United States according to the Princeton Review. Groups based on local, national, and international issues are popular, and political speech is protected on campus. Student political organizations are active on campus and engage their many members in local and national politics. The Georgetown University College Republicans represent their party, while the Georgetown University College Democrats, the largest student organization on campus in 2008, represent theirs. Being a Catholic university, the pro-life organization Georgetown University Right to Life is officially recognized by the university. They actively participate in on-campus as well as nationally focused activism, provide free baby-sitting services for all parenting students, and free diapers and material support to mothers and families in the DC Area. In 1981, Right to Life students helped found The Northwest Center, one of two crisis pregnancy centers in Washington, that continues to serve women and families to this day. Every year, the organization sends a delegation to the March for Life to show support for the national pro-life movement. In addition, every January since 2000 the club has organized the Cardinal O'Connor Conference on Life. The largest student-organized pro-life conference in the United States, it regularly hosts hundreds of attendees and prominent speakers such as Cardinal O'Malley. The pro-abortion organization H*yas for Choice is not officially recognized by the university as its positions on abortion are in opposition to university policy, including supporting late-term abortion as is still legal in Washington, D.C., prompting the asterisk in "Hoyas." While not financially supported by the school, the organization is permitted to meet and table in university spaces. Georgetown is also home to a number of student organizations focused on sustainability and environmentalism. GREEN, the Georgetown Renewable Energy and Environmental Network, is the largest of these groups. Another student group, GU Fossil Free, was founded in 2013, and aimed to pressure the university to divest its endowment from fossil fuels. Georgetown is a member of the Ivy Plus Sustainability Consortium, through which it has committed to best-practice sharing and the ongoing exchange of campus sustainability solutions along with the other member institutions. Georgetown hosted the annual Ivy Plus summit in 2019. Georgetown announced that it would fully divest its endowment from fossil fuels in February 2020. Georgetown University has several student-run newspapers and academic journals. The Hoya is the university's oldest newspaper. It has been in print since 1920, and since 1987, has been published twice weekly. The Georgetown Voice, known for its weekly cover stories, is a newsmagazine that was founded in March 1969 to focus more attention on citywide and national issues. The Georgetown Independent is a monthly journal of news, commentary and the arts. Founded in 1966, the Georgetown Law Weekly is the student-run paper on the Law Center campus, and is a three-time winner of the American Bar Association's Best Newspaper award. Established in 1995, the Georgetown Public Policy Review is a student-run journal based out of the McCourt School of Public Policy that publishes online articles and a peer-reviewed spring edition. The Georgetown Journal of International Affairs, established in 2000, is a student-managed, peer-reviewed Journal that publishes perspectives on current affairs and international relations from experts such as heads of states and renowned professors. The Georgetown Academy, restarted in 2008 after a hiatus, targets traditionalist Catholic readers, and the Georgetown Review, founded in 2016, aims to bring a conservative and libertarian viewpoint to campus. Other political publications include the Georgetown Progressive, an online publication run by the Georgetown University College Democrats, and Counterpoint Magazine, a liberal monthly founded in the spring of 2011. The Fire This Time is Georgetown's minority newssource. The Georgetown Heckler is a humor magazine founded on the Internet in 2003 by Georgetown students, releasing its first print issue in 2007. The university has a campus-wide television station, GUTV, which began broadcasting in 1999. The station hosts an annual student film festival in April for campus filmmakers. WGTB, Georgetown's radio station, is available as a webcast and on 92.3 FM in certain dormitories. The station was founded in 1946, and broadcast on 90.1 FM from 1960 to 1979, when university president Timothy S. Healy gave away the frequency and broadcast capabilities to the University of the District of Columbia because of WGTB's far left political orientation. The station now broadcasts through the Internet in its headquarters in the Leavey Center. Although Jesuit schools are not obliged to disassociate from Greek systems, many do, and Georgetown University officially recognizes and funds only one of the many Greek organizations on campus, Alpha Phi Omega, the national co-ed community service fraternity. Other Greek organizations exist on campus, although none require members to live in Greek housing. Additionally, Georgetown University students are affiliated, in some cases, with fraternities at other nearby universities and colleges. About 10 percent of undergraduate students participate in Greek life, a ratio lower than at many other colleges and universities. Annual events on campus celebrate Georgetown traditions, culture, alumni, sports, and politics. In late April, Georgetown University celebrates Georgetown Day. Homecoming coincides with a home football game, and festivities such as tailgating and a formal dance are sponsored by the Alumni Association to draw past graduates back to campus. The largest planned sports related celebration is the first basketball practice of the season. Dubbed Midnight Madness, this event introduces the men's and women's basketball teams shortly after midnight on the first day the teams are allowed by NCAA rules to formally practice together. The festivities include a dunk contest, a 3-point contest, a scrimmage, and a musical act. Georgetown fields 23 varsity teams and the Club Sports Board supports an additional 23 club teams. The varsity teams participate in the NCAA's Division I. The school generally competes in the Big East Conference, although the football team competes in the Division I FCS Patriot League, the sailing team in Middle Atlantic Intercollegiate Sailing Association, and the rowing teams in the Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges.[citation needed] U.S. News & World Report listed Georgetown's athletics program among the 20 best in the nation. Georgetown's student athletes have a 94% graduation success rate, and over one-hundred have gone on to play professionally. The school's teams are called "Hoyas", a name whose origin is uncertain. Sometime before 1893, students invented the mixed Greek and Latin chant of "Hoya Saxa", translating roughly as "what (or such) rocks." The school's baseball team, then called the Stonewalls, began in 1870, and football in 1874; the chant likely refers to one of these teams. By the 1920s, the term "Hoyas" was used to describe groups on campus, and by 1928, campus sports writers started using it instead of the older team name, the "Hilltoppers." The men's basketball team is particularly noteworthy as it won the NCAA championship in 1984 under coach John Thompson. The team has the record for the most Big East conference tournament titles with eight, and has made thirty NCAA tournament appearances. Georgetown's NBA alumni are collectively among the highest earners from a single program. The sailing team has won fourteen national championships since 2001, as well as one World Championship in match racing. Over that time they have graduated 79 All-Americans and 6 College Sailors of the year. Georgetown has been nationally successful in both cross country and track and field, and in 2011, the women's cross country team won Georgetown's second team NCAA Championship. The rowing teams are perennial contenders as well for national titles. The men's and women's lacrosse teams have both been ranked in the top ten nationally, as have both soccer teams, with the men winning Georgetown's third team national championship in 2019, and the women making the national quarterfinals in 2010 and the semifinals in 2016. The rugby club team also made it to the Division II Final Four in 2005 and 2009. In 2019, Georgetown won the women's team championship at the United States Intercollegiate Boxing Association national tournament held at Syracuse University. Former Georgetown tennis coach Gordon "Gordie" Ernst, one of several people implicated in the 2019 college admissions bribery scandal, is alleged to have facilitated the admission to Georgetown of as many as 12 students through fraudulent means while accepting bribes of up to $950,000. Ernst had relocated to the University of Rhode Island, where he was placed on administrative leave after he was charged and arrested. He later pled guilty to conspiracy to commit federal programs bribery, three counts of federal programs bribery, and to filing false tax returns for failing to report many of the bribery payments. Georgetown graduates have found success in a wide variety of fields, and have served at the heads of diverse institutions both in the public and private sector. Immediately after graduation, about 73% of undergraduates enter the workforce, while others go on to additional education, as of 2017[update]. Georgetown graduates have been recipients of 28 Rhodes Scholarships, 41 Marshall Scholarships, 33 Truman Scholarships, 15 Mitchell Scholarships, and 12 Gates Cambridge Scholarships. Georgetown is among the nation's top producers of Fulbright Scholars, with 429 over its history, and produced more than any other institution in the 2019–2020 academic year. Georgetown is also one of the top-ten yearly producers of Peace Corps volunteers as of 2016[update]. Graduates of the McDonough School of Business have the highest starting salaries, at $70,606, and alumni in general have a median starting salary of $61,681 with a median mid-career salary of $129,500. Georgetown also ranks among the top ten U.S. colleges for median graduate income. Government and International relations are the top two most popular undergraduate majors across every college at Georgetown, and many students go on to careers in politics. Former President of the United States Bill Clinton is a 1968 graduate of the School of Foreign Service. World leaders have attended. Georgetown educated more U.S. diplomats than any other university, including former Secretary of State Alexander Haig and Director-General of the Foreign Service Marcia Bernicat. Many alumni have served as foreign ministers in many countries. In the 118th U.S. Congress, eight alumni serve in the United States Senate, and twenty in the House of Representatives. Current congressional alumni include Hakeem Jeffries, House minority leader, and Dick Durbin, Senate majority whip. 25 alumni have served as U.S. state governors, including for some of the largest states such as Josh Shapiro of Pennsylvania and Pat Quinn of Illinois. On the U.S. Supreme Court, alumni include former Associate Justice Antonin Scalia and former Chief Justice Edward Douglass White. Hoya Battalion, the school's ROTC program, was ranked as the best in the country in 2012 for preparing cadets for military service, and graduates have gone on to hold leadership roles in defense and national security on both the domestic and international level. Finance and economics are the third and fourth most popular undergraduate majors, and almost a quarter of graduates start careers at consulting or financial services firms. The university is among the top ten alma maters reported by current Wall Street banking employees as of June 2020[update] according to surveys of LinkedIn data. Citigroup was the most commonly reported employer, and their former CEO Charles Prince is a graduate of the Law School. Five undergraduate alumni own professional sports teams, making Georgetown the most popular undergraduate university for major North American sports franchise owners. Over 80% of theater major graduates go onto careers in that industry. Georgetown alumni have been awarded the Pulitzer Prize, Edward R. Murrow Award, and Peabody Award, including The Washington Post reporter Walter Pincus and NPR correspondent Lourdes Garcia-Navarro. Utraque Unum is Latin from Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians 2:14. See official explanation. Other translations available. The Traditional Undergraduate Student Population is defined as undergraduate students taking at least one course at Georgetown's main campus, excluding non-degree students and students returning for a second degree in nursing but including students studying abroad. This number is required by the 2010 Campus Plan not to exceed 6,675 students and was 6,684 students in Fall 2013. See 2013–2014 Compliance Report for the 2010 Campus Plan, p. 14 While Patrick Francis Healy inherited African ancestry from his mother and was consequently classified as racially black according to the "one-drop rule" of 19th-century American society, he self-identified racially as white and ethnically as Irish American. The School of Dentistry was founded in 1901 as a department of the School of Medicine, and was elevated to a school in 1951. The school was disestablished in 1990. The School of Languages and Linguistics was created out of the School of Foreign Service in 1949 as the Institute of Languages and Linguistics. It was elevated to a school in 1959. In 1994, the school was subsumed primarily by the College of Arts & Sciences. Other consists of Multiracial Americans & those who prefer to not say. The percentage of students who received an income-based federal Pell grant intended for low-income students. Clemens, Aaron M. (September 1, 2006). "Dr. of Law". The Florida Bar. Retrieved October 3, 2022. "Georgetown's Diploma Reflects University's Values and Its Place in the World". Georgetown University School of Continuing Studies. January 22, 2021. Retrieved October 3, 2022. Nevils 1934, pp. 1–25 As of June 30, 2023. Georgetown University Consolidated Financial Statements (Report). Georgetown University. Retrieved October 10, 2023. Cuccia, Annemarie (July 30, 2020). "Georgetown Explained: University finances and executive salaries". The Georgetown Voice. Retrieved February 9, 2022. "Georgetown Key Facts". Georgetown University. Fall 2017. Archived from the original on November 11, 2019. Retrieved November 11, 2019. "Services and Administration". Georgetown University. 2009. Archived from the original on February 15, 2009. Retrieved February 15, 2009. "Georgetown Facts". Office of Communications. Georgetown University. 2009. Archived from the original on March 19, 2009. Retrieved August 24, 2009. "Georgetown University History". Georgetown.edu. Retrieved October 13, 2020. After the Second Battle of Bull Run in Manassas, Virginia, in 1862, several campus buildings were turned into a temporary hospital, including the former Jesuit Residence. To celebrate the end of the Civil War, Georgetown students selected the colors blue (Union) and gray (Confederate) as the school's official colors in 1876. "Colors". Georgetown.edu. Retrieved December 25, 2019. Fitzpatrick, Edward A.; Nevils, William Coleman (January 1936). "Miniatures of Georgetown, 1634 to 1934". The Journal of Higher Education. 7 (1). Ohio State University Press: 56–57. doi:10.2307/1974310. JSTOR 1974310. Devitt, E.I. (1909). "Georgetown University". Catholic Encyclopedia. Robert Appleton Company. Archived from the original on July 1, 2007. Retrieved July 10, 2007. Curran 1993, pp. 33–34 "Georgetown's Catholic and Jesuit Identity". Georgetown University. February 15, 2008. Archived from the original on March 18, 2009. Retrieved March 24, 2009. O'Neill & Williams 2003, p. 12 Curran, Robert Emmett (July 7, 2007). "Georgetown: A Brief History". Georgetown University – Undergraduate Bulletin. Archived from the original on May 24, 2007. Retrieved August 27, 2007. Thomas Murphy, SJ. Jesuit Slaveholding in Maryland, 1717–1838, Archived May 27, 2016, at the Wayback Machine New York: Routledge, 2001, p. 4 Swarns, Rachel (April 17, 2016). "272 Slaves Were Sold to Save Georgetown. What Does It Owe Their Descendants?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 6, 2017. Retrieved April 17, 2016. "The Federal Charter". Georgetown University – About Georgetown. Archived from the original on January 3, 2008. Retrieved March 6, 2007. "Charter of the University". Georgetown University. Archived from the original on August 17, 2016. Retrieved August 4, 2016. "History" (PDF). Georgetown University School of Medicine. March 23, 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 4, 2009. Retrieved March 24, 2009. O'Neill & Williams 2003, pp. 36–39 "Georgetown Traditions: The Blue & Gray". HoyaSaxa.com. August 17, 2005. Archived from the original on April 27, 2007. Retrieved April 26, 2007. O'Connor, John J.; Gasperetti, Elio (1955). "A Negro President at Georgetown University Some Eighty Years Ago". Negro History Bulletin. 18 (8): 175–176. ISSN 0028-2529. JSTOR 44176904. Magazine, Smithsonian; Greene, Bryan. "Born Enslaved, Patrick Francis Healy 'Passed' His Way to Lead Georgetown University". Smithsonian Magazine. Retrieved June 17, 2023. "Patrick Francis Healy Inaugurated". American Memory. Library of Congress. July 31, 2006. Archived from the original on July 9, 2007. Retrieved July 9, 2007. Spindle, Lindsey (July 30, 2003). "Georgetown University School of Nursing and Health Studies Appoints New Director of Development". Office of Communications. Georgetown University. Archived from the original on March 21, 2007. Retrieved April 26, 2007. "Third Grammar Class, Second Section, on the steps of Healy Hall at Georgetown University". Loyola Notre Dame Library. Archived from the original on September 28, 2007. Retrieved September 6, 2007. "Dental Alumni History 1970s and 1980s – Georgetown Alumni Online". alumni.georgetown.edu. Archived from the original on September 10, 2015. Retrieved September 12, 2015. Lyons, Emily (October 9, 1998). "GSB Takes New Name". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 19, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. "Georgetown University history: Co-Ed". Georgetown University – About Georgetown. Archived from the original on January 3, 2008. Retrieved July 17, 2007. Timiraos, Nick (April 1, 2003). "Areen Outlines Women's Role". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. Khalil, Osamah F. (2016). America's Dream Palace: Middle East Expertise and the Rise of the National Security State. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-97157-8. Feinberg, Lawrence (May 12, 1980). "United Arab Emirates Gives GU $750,000 for A Chair in Arab Studies". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved November 26, 2021. Maeroff, Gene I. (February 24, 1981). "UNIVERSITY RETURNS $600,000 LIBYAN GIFT". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 26, 2021. Sullivan, Tim (February 16, 2001). "DeGioia Named Next GU President". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 19, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. Timiraos, Nick (September 12, 2003). "Capital Campaign Close to $1 Billion". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 19, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. Murphy, Caryle (December 13, 2005). "Saudi Gives $20 Million to Georgetown". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on June 16, 2017. Retrieved November 4, 2018. Parham, Connie; Myers, Yoshi (January 18, 2008). "Georgetown Opens Liaison Office at Fudan University". The Hoya. Retrieved March 9, 2010. "Biography". Office of the President. Georgetown University. February 2005. Archived from the original on February 10, 2009. Retrieved October 26, 2009. "Georgetown Advancing Interreligious Understanding". Georgetown University. April 2, 2007. Archived from the original on June 11, 2010. Retrieved March 10, 2010. "Georgetown University marks inauguration of Qatar campus". The Peninsula. April 13, 2006. Archived from the original on March 12, 2007. Retrieved March 10, 2010. England, Andrew; Kerr, Simeon (December 13, 2018). "Universities challenged: scrutiny over Gulf money". Financial Times. Archived from the original on December 10, 2022. Retrieved November 26, 2021. "Jesuit Ideals Drive Daily Life at Georgetown". Blue & Gray. November 5, 2007. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008. Retrieved November 7, 2007. "Board of Directors". Georgetown University. 2015. Archived from the original on July 27, 2013. Retrieved July 31, 2015. "About Us". Archdiocese of Washington. Archived from the original on October 20, 2016. Retrieved September 9, 2016. "Jesuit Community Members". Jesuit Community. Georgetown University. 2012. Archived from the original on February 19, 2013. Retrieved December 9, 2012. Fasoranti, Oluseyi (February 2, 2010). "GU Celebrates Jesuit Heritage Week". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 19, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. Wildes, Kevin (February 13, 2004). "Shades of Gray Define Catholic Complexities". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved August 15, 2011. "Chains Effective for Georgetown Protesters". NBC Washington. March 29, 2010. Archived from the original on March 14, 2012. Retrieved June 20, 2011. Kaplan, Sarah (January 25, 2011). "Anti-Abortion Summit at GU". The Hoya. Archived from the original on May 14, 2012. Retrieved April 13, 2012. Haggerty, Tim (February 25, 2000). "University, MedStar Agree to Hospital Sale". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 19, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. Argetsinger, Amy and Avram Goldstein (January 30, 2004). "GU to Continue Controversial Research". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 6, 2014. Retrieved September 17, 2012. Murugesan, Vidhya (September 9, 2005). "Catholic Group Criticizes GU Profs". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 19, 2012. Retrieved April 26, 2011. Sahrmann, Marie (April 14, 2009). "Protests Come to Campus Alongside Obama". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. Boorstein, Michelle (May 15, 2012). "Washington's Catholic archbishop, Georgetown president spar over graduation invitation to Kathleen Sebelius". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 16, 2012. Retrieved May 16, 2012. A Rainbow Over Catholic Colleges: How Georgetown Became a Gay-Friendly Campus Archived June 25, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, July 30, 2013 Burke, Heather (October 8, 1999). "The Catholic Question". The Hoya. Archived from the original on October 24, 2007. Retrieved August 15, 2007. Fuchs, Marek (June 12, 2004). "At One Catholic College, Crucifixes Make a Comeback". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 6, 2012. Retrieved August 19, 2007. Fiore, Liz; Jim Rowan; Jon Soucy (April 20, 1999). "Crucifix Leaders Angry at University". The Hoya. Archived from the original on May 6, 2004. Retrieved August 19, 2007. Allen, John L Jr. (May 14, 2004). "Muslim chaplain sees value in crucifixes". National Catholic Reporter. Archived from the original on December 10, 2008. Retrieved August 15, 2007. "Crucifixes and Religious Symbolism". Georgetown's Catholic and Jesuit Identity. Georgetown University. June 16, 2005. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved August 15, 2007. "Jesus Missing From Obama's Georgetown Speech" Archived January 8, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, NBC News, July 13, 2009 "Georgetown University dental student with patient". Georgetown University Library. 1935. hdl:10822/552729. "Dental Alumni History: 1930–1960". alumni.georgetown.edu. Archived from the original on September 10, 2015. Retrieved September 12, 2015. "Georgetown University: A Documentary History". Georgetown University Library. July 15, 1989. Archived from the original on February 5, 2023. Retrieved June 30, 2023. Curran 2010b, p. 346 Curran 2010c, p. 275 "Our Schools". Georgetown University. Archived from the original on September 20, 2019. Retrieved September 20, 2019. "Application Checklist". Admissions. Georgetown Visitation Preparatory School. 2007. Archived from the original on November 3, 2007. Retrieved October 7, 2007. "Undergraduate Bulletin". Georgetown University. 2020. Retrieved May 30, 2020. "Overseas Study – Statistics". Georgetown University. Archived from the original on October 3, 2013. Retrieved November 25, 2013. "The Best International Relations Schools in the World". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on July 29, 2015. Retrieved March 7, 2017. "Academic Programs". Center for Contemporary Arab Studies. 2015. Archived from the original on September 5, 2015. Retrieved September 6, 2015. "Listing of Joint / Dual Degrees Offered". Georgetown University Graduate School of Arts and Sciences. 2007. Archived from the original on August 14, 2007. Retrieved September 20, 2007. Castronuovo, Jenny (December 1, 2000). "Joint Public Health Center Launched". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. "About SCS". The School of Continuing Studies. Georgetown University. June 11, 2007. Archived from the original on July 9, 2007. Retrieved July 26, 2007. Lewin, Tamar (October 29, 1987). "Plagued by Falling Enrollment, Dental Schools Close or Cut Back". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on June 20, 2016. Retrieved September 12, 2015. "ShanghaiRanking's 2023 Academic Ranking of World Universities". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. Retrieved February 10, 2024. "Forbes America's Top Colleges List 2023". Forbes. Retrieved September 22, 2023. "2023-2024 Best National Universities". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved September 22, 2023. "2023 National University Rankings". Washington Monthly. Retrieved February 10, 2024. "2024 Best Colleges in the U.S." The Wall Street Journal/College Pulse. Retrieved January 27, 2024. "ShanghaiRanking's 2023 Academic Ranking of World Universities". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. Retrieved February 10, 2024. "QS World University Rankings 2024: Top global universities". Quacquarelli Symonds. Retrieved June 27, 2023. "World University Rankings 2024". Times Higher Education. Retrieved September 27, 2023. "2022-23 Best Global Universities Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved February 25, 2023. "Common Data Set 2019–2020". Georgetown University. Retrieved August 17, 2020. "Common Data Set 2014–2015". Georgetown University. Retrieved August 17, 2020. "Georgetown University". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on August 4, 2015. Retrieved July 17, 2015. "GU Admits Just 12% of Applicants, Setting Record Low". April 14, 2021. Retrieved January 5, 2022. "10 Medical Schools With Lowest Acceptance Rates". USNWR. April 5, 2011. Archived from the original on July 6, 2011. Retrieved June 22, 2011. "Internet Legal Research Group (ILRG)". Internet Legal Research Group. Retrieved September 10, 2020. "Statistical Profiles of Admitted Students 2007–2010 – MSFS". Georgetown University. Archived from the original on March 17, 2011. Retrieved June 21, 2011. "Full-Time MBA Profile". McDonough School of Business. 2008. Archived from the original on February 16, 2009. Retrieved June 22, 2011. Avery, Christopher, Glickman, Mark E., Hoxby, Caroline Minter and Metrick, Andrew (December 2005). "A Revealed Preference Ranking of U.S. Colleges and Universities" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on February 3, 2007. Retrieved May 14, 2007.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "2021 Georgetown University Rankings". Niche. Retrieved September 4, 2020. "The Best International Relations Schools in the World". Foreign Policy. Retrieved September 4, 2020. "Best Medical Schools: Georgetown University". usnews. Retrieved September 3, 2020. "Best Business Schools, Georgetown University". usnews.com. Retrieved September 3, 2020. "Best Law Schools: Georgetown University". usnews.com. Retrieved September 3, 2020. "ShanghaiRanking's Global Ranking of Academic Subjects 2020 – Law | Shanghai Ranking – 2020". www.shanghairanking.com. Archived from the original on July 13, 2019. Retrieved September 4, 2020. "Georgetown 2017 Profile for Schools and Candidates". Georgetown University. 2017. Archived from the original on January 30, 2016. Retrieved October 18, 2017. "Preparation Process for First Year Applicants". Georgetown University. 2011. Archived from the original on September 28, 2011. Retrieved September 20, 2011. "Undergraduate Financial Aid". Georgetown Facts. Georgetown University. August 31, 2009. Archived from the original on June 13, 2011. Retrieved May 21, 2011. "Financial Aid – Georgetown University". Georgetown University. Archived from the original on April 20, 2021. Retrieved March 22, 2021. Blazey, Elizabeth (October 3, 2008). "Student Life Begins to Boom in SFS-Q's Infant Years". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 19, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. Sahrmann, Marie (October 17, 2008). "Faculty Gender Ratio Favors Males". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 19, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. Heberle, Robert (September 21, 2004). "Faculty Funds Favor Kerry". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 19, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. Hu, Dawn (November 21, 2008). "GU Faculty Among Highest Donors to Obama Campaign". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. "List all faculty experts". Georgetown University – Faculty Experts. 2007. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved July 14, 2007. "Faculty and Administration". Georgetown University Law Center. 2009. Archived from the original on January 16, 2010. Retrieved November 23, 2009. Reddy, Sudeep (September 23, 2014). "George Akerlof (aka Mr. Janet Yellen) Heads to Georgetown – Real Time Economics – WSJ". Wall Street Journal. blogs.wsj.com. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. Retrieved October 25, 2014. "Colombia Reports". September 8, 2010. Archived from the original on August 13, 2011. Retrieved September 8, 2010. Sarubbi, Andrea E. (March 7, 2006). "Former President of Poland Joins Georgetown Faculty as Distinguished Scholar". Georgetown University Department of Communications. Archived from the original on March 24, 2007. Retrieved February 15, 2009. Heller, Chris (August 11, 2010). "Former Colombian President to teach at Georgetown". The Georgetown Voice. Archived from the original on October 4, 2011. Retrieved August 11, 2010. Georgetown Medical School:Research Archived November 23, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, Retrieved: May 29, 2019 "Georgetown University". The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. 2010. Archived from the original on September 13, 2018. Retrieved September 17, 2012. "The Library in Numbers". Georgetown University Library. 2014. Archived from the original on August 21, 2014. Retrieved August 11, 2014. "Library Resident Program". Georgetown Law Library. 2007. Archived from the original on November 11, 2006. Retrieved July 9, 2007. "Research centers, institutes and programs". Georgetown University – Research & Scholarship. 2007. Archived from the original on June 23, 2007. Retrieved July 13, 2007. "Georgetown University". National Science Foundation. 2017. Retrieved February 23, 2020. Ponder, Meredith; Anna Cheimets (February 27, 2008). "Science at Georgetown: Research and the Real World". The Georgetown Independent. Archived from the original on July 17, 2011. Retrieved December 13, 2010. Weber, Lauren (September 10, 2010). "Georgetown Receives $5.6 Million Department of Education Grant". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. "Georgetown Research Leads To First Cancer Vaccine". Science Daily. June 9, 2006. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved August 18, 2007. [1] Archived January 14, 2014, at the Wayback Machine "Georgetown University Transportation Shuttle (GUTS)". Georgetown University. 2011. Archived from the original on July 19, 2011. Retrieved May 21, 2011. Bachman, Jessica (May 1, 2007). "Years After Blueprint Ditched, Some Lament Missed Chance". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 19, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. "Georgetown Key Facts". Georgetown University. 2011. Archived from the original on May 24, 2012. Retrieved February 7, 2011. "Georgetown Goes Greener". Blue & Gray. July 5, 2007. Archived from the original on July 15, 2007. Retrieved July 18, 2007. "Georgetown University". College Sustainability Report Card. 2011. Archived from the original on September 2, 2012. Retrieved January 5, 2012. Berman, Noah (February 22, 2018). "Georgetown Nominated for Sustainability Award". The Hoya. Archived from the original on May 9, 2018. Retrieved May 8, 2018. George, Hardy (October 1972). "Georgetown University's Healy Building" (PDF). The Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians. 31 (3). Society of Architectural Historians: 208–216. doi:10.2307/988766. JSTOR 988766. "Map of Healy Hall". Georgetown University. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved August 13, 2015. "District of Columbia Inventory of Historic Sites". District of Columbia: Office of Planning. September 28, 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 1, 2011. Retrieved December 13, 2010. Simpao, Bernadette. "Red Square". The Hoya. Archived from the original on April 1, 2004. Retrieved July 24, 2007. "Georgetown's Newest Residence Hall Named for Society of Jesus Leader". www.georgetown.edu. August 11, 2016. Archived from the original on September 4, 2017. Retrieved July 7, 2017. "Georgetown Map Directory". Georgetown University. 2011. Archived from the original on June 8, 2011. Retrieved May 21, 2011. Timiraos, Nick (August 22, 2003). "From Hole to Home, Southwest Quad Completed". The Hoya. Archived from the original on October 24, 2007. Retrieved May 7, 2007. "$20 Million Gift to Benefit New MSB Building". Office of Communications. Georgetown University. July 10, 2009. Archived from the original on June 13, 2011. Retrieved July 10, 2009. Richardson, Katherine (September 9, 2014). "HFSC Opens to Students". The Hoya. Archived from the original on April 27, 2015. Retrieved April 13, 2015. Bellmore, Ryan (August 2, 2011). "Princeton Review justifies its existence, ranks colleges". The Georgetown Voice. Archived from the original on September 16, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011. Cho, Ah-Hyun (February 21, 2008). "Not Always a Beautiful Day in the Neighborhood". The Hoya. Archived from the original on March 1, 2008. Retrieved August 12, 2008. Burke, Brian (October 7, 2009). "Campus Crime Rose 7% in 2008, DPS Report Says". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. "Frequently Asked Questions". Georgetown University Law Center – On-Campus Housing. January 10, 2007. Archived from the original on July 2, 2007. Retrieved August 2, 2007. "Washington Neighborhoods". Office of Housing and Residential Life. Georgetown University Law Center. May 3, 2007. Archived from the original on July 6, 2007. Retrieved August 2, 2007. Mlyniec, Wally (October 26, 2004). "Construction Notes". Georgetown University Law Center – Campus Completion Project. Archived from the original on July 3, 2007. Retrieved July 8, 2007. Anderson, Nick (November 29, 2019). "Georgetown University is building more student housing — but not in Georgetown". Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 14, 2019. Retrieved December 13, 2019. "Our Campus | Georgetown SCS". scs.georgetown.edu. Archived from the original on March 28, 2019. Retrieved March 28, 2019. Heberle, Robert (May 20, 2005). "SFS to Establish Qatar Campus". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. "Studying International Affairs". School of Foreign Service in Qatar. Georgetown University. Archived from the original on July 10, 2007. Retrieved July 26, 2007. "Welcome to the Villa". Georgetown University – Villa le Balze. April 23, 2008. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008. Retrieved July 26, 2007. "Study Abroad in Italy". Georgetown University – Villa le Balze. April 23, 2008. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008. Retrieved August 12, 2008. "About". McGhee Center for Eastern Mediterranean Studies. Georgetown University. December 18, 2007. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008. Retrieved April 26, 2008. "Fall 2008: Semester Abroad". McGhee Center for Eastern Mediterranean Studies. Georgetown University. February 22, 2008. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008. Retrieved April 26, 2008. "乔治敦大学联络办公室 Georgetown University Liaison Office". Georgetown University Office of the Provost. 2009. Archived from the original on July 5, 2008. Retrieved February 4, 2009. Parks, Ann W. (November 3, 2008). "The Center for Transnational Legal Studies Kicks off in London". Georgetown University Law Center. Archived from the original on March 16, 2009. Retrieved July 12, 2009. "Georgetown to Open Campus in Indonesia". November 14, 2023. Retrieved November 14, 2023. House, The White (November 12, 2023). "Background Press Call by Senior Administration Officials Previewing the Bilateral Engagement of President Biden and President Joko Widodo of Indonesia". The White House. Retrieved November 14, 2023. House, The White (November 14, 2023). "Joint Statement from the Leaders of the United States and the Republic of Indonesia: Elevating Relations to a Comprehensive Strategic Partnership". The White House. Retrieved November 14, 2023. antaranews.com (November 16, 2023). "Georgetown University planning Indonesian campus: ministry". Antara News. Retrieved November 16, 2023. "College Scorecard: Georgetown University". United States Department of Education. Retrieved May 8, 2022. "GU Student Profile 2017". Office of Undergraduate Admissions. Georgetown University. 2017. Archived from the original on January 30, 2016. Retrieved April 1, 2018. "Most International Students: National Universities". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on May 9, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015. "Statistics on Georgetown's International Community". Office of International Programs. Georgetown University. June 30, 2010. Archived from the original on June 9, 2010. Retrieved May 21, 2011. Aisch, Gregor; Buchanan, Larry; Cox, Amanda; Quealy, Kevin (January 18, 2017). "Economic diversity and student outcomes at Georgetown". The New York Times. Retrieved August 9, 2020. "Georgetown University 2014–2015". National Center for Education Statistics. Archived from the original on January 9, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2015. "Final Report and Recommendations". Student Commission for Unity. Georgetown University. January 2009. Archived from the original on April 8, 2014. Retrieved December 2, 2009. Heneghan, Tom (July 9, 2007). "U.S. imam questions if "American" Islam exists". Reuters. Archived from the original on July 11, 2007. Retrieved July 24, 2007. "Georgetown University appoints first Hindu priest". The Hindu. October 8, 2014. Archived from the original on October 8, 2014. Retrieved October 14, 2014. "Other Traditions". Campus Ministry. Georgetown University. Archived from the original on July 18, 2010. Retrieved August 2, 2010. "Volunteerism and Service at Georgetown". Georgetown University – Georgetown Facts. June 16, 2005. Archived from the original on February 14, 2008. Retrieved July 24, 2007. "Georgetown's Great Escape". Georgetown Magazine. Georgetown University. February 27, 2006. Archived from the original on August 25, 2007. Retrieved July 24, 2007. Norton, Chris (April 26, 2007). "Suggestive figures, Grading on curves, Georgetown gets down". The Georgetown Voice. Archived from the original on September 28, 2007. Retrieved July 24, 2007. Salinas, Anna (January 30, 2009). "SCU Report Prescribes Change, Inclusion". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 19, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. Heller, Chris (September 16, 2010). "Newsweek ranks Georgetown among the nation's most diverse and LGBTQ-friendly schools". The Georgetown Voice. Archived from the original on October 4, 2011. Retrieved September 16, 2010. Kurzius, Rachel (June 17, 2016). "Survey: Three In 10 Female Georgetown Undergrads Report Non-Consensual Sexual Contact". DCist.com. Archived from the original on June 20, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Farra, Emily (December 8, 2011). "The 10 Most Hipster Campuses". College Magazine. Archived from the original on January 7, 2012. Retrieved December 12, 2011. "Most Vegan-Friendly College Contest 2011". December 2011. Archived from the original on December 5, 2011. Retrieved December 12, 2011. "COOL: College Opportunities Online Locator". National Center for Education Statistics. 2005. Archived from the original on September 25, 2007. Retrieved July 11, 2007. Marush, Gabrielle (June 13, 2011). "Neighbors ask Georgetown to house all students on campus". The GW Hatchet. Archived from the original on June 9, 2012. Retrieved October 3, 2011. Koester, Anne Y. (June 13, 2011). "Spring 2011 Semester Report" (PDF). Off Campus Student Life. Georgetown University. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 1, 2011. Retrieved October 3, 2011. "Frequently Asked Questions". Georgetown University – Prospective Students. Archived from the original on July 2, 2007. Retrieved July 25, 2007. Mac Neal, Caitlin (November 13, 2009). "2010–2020 Campus Plan Drafted". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 19, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. "Student Life". Georgetown University School of Medicine. 2009. Archived from the original on June 28, 2009. Retrieved July 15, 2009. "Student Life Report 2012" (PDF). Georgetown University Student Association. February 24, 2012. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved March 1, 2012. Palko, Ian (September 21, 1999). "SAC Fair Is Opportunity for Most, Exclusion for Some". The Hoya. Archived from the original on October 24, 2007. Retrieved July 27, 2007. Giblin, Adam (October 1, 2002). "Support Your Neighborhood, Vote in D.C." The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. "Philodemic Society". Georgetown University. March 19, 2007. Archived from the original on March 20, 2007. Retrieved May 3, 2007. Jarvis, Nicole (September 7, 2012). "Country's Oldest Theater Troupe Shines". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 25, 2016. Retrieved November 26, 2013. "About Us". Nomadic Theatre. Georgetown University. 2008. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008. Retrieved April 26, 2008. "About". The Georgetown Improv Association. Georgetown University. 2010. Archived from the original on August 5, 2012. Retrieved June 20, 2010. Moore, Maddy. "Model UN Wins Award". The Hoya. No. March 28, 2014. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2015. "Collegiate-Acappella Directory of College A Cappella Groups A–G". Collegiate-acappella.com. Archived from the original on July 8, 2011. Retrieved March 20, 2011. Bayer, Michael (November 5, 2003). "A capella abounds at DCAF". The Georgetown Independent. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved August 19, 2007. "History of The Chimes". Georgetown Chimes. August 5, 2008. Archived from the original on May 15, 2008. Retrieved August 12, 2008. "Spring Sing returns to Gaston Hall tomorrow | Vox Populi". Archived from the original on March 25, 2020. Retrieved March 25, 2020. "Pep Band Homepage". Georgetown University. 2008. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008. Retrieved February 24, 2008. "About The Corp". The Corp. April 29, 2007. Archived from the original on June 29, 2007. Retrieved July 9, 2007. "Non-profit report for Students of Georgetown, Inc". GuideStar USA. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved June 12, 2015. Riley, Anna (April 10, 2015). "The Corp Adds Social Impact Chair to Board". The Hoya. Archived from the original on April 15, 2015. Retrieved April 16, 2015. Cauterucci, Christina. "GUASFCU Celebrates 30th Anniversary". Online Magazine. Georgetown Alumni Online. Archived from the original on April 16, 2015. Retrieved April 16, 2015. Swan, John (October 3, 2006). "GU Goes 'Mad' for Financial Advice". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. "» Our Clients". hilltopconsultants.org. Retrieved May 13, 2020. "» About Us". hilltopmfi.org. Retrieved March 25, 2020. "About – GERMS". Archived from the original on May 6, 2021. Retrieved May 6, 2021. "Battalion History". The HOYA Battalion. August 4, 2010. Archived from the original on August 28, 2010. Retrieved December 13, 2010. Goldberg, Roxanne (February 27, 2012). "ROTC ranked nation's best". GW Hatchet. Archived from the original on May 8, 2012. Retrieved February 27, 2012. "National University Rankings 2010". Washington Monthly. 2010. Archived from the original on May 1, 2011. Retrieved May 1, 2011. "Georgetown University Grilling Society (GUGS): About". Studentorgs.georgetown.edu. February 20, 2003. Archived from the original on July 19, 2011. Retrieved May 1, 2011. Baldwin, Leslie (November 8, 2001). "Events educate GU on violence against women". The Georgetown Voice. Archived from the original on September 28, 2007. Retrieved July 10, 2007. Amend, Andy (February 9, 1999). "Compromise Reached". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. Somers, Bailey (March 6, 2003). "Cafeterias to offer only Fair Trade coffee". The Georgetown Voice. Archived from the original on September 28, 2007. Retrieved July 10, 2007. Toporek, Bryan (May 2008). "Georgetown Students Struggle to Endorse Candidates". Georgetown Journalism. Georgetown University. Washington, D.C. Archived from the original on December 15, 2012. Retrieved April 18, 2012. "Gimme an 'O'!". The Chronicle of Higher Education. May 12, 2006. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 21, 2017. Goodstein, Laurie; Hartocollis, Anemona (2017). "Abortion Foes Aim to Compete With Turnout for Women's March". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 21, 2017. "Anti-Abortion Activists Convene for Conference". January 31, 2017. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 21, 2017. Walters, Anne K. (May 12, 2006). "Gimme an 'O'!". The Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved December 13, 2010. Johnson, Andrew (November 6, 2003). "Jesuit colleges lack pro-choice groups". Marquette Tribune. Archived from the original on July 27, 2011. Retrieved April 25, 2007. "Student Organizations and Campus Life". Sustainability at Georgetown University. Retrieved October 28, 2021. "GUFF Reflects on GU's Journey to Divestment". June 19, 2020. Retrieved October 28, 2021. "Partnerships". Princeton Office of Sustainability. Retrieved November 18, 2023. "Ivy Plus Sustainability Consortium". Brown University. Retrieved November 18, 2023. "University Announces Fossil Fuel Divestment Plans After Years of Student Advocacy". February 7, 2020. Retrieved October 28, 2021. "The Hoya: A Brief History". Digital Georgetown. Archived from the original on June 11, 2010. Retrieved March 25, 2010. Zumbrun, Josh (January 14, 2005). "How Georgetown Found a Different Voice". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 19, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. "About The Georgetown Independent". November 10, 2008. Archived from the original on March 16, 2010. Retrieved March 25, 2010. Free, Elissa (October 21, 2004). "Georgetown Law Weekly Wins ABA's Best Newspaper Award Three Years Running". Georgetown University Law Center. Archived from the original on January 17, 2010. Retrieved November 25, 2009. "About – Georgetown Public Policy Review". Georgetown Public Policy Review. Archived from the original on June 16, 2018. Retrieved May 30, 2018. "About the Journal". Georgetown Journal of International Affairs. 2013. Archived from the original on October 26, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2013. Redden, Molly (October 23, 2008). "Controversial Catholics...and the third coming of The Georgetown Academy". The Georgetown Voice. Archived from the original on October 26, 2008. Retrieved October 27, 2008. Jubber, Eric (October 18, 2016). "Conservative Blog To Launch". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 3, 2017. Retrieved January 2, 2017. "Students start progressive political magazine". Georgetown Voice. March 30, 2011. Archived from the original on October 4, 2011. Retrieved June 27, 2011. "The Fire This Time". Georgetown University. Archived from the original on June 20, 2010. Retrieved April 21, 2012. "The Georgetown Heckler". January 23, 2007. Archived from the original on April 19, 2007. Retrieved April 19, 2007. Cho, Ah-Hyun (January 27, 2006). "The Revolution Will Be Televised". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. Dillon, Liam (October 17, 2002). "Finding a Place for Campus Radio". The Georgetown Voice. Archived from the original on September 28, 2007. Retrieved August 19, 2007. Singh, Suma (September 19, 2000). "Greek Life: Alive and Well At Georgetown". The Hoya. Archived from the original on November 22, 2005. Retrieved March 10, 2007. Boyle, Terrence (December 2, 2007). "The Other Georgetown Fraternities". Delta Phi Epsilon. Archived from the original on January 6, 2009. Retrieved December 2, 2007. Townsend, Jack (April 12, 2019). "It's All Greek to Me: Fraternities and Sororities on the Hilltop". The Georgetown Voice. Retrieved July 20, 2021. Barshay, Jill (July 19, 2021). "New poll points to college and career benefits of Greek life despite criticism". The Hechinger Report. Retrieved December 5, 2021. "Schedule of Events". Georgetown Day. Archived from the original on April 28, 2009. Retrieved October 8, 2009. Mellott, Sarah (October 25, 2005). "Parties, Pageantry Mark Homecoming". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 19, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. Tarnow, George (October 21, 2004). "Clock strikes midnight, basketball stars come out". The Georgetown Voice. Archived from the original on September 28, 2007. Retrieved July 27, 2007. Witkin, Gordon and Jodi Schneider (March 10, 2002). "Why they're not just about winning and losing anymore". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on May 7, 2005. Retrieved July 26, 2007. "Graduation Rates Report" (PDF). NCAA. October 21, 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 30, 2012. Retrieved February 10, 2012. Shoup-Mendizabal, Jon (January 23, 2004). "Glory Days". The Hoya. Archived from the original on March 14, 2007. Retrieved August 27, 2007. O'Neill & Williams 2003, pp. 54, 62–63 "What's A Hoya?". HoyaSaxa.com. August 17, 2005. Archived from the original on February 27, 2009. Retrieved April 30, 2007. Reynolds, Jon K. (September–October 1983). "The Dogs of Georgetown". Georgetown Magazine. Georgetown University Library. Archived from the original on May 17, 2008. Retrieved June 30, 2008. "Hoyas claim their first Big East tourney title since 1989". ESPN.com. Associated Press. Archived from the original on March 23, 2007. Retrieved July 10, 2007. "Rams hope to charge past Hoyas in Southwest Regional clash". 9news. The Sports Network. March 18, 2011. Archived from the original on July 16, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. Diamond, Jared (February 8, 2012). "Basketball's Alumni Loot Index". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on January 9, 2015. Retrieved February 7, 2012. "A National Championship". We Are Georgetown. November 13, 2013. Archived from the original on August 12, 2014. Retrieved August 11, 2014. "Georgetown wins World University Match Racing Championships". Scuttlebutt Sailing News. July 5, 2014. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved July 7, 2014. Jammet, Nicolas (November 23, 2004). "Georgetown's Track Program Quietly Dominates". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. Owings, Matt (November 21, 2011). "Wisconsin men, Georgetown women earn cross country titles". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 7, 2012. Retrieved February 10, 2012. Mendoza, Moises (May 20, 2005). "Experience, Leadership and Vision Propel Hoya Crew to National Prominence". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 19, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. "Georgetown Men's Lacrosse Moves Up to No. 4 in National Rankings". Georgetown University Official Athletic Site. April 24, 2007. Archived from the original on December 10, 2008. Retrieved April 26, 2007. Bohbot, Samantha (April 21, 2009). "Ford, Hubschmann Lead GU to Big East Crown". The Hoya. Archived from the original on January 19, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2011. Goff, Steven (December 15, 2019). "College Cup soccer: Georgetown outlasts Virginia in penalty kicks to win its first NCAA title". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 17, 2019. Retrieved December 16, 2019. El-Bashir, Tarik (November 26, 2010). "Georgetown women's soccer has reached new heights". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 24, 2011. Retrieved January 10, 2013. "2016 Women's College Cup: Preview | College Soccer". TopDrawerSoccer.com. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 26, 2017. Finn, Dave (November 17, 2009). "Hoyas Finish Off Undefeated Season". The Hoya. Archived from the original on February 27, 2014. Retrieved February 10, 2012. "Grand Forks woman wins boxing title for Georgetown". April 6, 2019. Archived from the original on August 25, 2019. Retrieved August 25, 2019. Brennan, George (March 13, 2019). "Martha's Vineyard tie to college admissions scandal". The Martha's Vineyard Times. Retrieved March 13, 2019. Reynolds, Mark (October 25, 2021). "RI tennis legend 'Gordie' Ernst pleads guilty in Varsity Blues college admissions scandal". Providence Journal. Retrieved November 6, 2021. Lumpkin, Lauren (September 15, 2021). "Former Georgetown tennis coach to plead guilty following college admissions scandal". Washington Post. Retrieved September 21, 2021. Hartocollis, Anemona (September 15, 2021). "Former Georgetown Tennis Coach Agrees to Plead Guilty in Admissions Scandal". The New York Times. Retrieved September 21, 2021. Hafer, Chelsea (November 2, 2018). "2017 First Destination Report: Consulting, Finance Top Industries". The Hoya. Retrieved November 7, 2020. Stockton, Curran (December 6, 2019). "Senior Becomes 1st RhodesScholar in NHS History". The Hoya. Retrieved July 30, 2019. "Statistics and Resources – Marshall Scholarships". www.marshallscholarship.org. Retrieved January 5, 2021. "Truman Scholars from Georgetown University". Truman.gov. October 15, 2019. Retrieved October 15, 2019. "Georgetown Student Wins Mitchell Scholarship to Study in Ireland". Georgetown University. November 17, 2012. Archived from the original on December 2, 2012. Retrieved November 29, 2012. alex.corr (October 19, 2014). "Find a scholar". Gates Cambridge. Archived from the original on August 20, 2017. Retrieved August 22, 2019. "Georgetown Is No. 1 Producer of U.S. Fulbright Student Scholars". Georgetown University. February 10, 2020. Retrieved May 17, 2020. "Georgetown Alumni Continue Strong Tradition of Peace Corps Service". Georgetown University. March 18, 2016. Archived from the original on June 5, 2019. Retrieved August 8, 2019. "2017–2018 College Salary Report". Payscale. Archived from the original on March 15, 2018. Retrieved May 7, 2018. Bui, Quoctrung; Ma, Jessia (March 27, 2023). "Opinion | Build Your Own College Rankings". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved September 20, 2023. McNair, Kamaron (April 6, 2023). "Top 10 colleges to attend if you want to make a lot of money—Harvard and Yale didn't make the list". CNBC. Retrieved September 20, 2023. "Academics at Georgetown University". College Factual. 2019. Retrieved November 6, 2020. McClain, Buzz (2015). "Mason Ranks Seventh in Country for Placing Foreign Service Officers". George Mason University. Archived from the original on August 3, 2019. Retrieved August 3, 2019. "Marcia S. Bernicat". United States Department of State. Retrieved October 7, 2023. "Prominent Alumni". SFS – School of Foreign Service – Georgetown University. Retrieved October 7, 2023. Lane, Rosemary (December 8, 2022). "28 Georgetown Alumni and Faculty Will Serve in 118th U.S. Congress". Georgetown University. Retrieved October 7, 2023. "More than 20 Georgetown Alumni Serving in the 117th Congress". Georgetown University. December 28, 2020. Retrieved January 5, 2021. Pongsajapan, Robert (February 16, 2016). "Georgetown Remembers Alumnus and U.S. Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia". Georgetown University. Retrieved October 7, 2023. "Edward Douglass White, Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court". Georgetown University Library. 1891. Retrieved October 7, 2023. Goldberg, Roxanne (February 27, 2012). "ROTC ranked nation's best". The GW Hatchet. Retrieved November 7, 2020. "Civic Engagement and National Service". Quarterly Reports. Georgetown University. Spring 2009. Archived from the original on December 25, 2010. Retrieved August 23, 2011. "General Joseph F. Dunford Jr. > U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE > Biography". www.defense.gov. Retrieved August 13, 2020. Long, Heather (October 2, 2014). "Want a job on Wall Street? Go to UPenn or Georgetown". CNN Money. Retrieved November 6, 2020. "Top Feeders to Wall Street". College Transitions. June 2020. Retrieved November 6, 2020. Diamond, Jared (December 13, 2011). "Where the People in Charge Went to School". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on January 9, 2015. Retrieved February 1, 2012. "Theater Alumni". Georgetown University Department of Performing Arts. April 2016. Retrieved November 6, 2020. Pincus, Walter (May 27, 2013). "Circling the media wagons". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved August 29, 2020. "Lulu Garcia-Navarro". NPR.org. Retrieved August 29, 2020. Curran, Robert Emmett (1993). The Bicentennial History of Georgetown University: From Academy to University, 1789–1889. Vol. 1. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press. ISBN 978-0-87840-485-8. Archived from the original on June 30, 2023. Retrieved June 30, 2023 – via Google Books. Curran, Robert Emmett (2010a). A History of Georgetown University: From Academy to University, 1789–1889. Vol. 1. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press. ISBN 978-1-58901-688-0. Curran, Robert Emmett (2010b). A History of Georgetown University: The Quest for Excellence, 1889–1964. Vol. 2. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press. ISBN 978-1-58901-689-7. Curran, Robert Emmett (2010c). A History of Georgetown University: The Rise to Prominence, 1964–1989. Vol. 3. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press. ISBN 978-1-58901-690-3. Durkin, Joseph ed. Swift Potomac's Lovely Daughter. Two Centuries at Georgetown through Students' Eyes (Georgetown UP, 1990) 446 pp. Fiske, Edward B. (2010). Fiske Guide to Getting Into the Right College. Sourcebooks, Inc. p. 66. ISBN 978-1-4022-4309-7. McFadden, William C. ed. Georgetown at Two Hundred: Faculty Reflections on the University's Future (Georgetown UP, 1990), 353 pp. Nevils, William Coleman (1934). Miniatures of Georgetown: Tercentennial Causeries. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press. OCLC 8224468. O'Neill, Paul R.; Williams, Paul K. (2003). Georgetown University. Charleston, South Carolina: Arcadia Publishing. ISBN 0-7385-1509-4. Wikiquote has quotations related to Georgetown University. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Georgetown University. Official website Georgetown Athletics website Portals:  Architecture  Catholic Church  Schools  United States