The women's field hockey tournament at the 2008 Summer Olympics was the 8th edition of the field hockey event for women at the Summer Olympic Games. It was held over a thirteen-day period beginning on 10 August, and culminating with the medal finals on 22 August. All games were played at the hockey field constructed on the Olympic Green in Beijing, China. The Netherlands won the gold medal for the second time after defeating China 2–0 in the final. Argentina won the bronze medal by defeating defending champions Germany 3–1. The twelve teams in the tournament were divided into two pools of six, with each team initially playing round-robin games within their pool. Following the completion of the round-robin, the top two teams from each pool advance to the semifinals. All other teams play classification matches to determine the final tournament rankings. The two semi-final winners meet for the gold medal match, while the semi-final losers play in the bronze medal match. Each of the continental champions from five federations and host received an automatic berth. The European federation received two extra quotas, while Oceanian received one extra quota, based upon the FIH World Rankings at the completion of the 2006 World Cup. In addition to the three teams qualifying through the Olympic Qualifying Tournaments, the following twelve teams, shown with final pre-tournament rankings, competed in this tournament. ^1 – China qualified both as host and continental champion, therefore that quota was given to the Asian federation allowing Japan to qualify directly to the 2008 Summer Olympics as the second-placed team at the 2006 Asian Games . Fifteen umpires for the women's event were appointed by the FIH. During each match, a video umpire was used to assist the on-field umpires in determining if a goal had been legally scored.  Julie Ashton-Lucy (AUS)  Stella Bartlema (NED)  Ute Conen (GER)  Marelize de Klerk (RSA)  Carolina de la Fuente (ARG)  Sarah Garnett (NZL)  Soledad Iparraguirre (ARG)  Lee Keum-ju (KOR)  Anne McRae (GBR)  Carol Metchette (IRL)  Miao Lin (CHN)  Lisa Roach (AUS)  Chieko Soma (JPN)  Gina Spitaleri (ITA)  Minka Woolley (AUS) All times are China Standard Time (UTC+08:00) Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed]  Netherlands  China  Argentina  Germany  Australia  Great Britain  Spain  United States  South Korea  Japan  South Africa  New Zealand 11 goals Maartje Paumen 5 goals Alejandra Gulla Fu Baorong Lee Seon-ok 4 goals Carla Rebecchi Casey Eastham Tang Chunling Angie Loy 3 goals Nikki Hudson Angela Lambert Sarah Young Li Hongxia Crista Cullen Anke Kühn Fanny Rinne Keli Smith 2 goals Claudia Burkart Soledad García Mariné Russo Shelly Liddelow Gao Lihua Janine Beermann Eileen Hoffmann Natascha Keller Marion Rodewald Keiko Miura Gim Sung-hee Park Jeong-sook Park Mi-hyun Marilyn Agliotti Ellen Hoog Gemma Flynn Vida Ryan 1 goal Luciana Aymar Noel Barrionuevo Rosario Luchetti Madonna Blyth Emily Halliday Hope Munro Megan Rivers Ma Yibo Song Qingling Zhao Yudiao Melanie Clewlow Alex Danson Anne Panter Sarah Thomas Katharina Scholz Kaori Chiba Rika Komazawa Sakae Morimoto Toshie Tsukui Kim Da-rae Kim Eun-sil Kim Jong-eun Kim Mi-sun Minke Booij Wieke Dijkstra Maartje Goderie Eefke Mulder Janneke Schopman Naomi van As Jaimee Claxton Krystal Forgesson Jo Galletly Lizzy Igasan Niniwa Roberts Cindy Brown Kate Hector Marsha Marescia Jennifer Wilson Núria Camón Raquel Huertas Silvia Muñoz María Romagosa Pilar Sánchez Esther Termens Rocío Ybarra Kate Barber Kayla Bashore Dana Sensenig Tiffany Snow "Hockey at the 2008 Beijing Summer Games: Women's Hockey". Sports Reference. Archived from the original on 17 April 2020. Retrieved 22 October 2019. "Qualification System - Games of the XXIX Olympiad" (PDF). FIH. February 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-04-28. Retrieved 2012-11-13. "FIH releases pools for Women's Olympic Hockey Tournament". FIH. 2008-05-05. Retrieved 2014-01-27. FIH Outdoor Appointments 2008 XXIXth Olympic Games Tournament Regulations - Men's and Women's Hockey Competitions Official FIH website