Dartmouth College (/ˈdɑːrtməθ/; DART-məth) is a private Ivy League research university in Hanover, New Hampshire. Established in 1769 by Eleazar Wheelock, Dartmouth is one of the nine colonial colleges chartered before the American Revolution. Emerging into national prominence at the turn of the 20th century, Dartmouth has been considered among the most prestigious undergraduate colleges in the United States since the early 1900s. Although originally established to educate Native Americans in Christian theology and the English way of life, the university primarily trained Congregationalist ministers during its early history before it gradually secularized. While Dartmouth is now a research university rather than simply an undergraduate college, it continues to go by "Dartmouth College" to emphasize its focus on undergraduate education. Following a liberal arts curriculum, Dartmouth provides undergraduate instruction in 40 academic departments and interdisciplinary programs, including 60 majors in the humanities, social sciences, natural sciences, and engineering, and enables students to design specialized concentrations or engage in dual degree programs. In addition to the undergraduate faculty of arts and sciences, Dartmouth has four professional and graduate schools: the Geisel School of Medicine, the Thayer School of Engineering, the Tuck School of Business, and the Guarini School of Graduate and Advanced Studies. The university also has affiliations with the Dartmouth–Hitchcock Medical Center. Dartmouth is home to the Rockefeller Center for Public Policy and the Social Sciences, the Hood Museum of Art, the John Sloan Dickey Center for International Understanding, and the Hopkins Center for the Arts. With a student enrollment of about 6,700, Dartmouth is the smallest university in the Ivy League. Undergraduate admissions are highly selective with an acceptance rate of 5.3% for the class of 2028, including a 3.8% rate for regular decision applicants. Situated on a terrace above the Connecticut River, Dartmouth's 269-acre (109 ha) main campus is in the rural Upper Valley region of New England. The university functions on a quarter system, operating year-round on four ten-week academic terms. Dartmouth is known for its undergraduate focus, Greek culture, and campus traditions. Its 34 varsity sports teams compete intercollegiately in the Ivy League conference of the NCAA Division I. The university has many prominent alumni, including 170 members of the United States Congress, 24 U.S. governors, 8 U.S. Cabinet secretaries, 3 Nobel Prize laureates, 2 U.S. Supreme Court justices, and a U.S. vice president. Other notable alumni include 81 Rhodes Scholars, 26 Marshall Scholarship recipients, 13 Pulitzer Prize recipients, 10 CEOs of Fortune 500 companies, and 51 Olympic medalists. Dartmouth was founded by Eleazar Wheelock, a Yale graduate and Congregational minister from Windham, Connecticut, who had sought to establish a school to train Native Americans as Christian missionaries. It was one of the nine colonial colleges chartered before the American Revolution. Wheelock's ostensible inspiration for such an establishment resulted from his relationship with Mohegan Indian Samson Occom. Occom became an ordained minister after studying under Wheelock from 1743 to 1747, and later moved to Long Island to preach to the Montauks. Wheelock founded Moor's Indian Charity School in 1755. The Charity School proved somewhat successful, but additional funding was necessary to continue school's operations, and Wheelock sought the help of friends to raise money. The first major donation to the school was given by John Phillips in 1762, who would go on to found Phillips Exeter Academy. Occom, accompanied by the Reverend Nathaniel Whitaker, traveled to England in 1766 to raise money from churches. With these funds, they established a trust to help Wheelock. The head of the trust was a Methodist named William Legge, 2nd Earl of Dartmouth. Although the fund provided Wheelock ample financial support for the Charity School, Wheelock initially had trouble recruiting Indians to the institution, primarily because its location was far from tribal territories. In seeking to expand the school into a college, Wheelock relocated it to Hanover, in the Province of New Hampshire. The move from Connecticut followed a lengthy and sometimes frustrating effort to find resources and secure a charter. The Royal Governor of New Hampshire, John Wentworth, provided the land upon which Dartmouth would be built and on December 13, 1769, issued a royal charter in the name of King George III establishing the college. That charter created a college "for the education and instruction of Youth of the Indian Tribes in this Land in reading, writing & all parts of Learning which shall appear necessary and expedient for civilizing & christianizing Children of Pagans as well as in all liberal Arts and Sciences and also of English Youth and any others". The reference to educating Native American youth was included to connect Dartmouth to the Charity School and enable the use of the Charity School's unspent trust funds. Named for William Legge, 2nd Earl of Dartmouth – an important supporter of Eleazar Wheelock's earlier efforts but who, in fact, opposed creation of the college and never donated to it – Dartmouth is the nation's ninth oldest college and the last institution of higher learning established under Colonial rule. The college granted its first degrees in 1771. Given the limited success of the Charity School, however, Wheelock intended his new college as one primarily for whites. Occom, disappointed with Wheelock's departure from the school's original goal of Indian Christianization, went on to form his own community of New England Indians called Brothertown Indians in New York. In 1819, Dartmouth College was the subject of the historic Dartmouth College case, which challenged New Hampshire's 1816 attempt to amend the college' charter to make the school a public university. An institution called Dartmouth University occupied the college buildings and began operating in Hanover in 1817, though the college continued teaching classes in rented rooms nearby. Daniel Webster, an alumnus of the class of 1801, presented the college's case to the Supreme Court, which found the amendment of Dartmouth's charter to be an illegal impairment of a contract by the state and reversed New Hampshire's takeover of the college. Webster concluded his peroration with the famous words: "It is, Sir, as I have said, a small college. And yet there are those who love it." Dartmouth taught its first African-American students in 1775 and 1808. By the end of the Civil War, 20 black men had attended the college or its medical school. and Dartmouth "was recognized in the African-American community as a place where a man of color could go to get educated". One of them, Jonathan C. Gibbs, served as Secretary of State and Superintendent of Public Instruction for the state of Florida. In 1866, the New Hampshire College of Agriculture and the Mechanic Arts was incorporated in Hanover, in connection with Dartmouth College. The institution was officially associated with Dartmouth and was directed by Dartmouth's president. The new college was moved to Durham, New Hampshire, in 1891, and later became known as the University of New Hampshire. Dartmouth emerged onto the national academic stage at the turn of the 20th century. Prior to this period, the college had clung to traditional methods of instruction and was relatively poorly funded. Under President William Jewett Tucker (1893–1909), Dartmouth underwent a major revitalization of facilities, faculty, and the student body, following large endowments such as the $10,000 given by Dartmouth alumnus and law professor John Ordronaux. 20 new structures replaced antiquated buildings, while the student body and faculty both expanded threefold. Tucker is often credited for having "refounded Dartmouth" and bringing it into national prestige. Presidents Ernest Fox Nichols (1909–16) and Ernest Martin Hopkins (1916–45) continued Tucker's trend of modernization, further improving campus facilities and introducing selective admissions in the 1920s. In 1945, Hopkins was subject to no small amount of controversy, as he openly admitted to Dartmouth's practice of using racial quotas to deny Jews entry into the university. John Sloan Dickey, serving as president from 1945 until 1970, strongly emphasized the liberal arts, particularly public policy and international relations. During World War II, Dartmouth was one of 131 colleges and universities nationally that took part in the V-12 Navy College Training Program which offered students a path to a navy commission. The Dartmouth workshop, which was held in 1956, is widely considered to be the founding event of artificial intelligence as a field. In 1970, longtime professor of mathematics and computer science John George Kemeny became president of Dartmouth. Kemeny oversaw several major changes at the college. Dartmouth, which had been a men's institution, began admitting women as full-time students and undergraduate degree candidates in 1972 amid much controversy. At about the same time, the college adopted its "Dartmouth Plan" of academic scheduling, permitting the student body to increase in size within the existing facilities. In 1988, Dartmouth's alma mater song's lyrics changed from "Men of Dartmouth" to "Dear old Dartmouth". During the 1990s, the college saw a major academic overhaul under President James O. Freedman and a controversial (and ultimately unsuccessful) 1999 initiative to encourage the school's single-sex Greek houses to go coed. The first decade of the 21st century saw the commencement of the $1.5 billion Campaign for the Dartmouth Experience, the largest capital fundraising campaign in the college's history, which surpassed $1 billion in 2008. The mid- and late first decade of the 21st century have also seen extensive campus construction, with the erection of two new housing complexes, full renovation of two dormitories, and a forthcoming dining hall, life sciences center, and visual arts center. In 2004, Booz Allen Hamilton selected Dartmouth College as a model of institutional endurance "whose record of endurance has had implications and benefits for all American organizations, both academic and commercial", citing Dartmouth College v. Woodward and Dartmouth's successful self-reinvention in the late 19th century. Since the election of a number of petition-nominated trustees to the Board of Trustees starting in 2004, the role of alumni in Dartmouth governance has been the subject of ongoing conflict. President James Wright announced his retirement in February 2008 and was replaced by Harvard University professor and physician Jim Yong Kim on July 1, 2009. Kim was succeeded by Philip J. Hanlon in June 2013 and Sian Leah Beilock in June 2023. In May 2010 Dartmouth joined the Matariki Network of Universities (MNU) together with Durham University (UK), Queen's University (Canada), University of Otago (New Zealand), University of Tübingen (Germany), University of Western Australia (Australia) and Uppsala University (Sweden). In early August 2019, Dartmouth College agreed to pay nine current and former students a total of $14 million to settle a class-action lawsuit alleging they were sexually harassed by three former neuroscience professors. In 2019, Dartmouth College was elected to the Association of American Universities (AAU). In April 2022, Dartmouth College returned the papers of Samson Occum (who helped Eleazar Wheelock secure the funds for Dartmouth College for what Occom believed would be a school for Native students in Connecticut) to the Mohegan Tribe. In November 2022, Dartmouth Hall was rededicated after a $42 million renovation. Fundraising for the project was led by over 1700 alumnae as part of the celebration of 50 years of coeducation at Dartmouth College. Dartmouth, a liberal arts institution, offers a four-year Bachelor of Arts and ABET-accredited Bachelor of Engineering degree to undergraduate students. The college has 39 academic departments offering 56 major programs, while students are free to design special majors or engage in dual majors. For the graduating class of 2017, the most popular majors were economics, government, computer science, engineering sciences, and history. The Economics Department, whose prominent professors include David Blanchflower, Andrew Samwick, and Diego Comin, among others, also holds the distinction as the top-ranked bachelor's-only economics program in the world. The Government Department similarly includes numerous eminent faculty members, such as Stephen Brooks and William Wohlforth, and is among Dartmouth’s most popular majors. These two departments are known for enforcing a median grade of B+ in most of their courses in order to curb the burgeoning trend of grade inflation at American universities. In order to graduate, a student must complete 35 total courses, eight to ten of which are typically part of a chosen major program. Other requirements for graduation include the completion of ten "distributive requirements" in a variety of academic fields, proficiency in a foreign language, and completion of a writing class and first-year seminar in writing. Many departments offer honors programs requiring students seeking that distinction to engage in "independent, sustained work", culminating in the production of a thesis. In addition to the courses offered in Hanover, Dartmouth offers 57 different off-campus programs, including Foreign Study Programs, Language Study Abroad programs, and Exchange Programs. Through the Graduate Studies program, Dartmouth grants doctorate and master's degrees in 19 Arts & Sciences graduate programs. Although the first graduate degree, a PhD in classics, was awarded in 1885, many of the current PhD programs have only existed since the 1960s. Furthermore, Dartmouth is home to three professional schools: the Geisel School of Medicine (established 1797), Thayer School of Engineering (1867)—which also serves as the undergraduate department of engineering sciences—and Tuck School of Business (1900). With these professional schools and graduate programs, conventional American usage would accord Dartmouth the label of "Dartmouth University"; however, because of historical and nostalgic reasons (such as Dartmouth College v. Woodward), the school uses the name "Dartmouth College" to refer to the entire institution. Dartmouth employs a total of 607 tenured or tenure-track faculty members, including the highest proportion of female tenured professors among the Ivy League universities, and the first black woman tenure-track faculty member in computer science at an Ivy League university. Faculty members have been at the forefront of such major academic developments as the Dartmouth Workshop, the Dartmouth Time Sharing System, Dartmouth BASIC, and Dartmouth ALGOL 30. In 2005, sponsored project awards to Dartmouth faculty research amounted to $169 million. Dartmouth served as the host member of the University Press of New England, a university press founded in 1970 that included Brandeis University, Tufts University, the University of New Hampshire, and Northeastern University. The University Press of New England shut down in 2018. With the exception of Dartmouth College Press titles, in 2021, Brandeis become the sole owner of all copyrights and titles of UPNE. Dartmouth was ranked 12th among undergraduate programs at national universities by U.S. News & World Report in its 2022 rankings. U.S. News also ranked the school 3rd best for veterans, tied for 5th best in undergraduate teaching, and 7th for "best value" national universities. Dartmouth's undergraduate teaching was previously ranked 1st by U.S. News for five years in a row (2009–2013). Dartmouth College is accredited by the New England Commission of Higher Education. In Forbes' 2019 rankings of 650 universities, liberal arts colleges and service academies, Dartmouth ranked 10th overall and 10th in research universities. In the Forbes 2018 "grateful graduate" rankings, Dartmouth came in first for the second year in a row. The 2021 Academic Ranking of World Universities ranked Dartmouth among the 90–110th best universities in the nation. However, this specific ranking has drawn criticism from scholars for not adequately adjusting for the size of an institution, which leads to larger institutions ranking above smaller ones like Dartmouth. The 2006 Carnegie Foundation classification listed Dartmouth as the only "majority-undergraduate", "arts-and-sciences focus[ed]", "research university" in the country that also had "some graduate coexistence" and "very high research activity". Undergraduate admission to Dartmouth College is characterized by the Carnegie Foundation and U.S. News & World Report as "most selective". The Princeton Review, in its 2023 edition, gave the university an admissions selectivity rating of 98 out of 99. For the freshman class entering Fall 2023, Dartmouth received a record 28,841 applications of which 6.2% were accepted, consistent with the prior two years; approximately 67% of those accepted are expected to matriculate. Of those admitted students who reported class rank, 444 were ranked first or second in their class, while 96% ranked in the top decile. The admitted students' academic profile showed an all-time high SAT average score of 1501, while the average composite ACT score remained at 33. Additionally, for the 2016–2017 academic year, Dartmouth received 685 transfer applications of which 5.1% were accepted, with an average SAT composite score of 1490, average composite ACT score of 34, and average college GPA of about 3.85. Dartmouth meets 100% of students' demonstrated financial need in order to attend the college, and currently admits all students, including internationals, on a need-blind basis. Dartmouth guarantees to meet 100% of the demonstrated need of every admitted student who applies for financial aid at the time of admission. Dartmouth is one of seven American universities to practice international need-blind admissions. This means that all applicants, including U.S. permanent residents, undocumented students in the U.S., and international students, are admitted to the college without regard to their financial circumstances. At Dartmouth, free tuition is provided for students from families with total incomes of $125,000 or less and possessing typical assets. Dartmouth is also one of a few U.S. universities to eliminate undergraduate student loans and replace them with expanded scholarship grants. In 2015, $88.8 million (~$112 million in 2023) in need-based scholarships were awarded to Dartmouth students. The median family income of Dartmouth students is $200,400, with 58% of students coming from the top 10% highest-earning families and 14% from the bottom 60%.[needs update] However, a 2022 article from The Dartmouth disputes the college's claims by saying the following: "To put it all together with the $9 million of student debt from the Class of 2021, this change in Dartmouth policy, hailed as "eliminat[ing] loans for undergraduate students" actually eliminated only about a quarter—27.4% to be exact—of student loans for undergraduate students. So, while Dartmouth gets glowing coverage in news publications across the country, 72.6% of the debt it saddles its students with remains." Dartmouth functions on a quarter system, operating year-round on four ten-week academic terms. The Dartmouth Plan (or simply "D-Plan") is an academic scheduling system that permits the customization of each student's academic year. All undergraduates are required to be in residence for the fall, winter, and spring terms of their freshman year and two terms of their senior year, as well as the summer term of their sophomore year. However, students may petition to alter this plan so that they may be off during terms of their senior year or sophomore summer terms. During all terms, students are permitted to choose between studying on-campus, studying at an off-campus program, or taking a term off for vacation, outside internships, or research projects. The typical course load is three classes per term, and students will generally enroll in classes for 12 total terms over the course of their academic career. The D-Plan was instituted in the early 1970s at the same time that Dartmouth began accepting female undergraduates. It was initially devised as a plan to increase the enrollment without enlarging campus accommodations, and has been described as "a way to put 4,000 students into 3,000 beds". Although new dormitories have been built since, the number of students has also increased and the D-Plan remains in effect. It was modified in the 1980s in an attempt to reduce the problems of lack of social and academic continuity. Dartmouth is governed by a board of trustees comprising the college president (ex officio), the state governor (ex officio), 13 trustees nominated and elected by the board (called "charter trustees"), and eight trustees nominated by alumni and elected by the board ("alumni trustees"). The nominees for alumni trustee are determined by a poll of the members of the Association of Alumni of Dartmouth College, selecting from among names put forward by the Alumni Council or by alumni petition. Although the board elected its members from the two sources of nominees in equal proportions between 1891 and 2007, the board decided in 2007 to add several new members, all charter trustees. In the controversy that followed the decision, the Association of Alumni filed a lawsuit, although it later withdrew the action. In 2008, the board added five new charter trustees. This is what a college is supposed to look like. —U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1953 Dartmouth College is situated in the rural town of Hanover, New Hampshire, located in the Upper Valley along the Connecticut River in New England. Its 269-acre (1.09 km2) campus is centered on a 5-acre (2 ha) "Green", a former field of pine trees cleared in 1771. Dartmouth is the largest private landowner of the town of Hanover, and its total landholdings and facilities are worth an estimated $434 million. In addition to its campus in Hanover, Dartmouth owns 4,500 acres (18 km2) of Mount Moosilauke in the White Mountains and a 27,000-acre (110 km2) tract of land in northern New Hampshire known as the Second College Grant. Dartmouth's campus buildings vary in age from Wentworth and Thornton Halls of the 1820s (the oldest surviving buildings constructed by the college) to new dormitories and mathematics facilities completed in 2006. Most of Dartmouth's buildings are designed in the Georgian colonial architecture style, a theme which has been preserved in recent architectural additions. The college has actively sought to reduce carbon emissions and energy usage on campus, earning it the grade of A− from the Sustainable Endowments Institute on its College Sustainability Report Card 2008. A notable feature of the Dartmouth campus is its many trees which (despite Dutch elm disease) include some 200 American elms. The campus also has the largest Kentucky coffeetree in New Hampshire, at 91 ft tall. While Dartmouth's campus is located in a rural setting, it is connected to several major cities by intercity bus services that directly serve Dartmouth and Hanover. Dartmouth Coach provides service from Hanover to South Station and Logan International Airport in Boston as well as New York City, while Greyhound Lines operates a daily route connecting Hanover and Montreal. All three cities are popular weekend/vacation destinations for Dartmouth students. The college's creative and performing arts facility is the Hopkins Center for the Arts ("the Hop"). Opened in 1962, the Hop houses the college's drama, music, film, and studio arts departments, as well as a woodshop, pottery studio, and jewelry studio which are open for use by students and faculty. The building was designed by the famed architect Wallace Harrison, who would later design the similar-looking façade of Manhattan's Metropolitan Opera House at Lincoln Center. Its facilities include two theaters and one 900-seat auditorium and the Courtyard Café dining facility. The Hop is connected to the Hood Museum of Art, arguably North America's oldest museum in continuous operation, and the Loew Auditorium, where films are screened. In addition to its 19 graduate programs in the arts and sciences, Dartmouth is home to three separate graduate schools. The Geisel School of Medicine is located in a complex on the north side of campus and includes laboratories, classrooms, offices, and a biomedical library. The Dartmouth–Hitchcock Medical Center, located several miles to the south in Lebanon, New Hampshire, contains a 396-bed teaching hospital for the Medical School. The Thayer School of Engineering and the Tuck School of Business are both located at the end of Tuck Mall, west of the center of campus and near the Connecticut River. The Thayer School comprises two buildings; Tuck has seven academic and administrative buildings, as well as several common areas. The two graduate schools share a library, the Feldberg Business & Engineering Library. In December 2018, Dartmouth began a major expansion of the west end of campus by breaking ground on the $200 million (~$239 million in 2023) Center for Engineering and Computer Science. The Center will house the Computer Science department and Magnuson Center for Entrepreneurship. In October 2019, construction began on the Irving Institute of Energy and Society. Both were completed by Spring 2022, and the Center for Engineering and Computer Science was renamed the Class of 1982 Engineering and Computer Science Center. Dartmouth's libraries are all part of the collective Dartmouth College Library, which comprises 2.48 million volumes and 6 million total resources, including videos, maps, sound recordings, and photographs. Its specialized libraries include the Biomedical Libraries, Evans Map Room, Feldberg Business & Engineering Library, Jones Media Center, Rauner Special Collections Library, and Sherman Art Library. Baker-Berry Library is the main library at Dartmouth, consisting of a merger of the Baker Memorial Library (opened 1928) and the Berry Library (completed 2002). Located on the northern side of the Green, Baker's 200-foot (61 m) tower is an iconic symbol of the college. Dartmouth's original sports field was the Green, where students played cricket and old division football during the 19th century. Today, two of Dartmouth's athletic facilities are located in the southeast corner of campus. The center of athletic life is the Alumni Gymnasium, which includes the Karl Michael Competition Pool and the Spaulding Pool, a fitness center, a weight room, and a 1/13th-mile (123 m) indoor track. Attached to Alumni Gymnasium is the Berry Sports Center, which contains basketball and volleyball courts (Leede Arena), as well as the Kresge Fitness Center. Behind the Alumni Gymnasium is Memorial Field, a 15,600-seat stadium overlooking Dartmouth's football field and track. The nearby Thompson Arena, designed by Italian engineer Pier Luigi Nervi and constructed in 1975, houses Dartmouth's ice rink. Also visible from Memorial Field is the 91,800-square-foot (8,530 m2) Nathaniel Leverone Fieldhouse, home to the indoor track. The new softball field, Dartmouth Softball Park, was constructed in 2012, sharing parking facilities with Thompson arena and replacing Sachem Field, located over a mile from campus, as the primary softball facility. Dartmouth's other athletic facilities in Hanover include the Friends of Dartmouth Rowing Boathouse and the old rowing house storage facility (both located along the Connecticut River), the Hanover Country Club, Dartmouth's oldest remaining athletic facility (established in 1899), and the Corey Ford Rugby Clubhouse. The college also maintains the Dartmouth Skiway, a 100-acre (0.40 km2) skiing facility located over two mountains near the Hanover campus in Lyme Center, New Hampshire, that serves as the winter practice grounds for the Dartmouth Ski Team, which is a perennial contender for the NCAA Division I championship. Dartmouth's close association and involvement in the development of the downhill skiing industry is featured in the 2010 book Passion for Skiing as well as the 2013 documentary based on the book Passion for Snow. Beginning in the fall term of 2016, Dartmouth placed all undergraduate students in one of six House communities, similar to residential colleges, including Allen House, East Wheelock House, North Park House, School House, South House, and West House, alongside independent Living Learning Communities. Dartmouth used to have nine residential communities located throughout campus, instead of ungrouped dormitories or residential colleges. The dormitories varied in design from modern to traditional Georgian styles, and room arrangements range from singles to quads and apartment suites. Since 2006, the college has guaranteed housing for students during their freshman and sophomore years. More than 3,000 students elect to live in housing provided by college. Campus meals are served by Dartmouth Dining Services, which operates 11 dining establishments around campus. The Class of 1953 Commons, commonly referred to as "Foco", is the all-you-can-eat dining hall, located at the center of campus. Dartmouth also operates à la carte cafes around campus (Collis Café, Courtyard Café, Novack Café, The Fern Coffee & Tea Bar, Ramekin, and Café@Baker), a convenience store (Collis Market), and 3 snack bars located in the Allen House Commons (also called the "Cube"), McLaughlin Cluster, and East Wheelock Cluster. The Collis Center is the center of student life and programming, serving as what would be generically termed the "student union" or "campus center". It contains a café, study space, common areas, and a number of administrative departments, including the Academic Skills Center. Robinson Hall, next door to both the Collis Center and the Class of 1953 Commons, contains the offices of a number of student organizations, including the Dartmouth Outing Club and The Dartmouth daily newspaper. Lord Hall, Allen House Morton Hall, East Wheelock House Woodward Hall, North Park House Mid Massachusetts Hall, School House Topliff Hall, South House Russell Sage Hall, West House Dartmouth Student Government represents students on issues related to student life. Annually, students elect a student body president, vice president, and undergraduate senate to represent them in the following academic year. In 2006, The Princeton Review ranked Dartmouth third in its "Quality of Life" category, and sixth for having the "Happiest Students". Athletics and participation in the Greek system are the most popular campus activities. In all, Dartmouth offers more than 350 organizations, teams, and sports. The school is also home to a variety of longstanding traditions and celebrations and has a loyal alumni network; Dartmouth ranked #2 in "The Princeton Review" in 2006 for Best Alumni Network. In 2014, Dartmouth College was the third highest in the nation in "total of reports of rape" on their main campus, with 42 reports of rape. The Washington Post attributed the high number of rape reports to the fact that a growing number of sexual assault victims feel comfortable enough to report sexual assaults that would have gone unreported in previous years. In 2015, the Huffington Post reported that Dartmouth had the highest rate of bystander intervention of any college surveyed, with 57.7% of Dartmouth students reporting that they would take some sort of action if they saw someone acting in a "sexually violent or harassing manner," compared to 45.5% of students nationally. Dartmouth fraternities have an extensive history of hazing and alcohol abuse, leading to police raids and accusations of sexual harassment. Dartmouth's more than 200 student organizations and clubs cover a wide range of interests. In 2007, the college hosted eight academic groups, 17 cultural groups, two honor societies, 30 "issue-oriented" groups, 25 performing groups, 12 pre-professional groups, 20 publications, and 11 recreational groups. Notable student groups include the nation's largest and oldest collegiate outdoors club, the Dartmouth Outing Club, which includes the nationally recognized Big Green Bus; the campus's oldest a cappella group, The Dartmouth Aires; the controversial independent newspaper The Dartmouth Review; Dartmouth Student Government, the college's official undergraduate student government; and The Dartmouth, arguably the nation's oldest university newspaper. The Dartmouth describes itself as "America's Oldest College Newspaper, Founded 1799". Partially because of Dartmouth's rural, isolated location, the Greek system dating from the 1840s is one of the most popular social outlets for students. Dartmouth is home to 32 recognized Greek houses: 17 fraternities, 12 sororities, and three coeducational organizations. In 2007, roughly 70% of eligible students belonged to a Greek organization; since 1987, students have not been permitted to join Greek organizations until their sophomore year. Dartmouth College was among the first institutions of higher education to desegregate fraternity houses, doing so in the 1950s, and was involved in the movement to create coeducational Greek houses in the 1970s. In the early first decade of the 21st century, campus-wide debate focused on a board of trustees recommendation that Greek organizations become "substantially coeducational"; this attempt to change the Greek system eventually failed. Dartmouth also has a number of secret societies, which are student- and alumni-led organizations often focused on preserving the history of the college and initiating service projects. Most prominent among them is the Sphinx society, housed in a prominent Egyptian tomb-like building near the center of campus. The Sphinx has been the subject of numerous rumors as to its facilities, practices, and membership. The college has an additional classification of social/residential organizations known as undergraduate societies. Approximately 20% of students participate in a varsity sport, and nearly 80% participate in some form of club, varsity, intramural, or other athletics. In 2021, Dartmouth College fielded 33 intercollegiate varsity teams: 15 for men, 17 for women, and coeducational sailing and equestrian programs. Dartmouth's athletic teams compete in the NCAA Division I eight-member Ivy League conference; some teams also participate in the Eastern College Athletic Conference (ECAC). As is mandatory for the members of the Ivy League, Dartmouth College does not offer athletic scholarships. In addition to the traditional American team sports (football, basketball, baseball, and ice hockey), Dartmouth competes at the varsity level in many other sports including track and field, softball, squash, sailing, tennis, rowing, soccer, skiing, and lacrosse. The college also offers 26 club and intramural sports such as fencing, rugby, water polo, figure skating, boxing, volleyball, ultimate frisbee, and cricket, leading to a 75% participation rate in athletics among the undergraduate student body. The Dartmouth Fencing Team, despite being entirely self-coached, won the USACFC club national championship in 2014. The Dartmouth Men's Rugby Team, founded in 1951, has been ranked among the best collegiate teams in that sport, winning for example the Ivy Rugby Conference every year between 2008 and 2020. The figure skating team won the national championship five straight times from 2004 through 2008. In addition to the academic requirements for graduation, Dartmouth requires every undergraduate to complete a 50-yard (46 m) swim and three terms of physical education. The charter of Dartmouth College, granted to Wheelock in 1769, proclaims that the institution was created "for the education and instruction of Youth of the Indian Tribes in this Land in reading, writing and all parts of Learning ... as well as in all liberal Arts and Sciences; and also of English Youth and any others". However, Wheelock primarily intended the college to educate white youth, and the few Native students that attended Dartmouth experienced much difficulty in an institution ostensibly dedicated to their education. The funds for the Charity School for Native Americans that preceded Dartmouth College were raised primarily by the efforts of a Mohegan named Samson Occom, and at least some of those funds were used to help found the college. The college graduated only 19 Native Americans during its first 200 years. In 1970, the college established Native American academic and social programs as part of a "new dedication to increasing Native American enrollment". Since then, Dartmouth has graduated over 700 Native American students from over 200 different tribes, more than the other seven Ivy League universities combined. Dartmouth is well known for its fierce school spirit and many traditions. The college functions on a quarter system, and one weekend each term is set aside as a traditional celebratory event, known on campus as "big weekends" or "party weekends". In the fall term, Homecoming (officially called Dartmouth Night) is marked by a bonfire on the Green constructed by the freshman class. Winter term is celebrated by Winter Carnival, a tradition started in 1911 by the Dartmouth Outing Club to promote winter sports. This tradition is the oldest in the United States, and subsequently went on to catch on at other New England colleges. In the spring, Green Key is a weekend mostly devoted to campus parties and celebration. The summer term was formerly marked by Tubestock, an unofficial tradition in which the students used wooden rafts and inner tubes to float on the Connecticut River. Begun in 1986, Tubestock was ended in 2006 by town ordinance. The Class of 2008, during their summer term on campus in 2006, replaced the defunct Tubestock with Fieldstock. This new celebration includes a barbecue, live music, and the revival of the 1970s and 1980s tradition of racing homemade chariots around the Green. Unlike Tubestock, Fieldstock is funded and supported by the college. Another longstanding tradition is four-day, student-run First-Year Trips for incoming freshmen, begun in 1935. Each trip concludes at the Moosilauke Ravine Lodge. In 2011, over 96% of freshmen elected to participate. Dartmouth's motto, chosen by Eleazar Wheelock, is Vox clamantis in deserto. The Latin motto is literally translated as "The voice of one crying in the wilderness", but is more often rendered as "A voice crying out in the wilderness". The phrase appears five times in the Bible and is a reference to the college's location on what was once the frontier of European settlement. Richard Hovey's "Men of Dartmouth" was elected as the best of Dartmouth's songs in 1896, and became the school's official song in 1926. The song was retitled to "Alma Mater" in the 1980s when its lyrics were changed to refer to women as well as men. Dartmouth's 1769 royal charter required the creation of a seal for use on official documents and diplomas. The college's founder, Eleazar Wheelock, designed a seal for his college bearing a striking resemblance to the seal of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, a missionary society founded in London in 1701, in order to maintain the illusion that his college was more for mission work than for higher education. Engraved by a Boston silversmith, the seal was ready by commencement of 1773. The trustees officially accepted the seal on August 25, 1773, describing it as: An Oval, circumscribed by a Line containing SIGILL: COL: DARTMUTH: NOV: HANT: IN AMERICA 1770. within projecting a Pine Grove on the Right, whence proceed Natives towards an Edifice two Storey on the left; which bears in a Label over the Grove these Words "vox clamantis in deserto" the whole supported by Religion on the Right and Justice on the Left, and bearing in a Triangle irradiate, with the Hebrew Words [El Shaddai], agreeable to the above Impression, be the common Seal under which to pass all Diplomas or Certificates of Degrees, and all other Affairs of Business of and concerning Dartmouth College. On October 28, 1926, the trustees affirmed the charter's reservation of the seal for official corporate documents alone. The College Publications Committee commissioned noted typographer William Addison Dwiggins to create a line drawing version of the seal in 1940 that saw widespread use. Dwiggins' design was modified during 1957 to change the date from "1770" to "1769", to accord with the date of the college charter. The trustees commissioned a new set of dies with a date of "1769" to replace the old dies, now badly worn after almost two hundred years of use. The 1957 design continues to be used under trademark number 2305032. On October 28, 1926, the trustees approved a "Dartmouth College Shield" for general use. Artist and engraver W. Parke Johnson designed this emblem on the basis of the shield that is depicted at the center of the original seal. This design does not survive. On June 9, 1944, the trustees approved another coat of arms based on the shield part of the seal, this one by Canadian artist and designer Thoreau MacDonald. That design was used widely and, like Dwiggins' seal, had its date changed from "1770" to "1769" around 1958. That version continues to be used under trademark registration number 3112676 and others. College designer John Scotford made a stylized version of the shield during the 1960s, but it did not see the success of MacDonald's design. The shield appears to have been used as the basis of the shield of the Geisel School of Medicine, and it has been reproduced in sizes as small as 20 micrometers across. The design has appeared on Rudolph Ruzicka's Bicentennial Medal (Philadelphia Mint, 1969) and elsewhere. Dartmouth has never had an official mascot. The nickname "The Big Green", originating in the 1860s, is based on students' adoption of a shade of forest green ("Dartmouth Green") as the school's official color in 1866. Beginning in the 1920s, the Dartmouth College athletic teams were known by their unofficial nickname "the Indians", a moniker that probably originated among sports journalists. This unofficial mascot and team name was used until the early 1970s, when its use came under criticism. In 1974, the Trustees declared the "use of the [Indian] symbol in any form to be inconsistent with present institutional and academic objectives of the College in advancing Native American education". Some alumni and students, as well as the conservative student newspaper, The Dartmouth Review, have sought to return the Indian symbol to prominence, but never succeeded in doing so. Various student initiatives have been undertaken to adopt a mascot, but none has become "official". One proposal devised by the college humor magazine the Dartmouth Jack-O-Lantern was Keggy the Keg, an anthropomorphic beer keg who makes occasional appearances at college sporting events. Despite student enthusiasm for Keggy, the mascot has received approval from only the student government. In November 2006, student government attempted to revive the "Dartmoose" as a potential replacement amid renewed controversy surrounding the former unofficial Indian mascot. Dartmouth's alumni are known for frequently donating to their alma mater. Most start by giving to the Senior Class Gift. According to a 2008 article in The Wall Street Journal based on data from payscale.com, Dartmouth graduates also earn higher median salaries at least 10 years after graduation than alumni of any other American university surveyed. By 2008, Dartmouth had graduated 238 classes of students, and had over 60,000 living alumni in a variety of fields. Finance, consulting, and technology have consistently been the most popular industries to enter for students. Top employers of new graduates include Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, McKinsey & Company, Bain & Company, Amazon, Microsoft, and Google. Nelson A. Rockefeller, 41st Vice President of the United States and 49th Governor of New York, graduated cum laude from Dartmouth with a degree in economics in 1930. Over 164 Dartmouth graduates have served in the United States Senate and United States House of Representatives, such as Massachusetts statesman Daniel Webster. Cabinet members of American presidents include Attorney General Amos T. Akerman, Secretary of Defense James V. Forrestal, Secretary of Labor Robert Reich, Secretary of the Treasury Henry Paulson, and Secretary of the Treasury Timothy Geithner. C. Everett Koop was the Surgeon General of the United States under President Ronald Reagan. Two Dartmouth alumni have served as justices on the Supreme Court of the United States: Salmon P. Chase and Levi Woodbury. Eugene Norman Veasey (class of 1954) served as the Chief Justice of Delaware. The 46th Governor of Pennsylvania, Tom Wolf; the 42nd Governor of Illinois, businessman Bruce Rauner; and the 31st governor and current senator from North Dakota, John Hoeven (R), are also Dartmouth alumni. Ernesto de la Guardia, class of 1925, was president of the Republic of Panama. In literature and journalism, Dartmouth has produced 13 Pulitzer Prize winners: Thomas M. Burton, Richard Eberhart, Dan Fagin, Paul Gigot, Frank Gilroy, Jake Hooker, Nigel Jaquiss, Joseph Rago, Martin J. Sherwin, David K. Shipler, David Shribman, Justin Harvey Smith and Robert Frost. Frost, who received four Pulitzer Prizes for Poetry in his lifetime, attended but did not graduate from Dartmouth; he is, however, the only person to have received two honorary degrees from Dartmouth. Other authors and media personalities include CNN Chief White House correspondent and anchor Jake Tapper, novelist and founding editor of The Believer Heidi Julavits, "Dean of rock critics" Robert Christgau, National Book Award winners Louise Erdrich and Phil Klay, novelist/screenwriter Budd Schulberg, political commentator Dinesh D'Souza, radio talk show host Laura Ingraham, commentator Mort Kondracke, and journalist James Panero. Norman Maclean, professor at the University of Chicago and author of A River Runs Through It and Other Stories, graduated from Dartmouth in 1924. Theodor Geisel, better known as children's author Dr. Seuss, was a member of the class of 1925. In the area of religion and theology, Dartmouth alumni include priests and ministers Ebenezer Porter, Jonathan Clarkson Gibbs, Caleb Sprague Henry, Arthur Whipple Jenks, Solomon Spalding, and Joseph Tracy; and rabbis Marshall Meyer, Arnold Resnicoff, and David E. Stern. Hyrum Smith, brother of Mormon Prophet Joseph Smith, attended the college in his teens. He was Patriarch of the LDS Church. Dartmouth alumni in academia include Stuart Kauffman and Jeffrey Weeks, both recipients of MacArthur Fellowships (commonly called "genius grants"). Dartmouth has also graduated three Nobel Prize winners with four separate prizes: Owen Chamberlain (Physics, 1959), K. Barry Sharpless (Chemistry, 2001 and 2022), and George Davis Snell (Physiology or Medicine, 1980). Educators include founder and first president of Bates College Oren Burbank Cheney (1839); the former chancellor of the University of California, San Diego, Marye Anne Fox (PhD. in Chemistry, 1974); founding president of Vassar College Milo Parker Jewett; founder and first president of Kenyon College Philander Chase; first professor of Wabash College Caleb Mills; president of Union College Charles Augustus Aiken. Nine of Dartmouth's 17 presidents were alumni of the college. Dartmouth alumni serving as CEOs or company presidents and executives include Charles Alfred Pillsbury, founder of the Pillsbury Company and patriarch of the Pillsbury family, Sandy Alderson (San Diego Padres), John Donahoe (eBay), Louis V. Gerstner, Jr. (IBM), Charles E. Haldeman (Putnam Investments), Donald J. Hall Sr. (Hallmark Cards), Douglas Hodge (CEO of PIMCO accused of fraud), Jeffrey R. Immelt (General Electric), Gail Koziara Boudreaux (United Health Care), Grant Tinker (NBC), Greg Maffei (Liberty Media), and Brian Goldner (Hasbro). In film, entertainment, and television, Dartmouth is represented by David Benioff, co-creator, showrunner, and writer of Game of Thrones; Shonda Rhimes, creator of Grey's Anatomy, Private Practice, and Scandal; Budd Schulberg, Academy Award-winning screenwriter of On the Waterfront; Michael Phillips, who won the Academy Award for Best Picture as co-producer of The Sting; Rachel Dratch, a former cast member of Saturday Night Live; Chris Meledandri, executive producer of Ice Age, Horton Hears a Who!, and Despicable Me; writer and director duo Phil Lord and Chris Miller; and the title character of Mister Rogers' Neighborhood, Fred Rogers. Other notable film and television figures include Sarah Wayne Callies (Prison Break), Emmy Award winner Michael Moriarty, Andrew Shue of Melrose Place, Aisha Tyler of Friends and 24, ESPN and Tennis Channel broadcaster Brett Haber, Connie Britton of Spin City and Friday Night Lights, Mindy Kaling of The Office and The Mindy Project, David Harbour of Stranger Things, and Michelle Khare of HBO Max's Karma. A number of Dartmouth alumni have found success in professional sports. In baseball, Dartmouth alumni include All-Star and three-time Gold Glove winner and manager Brad Ausmus, All-Star reliever Mike Remlinger, and pitcher Kyle Hendricks. Professional football players include Miami Dolphins quarterback Jay Fiedler, linebacker Reggie Williams, three-time Pro Bowler Nick Lowery, quarterback Jeff Kemp, and Tennessee Titans tight end Casey Cramer, and Miami Dolphins defensive coordinator Matt Burke. Dartmouth has also produced a number of Olympic competitors. Adam Nelson won the silver medal in the shot put in the 2000 Sydney Olympics and the gold medal at the 2004 Athens Olympics to go along with his gold medal in the 2005 World Championships in Athletics in Helsinki. Kristin King and Sarah Parsons were members of the United States' 2006 bronze medal-winning ice hockey team. Cherie Piper, Gillian Apps, and Katie Weatherston were among Canada's ice hockey gold medalists in 2006. Lawrence Whitney won bronze at the 1912 Summer Olympics in men's shot put. Dick Durrance and Tim Caldwell competed for the United States in skiing in the 1936 and 1976 Winter Olympics, respectively. Arthur Shaw, Earl Thomson, Edwin Myers, Marc Wright, Adam Nelson, Gerry Ashworth, and Vilhjálmur Einarsson have all won medals in track and field events. Former heavyweight rower Dominic Seiterle is a member of the Canadian national rowing team and won a gold medal at the 2008 Summer Olympics in the men's 8+ event. Notable Dartmouth alumni include: Robert Frost, poet Dr. Seuss, writer and illustrator Henry Paulson, former CEO of Goldman Sachs and United States Secretary of the Treasury Timothy Geithner, former United States Secretary of the Treasury Salmon Chase, former Chief Justice of the U.S. Daniel Webster, former Secretary of State Nelson Rockefeller, former Vice President of the United States Kirsten Gillibrand, United States senator Robert Reich, former United States Secretary of Labor, political commentator, professor, and author Sarah Wayne Callies, actress Mindy Kaling, actress and comedian Connie Britton, actress, singer and producer Shonda Rhimes, television producer and writer Brad Ausmus, baseball player Jake Tapper, journalist, author, and commentator David Benioff, screenwriter and television producer, writer, and director Fred Rogers, television personality (did not graduate) Rachel Dratch, comedian Dartmouth College has appeared in or been referenced by a number of popular media. Some of the most prominent include: The 1978 comedy film National Lampoon's Animal House, was co-written by Chris Miller '63 and is based loosely on a series of stories he wrote about his fraternity days at Dartmouth. In a CNN interview, John Landis said the movie was "based on Chris Miller's real fraternity at Dartmouth", Alpha Delta Phi. Dartmouth's Winter Carnival tradition was the subject of the 1939 film Winter Carnival starring Ann Sheridan and written by Budd Schulberg '36 and F. Scott Fitzgerald. Other consists of Multiracial Americans & those who prefer to not say. The percentage of students who received an income-based federal Pell grant intended for low-income students. The percentage of students who are a part of the American middle class at the bare minimum. "Dartmouth Grad Guide" (PDF). Dartmouth College. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 29, 2022. Retrieved September 22, 2021. Sketches of the alumni of Dartmouth college Archived April 4, 2019, at the Wayback Machine, Page 108, The New Hampshire Repository, Volumes 1–2, William Cogswell, Publisher: Alfred Prescott, 1846 As of October 11, 2021. "Endowment Growth Supports the Dartmouth Community". Dartmouth. October 11, 2021. Archived from the original on October 13, 2021. Retrieved October 11, 2021. Correspondent, Damien Fisher Union Leader (March 10, 2021). "Dartmouth approves $1.2 billion budget, tuition hikes". UnionLeader.com. "Dartmouth at a Glance". Trustees of Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on September 15, 2019. Retrieved October 6, 2019. "Common Data Set 2023–2024" (PDF). Dartmouth College. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "College Navigator – Dartmouth College". National Center for Education Statistics. Retrieved August 16, 2022. "Color Palette" (PDF). Dartmouth Athletics Visual Identity Guidelines. March 13, 2019. Retrieved July 17, 2019. Hoefnagel, Dick; Virginia L. Close (2002). Eleazar Wheelock and the Adventurous Founding of Dartmouth College. Hanover, New Hampshire: Durand Press for Hanover Historical Society. "The World's Most Enduring Institutions" (PDF). Booz Allen Hamilton. December 16, 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 7, 2017. Retrieved August 23, 2008.; "Dartmouth College went from a floundering, financially weak institution of about 300 students over the next 20 years to an enrollment of more than 2,000, a robust endowment, and a national reputation as the most prestigious undergraduate college in the United States." "Departments & Programs—Arts & Sciences". Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on September 14, 2016. Retrieved September 13, 2016. "Dartmouth College: At a Glance". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on September 18, 2007. Retrieved September 19, 2007. "Class of 2027 Selected From Record Application Pool". Dartmouth. March 30, 2023. Retrieved April 1, 2023. "Explore the Green". Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on June 8, 2017. Retrieved June 15, 2017. "A Flexible Study Plan". Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on August 30, 2016. Retrieved September 13, 2016. Kennedy, Randy (November 7, 1999). "A Frat Party Is:; a) Milk and Cookies; b) Beer Pong". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 11, 2012. Retrieved August 23, 2008. ... at Dartmouth College a place where traditions die hard ... "Hill Winds, Granite Brains, and Other Dartmouth Traditions". Summer 2007 Newsletter. Dartmouth Parents & Grandparents. Archived from the original on July 6, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Dartmouth alumni seek national, state political offices". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on January 8, 2017. Retrieved April 14, 2016. "Jessica Chiriboga '24 and Zachary Lang '23 Named Rhodes Scholars". Dartmouth Now. Archived from the original on November 23, 2016. Retrieved November 13, 2023. "Statistics". Marshallscholarship.org. Archived from the original on January 26, 2017. Retrieved December 7, 2017. "Which Colleges and Universities Have the Most Alumni Who Are CEOs of Fortune 500 Companies?". academicinfluence.com. June 20, 2022. Retrieved April 15, 2023. "Dartmouth Olympians". Dartmouth. Retrieved April 15, 2023. Childs, Francis Lane (December 1957). "A Dartmouth History Lesson for Freshman". Dartmouth Alumni Magazine. Archived from the original on September 8, 2015. Retrieved February 12, 2007. Hoefnagel, Dick; Virginia L. Close (November 1999). "Eleazar Wheelock's Two Schools". Dartmouth College Library Bulletin. Archived from the original on August 7, 2020. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "About Dartmouth – History". Dartmouth.edu. Archived from the original on September 28, 2010. Retrieved October 15, 2010. "Samson Occom". Christian History Institute. Archived from the original on April 7, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Rauner Library Blog: Is This Cricket?". Dartmouth College Library. January 29, 2010. Archived from the original on May 15, 2021. Retrieved February 10, 2010. Black Alumni of Dartmouth Association (2019). "Dartmouth Black Students from the 18th to Mid-20th Century". Archived from the original on August 24, 2019. Retrieved August 20, 2019. "The Graduation of Dartmouth's First Black Student". Dartmouth College. October 9, 2018. Archived from the original on August 24, 2019. Retrieved August 24, 2019. "University Chronology | University of New Hampshire Library". Unh.edu. Archived from the original on January 10, 2016. Retrieved December 7, 2017. Sayigh, Aziz G.; Boris V. Vabson (October 1, 2006). "The Wheelock Succession". The Dartmouth Review. Archived from the original on October 23, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Many Bequests to Charity; Will of Dr. Ordronaux D ..." (PDF). The New York Times. March 29, 1908. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 12, 2020. Retrieved February 20, 2009. "William Jewett Tucker". Office of the President. Archived from the original on June 21, 2006. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "17 Aug 1945, Page 6 - The Wisconsin Jewish Chronicle at Newspapers.com". Newspapers.com. Archived from the original on May 29, 2018. Retrieved May 28, 2018. Eric F. Goldman, The Crucial Decade: America, 1945–1955, (New York: Knopf, 1956), p. 42: "... and Dartmouth's president, Ernest Hopkins, blandly explained that of course his college admitted only a quota of Jews." "John Sloan Dickey". Office of the President. Archived from the original on September 25, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Records of the Bureau of Naval Personnel". National Archives. 2011. Archived from the original on September 27, 2011. Retrieved September 25, 2011. "The Wheelock Succession of Dartmouth Presidents: John G. Kemeny, 1970–1981". Dartmouth News. Archived from the original on September 8, 2008. Retrieved May 12, 2008. "When did Dartmouth become co-educational?". AskDartmouth. Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on June 25, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Kaminer, Ariel (September 24, 2013). "Rutgers Updates Its Anthem to Include Women". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. "James O. Freedman". Office of the President. Archived from the original on September 16, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Coburn, Michael (January 23, 2008). "Capital campaign hits $1 billion benchmark". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on July 6, 2008. Retrieved February 5, 2008. Santo, JR (May 4, 2007). "65 percent done, $1.3 billion capital campaign right on track". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on February 17, 2008. Retrieved February 5, 2008. "Current Capital Projects". Office of Planning, Design & Construction. Archived from the original on November 9, 2009. Retrieved February 5, 2008. Schpero, William (September 19, 2007). "Battle for Board leaves boardroom". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on July 23, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Lowe, Allie (February 4, 2008). "President Wright to step down in June 2009". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on February 8, 2008. Retrieved February 5, 2008. "Dr. Jim Yong Kim appointed 17th President of Dartmouth College" (Press release). Dartmouth College. March 2, 2009. Archived from the original on April 6, 2009. Retrieved March 2, 2009. "Members of the Matariki Network of Universities". Matarikinetwork.com. Archived from the original on December 7, 2020. Retrieved October 15, 2010. Fernandes, Deirdre (August 6, 2019). "Dartmouth College settles sex harassment suit for $14 million". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on August 6, 2019. Retrieved August 7, 2019. "Three Leading Research Universities Join the Association of American Universities (AAU)". www.aau.edu. Archived from the original on April 29, 2020. Retrieved March 5, 2020. Grahn, Matt. "Mohegan Tribe saw repatriation from Dartmouth College. Why are the Occom papers important?". Norwich Bulletin. Retrieved December 30, 2022. "In repatriation ceremony, Dartmouth returns historic Occom papers to the Mohegan Tribe". Connecticut Public. April 27, 2022. Retrieved December 30, 2022. "Dartmouth Hall Renovation". Campus Services. January 19, 2021. Retrieved February 20, 2023. "About Dartmouth: Facts". Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on May 27, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "About Dartmouth". Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved February 27, 2012. "Undergraduate Majors". Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on May 29, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Blumberg, Joseph (June 9, 2017). "Commencement Notes for the Dartmouth Class of 2017". Dartmouth News. Archived from the original on August 15, 2017. Retrieved December 12, 2017. Kalaitzidakis, Pantelis; Mamuneas, Theofanis P.; Stengos, Thanasis (June 2003). "Rankings of Academic Journals and Institutions in Economics" (PDF). University of Guelph. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 21, 2010. Retrieved December 28, 2010. "Requirements for the Degree of Bachelor of Arts". Office of the Registrar. Archived from the original on September 14, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Programs – List All". Off-Campus Programs. Archived from the original on December 9, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Types of Programs". Off-Campus Programs. Archived from the original on October 13, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Meet Nigerian Temiloluwa O. Prioleau, the first Black woman tenure-track faculty in Computer Science in the Ivy League". The Africa I know. Archived from the original on June 23, 2021. Retrieved May 19, 2022. "Academics & Research". Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on June 15, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Hongoltz-Hetling, Matt (April 19, 2018). "Dartmouth's University Press to Close Down; Impact Could Ripple Across the Industry". Valley News. "Brandeis Acquires U Press of New England Titles". Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved August 2, 2022. "Brandeis University Press to exclusively manage the University Press of New England". BrandeisNOW. Retrieved August 2, 2022. "Forbes America's Top Colleges List 2023". Forbes. Retrieved September 22, 2023. "2023-2024 Best National Universities". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved September 22, 2023. "2023 National University Rankings". Washington Monthly. Retrieved February 10, 2024. "2024 Best Colleges in the U.S." The Wall Street Journal/College Pulse. Retrieved January 27, 2024. "ShanghaiRanking's 2023 Academic Ranking of World Universities". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. Retrieved February 10, 2024. "QS World University Rankings 2024: Top global universities". Quacquarelli Symonds. Retrieved June 27, 2023. "World University Rankings 2024". Times Higher Education. Retrieved September 27, 2023. "2022-23 Best Global Universities Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved February 25, 2023. "Dartmouth College". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on March 14, 2017. Retrieved April 1, 2021. "Dartmouth College Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. 2020. Archived from the original on October 7, 2019. Retrieved September 11, 2019. "'U.S. News': Dartmouth Again No. 1 for Teaching, Top 10 Overall | Dartmouth News". news.dartmouth.edu. September 10, 2013. Archived from the original on July 2, 2020. Retrieved July 2, 2020. New Hampshire Institutions – NECHE, New England Commission of Higher Education, archived from the original on May 12, 2021, retrieved May 26, 2021 "America's Top Colleges 2019". Forbes. August 15, 2019. Archived from the original on August 4, 2012. Retrieved August 26, 2017. Hansen, Sarah (August 21, 2018). "Grateful Grads 2018 – 200 Colleges With The Happiest, Most Successful Alumni". Forbes. Archived from the original on September 28, 2019. Retrieved September 11, 2019. "Academic Ranking of World Universities 2021". www.shanghairanking.com. Archived from the original on November 22, 2021. Retrieved October 15, 2021. Bahram Bekhradnia (December 15, 2016). "International university rankings: For good or ill?" (PDF). Higher Education Policy Institute. p. 16. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 15, 2017. Retrieved June 10, 2017. ARWU presents a further data issue. Whereas in the case of the other rankings the results are adjusted to take account of the size of institutions, hardly any such adjustment is made by ARWU. So there is a distortion in favor of large institutions. If two institutions were to merge, the very fact of merger would mean that the merged institution would do nearly twice as well as either of the individual institutions prior to merger, although nothing else had changed. "Carnegie Classifications | Institution Profile". Classifications.carnegiefoundation.org. Archived from the original on September 13, 2018. Retrieved October 15, 2010. "The Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education". The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. Archived from the original on August 22, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Classifications: Dartmouth College". The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Common Data Set 2020–2021" (PDF). Dartmouth College. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "Dartmouth College". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on September 17, 2016. Retrieved September 13, 2016. "The Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education: Four-year, full-time, most selective, lower transfer-in (2015) | Carnegie Classification". Archived from the original on May 27, 2020. Retrieved May 14, 2016. "Dartmouth College". The Princeton Review. Archived from the original on September 3, 2016. Retrieved July 8, 2023. "Dartmouth admits 8.8 percent of applicants to Class of 2024". The Dartmouth. March 26, 2020. Archived from the original on August 10, 2020. Retrieved April 14, 2020. "Data set" (PDF). Dartmouth College. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 19, 2017. "College ends need-blind admission for international students". Archived from the original on September 29, 2015. Retrieved September 28, 2015. "Dartmouth Adopts Need-Blind International Admissions | Dartmouth". Bowdoin News. Archived from the original on August 17, 2022. Retrieved December 30, 2022. "Dartmouth Expands Commitment to Middle-Income Families". May 9, 2021. Archived from the original on May 14, 2021. Retrieved May 14, 2021. Archie, Ayana (June 21, 2022). "Dartmouth College is eliminating loans from its financial aid packages". NPR. Retrieved August 2, 2022. Aisch, Gregor; Buchanan, Larry; Cox, Amanda; Quealy, Kevin (January 18, 2017). "Economic diversity and student outcomes at Dartmouth". The New York Times. Retrieved August 9, 2020. "Novicoff: Dartmouth didn't get rid of even half of student loans for undergraduates". The Dartmouth. Retrieved August 2, 2022. "D-Plan". Admissions and Financial Aid. Archived from the original on September 19, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Petition for Change in Enrollment Pattern". Dartmouth. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 12, 2014. Retrieved July 23, 2014. "Working Rules and Procedures". Office of the Registrar. Archived from the original on July 24, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Dartmouth Trustees vote to expand size of board". Dartmouth News. November 17, 2003. Archived from the original on October 13, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Board of trustees vote to change how Dartmouth College is run". The Boston Globe. Associated Press. September 7, 2007. Archived from the original on December 2, 2008. Retrieved August 20, 2008. Schpero, William (September 8, 2007). "Board adds 8 seats, ends century-old parity". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on March 7, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Schpero, William (August 20, 2008). "Divided Association of Alumni sues College". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on October 2, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Lawsuit against College dismissed". TheDartmouth.com. June 27, 2008. Archived from the original on September 26, 2013. Retrieved September 22, 2013. College, Dartmouth (September 5, 2008). "Dartmouth College's Board of Trustees Elects Five Alumni as New Trustees". Press Release. Archived from the original on September 12, 2008. Retrieved October 3, 2008. Clinton, William J. (June 11, 1995). "Remarks at the Dartmouth College Commencement Ceremony in Hanover, New Hampshire". The American Presidency Project. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "The Campus". Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on June 15, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "The Green". Dartmo.: The Buildings of Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on February 8, 2005. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Open Space Priorities Plan Summary". Planning and Zoning Department of the Town of Hanover, New Hampshire. Archived from the original on January 14, 2012. Retrieved October 21, 2011. "2005 Form 990" (PDF). GuideStar.org. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 9, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Dartmouth Outing Guide p. 56. "Second College Grant". Dartmouth Outing Club. Archived from the original on November 2, 2007. Retrieved August 20, 2008. "Kemeny Hall and Haldeman Center". Office of Planning, Design, and Construction. Archived from the original on July 25, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "McLaughlin Cluster Residence Halls". Office of Planning, Design, and Construction. Archived from the original on September 17, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "CIC Historic Campus Architecture Project" (PDF). The Council of Independent Colleges. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 25, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Atkin Olshin Lawson-Bell Architects". Dartmo.: The Buildings of Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on October 20, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Thelin, John R. (2004). A History of American Higher Education. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-7855-8. Archived from the original on January 29, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2020. "Dartmouth Landscape Design Guidelines". Saucier + Flynn Landscape Architects. Archived from the original on October 17, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Dartmouth Sustainability Initiative". Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on March 19, 2008. Retrieved May 21, 2008. "College Sustainability Report Card 2008". Sustainable Endowments Institute. Archived from the original on July 17, 2008. Retrieved May 21, 2008. "Old Growth – Dartmouth's elms endure as defining features of the campus". Dartmouth College website, Dartmouth Life Home. June 2007. Archived from the original on January 4, 2015. Retrieved December 26, 2014. The College's claim on the landscape began with the felling of the great white pines that grew on the plain above the Connecticut River; planting came later. By the middle of the 19th century, villages and towns throughout New England—and eventually across the nation—were shading their streets with the American elm, Ulmus americana. A circa 1840 watercolor image of the College depicts graceful young elms edging the Green. "If you look at pictures of old Hanover," says John Gratiot, associate vice president for Facilities Operations and Management, "Main Street and College Street were completely lined with elms, like a green tunnel." "50 Trees in 50 Minutes". Dartmouth College website, The Graduate Forum. October 1, 2014. Archived from the original on January 4, 2015. Retrieved December 26, 2014. "New Hampshire Big Tree Map". Archived from the original on April 23, 2021. Retrieved April 23, 2021. "General Information & History". Hopkins Center for the Arts. Archived from the original on February 25, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Steinert, Tamara (November 4, 2002). "The Hopkins Center Turns 40". Dartmouth News. Archived from the original on October 11, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Dining Locations: Courtyard Café". Dartmouth Dining Service. Archived from the original on October 31, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Dartmouth College: Services and Facilities". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on February 25, 2008. Retrieved September 17, 2007. "The Arts". Graduate Studies. Archived from the original on January 27, 2012. Retrieved October 21, 2011. "Maps and Directions". Dartmouth Medical School. Archived from the original on August 24, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Dartmouth Maps". Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on September 14, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "About Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center". Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center. Archived from the original on January 17, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Our Campus". Tuck School of Business. Archived from the original on June 15, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Center for Engineering and Computer Science". Campus Services. September 15, 2016. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved November 17, 2020. "Arthur L. Irving Institute for Energy and Society". Campus Services. September 15, 2016. Archived from the original on October 20, 2020. Retrieved November 17, 2020. "Dartmouth Names New Engineering & CS Center for Class of 1982". Dartmouth Engineering. "Library Holdings" (PDF). Dartmouth College Fact Book. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 9, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "About Baker-Berry Library". Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on September 5, 2015. Retrieved November 11, 2015. "Baker Library Bell Tower". Dartmouth College Libraries. Archived from the original on September 20, 2009. Retrieved March 14, 2009. Santos, Nicholas J (September 17, 2004). "No Bridge Left Unburned: Rage at Dartmouth". The Dartmouth Free Press. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Dartmouth College's Berry/Baker Library" (PDF). The Observer. New Hampshire Society of Professional Engineers. February 2003. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 25, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Dartmouth College Athletic Facilities". Dartmouth Sports. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Alumni Gym". Dartmouth Sports. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Berry Sports Center". Dartmouth Sports. Archived from the original on December 10, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Memorial Field". Dartmouth Sports. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Thompson Arena". Dartmouth Sports. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "History". Hanover Country Club. Archived from the original on July 25, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Monahan, Thomas. "Rugby Fires It Up With New Clubhouse". The Dartmouth Review. Archived from the original on November 18, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Dartmouth Skiway". Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on September 7, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "2013 IHSA Awards brochure" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on September 28, 2013. Retrieved September 22, 2013. "College Unveils Six House Communities to Open Next Fall". Dartmouth College. November 2, 2015. Archived from the original on April 20, 2016. Retrieved April 23, 2016. "Introduction: Housing on Campus". Office of Residential Life. Archived from the original on September 17, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. O'Donnell, Katy (January 18, 2006). "Assembly reworks UFC membership guidelines". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on October 19, 2014. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Campus Map". Dartmouth Dining Services. Archived from the original on December 29, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Dining Locations". Dartmouth Dining Services. Archived from the original on September 16, 2007. Retrieved September 19, 2007. "Collis Center". Collis Center & Student Activities Office. Archived from the original on September 20, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Collis Floor Plans". Collis Center & Student Activities Office. Archived from the original on July 18, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Administrative Departments in Collis Center". Collis Center & Student Activities Office. Archived from the original on September 20, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Robinson Hall". Collis Center & Student Activities Office. Archived from the original on September 20, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Our Houses". Office of Residential Life. August 23, 2016. Archived from the original on September 19, 2020. Retrieved September 13, 2020. "Housing Locations". Office of Residential Life. September 8, 2016. Archived from the original on September 20, 2020. Retrieved September 13, 2020. "College Scorecard: Dartmouth College". United States Department of Education. Retrieved May 8, 2022. "Dartmouth Student Government Official Website". Retrieved February 28, 2023. James-Rodil, Adriana (September 20, 2022). "Dartmouth Student Government announces new name with new goals, structure". The Dartmouth. Retrieved February 28, 2023. Korkowski, Ben (September 20, 2022). "David Millman '23 and Jessica Chiriboga '24 elected student body president, vice president". Retrieved February 28, 2023. The Princeton Review (2006). Best 361 Colleges. New York, NY: Princeton Review Press. Webster, Katharine (May 25, 2007). "Conservatives Gain Ground at Dartmouth: Dartmouth Alumni Elect Conservatives to Trustees Amid Struggle to Change College's Direction". Washington Post. Associated Press. Archived from the original on September 3, 2015. Retrieved October 21, 2011. "Student Life". Admissions and Financial Aid. Archived from the original on September 19, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Dartmouth College – The Princeton Review College Rankings & Reviews". www.princetonreview.com. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved July 30, 2015. Anderson, Nick (June 7, 2016). "These colleges have the most reports of rape". Archived from the original on June 9, 2016. Retrieved June 9, 2016 – via www.washingtonpost.com. Kingkade, Tyler (September 23, 2015). "How Dartmouth Is Getting Students To Help Prevent Sexual Assault". HuffPost US. Archived from the original on January 29, 2022. Retrieved August 20, 2020. Janet Reitman, "Confessions of an Ivy League Frat Boy: Inside Dartmouth's Hazing Abuses" Archived May 4, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, Rolling Stone, April 12, 2012 Richard Perez-Pena, "Dartmouth in the Glare of Scrutiny on Drinking" Archived May 15, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, New York Times, October 2, 2013 "Campus Life: Clubs and Organizations". Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on September 14, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "COSO Student Organizations". Collis Center and Student Activities Office. Archived from the original on June 1, 2009. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Collins, Jim (December 2009). "100 Years of the Dartmouth Outing Club". The Dartmouth Alumni Magazine (November–December 2009). Hanover, NH: Dartmouth College: 38. ISSN 2150-671X. "Big Green Bus in the News". The Big Green Bus. Archived from the original on September 28, 2011. Retrieved June 5, 2010. Longman, Phillip (February 14, 1988). "Reagan's Disappearing Bureaucrats". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 31, 2010. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "The Dartmouth". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on January 29, 2008. Retrieved January 27, 2008. Meacham, Scott. "Halls, Tombs and Houses: Student Society Architecture at Dartmouth". Dartmo.: The Buildings of Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Coed, Fraternity, and Sorority Administration". Office of Residential Life. Archived from the original on October 17, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Cohen, Amanda (May 3, 2007). "Transgenders try to navigate Greek system". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on November 6, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "History of CFS Organizations at Dartmouth". Greek Leadership Council. Archived from the original on February 18, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Hill, Ralph Nading (1965). The College on the Hill: A Dartmouth Chronicle. Hanover, New Hampshire: Dartmouth Publications. pp. 259–260. LCCN 65002598. Wellman, Stephan (March 1999). "Dartmouth to Abolish Fraternities and Sororities". Accuracy in Academia. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Rago, Joseph (January 30, 2005). "Interrogating the S.L.I." The Dartmouth Review. Archived from the original on October 23, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Mirror at the End of the Tunnel". October 5, 2012. Archived from the original on November 21, 2014. Retrieved December 2, 2014. "Senior and Undergraduate Society Administration". Office of Residential Life. Archived from the original on May 16, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "What percentage of Dartmouth students play a varsity sport?". Ask Dartmouth. Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on November 5, 2007. Retrieved September 23, 2008. "Dartmouth College Athletics – Official Athletics Website". Dartmouth College Athletics. Archived from the original on March 12, 2021. Retrieved May 13, 2021. "About Dartmouth Athletics". Dartmouth Sports. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "What is the Ivy League?". Ivy League Sports. Archived from the original on April 28, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Club Sports". Dartmouth Sports. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Club fencing takes first national title". Archived from the original on January 3, 2015. Retrieved January 3, 2015. "Dartmouth Men". Ivy Rugby Conference. Archived from the original on October 5, 2015. Retrieved November 11, 2015. "Dartmouth Wins Fourth Consecutive National Title". Dartmouth Figure Skating Team. March 27, 2007. Archived from the original on December 9, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "General Academic Requirements for Graduation". First Year Office. Archived from the original on August 25, 2011. Retrieved October 21, 2011. "The Charter of Dartmouth College". Dartmo.com. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "About the Native American Program". Native American Program. Archived from the original on August 9, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Wald, Matthew L (July 20, 1987). "15th President Installed at Dartmouth". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 29, 2022. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Herbert, Stephanie (May 19, 2006). "Steph's So Dartmouth". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on November 19, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "The Dartmouth Green: A Walking Tour of Dartmouth". Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Mehta, Chetan (February 10, 2006). "Hopkins Center offers many alternatives over weekend". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Rago, Joseph (October 21, 2005). "A History of Homecoming". The Dartmouth Review. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Winter Carnival: Stories of the Mardi Gras of the North". The Dartmouth Review. February 11, 2007. Archived from the original on October 23, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Winter carnival to be held | News | Bates College". www.bates.edu. January 13, 1997. Archived from the original on February 15, 2016. Retrieved February 7, 2016. "Green Key History: Those Were the Days". The Dartmouth Review. May 11, 2004. Archived from the original on October 23, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Fisher, Samuel. "Town, College Weigh Tubestock Changes". The Dartmouth Review. Archived from the original on October 23, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Garfinkel, Jennifer (July 26, 2006). "Fieldstock, chariots await town approval". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "About the Program". Dartmouth Outing Club. Archived from the original on September 20, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Out of the Woods". Time. November 23, 1962. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Good, Jonathan (April 1997). "Notes from the Special Collections: The Dartmouth College Seal". Dartmouth College Library Bulletin (NS 37). Archived from the original on September 17, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Bartlett Hall's Wheelock Memorial Window". Dartmo.: The Buildings of Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Follow-up on the news; Song out of tune with the times". The New York Times. March 1, 1987. Archived from the original on February 7, 2012. Retrieved January 7, 2008. Krieger, Barbara L. "The Alma Mater". Dartmouth College Library Rauner Special Collections Library. Archived from the original on January 16, 2008. Retrieved January 7, 2008. Dartmouth College, Trustees' Records, 1:26. Dartmouth College Library, Special Collections, DA-1. "United States Patent and Trademark Office". Archived from the original on October 6, 2009. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Good, Jonathan. "A Proposal for a Heraldic Coat of Arms for Dartmouth College". Dartmo. Archived from the original on March 17, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2010. Nabity, Joe. "Nanometer Pattern Generation System: Dartmouth Seal". Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on October 11, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Is "The Big Green" really Dartmouth's mascot? If so, where does it come from and what does it mean?". AskDartmouth. Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on October 2, 2011. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "The". Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. Retrieved September 10, 2016. "Why is green Dartmouth's color?". AskDartmouth. Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on July 9, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Chase, Frederick; John King Lord (1913). A History of Dartmouth College and the Town of Hanover, New Hampshire, Volume 2 (1 ed.). Concord, N.H.: J. Wilson, The Rumford Press. p. 373. "The 'Big Green' Nickname". DartmouthSports.com. January 10, 2007. Archived from the original on September 12, 2011. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Beck, Stefan M (June 8, 2003). "Dartmouth Indians: The New Tradition". The Dartmouth Review. Archived from the original on December 27, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Hart, Jeffrey (December 15, 1998). "The Banning of the Indian". The Dartmouth Review. Archived from the original on December 27, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Blodget, Kelsey (January 5, 2007). "Straight from the Tap: the men behind the mascot". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Buck, Caroline (April 29, 2010). "It's not easy being Green". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on January 27, 2012. Retrieved October 21, 2011. Lowe, Allie (January 10, 2007). "First SA meeting draws crowd". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on October 29, 2007. Retrieved January 24, 2007. Hansen, Sarah (August 21, 2018). "Grateful Grads 2018 - 200 Colleges With The Happiest, Most Successful Alumni". Forbes. Retrieved September 21, 2023. Needleman, Sarah E. (July 31, 2008). "Ivy Leaguers' Big Edge: Starting Pay". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on January 29, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2008. Ghods-Esfahani, Emily (October 11, 2006). "The Alumni Constitution, in Brief". The Dartmouth Review. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Cap and Gown Survey". Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on September 23, 2020. Retrieved November 17, 2020. "Members of Congress". Dartmouth Club of Washington, D.C. Archived from the original on April 2, 2013. Retrieved December 10, 2006. "Amos T. Akerman". The New Georgia Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on January 30, 2013. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Leading Voices Lecturer: Robert Reich '68". Dartmouth College. July 20, 2011. Archived from the original on April 6, 2012. Retrieved October 21, 2011. "C. Everett Koop". United States Department of Health & Human Services. Archived from the original on December 9, 2006. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Salmon P. Chase". Tulane University. Archived from the original on December 31, 2006. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Levi Woodbury". Oyez Supreme Court Media. Archived from the original on April 12, 2007. Retrieved December 10, 2006. O'Toole, James (October 12, 2014). "As Tom Wolf seeks the Pennsylvania governor's office, political life comes full circle". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Archived from the original on January 11, 2015. Retrieved January 20, 2015. Pearson, Rick (November 5, 2014). "Bruce Rauner, political rookie, rises to claim governorship". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on January 10, 2018. Retrieved January 9, 2018. Curtis, Meredith (Fall 2004). "Wall Street, Aneurysms and Explanatory Writing: An Interview With Thomas Burton '71" (PDF). Dartmouth Undergraduate Journal of Science. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Richard Eberhart". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on November 20, 2011. Retrieved December 10, 2006. Lee, Fred (April 23, 2014). "Dan Fagin '85 Awarded 2014 Pulitzer Prize for 'Toms River'". Dartmouth Now. Archived from the original on January 15, 2015. Retrieved January 15, 2015. "More GreenNews". Dartmouth Office of Alumni Relations. Archived from the original on December 9, 2008. Retrieved November 30, 2008. Jake Hooker '95: New York Times reporter, wins 2008 Pulitzer Prize for journalism for investigative reporting on the flow of dangerous pharmaceutical ingredients from China into world market. (New York Times) "The Pulitzer Prize Winners 2005". The Pulitzer Prizes. Archived from the original on November 14, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "WSJ's Rago Wins Pulitzer Prize". Wall Street Journal. April 19, 2011. Archived from the original on April 5, 2015. Retrieved October 21, 2011. "History". The John Sloan Dickey Center for International Understanding. Archived from the original on February 8, 2007. Retrieved November 20, 2007. Stavis, Laurel. "Six to receive Social Justice Awards". Vox of Dartmouth. Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on December 9, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Jay Parini (2000). Robert Frost: A Life. Macmillan. pp. 64–65. ISBN 978-0-8050-6341-7. Dartmouth News Archived February 6, 2007, at the Wayback Machine, "Dartmouth acquires Budd Schulberg '36 papers" "About Dinesh D'Souza". DineshDSouza.com. Archived from the original on April 5, 2012. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Ingraham '85 to speak on election". Dartmouth News. October 6, 2006. Archived from the original on December 9, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Mort Kondracke". Fox News. September 19, 2006. Archived from the original on September 7, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "James Panero". The New Criterion. Archived from the original on October 17, 2011. Retrieved October 21, 2011. Breu, Giovanna (December 13, 1976). "Professor, Outdoorsman, Now a Novelist—Norman Maclean 'Finds Life Again' at 73". People. Archived from the original on January 11, 2012. Retrieved December 7, 2011. Smith, Steve (June 5, 2010). "And to Think That It Happened at Dartmouth". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on September 24, 2011. Retrieved December 7, 2011. Lathem, Edward Connery (November 2000). "Who's Who & What's What in the Books of Dr. Seuss". Archived from the original on August 7, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Marsh, James; John J. Duffy (1973). Coleridge's American disciples: the selected correspondence of James Marsh. Univ of Massachusetts Press. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-87023-121-6. Archived from the original on January 26, 2020. Retrieved October 24, 2020. Persuitte, David (2000). Joseph Smith and the origins of the Book of Mormon (2 ed.). McFarland. p. 277. ISBN 978-0-7864-0826-9. Archived from the original on October 22, 2016. Retrieved October 24, 2020. Gilman, Marcus (1897). The Bibliography of Vermont: Or, A List of Books and Pamphlets Relating. The Free Press Association. p. 279. OCLC 04072330. "Rabbi David E. Stern Endowed Scholarship Established at HUC-JIR". Hebrew Union College. Archived from the original on November 10, 2007. Retrieved February 8, 2010. "Rabbi Arnold E. Resnicoff Named National Director of Interreligious Relations". American Jewish Committee (via Charity Wire). October 4, 2001. Archived from the original on July 8, 2011. Retrieved February 8, 2010. "Stuart Kauffman". Esalen Center for Theory & Research. Archived from the original on February 16, 2012. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Vita for Dr. Jeffrey Weeks". Division of Mathematics & Science, United States Naval Academy. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Owen Chamberlain". Nobel Foundation. Archived from the original on November 27, 2015. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "K. Berry Sharpless curriculum vitae". Scripps College. Archived from the original on November 24, 2011. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "George Davis Snell". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Oren B. Cheney". Bates College. Archived from the original on October 15, 2006. Retrieved December 10, 2006. "Dartmouth Grad Named New UCSD Chancellor". Dartmouth.edu. Archived from the original on September 27, 2013. Retrieved September 22, 2013. Close, Virginia L (April 1993). "Double Play: Women's Education and Anti-Slavery". Dartmouth College Library Bulletin. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Philander Chase". Ohio History Central. Archived from the original on March 21, 2013. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Osborne, James Insley; Theodore Gregory Gronert (1932). Wabash College: The First Hundred Years, 1832–1932. Crawfordsville, Indiana: R. E. Banta. p. 31. Krieger, Lois A. (2002). "The Woodward Succession: A Brief History of the Dartmouth College Library, 1769–2002". Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved October 21, 2011. "Past Presidents of Union". Union College. Archived from the original on March 19, 2011. Retrieved October 21, 2011. "Presidents of Dartmouth College". Rauner Special Collections Library, Dartmouth College. Archived from the original on December 7, 2006. Retrieved December 10, 2006. "Richard "Sandy" Alderson, Chief Executive Officer, San Diego Padres". Association for Strategic Planning. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "The Networked World: Are We Ready For It?". MIT World. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. "Dartmouth Board of Trustees Biographies". Archived from the original on April 9, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Eisele, Rob (August 26, 1998). "William Jewell Honors Kansas City Business Leaders with Yates Medal". William Jewell College. Archived from the original on February 12, 2005. Retrieved December 10, 2006. ""Calif. parent in college bribery scheme appears in Boston court" – The Boston Globe". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on March 20, 2019. Retrieved March 20, 2019. Knapp, Sue (April 9, 2004). "GE's Jeffrey Immelt to speak at Dartmouth Entrepreneurship Conference". Dartmouth News. Archived from the original on September 23, 2006. Retrieved August 23, 2008. Weeks, Christian (October 5, 2005). "Hank Paulson '68, Business Big Shot". BuzzFlood. McLeland, Susan. "Tinker, Grant". Museum of Broadcast Communications. Archived from the original on February 7, 2007. Retrieved March 28, 2007. Grimaldi, Paul (May 20, 2008). "In charge at Hasbro". The Providence Journal. Archived from the original on July 9, 2008. Retrieved May 20, 2008. "This Grey's Anatomy isn't gross—but it's a textbook case of a hit show". Dartmouth Medical Magazine. Fall 2005. Archived from the original on October 31, 2006. Retrieved December 10, 2006. "Dartmouth Alumni in Entertainment and Media Association". Archived from the original on February 12, 2010. Retrieved December 10, 2006. "'Mister Rogers' to give Dartmouth Commencement Address". Dartmouth News. May 2, 2002. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved December 10, 2006. Garfinkel, Jennifer (January 6, 2005). "Alums bring Fringe fave to Hop". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008. Retrieved December 10, 2006. Crawford, E.J. "Andrew Shue". Ivy@50. Archived from the original on April 5, 2015. Retrieved December 10, 2006. Olshansky, Elliot (May 19, 2003). "Ausmus '91 produces Gold Gloves and success for Astros". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on November 3, 2005. Retrieved December 10, 2006. "Mike Remlinger". ESPN. Archived from the original on September 3, 2006. Retrieved December 10, 2006. "Dolphins still winning, Jay Fiedler '94 still standing". BuzzFlood. December 5, 2003. Archived from the original on December 13, 2007. Retrieved December 10, 2006. "2004 Greater Flint Afro-American Hall of Fame: Reggie Williams". Flint Public Library. October 25, 2005. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved January 12, 2007. "Ivy Football Association To Honor Reggie Williams '76". Big Green Sports. January 12, 2006. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved September 20, 2007. "Football star Nick Lowery to discuss community service Oct. 29 at Dartmouth". Dartmouth News. October 23, 1998. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved December 10, 2006. "Jeff Kemp". Premiere Speakers Bureau. Archived from the original on November 18, 2006. Retrieved December 10, 2006. Dougherty, Matt (June 2004). "Sports Roundup". Dartmouth Life. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved August 9, 2007. "Adam Nelson". USA Track & Field, Inc. Archived from the original on January 1, 2012. Retrieved December 10, 2006. Rose, Jordan (January 9, 2006). "Dartmouth athletes gear up for Olympic competition". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on March 20, 2012. Retrieved December 10, 2006. Mitchell, John (November 13, 2006). "Sports: One on One". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on April 3, 2012. Retrieved December 10, 2006. "Cherie Piper". Big Green Sports. Archived from the original on October 15, 2015. Retrieved December 10, 2006. "Gillian Apps". Big Green Sports. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved December 10, 2006. "Katie Weatherston". Big Green Sports. Archived from the original on October 15, 2015. Retrieved December 10, 2006. Lund, Morten (June 14, 2004). "Dick Durrance, America's Champion". Skiing Heritage Journal. Archived from the original on January 29, 2022. Retrieved October 21, 2011. "Pamphlet" (PDF). Dartmouth College. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 27, 2007. Retrieved August 22, 2007. "Men's Track & Field Olympians". Big Green Sports. August 31, 2006. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Retrieved December 10, 2006. "NCAA Champions from Dartmouth College" (PDF). Ivy League Sports. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 31, 2004. Retrieved December 10, 2006. The Canadian Press (August 18, 2008). "Gold in Men's Eight, Bronze in Women's Double, Men's Four". The Sports Network. Archived from the original on May 22, 2011. Retrieved August 18, 2008. "Dartmouth 'Animal House' frat loses appeal to stay on campus". New York Daily News. May 9, 2015. Archived from the original on September 16, 2016. Retrieved September 10, 2016. "Interview with John Landis". CNN. August 29, 2003. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved February 12, 2007. Behrens, Richard K., "From the Connecticut Valley to the West Coast: The Role of Dartmouth College in the Building of the Nation," Historical New Hampshire, 63 (Spring 2009), 45–68. Calloway, Colin G. The Indian History of an American Institution: Native Americans and Dartmouth (Dartmouth College Press, 2010) online. Campbell, David P. "The Vocational Interests of Dartmouth College Freshmen: 1947‐67." Personnel and Guidance Journal 47.6 (1969): 521-530. online Chase, Frederick; John King Lord (1913). A History of Dartmouth College and the Town of Hanover, New Hampshire, Volume 2 (1 ed.). Concord, N.H.: J. Wilson, The Rumford Press. OCLC 11267716. (Read and download public domain copy via Google Books Archived December 3, 2020, at the Wayback Machine.) Drake, Chuck (2004). Dartmouth Outing Guide (Fifth ed.). Dartmouth Outing Club. Graham, Robert B. (1990). The Dartmouth Story: A Narrative History of the College Buildings, People, and Legends. Dartmouth Bookstore. Glabe, Scott L. (2005). Dartmouth College: Off the Record. College Prowler. ISBN 978-1-59658-038-1. Hoge, Dean R. "Changes in college students' value patterns in the 1950's, 1960's, and 1970's." Sociology of Education (1976): 155-163. online Hughes, Molly K.; Susan Berry (2000). Forever Green: The Dartmouth College Campus—An arboretum of Northern Trees. Enfield Books. ISBN 978-1-893598-01-0. Kegerreis, Richard. "The Handel Society of Dartmouth." American Music (1986): 177-193. online Person, Harlow S. "The Amos Tuck School of Dartmouth College." Journal of Political Economy 21.2 (1913): 117-126. online Putnam, Constance. (2015) The Science We Have Loved and Taught: Dartmouth Medical School's First Two Centuries (Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, 2015).online Richardson, Leon B. (1932). History of Dartmouth College. Dartmouth College Publications. OCLC 12157587. Syrett, Nicholas L. "The boys of Beaver Meadow: A homosexual community at 1920s Dartmouth College." American Studies 48.2 (2007): 9-18. online Tobias, Marilyn. (1982) Old Dartmouth on trial: The transformation of the academic community in nineteenth-century America (NYU Press, 1982) online Listen, Look, Likeness: examining the portraits of Félix de la Concha Archived July 30, 2014, at the Wayback Machine 2009 ArtsEditor.com article Wikisource has original text related to this article: Dartmouth College Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dartmouth College. Wikiquote has quotations related to Dartmouth College. New Hampshire portal Official website Dartmouth Athletics website