Gianluigi Buffon Ufficiale OMRI (Italian pronunciation: [dʒanluˈiːdʒi bufˈfɔn]; born 28 January 1978), also known as Gigi Buffon, is an Italian former professional footballer who played as a goalkeeper. Widely regarded as one of the greatest goalkeepers of all time, he is one of the few recorded players to have made over 1,100 professional career appearances and holds the record for the most appearances in the Serie A. Buffon made his Serie A debut at Parma in 1995, helping Parma to win the Coppa Italia, the UEFA Cup and the Supercoppa Italiana in 1999. After joining Juventus in 2001, for the world record fee for a goalkeeper of €52.9 million at the time, Buffon won Serie A titles in both of his first two seasons at the club. In his first spell at Juventus enduring 17 years, he won a record nine Serie A titles, four Coppa Italias, and five Supercoppa Italianas. He was the first goalkeeper to win the Serie A Footballer of the Year award, and was named Serie A Goalkeeper of the Year a record twelve times. After reaching the 2015 and 2017 UEFA Champions League finals, Buffon was named to the Champions League Squad of the Season on both occasions, and won the inaugural The Best FIFA Goalkeeper award in the latter year. Buffon signed with French club Paris Saint-Germain at the age of 40 in 2018, where he was used in a rotational role with Alphonse Areola; he won the Trophée des Champions and Ligue 1 title in his only season with the team, before returning to Juventus the following year. During the 2019–20 season, Buffon served primarily as a back-up to Wojciech Szczęsny, but still managed to break Paolo Maldini's record of 647 appearances in Serie A, as he won a record tenth top flight title with the club. The following season he continued to serve as a back-up, but started in the Coppa Italia, winning his record sixth title. In June 2021, Buffon returned to his boyhood club Parma, who had been relegated to Serie B for that season, before announcing his retirement from football in 2023 at the age of 45. With 176 international caps, Buffon is the most capped goalkeeper of all time, the most capped player in the history of the Italy national team, and the third-most capped European international player ever. Buffon also holds the record for most appearances for Italy as captain after he inherited the armband in 2010. Buffon was called up for a record of five FIFA World Cup tournaments (in 1998, 2002, 2006, 2010 and 2014) after making his debut in 1997; he was an unused substitute in the 1998 edition. He was the starting goalkeeper of the squad that won the 2006 tournament, being awarded the Golden Glove as the competition's best goalkeeper. He also represented Italy at four European Championships, at the 1996 Olympics, and at two FIFA Confederations Cups, winning a bronze medal in the 2013 edition of the tournament. Following his performances during the 2006 World Cup, where he kept a record five clean sheets, Buffon won the Yashin Award and was elected to the Team of the Tournament, an honour he also received from UEFA after reaching the quarter-finals of the 2008 and the final of the 2012 European Championship. Buffon retired from international football in 2017, after Italy failed to qualify for the 2018 FIFA World Cup; although he reversed this decision to play in the team's friendlies the following year, he officially confirmed his international retirement in May 2018. Buffon was named by Pelé in the FIFA 100 list of the world's greatest living players in 2004. He is the only goalkeeper to win the UEFA Club Footballer of the Year award, which he achieved after reaching the 2003 Champions League final; he also won UEFA's award for best goalkeeper that year, and was additionally voted into the UEFA Team of the Year on five occasions. Buffon was the runner-up for the Ballon d'Or in 2006, and was elected part of the FIFPro World11 three times. He was the first ever goalkeeper to win the Golden Foot Award, and was also named the IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper a record five times, alongside Iker Casillas and Manuel Neuer. He would go on to be named the best goalkeeper of the 21st century, of the past 25 years and of the decade by the same organisation. Buffon was born in Carrara, Tuscany, although he is of Friulian origin, from Latisana. He was born into a sporting family: his mother Maria Stella Masocco was three times Italian champion in shot put and discus throw, his uncle Dante Masocco was a basketball player who played in the Serie A1, his father Adriano also practiced shot put, and his elder sisters Guendalina and Veronica Buffon [it] were professional volleyball players. He is a relative of Lorenzo Buffon, goalkeeper for Milan, Genoa, Inter, Fiorentina and the Italian national team: Lorenzo is Gianluigi's second cousin twice removed. In June 2017, he received honorary citizenship from the city of Latisana. "I've never seen a debut like his for the personality and quality he showed." —Former goalkeeper and manager Dino Zoff on Buffon's debut. Despite offers from Bologna and Milan, Buffon began his career with the Parma youth system in 1991, at the age of 13. During his time in the youth academy, he initially played in several out-field positions, in particular as a midfielder, before switching to his current position of goalkeeper. His idol Thomas N'Kono inspired this change of position due to his notable goalkeeping performances for Cameroon at the 1990 World Cup in Italy; as a result, when both of the Parma youth team's keepers suddenly suffered injuries, Buffon was called upon due to his interest, height and physical attributes. He quickly adapted to this role, and within two weeks he had been promoted to first keeper of the Parma youth team. Ermes Fulgoni, the academy's goalkeeping coach, would soon become a mentor to the young goalkeeper. After an initial call-up to train with the first team during the summer of 1994, Buffon was promoted to the senior squad in 1995, and at the age of 17 years, 295 days, he made his Serie A debut for Parma under Nevio Scala, keeping a clean sheet in a 0–0 home draw against eventual Serie A Champions Milan, on 19 November 1995. Buffon made notable saves against Ballon d'Or winners Roberto Baggio and George Weah, as well as Marco Simone, throughout the match. Buffon went on to make seven more first team appearances that season as well as one appearance in the Coppa Italia, making his debut in the competition, as Parma were eliminated in the second round. Parma finished in sixth place in Serie A that season, qualifying for the UEFA Cup. During his time at Parma, he trained under goalkeeping coach Villiam Vecchi, a person to whom Buffon attributes much of his confidence, development, and success. In the 1996–97 Serie A season, his second full season with the club, Buffon was named as the starting goalkeeper ahead of Luca Bucci, and Alessandro Nista. Parma finished the 1996–97 season as runners-up in Serie A, behind Juventus, qualifying for the UEFA Champions League. Buffon conceded 17 goals in 27 appearances, and his consistent performances began to gain attention in Italy. Parma were once again eliminated in the second round of the Coppa Italia and in the first round of the UEFA Cup that season, where Buffon made his European debut in a 2–0 defeat to Portuguese club Vitória de Guimarães on 24 September 1996, aged 18 years, 240 days. In the 1997–98 season, Parma finished in fifth place in Serie A and reached the Coppa Italia semi-finals. Buffon also made his debut in the UEFA Champions League that season: his first appearance came in a 3–1 away win over Widzew Łódź on 13 August 1997, in the first leg of the second qualifying round, aged 19 years, 197 days, while he made his debut in the group stage in a 2–0 home victory against Galatasaray on 1 October later that year, aged 19 years, 246 days; Parma were ultimately knocked out in the first round of the competition, finishing second in their group, behind defending champions Borussia Dortmund. Buffon acquired his nickname "Superman" during the course of the season, when he stopped a penalty by Inter striker and Ballon d'Or holder Ronaldo. Buffon celebrated the save by showing the Parma fans a Superman T-shirt, which he was wearing underneath his jersey; the nickname was also a reference to Buffon's athleticism, agility and aerial ability. In his fourth season with the club, Buffon won his first European trophy, the UEFA Cup, keeping a clean sheet in the final against Marseille, which ended in a 3–0 win for Parma; he also won the Coppa Italia with the club that season, as Parma defeated Fiorentina on away goals. Parma finished fourth in Serie A, which allowed them to reach the playoff round of the UEFA Champions League, although they were relegated to the UEFA Cup after losing to Rangers. Buffon's performances that season earned him his first Serie A Goalkeeper of the Year Award, as well as the Bravo Award, the trophy given to the best player under 23 years of age in Europe. He also placed fifth in the IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper rankings, and received his first ever Ballon d'Or nomination. In the following season, he won his first Supercoppa Italiana title against Serie A champions Milan, and Parma finished fourth in Serie A once again, tied with Inter for the final remaining Champions League spot. Parma lost 3–1 to Inter in the European playoff match. The club was knocked out in the round of 16 of both the UEFA Cup and the Coppa Italia. In the 2000–01 season, Buffon helped lead Parma to another Coppa Italia Final, in which they were defeated by Fiorentina; but the team suffered a third-round elimination in the UEFA Cup. Parma also finished the season in fourth place for the third consecutive year, which allowed them to go through to the Champions League play-off round. Buffon was voted Serie A Goalkeeper of the Year for the second time in his career, and he also placed third in the IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper award. On 3 July 2001, Buffon was sold to Juventus for a world-record goalkeeper's transfer fee of 100 billion lire, (€51,645,690) (Or €51.956 million including other minor costs that could be capitalised) with part of the transfer fees paid via the transfer of Jonathan Bachini to Parma for an undisclosed fee (which saw Juventus make a capital gain of €10M, i.e. he was sold for equal to or more than €10M). Buffon transferred from Parma to Juventus on 3 July 2001 for €52.9 million, along with former Parma teammate Lilian Thuram, and was handed the number 1 shirt as the starting goalkeeper, replacing Edwin van der Sar, who was sold to Fulham. Buffon later said that there had been an initial possibility for him to join Roma, but they signed Ivan Pelizzoli instead, and although negotiations were ongoing with Barcelona, he chose Juventus because his father convinced him he would be likely to achieve his ambition of winning the Scudetto. This transfer fee made Buffon Juventus' most expensive purchase ever, a record which was broken in 2016 by the acquisition of Gonzalo Higuaín. Buffon made his Juventus debut during the opening match of the 2001–02 Serie A season, on 26 August 2001, keeping a clean sheet in a 4–0 home win over Venezia. He kept two more clean sheets until he was beaten by Massimo Marazzina in a 3–2 home win over Chievo on the fourth match-day. He made his Juventus Champions League debut on 18 September, in a 3–2 home win over Celtic. In his first season with Juventus, Buffon appeared in 45 official matches, helping his team to the Serie A title, as Juventus finished the season with the best defence in Italy, with Buffon only conceding 22 goals in 34 Serie A matches. Juventus also finished as runners-up in the Coppa Italia that season to Buffon's former club, Parma; Buffon only made one appearance in the competition. Juventus were eliminated in the second group stage of the UEFA Champions League. Despite coming under criticism in the media for some errors early on in the season, in particular against Chievo, Buffon was awarded his third Serie A Goalkeeper of the Year Award at the end of the season for his performances throughout the year, and he was nominated for the UEFA Team of the Year for the first time in his career, losing out to Rüştü Reçber. At the beginning of the 2002–03 season, Juventus won the 2002 Supercoppa Italiana against Parma. Buffon had a dominant year, totalling 47 appearances in all competitions, of which 32 were in Serie A. He helped Juventus to the UEFA Champions League final, only for his team to lose in a penalty shoot-out to Milan after a 0–0 draw at Old Trafford following extra time. Buffon managed to save two penalties, but Milan won the shootout 3–2. Buffon drew praise for making a reaction save from a close-range header by Filippo Inzaghi in the final during regulation time, which he later described as the most difficult save of his career in his 2008 autobiography, and as one of the most beautiful in 2014. Buffon saved a Luís Figo penalty in the second leg of the semi-finals, against defending champions Real Madrid, in Turin. Juventus progressed to the final, winning 4–3 on aggregate. Juventus managed to celebrate their second consecutive Serie A title that season, finishing the season with the best defence yet again, as Buffon conceded only 23 goals in 32 appearances. In 2003, Buffon received the Serie A Goalkeeper of the Year for the fourth time. He also became the only goalkeeper ever to win the now defunct UEFA Most Valuable Player or UEFA Club Footballer of the Year award. He also won the UEFA Best Goalkeeper award, and was elected to the UEFA Team of the Year for the first time. He was also named the IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper for the first time in his career. Buffon was also nominated for the 2003 Ballon d'Or that season, finishing in ninth place. Buffon began the 2003–04 season with Juventus by defeating Milan on penalties in the 2003 Supercoppa Italiana, with Buffon saving a penalty in the shootout, after a 1–1 draw. Juventus were eliminated in the round of 16 of the Champions League that season by Deportivo de La Coruña and finished the Serie A season in a disappointing third place, although they managed to reach the Coppa Italia final. Buffon made his 100th appearance for Juventus that season on 30 September 2003 in a 2–1 away win over Olympiacos in the group stage of the Champions League. He was named by Pelé as one of the top 125 greatest living footballers in March 2004, but missed out on the Serie A Goalkeeper of the Year award, which went to Milan's league-winning goalkeeper Dida. He was once again elected as the Goalkeeper for the UEFA Team of the Year and as the IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper. Buffon also received his first ever FIFA World Player of the Year nomination in 2004, finishing in 21st place alongside countryman Paolo Maldini. In the summer of 2004, Marcello Lippi left Juventus to take charge of the Italy national team and was replaced by Fabio Capello. In his fourth season with the club, Buffon made 38 appearances in Serie A and 48 in all competitions that season as he won his third Serie A title in four years with Juventus, winning once again the Serie A Goalkeeper of the Year award for the fifth time in his career. Juventus were knocked out in the quarter-finals of the Champions League, against eventual winners Liverpool, and in 2005, Buffon was nominated for the UEFA Team of the Year for the fourth consecutive year. In August 2005, Buffon collided with Milan midfielder Kaká during the annual preseason Trofeo Luigi Berlusconi match, suffering a dislocated shoulder that required surgery. Milan loaned backup goalkeeper Christian Abbiati to Juventus as compensation while Buffon recovered. Buffon returned to the Juventus starting line-up in November, but injury again sidelined him until January. He recovered in time to help Juventus win their second consecutive Scudetto and his fourth overall, returning to the starting line-up in January 2006, in a Coppa Italia match against Fiorentina. Juventus were once again knocked out in the quarter-finals of the Champions League by runners-up Arsenal, and in the quarter-finals of the Coppa Italia on away goals to eventual runners-up Roma. Buffon was named IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper for the third time in his career and Serie A Goalkeeper of the Year for the sixth time. He was also placed second in the 2006 Ballon d'Or (the first goalkeeper to do so since compatriot Dino Zoff in 1973) and eighth in the FIFA World Player of the Year Award behind his winning Italy teammate Fabio Cannavaro, and was elected as the starting goalkeeper for both the 2006 FIFPro XI and the UEFA Team of the Year, following his fifth consecutive nomination. Buffon made his 200th appearance for Juventus that season in a 2–0 away defeat at the hands of Arsenal in the quarter-finals of the Champions League. On 12 May 2006, several players, including Buffon, were accused of participating in illegal betting on Serie A matches. Buffon voluntarily co-operated, allowing himself to be interrogated by Turin magistrates. While admitting that he did place bets on sporting matches (until regulations went into effect in late 2005, banning players from doing so), he vehemently denied placing wagers on Italian football matches. Despite concerns that he had jeopardised his chance of playing for Italy in the 2006 World Cup, he was officially named Italy's starting goalkeeper on 15 May and helped Italy to win their fourth title. Buffon was cleared of all charges by the Italian Football Federation (FIGC) on 27 June 2007. Following Juventus' punishment in the Calciopoli scandal, in which their two most recent Serie A titles were stripped and the squad were relegated to Serie B and penalised with a point deduction, rumours spread that Buffon would be placed on the transfer market. Buffon elected to remain with Juventus, despite the team's relegation, a decision which made him extremely popular with the Juventus fans. "Buffon is one of the greatest and best goalkeepers in football history. When Juventus were in Serie B, he showed himself to be faithful to the team, it was a great gesture." —Former Bayern Munich coach Jupp Heynckes. During the 2006–07 Serie B season, Buffon made his debut in the Italian second division in a 1–1 away draw against Rimini on 9 September 2006; later that year, he also received the first red card of his career in a 1–1 away draw against AlbinoLeffe on 18 November. In total he made 37 league appearances throughout the season. After Juventus won the Serie B title, earning promotion to Serie A for the 2007–08 season, Buffon signed a contract extension with Juventus until 2012. In 2007, Buffon was also elected as the goalkeeper for the 2007 FIFPro XI for the second consecutive year, and the IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper for a record-breaking fourth time. Buffon was a key player for Juventus in the 2007–08 season, their first back in the top flight, as he helped Juventus to a third-place finish, and Champions League qualification. Juventus lost to runners-up Inter in the Coppa Italia quarter-finals. Buffon produced 94 saves in 34 league appearances and was named Serie A Goalkeeper of the Year for the seventh time in his career. Buffon was also nominated for the 2008 Ballon d'Or for the sixth consecutive time in his career since 2003, and the FIFA World Player of the Year Award. During this season, Buffon began to suffer problems with his back, caused by a herniated disc, which frequently keep him sidelined during the next few seasons. On 10 March 2008, Buffon renewed his contract until 2013, expressing his desire to win everything with the club. In the 2008–09 season, Buffon was once again sidelined by several injuries. From September through January, reserve goalkeeper Alexander Manninger held his position between the sticks, gaining praise for his deputising. Due to recurring injuries, Manninger's performances and Juventus' poor form towards the end of the season (as Buffon was seen despondent whilst the team drew with both Lecce and Atalanta), there were further rumours that Buffon was displeased and wanted to part ways with the club. He admitted he was disappointed with the current results, but assured that he had no intention of leaving. After a discussion with management, he said he was reassured about the club's future and signed a contract extension to 2013. Buffon and Juventus finished the season on a high note, with two victories, finishing in second place behind Internazionale. They were knocked out of the Coppa Italia semi-finals by eventual champions Lazio and of the Champions League in the round of 16 by Chelsea. Buffon was nominated for the FIFA World Player of the Year in 2009 for the sixth consecutive season since first being nominated in 2004. Buffon made his 300th appearance for Juventus in a 3–3 home draw against Chievo in 2009. Juventus and Buffon began the 2009–10 season strongly, although the squad suffered a severe dip in form as they were eliminated from the Champions League, finishing third in their group. They were subsequently eliminated in the Round of 16 of the Europa League against Fulham. Juventus were knocked out in the quarter-finals of the Coppa Italia to eventual champions Inter, and finished the Serie A season in a disappointing seventh place, only qualifying for the 2010–11 Europa League through the playoff round. Buffon was often sidelined that season, due to several recurring injuries. In 2010, Buffon was voted goalkeeper of the decade by IFFHS. Buffon did not play for the first half of the 2010–11 season as he was recovering from surgery after an injury he endured to his sciatic nerve during the 2010 World Cup, and he was replaced by his new deputy, Marco Storari. Juventus were knocked out of the Europa League group stage, the Coppa Italia in the quarter-finals and finished the Serie A season in seventh place, failing to qualify for Europe, the first time since the 1990–91 season. During the 2011–12 season under new manager and former club midfielder Antonio Conte, Juventus were once again a dominating force in Serie A. Buffon re-found his form, and made numerous notable saves throughout the season, including stopping a penalty kick from Francesco Totti, which enabled Juventus to capture a crucial draw against Roma at the Stadio Olimpico in Rome. Buffon's fine form at the end of the first half of the season saw elected Juventus' Player of the Month in December 2011 by fans. Buffon kept his 15th clean sheet of the season in Juventus' victory over rivals Inter in the Derby d'Italia; after the match, he was described as "the best goalkeeper in Italy and probably the World". Juventus finished the season unbeaten, winning their first Scudetto since the Calciopoli scandal, and qualifying for the 2012–13 Champions League after a two-year absence. Buffon described it as the second highest point of his career, after the 2006 World Cup victory. Playing behind a strong three-man defensive line under Conte's newly established 3–5–2 formation, made up predominantly of Giorgio Chiellini, Leonardo Bonucci and Andrea Barzagli, Buffon obtained a league record of 21 clean sheets in Serie A, and only conceded a personal best of 16 goals from 35 appearances (an average of 0.46 goals per game), as Juventus finished the season with the best defence in Italy, and became the European team with the second-best defence that season, after Porto. Buffon made 81 saves in Serie A that season and his 82% save percentage was the highest of any goalkeeper playing in one of Europe's five major leagues. Buffon was included in the 2011–12 Serie A Team of the Year for his performances. Juventus also made the Coppa Italia final that season, although Buffon did not play in this competition. On 11 August 2012, Buffon lifted his first trophy as the new Juventus captain, following Alessandro Del Piero's departure as Juventus defeated Napoli 4–2 in extra time in the 2012 Supercoppa Italiana in Beijing. Buffon suffered a minor injury and missed the first Serie A match of the 2012–13 season against Parma on 25 August 2012. He returned to the starting line-up for the next match against Udinese in Udine on 2 September, wearing the captain's armband; Juventus won the match 4–1. On 20 September, in Juventus' first Champions League match of the season against defending champions Chelsea, Buffon made his 400th appearance for Juventus; the match ended in a 2–2 away draw. Buffon obtained his first clean sheet of the season in a 2–0 home win against Chievo on 22 September. Buffon was nominated for the 2012 FIFA Ballon d'Or and the 2012 UEFA Team of the Year following his performances throughout the calendar year. He obtained his first Champions League clean sheet, against Nordsjælland, on 7 November, a match which Juve won 4–0 at Juventus Stadium. He also kept clean sheets as Juventus beat defending champions Chelsea 3–0 at home, and Shakhtar Donetsk 1–0 away from home, on Buffon's 100th club appearance in European competitions. Juventus topped their group undefeated, and advanced to the knockout stages for first time since 2008–09. Buffon kept a clean sheet in a 1–0 Coppa Italia win against Cagliari on 12 December, allowing Juventus to progress to the quarter-finals of the tournament. On 16 December, Juventus defeated Atalanta 3–0, allowing Juventus to once again claim the unofficial title of "Serie A Winter Champions", with the best defence in Serie A, having only conceded ten goals in 17 matches. This was also Buffon's 20th clean sheet in 2012, the most of any other goalkeeper in Europe. Buffon was voted second in the IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper award, behind Iker Casillas, and was named as goalkeeper of the century by the same organisation. On 23 January 2013, Buffon signed a contract extension with Juventus, keeping him at the club until 2015. On 27 January 2013, Buffon was awarded the Serie A Goalkeeper of the Year award for the eighth time in his career. Juventus retained their Serie A title that season, and finished the league with the best defence, as Buffon conceded just 19 goals. The league victory allowed Buffon to lift the Serie A trophy as captain for the first time. Juventus were eliminated in the semi-finals of the Coppa Italia to winners Lazio, and in the quarter-finals of the Champions League to winners Bayern Munich. On 18 August 2013, Juventus began the 2013–14 season by defending their Supercoppa Italiana title, at the Stadio Olimpico in Rome. Juventus defeated Lazio 4–0, with Buffon keeping a clean sheet in the competition for the first time; Buffon was praised for making several saves. On 24 November, Buffon made his 500th appearance in Serie A, keeping a clean sheet in a 2–0 away win against Livorno. On 6 December, Buffon recorded his seventh consecutive clean sheet, and his ninth of the season; as a result, he bettered his previous personal record of 568 minutes without conceding a goal in Serie A, going 640 minutes without being beaten in the Italian League. Buffon was finally beaten by Maximiliano Moralez in a 4–1 win over Atalanta, after going 745 minutes without conceding a goal in Serie A, and equalling Luca Marchegiani's sixth-best unbeaten streak in Serie A history. Buffon was nominated for the 2013 FIFPro XI and the 2013 Ballon d'Or for his performances throughout the calendar year. In 2013, Buffon was once again named the second best goalkeeper in the world by IFFHS, behind Manuel Neuer. His performances earned him the Juventus player of the month award for December 2013. On 16 March 2014, Buffon saved the 20th penalty of his career in a 1–0 away win over Genoa, equalising Dino Zoff's 476 appearances for Juventus as the club's fifth all-time appearance holder. Buffon lifted the Serie A title for the third consecutive year, captaining the team to their 30th league title. During the 2013–14 season, Juventus managed an Italian-record of 102 points, including a Serie A record of 33 victories; Juventus finished with the best defence of the league, yet again. Buffon managed 89 saves and 18 clean sheets in 33 appearances during the Serie A season, and conceded 19 goals. Juventus were eliminated in the group stage of the Champions League, although they later managed to reach the semi-finals of the Europa League, losing to Benfica. Buffon was chosen as part of the 2013–14 Europa League Team of the Season for his performances throughout the tournament. On 1 July 2014, Buffon signed a contract extension that would keep him at the club until 2017. "He is a benchmark for me, and for every keeper of my generation. When I started playing, I had a dream – I dreamed of becoming like him, and every time I play against him it's a real pleasure." —former captain and goalkeeper for both Real Madrid and Spain Iker Casillas on Buffon and his 500th appearance with Juventus. In the summer of 2014, manager Antonio Conte left Juventus to take charge of the Italy national team, with former Milan manager Massimiliano Allegri called in as his replacement. Juve opened the 2014–15 season with a 1–0 away win over Chievo, with Buffon keeping a clean sheet and saving from Maxi López in the second half. On 27 September, Buffon saved a Germán Denis penalty in a 3–0 away win over Atalanta, helping Juventus to keep their fifth consecutive clean sheet in Serie A. He was eventually beaten by a Francesco Totti penalty in a 3–2 home win over Roma on 5 October after going unbeaten for 616 minutes that season. Including the previous season, Buffon managed to go 801 minutes in total without conceding a league goal; at the time, this record had only been bettered by Dino Zoff and Sebastiano Rossi. On 29 October, Buffon made his 500th appearance for Juventus in a 1–0 away loss to Genoa. On 1 November 2014, Buffon made his 400th League appearance with Juventus (37 of which were in Serie B, and 363 of which were in Serie A), keeping a clean sheet in a 2–0 away win over Empoli. On 24 November, Buffon was nominated for the 2014 FIFPro World XI for a record tenth time. He is currently the only goalkeeper to have been nominated for the award every year since its inception in 2005. The same week, Buffon was also nominated for the UEFA Team of the Year. On 15 December 2014, Buffon was named Serie A Goalkeeper of the Year for the ninth time in his career, and was elected to the 2014 Serie A Team of the Year. On 22 December, Juventus were defeated by Napoli in the 2014 Supercoppa Italiana 8–7 on penalties, following a 2–2 draw after extra time. Although Buffon made several saves during the match, and managed to stop three penalties in the shoot-out, he was unable to prevent his team from losing the title. Buffon placed fourth in the 2014 IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper Award, behind Manuel Neuer, Thibaut Courtois and Keylor Navas; this was the 15th consecutive year in which he had been named as one of the world's top five goalkeepers. On 15 February 2015, Buffon surpassed Gaetano Scirea as the Juventus player with the second most minutes played in Serie A, behind only Giampiero Boniperti. On 2 March 2015, Buffon equalled Scirea as the Juventus player with the third most appearances in Serie A, behind only Boniperti and Del Piero. He later surpassed Scirea on 14 March, making his 378th Serie A appearance with Juventus in a 1–0 away win over Palermo. After keeping a clean sheet in the second leg of the Champions League quarter-final against Monaco on 22 April, Buffon overtook Dida as the goalkeeper with the fourth-highest number of clean sheets in Champions League history, with 36. On 26 April, Buffon made his 528th appearance for Juventus in all competitions, equalling Giuseppe Furino as the player with third-most appearances for the club; he overtook Furino on 29 April. On 2 May, Buffon kept a clean sheet in a 1–0 away win over Sampdoria, as Juventus won their fourth consecutive Serie A title. On 13 May, Buffon produced a man of the match performance as Juventus drew 1–1 with Real Madrid at the Santiago Bernabéu Stadium in the second leg of the UEFA Champions League semi-final, only being beaten by a Cristiano Ronaldo penalty; the result allowed Buffon to progress to his second career Champions League final with Juventus, 12 years after his last appearance. On 20 May, he won his first Coppa Italia title with Juventus, despite not featuring throughout the tournament that season. On 23 May, in his 900th career appearance, Buffon saved a Lorenzo Insigne penalty in a 3–1 home win over Napoli in Serie A. Buffon captained Juventus in the 2015 Champions League final as the Turin club were defeated 3–1 by Barcelona at Berlin's Olympiastadion. Buffon made the most saves throughout the tournament (39), and kept the most clean sheets (6), along with Danijel Subašić, Manuel Neuer and Marc-André ter Stegen. He was named to the 2014–15 UEFA Champions League Team of the Season for his performances throughout the tournament. On 15 July 2015, Buffon was named to the ten-man shortlist for the 2015 UEFA Best Player in Europe Award. His save on Dani Alves in the Champions League final was also nominated for the UEFA Save of the Season Award, finishing on a tied third-place in the voting. On 8 August, Buffon kept a clean sheet as Juventus defeated Lazio 2–0 in the 2015 Supercoppa Italiana to win the title for a record seventh time. This was also Buffon's record sixth title, and his fifth with Juventus. On 12 August, it was announced that he placed fourth in the 2015 UEFA Best Player in Europe Award. Buffon was named the first Juventus Player of the Month of the 2015–16 season for September by fans after a series of consistent performances. On 21 October 2015, Buffon overtook Alessandro Del Piero's record for most minutes played with Juventus in the 73rd minute of Juventus' 0–0 home draw against Borussia Mönchengladbach, in the Champions League group stage. In the return group fixture against Borussia Mönchengladbach on 3 November, he made his 100th Champions League appearance, which ended in a 1–1 draw. On 21 November, he made his 552nd appearance for Juventus in a 1–0 home win over Milan, equalling Scirea as the club's second-highest appearance holder in all competitions, behind only Alessandro Del Piero. The following week, Buffon was nominated for the 2015 UEFA Team of the Year, also making his 100th appearance for Juventus in European Club Competitions in a 1–0 home win over Manchester City on 25 November. The following day, Buffon was included in the player shortlist for the 2015 FIFPro World XI, despite having previously been omitted from the list of candidates for the 2015 FIFA Ballon d'Or. On 4 December 2015, Buffon made his 400th Serie A appearance with Juventus in a 2–0 away win over Lazio. For his performances throughout the previous season, Buffon was named Serie A Goalkeeper of the Year for the tenth time in his career on 14 December, and subsequently to the 2015 Serie A Team of the Year. Later that month, he was named one of the three finalists for the Globe Soccer Player of the Year Award. On 6 January 2016, he placed second in the 2015 IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper Award, once again behind Manuel Neuer. "Watching him close-up in training and during games is really quite impressive. Weaknesses? He has none." —Andrea Pirlo on Buffon. On 28 February 2016, Buffon kept his eighth consecutive clean sheet in Serie A in a 2–0 win over Inter. In the process, he set a new personal best in the top flight, and the outright sixth-best unbeaten streak in the history of the Italian league, after going 746 minutes without conceding a goal in Serie A, overtaking Morgan De Sanctis and Marchegiani. In the following league match against Atalanta on 6 March, he extended his unbeaten record by keeping another clean sheet in a 2–0 away win, also equalling Dino Zoff's and Sebastiano Rossi's league record of nine consecutive clean sheets in Serie A. His unbeaten streak of 836 minutes without conceding a goal was the third best unbeaten streak in Serie A history, behind only Zoff and Rossi, and was also the longest period a goalkeeper has gone without conceding a goal since three points for a win were introduced in Serie A during the 1994–95 season. He overtook Zoff in a 1–0 home victory over Sassuolo on 11 March, achieving a league record 10 consecutive clean sheets, and extended his unbeaten streak to 926 minutes without conceding a goal, only three minutes behind the all-time record holder, Rossi; the last time he had conceded a goal was when he was beaten by Antonio Cassano, in the 64th minute of a 2–1 away win over Sampdoria, on 10 January 2016. Buffon surpassed Rossi's record of 929 minutes by 45 minutes in a 4–1 away win over inter-city rivals Torino on 20 March, also surpassing Gianpiero Combi's Italian league record unbeaten streak of 934 minutes in the process; he set the new all-time record at 974 consecutive minutes without conceding a goal. Andrea Belotti finally ended his goalless streak by beating him from the penalty spot in the 48th minute of the same match. On 24 April, Buffon saved a late penalty from Nikola Kalinić to secure a 2–1 away victory over Fiorentina, his 13th penalty save in Serie A; following Napoli's defeat against Roma the following day, Juventus clinched their record fifth consecutive Serie A title with three games at hand. In addition to his decisive saves and record breaking unbeaten streak, Buffon was praised for his leadership, and his role in motivating the team following their defeat against Sassuolo on 28 October 2015, as Juventus subsequently went on a 25-match unbeaten streak to come back from 12th place after ten matches to win the title. For his key performances in helping Juventus capture the league title, Buffon was named the Juventus Player of the Month for April 2016. On 11 May, Buffon extended his contract until the end of the 2017–18 season. Throughout the 2015–16 season, Buffon had managed to equal his personal best of 21 clean sheets in a single league season, and was voted Juventus' Player of the Season. On 18 July, Buffon was included in the ten-man shortlist for the 2016 UEFA Best Player in Europe Award, in which he finished sixth. On 11 October 2016, Buffon became the first goalkeeper ever to win the Golden Foot Award. Following his performances throughout the year, Buffon was included in the 30-man shortlist for the 2016 Ballon d'Or; he placed ninth alongside Pepe in the final ranking. In Juventus' fourth Champions League group match of the season on 2 November, a 1–1 home draw against Lyon, Buffon made his 100th Champions League appearance (excluding appearances in qualifying rounds), becoming the 29th player to reach this landmark. On 4 November, he was included in the 23-player shortlist for The 2016 Best FIFA Men's Player Award. On 6 November, Buffon earned his 600th Serie A appearance in a 2–1 away win against Chievo, the fourth player to reach this milestone. His performances saw him earn the Juventus Player of the Month Award for October 2016. On 21 November, Buffon was nominated for the UEFA Team of the Year for the ninth time his career, making him goalkeeper with the most nominations ever, alongside Iker Casillas. On 1 December, Buffon was nominated for the 2016 FIFPro World XI, making him the only player, alongside Cristiano Ronaldo, to have been included in the shortlist every year since its inception in 2005. On 23 December, Buffon made his 600th competitive appearance for Juventus in the 2016 Supercoppa Italiana; following a 1–1 draw after extra time, Juventus lost 4–3 to Milan in a penalty shoot-out, although Buffon saved Gianluca Lapadula's initial spot kick. Buffon capped off the year by placing second in the 2016 IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper Award, finishing behind Neuer once again. On 5 January 2017, Buffon was named to the 2016 UEFA Team of the Year, becoming the oldest player ever to be named to the UEFA Team of the Year; this was also the fourth time he had been voted to the UEFA Team of the Year. On 9 January, it was announced Buffon had placed eighth in The 2016 Best FIFA Men's Player Award. On 30 January, Buffon was voted Serie A Goalkeeper of the Year for the 11th time, and named to the 2016 Serie A Team of the Year. On 17 February, Buffon made his 443rd Serie A appearance for Juventus in a 4–1 home win over Palermo, equalling Giampiero Boniperti as the club's all-time second highest appearance holder in the competition, behind only Del Piero. On 22 February, he made his 100th Champions League appearance for Juventus in the first leg of the club's round of 16 tie against Porto, keeping a clean sheet in the 2–0 away win. On 5 March, Buffon drew level with Totti as the joint third-highest appearance holder in Serie A after making his 612th appearance in the competition in a 1–1 away draw against Udinese. On 19 March, Buffon surpassed Boniperti as the all-time minute holder for a Juventus player in Serie A in the 66th minute of a 1–0 away win over Sampdoria. On 2 April, he equalled Javier Zanetti as the joint-second highest appearance holder of all time in Serie A, with his 615th Serie A appearance in a 1–1 away draw against Napoli. On 3 May, Buffon made his 100th appearance for Juventus in the UEFA Champions League (excluding appearances in the qualifying rounds) in a 2–0 away win against Monaco, in the first leg of the semi-finals of the competition; Buffon became only the second Italian player after Paolo Maldini to make 100 Champions League appearances for a single club, and marked the occasion with a clean sheet, his 47th overall in the competition, making him the goalkeeper with the third-highest number of Champions League clean sheets, alongside Čech, and behind only Casillas (57) and Van der Sar (50). This was the first time Juventus had managed to keep six consecutive clean sheets in a single edition of the tournament, the joint third-best number of consecutive clean sheets in a single Champions League season. On 9 May, Buffon made his 150th UEFA club appearance in a 2–1 home win over Monaco in the second leg of the Champions League semi-final, making him the player with the ninth-most appearances in UEFA club matches, alongside Jamie Carragher. Juventus' 4–1 win on aggregate saw Buffon reach the third Champions League final of his career; Kylian Mbappé's second-half goal ended Buffon's goalless streak, which saw him set a new personal best of 600 minutes without conceding a goal in the Champions League, and put him fifth on the all-time table, while Juventus' overall unbeaten run of 690 minutes was the second-longest in the history of the competition. On 17 May 2017, Juventus won their 12th Coppa Italia title in a 2–0 win over Lazio, becoming the first team to win three consecutive cups. Buffon did not feature, as his usual back-up Neto was the club's starting goalkeeper in the competition. Four days later on 21 May, following a 3–0 win over Crotone, Juventus secured their sixth consecutive Serie A title, establishing an all-time record of successive triumphs in the competition; with his eighth Serie A title, Buffon equalled Virginio Rosetta, Giovanni Ferrari, and Giuseppe Furino as the player with the most Italian league title victories. On 3 June 2017, Juventus entered a second Champions League final in three years, and the third final for Buffon, but were defeated 4–1 by defending champions Real Madrid. With his third Champions League final defeat, Buffon became the player with the most Champions League final appearances without a Champions League medal, alongside former Juventus teammates Paolo Montero and Alessio Tacchinardi. He was named in the UEFA Champions League squad of the season for the second time, and the tournament's best goalkeeper. On 12 June 2017, Buffon announced that the 2017–18 season would likely be his last with the club. On 4 August, Buffon was named one of the three finalists for the Goalkeeper of the 2016–17 UEFA Champions League season award, along with Manuel Neuer and Jan Oblak. On 15 August, Buffon was also listed as one of the three finalists for the 2017 UEFA Best Player of the Year Award, along with Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo. On 19 August, Buffon made history by saving the first Serie A penalty awarded via VAR in a 3–0 home win over Cagliari in the club's opening league match of the season. On 24 August, he was named the best goalkeeper of the 2016–17 Champions League season, He also placed third in the UEFA Men's Player of the Year Award, with 109 votes. On 23 October, Buffon won the inaugural 2017 Best FIFA Goalkeeper award, and was named to the FIFPro World XI for the third time in his career; he was also nominated for the 2017 Best FIFA Men's Player Award, finishing in fourth place in the voting. On 27 November, Buffon won the Serie A Footballer of the Year award, the first time a goalkeeper has won the award, along with the Serie A Goalkeeper of the Year award for the twelfth time, while being named to the Serie A Team of the Year for the fifth time in his career. On 3 December, he equalled Casillas by winning the IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper Award for a record fifth time, and on 7 December, he placed fourth in the 2017 Ballon d'Or. Following Juventus' 1–0 away victory against fellow title contenders Napoli on 1 December, Buffon was ruled out of Juventus' final Champions League group match against Olympiacos four days later, after picking up a calf strain in the previous match, an injury which kept him sidelined for almost two months; was replaced by his deputy Wojciech Szczęsny in goal during his absence. On 11 January 2018, Buffon was named to the 2017 UEFA Team of the Year for the fifth time. Buffon returned to action on 30 January 2018, two days after his 40th birthday, keeping a clean sheet and saving a penalty from Alejandro Gómez to secure a 1–0 away win over Atalanta in the first leg of the Coppa Italia semi-finals; this was his first Coppa Italia appearance in over five years, while his penalty save was the 30th of his career, excluding those made in shoot-outs, and his first ever in regulation time in the competition. He made his 500th league appearance with Juventus — including both Serie A and Serie B matches — on 9 February, in a 2–0 away win over Fiorentina. After Juventus lost 3–0 to Real Madrid at home in the first leg of the Champions League quarter-final on 3 April, Buffon helped Juventus keep a 3–0 away lead in the second leg on 11 April, until the 93rd minute when he was sent off for dissent after a confrontation with referee Michael Oliver who awarded an injury time penalty to Real Madrid; Szczęsny was forced to be substituted in, with the resulting penalty kick converted by Cristiano Ronaldo for a final 4–3 aggregate loss. On 9 May, Buffon kept a clean sheet, his 300th clean sheet with Juventus, and his 383rd at club level, in a 4–0 win over Milan in the 2018 Coppa Italia final; this was Juventus' fourth consecutive Coppa Italia title. On 11 May, Buffon was charged by UEFA over post-match comments made about referee Oliver. On 13 May, Buffon won his record seventh straight Scudetto, following a 0–0 draw with Roma in Juventus' penultimate match of the season while an unused substitute; with this league victory, he became the first player ever to win nine Serie A titles. On 17 May, with one league match still left, Buffon announced in a press conference that he would leave Juventus at the end of the season. On 19 May, after 17 seasons with the club, Buffon played his 656th and final match with Juventus, the last match of the season at home against Hellas Verona. He started in goal, and was later substituted in the 64th minute by debutant Carlo Pinsoglio as he received a standing ovation with the score 2–0 in favour of Juventus; the match later ended in a 2–1 victory. On 5 June, the UEFA Control, Ethics and Disciplinary Body gave Buffon a three-match ban for UEFA competition matches "for which he would be otherwise eligible", after his post-match comments about referee Oliver in the season's Champions League quarter-final against Real Madrid. On 30 June, the final day of his Juventus contract, Buffon bid the club farewell with a post on Twitter: "Seventeen years in black and white [officially] end today. Seventeen years of friends, team-mates, tears, victories, [defeats,] trophies, words, anger, disappointments, happiness and many, many emotions. I will never forget anything. I will always carry everything with me." — Buffon on his last official day of this spell as a Juventus player in 2018 On 6 July 2018, Buffon signed a one-year contract, with the option for a second year, with Paris Saint-Germain. He made his competitive debut for PSG on 4 August, keeping a clean sheet in a 4–0 win against Monaco in the 2018 Trophée des Champions. Buffon made his Ligue 1 debut on 12 August, keeping a clean sheet in a 3–0 home win over Caen. He was used in a rotational role with Alphonse Areola during the 2018–19 season by manager Thomas Tuchel. After serving a three-match ban in UEFA club competitions, Buffon started for PSG in a 1–1 away draw against Napoli on 6 November, and was beaten by an Insigne penalty; at the age of 40 years and 282 days, he became the second-oldest player ever to make their Champions League debut for a club after Mark Schwarzer, who made his debut in the competition with Chelsea in a 1–0 home victory over Steaua București on 11 December 2013, aged 41 years and 65 days. On 18 December, following an injury to Areola, Buffon played the second half of an eventual 2–1 away win over Orléans in the round of 16 of the Coupe de la Ligue. PSG were eliminated from the competition in the following round after a surprise 2–1 home defeat to Guingamp on 9 January 2019, during which Buffon remained on the bench. On 12 February, Buffon kept his 50th Champions League clean sheet in a 2–0 away win over Manchester United, becoming only the third goalkeeper to reach this milestone after Iker Casillas (57) and Edwin van der Sar (51). He also made his 121st Champions League appearance – excluding qualifying rounds – during the same match, which made him the player with the tenth-most appearances of all time in the competition. In the return leg in Paris on 6 March, Buffon came under criticism in the media for committing an error with the score tied 1–1, after he spilled Marcus Rashford's long-range shot, thus allowing Romelu Lukaku to score from the rebound and send United into the lead; following an injury-time goal from a penalty by Rashford, Manchester United completed a comeback to win the match 3–1, advancing to the Champions League quarter-finals on away goals. PSG finished the season as Ligue 1 champions, which saw Buffon win his tenth league title of his career, the most of any Italian player. PSG later lost 6–5 on penalties to Rennes in the 2019 Coupe de France final, following a 2–2 draw after extra time, although Buffon did not appear during the final. On 5 June, it was confirmed that he was leaving the club after one season. On 4 July 2019, after a season away from Juventus, Buffon signed a one-year contract with the club. Upon arrival, he was offered the number 1 shirt by Wojciech Szczęsny and the captaincy by Giorgio Chiellini, but he turned them down, saying "I didn't come back to take something from someone or take it back...I just want to do my bit for the team". Instead, he chose to wear number 77; the same number he had worn during his final season at Parma, before joining Juventus in 2001. He made his first appearance since his return to the club on 21 September, in a 2–1 home win over Verona in Serie A; this was his 902nd career club appearance, which equalled Paolo Maldini's record as the Italian player with the most career club appearances. On 28 September, he overtook Maldini with his 903rd appearance in a 2–0 home win over SPAL in Serie A. On 30 October 2019, Buffon made his 513th league appearance for Juventus (including Serie B matches) in a 2–1 home win over Genoa in Serie A, equalling Del Piero as the player with the most league appearances for the club. On 11 December, he kept his 51st Champions League clean sheet (excluding those in the qualifying rounds) in a 2–0 away win over Bayer Leverkusen in Juventus' final group match of the campaign, equalling Van der Sar as the goalkeeper with the second-most clean sheets ever in the competition, behind only Iker Casillas. On 15 December, he made his 700th Italian league appearance in a 3–1 home win over Udinese; during the same match, he also made his 478th Serie A appearance for Juventus, which saw him equal Del Piero as the player with the most appearances in the competition for the club. On 18 December, in a 2–1 away win over Sampdoria, Buffon made his 479th Serie A appearance for Juventus, surpassing Del Piero's appearance record for the club in the Italian top flight, as well as making his 647th overall Serie A appearance, tying Maldini as the player with the most appearances in the competition. On 13 February 2020, Buffon made nine saves in a 1–1 away draw against Milan in the first leg of the Coppa Italia semi-finals. He started in the final against Napoli on 17 June, keeping a clean sheet and making a series of injury-time saves to keep the score tied at 0–0; however, Juventus suffered a 4–2 defeat in the resulting penalty shoot-out, with Buffon unable to save any spot kicks. On 29 June, Buffon signed a new contract with Juventus, extending until June 2021. On 4 July, he made his 648th appearance in Serie A in a 4–1 home win over rivals Torino, overtaking Maldini as the most capped player of all time in the competition, also becoming the most capped player in Europe's top five leagues with 665 appearances, including his 17 Ligue 1 appearances for Paris Saint-Germain during the 2018–19 season. On 17 October, Buffon made his first appearance of the 2020–21 season, starting in a 1–1 away draw against Crotone. On 8 December, Buffon kept a clean sheet by saving seven shots, all of them taken by Messi, in a 3–0 away win over Barcelona in Juventus' final group match of the campaign. Buffon became the first goalkeeper to ever record a Champions League clean sheet in four different decades. Messi's seven shots on target were also the most recorded without scoring in the Champions League since the 2002–03 edition. On 11 May 2021, Buffon announced that he would leave Juventus at the end of the season. The following day, Buffon saved Domenico Berardi's penalty in a 3–1 away victory against Sassuolo, becoming the oldest Serie A goalkeeper to do so at the age of 43 years, 103 days. On 19 May, he started in Juventus's 2–1 victory over Atalanta in the 2021 Coppa Italia final, his final and 685th appearance for the club; after the match, he was given the honour of lifting the title, the sixth of his career, equalling Roberto Mancini as the player with the most title victories. On 17 June 2021, after days of speculation following his departure from Juventus, newly relegated Parma announced the return of Buffon through a short video posted on the club's official Twitter account. Upon winning the Coppa Italia in his last season at Juventus, many expected that it was going to be the end of his career. Instead, he announced that he was going to join his boyhood club and this marked 20 years since he left Parma for Juventus in 2001. On 20 August 2021, Buffon made his first appearance, conceding a late equaliser in a 2–2 away draw against Frosinone. On 5 February 2022, following a 0–0 away draw against Benevento in Serie B, Buffon became the first goalkeeper ever in men's association football to keep 500 clean sheets (322 with Juventus, 92 with Parma, 9 with PSG and 77 with Italy). On 28 February, Parma announced Buffon's contract extension until 2024, which would have kept him playing until the age of 46. On 2 August 2023, at the age of 45 and after a 28-year playing career, Buffon announced his retirement from professional football. Buffon represented Italy at all youth levels, from the under-16 side to the under-23 side, as well as the Olympic side in 1996. With the Italy under-16 side, he reached the final of the 1993 UEFA European Under-16 Championship, saving two penalties and even scoring one himself in the quarter-final shootout victory over Spain, and subsequently saving three penalties – but also missing one himself – in the semi-final shootout victory over Czechoslovakia. With the Italy U-17 side he took part at the 1993 FIFA U-17 World Championship in Japan. In 1995, he reached the final of the UEFA European Under-19 Championship with the Italian U-19 side. He was most notably a member of Italy's 1996 UEFA European Under-21 Championship-winning squad. Buffon was a member of the Italy squad that won the gold medal for football at the 1997 Mediterranean Games in Bari, on home soil. Buffon currently holds the record for the most clean sheets with the Italy national side. Buffon was awarded his first cap for the senior Italy national team under Cesare Maldini on 29 October 1997, at the age of 19 years and 9 months (19 years, 274 days), as an injury replacement for Gianluca Pagliuca during the first leg of the 1998 World Cup qualification play-off against Russia, in Moscow; with this cap, Buffon became the youngest goalkeeper to feature for Italy post-World War II. This record was beaten by Gianluigi Donnarumma on 1 September 2016. Buffon came on in the 31st minute and made notable saves under snowy conditions in a 1–1 away draw, including an important stop from a Dmitri Alenichev shot, only being beaten by a Fabio Cannavaro own goal. The result helped Italy to qualify for the upcoming World Cup 2–1 on aggregate. He was a member of the squad for the 1998 World Cup finals, initially as the third choice goalkeeper; after an injury to starting goalkeeper Angelo Peruzzi, Buffon was promoted to second-choice goalkeeper behind Pagliuca, with Francesco Toldo being called up as third-choice, but Buffon did not play a single game in the tournament. Italy were eliminated in the quarter-finals on penalties to hosts and eventual 1998 World Cup champions France. Buffon became the first choice goalkeeper during the Euro 2000 qualifying campaign and was due to start in goal during the finals under manager and former Italy goalkeeping legend Dino Zoff, but he broke his hand while attempting to stop John Carew's goal in a 1–0 defeat against Norway in a warm up game just a few days before Italy's opening match of the tournament against Turkey. His starting place was taken by backup goalkeeper Francesco Toldo, and Christian Abbiati was called up as a replacement third keeper, with Francesco Antonioli being promoted to second goalkeeper. Italy reached the final of the tournament, losing once again to France. Francesco Toldo's impressive performances at Euro 2000 meant that he retained his place in the first team for the beginning of Italy's 2002 World Cup qualifying campaign. In spite of heavy competition from Toldo, Buffon regained the starting goalkeeping spot for the fourth match of the qualification series, away to Romania, and was the starting goalkeeper for the remaining four matches under Giovanni Trapattoni as Italy qualified with an unbeaten record. Buffon played every minute of Italy's 2002 World Cup campaign, keeping a clean sheet in the opening match against Ecuador, and saving a controversial penalty against co-hosts South Korea in the round of 16, which was not enough to stop the under-performing side from being eliminated by a golden goal in extra time. He also featured in every match at Euro 2004, keeping a clean sheet in his nation's opening 0–0 draw against Denmark, although Italy, despite not losing a match, once again underperformed, and were eliminated in the first round on direct encounters following a three-way, five-point tie with Sweden and Denmark. "Gigi proved once again he's the best goalkeeper in the world." —Ukraine striker Andriy Shevchenko on Buffon's performance following Italy's 3–0 victory over his side in the 2006 World Cup quarter-finals. Buffon was once again the first choice goalkeeper under his former Juventus coach and Trapattoni's replacement Marcello Lippi, as Italy finished first in their 2006 World Cup qualifying group. Although his place in Italy's 2006 World Cup was initially in doubt, as he was being investigated for possible involvement in the 2006 Calciopoli scandal, he was later named by Lippi as Italy's starting goalkeeper for the tournament. During the 2006 World Cup finals, Buffon was in excellent form, setting a World Cup record by conceding just two goals in seven matches, and keeping five clean sheets. In addition, he posted a 453-minute scoreless streak, only 64 minutes short of compatriot Walter Zenga's all-time unbeaten record from the 1990 World Cup. The only goals he conceded were not in open play; an own goal by teammate Cristian Zaccardo after a free-kick against the United States in Italy's second match of the group stage, and a Zinedine Zidane penalty in the final against France. In the final, Buffon later made an important save in extra time on a header from eventual Golden Ball winner Zidane, which Buffon later described as the most important save of his career. The match ended 1–1 after extra time and was followed by a penalty shootout in which neither Buffon nor Fabien Barthez saved a spot kick. The lone miss was David Trezeguet's effort which hit the bottom of the crossbar and failed to cross the line, enabling Italy's Fabio Grosso to seal the victory for Italy. Buffon was named Man of the Match in Italy's 1–0 victory over Australia in the round of 16, and later also received the Yashin Award as the best goalkeeper of the tournament, producing 40 saves, and was elected to the Team of the Tournament. Buffon also finished second to compatriot Fabio Cannavaro in the 2006 Ballon d'Or and eighth in the FIFA World Player of the Year for his performances that season, and was named in the 2006 FIFPro World XI and the 2006 UEFA Team of the Year. In 2013, Nick Miller of ESPN FC named Buffon's save against Lukas Podolski in Italy's 2–0 victory against hosts Germany in the semi-finals as one of the greatest in World Cup history, placing it at number nine in his list of "World Cup's greatest ever saves". In 2019, Diario AS placed the latter save at number eight in their collection of "The 10 greatest saves of all time". Buffon wore the captain's armband for Italy for the first time under manager Roberto Donadoni, in a 2–0 home win over Georgia in a Euro 2008 qualifier, due to the suspension of regular skipper Fabio Cannavaro. He was later named Italy's second acting captain for Euro 2008 after incumbent Cannavaro was ruled out of the tournament due to injury, and as Italy's replacement captain Alessandro Del Piero was frequently deployed as a substitute. He made his first appearance as Italy's captain in the nation's opening fixture of Euro 2008 on 9 June, a 3–0 defeat to the Netherlands. In the second game of the group stage against Romania on 13 June, he saved an 81st-minute penalty from Adrian Mutu to keep Italy's hopes alive following their opening defeat, as the match ended 1–1. Buffon kept a clean sheet against France in the final group game, and garnered praise in the media for a notable save against Karim Benzema, as Italy won 2–0 to advance to the quarter-finals. Italy were eliminated nine days later, when a 0–0 draw after extra time led to a 4–2 penalty shootout loss to eventual champions Spain; Buffon saved one penalty in the shootout and was elected to the Team of the Tournament for his performances. Upon Marcello Lippi's return, Buffon was confirmed as the starting goalkeeper. He played all three group matches during Italy's disappointing 2009 FIFA Confederations Cup campaign in South Africa, in which they finished third in their group in three-way three-point tie. He earned his 100th cap on 14 November 2009 in a friendly match against the Netherlands. He was a key player in Italy's World Cup qualifying campaign as they finished top of their group, undefeated. In the 2010 World Cup, Buffon was replaced at half-time in Italy's 1–1 draw in their opening group stage match against Paraguay after he had a problem with his sciatic nerve. He did not play again in the tournament and was substituted by Federico Marchetti. Reigning champions Italy disappointed and failed to win a match, finishing last in their group with just two points earned. Lippi was dismissed after Italy's premature elimination from the World Cup. After the international retirement of Fabio Cannavaro, Buffon became the new captain of the national team under new manager Cesare Prandelli. On 9 February 2011, after recovering from a back injury, Buffon played his first game as Italy's official captain in a 1–1 friendly draw against Germany in Dortmund. On 6 September 2011, after a 1–0 Italy win over Slovenia, Buffon surpassed Dino Zoff and established the new record for most minutes without conceding a goal in European Championship qualifying matches, going 644 minutes without conceding a goal; the win also allowed Italy to qualify for Euro 2012. On 11 October, prior to Italy's 3–0 win in a European qualifier against Northern Ireland, Buffon received a commemorative cap and medal from UEFA to mark his 100th international appearance; regarding his achievement, he commented: "I feel I'm entering the football nobility today and I'm happy to celebrate this milestone while still playing". On 15 November 2011, in a friendly match against Uruguay, Buffon surpassed Zoff's number of caps for Italy (112), putting him behind only the retired former Italian captains Cannavaro and Paolo Maldini; he overtook Zoff in Italy's next friendly match against the United States on 29 February 2012. He was subsequently selected as Italy's starting goalkeeper and captain for Euro 2012 after leading his national side to qualify for the tournament undefeated, only conceding two goals. At Euro 2012, Buffon acted as captain during the entire tournament. He kept a clean sheet against the Republic of Ireland in the third group stage match and against England, saving a crucial penalty from Ashley Cole in the quarter-final shootout, in which he was elected man of the match. In the semi-final match against Germany, Buffon made several important saves, only being beaten by a penalty from Mesut Özil in the 92nd minute. Italy won the match 2–1 and advanced to the final against defending European and World champions Spain, with whom Italy had drawn 1–1 in the opening group stage match, only having conceded three goals; the semi-final victory qualified Italy for the 2013 Confederations Cup, as Spain had previously won the 2010 World Cup. Italy were beaten 4–0 in the final as Spain claimed a record third consecutive major trophy, and their second consecutive European Championship title. Buffon was once again elected to the Team of the Tournament for his performances. On 26 March 2013, in a 2014 World Cup qualifying match against Malta, Buffon earned his 126th cap for Italy, equalling Paolo Maldini's number of caps for the national team. In the same match, Buffon saved a penalty from Michael Mifsud, helping Italy to a 2–0 away win. Buffon was included in the Italian squad for the 2013 Confederations Cup in Brazil and played in every match of the tournament as captain. On 16 June 2013, he featured in Italy's opening 2–1 win against Mexico, where he was beaten only by a Javier Hernández penalty. In the next game, on 19 June 2013 against Japan, the referee awarded Japan a penalty in the 20th minute of the first half when he declared that Shinji Okazaki had been brought down by Buffon after a misplaced back pass by Mattia De Sciglio; Buffon received a yellow card. The squad's eventual 4–3 win allowed Italy to progress to the semi-finals of the competition for the first time, where they were to face Spain in a rematch of the Euro 2012 final. After a 0–0 draw, they lost 7–6 in the resulting penalty shootout. Although both Buffon and Spanish counterpart Iker Casillas had managed to keep a clean sheet throughout the match, neither goalkeeper was able to stop a penalty in the shootout; the lone miss, by Leonardo Bonucci, was hit over bar. In the third-place match, Italy defeated Uruguay 3–2 in the penalty shootout after a 2–2 deadlock following extra time. Buffon saved three penalties; those taken by Diego Forlán, Juventus teammate Martín Cáceres and Walter Gargano. On 6 September 2013, Buffon earned his 135th cap for Italy in the 2014 World Cup qualifier against Bulgaria. This cap put him at only one cap from record appearance holder Fabio Cannavaro. Buffon kept a clean sheet for Italy in the 1–0 win and was praised for making several saves, earning the man of the match award. The win allowed Italy to move seven points clear in their qualifying group. In the 2014 FIFA World Cup qualifying fixture against the Czech Republic, at Juventus Stadium in Turin on 10 September 2013, Buffon equalled Cannavaro as the Italian national team record appearance holder, with 136 caps. Italy won the match 2–1, allowing them to qualify for the 2014 World Cup in Brazil as top of their group, with two games at hand; this was the first time that the Italian squad had done so. On 11 October 2013, in a 2–2 World Cup qualifier draw against Denmark, Buffon surpassed Cannavaro, becoming the sole record appearance holder for Italy, with 137. On 2 January 2014, Buffon was awarded the 2013 Pallone Azzurro award, which is given to the Italy national side's best player of the year. "Buffon is the Maradona of goalkeepers." —Italy teammates on Buffon. On 12 May, Buffon was named in Italy's 31-man preliminary World Cup squad by Cesare Prandelli, and on 31 May, he was named the starting goalkeeper and captain in the final squad. Italy were placed in Group D, in the so-called "group of death", or "group of champions", with Costa Rica, England and Uruguay. Buffon became the third player to be part of five World Cup squads, tying the records held by Mexican goalkeeper Antonio Carbajal and German footballer Lothar Matthäus. Due to an ankle injury suffered in training, Buffon was not selected to start in Italy's first match of the World Cup against England on 14 June 2014; he was replaced by Salvatore Sirigu. Andrea Pirlo captained the team in his absence, as Italy won the match 2–1. In Italy's next group match, which ended in a 1–0 loss to Costa Rica, he captained his national side for the first time at a World Cup, the fourth World Cup in which he appeared. In Italy's final group game against Uruguay, Buffon saved shots from Luis Suárez and Nicolás Lodeiro, as Italy were reduced to ten men following Claudio Marchisio's controversial red card. Buffon was eventually beaten in the 81st minute by a Diego Godín header, moments after Luis Suárez's bite on Giorgio Chiellini. Buffon was voted man of the match for his performance. Italy finished in third place in their group, and were eliminated in the group stage for a second consecutive World Cup. Buffon made his first appearance for Italy under new manager Antonio Conte on 9 September 2014, captaining his team in their opening European Championship qualifying match against Norway in Oslo. He kept a clean sheet as Italy won the match 2–0. On 12 June 2015, Buffon became the first player to appear in 50 UEFA competitive international matches in Italy's 1–1 away draw against Croatia in a European qualifying match. Buffon saved an early Mario Mandžukić penalty, but was taken off at half time and replaced by Salvatore Sirigu due to an injury. He made his 150th appearance for Italy on 6 September 2015, keeping a clean sheet in a home 1–0 win over Bulgaria, his 62nd clean sheet at the international level. Italy qualified for Euro 2016 on 10 October in a 3–1 win over Azerbaijan. After the Euro qualification, Buffon stated that Euro 2016 would be the final European Championship of his career, but expressed his intentions to retire only after the 2018 World Cup, which would see him play up to the age of 40. On 31 May 2016, Buffon was named the captain of Conte's 23-man Italy squad for Euro 2016. In Italy's first game of the tournament on 13 June, Buffon kept a clean sheet in a 2–0 victory over Belgium. This was Buffon's 14th appearance at the European Championships, making him Italy's out-right most capped player of all time in the tournament, after overtaking Maldini, Del Piero and Cassano; with his fourth tournament appearance, he also equalled Del Piero for the most UEFA European Championships played in by an Italian player. He kept another clean sheet in a 1–0 win over Sweden in Italy's second group fixture on 17 June, which allowed his nation to top the group and advance to the second round, although he was later booked in injury time for time-wasting. Due to a bout of fever, Buffon was rested in Italy's final group match on 22 June, a 1–0 defeat against the Republic of Ireland, and was replaced by deputy Salvatore Sirigu. He returned to the starting line-up for his nation's round of 16 fixture against Spain on 27 June, making a crucial injury time save on Gerard Piqué to earn his third consecutive clean sheet of the tournament, as Italy avenged their Euro 2012 final defeat with a 2–0 victory over the defending champions. After a 1–1 draw following extra time in Italy's quarter-final fixture against Germany on 2 July, Buffon saved one penalty in the resulting shoot-out, although the reigning World Cup champions would ultimately emerge victorious following a 6–5 shoot-out loss. His one on one save to deny Mario Gómez in regulation time was later nominated for the UEFA Save of the Season Award. By the end of the following month, his nominated save on Gómez finished third with 14% of the votes. On 6 October 2016, Buffon made his 164th appearance for Italy in a 1–1 draw against Spain in a 2018 World Cup qualifying match in Turin, under manager Gian Piero Ventura, making him the joint eighth-most capped international player of all time with Cobi Jones, and the second-most capped active international player, behind only Iker Casillas. On 15 November 2016, Buffon won his 167th Italy cap in their friendly 0–0 draw in Milan against Germany, equalling the European international appearance record jointly held by Iker Casillas and Vitālijs Astafjevs, and making him the most capped active international player in the world alongside Casillas. On 1 January 2017, Buffon was awarded the 2016 Pallone Azzurro Award, as Italy's best international player throughout the calendar year, becoming the first player to win the award more than once. On 24 March, Buffon made his 1,000th career appearance, keeping a clean sheet (his 426th overall for club and country) in a 2–0 home over Albania in a World Cup qualifier, becoming the eighteenth player to reach this milestone; in the process, he also became the sole most capped European player at international level, with his 168th appearance for Italy, and the joint fifth-most capped male international footballer of all time, alongside Iván Hurtado. On 2 September, Buffon made his 170th international appearance in a 3–0 away defeat to Spain in a World Cup qualifier; he later extended his European international appearance record with his 172nd appearance for Italy on 6 October, in a 1–1 home draw against Macedonia in a 2018 World Cup qualifier, making him the fourth-most capped male international footballer of all time, ahead of Egyptian striker Hossam Hassan (169 caps), and behind only Egyptian midfielder Ahmed Hassan (184 caps), Saudi Arabian goalkeeper Mohamed Al-Deayea (178 caps), and Mexican defender Claudio Suárez (177 caps). Buffon's 175th international appearance came on 13 November, in the second leg of the World Cup play-offs against Sweden, at the San Siro Stadium in Milan. Although he kept a clean sheet in the 0–0 draw, Italy's 1–0 away loss in the first leg on 10 November saw Sweden advance on aggregate, meaning that Italy had failed to qualify for the World Cup for the first time in 60 years. Although he had originally intended to retire after competing in the 2018 World Cup, following the match and Italy's failure to qualify the tournament, an emotional and tearful Buffon communicated his retirement from international football, stating: "I'm not sorry for myself but all of Italian football. We failed at something which also means something on a social level. There's regret at finishing like that, not because time passes. There is certainly a future for Italian football, as we have pride, ability, determination and after bad tumbles, we always find a way to get back on our feet." He later confirmed his international retirement on social media, tweeting from the national team's official account: "We are proud, we are strong, we are stubborn. We will pick ourselves up as we have always done. I am leaving a national team set-up that will know how to pick itself up again. Best wishes to everybody, and especially to those with whom I have shared this beautiful journey." After winning the Serie A Footballer of the Year Award later that month, Buffon hinted that he could possibly play for Italy again, stating: "I took a break from the national team. I'm of a certain age, so it's right for me to take a pause. With the way I am though, both for Juventus and for the national team I have always considered myself a soldier, so I could never desert a possible call in the future if needed. Even at 60, if there were a total absence of goalkeepers and they asked me to come back, I'd be there, because I have in me the concept of nation." On 17 March 2018, despite Buffon's initial decision to retire, he was called up for Italy's March friendlies against Argentina and England by caretaker manager Luigi Di Biagio. When asked why he had accepted a call-up after initially announcing his international retirement, he responded: "I'm a consistent person, who feels a great sense of responsibility, that alone is enough to explain my presence. In addition, I've always been an unifying element in the national set-up, and I'd like my presence to be seen in this way. The young lads will grow, some already have, and from tomorrow they'll get their chance," and "I am here for Astori [a former international teammate of Buffon's who had recently died from a heart attack] as well, it's another reason why I wanted to be here." On 23 March, Buffon started in goal for Italy for the 176th time, in a friendly against Argentina, and also surpassed Cannavaro to become the record appearance holder as Italy captain, with 80; Italy were defeated by Argentina 2–0. On 17 May 2018, Buffon announced in a press conference with Juventus that he would not return to the national team for its May and June friendlies. "The best goalkeeper I have ever faced was Buffon. When I was at Juventus, it was already difficult to get past Cannavaro and Thuram in defence during training sessions. If I managed to get past them, then I would find Buffon, and it was almost impossible to beat him!" —Zlatan Ibrahimović. Since his emergence as a precocious talent in his youth, Buffon was renowned for his consistent performances throughout his career, and received praise from managers, players, as well as both present and former goalkeeping colleagues, for his concentration and calm composure under pressure, as well as his work-rate, and longevity. Regarded as one of the best players ever in his position, he was often considered to be the archetype of the modern goalkeeper, and has been cited by many other subsequent goalkeepers as a major influence and role model. He was described as "an agile, strong, and commanding shot-stopper, who is hugely experienced at the highest level" and "an accomplished and well respected keeper" with an "[e]xcellent positional sense, courage, power and class". Buffon was praised for his athleticism, his "outstanding shot-stopping", his acrobatic dives, and his quick reflexes, as well as his ability to produce decisive saves, despite being a tall, large and physically imposing goalkeeper. Although he at times was criticised for not being particularly adept at stopping penalties, he was also proven to be effective in this area, as demonstrated by his penalty-saving record; with sixteen saves, he has stopped the joint-fifth-highest number of penalties in Serie A history, alongside Giuseppe Moro. "There have been some very good goalkeepers in my era, but Buffon is there for consistency. Most of the goalkeepers have had times when their form has not been so good, but Buffon has been at such a high level for so long." —Ronaldinho on choosing Buffon as the goalkeeper in his all-time top XI. In his prime, Buffon was a talented, complete, brave, aggressive, and often instinctive and frenetic goalkeeper, who was recognised for his speed, prowess, and anticipation when coming off his line in one on one situations, as well as his confidence, goalkeeping technique, reactions, and ability to get to ground quickly to collect, parry, or even challenge for the ball with his feet; when playing in teams that relied upon high defensive lines and a zonal marking system, he often functioned as a sweeper-keeper, frequently rushing out of his area to clear the ball or face opponents who had beaten the offside trap. He was also highly regarded for his handling, aerial ability, and command of the area on high balls; however, throughout his career, Buffon was occasionally accused by pundits of being overly cautious on crosses and of not always coming out to collect them, and also drew criticism for preferring to punch the ball out to his teammates at times rather than holding on to it. Although not as adept with the ball at his feet as the newer generation of goalkeepers that emerged in his later career, Buffon also possessed good footwork, as well as reliable distribution, which enabled him to adapt to more contemporary systems requiring goalkeepers to play with their feet more frequently and be involved in the build-up of plays. His confidence in possession allowed him to play the ball out from the back on the ground to his defenders and start swift counter-attacks, as well as find his teammates further up the pitch or out on the wing with deeper kicks with his right foot. In his youth, his ball skills even occasionally led him to take on opponents, whenever he was put under pressure by on-running strikers. "Technically, with his feet, you wouldn't say he looks a natural. He's not a keeper like Marc-André ter Stegen, Claudio Bravo or Manuel Neuer. But his positioning is perfect. He's very deep. He never strays far from his line. That gives him an extra split second to see the ball, judge the flight, move his feet. And more often than not, he catches the ball. The other thing that stands out is his shape when diving. It's almost faultless. His arms and legs and body are all in sync. Everything is solid." —Football coach, pundit and former Sunderland goalkeeper David Preece on Buffon. After struggling with a series of injuries between 2008 and 2010, Buffon effectively adapted his style of goalkeeping to the physical effects of ageing, while also modifying his diet and training regime, and as a result, developed into a less spectacular, but more efficient, calm, and reflective goalkeeper; despite the loss of some of his physical strength, explosiveness, speed and mobility, he continued to excel at the highest level due to the consistency of his performances, as well as his positioning between the posts, tactical intelligence, decision-making, and his ability to read the game and organise his defence. In contrast with his goalkeeping style in his early career, Buffon often preferred to position himself in deeper areas closer to his line in his later career, particularly in one-on-one situations, in order to increase the distance between himself and his opponent, giving himself more time to assess situations and parry the ball. In addition to his goalkeeping abilities, Buffon was singled out for his charisma, strong mentality, discipline in training, vocal presence in goal, and leadership, and was described as "a key dressing room personality". Buffon is widely regarded by players, pundits and managers as one of the greatest goalkeepers of all time, and by some in the sport as the greatest ever. In the introduction of his 2008 autobiography, Numero 1 (Number 1), Roberto Perrone describes him as: "the greatest goalkeeper in the world, one of the four or five that will always live on in the memory of world football". In 2012, he was voted the 20th best footballer in the world by The Guardian, finishing as the second-highest ranked goalkeeper, behind Iker Casillas. Buffon was awarded the Nereo Rocco Prize on 2 September 2014, which is given to a footballer in recognition of their career. In 2015, France Football rated him as one of the ten best footballers in the world over the age of 36. In 2016, he was named the greatest goalkeeper in history by the same magazine. Later that year, he was also voted the UEFA Champions League's greatest goalkeeper of all time in an official UEFA online Twitter poll. In 2015, UEFA ranked Buffon as the third-best player ever not to have won the Champions League, while in 2019, FourFourTwo placed Buffon at number two behind only Ronaldo in their list of "The 25 best players never to win the Champions League". In May 2020, Sky Sports ranked him as the fourth-best player ever to have not won the Champions League or European Cup, and he was also voted the "Greatest Goalkeeper Ever" by users of Eurosport.com. Although when he started his career it was more common for goalkeepers to wear long-sleeved jerseys, Buffon was always known for wearing short-sleeves throughout his entire career, even during the winter months; when asked in a 2017 interview with FourFourTwo why he preferred to wear short sleeves, he commented: "I really don't know why. It's just something that I've always done, right from the time I first started playing in goal. It always felt good. And now look: lots of goalkeepers do it. I've started a fashion." When asked again about his goalkeeping attire in a 2018 interview with L'Équipe's magazine Sports et Style, he stated that he first cut the sleeves off of his goalkeeping kit as a youngster, "for convenience and to feel more comfortable", also adding that he "feel[s] more when the ball touches [his] forearms". Buffon was born into a family of Italian athletes on 28 January 1978. His mother, Maria Stella, was a discus thrower and his father, Adriano, was a weightlifter. Following their athletic retirement, they subsequently worked as P.E. school teachers. Buffon's two sisters, Veronica and Guendalina, played volleyball for the Italian national volleyball team, and his uncle, Dante Masocco, was a basketball player in Serie A1, who also represented the national team. Former Milan, Inter, and Italy goalkeeper Lorenzo Buffon is also a cousin of Gianluigi Buffon's grandfather. Buffon is Catholic. Buffon married Czech model Alena Šeredová in June 2011, although they had been in a relationship since 2005. They have two children, Louis Thomas (born in 2007 and named after Buffon's idol Thomas N'Kono) and David Lee (born in 2009 and named after Van Halen singer David Lee Roth). In May 2014, Buffon announced that he had separated from his wife after three years of marriage. He was soon romantically linked to Italian sports pundit, journalist and television host Ilaria D'Amico. In 2015, Buffon announced that the couple were expecting a child together. On 6 January 2016, the couple announced the birth of their son Leopoldo Mattia. In the summer of 2017, the pair became engaged. Prior to his relationship with and marriage to Šeredová, Buffon had also previously been engaged to a sprinter from the Italy national athletics team, Vincenza Calì. On 14 November 2008, Buffon released the Italian edition of his autobiography, Numero 1 (Number 1), which was written in collaboration with writer and Corriere della Sera journalist Roberto Perrone. In his autobiography, he revealed that he had suffered with bouts of depression during the 2003–04 season, following Juventus' penalty shoot-out defeat in the 2003 Champions League final, and due to Juventus' negative performance that season. In 2013, he elaborated that, between December 2003 and June 2004, he regularly visited a psychologist, but refused to take medication, and he overcame his depression prior to Euro 2004. In January 2019, he further revealed that he had even suffered from panic attacks due to his depression during his early career with Juventus, and that he even missed a game as a result. Buffon suffers from spheksophobia, as he is allergic to wasp stings. In his youth, Buffon supported a number of clubs, including his hometown club Carrarese, along with Genoa, and German side Borussia Mönchengladbach; up until the age of seven, he also supported Juventus, while between the ages of eight and twelve, he was a fan of Inter – due to his admiration for manager Giovanni Trapattoni – as well as Pescara, Como, Avellino, and Campobasso, before eventually supporting Genoa. He was a member of the ultras of Carrarese, specifically the "Commando Ultrà Indian Tips", and to this day, he still has the group's name printed on his goalkeeping gloves. On 7 May 2012, Buffon was elected vice-president of the Italian Footballers' Association (AIC); this was the first time an active footballer had held this position. After retiring from professional football, Buffon was appointed by the FIGC as the head of delegation of the Italy national team on 5 August 2023, a position last held by the late Gianluca Vialli. Buffon was sponsored by German sportswear company Puma during his career, wearing Puma gloves and Puma King football boots, and has appeared in Puma commercials. Buffon has also featured in Pepsi commercials, including an advertisement for the 2002 World Cup in Korea and Japan, where he lined up alongside several other footballers, including David Beckham, Raúl and Roberto Carlos, in taking on a team of sumo players. In 2009, Buffon, an avid poker player and gambler, was hired by PokerStars to endorse their products. Buffon was featured on the cover of the Italian edition of Konami's PES 2008, alongside global coverstar Cristiano Ronaldo. Buffon also features in EA Sports' FIFA video game series, and was named alongside Manuel Neuer, Iker Casillas and Petr Čech in the Ultimate Team Best Goalkeepers in FIFA 14. In 2011, he featured in a commercial for Italian mineral water company Ferrarelle. In 2016, Buffon was chosen as the new face of Amica Chips. The following year, he was instead chosen as the new face of Head & Shoulders in Italy. Throughout the 2017–18 season, Buffon appeared in the Netflix docu-series First Team: Juventus. In May 2018, Buffon announced his partnership with the video game World of Tanks. Late that same year, he also featured in a commercial for Birra Moretti. In December 2019, Buffon announced his collaboration with the Spanish clothing and accessories retailer Kimoa, which is owned by Spanish race car driver Fernando Alonso, to release four different limited edition models of sunglasses, which represent four European cities associated with Buffon's football career and achievements: Berlin (the location of the victorious 2006 World Cup final), Moscow (the city in which he made his international debut and won the UEFA Cup), Paris (the city in which his former club PSG is based), and Turin (the city in which his club at the time, Juventus, is based). In January 2020, Buffon made a cameo appearance in the music video for "Ti saprò aspettare" by Biagio Antonacci, where he coaches a children's football team against Antonacci as the opposing coach. In the last scene, Buffon takes a shot on Antonacci as goalkeeper, with the video intentionally stopping before the ball is either scored or saved. On 16 July 2010, Buffon became a share-holding partner of his hometown club Carrarese; he initially owned 50% of the club's shares, along with Cristiano Lucarelli and Maurizio Mian. On 10 June 2011, he acquired an additional 20% of the club's shares. On 6 July 2012, Buffon become the sole shareholder of Carrarese through his family's company, Buffon & co. In May 2015, Buffon stated that he would be stepping down from his position as the owner of Carrarese at the end of the 2014–15 season; in July, he sold 70% of Carrarese's shares to the Italian real estate developer Raffaele Tartaglia, who took control of the club, although Buffon still remained with the club as a minority shareholder. After continuing to struggle with financial difficulties, the club officially declared bankruptcy on 11 March 2016. On 30 May 2011, he joined the board of directors of the Italian textile company Zucchi Group S.p.A., with a share of 19.4%. Despite the company's financial difficulties, in 2015, Buffon, who had by then acquired 56% of the company's shares, had reportedly invested €20 million in order to save the company from bankruptcy. In late December, Zucchi was acquired by a French investment fund, Astrance Capital, which took control of Buffon's company GB Holding, under an agreement to restructure Zucchi Group's debt, while Buffon was allowed to retain a 15% share in the company. In 2017, Buffon launched his own brand of wine under the name "Buffon #1". Buffon is also known for his charity work. In addition to his other charitable endeavours, after every match he auctioned off his personalised captain's armband for charity. In 2012, Buffon joined the "Respect Diversity" Programme, through UEFA, which aimed to fight against racism, discrimination and intolerance in football. On 1 September 2014, Buffon, along with many current and former footballing stars, took part in the "Match for Peace", which was played at Rome's Stadio Olimpico, with the proceeds being donated to charity. In October 2019, Buffon was named a UN Goodwill Ambassador for the World Food Programme. Prior to the 2013 Italian general election, Buffon publicly endorsed the prime minister at the time, Mario Monti. Buffon was one of over 80 Italian celebrities to sign a petition in favour of the 2016 Italian constitutional referendum promoted by the Democratic Party under then prime minister Matteo Renzi. While at Parma, Buffon's decision to wear the number 88 shirt, rather than his previous number 1 shirt, for the 2000–01 season caused controversy in Italy. Buffon claimed to be unaware of the number's neo-Nazi connotations, stating that 88 represented "four balls", which are symbols of the character and attributes of a person. He stated that they were meant to signify his need for these attributes after his injury prior to Euro 2000, and that they also represented his "rebirth". He subsequently offered to change numbers, choosing the squad number 77 instead. In September 1999, Buffon faced heavy criticism and severe disciplinary sanctions for bearing the Italian fascist slogan Boia chi molla ("Who gives up is a scoundrel") handwritten on a T-shirt under his goalkeeping jersey, which he wore and showed during media interviews after a match against Lazio. Buffon publicly apologised, stating that it was a stupid and naïve gesture because he was completely ignorant of the slogan's neo-fascist connotations, stating that he had first encountered the slogan written on a boarding school desk, and was unaware of its far right-wing association and, in particular, its use with the neo-fascists in Reggio Calabria during the Reggio revolt in the early 1970s. He declared that he merely intended to use the slogan to spur on his teammates and the fans, as Parma had previously encountered some disappointing results. In 2000, Buffon risked a four-year prison sentence for falsifying a high school accounting diploma in order to enroll for a law degree at the University of Parma, and ultimately paid a 6,350,000 Lire fine in 2001; he later described the incident as his biggest regret in life, stating that it had been a dishonest gesture. On 12 May 2006, during the height of the Calciopoli scandal, Buffon was accused of illegally betting on Serie A matches, which initially put his place in Italy's 2006 World Cup squad at risk. Buffon was formally interrogated and admitted placing bets on sporting matches until players were forbidden from doing so in October 2005, but denied ever placing wagers on Italian football matches. He was cleared of all charges in December 2006. Following Italy's 2006 World Cup victory celebrations at Circus Maximus in Rome in July, he attracted further controversy when he displayed a banner he had received from the crowd, with the writing "Fieri di essere italiani" ("Proud to be Italian"), as well as a Celtic cross, a symbol adopted by neo–Nazis into the 21st century; Buffon later stated that he had not seen the symbol. On 11 April 2018, in the 2017–18 UEFA Champions League quarter-final second leg away to Real Madrid, Juventus needed a 3–0 win to force extra time, which was the scoreline when, deep into second-half stoppage time, referee Michael Oliver awarded a penalty to Real Madrid. Buffon was sent off for dissent after a confrontation with Oliver; Juventus were eliminated from the Champions League as the resulting penalty kick was converted by Cristiano Ronaldo. Buffon's post-match comments made about Oliver drew much media attention and controversy: "I know the referee saw what he saw, but it was certainly a dubious incident. Not clear-cut. And a dubious incident at the 93rd minute when we had a clear penalty denied in the first leg, you cannot award that at this point. The team gave its all, but a human being cannot destroy dreams like that at the end of an extraordinary comeback on a dubious situation. Clearly you cannot have a heart in your chest, but a bag of rubbish. On top of that, if you don't have the character to walk on a pitch like this in a stadium like this, you can sit in the stands with your wife, your kids, having your drink and eating crisps. You cannot ruin the dreams of a team. I could have told the referee anything at that moment, but he had to understand the degree of the disaster he was creating. If you can't handle the pressure and have the courage to make a decision, then you should just sit in the stands and eat your crisps." — Buffon's post-match comments about referee Michael Oliver On 11 May, Buffon was charged by UEFA over post-match comments made about referee Oliver, and later, on 5 June, the UEFA Control, Ethics and Disciplinary Body gave Buffon a three-match ban for UEFA competition matches "for which he would be otherwise eligible". Buffon later issued an apology, stating: "If I saw the referee again, I would give him a hug and say that he should have taken more time with that decision. With the feelings, emotions and disappointment of the situation, I behaved in a way that was not usual for me. After that match, I went beyond the limits with the things I said about the referee and I apologise for that." — Buffon's apology to referee Michael Oliver Includes Coppa Italia, Coupe de France Includes Coupe de la Ligue Appearances in UEFA Cup Appearances in UEFA Champions League Two appearances in UEFA Champions League, seven appearances in UEFA Cup One appearance in Supercoppa Italiana, one appearance in 4th-place Serie A UEFA Champions League tie-breaker Appearance in Supercoppa Italiana Six appearances in UEFA Champions League, one appearance in UEFA Europa League Six appearances in UEFA Champions League, eight appearances in UEFA Europa League Appearance in Trophée des Champions Appearance in Serie B promotion play-offs Parma Coppa Italia: 1998–99 Supercoppa Italiana: 1999 UEFA Cup: 1998–99 Juventus Serie A: 2001–02, 2002–03, 2011–12, 2012–13, 2013–14, 2014–15, 2015–16, 2016–17, 2017–18, 2019–20 Serie B: 2006–07 Coppa Italia: 2014–15, 2015–16, 2016–17, 2017–18, 2020–21 Supercoppa Italiana: 2002, 2003, 2012, 2013, 2015, 2020 UEFA Champions League runner-up: 2002–03, 2014–15, 2016–17 Paris Saint-Germain Ligue 1: 2018–19 Trophée des Champions: 2018 Italy U21 UEFA European Under-21 Championship: 1996 Mediterranean Games: 1997 Italy FIFA World Cup: 2006 UEFA European Championship runner-up: 2012 Individual Bravo Award: 1999 Serie A Goalkeeper of the Year Award: 1999, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2008, 2012, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017 UEFA Club Goalkeeper of the Year: 2002–03 UEFA Club Footballer of the Year: 2002–03 UEFA Team of the Year: 2003, 2004, 2006, 2016, 2017 ESM Team of the Year: 2002–03, 2016–17 Best European Goalkeeper: 2003, 2016, 2017[citation needed] Ballon d'Or: Second place 2006 IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper: 2003, 2004, 2006, 2007, 2017 IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper: Runner-up 2008, 2009, 2012, 2013, 2015, 2016 IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper: 3rd place 2001, 2005, 2018 FIFA 100 FIFA World Cup Yashin Award: 2006 FIFA World Cup All-Star Team: 2006 Serie A "Fan" Award: 2006, 2007 FIFA FIFPro World XI: 2006, 2007, 2017 UEFA European Championship Team of the Tournament: 2008, 2012 Sports Illustrated Team of the Decade: 2009 ESPN World Team of the Decade: 2009 IFFHS Best Goalkeeper of the Decade 2001–2010 IFFHS Best Goalkeeper of the Decade 2011–2020: 2nd IFFHS Best Goalkeeper of the 21st Century 2001–2020 IFFHS Best Goalkeeper of the Past 25 Years: 1987–2012 IFFHS All Time World's Best Goalkeeper: 1987–2020 Serie A Team of the Year: 2012, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017 AIC Legend Special Award: 2023 Pallone Azzurro: 2013, 2016 UEFA Europa League Squad of the Season: 2013–14 Premio Nereo Rocco: 2014 UEFA Champions League Squad of the Season: 2014–15, 2016–17 UEFA Ultimate Team of the Year substitute (published 2015) France Football World XI: 2015 Gianni Brera Award for Sportsman of the Year: 2015 Juventus MVP of the Year: 2015–16 UEFA Euro All-time XI (published 2016) Premio Nazionale Carriera Esemplare "Gaetano Scirea": 2016 Golden Foot: 2016 Serie A Footballer of the Year: 2016–17 The Best FIFA Goalkeeper: 2017 UEFA Champions League Goalkeeper of the Season: 2016–17 IFFHS Men's World Team: 2017 Gazzetta Sports Awards Man of the Year: 2017 Juventus Greatest XI of All Time: 2017 FourFourTwo best goalkeeper of the 21st century: 2019 Ballon d'Or Dream Team (Silver): 2020 IFFHS All-time Men's B Dream Team: 2021 Records Most appearances in Serie A: 657 Second-most appearances for Juventus in all competitions: 685, behind Alessandro Del Piero, 705 Most appearances for Juventus in Serie A: 489 Most appearances for Juventus in Italian League matches (includes Serie A and Serie B): 526 Most appearances for Juventus in the Supercoppa Italiana: 8 Most appearances for Juventus in the UEFA Champions League: 117 (including 4 in the qualifying rounds) Most appearances for Juventus in UEFA club competitions: 126 Second-most appearances for Juventus in international club competitions: 126, behind Alessandro Del Piero, 130 Joint-most appearances for Juventus in Serie B: 37, alongside Federico Balzaretti and Alessandro Birindelli Most all-time minutes played for Juventus in all competitions: 61,412 Most all-time minutes played for Juventus in Serie A: 43,549 Most career club appearances by an Italian player: 975 Most appearances in Europe's top five leagues: 674 (657 in Serie A and 17 in Ligue 1) Most appearances for Italy senior team: 176 Most all-time minutes played for Italy senior team: 15,251 Most appearances for Italy in FIFA World Cup qualification matches: 39 Joint second-most appearances for Italy in UEFA European Championship matches: 17, alongside Giorgio Chiellini, and behind Leonardo Bonucci, 18 Most appearances for Italy in UEFA European Championship qualifying matches: 41 Most appearances for Italy in UEFA European Championship (final tournament and qualifying matches): 58 Joint-most appearances for Italy in FIFA Confederations Cup matches: 8, alongside Giorgio Chiellini and Riccardo Montolivo Most appearances as captain for Italy senior team: 80 Most goalkeeper appearances as captain for Italy senior team: 80 Most appearances by a goalkeeper at the UEFA European Championship: 17 Joint-fewest goals conceded in a single FIFA World Cup edition by a starting World Cup winning goalkeeper: 2 goals in 7 appearances at the 2006 World Cup, alongside Iker Casillas in 2010 and Fabien Barthez in 1998 Joint-fewest goals conceded in a single UEFA European Championship edition (at least 3 matches played): 1 goal in 4 appearances at Euro 2016, alongside Iker Casillas in 2012, Thomas Myhre in 2000 and Dino Zoff in 1968 Joint-most clean sheets in a single World Cup edition: 5 at the 2006 World Cup, alongside Iker Casillas in 2010, Oliver Kahn in 2002, Fabien Barthez in 1998 and Walter Zenga in 1990 Longest consecutive run without conceding a goal in a single Serie A season: 974 minutes in 2015–16 Most consecutive clean sheets in a single Serie A season: 10 in 2015–16 Joint-most clean sheets in a single Serie A season: 21 in 2011–12 and 2015–16 Longest consecutive run without conceding a goal in the qualifying stages of the UEFA European Championship: 644 minutes in 2010 and 2011 One of only eight players to take part in five FIFA World Cups: 1998, 2002, 2006, 2010 and 2014 Most clean sheets by an individual goalkeeper in all-time: 501 Most clean sheets for Italy senior team: 77 (second-most clean sheets in international football) Most clean sheets for Italy at the FIFA World Cup: 6 Most clean sheets for Italy at the UEFA European Championship: 8 Most clean sheets for Italy at the FIFA Confederations Cup: 1 Most clean sheets for Italy in FIFA World Cup qualification matches: 21 Most clean sheets for Italy in UEFA European Championship qualifying matches: 23 Most clean sheets in Serie A: 299 Most clean sheets by a goalkeeper in men's association football: 505 Third-most clean sheets in the UEFA Champions League: 53 (excluding 3 in the qualifying rounds), behind Iker Casillas, 57 (excluding 2 in qualifying) and Manuel Neuer, 54 (excluding 2 in qualifying) Second most clean sheets kept in a single UEFA Champions League season: 8 (2016–17 season) Most appearances in the UEFA Champions League by an Italian player: 124 (excluding 8 in the qualifying rounds) Joint sixth-most appearances in UEFA club competitions: 167 (124 in the UEFA Champions League, 8 in the UEFA Champions League qualifying rounds and 35 in the UEFA Cup/Europa League) Third-longest consecutive run without conceding a goal in the UEFA Champions League: 690 minutes in 2016–17, behind Ederson, 706, and Jens Lehmann, 853 Third-most appearances by a goalkeeper in the UEFA Champions League: 132 (including 8 in the qualifying rounds), behind Iker Casillas, 181 (including 4 in qualifying rounds) and Manuel Neuer, 133 (including 2 in the qualifying rounds) Third-most appearances by a goalkeeper in UEFA club competitions: 167, behind Iker Casillas, 188, and Pepe Reina, 183 Most UEFA Champions League final appearances without a victory: 3, alongside Paolo Montero Most penalties saved for Italy senior team: 5 Joint-most penalties saved in shoot-outs at the UEFA European Championship: 3, alongside Iker Casillas, Gianluigi Donnarumma and Unai Simón Joint third-most penalties saved in the UEFA Champions League (excluding shoot-outs): 4 (out of 13), alongside Manuel Neuer (out of 11), and behind Iker Casillas, 7 (out of 23) and Petr Čech, 5 (out of 11) Third-most senior international appearances by a European footballer: 176, behind Cristiano Ronaldo, 200 and Sergio Ramos, 180 Ninth-most men's senior international appearances: 176 Second-most appearances in UEFA European Championship (final tournament and qualifying matches): 58, behind Cristiano Ronaldo, 64 Only goalkeeper to ever win the UEFA Club Footballer of the Year Award: 2003 Most Serie A titles won by a player: 10 (all with Juventus) Third-most consecutive Serie A titles: 7, alongside Stephan Lichtsteiner and Claudio Marchisio, behind Andrea Barzagli, 8 and Giorgio Chiellini, 9 Joint-most Supercoppa Italiana titles: 6 (1 with Parma and 5 with Juventus), alongside Dejan Stanković Joint-most Coppa Italia titles: 6 (1 with Parma and 5 with Juventus), alongside Roberto Mancini Most Serie A Goalkeeper of the Year awards: 13 Joint-most IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper Awards: 5, alongside Iker Casillas and Manuel Neuer Most Top 3 IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper Awards: 14 (first place 5 times, second place 6 times and third place 3 times) Most Pallone Azzurro Awards: 2 Fourth-most expensive goalkeeper of all time: €52 million, behind Kepa Arrizabalaga, €80 million, Alisson, €72.5 million and André Onana, €52.5 million Most titles won with Juventus: 21 Second-oldest player to appear in Serie A: 43 years, 104 days, behind Marco Ballotta, 44 years, 38 days Second-oldest goalkeeper to appear in the UEFA Champions League: 42 years, 315 days, behind Marco Ballotta, 43 years, 252 days He also has the second highest number of clean sheets (420) since 2000s among all goalkeepers.(2000–2020) Orders CONI: Golden Collar of Sports Merit: 2006 4th Class / Officer: Ufficiale Ordine al Merito della Repubblica Italiana: 2006 Association football portal Italy portal List of footballers with 100 or more UEFA Champions League appearances List of men's footballers with 100 or more international caps List of men's footballers with 1000 or more official appearances Not including the 2004–05 and 2005–06 Serie A titles, which were revoked following the Calciopoli scandal. Gianpiero Combi's Italian league record unbeaten streak was set during the 1925–26 Prima Divisione season, prior to the establishment of the Serie A in the 1929–30 season. A name change occurred in 2001 to reflect the players' age limit at the end of the season rather than at the start of the season; the Italy under-16 team of the 1993–94 season (which took part at the 1994 UEFA European Under-16 Championship) was therefore the equivalent of the current Italy national under-17 football team See See See See See See See Tally does not include appearances of players who also appeared in the European Cup prior to the establishment of the UEFA Champions League during the 1992–93 season. "2014 FIFA World Cup Brazil: List of Players: Italy" (PDF). FIFA. 14 July 2014. p. 21. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2019. "Gianluigi Buffon" (in Italian). Juventus FC. Archived from the original on 24 October 2016. Retrieved 31 March 2022. Udine, Redazione (13 June 2017). "Gianluigi Buffon cittadino onorario di Latisana". Diario di Udine. Archived from the original on 12 April 2021. Retrieved 12 April 2021. Mauro, Paola (13 June 2017). "Gianluigi Buffon: "Io un campione? È nel dna dei friulani"". Messaggero Veneto. Archived from the original on 12 April 2021. Retrieved 12 April 2021. Schianchi, Andrea (2011). Il calcio di Buffon ai raggi X. La Gazzetta dello Sport. pp. 13, 22. In other words, Lorenzo Buffon is a cousin of Gianluigi's grandfather. "Ci ritorni in mente... Lorenzo Buffon". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 12 July 2009. Archived from the original on 19 October 2020. Retrieved 23 May 2014. Greg Lea (29 October 2014). "Why Superman Buffon stayed at Juventus for 500 games". FourFourTwo. Archived from the original on 21 August 2016. Retrieved 13 July 2016. James Horncastle (9 April 2015). "Parma legend Buffon prepares to return with juventus". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 11 February 2016. Retrieved 21 September 2015. "Gianluigi Buffon". UEFA. Archived from the original on 3 February 2012. Retrieved 9 June 2013. "Gianluigi Buffon" (in Italian). La Repubblica. 23 May 2008. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 1 November 2014. Paolo Menicucci (19 November 2015). "Gianluigi Buffon: 'Destiny made me become a goalkeeper'". UEFA.com. Archived from the original on 3 December 2017. Retrieved 19 November 2017. "Asd Perticata Calcio: I Campioni – Gianluigi Buffon" (in Italian). Archived from the original on 16 June 2013. Retrieved 5 August 2012. Simon Burnton (12 February 2014). "World Cup: 25 stunning moments ... No1: Cameroon stun Argentina in 1990". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 16 March 2016. "Italy record-breaker Buffon may go down as the greatest goalkeeper in history". Goal.com. 11 October 2013. Archived from the original on 24 February 2015. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Gianluigi Buffon: Bio". gianluigibuffon.it. Archived from the original on 16 May 2017. Retrieved 30 October 2014. "Buffon a un passo dalle 100 in Champions con la Juve" (in Italian). UEFA.com. 2 May 2017. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 1 November 2017. "Buffon: "Superman? E' nato così..."" (in Italian). Tuttosport.com. 4 October 2009. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 27 June 2014. Jonathan Jurejko (23 February 2015). "Parma's uncertain future: Former Uefa Cup winners rack up debts". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 31 January 2021. Retrieved 16 March 2016. "Parma, regina d'Italia" (in Italian). RaiSport.RAI.it. 5 May 1999. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 16 March 2016. "Parma vs. Rangers: 1–0 (Aggregate: 1–2)". UEFA.com. Archived from the original on 6 September 2016. Retrieved 16 March 2016. José Luis Pierrend (8 January 2015). "The "Bravo" Award". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 1 July 2014. Retrieved 20 November 2015. "IFFHS Goalkeeper of the year 1999". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 28 September 2022. Retrieved 6 January 2013. "European Footballer of the Year ("Ballon d'Or") 1999". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 14 March 2013. Retrieved 5 August 2014. "Supercoppa al Parma" (in Italian). RaiSport.RAI.it. 21 August 1999. Archived from the original on 22 March 2016. Retrieved 16 March 2016. "Baggio porta l'Inter tra i Campioni" (in Italian). RaiSport.RAI.it. Archived from the original on 1 December 2013. Retrieved 30 October 2014. "Coppa alla Fiorentina col pareggio più bello". La Repubblica (in Italian). 13 June 2001. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 16 March 2016. "IFFHS goalkeeper of the year 2001". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. Retrieved 6 January 2013. "Acquistato Buffon" (Press release) (in Italian). Turin: Juventus FC. 3 July 2001. Archived from the original on 7 September 2001. Retrieved 6 April 2010. "Rui Costa al Parma, Buffon alla Juve". La Repubblica (in Italian). 30 June 2001. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 2 July 2017. "Juve land £23m Buffon". BBC Sport. British Broadcasting Corporation. 4 July 2001. Archived from the original on 18 June 2010. Retrieved 6 April 2010. Parma A.C. S.p.A. bilancio (financial report and accounts) on 30 June 2002 (in Italian), PDF purchased in Italian CCIAA "Reports and Financial Statements at 30 June 2002" (PDF). Turin: Juventus FC. 28 October 2002. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 June 2015. Retrieved 3 November 2012. "On This Day: Juventus sign Buffon". Football Italia. 3 July 2017. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 3 July 2017. David Plummer; Daniel Taylor (1 August 2001). "Fulham capture Van der Sar in surprise £7m move from Juventus". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 January 2021. Retrieved 3 July 2017. Simon Evans (26 August 2001). "Juve look sharper for Zidane's exit". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 30 January 2021. Retrieved 3 July 2017. "Buffon non-dimentica 'Mi mancano due scudetti'". La Repubblica (in Italian). 27 February 2009. Archived from the original on 20 May 2014. Retrieved 20 May 2014. "Buffon e le parate da tre punti quando il fuoriclasse è tra i pali" (in Italian). La Repubblica. Archived from the original on 30 October 2014. Retrieved 30 October 2014. "Gonzalo Higuain's £75m Juventus move – its place in history and what it means for football". eurosport.com. 26 July 2016. Archived from the original on 30 July 2016. Retrieved 26 July 2016. "Higuain joins Juventus". juventus.com. 26 July 2016. Archived from the original on 26 July 2016. Retrieved 26 July 2016. "Gianluigi Buffon – Sito Ufficiale: Scheda Tecnica". gianluigibuffon.it. Archived from the original on 1 February 2021. Retrieved 9 September 2014. "Buffon si tuffa nel mito: 500 partite a difesa della Juventus" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 27 October 2014. Archived from the original on 23 October 2020. Retrieved 30 October 2014. "Buffon: A big save is as important as a goal". FIFA.com. 6 May 2013. Archived from the original on 6 June 2013. Retrieved 5 May 2014. Massimo Vincenzi (15 September 2001). "Il Chievo spaventa la Juve ma i bianconeri vincono" (in Italian). La Repubblica. Archived from the original on 14 September 2016. Retrieved 3 July 2017. "Gianluigi Buffon, Uefa.com Profile". UEFA.com. Archived from the original on 9 October 2019. Retrieved 9 September 2014. "Tutte le volte della Signora in Supercoppa italiana" (in Italian). juventus.com. 20 December 2014. Archived from the original on 21 December 2014. Retrieved 4 May 2015. Matteo Durante. "Milan campione. La Juve s'inchina ai rigori". panorama.it (in Italian). Panorama. Archived from the original on 4 May 2016. Retrieved 10 February 2015. "Gigi Buffon, "Numero 1" al Corriere". Il Corriere della Sera (in Italian). 14 November 2008. Archived from the original on 29 September 2020. Retrieved 24 April 2020. Cresto–Dina, Dario (1 June 2014). "Le mani di Buffon sul Brasile". La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 3 February 2020. Retrieved 24 April 2020. "Real Madrid travolto la Juve vola a Manchester". repubblica.it (in Italian). La Repubblica. Archived from the original on 10 February 2015. Retrieved 10 February 2015. "UEFA Club Football Awards". uefa.org. May 2011. Archived from the original on 26 December 2014. Retrieved 10 February 2015. "UEFA Team of the Year 2003". uefa.com. 10 January 2012. Archived from the original on 15 May 2020. Retrieved 10 February 2015. "IFFHS Goalkeeper of the Year 2003". IFFHS. Archived from the original on 21 October 2020. Retrieved 18 August 2012. Pierrend, José (26 March 2005). "European Footballer of the Year ("Ballon d'Or") 2003". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 1 March 2015. Retrieved 16 March 2016. "2003, Milan ko: alla Juve va la Supercoppa italiana" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 3 August 2011. Archived from the original on 27 July 2014. Retrieved 10 February 2015. "The Fifa 100". The Guardian. 4 March 2004. Retrieved 9 June 2015. "IFFHS' World's Best Goalkeeper of the Year 2007". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 18 December 2015. Retrieved 19 August 2012. "Juve, Buffon fuori almeno due mesi" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 16 August 2005. Archived from the original on 27 May 2013. Retrieved 18 August 2012. "Portiere portafortuna Vorrei imitare Abbiati" (in Italian). La Repubblica. 22 June 2010. Archived from the original on 13 February 2021. Retrieved 18 August 2012. "Buffon, semplicemente il migliore" [Buffon, simply the best] (in Italian). Sky.it. 15 November 2008. Archived from the original on 30 October 2014. Retrieved 1 November 2014. "2006 FIFPro XI". FIFPro.org. Archived from the original on 9 August 2012. Retrieved 18 August 2012. "Scommesse, Buffon si difende" [Betting, Buffon defends himself] (in Italian). La Repubblica. 13 May 2006. Archived from the original on 16 April 2015. Retrieved 4 May 2015. Northcroft, Jonathan (16 July 2006). "Liverpool set for raid on Juve". London: The Sunday Times. Archived from the original on 4 March 2020. Retrieved 16 July 2006. "Gianluigi Buffon: Gigi at 30". Football Italia. Archived from the original on 19 October 2011. Retrieved 12 September 2011. "CALCIO, JUVE; BUFFON: VOGLIO RESTARE, I TIFOSI MI AMANO" (in Italian). La Repubblica. Archived from the original on 11 August 2014. Retrieved 3 August 2014. ""Buffon goes from OAP to VIP in Bayern's esteem"". Reuters. 9 April 2013. Archived from the original on 20 August 2017. Retrieved 19 May 2014. "Juve, il debutto in B è un flop a Rimini trova solo un pareggio" (in Italian). La Repubblica. 9 September 2006. Archived from the original on 20 January 2018. Retrieved 15 November 2017. "Espulso Buffon, la Juventus fermata dall'Albinoleffe" (in Italian). La Repubblica. 18 November 2006. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 15 November 2017. Bargellini, Simone (23 July 2011). "Buffon pledges future to Juve". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 12 September 2011. "FIFPro XI 2007". FIFPro.org. Archived from the original on 11 May 2013. Retrieved 19 August 2012. "Gianluigi Buffon, ESPN Profile, Bio and Career Stats – 2007–08". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 18 December 2012. Pierrend, José Luis (16 January 2009). "European Footballer of the Year ("Ballon d'Or") 2008". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 12 March 2009. Retrieved 1 January 2016. "FIFA World Player of the Year – Men's votes by player" (PDF). FIFA.com. Fédération Internationale de Football Association. 12 January 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 January 2009. Retrieved 1 January 2016. "Gianluigi Buffon Will Be Back Playing For Juventus in January – Agent". Goal.com. 10 November 2010. Archived from the original on 24 February 2015. Retrieved 12 September 2011. "Alex Manninger Committed To Juventus – Agent". Goal.com. 24 May 2009. Archived from the original on 24 February 2015. Retrieved 12 September 2011. "Juventus Duo Camoranesi And Buffon Furious After Lecce Draw – Report". Goal.com. 3 May 2009. Archived from the original on 13 February 2021. Retrieved 13 June 2010. "Buffon k.o." (in Italian). Sport.it. Archived from the original on 22 October 2013. Retrieved 18 August 2012. "IFFHS Goalkeeper of the decade (2000–2010)". IFFHS. Archived from the original on 12 September 2017. Retrieved 6 January 2013. Nicky Bandini (4 November 2012). "Juventus lose at last – but how significant will this defeat prove?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 1 January 2016. "Conte replaces Del Neri at Juventus". ESPN Soccernet. 31 May 2011. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 1 January 2016. "Juventus' Gianluigi Buffon: Saving Francesco Totti's penalty against Roma was down to hard work in training". Goal.com. 14 December 2011. Archived from the original on 20 October 2020. Retrieved 17 January 2012. "Buffon voted player of the month for December". Juventus.com. 13 January 2012. Retrieved 17 January 2012. "Juventus vs. Inter Milan: 5 Lessons Learned from Derby D'Italia". Bleacher Report. 25 March 2012. Archived from the original on 27 May 2013. Retrieved 1 February 2013. Chelston D'souza (26 March 2012). "Juventus 2–0 Inter – Post Mortem: Del Piero's Goal And Conte's Formation Bury The Nerazzurri". Thehardtackle.com. Archived from the original on 12 May 2013. Retrieved 1 February 2013. "Juve's Ministers of Defence". Football Italia. 2 May 2012. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 20 March 2016. Amlan Chaudhury (21 May 2012). "Best Goalkeepers in Europe". Thehardtackle.com. Archived from the original on 17 March 2021. Retrieved 1 February 2013. "Verona v Juventus: Asamoah wants to keep pushing". FourFourTwo. 6 May 2016. Archived from the original on 17 June 2021. Retrieved 9 May 2016. "Euro 2012: Juventus renaissance transforms Cesare Prandelli's Italy". The Guardian. 27 June 2012. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 20 March 2016. "Goal.com 50". Goal.com. Archived from the original on 17 August 2012. Retrieved 18 August 2012. "Gianluigi Buffon, ESPN Profile, Bio and Career Stats – 2011–12". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 8 October 2017. Retrieved 18 December 2012. "Gianluigi Buffon Statistics". NBC. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2012. "Juventus 2011–12 Season in Review: The Goalkeepers". 26 May 2012. Archived from the original on 30 June 2012. Retrieved 18 December 2012. "Player Focus: Save Success Rate". Archived from the original on 25 June 2012. Retrieved 18 December 2012. James Horncastle (14 May 2012). "Serie A Team of the Season". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 19 May 2012. Retrieved 18 August 2012. Nicky Bandini (21 May 2012). "Napoli ruin Del Piero's final farewell with Coppa Italia win over Juventus". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 20 March 2016. "Juventus 4–2 Napoli". ESPN FC. 14 August 2012. Archived from the original on 8 October 2017. Retrieved 23 August 2012. "Buffon out of Serie A curtain-raiser for champions Juventus". Goal.com. 25 August 2012. Archived from the original on 13 February 2021. Retrieved 26 August 2012. "TEAM NEWS: Buffon returns to action for Juventus' clash with Udinese". Goal.com. 2 September 2012. Archived from the original on 10 September 2012. Retrieved 2 September 2012. "Udinese 1–4 Juventus: Giovinco double helps sink 10-man hosts". Yahoo.com. Archived from the original on 23 October 2013. Retrieved 2 September 2012. "Chelsea vs Juventus: 2–2; Buffon admires Oscar, salutes Juve display". FIFA.com. Archived from the original on 23 September 2012. Retrieved 27 September 2012. "Juventus FC Fixtures, Schedule & Results – 2012–13 Season". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 3 December 2010. Retrieved 27 September 2012. "Ballon d'Or 2013: Nominees List". Juventus.com. 29 October 2012. Archived from the original on 30 April 2015. Retrieved 6 December 2012. "Juventus vs FC Nordsjaelland". Goal.com. Archived from the original on 11 November 2012. Retrieved 6 December 2012. "Juventus vs. Chelsea: 3–0". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 5 December 2012. Retrieved 6 December 2012. "Shaktar Donetsk vs Juventus: 0–1". Eurosport. Archived from the original on 8 December 2012. Retrieved 6 December 2012. Ivan Palumbo (12 December 2012). "La Juve nel segno del 12 Giovinco la manda ai quarti" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 30 January 2018. "Another clean sheet for Buffon". Football Italia. Archived from the original on 20 December 2012. Retrieved 18 December 2012. "Juventus are winter champions". Football Italia. 16 December 2012. Archived from the original on 18 December 2012. Retrieved 18 December 2012. "IFFHS goalkeeper of the year 2012". IFFHS. Archived from the original on 10 September 2015. Retrieved 6 January 2013. "IFFHS Goalkeeper of the 21st Century (2000–2012)". IFFHS. Archived from the original on 8 February 2012. Retrieved 6 January 2013. "Agnelli: "Buffon, un uomo leale"" (in Italian). Juventus FC Official Website. 23 January 2013. Archived from the original on 26 June 2015. Retrieved 23 January 2013. "Gran Gala del Calcio 2012". forzaitalianfootball.com. 27 January 2013. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 28 January 2013. "Juventus 'continue to write history'". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 20 August 2013. Retrieved 19 August 2013. "Juventus vs. Lazio: 4–0". Goal.com. Archived from the original on 23 August 2013. Retrieved 29 August 2013. "Juventus goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon pleased with result". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 11 December 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Buffon Extends Unbeatable Spell". 7 December 2013. Archived from the original on 14 December 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "Buffon sixth in all-time list". Football Italia. Archived from the original on 9 February 2014. Retrieved 23 December 2013. "Shortlist FIFA FIFPro World XI 2013". FIFPro. Archived from the original on 27 December 2013. Retrieved 10 December 2013. "The IFFHS world's best goalkeeper 2013 is Manuel Neuer". IFFHS. Archived from the original on 12 September 2016. Retrieved 23 May 2014. "Buffon receives December's player of the month award". Juventus.com. 22 January 2014. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 11 December 2015. "Genoa-Juventus 0–1. Gol di Pirlo. Buffon para un rigore a Calaiò" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 16 March 2014. Archived from the original on 20 April 2021. Retrieved 30 October 2014. "Genoa-Juve 0–1: Buffon e Pirlo decisivi" (in Italian). Calciomercato.com. 16 March 2014. Archived from the original on 20 April 2021. Retrieved 30 October 2014. "Buffon celebrates landmark Juve title". ESPN FC. 4 May 2014. Archived from the original on 8 October 2017. Retrieved 16 March 2016. "#1 Gianluigi Buffon". NBC Sports. Archived from the original on 19 May 2014. Retrieved 19 May 2014. "Gianluigi Buffon, ESPN Profile, Bio and Career Stats – 2013–14". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 4 June 2014. Retrieved 19 May 2014. "La squadra della stagione di UEFA Europa League" [UEFA Europa League Team of the Season] (in Italian). UEFA.com. 30 May 2014. Archived from the original on 13 July 2015. Retrieved 28 September 2014. "Calciomercato Juve, accordo con Buffon: rinnova fino al 2017!" (in Italian). Il Corriere dello Sport. 1 July 2014. Archived from the original on 7 August 2014. Retrieved 13 July 2014. Roberta Radaelli (29 October 2014). "Buffon hailed after 500th Juventus appearance". UEFA.com. Retrieved 30 October 2014. "Chievo-Juventus 0–1, autogol di Biraghi. Allegri comincia con una vittoria" (in Italian). la Gazzetta dello Sport. 31 August 2014. Archived from the original on 31 August 2014. Retrieved 31 August 2014. "Leonardo Bonucci's spectacular late volley gave Juventus victory in a fiery encounter with title rivals Roma". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 9 October 2014. "Serie A – Il record mancato da Buffon: colpa di Totti e Conte" (in Italian). Eurosport. Archived from the original on 15 October 2014. Retrieved 9 October 2014. "Record di imbattibilità: i bookie si fidano con riserva di Buffon" (in Italian). Calcio Mercato.com. 29 September 2014. Archived from the original on 1 March 2021. Retrieved 30 October 2014. "Genoa 1–0 Juventus: Gianluigi Buffon loses 500th league game". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2014. "Empoli-Juventus 0–2: Pirlo e Morata in gol. Allegri torna a +3 sulla Roma" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 1 November 2014. Archived from the original on 1 November 2014. Retrieved 1 November 2014. "Five goalkeepers shortlisted for FIFA FIFPro World XI 2014". FIFA. 25 November 2014. Archived from the original on 24 November 2014. Retrieved 25 November 2014. "Dream Team Uefa: 4 "italiani" nell'elenco dei 40 migliori" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 25 November 2014. Archived from the original on 28 November 2014. Retrieved 25 November 2014. "Buffon Goalkeeper of the Year". Football Italia. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 15 December 2014. "Supercoppa al Napoli, Juventus battuta 8–7 ai rigori" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 22 December 2014. Archived from the original on 4 December 2020. Retrieved 22 December 2014. "Serie A – Napoli claim Italian Super Cup on penalties despite Gianluigi Buffon brilliance". Eurosport. Archived from the original on 24 December 2014. Retrieved 23 December 2014. "Italy's Buffon named Cup's top goalkeeper". Chron. 10 July 2006. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. Retrieved 19 October 2018. "IFFHS Names Manuel Neuer the World's Best Goalkeeper in 2014". 8 January 2015. Archived from the original on 9 February 2021. Retrieved 10 February 2015. "Italy's Buffon named Cup's top goalkeeper". Chron. 10 July 2006. Archived from the original on 28 December 2018. Retrieved 19 October 2018. Antonio Fioretto (19 February 2015). "GiGigantesco: Buffon da record, superato Scirea" [Gigantic Gigi: Record beater Buffon, Scirea surpassed]. sportcafe24.com (in Italian). Archived from the original on 22 October 2020. Retrieved 3 March 2015. Luke Reddy (2 March 2015). "Roma-Juventus (1–1)". bbc.com. BBC. Archived from the original on 3 March 2015. Retrieved 3 March 2015. Susy Campanale (16 February 2015). "Serie A Week 23: Did You Know?". football-italia.net. Football Italia. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 3 March 2015. "Palermo 0–1 Juventus". espnfc.com. ESPN FC. 14 March 2015. Archived from the original on 15 March 2015. Retrieved 14 March 2015. Andrea Tabacco (15 April 2015). "Buffon e gli altri 6 portieri meno battuti della Champions League" (in Italian). Yahoo. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 15 September 2015. "Juventus, Furino raggiunto da Buffon a quota 528: Gigi è eterno, spero supererà Zoff" [Juventus, Furino equalled by Buffon with 528 appearances: Gigi is eternal, I hope he overtakes Zoff]. lapresse.it (in Italian). 27 April 2015. Archived from the original on 4 May 2015. Retrieved 29 April 2015. "Sampdoria-Juventus (0–1)". BBC. 2 May 2015. Archived from the original on 14 January 2016. Retrieved 4 May 2015. "Morata takes Juve through at Madrid's expense". UEFA. 13 May 2015. Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 14 May 2015. Jacopo Gerna (20 May 2015). "Juve infinita, vince la 10ª Coppa Italia: Matri piega la Lazio ai supplementari" [An infinite Juve wins its 10th Coppa Italia: Matri sinks Lazio in extra-time] (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. Archived from the original on 28 July 2017. Retrieved 21 May 2015. "Buffon raggiunge le 900 presenze in carriera!" (in Italian). Tutto Juve. 23 May 2015. Archived from the original on 13 April 2021. Retrieved 24 May 2015. "Napoli's Miguel Britos sent off for head-butting in defeat by Juventus". theguardian.com. 23 May 2015. Archived from the original on 7 March 2019. Retrieved 6 March 2019. "Barcelona see off Juventus to claim fifth title". UEFA. 6 June 2015. Archived from the original on 8 June 2015. "Statistics". UEFA. Archived from the original on 11 August 2015. Retrieved 10 June 2015. "Champions League final: All the best stats and facts". Sky Sports. 5 June 2015. Archived from the original on 10 June 2015. Retrieved 10 June 2015. "UEFA Champions League squad of the season". UEFA. 9 June 2015. Archived from the original on 11 June 2015. Retrieved 9 June 2015. "Best Player in Europe Award shortlist announced". UEFA.com. 15 July 2015. Archived from the original on 31 January 2019. Retrieved 16 July 2015. "Ter Stegen, sublime against Bayern". UEFA.com. Archived from the original on 28 August 2016. Retrieved 17 December 2015. "Juventus-Lazio 2–0, Mandzukic e Dybala decidono la Supercoppa" [Juventus-Lazio 2–0, Mandzukic and Dybala decide the Supercup] (in Italian). La Repubblica. 8 August 2015. Archived from the original on 8 September 2018. Retrieved 8 August 2015. "Best Player in Europe: Messi, Ronaldo or Suárez". UEFA.com. 12 August 2015. Archived from the original on 31 January 2020. Retrieved 12 August 2015. "Buffon takes first 2015/16 MVP of the Month". Juventus.com. 2 October 2015. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 11 December 2015. "Borussia Mönchengladbach hold Juventus in tale of Buffon and Sommer". The Guardian. 22 October 2015. Archived from the original on 27 October 2020. Retrieved 21 October 2015. Jonathan Terreni (19 November 2015). "Juventus, Buffon: dal Milan al... Milan! Vent'anni e 551 partite dopo" (in Italian). Calcio Mercato. Archived from the original on 20 November 2015. Retrieved 26 November 2015. "Serie A Week 13: Did You Know?". Football Italia. 22 November 2015. Archived from the original on 1 March 2021. Retrieved 23 November 2015. Paul Sumeet (24 November 2015). "Six Juventus stars nominated for UEFA Team of the Year". La Gazzetta dello Sport. Archived from the original on 27 November 2015. Retrieved 26 November 2015. Gianluca Oddenino (26 November 2015). "Buffon: "Dopo Barcellona e Bayern, c'è la Juve"" [Buffon: "After Barcelona and Bayern, there is Juve"] (in Italian). La Stampa. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 26 November 2015. "Final 55 nominees for World XI 2015". FIFPro. 26 November 2015. Archived from the original on 29 November 2015. Retrieved 27 November 2015. "Ballon D'Or, Buffon left out". Football Italia. 2 October 2015. Archived from the original on 5 December 2015. Retrieved 27 November 2015. "Buffon: "We're not done yet"". Juventus.com. 4 December 2015. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 5 December 2015. "Oscar del Calcio, dominio Juve. Buffon: "Donnarumma ha doti da grande"" [Serie A Oscars, Juve dominate. Buffon: "Donnarumma has the characteristics to be great"] (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 14 December 2015. Archived from the original on 12 May 2019. Retrieved 14 December 2015. "Buffon, Messi, CR7 for 'Best Player'". Football Italia. 17 December 2015. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 18 December 2015. "THE WORLD'S BEST GOALKEEPER 2015". IFFHS.de. 6 January 2016. Archived from the original on 8 January 2016. Retrieved 13 January 2016. Michele Gazzetti (20 March 2016). "SUPERGIGI: NESSUNO COME BUFFON" [SuperGigi: No one like Buffon] (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. Archived from the original on 2 April 2016. Retrieved 21 March 2016. "Juventus 2 Inter 0: Bonucci, Morata settle Derby d'Italia". FourFourTwo. 28 February 2016. Archived from the original on 6 March 2016. Retrieved 29 February 2016. "Buffon eyes Serie A record". Football Italia. 6 March 2016. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 7 March 2016. "Atalanta 0 Juventus 2: Barzagli and Lemina restore champions' advantage at Serie A summit". FourFourTwo. 6 March 2016. Archived from the original on 1 March 2021. Retrieved 7 March 2016. "Buffon eyes all-time record". Football Italia. 11 March 2016. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 11 March 2016. Paolo Menicucci (12 March 2016). "Zoff v Buffon: who is Italy's all-time No1?". UEFA.com. Retrieved 21 March 2016. "Juve, Buffon: nuovo record di imbattibilità a 973 minuti! Seba Rossi battuto" [Juve, Buffon: new unbeaten record of 973 minutes! Seba Rossi beaten] (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello sport. 20 March 2016. Archived from the original on 25 March 2016. Retrieved 20 March 2016. "20 dicembre 1902: nasce Combi, il "nonno" di Zoff e Buffon" (in Italian). La Repubblica. 20 December 2014. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021. Retrieved 11 March 2017. From the third match (Juventus 6–0 Milan on 25 October 1925) to thirteenth match (Parma 0–3 Juventus on 28 February 1926) of the 1925–26 FIGC Football Championship according to (in Italian) All Juventus FC matches: Italian Federal Championship (pages 14 and 15) Archived 2 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine – www.juworld.net. "Gianluigi Buffon sets goalkeeping record as Juventus sweep aside Torino". The Guardian. 20 March 2016. Archived from the original on 21 March 2016. Retrieved 20 March 2016. "Buffon sets new Serie A record". Football Italia. 20 March 2016. Archived from the original on 1 April 2016. Retrieved 20 March 2016. Federico Sala (20 March 2016). "Torino-Juventus 1–4: riscatto bianconero nel derby e Buffon da record" (in Italian). La Repubblica. Archived from the original on 21 March 2016. Retrieved 20 March 2016. Edo Dalmonte (24 April 2016). "Juventus' frantic finish puts them 12 ahead of Napoli, Buffon is a monster". Calciomercato.com. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021. Retrieved 27 April 2016. Susy Campanale (25 April 2016). "Serie A Week 35: Did You Know?". Football Italia. Archived from the original on 28 April 2016. Retrieved 27 April 2016. "Serie A: Juventus win 32nd Scudetto after Roma beat Napoli". Sky Sports. 25 April 2016. Archived from the original on 13 February 2021. Retrieved 27 April 2016. Nicky Bandini (26 April 2016). "Juventus' relentless triumph suggests no end in sight to their dominance". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 January 2021. Retrieved 27 April 2016. Timothy Ormezzano (25 April 2016). "Juventus campione d'Italia: a Vinovo esplode la festa. Allegri: "Sono ancora più orgoglioso"" (in Italian). La Repubblica. Archived from the original on 4 February 2021. Retrieved 27 April 2016. Nicola Balice (25 April 2016). "Buffon has been Juventus' hero". Calciomercato.com. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021. Retrieved 27 April 2016. "Official: Juventus retain Scudetto!". Football Italia. 25 April 2016. Archived from the original on 27 April 2016. Retrieved 27 April 2016. "Buffon scoops April's MVP award". Juventus.com. 29 April 2016. Archived from the original on 2 May 2016. Retrieved 29 April 2016. "Official: Buffon, Barzagli new deals". Football Italia. 11 May 2016. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 11 May 2016. "Buffon voted MVP of the Year". Juventus.com. 12 May 2016. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 13 May 2016. "Best Player in Europe Award shortlist revealed". UEFA.com. 18 July 2016. Archived from the original on 9 June 2019. Retrieved 18 July 2016. "Best Player in Europe: Bale, Griezmann or Ronaldo". UEFA.com. 5 August 2016. Archived from the original on 19 September 2018. Retrieved 6 August 2016. Steve Mitchell (11 October 2016). "Buffon wins the Golden Foot award, the fourth Italian to do so". CalcioMercato.com. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 11 October 2016. "Buffon on Ballon d'Or shortlist". Football Italia. 24 October 2016. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 3 November 2016. "Ronaldo Ballon d'Or, Buffon ninth". Football Italia. 12 December 2016. Archived from the original on 13 February 2021. Retrieved 12 December 2016. "Champions League: Buffon, Aubameyang, Ozil and Falcao light up matchday four". BBC Sport. 2 November 2016. Archived from the original on 26 May 2021. Retrieved 2 November 2016. "Who will be The Best FIFA Men's Player 2016?". FIFA.com. 4 November 2016. Archived from the original on 4 November 2016. Retrieved 4 November 2016. "Chievo vs Juventus". Football Italia. 6 November 2016. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 6 November 2016. "Super Gigi, MVP for October!". Juventus.com. 9 November 2016. Archived from the original on 11 November 2016. Retrieved 10 November 2016. Paul Saffer (21 November 2016). "Team of the Year by numbers". UEFA.com. Archived from the original on 23 November 2016. Retrieved 22 November 2016. "Nine new faces on World 11 shortlist". FIFPro. 1 December 2016. Archived from the original on 17 August 2017. Retrieved 1 December 2016. "Buffon has Supercoppa regrets". Football Italia. 23 December 2016. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 23 December 2016. Robert Ley (25 December 2016). "THE WORLD'S BEST GOALKEEPER 2016: Manuel Neuer". IFFHS. Archived from the original on 26 December 2016. Retrieved 26 December 2016. "Team of the Year 2016". UEFA.com. 5 January 2017. Retrieved 5 January 2017. "FIFA Football Awards 2016 – Voting Results – The Best FIFA Men's Player 2016" (PDF). FIFA.com. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 February 2017. Retrieved 13 January 2017. "Gran Galà del calcio, la Juventus fa incetta di premi" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 31 January 2017. Retrieved 31 January 2017. "Juventus, Buffon: "Inter la più in forma, match non decisivo" Juventus, Buffon: "Inter la più in forma, match non decisivo"" (in Italian). Il Corriere dello Sport. 30 January 2017. Archived from the original on 18 January 2021. Retrieved 31 January 2017. "Dybala at the double!". Juventus FC. 17 February 2017. Archived from the original on 18 February 2017. Retrieved 22 February 2017. Gianluca Oddenino (20 February 2017). "Buffon fa 100 in Champions con la Juve e ritrova l'amico Casillas" (in Italian). La Stampa. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 22 February 2017. Luke Reddy (22 February 2017). "FC Porto 0–2 Juventus". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 22 February 2017. Retrieved 22 February 2017. "Buffon & Totti level on appearances". Football Italia. 6 March 2017. Archived from the original on 10 February 2021. Retrieved 6 March 2017. "After 39,681 Serie A minutes, Buffon smashes yet another Juventus record". fourfourtwo.com. 19 March 2017. Archived from the original on 20 March 2017. Retrieved 19 March 2017. Enrico Turcato (2 April 2017). "Storico Buffon: 615 presenze in A, agganciato Zanetti al secondo posto all time" (in Italian). Eurosport. Retrieved 2 April 2017. "Gianluigi Buffon still Juventus' rock after 100 Champions League games". ESPN FC. 4 May 2017. Archived from the original on 7 May 2017. Retrieved 4 May 2017. Ben Burrows (4 May 2017). "I want people to be sad when I retire says Gianluigi Buffon after Juventus keep his Champions League dream alive". The Independent. Archived from the original on 13 May 2017. Retrieved 4 May 2017. "Monaco 0–2 Juventus". BBC Sport. 3 May 2017. Archived from the original on 11 May 2017. Retrieved 9 May 2017. "Juventus defensive masterclass dumps out Barcelona". Eurosport.com. 19 April 2017. Retrieved 9 May 2017. "Casillas and Buffon in the UEFA Champions League: Did you know?". UEFA.com. 14 March 2017. Archived from the original on 10 July 2018. Retrieved 10 May 2017. "Gianluigi Buffon: Juventus goalkeeper says 'you have to believe in your dreams'". BBC Sport. 9 May 2017. Archived from the original on 3 February 2021. Retrieved 9 May 2017. "Buffon and Juventus fall short of Champions League records". UEFA.com. 9 May 2017. Archived from the original on 10 April 2019. Retrieved 9 May 2017. "JUVENTUS WINS HISTORIC THIRD STRAIGHT COPPA ITALIA". beinsports.com. 17 May 2017. Archived from the original on 22 August 2017. Retrieved 17 May 2017. "Giocatori pluriscudettati, Buffon raggiunge la vetta con 8: Bonucci a 7". Goal.com (in Italian). 21 May 2017. Retrieved 21 May 2017. "Juventus Clinch Sixth Consecutive Serie A Title Against Crotone". espnfc.us. 21 May 2017. Archived from the original on 23 May 2017. Retrieved 21 May 2017. "Juventus, Champions of Italy for the sixth time in a row". juventus.com. 21 May 2017. Archived from the original on 17 April 2019. Retrieved 3 June 2017. "Real Madrid and Cristiano Ronaldo see off Juventus to win Champions League". The Guardian. 3 June 2017. Archived from the original on 3 June 2017. Retrieved 3 June 2017. "Who has played most games without winning the Champions League?". UEFA.com. 7 February 2018. Archived from the original on 14 November 2019. Retrieved 19 May 2018. "UEFA Champions League Squad of the Season". UEFA.com. 5 June 2017. "Buffon, Ramos, Modrić and Ronaldo win positional awards". UEFA.com. 24 August 2017. Archived from the original on 8 July 2018. Retrieved 24 August 2017. "Juventus' Gianluigi Buffon admits that next season will be his last". The Independent. 12 June 2017. Archived from the original on 11 November 2020. Retrieved 19 August 2017. Ben Gladwell (12 June 2017). "Juventus' Gianluigi Buffon: Next season almost certain to be my last". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 20 August 2017. Retrieved 19 August 2017. "UEFA Champions League positional awards shortlists". UEFA.com. 4 August 2017. Archived from the original on 18 August 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017. "Buffon, Messi and Ronaldo on Player of the Year shortlist". UEFA.com. 15 August 2017. Archived from the original on 2 February 2019. Retrieved 15 August 2017. "History made in Juventus-Cagliari". Football Italia. 19 August 2017. Archived from the original on 22 August 2017. Retrieved 19 August 2017. "Ronaldo named 2016/17 Men's Player of the Year". UEFA.com. 24 August 2017. Archived from the original on 26 August 2017. Retrieved 24 August 2017. "The Best FIFA Goalkeeper: Gianluigi BUFFON". FIFA.com. Archived from the original on 7 August 2017. Retrieved 23 October 2017. "FIFA FIFPro World11". FIFA.com. Archived from the original on 3 November 2016. Retrieved 23 October 2017. "The Best FIFA Men's Player". FIFA.com. Archived from the original on 25 November 2017. Retrieved 23 October 2017. "FIFA Football Awards 2017 – Voting Results FIFA MEN'S WORLD PLAYER 2017" (PDF). FIFA.com. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 October 2017. Retrieved 25 October 2017. "Buffon named best player". Football Italia. 27 November 2017. Archived from the original on 28 June 2019. Retrieved 28 November 2017. "THE WORLD'S BEST GOALKEEPER 2017: GIANLUIGI BUFFON MAKES IT FIVE!". IFFHS.de. 3 December 2017. Archived from the original on 4 December 2017. Retrieved 3 December 2017. "Buffon fourth in Ballon d'Or". Football Italia. 7 December 2017. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020. Retrieved 7 December 2017. "Buffon delighted with clean sheet in Napoli win". www.juventus.com. 1 December 2017. Archived from the original on 31 January 2021. Retrieved 6 January 2018. Ben Gladwell (5 December 2017). "Gianluigi Buffon doubt for Juventus' decisive UCL clash with Olympiakos". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 3 February 2021. Retrieved 6 January 2018. Marco Demicheli (5 January 2018). "Juve, Buffon will stay behind Maldini for the record of appearances unless..." www.calciomercato.com. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 6 January 2018. "Facts and figures: UEFA.com Team of the Year 2017". UEFA.com: The official website for European football. UEFA. 11 January 2018. Retrieved 13 January 2018. "'Buffon is Buffon': Max Allegri thrilled with goalkeeper's return". ESPN FC. 30 January 2018. Archived from the original on 31 January 2018. Retrieved 30 January 2018. Mina Rzouki (30 January 2018). "Gonzalo Higuain and Gianluigi Buffon's heroics lift Juve past Atalanta". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 31 January 2018. Retrieved 30 January 2018. Pierfrancesco Catucci (30 January 2018). "Juve, Buffon para il rigore numero 30. Il primo quando aveva 18 anni" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. Archived from the original on 31 January 2018. Retrieved 30 January 2018. "Coppa: Buffon keeps Atalanta quiet". Football Italia. 30 January 2018. Archived from the original on 31 January 2018. Retrieved 31 January 2018. Ryan Benson (9 February 2018). "Buffon makes 500th Juventus league appearance". Goal.com. Archived from the original on 2 March 2021. Retrieved 9 February 2018. Enrico Turcato (9 February 2018). "L'ex Bernardeschi e Higuain: la Juventus vince 2-0 a Firenze" (in Italian). Eurosport. Retrieved 9 February 2018. "CL: Juve heartbreak at the Bernabeu". Football Italia. 11 April 2018. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 11 April 2018. "Buffon: Referee 'has a trashcan in place of a heart'". thescore.com. 11 April 2018. Archived from the original on 22 April 2021. Retrieved 15 April 2018. "Coppa: Force Four Juve flatten Milan". Football Italia. 9 May 2018. Archived from the original on 10 May 2018. Retrieved 9 May 2018. "Buffon reaches 300 clean sheets". Football Italia. 10 May 2018. Archived from the original on 28 February 2021. Retrieved 11 May 2018. "Gigi Buffon: "Addio alla Juve e alla Nazionale". Ritiro o esperienza all'estero? Decide in 7 giorni" (in Italian). Sky.it. 17 May 2018. Archived from the original on 18 May 2018. Retrieved 19 May 2018. ["Gianluigi Buffon: Juventus keeper charged over Michael Oliver comments". BBC Sport. 11 May 2018. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 11 May 2018. "Juventus Seven-Up". Football Italia. 13 May 2018. Archived from the original on 14 May 2018. Retrieved 13 May 2018. "GIGI BUFFON, RECORDMAN". www.legaseriea.it. 14 May 2018. Archived from the original on 11 April 2021. Retrieved 19 May 2018. "Gianluigi Buffon: Italy goalkeeper to play final game for Juventus". BBC Sport. 17 May 2018. Archived from the original on 18 May 2018. Retrieved 19 May 2018. "OFFICIAL: Buffon to leave Juve". Football Italia. 17 May 2018. Archived from the original on 9 February 2021. Retrieved 17 May 2018. "Gianluigi Buffon farewell to Juventus: Serie A legend's final day in pictures". espn.com. 19 May 2018. Archived from the original on 20 May 2018. Retrieved 19 May 2018. "Buffon bids tearful farewell to Juve after 656 games". Reuters. 19 May 2018. Archived from the original on 20 May 2018. Retrieved 19 May 2018. "Gianluigi Buffon banned for three matches over referee commentsd". bbc.com. 5 June 2018. Archived from the original on 23 January 2021. Retrieved 5 June 2018. "Buffon bids final farewell to Juventus as contract expires". FourFourTwo. 30 June 2018. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 7 July 2018. "OFFICIAL: PSG sign Buffon". Football Italia. 6 July 2018. Archived from the original on 30 March 2021. Retrieved 6 July 2018. "Gianluigi Buffon: Paris St-Germain complete signing of Juventus legend". BBC Sport. 6 July 2018. Archived from the original on 5 February 2021. Retrieved 6 July 2018. "PSG thrash Monaco to win French Super Cup as Neymar plays 15 minutes". ESPN. Retrieved 4 August 2018. "Buffon wins Ligue 1 debut". Football Italia. 12 August 2018. Archived from the original on 1 February 2021. Retrieved 13 August 2018. Johnson, Jonathan (24 August 2018). "PSG to start Alphonse Areola over Gianluigi Buffon in next two games". ESPN. Archived from the original on 10 November 2018. Retrieved 2 September 2018. "Buffon plays down reports of Juventus return". www.calciomercato.com. 26 April 2019. Archived from the original on 1 February 2021. Retrieved 30 April 2019. Andrew Dampf (7 November 2018). "Buffon behaves when faced with another penalty". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 20 December 2018. Retrieved 7 November 2018. "Buffon: Suffered in silence". Football Italia. 7 November 2018. Archived from the original on 1 February 2021. Retrieved 7 November 2018. Emlyn Begley (6 November 2018). "Tottenham Hotspur 2-1 PSV Eindhoven". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 7 February 2021. Retrieved 7 November 2018. Jonathan Johnson (20 December 2018). "Buffon: I would have quit without Paris Saint-Germain, Barcelona or Real Madrid call". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 23 December 2019. Retrieved 20 December 2018. Jed Court (9 January 2019). "Coupe de la Ligue Recap: Guingamp pull off upset win over PSG, Monaco reach semis". The Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on 10 January 2019. Retrieved 28 April 2019. "Champions League Extra Time: Manchester United's horror night as Gianluigi Buffon enters top 10". Fox Sports. 12 February 2019. Archived from the original on 19 June 2021. Retrieved 14 February 2019. Shamoon Hafez (6 March 2019). "Paris Saint Germain 1–3 Manchester United". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 2 June 2021. Retrieved 28 April 2019. "Juventus celebrate Buffon on Twitter as PSG secure league title". www.calciomercato.com. 21 April 2019. Archived from the original on 1 February 2021. Retrieved 28 April 2019. Cola, Simone (22 April 2019). "Buffon, record e messaggio al PSG: "Chi non soffre non vince"" [Buffon, record and message to PSG: "Whoever doesn't suffer doesn't win"]. Fox Sports (in Italian). Archived from the original on 1 November 2019. Retrieved 1 November 2019. "Rennes 2–2 Paris Saint-Germain". BBC Sport. 27 April 2019. Archived from the original on 17 May 2019. Retrieved 28 April 2019. "Gianluigi Buffon to leave Paris St-Germain at end of month". BBC Sport. 5 June 2019. Archived from the original on 6 June 2019. Retrieved 6 June 2019. "Welcome home, Gigi!". Juventus.com. 4 July 2019. Archived from the original on 29 November 2019. Retrieved 4 July 2019. "Gianluigi Buffon returns to Juventus after one season at Paris St-Germain". BBC Sport. 4 July 2019. Archived from the original on 24 May 2021. Retrieved 16 March 2021. "Buffon: My number, Sarri, CR7..." Football Italia Staff. 4 July 2019. Archived from the original on 27 September 2020. Retrieved 5 July 2019. "Juventus 2 - 1 Verona". Football Italia. 21 September 2019. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 22 September 2019. "Cristiano Ronaldo, Miralem Pjanic Score as Juventus beats SPAL". Sports Illustrated. 28 September 2019. Archived from the original on 28 September 2019. Retrieved 28 September 2019. "Juventus 2-1 Genoa: Ronaldo penalty gives 10-man champions late winner". Yahoo.com. 30 October 2019. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 1 November 2019. "Buffon: 'I must accept criticism'". Football Italia. 11 December 2019. Archived from the original on 1 February 2021. Retrieved 12 December 2019. "Juventus 3–1 Udinese". BBC Sport. 15 December 2019. Archived from the original on 2 February 2021. Retrieved 15 December 2019. "Buffon, 478 presenze in bianconero in serie A: agganciato Del Piero" (in Italian). www.juvenews.eu. 15 December 2019. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 15 December 2019. "Buffon matches Maldini record". Football Italia. 18 December 2019. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 18 December 2019. Mendola, Nicholas (13 February 2020). "Buffon hails Ronaldo, Zlatan, himself after nine-save show". NBC Sports. Archived from the original on 20 October 2020. Retrieved 24 April 2020. "Coppa: Napoli beat Juventus on penalties". Football Italia. 17 June 2020. Archived from the original on 17 June 2020. Retrieved 17 June 2020. "GIGI AND CHIELLO, 2021!". Juventus. 29 June 2020. Archived from the original on 24 May 2021. Retrieved 29 June 2020. "Serie A Live - Juventus Vs Torino - Live Stream". beIN SPORTS. 4 July 2020. Archived from the original on 6 September 2020. Retrieved 4 July 2020. "Juventus 4-1 Torino: Cristiano Ronaldo scores first free-kick for Juve in win". BBC Sport. 4 July 2020. Archived from the original on 8 July 2020. Retrieved 4 July 2020. "Crotone 1 - 1 Juventus". Football Italia. 17 October 2020. Archived from the original on 25 January 2021. Retrieved 18 October 2020. "Buffon makes record Messi saves". Football Italia. 8 December 2020. Archived from the original on 1 February 2021. Retrieved 9 December 2020. "Buffon 2° tra i più anziani di sempre in Champions: c'è un altro numero da record!". il BiancoNero (in Italian). 12 October 2020. Archived from the original on 1 February 2021. Retrieved 10 December 2020. "Gianluigi Buffon: Lionel Messi left star-struck by Juventus' "monument of world football"". Squawka. 9 December 2020. Archived from the original on 10 December 2020. Retrieved 11 December 2020. "Buffon lascia la Juventus: "E' finito un ciclo, tolgo il disturbo"". la Repubblica (in Italian). 11 May 2021. Archived from the original on 19 May 2021. Retrieved 13 May 2021. Sport, Sky (13 May 2021). "Eterno Buffon, il pararigori più anziano di sempre in Serie A". sport.sky.it (in Italian). Archived from the original on 13 May 2021. Retrieved 13 May 2021. "Buffon wins Coppa with Chiesa Senior and Junior". Football Italia. 19 May 2021. Archived from the original on 20 May 2021. Retrieved 19 May 2021. "Buffon torna a Parma. L'annuncio dei ducali: "Superman Returns"" (in Italian). TuttoMercatoWeb. 17 June 2021. Archived from the original on 28 June 2021. Retrieved 17 June 2021. "Gigi Buffon: Italian Goalkeeper Still Playing At Age 44". History Of Soccer. 13 September 2021. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 18 June 2022. "Serie B Frosinone 2-2 Parma late equaliser ruins debut for Buffon". Football Italia. 20 August 2021. Archived from the original on 28 August 2021. Retrieved 28 August 2021. "Buffon continues to make history: 500 clean sheets". MARCA. 6 February 2022. Archived from the original on 10 April 2022. Retrieved 16 February 2022. "Kyle Krause Announces Buffon's Contract Renewal: "He's One of the Top Three Italian Goalkeepers"". Parma Calcio 1913. 28 February 2022. Archived from the original on 28 February 2022. Retrieved 28 February 2022. "Buffon non smette più, rinnovo col Parma: giocherà fino a 46 anni". Sportmediaset.it. Retrieved 28 February 2022. "Gianluigi Buffon: Italy legend retires aged 45". BBC Sport. 2 August 2023. Retrieved 2 August 2023. Giancarlo Rinaldi (9 September 2013). "A thank you to Buffon". football-italia.net. Football Italia. Retrieved 27 March 2015. Licia Granello (30 October 1997). "ITALIA A UN PASSO DAI MONDIALI" [Italy a Step Away from the World Cup] (in Italian). La Repubblica. Retrieved 11 May 2016. "esordienti: ha battuto Maldini, il piu' giovane rimane Bergomi" [debutants: he beat Maldini, the youngest remains Bergomi] (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 31 October 1997. Archived from the original on 14 August 2016. Retrieved 12 May 2016. "Donnarumma: 'Indescribable!'". Football Italia. 1 September 2016. Retrieved 1 September 2016. Paolo Menicucci (24 March 2017). "Full breakdown of Gianluigi Buffon's 1,000 games". UEFA.com. Retrieved 14 November 2017. Jim Weeks (29 October 2015). "Throwback Thursday: 18 Years on From Buffon's International Debut". Vice.com. Retrieved 14 November 2017. "Italia ai playoff Mondiali, l'unico precedente nel 1997 contro la Russia. Fu l'esordio di Buffon" (in Italian). Sky.it. 17 October 2017. Retrieved 14 November 2017. "Sfortuna mondiale Peruzzi resta a casa" [World Cup misfortune Peruzzi stays at home] (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 1 June 1998. Archived from the original on 15 April 2015. Retrieved 4 May 2015. Gianni Mura (1 June 1998). "Peruzzi, addio al mondiale Giocatori stanchi un brutto segnale" (in Italian). La Repubblica. Retrieved 14 November 2017. "Gianluigi Buffon: The Juventus keeper still making history". BBC Sport. 20 March 2016. Retrieved 14 November 2017. "2014 FIFA World Cup: 25 Days to Go". FIFA.com. 19 May 2014. Archived from the original on 19 May 2014. Retrieved 19 May 2014. Dario Di Gennaro (3 July 1998). "Italia-Francia, 1998 0–0 (3–4)". rai.it (in Italian). Rai Sport. Archived from the original on 16 June 2012. Retrieved 13 June 2012. Fabio Monti; Giancarlo Padovan (4 June 2000). "L' Italia perde un altro pezzo: Buffon" [Italy loses another piece: Buffon] (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 4 May 2015. "Injured Buffon out of Euro 2000". BBC Sport. 3 June 2000. Retrieved 15 November 2017. "Gol d'oro per Trezeguet e la Francia" [Golden goal for Trezeguet and France] (in Italian). UEFA.com. 6 October 2003. Retrieved 29 January 2015. "Toldo makes his mark". BBC News. 30 June 2000. Retrieved 16 March 2016. Fabio Bianchi (18 October 2002). "Zenga e Tacconi: quando la rivalità era uno spettacolo" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. Retrieved 30 October 2017. "Italy's number one priority". BBC News. 12 April 2002. Retrieved 16 March 2016. Massimo Vincenzi (3 June 2002). "L'Italia parte bene Battuto l'Ecuador 2–0" [Italy starts well Ecuador defeated 2–0] (in Italian). La Repubblica. Retrieved 14 November 2015. Vincenzi, Massimo. "Golden gol della Corea L'Italia torna a casa". repubblica.it (in Italian). La Repubblica. Retrieved 11 February 2015. "L'Italia non-graffia". uefa.com (in Italian). Retrieved 11 February 2015. "Italy 2–1 Bulgaria". BBC. 23 June 2004. Retrieved 14 December 2015. Brodkin, Jon (3 July 2006). "Buffon the ultimate barrier screams Italian defiance". The Guardian. Retrieved 24 April 2020. "2006 Italia – Capitolo II: La nuova Italia di Lippi" (in Italian). Storie di Calcio. Retrieved 27 April 2016. "Lippi ha fiducia, nonostante tutto Convocato Buffon: "E' sereno"" (in Italian). La Repubblica. 15 May 2006. Retrieved 20 January 2017. "Italia-Usa: la guerra che non si voleva Pari con 3 espulsi. Qualificazione rinviata" [Italy-USA: the war that was to be avoided A draw with 3 sending-offs. Qualification postponed] (in Italian). La Repubblica. 17 June 2006. Retrieved 4 May 2015. "Italy 1 – 1 France (5–3 pens)". The Guardian. Retrieved 27 June 2014. Grandesso, Alessandro (20 November 2011). "Domenech, in uscita il libro "Materazzi lo sogno la notte"". gazzetta.it (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. Retrieved 11 February 2015. "The big interview: Gianluigi Buffon – "Goalkeepers are perverse – you're playing a game where everyone uses their feet, but you want to use your hands"". FourFourTwo. 24 March 2017. Retrieved 24 April 2020. "Italy 1–1 France: Italy triumph as Zizou explodes". ESPNsoccernet. ESPN FC. 9 July 2006. Archived from the original on 23 October 2012. Retrieved 15 June 2010. "Italy 1–0 Australia". FIFA.com. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 3 July 2016. "Gianluigi Buffon, ESPN Profile, Bio and Career Stats – 2006–07". ESPN FC. Retrieved 27 June 2014. "FIFA World Cup "Lev Yashin" Award". rssf.com. Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016. Retrieved 15 June 2010. "France, Italy dominate World Cup all-star squad". CBC. 7 July 2006. Retrieved 27 May 2015. Miller, Nick (23 April 2018). "Shilton, Buffon, Banks vs. Pele among World Cup's greatest ever saves". ESPN FC. Retrieved 24 April 2020. "The 10 greatest saves of all time". AS.com. 10 October 2019. Retrieved 24 April 2020. "Pirlo e Grosso tengono in corsa l'Italia" (in Italian). UEFA.com. 14 October 2007. Retrieved 20 November 2017. Paolo Menicucci (10 June 2008). "L'Italia parte male, l'Olanda cala il tris" [Italy start badly, Holland score three] (in Italian). UEFA. Retrieved 4 May 2015. Micaela Del Monte (29 March 2012). "Capitani Azzurri: Gianluigi Buffon (2008 – Oggi)" (in Italian). TuttoNazionali.com. Retrieved 23 July 2016. "Cannavaro vows to stay with squad". BBC Sport. 3 June 2008. Retrieved 3 April 2010. Michael Harrold (14 June 2008). "Buffon tiene in vita l'Italia" [Buffon keeps Italy alive]. uefa.com (in Italian). Retrieved 11 February 2015. Paolo Menicucci (17 June 2008). "L'Italia si sveglia e vola ai quarti" [Italy wake up and fly on to the quarter-finals] (in Italian). UEFA. Retrieved 4 May 2015. "Spain 0 – 0 Italy". ESPNsoccernet. ESPN FC. 22 June 2008. Archived from the original on 28 June 2008. Retrieved 15 June 2010. "Spain dominate Team of the Tournament". UEFA. 1 July 2008. Retrieved 27 May 2015. "Irresistible Brazil eliminate Italy". FIFA. 21 June 2009. Archived from the original on 29 March 2013. Retrieved 4 May 2015. "Gianluigi Buffon: Italy star player at World Cup 2010". The Daily Telegraph. London. 20 November 2009. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 26 August 2012. "World Cup 2010: Gianluigi Buffon's World Cup in doubt". BBC Sport. BBC. 15 June 2010. Retrieved 15 June 2010. Paul Wilson (24 June 2010). "World Cup 2010: Italy exit as Slovakia turf out reigning champions". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 28 June 2012. "Il gol di Rossi salva l'Italia: 1-1" (in Italian). www.sportmediaset.mediaset.it. 10 February 2011. Retrieved 20 November 2017. "Buffon, felice per il record di imbattibilità" (in Italian). Ansa.it. 7 September 2011. Retrieved 19 August 2013. "Buffon come Zoff: 112 volte in azzurro" [Buffon reaches Zoff: 112 appearances in an "azzurri" shirt] (in Italian). Il Tempo. 15 November 2011. Archived from the original on 5 May 2015. Retrieved 4 May 2015. "Consegnata all'Uefa la lista dei 23 giocatori convocati per gli Europei" [23-player list for European Championships delivered to UEFA] (in Italian). FIGC. 29 May 2012. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 4 May 2015. Mandeep Sanghera (18 June 2012). "Italy 2–0 Rep of Ireland". BBC Sport. Retrieved 4 May 2015. Phil McNulty (24 June 2012). "England 0–0 Italy". BBC Sport. Retrieved 4 May 2015. Sam Adams (28 June 2012). "Balotelli sends Italy past Germany". UEFA. Retrieved 4 May 2015. Phil McNulty (1 July 2012). "Spain 4–0 Italy". BBC Sport. Retrieved 4 May 2015. "Ten Spain players in Team of the Tournament". UEFA. 2 July 2012. Retrieved 4 May 2015. "Malta-Italia: 0–2" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 26 March 2013. Retrieved 19 August 2013. "Inviata alla FIFA la lista per la Confederations Cup: c'è anche Barzagli" [Confederations Cup list submitted to FIFA: Barzagli is also included] (in Italian). FIGC. 3 June 2013. Retrieved 4 May 2015. "Centurion Pirlo and Balotelli see off Mexico". FIFA. 16 June 2013. Archived from the original on 19 June 2013. Retrieved 4 May 2015. 4 May 2015 (19 June 2013). "Italy edge Japan in thriller to reach semis". FIFA. Archived from the original on 5 May 2015. Retrieved 4 May 2015.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Spain edge dramatic shootout to reach Final". FIFA. 27 June 2013. Archived from the original on 18 April 2015. Retrieved 4 May 2015. "Buffon stars as Italy win shootout & bronze". FIFA.com. 30 June 2013. Archived from the original on 9 July 2014. Retrieved 30 June 2013. "'Extraordinary' Buffon saved Italy – Prandelli". Goal.com. 7 September 2013. Retrieved 7 September 2013. "Italy vs Bulgaria: 1–0". Goal.com. Retrieved 6 September 2013. "Del Piero marks Buffon record". Football Italia. 10 September 2013. Retrieved 10 September 2013. "Italia-Rep. Ceca 2–1: gol di Kozak, Chiellini e Balotelli su rigore. Azzurri qualificati" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 10 September 2013. Retrieved 10 September 2013. Marcus Christenson (10 September 2013). "Gianluigi Buffon: from depression to Italy's record books". The Guardian. Retrieved 10 September 2013. "Denmark vs. Italy: 2–2". Goal.com. Retrieved 11 October 2013. "I tifosi della Nazionale premiano Buffon con il 'Pallone Azzurro' 2013" [Italian National Team fans award Buffon with the 2013 "Pallone Azzurro"] (in Italian). FIGC. 2 January 2014. Retrieved 5 January 2014. "CALCIO, AZZURRI; VIVIANO: BUFFON E' IL MARADONA DEI PORTIERI" [Football, Azzurri; Viviano: Buffon is the Maradona of Goalkeepers]. repubblica.it (in Italian). La Repubblica. Retrieved 10 February 2015. Colombo, Monica (3 September 2011). "Abbiati: "Solo Barça e Real meglio di noi Il mio futuro? Vorrei allenare i portieri"" [Abbiati: "Only Barca and Real better than us My future? I'd like to coach goalkeepers"]. corriere.it (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. Retrieved 10 February 2015. Grandi, Stefano. "Calciomercato Juventus, Cannavaro: "Buffon è il Maradona dei portieri"" [Juventus transfer-market, Cannavaro: "Buffon is the Maradona of Goalkeepers"]. sportevai.it (in Italian). Archived from the original on 10 February 2015. Retrieved 10 February 2015. "Italy World Cup Roster 2014: Full 30-Man Squad and Starting 11 Projections". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 19 May 2014. "World Cup 2014: Italy omit Giuseppe Rossi from final squad". BBC Sport. 1 June 2014. Retrieved 15 June 2014. "England's World Cup rivals Italy livid they are in Group of Death that also includes Uruguay". The Mirror. 6 December 2013. Retrieved 26 June 2014. "Group D: Tough tests in group of champions". FIFA.com. Archived from the original on 13 April 2014. Retrieved 17 August 2014. Dampf, Andrew (10 June 2014). "Italy's Buffon Ties Record at His 5th World Cup". ABC News. Retrieved 21 June 2014. "World Cup – Buffon out of England game, could miss tournament". Eurosport. Retrieved 14 June 2014. "Costa Rica advances at World Cup; England out". www.sportsnet.ca. 20 June 2014. Retrieved 21 June 2014. "AdTech Ad World Cup: Luis Suarez mired in another biting controversy as Uruguay beat Italy". Sky Sports. Retrieved 26 June 2014. "Italy vs. Uruguay: 0–1 – Man of the Match – Gianluigi Buffon". FIFA.com. Archived from the original on 11 June 2014. Retrieved 26 June 2014. "Zico: Italy pay price for over-reliance on Andrea Pirlo and must rebuild". The Guardian. 25 June 2014. Retrieved 26 June 2014. "Norvegia-Italia (0–2)" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 9 September 2014. Retrieved 9 September 2014. "Euro 2016, qualificazioni. Norvegia-Italia 0–2. Gol di Zaza e Bonucci" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 9 September 2014. Retrieved 9 September 2014. "Buffon first to 50 UEFA EURO appearances". UEFA. 12 June 2015. Retrieved 12 June 2015. "Buffon: '150 caps and a clean sheet'". Football Italia. 6 September 2015. Retrieved 8 September 2015. "Italy beats Azerbaijan to qualify for Euro 2016". SportsNet. 10 October 2015. Retrieved 22 December 2015. "Buffon: Zen and the art of footballing longevity". UEFA.com. 29 May 2016. Retrieved 1 June 2016. "Buffon: 'Retirement in 2018'". Football Italia. 25 January 2016. Retrieved 25 January 2016. "OFFICIAL: Italy squad for Euro 2016". Football Italia. 31 May 2016. Retrieved 31 May 2016. "UEFA Euro 2016 – Belgium-Italy". UEFA. 13 June 2016. Retrieved 13 June 2016. Massimo Fiandrino (13 June 2016). "Euro 2016, Belgio-Italia: 5 motivi per non perdersela" (in Italian). Datasport.it. Retrieved 14 June 2016. Rob Smyth (17 June 2016). "Italy 1 – 0 Sweden". The Guardian. Retrieved 2 July 2016. Selene Scarsi (22 June 2016). "Gianluigi Buffon set to be among Italy changes vs. Ireland at Euro 2016". ESPN FC. Retrieved 2 July 2016. Luke Brown (22 June 2016). "Republic of Ireland 1 Italy 0, Euro 2016: Late Robbie Brady goal sends delirious Irish into Round of 16". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 2 July 2016. Rob Smyth (27 June 2016). "Italy 2–0 Spain". The Guardian. Retrieved 2 July 2016. Rob Smyth (2 July 2016). "Germany 1–1 Italy". The Guardian. Retrieved 2 July 2016. "Neuer, Buffon, Lloris? What was your save of the season?". UEFA.com. 25 July 2016. Retrieved 26 July 2016. "Király keeps De Bruyne at bay". UEFA.com. Archived from the original on 28 August 2016. Retrieved 10 September 2016. Francesco Cisternino (6 October 2016). "Gigi Buffon, l'uomo dei record: con 164 presenze in Nazionale è l'8° di sempre!" (in Italian). Eurosport.com. Retrieved 2 November 2016. "Buffon equals Casillas's European caps record". www.uefa.com. 15 November 2016. "Nazionale, a Buffon il 'Pallone azzurro'" (in Italian). La Repubblica. 1 January 2017. Retrieved 1 January 2017. "Italia, prove di 4–2–4. Belotti-Immobile in avanti" (in Italian). Sky.it. 20 March 2017. Retrieved 25 March 2017. "Italy 2–0 Albania". BBC. 24 March 2017. Retrieved 25 March 2017. "Buffon plays 1,000th professional match". FIFA.com. 24 March 2015. Archived from the original on 25 March 2017. Retrieved 25 March 2017. "ITALY BEAT ALBANIA ON GIANLUIGI BUFFON'S 1,000TH APPEARANCE". beIN Sports. 24 March 2017. Retrieved 25 March 2017. James Horncastle (23 March 2017). "Gianluigi Buffon is far from finished after 1,000 games between the posts". ESPN FC. Retrieved 27 March 2017. Matthew Santangelo (8 September 2017). "Don't blame Buffon". Football Italia. Retrieved 8 November 2017. Elia Di Marzio; Sam Leveridge (6 October 2017). "Buffon breaks into top four for international appearances". Marca. Retrieved 6 October 2017. "Italy 1 Macedonia 1: Azzurri fail to clinch play-off spot with disappointing draw". FourFourTwo. 6 October 2017. Archived from the original on 7 October 2017. Retrieved 6 October 2017. Massimo Cecchini (8 November 2017). "Italia, Buffon sfida anche la Storia: "Se vinciamo sono leggenda"" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. Retrieved 8 November 2017. Luke Brown (13 November 2017). "Italy goalkeeper Gigi Buffon announces his international retirement after draw with Sweden ends 2018 World Cup dream". The Independent. Retrieved 13 November 2017. "Ignominious Italy out of World Cup". Football Italia. 13 November 2017. "Capitani azzurri: Buffon eguaglia Cannavaro" (in Italian). UEFA.com. 14 November 2017. Retrieved 15 November 2017. Richard Williams (17 November 2017). "Wild-eyed fury, urchin's grin, sheer dynamism – Gianluigi Buffon had it all". The Guardian. Retrieved 20 November 2017. "I could never desert a possible call – Buffon open to Italy return". FourFourTwo. 27 November 2017. Retrieved 12 December 2017. Jack Austin (28 November 2017). "Gianluigi Buffon leaves door open to Italy return despite retirement". The Independent. Retrieved 12 December 2017. "Italy squad for Argentina and England - Football Italia". Football Italia. 17 March 2018. Retrieved 17 March 2018. "Buffon: Here for two reasons..." Football Italia. 19 March 2018. Retrieved 19 March 2018. AS, Diario (19 March 2018). "Buffon cites Astori among reasons for Italy return". AS.com. Retrieved 9 October 2018. "Italy: Argentina defeat new Azzurri". Football Italia. 23 March 2018. "Buffon ends Italy career". Football Italia. 17 May 2018. "Buffon lascia la Nazionale: "Non ho bisogno di ulteriori celebrazioni"" (in Italian). tuttomercatoweb.com. 17 May 2018. "Ibrahimovic: "Ronaldo il Fenomeno, non ci sarà mai un giocatore migliore di lui"" (in Italian). La Gazetta Dello Sport. 5 June 2014. Retrieved 29 September 2014. "Anatomy of a goalkeeper: What makes Buffon the best". La Gazzetta dello Sport. 18 September 2015. Retrieved 26 November 2015. Louise Taylor (23 March 2017). "Gianluigi Buffon's 1,000th career game is testament to a beacon of stability". The Guardian. Retrieved 27 March 2017. "Nkono: I'm honoured to be Buffon's inspiration". FIFA. 21 March 2016. Archived from the original on 2 April 2016. Retrieved 19 October 2016. Joshua Robinson (12 June 2016). "Goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon Is Still Saving Italy". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 23 October 2016. Adam Bate (13 May 2015). "Iker Casillas versus Gianluigi Buffon: Which one is the better goalkeeper?". Sky Sports. Retrieved 27 March 2017. Michael Cox (25 June 2013). "Trendsetters Buffon, Casillas keep it legendary". ESPN FC. Retrieved 22 May 2014. "Gianluigi Buffon". BBC Sport. 10 April 2002. Retrieved 4 June 2016. Guillem Balagué (5 February 2010). "Casillas names his top ten No1s". UEFA.org. Archived from the original on 28 March 2017. Retrieved 27 March 2017. "Italy's Best Ever Goalkeeper: Dino Zoff or Gianluigi Buffon?". forzaitalianfootball.com. 10 December 2011. Retrieved 23 May 2014. Jeremy Wilson (10 June 2014). "World Cup 2014: Italy goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon still standing in England's way ahead of clash in Manaus". telegraph.co.uk. The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 10 February 2015. "The most expensive goalkeepers in world football before Ederson Moraes". ESPN FC. 1 June 2017. Retrieved 3 October 2017. Flanagan, Chris (20 February 2019). "Jan Oblak exclusive: "For sure, numbers like mine aren't normal in modern football..."". FourFourTwo. Retrieved 18 June 2020. "Gianluigi Buffon Player Profile, Bio and Career Stats". ESPN FC. Retrieved 19 August 2012. "GIANLUIGI BUFFON – Italia – Euro 2012". corriere.it (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. Retrieved 21 October 2016. Frank Dell'Apa (8 July 2006). "Nobody's fool: Little getting past Buffon". The Boston Globe. Retrieved 1 February 2017. Henry Winter (30 June 2012). "Euro 2012: I look up to Italy goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon, reveals Spain's No 1 Iker Casillas". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 14 March 2017. "Gianluigi Buffon: Player Profile". Juventus FC. Retrieved 26 December 2012. "Italy Penpix". Reuters. 30 June 2012. Retrieved 1 July 2012. "record breaking reflexes of Gianluigi Buffon". Retrieved 22 May 2014. Riccardo Pratesi (7 February 2007). "Chi è il più forte del mondo?" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. Archived from the original on 8 August 2017. Retrieved 9 December 2016. John Molinaro (2 June 2016). "Will Italy regret snubbing Giovinco for Euro 2016?". Sportsnet. Retrieved 18 March 2017. "Gianluigi Buffon" (in Italian). La Repubblica. 23 May 2008. Retrieved 29 September 2014. "Buffon: "Non paro i rigori? Critiche umilianti per me"" (in Italian). Tutto Sport. 30 June 2013. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 21 October 2016. "Intervista a Buffon: "Troppi rischi: non esco più!" (in Italian). ilnumero1.it. 28 December 2013. Retrieved 22 May 2014. Alessandro Baretti (29 September 2014). "Buffon, hai ragione tu: sei anche un pararigori" [Buffon, you're right: you are also a penalty-saving specialist] (in Italian). Tuttosport. Archived from the original on 3 July 2015. Retrieved 20 July 2015. "REVEALED Buffon's 29 penalty saves". CalcioMercato.com. 19 October 2016. Retrieved 21 October 2016. "Gianluigi Buffon". BBC Sport. 25 May 2004. Retrieved 18 May 2020. "Handanovic come Pagliuca, la classifica dei migliori pararigori della storia della Serie A" (in Italian). sport.sky.it. 12 January 2020. "Ronaldinho sceglie la sua top 11: ci sono Maldini e Buffon" (in Italian). Sky.it. 6 March 2015. Archived from the original on 12 March 2016. Retrieved 2 February 2016. Sheen, Tom (6 March 2015). "Ronaldinho dream XI: John Terry, Frank Lampard and Claude Makelele are in as former Barcelona superstar names ideal side". The Independent. Archived from the original on 23 December 2020. Retrieved 1 June 2020. Giancarlo Rinaldi (16 November 2011). "Zoff or Buffon – who is No 1? – Football Italia". Football Italia. Retrieved 16 March 2016. "Pari con polemiche tra Fiorentina e Juventus" (in Italian). La Repubblica. 7 October 2007. Retrieved 23 October 2016. Richard Hall (14 June 2016). "Gianluigi Buffon: The Tactical Goalkeeper". beINSports.com. Retrieved 23 October 2016. "The top 20 best goalkeepers in the world". The Telegraph. 19 October 2016. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 4 November 2016. Alberto Polverosi. "Buffon, Gianluigi" (in Italian). Treccani: Enciclopedia dello Sport (2002). Retrieved 16 November 2016. "William Vecchi: 'Ho allenato Dida e Buffon: sono incredibili'" [William Vecchi: "I trained Dida and Buffon: they're incredible"]. ilportiere.com (in Italian). 2 December 2004. Archived from the original on 16 September 2016. Retrieved 16 July 2016. Jonathan Liew (27 May 2017). "Gianluigi Buffon's eternal quest for Champions League glory makes Juventus the neutral's choice against Real Madrid". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 31 May 2017. Luca Calamai; Andrea Schianchi (15 October 1999). "Toldo-Buffon, le 20 meraviglie" [Toldo-Buffon, the 20 wonders] (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. Retrieved 7 July 2016. Juan Castro (29 September 2015). "Buffon: "I would've liked to have played in the Premiership"". Marca. Retrieved 24 January 2018. Iacopo Iandiorio (3 September 2005). "Uno su tutti" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. Retrieved 30 May 2018. "Buffon: "Contro i portieri regole disumane"" [Buffon: "Inhumane regulations against goalkeepers"] (in Italian). Il Corriere dello Sport. 27 December 2013. Archived from the original on 11 February 2016. Retrieved 19 October 2016. Francesco Bramardo (29 November 2003). "Una notte da portieri volanti" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. Retrieved 4 September 2018. Alberto Polverosi (30 August 2017). "Il ruolo del portiere: L'evoluzione dei numeri 1" (in Italian). www.ilnumero1.it. Retrieved 22 September 2018. "Who is the world's best keeper?". FIFA.com. 6 November 2007. Archived from the original on 16 February 2018. Retrieved 11 November 2018. "Gianluigi Buffon has a few things to tell you about goalkeeping – and life". FourFourTwo. 6 March 2019. Retrieved 17 May 2020. "Fantastic Celtic, Feckless Refereeing but Fair Play to Juventus". The Huffington Post. 14 February 2013. Retrieved 22 May 2014. Paolo Mulas (12 February 2013). "MARCHISIO TOP PLAYER, MATRI IMPLACABILE, BUFFON PRESA D'ACCIAIO" (in Italian). Tutto Juve. Retrieved 21 October 2016. Caterina Baffoni (14 August 2015). "Da venti anni, è il patrimonio del calcio mondiale: semplicemente Gianluigi Buffon" (in Italian). Tutto Juve. Retrieved 21 October 2016. Valeria Benedetti; Fabiana Della Valle; Giorgio Dell'Arti (21 March 2017). "Buffon nell'Olimpo. Contro l'Albania Gigi sarà leggenda. Solo lui e Maldini nell'Italia dei mille" (in Italian). www.cinquantamila.it. Retrieved 19 January 2018. "Kiko Casilla: "For a goalkeeper, Messi and Cristiano are the opponents to beat"". La Liga. 2 January 2015. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 25 May 2017. James Horncastle (4 June 2014). "Gianluigi Buffon: a goalkeeper must be a masochist and egocentric". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 8 February 2016. Retrieved 30 November 2015. "Non sparate sul portiere, Buffon difende il ruolo a spada tratta: "Certe regole sono disumane"". Goal.com (in Italian). 27 December 2013. Retrieved 4 September 2018. Thomas Goldmann; Alessandro Massimo (22 February 2016). "Expert view: Gianluigi Buffon v Manuel Neuer". UEFA.com. Retrieved 23 October 2016. "Buffon: 'Neuer not original'". Football Italia. 31 March 2016. Retrieved 7 April 2016. Matteo Dore (14 March 2001). "Buffon e Van der Sar maestri con i piedi" [Buffon and Van der Sar masters with their feet] (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. Archived from the original on 23 May 2014. Retrieved 23 May 2014. Nicola Cecere (7 October 1998). "Buffon para Pagliuca: "in Francia avrei potuto giocare io"" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. Retrieved 4 November 2017. "ESCLUSIVA PIANETAGENOA-Davide Micillo: "Perin? A tratti ricorda Zenga e Buffon"" (in Italian). tuttomercatoweb.com. Retrieved 23 May 2014. "Emil Audero, the future's in safe hands". Juventus FC. 21 October 2014. Retrieved 25 May 2017. "New beginnings for Massimiliano Allegri's Juventus". Yahoo Sports. 18 September 2014. Retrieved 14 April 2016. EMILIO MARRESE (19 February 2001). "Super Buffon ferma il Brescia poi il Parma si sveglia e domina" (in Italian). La Repubblica. Retrieved 28 October 2017. Marco Frattino (3 June 2017). "Juve-Real, Julio Iglesias: "Perez e Butragueno a casa mia, speriamo di vincere"" (in Italian). Tutto Mercato. Retrieved 28 October 2017. Luca Barbon (19 November 2015). "Juventus, Buffon analizza i colleghi: "Cech il migliore, come tecnico stimo Luis Enrique"". Goal.com (in Italian). Retrieved 4 November 2017. "Juve, Sorrentino: 'Il segreto di Buffon? I piedi e il lavoro'" (in Italian). Calcio Mercato. 21 October 2019. Retrieved 25 October 2019. Nicky Bandini (1 March 2010). "Sirigu offers Buffon a glimpse of the future as Palermo beat Juventus". The Guardian. Retrieved 28 October 2017. Filippo Monteforte (5 July 2010). "Buffon undergoes back operation after World Cup injury". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 28 October 2017. "Intervista a Sarti: "Yashin e Buffon sono i più grandi della storia"" (in Italian). ilnumero1.it. 29 December 2013. Retrieved 6 June 2017. "Buffon a leader, says Pagliuca". Football Italia. 16 May 2012. Retrieved 12 September 2015. Gianluca Nesci (24 July 2017). "Perfect player series: Building a flawless goalkeeper". The Score. Retrieved 17 January 2018. Nicky Bandini (29 February 2016). "Leonardo Bonucci in the spotlight as Inter cannot stop remarkable Juventus". The Guardian. Retrieved 21 March 2016. Mina Rzouki (20 March 2016). "Gianluigi Buffon breaks Serie A record as Juventus ease past Torino". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 21 March 2016. Retrieved 21 March 2016. "2010 World Cup Player Profile: Gianluigi Buffon, Italy's Superman". sbnation.com. 26 May 2010. Retrieved 4 January 2015. "Casillas and Buffon go head to head". UEFA. 30 June 2012. Retrieved 4 January 2015. Neale Graham (9 February 2009). "The best goalkeepers of all time". CNN. Retrieved 26 November 2015. "Gianluigi Buffon Number One in Goalkeeper Rankings". Goal.com. 19 January 2010. Retrieved 13 June 2010. Amy Lawrence (14 May 2015). "Gianluigi Buffon still the godfather in gloves as he gets set for date with destiny". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 11 June 2015. Retrieved 26 November 2015. "Juventus keeper Gianluigi Buffon celebrates 20 years since debut". Sky Sports. 19 November 2015. Retrieved 26 November 2015. "Trezeguet: 'Buffon the best ever'". Football Italia. 8 December 2015. Retrieved 10 November 2015. "Buffon voted greatest 'keeper". Football Italia. 12 February 2016. Retrieved 12 February 2016. Ben Gladwell (9 November 2015). "Gianluigi Buffon 'best goalkeeper in history' – Juventus boss Allegri". ESPN FC. Retrieved 12 February 2016. "Pirlo: 'Buffon the best ever'". Football Italia. 17 September 2015. Retrieved 12 February 2016. James Horncastle (21 March 2016). "Gianluigi Buffon record cements his legacy as greatest keeper of all-time". ESPN FC. Retrieved 21 March 2016. "Bonucci desperate to deliver record for Buffon". FourFourTwo. 19 March 2016. Retrieved 21 March 2016. Nicky Bandini (31 May 2017). "Will Gianluigi Buffon finally get the UCL glory his stellar career deserves?". ESPN FC. Retrieved 31 May 2017. "Serie A Galli: "Buffon pallone d'oro? Lo merita, il migliore di sempre"" [Serie A Galli: Ballon d'Or to Buffon? He deserves it, he's the best ever]. Tutto Sport (in Italian). 21 May 2017. Retrieved 9 October 2019. McKay, Gaby. "The Greatest of all Time?". Football Italia. Retrieved 24 April 2020. "Campioni ai Raggi X: Gianluigi Buffon, il 'Numero Uno'" (in Italian). www.calciomercato.it. 30 April 2012. Archived from the original on 10 October 2019. Retrieved 10 October 2019. "Classifica 100 migliori calciatori del 2012 stilata dal The Guardian". The Guardian (in Italian). Archived from the original on 12 March 2013. Retrieved 23 December 2014. "In serata Buffon ritira il "Premio Nereo Rocco"" (in Italian). Tutto Juve. Retrieved 3 September 2014. Thomas Simon (19 May 2015). "Le top 10 des meilleurs vieux" [The top 10 of the best oldies] (in French). France Football. Retrieved 4 August 2015. "Buffon Champions League award". Football Italia. 10 September 2016. Retrieved 12 September 2016. "The best not to have won the Champions League". UEFA. 19 May 2015. Retrieved 11 August 2020. Lea, Greg (28 May 2019). "The 25 best players never to win the Champions League. #2 Buffon". FourFourTwo. Retrieved 27 May 2020. Solhekol, Kaveh; Sheth, Dharmesh (30 May 2020). "Ronaldo, Eric Cantona, Zlatan Ibrahimovic: The best players never to win Champions League 25-1". Sky Sports. Retrieved 1 June 2020. "RESULT: Gianluigi Buffon voted greatest goalkeeper ever". Eurosport. 24 May 2020. Retrieved 27 May 2020. Matt Barker (24 March 2017). "Gianluigi Buffon, One-on-One: You have to be a real masochist to play in goal – and a bit perverse". FourFourTwo. Archived from the original on 12 June 2017. Retrieved 13 June 2017. Gaetano Imparato (5 May 2012). "Zoff: "Sereno Buffon Resti un grande"" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. Retrieved 13 June 2017. "Buffon: 'Why I cut my sleeves'". Football Italia. 6 October 2018. Retrieved 7 October 2018. Gianluigi Buffon (13 November 2008). "Buffon: Ricco e famoso la depressione mi prese lo stesso" [Buffon: I'm rich and famous but depression got me anyway] (in Italian). La Stampa. Retrieved 11 May 2015. Timothy Ormezzano (8 November 2010). "Mistero Buffon: dove è il portierone? Vita di quartiere tra ristoranti e cure" (in Italian). La Repubblica. Retrieved 27 February 2018. "Buffon, rientro spirituale con la visita a Medjugorje" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 3 July 2012. Retrieved 30 October 2014. "Ilaria D'Amico: 'Buffon poco scaramantico e molto cattolico. Futuro? La Juve non gli lascia scelta'" (in Italian). www.calciomercato.com. 8 May 2017. Retrieved 27 February 2018. "Ilaria D'Amico: "Quelle visite mattutine in chiesa di Gigi..."" (in Italian). Vanity Fair. 9 May 2017. Retrieved 27 February 2018. Paolo Menicucci (17 May 2018). "Buffon leaves Juventus: how awesome is his legacy?". UEFA. Retrieved 19 May 2018. "Alena e Gigi oggi sposi" (in Italian). juventus.com. 16 June 2011. Archived from the original on 10 February 2015. Retrieved 30 November 2015. "Italy's Buffon ties record at his 5th World Cup". usatoday.com. Retrieved 6 March 2019. "Buffon e la D'Amico escono allo scoperto: primo bacio pubblico" (in Italian). La Repubblica. 1 July 2014. Retrieved 17 July 2014. "Buffon aspetta il terzo figlio da Ilaria D'Amico: "Sono abbonato ai maschi..."" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 3 September 2015. Retrieved 3 September 2015. "Buffon-D'Amico: è nato Leopoldo Mattia" [Buffon-D'Amico: Leopoldo Mattia is born] (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 6 January 2016. Retrieved 7 January 2016. Lavinia Farnese (28 July 2017). "Ilaria D'Amico: "Se io fossi Virginia Raggi"" (in Italian). www.vanityfair.it. Retrieved 11 October 2017. "Vincenza e Gigi: fine di un amore" (in Italian). tgcom24.mediaset.it. 26 January 2004. Archived from the original on 8 March 2013. Retrieved 29 November 2012. "Gigi Buffon, "Numero 1" al Corriere" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 14 November 2008. Retrieved 3 September 2014. "Gianluigi Buffon: Paris St-Germain goalkeeper reveals he had depression and panic attacks at Juventus". BBC Sport. 8 January 2019. Retrieved 9 January 2019. "What you might not know about Gianluigi Buffon". UEFA.com. 28 January 2021. Retrieved 4 April 2021. Doro, Rosa (10 April 2017). "Mundo Deportivo - Le 39 cose che dovete sapere su Gigi Buffon". Tutto Juve (in Italian). Retrieved 4 April 2021. "Las 39 cosas que debes saber de Buffon: depresión, ludopatía y manías" (in Spanish). Mundo Deportivo. 10 April 2017. Retrieved 4 April 2021. "Buffon: "Io, giovane ultrà che faceva cazz... di ogni tipo. E quella canna..."". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 8 January 2019. Retrieved 10 October 2019. Adamoli, Gessi (19 October 2007). "Buffon, messaggi d' amore 'Al Genoa anche gratis'". La Repubblica (in Italian). Retrieved 10 October 2019. "Gigi Buffon reveals which club he supports other than Juventus and why". www.calciomercato.com. 13 December 2016. Retrieved 10 October 2019. Fonsato, Stefano (6 June 2019). "Lazio, Roma, Parma, Genoa, MLS, Qatar o Emirati: a chi serve Gigi Buffon?" (in Italian). Eurosport. Retrieved 10 October 2019. "Buffon: 'Juve fan up to the age of seven'". Football Italia. 18 March 2020. Retrieved 18 March 2020. "Buffon è il vice di Tommasi". sport.libero.it (in Italian). Retrieved 3 September 2014. "AIC: ORGANIGRAMMA (Buffon, Vicepresidente)" (in Italian). AIC. Retrieved 3 September 2014. "Gianluigi Buffon appointed as head of delegation at FIGC". theathletic.com. 5 August 2023. "Italy's Gianluigi Buffon wears the Puma King!". Football Boots.co.uk. 12 September 2013. Retrieved 8 February 2015. "Millions riding on injured England captain mean he is still a crock of gold". The Telegraph. 11 April 2002. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 6 February 2015. "Gigi Buffon Firma per Pokerstars. Mentre Totti..." (in Italian). Retrieved 3 September 2014. "Pro Evolution Soccer 2008". giantbomb.com. 24 January 2008. Retrieved 25 April 2015. "The Best Goalkeepers of FIFA 14 Ultimate Team". FIFA Ultimate Team. 5 September 2013. Retrieved 8 February 2015. Hurrey, Adam (28 January 2018). "Forty reasons to love Buffon, aged 40". ESPN.com. Retrieved 28 July 2020. "Amica Chips celebrates friendship with Amica trasparente and Gigi Buffon". Amica Chips. 10 February 2016. Retrieved 28 July 2020. "HEAD&SHOULDERS SCEGLIE GIGI BUFFON COME TESTIMONIAL DELLA SUA NUOVA CAMPAGNA" (in Italian). www.headandshoulders.it. Retrieved 28 July 2020. Antonio Corsa (19 February 2018). "Il documentario sulla Juve di Netflix è un esperimento riuscito" (in Italian). "Dalla mancata campagna di Russia alle battaglie virtuali: Buffon sale sui carrarmati di World of Tanks" (in Italian). Sky.it. 5 May 2018. Retrieved 29 August 2018. Prisco, Francesco (22 June 2018). "Mondiali senza Italia? Il marketing gioca con l'ironia (tra Moretti e Ikea)". Il Sole 24 ORE (in Italian). Retrieved 28 July 2020. "Buffon si dà alla moda: sarà stilista per una linea di occhiali". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 13 December 2019. Retrieved 30 June 2020. "Buffon by Kimoa". Kimoa. Retrieved 30 June 2020. "BIAGIO ANTONACCI E GIGI BUFFON INSIEME NEL VIDEO "TI SAPRÒ ASPETTARE"" (in Italian). radioitalia.it. 26 January 2020. "Finalmente, accordo fatto: si parte" (in Italian). Il Tirreno. 17 July 2010. Retrieved 3 September 2014. "Gigi Buffon, rinnova il suo investimento con la Carrarese". tuttolegapro.com (in Italian). Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 3 September 2014. "Calcio"Calciomercato Venerdì 6 Luglio, 2012 27 commenti Carrarese, Buffon diventa azionista unico" (in Italian). Tuttosport. 6 July 2012. Archived from the original on 4 April 2016. Retrieved 3 September 2014. "Buffon walks away from Carrarese". Football Italia. 26 May 2015. Retrieved 27 May 2015. "Carrarese, accordo fatto: entra l'imprenditore Raffaele Tartaglia". Il Tirreno (in Italian). 21 July 2015. Retrieved 13 March 2016. Pippo Russo (12 March 2016). "Carrarese, cronaca di una fine annunciata: Buffon è corresponsabile". calciomercato.com (in Italian). Retrieved 13 March 2016. "Gigi Buffon entra nel CDA Zucchi" (in Italian). Archived from the original on 6 December 2014. Retrieved 3 September 2014. Nick Squires (31 December 2015). "Italy's most celebrated goalkeeper makes crucial save – of a struggling company". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 12 January 2016. Jonathan Shkurko (17 August 2017). "Grapes of success: Juventus keeper Gianluigi Buffon ventures into wine". CNN.com. Retrieved 22 August 2017. "Juve, la beneficienza di Buffon e Chiellini" (in Italian). La Repubblica. 13 May 2013. Retrieved 3 September 2014. "Germany and Italy captains back campaign". UEFA.com. 29 June 2012. Retrieved 30 October 2014. "Il Papa a Maradona: "Ti aspettavo". Diego show con Baggio, poi si infuria: "Icardi non doveva giocare"" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 1 September 2014. Retrieved 1 September 2014. "Buffon named UN Ambassador". Football Italia. 9 October 2019. Retrieved 10 October 2019. "Elezioni 2013, l'endorsement di Gianluigi Buffon per Mario Monti: "Ha il mio appoggio totale e incondizionato"". The Huffington Post (in Italian). 15 February 2013. Retrieved 30 October 2014. Pierluigi Battista (7 October 2016). "Referendum: la società dello spettacolo espugna i costituzionalisti" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. Retrieved 22 August 2017. The number 88 is used by neo-Nazis as an abbreviation of the Nazi salute Heil Hitler, as H is the eighth letter of the alphabet. "88, Cioè 4 Palle" (in Italian). RaiSport.RAI.it. 8 September 2000. Archived from the original on 18 February 2012. Retrieved 19 August 2012. Brodkin, Jon (9 September 2000). "Buffon in trouble for choosing the wrong number at Parma". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 17 July 2014. Marshall, Adam (9 September 2000). "Buffon Defuses Nazi Row". Sky Sports. Retrieved 16 March 2016. "Gigi Buffon: ecco "la storia del 'boia chi molla' e del numero 88"" (in Italian). www.quinews.it. 29 November 2008. Retrieved 17 July 2014. Corrado Zunino (8 September 2000). "Gli ebrei di Roma L' 88 di Buffon significa Heil Hitler" (in Italian). La Repubblica. Retrieved 17 July 2014. "Quando Buffon scrisse: "Boia chi molla"" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 16 January 2003. Retrieved 17 July 2014. "Diploma non-autentico, Buffon rischia fino a 4 anni" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 14 September 2000. Retrieved 4 June 2017. "Sei milioni di multa Falso diploma di ragioniere: Buffon patteggia" [Six million lire fine False accounting diploma: Buffon accepts plea bargain] (in Italian). Il Tirreno. 7 February 2001. Archived from the original on 7 October 2020. Retrieved 4 June 2017. "Buffon nel giro delle scommesse" (in Italian). La Repubblica. 12 May 2006. Retrieved 3 August 2014. "Buffon: "Sono pulito, solo scommesse legali"" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 13 May 2006. Retrieved 3 August 2014. "Buffon prosciolto: "Sapevo di non aver fatto niente"" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 30 December 2006. Archived from the original on 3 November 2015. Retrieved 3 August 2014. Stoppini, Davide (12 July 2006). "E Buffon inciampa sulla croce celtica". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Retrieved 28 July 2020. de Menezes, Jack (17 May 2018). "Gianluigi Buffon apologises to referee Michael Oliver for going 'beyond the limits' after Champions League red card". The Independent. Retrieved 14 April 2020. Gianluigi Buffon at Soccerway. Retrieved 11 May 2019. "Gianluigi Buffon – Century of International Appearances". RSSSF. 29 February 2012. Retrieved 1 February 2013. "Gianluigi Buffon". FIGC profile (in Italian). Retrieved 17 April 2015. "Gianluigi Buffon: Palmares". gianluigibuffon.it (in Italian). Retrieved 28 September 2014. "Albo d'Oro" (in Italian). assocalciatori.it. Archived from the original on 15 May 2013. Retrieved 15 September 2015. "Gianluigi Buffon" (in Italian). grangala.assocalciatori.it. Retrieved 25 October 2019. Karel Stokkermans (14 March 2007). "ESM Season XI 2002/03". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 7 February 2016. Retrieved 20 May 2015. "ESM Top-Elf: Ein Bayern-Star in Europas Elite". Abendzeitung (in German). 8 June 2017. Retrieved 12 June 2017. "FORMER RESULTS". IFFHS.de. Archived from the original on 8 December 2016. Retrieved 18 October 2015. "FIFPro World XI 2005/2006". FIFPro. 20 December 2013. Archived from the original on 9 July 2015. Retrieved 9 June 2015. "FIFPro World XI 2006/2007". FIFPro. 20 December 2013. Archived from the original on 2 March 2014. Retrieved 9 June 2015. "All-Decade Team: Soccer". Sports Illustrated. 21 December 2009. Archived from the original on 13 November 2012. Retrieved 6 October 2017. Brewin, John (25 December 2009). "World Team of the Decade". ESPNsoccernet. ESPN. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 29 January 2018. "Gianluigi Buffon ahead of Iker Casillas by a hair". iffhs.de. 7 February 2012. Archived from the original on 8 February 2012. Retrieved 7 February 2012. "IFFHS WORLD'S BEST MAN GOALKEEPER OF THE DECADE 2011-2020: MANUEL NEUER". iffhs.com. 14 January 2021. "IFFHS GOALKEEPERS OF THE XXIst CENTURY (2001-2020) - BUFFON LEADS THE RANKING". IFFHS. 13 February 2021. "Buffon best in the 21st Century". Football Italia. 7 February 2012. Retrieved 25 November 2014. "Buffon: best goalkeeper of the decade according to IFFHS". Juventus FC. 13 October 2010. Archived from the original on 5 May 2015. Retrieved 4 May 2015. "Buffon best world keeper of 25 years". Football Italia. 17 January 2013. Retrieved 30 October 2014. "IFFHS ALL TIME RANKING OF THE WORLD'S BEST GOALKEEPERS (1987-2020)". IFFHS. 24 February 2021. "Gran Galà del Calcio Aic. E' Pirlo il migliore del 2012" [Gran Galà del Calcio Aic. Pirlo is the best of 2012] (in Italian). Tuttosport. 27 January 2013. Archived from the original on 24 June 2015. Retrieved 1 June 2015. "Serie A, Gran Galà del Calcio Aic. Tutte le frasi e i premi" [Serie A, Gran Galà del Calcio Aic. All the quotes and awards] (in Italian). Tuttosport. 15 December 2014. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 11 January 2016. "Gran Galà del Calcio: tutti i vincitori della serata LIVE". Sky Sport (in Italian). 4 December 2023. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Ultimate Team of the Year: The All-Time XI". UEFA. 22 November 2015. Retrieved 25 November 2015. "Messi, Neymar Jr, Iniesta and Alves in France Football world XI of 2015". FC Barcelona.com. 30 December 2015. Retrieved 30 December 2015. "Your All-time EURO 11 revealed". UEFA. 7 June 2016. Retrieved 8 June 2016. Andrea Guerra (26 July 2016). "A Gigi Buffon il premio Scirea: sul podio Barzagli e Abbiati" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. Retrieved 26 July 2016. "A Buffon il Golden Foot 2016: è il quarto italiano a vincerlo" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 11 October 2016. Retrieved 11 October 2016. "Gianluigi Buffon named #UCL goalkeeper of the season". UEFA.com. 24 August 2017. Retrieved 24 August 2017. "The IFFHS Men World Team 2017". IFFHS.de. 12 December 2017. Archived from the original on 13 December 2017. Retrieved 12 December 2017. "Gazzetta Sports Awards: Buffon l'uomo dell'anno, Totti e Contador leggende" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 12 December 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2017. "#JUVE120 team announced". juventus.com. 24 November 2017. Archived from the original on 27 May 2018. Retrieved 29 May 2018. Warrington, Declan (7 March 2018). "Ranked! The 10 best goalkeepers of the 21st century". FourFourTwo. Archived from the original on 30 May 2019. Retrieved 1 April 2020. "The other two Ballon d'Or Dream Team XIs: Zidane, Cruyff, Iniesta, Di Stefano... but no Casillas". MARCA. 15 December 2020. Retrieved 15 December 2020. "IFFHS ALL TIME WORLD MEN'S DREAM TEAM". IFFHS. 22 May 2021. "Totti fa 615, agganciato Zanetti" (in Italian). UEFA.com. 16 April 2017. Retrieved 17 April 2017. "Juventus 2 Verona 1: Buffon signs off on a high". FourFourTwo. 19 May 2018. Retrieved 19 May 2018. "Presenze Giocatori" [Player appearances] (in Italian). My Juve.it. Retrieved 4 May 2015. "Presenze Giocatori Campionato Serie A" [Player Appearances Serie A Championship]. myjuve.it (in Italian). My Juve.it. Retrieved 25 October 2015. "B-Day: tutti i numeri di Gianluigi Buffon" (in Italian). Mediaset. 17 May 2018. Retrieved 19 May 2018. Fabiana Della Valle (1 March 2016). "Juve, Buffon: l'uomo dei record. Ora punta Zoff e Seba Rossi" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. Retrieved 1 March 2016. "Buffon looks to Juve and Italy future". Football Italia. 19 March 2017. Retrieved 20 March 2017. "Italy – Record International Players". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 14 March 2013. Retrieved 30 October 2014. "Qualificazioni Mondiali: Presenze" [World Cup Qualifying: Appearances] (in Italian). Italia1910. Retrieved 3 May 2016. Paolo Menicucci (15 April 2016). "Stars of UEFA EURO 2016: Gianluigi Buffon". UEFA. Retrieved 15 April 2016. "Presenze: Campionati Europei" (in Italian). Italia1910. Retrieved 14 March 2017. "Presenze: Qualificazioni Europei" (in Italian). Italia1910. Retrieved 14 March 2017. "Confederations Cup: Presenze" (in Italian). Italia1910. Retrieved 3 May 2016. "La prima volta di Buffon...in azzurro" (in Italian). Il Corriere dello Sport. 6 October 2017. Retrieved 15 October 2017. "Buffon vicino a un nuovo record da capitano della Nazionale" (in Italian). Tuttosport. 4 October 2017. Retrieved 15 October 2017. Jonathan Stevenson (9 July 2006). "Italy 1–1 France (aet)". BBC Sport. Retrieved 8 December 2015. "Veteran Juventus Goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon Still Vital World Cup Cog for Italy". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 30 October 2014. "RECORD DI IMBATTIBILITA' PER BUFFON: 974'" [Record unbeaten streak for Buffon: 974 minutes] (in Italian). LegaSerieA.it. 20 March 2016. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 22 March 2016. "Buffon's Juventus moments". Football Italia. 17 May 2018. Retrieved 19 May 2018. "Italy's Buffon ties record at his 5th World Cup". Yahoo.com. Retrieved 30 October 2014. Ed Malyon (22 June 2018). "Rafael Marquez: Five World Cups but Mexico's captain is lost in the shadows far from the national hero he should be". The Independent. Retrieved 6 August 2018. "Totale: Porta inviolata (portieri)" (in Italian). Italia1910. Retrieved 11 March 2017. "Best goalkeepers in football: From Iker Casillas to Manuel Neuer". olympics.com. 18 December 2022. "Campionati Mondiali: Porta inviolata (portieri)" (in Italian). Italia1910.com. Retrieved 17 April 2017. "Campionati Europei: Porta inviolata (portieri)" (in Italian). Italia1910.com. Retrieved 17 April 2017. "Confederations Cup: Porta inviolata (portieri)" (in Italian). Italia1910.com. Retrieved 17 April 2017. "Qualificazioni Mondiali: Porta inviolata (portieri)" (in Italian). Italia1910.com. Retrieved 17 April 2017. "Qualificazioni Europei: Porta inviolata (portieri)" (in Italian). Italia1910.com. Retrieved 17 April 2017. "Every record Gianluigi Buffon holds - and could break in the future". FotMob. 23 February 2021. Retrieved 30 April 2021. Paul Fletcher; John Bennett (2 June 2017). "Champions League final: Gianluigi Buffon inspired by Cameroon keeper Thomas N'Kono". BBC Sport. Retrieved 2 June 2017. "Buffon v Ronaldo: The Champions League's greatest goalkeeper meets its most prolific goalscorer". FourFourTwo. 31 May 2017. Retrieved 31 May 2017. "The Champions League's greatest ever goalkeepers". UEFA.com. 20 March 2018. Retrieved 20 March 2018. "Champions League's top goalkeepers: Most appearances, clean sheets". UEFA. 1 January 2023. Retrieved 2 August 2023. "Champions League's top goalkeepers: Most appearances, clean sheets". UEFA.com. 1 January 2023. "Players with the most UEFA club appearances". UEFA. 1 January 2017. Retrieved 1 January 2017. "Man City can beat Buffon's record". Football Italia. 16 March 2021. "Totale: Rigori parati" (in Italian). Italia1910. Retrieved 3 May 2016. "All you ever wanted to know: Champions League penalties". UEFA.com. 6 December 2018. Retrieved 14 December 2018. "Ramos now leads Europe as player with most international caps". Real Madrid CF. 11 November 2020. "Gianluigi Buffon". UEFA. Retrieved 30 October 2014. "Buffon by the numbers". Football Italia. 17 May 2018. Retrieved 19 May 2018. "Juve, la gioia di capitan Buffon: "Siamo nella storia del calcio"" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 21 May 2017. Retrieved 21 May 2017. "Juve, Supercoppa dei record. Notte e numeri da capogiro" [Juve, Supercup of records. A night and numbers to make your head spin] (in Italian). La Gazzetta dello Sport. 9 August 2015. Retrieved 31 August 2015. "New Italy captain Buffon ruled out for three months". CNN. 5 July 2010. Retrieved 6 August 2015. "Kepa Arrizabalaga: Chelsea sign Athletic Bilbao goalkeeper in world record deal". BBC Sport. 8 August 2018. "World Cup Watch: The Galacticos". The Independent. Archived from the original on 19 November 2014. Retrieved 30 October 2014. Romano, Fabrizio (18 July 2018). "Liverpool sign Roma goalkeeper Alisson for world-record £66.9m fee". The Guardian. Retrieved 19 July 2018. "Manchester United announce the signing of Andre Onana". OneFootball. 20 July 2023. Retrieved 20 July 2023. Michael J. Chandler (19 May 2018). "By the numbers: Buffon ends record-smashing Juventus tenure on top". The Score. Retrieved 13 August 2018. Camedda, Paolo (8 October 2019). "Giocatori più anziani Serie A: la classifica di tutti i tempi" (in Italian). Calcio News 24. Retrieved 9 October 2019. "Champions, Buffon scala la classifica dei record: adesso non gli resta che... vincere". ilposticipo.it (in Italian). 11 December 2019. Retrieved 12 December 2019. Danny Ryan (30 June 2020). "The 25 goalkeepers with the most clean sheets since the year 2000 (11th-1st)". Give Me Sport. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 2 July 2020. "5 Goalkeepers With the Most Clean Sheets in the 21st Century". 90min.com. 8 July 2020. "Coni: Consegna dei Collari d'Oro e dei Diplomi d'Onore. Premia il Presidente del Consiglio Romano Prodi. Diretta Tv su Rai 2" (in Italian). Coni.it. 16 October 2006. Retrieved 23 December 2016. "Ufficiale Ordine al Merito della Repubblica Italiana Sig. Gianluigi Buffon" (in Italian). Quirinale.it. Archived from the original on 14 December 2013. Retrieved 1 February 2013. Gianluigi Buffon, Roberto Perrone, Numero 1, Milan, Rizzoli, 2007, ISBN 978-88-17-02438-9 (Number 1). (in Italian) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gianluigi Buffon. Wikiquote has quotations related to Gianluigi Buffon. Official website PSG official profile Gianluigi Buffon at Soccerway Profile at legaseriea.it Archived 13 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine (in Italian) Profile at aic.football.it (in Italian) Gianluigi Buffon at TuttoCalciatori.net (in Italian) FIGC official profile (in Italian) Profile at Italia1910.com (in Italian) Gianluigi Buffon – FIFA competition record (archived) Gianluigi Buffon – UEFA competition record (archive) 