Cleveland, officially the City of Cleveland, is a city in the U.S. state of Ohio and the county seat of Cuyahoga County. Located in Northeast Ohio along the southern shore of Lake Erie, it is situated across the U.S. maritime border with Canada and lies approximately 60 miles (97 km) west of Pennsylvania. Cleveland ranks as the most populous city on Lake Erie, the second-most populous city in Ohio, and the 54th-most populous city in the U.S. with a 2020 population of 372,624. The city anchors the Cleveland metropolitan area, the 33rd-largest in the U.S. at 2.18 million residents, as well as the larger Cleveland–Akron–Canton combined statistical area, the most populous in Ohio and the 17th-largest in the country with a population of 3.63 million in 2020. Cleveland was founded in 1796 near the mouth of the Cuyahoga River as part of the Connecticut Western Reserve by General Moses Cleaveland, after whom the city was named. Its location on the river and the lake shore allowed it to grow into a major commercial and industrial metropolis by the late 19th century, attracting large numbers of immigrants and migrants. It was among the top 10 largest U.S. cities by population for much of the 20th century, a period that saw the development of the city's cultural institutions. By the 1960s, Cleveland's economy began to slow down as manufacturing declined and suburbanization occurred. The city has since developed a diversified economy and gained a national reputation as a center for healthcare and the arts. Cleveland is a port city, connected to the Atlantic Ocean via the Saint Lawrence Seaway. Its economy relies on diverse sectors that include higher education, manufacturing, financial services, healthcare, and biomedicals. The city serves as the headquarters of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, as well as several major companies. The GDP for the Greater Cleveland MSA was $138.3 billion in 2022. Combined with the Akron MSA, the eight-county Cleveland–Akron metropolitan economy was $176 billion in 2022, the largest in Ohio. Designated as a global city by the Globalization and World Cities Research Network, Cleveland is home to several major cultural institutions, including the Cleveland Museum of Art, the Cleveland Museum of Natural History, the Cleveland Orchestra, the Cleveland Public Library, Playhouse Square, and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, as well as Case Western Reserve University. Known as "The Forest City" among many other nicknames, Cleveland serves as the center of the Cleveland Metroparks nature reserve system. The city's major league professional sports teams include the Cleveland Browns (NFL), the Cleveland Cavaliers (NBA), and the Cleveland Guardians (MLB). Cleveland was established on July 22, 1796, by surveyors of the Connecticut Land Company when they laid out Connecticut's Western Reserve into townships and a capital city. They named the settlement "Cleaveland" after their leader, General Moses Cleaveland, a veteran of the American Revolutionary War. Cleaveland oversaw the New England–style design of the plan for what would become the modern downtown area, centered on Public Square, before returning to Connecticut, never again to visit Ohio. The town's name was often shortened to "Cleveland", even by Cleaveland's original surveyors. A common myth emerged that the spelling was altered by The Cleveland Advertiser in order to fit the name on the newspaper's masthead. The first permanent European settler in Cleveland was Lorenzo Carter, who built a cabin on the banks of the Cuyahoga River. The emerging community served as an important supply post for the U.S. during the Battle of Lake Erie in the War of 1812. Locals adopted Commodore Oliver Hazard Perry as a civic hero and erected a monument in his honor decades later. Largely through the efforts of the settlement's first lawyer Alfred Kelley, the village of Cleveland was incorporated on December 23, 1814. In spite of the nearby swampy lowlands and harsh winters, the town's waterfront location proved to be an advantage, giving it access to Great Lakes trade. It grew rapidly after the 1832 completion of the Ohio and Erie Canal. This key link between the Ohio River and the Great Lakes connected Cleveland to the Atlantic Ocean via the Erie Canal and Hudson River, and later via the Saint Lawrence Seaway. The town's growth continued with added railroad links. In 1836, Cleveland, then only on the eastern banks of the Cuyahoga, was officially incorporated as a city, and John W. Willey was elected its first mayor. That same year, it nearly erupted into open warfare with neighboring Ohio City over a bridge connecting the two communities. Ohio City remained an independent municipality until its annexation by Cleveland in 1854. A center of abolitionist activity, Cleveland (code-named "Station Hope") was a major stop on the Underground Railroad for escaped African American slaves en route to Canada. The city also served as an important center for the Union during the American Civil War. Decades later, in July 1894, the wartime contributions of those serving the Union from Cleveland and Cuyahoga County would be honored with the Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument on Public Square. The Civil War vaulted Cleveland into the first rank of American manufacturing cities and fueled unprecedented growth. Its prime geographic location as a transportation hub on the Great Lakes played an important role in its development as an industrial and commercial center. In 1870, John D. Rockefeller founded Standard Oil in Cleveland, and in 1885, he moved its headquarters to New York City, which had become a center of finance and business. Cleveland's economic growth and industrial jobs attracted large waves of immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe as well as Ireland. Urban growth was accompanied by significant strikes and labor unrest, as workers demanded better wages and working conditions. Between 1881 and 1886, 70 to 80% of strikes were successful in improving labor conditions in Cleveland. The Cleveland Streetcar Strike of 1899 was one of the more violent instances of labor strife in the city during this period. By 1910, Cleveland had become known as the "Sixth City" due to its status at the time as the sixth-largest U.S. city. Its automotive companies included Peerless, Chandler, and Winton, maker of the first car driven across the U.S. Other manufacturing industries in Cleveland included steam cars produced by White and electric cars produced by Baker. The city counted major Progressive Era politicians among its leaders, most prominently the populist Mayor Tom L. Johnson, who was responsible for the development of the Cleveland Mall Plan. The era of the City Beautiful movement in Cleveland architecture, this period saw wealthy patrons support the establishment of the city's major cultural institutions. The most prominent among them were the Cleveland Museum of Art, which opened in 1916, and the Cleveland Orchestra, established in 1918. In addition to the large immigrant population, African American migrants from the rural South arrived in Cleveland (among other Northeastern and Midwestern cities) as part of the Great Migration for jobs, constitutional rights, and relief from racial discrimination. By 1920, the year in which the Cleveland Indians won their first World Series championship, Cleveland had grown into a densely-populated metropolis of 796,841, making it the fifth-largest city in the nation, with a foreign-born population of 30%. At this time, Cleveland saw the rise of radical labor movements, most prominently the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), in response to the conditions of the largely immigrant and migrant workers. In 1919, the city attracted national attention amid the First Red Scare for the Cleveland May Day Riots, in which local socialist and IWW demonstrators clashed with anti-socialists. The riots occurred during the broader strike wave that swept the U.S. that year. Cleveland's population continued to grow throughout the Roaring Twenties. The decade saw the establishment of the city's Playhouse Square, and the rise of the risqué Short Vincent. The Bal-Masque balls of the avant-garde Kokoon Arts Club scandalized the city. Jazz came to prominence in Cleveland during this period. Prohibition first took effect in Ohio in May 1919 (although it was not well-enforced in Cleveland), became law with the Volstead Act in 1920, and was eventually repealed nationally by Congress in 1933. The ban on alcohol led to the rise of speakeasies throughout the city and organized crime gangs, such as the Mayfield Road Mob, who smuggled bootleg liquor across Lake Erie from Canada into Cleveland. The era of the flapper marked the beginning of the golden age in Downtown Cleveland retail, centered on major department stores Higbee's, Bailey's, the May Company, Taylor's, Halle's, and Sterling Lindner Davis, which collectively represented one of the largest and most fashionable shopping districts in the country, often compared to New York's Fifth Avenue. In 1929, Cleveland hosted the first of many National Air Races, and Amelia Earhart flew to the city from Santa Monica, California in the Women's Air Derby. The Van Sweringen brothers commenced construction of the Terminal Tower skyscraper in 1926 and oversaw it to completion in 1927. By the time the building was dedicated as part of Cleveland Union Terminal in 1930, the city had a population of over 900,000. Cleveland was hit hard by the Wall Street Crash of 1929 and the subsequent Great Depression. A center of union activity, the city saw significant labor struggles in this period, including strikes by workers against Fisher Body in 1936 and against Republic Steel in 1937. The city was also aided by major federal works projects sponsored by President Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal. In commemoration of the centennial of Cleveland's incorporation as a city, the Great Lakes Exposition debuted in June 1936 at the city's North Coast Harbor, along the Lake Erie shore north of downtown. Conceived by Cleveland's business leaders as a way to revitalize the city during the Depression, it drew four million visitors in its first season, and seven million by the end of its second and final season in September 1937. On December 7, 1941, Imperial Japan attacked Pearl Harbor and declared war on the U.S. Two of the victims of the attack were Cleveland natives – Rear Admiral Isaac C. Kidd and ensign William Halloran. The attack signaled America's entry into World War II. A major hub of the "Arsenal of Democracy", Cleveland under Mayor Frank Lausche contributed massively to the U.S. war effort as the fifth largest manufacturing center in the nation. During his tenure, Lausche also oversaw the establishment of the Cleveland Transit System, the predecessor to the Greater Cleveland Regional Transit Authority. After the war, Cleveland initially experienced an economic boom, and businesses declared the city to be the "best location in the nation". In 1949, the city was named an All-America City for the first time, and in 1950, its population reached 914,808. In sports, the Indians won the 1948 World Series, the hockey team, the Barons, became champions of the American Hockey League, and the Browns dominated professional football in the 1950s. As a result, along with track and boxing champions produced, Cleveland was declared the "City of Champions" in sports at this time. Additionally, the 1950s saw the rising popularity of a new music genre that local WJW (AM) disc jockey Alan Freed dubbed "rock and roll". However, by the 1960s, Cleveland's economy began to slow down, and residents increasingly sought new housing in the suburbs, reflecting the national trends of suburban growth following federally subsidized highways. Industrial restructuring, particularly in the steel and automotive industries, resulted in the loss of numerous jobs in Cleveland and the region, and the city suffered economically. The burning of the Cuyahoga River in June 1969 brought national attention to the issue of industrial pollution in Cleveland and served as a catalyst for the American environmental movement. Housing discrimination and redlining against African Americans led to racial unrest in Cleveland and numerous other Northern U.S. cities. In Cleveland, the Hough riots erupted from July 18 to 24, 1966, and the Glenville Shootout took place on July 23, 1968. In November 1967, Cleveland became the first major American city to elect an African American mayor, Carl B. Stokes, who served from 1968 to 1971 and played an instrumental role in restoring the Cuyahoga River. In December 1978, during the turbulent tenure of Dennis Kucinich as mayor, Cleveland became the first major American city since the Great Depression to enter into a financial default on federal loans. The national recession of the early 1980s "further eroded the city's traditional economic base." While unemployment during the period peaked in 1983, Cleveland's rate of 13.8% was higher than the national average due to the closure of several steel production centers. The city began a gradual economic recovery under Mayor George V. Voinovich in the 1980s. Downtown saw the construction of the Key Tower and 200 Public Square skyscrapers, as well as the development of the Gateway Sports and Entertainment Complex – consisting of Progressive Field and Rocket Mortgage FieldHouse – and North Coast Harbor, including the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, Cleveland Browns Stadium, and the Great Lakes Science Center. Although the city emerged from default in 1987, it later suffered from the impact of the subprime mortgage crisis and the Great Recession. Nevertheless, by the turn of the 21st century, Cleveland succeeded in developing a more diversified economy and gained a national reputation as a center for healthcare and the arts. The city's downtown and several neighborhoods have experienced significant population growth since 2010, while overall population decline has slowed. Challenges remain for the city, with economic development of neighborhoods, improvement of city schools, and continued efforts to tackle poverty, homelessness, and urban blight being top municipal priorities. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the city has a total area of 82.47 square miles (213.60 km2), of which 77.70 square miles (201.24 km2) is land and 4.77 square miles (12.35 km2) is water. The shore of Lake Erie is 569 feet (173 m) above sea level; however, the city lies on a series of irregular bluffs lying roughly parallel to the lake. In Cleveland these bluffs are cut principally by the Cuyahoga River, Big Creek, and Euclid Creek. The land rises quickly from the lake shore elevation of 569 feet. Public Square, less than one mile (1.6 km) inland, sits at an elevation of 650 feet (198 m), and Hopkins Airport, 5 miles (8 km) inland from the lake, is at an elevation of 791 feet (241 m). Cleveland borders several inner-ring and streetcar suburbs. To the west, it borders Lakewood, Rocky River, and Fairview Park, and to the east, it borders Shaker Heights, Cleveland Heights, South Euclid, and East Cleveland. To the southwest, it borders Linndale, Brooklyn, Parma, and Brook Park. To the south, the city borders Newburgh Heights, Cuyahoga Heights, and Brooklyn Heights and to the southeast, it borders Warrensville Heights, Maple Heights, and Garfield Heights. To the northeast, along the shore of Lake Erie, Cleveland borders Bratenahl and Euclid. Cleveland's downtown architecture is diverse. Many of the city's government and civic buildings, including City Hall, the Cuyahoga County Courthouse, the Cleveland Public Library, and Public Auditorium, are clustered around the open Cleveland Mall and share a common neoclassical architecture. They were built in the early 20th century as the result of the 1903 Group Plan. They constitute one of the most complete examples of City Beautiful design in the U.S. Completed in 1927 and dedicated in 1930 as part of the Cleveland Union Terminal complex, the Terminal Tower was the tallest building in North America outside New York City until 1964 and the tallest in the city until 1991. It is a prototypical Beaux-Arts skyscraper. The two other major skyscrapers on Public Square, Key Tower (the tallest building in Ohio) and 200 Public Square, combine elements of Art Deco architecture with postmodern designs. Running east from Public Square through University Circle is Euclid Avenue, which was known as "Millionaires' Row" for its prestige and elegance as a residential street. In the late 1880s, writer Bayard Taylor described it as "the most beautiful street in the world". Known as Cleveland's "Crystal Palace", the five-story Cleveland Arcade (sometimes called the Old Arcade) was built in 1890 and renovated in 2001 as a Hyatt Regency Hotel. Another major architectural landmark, the Cleveland Trust Company Building, was completed in 1907 and renovated in 2015 as a downtown Heinen's supermarket. Cleveland's historic ecclesiastical architecture includes the Presbyterian Old Stone Church in downtown Cleveland, the onion domed St. Theodosius Russian Orthodox Cathedral in Tremont, and the Catholic Cathedral of St. John the Evangelist along with myriad other ethnically inspired Roman Catholic churches. Cleveland Arcade, 1890 Cleveland Trust Company Building, 1907 Connor Palace Theatre, 1922 Terminal Tower from Euclid Avenue Grand foyer of Severance Hall, 1931 The Cleveland City Planning Commission has officially designated 34 neighborhoods in Cleveland. Centered on Public Square, Downtown Cleveland is the city's central business district, encompassing a wide range of subdistricts, such as the Nine-Twelve District, the Campus District, the Civic Center, East 4th Street, and Playhouse Square. It also historically included the lively Short Vincent entertainment district. Mixed-use areas, such as the Warehouse District and the Superior Arts District, are occupied by industrial and office buildings as well as restaurants, cafes, and bars. The number of condominiums, lofts, and apartments has been on the increase since 2000 and especially 2010, reflecting downtown's growing population. Clevelanders geographically define themselves in terms of whether they live on the east or west side of the Cuyahoga River. The East Side includes the neighborhoods of Buckeye–Shaker, Buckeye–Woodhill, Central, Collinwood (including Nottingham), Euclid–Green, Fairfax, Glenville, Goodrich–Kirtland Park (including Asiatown), Hough, Kinsman, Lee–Miles (including Lee–Harvard and Lee–Seville), Mount Pleasant, St. Clair–Superior, Union–Miles Park, and University Circle (including Little Italy). The West Side includes the neighborhoods of Brooklyn Centre, Clark–Fulton, Cudell, Detroit–Shoreway, Edgewater, Ohio City, Old Brooklyn, Stockyards, Tremont (including Duck Island), West Boulevard, and the four neighborhoods colloquially known as West Park: Kamm's Corners, Jefferson, Bellaire–Puritas, and Hopkins. The Cuyahoga Valley neighborhood (including the Flats) is situated between the East and West Sides, while Broadway–Slavic Village is sometimes referred to as the South Side. Several neighborhoods have begun to attract the return of the middle class that left the city for the suburbs in the 1960s and 1970s. These neighborhoods are on both the West Side (Ohio City, Tremont, Detroit–Shoreway, and Edgewater) and the East Side (Collinwood, Hough, Fairfax, and Little Italy). Much of the growth has been spurred on by attracting creative class members, which has facilitated new residential development and the transformation of old industrial buildings into loft spaces for artists. With its extensive cleanup of its Lake Erie shore and the Cuyahoga River, Cleveland has been recognized by national media as an environmental success story and a national leader in environmental protection. Since the city's industrialization, the Cuyahoga River had become so affected by industrial pollution that it "caught fire" a total of 13 times beginning in 1868. It was the river fire of June 1969 that spurred the city to action under Mayor Carl B. Stokes, and played a key role in the passage of the Clean Water Act in 1972 and the National Environmental Policy Act later that year. Since that time, the Cuyahoga has been extensively cleaned up through the efforts of the city and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (OEPA). In addition to continued efforts to improve freshwater and air quality, Cleveland is now exploring renewable energy. The city's two main electrical utilities are FirstEnergy and Cleveland Public Power. Its climate action plan, updated in December 2018, has a 2050 target of 100% renewable power, along with reduction of greenhouse gases to 80% below the 2010 level. In recent decades, Cleveland has been working to address the issue of harmful algal blooms on Lake Erie, fed primarily by agricultural runoff, which have presented new environmental challenges for the city and for northern Ohio. Typical of the Great Lakes region, Cleveland exhibits a continental climate with four distinct seasons, which lies in the humid continental (Köppen Dfa) zone. The climate is transitional with the Cfa humid subtropical climate. Summers are hot and humid, while winters are cold and snowy. East of the mouth of the Cuyahoga, the land elevation rises rapidly in the south. Together with the prevailing winds off Lake Erie, this feature is the principal contributor to the lake-effect snow that is typical in Cleveland (especially on the city's East Side) from mid-November until the surface of the lake freezes, usually in late January or early February. The lake effect causes a relative differential in geographical snowfall totals across the city. On the city's far West Side, the Hopkins neighborhood only reached 100 inches (254 cm) of snowfall in a season three times since record-keeping for snow began in 1893. By contrast, seasonal totals approaching or exceeding 100 inches (254 cm) are not uncommon as the city ascends into the Heights on the east, where the region known as the "Snow Belt" begins. Extending from the city's East Side and its suburbs, the Snow Belt reaches up the Lake Erie shore as far as Buffalo. The all-time record high in Cleveland of 104 °F (40 °C) was established on June 25, 1988, and the all-time record low of −20 °F (−29 °C) was set on January 19, 1994. On average, July is the warmest month with a mean temperature of 74.5 °F (23.6 °C), and January, with a mean temperature of 29.1 °F (−1.6 °C), is the coldest. Normal yearly precipitation based on the 30-year average from 1991 to 2020 is 41.03 inches (1,042 mm). The least precipitation occurs on the western side and directly along the lake, and the most occurs in the eastern suburbs. Parts of Geauga County to the east receive over 44 inches (1,100 mm) of liquid precipitation annually. At the 2020 census, there were 372,624 people and 170,549 households in Cleveland. The population density was 4,901.51 inhabitants per square mile (1,892.5/km2). The median household income was $30,907 and the per capita income was $21,223. 32.7% of the population was living below the poverty line. Of the city's population over the age of 25, 17.5% held a bachelor's degree or higher, and 80.8% had a high school diploma or equivalent. The median age was 36.6 years. As of 2020[update], the racial and ethnic composition of the city was 47.5% African American, 32.1% non-Hispanic white, 13.1% Hispanic or Latino, 2.8% Asian and Pacific Islander, 0.2% Native American, and 3.8% from two or more races. 85.3% of Clevelanders age five and older spoke only English at home, while 14.7% spoke a language other than English, including Spanish, Arabic, Chinese, Albanian, and various Slavic languages (Russian, Polish, Serbian, Croatian, and Slovene). The city's spoken accent is an advanced form of Inland Northern American English, similar to other Great Lakes cities, but distinctive from the rest of Ohio. In the 19th and early 20th centuries, Cleveland saw a massive influx of immigrants from Ireland, Italy, and the Austro-Hungarian, German, Russian, and Ottoman empires, most of whom were attracted by manufacturing jobs. As a result, Cleveland and Cuyahoga County today have substantial communities of Irish (especially in West Park), Italians (especially in Little Italy), Germans, and several Central-Eastern European ethnicities, including Czechs, Hungarians, Lithuanians, Poles, Romanians, Russians, Rusyns, Slovaks, Ukrainians, and ex-Yugoslav groups, such as Slovenes, Croats and Serbs. The presence of Hungarians within Cleveland proper was, at one time, so great that the city boasted the highest concentration of Hungarians in the world outside of Budapest. Cleveland has a long-established Jewish community, historically centered on the East Side neighborhoods of Glenville and Kinsman, but now mostly concentrated in East Side suburbs such as Cleveland Heights and Beachwood, location of the Maltz Museum of Jewish Heritage. The availability of jobs attracted African Americans from the South. Between 1910 and 1970, the black population of Cleveland, largely concentrated on the city's East Side, increased significantly as a result of the First and Second Great Migrations. Cleveland's Latino community consists primarily of Puerto Ricans, as well as smaller numbers of immigrants from Mexico, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, South and Central America, and Spain. The city's Asian community, centered on historical Asiatown, consists of Chinese, Koreans, Vietnamese, and other groups. Additionally, the city and the county have significant communities of Albanians, Arabs (especially Lebanese, Syrians, and Palestinians), Armenians, French, Greeks, Iranians, Scots, Turks, and West Indians. A 2020 analysis found Cleveland to be the most ethnically and racially diverse major city in Ohio. The influx of immigrants in the 19th and early 20th centuries drastically transformed Cleveland's religious landscape. From a homogeneous settlement of New England Protestants, it evolved into a city with a diverse religious composition. The predominant faith among Clevelanders today is Christianity (Catholic, Protestant, and Eastern and Oriental Orthodox), with Jewish, Muslim, Hindu, and Buddhist minorities. Within Cleveland, the neighborhoods with the highest foreign-born populations are Asiatown/Goodrich–Kirtland Park (32.7%), Clark–Fulton (26.7%), West Boulevard (18.5%), Brooklyn Centre (17.3%), Downtown (17.2%), University Circle (15.9%, with 20% in Little Italy), and Jefferson (14.3%). Recent waves of immigration have brought new groups to Cleveland, including Ethiopians and South Asians, as well as immigrants from Russia and the former USSR, Southeast Europe (especially Albania), the Middle East, East Asia, and Latin America. In the 2010s, the immigrant population of Cleveland and Cuyahoga County began to see significant growth, becoming a major center for immigration in the Great Lakes region. A 2019 study found Cleveland to be the city with the shortest average processing time in the nation for immigrants to become U.S. citizens. The city's annual One World Day in Rockefeller Park includes a naturalization ceremony of new immigrants. Cleveland's location on the Cuyahoga River and Lake Erie has been key to its growth as a major commercial center. Steel and many other manufactured goods emerged as leading industries. The city has since diversified its economy in addition to its manufacturing sector. Established in 1914, the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland is one of 12 U.S. Federal Reserve Banks. Its downtown building, located on East 6th Street and Superior Avenue, was completed in 1923 by the Cleveland architectural firm Walker and Weeks. The headquarters of the Federal Reserve System's Fourth District, the bank employs 1,000 people and maintains branch offices in Cincinnati and Pittsburgh. The president and CEO is Loretta Mester. Cleveland and Cuyahoga County are home to Fortune 500 companies Cleveland-Cliffs, Progressive, Sherwin-Williams, Parker-Hannifin, KeyCorp, and Travel Centers of America. Other large companies based in the city and the county include Aleris, American Greetings, Applied Industrial Technologies, Eaton, Forest City Realty Trust, Heinen's Fine Foods, Hyster-Yale Materials Handling, Lincoln Electric, Medical Mutual of Ohio, Moen Incorporated, NACCO Industries, Nordson Corporation, OM Group, Swagelok, Kirby Company, Things Remembered, Third Federal S&L, TransDigm Group, and Vitamix. NASA maintains the Glenn Research Center in Cleveland. Jones Day, one of the largest law firms in the U.S., was founded in Cleveland in 1893. Healthcare plays a major role in Cleveland's economy. The city's "Big Three" hospital systems are the Cleveland Clinic, University Hospitals, and MetroHealth. The Cleveland Clinic is the largest private employer in the state of Ohio, with a workforce of over 55,000 as of 2022[update]. It carries the distinction as being among America's best hospitals with top ratings published in U.S. News & World Report. The clinic is led by Croatian-born president and CEO Tomislav Mihaljevic and it is affiliated with Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine. University Hospitals includes the University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center and its Rainbow Babies & Children's Hospital. Cliff Megerian serves as that system's CEO. MetroHealth on the city's west side is led by president and CEO Airica Steed. Formerly known as City Hospital, it operates one of two Level I trauma centers in the city, and has various locations throughout Greater Cleveland. In 2013, Cleveland's Global Center for Health Innovation opened with 235,000 square feet (21,800 m2) of display space for healthcare companies across the world. To take advantage of the proximity of universities and other medical centers in Cleveland, the Veterans Administration moved the region's VA hospital from suburban Brecksville to a new facility in University Circle. Cleveland's Playhouse Square is the second largest performing arts center in the U.S. behind New York City's Lincoln Center. It includes the State, Palace, Allen, Hanna, and Ohio theaters. The theaters host Broadway musicals, special concerts, speaking engagements, and other events throughout the year. Playhouse Square's resident performing arts companies include Cleveland Ballet, the Cleveland International Film Festival, the Cleveland Play House, Cleveland State University Department of Theatre and Dance, DANCECleveland, the Great Lakes Theater Festival, and the Tri-C Jazz Fest. A city with strong traditions in theater and vaudeville, Cleveland has produced many renowned performers, most prominently comedian Bob Hope. Outside Playhouse Square is Karamu House, the oldest African American theater in the nation, established in 1915. On the West Side, the Gordon Square Arts District in the Detroit–Shoreway neighborhood is the location of the Capitol Theatre, the Near West Theatre, and an Off-Off-Broadway playhouse, the Cleveland Public Theatre. The Dobama Theatre and the Beck Center for the Arts are based in Cleveland's streetcar suburbs of Cleveland Heights and Lakewood respectively. The Cleveland Orchestra is widely considered one of the world's finest orchestras, and often referred to as the finest in the nation. It is one of the "Big Five" major orchestras in the U.S. The orchestra plays at Severance Hall in University Circle during the winter and at Blossom Music Center in Cuyahoga Falls during the summer. The city is also home to the Cleveland Pops Orchestra, the Cleveland Youth Orchestra, the Contemporary Youth Orchestra, the Cleveland Youth Wind Symphony, and the biennial Cleveland International Piano Competition which has, in the past, often featured the Cleveland Orchestra. One Playhouse Square, now the headquarters for Cleveland's public broadcasters, was initially used as the broadcast studios of WJW (AM), where disc jockey Alan Freed first popularized the term "rock and roll". Beginning in the 1950s, Cleveland gained a strong reputation as a key breakout market for rock music. Its popularity in the city was so great that Billy Bass, the program director at the WMMS radio station, referred to Cleveland as "The Rock and Roll Capital of the World". The Cleveland Agora Theatre and Ballroom has served as a major venue for rock concerts in the city since the 1960s. From 1974 through 1980, the city hosted the World Series of Rock at Cleveland Municipal Stadium. Jazz and R&B have a long history in Cleveland. Many major figures in jazz performed in the city, including Louis Armstrong, Cab Calloway, Duke Ellington, Ella Fitzgerald, Dizzy Gillespie, and Billie Holiday. Legendary pianist Art Tatum regularly played in Cleveland clubs in the 1930s, and gypsy jazz guitarist Django Reinhardt gave his U.S. debut performance in Cleveland in 1946. Prominent jazz artist Noble Sissle was a graduate of Cleveland Central High School, and Artie Shaw worked and performed in Cleveland early in his career. The Tri-C Jazz Fest has been held annually in Cleveland at Playhouse Square since 1980, and the Cleveland Jazz Orchestra was established in 1984. The city has a history of polka music being popular both past and present and is the location of the Polka Hall of Fame. There is even a subgenre called Cleveland-style polka, named after the city. The music's popularity is due in part to the success of Frankie Yankovic, a Cleveland native who was considered "America's Polka King". There is a significant hip hop music scene in Cleveland. In 1997, the Cleveland hip hop group Bone Thugs-n-Harmony won a Grammy for their song "Tha Crossroads". The first film shot in Cleveland was in 1897 by the company of Ohioan Thomas Edison. Before Hollywood became the center for American cinema, filmmaker Samuel R. Brodsky and playwright Robert H. McLaughlin operated a film studio at the Andrews mansion on Euclid Avenue (now the WEWS-TV studio). There they produced major silent-era features, such as Dangerous Toys (1921), which are now considered lost. Brodsky also directed the weekly Plain Dealer Screen Magazine that ran in theaters in Cleveland and Ohio from 1917 to 1924. In addition, Cleveland hosted over a dozen sponsored film studios, including Cinécraft Productions, which still operates in Ohio City. In the "talkie" era, Cleveland featured in several major studio films, such as Michael Curtiz's pre-Code classic Goodbye Again (1933) with Warren William and Joan Blondell. Players from the 1948 Cleveland Indians appeared in The Kid from Cleveland (1949). Billy Wilder's The Fortune Cookie (1966) was set and filmed in the city and marked the first onscreen pairing of Walter Matthau and Jack Lemmon. Labor struggles in Cleveland were depicted in Native Land (1942), narrated by Paul Robeson, and in Norman Jewison's F.I.S.T. (1978) with Sylvester Stallone. Clevelander Jim Jarmusch's Stranger Than Paradise (1984) – a deadpan comedy about two New Yorkers who travel to Florida by way of Cleveland – was a favorite of the Cannes Film Festival. Major League (1989) reflected the perennial struggles of the Cleveland Indians, while American Splendor (2003) reflected the life of Cleveland graphic novelist Harvey Pekar. Kill the Irishman (2011) depicted the 1970s turf war between Danny Greene and the Cleveland crime family. Cleveland has doubled for other locations in films. The wedding and reception scenes in The Deer Hunter (1978), while set in suburban Pittsburgh, were shot in Cleveland's Tremont neighborhood. A Christmas Story (1983) was set in Indiana, but drew many external shots from Cleveland. The opening shots of Air Force One (1997) were filmed in and above Severance Hall, and Downtown Cleveland doubled for Manhattan in Spider-Man 3 (2007), The Avengers (2012), and The Fate of the Furious (2017). More recently, Judas and the Black Messiah (2021), though set in Chicago, was filmed in Cleveland. Future productions are handled by the Greater Cleveland Film Commission at the Leader Building on Superior Avenue. In television, the city is the setting for the popular network sitcom The Drew Carey Show, starring Cleveland native Drew Carey. Hot in Cleveland, a comedy that aired on TV Land, premiered on June 16, 2010, and ran for six seasons until its finale on June 3, 2015. Cleveland Hustles, the CNBC reality show co-created by LeBron James, was filmed in the city. Cleveland has a thriving literary and poetry community, with regular poetry readings at bookstores, coffee shops, and various other venues. In 1925, Russian Futurist poet Vladimir Mayakovsky came to Cleveland and gave a poetry recitation to the city's ethnic working class, as part of his trip to America. The Cleveland State University Poetry Center serves as an academic center for poetry in the city. Langston Hughes, preeminent poet of the Harlem Renaissance and child of an itinerant couple, lived in Cleveland as a teenager and attended Central High School in Cleveland in the 1910s. At Central High, the young writer was taught by Helen Maria Chesnutt, daughter of Cleveland-born African American novelist Charles W. Chesnutt. Hughes authored some of his earliest poems, plays, and short stories in Cleveland and contributed to the school newspaper. The African American avant-garde poet Russell Atkins lived in the city as well. The American modernist poet Hart Crane was born in nearby Garrettsville, Ohio in 1899. His adolescence was divided between Cleveland and Akron before he moved to New York City in 1916. Aside from factory work during World War I, he served as a reporter to The Plain Dealer for a short period, before achieving recognition in the Modernist literary scene. On the Case Western Reserve University campus, a statue of Crane, designed by sculptor William McVey, stands behind the Kelvin Smith Library. Cleveland was the home of Joe Shuster and Jerry Siegel, who created the comic book character Superman in 1932. Both attended Glenville High School, and their early collaborations resulted in the creation of "The Man of Steel". Harlan Ellison, noted author of speculative fiction, was born in Cleveland in 1934; his family subsequently moved to nearby Painesville, though Ellison moved back to Cleveland in 1949. As a young man, he published a series of short stories appearing in the Cleveland News, and performed in a number of productions for the Cleveland Play House. Cleveland is the site of the Anisfield-Wolf Book Award, established by poet and philanthropist Edith Anisfield Wolf in 1935, which recognizes books that have made important contributions to the understanding of racism and human diversity. Presented by the Cleveland Foundation, it remains the only American book prize focusing on works that address racism and diversity. Cleveland has two main art museums. The Cleveland Museum of Art is a major American art museum, with a collection that includes more than 60,000 works of art ranging from ancient masterpieces to contemporary pieces. The Museum of Contemporary Art Cleveland showcases established and emerging artists, particularly from the Cleveland area, through hosting and producing temporary exhibitions. Both museums offer free admission to visitors, with the Cleveland Museum of Art declaring their museum free and open "for the benefit of all the people forever." The two museums are part of Cleveland's University Circle, a 550-acre (2.2 km2) concentration of cultural, educational, and medical institutions located 5 miles (8.0 km) east of downtown. In addition to the art museums, the neighborhood includes the Cleveland Botanical Garden, Case Western Reserve University, University Hospitals, Severance Hall, the Cleveland Museum of Natural History, and the Western Reserve Historical Society. Also located at University Circle is the Cleveland Cinematheque at the Cleveland Institute of Art, hailed by The New York Times as one of the country's best alternative movie theaters. The I. M. Pei-designed Rock and Roll Hall of Fame is located on Cleveland's Lake Erie waterfront at North Coast Harbor downtown. Neighboring attractions include Cleveland Browns Stadium, the Great Lakes Science Center, the Steamship Mather Museum, the International Women's Air & Space Museum, and the USS Cod, a World War II submarine. Designed by architect Levi T. Scofield, the Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument at Public Square is Cleveland's major Civil War memorial and a major attraction in the city. Other city attractions include Grays Armory and the Children's Museum of Cleveland. A Cleveland holiday attraction, especially for fans of Jean Shepherd's A Christmas Story, is the Christmas Story House and Museum in Tremont. Cleveland hosts the WinterLand holiday display lighting festival annually at Public Square, and the Cleveland International Film Festival has been held in the city since 1977. The Cleveland National Air Show, an indirect successor to the National Air Races, has been held at the city's Burke Lakefront Airport since 1964. The Great Lakes Burning River Fest, a two-night music and beer festival at Whiskey Island, has been sponsored by the Great Lakes Brewing Company since 2001. Many ethnic festivals are held in Cleveland throughout the year. These include the annual Feast of the Assumption in Little Italy, Russian Maslenitsa in Rockefeller Park, the Puerto Rican Parade and Cultural Festival in Clark–Fulton, the Cleveland Asian Festival in Asiatown, the Tremont Greek Fest, and the St. Mary Romanian Festival in West Park. Cleveland also hosts annual Polish Dyngus Day and Slovene Kurentovanje celebrations. The city's annual Saint Patrick's Day parade brings hundreds of thousands to the streets of Downtown. The Cleveland Thyagaraja Festival held each spring at Cleveland State University is the largest Indian classical music and dance festival in the world outside of India. Since 1946, the city has annually marked One World Day in the Cleveland Cultural Gardens in Rockefeller Park, celebrating all of its ethnic communities. Cleveland's mosaic of ethnic communities and their various culinary traditions have long played an important role in defining the city's cuisine. Local mainstays include an abundance of Slavic, Hungarian, and Central-Eastern European contributions, such as kielbasa, stuffed cabbage, pierogies, goulash, and chicken paprikash. German, Irish, Jewish, and Italian American cuisines are also prominent in Cleveland, as are Lebanese, Greek, Chinese, Puerto Rican, Mexican, and numerous other ethnic cuisines. Vendors at the West Side Market in Ohio City offer many ethnic foods for sale. In addition, the city boasts a vibrant barbecue and soul food scene. Cleveland has plenty of corned beef, with nationally renowned Slyman's Deli, on the near East Side, a perennial winner of various accolades for its celebrated sandwich. Another famed sandwich, the Polish Boy, is a popular street food and Cleveland original frequently sold at downtown hot dog carts and stadium concession stands. With its blue-collar roots well intact, and plenty of Lake Erie perch available, the tradition of Friday night fish fries remains alive and thriving in Cleveland, particularly in ethnic parish-based settings, especially during the season of Lent. For dessert, the Cleveland Cassata Cake is a unique treat invented in the local Italian community and served in Italian establishments throughout the city. Another popular dessert, the locally crafted Russian Tea Biscuit, is common in many Jewish bakeries in Cleveland. Cleveland is noted in the world of celebrity food culture. Famous local figures include chef Michael Symon and food writer Michael Ruhlman, both of whom achieved local and national attention for their contributions to the culinary world. In 2007, Symon helped gain the spotlight when he was named "The Next Iron Chef" on the Food Network. That same year, Ruhlman collaborated with Anthony Bourdain, to do an episode of his Anthony Bourdain: No Reservations focusing on Cleveland's restaurant scene. In 2023, Travel + Leisure named Cleveland the 7th best food city in the nation. Ohio produces the fifth most beer in the U.S., with its largest brewery being Cleveland's Great Lakes Brewing Company. Cleveland has had a long history of brewing, tied to many of its ethnic immigrants, and has reemerged as a regional leader in production. Dozens of breweries exist in the city limits, including large producers such as Market Garden Brewery and Platform Beer Company. Breweries can be found throughout the city, but the highest concentration is in the Ohio City neighborhood. Cleveland hosts expansions from other countries as well, including the Scottish BrewDog and German Hofbrauhaus. Cleveland's major professional sports teams are the Cleveland Guardians (Major League Baseball), the Cleveland Browns (National Football League), and the Cleveland Cavaliers (National Basketball Association). Other professional teams include the Cleveland Monsters (American Hockey League), the Cleveland Charge (NBA G League), the Cleveland Crunch (Major League Indoor Soccer), Cleveland SC (National Premier Soccer League), and the Cleveland Fusion (Women's Football Alliance). Local sporting venues include Progressive Field, Cleveland Browns Stadium, Rocket Mortgage FieldHouse, the Wolstein Center, and the I-X Center. Major League Minor League The Cleveland Guardians – known as the Indians from 1915 to 2021 – won the World Series in 1920 and 1948. They also won the American League pennant, making the World Series in the 1954, 1995, 1997, and 2016 seasons. Between 1995 and 2001, Jacobs Field (now known as Progressive Field) sold out 455 consecutive games, a Major League Baseball record until it was broken in 2008. Historically, the Browns have been among the most successful franchises in American football history, winning eight titles during a short period of time – 1946, 1947, 1948, 1949, 1950, 1954, 1955, and 1964. The Browns have never played in a Super Bowl, getting close five times by making it to the NFL/AFC Championship Game in 1968, 1969, 1986, 1987, and 1989. Former owner Art Modell's relocation of the Browns after the 1995 season (to Baltimore creating the Ravens), caused tremendous heartbreak and resentment among local fans. Cleveland mayor, Michael R. White, worked with the NFL and Commissioner Paul Tagliabue to bring back the Browns beginning in the 1999 season, retaining all team history. In Cleveland's earlier football history, the Cleveland Bulldogs won the NFL Championship in 1924, and the Cleveland Rams won the NFL Championship in 1945 before relocating to Los Angeles. The Cavaliers won the Eastern Conference in 2007, 2015, 2016, 2017 and 2018 but were defeated in the NBA Finals by the San Antonio Spurs and then by the Golden State Warriors, respectively. The Cavs won the Conference again in 2016 and won their first NBA Championship coming back from a 3–1 deficit, finally defeating the Golden State Warriors. Afterwards, over 1.3 million people attended a parade held in the Cavs' honor on June 22, 2016, in Downtown Cleveland. Previously, the Cleveland Rosenblums dominated the original American Basketball League, and the Cleveland Pipers, owned by George Steinbrenner, won the American Basketball League championship in 1962. The Cleveland Monsters of the American Hockey League won the 2016 Calder Cup. They were the first Cleveland AHL team to do so since the 1964 Barons. Collegiately, NCAA Division I Cleveland State Vikings have 19 varsity sports, nationally known for their Cleveland State Vikings men's basketball team. NCAA Division III Case Western Reserve Spartans have 17 varsity sports, most known for their Case Western Reserve Spartans football team. The headquarters of the Mid-American Conference (MAC) are in Cleveland. The conference stages both its men's and women's basketball tournaments at Rocket Mortgage FieldHouse. The Cleveland Marathon has been hosted annually since 1978, and a monument commemorating one of Cleveland's most prominent track and field athletes, Jesse Owens, stands at the city's Fort Huntington Park. The second American Chess Congress, a predecessor to the U.S. Championship, was held in Cleveland in 1871, and won by George Henry Mackenzie. The 1921 and 1957 U.S. Open Chess Championships took place in the city, and were won by Edward Lasker and Bobby Fischer, respectively. The Cleveland Open is held annually. In 2014, Cleveland hosted the ninth official Gay Games ceremony. Funded by the Cleveland Foundation, the 2014 games hosted thousands of athletes and tourists and was said to bring in about $52.1 million (~$66.1 million in 2023) for the local economy. Known locally as the "Emerald Necklace", the Olmsted-inspired Cleveland Metroparks encircle Cleveland and Cuyahoga County. The city proper encompasses the Metroparks' Brookside and Lakefront Reservations, as well as significant parts of the Rocky River, Washington, and Euclid Creek Reservations. The Lakefront Reservation, which provides public access to Lake Erie, consists of four parks: Edgewater Park, Whiskey Island–Wendy Park, East 55th Street Marina, and Gordon Park. Three more parks fall under the jurisdiction of the Euclid Creek Reservation: Euclid Beach, Villa Angela, and Wildwood Marina. Further south, bike and hiking trails in the Brecksville and Bedford Reservations, along with Garfield Park, provide access to trails in the Cuyahoga Valley National Park. Also included in the Metroparks system is the Cleveland Metroparks Zoo, established in 1882. Located in Big Creek Valley, the zoo has one of the largest collections of primates in North America. In addition to the Metroparks, the Cleveland Public Parks District oversees the city's neighborhood parks, the largest of which is the historic Rockefeller Park. The latter is notable for its late 19th century landmark bridges, the Rockefeller Park Greenhouse, and the Cleveland Cultural Gardens, which celebrate the city's ethnic diversity. Just outside of Rockefeller Park, the Cleveland Botanical Garden in University Circle, established in 1930, is the oldest civic garden center in the nation. In addition, the Greater Cleveland Aquarium, located in the historic FirstEnergy Powerhouse in the Flats, is the only independent, free-standing aquarium in the state of Ohio. Cleveland operates on a mayor–council (strong mayor) form of government, in which the mayor is the chief executive and the city council serves as the legislative branch. City council members are elected from 17 wards to four-year terms. From 1924 to 1931, the city briefly experimented with a council–manager government under William R. Hopkins and Daniel E. Morgan before returning to the mayor–council system. Cleveland is served by Cleveland Municipal Court, the first municipal court in the state. The city also anchors the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Ohio, based at the Carl B. Stokes U.S. Courthouse and the historic Howard M. Metzenbaum U.S. Courthouse. The Chief Judge for the Northern District is Sara Elizabeth Lioi and the Clerk of Court is Sandy Opacich. The U.S. Attorney is Rebecca C. Lutzko and the U.S. Marshal is Peter Elliott. The office of the mayor has been held by Justin Bibb since 2022. Previous mayors include progressive Democrat Tom L. Johnson, World War I-era War Secretary and BakerHostetler founder Newton D. Baker, U.S. Supreme Court Justice Harold Hitz Burton, two-term Ohio Governor and Senator Frank J. Lausche, former U.S. Health, Education, and Welfare Secretary Anthony J. Celebrezze, two-term Ohio Governor and Senator George V. Voinovich, former U.S. Congressman Dennis Kucinich, and Carl B. Stokes, the first African American mayor of a major U.S. city. Frank G. Jackson was the city's longest-serving mayor. The President of Cleveland City Council is Blaine Griffin, the council Majority Leader is Kerry McCormack, and the Majority Whip is Jasmin Santana. Patricia Britt serves as the Clerk of Council. Historically, from the Civil War era to the 1940s, Cleveland had been dominated by the Republican Party, with the notable exceptions of the Johnson and Baker mayoral administrations. Businessman and Senator Mark Hanna was among Cleveland's most influential Republican figures, both locally and nationally. Another nationally prominent Ohio Republican, former U.S. President James A. Garfield, was born in Cuyahoga County's Orange Township (today the Cleveland suburb of Moreland Hills). His resting place is the James A. Garfield Memorial in Cleveland's Lake View Cemetery. Today Cleveland is a major stronghold for the Democratic Party in Ohio. Although local elections are nonpartisan, Democrats still dominate every level of government. Politically, Cleveland and several of its neighboring suburbs comprise Ohio's 11th congressional district. The district is represented by Shontel Brown, one of five Democrats representing the state of Ohio in the U.S. House of Representatives. Cleveland has hosted three Republican national conventions, in 1924, 1936, and 2016. Additionally, the city hosted the Radical Republican convention of 1864. Although Cleveland has not hosted a national convention for the Democrats, it has hosted several national election debates, including the second 1980 U.S. presidential debate, the 2004 U.S. vice presidential debate, one 2008 Democratic primary debate, and the first 2020 U.S. presidential debate. Founded in 1912, the City Club of Cleveland provides a platform for national and local debates and discussions. Known as Cleveland's "Citadel of Free Speech", it is one of the oldest continuous independent free speech and debate forums in the country. Like in other major American cities, crime in Cleveland is concentrated in areas with higher rates of poverty and lower access to jobs. In recent decades, the rate of crime in the city, although higher than the national average, experienced a significant decline, following a nationwide trend in falling crime rates. However, as in other major U.S. cities, crime in Cleveland saw an abrupt rise in 2020–21. Cleveland's law enforcement agency is the Cleveland Division of Police, established in 1866. The division had 1,400 sworn officers as of 2022, covering five police districts. The district system was introduced in the 1930s by Cleveland Public Safety Director Eliot Ness (of the Untouchables), who later ran for mayor of Cleveland in 1947. The Chief of Police is Dorothy A. Todd. In addition, the Cuyahoga County Sheriff's Office is based in Downtown Cleveland at the Justice Center Complex. Cleveland is served by the firefighters of the Cleveland Division of Fire, established in 1863. The fire department operates out of 22 active fire stations throughout the city in five battalions. Each Battalion is commanded by a Battalion Chief, who reports to an on-duty Assistant Chief. The Division of Fire operates a fire apparatus fleet of twenty-two engine companies, eight ladder companies, three tower companies, two task force rescue squad companies, hazardous materials ("haz-mat") unit, and numerous other special, support, and reserve units. The Chief of Department is Anthony Luke. Cleveland EMS is operated by the city as its own municipal third-service EMS division. Cleveland EMS is the primary provider of Advanced Life Support and ambulance transport within the city of Cleveland, while Cleveland Fire assists by providing fire response medical care. Although a merger between the fire and EMS departments was proposed in the past, the idea was subsequently abandoned. Cleveland serves as headquarters to Coast Guard District 9 and is responsible for all U.S. Coast Guard operations on the five Great Lakes, the Saint Lawrence Seaway, and surrounding states accumulating 6,700 miles of shoreline and 1,500 miles of international shoreline with Canada. It reports up through the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Station Cleveland Harbor, located in North Coast Harbor, has a responsibility covering about 550 square miles of the federally navigable waters of Lake Erie, including the Cuyahoga and Rocky rivers, as well as a number of their tributaries. The Cleveland Metropolitan School District is the second-largest K–12 district in the state of Ohio. It is the only district in Ohio under the direct control of the mayor, who appoints a school board. Approximately 1 square mile (2.6 km2) of Cleveland's Buckeye–Shaker neighborhood is part of the Shaker Heights City School District. The area, which has been a part of the Shaker school district since the 1920s, permits these Cleveland residents to pay the same school taxes as the Shaker residents, as well as vote in the Shaker school board elections. There are several private and parochial schools in Cleveland. These include Benedictine High School, Cleveland Central Catholic High School, Eleanor Gerson School, St. Ignatius High School, St. Joseph Academy, Villa Angela-St. Joseph High School, and St. Martin de Porres. Cleveland is home to a number of colleges and universities. Most prominent among them is Case Western Reserve University (CWRU), a widely recognized research and teaching institution based in University Circle. A private university with several prominent graduate programs, CWRU was ranked 53rd in the nation in 2024 by U.S. News & World Report. University Circle also contains the Cleveland Institute of Art and the Cleveland Institute of Music. Downtown Cleveland is home to Cleveland State University, a public research university with eight constituent colleges, and the metropolitan campus of Cuyahoga Community College. Ohio Technical College is also based in Cleveland. Cleveland's suburban universities and colleges include Baldwin Wallace University in Berea, John Carroll University in University Heights, Ursuline College in Pepper Pike, and Notre Dame College in South Euclid. Established in 1869, the Cleveland Public Library is one of the largest public libraries in the nation with a collection of over 10 million materials in 2021. Its John G. White Special Collection includes the largest chess library in the world, as well as a significant collection of folklore and rare books on the Middle East and Eurasia. The library's main building was designed by Walker and Weeks and dedicated in 1925, under head librarian Linda Eastman, the first woman to lead a major library system in the U.S. Between 1904 and 1920, 15 libraries built with funds from Andrew Carnegie were opened in the city. Known as the "People's University", the library presently maintains 27 branches. It serves as the headquarters for the CLEVNET library consortium, which includes 47 public library systems in Northeast Ohio. Cleveland's primary daily newspaper is The Plain Dealer and its associated online publication, Cleveland.com. Defunct major newspapers include the Cleveland Press, an afternoon paper which printed its last edition in 1982; and the Cleveland News, which ceased publication in 1960. Additional publications include Cleveland Magazine, a regional culture magazine published monthly; Crain's Cleveland Business, a weekly business newspaper; and Cleveland Scene, a free alternative weekly paper which absorbed its competitor, the Cleveland Free Times, in 2008. The digital Belt Magazine was founded in Cleveland in 2013. Time magazine was published in Cleveland from 1925 to 1927. Several ethnic publications are based in Cleveland. These include the Call and Post, a weekly newspaper that primarily serves the city's African American community; the Cleveland Jewish News, a weekly Jewish newspaper; the bi-weekly Russian-language Cleveland Russian Magazine; the Mandarin Erie Chinese Journal; La Gazzetta Italiana in English and Italian; the Ohio Irish American News; and the Spanish language Vocero Latino News. The Cleveland-area television market is served by 11 full power stations, including WKYC (NBC), WEWS-TV (ABC), WJW (Fox), WDLI-TV (Bounce), WOIO (CBS), WVPX-TV (Ion), WVIZ (PBS), WUAB (CW), WRLM (TCT), WBNX-TV (independent), and WQHS-DT (Univision). As of 2021,[update] the market, which includes the Akron and Canton areas, was the 19th-largest in the country, as measured by Nielsen Media Research. The Mike Douglas Show, a nationally syndicated daytime talk show, began in Cleveland in 1961 on KYW-TV (now WKYC), while The Morning Exchange on WEWS-TV served as the model for Good Morning America. Tim Conway and Ernie Anderson first established themselves in Cleveland while working together at KYW-TV and later WJW-TV (now WJW). Anderson both created and performed as the immensely popular Cleveland horror host Ghoulardi on WJW-TV's Shock Theater, and was later succeeded by the long-running late night duo Big Chuck and Lil' John. Another Anderson protégé – Ron Sweed – would become a popular Cleveland late night movie host in his own right as "The Ghoul". Cleveland is directly served by 28 full power AM and FM radio stations, 21 of which are licensed to the city. Music stations – which are frequently the highest-rated in the market – include WQAL (hot adult contemporary), WDOK (adult contemporary), WFHM (Christian contemporary), WAKS (contemporary hits), WHLK (adult hits), WMJI (classic hits), WMMS (active rock/hot talk), WNCX (classic rock), WNWV (alternative rock), WGAR-FM (country), WZAK (urban adult contemporary), WENZ (mainstream urban), WJMO (urban gospel), and WCLV (classical/jazz). News/talk stations include WHK, WTAM, and WERE. During the Golden Age of Radio, WHK was the first radio station to broadcast in Ohio, and one of the first in the country. WTAM is the AM flagship for both the Cleveland Cavaliers and the Cleveland Guardians. Sports stations include WKNR (ESPN), WARF (Fox) and WKRK-FM (CBS), with WKNR and WKRK-FM serving as co-flagship stations for the Cleveland Browns. Religious stations include WHKW, WCCR, and WCRF. As the regional NPR affiliate, WKSU serves all of Northeast Ohio (including both the Cleveland and Akron markets). College stations include WBWC (Baldwin Wallace), WCSB (Cleveland State), WJCU (John Carroll), and WRUW-FM (Case Western Reserve). Cleveland has a bus and rail mass transit system operated by the Greater Cleveland Regional Transit Authority (RTA). The rail portion is officially called the RTA Rapid Transit, but local residents refer to it as The Rapid. It consists of three light rail lines, known as the Blue, Green, and Waterfront Lines, and a heavy rail line, the Red Line. In 2008, RTA completed the HealthLine, a bus rapid transit line, for which naming rights were purchased by the Cleveland Clinic and University Hospitals. It runs along Euclid Avenue from downtown through University Circle, ending at the Louis Stokes Station at Windermere in East Cleveland. In 1968, Cleveland became the first city in the nation to have a direct rail transit connection linking the city's downtown to its major airport. In 2021, Walk Score ranked Cleveland the 17th most walkable of the 50 largest cities in the U.S., with a Walk Score of 57, a Transit Score of 45, and a Bike Score of 55 (out of a maximum of 100). Cleveland's most walkable areas can be found in the Downtown, Ohio City, Detroit–Shoreway, University Circle, and Buckeye–Shaker neighborhoods. Like other major cities, the urban density of Cleveland reduces the need for private vehicle ownership. In 2016, 23.7% of Cleveland households lacked a car, while the national average was 8.7%. Cleveland averaged 1.19 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8. Cleveland's road system consists of numbered streets running roughly north–south, and named avenues, which run roughly east–west. The numbered streets are designated "east" or "west", depending on where they lie in relation to Ontario Street, which bisects Public Square. The two downtown avenues which span the Cuyahoga change names on the west side of the river. Superior Avenue becomes Detroit Avenue on the West Side, and Carnegie Avenue becomes Lorain Avenue. The bridges that make these connections are the Hope Memorial (Lorain–Carnegie) Bridge and the Veterans Memorial (Detroit–Superior) Bridge. Cleveland is served by three two-digit interstate highways – Interstate 71, Interstate 77, and Interstate 90 – and by two three-digit interstates – Interstate 480 and Interstate 490. Running due east–west through the West Side suburbs, I-90 turns northeast at the junction with I-490, and is known as the Cleveland Inner Belt. The Cleveland Memorial Shoreway carries Ohio State Route 2 along its length, and at varying points carries US 6, US 20 and I-90. At the junction with the Shoreway, I-90 makes a 90-degree turn in the area known as Dead Man's Curve, then continues northeast. The Jennings Freeway (State Route 176) connects I-71 just south of I-90 to I-480. A third highway, the Berea Freeway (State Route 237 in part), connects I-71 to the airport and forms part of the boundary between Brook Park and Cleveland's Hopkins neighborhood. Cleveland is a major North American air market, serving 4.93 million people. Cleveland Hopkins International Airport is the city's primary major airport and an international airport that serves the broader region. Originally known as Cleveland Municipal Airport, it was the first municipally owned airport in the country. Cleveland Hopkins is a significant regional air freight hub hosting FedEx Express, UPS Airlines, U.S. Postal Service, and major commercial freight carriers. In addition to Hopkins, Cleveland is served by Burke Lakefront Airport, on the north shore of downtown between Lake Erie and the Shoreway. Burke is primarily a commuter and business airport. The Port of Cleveland, at the Cuyahoga River's mouth, is a major bulk freight and container terminal on Lake Erie, receiving much of the raw materials used by the region's manufacturing industries. The Port of Cleveland is the only container port on the Great Lakes with bi-weekly container service between Cleveland and the Port of Antwerp in Belgium on a Dutch service called the Cleveland-Europe Express. In addition to freight, the Port of Cleveland welcomes regional and international tourists who pass through the city on Great Lakes cruises. Cleveland has a long history as a major railroad hub in North America. Today, Amtrak provides service to Cleveland, via the Capitol Limited and Lake Shore Limited routes, which stop at Cleveland Lakefront Station. Additionally, Cleveland hosts several inter-modal freight railroad terminals, for Norfolk Southern, CSX and several smaller companies. National intercity bus service is provided by Greyhound at the station located behind Playhouse Square. Akron Metro, Brunswick Transit Alternative, Laketran, Lorain County Transit, and Medina County Transit provide connecting bus service to the Greater Cleveland Regional Transit Authority. Geauga County Transit and Portage Area Regional Transportation Authority (PARTA) also offer connecting bus service in their neighboring areas. Cleveland maintains cultural, economic, and educational ties with 28 sister cities around the world. It concluded its first sister city partnership with Lima, Peru, in 1964. In addition, Cleveland hosts the Consulate General of the Republic of Slovenia, which, until Slovene independence in 1991, served as an official consulate for Tito's Yugoslavia. The Cleveland Clinic operates the Cleveland Clinic Abu Dhabi hospital, two outpatient clinics in Toronto, and a hospital campus in London. The Cleveland Council on World Affairs was established in 1923. Historically, Cleveland industrialist Cyrus S. Eaton, an apprentice of John D. Rockefeller, played a significant role in promoting dialogue between the U.S. and the Soviet Union during the Cold War. In October 1915 at Cleveland's Bohemian National Hall, Czech American and Slovak American representatives signed the Cleveland Agreement, calling for the formation of a joint Czech and Slovak state. List of people from Cleveland List of references to Cleveland in popular culture USS Cleveland, 4 ships Pronounced /ˈkliːvlənd/ KLEEV-lənd Mean monthly maxima and minima (i.e. the expected highest and lowest temperature readings at any point during the year or given month) calculated based on data at said location from 1991 to 2020. Official records for Cleveland kept at downtown from January 1871 to May 1941, and at Hopkins Airport since June 1941. For more information, see ThreadEx. From 15% sample "Forest City". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. June 5, 2020. Retrieved May 19, 2023. "Municipal Symbols". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. October 3, 2022. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Rose 1990, p. 145. "ArcGIS REST Services Directory". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved September 20, 2022. U.S. Geological Survey Geographic Names Information System: Cleveland "2020 Population and Housing State Data". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved December 14, 2021. "Total Real Gross Domestic Product for Cleveland-Elyria, OH (MSA)". U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). Retrieved January 5, 2024. "ZIP Code Lookup". USPS. Archived from the original on September 3, 2007. Retrieved November 14, 2014. "Charter of the City of Cleveland". American Legal. December 31, 2023. Retrieved February 1, 2024. "Find a County". National Association of Counties. Archived from the original on May 31, 2011. Retrieved June 7, 2011. "Cleveland". QuickFacts. United States Census Bureau. Retrieved May 19, 2023. "Metropolitan and Micropolitan Statistical Areas Population Totals and Components of Change: 2010-2019". United States Census Bureau, Population Division. March 26, 2020. Retrieved April 26, 2020. "Cleveland". The Center for Cleveland. Retrieved May 19, 2023. "Immigration and Migration". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. February 25, 2019. Retrieved August 1, 2022. Gibson, Campbell (June 1998). "Population of the 100 Largest Cities and Other Urban Places in the United States: 1790 to 1990". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved November 15, 2023. Hammack, David C. (May 28, 2018). "Economy". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. Retrieved September 15, 2020. "Total Real Gross Domestic Product for Akron, OH (MSA)". U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). Retrieved January 5, 2024. "The World According to GaWC 2020". GaWC – Research Network. Globalization and World Cities. Retrieved August 31, 2020. "Cleaveland, Moses". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. January 20, 2019. Retrieved August 21, 2019. Burton, Abby (November 25, 2019). "CLE Myths: The "A" In Cleaveland". Cleveland Magazine. Retrieved May 20, 2023. Bourne, Henry E. (1896). "The Story of Cleveland". New England Magazine. Vol. 14, no. 6. p. 744. It was agreeable to the wishes of many of our oldest and most intelligent citizens, who are of the opinion that the 'a' is superfluous. Miller & Wheeler 1997, p. 14. "War of 1812". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. January 20, 2019. Retrieved May 29, 2020. "Perry Monument". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. June 18, 2018. Retrieved May 29, 2020. Rose 1990, p. 74. "Ohio and Erie Canal". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. February 7, 2019. Retrieved August 5, 2019. Miller & Wheeler 1997, p. 51. "Timeline". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. April 5, 2022. Retrieved August 1, 2022. "Columbus Street Bridge". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. November 18, 2019. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Keating 2022, pp. 13–15. Wyatt-Brown, Bertram (May 31, 2019). "Abolitionism". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. Retrieved June 7, 2020. "In Search of the Underground Railroad". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved June 7, 2020. Keating 2022, p. 38. "Abraham Lincoln in Cleveland: Remembering a Slain President". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved August 8, 2023. "Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 22, 2018. Retrieved August 3, 2019. Miller & Wheeler 1997, p. 69. Rose 1990, p. 937. "American Experience: Rockefellers Timeline". PBS. Retrieved May 19, 2023. 1885: Standard Oil moves into new headquarters at 26 Broadway in New York. Miller & Wheeler 1997, pp. 87–89. Harrison, Dennis I. (January 29, 2021). "Labor". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. Retrieved January 29, 2021. "Streetcar Strike of 1899". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 22, 2018. Retrieved July 3, 2021. "Cleveland Nicknames and Slogans". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. February 27, 2023. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Miller & Wheeler 1997, p. 116. "Johnson, Tom L". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. September 19, 2021. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Turner 1991, p. 9. Rosenberg 2000, pp. 43–44. "African Americans". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. July 15, 2019. Retrieved July 15, 2019. Salling, Mark; Cyran, Ellen (January 1, 2006). Foreign-Born Population in Selected Ohio Cities, 1870 to 2000: A Brief Descriptive Report (Report). Cleveland State University. p. 9. Retrieved July 2, 2019. "May Day Riots". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 19, 2019. Retrieved July 15, 2019. "May Day Riot". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved July 22, 2019. Brecher 2020, p. 110. Condon 1979, p. 99. "Playhouse Square". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 31, 2019. Retrieved July 15, 2019. "Short Vincent". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 22, 2018. Retrieved July 15, 2019. Miller, Marilyn. "Short Vincent: A Walk on Cleveland's Historic Wild Side". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved June 5, 2023. Adams & Waldman 2011, pp. 85–87. "The Kokoon Arts Klub". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved August 9, 2019. Theiss, Evelyn (February 5, 2012). "In Cleveland's 'second downtown,' jazz once filled the air: Elegant Cleveland". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved June 19, 2023. Mosbrook 2013, p. 10. "Prohibition Amendment". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. June 18, 2018. Retrieved July 15, 2019. Kelly, Ralph (December 28, 1933). "Murder in Cleveland: The Prohibition Toll. Chapter 3—Rise of the Rum Kings; the 'Bloody Corner". The Plain Dealer. pp. 1, 5. "Downtown Department Stores: Cleveland's Fifth Avenue". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved June 5, 2023. "Cleveland National Air Races". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved July 15, 2019. Guerrieri, Vince (July 2021). "The Rise and Fall of the Cleveland Air Races". Ohio Magazine. Retrieved January 4, 2024. Harwood 2003, pp. 134–135. Miller & Wheeler 1997, p. 146, "Industrialist Cyrus Eaton would later say that Cleveland was hurt more by the Depression than any other city in the United States". Miller & Wheeler 1997, pp. 136–139. Porter 1976, pp. 106–107. "Great Lakes Exposition". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. March 21, 2019. Retrieved July 15, 2019. Albrecht & Banks 2015, p. 8. Albrecht & Banks 2015, p. 54. "Greater Cleveland Regional Transit Authority". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 11, 2018. Retrieved July 22, 2019. "Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. April 4, 2019. Retrieved July 22, 2019. Schneider, Russell (November 3, 1991). "Those Championship Seasons: Cleveland's Rich Sports History". The Plain Dealer. p. 206. Once upon a time, Cleveland was known as the 'City of Champions.' "Freed, Alan". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 11, 2018. Retrieved May 19, 2023. "Suburbs". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. June 14, 2018. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Miller & Wheeler 1997, p. 183. Maag, Christopher (June 20, 2009). "From the Ashes of '69, Cleveland's Cuyahoga River Is Reborn". The New York Times. Retrieved July 25, 2019. Rothstein 2017, p. 14. Eddings, Amy (November 14, 2017). "Divided by Design: Tracking Neighborhood Racial Segregation in Cleveland". Ideastream. Retrieved July 3, 2019. "Hough Riots". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. November 11, 2020. Retrieved January 4, 2024. "Glenville Shootout". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. July 1, 2020. Retrieved January 4, 2024. Stokes 1973, p. 42. "Carl B. Stokes and the 1969 River Fire". National Park Service. Retrieved May 30, 2020. "Mayoral Administration of Dennis J. Kucinich". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 12, 2018. Retrieved July 15, 2019. Fobes, Jon (February 8, 2009). "Unemployment hits nearly every area in Ohio, analysis of new claims finds". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved May 19, 2023. "Fisher Body Division of General Motors Corp". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. February 10, 2020. Retrieved May 22, 2023. "Mayoral Administration of George V. Voinovich". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. February 21, 2019. Retrieved August 3, 2019. Kotlowitz, Alex (March 4, 2009). "All Boarded Up: How Cleveland is Dealing With Mass Foreclosure". The New York Times. Retrieved December 1, 2023. Michener, Charles (April 2011). "Cleveland's Signs of Renewal". Smithsonian. Retrieved May 19, 2023. "Census 2020 in Cleveland". Cleveland City Planning Commission. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Morris, Conor (June 27, 2023). "Cleveland Mayor Justin Bibb announces five picks for CMSD Board of Education". Ideastream. Retrieved August 8, 2023. Buckley, Bri (November 28, 2023). "Cleveland homeless shelters near capacity". WKYC. Retrieved December 20, 2023. Daprile, Lucas (June 4, 2022). "Cleveland poised to move forward with plans to demolish blighted buildings, but will $15 million be enough?". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved August 8, 2023. "US Gazetteer files 2010". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved June 6, 2016. "Cleveland-Hopkins International Airport". AirNav. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Lawrence 1980, pp. 20–25. "Mall". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 22, 2018. Retrieved August 21, 2019. Toman & Cook 2005, p. 76. Raponi, Richard. "Key Tower: Cesar Pelli's Nod to Art Deco-Era Manhattan". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved February 1, 2024. Raponi, Richard. "200 Public Square". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved February 1, 2024. Cigliano 1991, pp. 1–2. Rose, Danielle. "Millionaires' Row: Cleveland's Famous Euclid Avenue". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved June 5, 2023. Upton 1910, p. 507. Florence, Cheyenne. "The Arcade: Cleveland's Crystal Palace". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved June 5, 2023. Toledo, Charlotte Nicole; Roy, Chris. "Cleveland Trust Company Building". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved August 21, 2019. Raponi, Richard. "Old Stone Church". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved August 8, 2019. Rotman, Michael; Dubelko, Jim. "St. Theodosius Cathedral". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved August 8, 2019. "Cleveland Sacred Landmarks". Cleveland State University. Retrieved May 19, 2023. "Urban Tree Canopy Assessment Update: Cleveland Neighborhoods". Cuyahoga County Planning Commission. Retrieved July 20, 2021. Roy, Chris. "The Theatrical Grill". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved June 22, 2022. Dutka 2012, p. 37. Exner, Rich (May 13, 2016). "How downtown Cleveland is changing: by the numbers". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved July 10, 2019. Condon 1967, p. 9, "For all practical purposes, though – and hang the technicalities – everything east of the [Cuyahoga] river constitutes the East Side. Everything west of the river can be considered the West Side. That is the realistic view taken by Clevelanders. When two Clevelanders meet for the first time, they fence conversationally until the vital question of East or West is answered. Knowing which side of town a new acquaintance comes from makes a subtle difference". Exner, Rich (November 7, 2023). "Get to know Cleveland's East Side". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved November 15, 2023. Exner, Rich (November 1, 2023). "Get to know Cleveland's West Side". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved November 15, 2023. Nalewicki, Jennifer (July 27, 2018). "Vibrant Art Installations Infuse New Life into Abandoned Houses in This Cleveland Neighborhood". Smithsonian. Retrieved June 5, 2023. A symphony of hammers, saws and chisels pierce the early-morning silence that had blanketed Slavic Village, a neighborhood tucked away on Cleveland's south side. Glusac, Elaine (November 15, 2017). "A Cleveland Arts District Hustles and Rebounds". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved August 1, 2019. Grant, Julie (April 21, 2017). "How a Burning River Helped Create the Clean Water Act". The Allegheny Front. Retrieved February 22, 2020. Piepenburg, Erik (June 7, 2019). "A Cleveland River Once Oozed and Burned. It's Now a Hot Spot". The New York Times. Retrieved August 8, 2023. Gearino, Dan (September 22, 2018). "100% Renewable Energy: Cleveland Sets a Big Goal as It Sheds Its Fossil Fuel Past". InsideClimate News. Retrieved January 26, 2019. Vandenberge, Jordan (August 10, 2020). "Local company developing antidote to Lake Erie algal blooms". WEWS-TV. Retrieved December 30, 2020. Kottek, Marcus; Greiser, Jürgen; et al. (June 2006). "World Map of Köppen – Geiger Climate Classification" (PDF). Meteorologische Zeitschrift. 15 (3): 261. Bibcode:2006MetZe..15..259K. doi:10.1127/0941-2948/2006/0130. "Cleveland Snowfall Statistics". National Weather Service. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Johnson, Mark. "Where is Northern Ohio's Snow Belt?". WEWS-TV. Archived from the original on September 22, 2013. Retrieved January 20, 2013. Smith, Susan (June 26, 1988). "Akron, State Blanketed in 3-Digit Heat". Akron Beacon Journal. p. A1. The high of 104 degrees at Cleveland-Hopkins International Airport was the highest recorded in Cleveland since official weather record -keeping began in 1871, weather service officials said. Mio, Lou (January 20, 1994). "Stopped Cold: All-Time Lows Shiver Ohio, But Forecast's for 'Warming'". The Plain Dealer. p. 1A. It was 20 below Tuesday night, breaking Cleveland's all-time record of 19 below set Jan. 24, 1963, a few weeks after Browns owner Art Modell fired head coach Paul Brown during a newspaper strike. "NOWData – NOAA Online Weather Data". National Weather Service. Retrieved May 19, 2023. "Precipitation: Annual Climatology (1971–2000)". PRISM Climate Group, Oregon State University. Archived from the original on September 22, 2013. Retrieved May 19, 2023. "NOWData – NOAA Online Weather Data". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved May 10, 2021. "Station: Cleveland, OH". U.S. Climate Normals 2020: U.S. Monthly Climate Normals (1991-2020). National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved May 9, 2021. "WMO Climate Normals for CLEVELAND/HOPKINS INTL AP, OH 1961–1990". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved March 10, 2014. "Cleveland, Ohio, USA - Monthly weather forecast and Climate data". Weather Atlas. Retrieved July 4, 2019. "Cleveland". QuickFacts (2010). United States Census Bureau. Archived from the original on February 18, 2014. "Race and Hispanic Origin for Selected Cities and Other Places: Earliest Census to 1990". United States Census Bureau. Archived from the original on August 12, 2012. Smith, Zachary (March 31, 2022). "Every Ohio city ranked for median age, youth, seniors - new census estimates". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved May 24, 2023. Polk, Mike Jr. (October 22, 2020). "Mike Polk Jr. investigates the 'Cleveland Accent'". WKYC. Retrieved August 8, 2023. Cleveland is very distinctive from the rest of Ohio in its accent [with] that backwards 'A' and that that long drawn out 'O.' McIntyre, Michael K. (January 13, 2017). "Clevelanders probably think they don't have an accent, but we do, and so do others in the Midwest". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved August 8, 2023. [The accent is] nasal and marked by a raised 'a' that makes 'cat' sound like 'cayat,' a fronted 'o' that makes 'box' sound like 'bahx.' "Hungarians". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 11, 2018. Retrieved July 8, 2019. "Jews & Judaism". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 11, 2018. Retrieved July 2, 2019. "Hispanic Community". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 11, 2018. Retrieved July 2, 2019. "Asiatown". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 11, 2018. Retrieved July 2, 2019. "Albanians". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 11, 2018. Retrieved July 2, 2019. "Arab Americans". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 11, 2018. Retrieved August 9, 2019. "Armenians". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. January 10, 2021. Retrieved June 7, 2023. "French". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 11, 2018. Retrieved August 9, 2019. "Greeks". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 11, 2018. Retrieved August 9, 2019. Vandenberge, Jordan (January 3, 2020). "Iranian-Americans in Cleveland keeping close eye on rising tensions between US, Iran". WEWS-TV. Retrieved June 21, 2020. "Turks in Cleveland". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. October 2, 2019. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Mosby, Chris (January 23, 2020). "3 Ohio Cities Among Nation's Most Diverse: U.S. News". Patch. Retrieved May 24, 2020. "Religion". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 12, 2018. Retrieved July 31, 2019. "National Origin in Cleveland, Ohio". Statistical Atlas. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Drown, Hannah (August 26, 2019). "New Ethiopian Cultural Garden first in Cleveland to represent an African nation". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved June 19, 2023. "Indians (Asian)". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. February 21, 2019. Retrieved July 2, 2019. "Russians". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 30, 2023. Retrieved June 7, 2023. "Soviet and Post-Soviet Immigration". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. October 7, 2019. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Exner, Rich (April 2, 2018). "Among counties, Cuyahoga near top in Midwest for attracting immigrants". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved July 8, 2019. Cho, Janet H. (February 7, 2019). "Cleveland is the No. 1 city for immigrants to become U.S. citizens, study says". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved July 2, 2019. "Cleveland Cultural Gardens". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. January 10, 2022. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Stapleton, Darwin H. (May 11, 2018). "Industry". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. Retrieved August 5, 2019. "About Us". Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. June 29, 2023. Retrieved July 7, 2023. Johannesen 1999, p. 41. "Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 31, 2019. Retrieved August 5, 2019. "Loretta J. Mester, President and Chief Executive Officer". Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. June 29, 2023. Retrieved July 7, 2023. "Firm History". Jones Day. Retrieved August 7, 2022. Walsh, Jonathan (February 1, 2019). "Comparing prices at the big 3 local hospitals: Are you getting the best rates and what do the prices really mean?". WEWS-TV. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Ohio Major Employers (PDF) (Report). Ohio Department of Development. December 2022. p. 4. Retrieved May 24, 2023. "U.S. News Best Hospitals: Cardiology & Heart Surgery". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved May 22, 2023. Segall, Grant (April 26, 2018). "New Cleveland Clinic chief Dr. Tomislav Mihaljevic perplexed friends by leaving Harvard for the North Coast: My Cleveland". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved June 21, 2020. Jain, Mukesh (March 29, 2021). "Academic Life & Leadership: A Dialogue with Cliff A. Megerian, MD, FACS". University Hospitals. Retrieved May 13, 2021. Marshall, Micaela (January 7, 2023). "Meet new MetroHealth CEO Dr. Airica Steed". Spectrum News. Retrieved January 9, 2023. Stewart, Shannon. "Metro Health Medical Center". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved July 7, 2023. Ross, Casey (April 29, 2016). "Level 1 trauma: How University Hospitals' new facility has impacted MetroHealth, delivery of care citywide". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved August 8, 2023. Suchetka, Diane (October 2, 2013). "After years of hurdles, Cleveland's medical mart officially opens with an Oct. 8 ribbon-cutting". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved May 14, 2021. "V.A. and Military Hospitals of Greater Cleveland". Cleveland Memory Project. Cleveland State University. Retrieved May 14, 2021. "Playhouse Square". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved July 1, 2023. By the turn of the twenty-first century, all of the original theaters were again hosting performances, constituting the nation's second largest performing arts complex after New York's Lincoln Center. "Resident Companies". Playhouse Square Center. Retrieved June 7, 2020. "Bob Hope and the American Variety: Early Life". Library of Congress. May 10, 2000. Retrieved August 3, 2012. "Karamu House". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. April 5, 2021. Retrieved May 11, 2021. Mansfield, Herbert (May 12, 2018). "Theater". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. Retrieved August 1, 2019. Allen, David (October 9, 2020). "The Cleveland Orchestra, America's Finest, Restarts Recording". The New York Times. Retrieved June 19, 2023. The Cleveland Orchestra is America's finest, still. Rosenberg 2000, p. 522. "Mission & History". The Cleveland Orchestra. Retrieved August 9, 2019. "About". Piano Cleveland. Retrieved June 4, 2023. "Rock 'n' Roll". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 13, 2023. Retrieved May 19, 2023. "Agora/Agora Ballroom". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. February 19, 2020. Retrieved June 1, 2021. Toman 1997, pp. 64–65. "Jazz". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. June 29, 2018. Retrieved June 14, 2019. Mosbrook 2013, pp. 32–33, 59, 126. Meiksins, Robin. "Django Reinhardt at the Music Hall". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved August 5, 2019. Mosbrook 2013, p. 193. Valencic, Joseph (June 18, 2018). "Polkas". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. Retrieved July 1, 2023. "Bone Thugs-N-Harmony | Biography & History". AllMusic. Retrieved October 20, 2015. "Cleveland on Film". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 30, 2023. Retrieved June 7, 2023. "Andrews's Folly". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. July 2, 2021. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Dubelko, Jim. "Cinecraft Productions: The Historic Film Company produced by a Love Story". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved May 22, 2023. Stanley, Alessandra (June 15, 2010). "Stay. Eat. Make Yourself at Home. Maybe Find a Man". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2010. Rice, Lynette (June 17, 2010). "'Hot in Cleveland' attracts record ratings for TV Land". Hollywood Insider. Archived from the original on June 19, 2010. Retrieved July 7, 2010. Andreeva, Nellie (November 17, 2014). "'Hot In Cleveland' To End Run After Six Seasons On TV Land". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved June 7, 2023. A calendar of Cleveland area poetry events can be found at "Cleveland Poetics". Retrieved May 20, 2023. Shakarian, Pietro A. "Mayakovsky in Cleveland: A Fiery Futurist's Discovery of the Forest City". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved April 27, 2023. "Through the Brooklyn Bridge. Here Stood Mayakovsky". Harriman Institute (Columbia University). January 18, 2019. Retrieved August 1, 2022. "Mission". Cleveland State University Poetry Center. Retrieved May 28, 2023. "Hughes, (James) Langston". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. February 14, 2022. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Ronnick, Michele Valerie. "Within CAMWS Territory: Helen M. Chesnutt (1880-1969), Black Latinist". CAMWS. Retrieved February 1, 2019. Perkovic, John (October 24, 2013). "Cleveland home of literary great Langston Hughes on the market for $85,000". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved May 20, 2023. Gibans, Nina; Shelley, James (May 11, 2018). "Literature". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. Retrieved June 7, 2023. "Crane, Hart". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. March 3, 2023. Retrieved June 7, 2023. "Hart Crane Memorial". Ohio Outdoor Sculpture. Retrieved June 7, 2020. "Superman". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 12, 2018. Retrieved August 5, 2019. Ricca 2013, p. 100. Dawidziak, Mark (June 28, 2018). "Harlan Ellison, fiery and brilliant writer from Cleveland, dead at 84". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved May 22, 2023. "About". Anisfield-Wolf Book Award. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Marino, Jacqueline (September 9, 2013). "The Biggest Little-Known Book Award". Belt Magazine. Retrieved May 20, 2023. "Collection Online Guide and FAQs". Cleveland Museum of Art. July 13, 2021. Retrieved June 19, 2023. "About MOCA Cleveland: The Art + Ideas of Our Time". Museum of Contemporary Art Cleveland. Retrieved July 22, 2019. "Museum History". Cleveland Museum of Art. October 5, 2012. Retrieved July 15, 2019. "About the Cinematheque". Cleveland Institute of Art. Retrieved August 9, 2019. Fearing, Heidi K. "Grays Armory". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved July 16, 2023. "Museum History, Vision & Mission". Children's Museum of Cleveland. Retrieved August 8, 2023. "About". A Christmas Story House and Museum. Retrieved August 5, 2019. "About". WinterLand CLE. Retrieved May 19, 2023. "History". Cleveland International Film Festival. Retrieved August 3, 2019. "Cleveland Air Show". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. March 21, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019. "Our History". Great Lakes Brewing Company. Retrieved August 10, 2019. "About". Little Italy's Feast of the Assumption, Cleveland. Retrieved June 4, 2023. DeMarco, Laura (February 14, 2018). "Russian Maslenitsa Festival in Rockefeller Park celebrates end of winter". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved January 17, 2024. "Puerto Rican Parade & Cultural Festival". Destination Cleveland. Retrieved June 4, 2023. "Cleveland Asian Festival". Destination Cleveland. Retrieved June 4, 2023. Abusada, Abusada (May 28, 2022). "Tremont's Greek Fest is officially back". WEWS-TV. Retrieved June 4, 2023. Valentic, Stefanie (August 19, 2019). "West Park Romanian festival celebrates 14 years of tradition". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved June 4, 2023. "History". Cleveland Dyngus Day. Retrieved February 18, 2021. "Our History". Cleveland Kurentovanje. Retrieved August 1, 2022. "About Us". Cleveland St. Patrick's Day Parade. Retrieved July 22, 2021. DeJong, Lisa (March 30, 2016). "Cleveland Thyagaraja Festival". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved June 19, 2023. Snook, Debbi (May 27, 2012). "Cleveland's West Side Market feeds bellies and our souls with its rich ethnic heritage". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved August 1, 2022. Cain, Brenda; Rodriguez, Yadi (February 3, 2020). "Top 20 Soul Food Restaurants in Greater Cleveland according to Yelp". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Goodrich, Barry (January 22, 2020). "Classic Cleveland Restaurants: Slyman's Restaurants". Cleveland Magazine. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Axelrod, Ben (April 11, 2023). "Cleveland's Polish Boy named one of world's 10 best hot dogs". WKYC. Retrieved August 8, 2023. "2023 Cleveland Fish Fry Guide". Cleveland Magazine. Retrieved May 19, 2023. Wolfe, Paris (March 10, 2023). "Cleveland Cassata Cake is a local invention". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Bania-Dobyns, Sarah (September 22, 2021). "If you want this delectable Jewish pastry, you'll have to go to Cleveland". The Jerusalem Post. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Eng, Monica (January 29, 2008). "Hot new dining city: Cleveland?!". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved July 7, 2023. By the time I hit Cleveland for the grand culinary tour, Ruhlman had the routine down. Earlier in the year, his chef/writer pal Anthony Bourdain had filmed a whole episode of his Travel Channel show "No Reservations" in Cleveland. Ellman, Lauren Dana (March 19, 2023). "The Best Food Cities in the U.S." Travel + Leisure. Retrieved July 7, 2023. "Ohio craft-beer production ranks 5th in U.S.; 3 breweries in top 50". The Plain Dealer. April 14, 2021. Retrieved May 20, 2021. "Vintage pictures of Cleveland's historic breweries". The Plain Dealer. August 17, 2017. Retrieved May 20, 2021. "10 Breweries with outdoor seating in and around Ohio City". The Plain Dealer. April 6, 2021. Retrieved May 20, 2021. "Hofbrauhaus Cleveland set to reopen next week". The Plain Dealer. February 26, 2021. Retrieved May 20, 2021. "BrewDog confirms Cleveland expansion". The Plain Dealer. April 13, 2021. Retrieved May 20, 2021. Burt, Bill (September 9, 2008). "Sellouts! Record 456 and counting for Sox". Eagle Tribune. Archived from the original on September 3, 2012. Retrieved September 10, 2008. Walker, James (July 13, 2010). "Take your pick recap: LeBron vs. Modell". ESPN. Retrieved July 27, 2010. Kroll, John (September 6, 2012). "When Art Modell moved his Cleveland Browns team to Baltimore: How The Plain Dealer reported it". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved June 26, 2016. "Cleveland Bulldogs". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 11, 2018. Retrieved May 24, 2023. "Cleveland Rams". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. March 10, 2021. Retrieved May 24, 2023. Hoppert, Melissa (June 22, 2016). "Cavaliers Parade Caps Off Cleveland Victory Party". The New York Times. Retrieved July 21, 2023. Condon 1979, p. 145. Livingston 2015, pp. 176–178. Wright, Branson (June 11, 2016). "Lake Erie Monsters win Calder Cup title with 1–0 OT victory over Hershey". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved June 26, 2016. "Athletics". Cleveland State University. August 2, 2023. Retrieved August 8, 2023. "CWRU Athletics". Case Western Reserve University. May 20, 2023. Retrieved August 8, 2023. "History of the MAC". Mid-American Conference. Retrieved May 24, 2023. "Rite Aid Cleveland Marathon and 10K". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 22, 2018. Retrieved June 7, 2020. Dubelko, Jim. "Jesse Owens: The Cleveland Years". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved January 4, 2024. "George Henry Mackenzie". World Chess Hall of Fame. April 7, 2018. Retrieved August 8, 2023. Hanken, Jerry (June 13, 2008). "Big Time chess returns to Cleveland". The United States Chess Federation. Retrieved June 7, 2020. "Federation of Gay Games - Gay Games IX - Cleveland". gaygames.org. Retrieved May 13, 2022. "Lakefront Reservation". Cleveland Metroparks. Retrieved August 3, 2019. "Euclid Creek Reservation". Cleveland Metroparks. Retrieved August 3, 2019. "Mountain Biking". Cleveland Metroparks. Retrieved May 19, 2023. "Cleveland Metroparks Zoo". Destination Cleveland. Retrieved August 3, 2019. "Rockefeller Park". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. November 11, 2020. Retrieved June 7, 2023. "Cleveland Botanical Garden". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 26, 2022. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Ondrey, Thomas (May 19, 2012). "Underwater wonders among the newcomers in Northeast Ohio". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved June 19, 2023. Richardson, James F. (June 18, 2018). "Politics". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. Retrieved August 5, 2019. "Court History". Cleveland Municipal Court. Retrieved August 8, 2023. "U.S. District Judge Sara Lioi Sworn In as Chief Judge" (Press release). United States District Court for the Northern District of Ohio. June 7, 2023. Retrieved June 9, 2023. "Meet the First Assistant U.S. Attorney". The United States Attorney's Office, Northern District of Ohio (Department of Justice). August 31, 2023. Retrieved November 11, 2023. "Northern District of Ohio United States Marshal - Peter J. Elliott". U.S. Marshals Service. October 2020. Retrieved August 7, 2022. Castele, Nick (January 3, 2022). "Justin Bibb sworn in as Cleveland's new mayor". Ideastream. Retrieved August 8, 2023. Vosburgh, Mark (December 13, 2021). "Frank Jackson: Man, mayor and mystery". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved July 16, 2023. "Leadership". Cleveland City Council. Retrieved June 17, 2022. "Clerk of Council". Cleveland City Council. Retrieved June 17, 2022. Horner 2010, p. 33. Hardison, Ashley. "James A. Garfield Memorial". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved August 10, 2019. Eaton, Sabrina (November 8, 2022). "U.S. Rep. Shontel Brown wins reelection in 11th congressional district". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved May 24, 2023. "2016 Republican Convention in Cleveland: 5 Things to Know". Time. July 8, 2014. Retrieved August 7, 2019. "Cleveland Convention". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 11, 2018. Retrieved August 7, 2019. Bamforth, Emily (July 27, 2020). "First 2020 presidential debate will be in Cleveland". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved July 28, 2020. "City Club of Cleveland". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. August 6, 2020. Retrieved June 7, 2023. "Mission & Vision". City Club of Cleveland. Retrieved August 8, 2019. "Neighborhoods and Violent Crime". United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. Retrieved August 7, 2019. Wells, Michael V. (May 11, 2018). "Crime". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. Retrieved August 7, 2019. Higgs, Robert (January 30, 2019). "Cleveland's rates for nearly all violent crimes, property crimes dropped again in 2018". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved July 10, 2019. Smith, Shannon (January 4, 2021). "Cleveland's rise in violent crime makes national headlines, city leaders react". WOIO. Retrieved June 17, 2022. "Cleveland Police Department". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 31, 2019. Retrieved August 7, 2019. Gallek, Ed; Gallek, Peggy (July 14, 2022). "Tentative agreement reached to increase pay for Cleveland police officers". WJW. Retrieved May 22, 2023. "Cleveland Police Districts". City of Cleveland. 2019. Retrieved August 7, 2019. "Eliot Ness and his role in Cleveland history". Cleveland Police Museum. Retrieved August 7, 2019. "Division of Police". City of Cleveland. Retrieved March 17, 2024. "About Us". Cuyahoga County Sheriff's Office. Retrieved May 24, 2023. "Cleveland Fire Department". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 22, 2018. Retrieved August 21, 2019. "Division of Fire". City of Cleveland. Retrieved August 21, 2019. "Cleveland Fire Stations". City of Cleveland. Retrieved August 21, 2019. "Anthony P. Luke sworn in as Cleveland's new fire chief". WKYC. November 1, 2022. Retrieved May 19, 2023. "Cleveland EMS History". Cleveland Association of Rescue Employees. Retrieved January 22, 2019. Atassi, Leila (April 13, 2014). "Cuyahoga Prosecutor says former Cleveland Fire Chief Paul Stubbs ignored payroll abuses; Mayor has remained steadfast in defense". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved January 22, 2019. "Station Cleveland Harbor". USCG District 9. Retrieved January 31, 2023. "Cleveland Public Schools". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. November 11, 2020. Retrieved May 19, 2023. "Shaker Heights City School District". The Plain Dealer. April 25, 2010. Retrieved August 7, 2022. "Education". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 11, 2018. Retrieved August 7, 2022. "Case Western Reserve University – Best College". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved March 13, 2024. "Ohio Technical College School History". Ohio Technical College. June 26, 2023. Retrieved July 31, 2023. "Higher Education". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 11, 2018. Retrieved August 8, 2019. Cramer 1972, pp. 14–15. 2021 CPL Annual Report (Report). Cleveland Public Library. December 13, 2022. p. 28. Retrieved May 24, 2023. Bash, Homa (June 12, 2019). "Did you know? Cleveland is home to the world's largest chess collection". WEWS-TV. Retrieved August 8, 2019. "Special Collections". Cleveland Public Library. Retrieved August 8, 2019. "White, John Griswold". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 12, 2018. Retrieved August 8, 2019. Johannesen 1999, pp. 68–69. "Eastman, Linda Anne". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. April 3, 2020. Retrieved January 5, 2024. Bamforth, Emily; Petkiewicz, David (July 8, 2019). "Cleveland had 15 Carnegie libraries: See them then and now". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved May 30, 2020. "Cleveland Public Library". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. November 18, 2019. Retrieved January 5, 2024. "What is CLEVNET?". CLEVNET. March 28, 2023. Retrieved July 31, 2023. "Plain Dealer". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. November 18, 2019. Retrieved June 26, 2020. "Cleveland Press". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. November 11, 2020. Retrieved June 7, 2023. "Cleveland News". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. March 9, 2021. Retrieved June 7, 2023. "About Us". Cleveland Magazine. Retrieved June 26, 2020. "Crain's Cleveland Business". Crain's Cleveland Business. Retrieved June 26, 2020. "Scene". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 12, 2018. Retrieved August 7, 2019. "About Us". Belt Magazine. Retrieved August 5, 2019. "Time". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 12, 2018. Retrieved August 5, 2019. "Cleveland Call & Post". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 22, 2018. Retrieved June 26, 2020. "Cleveland Jewish News". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 11, 2018. Retrieved August 5, 2019. "Cleveland Russian Magazine". Cleveland Russian Magazine. Retrieved June 26, 2020. "About". Erie Chinese Journal (in Chinese). Retrieved May 22, 2023. "About Us". La Gazzetta Italiana. Retrieved June 26, 2020. "Ohio Irish American News". Ohio Irish American News. Retrieved June 26, 2020. "Vocero Latino News". Vocero Latino News. Retrieved June 26, 2020. Out of Home Advertising Association of America (2021). 2021 Neilsen DMA Ratings (PDF). OAAA (Report). Out-of-Home Advertising Association of America. p. 1. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 23, 2022. Retrieved May 11, 2023. Weiner, Tim (August 12, 2006). "Mike Douglas, TV Host and Pop Singer, Dies at 81". The New York Times. Retrieved August 8, 2023. Livingston, Tommy (July 19, 2019). "Fred Griffith, former host of The Morning Exchange, dies at 90". WEWS-TV. Retrieved August 8, 2023. Feran & Heldenfels 1997, pp. 135–136. DeNatale, Dave "Dino" (April 2, 2019). "Legendary Cleveland television personality Ron 'The Ghoul' Sweed passes away". WKYC. Retrieved August 1, 2022. "Classical Pick: Radio Days". The New Yorker. July 1, 2010. Retrieved March 14, 2011. "Cleveland Radio Stations". Radio Station World. Retrieved May 19, 2023. "Ratings: #34 Cleveland". Radio Online. 2019. Retrieved August 7, 2019. "WHK". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. June 22, 2021. Retrieved May 22, 2023. "List of the Pioneer Broadcast Service Stations". United States Early Radio History. Retrieved May 22, 2023. "Broadcast". Cleveland Cavaliers. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. 2023. Retrieved August 8, 2023. "Guardians Radio Affiliates". Cleveland Guardians. MLB Advanced Media, LP. 2023. Retrieved August 8, 2023. Yarborough, Chuck (September 2, 2011). "WKRK FM/92.3 The Fan replaces rock with sports talk". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved September 17, 2011. Grossi, Tony (March 28, 2013). "ESPN 850 WKNR is the new radio home of the Cleveland Browns". ESPNCleveland.com. ESPN. Archived from the original on May 10, 2013. Retrieved March 28, 2013. Press Release (March 28, 2013). "Browns Enter into Groundbreaking Radio Partnership With ESPN 850 WKNR And CBS Radio's 92.3 The Fan And 98.5 WNCX". Cleveland.CBSLocal.com. CBS Radio. Retrieved March 28, 2013. "Northeast Ohio NPR programming shifts from WCPN to WKSU, classical music now on 90.3 FM". Akron Beacon Journal. March 28, 2022. Retrieved May 19, 2023. "RTA HealthLine: About". Greater Cleveland Regional Transit Authority. Retrieved June 1, 2023. "Living in Cleveland". Walk Score. Retrieved April 26, 2021. "Car Ownership in U.S. Cities Data and Map". Governing. December 9, 2014. Retrieved May 4, 2018. "Street Names". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. June 29, 2018. Retrieved May 22, 2023. Rotman, Michael. "Lorain-Carnegie Bridge: Home of the Guardians". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved July 21, 2023. O'Grady, F. X.; Rotman, Michael. "Detroit-Superior Bridge: The City's First High-Level Bridge". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved July 21, 2023. Lanese, Jim. "The Cleveland Inner Belt: Future Interstate Highways Merge in the City". Cleveland Historical. Cleveland State University. Retrieved July 7, 2023. "Memorial Shoreway". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 11, 2018. Retrieved July 21, 2023. Dorwart, Laura (May 29, 2018). "Why This Cleveland Roadway Is Known as 'Dead Man's Curve'". Culture Trip. Retrieved August 8, 2023. Roy, Christopher (March 12, 2022). "Hopkins Neighborhood". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. Retrieved July 21, 2023. Culley, Jim (May 10, 2022). "Cleveland Hopkins International Airport". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. Retrieved May 28, 2023. "Burke Lakefront Airport". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. June 25, 2020. Retrieved May 19, 2023. "About". Port of Cleveland. Retrieved May 20, 2023. "Cleveland-Europe Express". Port of Cleveland. Retrieved January 5, 2020. "Great Lakes Cruising". Port of Cleveland. Retrieved May 20, 2023. "CSX Intermodal Terminal Details". CSX. Retrieved August 8, 2023. "Cleveland, OH: Terminals & Schedules". Norfolk Southern. Retrieved August 8, 2023. "Getting to Cleveland". Destination Cleveland. Retrieved June 4, 2023. "Out-of-County Transfers". Greater Cleveland Regional Transit Authority. Retrieved June 4, 2023. "Cleveland Sister City Partnerships". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. December 14, 2023. Retrieved January 4, 2024. "Slovenes". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 11, 2018. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Coutré, Lydia (February 15, 2023). "Cleveland Clinic London to open second outpatient building this fall". Crain's Cleveland Business. Retrieved July 1, 2023. "Cleveland Council on World Affairs". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. May 11, 2018. Retrieved June 21, 2020. "Eaton, Cyrus Stephen". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. July 30, 2019. Retrieved November 10, 2019. Burik, Paul (October 3, 2020). "Cleveland Agreement of 1915". The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History. Case Western Reserve University. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Adams, Henry; Waldman, Lawrence (2011). Out of the Kokoon. Cleveland: Cleveland Public Library and Cleveland Artists Foundation. ISBN 978-0615534008. Albrecht, Brian; Banks, James (2015). Cleveland in World War II. Charleston: The History Press (Arcadia). ISBN 978-1-62619-882-1. Brecher, Jeremy (2020). Strike!. Oakland, CA: PM Press. ISBN 978-1-62963-808-9 – via Internet Archive. Cigliano, Jan (1991). Showplace of America: Cleveland's Euclid Avenue, 1850-1910. Kent, OH: Kent State University Press. ISBN 978-0873384452. Condon, George E. (1967). Cleveland: The Best Kept Secret. New York: Doubleday. ISBN 978-1-936323-08-1 – via Internet Archive. Condon, George E. (1979). Cleveland: Prodigy of the Western Reserve. Tulsa: Continental Heritage Press. ISBN 978-093298606-1 – via Internet Archive. Cramer, C. H. (1972). Open Shelves and Open Minds: A History of the Cleveland Public Library. Cleveland: The Press of Case Western Reserve University. ISBN 978-082950219-0 – via Internet Archive. Dutka, Alan F. (2012). Cleveland's Short Vincent: The Theatrical Grill and Its Notorious Neighbors. Cleveland: Cleveland Landmarks Press. ISBN 978-0936760322. Feran, Tom; Heldenfels, R. D. (1997). Ghoulardi: Inside Cleveland TV's Wildest Ride. Cleveland: Gray & Co. ISBN 978-188622818-4. Harwood, Herbert H. Jr. (2003). Invisible Giants: The Empires of Cleveland's Van Sweringen Brothers. Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-253-34163-9. Horner, William T. (2010). Ohio's Kingmaker: Mark Hanna, Man and Myth. Athens, OH: Ohio University Press. ISBN 978-0-8214-1894-9. Johannesen, Eric (1999). A Cleveland Legacy: The Architecture of Walker and Weeks. Kent, OH: Kent State University Press. ISBN 0-87338-589-6. Keating, W. Dennis (2022). Cleveland and the Civil War. Charleston: The History Press (Arcadia). ISBN 978-1467147736. Lawrence, Michael (1980). Make No Little Plans. Cleveland: Western Reserve Historical Society. ISBN 0-911704-24-8. Livingston, Bill (2015). George Steinbrenner's Pipe Dream: The ABL Champion Cleveland Pipers. Kent, OH: Black Squirrel Books. ISBN 978-1-60635-261-8. Miller, Carol Poh; Wheeler, Robert A. (1997). Cleveland: A Concise History, 1796–1996 (2nd ed.). Bloomington: Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-025321147-7 – via Internet Archive. Mosbrook, Joe (2013) [Originally published in 2003 by Northeast Ohio Jazz Society]. Cleveland Jazz History (2nd ed.). Cleveland: MSL Academic Endeavors (Cleveland State University). ISBN 978-1-936323-41-8. Porter, Philip (1976). Cleveland: Confused City on a Seesaw. Columbus, OH: Ohio State University Press. ISBN 978-0814202647. Ricca, Brad (2013). Super Boys: The Amazing Adventures of Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster—the Creators of Superman. New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0312643805 – via Internet Archive. Rose, William Ganson (1990). Cleveland: The Making of a City. Kent, OH: Kent State University Press. ISBN 978-0873384285. Rosenberg, Donald (2000). Second to None: The Cleveland Orchestra Story. Cleveland: Gray & Company. ISBN 978-188622824-5. Rothstein, Richard (2017). The Color of Law: A Forgotten History of How Our Government Segregated America. New York: Liveright (W. W. Norton & Company). ISBN 978-163149285-3. Stokes, Carl B. (1973). Promises of Power. New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-067121602-3 – via Internet Archive. Toman, James (1997). Cleveland Stadium: The Last Chapter. Cleveland: Cleveland Landmarks Press. ISBN 978-0936760100. Toman, James; Cook, Daniel (2005). Cleveland's Towering Treasure. Cleveland: Cleveland Landmarks Press. ISBN 978-0936760209. Turner, Evan H. (1991). Object Lessons: Cleveland Creates an Art Museum. Cleveland: Cleveland Museum of Art. ISBN 978-0940717107 – via Internet Archive. Upton, Harriet Taylor (1910). History of the Western Reserve. Chicago and New York: The Lewis Publishing Company – via Internet Archive. Condon, George E. (2006). West of the Cuyahoga. Kent, OH: Kent State University Press. ISBN 978-0873388542. Chapman, Edmund H. (1981). Cleveland: Village to Metropolis. Cleveland: Western Reserve Historical Society. ISBN 978-091170429-7. Johannesen, Eric (1979). Cleveland Architecture, 1876-1976. Cleveland: Western Reserve Historical Society. ISBN 978-091170421-1. Grabowski, John J. (2019). Cleveland A to Z: An Essential Compendium for Visitors and Residents Alike. Kent, OH: Kent State University Press. ISBN 978-1606353905. Grabowski, John J.; Grabowski, Diane Ewart (2000). Cleveland: A History in Motion. Carlsbad, CA: Heritage Media. ISBN 978-1886483385. Cleveland at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Official website Destination Cleveland, official tourism website Greater Cleveland Partnership Cleveland at Curlie The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History at Case Western Reserve University Cleveland Historical at Cleveland State University Cleveland Memory Project at Cleveland State University Portals:  Geography  North America  United States  Ohio  Cities