Kochi (/ˈkoʊtʃi/; Malayalam: [koˈtːʃi] ), also known by its former name Cochin (/ˈkoʊtʃɪn/ KOH-chin), is a major port city along the Malabar Coast of India bordering the Laccadive Sea. It is part of the district of Ernakulam in the state of Kerala. The city is also commonly referred to as Ernakulam. As of 2011, the Kochi Municipal Corporation had a population of 677,381 over an area of 94.88 km2, and the larger Kochi urban agglomeration had over 2.1 million inhabitants within an area of 440 km2, making it the largest and the most populous metropolitan area in Kerala. Kochi city is also part of the Greater Cochin development region and is classified as a Tier-II city by the Government of India. The civic body that governs the city is the Kochi Municipal Corporation, which was constituted in the year 1967, and the statutory bodies that oversee its development are the Greater Cochin Development Authority (GCDA) and the Goshree Islands Development Authority (GIDA). Nicknamed the Queen of the Arabian Sea, Kochi was an important spice trading center on the west coast of India from antiquity. The port of Muziris traded with the Romans, Persians, Arabs, and Chinese. From 1503 to 1663, the Portuguese established a colony in Fort Kochi (Fort Emmanuel), before being taken by the Dutch in 1663. The Dutch then ceded the area to the United Kingdom. Kochi remained under the control of the Kingdom of Cochin, which became a princely state of the British. Today, Kochi as been described as the financial, commercial and industrial capital of Kerala. Kochi is the only city in the country to have a water metro system, which has been described as the world's largest electric boat metro transportation infrastructure. The Cochin International Airport is the first in the world to operate solely on solar energy. Kochi was one of the 28 Indian cities among the emerging 440 global cities that will contribute 50% of the world GDP by 2025, in a 2011 study done by the McKinsey Global Institute. In July 2018, Kochi was ranked the topmost emerging future megacity in India by global professional services firm JLL. Kochi's rich cultural heritage has made it a popular tourist destination among both domestic and international travellers. It has been hosting India's first art biennale, the Kochi-Muziris Biennale, since 2012, which attracts international artists and tourists. The Chinese fishing nets, introduced during the 14th century by the Chinese, are a symbol of the city and a popular tourist attraction in themselves. Other landmarks include Mattanchery Palace, Marine Drive, Venduruthy Bridge, Church of Saint Francis and Mattanchery Bridge. The city ranks first in the total number of international and domestic tourist arrivals in Kerala. The city was ranked the sixth best tourist destination in India according to a survey conducted by the Nielsen Company on behalf of the Outlook Traveller magazine. In October 2019, Kochi was ranked seventh in Lonely Planet's list of top 10 cities in the world to visit in 2020. In November 2023, the British Luxury travel magazine Condé Nast Traveller rated Kochi as one of the best places to go in Asia in 2024. Ancient travellers and tradesmen referred to Kochi, variously alluding to it as Cocym, Cochym, Cochin, and Kochi. The Cochin Jewish community called Cochin Kogin (Hebrew: קוגין), which is seen in the seal of the synagogue owned by the community. The Arab merchants called this place Kashi, which is seen in the books such as Tuhfat Ul Mujahideen. The origin of the name Kochi is thought to be the Malayalam word kochu azhi, meaning 'small lagoon'. Accounts by Italian explorers Nicolo Conti (15th century), and Fra Paoline in the 17th century say that it was called Kochchi, named after the river connecting the backwaters to the sea.[citation needed] After the arrival of the Portuguese, and later the British, the name Cochin stuck as the official appellation. The city reverted to a closer transcription of its original Malayalam name, Kochi, in 1996. This change in name was challenged by the city municipal corporation but the court later dismissed the plea. Muziris, a port somewhere north of Kochi (mostly identified with Kodungallur in Thrissur district), was the centre of Indian spice trade for many centuries, and was known to the Arabs, Yavanas (Greeks and Romans) as well as Jews, Syrians, and Chinese since ancient times. Kochi rose to significance as a trading centre after the port Muziris around Kodungallur (Cranganore) was destroyed by the massive flooding of Periyar in 1341. The earliest documented references to Kochi occur in books written by Chinese voyager Ma Huan during his visit to Kochi in the 15th century as part of Admiral Zheng He's treasure fleet. There are also references to Kochi in accounts written by Italian traveller Niccolò Da Conti, who visited Kochi in 1440. The ruler of Perumpadappu (near Ponnani) fled to Kodungallur in the early medieval period, when the Zamorin of Calicut annexed Ponnani region, after Tirunavaya war. They later moved to Kochi and established the Kingdom of Cochin. When Vasco Da Gama landed at Kozhikode and the Zamorin of Calicut fought against the Portuguese with Kunjali Marakkar, the ruler of Cochin aligned with the Portuguese. On the Malabar coast during the early 15th century, Calicut and Kochi were in an intense rivalry, so the Ming dynasty of China decided to intervene by granting special status to Kochi and its ruler known as Keyili (可亦里) to the Chinese. Calicut had been the dominant port-city in the region, but Kochi was emerging as its main rival. For the fifth Ming treasure voyage, Admiral Zheng He was instructed to confer a seal upon Keyili of Kochi and enfeoff a mountain in his kingdom as the Zhenguo Zhi Shan (鎮國之山, Mountain Which Protects the Country). Zheng He delivered a stone tablet, inscribed with a proclamation composed by the Yongle Emperor himself, to Kochi. As long as Kochi remained under the protection of Ming China, the Zamorin of Calicut was unable to invade Kochi and a military conflict was averted. The cessation of the Ming treasure voyages consequently had negative results for Kochi, as the Zamorin of Calicut would eventually launch an invasion against Kochi. In the late 15th century, the Zamorin occupied Kochi and installed his representative as the king of the port-city. According to many historians, the precursor state to Kingdom of Kochi came into existence in the early 12th century, after the fall of the Chera Kingdom. The reign of the Kingdom was hereditary, and the family that ruled over the region was known as the Perumpadappu Swaroopam in the local vernacular. The port at Kozhikode held superior economic and political position in medieval Kerala coast, while Kannur, Kollam, and Kochi, were commercially important secondary ports, where the traders from various parts of the world would gather. The Portuguese arrived at Kappad Kozhikode in 1498 during the Age of Discovery, thus opening a direct sea route from Europe to India. Portuguese navigator, Pedro Álvares Cabral founded the first European settlement in India at Kochi in 1500. From 1503 to 1663, Fort Kochi (Fort Emmanuel) was ruled by Portugal. This Portuguese period was a harrowing time for the Saint Thomas Christians, Muslim Mappilas, and the Jews, as the Inquisition was active in Portuguese India. The ruler of the Kingdom of Tanur, who was a vassal to the Zamorin of Calicut, sided with the Portuguese, against his overlord at Kozhikode. As a result, the Kingdom of Tanur (Vettathunadu) became one of the earliest Portuguese Colonies in India. The ruler of Tanur also sided with Cochin. Many of the members of the royal family of Cochin in 16th and 17th centuries were selected from Vettom. However, the Tanur forces under the king fought for the Zamorin of Calicut in the Battle of Cochin (1504). However, the allegiance of the Mappila merchants in Tanur region still stayed under the Zamorin of Calicut. Kochi hosted the grave of Vasco da Gama, the first European explorer to set sail for India, who was buried at St. Francis Church until his remains were returned to Portugal in 1539. The Portuguese rule was followed by that of the Dutch who renamed Fort Immanuel as Fort Stormsburg. In meantime, the Royal Family of Kochi relocated the capital of Kochi Kingdom to Thrissur, leaving nominal authority over Islands of Kochi. In 1664, Fort Kochi Municipality was established by Dutch, making it the first municipality in Indian subcontinent, which got dissolved when Dutch authority got weaker in the 18th century. The remaining part of Kochi were governed by governors of Kochi Kingdom. By 1773, the Mysore ruler Hyder Ali extended his conquest in the Malabar region to Kochi forcing it to become a tributary of Mysore. The hereditary Prime Ministership of Kochi held by the Paliath Achans ended during this period. Meanwhile,[clarification needed] the Dutch, fearing an outbreak of war on the United Provinces, signed the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814 with the United Kingdom, under which Kochi was ceded to the United Kingdom in exchange for the island of Bangka, east of Sumatra. However, there are evidences of English habitation in the region even before the signing of the treaty. In 1866, Fort Kochi municipality was reinstalled. Fort Kochi, which was a part of Malabar District until 1956, was made a municipality on 1 November 1866, along with Kannur, Thalassery, Kozhikode, and Palakkad, according to the Madras Act 10 of 1865 (Amendment of the Improvements in Towns act 1850) of the British Indian Empire. Its first Municipal Council seating contest was conducted in 1883. In 1896, H.H. Rama Varma XV, The Maharaja of Cochin, initiated local administration by forming town councils in Mattancherry and Ernakulam. In 1907, the Governor of the Madras Presidency, Sir Arthur Lawley and his brother, Beilby Lawley, 3rd Baron Wenlock, Governor of Madras, 1891 to 1896, left for an official tour of Cochin and Travancore, which lasted from 25 January to 14 February. On 26 January, they were met by His Highness the Rajah of Cochin who gave a State Dinner in their honour at Ernakulam. By the 1870s, the capital of Kochi Kingdom was relocated again to Kochi Suburb of Tripunithura. In 1910, Ernakulam became the administrative capital of Kochi Kingdom with establishment of Royal Secretariat and State Durbar. The offices of the Diwan and High court were soon moved into Ernakulam. In 1925, Kochi legislative assembly was constituted due to public pressure on the state. Towards the early 20th century, trade at the port had increased substantially, and the need to develop the port was greatly felt. Harbour engineer Robert Bristow was brought to Kochi in 1920 under the direction of Lord Willingdon, then the Governor of Madras. In a span of 21 years, he transformed Kochi as one of the safest harbours in the peninsula, where ships berthed alongside the newly reclaimed inner harbour equipped with a long array of steam cranes. In 1947, when India gained independence from the British colonial rule, Cochin was the first princely state to join India willingly. In 1949, Travancore-Cochin state came into being with the merger of Cochin and Travancore. The King of Travancore was the Rajpramukh of the Travancore-Cochin Union from 1949 to 1956. Travancore-Cochin, was in turn merged with the Malabar district of the Madras State. Finally, the Government of India's States Reorganisation Act (1956) inaugurated a new state—Kerala—incorporating Travancore-Cochin (excluding the four southern Taluks which were merged with Tamil Nadu), Malabar District, and the taluk of Kasargod, South Kanara. On 9 July 1960 the Mattancherry council passed a resolution—which was forwarded to the government—requesting the formation of a municipal corporation by combining the existing municipalities of Fort Kochi, Mattancherry, and Ernakulam. The government appointed a commission to study the feasibility of the suggested merger. Based on its report, the Kerala Legislative Assembly approved the corporation's formation. On 1 November 1967, exactly eleven years since the establishment of the state of Kerala, the Kochi Municipal Corporation came into existence. The merger leading to the establishment of the corporation, was between the municipalities of Ernakulam, Mattancherry and Fort Kochi, along with that of the Willingdon Island, four panchayats (Palluruthy, Vennala, Vyttila and Edappally), and the small islands of Gundu and Ramanthuruth.[citation needed] The Kochi and Ernakulam districts formed on 1 April 1958 carving areas of the erstwhile Travancore-Kochi-Malabar regions. A major portion of the district is from the Kochi kingdom. The city's economic growth gathered momentum after economic reforms in India introduced by the central government in the early 1990s. Since 2000, the service sector has energised the city's economy. The establishment of several industrial parks based on IT and other port based infrastructure triggered a construction and realty boom in the city. Over the years, Kochi has witnessed rapid commercialisation, and has today grown into the commercial hub of Kerala. Kochi is located on the southwest coast of India at 9°58′N 76°13′E﻿ / ﻿9.967°N 76.217°E﻿ / 9.967; 76.217, with a corporation limit area of 94.88 km2 (36.63 sq mi). Over the years, the city has expanded considerably outside the corporation limit set in 1967, although the official city limits hasn't yet been increased. The city straddles the backwaters, encompassing the northern end of a peninsula, several islands and a portion of the mainland. To the west lies the Laccadive Sea, and to the east is the urbanised region in the rest of the mainland area. Much of Kochi lies at sea level, with a coastline of 48 km. The eastern part of Kochi is mainly known as Ernakulam, while the western part of it after the Venduruthy Bridge is called as Western Kochi. The current metropolitan limits of Kochi include the mainland Ernakulam, Fort Kochi, the suburbs of Edapally, Kalamassery, Aluva and Kakkanad to the northeast; Tripunithura to the southeast; and a group of islands closely scattered in the Vembanad Lake. The state government and the GCDA have plans to include Mala and Kodungallur in Thrissur district, Angamaly, Perumbavoor, Piravom and Kolenchery in Ernakulam district, Thalayolaparambu and Vaikom in Kottayam and Cherthala in Alappuzha district within Kochi metropolitan limits. The newly formed metropolis would be put under the charge of a new authority called Kochi Metropolitan Regional Development Authority. However, The Hindu reported that the state government is yet to take any concrete steps in this regard. Soil consists of sediments such as alluvium, teris, brown sands, etc. Hydromorphic saline soils are also found in the areas surrounding the backwaters. Predominant rock types found here are Archaean-basic dykes, Charnockites and Gneisses. An ecologically sensitive area, the Mangalavanam Bird Sanctuary is located in the central part of the city. It has a wide range of mangrove species and is a nesting ground for a vast variety of migratory birds. Kochi's water needs are entirely dependent on ground water and the two rivers flowing through the district viz., Periyar and Muvattupuzha. Periyar serves the entire northern part of the city whereas Muvattupuzha river under the JnNurm project covers the western part. Under the Köppen climate classification, Kochi features a tropical monsoon climate (Am). Kochi's proximity to the equator along with its coastal location results in little seasonal temperature variation, with moderate to high levels of humidity. Annual temperatures range between 23 and 31 °C (73 and 88 °F) with the record high being 36.5 °C (97.7 °F), and record low 16.3 °C (61.3 °F). From June to September, the south-west monsoon brings in heavy rains as Kochi lies on the windward side of the Western Ghats. From October to December, Kochi receives lighter (yet significant) rain from the northeast monsoon, as it lies on the leeward side. Average annual rainfall is 3,014.9 mm (118.70 in), with an annual average of 124 rainy days. The city is governed by the Kochi Corporation, headed by a mayor. For administrative purposes, the city is divided into 74 wards, from which the members of the corporation council are elected for five years. Earlier; Fort Kochi, Mattancherry and Ernakulam were the three Municipalities in Cochin area, which was later merged to form the Cochin Corporation. The corporation has its headquarters in Ernakulam, and zonal offices at Fort Kochi, Mattancherry, Palluruthy, Edappally and Pachalam. The general administration of the city is handled by the Personnel Department and the Council Standing committee Section.[citation needed] Other departments include that of town planning, health, engineering, revenue and accounts. The corporation is also responsible for waste disposal and sewage management. The city produces more than 600 tons of waste per day and a large portion of waste is decomposed at Brahmapuram Solid Waste plant into organic manure.The supply of potable water, sourced from the Periyar River is handled by Kerala Water Authority with support of Water works department of Kochi Corporation. Electricity is provided by the Kerala State Electricity Board. The GCDA and GIDA are the government agencies initiating and monitoring the development of Greater Cochin area, mainly in developing infrastructure facilities for the city. Kochi is the seat of High Court of Kerala, the highest judicial body in the state of Kerala. The Kochi City Police is headed by a Police Commissioner, an Indian Police Service (IPS) officer. The city is divided into five zones and each zone under a circle officer. Apart from regular law & order, the city police comprises the Traffic Police, Narcotics Cell, Riot horse, Armed Reserve Camps, District Crime Records Bureau and a Women's Police station. It operates 19 police stations functioning under the Home Ministry of Government of Kerala. An anti-corruption branch of the Central Bureau of Investigation also operates out of the city. CISF maintains 3 squadrons for providing security to various central and state heavy industries, airport and seaport zones. Other major central agencies are NIA, DRI and Indian Customs due to the presence of major port. According to National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB), Kochi reported significant increase of 193.7 per cent IPC crimes in 2010 compared to 2009, and reported a crime rate of 1,897.8 compared to the 424.1 in whole Kerala. However, the city police commissioner defended that in major crimes such as murders and kidnapping, the city registered a low crime rate even behind other cities in the state. Kochi is part of the Ernakulam Lok Sabha constituency in Indian Parliament. The current elected Member of Parliament representing the constituency is Hibi Eden of Indian National Congress. The Ernakulam Lok Sabha constituency elects seven members to the state Legislative Assembly, one each from Ernakulam, Kalamassery, Kochi, Paravur, Thrikkakara, Thrippunithura and Vypin. Kochi is widely referred to as the financial and commercial capital of Kerala. Federal Bank, the fourth-largest Private-sector bank in India is located in Aluva which is a suburb of Kochi. Being a major online trading centre in the country, Kochi has a newly opened SEBI office. Availability of electricity, fresh water, long coastline, backwaters, good banking facilities, presence of a major port, container trans-shipment terminal, harbour terminal and an international air terminal are some of the factors which accelerated the industrial growth in the city and its adjoining district. In recent years the city has witnessed heavy investment, thus making it one of the fastest-growing second-tier metro cities in India. Sales tax income generated in the Kochi metropolitan area contributes heavily to state revenue. The district contributes 15.1% of the state GDP. Construction and manufacturing industries combined contributes 37% of the district's total GDP, and trade, tourism and hospitality industries together provides another 20%. Major business sectors include construction, manufacturing, shipbuilding, transportation/shipping, seafood and spices exports, chemical industries, information technology (IT), tourism, health services, and banking. Kochi is recognised as one of the seventeen major industrial cities of India by the World Bank Group. However, in the 2009 rankings of ease to start and operate a business, among the 17 Indian cities selected, Kochi was rated as the second most difficult city to start business and was ranked 16th, above Kolkata. As in most of Kerala, remittances from non-resident Indians (NRI)s is a major source of income. Eloor, situated 13 kilometres (8.1 miles) north of the city-centre, is the largest industrial belt in Kerala, with more than 250 factories manufacturing a range of products including chemical and petrochemical products, pesticides, rare earth elements, rubber processing chemicals, fertilisers, zinc and chromium compounds, and leather products. Fertilisers and Chemicals Travancore Limited (FACT), one of the oldest fertilizers and chemical industry in Kerala is located in Kochi. Kochi Refineries of (BPCL) at Ambalamugal is the largest state owned refinery in India. Petronet India has now almost completed Kochi LNG Terminal, for importing and storing natural gas, for energy and fueling needs. Central Government establishments like the Coconut Development Board, the Coir Board and the Marine Products Export Development Authority (MPEDA) have head offices located in the city. Kalamassery which is situated around 16.5 km from the City Center is one of the major Industrial areas. Leading factories like FACT, HMT and IT/Biotechnology park like KINFRA Hi-Tech Park are located here. The Cochin University of Science and Technology is located at Kalamassery. Irimpanam is another major industrial area in Kochi. The Seaport-Airport Road (SPAP Road) passes through this place and oil giants like Indian Oil Corporation, Bharat Petroleum and Hindustan Petroleum have plants here. Like elsewhere in Kerala, tourism is one of the major contributors of the local economy. Ernakulam district, in which Kochi is situated, ranks first in the total number of domestic tourists visiting Kerala, and thus contributes to the economy of the city. The tourist enclave at Fort Kochi and presence of several historical monuments, museums etc. as well as natural attractions like the Vembanad lake and the backwaters attract large number of tourists to the city. Presence of several leading hospitality brands have been a major source of employment for locals. The Kochi Port is one of the leading ports where international cruisers call on regularly. The city has the first marina facility in the country, Kochi Marina which attracts large number of yacht-totters. Real Estate industry is also one industry which is contributing a lot to the economy of Kochi. Many players have entered the market and have developed residential properties. Kochi is the headquarters of the Southern Naval Command, the primary training centre of the Indian Navy. The Cochin Shipyard, contributes to the economy of the city. The fishing harbour at Thoppumpady is a minor fishing port in the state and supplies fish to local and export markets. To further tap the potential of the all-season harbour at Kochi, an international cruise terminal was also constructed. Exports and allied activities are also important contributors to the city's economy. The Cochin Port currently handles export and import of container cargo at its terminal at Willingdon Island. The International Container Transshipment Terminal operating out of Vallarpadam, is India's largest transshipment terminal.Cochin Port Trust also planning to build an Outer Harbour near Puthuvype. Kochi's historical reliance on trade continues into modern times, as the city is a major exporter of spices and is home to the International Pepper Exchange, where black pepper is globally traded. The Spices Board of India and World Spice Organisation are headquartered in Kochi. The IT and ITES related industries are growing up in Kochi. Availability of cheap bandwidth through undersea cables and lower operational costs compared to other major cities in India, has been to its advantage. Various technology and industrial campuses including the government promoted InfoPark, Cochin Special Economic Zone and KINFRA Export Promotion Industrial Park operate in the outskirts of the city. Several new industrial campuses are under construction in the suburbs of the city. SmartCity at Kakkanad is one of the prominent projects. Cyber City at Kalamassery is another integrated IT township SEZ being planned in the private sector. Kochi has an established electronics hardware industry with companies such as V-Guard Industries, OEN India Limited, FCI OEN Connectors and SFO Technologies. The Government of Kerala has announced a project to build an industrial park named Electronic City spanning an area of 340 acres (140 ha), to cater to the electronic hardware industries. The private operator NeST is building a Special Economic Zone specifically for electronics hardware spanning an area of 30 acres (12 ha). The Cochin International Airport is in the process of setting up an aerotropolis at Nedumbassery. The air gateway to Kochi is the Cochin International Airport (CIAL) located at Nedumbassery, which is about 28 km (17 mi) north of Kochi city, and handles both domestic and international flights. It is the first international airport in India to be built without Central Government funds and is the world's first fully solar energy powered airport. The Cochin airport provides direct connectivity to popular international destinations in the Middle East, Malaysia, Thailand and Singapore and to most major Indian cities apart from tourist destinations like Lakshadweep. Kochi is also the headquarters of the Air India Express service. With a terminal area of 840,000 sq ft (78,000 m2), and a passenger capacity of 2200 (international and domestic), it is the largest and busiest airport in the state. It is also the fourth busiest airport in India in terms of international passenger traffic, and seventh busiest overall. Kochi is well connected to neighbouring cities and states via several highways. It is a node in the North-South Corridor of the National Highway system. The road infrastructure in Kochi has not been able to meet the growing traffic demand and hence traffic congestion is a major problem in the city. Kochi is served by National Highway 66, National Highway 544, National Highway 966A and National Highway 966B. Several state highways also connect Kochi with other parts of Kerala. SH 15, Ettumanoor-Ernakulam Road, connects the city to Kottayam, Pala, Kumily, Changanacherry, Pathanamthitta etc. SH 41, Palarivattom-Thekkady Road, provides a corridor to the eastern parts of the district. SH 63, Vypeen Pallipuram Road and SH 66, Alappuzha – Thoppumpady road are coastal roads that serve the narrow sliver of land between the backwaters and the sea. The main arterial roads of the city are the Mahatma Gandhi Road and Sahodaran Ayyappan Road in Ernakulam, constructed in 1925 & 1962 respectively which runs parallel & perpendicular to the coast and having the proposed Metro Rail connectivity. The Seaport-Airport Road is another major road and connects the Cochin Seaport to the Cochin International Airport. The Infopark Expressway in Kakkanad is connected to the Seaport-Airport Road and stretches all the way to Infopark. Other major roads include Chittoor Road, Banerji Road, Shanmugham Road, Kochi Bypass, Kaloor-Kadavanthra Road, Park Avenue etc. A new ring road is proposed for Kochi city by the state government for which a project study is being currently undertaken by NATPAC. The primary form of public transport within the city is largely dependent on privately owned bus networks. The state-run also operates its services in the city through the Thirukochi service. The major bus terminals in the city are Ernakulam Town, Ernakulam Jetty and the private bus terminal at Kaloor. An integrated transit terminal namely The Mobility Hub at Vytilla is under second phase of construction. The terminal acts as a hub for long-distance bus services away from the city centre, and also a converging point for different modes of public transport, namely bus, metro and ferry. Kochi is one of the few cities to be granted the new-generation air-conditioned low-floor and non-air-conditioned semi-low-floor buses under the JNNURM city transport development project. KURTC and private buses operate frequent schedules to neighbouring areas of Nedumbassery, Perumbavoor, Aluva, Muvattupuzha, Kothamangalam, Cherthala and Poochakkal. Taxis and auto rickshaws (called autos) are available for hire throughout the day. Development of road infrastructure not keeping pace with the increase in traffic is a major problem faced by Kochi, like most other parts of Kerala. The city has four major railway stations – Ernakulam Junction, Ernakulam Town (locally known as the South and North railway stations respectively), Aluva, Angamaly and Tripunithura followed by smaller stations, Edapally and Kalamassery. There is also the Cochin Harbour Terminus providing rail connectivity to the southern segment of the Port of Kochi. The terminus is currently under renovation for the suburban rail networks in the city. The main rail transport system in Kochi is operated by the Southern Railway Zone of Indian Railways, and comes under Thiruvananthapuram Railway division. The South station is one of the busiest railway stations in South India, with more than 128 scheduled train services daily. The North station situated on the northern side of the city, caters mostly to long-distance services that bypass the South station, and also is an additional halt station for many trains. There is also a historic station named as Ernakulam Terminus(station code:ERG) situated behind the High Court. Great personalities like Mahatma Gandhi and The British Viceroy have visited Cochin through this old railway station. Ernakulam Terminus was the first station to serve the city but had to be abandoned in the early 1960s. Now this station operates as a goods depot of Southern Railway. The Kochi Metro is a metro rapid transit system serving the city of Kochi, intended to considerably ease traffic congestion in the city and its surrounding metropolitan area. It is being set up at an overall estimated cost of ₹5,146 crore (US$640 million). The Phase-1 of the metro system will have 22 stations connecting the suburban towns of Aluva and Pettah while passing through downtown. The first half of the Phase-1 of Kochi Metro was inaugurated on 17 June 2017 by Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Currently Kochi Metro is operational from Aluva till Maharaja's College along the Kalamassery – Edappally – Kaloor – MG Road stretch, covering a total of 18.4 km with 16 operational metro stations. Kochi ranks among India's major seaports, partly due to being one of the safest harbours in the Indian Ocean. The port, administered by a statutory autonomous body known as the Cochin Port Trust, offers facilities for bunkering, handling cargo and passenger ships and storage accommodation. The port is a complex of three islands, one of which is man-made. It also operates passenger ships to Colombo and Lakshadweep. Boat services are operated by Kerala Shipping and Inland Navigation Corporation, the State Water Transport Department and private firms from various boat jetties in the city. The junkar ferry for the transshipment of vehicles and passengers between the islands are operated between Ernakulam and Vypin, and between Vypin and Fort Kochi. However, with the construction of the Goshree bridges (which links Kochi's islands), ferry transport has become less essential. The main boat jetties are Ernakulam Main Boat Jetty near Park Avenue, High Court Jetty in Banerjee Road, Embarkation Jetty in Willingdon Island and Fort Kochi Jetty. In April 2023, Kochi became India's first city to have a water metro project. The Kochi Water Metro is the first water metro project in India and the first integrated water transport system of this size in Asia connects 10 islands of Kochi through a network of 15 routes that span 76 km and 38 jetties. Kochi has the highest population density in Kerala with 7139 people per km2. As of 2011[update], Kochi had a metropolitan area population of 2,117,990. The female-to-male ratio is 1,028:1,000, significantly higher than the all-India average of 933:1,000. Kochi's literacy rate is 97.5%. The female literacy rate lags that of males by 1.1%, among the lowest such gaps in India. Kochi's major religions are Hinduism, Christianity and Islam. Jainism, Judaism, Sikhism and Buddhism, with smaller followings, are also practised in Kochi. Though 44% practice Hinduism, Christianity's large following (38%) makes Kochi a city with one of the largest Christian populations in India. The majority of the city's residents are Malayalis. However, there are significant ethnic minority communities including Tamils, Gujaratis, Jews, Anglo-Indians, Sikhs and Konkanis Malayalam is the main language of communication and medium of instruction for primary education, although a number of schools do offer English medium education. The higher education is invariably in English medium, and it is the preferred language in business circles. Tamil and Hindi are widely understood—albeit rarely spoken. Like other fast-growing cities in the developing world, Kochi suffers from major urbanisation problems. The city was ranked tenth among Indian cities in terms of house-cost and availability, urban household crowding and household incomes. The government has plans to make the city slum-free by 2016. According to the National Crime Records Bureau, the city holds the fourth position in the number of recorded crimes in India. In 2009, the city recorded an average crime rate of 646.3 against the national average of 181.4. But Kochi City Police Commissioner later clarified that this anomaly was due to higher reporting rates of minor crimes in Kochi than in other Indian cities. The State Crime Records Bureau (SCRB) report gives further credence to this as it finds that Kochi has the fewest crime against women in the state of Kerala. According to the 2011 CII/Institute of Competitiveness report on Liveability, Kochi stands first in the state, and sixth in the country. Kochi is ranked seventh in the list of the top ten most affluent cities in India by 2009 study by Nielsen Company. Kochi was ranked the fourth cleanest city in India in the Swachch Bharat rankings for cities. It was selected as one of the hundred Indian cities to be developed as a smart city under Prime Minister Narendra Modi flagship Smart Cities Mission. As a result of successive waves of migration over the course of several centuries, the population of the city is a mix of people from all parts of Kerala and most of India. The pan-Indian nature is highlighted by the substantial presence of various ethnic communities from different parts of the country. Kochi has a diverse, multicultural, and secular community consisting of Malayalis, Konkanis, Gujaratis, Bengalis, Marathis, Punjabis, Tamilians, Kannadigas, Biharias, Anglo Indians and a few families of Jews among other denominations. The city once had a large Jewish community, known as the Malabar Yehuden—and now increasingly as Cochin Jews—who figured prominently in Kochi's business and economic strata and owned several Synagogues across Kochi and nearby areas such as Chendamangalam, Paravur or Mala. Kochi was one among the seven diocese of Syrian Orthodox (Jacobite Syrian Christian Church) in Kerala formed in 1876. The seat of the Bishop is at St George Cathedral, Karingachira. Also at Mary's Cathedral Elamkulam, seat of bishop of Simhasana churches of Jacobites is in the city. The seat of Roman Catholic Cathedral of Kerala's first Archdiocese Archdiocese of Verapoly and the first diocese Diocese of Cochin are located in the city. The Syro-Malabar Church, one of the 22 sui iuris Eastern Catholic Churches and a part of the Saint Thomas Christian community, has its seat at Ernakulam. Prominent places of Christian worship include the St. Mary's Syro-Malabar Catholic Cathedral Basilica, Ernakulam, St. Francis Assisi Roman Catholic Cathedral, Ernakulam, Basilica of Our Lady of Ransom, Vallarpadam-Ernakulam, Santa Cruz Basilica Roman Catholic Cathedral, Fort Kochi, St. Antony's Shrine at Kaloor, St. George Forane Church, Edappally and . Appropriate to its multi-ethnic composition, Kochi celebrates traditional Kerala festivals like Onam and Vishu along with North Indian Hindu festivals like Holi with great fervour. Christian and Islamic festivals like Christmas, Easter, Eid ul-Fitr and Milad-e-sherif are also celebrated. A merry making fest called the Cochin Carnival is celebrated at Fort Kochi during the last ten days of December. The residents of Kochi are known as Kochiites; they are an important part of the South Indian culture. However, the city's culture is rapidly evolving with Kochiites generally becoming more cosmopolitan in their outlook. The people are also increasingly fashion-conscious, often deviating from the traditional Kerala wear to western clothing. Kochiites generally partake of Keralite cuisine, which is generally characterised by an abundance of coconut and spices. Other South Indian cuisines, as well as Chinese and North Indian cuisines are popular. Fast food culture is also very prominent. Being a tourist hotspot, Fort Kochi have a number of restaurants that offer international cuisine, like Italian, French, Mexican etc. Being close to the ocean and the backwaters, Kochi has an abundance of seafood, which reflects in the cuisine. Cochin is also called the official food capital of Kerala with largest number of restaurants and cafeterias in Kerala that serves every kind of delicious cuisine. A service known as You Buy, We Cook is available at the waterfront of Fort Kochi, where the fresh seafood purchased from the nets is cooked as per the customers needs. Arabian food joints that serve Shawarma and roasted chicken are a new addition to the fast food scene in the city. Kochi also has a number of shopping malls including Oberon Mall, Gold Souk Grande, Bay Pride Mall, Centre Square Mall, Abad Nucleus Mall and LuLu Mall, which is one of the largest shopping malls in India in terms of total leasable area of 17 acres (7 ha). Various shopping malls are expected to open in the city in the near future including Forum Thomsun Mall. Kochi is the official food capital of Kerala because of the highest number of restaurants and the varieties of foods available. Kochi serves every type of food available in Kerala. Its very famous for varieties of non-vegetarian food. Kochi also has the most five star hotels in the state. These include international brands like Crowne Plaza, Marriott International, Grand Hyatt, Sheraton, Le Méridien, Radisson Blu, Holiday Inn, Ramada, Ibis, Taj Malabar, The Gateway etc. Kochi was home to some of the most influential figures in Malayalam literature, including Changampuzha Krishna Pillai, Kesari Balakrishna Pillai, G. Sankara Kurup, and Vyloppilli Sreedhara Menon. Prominent social reformers such as Sahodaran Ayyappan and Pandit Karuppan also are from Kochi. The Kochi International Book Festival is an annual event. The Maharajas of Kochi (then Cochin) were scholars who knew the epics and encouraged the arts. The paintings at the Hill Palace and the Dutch Palace are testimony to their love for arts. Kochiites are known for their enthusiasm in sports, especially football and cricket. The Jawaharlal Nehru International Stadium in Kochi is one of the largest stadiums in India with floodlights for Cricket and Football matches. The Regional Sports Centre is an important centre of sporting activity in the city. Kochi is reportedly the sixth best city in India according to the livability index of 2011. With many advanced tertiary/quaternary care facilities, Kochi has one of the best healthcare facilities in India. It is the prime destination for people seeking advanced healthcare facilities from across Kerala. In recent times, it has attracted many patients from India, the Middle East, Africa, Europe and the United States looking for relatively inexpensive advanced medical care. Kochi is the only city from Kerala that have carried out successful heart transplantations. Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre, Sunrise Hospital, Specialist Hospital, Medical Trust Hospital, PVS Memorial Hospital, Renai medicity, Lakeshore Hospital, Lisie Hospital, Aster Medcity, Rajagiri Institute of Medical Sciences are some of the advanced tertiary/quaternary healthcare facilities in Kochi. Other reputed institutions in the city include Ernakulam Medical Centre, KIMS Hospital, Gautham Hospital, Lourdes Hospital and Saraf Hospital. Some of the reputed fertility related treatment centres in India – like Vijaya Hospital, Bourn Hall Clinic and CIMAR – are located in Kochi. General Hospital, Ernakulam and Government Medical College, Ernakulam are the notable medical institutions in the government sector in Kochi. In August 2019, a home daycare program in the district, Arike has started for extending the service of the home palliative care. Nurses who have undergone training in palliative care will be reaching out to patients at home every day on two-wheelers. The service will be available to those who have registered with the General Hospital's home palliative care programme. The pattern of primary education is essentially the same all over the state. There are government owned schools and government aided schools, which are affiliated to the Kerala State Education Board. A few privately owned schools are also affiliated to the system. Most of the schools owned by private organisations or individuals are affiliated to the Central Board for Secondary Education (CBSE). Indian Certificate of Secondary Education (ICSE) have some schools affiliated to them as well. The state education board offers both Malayalam and English medium instruction, while the other boards offer English medium alone. There are a few schools that follow international curricula, such as IB and IGCSE. There 34 government schools, 67 private aided schools and 31 unaided schools affiliated to the Kerala State Education Board in the city and suburbs. There are 62 CBSE Schools, 2 IGCSE and 9 ICSE Schools as well. The notable schools in the government sector are Sree Rama Varma High School, Edappally High School, Government School-Kochi and Govt Girls Higher Secondary School, Ernakulam. There are Kendriya Vidyalaya, Chinmaya Mission and Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan run several quasi-private charter schools within the city limits, as well as in the suburbs. There are several private schools (both aided & unaided0 that are owned by secular and religious trusts which are of particular renown, such as:St. Albert's HSS, Ernakulam, St. Teresa's CGHSS, St. Mary's CGHSS Ernakulam, St. Antony's CGHSS, Model Technical Higher Secondary School, Kaloor The Delta Study, Rajagiri Public School, Campion School, Assisi Vidyaniketan, Cochin Refineries School, Gregorian Public School, Greets Public School, Toc-H Public School, Navy Children School, Global Public School, Choice School, Vidyodaya School, Mar Thoma Public School, Nava Nirman Public School and St. Pauls International School, Kalamassery, The Charter School Kochi. The Cochin University of Science and Technology (CUSAT) is a major university named after the city. Most of the colleges in Kochi offering tertiary education are affiliated either with the Mahatma Gandhi University or with the Cochin University. Kochi has one of the campuses of the Indian Maritime University at Willingdon Island. Sree Sankaracharya University of Sanskrit in Kalady is a research-oriented university located at the outskirts. Other national educational institutes include the Central Institute of Fisheries Nautical and Engineering Training, the National University of Advanced Legal Studies, the National Institute of Oceanography and the Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute. Kochi has some of the leading B-Schools in the region. The Indian Institute of Management Kozhikode (IIMK) has set up its first satellite campus at Athulya building in InfoPark, Kochi. Cochin University's School of Management Studies (SMS) is the first and oldest managerial education institution in South India. SCMS Cochin is one of the emerging B-Schools in the country. Another major B-School XIME is opening a new campus in Kochi. Other leading managerial institutions include Rajagiri Centre for Business Studies, Kochi Business School, Amrita School of Business, Albertian Institute of Management and Toc-H B school. The city and outskirts are home to four medical schools—Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre at Ponekkara, Cochin Medical College at Kalamassery, Sree Narayana Institute of Medical Sciences, and M.O.S.C. Medical College, Kolenchery. Some of the prestigious general colleges are Maharaja's College, St. Albert's College, St. Teresa's College, Sacred Hearts College, Bharata Matha College, Aquina's College, De Paul Institute of Science & Technology (DIST) and Cochin College. The major Engineering and Technology colleges in the city are School of Engineering CUSAT, SCMS School of Engineering and Technology at Kalamassery, Model Engineering College, Rajagiri School of Engineering & Technology and FISAT (Federal Institute of Science & Technology). Being the seat of the High Court of Kerala, several top legal education institutes are here. The Government Law College-Ernakulam is one of the oldest law schools in Kerala. The School of Legal Studies (SLS), CUSAT is one of the leading graduate, post-graduate, and research institutes in the country. The National University of Advanced Legal Studies (NUALS) is located in the city, which is a premier law university in India and the only Law college listed in CLAT (Common Law Admission Test) in Kerala. Some of the main orphanages and rehabilitation shelters in Cochin City are Palluruthy Relief Settlement in Palluruthy Veli, Don Bosco Sneha Bhavan, Don Bosco Big Boys, Crescent Girls Orphanage, YMCA Boys Home, Bal Bhavan, Valsalya Bhavan. Palluruthy Relief Settlement is under Kochi Municipal Corporation and managed in association with Peoples Council for Social Justice. There are about 300 inmates and many of them are mentally ill. The night shelter for women run by Kochi Municipal Corporation near Kerala State Road Transport Corporation bus stand provides free and safe accommodation. Peoples Council for Social Justice was found in 1985 under the patronage of Justice V. R. Krishna Iyer with the aim to work for human rights protection, free legal aid and to strive for social justice. The orphanages for children under Don Bosco Sneha Bhavan Cochi are Sneha Bhavan Annexe, SnehaBhavan, Valsalya Bhavan, Don Bosco and Bosco Nilayam. The Childline India project in Cochin is taken in collaboration with Don Bosco. Children in distress and in need of help can contact in '1098' (toll free number). Sneha Bhavan Annexe is the first point of contact with children and children can stay as a safe night shelter. Sneha Bhavan is a home for the children from the streets and for those from unhealthy and risky situations. The Valsalya Bhavan centre is solely for the girls who are rescued from the streets. Runaways, street children, children of sex workers, abused children and child labourers all live here. Along with primary and high school education at a local school, the centre provides shelter, food, clothing and educational support. There are also people doing independent social services within the city. The Italian Sister Fabiola conducts a home at Fort Kochi known as "Ashwasa Bhavan", for young orphaned children. Br. Judson run his own "Mobile Bath Service" in his vehicle for the abandoned. Major Malayalam newspapers published in Kochi include Malayala Manorama, Mathrubhumi, Siraj Daily, Madhyamam, Deshabhimani, Deepika, Kerala Kaumudi, Janmabhumi, etc. Popular English newspapers include The Hindu, The New Indian Express, The Times of India, The Pioneer and The Deccan Chronicle. A number of evening papers are also published from the city. Newspapers in other regional languages like Hindi, Kannada, Tamil and Telugu are also available. A number of financial publications are also published in the city. These include The Economic Times, Business Line, The Business Standard and The Financial Express. Prominent magazines and religious publications like the Sathyadeepam, The Week and Vanitha are also published from the city. Kochi houses several leading Malayalam television channels like Asianet Plus, Flowers, Jeevan TV, Mazhavil Manorama, Kairali We, Manorama News and Reporter TV as well as major news bureaus of Asianet, Kairali TV, Amrita TV and Doordarshan. Prasar Bharati maintains its earth station and broadcasting centre in Kakkanad, Kochi. Satellite television services are available through DD Direct+, Dish TV, Airtel digital TV, Reliance DTH, Sun Direct DTH and Tata Sky. FM radio channels broadcast from Kochi are Rainbow FM (AIR) 101.9 MHz, AIR Kochi 102.3 MHz, Club FM 94.3 MHz, Radio Mango 91.9 MHz, Red FM 93.5 MHz, Radio Mirchi 104.0 MHz. Kochi is considered to be the hub of the vibrant Malayalam movie industry, especially contemporary Malayalam movies. The rise of Kochi to the centre stage of the entertainment industry occurred coinciding with the economic boom of the last couple of decades. Many movies are shot in Kochi every year. Kochi also has a host of state-of-the-art production and post-production facilities. Due to these reasons, major section of film personalities including of actors, technical experts and other related workers reside in Kochi. There are over 50 cinema halls that screen movies in Malayalam, Tamil, English and Hindi. The city hosts Kerala's first cine multiplex, at the Oberon Mall with four screens. Gold Souk Grande also has a cine multiplex operated by Q cinemas with four screens. PVR with 9 screens is another national multiplex brand that has presence in Kochi and is based out of LuLu International Shopping Mall. Cinepolis at Centre Square Mall with 11 screens is the first international megaplex brand in the state. 16 more multiplex screens are expected in the city in the near future. The district has the largest number of telephone connections in Kerala. Telephony services are provided by various private sector players like Aircel, Airtel, Idea Cellular, Vodafone, Reliance Infocomm, Tata Docomo, Jio, Tata Indicom and the state owned BSNL. All the private sector telecom companies have their headquarters for Kerala circle located in Kochi. Like elsewhere in Kerala, football is arguably the most passionate sport among the locals. In the Indian Super League (ISL), Kerala Blasters represents the city as well as the state of Kerala. The Blasters are one of the most widely supported clubs in the country as well as the fifth most followed football club from Asia in the social media. Kochi was also home to the now defunct football clubs FC Kochin and Chirag United Kerala. FC Kochin is considered as the first fully professional football club from India. Kochi was one of the six cities to host the 2017 FIFA U-17 World Cup held in India. India's fourth largest stadium and third largest cricket stadium, the Jawaharlal Nehru International Stadium located in Kaloor, is a major facility for football and cricket. Kochi was home to the now defunct Indian Premier League cricket team, Kochi Tuskers Kerala which won franchise rights to play in the 2011 edition of IPL. The Maharaja's Stadium located on MG Road in the heart of the city, is the major athletic facility in the state with synthetic tracks and turf grass as per international standards. The Ambedkar stadium, maintained by GCDA, was developed exclusively for football with funds from Government of Kerala and FIFA. Spanish club Real Madrid has proposed to set up a football school in Kochi. The Rajiv Gandhi Sports Complex at Kadavanthra is a major indoor stadium, mainly used for conducting badminton, tennis and basketball tournaments. The 25 m X 10 m swimming pool at the centre is one of the larger water sports facility in the state, where regular swimming competitions and coaching are conducted. The FACT Grounds at Udyogamandal, Sacred Heart's College Grounds, HMT Grounds at Kalamassery and St. Albert's College Grounds are the other major training facilities for various games like volleyball, badminton, cricket etc. Kochi has two golf courses in the city, and one in the suburbs. The oldest golf club is located at Bolgatty Palace constructed in 1903, which is a nine-hole facility run by Cochin Golf Club society. The Cochin Golf and Country Club located near to Cochin Airport, operated by CIAL, is Kerala's first 18-hole golf course with a playing area of over 7,200 yards. The first phase of the all-weather golf course comprising nine holes was opened in May 2010 for members and public. The expansion to an 18-hole course is progressing, which is scheduled to be open in September 2012. Being surrounded by water bodies, the city is ideal for Yachting. The Kerala Yachting Association and the Cochin Yacht Club are located in the city. Both organisations conduct regular yachting tournaments. Kochi was the only Indian city chosen for stopover during the 2008–09 Volvo Ocean Race. The Southern Naval Command, one of the three main formations of the Indian Navy has its headquarters in Kochi at INS Venduruthy. It is commanded by the Flag Officer Commanding-in-Chief. The Southern Naval Command consists of Flag Officer Sea Training (FOST), a training squadron, training establishments and bases, and land forces and survey ships. It has a naval air station, and a ship repair yard. The Indian Navy Day is also celebrated here. It is a week-long event showcasing warships, planes, helicopters etc. of the Indian Navy at INS Venduruthy. It is a public event attended in large numbers. The close by located Cochin Shipyard Limited is the largest shipbuilding and maintenance facility in India. Presently it is building the first indigenous aircraft carrier for the Indian Navy. Kochi is twinned with: Norfolk, Virginia, United States Menlo Park, California, United States Pyatigorsk, Russia Neighbourhoods of Kochi List of tallest buildings in Kochi Portuguese Cochin Cochin Jews K. C. Sivaramakrishnan (2006). People's Participation in Urban Governance. Concept Publishing Company. p. 156. ISBN 81-8069-326-0. Archived from the original on 8 February 2016. Ganesh Kumar (September 2010). Modern General Knowledge. Upkar Prakashan. p. 194. ISBN 978-81-7482-180-5. Archived from the original on 6 February 2016. "Ernakulam_History". Archived from the original on 15 November 2007. Retrieved 5 April 2015. "Profile of Kochi". Kochi Municipal Corporation. Archived from the original on 15 August 2018. Retrieved 15 August 2018. "Demographia World Urban Areas" (PDF). demographia.com. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 August 2011. "Urban Agglomerations/Cities having population 1 million and above" (PDF). Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner, India. Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 December 2011. Sadasivan, S.N. (2005). Territorial Integration. Mittal Publications. p. 64. ISBN 9788170999683. {{cite book}}: |work= ignored (help) Menon, K.P.S. (23 January 1977). "My Kerala". Sunday. Vol. 4, no. 44. Ananda Bazar. p. 31. S. Muhammad Hussain Nainar (1942). Tuhfat-al-Mujahidin: An Historical Work in The Arabic Language. University of Madras. "Urban Sector Kerala" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 March 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. "GCDA – Greater Cochin Development Authority". Archived from the original on 28 March 2015. Retrieved 5 April 2015. "Indian Census 2011 list of cities" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 November 2011. Retrieved 5 June 2017. "Muziris, at last?" Archived 19 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine R. Krishnakumar, www.frontline.in Frontline, 10–23 April 2010. "Setting a scorching pace: the metro saga". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 3 March 2018. Retrieved 22 October 2017. "Check out the 10 novelties onboard Kochi Metro". Malayala Manorama. Archived from the original on 23 October 2017. Retrieved 23 October 2017. "Cochin Chronicle -- Introduction". Kerala Tourism Development Corporation. Archived from the original on 22 October 2017. Retrieved 22 October 2017. "Kochi emerging as tier-2 destination for corporates". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 23 October 2017. Retrieved 23 October 2017. "Industrial areas in Kochi". Kerala Tourism Development Corporation. Archived from the original on 22 October 2017. Retrieved 22 October 2017. "LNG the answer?". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 23 October 2017. Kumar, V. Sajeev (9 January 2022). "Kochi becomes first city with water metro project". www.thehindubusinessline.com. Archived from the original on 27 December 2022. Retrieved 27 December 2022. "World's first solar-powered airport". BBC News. Retrieved 17 November 2023. "Urban world: Mapping the economic power of cities 2011". McKinsey Global Institute. Archived from the original on 29 March 2013. Retrieved 3 February 2013. "Kochi rated as future mega city in India by JLL". The Economic Times. 1 August 2018. Archived from the original on 2 August 2018. Retrieved 2 August 2018. "Kochi ranked topmost emerging city in country". The New Indian Express. 2 August 2018. Archived from the original on 2 August 2018. Retrieved 2 August 2018. "Facts about Kochi Biennale Foundation". Kochi Biennale Foundation. Archived from the original on 31 October 2014. Retrieved 9 January 2010. Rongmei, Precious. "The fast-disappearing act of Kochi's iconic Chinese Fishing Nets". The Times of India. ISSN 0971-8257. Retrieved 17 November 2023. Culture and trade thrive in Kerala's Kochi | CNN, 28 January 2020, retrieved 17 November 2023 "Destnation [sic] Wide Number of Foreign Tourists Visited Kerala During 2010" (PDF). Kerala Tourism Development Corporation. Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 July 2017. Retrieved 22 October 2017. "Tourist statistics – 2008" (PDF). Kerala Tourism Development Corporation. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 June 2010. Retrieved 22 October 2010. "Nielsen retains top tourism destination grade for Kerala". Business Line. Archived from the original on 13 September 2023. Retrieved 22 February 2012. "Kochi included in list of Lonely Planet top 10 cities for 2020; the only name from India". The Week. 22 October 2019. Archived from the original on 6 November 2019. Retrieved 6 November 2019. "Kochi seventh in top 10 cities to visit in 2020: Lonely Planet". The Indian Express. 23 October 2019. Archived from the original on 25 October 2019. Retrieved 6 November 2019. "Condé Nast Traveller rates Kochi one of the best places to go in Asia in 2024; Here's why". www.onmanorama.com. Retrieved 17 November 2023. "Facts about India" (PDF). Kochi Municipal Corporation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 December 2009. Retrieved 9 January 2010. "Fort And Harbour". Cghearth.com. Archived from the original on 28 August 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. "C.Ramachandra Menon vs State Of Kerala on 7 February, 1990". indiankanoon.org. Archived from the original on 21 July 2017. "History of Ernakulam". Ernakulam Portal. National Informatics Centre. Archived from the original on 15 November 2007. Retrieved 23 May 2006. "History of Kochi Rajas". Centre For Heritage Studies. Archived from the original on 14 February 2009. Retrieved 12 March 2009. Ma Huan: Ying Yai Sheng Lan (1970). The Overall Survey of the Ocean's Shores. translated by J. V. G. Mills. Hakluyt Society, White Lotus Press. ISBN 974-8496-78-3. "Accounts of Nicolo de' Conti (ca. 1395–1469)". Niccolò di Conti. win.tue.nl. Archived from the original on 21 February 2013. Retrieved 23 May 2006. A Survey of Kerala History, A. Sreedhara Menon, DC Books, Kottayam (2007) Sen, Tansen (2016). "The Impact of Zheng He's Expeditions on Indian Ocean Interactions". Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies. 79 (3): 616–617. doi:10.1017/S0041977X16001038.. C. M. Dinesh Mani, Mayor(2000–2005). "Cochin" (PDF). Cochin (A Monograph). Corporation of Kochi. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 July 2011. Retrieved 11 October 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) The Portuguese, Indian Ocean and European Bridgeheads 1500–1800. Festschrift in Honour of Prof. K. S. Mathew (2001). Edited by: Pius Malekandathil and T. Jamal Mohammed. Fundacoa Oriente. Institute for Research in Social Sciences and Humanities of MESHAR (Kerala) DC Books, Kottayam (2007), A. Sreedhara Menon, A Survey of Kerala History "Early Voyages to the Far East". University of Calgary. Archived from the original on 1 March 2011. Retrieved 9 March 2011. Logan, William (2010). Malabar Manual (Volume-I). New Delhi: Asian Educational Services. pp. 631–666. ISBN 9788120604476. "St. Francis Church in Ernakulam". Department of Tourism, Kerala. Archived from the original on 19 January 2018. Retrieved 19 January 2018. "Kochi 'Queen Of Arabian Sea'". National Informatics Centre. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017. Retrieved 8 January 2018. KP Padmanabha Menon. (1914). Kochi Rajyacharithram. "Chronological List of Central Acts (Updated through 17-10-2014)". Lawmin.nic.in. Archived from the original on 7 January 2018. Retrieved 7 August 2016. Lewis McIver, G. Stokes (1883). Imperial Census of 1881 Operations and Results in the Presidency of Madras ((Vol II) ed.). Madras: E.Keys at the Government Press. p. 444. Archived from the original on 27 March 2023. Retrieved 5 December 2020. Presidency, Madras (India (1915). Madras District Gazetteers, Statistical Appendix For Malabar District (Vol.2 ed.). Madras: The Superintendent, Government Press. p. 20. Archived from the original on 27 March 2023. Retrieved 2 December 2020. Frowde, Henry (1908–1909). Imperial Gazetteer of India (New ed.). Oxford: Clarendon Press. Archived from the original on 16 December 2008. Retrieved 2 December 2020. Sir Arthur Lawley's Photo Album, Empire and Commonwealth Museum The Fourth Tour of His Excellency Sir Arthur Lawley to Cochin and Travancore – 25 January to 14 February 1907. Madras Government Press. Letter from Lord Wenlock to his wife Constance, 29 January 1907. Hull University. Forbes Adam Archive. Sir Arthur Lawley, Eloquent Knight Errant, Chapter 5. Ruler of the Raj. Lady Lawley Cottage (Western Australian Red Cross) 2008 iBooks "History". National Informatics Centre. Archived from the original on 1 August 2017. Retrieved 15 January 2018. "Cochin Harbour and Willingdon Island". Official website of Ernakulam District. Government of Kerala. Archived from the original on 7 November 2006. Retrieved 21 August 2006. Plunkett, R., Cannon, T., Davis, P., Greenway, P. & Harding (2001). Lonely Planet South India. Lonely Planet. ISBN 1-86450-161-8.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Statistical data". Govt. of Kerala. Archived from the original on 28 May 2006. Retrieved 22 August 2006. "Cochin City Profile". Kochi Municipal Corporation. Archived from the original on 3 March 2018. Retrieved 15 January 2018. "Kochi City Development Plan" (PDF). Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 August 2016. Retrieved 19 January 2018. "Govt of Kerala, CDP Kochi". Archived from the original on 12 April 2010. Retrieved 21 January 2018. "Metro status for Kochi soon". Archived from the original on 26 April 2013. Retrieved 12 February 2013. "Kochi forward for Metro status". The New Indian Express. Archived from the original on 18 April 2015. Retrieved 5 April 2015. "Metro status eludes Kochi as government drags its feet". The Hindu. 13 April 2013. Archived from the original on 14 April 2013. "Mangalavanam Bird Sanctuary". Kerala Tourism Development Corporation. Archived from the original on 10 January 2018. Retrieved 10 January 2018. "Growth response of phytoplankton exposed to industrial effluents in River Periyar" (PDF). CUSAT. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 January 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "West Kochi water project to be commissioned tomorrow". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 3 March 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "Extremes of Temperature & Rainfall for Indian Stations (Up to 2012)" (PDF). India Meteorological Department. December 2016. p. M107. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 February 2020. Retrieved 29 February 2020. "Station: Cochin (N.A.S) Climatological Table 1981–2010" (PDF). Climatological Normals 1981–2010. India Meteorological Department. January 2015. pp. 201–202. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 February 2020. Retrieved 29 February 2020. "Climate and monthly weather forecast Kochi (Cochin), India". Weather Atlas. Archived from the original on 16 June 2022. Retrieved 16 June 2022. "Kochi Municipal Corporation". Archived from the original on 30 September 2022. Retrieved 3 August 2022. "Kochi Municipal Corporation, Division Map" (PDF). Kochi Municipal Corporation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 November 2010. Retrieved 3 November 2010. "Zonal Office". Kochi Municipal Corporation. Archived from the original on 11 January 2018. Retrieved 11 January 2018. "Private firm allowed to draw Periyar water". The Hindu. 9 September 2003. Archived from the original on 1 October 2007. Retrieved 22 August 2006. "About". Greater Cochin Development Authority. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 11 January 2018. "Organisational chart". Kochi City Police. Archived from the original on 24 August 2006. Retrieved 22 August 2006. Radhakrishnan, S. Anil (28 October 2011). "Alarming crime rate in Kochi". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 31 October 2011. "Kochi city police 'set record straight'". The Hindu. 30 October 2011. Archived from the original on 18 May 2014. "Assembly Constituencies – Corresponding Districts and Parliamentary Constituencies" (PDF). Kerala. Election Commission of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 October 2008. Retrieved 19 October 2008. "PRS Legislative Research – Find Your MP". Archived from the original on 24 August 2022. Retrieved 24 August 2022. "SEBI opens office in Kochi". The Hindu Business Line. 29 May 2013. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 5 April 2015. George Joseph (10 June 2005). "Check out how Kochi is shining!". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 28 April 2006. Retrieved 6 January 2006. "Developing metro and quaint environs". Kerala Tourism Development Corporation. India. Archived from the original on 9 July 2017. Retrieved 24 July 2017. "Rs.620-crore rise in revenue collection in Ernakulam district". The Hindu. 20 January 2009. Archived from the original on 28 February 2009. Retrieved 1 March 2009. "Government starves the golden goose". The Hindu. 23 December 2012. Archived from the original on 26 January 2013. Retrieved 21 January 2013. "Archived copy" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 April 2021. Retrieved 19 December 2020.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) "Doing Business in India 2009" (PDF). World Bank. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 October 2010. Retrieved 8 June 2010. Director, Kerala Tourism. "Kerala, Gods Own Country: Where Business Blooms". cbcglobelink.org. Archived from the original on 17 June 2006. Retrieved 7 February 2006. "Status of Human Health at the Eloor Industrial Belt, Kerala- India". Greenpeace. Archived from the original on 12 January 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018. Money Control. "Fertilisers and Chemicals Travancore". Money Control. Archived from the original on 29 January 2013. Retrieved 2 October 2010. "Petronet LNG Kochi terminal's operating capacity goes up". Business Line. 18 May 2017. Archived from the original on 3 March 2018. Retrieved 18 May 2017. "Tanker lorry strike at Irumpanam IOC plant ends". Mathrubhumi. Archived from the original on 11 January 2018. Retrieved 11 January 2018. "LPG truck employees in Kerala call off scheduled strike". Malayala Manorama. Archived from the original on 11 January 2018. Retrieved 11 January 2018. "BPCL to set up LPG pipeline from Kochi to Coimbatore". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 21 March 2014. Retrieved 11 January 2018. "Cochin Port Trust, the Cruise Destination". Cochin Port Trust. Archived from the original on 17 April 2010. Retrieved 3 November 2010. Joseph, George (19 April 2010). "Kochi marina set to start operations". Business Standard India. Business-standard.com. Archived from the original on 8 July 2011. Retrieved 14 October 2010. "Southern Naval Command". Bharat Rakshak. Archived from the original on 25 August 2006. Retrieved 29 August 2006. In terms of deadweight tonnage of ships built "List of ship building centres in India". Shipping Ministry of India. Archived from the original on 15 September 2005. Retrieved 23 May 2006. "Cochin – The Leading Cruise Destination In India". Cochin Port Trust. 30 June 2007. Archived from the original on 14 January 2012. Retrieved 29 August 2007. "Kochi terminal handed over to Dubai Ports International". The Hindu. 2 April 2005. Archived from the original on 18 May 2006. Retrieved 23 May 2006. "Vallarpadam phase I by early 2009: DP World". The Hindu. 2 April 2005. Archived from the original on 30 June 2006. Retrieved 23 May 2006. "Vallarpadam ICTT: Set to make Kochi a key hub". The Hindu Business Line. 27 October 2008. Archived from the original on 10 December 2008. Retrieved 14 November 2008. "Statement by the Government of India" (PDF). Press Information Bureau, Govt of India. 27 October 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 February 2009. Retrieved 14 November 2008. "Cochin Port Trust" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 July 2011. "SmartCity Kochi inaugurated". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 3 March 2018. Retrieved 11 January 2018. "HDIL says it will not exit Cybercity project in Kochi". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 20 September 2013. Retrieved 11 January 2018. "Kochi, the next electronic city". The New Indian Express. 31 August 2010. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 11 October 2010. "Kochi, the next electronic city". NeST Electronics City in Kochi soon. The Hindu Business Line. 9 July 2010. Archived from the original on 16 December 2010. Retrieved 11 October 2010. "CIAL presents 'Aerotropolis' roadmap". The Hindu. 5 June 2008. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. Retrieved 28 February 2009. "Kochi airport presents 'Aerotropolis' roadmap". The Hindu. 5 June 2008. Archived from the original on 3 March 2009. Retrieved 28 February 2009. "The Official Website of Cochin International Airport". Cochin-airport.in. Archived from the original on 26 March 2010. Retrieved 14 October 2010. "A novel venture in the history of Indian Aviation". Cochin International Airport. Archived from the original on 23 May 2006. Retrieved 23 May 2006. "CIAL Technical Information". Airports Authority of India. Archived from the original on 20 July 2011. Retrieved 13 October 2010. "CIAL to enhance solar power generation". The New Indian Express. Archived from the original on 19 January 2018. Retrieved 19 January 2018. "Cial hopeful of crossing the 1-crore passenger milestone". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 29 May 2018. Retrieved 19 January 2018. "NS&EW Corridor Map". National Highway Authority of India. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 11 January 2018. "NS&EW Corridor Chainage Chart". National Highway Authority of India. Archived from the original on 1 July 2017. Retrieved 11 January 2018. "Kochi Metro extension decongests traffic, brings much-needed breather to city roads". The New Indian Express. Archived from the original on 19 January 2018. Retrieved 19 January 2018. "NS&EW Corridor Map". National Highway Authority of India. Archived from the original on 27 July 2011. Retrieved 24 January 2011. "NS&EW Corridor Chainage Chart". National Highway Authority of India. Archived from the original on 20 August 2010. Retrieved 24 January 2011. "A mammoth task achieved". The Hindu. 11 February 2011. Archived from the original on 9 November 2012. Retrieved 22 March 2011. "State Highways in Kerala". Archived from the original on 1 December 2010. Retrieved 17 November 2010. "Ring roads for Kochi city". MyDreamHouse.in. 17 February 2012. Archived from the original on 26 April 2013. Retrieved 12 November 2012. "Vyttila Mobility Hub". Archived from the original on 2 March 2011. Retrieved 3 March 2018. "Kochi Municipal Corporation – Urban Knowledge Base" (PDF). Kochi Municipal Corporation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 January 2011. Retrieved 25 October 2010. "Ernakulam Junction (South)/ERS Railway Station – Today's Train Arrival Timings – All Trains – India Rail Info – Database of Indian Railways Trains & Stations". India Rail Info. 19 June 2010. Archived from the original on 13 July 2011. Retrieved 14 October 2010. "Cochin State Railways". Irfca.org. Archived from the original on 20 January 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. "More funds for metro rail; sanction yet to be granted". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 5 August 2011. "Metro Stations". Kochi Metro Rail Ltd. Archived from the original on 28 March 2012. Retrieved 24 February 2012. "Kochi metro inauguration in pictures". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 3 March 2018. "Trade with India—major ports in India". National Informatics Centre. Archived from the original on 15 December 2006. Retrieved 23 May 2006. Gopal, Madan (1990). K.S. Gautam (ed.). India through the ages. Publication Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India. p. 177. "Ernakulam-West Kochi circular ferry services from tomorrow". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 12 January 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "Census of India, 2011, Religion PCA". Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner, India. Archived from the original on 14 December 2019. Retrieved 20 September 2020. "Jain Temple turns 100". The Hindu. 25 November 2004. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. Retrieved 1 March 2011. "The Punjabi part of Kochi". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 15 June 2002. Retrieved 3 June 2002. "Liveability Index 2011, The Best Cities in India" (PDF). IFC. 12 December 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 April 2013. Retrieved 11 July 2012. "City Development Plan—Kochi" (PDF). Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 May 2008. Retrieved 20 March 2008. "TABLE-1.6" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 June 2011. Retrieved 14 October 2010. "IPC crime rate in Mega Cities: Table Table-2 (A), page-44" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 June 2011. Retrieved 9 March 2011. "Crime rate high in Kochi". Metrovaartha.com. 29 March 2010. Archived from the original on 14 July 2011. Retrieved 14 October 2010. "Kochi is safest in Kerala for women". AsianAge. 9 October 2012. Archived from the original on 18 February 2017. Retrieved 21 January 2013. "Liveability Index 2011, The Best Cities In India" (PDF). CII/Institute of Competitiveness. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 April 2013. Retrieved 11 July 2012. "Top 10 affluent Indian cities ranked". Nielsen Company. Archived from the original on 14 July 2011. Retrieved 4 November 2010. "Only 98 cities instead of 100 announced: All questions answered about the smart cities project – Firstpost". www.firstpost.com. 28 August 2015. Archived from the original on 19 January 2017. T S Sudhir (29 April 2006). "Kochi's 'mini-India'". NDTV. Archived from the original on 13 September 2023. Retrieved 23 May 2006. "Konkani Akademi Library". University of Chicago. Archived from the original on 25 July 2011. Retrieved 1 March 2011. "Konkanis in Kochi". The Hindu. 13 August 2009. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. Retrieved 1 March 2011. "Bengalis celebrate Durga Puja". The Hindu. 19 October 2007. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. Retrieved 1 March 2011. "From the land of Marathas". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 19 January 2018. Rajagopal, Shyama (25 July 2008). "Sikhs love peace-loving Kochi". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 14 December 2020. Retrieved 1 March 2011. "The Jews, Israel, and India". An Interview with Nathan Katz. Jerusalem Centre for public affairs. Archived from the original on 5 September 2006. Retrieved 17 May 2006. "Cochin celebration and carnival 2016". Mathrubhumi. Archived from the original on 2 January 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "Fast food overtakes the spice route". The Hindu. 28 November 2005. Archived from the original on 14 October 2007. Retrieved 23 May 2006.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Bradnock, Robert; Bradnock, Roma (2000). South India handbook. Footprint Travel Guides. p. 255. ISBN 978-1-900949-81-1. "Biggest shopping mall in India opens in Kochi". The New Indian Express. 10 March 2013. Archived from the original on 24 May 2013. "India's biggest shopping mall opens in Kochi". The Hindu. 11 March 2013. Archived from the original on 16 May 2013. "Kochi boasts of Asia's largest shopping mall". Deccan Chronicle. 10 March 2013. Archived from the original on 25 May 2013. "Kochi to get three more malls". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "4 Indian cities that will dominate culinary map of 2025". Archived from the original on 2 June 2021. Retrieved 30 May 2021. "Crowne Plaza Kochi". InterContinental Hotels Group. Archived from the original on 13 January 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "Kochi Marriott Hotel". Marriott International. Archived from the original on 30 June 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "Grand Hyatt Kochi Bolgatty". Hyatt. Archived from the original on 27 October 2020. Retrieved 29 October 2020. "Four Points by Sheraton Kochi Infopark". Marriott International. Archived from the original on 12 February 2019. Retrieved 11 February 2019. "Le Méridien Kochi". Marriott International. Archived from the original on 29 October 2020. Retrieved 29 October 2020. "Radisson Blu Kochi". Radisson Blu. Archived from the original on 13 January 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "Welcome to Holiday Inn Cochin". InterContinental Hotels Group. Archived from the original on 13 January 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "Ramada Resort Cochin". Wyndham Worldwide. Archived from the original on 4 November 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "ibis Kochi City Centre". Ibis. Archived from the original on 13 January 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "Taj Malabar Resort & Spa, Cochin". Taj Hotels Resorts and Palaces. Archived from the original on 30 October 2020. Retrieved 29 October 2020. "The Gateway Hotel Marine Drive Ernakulam". The Gateway Hotels and Resorts. Archived from the original on 24 June 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "Changampuzha Krishna Pillai – Biography". www.keralasahityaakademi.org. Archived from the original on 19 June 2017. Retrieved 15 January 2018. "History of ideas". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 6 November 2018. Retrieved 15 January 2018. "A house for a poet". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 15 January 2018. Retrieved 15 January 2018. "One for the road". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 28 March 2014. Retrieved 15 January 2018. "The Making of a Brotherhood: An anti-caste communal feast in Kerala and its relevance in current culture wars". The Indian Express. Archived from the original on 16 January 2018. Retrieved 15 January 2018. Sadasivan, S N (2000). A Social History of India. New Delhi: A P H Publishing Corporation. p. 551. ISBN 9788176481700. Archived from the original on 27 December 2016. "Football and Cricket—the Most Popular Games". Sports and Games in Kerala. Information and Public relations office of Kerala. Archived from the original on 28 April 2006. Retrieved 12 June 2006. "Nehru Stadium". cricInfo. Archived from the original on 30 March 2010. Retrieved 2 April 2010. "Liveability Index 2011 – The Best Cities in India" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 April 2013. Retrieved 11 July 2012. Sudha Nambudiri (19 April 2011). "Kochi, the new medical hub". Archived from the original on 26 May 2013. Retrieved 19 March 2013. "Kochi set to be hub of plush hospitals". News 18. 26 September 2011. Archived from the original on 12 January 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "Gift of life". The Hindu. 21 December 2004. Archived from the original on 8 November 2012. "Top Angioplasty Surgery Hospital In Kerala, India, Coronary Artery Bypass Surgery Asia". Archived from the original on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 5 April 2015. "Medical Trust Hospital". Archived from the original on 24 March 2015. Retrieved 5 April 2015. "Best IVF, Surrogacy and Infertility treatment clinic in India". Bourn hall IVF clinic. Archived from the original on 15 March 2015. Retrieved 5 April 2015. "Home palliative day care service launched". The Hindu. 7 August 2019. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 9 August 2019. "CBSE Schools in Ernakulam District". National Informatics Centre. Archived from the original on 4 July 2017. Retrieved 15 January 2018. "Good show by Kochi schools in ICSE exams". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 15 January 2018. "Kerala parents opt for home-schools for their children". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 15 January 2018. Retrieved 15 January 2018. "List of Schools in Ernakulam District" (PDF). Government of Kerala, Education Department. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 June 2011. Retrieved 24 November 2010. "Central Board of Secondary Education". Central Board of Secondary Education. Archived from the original on 22 November 2010. Retrieved 24 November 2010. "Locate Affiliated Schools". Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations. Archived from the original on 17 April 2011. Retrieved 23 November 2010. "List of Schools in Ernakulam District" (PDF). Government of Kerala, Education Department. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 June 2011. Retrieved 24 November 2010. "NIO at a Glance". National Institute of Oceanography. Archived from the original on 19 August 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "NUALS – An Overview". National University of Advanced Legal Studies. Archived from the original on 7 September 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "About Us". Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute. Archived from the original on 13 January 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "IIM-K Satellite campus in Kochi". Thehindubusinessline.com. Archived from the original on 13 September 2023. Retrieved 12 November 2012. "Award for SCMS-Cochin". Thehindubusinessline.com. Archived from the original on 24 October 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. "XIME Bangalore to inaugurate Kochi campus in November 2012". Mbauniverse.com. 4 September 2012. Archived from the original on 8 October 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. "List of Institutions having B.Tech". Government of Kerala. Archived from the original on 13 January 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "Education Plus Thiruvananthapuram : In the name of law". The Hindu. 28 December 2004. Archived from the original on 20 August 2010. Retrieved 14 October 2010. "Centres". Archived from the original on 20 August 2011. Retrieved 23 April 2011. 8 "Journey home for relief centre inmates", The Hindu (20 February), 2011 "Keeping Kochi updated". The Hindu. 19 January 2004. Archived from the original on 10 August 2010. Retrieved 2 April 2011.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Accredited Organisations". KELSA. Archived from the original on 3 December 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. "List of Service Providers" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 January 2011. Retrieved 23 April 2011. "News » Childline Kochi unearths bonded Labor". Childlineindia.org.in. 22 September 2010. Archived from the original on 22 October 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. "Palluruthy". dbbangalore.org. 26 May 1974. Archived from the original on 24 November 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. "Don Bosco Sneha Bhavan, Street Children, Young at Risk, Welfare, Palluruthy, Kochi". Dbsnehabhavan.org. Archived from the original on 3 November 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. "Q & A with Sr. Fabiola Fabbri, bringing love to orphans in southern India". National Catholic Reporter. Archived from the original on 13 January 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "Indian Catholic's 'mobile bathroom' serves sick, abandoned". Catholic.org. 17 April 2006. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. "'Mobile bath' serves the sick and abandoned in southern Indian city". Thefreelibrary.com. 5 May 2006. Archived from the original on 22 June 2013. Retrieved 12 November 2012. "Keeping Kochi updated". The Hindu. 15 September 2003. Archived from the original on 7 May 2005. Retrieved 2 June 2006.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Online Radio " Vipindas.co.nr". Vipinmpd08.wordpress.com. Archived from the original on 27 February 2009. Retrieved 14 October 2010. "Club FM". Club FM. Archived from the original on 15 March 2011. Retrieved 7 March 2011. "Radio Mango Cochin". Archived from the original on 12 March 2011. Retrieved 7 March 2011. "RED FM Kochi". Kal Radio Limited. Archived from the original on 7 July 2011. Retrieved 7 March 2011. "Radio Mirchi Kochi Launches". Archived from the original on 19 April 2016. Retrieved 10 June 2016. Subin Mananthavady (30 April 2011). "Mollywood comes to Kochi". Passline Business Magazine. Archived from the original on 21 January 2013. Retrieved 21 January 2013. "Kochi takes centrestage in Mollywood". The Times of India. 5 January 2013. Archived from the original on 26 April 2013. Retrieved 21 January 2013. G. Krishnakumar (15 September 2006). "Filmmakers' hotspot". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 11 April 2013. Retrieved 19 February 2013. "Megamedia Films launches post-production facility in Kochi". Post Production Buyer's Guide. 15 December 2008. Archived from the original on 16 February 2013. Retrieved 21 January 2013. "Chithranjali unit coming to city". The New Indian Express. 6 March 2010. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 21 January 2013. "Chithranjali opens studio in Kochi". The Hindu. 7 March 2010. Archived from the original on 14 May 2010. Retrieved 21 January 2013. "Kochi sizzling onscreen". The New Indian Express. 29 January 2013. Archived from the original on 26 May 2013. Retrieved 3 February 2013. "Making the right move". Deccan Chronicle. 10 October 2011. Archived from the original on 20 January 2013. Retrieved 21 January 2013. "Kamal in Kochi". Malayala Manorama. 6 May 2012. Archived from the original on 31 May 2014. Retrieved 21 January 2013. "PRD Kerala". Communications. Public Relations Department, Kerala. Archived from the original on 25 April 2013. Retrieved 19 February 2013. Salikha, Adelaida. "Top FIVE Asian Clubs With Highest Social Media Followers, Up to October 2018 | Seasia.co". Good News from Southeast Asia. Archived from the original on 13 November 2021. Retrieved 17 September 2020. "Indian Football: Five most-followed clubs on social media". Khel Now. 18 June 2020. Archived from the original on 13 November 2021. Retrieved 10 September 2020. "First Soccer City in Kochi | Kochi Cochin News". Cochinsquare.com. 30 April 2010. Archived from the original on 18 September 2010. Retrieved 14 October 2010. "Metro Plus Kochi : A home for Josco". The Hindu. 29 April 2010. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. Retrieved 14 October 2010. "Kochi to host U-17 FIFA World Cup matches". Manoramaonline. Archived from the original on 8 April 2015. "Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium". 35th National Games. Archived from the original on 30 June 2017. Retrieved 11 April 2011. "Nehru Stadium". Hindustantimes.com. 11 April 2011. Archived from the original on 12 April 2011. Retrieved 11 April 2011. "New International Stadium Confirmed To Come In Ernakulam (Cochin) – Cochin". Zimbio. Archived from the original on 23 March 2010. Retrieved 14 October 2010. "Development should go beyond city limits". The Hindu. 26 March 2012. Archived from the original on 4 August 2012. "Real Madrid plan to open football school in Kerala- Football- IBNLive". Ibnlive.in.com. 30 March 2012. Archived from the original on 2 May 2012. Retrieved 12 November 2012. "Swimming pool complex". Rajiv Gandhi Sports Centre. Archived from the original on 1 August 2010. Retrieved 12 October 2010. "Kochi Golf Club and Golf Course, Bolgatty". Cochin Golf Club Society. Archived from the original on 8 February 2011. Retrieved 24 October 2010. "18-Hole Golf Course To Be Opened Next Year". The Hindu. 5 December 2011. Archived from the original on 7 December 2011. "Cochin Golf Cup". The Hindu. 15 March 2009. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. Retrieved 25 October 2010. "Kerala Yachting Association, Kochi". Kerala Yachting Association. Archived from the original on 23 September 2010. Retrieved 12 October 2010. "Cochin Yacht Club". Cochin Yacht Club. Archived from the original on 13 February 2010. Retrieved 12 October 2010. "Kerala Blasters FC – Official Website". Retrieved 16 September 2023. "Kochi Blue Spikers". www.kochibluespikers.com. Retrieved 16 September 2023. Aravind, V. S. (11 December 2022). "Akhil Rabindra wins Drivers Championship in inaugural Indian Racing League". Sportstar. Retrieved 16 September 2023. "Golden Threads Football Club – Professional Football Club From Kerala". goldenthreadsfc.com. Retrieved 16 September 2023. "Organisation of Southern Naval Command, Kochi". Indian Navy. Archived from the original on 9 July 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "INS Grauda (Aviation Establishment)". Indian Navy. Archived from the original on 12 January 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "Navy Day celebrations". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 3 March 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "Navy Week celebration in Kochi from November 28". The New Indian Express. Archived from the original on 13 January 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018. "Welcome to Cochin Shipyard : ISO 9001 Certified Shipyard of the Millenium". Cochinshipyard.com. Archived from the original on 14 September 2013. Retrieved 15 August 2013. "Kochi, India – Norfolk Sister City Association". Norfolk Sister City Association. Archived from the original on 20 December 2017. Retrieved 13 January 2018. "Kochi, Menlo Park sign agreement on cultural and economic exchange". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 3 March 2018. Retrieved 13 January 2018. "Association with Pyatigorsk". Centre for Heritage, Environment and Development. Archived from the original on 26 October 2016. Retrieved 13 January 2018. Ma Huan: Ying Yai Sheng Lan, The Overall Survey of the Ocean's Shores, translated by J.V.G. Mills, 1970 Hakluyt Society, reprint 1997, White Lotus Press, ISBN 974-8496-78-3. Plunkett, R, Cannon, T, Davis, P, Greenway, P & Harding, P (2001), Lonely Planet South India, Lonely Planet, ISBN 1-86450-161-8. Manorama Yearbook 2003 (English Edition), ISBN 81-900461-8-7. Robert Charles Bristow. Cochin Saga, Paico Pub. House; 2d ed. edition (1967), OCLC 1659055. Unemployment in Kerala at the turn of the 20th century Insights from the CDS gulf migration studies by K. C. Zachariah, S. Irudaya Rajan. Kochi Rajyacharithram by KP Padmanabha Menon. P (1914) "Akhilavijnanakosam". Malayalam Encyclopedia. D C Books Multimedia Series. GeoHack - Kochi Wikimedia Commons has media related to Kochi, Kerala. Kochi at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Official website (Government of Kerala) Official website (Government of India) The Story of India: South India, Cochin, BBC Portal:  India