Peterborough (/ˈpiːtərbərə, -bʌrə/ PEE-tər-bər-ə, -⁠burr-ə) is a cathedral city in the City of Peterborough district of Cambridgeshire, England. The city and its surroundings, the Soke of Peterborough, had an independent county council between 1889 and 1965. It formed part of the short-lived Huntingdon and Peterborough between 1965 and 1974. Before 1889, it was a liberty of Northamptonshire. The city is 76 mi (122 km) north of London, on the River Nene which flows into the North Sea 30 mi (48 km) to the north-east. The local topography is flat, and in some places, the land lies below sea level, for example in parts of the Fens to the east and to the south of Peterborough. Human settlement in the area began before the Bronze Age, as can be seen at the Flag Fen archaeological site to the east of the current city centre, also with evidence of Roman occupation. The Anglo-Saxon period saw the establishment of a monastery, Medeshamstede, which later became Peterborough Cathedral. In 2020 the built-up area subdivision had an estimated population of 179,349. In 2021 the Unitary Authority area had a population of 215,671. The population grew rapidly after the railways along with industry, the town became known for brick manufacture, arrived in the 19th century. After the Second World War, industrial employment fell and growth was limited until its designation as a New Town in the 1960s. The town's main economic sectors are financial services and distribution. The original name of the town was Medeshamstede. The town's name changed to Burgh from the late tenth century, possibly after Abbot Kenulf had built a defensive wall around the abbey which was dedicated to Saint Peter; eventually this developed into the form Peterborough. In the 12th century, the town was also known as Gildenburgh, which is found in the Peterborough version of the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle (see Peterborough Chronicle below) and a history of the abbey by the monk Hugh Candidus. The town does not appear to have been a borough until at least the 12th century. Peterborough and its surrounding areas around have been inhabited for thousands of years because it is where permanently drained land in The Fens is created by the River Nene. Remains of Iron Age settlement and what is thought to be religious activity can be seen at the Flag Fen archaeological site to the east of the city centre. The Romans established a fortified garrison town at Durobrivae on Ermine Street, five miles (8.0 km) to the west in Water Newton, around the middle of the 1st century AD. Durobrivae's earliest appearance among surviving records is in the Antonine Itinerary of the late 2nd century. There was also a large 1st century Roman fort at Longthorpe, designed to house half a legion, or about 3,000 soldiers; it may have been established as early as around AD 44–48. Peterborough was an important area of ceramic production in the Roman period, providing Nene Valley Ware that was traded as far away as Cornwall and the Antonine Wall, Caledonia. Peterborough is shown by its original name Medeshamstede to have possibly been an Anglian settlement before AD 655, when Sexwulf founded a monastery on land granted to him for that purpose by Peada of Mercia, who converted to Christianity and was briefly ruler of the smaller Middle Angles sub-group. His brother Wulfhere murdered his own sons, similarly converted and then finished the monastery by way of atonement. Hereward the Wake rampaged through the town in 1069 or 1070. Outraged, Abbot Turold erected a fort or castle, which, from his name, was called Mont Turold: this mound, or hill, is on the outside of the deanery garden, now called Tout Hill, although in 1848 Tot-hill or Toot Hill. The abbey church was rebuilt and greatly enlarged in the 12th century. The Peterborough Chronicle, a version of the Anglo-Saxon one, contains unique information about the history of England after the Norman conquest, written here by monks in the 12th century. This is the only known prose history in English between the conquest and the later 14th century. The burgesses received their first charter from "Abbot Robert" – probably Robert of Sutton (1262–1273). The place suffered materially in the war between King John and the confederate barons, many of whom took refuge in the monastery here and in Crowland Abbey, from which sanctuaries they were forced by the king's soldiers, who plundered the religious houses and carried off great treasures. The abbey church became one of Henry VIII's retained, more secular, cathedrals in 1541, having been assessed at the Dissolution as having revenue of £1,972.7s.0¾d per annum. When civil war broke out, Peterborough was divided between supporters of King Charles I and the Long Parliament. The city lay on the border of the Eastern Association of counties which sided with Parliament, and the war reached Peterborough in 1643 when soldiers arrived in the city to attack Royalist strongholds at Stamford and Crowland. The Royalist forces were defeated within a few weeks and retreated to Burghley House, where they were captured and sent to Cambridge. While the Parliamentary soldiers were in Peterborough, however, they ransacked the cathedral, destroying the Lady Chapel, chapter house, cloister, high altar and choir stalls, as well as mediaeval decoration and records. Housing and sanitary improvements were effected under the provisions of an Act of Parliament passed in 1790; and an Act was passed in 1839 to build a gaol to replace the two that previously stood. After the dissolution the dean and chapter, succeeded the abbot as lords of the manor. The municipal borough was incorporated in 1874 under the government of a mayor, six aldermen and eighteen councillors. Among the privileges claimed by the abbot as early as the 13th century was that of having a prison for felons taken in the Soke of Peterborough, a liberty within Northamptonshire. This afforded it administrative and judicial independence from the rest of the county, with it having a quarter sessions separate from the rest of Northamptonshire from 1349. In 1576 Bishop Edmund Scambler sold the lordship of the hundred of Nassaburgh, which was coextensive with the Soke, to Queen Elizabeth I, who gave it to Lord Burghley, and from that time until the 19th century he and his descendants, the Earls and Marquesses of Exeter, had a separate gaol for prisoners arrested in the Soke. The abbot formerly held four fairs, of which two, St. Peter's Fair, granted in 1189 and later held on the second Tuesday and Wednesday in July, and the Brigge Fair, granted in 1439 and later held on the first Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday in October, were purchased by the corporation from the Ecclesiastical Commissioners in 1876. The Bridge Fair, as it is now known, granted to the abbey by King Henry VI, survives. Prayers for the opening of the fair were once said at the morning service in the cathedral, followed by a civic proclamation and a sausage lunch at the town hall which still takes place. The mayor traditionally leads a procession from the town hall to the fair where the proclamation is read, asking all persons to "behave soberly and civilly, and to pay their just dues and demands according to the laws of the realm and the rights of the City of Peterborough". Railway lines began operating locally during the 1840s, but it was the 1850 opening of the Great Northern Railway's line from London to York that transformed Peterborough from a market town to an industrial centre. Lord Exeter had opposed the railway passing through Stamford, so Peterborough, situated between two main terminals at London and Doncaster, increasingly developed as a regional hub. Coupled with vast local clay deposits, the railway enabled large-scale brick-making and distribution to take place. The area was the UK's leading producer of bricks for much of the twentieth century. Brick-making had been a small seasonal craft since the early nineteenth century, but during the 1890s successful experiments at Fletton using the harder clays from a lower level had resulted in a much more efficient process. The market dominance during this period of the London Brick Company, founded by the prolific Scottish builder and architect John Cathles Hill, gave rise to some of the country's most well-known landmarks, all built using the ubiquitous Fletton Brick. Perkins Engines was established in Peterborough in 1932 by Frank Perkins, creator of the Perkins diesel engine. Thirty years later it employed more than a tenth of the population of Peterborough, mainly at Eastfield. Baker Perkins had relocated from London to Westwood, now the site of HM Prison Peterborough, in 1903, followed by Peter Brotherhood to Walton in 1906; both manufacturers of industrial machinery, they too became major employers in the city. British Sugar has moved its headquarters to Hampton from Woodston, the beet sugar factory, which opened there in 1926, was closed in 1991. The Norwich and Peterborough (N&P) was formed by the merger of the Norwich Building Society and the Peterborough Building Society in 1986. It was the ninth largest building society at the time of its merger into the Yorkshire Group in 2011. N&P continued to operate under its own brand administered at Lynch Wood until 2018. Prior to merger with the Midlands Co-op in 2013, Anglia Regional, the UK's fifth largest co-operative society, was also based in Peterborough, where it was established in 1876. The combined society began trading as Central England Co-operative in 2014. Designated a New Town in 1967, Peterborough Development Corporation was formed in partnership with the city and county councils to house London's overspill population in new townships sited around the existing urban area. There were to be four townships, one each at Bretton (originally to be called Milton, a hamlet in the Middle Ages), Orton, Paston/ Werrington and Castor. The last of these was never built, but a fourth, called Hampton, is now taking shape south of the city. It was decided that the city should have a major indoor shopping centre at its heart. Planning permission was received in late summer 1976 and Queensgate, containing over 90 stores and including parking for 2,300 cars, was opened by Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands in 1982. 34 miles (55 km) of urban roads were planned and a network of high-speed landscaped thoroughfares, known as parkways, was constructed. Peterborough's population grew by 45.4% between 1971 and 1991. New service-sector companies like Thomas Cook and Pearl Assurance were attracted to the city, ending the dominance of the manufacturing industry as employers. An urban regeneration company named Opportunity Peterborough, under the chairmanship of Lord Mawhinney, was set up by the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister in 2005 to oversee Peterborough's future development. Between 2006 and 2012 a £1 billion redevelopment of the city centre and surrounding areas was planned. The master plan provided guidelines on the physical shaping of the city centre over the next 15–20 years. Proposals are still progressing for the north of Westgate, the south bank and the station quarter, where Network Rail is preparing a major mixed use development. Whilst recognising that the reconfiguration of the relationship between the city and station was critical, English Heritage found the current plans for Westgate unconvincing and felt more thought should be given to the vitality of the historic core. With the city expanding, in July 2005 the council adopted a new statutory development plan. Its aim is to accommodate an additional 22,000 homes, 18,000 jobs and over 40,000 people living in Peterborough by 2020. The newly developing Hampton township will be completed, there will be a 1,500-home development at Stanground and a further 1,200-home development at Paston. In recent years Peterborough has undergone significant changes with numerous developments underway, most notably are Fletton Quays, a project to construct 350 apartments, various office spaces as well as a new home for Peterborough City Council with other projects within the development to include a Hilton Garden Inn hotel with a sky bar, a new passport office and various leisure, restaurant and retail opportunities. Other projects within the city include the extension to Queensgate Shopping Centre, The Great Northern Hotel and more recently plans to extend the Peterborough Railway Station and long stay car park to facilitate more office space in the city centre and further parking. In 2020 planning permission was granted for a new university, ARU Peterborough, which subsequently opened its doors in September 2022 on Bishops Road, a five-minute walk from the City Centre. It is an employment focused university run by Anglia Ruskin University with four faculties: Business, Innovation and Entrepreneurship; Creative and Digital Arts and Sciences; Agriculture, Environment and Sustainability; Health and Education. The new university took its first cohort of students in 2022, expecting to recruit up to 12,500 by 2028. ARU Peterborough is not expected to receive its degree awarding powers before 2030 when a review will take place to determine its future as part of Anglia Ruskin University or whether it should become its own entity. Figures plotting growth from 1995 to 2004, revealed that Peterborough had become the most successful economy among unitary authorities in the East of England. They also revealed that the city's economy had grown faster than the regional average and any other economy in the region. It has a strong economy in the environmental goods and services sector and has the largest cluster of environmental businesses in the UK. In 1994, Peterborough designated itself one of four environment cities in the UK and began working to become the country's acknowledged environment capital. Peterborough Environment City Trust (PECT), an independent charity, was set up at the same time to work towards this goal, delivering projects promoting healthier and sustainable living in the city. Until 2017, PECT organised a yearly 'Green Festival' centered around Cathedral Square, Peterborough, which also benefited local artists and arts organisations through attracting Arts Council funding grants aided by arts facilitator organisation Metal. During the summer of 2018 the last Green Festival was held at Nene Park, in 2019 Peterborough's community environmental projects attracted ministerial attention from the environment secretary Michael Gove. During the COVID-19 pandemic of 2020-21 Peterborough's culture and leisure umbrella charity, Vivacity ceased operating. The council and regional development agency have taken advice on regeneration issues from a number of internationally recognised experts, including Benjamin Barber (formerly an adviser to President Bill Clinton), Jan Gustav Strandenaes (United Nations adviser on environmental issues) and Patama Roorakwit (a Thai "community architect"). According to the 2001 census, the workplace population of 90,656 is divided into 60,118 people who live in Peterborough and 30,358 people who commute in. A further 13,161 residents commute out of the city to work. Earnings in Peterborough are lower than average. Median earnings for full-time workers were £11.93 per hour in 2014, less than the regional median for the East of England of £13.62 and the median hourly rate of £13.15 for Great Britain as a whole. As part of the government's M11 corridor, Peterborough is committed to creating 17,500 jobs with the population growing to 200,000 by 2020. Future employment will also be created through the plan for the city centre launched by the council in 2003. Predictions of the levels and types of employment created were published in 2005. These include 1,421 jobs created in retail; 1,067 created in a variety of leisure and cultural developments; 338 in three hotels; and a further 4,847 jobs created in offices and other workspaces. Recent relocations of large employers include both Tesco (1,070 employees) and Debenhams (850 employees) distribution centres. A further 2,500 jobs were to be created in the £140 million Gateway warehouse and distribution park. This was expected to compensate for the 6,000 job losses as a result of the decline in manufacturing, anticipated in a report cited by the cabinet member for economic growth and regeneration in 2006. With traditionally low levels of unemployment, Peterborough is a popular destination for workers and has seen significant growth through migration since the post-war period. The leader of the council said in August 2006 that he believed that 80% of the 65,000 people who had arrived in East Anglia from the states that joined the European Union in 2004 were living in Peterborough. To help cope with this influx, the council put forward plans to construct an average of 1,300 homes each year until 2021. Peterborough Trades Council, formed in 1898, is affiliated to the Trades Union Congress. Peterborough railway station is a principal stop on the East Coast Main Line, 45–50 minutes' journey time from central London, with high-speed intercity services from King's Cross to Edinburgh Waverley operated by the London North Eastern Railway at around a 20-minute frequency. It is the northern terminus of slower commuter services from Horsham via Gatwick Airport and central London operated by Govia Thameslink Railway. It is a major railway junction where a number of cross-country routes converge: East Midlands Railway operates through services between Norwich, Nottingham and Liverpool Lime Street that call at Peterborough, as well as trains on the line to Lincoln. CrossCountry provides connections west to Leicester and Birmingham, and east to Ely, Cambridge and Stansted Airport. Greater Anglia also runs trains to and from Ipswich via Soham. The River Nene, made navigable from the port at Wisbech to Northampton by 1761, passes through the city centre. The Nene Viaduct carries the railway over the river. It was built in 1847 by Sir William and Joseph Cubitt. William Cubitt was the chief engineer of Crystal Palace erected at Hyde Park in 1851. Apart from some minor repairs in 1910 and 1914 (the steel bands and cross braces around the fluted legs) the bridge remains as Cubitts built it. Now a Grade II* listed structure, it is the oldest surviving cast iron railway bridge in the UK. By the Town Bridge, the Customs House, built in the early eighteenth century, is a visible reminder of the city's past function as an inland port. The Environment Agency navigation starts at the junction with the Northampton arm of the Grand Union Canal and extends for 91 miles (146 km) ending at Bevis Hall just upstream of Wisbech. The tidal limit used to be Woodston Wharf until the Dog-in-a-Doublet lock was built five miles (8.0 km) downstream in 1937. The A1/A1(M) primary route (part of European route E15) broadly follows the path of the historic Great North Road from St Paul's Cathedral in the heart of London, passing Peterborough (Junction 17), and continuing north a further 335 miles (539 km) to central Edinburgh. In 1899 the British Electric Traction Company sought permission for a tramway joining the northern suburbs with the city centre. The system, which operated under the name Peterborough Electric Traction Company, opened in 1903 and was abandoned in favour of motor buses in 1930, when it was merged into the Eastern Counties Omnibus Company. Today, bus services in the city are operated by several companies including Stagecoach (formerly Cambus and Viscount) and Delaine Buses. Despite its large-scale growth, Peterborough has the fastest peak and off-peak travel times for a city of its size in the UK, due to the construction of the parkways. The Local Transport Plan anticipated expenditure totalling around £180 million for the period up to 2010 on major road schemes to accommodate development. The combination of rail connections to the Port of Felixstowe and to the East Coast Main Line as well as a road connection via the A1(M) has led to Peterborough being proposed as the site of a 334 acres (1.35 km2) rail-road logistics and distribution centre to be known as Magna Park. The Peterborough Millennium Green Wheel is a 50-mile (80 km) network of cycleways, footpaths and bridleways which provide safe, continuous routes around the city with radiating spokes connecting to the city centre. The project has also created a sculpture trail, which provides functional, landscape artworks along the Green Wheel route and a Living Landmarks project involving the local community in the creation of local landscape features such as mini woodlands, ponds and hedgerows. Another long-distance footpath, the Hereward Way, runs from Oakham in Rutland, through Peterborough, to East Harling in Norfolk. While cycling within the city received a boost during the COVID-19 pandemic with the introduction of new cycle lanes in busy streets, plans to connect the villages to the west of Peterborough with a new cycle track have been refused permission and some cycle lane decisions have been reversed in the city centre during easing of the corona virus lockdowns. The City of Peterborough local authority area has a population of 216,349 (2021). It is forecast to reach 230,000 in 2031 and 240,000 by around 2041. Peterborough's population growth was reportedly the second fastest of any British city over the ten years from 2004 to 2013, driven partly by immigration. According to the 2011 Census, 82.5% of Peterborough's residents categorised themselves as white, 2.8% of mixed ethnic groups, 11.7% Asian, 2.3% black and 0.8% other. Amongst the white population, the largest categories were indigenous groups, those being English/Welsh/Scottish/Northern Irish/British (70.9%), and other white (10.6%). Those of Pakistani ethnicity accounted for 6.6% of the population and those of Indian ethnicity 2.5.%. The largest black group were those of African ethnicity (1.4%). Peterborough is home to one of the largest concentrations of Italian immigrants in the UK. This is mainly as a result of labour recruitment in the 1950s by the London Brick Company in the southern Italian regions of Apulia and Campania. By 1960, approximately 3,000 Italian men were employed by London Brick, mostly at the Fletton works. In 1962, the Scalabrini Fathers, who first arrived in 1956, purchased an old school and converted it into a mission church named after the patron saint of workers Saint Joseph (San Giuseppe). By 1991, over 3,000 christenings of second-generation Italians had been carried out there. In 1996, it was estimated that the Italian community of Peterborough numbered 7,000, making it the third largest in the UK after London and Bedford. The 2011 Census recorded 1,179 residents born in Italy. In the late twentieth century the main source of immigration was from new Commonwealth countries. The 2011 Census showed that a total of 24,166 migrants moved to Peterborough between 2001 and 2011. The city has experienced significant immigration from the A8 countries that joined the European Union in 2004, and in 2011, 14,134 residents of the city were people born in Central and Eastern Europe. According to a report published by the police in 2007, recent migration had resulted in increased translation costs and a change in the nature of crime in the county, with an increase in drink-driving offences, knife crime and an international dimension added to activities such as running cannabis factories and human trafficking. The number of foreign nationals arrested in the north of the county rose from 894 in 2003, to 2,435 in 2006, but the report also said that "inappropriately negative" community perceptions about migrant workers often complicate routine incidents, raising tensions and turning them "critical". It also noted there was "little evidence that the increased numbers of migrant workers have caused significant or systematic problems in respect of community safety or cohesion". In 2007, Julie Spence, the then Chief Constable emphasised that the fact that the demographic profile of Cambridgeshire had changed dramatically from one where 95% of teenagers were white four years previously to one of the country's fastest growing diverse populations, and said it had a positive impact on development and jobs. In 2008, the BBC broadcast The Poles are Coming!, a controversial documentary on the impact of Polish migration to Peterborough by Tim Samuels, as part of its White Season. The number of languages in use is growing where previously few languages other than English were spoken. As of 2006[update], Peterborough offered classes in Italian, Urdu and Punjabi in its primary schools. Christianity has the largest following in Peterborough, in particular the Church of England, with a significant number of parish churches and a cathedral. 56.7% of Peterborough's residents classified themselves as Christian in the 2011 Census. Recent immigration to the city has also seen the Roman Catholic population increase substantially. Other denominations are also in evidence; the latest church to be constructed is a £7 million "superchurch," KingsGate, formerly Peterborough Community Church, which can seat up to 1,800 worshippers. In comparison with the rest of England, Peterborough has a lower proportion of Christians, Buddhists, Hindus, Jews and Sikhs. The city has a higher percentage of Muslims than England as a whole (9.4% compared to 5% nationally). The majority of Muslims reside in the Millfield, West Town and New England areas of the city, where two large mosques (including the Faidhan-e-Madina Mosque and Husaini Islamic Center-Peterborough) are based. Peterborough also has both Hindu (Bharat Hindu Samaj) and Sikh (Singh Sabha Gurdwara) temples in these areas. The Anglican Diocese of Peterborough covers roughly 1,200 square miles (3,100 km2), including the whole of Northamptonshire, Rutland and the Soke of Peterborough. The parts of the city that lie south of the river, which were historically in Huntingdonshire, fall within the Diocese of Ely, which covers the remainder of Cambridgeshire and western Norfolk. The current Bishop of Peterborough has been appointed Assistant Bishop in the Diocese of Ely, with pastoral care for these parishes delegated to her by the Bishop of Ely. The city falls wholly within the Roman Catholic Diocese of East Anglia (which has its seat at the Cathedral Church of Saint John the Baptist, Norwich) and is served by Saint Peter and All Souls Church, built in 1896 and decorated in the Gothic style. The Greek Orthodox Community of Saint Cyril, Patriarch of Jerusalem was established in 1991 under the Orthodox Archdiocese of Thyateira and Great Britain. Peterborough has one independent boarding school: The Peterborough School at Westwood House, founded in 1895. The school caters for girls and now boys up to the age of 18. Peterborough's state schools have recently undergone significant change. Five of the city's 15 secondary schools were closed in July 2007, to be demolished over the coming years. John Mansfield (now an adult learning centre), Hereward (formerly Eastholm, now City of Peterborough Academy, sponsored by the Greenwood Dale Foundation Trust) and Deacon's were replaced with the flagship Thomas Deacon Academy, designed by Lord Foster of Thames Bank which opened in September 2007. Queen Katharine Academy (previously The Voyager School), which has specialist media arts status, replaced Bretton Woods and Walton Community School. It is part of the Thomas Deacon Education Trust. The schools that remain have been extended and enlarged. Over £200 million was spent and the changes on-going to 2010. The King's School is one of seven schools established, or in some cases re-endowed and renamed, by King Henry VIII during the Dissolution of the Monasteries to pray for his soul. In 2006, 39.4% of Peterborough local education authority pupils attained five grades A* to C, including English and Mathematics, in the General Certificate of Secondary Education, lower than the national average of 45.8%. The city has two colleges of further and higher education, Peterborough College (established in 1946 as Peterborough Technical College) and City College Peterborough (known as Peterborough College of Adult Education until 2010). By 2004, Peterborough College attracted over 15,000 students each year from the UK and abroad and was ranked in the top five per cent of colleges in the UK. Greater Peterborough University Technical College is a new education facility set to open in September 2015. The city is currently without a university, after Loughborough University closed its Peterborough campus in 2003. Consequently, it became the second largest centre of population in the UK (after Swindon) without its own higher education institution. In 2006, however, Peterborough Regional College began talks with Anglia Ruskin University to develop a new university campus for the city. The college and the university completed the legal contracts for the creation of a new joint venture company in 2007, marking the culmination of legal negotiations and securing of funds required in order to build the new higher education centre. University Centre Peterborough opened to the first 850 students in 2009. The former public library on Broadway was funded by Scottish philanthropist Andrew Carnegie and opened in 1906; Carnegie was made first freeman of the city on the day of the opening ceremony. Peterborough enjoys a wide range of events including the annual East of England Show, Peterborough Festival and CAMRA beer festival, which takes place on the river embankment in late August. The yearly festivals have attracted arts funding and enabled further community projects within the city. Nationally published cartoonist John Elson, from Peterborough, has provided imagery for many of the events. The city acts as the central hub for the region's visual arts community, with the Peterborough Artists Open Studio organisation (PAOS), celebrating its 21st anniversary year as of 2021. A number of statues by the British sculptor Antony Gormley were re-installed in the city in 2018. Removed for repair works from their original setting on concrete pillars next to the rowing lake in Nene Park, they can now be seen on top of buildings surrounding Cathedral Square in the town centre. The Key Theatre, built in 1973, is situated on the embankment, next to the River Nene. The theatre aims to provide entertainment, enlightenment and education by reflecting the rich culture Peterborough has to offer. The programme is made up of home-grown productions, national touring shows, local community productions and one-off concerts. There is disabled access, an infrared hearing system for the deaf and hard of hearing and there are also regular signed performances. In 1937, the Odeon Cinema opened on Broadway, where it operated successfully for more than half a century. In 1991, the Odeon showed its last film to the public and was left to fall into a state of disrepair, until 1997, when a local entrepreneur purchased the building as part of a larger project, including a restaurant and art gallery. The Broadway, designed by Tim Foster Architects, was one of the largest theatres in the region and offered a selection of live entertainment, including music, comedy and films. In 2009, it was severely damaged by arsonists, resulting in closure when its insurers refused to pay the claim due to faulty fire detection systems. The Embassy Theatre, a large Art Deco building designed by David Evelyn Nye, also opened on Broadway in 1937. Nye was usually a cinema architect, and this was his only theatre. The Embassy was converted into a cinema in 1953, becoming the ABC and later the Cannon Cinema, before it was closed in 1989. Since 1996, the premises have been occupied by the Edwards bar chain. The John Clare Theatre within the new central library, again on Broadway, is home to the Peterborough Film Society. One of the region's leading venues, the Cresset in Bretton, provides a wide range of events for the residents of the city and beyond, including theatre, comedy, music and dance. Peterborough has a 13-screen Showcase Cinema, an ice rink and two indoor swimming pools open to the general public.[citation needed] A diverse range of restaurants can be found throughout the city, including Chinese, Indian, Thai and many Italian restaurants. Peterborough has recently[when?] been used as the setting in popular literature: A Short History of Tractors in Ukrainian by Marina Lewycka, A Spot of Bother by Mark Haddon and, the first in a projected series, Long Way Home, a debut novel by Eva Doran. Peterborough United Football Club, known as The Posh, has been the local football team since 1934. The ground is situated at London Road on the south bank of the River Nene. Peterborough United have a history of cup giant-killings. They set the record for the highest number of league goals (134, Terry Bly alone scoring 52) in the 1960–61 season, which was their first season in the Football League, in which they won the Fourth Division title. The club's highest finish position to date was tenth place in Division One, then the second tier of English football, in the 1992–93 season. Irish property developer Darragh MacAnthony was appointed chairman in 2006 and is now owner, having undertaken a lengthy purchase from Barry Fry who remains director of football, having also been manager of the club from 1996 to 2005. Peterborough also has a non-league club: Peterborough Sports who play in the National League North. As well as football, Peterborough has teams competing in rugby, cricket, hockey, ice hockey, rowing, athletics, American and Australian rules football. Although Cambridgeshire is not a first-class cricket county, Northamptonshire staged some home matches in the city between 1906 and 1974. Peterborough Town Cricket Club and the City of Peterborough Hockey Club compete at their shared ground in Westwood. After reforming in 2005, rugby union club Peterborough Lions RFC now compete in National League 3 Midlands. Meanwhile, the city's oldest rugby team, Peterborough RUFC, play at Second Drove (otherwise known as "Fortress Fengate"), and have struggled in recent seasons. Relegation in 2013–14 season, from Midlands 1 East, has been followed by a season in the lower-mid table of the Midlands 2 East (South). Peterborough City Rowing Club moved from its riverside setting to the current Thorpe Meadows location in 1983. The spring and summer regattas held there attract rowers and scullers from competing clubs all over the country. Every February the adjacent River Nene is host to the head of the river race, which again attracts hundreds of entries. Peterborough Athletic Club train and compete at the embankment athletics arena. In 2006, after 10 years, the Great Eastern Run returned to the racing calendar. Around 3,000 runners raced through the flat streets of Peterborough for the half-marathon, supported by thousands of spectators along the course. Peterborough Phantoms are the city's ice hockey team, playing in the NIHL at Planet Ice Peterborough, located on Mallard Way in Bretton. Motorcycle speedway is also a popular sport in Peterborough, with race meetings held at the East of England Showground. The team, known as the Peterborough Panthers, have operated regularly in the Elite League. The Showground hosts the annual British Motorcycle Federation Rally each May. In 2009, Peterborough hosted one of the first rounds of the Tour Series, a new series of televised town and city centre cycling races. As of 2015[update], the city has hosted a round of the Tour Series each year since, with the exception of 2013. In March 2017 the first bandy session in England for over a century was held in Peterborough, in the form of rink bandy. In 2018 Peterborough Bandy Club was founded. At the 2022 Women's Bandy World Championship Great Britain made its debut in the tournament, represented by a Peterborough team. There is a major radio transmitter at Morborne, approximately eight miles (13 km) west of Peterborough, for national FM radio (BBC Radios 1–4 and Classic FM) and BBC Radio Cambridgeshire. This facility includes a 154-metre (505-foot) high guyed radio mast which collapsed in 2004 after a fire and has since been re-built. Another transmission site at Gunthorpe in the north east of the city transmits AM/MW and local FM radio. The site is only 3 metres (9.8 feet) above sea level and has an 83-metre (272-foot) high active insulated guyed mast situated on it. Peterborough is covered by six local radio stations and one regional station, though only two community stations broadcast from the city. These are Salaam FM, catering for the local Muslim population, which started broadcasting on 106.2 MHz in 2016 and Peterborough Community Radio (PCR FM), a station formed as a result of a merger between former Internet stations Peterborough FM and Radio Peterborough, which started broadcasting on 103.2 MHz in 2017. Heart Cambridgeshire (now Heart East), the original independent local radio station launched as Hereward Radio in 1980 and becoming Heart Peterborough in 2009, still holds a large section of the market on 102.7 MHz but relocated to Cambridge in 2012, where it began sharing the localised programming (of mainly national output) with Heart Cambridge. Hereward's sister station, WGMS, was launched on the old 1332 kHz (225 meters) frequency in 1992; known as Classic Gold from 1994 to 2007, it is now part of Heart's sister Gold Radio network, but has no programming made in Peterborough. Connect Radio (from 1999 to 2010, known as Lite FM), was the city's second commercial station on 106.8;MHz, but is now broadcast partly from Kettering and partly from Southend. Connect Radio was again sold and rebranded as Smooth East Midlands on 1 October 2019. BBC Radio Cambridgeshire, the BBC local radio station, began broadcasting on 1 May 1982 on 95.7 MHz (and, originally, 1449 kHz) in the north of the county; it maintains a studio in Priestgate, having moved from Broadway in 2012. Now rebranded to Greatest Hits Radio formerly Kiss & Vibe 105 < > 108 is now available on 107.7 MHz. NOW Peterborough is the local DAB multiplex; BBC National DAB and the national commercial multiplex, Digital One, are also available in the city. Local news and television programmes is provided by BBC East and ITV Anglia. Television signals are received from the Sandy Heath TV transmitter. The digital switchover in the East of England took place in 2011. Shopping channel Ideal World is broadcast nationwide on Freeview from studios in Newark Road, Fengate. The Peterborough Telegraph (established 1948) is the city's newspaper, published on Thursdays and, until 2012, six days a week as the Evening Telegraph, with jobs, property, motors and entertainment supplements. The Telegraph is now owned by East Midlands Newspapers, part of Johnston Press of Edinburgh. Its website, Peterborough Today, is updated six days a week. The PT's sister paper, the Peterborough Citizen (1898), was a weekly paper delivered free to many homes in the city. The Peterborough Herald and Post (1989, a replacement for the Peterborough Standard, established 1872) ceased publication in 2008. The publisher Emap, which specialises in the production of magazines and the organisation of business events and conferences, traces its origins back to Peterborough in 1854. The 33rd Mayor of Peterborough, Sir Richard Winfrey JP, founder of what would become the East Midland Allied Press, was perhaps the last person to read the Riot Act in 1914. Peterborough has been used as a location for various television programmes and films. The 1982 BBC production of The Barchester Chronicles was filmed largely in and around Peterborough. In 1983 opening scenes for the 13th James Bond film, Octopussy, starring Sir Roger Moore, were filmed at Orton Mere. A music video for the song "BreakThru" by the band Queen was also shot on the preserved Nene Valley Railway in 1989. In 1995 Pierce Brosnan filmed train crash sequences for the 17th Bond film, GoldenEye, at the former sugar beet factory. A scene for the film The Da Vinci Code was filmed at Burghley House during five weeks' secret filming in 2006; and actor, Lee Marvin, found himself camping in Ferry Meadows during the filming of The Dirty Dozen: Next Mission in 1985. In October 2008 Hollywood returned to Wansford for the filming of the musical Nine, starring Penélope Cruz and Daniel Day-Lewis. The Cathedral Church of Saint Peter, Saint Paul and Saint Andrew, whose statues look down from the three high gables of the West Front, was founded as a monastery in AD 655 and re-built in its present form between 1118 and 1238. It has been the seat of the Bishop of Peterborough since the diocese was created in 1541, when the last abbot was made the first bishop and the abbot's house was converted into the episcopal palace. Peterborough Cathedral is one of the most intact large Norman buildings in England and is renowned for its imposing early English Gothic West Front which, with its three enormous arches, is without architectural precedent and with no direct successor. The cathedral has the distinction of having had two queens buried beneath its paving: Catherine of Aragon and Mary, Queen of Scots. The remains of Queen Mary were removed to Westminster Abbey by her son James I when he became King of England. The general layout of Peterborough is attributed to Martin de Vecti who, as abbot from 1133 to 1155, rebuilt the settlement on dry limestone to the west of the monastery, rather than the often-flooded marshlands to the east. Abbot Martin was responsible for laying out the market place and the wharf beside the river. Peterborough's 17th-century Guildhall was built in 1671 by John Lovin, who also restored the bishop's palace shortly after the restoration of King Charles II. It stands on columns, providing an open ground floor for the butter and poultry markets which used to be held there. The Market Place was renamed Cathedral Square and the adjacent Gates Memorial Fountain moved to Bishop's Road Gardens in 1963, when the (then weekly) market was transferred to the site of the old cattle market. Peterscourt on City Road was designed by Sir George Gilbert Scott in 1864, housing St. Peter's Teacher Training College for men until 1938. The building is mainly listed for the 18th century doorway, brought from the London Guildhall following war damage. Nearby Tout Hill, the site of a castle bailey, is a scheduled monument. The city has a large Victorian park containing formal gardens, children's play areas, an aviary, bowling green, tennis courts, pitch and putt course and tea rooms. The Park has been awarded the Green Flag Award, the national standard for parks and green spaces, by the Civic Trust. A Cross of Sacrifice was erected in Broadway cemetery by the Imperial War Graves Commission in the early 1920s. The Lido, a striking building with elements of art deco design, was opened in 1936 and is one of the few survivors of its type still in use. Peterborough Museum and Art Gallery, built in 1816, housed the city's first infirmary from 1857 to 1928. The museum has a collection of some 227,000 objects, including local archaeology and social history, from the products of the Roman pottery industry to Britain's oldest known murder victim; a collection of marine fossil remains from the Jurassic period of international importance; the manuscripts of John Clare, the "Northamptonshire Peasant Poet" as he was commonly known in his own time; and the Norman Cross collection of items made by French prisoners of war. These prisoners were kept at Norman Cross on the outskirts of Peterborough from 1797 to 1814, in what is believed to be the world's first purpose-built prisoner of war camp. The art collection contains an impressive variety of paintings, prints and drawings dating from the 1600s to the present day. Peterborough Museum also holds regular temporary exhibitions, weekend events and guided tours. Burghley House to the north of Peterborough, near Stamford, was built and mostly designed by Sir William Cecil, later 1st Baron Burghley, who was Lord High Treasurer to Queen Elizabeth I for most of her reign. The country house, with a park laid out by Lancelot 'Capability' Brown in the 18th century, is one of the principal examples of 16th-century English architecture. The estate, still home to his descendants, hosts the Burghley Horse Trials, an annual three-day event. Another Grade I listed building, Milton Hall near Castor, ancestral home of the Barons and later Earls Fitzwilliam, also dates from the same period. For two centuries following the restoration the city was a pocket borough of this family. The John Clare Cottage in the village of Helpston was purchased by the John Clare Trust in 2005. The cottage, home of John Clare from his birth in 1793 until 1832, has been restored using traditional building methods to create a resource where visitors can learn about the poet, his works and how rural people lived in the early 19th century. The John Clare Cottage and Thorney Heritage Museum form part of the Greater Fens Museum Partnership, along with Peterborough Museum and Flag Fen. Longthorpe Tower, a 14th-century three-storey tower and fortified manor house in the care of English Heritage, is situated about 2 mi (3.2 km) west of the city centre. It is a scheduled monument, and contains the finest and most complete set of domestic paintings of their period in northern Europe. Nearby Thorpe Hall is one of the few mansions built in the Commonwealth period. A maternity hospital from 1943 to 1970, it was acquired by the Sue Ryder Foundation in 1986 and is currently in use as a hospice. Flag Fen, the Bronze Age archaeological site, was discovered in 1982, when a team led by Dr Francis Pryor carried out a survey of dykes in the area. Probably religious, it comprises a large number of poles arranged in five long rows, connecting Whittlesey with Peterborough across the wet fenland. The museum exhibits many of the artefacts found, including what is believed to be the oldest wheel in Britain. An exposed section of the Roman road known as the Fen Causeway also crosses the site. The Nene Valley Railway, which is now a 7.5-mile (12.1 km) heritage railway, was one of the last passenger lines to fall under the Beeching Axe in 1966, although it remained open for freight traffic until 1972. In 1974, the former development corporation bought the line, which runs from the city centre to Yarwell Junction just west of Wansford via Orton Mere and the 500 acres (200 hectares) Ferry Meadows country park, and leased it to the Peterborough Railway Society. Railworld is a railway museum located beside Peterborough Nene Valley railway station. The Nene Park, which opened in 1978, covers a site 3.5 mi (5.6 km) long, from slightly west of Castor to the centre of Peterborough. The park has three lakes, one of which houses a watersports centre. Ferry Meadows, one of the major destinations and attractions signposted on the Green Wheel, occupies a large portion of Nene Park. Orton Mere provides access to the east of the park. Southey Wood, once included in the Royal Forest of Rockingham, is a mixed woodland maintained by the Forestry Commission between the villages of Upton and Ufford. Nearby, Castor Hanglands, Barnack Hills and Holes and Bedford Purlieus national nature reserves are each sites of special scientific interest. In 2002, the Hills and Holes, one of Natural England's 35 spotlight reserves, was designated a special area of conservation as part of the Natura 2000 network of sites throughout the European Union. Peterborough is the birthplace of many notable people, the astronomer George Alcock, one of the most successful visual discoverers of novas and comets; John Clare, from Helpston, the nineteenth century poet; artist, Christopher Perkins – brother of Frank; and Sir Henry Royce, 1st Baronet of Seaton, engineer and co-founder of Rolls-Royce. Physician, actor and author, "Sir" John Hill, credited with 76 separate works in the Dictionary of National Biography, the most valuable of which dealing with botany, is also said to have been born here. The socialist writer and illustrator, Frank Horrabin, who was born in the city, and was elected as the Labour Member of Parliament in 1929. The utilitarian philosopher, Dr Richard Cumberland, was 14th Lord Bishop of Peterborough from 1691 until his death in 1718; and Norfolk-born nurse and humanitarian, Edith Cavell, who received part of her education at Laurel Court in the Minster Precinct, is commemorated by a plaque in the cathedral and by the name of the hospital. A gravedigger called Old Scarlett, whose portrait can be seen above the west door of Peterborough Cathedral, is considered a folk hero. He died in 1594 at the age of 98, having spent much of his life as the sexton at Peterborough Cathedral; having buried two monarchs, he has also been suggested as the inspiration for the gravedigger in Shakespeare's Hamlet. Two prominent historical figures were born locally, Hereward the Wake, an outlaw who led resistance to the Norman Conquest and now lends his name to several places and businesses in the city; and St. John Payne, one of the group of prominent Catholics martyred between 1535 and 1679 and later designated the Forty Martyrs of England and Wales, who was beatified by Pope Leo XIII in 1886 and canonised with the other 39 by Pope Paul VI in 1970. Musicians include Sir Thomas Armstrong, organist, conductor and former principal of the Royal Academy of Music; Andy Bell, lead vocalist of the electronic pop duo Erasure; Barrie Forgie, leader of the BBC Big Band; Don Lusher, trombonist and former professor of the Royal College of Music and the Royal Marines School of Music; Paul Nicholas, actor and singer; Maxim Reality and Gizz Butt of The Prodigy and Aston Merrygold of Brit Award-winning pop group JLS. Comedian Ernie Wise lived on Thorpe Avenue for many years, next door to Canadian baritone and actor Edmund Hockridge. Jimmy Savile also lived in the city in the early 1990s. Other media personalities include actors Simon Bamford, known for the 'Hellraiser' franchise, Adrian Lyne, director of Fatal Attraction, Oscar Jacques, known for playing Tom Tupper in the CBBC Series M.I. High, Luke Pasqualino, known for his roles in Skins and The Musketeers; television presenter, Sarah Cawood, who grew up in Maxey; BBC Formula One presenter, Jake Humphrey; football journalist and Talksport radio presenter, Adrian Durham; and the biologist, author and broadcaster, Prof. Brian J. Ford, who attended the King's School and still lives in Eastrea near Whittlesey. PJ Ligouri, a YouTuber with over a million subscribers spent his childhood in Peterborough. Local businessman, Peter Boizot, founder of the Pizza Express restaurant chain and Deputy Lieutenant of Cambridgeshire, has supported the cultural and sporting life of Peterborough and received its highest accolade, the freedom of the city. The thalidomide victim Terry Wiles, subject of the 1979 film On Giant's Shoulders, was born in the city. In the sporting world, former Tottenham Hotspur and England footballer, David Bentley, was born in the city, as was Louis Smith, who at the 2008 games became Great Britain's first gymnast to win an individual Olympic medal in a century. Chelsea Football player, currently on loan at Luton Town footballer Isaiah Brown, was born in Peterborough, before joining Leicester City and later West Bromwich Albion, becoming the second youngest player to play in the Premier League. Harry Wells, a rugby union player for Leicester Tigers in Premiership Rugby, was born in Peterborough and attended The King's (The Cathedral) School.[citation needed] According to the Köppen classification the British Isles experience a maritime climate characterised by relatively cool summers and mild winters. Compared with other parts of the country, East Anglia is slightly warmer and sunnier in the summer and colder and frostier in the winter. Owing to its inland position, furthest from the landfall of most Atlantic depressions, Cambridgeshire is one of the driest counties in the UK, receiving, on average, around 600 mm (2.0 ft) of rain per year. The Met Office weather station at Wittering, within the unitary authority of Peterborough, recorded a maximum temperature of 36.7 °C (98.1 °F) on 25 July 2019. The lowest temperature in recent years was −13.4 °C (7.9 °F) during February 2012. East Anglia is most notable for being almost flat (it is mainly on a floodplain). During the Ice Age much of the region was covered by ice sheets and this has influenced the topography and nature of the soils. Much of Cambridgeshire is low-lying, in some places below present-day mean sea level. The lowest point on land is supposedly just to the south of the city at Holme Fen, which is 2.75 metres (9.0 feet) below sea level. The largest of the many settlements along the Fen edge, Peterborough has been called the Gateway to the Fens. Before they were drained the Fens were liable to periodic flooding so arable farming was limited to the higher areas of the Fen edge, with the rest of the Fenland dedicated to pastoral farming. In this way, the mediaeval and early modern Fens stood in contrast to the rest of southern England, which was primarily arable. Since the advent of modern drainage in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries the Fens have been radically transformed such that arable farming has almost entirely replaced pastoral. The unitary authority extends north west to the settlements of Wothorpe and Wittering and east beyond Thorney into the historic Isle of Ely and includes the Ortons, south of the River Nene. It borders Northamptonshire to the west, Lincolnshire to the north, and the Cambridgeshire districts of Fenland and Huntingdonshire to the south and east. The city centre is located at 52°35'N latitude 0°15'W longitude or Ordnance Survey national grid reference TL 185 998. Urban areas Townships are in bold type. In addition to the surrounding villages, Bretton, Orton Longueville and Orton Waterville are parished. The city council also works closely with Werrington neighbourhood association which operates on a similar basis to a parish council. Bretton – Dogsthorpe – Eastfield – Eastgate – Fengate – Fletton – Gunthorpe – The Hamptons – Longthorpe – Millfield – Netherton – Newark – New England – The Ortons – Parnwell – Paston – Ravensthorpe – Stanground – Walton – Werrington – West Town – Westwood – Woodston Rural areas Civil parishes do not cover the whole of England and mostly exist in rural hinterland. They are usually administered by parish councils which have various local responsibilities. Ailsworth – Bainton – Barnack – Borough Fen – Castor – Deeping Gate – Etton – Eye – Eye Green – Glinton – Helpston – Marholm – Maxey – Newborough – Northborough – Peakirk – Southorpe – St. Martin's Without – Sutton – Thorney – Thornhaugh – Ufford – Upton – Wansford – Wittering – Wothorpe These are further arranged into 24 electoral wards for the purposes of local government. 15 wards comprise the Peterborough constituency for elections to the House of Commons, while the remaining nine fall within the North West Cambridgeshire constituency. Peterborough lies in the middle of several distinct regional accent groups and as such has a hybrid of Fenland East Anglian, East Midland and London Estuary English features. The city falls just north of the A vowel isogloss and as such most native speakers will use the flat A, as found in cat, in words such as last. Yod-dropping is often heard from Peterborians, as in the rest of East Anglia, for example new as /nuː/. However, the large number of newcomers has impacted greatly on the English spoken by the younger generation. Common so-called Estuary English features such as L-vocalisation, T glottalisation and Th-fronting give today's Peterborough accent a definite south-eastern sound. Town twinning started in Europe after the Second World War. Its purpose was to promote friendship and greater understanding between the people of different European cities. A twinning link is a formal, long-term friendship agreement involving co-operation between two communities in different countries and endorsed by both local authorities. The two communities organise projects and activities addressing a range of issues and develop an understanding of historical, cultural, lifestyle similarities and differences. Peterborough is twinned with the following municipalities: Alcalá de Henares, Spain (birthplace of Queen Katherine, 1986) Ballarat, Australia (1947) Bourges, France (1957) Forlì, Italy (1981) Viersen, Germany (1981) Vinnytsia, Ukraine (1991) Bourges and Forlì are also twinned with each other. The city also has more informal friendship links with Foggia, Italy; Kwe Kwe, Zimbabwe; Pécs, Hungary; and all Peterboroughs around the world. The county of Cambridgeshire has been twinned with Kreis Viersen, Germany since 1983. Fossils of a hybodontiform fish Planohybodus were found in the Callovian (Middle Jurassic) deposits near Peterborough. The type species Planohybodus peterboroughensis was named after Peterborough in 2008. The following People, Military Units and Organisations and Groups have received the Freedom of the City of Peterborough. Peter Boizot: 2007 Wyndham Thomas, British architect, 19 September 2015 Louis Smith: 21 March 2017 James Fox: 21 March 2017 Lee Manning: 21 March 2017 Tommy Robson: 12 March 2020. RAF Wittering: 1983. 158 (Royal Anglian) Transport Regiment, Royal Logistic Corps (Volunteers): 25 July 2009. 115 (Peterborough) Squadron Air Training Corps: 28 April 2014. The Salvation Army (Peterborough Branch): 4 March 2015. The Royal British Legion (Peterborough Branch): 28 July 2021. Weather station is located 8.9 miles (14.3 km) from the Peterborough city centre. "population estimate for Peterborough local authority is 202,110 at mid 2017". Peterborough City Council. Archived from the original on 10 January 2019. Retrieved 14 December 2019. "Peterborough". City Population De. Retrieved 7 August 2022. "TS001 - Number of usual residents in households and communal establishments - Nomis - Official Census and Labour Market Statistics". www.nomisweb.co.uk. Retrieved 14 November 2022. Garmonsway (pp.183 & 198–99); Mellows, 1949 (p.66). As a modern local historian has put it, this was "a rhetorical term," used in these 12th century local histories "to contrast the riches of the late Anglo-Saxon monastery with the decrease in income caused by later impositions and the despoliation of the monastic treasure by Hereward," see Tebbs, Herbert F. Peterborough: A History (p.23) The Oleander Press, Cambridge, 1979. Originating in a new name for the abbey at Medeshamstede, and not the town, the name Burh was adopted for the abbey in the late 10th century, see Garmonsway (p. 117), also Mellows, William Thomas (ed.) The Chronicle of Hugh Candidus a Monk of Peterborough (pp.38 & 480) Oxford University Press, 1949, OCLC 314897451; the addition of Peter, the name of the abbey's principal titular saint, parallels development of e.g. the name Bury St. Edmunds and will have served to distinguish between the two places. Exemplified in mediaeval records in the Latinised form Burgus Sancti Petri, this gave rise to the modern name Peterborough. Parthey, Gustav and Pinder, Moritz (eds.) Itinerarivm Antonini Avgvsti et Hierosolymitanum: ex libris manu scriptis Iter Britanniarvm Archived 3 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine (Iter V: Item a Londinio Luguvalio ad vallum mpm clvi sic) Friederich Nicolaus, Berlin, 1848. See also Reynolds, Thomas Iter Britanniarum or that part of the itinerary of Antoninus which relates to Britain with a new comment J. Burges, Cambridge, 1799. They came, they saw Archived 5 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine Top 30 Roman sites (6), Channel 4 Television (Retrieved 20 July 2008). Historic England. "Monument No. 364099". Research records (formerly PastScape). Retrieved 20 July 2008. Fincham, Garrick (2004). Durobbrivae: A Roman Town Between Fen and Upland. Stroud: Tempus. pp. 102–08. ISBN 0-7524-3337-7. Samuel Lewis, ed. (1848). "Peterborough". A Topographical Dictionary of England. Institute of Historical Research. Archived from the original on 3 October 2012. Retrieved 11 May 2013. Historic England. "Touthill and site of castle bailey (1006846)". National Heritage List for England. Retrieved 11 May 2013. Scheduled Ancient Monument Tim Tatton-Brown and John Crook, The English Cathedral, New Holland (2002) ISBN 1-84330-120-2 Bodleian, MS. Laud 636 (E), see Ingram, James Henry (trans.) The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle J. M. Dent & Sons, London, 1823 (facsimile of the 1847 Everyman's Library ed. with additional readings from the translation of John Allen Giles Archived 29 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine from Project Gutenberg. Retrieved 19 September 2007). OCLC 645704. A modern edition, comparing the Peterborough version with such others as survive, is in Garmonsway, George Norman (trans.) The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle J. M. Dent & Sons, London, 1972 & 1975. OCLC 63489126. For the Peterborough Chronicle's unique information, see also Clark, Cecily (ed.) The Peterborough Chronicle 1070–1154 (pp. xxi–xxx) Oxford University Press, 1958. Bennett, Jack Arthur Walter Middle English Literature (ed. and completed by Douglas Gray), Oxford University Press, 1986. Chisholm, Hugh (ed.) Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.) vol.21 Cambridge University Press, 1911 (text in the public domain). Sweeting, Walter Debenham The Cathedral Church of Peterborough: A Description of its Fabric and a Brief History of the Episcopal See (pp.3–35) G. Bell & Sons, London, 1898 (facsimile of the 1926 reprint of the 2nd ed. of Bell's Cathedrals Archived 10 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine from Project Gutenberg. Retrieved 23 April 2007). Davies, Elizabeth et al. Peterborough: A Story of City and Country, People and Places Archived 8 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine (pp.18–19) Peterborough City Council and Pitkin Unichrome, 2001. King, Richard J. /Peterborough/1.html Handbook to the Cathedrals of England Archived 27 May 2021 at the Wayback Machine (p.77) John Murray, London, 1862. OCLC 27305221. Under the Municipal Corporations Act 1835 (5 & 6 Will. 4. c. 76), Charter of Incorporation dated 17 March 1874. Brandon, David; Knight, John (2001). Peterborough Past. Phillimore. ISBN 9781860771842. "At the bridge of Peterborough by the River Nene, as well in the county of Huntingdon as in the county of Northampton, on all sides of the bridge." Tebbs (p.125). Brooks, John [web.archive.org/web/20050513152328/http://www.towns.org.uk/market-towns-projects/Market-Towns-Food-and-Tourism-Guides~3.pdf Archived 25 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine A Flavour of the Welland] (p.12) The Welland Partnership and Jarrold Publishing, Norwich, 2004. Davies (pp.23–24). London Brick: 130 Years of History 1877–2007 Archived 29 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine Hanson Building Products, 2007. Baker, Anne Pimlott "Perkins, Francis Arthur (1889–1967)" Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004.doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/48099. Davies (pp.26–27). The History of British Sugar British Sugar (Retrieved 5 January 2008). Archived 16 January 2008 at the Wayback Machine "British Sugar". Archived from the original on 11 April 2008. Retrieved 5 January 2008. Members agree Yorkshire and N&P building societies merger Archived 9 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine BBC News, 22 August 2011. Brooks, Beth Central England Co-op born out of Midlands-Anglia merger Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine The Grocer, 16 January 2014. Under the New Towns Act 1965 (1965 cap.59) cf. The Peterborough Development Corporation (Transfer of Property and Dissolution) Order 1988 Archived 30 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine (SI 1988/1410); the designation was made on 21 July 1967, see "No. 44377". The London Gazette. 1 August 1967. p. 8515. Hancock, Tom Greater Peterborough Master Plan Peterborough Development Corporation, 1971. "Expansion: A billion reasons to be cheerful" Archived 14 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 2 March 2005. The Plan for Peterborough City Centre Archived 16 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine Peterborough City Council, East of England Development Agency and English Partnerships, February 2005. Urban Panel Review Paper for Peterborough (see archived copy in the UK Government Web Archive, archived on 10 January 2008) Historic Buildings and Monuments Commission for England and Commission for Architecture and the Built Environment, 16 March 2006. Peterborough Local Plan (First Replacement)[permanent dead link] Peterborough City Council, July 2005. Hastings, David and Swadkin, Claire Regional economic indicators with a focus on the differences in regional economic performance Archived 16 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine Economic and Labour Market Review, vol.1 no.2 (pp.52–64) February 2007. Peterborough Environment Cluster The UK Centre for Economic and Environmental Development (Retrieved 20 December 2007). Archived 18 November 2007 at the Wayback Machine Peterborough – the UK's Environment Capital Archived 16 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine Greater Peterborough Partnership (Retrieved 20 December 2007). "Greater Peterborough Partnership". Archived from the original on 12 April 2008. Retrieved 20 December 2007. About Us Archived 25 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine Peterborough Environment City Trust (Retrieved 30 May 2010). "FUTURE FLOODLANDS, PETERBOROUGH GREEN FESTIVAL". Idea1. 13 August 2016. Archived from the original on 19 October 2021. Retrieved 18 October 2021. Lamy, Joel (4 February 2019). "Environment Secretary Michael Gove praises Peterborough's eco-credentials on visit to community project". Peterborough Telegraph. Archived from the original on 20 October 2021. Retrieved 18 October 2021. BBC News (18 June 2020). "Peterborough leisure and libraries charity Vivacity shut by lockdown". bbc.co.uk. Archived from the original on 19 October 2021. Retrieved 18 October 2021. Salman, Saba "The civic engineer" Archived 31 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine, The Guardian, London and Manchester, 8 October 2008. Commuting Profile for Peterborough Archived 10 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine East of England Regional Assembly, 11 April 2005. "Earnings by residence (2014)". Office for National Statistics. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 1 May 2015. "Employment: Projects promise jobs to end worrying trend" Archived 22 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 23 March 2006. "Jobs: Boom Time" Archived 22 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 18 April 2005. "Business: Distribution park will bring 2,500 jobs to city" Archived 22 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 12 September 2006. "Limit plea: Fears over immigrants" Archived 22 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 23 August 2006. Housing Strategy Statement 2004-7 Peterborough City Council, July 2004. About PTUC Archived 30 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine Peterborough Trades Union Council (Retrieved 30 May 2015). Station Facilities for Peterborough Archived 18 July 2007 at the Wayback Machine National Rail Enquiries, 28 November 2006. Under the Nene Navigation Acts 1714 (12 Ann. c. 7), 1725 (11 Geo. 1. c. 19), 1756 (29 Geo. 2. c. 69) and 1794 (34 Geo. 3. c. 85). Gordon Bibble, Britanic's History Railway Buildings. An Oxford Gazetteer of Structures and Sites, (p.195), Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2003 ISBN 978-0198662471 Labrum, Edward A. Civil Engineering Heritage: Eastern and Central England Archived 20 June 2013 at the Wayback Machine (pp.78–79) Thomas Telford, London, 1994. See also Cossey, F. "Cast Iron Railway Bridge at Peterborough" in Hudson, Kenneth (ed.) Industrial Archaeology vol. 4 (pp.138–147) David & Charles, Newton Abbot, 1967. Brandon, David and Knight, John Peterborough Past: The City and The Soke (p.54) Phillimore & Co., Chichester, 2001. Navigations in the Anglian Region Archived 18 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine Public Relations Department, National Rivers Authority, Anglian Region (NRA Anglian 88) 1994. Brandon and Knight (pp.47–49). The Second Local Transport Plan Archived 23 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine Peterborough City Council, March 2006. Regional Freight Interchange[permanent dead link] Peterborough City Council (Retrieved 21 January 2012). "Cycle Guide: The Green Wheel" Archived 26 January 2008 at the Wayback Machine, The Guardian, London and Manchester, 3 March 2007. Noyes, T.B. The Hereward Way: A Walking Route Across the Fens Oakham to Thetford (also part of European route E2 Ely to Oakham) Archived 22 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine The Ramblers' Association (Peterborough Group), 1985 (Republished 2004 and published online 2007). Alexander, Rob (1 July 2021). "Plans for a new 'cycle highway' near Peterborough turned down". www.peterboroughtoday.co.uk/. Archived from the original on 19 October 2021. Retrieved 18 October 2021. Lamy, Joel (22 July 2021). "Mayor urged to intervene over 'misuse' of Peterborough cycling funds". www.peterboroughtoday.co.uk. Archived from the original on 19 October 2021. Retrieved 18 October 2021. "Mid-Year Population Estimates, UK, June 2021". Office for National Statistics. 21 December 2022. Retrieved 18 October 2023. CCC 2020-based population forecasts, Peterborough, 2020-2041 Enlarged to include former Gunthorpe CP, Longthorpe CP, Paston CP, Peterborough Without CP, Walton CP and Werrington CP from Peterborough RD in 1929. Because of the Second World War there was no census taken in 1941. However, following the passage into law (on 5 September) of the National Registration Act 1939, a population count was carried out on 29 September which was, in effect, a census. Aggregate of Peterborough MB, Peterborough RD and Barnack RD for illustration from 1965. A vision of Britain through time Archived 7 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine presents long-run change by redistricting historical statistics to modern units. Enlarged to include former Peterborough RD, Barnack RD, Thorney RD, Old Fletton UD and Orton Longueville CP from Norman Cross RD in 1974. "Census shows increase in population in the East of England" (PDF). Office for National Statistics. 16 July 2012. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 12 April 2015. "How the population changed in Peterborough, Census 2021 - ONS". Grinnell, Paul (19 January 2015). "Peterborough loses top spot as UK's fastest growing city in new report". Peterborough Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 July 2015. Retrieved 9 July 2015. "2011 Census: Ethnic group, local authorities in England and Wales". Office for National Statistics. 11 December 2012. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 12 April 2015. Colpi, Terry The Italian Factor: The Italian Community in Great Britain (p.149) Mainstream Publishing, Edinburgh, 1991. Colpi (p.235). Tubito, Mariacaterina; King, Russell (October 1996). Italians in Peterborough: between integration, encapsulation and return. Research Papers in Geography. University of Sussex. ISBN 1874465274. Archived from the original on 4 February 2015. Retrieved 21 April 2015. "2011 Census: QS203EW Country of birth (detailed), local authorities in England and Wales". Office for National Statistics. 11 December 2012. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 20 May 2015. Robinson, Nick (30 April 2013). "How has immigration changed Britain?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 20 April 2015. Retrieved 16 July 2015. Fellowes, Dawn (12 December 2012). "2011 Census show highest migration levels to Peterborough in seven decades". Peterborough Telegraph. Archived from the original on 21 May 2015. Retrieved 20 May 2015. The changing demography of Cambridgeshire: implications for policing Archived 27 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine Cambridgeshire Constabulary and Cambridgeshire Police Authority, 19 September 2007. Travis, Alan (20 September 2007). "Ministers to assess migrant groups' impact on public services". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 16 July 2015. Retrieved 16 July 2015. The Poles are Coming! Archived 23 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine Is white working class Britain becoming invisible? A season of programmes on BBC Two (Retrieved 19 March 2008). Positively Plurilingual: The contribution of community languages to UK education and society Archived 28 November 2007 at the Wayback Machine (p.6) CILT the National Centre for Languages, 2006. "Table KS209EW 2011 Census: Religion, local authorities in England and Wales". Office for National Statistics. 11 December 2012. Archived from the original on 26 January 2013. Retrieved 1 May 2015. Walton, Jemma "How immigration has led to the rebirth of the Catholic Church" Archived 22 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 27 February 2007. Sandall, Jonathan "Peterborough superchurch to open" Archived 22 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 21 September 2006. "Mosque due to open in Peterborough". 2003. Archived from the original on 20 January 2018. Retrieved 19 January 2018. "Bharat Hindu Samaj Temple". www.bharathindusamaj.co.uk. Archived from the original on 20 January 2018. Retrieved 19 January 2018. "Sri Guru Singh Sabha Gurdwara Peterborough". sgsspeterborough.org. Archived from the original on 20 January 2018. Retrieved 19 January 2018. "Religion: Bishops bridge boundaries aboard boat" Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 2 August 2004. Bridging the divide in a city Archived 7 March 2007 at the Wayback Machine Diocese of Ely, Ref. 0471, 29 July 2004. Waszak, Peter "The Revival of the Roman Catholic Church in Peterborough c. 1793–1910" in Peterborough's Past vol.3 Peterborough Museum Society, 1988. Neighbouring Greek Communities Archived 24 March 2011 at the Wayback Machine Northampton Greek Community (Retrieved 31 October 2010). "No playground for 'super school'". 6 May 2007. Archived from the original on 19 January 2018. Retrieved 19 January 2018. Secondary School Review Peterborough City Council (Retrieved 15 April 2007). Archived 16 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine Orme, Nicholas The King's school has an "outstanding" status and is widely considered the best in Peterborough.School founders and patrons in England, 597–1560 Archived 10 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine Oxford Dictionary of National Biography Oxford University Press, October 2006. "How different LEAs performed" Archived 11 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine, BBC News Online, 19 January 2007. Nasta, Tony Statutory Inspection of Peterborough Regional College under Section 3 of the School Inspections Act 1996 (1996 cap.57) Office for Standards in Education and Adult Learning Inspectorate, 17 October 2006. About us Archived 18 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine Greater Peterborough University Technical College (Retrieved 21 April 2015). Peterborough Sub-Regional Study: Final Report Archived 28 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine 3.2.3 Improving further and higher education provision (p.19) Llewelyn Davies for the East of England Regional Assembly, November 2003. Major step towards university for Peterborough Anglia Ruskin University, 22 February 2006. £10 million boost for university facility in Peterborough Anglia Ruskin University, 11 December 2006. Legal deal signed and sealed facilitates the 'emergence' of new University Centre in Peterborough Anglia Ruskin University, 3 April 2007. University Centre Peterborough opening will ‘lift aspirations’ Archived 2 August 2012 at archive.today Anglia Ruskin University, 4 March 2010. Gray, Christopher (2 February 2011). "When libraries were given, not taken away". The Oxford Times. Archived from the original on 30 May 2015. Retrieved 22 April 2015. Hucklesby, John (2009). People of Peterborough: Famous, infamous and interesting people from the history of Peterborough. Peterborough: Peterborough Museum Publications. pp. 114–16. Destination Guide for Peterborough Archived 18 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine English Tourist Board (Retrieved 20 April 2007). Barns, Brad (31 January 2020). "Peterborough artists open pop-up studio in Queensgate". Peterborough Telegraph. Archived from the original on 19 October 2021. Retrieved 18 October 2020. Newsdesk, Bury (2 October 2021). "Cartoonist John Elson's take on the fuel crisis". Suffolk News. Retrieved 5 March 2022. "Beer Around 'Ere, 197". Peterborough CAMRA. 1 October 2017. Retrieved 5 March 2022. Barns, Brad (20 June 2021). "Peterborough Artists' Open Studios (PAOS) comes of age in 2021 as it celebrates its 21st anniversary year". Peterborough Telegraph. Archived from the original on 19 October 2021. Retrieved 18 October 2021. the moment MAGAZINE (23 May 2018). "Antony Gormley: looking up…". www.themomentmagazine.com. Archived from the original on 20 October 2021. Retrieved 18 October 2021. The Key Times is the theatre's newspaper, available free of charge from the last Saturday of each month. "First Glimpse of Mecca to Movies", Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 18 April 2001. Baker, Marie "Broadway devastated by major fire blaze" Archived 4 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 26 January 2009. 50th Anniversary 1937–1987 Souvenir Brochure Archived 7 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine Cannon Cinema, Peterborough, 1987. "Embassy (Peterborough)". The Theatres Trust. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 23 January 2011. Managed on behalf of the council by Vivacity Archived 2 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine, an independent, not-for-profit organisation with charitable status; there are also nine branch libraries and a mobile library. Orange Broadband prize for Fiction 2005 shortlist title A Short History of Tractors in Ukrainian by Marina Lewycka (336 pp. Viking, London, 2005) Orange Home UK (Retrieved 26 January 2008). Archived 6 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine Ness, Patrick "Pleasant incidents" Archived 20 January 2008 at the Wayback Machine (review of A Spot of Bother by Mark Haddon, 390 pp. Jonathan Cape, London, 2006), The Guardian, London and Manchester, 26 August 2006. Wilson, Laura Crime fiction roundup – reviews Archived 5 June 2016 at the Wayback Machine The Guardian, 23 January 2014. Plummer, Russell Peterborough United on the FA Cup Trail, Part 1: "Sixty Years of Highlights in the Greatest Knockout Event" Archived 23 July 2008 at the Wayback Machine and Part 2: "Sunderland Disaster to Glory in Defeat at Old Trafford" Archived 23 July 2008 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough United Football Club, 3 & 4 January 2002. Posh Stats and Records Archived 8 August 2008 at the Wayback Machine Peterborough United Football Club, 9 May 2007. Peterborough Town changed its name for the 2006/7 season following a merger with Peterborough Athletic Hockey Club, see City of Peterborough Hockey Club Archived 30 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine for more details. Club History Archived 6 January 2015 at the Wayback Machine Peterborough Lions Rugby Football Club (Retrieved 7 May 2015). Midlands Division Archived 10 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine Fixtures and Results, Rugby Football Union (Retrieved 7 May 2015). Bath, David A History of Rugby Union in the Peterborough Area with special reference to the history of Peterborough Rugby Union Football Club Archived 16 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine An extended version of a paper delivered to the Peterborough Burgh Society, October 2002. Midlands 1 East League Table, Peterborough Rugby Union Football Club (Retrieved 7 May 2015). Midlands 2 East (South) Archived 2 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine League Table, Peterborough Rugby Union Football Club (Retrieved 7 May 2015). "Rowing: Hunt and Gilbert strike gold for City" Archived 22 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 7 February 2006. The Story Behind The Return of The Great Eastern Run Peterborough City Council (Retrieved 30 September 2007). Club Honours Archived 23 April 2008 at the Wayback Machine Peterborough Speedway Showcase (Retrieved 19 March 2008). Bull, Nick (14 February 2015). "Is this the 2014 Pearl Izumi Tour Series schedule?". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 16 July 2015. Retrieved 15 July 2015. "2015 Tour Series dates announced". British Cycling. 26 February 2015. Archived from the original on 16 July 2015. Retrieved 15 July 2015. "Bandy "Try It" Session at Planet Ice Peterborough, Sunday 19th March". Ice Hockey Review. 11 March 2017. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 28 April 2019. "Bandy: A guide to Peterborough's newest and coolest sport…". 28 June 2018. Archived from the original on 29 June 2018. Retrieved 29 June 2018. Britain in the Bandy World Championships "Mast fire 'could be deliberate'" Archived 21 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine, BBC News Online, 1 November 2004. "Fire: Mast blaze brings radio blackout" Archived 22 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 1 November 2004. "Salaam radio goes on air". www.peterboroughtoday.co.uk. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved 18 July 2017. "New Peterborough radio station to hit the airwaves on Good Friday". www.peterboroughtoday.co.uk. Archived from the original on 15 April 2017. Retrieved 18 July 2017. Lawrence, Kev "Goodbye Hereward Radio" Archived 21 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 6 January 2009. Uren, Adam "Heart FM to leave city and go to Cambridge" Archived 21 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 16 September 2011. Clarkson, Stuart "Heart Cambridgeshire to leave Peterborough" Archived 8 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine, RadioToday, 19 September 2011. "BBC Radio Cambridgeshire - 25 years young!". www.bbc.co.uk. Archived from the original on 19 April 2016. Retrieved 23 September 2019. Radio Authority awards local digital multiplex licence for Peterborough Archived 14 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine Radio Authority, News Release 161/01, 9 November 2001. "Full Freeview on the Sandy Heath (Central Bedfordshire, England) transmitter". UK Free TV. 1 May 2004. Retrieved 12 February 2024. East Midlands Newspapers Archived 27 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine Johnston Press (Retrieved 18 September 2007). Midland Weekly Media Trinity Mirror (Retrieved 18 September 2007). Newton, David Men of Mark: Makers of East Midland Allied Press Emap, Peterborough, 1977. Walton, Jemma "Part 2: 'Fen men to the marrow' who have served us down through the years" Archived 22 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 14 June 2007. "Peterborough on the big screen" Archived 2 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 13 June 2008. "Nene Valley Railway used for filming of Nine" Archived 2 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 7 November 2008. Skinner, Julia (with particular reference to the work of Robert Cook) Did You Know? Peterborough: A Miscellany (pp.33, 25 & 16) The Francis Frith Collection, Salisbury, 2006. Heritage Explorer: Images for Learning[permanent dead link] National Monuments Record, English Heritage (Retrieved 4 July 2010). Green Flag Award Winners (p.13) The Civic Trust, 21 July 2006. Peterborough Civic Society Archived 8 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine is registered with the Civic Trust. Buildings of Local Importance in Peterborough Archived 31 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine (p. 88) Peterborough City Council, March 2013. Brandon and Knight (pp.111–112). Grainger, Margaret A Descriptive Catalogue of the John Clare Collection Peterborough Museum and Art Gallery, 1973. Leatham, Victoria Burghley: The Life of a Great House The Herbert Press, London, 1992. See also Becker, Alida "This Old House" Archived 14 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine (review of Life at Burghley: Restoring One of England's Great Houses by the same author), The New York Times, 27 December 1992. Turner, Roger Capability Brown and the Eighteenth Century English Landscape (pp.110–112) Phillimore & Co., Chichester, 1999. Wentworth-Fitzwilliam family of Milton Peterborough City Council (Retrieved 22 September 2007). Archived 16 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine Welcome to John Clare Cottage Archived 21 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine John Clare Trust (Retrieved 21 April 2015). Salter, Mike The Castles of East Anglia (p.21) Folly Publications, Malvern, 2001. Brandon and Knight (p.17). Pryor, Francis Flag Fen: Life and Death of a Prehistoric Landscape Tempus Publishing, Stroud, 2005. Rhodes, John The Nene Valley Railway, Turntable Publications, Sheffield, 1976. Changing Places: Case Studies of the Urban Renaissance Archived 28 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine The Urban and Economic Development Group (Retrieved 2 May 2007). Woodland Wildlife Walk: Southey Wood Archived 26 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine Cambridgeshire County Council, 2004. Castor Hanglands NNR Archived 11 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine English Nature, 2004. Barkham, John Review of Bedford Purlieus: Its History, Ecology and Management by George Frederick Peterken and Robert Colin Welch (eds.) Journal of Biogeography, vol.3 no.3 (pp.322–323) September 1976. Barnack Hills and Holes NNR Archived 26 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine English Nature, 2004. Cecil Family, Marquess of Exeter Peterborough City Council (Retrieved 22 September 2007). Archived 16 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine Obituary of George Eric Deacon Alcock Archived 14 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine Journal of the British Astronomical Association, vol.111 no.2 (pp.64–66) February 2001. Robinson, Eric H. Clare, John (1793–1864) Archived 16 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine Oxford Dictionary of National Biography Oxford University Press, 2004 (subscription required doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/5441. Retrieved 10 September 2007). Collins, R. D. J. Perkins, Christopher Edward (1891–1968) Archived 24 May 2010 at the Wayback Machine Dictionary of New Zealand Biography vol.4 Auckland University Press, 1998. Jeremy, David J. Royce, Sir (Frederick) Henry, baronet (1863–1933) Archived 16 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine Oxford Dictionary of National Biography Oxford University Press, 2004 (subscription required doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/35860. Retrieved 10 September 2007). O'Connor, Barry Hill, Sir John (bap. 1714, d. 1775) Archived 16 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine Oxford Dictionary of National Biography Oxford University Press, 2004 (subscription required doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/13281. Retrieved 30 September 2007). Cole, Margaret Horrabin, James Francis (1884–1962) Archived 16 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine (rev. Amanda L. Capern) Oxford Dictionary of National Biography Oxford University Press, 2004 (subscription required doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/33995. Retrieved 6 October 2007). Parkin, Jon Cumberland, Richard (1632–1718) Archived 16 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine Oxford Dictionary of National Biography Oxford University Press, 2004 (subscription required doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/6887. Retrieved 30 September 2007). Daunton, Claire Cavell, Edith Louisa (1865–1915) Archived 16 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine Oxford Dictionary of National Biography Oxford University Press, 2004 (subscription required doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/32330. Retrieved 30 April 2007). Reed, John (2005). "Old Scarlett: The Gravedigger of Peterborough". www.timetravel-britain.com. Archived from the original on 17 August 2021. Retrieved 18 October 2021. Mellows, William Thomas (ed.) The Peterborough Chronicle of Hugh Candidus (p.41) Peterborough Natural History, Scientific and Archæological Society, 1941. Canonizzazione di Quaranta Martiri dell’Inghilterra e del Galles Archived 4 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine Omelia del Santo Padre Paolo VI The Holy See, 25 October 1970. Stoker, Richard Armstrong, Sir Thomas Henry Wait (1898–1994) Archived 16 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine Oxford Dictionary of National Biography Oxford University Press, 2004 (subscription required doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/54713. Retrieved 24 April 2007). "Erasure uncovered in Norwich" Archived 14 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine, BBC News Online, 10 February 2003. The Barry Forgie Orchestra Vinyl Vulture (Retrieved 24 April 2007). Archived 16 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine Voce, Steve "Obituary of Gordon Douglas Lusher" Archived 30 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine, The Independent, London, 7 July 2006. Biography of Paul Nicholas Archived 20 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine Internet Movie Database (Retrieved 24 April 2007). Montalbano, Dan "The city of Hereward the Wake" Archived 21 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine, The Independent, London, 31 August 2006. "X Factor: Aston Merrygold and The JLS journey" Archived 18 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 27 October 2008. Patrick, Neil "Obituary of Edmund Hockridge: Canadian actor and singer whose life story read like the script of a musical" Archived 27 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine, The Guardian, London and Manchester, 18 March 2009. Briggs, S. (1 November 2011). "Tributes: How Sir Jimmy Savile fixed it for good causes in Peterborough". Peterborough Telegraph. Archived from the original on 2 December 2013. Retrieved 5 June 2014. "Adrian Lyne, IMDb". Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 2 August 2016. Reinis, Nick "Luke lands a skate role in E4's Skins" Archived 3 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 22 January 2009. "Inside out: Health Check – Sarah Cawood (Features)" Archived 28 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Liverpool Daily Post, 3 February 2004. "Peterborough's famous faces", Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 4 August 2009. Kirby, Terry "Author in a Spot of Bother for 'horrible' view of Peterborough" Archived 20 May 2007 at the Wayback Machine, The Independent, London, 31 August 2006. Pearson, Mark "Teaching via the Internet" Archived 14 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 7 October 2005 (facsimile of p.23 from the Brian J. Ford Website. Retrieved 24 April 2007). Muir, Jonny "Five are honoured with freedom nominations", Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 4 October 2007. "Terry Wiles: Man's Estate - a BBC East documentary from 1980 profiling the life of thalidomide sufferer Terry Wiles - East Anglian Film Archive". Archived from the original on 10 September 2015. Retrieved 20 October 2014. "The Terry Wiles Website". Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 20 October 2014. Profile for David Bentley Archived 13 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine ESPNsoccernet (Retrieved 27 May 2007). "Smith wins historic bronze for GB" Archived 18 August 2008 at the Wayback Machine, BBC News Online, 17 August 2008. "Peterborough". Barry Hugman's Footballers. Retrieved 26 July 2017. Brown, Chris State of the Environment Report 1998 Archived 7 September 2008 at archive.today Chapter 11: Physical Background (pp.305–306) Cambridgeshire County Council (Retrieved 19 July 2007). "Synop reports summary". Ogimet. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 26 July 2019. "2012 Temperature". Tutiempo. Archived from the original on 6 June 2014. Retrieved 5 June 2014. "Wittering 1991–2020 averages". Met Office. Retrieved 13 June 2019. "Monthly Extreme Maximum Temperature". Starlings Roost Weather. Archived from the original on 1 February 2023. Retrieved 3 February 2023. "Monthly Extreme Minimum Temperature". Starlings Roost Weather. Archived from the original on 1 February 2023. Retrieved 3 February 2023. Brown (p.301). Brown (p.304). Dixon, Rachel Let’s go to … Peterborough Archived 4 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine The Guardian, 27 October 2015. Broadberry, Stephen et al. English Agricultural Output 1250–1450: Some Preliminary Estimates Archived 6 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine (p.10) University of Warwick, 27 November 2008. The City of Peterborough (Electoral Changes) Order 2003 Archived 1 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine (SI 2003/161) and The City of Peterborough (Electoral Changes) (Amendment) Order 2004 Archived 1 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine (SI 2004/721), see Boundary Committee for England report to the Electoral Commission Final Recommendations on the Future Electoral Arrangements for Peterborough Archived 30 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine, 9 July 2002. Clegg, William General Review of Parliamentary Constituency boundaries in Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Archived 27 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine (archived copy as at 17 May 2009 from the UK Government Web Archive) Assistant Commissioner's report to the Chairman and Members of the Boundary Commission for England, 18 March 2004 and Final Recommendations for Parliamentary Constituencies in the Counties of Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Archived 28 January 2007 at the Wayback Machine (archived copy as at 17 May 2009 from the UK Government Web Archive) Boundary Commission for England, 19 January 2005. Britain, David Surviving Estuary English: Innovation diffusion, koineisation and local dialect differentiation in the English Fenland Archived 27 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine Essex Research Reports in Linguistics, vol.41 (pp.74–103) University of Essex, Department of Language and Linguistics, 2002. "Peterborough's twin towns" Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine, Peterborough Evening Telegraph, 11 March 2009. "English Town Calls Up Ballarat". Building and Engineering. 24 April 1947. p. 61. Retrieved 17 October 2023. "Voice of friendship from 'Old Country'". thecourier.com.au. 25 September 2008. Retrieved 17 October 2023. "British towns twinned with French towns". Archant Community Media Ltd. Archived from the original on 5 July 2013. Retrieved 11 July 2013. International Links Archived 7 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine Peterborough City Council (Retrieved 22 April 2015). Town Twinning Archived 15 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine Visit Peterborough (Retrieved 22 April 2015). "How 40-year twinning relationship between Cambridgeshire and German region of Kreis Viersen has fallen victim to spending cuts", Cambridge News, 18 November 2013. Rees, Jan; Underwood, Charlie J. (January 2008). "Hybodont Sharks of the English Bathonian and Callovian (Middle Jurassic)". Palaeontology. 51 (1): 117–147. Bibcode:2008Palgy..51..117R. doi:10.1111/j.1475-4983.2007.00737.x. ISSN 0031-0239. Archived from the original on 13 February 2024. "Louis Smith in Freedom of City of Peterborough honour". BBC News. 21 March 2017. Archived from the original on 22 March 2017. Retrieved 12 October 2020. "Peterborough United 'legend' Tommy Robson awarded freedom of the city". BBC News. 12 March 2020. Archived from the original on 4 June 2020. Retrieved 12 October 2020. "VIDEO: Freedom of the City parade is 'Great Escape' for RAF Wittering's 100th anniversary". Archived from the original on 3 October 2016. Retrieved 17 March 2020. "Anglian regiment given freedom of the city". Peterborough Telegraph. 25 July 2009. Archived from the original on 3 October 2012. Retrieved 17 March 2020. "Peterborough Squadron granted Freedom of the City". RAF Air Cadets. Archived from the original on 22 May 2020. Retrieved 17 March 2020. "The Salvation Army celebrating receipt of Freedom of Peterborough". Archived from the original on 7 December 2021. Retrieved 7 December 2021. Lamy, Joel (27 July 2021). "Royal British Legion receiving Freedom of Peterborough is 'high honour'". The Peterborough Telegraph. Archived from the original on 7 October 2021. Retrieved 7 October 2021. Banham, John Final Recommendations for the Future Local Government of Cambridgeshire HMSO, London, 1994. Banham, John Final Recommendations on the Future Local Government of Basildon & Thurrock, Blackburn & Blackpool, Broxtowe, Gedling & Rushcliffe, Dartford & Gravesham, Gillingham & Rochester upon Medway, Exeter, Gloucester, Halton & Warrington, Huntingdonshire & Peterborough, Northampton, Norwich, Spelthorne and the Wrekin HMSO, London, 1995. Bennett, Jack Arthur Walter Middle English Literature (ed. and completed by Douglas Gray) Oxford University Press, 1986 (ISBN 0-19-812214-4). Brandon, David and Knight, John Peterborough Past: The City and The Soke Phillimore & Co., Chichester, 2001 (ISBN 1-86077-184-X). Chisholm, Hugh (ed.) Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed., 28 vols.) Cambridge University Press, 1911 (text in the public domain). Clark, Cecily (ed.) The Peterborough Chronicle 1070–1154 Oxford University Press, 1958 (ISBN 0-19-811136-3). Colpi, Terry The Italian Factor: The Italian Community in Great Britain Mainstream Publishing, Edinburgh, 1991 (ISBN 1-85158-344-0). Davies, Elizabeth et al. Peterborough: A Story of City and Country, People and Places Peterborough City Council and Pitkin Unichrome, 2001 (ISBN 1-84165-050-1). Garmonsway, George Norman (trans.) The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle J. M. Dent & Sons, London, 1972 & 1975 (ISBN 0-460-87038-6). Grainger, Margaret A Descriptive Catalogue of the John Clare Collection Peterborough Museum and Art Gallery, 1973 (ISBN 0-904108-00-7). Hancock, Henry Drummond Report and Proposals for the East Midlands General Review Area (LGCE Report No.3) HMSO, London, 1961. Hancock, Henry Drummond Report and Proposals for the Lincolnshire and East Anglia General Review Area (LGCE Report No.9) HMSO, London, 1965. Hancock, Tom Greater Peterborough Master Plan Peterborough Development Corporation, 1971. Ingram, James Henry (trans.) The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle J. M. Dent & Sons, London, 1823 (1847 Everyman's Library ed. with additional readings from the translation of John Allen Giles). King, Richard John Handbook to the Cathedrals of England John Murray, London, 1862. Labrum, Edward A. Civil Engineering Heritage: Eastern and Central England Thomas Telford, London, 1994 (ISBN 0-7277-1970-X). Leatham, Victoria Burghley: The Life of a Great House The Herbert Press, London, 1992 (ISBN 1-871569-47-8). Matthew, Henry Colin Gray and Harrison, Brian Howard (eds.) Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (60 vols.) Oxford University Press in association with the British Academy, 2004–2006 (ISBN 0-19-861411-X). Mellows, William Thomas (ed.) The Chronicle of Hugh Candidus a Monk of Peterborough, Oxford University Press, 1949 (scholarly ed. in Latin). Mellows, William Thomas (ed.) The Peterborough Chronicle of Hugh Candidus (trans.) Peterborough Natural History, Scientific and Archæological Society, 1941 (popular ed. in English). Newton, David Men of Mark: Makers of East Midland Allied Press Emap, Peterborough, 1977 (ISBN 0-9505954-0-3). Parthey, Gustav and Pinder, Moritz (eds.) Itinerarivm Antonini Avgvsti et Hierosolymitanum: ex libris manu scriptis Friederich Nicolaus, Berlin, 1848. Pryor, Francis Flag Fen: Life and Death of a Prehistoric Landscape Tempus Publishing, Stroud, 2005 (ISBN 0-7524-2900-0). Rhodes, John The Nene Valley Railway Turntable Publications, Sheffield, 1976 (ISBN 0-902844-60-1). Salter, Mike The Castles of East Anglia Folly Publications, Malvern, 2001 (ISBN 1-871731-45-3). Skinner, Julia (with particular reference to the work of Robert Cook) Did You Know? Peterborough: A Miscellany The Francis Frith Collection, Salisbury, 2006 (ISBN 1-84589-263-1). Sweeting, Walter Debenham The Cathedral Church of Peterborough: A Description of its Fabric and a Brief History of the Episcopal See G. Bell & Sons, London, 1898 (1926 reprint of the 2nd ed. of Bell's Cathedrals). Tebbs, Herbert F. Peterborough: A History The Oleander Press, Cambridge, 1979 (ISBN 0-900891-30-0). Turner, Roger Capability Brown and the Eighteenth Century English Landscape Phillimore & Co., Chichester, 1999 (ISBN 1-86077-114-9). Youngs, Frederic A. Guide to the Local Administrative Units of England (2 vols.) The Offices of the Royal Historical Society, University College London, 1991 (ISBN 0-86193-127-0). Wikimedia Commons has media related to Peterborough. Listen to this article (59 minutes) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 27 November 2007 (2007-11-27), and does not reflect subsequent edits. (Audio help · More spoken articles) Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Peterborough. Peterborough City Council Opportunity Peterborough Peterborough Today