Electronic dance music (EDM) is a broad range of percussive electronic music genres originally made for nightclubs, raves, and festivals. It is generally produced for playback by DJs who create seamless selections of tracks, called a DJ mix, by segueing from one recording to another. EDM producers also perform their music live in a concert or festival setting in what is sometimes called a live PA. Since its inception EDM has expanded to include a wide range of subgenres. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, following the emergence of raving, pirate radio, PartyCrews, underground festivals and an upsurge of interest in club culture, EDM achieved mainstream popularity in Europe. However, rave culture was not as broadly popular in the United States; it was not typically seen outside of the regional scenes in New York City, Florida, the Midwest, and California. Although the pioneer genres of electro, Chicago house and Detroit techno were influential both in Europe and the United States, mainstream media outlets and the record industry in the United States remained openly hostile to it until the 1990s and beyond. There was also a perceived association between EDM and drug culture, which led governments at state and city levels to enact laws and policies intended to halt the spread of rave culture. Subsequently, in the new millennium, the popularity of EDM increased globally, particularly in the United States and Australia. By the early 2010s, the term "electronic dance music" and the initialism "EDM" was being pushed by the American music industry and music press in an effort to rebrand American rave culture. Despite the industry's attempt to create a specific EDM brand, the acronym remains in use as an umbrella term for multiple genres, including dance-pop, house, techno, electro and trance, as well as their respective subgenres, which all predate the acronym. Various EDM genres have evolved over the last 40 years, for example; house, techno, drum and bass, dance-pop etc. Stylistic variation within an established EDM genre can lead to the emergence of what is called a subgenre. Hybridization, where elements of two or more genres are combined, can lead to the emergence of an entirely new genre of EDM. In the late 1960s bands such as Silver Apples created electronic music intended for dancing. Other early examples of music that influenced later electronic dance music include Jamaican dub music during the late 1960s to 1970s, the synthesizer-based disco music of Italian producer Giorgio Moroder in the late 1970s, and the electropop of Kraftwerk and Yellow Magic Orchestra in the mid-to-late 1970s. Author Michael Veal considers dub music, a Jamaican music stemming from roots reggae and sound system culture that flourished between 1968 and 1985, to be one of the important precursors to contemporary electronic dance music. Dub productions were remixed reggae tracks that emphasized rhythm, fragmented lyrical and melodic elements, and reverberant textures. The music was pioneered by studio engineers, such as Sylvan Morris, King Tubby, Errol Thompson, Lee "Scratch" Perry, and Scientist. Their productions included forms of tape editing and sound processing that Veal considers comparable to techniques used in musique concrète. Dub producers made improvised deconstructions of existing multi-track reggae mixes by using the studio mixing board as a performance instrument. They also foregrounded spatial effects such as reverb and delay by using auxiliary send routings creatively. The Roland Space Echo, manufactured by Roland Corporation, was widely used by dub producers in the 1970s to produce echo and delay effects. Despite the limited electronic equipment available to dub pioneers such as King Tubby and Lee "Scratch" Perry, their experiments in remix culture were musically cutting-edge. Ambient dub was pioneered by King Tubby and other Jamaican sound artists, using DJ-inspired ambient electronics, complete with drop-outs, echo, equalization and psychedelic electronic effects. It featured layering techniques and incorporated elements of world music, deep bass lines and harmonic sounds. Techniques such as a long echo delay were also used. Hip hop music has had some influence in the development of electronic dance music since the 1970s. Inspired by Jamaican sound system culture Jamaican-American DJ Kool Herc introduced large bass heavy speaker rigs to the Bronx. His parties are credited with having kick-started the New York City hip-hop movement in 1973. A technique developed by DJ Kool Herc that became popular in hip hop culture was playing two copies of the same record on two turntables, in alternation, and at the point where a track featured a break. This technique was further used to manually loop a purely percussive break, leading to what was later called a break beat. Turntablism has origins in the invention of the direct-drive turntable, by Shuichi Obata, an engineer at Matsushita (now Panasonic). In 1969, Matsushita released it as the SP-10, the first direct-drive turntable on the market, and the first in their influential Technics series of turntables. The most influential turntable was the Technics SL-1200, which was developed in 1971 by a team led by Shuichi Obata at Matsushita, which then released it onto the market in 1972. In the 1980s and 1990s hip-hop DJs used turntables as musical instruments in their own right and virtuosic use developed into a creative practice called turntablism. In 1974, George McCrae's early disco hit "Rock Your Baby" was one of the first records to use a drum machine, an early Roland rhythm machine. The use of drum machines in disco production was influenced by Sly and the Family Stone's "Family Affair" (1971), with its rhythm echoed in McCrae's "Rock Your Baby", and Timmy Thomas' "Why Can't We Live Together" (1972). Disco producer Biddu used synthesizers in several disco songs from 1976 to 1977, including "Bionic Boogie" from Rain Forest (1976), "Soul Coaxing" (1977), and Eastern Man and Futuristic Journey (recorded from 1976 to 1977). Acts like Donna Summer, Chic, Earth, Wind, and Fire, Heatwave, and the Village People helped define the late 1970s disco sound. Giorgio Moroder and Pete Bellotte produced "I Feel Love" for Donna Summer in 1977. It became the first well-known disco hit to have a completely synthesized backing track. Other disco producers, most famously American producer Tom Moulton, grabbed ideas and techniques from dub music (which came with the increased Jamaican migration to New York City in the 1970s) to provide alternatives to the four-on-the-floor style that dominated. During the early 1980s, the popularity of disco music sharply declined in the United States, abandoned by major US record labels and producers. Euro disco continued evolving within the broad mainstream pop music scene. Synth-pop (short for synthesizer pop; also called techno-pop) is a music genre that first became prominent in the late 1970s and features the synthesizer as the dominant musical instrument. It was prefigured in the 1960s and early 1970s by the use of synthesizers in progressive rock, electronic, art rock, disco, and particularly the Krautrock of bands like Kraftwerk. It arose as a distinct genre in Japan and the United Kingdom in the post-punk era as part of the new wave movement of the late 1970s. Early synth-pop pioneers included Japanese group Yellow Magic Orchestra, and British bands Ultravox, the Human League and Berlin Blondes[citation needed]. The Human League used monophonic synthesizers to produce music with a simple and austere sound. After the breakthrough of Gary Numan in the UK Singles Chart in 1979, large numbers of artists began to enjoy success with a synthesizer-based sound in the early 1980s, including late-1970s debutants like Japan and Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark, and newcomers such as Depeche Mode and Eurythmics. In Japan, Yellow Magic Orchestra's success opened the way for synth-pop bands such as P-Model, Plastics, and Hikashu. The development of inexpensive polyphonic synthesizers, the definition of MIDI and the use of dance beats, led to a more commercial and accessible sound for synth-pop. This, its adoption by the style-conscious acts from the New Romantic movement, together with the rise of MTV, led to success for large numbers of British synth-pop acts (including Duran Duran and Spandau Ballet) in the United States. The use of digital sampling and looping in popular music was pioneered by Japanese electronic music band Yellow Magic Orchestra (YMO). Their approach to sampling was a precursor to the contemporary approach of constructing music by cutting fragments of sounds and looping them using computer technology. "Computer Game/Firecracker" (1978) interpolated a Martin Denny melody, and sampled Space Invaders video game sounds. Technodelic (1981) introduced the use of digital sampling in popular music, as the first album consisting of mostly samples and loops. The album was produced using Toshiba-EMI's LMD-649 digital PCM sampler, which engineer Kenji Murata custom-built for YMO.[better source needed] The LMD-649 was also used for sampling by other Japanese synthpop artists in the early 1980s, including YMO-associated acts such as Chiemi Manabe and Logic System. The emergence of electronic dance music in the 1980s was shaped by the development of several new electronic musical instruments, particularly those from the Japanese Roland Corporation. The Roland TR-808 (often abbreviated as the "808") notably played an important role in the evolution of dance music, after Afrika Bambaataa's "Planet Rock" (1982), made it very popular on dancefloors. The track, which also featured the melody line from Kraftwerk's Trans-Europe Express, informed the development of electronic dance music, and subgenres including Miami bass and Detroit techno, and popularized the 808 as a "fundamental element of futuristic sound". According to Slate, "Planet Rock" "didn't so much put the 808 on the map so much as reorient an entire world of post-disco dance music around it". The Roland TR-909, TB-303 and Juno-60 similarly influenced electronic dance music such as techno, house and acid. During the post-disco era that followed the backlash against "disco" which began in the mid to late 1979, which in the United States lead to civil unrest and a riot in Chicago known as the Disco Demolition Night,[13] an underground movement of "stripped-down" disco inspired music featuring "radically different sounds"[14] started to emerge on the East Coast.[15] [Note 1] This new scene was seen primarily in the New York metropolitan area and was initially led by the urban contemporary artists that were responding to the over-commercialization and subsequent demise of disco culture. The sound that emerged originated from P-Funk[18] the electronic side of disco, dub music, and other genres. Much of the music produced during this time was, like disco, catering to a singles-driven market.[14] At this time creative control started shifting to independent record companies, less established producers, and club DJs.[14] Other dance styles that began to become popular during the post-disco era include dance-pop,[19] [20] boogie,[14] electro, Hi-NRG, Italo disco, house,[19] [21] [22] [23] and techno.[22] [24] [25] [26] [27] In the early 1980s, electro (short for "electro-funk") emerged as a fusion of synth-pop, funk, and boogie. Also called electro-funk or electro-boogie, but later shortened to electro, cited pioneers include Ryuichi Sakamoto, Afrika Bambaataa, Zapp, D.Train, and Sinnamon. Early hip hop and rap combined with German and Japanese electropop influences such as Kraftwerk and Yellow Magic Orchestra inspired the birth of electro. As the electronic sound developed, instruments such as the bass guitar and drums were replaced by synthesizers and most notably by iconic drum machines, particularly the Roland TR-808 and the Yamaha DX7. Early uses of the TR-808 include several Yellow Magic Orchestra tracks in 1980–1981, the 1982 track "Planet Rock" by Afrika Bambaataa, and the 1982 song "Sexual Healing" by Marvin Gaye. In 1982, producer Arthur Baker, with Afrika Bambaataa, released the seminal "Planet Rock", which was influenced by Yellow Magic Orchestra, used Kraftwerk samples, and had drum beats supplied by the TR-808. Planet Rock was followed later that year by another breakthrough electro record, "Nunk" by Warp 9. In 1983, Hashim created an electro-funk sound with "Al-Naafyish (The Soul)" that influenced Herbie Hancock, resulting in his hit single "Rockit" the same year. The early 1980s were electro's mainstream peak. According to author Steve Taylor, Afrika Bambaataa's Planet Rock serves as a "template for all interesting dance music since". In the early 1980s, Chicago radio jocks The Hot Mix 5 and club DJs Ron Hardy and Frankie Knuckles played various styles of dance music, including older disco records (mostly Philly disco and Salsoul tracks), electro funk tracks by artists such as Afrika Bambaataa, newer Italo disco, B-Boy hip hop music by Man Parrish, Jellybean Benitez, Arthur Baker, and John Robie, and electronic pop music by Kraftwerk and Yellow Magic Orchestra. Some made and played their own edits of their favorite songs on reel-to-reel tape, and sometimes mixed in effects, drum machines, and other rhythmic electronic instrumentation. The hypnotic electronic dance song "On and On", produced in 1984 by Chicago DJ Jesse Saunders and co-written by Vince Lawrence, had elements that became staples of the early house sound, such as the Roland TB-303 bass synthesizer and minimal vocals as well as a Roland (specifically TR-808) drum machine and Korg (specifically Poly-61) synthesizer. "On and On" is sometimes cited as the 'first house record', though other examples from around that time, such as J.M. Silk's "Music is the Key" (1985), have also been cited. House music quickly spread to American cities including New York City, and Newark, and Detroit—all of which developed their own regional scenes. In the mid-to-late 1980s, house music became popular in Europe as well as major cities in South America, and Australia. Chicago House experienced some commercial success in Europe with releases such as "House Nation" by House Master Boyz and the Rude Boy of House (1987). Following this, a number of house inspired releases such as "Pump Up The Volume" by M|A|R|R|S (1987), "Theme from S'Express" by S'Express (1988), and "Doctorin' the House" by Coldcut (1988) entered the pop charts. The electronic instrumentation and minimal arrangement of Charanjit Singh's Synthesizing: Ten Ragas to a Disco Beat (1982), an album of Indian ragas performed in a disco style, anticipated the sounds of acid house music, but it is not known to have had any influence on the genre prior to the album's rediscovery in the 21st century. In the 1980s, Detroit DJs Juan Atkins, Derrick May, and Kevin Saunderson laid the foundation for a new style of music which would dubbed techno. They fused Chicago house influenced electronic and Detroit (including Motown) influenced funk sounds with the mechanical vibes of the post-industrial city, creating the techno sound of four-on-the-floor beat driven by a kick drum on the quarter notes and a snare or high hat on the second, fourth, or eighth notes. In the mid-1980s house music thrived on the small Balearic Island of Ibiza, Spain. The Balearic sound was the spirit of the music emerging from the island at that time; the combination of old vinyl rock, pop, reggae, and disco records paired with an "anything goes" attitude made Ibiza a hub of drug-induced musical experimentation. A club called Amnesia, whose resident DJ, Alfredo Fiorito, pioneered Balearic house, was the center of the scene. Amnesia became known across Europe and by the mid to late 1980s it was drawing people from all over the continent. By 1988, house music had become the most popular form of club music in Europe, with acid house developing as a notable trend in the United Kingdom and Germany in the same year. In the UK an established warehouse party subculture, centered on the British African-Caribbean sound system scene fueled underground after-parties that featured dance music exclusively. Also in 1988, the Balearic party vibe associated with Ibiza's DJ Alfredo was transported to London, when Danny Rampling and Paul Oakenfold opened the clubs Shoom and Spectrum, respectively. Both places became synonymous with acid house, and it was during this period that MDMA gained prominence as a party drug. Other important UK clubs included Back to Basics in Leeds, Sheffield's Leadmill and Music Factory, and The Haçienda in Manchester, where Mike Pickering and Graeme Park's spot, Nude, was an important proving ground for American underground dance music. The success of house and acid house paved the way for Detroit Techno, a style that was initially supported by a handful of house music clubs in Chicago, New York, and Northern England, with Detroit clubs catching up later. The term Techno first came into use after a release of a 10 Records/Virgin Records compilation titled Techno: The Dance Sound of Detroit in 1988. One of the first Detroit productions to receive wider attention was Derrick May's "Strings of Life" (1987), which, together with May's previous release, "Nude Photo" (1987), helped raise techno's profile in Europe, especially the UK and Germany, during the 1987–1988 house music boom (see Second Summer of Love). It became May's best-known track, which, according to Frankie Knuckles, "just exploded. It was like something you can't imagine, the kind of power and energy people got off that record when it was first heard. Mike Dunn says he has no idea how people can accept a record that doesn't have a bassline." According to British DJ Mark Moore, "Strings of Life" led London club-goers to accept house: "because most people hated house music and it was all rare groove and hip hop...I'd play 'Strings of Life' at the Mudd Club and clear the floor". By the late 1980s interest in house, acid house and techno escalated in the club scene and MDMA-fueled club-goers, who were faced with a 2 a.m. closing time in the UK, started to seek after-hours refuge at all-night warehouse parties. Within a year, in summer 1989, up to 25,000 people at a time were attending commercially organised underground parties called raves. Trance emerged from the rave scene in the United Kingdom in the late 1980s and developed further during the early 1990s in Germany before spreading throughout the rest of Europe, as a more melodic offshoot from techno and house.[citation needed] At the same time trance music was developing in Europe, the genre was also gathering a following in the Indian state of Goa. Trance is mostly instrumental, although vocals can be mixed in: typically they are performed by mezzo-soprano to soprano female soloists, often without a traditional verse/chorus structure. Structured vocal form in trance music forms the basis of the vocal trance subgenre, which has been described as "grand, soaring, and operatic" and "ethereal female leads floating amongst the synths". Trance music is broken into a number of subgenres including acid trance, classic trance, hard trance, progressive trance, and uplifting trance.[citation needed] Uplifting trance is also known as "anthem trance", "epic trance", "commercial trance", "stadium trance", or "euphoric trance", and has been strongly influenced by classical music in the 1990s and 2000s by leading artists such as Ferry Corsten, Armin Van Buuren, Tiësto, Push, Rank 1 and at present with the development of the subgenre "orchestral uplifting trance" or "uplifting trance with symphonic orchestra" by such artists as Andy Blueman, Ciro Visone, Soundlift, Arctic Moon, Sergey Nevone&Simon O'Shine etc. Closely related to Uplifting Trance is Euro-trance, which has become a general term for a wide variety of highly commercialized European dance music. Several subgenres are crossovers with other major genres of electronic music. For instance, Tech trance is a mixture of trance and techno, and Vocal trance "combines [trance's] progressive elements with pop music". The dream trance genre originated in the mid-1990s, with its popularity then led by Robert Miles. AllMusic states on progressive trance: "the progressive wing of the trance crowd led directly to a more commercial, chart-oriented sound since trance had never enjoyed much chart action in the first place. Emphasizing the smoother sound of Eurodance or house (and occasionally more reminiscent of Jean-Michel Jarre than Basement Jaxx), Progressive Trance became the sound of the world's dance floors by the end of the millennium. Critics ridiculed its focus on predictable breakdowns and relative lack of skill to beat-mix, but progressive trance was caned by the hottest DJ." By the early 1990s, a style of music developed within the rave scene that had an identity distinct from American house and techno. This music, much like hip-hop before it, combined sampled syncopated beats or breakbeats, other samples from a wide range of different musical genres, and, occasionally, samples of music, dialogue, and effects from films and television programmes. Relative to earlier styles of dance music such as house and techno, so-called 'rave music' tended to emphasise bass sounds and use faster tempos, or beats per minute (BPM). This subgenre was known as "hardcore" rave, but from as early as 1991, some musical tracks made up of these high-tempo breakbeats, with heavy basslines and samples of older Jamaican music, were referred to as "jungle techno", a genre influenced by Jack Smooth and Basement Records, and later just "jungle", which became recognized as a separate musical genre popular at raves and on pirate radio in Britain. It is important to note when discussing the history of drum & bass that prior to jungle, rave music was getting faster and more experimental. By 1994, jungle had begun to gain mainstream popularity, and fans of the music (often referred to as junglists) became a more recognisable part of youth subculture. The genre further developed, incorporating and fusing elements from a wide range of existing musical genres, including the raggamuffin sound, dancehall, MC chants, dub basslines, and increasingly complex, heavily edited breakbeat percussion. Despite the affiliation with the ecstasy-fuelled rave scene, Jungle also inherited some associations with violence and criminal activity, both from the gang culture that had affected the UK's hip-hop scene and as a consequence of jungle's often aggressive or menacing sound and themes of violence (usually reflected in the choice of samples). However, this developed in tandem with the often positive reputation of the music as part of the wider rave scene and dance hall-based Jamaican music culture prevalent in London. By 1995, whether as a reaction to, or independently of this cultural schism, some jungle producers began to move away from the ragga-influenced style and create what would become collectively labelled, for convenience, as drum and bass. Dubstep is a genre of electronic dance music that originated in South London in the late 1990s. It is generally characterized by sparse, syncopated rhythmic patterns with bass lines that contain prominent sub-bass frequencies. The style emerged as an offshoot of UK garage, drawing on a lineage of related styles such as 2-step, dub reggae, jungle, broken beat, and grime. In the United Kingdom, the origins of the genre can be traced back to the growth of the Jamaican sound system party scene in the early 1980s. The earliest known dubstep releases date back to 1998, and were usually featured as B-sides of 2-step garage single releases. These tracks were darker, more experimental remixes with less emphasis on vocals, and attempted to incorporate elements of breakbeat and drum and bass into 2-step. In 2001, this and other strains of dark garage music began to be showcased and promoted at London's nightclub Plastic People, at the "Forward" night (sometimes stylised as FWD>>), which went on to be considered influential to the development of dubstep. The term "dubstep" in reference to a genre of music began to be used around 2002 by labels such as Big Apple, Ammunition, and Tempa, by which time stylistic trends used in creating these remixes started to become more noticeable and distinct from 2-step and grime. Electro house is a form of house music characterized by a prominent bassline or kick drum and a tempo between 125 and 135 beats per minute, usually 128. Its origins were influenced by electro.[citation needed] The term has been used to describe the music of many DJ Mag Top 100 DJs, including Dimitri Vegas & Like Mike, Hardwell, Skrillex, and Steve Aoki. Italian DJ Benny Benassi, with his track "Satisfaction" released in 2002, is seen as the forerunner of electro-house who brought it to the mainstream. By the mid-2000s, electro-house saw an increase in popularity, with hits such as the Tom Neville remix of Studio B's "I See Girls" in 2005 (UK #11). In November 2006, electro-house tracks "Put Your Hands Up for Detroit" by Fedde Le Grand and the D. Ramirez remix of "Yeah Yeah" by Bodyrox and Luciana held the number one and number two spots, respectively, on the UK top 40 singles chart. Since then, electro-house producers such as Feed Me, Knife Party, The M Machine, Porter Robinson, Yasutaka Nakata and Dada Life have emerged. Trap music originated from techno, dub, and Dutch house, but also from the original off-shoot of Southern hip hop in the late 2000s and early 2010s. This form of trap music can be simplified by these three features: "1/3 hip hop (tempo and song structure are similar, most tracks are usually between 70–110 bpm) – with vocals sometimes being pitched down, 1/3 dance music – high-pitched Dutch synth work, hardstyle sampling, as well as a plethora of trap remixes of popular EDM songs, and 1/3 dub (low-frequency focus and strong emphasis on repetitiveness throughout a song)". Some of the artists that popularized this genre, along with several others, are producers such as RL Grime with the tracks "Core" and "Scylla" released in 2014, Flosstradamus with their Hdynation Radio album released in 2015 and Carnage with his track "Turn Up" released in 2012. Trap music in this connotation was characterized by "soulful synths, 808s, the pan flute, sharp snares and long, syrup-slurred vowels" which created dirty and aggressive beats resulting in "dark melodies". Trap is now mainly used to create remixes of already existing songs. In 1980 English producer Richard James Burgess, and his band Landscape, used the term on the sleeve of the single "European Man": "Electronic Dance Music... EDM; computer programmed to perfection for your listening pleasure." In response to a question about being credited with coining the term New Romantic Burgess has stated that: "Initially I was using three terms – Futurist, Electronic Dance Music (the Landscape singles have EDM printed on them) and New Romantic." Writing in The Guardian, journalist Simon Reynolds noted that the American music industry's adoption of the term EDM in the late 2000s was an attempt to re-brand US "rave culture" and differentiate it from the 1990s rave scene. It has been described as an era of electronic music, being described in a MixMag article as being "the drop-heavy, stadium-filling, fist-pumping, chart-topping, massively commercial main stage sound that conquered America...possibly somewhere between electro and progressive house, directed by Michael Bay, and like many music genres, trying to pin it down exactly is like trying to grab a fistful of water". In the UK, "dance music" or "dance" are more common terms for EDM.[4] What is widely perceived to be "club music" has changed over time; it now includes different genres and may not always encompass EDM. Similarly, "electronic dance music" can mean different things to different people. Both "club music" and "EDM" seem vague, but the terms are sometimes used to refer to distinct and unrelated genres (club music is defined by what is popular, whereas EDM is distinguished by musical attributes).[96] Though Billboard debuted a "dance" chart in 1974, the larger US music industry did not create music charts until the late 1990s.[93] In July 1995, Nervous Records and Project X Magazine hosted the first awards ceremony, calling it the "Electronic Dance Music Awards".[Note 4] Electronic dance music is generally composed and produced in a recording studio with specialized equipment such as samplers, synthesizers, effects units and MIDI controllers all set up to interact with one another using the MIDI protocol. In the genre's early days, hardware electronic musical instruments were used and the focus in production was mainly on manipulating MIDI data as opposed to manipulating audio signals. Since the late 1990s, the use of software has increased. A modern electronic music production studio generally consists of a computer running a digital audio workstation (DAW), with various plug-ins installed such as software synthesizers and effects units, which are controlled with a MIDI controller such as a MIDI keyboard. This setup is generally sufficient to complete entire productions, which are then ready for mastering. A ghost producer is a hired music producer in a business arrangement who produces a song for another DJ/artist that releases it as their own, typically under a contract which prevents them from identifying themselves as a personnel of the song. Ghost producers receive a simple fee or royalty payments for their work and are often able to work in their preference of not having the intense pressure of fame and the lifestyle of an internationally recognized DJ. A ghost producer may increase their notability in the music industry by acquainting with established "big name" DJs and producers. Producers like Martin Garrix and Porter Robinson are often noted for their ghost production work for other producers while David Guetta and Steve Aoki are noted for their usage of ghost producers in their songs whereas DJs like Tiësto have been openly crediting their producers in an attempt to avoid censure and for transparency. Many ghost producers sign agreements that prevent them from working for anyone else or establishing themselves as a solo artist. Such non-disclosure agreements are often noted as predatory because ghost producers, especially teenage producers, do not have an understanding of the music industry. London producer Mat Zo has alleged that DJs who hire ghost producers "have pretended to make their own music and [left] us actual producers to struggle". A bedroom producer is an independent musician who creates electronic music on their laptop or in a home studio. Unlike in traditional recording studios, bedroom producers typically use low-cost, accessible software and equipment which can lead to music being created completely "in the box," with no external hardware. Initially, the popularization of electronic dance music was associated with European rave and club culture and it achieved limited popular exposure in the United States. By the mid-to-late 1990s this began to change as the American music industry made efforts to market a range of dance genres as "electronica". At the time, a wave of electronic music bands from the United Kingdom, including The Prodigy, The Chemical Brothers, Fatboy Slim and Underworld, had been prematurely associated with an "American electronica revolution". But rather than finding mainstream success, many established EDM acts were relegated to the margins of the US industry. In 1998, Madonna's album Ray of Light—heavily influenced by club music trends and produced with British producer William Orbit—brought dance music to the attention of popular music listeners. In the late 1990s, despite US media interest in dance music re-branded as electronica, American house and techno producers continued to travel abroad to establish their careers as DJs and producers. According to New York Times journalist Kelefa Sanneh, Aaliyah's 2000 single "Try Again" "helped smuggle the innovative techniques of electronic dance music onto the American pop charts" By the mid-2000s, Dutch producer Tiësto was bringing worldwide popular attention to EDM after providing a soundtrack to the entry of athletes during the opening ceremony of the 2004 Summer Olympics — an event which The Guardian deemed as one of the 50 most important events in dance music. In 2003, the influence of dance music on American radio resulted in Billboard creating the first-ever Dance/Mix Show Airplay chart. By 2005, the prominence of dance music in North American popular culture had markedly increased. According to Spin, Daft Punk's performance at Coachella in 2006 was the "tipping point" for EDM—it introduced the duo to a new generation of "rock kids". As noted by Entertainment Weekly, Justin Timberlake's "SexyBack" helped introduce EDM sounds to top 40 radio, as it brought together variations of electronic dance music with the singer's R&B sounds. In 2009, French house musician David Guetta began to gain prominence in mainstream pop music thanks to several crossover hits on Top 40 charts such as "When Love Takes Over" with Kelly Rowland, as well as his collaborations with US pop and hip hop acts such as Akon ("Sexy Bitch") and The Black Eyed Peas ("I Gotta Feeling"). The music sharing website SoundCloud, as well as the video sharing website YouTube, also helped fuel interest in electronic music. Dubstep producer Skrillex popularized a harsher sound dubbed "Brostep", which had drawn comparisons to the aggression and tone of heavy metal. With the increasing popularity of electronic dance music, promoters and venues realized that DJs could generate larger profits than traditional musicians; Diplo explained that "a band plays [for] 45 minutes; DJs can play for four hours. Rock bands—there's a few headliner dudes that can play 3,000–4,000-capacity venues, but DJs play the same venues, they turn the crowd over two times, people buy drinks all night long at higher prices—it's a win-win." Electronic music festivals, such as Electric Daisy Carnival (EDC) in Las Vegas and Ultra Music Festival in Miami also grew in size, placing an increased emphasis on visual experiences, and DJs who had begun to attain a celebrity status. Other major acts that gained prominence, including Avicii and Swedish House Mafia, toured major venues such as arenas and stadiums rather than playing clubs; in December 2011, Swedish House Mafia became the first electronic music act to sell out New York City's Madison Square Garden. In 2011, Spin declared a "new rave generation" led by acts like David Guetta, Deadmau5, and Skrillex. In January 2013, Billboard introduced a new EDM-focused Dance/Electronic Songs chart, tracking the top 50 electronic songs based on sales, radio airplay, club play, and online streaming. According to Eventbrite, EDM fans are more likely to use social media to discover and share events or gigs. They also discovered that 78% of fans say they are more likely to attend an event if their peers do, compared to 43% of fans in general. EDM has many young and social fans. By late 2011, Music Trades was describing electronic dance music as the fastest-growing genre in the world. Elements of electronic music also became increasingly prominent in pop music. Radio and television also contributed to dance music's mainstream acceptance. Corporate consolidation in the EDM industry began in 2012—especially in terms of live events. In June 2012, media executive Robert F. X. Sillerman—founder of what is now Live Nation—re-launched SFX Entertainment as an EDM conglomerate, and announced his plan to invest $1 billion to acquire EDM businesses. His acquisitions included regional promoters and festivals (including ID&T, which organises Tomorrowland), two nightclub operators in Miami, and Beatport, an online music store which focuses on electronic music. Live Nation also acquired Cream Holdings and Hard Events, and announced a "creative partnership" with EDC organizers Insomniac Events in 2013 that would allow it to access its resources whilst remaining an independent company; Live Nation CEO Michael Rapino described EDM as the "[new] rock 'n' roll". US radio conglomerate iHeartMedia, Inc. (formerly Clear Channel Media and Entertainment) also made efforts to align itself with EDM. In January 2014 It hired noted British DJ and BBC Radio 1 personality Pete Tong to produce programming for its "Evolution" dance radio brand, and announced a partnership with SFX to co-produce live concerts and EDM-oriented original programming for its top 40 radio stations. iHeartMedia president John Sykes explained that he wanted his company's properties to be the "best destination [for EDM]". Major brands have also used the EDM phenomena as a means of targeting millennials and EDM songs and artists have increasingly been featured in television commercials and programs. Avicii's manager Ash Pournouri compared these practices to the commercialization of hip-hop in the early 2000s. Heineken has a marketing relationship with the Ultra Music Festival, and has incorporated Dutch producers Armin van Buuren and Tiësto into its ad campaigns. Anheuser-Busch has a similar relationship as beer sponsor of SFX Entertainment events. In 2014, 7 Up launched "7x7Up"—a multi-platform EDM-based campaign that included digital content, advertising featuring producers, and branded stages at both Ultra and Electric Daisy Carnival. Wireless carrier T-Mobile US entered into an agreement with SFX to become the official wireless sponsor of its events, and partnered with Above & Beyond to sponsor its 2015 tour. In August 2015, SFX began to experience declines in its value, and a failed bid by CEO Sillerman to take the company private. The company began looking into strategic alternatives that could have resulted in the sale of the company. In October 2015, Forbes declared the possibility of an EDM "bubble", in the wake of the declines at SFX Entertainment, slowing growth in revenue, the increasing costs of organizing festivals and booking talent, as well as an oversaturation of festivals in the eastern and western United States. Insomniac CEO Pasquale Rotella felt that the industry would weather the financial uncertainty of the overall market by focusing on "innovation" and entering into new markets. Despite forecasts that interest in popular EDM would wane, in 2015 it was estimated to be a £5.5bn industry in the US, up by 60% compared to 2012 estimates. SFX emerged from bankruptcy in December 2016 as LiveStyle, under the leadership of Randy Phillips, a former executive of AEG Live. The company began to slowly divest its live music assets in 2018, including selling its stakes in Rock in Rio (which it had bought as part of an attempted Las Vegas edition of the festival), and later other SFX-owned promoters such as ID&T and React Presents. Phillips stepped down as CEO in 2019 to pursue other projects. Following the popularization of EDM in America a number of producers and DJs, including Carl Cox, Steve Lawler, and Markus Schulz, raised concerns that the perceived over-commercialisation of dance music had impacted the art of DJing. Cox saw the "press-play" approach taken by newer EDM DJs as unrepresentative of what he called a "DJ ethos". Writing in Mixmag, DJ Tim Sheridan argued that "push-button DJs" who use auto-sync and play pre-recorded sets of "obvious hits" resulted in a situation overtaken by "the spectacle, money and the showbiz". Some house producers openly admitted that "commercial" EDM needed further differentiation and creativity. Avicii, whose 2013 album True featured songs incorporating elements of bluegrass, such as lead single "Wake Me Up", stated that most EDM lacked "longevity". Deadmau5 criticized the homogenization of popular EDM, and suggested that it "all sounds the same". During the 2014 Ultra Music Festival, Deadmau5 made critical comments about up-and-coming EDM artist Martin Garrix and later played an edited version of Garrix's "Animals" remixed to the melody of "Old McDonald Had a Farm". Afterwards, Tiësto criticized Deadmau5 on Twitter for "sarcastically" mixing Avicii's "Levels" with his own "Ghosts 'n' Stuff" (in reference to being a last-minute substitution for Avicii on the festival schedule due to a medical issue), to which Deadmau5 asked whether playing a song "sarcastically" involved "sneer[ing] while hitting the sync button". In May 2014, the NBC comedy series Saturday Night Live parodied the stereotypes of EDM culture and push-button DJs in a Digital Short titled When Will the Bass Drop?. It featured a DJ who goes about performing everyday activities—playing a computer game, frying eggs, collecting money—who then presses a giant "BASS" button, which explodes the heads of concertgoers. After years of rapid growth, the American popular EDM market started to wane in 2016 when a number of artists famous for producing so-called 'big room' electro-house started to diversify stylistically. This development was directly referenced by two such DJs – David Guetta and Showtek – in a techno-influenced single released in April 2016 titled 'The Death of EDM'. By the end of the 2010s, EDM's position as the dominant force in mainstream popular music began to plateau as it became displaced by other styles. In May 2015, the International Music Summit's Business Report estimated that the global electronic music industry had reached nearly $6.9 billion in value; the count included music sales, events revenue (including nightclubs and festivals), the sale of DJ equipment and software, and other sources of revenue. The report also identified several emerging markets for electronic dance music, including East Asia, India, and South Africa, credited primarily to investment by domestic, as well as American and European interests. A number of major festivals also began expanding into Latin America. In Ghana, West Africa, an artist named Djsky introduced EDM in 2015–present and organised successful festivals and events such as Hey Ibiza, Sunset music Festival, Sky show and more. In an interview with WatsUp TV, Djsky revealed he was the first to introduce Electronic Music Dance into Ghana music. In Ethiopia EDM has become part of mainstream music after the 2018 breakthrough of a young artist named Rophnan which incorporated EDM sound with traditional rhythms and melodies. In his shows, tens of thousands of youth were packing stadiums across the country and radios started to play the emerging genre. China is a market where EDM had initially made relatively few inroads; although promoters believed that the mostly instrumental music would remove a metaphorical language barrier, the growth of EDM in China was hampered by the lack of a prominent rave culture in the country as in other regions, as well as the popularity of domestic Chinese pop over foreign artists. Former Universal Music executive Eric Zho, inspired by the US growth, made the first significant investments in electronic music in China, including the organisation of Shanghai's inaugural Storm festival in 2013, the reaching of a title sponsorship deal for the festival with Anheuser-Busch's Budweiser brand, a local talent search, and organising collaborations between EDM producers and Chinese singers, such as Avicii and Wang Leehom's "Lose Myself". In the years following, a larger number of EDM events began to appear in China, and Storm itself was also preceded by a larger number of pre-parties in 2014 than its inaugural year. A new report released during the inaugural International Music Summit China in October 2015 revealed that the Chinese EDM industry was experiencing modest gains, citing the larger number of events (including new major festival brands such as Modern Sky and YinYang), a 6% increase in the sales of electronic music in the country, and the significant size of the overall market. Zho also believed that the country's "hands-on" political climate, as well as investments by China into cultural events, helped in "encouraging" the growth of EDM in the country. In the 1980s, electronic dance music was often played at illegal underground rave parties held in secret locations, for example, warehouses, abandoned aircraft hangars, fields and any other large, open areas. In the 1990s and 2000s, aspects of the underground rave culture of the 1980s and early 1990s began to evolve into legitimate, organized EDM concerts and festivals. Major festivals often feature a large number of acts representing various EDM genres spread across multiple stages. Festivals have placed a larger emphasis on visual spectacles as part of their overall experiences, including elaborate stage designs with underlying thematics, complex lighting systems, laser shows, and pyrotechnics. Rave fashion also evolved among attendees, which The Guardian described as having progressed from the 1990s "kandi raver" to "[a] slick and sexified yet also kitschy-surreal image midway between Venice Beach and Cirque du Soleil, Willy Wonka and a gay pride parade". These events differed from underground raves by their organized nature, often taking place at major venues, and with measures to ensure the health and safety of attendees. MTV's Rawley Bornstein described electronic music as "the new rock and roll", as has Lollapalooza organizer Perry Farrell. Ray Waddell of Billboard noted that festival promoters have done an excellent job at branding. Larger festivals have been shown to have positive economic impacts on their host cities the 2014 Ultra Music Festival brought 165,000 attendees—and over $223 million—to the Miami/South Florida region's economy. The inaugural edition of TomorrowWorld—a U.S.-based version of Belgium's Tomorrowland festival, brought $85.1 million to the Atlanta area—as much revenue as its hosting of the NCAA Final Four (the semi-final and national championship games of the NCAA Division I men's basketball tournament) earlier in the year. EDC Las Vegas boosted the Clark County economy by $350.3 million in 2015 alone, with over 405,000 attendees across three days (June 19–21). The popularity of EDM and festivals also led some multi-genre festivals not strongly associated with electronic music, such as Coachella and Lollapalooza, to add more electronic acts to their lineup. They often play EDM-specific stages, but major acts such as Deadmau5, Calvin Harris and Subtronics have made overall headlining appearances on the main stages of Lollapalooza and Coachella respectively—placements that are typically associated with rock and alternative acts.Russell Smith of The Globe and Mail felt that the commercial festival industry was an antithesis to the original principles of the rave subculture, citing "the expensive tickets, the giant corporate sponsors, the crass bro culture—shirtless muscle boys who cruise the stadiums, tiny popular girls in bikinis who ride on their shoulders – not to mention the sappy music itself." Drug-related incidents, as well as other complaints surrounding the behaviour of their attendees, have contributed to negative perceptions and opposition to electronic music events by local authorities. After Ultra Music Festival 2014, where a crowd of gatecrashers trampled a security guard on its first day, Miami's city commissioners considered banning the festival from being held in the city, citing the trampling incident, lewd behavior, and complaints by downtown residents of being harassed by attendees. The commissioners voted to allow Ultra to continue being held in Miami due to its positive economic effects, under the condition that its organizers address security, drug usage and lewd behavior by attendees. In 2018, after continued concerns, the commissioners voted to bar the festival from being held in Bayfront Park and downtown Miami, but subsequently approved a proposal to move the event to one of Miami's barrier islands, Virginia Key. Following the festival, which was impacted by transportation issues (as there is only one vehicular link between Virginia Key and mainland Miami) and other problems, Ultra pulled out of the agreement, and negotiated an agreement to return to Bayfront Park. The UK Jungle and Drum and Bass focused record label, Hospital Records, runs a festival called Hospitality in clubs and other locations scattered around the UK and other countries with big EDM influence. These events are usually concerts from artists on the record's roster of musicians. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, cancellation of festivals, accompanied by the restrictions on social distancing has negatively impacted economic activity of festivals and the music industry. Festivals are required to have regulations on health and safety, as well as deal with crisis and risk management, since they are at high risk due to the mass of people that attend. As a result, it has become normal for festivals or performances to be streamed online. During 2020, all large EDM music festivals were postponed or canceled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. On March 4, 2020, Ultra Miami was the first electronic dance music festival to cancel an event since the event could not conform to the state's capacity rules and county's safety protocols and regulations. On April 21, 2020, Electric Forest music festival in Rothbury, Michigan rescheduled their event on June 25–27, 2020 to June 2021 due to health concerns. On July 9, 2020, New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio decided that all sizeable events will be suspended through September 30. As a result, Electric Zoo 2020, which takes place on Randall's Island in New York City during Labor Day Weekend, fully canceled their 2020 event. Electric Daisy Carnival Las Vegas (EDC), the biggest dance music festival in North America, was scheduled to happen on May 15–17, 2020. In April, EDC postponed their May event to October 2–4, 2020, and later declared on August 2 that EDC Las Vegas 2020 would be officially canceled. Instead, EDC CEO Pasquale Rotella announced the celebration of EDC's 25th anniversary on May 21–23, 2021. On April 9, 2021, EDC had not yet released their lineup and COVID-19 safety protocols for the event happening in May 2021. On April 20, 2021, Rotella postponed the festival to October 22–24, 2021. The cancellations of these events economically hurt the music industry and the companies that run these events. EDC 2020 originally sold out of the 200,000 tickets for their first event, but offered full returns for those who could not make it to new dates. Electric Zoo included an incentive for customers to keep their ticket by providing an extra $50 for General Admission tickets and $100 for VIP tickets to spend on merchandise and food on festival grounds.  Most music festival companies offered to rollover the ticket to their next event or give full refunds to those who could not attend, but ultimately lost a lot of customers due to the uncertainty of COVID-19. Dance music has a long association with recreational drug use, particularly with a wide range of drugs that have been categorized under the name "club drugs". Russell Smith noted that the association of drugs and music subcultures was by no means exclusive to electronic music, citing previous examples of music genres that were associated with certain drugs, such as psychedelic rock and LSD, disco music and cocaine, and punk music and heroin. Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), also known as ecstasy, "E", or "Molly", is often considered the drug of choice within the rave culture and is also used at clubs, festivals and house parties. In the rave environment, the sensory effects from the music and lighting are often highly synergistic with the drug. The psychedelic amphetamine quality of MDMA offers multiple reasons for its appeals to users in the "rave" setting. Some users enjoy the feeling of mass communion from the inhibition-reducing effects of the drug, while others use it as party fuel because of the drug's stimulatory effects. Another drug para-Methoxyamphetamine (4-MA) also known as pink ecstasy, PMA, "Death" or "Dr. Death", it is similar to MDMA but they can take up to an hour to produce effects, which can result in hyperthermia and subsequently, organ failure. People who take PMA are often mistaken for it being identified as MDMA. MDMA is occasionally known for being taken in conjunction with psychedelic drugs. The more common combinations include MDMA combined with LSD, MDMA combined with DMT, MDMA with psilocybin mushrooms, and MDMA with the dissociative drug ketamine. Many users use mentholated products while taking MDMA for its cooling sensation while experiencing the drug's effects. Examples include menthol cigarettes, Vicks VapoRub, NyQuil, and lozenges. The incidence of nonmedical ketamine has increased in the context of raves and other parties. However, its emergence as a club drug differs from other club drugs (e.g. MDMA) due to its anesthetic properties (e.g., slurred speech, immobilization) at higher doses; in addition, there are reports of ketamine being sold as "ecstasy". The use of ketamine as part of a "postclubbing experience" has also been documented. Ketamine's rise in the dance culture was rapid in Hong Kong by the end of the 1990s. Before becoming a federally controlled substance in the United States in 1999, ketamine was available as diverted pharmaceutical preparations and as a pure powder sold in bulk quantities from domestic chemical supply companies. Much of the current ketamine diverted for nonmedical use originates in China and India. A number of deaths attributed to apparent drug use have occurred at major electronic music concerts and festivals. The Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum blacklisted Insomniac Events after an underaged attendee died from "complications of ischemic encephalopathy due to methylenedioxymethamphetamine intoxication" during Electric Daisy Carnival 2010; as a result, the event was re-located to Las Vegas the following year. Drug-related deaths during Electric Zoo 2013 in New York City, United States, and Future Music Festival Asia 2014 in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, prompted the final day of both events to be cancelled, while Life in Color cancelled a planned event in Malaysia out of concern for the incident, and other drug-related deaths that occurred at the A State of Trance 650 concerts in Jakarta, Indonesia. In September 2016, the city of Buenos Aires, Argentina banned all electronic music events, pending future legislation, after five drug-related deaths and four injuries at a Time Warp Festival event in the city in April 2016. The ban forced electronic band Kraftwerk to cancel a planned concert in the city, despite arguing that there were dissimilarities between a festival and their concerts. (alphabetical) Beatport Dance music Drop (music) Freetekno Latin freestyle List of electronic dance music venues List of electronic music genres Rave music Remix Sampling (music) Timeline of electronic music genres Fikentscher (2000), p. 5, in discussing the definition of underground dance music as it relates to post-disco music in America, states that: "The prefix 'underground' does not merely serve to explain that the associated type of music—and its cultural context—are familiar only to a small number of informed persons. Underground also points to the sociological function of the music, framing it as one type of music that to have meaning and continuity is kept away, to a large degree, from mainstream society, mass media, and those empowered to enforce prevalent moral and aesthetic codes and values." "Although it can now be heard in Detroit's leading clubs, the local area has shown a marked reluctance to get behind the music. It has been in clubs like the Powerplant (Chicago), The World (New York), The Hacienda (Manchester), Rock City (Nottingham), and Downbeat (Leeds) where the techno sound has found most support. Ironically, the only Detroit club which really championed the sound was a peripatetic party night called Visage, which unromantically shared its name with one of Britain's oldest new romantic groups". Koskoff (2004), p. 44. Butler (2006), pp. 12–13, 94. "How Rave Music Conquered America". The Guardian. August 2, 2012. Archived from the original on December 19, 2013. Retrieved December 14, 2016. Kembrew McLeod (2001). "Genres, Subgenres, Sub-Subgenres and More: Musical and Social Difference Within Electronic/Dance Music Communities". Journal of Popular Music Studies. 13: 59–75. doi:10.1111/j.1533-1598.2001.tb00013.x. Richard James Burgess (2014), The History of Music Production, page 115, Oxford University Press EDM – ELECTRONIC DANCE MUSIC Archived October 22, 2019, at the Wayback Machine, Armada Music Very interesting fact is, the term EDM is mostly in European area often associated with kitschy styles of electronic dance music genres like melodic techno, electro-house and similar cheesy imitations of underground culture. "Silver Apples Made EDM in the 1960s - Supersonic - Ep. 6". YouTube. Archived from the original on April 15, 2021. Retrieved July 11, 2018. Michael Veal (2013), Dub: Soundscapes and Shattered Songs in Jamaican Reggae, pages 26–44, "Electronic Music in Jamaica" Archived November 8, 2023, at the Wayback Machine, Wesleyan University Press Michael Veal (2013), Dub: Soundscapes and Shattered Songs in Jamaican Reggae, pages 85–86 Archived November 8, 2023, at the Wayback Machine, Wesleyan University Press Truesdell, Cliff (2007). Mastering Digital Audio Production: The Professional Music Workflow with Mac OS X. John Wiley & Sons. p. 310. ISBN 9780470165768. Archived from the original on November 8, 2023. Retrieved March 22, 2019. Nicholas Collins, Margaret Schedel, Scott Wilson (2013), Electronic Music: Cambridge Introductions to Music, page 20 Archived November 8, 2023, at the Wayback Machine, Cambridge University Press Holmes, Thom (2008). Electronic and Experimental Music: Technology, Music, and Culture. Routledge. p. 403. ISBN 978-0203929599. Archived from the original on November 8, 2023. Retrieved April 1, 2013. Toop, David (1995). Ocean of Sound. Serpent's Tail. p. 115. ISBN 9781852423827. "The Intersection of Hip Hop and Electronic Dance Music: A History of Influences". Electronica. March 22, 2021. Archived from the original on June 22, 2023. Retrieved June 22, 2023. Arthur P. Molella, Anna Karvellas (2015),"Places of Invention", Smithsonian Institution, p.47. Nicholas Collins, Margaret Schedel, Scott Wilson (2013), Electronic Music: Cambridge Introductions to Music, page 105, Cambridge University Press Brian Coleman, The Technics 1200 — Hammer Of The Gods Archived July 9, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, Medium Billboard, May 21, 1977, page 140 Trevor Pinch, Karin Bijsterveld, The Oxford Handbook of Sound Studies, page 515, Oxford University Press "History of the Record Player Part II: The Rise and Fall". Reverb.com. October 2015. Archived from the original on August 11, 2017. Retrieved June 5, 2016. Six Machines That Changed The Music World Archived July 28, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, Wired, May 2002 Martin Russ (2012), Sound Synthesis and Sampling, page 83 Archived November 8, 2023, at the Wayback Machine, CRC Press Mike Collins (2014), In the Box Music Production: Advanced Tools and Techniques for Pro Tools, page 320 Archived November 8, 2023, at the Wayback Machine, CRC Press Alice Echols (2010), Hot Stuff: Disco and the Remaking of American Culture, page 21 Archived November 8, 2023, at the Wayback Machine, W. W. Norton & Company Alice Echols (2010), Hot Stuff: Disco and the Remaking of American Culture, page 250 Archived November 8, 2023, at the Wayback Machine, W. W. Norton & Company Biddu Orchestra – Bionic Boogie at Discogs Biddu Orchestra – Soul Coaxing at Discogs "Futuristic Journey And Eastern Man CD". CD Universe. Archived from the original on October 25, 2012. Retrieved July 7, 2011. Biddu Orchestra – Futuristic Journey at Discogs (list of releases) Futuristic Journey and Eastern Man at AllMusic "Chart Search: Billboard". Billboard. Shapiro, Peter (2000). Modulations: A History of Electronic Music. Caipirinha Productions, Inc. pp. 254 pages. ISBN 978-0-8195-6498-6. see p.45, 46 "ARTS IN AMERICA; Here's to Disco, It Never Could Say Goodbye". The New York Times. December 10, 2002. Archived from the original on December 24, 2016. Retrieved February 18, 2017. Trynka & Bacon 1996, p. 60. "High-fidelity sound systems". Stereo Review. 48: 89. 1983. Archived from the original on November 8, 2023. Retrieved July 9, 2023. Collins, Schedel & Wilson 2013, p. 97, "synth pop (also called electro pop, techno pop, and the like)"; Hoffmann 2004, p. 2153, "Techno-pop, also termed synth-pop or electro-pop" "Synth-Pop Music Guide: A Brief History of Synth-Pop". Masterclass. June 7, 2021. Archived from the original on July 8, 2023. Retrieved July 9, 2023. Mayumi Yoshida Barakan & Judith Connor Greer (1996). Tokyo city guide. Tuttle Publishing. p. 144. ISBN 0-8048-1964-5. Archived from the original on November 8, 2023. Retrieved June 6, 2011. Carter, Monica (June 30, 2011). "It's Easy When You're Big In Japan: Yellow Magic Orchestra at The Hollywood Bowl". The Vinyl District. Archived from the original on March 21, 2012. Retrieved July 22, 2011. Condry, Ian (2006). Hip-hop Japan: rap and the paths of cultural globalization. Duke University Press. p. 60. ISBN 0-8223-3892-0. Archived from the original on July 25, 2023. Retrieved March 22, 2019. Rockin'f, March 1982, pages 140–141 Archived January 13, 2021, at the Wayback Machine Lewis, John (July 4, 2008). "Back to the future: Yellow Magic Orchestra helped usher in electronica – and they may just have invented hip-hop, too". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on November 11, 2011. Retrieved May 25, 2011. "The Wire, Issues 221–226", The Wire, p. 44, 2002, retrieved May 25, 2011 "Chiemi Manabe – 不思議・少女". Discogs. Archived from the original on April 27, 2017. Retrieved March 22, 2019. "Logic System – Orient Express". Discogs. Archived from the original on April 27, 2017. Retrieved March 22, 2019. Kirn, Peter (2011). Keyboard Presents the Evolution of Electronic Dance Music. Backbeat Books. ISBN 978-1-61713-446-3. Archived from the original on November 8, 2023. Retrieved February 13, 2021. Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (February 14, 2016). "Roland launch new versions of the iconic 808, 909 and 303 instruments". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on March 13, 2016. Retrieved January 16, 2016. Hawking, Tom (January 16, 2014). "10 great songs built around the 808". Flavorwire. Archived from the original on July 2, 2019. Retrieved January 16, 2017. Anderson, Jason (November 27, 2008). "Slaves to the rhythm". CBC News. Archived from the original on January 24, 2018. Retrieved January 16, 2017. Hamilton, Jack (December 16, 2016). "808s and heart eyes". Slate. ISSN 1091-2339. Archived from the original on January 16, 2017. Retrieved January 16, 2017. "Nine Great Tracks That Use the Roland TR-909". Complex. Archived from the original on September 5, 2015. Retrieved March 26, 2018. "9 of the best 909 tracks using the TR-909". Mixmag. Archived from the original on March 26, 2018. Retrieved March 26, 2018. "The Story of the Synth that Changed Pop Forever". www.vice.com. May 27, 2016. Archived from the original on February 17, 2020. Retrieved June 12, 2019. "The Wire, Volumes 143–148", The Wire, p. 21, 1996, archived from the original on November 8, 2023, retrieved May 25, 2011 (see online link Archived March 12, 2017, at the Wayback Machine) "Zapp". Vibe. Vol. 6. August 1999. p. 84. "Electro-Funk > WHAT DID IT ALL MEAN ?". Greg Wilson on electrofunkroots.co.uk. Archived from the original on September 29, 2016. Retrieved December 23, 2009. "Electro". Allmusic. Archived from the original on May 14, 2023. Retrieved June 20, 2012. "Nuts and Bolts". 2004. Archived from the original on November 8, 2023. Retrieved October 15, 2019. "Slaves to the rhythm". CBC News. November 28, 2008. Archived from the original on December 1, 2008. Retrieved November 28, 2008. Taylor, Steve (2004). The A to X of alternative music (2nd ed., reprint ed.). London: Continuum. p. 25. ISBN 9780826482174. Archived from the original on November 8, 2023. Retrieved February 13, 2021. Roy, Ron; Borthwick, Stuart (2004). Popular Music Genres: An Introduction. Edinburgh University Press. p. 255. ISBN 9780748617456. Rickey Vincent (2014). Funk: The Music, The People, and The Rhythm of The One. St. Martin's Press. p. 289. ISBN 978-1-4668-8452-6. Archived from the original on November 8, 2023. Retrieved August 27, 2017. Mitchell, Euan. Interviews: Marshall Jefferson 4clubbers.net[dead link] "Finding Jesse – The Discovery of Jesse Saunders As the Founder of House". Fly Global Music Culture. October 25, 2004. Archived from the original on March 22, 2012. Retrieved August 14, 2012. Paoletta, Michael (December 16, 1989). "Back To Basics". Dance Music Report: 12. Fikentscher, Kai (July–August 2000a). "The club DJ: a brief history of a cultural icon" (PDF). UNESCO Courier: 47. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved January 25, 2016. Around 1986/7, after the initial explosion of house music in Chicago, it became clear that the major recording companies and media institutions were reluctant to market this genre of music, associated with gay African Americans, on a mainstream level. House artists turned to Europe, chiefly London but also cities such as Amsterdam, Berlin, Manchester, Milan, Zurich, and Tel Aviv. ... A third axis leads to Japan where, since the late 1980s, New York club DJs have had the opportunity to play guest spots. Pattison, Louis (April 10, 2010). "Charanjit Singh, acid house pioneer". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 2, 2016. Retrieved March 22, 2019. Aitken, Stuart (May 10, 2011). "Charanjit Singh on how he invented acid house ... by mistake". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 2, 2016. Retrieved March 22, 2019. William Rauscher (May 12, 2010). "Charanjit Singh – Synthesizing: Ten Ragas to a Disco Beat". Resident Advisor. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved June 3, 2011. "What Is Balearic Beat? – BOILER ROOM". BOILER ROOM. July 12, 2014. Archived from the original on October 28, 2016. Retrieved October 28, 2016. Warren, Emma (August 12, 2007). "The birth of rave". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on August 19, 2013. Retrieved October 28, 2016. "Amnesia – history". www.amnesia.es. Archived from the original on October 26, 2016. Retrieved October 28, 2016. Rietveld (1998), pp. 40–50. Rietveld (1998), pp. 54–59. Brewster (2006), pp. 398–443. Reynolds, S. (1999). Generation Ecstasy: Into the World of Techno and Rave Culture. New York: Routledge. p. 71. ISBN 978-0415923736. Detroit's music had hitherto reached British ears as a subset of Chicago house; [Neil] Rushton and the Belleville Three decided to fasten on the word techno – a term that had been bandied about but never stressed – in order to define Detroit as a distinct genre. Unterberger R., Hicks S., Dempsey J, (1999). Music USA: The Rough Guide, Rough Guides Ltd; illustrated edition.(ISBN 9781858284217) "Interview: Derrick May—The Secret of Techno". Mixmag. 1997. Archived from the original on February 14, 2004. Retrieved July 25, 2012. Brewster (2006), p. 419. Cosgrove (1988). John M. (September 1, 2013). "A history of trance music". Archived from the original on February 25, 2017. Retrieved April 22, 2018. Hawkins, Erik (2004). The Complete Guide to Remixing. Boston, MA: Berklee Press. ISBN 0-87639-044-0: p. 51 ""Trance Music—What is Trance Music?"".[permanent dead link] Fassbender, Torsten (2008). The Trance Experience. Knoxville, Tennessee: Sound Org Inc. ISBN 978-0-2405-2107-7: p. 15, 16, 17, 19 Snoman, Rick (2009). The Dance Music Manual: Tools, Toys, and Techniques – Second Edition. Oxford, UK: Elsevier Press. ISBN 0-9748438-4-9: p. 251, 252, 253, 266 "Progressive Trance". AllMusic. Archived from the original on April 17, 2019. Retrieved April 22, 2018. Reynolds, Simon (2013). Energy Flash: A Journey Through Rave Music and Dance Culture. Soft Skull Press. So when I talk about the vibe disappearing from drum and bass, I'm talking about the blackness going as the ragga samples get phased out, the bass loses its reggae feels and becomes more linear and propulsive rather than moving around the beat with a syncopated relation with the drum. AllMusic – Dubstep Archived September 23, 2017, at the Wayback Machine "Absorbed and transfigured elements of techno, drum'n' bass and dub" Reynolds, S.(2012),Energy Flash: A Journey Through Rave Music and Dance Culture, Perseus Books; Reprint edition (Jan 5, 2012), pages 511–516, (ISBN 978-1-59376-407-4). The Big Big Sound System Splashdown Archived May 9, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, New Musical Express, February 21, 1981, ISSN 0028-6362. "Hatcha Biography". IMO Records. October 17, 2011. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved November 22, 2011. Lopez, Korina (December 13, 2011). "Electronic dance music glossary". USA Today. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved May 17, 2012. Electro: 'It's meant so many things in the last 30 years. Originally, it meant futuristic electronic music and was used to describe Kraftwerk and Afrika Bambaataa. Now, it means hard electronic dance music.' Electro can be used as an adjective, such as electro-house and electro-pop. "Electro House". Beat Explorers' Dance Music Guide. Archived from the original on June 15, 2015. Electro House rose to prominence in the early to mid 00's as a heavier alternative to other house subgenres that were prevalent at the time. [...] Electro House usually sits somewhere between 125-135bpm and tracks are arranged in a way that gives a large focus on the climax or drop. This usually contains a heavy bassline, and frequently includes melodic elements to help establish cohesion within the track. "Electro House". DI Radio. Digitally Imported. Archived from the original on June 18, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2018. Buzzing basslines, huge kicks, party rocking drops. House music packed full of gigantic bass and massive synths. Edwards, Owen. "Skrillex". DJ Mag. Archived from the original on May 23, 2015. Lester, Paul (September 1, 2011). "Skrillex (No 1,096)". New band of the day. London: The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 16, 2020. Retrieved August 25, 2012. ... Skrillex, a 23-year-old electro-house/dubstep producer ... Roullier, Ian. "Steve Aoki". DJ Mag. Archived from the original on May 21, 2015. Retrieved April 23, 2018. Steve Aoki's stock has risen once again over the past 12 months as he continues to perform the biggest, most audacious EDM sets across the globe and pump out his stomping, strutting electro house productions. David Jeffries. "Benny Benassi". AllMusic. Archived from the original on January 11, 2022. Retrieved April 23, 2018. "UK Top 40 Hit Database". everyHit.com. Archived from the original on September 13, 2008. Retrieved August 25, 2012. "Perfume Interview" (in Japanese). bounce.com. February 7, 2008. Archived from the original on December 9, 2008. Retrieved June 2, 2009. (English translation Archived March 10, 2021, at the Wayback Machine) "What is Trap Music? Trap Music Explained". Run The Trap. Archived from the original on April 8, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2019. Haithcoat, Rebecca (October 4, 2012). "What the Hell Is Trap Music (and Why Is Dubstep Involved)?". L.A. Weekly. Archived from the original on April 26, 2019. Retrieved April 26, 2019. "RICHARD JAMES BURGESS Interview". July 27, 2010. Archived from the original on December 22, 2020. Retrieved August 8, 2020. "Images for Landscape – European Man". Discogs. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved August 8, 2020. Matos, Michaelangelo (November 13, 2019). "The Mainstreaming Of EDM And The Precipitous Drop That Followed". NPR. Archived from the original on June 12, 2021. Retrieved June 13, 2021. Burgess, Richard James (2014). The History of Music Production. Oxford. pp. 136–146. ISBN 978-0199357161. "The Unspoken Side Of Ghost Producers". Your EDM. June 4, 2018. Archived from the original on August 5, 2018. Retrieved August 5, 2018. "What Exactly Does "Ghost Producer" Mean?". Magnetic Magazine. Archived from the original on June 9, 2017. Retrieved August 5, 2018. "Dance Music's "Dirty Little Secret" Isn't That Big of a Deal". Thump. May 1, 2014. Archived from the original on August 5, 2018. Retrieved August 5, 2018. Khawaja, Jemayel (July 29, 2013). ""Ghost-Producing" Is EDM's Dirty Little Secret". L.A. Weekly. Archived from the original on August 5, 2018. Retrieved August 5, 2018. "Mat Zo just called out the big names who use ghost producers". inthemix. June 3, 2015. Archived from the original on December 23, 2015. Retrieved August 5, 2018. Walzer, Daniel A. (October 25, 2016). "Independent music production: how individuality, technology and creative entrepreneurship influence contemporary music industry practices". Creative Industries Journal. 10 (1): 21–39. doi:10.1080/17510694.2016.1247626. ISSN 1751-0694. S2CID 151981731. Ben Sisario (April 4, 2012). "Electronic Dance Concerts Turn Up Volume, Tempting Investors". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 24, 2016. Retrieved February 18, 2017. Sherburne, Philip. "Harder, Better, Faster, Stronger" Archived April 5, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, Spin Magazine, pages 41–53, October 2011 Chaplin, Julia & Michel, Sia. "Fire Starters" Archived April 3, 2023, at the Wayback Machine, Spin Magazine, page 40, March 1997, Spin Media LLC. The 30 Greatest EDM Albums of All Time Archived January 29, 2015, at the Wayback Machine, Rolling Stone, August 2, 2012 Ray of Light—Madonna Archived November 20, 2015, at the Wayback Machine Allmusic Sanneh, Kelefa (September 2, 2001). "A Pioneer, Briefly, Of a New Sound". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 8, 2012. Retrieved December 9, 2012. "A history of dance music: Tiësto DJs at the Athens Olympics opening ceremony". The Guardian. Archived from the original on May 31, 2023. Retrieved December 2, 2015. Caulfield, Keith (October 17, 2003). "Billboard Bits: Jack Black, Dub Narcotic, Milky". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 8, 2023. Retrieved June 28, 2010. Goodman, Jessica (July 8, 2016). "Justin Timberlake explains how David Bowie influenced 'SexyBack'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 9, 2016. Retrieved July 9, 2016. Craddock, Lauren (July 8, 2016). "How David Bowie Inspired Justin Timberlake's 'SexyBack'". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 8, 2016. Retrieved July 9, 2016. Abel Alvarado. "It's a $6.2B industry but, how did EDM get so popular?". CNN. Archived from the original on September 4, 2018. Retrieved March 29, 2017. "DJ David Guetta leads the EDM charge into mainstream". USA Today. June 5, 2012. Archived from the original on November 5, 2017. Retrieved January 25, 2014. Jim Fusilli (June 6, 2012). "The Dumbing Down of Electronic Dance Music". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on March 29, 2017. Retrieved March 13, 2017. "'The potential for disaster was just too big': small Canadian city shuts down Skrillex gig". FACT Magazine. June 26, 2012. Archived from the original on July 12, 2012. Retrieved November 16, 2012. "Is dubstep the new metal?". Mixmag. Archived from the original on October 16, 2012. Retrieved November 16, 2012. "New Dance/Electronic Songs Chart Launches With Will.i.am & Britney at No. 1". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 10, 2016. Retrieved August 13, 2014. Peoples, Glenn. "EDM's Social Dance." Billboard: The International Newsweekly of Music, Video and Home Entertainment July 6, 2013: 8. ProQuest. Web. July 20, 2015 . "Just How Big is EDM?". Music Trades Magazine. Archived from the original on April 8, 2022. Retrieved June 14, 2014. "The Year EDM Sold Out: Swedish House Mafia, Skrillex and Deadmau5 Hit the Mainstream". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 8, 2013. Retrieved January 27, 2014. "Exclusive: SFX Acquires ID&T, Voodoo Experience". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 1, 2018. Retrieved April 18, 2013. "SFX Purchases 75% Stake in ID&T, Announce U.S. Edition of Tomorrowland at Ultra". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 22, 2014. Retrieved April 16, 2013. Zel McCarthy (June 20, 2013). "Live Nation Teams With Insomniac Events in 'Creative Partnership'". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved August 8, 2014. "Live Nation Acquires L.A. EDM Promoter HARD: Will the Mainstream Get More Ravey?". Spin. Archived from the original on April 5, 2018. Retrieved April 25, 2014. Dan Rys (May 9, 2012). "Live Nation Buys EDM Entertainment Company Cream Holdings Ltd, Owner of Creamfields Festivals". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved April 25, 2014. Ben Sisario (December 20, 2012). "Boston Radio Station Switches to Electronic Dance Format". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 23, 2012. Retrieved December 22, 2012. Kerri Mason (January 6, 2014). "SFX and Clear Channel Partner for Digital, Terrestrial Radio Push". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 11, 2014. Retrieved March 31, 2014. Kerri Mason (January 6, 2014). "John Sykes, Robert Sillerman on New Clear Channel, SFX Partnership: 'We Want to Be the Best'". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 10, 2014. Retrieved March 31, 2014. "7Up Turns to Electronic Dance Music to Lift Spirits – and Sales". Advertising Age. April 8, 2014. Archived from the original on June 29, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015. "Exclusive: Bolstering Massive EDM Strategy, T-Mobile Debuts Above & Beyond Video Series". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 19, 2021. Retrieved June 27, 2015. Burns, Will (May 26, 2014). "Is Electronic Dance Music The Ticket To Reach Millennials?". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved June 13, 2021. Kusnierek, Timmy (April 21, 2016). "Why Millennials And EDM Get Along So Well". Archived from the original on June 18, 2021. Retrieved June 13, 2021. "Booming business: EDM goes mainstream". Miami Herald. March 26, 2014. Archived from the original on July 2, 2014. Retrieved March 31, 2014. Valerie Lee (June 27, 2014). "An Electric Desert Experience: The 2014 EDC Las Vegas Phenomenon". Dancing Astronaut. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved December 9, 2014. Roy Trakin (April 3, 2014). "Ultra Music Festival's 16th Anything but Sweet, Though Still Potent". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 21, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2014. Mac, Ryan. "The Fall Of SFX: From Billion-Dollar Company To Bankruptcy Watch". Forbes. Archived from the original on September 5, 2015. Retrieved September 3, 2015. Sisario, Ben (August 14, 2015). "SFX Entertainment Is Back on the Block". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 7, 2017. Retrieved August 15, 2015. Faughnder, Ryan (August 14, 2015). "After failed CEO takeover bid, what's next for SFX Entertainment?". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 3, 2023. Retrieved August 17, 2015. "The $6.9 Billion Bubble? Inside The Uncertain Future Of EDM". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 28, 2016. Retrieved January 17, 2016. Blake, Jimmy (July 2016). "Has EDM opened doors or slammed them shut in dance music?". Archived from the original on November 6, 2020. Retrieved October 8, 2016. Sisario, Ben (December 7, 2016). "SFX Entertainment Emerges From Bankruptcy With New Name: LiveStyle". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 26, 2017. Retrieved February 9, 2017. "SFX Emerges From Bankruptcy with a New Name, LiveStyle, and New Leader in Randy Phillips". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 11, 2017. Retrieved February 9, 2017. "Live Nation Acquires Rock in Rio Festival". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2018. "Live Nation Acquires Rock in Rio Festival". Variety. May 2, 2018. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2018. Middleton, Ryan (September 20, 2021). "Superstruct Entertainment Purchases Dutch Festival Brand ID&T". Magnetic Magazine. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved January 10, 2022. "UK-based live events firm Superstruct Entertainment buys electronic music giant ID&T". Music Business Worldwide. September 17, 2021. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved January 10, 2022. "LiveXLive Acquires EDM Promoter React Presents for $2 Million". Digital Music News. February 10, 2020. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved January 10, 2022. Brooks, Dave (September 5, 2019). "Randy Phillips Steps Down as CEO of LiveStyle, Shifts Focus to Managing Boy Band Why Don't We: Exclusive". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved January 10, 2022. "Is EDM killing the art of DJing?". Mixmag. Archived from the original on May 29, 2014. Retrieved June 7, 2014. "EDM Will Eat Itself: Big Room stars are getting bored". Mixmag. Archived from the original on January 18, 2014. Retrieved January 20, 2014. "Deadmau5 Trolls Martin Garrix with 'Old MacDonald Had a Farm' Remix of 'Animals' at Ultra". radio.com. March 31, 2014. Archived from the original on April 28, 2014. "Deadmau5 gives reason for techno track: "EDM sounds the same to me"". Mixmag. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved April 25, 2014. "Deadmau5: The Man Who Trolled the World". Mixmag. Archived from the original on April 25, 2014. Retrieved April 25, 2014. "Afrojack and Deadmau5 argue over what's "good music"". Mixmag. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved January 20, 2014. "SNL Digital Shorts return with 'Davvincii' to skewer EDM and overpaid DJs". The Verge. May 18, 2014. Archived from the original on July 8, 2017. Retrieved August 31, 2017. "Watch Saturday Night Live Mock Big Room DJ Culture". Mixmag. Archived from the original on June 5, 2014. Retrieved June 7, 2014. "SNL takes stab at EDM culture in new digital short featuring 'Davvincii'". Dancing Astronaut. May 2014. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved June 7, 2014. "David Guetta's New Track Is Worse For Techno Than It Is For EDM". Ministry of Sound. Archived from the original on September 12, 2018. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Knopper, Steve (March 12, 2020). "'The Balloon Deflated': What's Next for Dance Music After the EDM Era". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 4, 2021. Retrieved June 13, 2021. "Electronic Music Industry Now Worth Close to $7 Billion Amid Slowing Growth". Thump. Vice Media. May 25, 2015. Archived from the original on May 28, 2015. Retrieved January 17, 2016. "DJ Sky shines at JD Music Fest". www.pulse.com.gh. October 7, 2019. Archived from the original on October 7, 2019. Retrieved October 9, 2019. "DJSky delivers electrifying performance at JD Music Fest". www.ghanaweb.com. October 7, 2019. Archived from the original on November 8, 2023. Retrieved October 9, 2019. Online, Peace FM. "Kuami Eugene, Wendy Shay, Edem, Yaa Pono, Others For Jack Daniel's Music Festival". www.peacefmonline.com. Archived from the original on October 9, 2019. Retrieved October 9, 2019. "منسق الموسيقى وحفلات ال dj العالمي سكاي وفريقه زار مستشفى سرطان الاطفال في غانا". يا صور (in Arabic). Archived from the original on October 9, 2019. Retrieved October 9, 2019. "DJ Sky brags, says he introduced electronic dance music to Ghana". Entertainment. October 11, 2019. Archived from the original on October 11, 2019. Retrieved October 11, 2019. WatsUpTV (October 11, 2019). "Introduced Electronic Dance Music to Ghana, Djsky on WatsUp TV – watsup.tv". WatsUp.TV, Pan African Entertainment TV Show (in French). Archived from the original on October 11, 2019. Retrieved October 11, 2019. Mwendera, Karen (July 1, 2019). "#30Under30: Creatives Category 2019". Forbes Africa. Archived from the original on August 19, 2019. Retrieved September 17, 2019. "Rophnan: Roots with Rare Genre". Addis Fortune. September 9, 2018. Archived from the original on July 30, 2019. Retrieved July 29, 2019. "Rophnan shines at Leza Awards night | The Reporter Ethiopia English". www.thereporterethiopia.com. October 27, 2018. Archived from the original on October 25, 2020. Retrieved August 8, 2020. Hannah Karp (October 5, 2014). "In China, Concert Promoter Wants EDM in the Mix". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on February 6, 2017. Retrieved March 6, 2017. "Is the EDM Scene in China about to Pop Off?". Thump. Vice Media. October 12, 2015. Archived from the original on April 29, 2016. Retrieved January 17, 2016. "technoton-magazin.com – technoton magazin Resources and Information". www.technoton-magazin.com. Archived from the original on May 7, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2015. "A fatal toll on concertgoers as raves boost cities' income". Los Angeles Times. February 3, 2013. Archived from the original on February 3, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2015. Lisa Rose, "N.J. basks in the glow of the brave new rave: Electronic dance festivals go mainstream" Archived December 15, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, Newark Star Ledger, May 16, 2012. Sarah Maloy (August 4, 2012). "Lollapalooza's Perry Farrell on EDM and Elevating the Aftershow: Video". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 15, 2021. Retrieved January 13, 2015. Melissa Ruggieri (April 8, 2014). "Study: TomorrowWorld had $85m impact". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Archived from the original on August 18, 2021. Retrieved August 18, 2021. "Report Reveals EDC Vegas' $1.3B+ Impact on Local Economy | Insomniac".[permanent dead link] "House Music Comes Home: How Chicago's Summer of Music Festivals Has Reinvigorated the City's Dance Spirit". Noisey. Vice. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved December 9, 2014. "How Coachella's final day symbolizes the electronic music fever pitch". Las Vegas Weekly. April 14, 2014. Archived from the original on November 8, 2023. Retrieved December 9, 2014. "Russell Smith: Exposés on EDM festivals shift long overdue blame". The Globe and Mail. July 12, 2015. Archived from the original on April 21, 2017. Retrieved October 3, 2015. "Music festival safety recommendations come too late for family". CBC News. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved October 3, 2015. "Ultra Fest to Stay in Miami, City Commission Decides". Rolling Stone. April 24, 2014. Archived from the original on April 25, 2014. Retrieved April 25, 2014. "Miami Commission: Ultra stays in downtown Miami". Miami Herald. Archived from the original on April 26, 2014. Retrieved April 25, 2014. "Ultra Music Announces Review After Festival Security Draws Criticism". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 4, 2014. Retrieved April 7, 2014. Duran, Jose D. (September 25, 2018). "Ultra Music Festival 2019 Tickets on Sale; Fate of Bayfront Park Location to Be Decided Thursday". Miami New Times. Archived from the original on March 31, 2019. Retrieved September 27, 2018. "Ultra Music Festival gave thousands to Miami campaigns. Will donations sway votes?". Miami Herald. Archived from the original on March 31, 2019. Retrieved September 27, 2018. "Miami Commission votes down Ultra Music Festival's return to Bayfront Park". Miami Herald. Archived from the original on March 31, 2019. Retrieved September 27, 2018. "Ultra Music Festival gets new home on Virginia Key for at least one year". Miami Herald. Archived from the original on February 28, 2019. Retrieved November 22, 2018. Nelson, Jess (July 25, 2019). "Ultra Music Festival to Return to Bayfront Park in 2020". Miami New Times. Archived from the original on August 6, 2019. Retrieved August 12, 2019. "Ultra Music Festival Announces New Miami 2020 Dates in Classic Downtown Location". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 2, 2019. Retrieved September 7, 2019. "Hospitality DNB". Archived from the original on January 22, 2023. Retrieved January 23, 2023. Khlystova, Olena; Kalyuzhnova, Yelena; Belitski, Maksim (February 1, 2022). "The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the creative industries: A literature review and future research agenda". Journal of Business Research. 139: 1192–1210. doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2021.09.062. ISSN 0148-2963. PMC 8490124. PMID 34629569. "BREAKING: Ultra Miami Cancelled Over Coronavirus Fears". Your EDM. March 4, 2020. Archived from the original on March 1, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "COVID-19 Concert Cancellation Tracker: Gauging How Long The Event Shutdown Will Last [Updates]". L4LM. February 16, 2022. Archived from the original on March 1, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Hatfield, Amanda. "Electric Zoo 2020 cancelled due to coronavirus". BrooklynVegan. Archived from the original on March 1, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Brooks, Dave (August 2, 2020). "Electric Daisy Carnival Officially Canceled for 2020, Founder Announces". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 1, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "EDC Las Vegas Officially Canceled For 2020". Siachen Studios. August 3, 2020. Archived from the original on March 1, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Blistein, Jon (April 9, 2021). "Electric Daisy Carnival to Take Place in May Despite Continued COVID-19 Concerns". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 1, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "COVID-19 effect: EDC Las Vegas postpones festival to October". ANI News. Archived from the original on November 8, 2023. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Bain, Katie (April 23, 2021). "EDC 2021's Failure to Launch: How a Plan to Bring 200,000 People to Vegas Fell Apart". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 1, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2022. Hatfield, Amanda. "Electric Zoo 2020 cancelled due to coronavirus". BrooklynVegan. Archived from the original on March 1, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2022. P. Nash Jenkins (September 20, 2013). "Electronic Dance Music's Love Affair With Ecstasy: A History". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on April 25, 2020. Retrieved March 6, 2017. Carvalho M, Carmo H, Costa VM, Capela JP, Pontes H, Remião F, Carvalho F, Bastos Mde L (August 2012). "Toxicity of amphetamines: an update". Arch. Toxicol. 86 (8): 1167–1231. doi:10.1007/s00204-012-0815-5. PMID 22392347. S2CID 2873101. MDMA has become a popular recreational drug of abuse at nightclubs and rave or techno parties, where it is combined with intense physical activity (all-night dancing), crowded conditions (aggregation), high ambient temperature, poor hydration, loud noise, and is commonly taken together with other stimulant club drugs and/or alcohol (Parrott 2006; Von Huben et al. 2007; Walubo and Seger 1999). This combination is probably the main reason why it is generally seen an increase in toxicity events at rave parties since all these factors are thought to induce or enhance the toxicity (particularly the hyperthermic response) of MDMA. ... Another report showed that MDMA users displayed multiple regions of grey matter reduction in the neocortical, bilateral cerebellum, and midline brainstem brain regions, potentially accounting for previously reported neuropsychiatric impairments in MDMA users (Cowan et al. 2003). Neuroimaging techniques, like PET, were used in combination with a 5-HTT ligand in human ecstasy users, showing lower density of brain 5-HTT sites (McCann et al. 1998, 2005, 2008). Other authors correlate the 5-HTT reductions with the memory deficits seen in humans with a history of recreational MDMA use (McCann et al. 2008). A recent study prospectively assessed the sustained effects of ecstasy use on the brain in novel MDMA users using repeated measurements with a combination of different neuroimaging parameters of neurotoxicity. The authors concluded that low MDMA dosages can produce sustained effects on brain microvasculature, white matter maturation, and possibly axonal damage (de Win et al. 2008). Reynolds, Simon (1999). Generation Ecstasy: Into the World of Techno and Rave Culture. Routledge. p. 81. ISBN 978-0415923736. Archived from the original on November 8, 2023. Retrieved February 13, 2021. Davies, Caroline (May 25, 2018). "Warning over fake ecstasy tablets after seven people die in Scotland". The Guardian. Archived from the original on February 2, 2020. Retrieved July 10, 2013. Saner, Emine (July 22, 2013). "PMA: 'Not just another drug scare story'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on November 8, 2019. Retrieved May 25, 2018. "Director's Report to the National Advisory Council on Drug Abuse". National Institute on Drug Abuse. May 2000. Archived from the original on August 26, 2009. Increased non-medical use references: Awuonda, M (July 13, 1996). "Swedes alarmed at ketamine misuse". The Lancet. 348 (9020): 122. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(05)64628-4. S2CID 53269227. Curran, HV; Morgan, C (April 2000). "Cognitive, dissociative and psychotogenic effects of ketamine in recreational users on the night of drug use and 3 days later". Addiction. 95 (4): 575–90. doi:10.1046/j.1360-0443.2000.9545759.x. PMID 10829333. Gahlinger, PM (June 1, 2004). "Club drugs: MDMA, gamma-hydroxybutyrate (GHB), Rohypnol, and ketamine". American Family Physician. 69 (11): 2619–2626. PMID 15202696. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved November 15, 2015. Jansen, KL (March 6, 1993). "Non-medical use of ketamine". BMJ. 306 (6878): 601–2. doi:10.1136/bmj.306.6878.601. PMC 1676978. PMID 8461808. Joe-Laidler & Hunt (2008) Joe-Laidler & Hunt (2008). Ketamine sold as "ecstasy" references: Tanner-Smith, E.E. (July 2006). "Pharmacological content of tablets sold as "ecstasy": Results from an online testing service" (PDF). Drug and Alcohol Dependence. 83 (3): 247–254. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2005.11.016. PMID 16364567. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 4, 2016. Retrieved November 15, 2015. Copeland, J.; Dillon, P. (2005). "The health and psycho-social consequences of ketamine use". International Journal of Drug Policy. 16 (2): 122–131. doi:10.1016/j.drugpo.2004.12.003. Measham, Fiona; Parker, Howard; Aldridge, Judith (2001). Dancing on Drugs: Risk, Health and Hedonism in the British Club Scene. London: Free Association Books. ISBN 9781853435126.[verification needed][page needed] Moore, K; Measham, F (2006). "Ketamine use: Minimising problems and maximising pleasure". Drugs and Alcohol Today. 6 (3): 29–32. doi:10.1108/17459265200600047. Morris, H.; Wallach, J. (July 2014). "From PCP to MXE: A comprehensive review of the non-medical use of dissociative drugs". Drug Testing and Analysis. 6 (7–8): 614–632. doi:10.1002/dta.1620. PMID 24678061. "'EDC' Raver Teen Sasha Rodriguez Died From Ecstasy Use". LA Weekly. August 31, 2010. Archived from the original on September 22, 2018. Retrieved January 4, 2017. "Man dies at Electric Daisy Carnival in Las Vegas". Chicago Tribune. June 22, 2014. Archived from the original on January 13, 2015. Retrieved January 13, 2015. Jon Pareles (September 1, 2014). "A Bit of Caution Beneath the Thump". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 23, 2019. Retrieved February 18, 2017. "Electric Zoo to Clamp Down on Drugs This Year". The Wall Street Journal. August 28, 2014. Archived from the original on November 20, 2018. Retrieved March 13, 2017. "Six dead from 'meth' at Future Music Festival Asia 2014: police". Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on October 18, 2019. Retrieved October 3, 2015. "Blanked out: Life In Color cancelled due to drug deaths". Malaysia Star. Archived from the original on July 11, 2017. Retrieved April 7, 2014. "Police Probe 'A State of Trance' Festival Drug Deaths". Jakarta Globe. Archived from the original on April 8, 2014. Retrieved April 7, 2014. "Three Dead After State of Trance Festival in Jakarta, Drugs Suspected". Spin.com. March 17, 2014. Archived from the original on January 31, 2020. Retrieved October 3, 2015. "Kraftwerk Can't Play Buenos Aires Concert Due to Electronic Music Ban: Report". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved January 5, 2017. "Buenos Aires bans electronic music festivals after five deaths". The Guardian. April 26, 2016. Archived from the original on July 13, 2019. Retrieved January 5, 2017. "66th Annual Grammy Awards Nominees". Grammy Awards. The Recording Academy. Retrieved February 8, 2024. "Top 100 DJs – 2023". DJ Mag. Thrust Publishing. Retrieved February 8, 2024. Rodriguez, Krystal (September 23, 2014). "Here are the winners of this year's Ibiza DJ Awards". In the Mix Webzine Australia. Zalokar, Gregor. "DJ Awards 2014 Winners". EMF Magazine. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 25, 2015. "30th Annual International Dance Music Awards—Winter Music Conference 2015—WMC 2015". Winter Music Conference. Archived from the original on March 13, 2018. Retrieved December 1, 2013. Larry Flick (August 12, 1995). "Gonzales Prepares More Batches of Bucketheads". Billboard. p. 24. Archived from the original on November 8, 2023. Retrieved February 13, 2021. "2022 Winners". The American Music Awards. MRC. Archived from the original on November 21, 2022. Retrieved April 17, 2023. "American Music Awards 2014: Complete List of Winners and Nominees". Los Angeles Times. October 13, 2014. Archived from the original on October 13, 2014. Retrieved February 22, 2018. Brewster, Bill (2006). Last Night a DJ Saved My Life. London: Headline. Retrieved November 3, 2022. Butler, Mark Jonathan (2006). Unlocking the Groove: Rhythm, Meter, and Musical Design in Electronic Dance Music. Indiana University Press. ISBN 9780253346629. Archived from the original on November 8, 2023. Retrieved November 20, 2015. Collins, Nick; Schedel, Margaret; Wilson, Scott (2013). Electronic Music. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-24454-2. Cosgrove (1988).[full citation needed], Fikentscher, Kai (2000). 'You Better Work'!: Underground Dance Music in New York. Hanover, NH: Wesleyan University Press. ISBN 9780819564047. Hoffmann, Frank (2004). Encyclopedia of Recorded Sound. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-135-94950-1. Joe-Laidler, K.; Hunt, G. (June 1, 2008). "Sit down to float: The cultural meaning of ketamine use in Hong Kong". Addiction Research & Theory. 16 (3): 259–271. doi:10.1080/16066350801983673. PMC 2744071. PMID 19759834. Koskoff, Ellen (2004). Music Cultures in the United States: an Introduction. Routledge. ISBN 9780415965897. Rietveld, Hillegonda C. (1998). This is Our House: House Music, Cultural Spaces, and Technologies. Popular Cultural Studies. Vol. 13. Ashgate. ISBN 9781857422429. Graham St John, editor. Weekend Societies: Electronic Dance Music Festivals and Event-Cultures, 2017, Bloomsbury Academic Trynka, Paul; Bacon, Tony, eds. (1996). Rock Hardware. Balafon Books. ISBN 978-0-87930-428-7. Hewitt, Michael. Music Theory for Computer Musicians. 1st Ed. U.S. Cengage Learning, 2008. ISBN 978-1-59863-503-4 "Electronic dance music glossary" by Moby for USA Today (December 13, 2011) Simplified guide to the various EDM genres with sample tracks: "An Idiot's Guide to EDM Genres" Vice Magazine. 2013. Rave Culture, a handy guide for middle America: "Explaining Rave Culture to Americans" "Beat Explorers Dance Music Guide" from "BeatExplorers"