Look up aka, AKA, or A.K.A. in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Aka, AKA or a.k.a. may refer to: "Also known as", used to introduce an alternative name Aka language (Sudan) Aka language, in the Central African Republic Hruso language, in India, also referred to as Aka a prefix in the names of Great Andamanese languages Akan language (ISO 639-2 and ISO 639-3 codes) Aka (name), a list of people with the given name or surname Aka people, in the Central African Republic and Congo Aka (tribe), of Kameng, Arunachal Pradesh, India AKA (rapper), stage name of South African Kiernan Forbes (1988–2023) Aka, Fukuoka, a village Mount Aka (Daisetsuzan), Daisetsuzan National Park, Hokkaidō Mount Aka (Yatsugatake), Yatsugatake Mountains, Honshū Aka Island, Okinawa Prefecture Aka River, Yamagata Prefecture Aka, Hungary, a village Aka Hills, Arunachal Pradesh, India Aka, Iran, a village in Khuzestan Province AKA (2023 film), a French-language film AKA (2002 film), a drama film "A.K.A." (Jericho episode), a 2007 episode of the TV series Jericho a.k.a. Cartoon, a Canadian animation company Aka Pella (Histeria!), a character from the cartoon Histeria! Channel AKA, former name of the UK music television channel Now 70s The A.K.A.s, an American rock band A.K.A. (album), a 2014 album by Jennifer Lopez "AKA", a video by True Widow Aka (Burmese), martial arts movements Aka (sailing), part of a multi-hull boat Aka Arena, a football stadium in Hønefoss, Norway American Kickboxing Academy American Kitefliers Association Australian Karting Association Alcoholic ketoacidosis, a medical condition A retired US Navy hull classification symbol: Attack cargo ship (AKA) Authentication and Key Agreement, a security protocol used in 3G networks Ankang Fuqiang Airport (IATA code: AKA), China Atka Airport (FAA location identifier: AKA), Alaska Aka Station, a railway station in Aka, Fukuoka Prefecture, Japan AKA (car), a defunct automobile manufacture from Czechoslovak Manpower Directorate (Agaf Koakh Adam) of the Israeli Defence Forces Alpha Kappa Alpha, an African-American sorority Aga Khan Academies, a network non-denominational day and residential schools Search for "aka" on Wikipedia. Akas (disambiguation) Akka (disambiguation) Akha (disambiguation) All pages with titles beginning with Aka All pages with titles containing Aka This disambiguation page lists articles associated with the title Aka. If an internal link led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article.