Christina María Aguilera (/ˌæɡɪˈlɛərə/ AG-il-AIR-ə, Spanish: [kɾisˈtina maˈɾi.a aɣiˈleɾa]; born December 18, 1980) is an American singer, songwriter, actress, and television personality. Referred to as the "Voice of a Generation", she is noted for her four-octave vocal range, musical reinventions, sustaining high notes including use of the whistle register, and a signature use of melisma throughout her music. Recognized as an influential figure in popular music, she also became known for incorporating controversial themes such as feminism, sexuality, LGBT culture and the sex-positive movement into her work. Aguilera was also honoured as a Disney Legend, for her contributions to The Walt Disney Company. After appearing on The All-New Mickey Mouse Club (1993–1994) as a child, Aguilera recorded "Reflection", the theme for the 1998 animated film Mulan and signed a record deal with RCA Records. She rose to fame in 1999 with her self-titled debut album and the US Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles, "Genie in a Bottle", "What a Girl Wants" and "Come On Over Baby (All I Want Is You)". Aguilera also won the Grammy Award for Best New Artist and followed with Mi Reflejo (2000) and My Kind of Christmas (2000); with the former becoming the best-selling Latin pop album of 2000. After gaining more control over her career, Aguilera sought a departure from her teen idol image and released Stripped (2002). Despite an initial mixed response, the album went on to become one of the best-selling albums of the 21st century. Aguilera underwent another reinvention with the release of the critically praised old-school-music inspired Back to Basics (2006). Throughout these periods, she amassed numerous international successes, including the number-one single "Lady Marmalade", alongside "Beautiful", "Dirrty", "Can't Hold Us Down", "Fighter", "Ain't No Other Man" and "Hurt". Throughout the early 2010s, Aguilera had a moderately successful period with the albums Bionic (2010) and Lotus (2012), with their respective lead singles, "Not Myself Tonight" and "Your Body", topping the Dance Club Songs chart. She also starred in the 2010 film Burlesque and contributed to its soundtrack, earning a Golden Globe Award nomination. Aguilera returned to the top of the charts with a string of collaborations, including "Feel This Moment", "Say Something", and "Moves like Jagger"; with the latter reaching number-one on the Hot 100, making Aguilera one of the few artists to reach the top spot over three decades. She found critical success with her follow-up albums Liberation (2018) and Aguilera (2022). Her concurrent ventures included a role in the series Nashville (2015), roles in the films The Emoji Movie (2017) and Zoe (2018), becoming an ambassador for the World Food Programme (WFP), performing two concert residencies and serving as a coach on the reality competition show The Voice (2011–2016). Aguilera is one of the best-selling music artists of all time, with estimated sales of over 90 million records sold worldwide. Considered a pop culture icon and a triple threat entertainer, she has been named one of the greatest vocalists of all time by publications such as Rolling Stone and Consequence of Sound and has been hailed as one of the most successful artists to come out of the 2000s. In 2009, Billboard named her the twentieth most successful artist of the decade, and was ranked eighth on VH1's list of greatest women in music. Aguilera has since been regarded as one of the most influential Latin artists in the entertainment industry, having helped shape the "Latin explosion" in the music industry. Her accolades include five Grammy Awards, two Latin Grammy Awards, six ALMA Awards, two MTV Video Music Awards (VMA), one Billboard Music Award, one Guinness World Record, and a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Christina María Aguilera was born on December 18, 1980, in New York City, to Shelly Loraine (née Fidler) and Fausto Wagner Xavier Aguilera. Her father is an Ecuadorian emigrant from Guayaquil while her mother has German, Irish, Welsh, and Dutch ancestry. Fausto Aguilera was a United States Army sergeant, and Shelly Loraine was a violinist in the American Youth Symphony before becoming a Spanish translator. Due to Fausto's military service, Aguilera's family moved frequently, living in New Jersey and Texas. In 1983, they moved to Japan and lived in Sagamihara for at least two years. During her youth in Pittsburgh metropolitan area, Aguilera attended North Allegheny Intermediate High School before leaving there to be homeschooled to avoid bullying she experienced at school. In 1986, the family returned to the United States, and settled in Pennsylvania, where they welcomed her younger sister, Rachel, in 1986. Aguilera has spoken out about her father's physically and emotionally abusive behavior. She noted that this is what made her turn to music, noting that, "growing up in an unstable environment and whatnot, music was my only real escape". In 1987, Shelly filed to divorce Fausto and moved with Aguilera and Rachel to her mother's home in Rochester, a suburb of Pittsburgh. She later married James Kearns with whom she had a son named Michael. In 2012, following decades of estrangement, Aguilera expressed interest in reconciling with her biological father. Aguilera moving to her grandmother's home allowed her to explore her grandmother's records, which featured mostly soul and blues singers and increased her interest in music. She also began to practice singing in public and competing in talent contests. Following numerous contests, she earned reputation in her neighborhood as the "little girl with a big voice" and received widespread attention from local television and radio programs. In 1990, she performed the popular song "A Sunday Kind of Love" on the reality competition show Star Search, but was eliminated during the semi-final round. Aguilera was eventually invited to sing "The Star-Spangled Banner" before Pittsburgh Penguins hockey, Pittsburgh Steelers football, and Pittsburgh Pirates baseball games, and at the 1992 Stanley Cup Finals. In 1991, Aguilera auditioned for a position on The All-New Mickey Mouse Club (MMC), aired on the Disney Channel. She ran against 400 candidates, and while she made the shortlist she was ultimately rejected for not meeting the minimum age requirement. One year later, in 1992, Aguilera received a call from one of the show's producers asking if she was still interested in becoming a "Mouseketeer". She once again competed for a spot (this time, against 15,000 candidates) and was selected to join the variety program the following year. Her fellow cast members included Ryan Gosling, Keri Russell, Britney Spears, and Justin Timberlake. During the show recordings—which included Aguilera performing musical numbers and comedy sketches—she moved with her family to Orlando, Florida. In 1994, it was reported the series would not return for a new season. Aiming to begin a music career, Aguilera moved to Japan in 1997. She was selected to record a duet with Japanese singer Keizo Nakanishi, with whom she performed in concert shows around the country. Their song, "All I Wanna Do", was released as a single but failed to reach commercial success. In June 1997, Aguilera went on to Romania to represent the United States in a singers contest during the Golden Stag Festival, but she failed to win over the audience. Seeking a recording contract, Aguilera recorded numerous demo tapes directed to record labels, including Walt Disney Records, for which she sent a cover of "Run to You" by Whitney Houston. She eventually was chosen to record "Reflection", the theme song from the animated film Mulan (1998), which reached number 15 on the Billboard Adult Contemporary chart. Following the attention she received with "Reflection", Aguilera caught the ear of Ron Fair, the A&R executive from RCA Records, who consequently signed Aguilera to the label. In late 1998, she began to record her debut studio album into which producers reportedly invested over $1 million worth of writers, producers and vocal lessons. In May 1999, Aguilera released "Genie in a Bottle", the lead single off her long-awaited debut album, which topped the Billboard Hot 100 for five consecutive weeks and became the second best-selling single of 1999. The song became an international success, increasing Aguilera's popularity worldwide, topping the charts in over 20 countries. The single also attracted the attention of conservatives including celebrities such as Debbie Gibson that spoke out against its lyrical content, and was eventually considered "too provocative" to be sung by a teen idol. Due to the criticism, Radio Disney replaced the song with a censored version. The song was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance. Aguilera's self-titled debut album, Christina Aguilera, was released on August 24, 1999, to critical praise, debuting at number one on the Billboard 200. It catapulted Aguilera into fame globally and sold over ten million copies in its first year. It was later certified eight times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), and it has sold over 17 million copies worldwide. Originally, Aguilera's desire was to create material directly inspired by R&B and soul, but the label opted for a more teen pop production due the genre's high financial return in the late 1990s. At the 42nd Annual Grammy Awards, Aguilera won the Best New Artist category for which Time credited the award for "[helping] certify her credentials as a real singer". I was completely blown away, shocked, overwhelmed and thrilled. I didn't expect it. I've dreamed of that since I was eight years old. I was rambling off the top of my head, my knees were shaking and I'm still floating on air because of it! —Aguilera on winning Best New Artist at the 42nd Annual Grammy Awards. After the album's release, "What a Girl Wants", topped the Hot 100 and is recognised as the first new number one entry on the chart for the 2000's decade. The song was also nominated for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance at the 43rd Annual Grammy Awards. This was followed with "I Turn to You" which reached number three there, and "Come On Over Baby (All I Want Is You)" which became Aguilera's third number one song and achieved worldwide success. She also released a cover of "The Christmas Song" in November 1999 which peaked at number 18 and became the second highest charting position of the song after the original in 1944. In May 2000, Aguilera embarked on her debut concert tour, Christina Aguilera in Concert, which toured North America, Latin America, Europe, and Japan until February 2001. Her success continued to rise with the release of her second studio album, Mi Reflejo, in September 2000 which topped both the Billboard Top Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums for nineteen consecutive weeks. The album featured Spanish-language versions of several songs from her debut album along with new songs, and had Latin pop themes. Three singles were release for the album including the Spanish version of "Come On Over Baby (All I Want Is You)" titled "Ven Conmigo (Solamente Tú)", "Pero Me Acuerdo de Ti" and "Falsas Esperanzas". The latter two were performed at the 43rd Annual Grammy Awards. The album went on to be the best-selling Latin pop album of 2000 and was later certified six times Latin platinum by the RIAA. Mi Reflejo also reached the platinum stats in Argentina, Mexico, and Spain. At the 2nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards, the album won Best Female Pop Vocal Album. In October 2000, Aguilera also released her third studio album, My Kind of Christmas, her first Christmas album, which reached number one on the US Top Holiday Albums chart. The album received generally polarised reviews at the time but has since gone on to retrospectively receive praise. Aguilera starred in a holiday special, My Reflection, which aired on December 3, 2000, on ABC. Aguilera's commercial success saw her being named the 2000 Top Female Pop Act by Billboard. The same year, she also filed a fiduciary duty against manager Steve Kurtz for "improper, undue, and inappropriate influence over her professional activities". She eventually hired Irving Azoff to manage her career, aiming for control of her career and image. On January 16, 2001, Aguilera featured on Ricky Martin's "Nobody Wants to Be Lonely", which topped charts internationally and peaked at number 13 on the Hot 100, becoming her fifth top-20 hit in the US. The song was ranked at number 65 on VH1's "100 Greatest Love Songs", and was nominated for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals at the 44th Annual Grammy Awards. In April of that year, Aguilera featured alongside Lil' Kim, Mýa, and Pink on "Lady Marmalade" from the soundtrack for the film, Moulin Rouge! (2001). The song received positive reviews and topped the Hot 100 for five consecutive weeks, becoming Aguilera's fourth number one. The song also won the Grammy Award for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals and the MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year. In August 2001, Warlock Records released Just Be Free, a demo album recorded by Aguilera between 1994 and 1995 while she was looking for a recording deal following the end of The All-New Mickey Mouse Club (MMC). She filed a suit against the label and the album's producers aiming to stop the release of the album; however, both parties came to a confidential settlement to release the album, in which Aguilera lent out her name, likeness, and image for an unspecified amount of damages. With a new management, Aguilera started moving away from her teen pop niche and began working on a new project. She cultivated a new image by adopting the alter ego Xtina, dyeing her hair black, and sporting several tattoos and body piercings. Aguilera's new persona was widely criticized by media outlets. In September 2002, she released the controversial song, "Dirrty", which garnered mixed reviews and peaked as number 48 on Billboard Hot 100. The song's accompanying music video generated controversy for depicting overtly sexual fetishes, and attracted the attention of conservative organizations and moralists who sought to have the video banned on MTV. The video also sparked protests in Thailand and was eventually banned on the country's local television. Despite the backlash, "Dirrty" topped the charts in the UK and Ireland, and has gone on to become a cult classic. Aguilera's fourth studio album, Stripped, followed with a release on October 22, 2002. She also executive produced and co-wrote the majority of the songs. Upon release, the album received generally mixed reviews but found commercial success and debuted at number two on the Billboard 200, and eventually was certified five times platinum by the RIAA. In the UK, Stripped sold over two million copies and became the second highest-selling album by an American female artists in the 2000s. Since then, it was reported the album sold 12 million copies globally. The album's second single, "Beautiful", was released to widespread acclaim for its empowering lyrics about embracing inner beauty, also becoming a LGBT anthem. The song reached number two on the Hot 100 and topped the chart in various international countries, including the UK, Canada, Ireland and New Zealand. It also reached number one on the US Adult Contemporary chart and the US Dance Club Songs chart. At the 46th Annual Grammy Awards, the single won Best Female Pop Vocal Performance. This was followed with the singles — "Fighter", "Can't Hold Us Down" and "The Voice Within". In June 2003, Aguilera co-headlined The Justified & Stripped Tour alongside Justin Timberlake. The joint tour visited North America solely, attracting an audience of 546,483 and grossed over $31.8 million. It ranked sixteenth on Billboard's list of Top 25 Tours of 2003. Later that year, she also embarked on The Stripped Tour in Europe, Asia, and Australia. Her performances at the Wembley Arena were taped, broadcast on WB Network and eventually sold as a video album under the name Stripped Live in the U.K. In early 2004, it was reported that she would return to North America to perform a second leg of her tour but was eventually canceled due to a vocal cord injury. In August 2003, at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards, Aguilera opened the show singing "Like a Virgin" and "Hollywood" alongside Britney Spears. Halfway through the performance, she was joined by Madonna whom they both kissed, consequently making the performance highly publicized. Various media outlets retrospectively considered it one of the "most iconic" VMAs performances of all time. In 2008, MTV listed the performance as the number-one opening moment in the history of MTV Video Music Awards, while Blender magazine cited it as one of the twenty-five sexiest music moments on television history. In November of that year, Aguilera hosted the 2003 MTV Europe Music Awards. She received widespread media attention for dressing up as a nun and being undressed to reveal her underclothes while performing the slutdrop dance style. She was later was named Top Female Pop Act of 2003 by Billboard. In August 2004, Aguilera recorded a cover of "Car Wash" alongside rapper Missy Elliott for the soundtrack of the DreamWorks film Shark Tale. She also voiced a Rastafarian jellyfish in the film. That September, Aguilera contributed vocals to "Tilt Ya Head Back" with rapper Nelly. The songs respectively reached number 63 and 58 on the Billboard Hot 100. In early 2005, Aguilera embraced a new image inspired by Old Hollywood figures, debuting burlesque-style curly blonde hair and makeup. Her new persona was eventually adopted to promote her subsequent music project. In March 2006, Aguilera released a duet with Andrea Bocelli, "Somos Novios (It's Impossible)", and performed the song together at the Sanremo Music Festival. She also featured on "A Song for You" by Herbie Hancock which received a Grammy Award nomination for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals. In June 2006, Aguilera released "Ain't No Other Man" as her then-forthcoming fifth studio album's lead single, which received critical acclaim and was praised by music critics. Critics compared her vocals on the songs to older singers such as Etta James and Aretha Franklin. The song achieved commercial success, peaked at number six on Billboard Hot 100 and has sold 1.7 million digital copies in the U.S. The single eventually earned her the Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance. Aguilera's fifth studio album, Back to Basics, was released as a double album in August 2006. The album was inspired by 1920s–1950s music and was described as a "throwback with elements of old-school [music] combined with a modern-day twist". The album debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 making it Aguilera's first album to top the chart since 1999. It also debuted atop the charts in numerous countries, including Australia, Canada, Germany, Switzerland, and the UK. The album received positive reviews and was nominated a Best Pop Vocal Album at the 49th Annual Grammy Awards. The album was later certified double platinum by the RIAA, and sold over 5 million units worldwide. "Hurt" and "Candyman" were released as singles following the album's release and became top-ten hits on various international charts, and peaked top-thirty on Hot 100. In November 2006, Aguilera performed "Steppin' Out with My Baby" at NBC's Tony Bennett: An American Classic special as a duet alongside Tony Bennett. The duo performed the song on Saturday Night Live and at the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards. Their live performance was nominated a Grammy Award at the 50th Annual Grammy Awards. Their version was officially recorded in 2012 for Bennett's Viva Duets. That same month, Aguilera also featured on rapper Diddy's song "Tell Me" which topped the UK R&B Singles chart and number eight in the UK. At the end of November 2006 until October 2008, Aguilera embarked on the Back to Basics Tour which visited North America, Europe, Asia, and Oceania. The tour received positive reviews and was divided into acts inspired by juke joints and the circus. Rolling Stone highlighted its "numerous sets and costumes changes" emphasizing Aguilera's "evolution from bubblegum starlet to dirrty vixen to her current incarnation as retro-styled soul siren". With earnings around 48.1 million, the tour was the highest-grossing concert tour by a female in 2007. Additionally, the performances at the Adelaide Entertainment Centre were taped, broadcast on VH1 and sold as a video album under the title Back to Basics: Live and Down Under. In February 2007, Aguilera performed "It's a Man's Man's Man's World" at the 49th Annual Grammy Awards, which received widespread praise and has been noted as one of the best Grammy performances of all time. Her performance has been voted as the 3rd Most Memorable Grammy Performance of all time, as presented in the 2007 CBS television special My Night at the Grammys. That same month she performed at the halftime show for the 2007 NBA All-Star Game. In April 2008, Aguilera appeared in Martin Scorsese's documentary, Shine a Light (which chronicled a two-day concert by The Rolling Stones at the Beacon Theatre), where she performed "Live with Me" with Mick Jagger. In September, she released "Keeps Gettin' Better" set to feature on her first then-upcoming greatest hits album of the same name. The song received mixed reviews but found commercial success debuting at number seven on the Billboard Hot 100 making it her highest debut on the chart at the time, and has since sold 1.156 million digital copies in the US. She performed the song live at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards alongside a medley. Keeps Gettin' Better: A Decade of Hits was released in November 2008 to positive reviews, debuting at number nine on Billboard 200 and was later certified gold by the RIAA. The compilation added two original songs (its title track and "Dynamite") and also featured remakes of "Genie in a Bottle" and "Beautiful". By late 2008, Aguilera stated that she had begun working on a new album. In 2009, at the end of the 2000s, Aguilera was named the twentieth best "Artist of the Decade" by Billboard, and was nominated for the MTV Europe Music Award for Best Act Ever. At the end of 2009, Aguilera stated that her then-forthcoming sixth studio album originally titled Light & Darkness would be released in March 2010. However, by February 2010, Aguilera stated that the album would be retitled and would be released in June. In April 2010, Aguilera released the lead single, "Not Myself Tonight" which peaked at number 23 on the Billboard Hot 100. She performed the song live on The Oprah Winfrey Show. This was followed by the album's second single, "Woohoo" featuring rapper Nicki Minaj. A music video was planned but was eventually scrapped.[citation needed] Aguilera released her sixth studio album, Bionic, on June 6, 2010 which debuted at number three on the Billboard 200, and topped the European and the UK charts. The album was inspired by electronic music, and was described by her as a project "about the future" noting that it was inspired her her son who "[motivated] her to want to play and have fun". It received generally mixed reviews by critics who called it "strong, but only in parts". It was later certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), and sold approximately over one million copies globally. "You Lost Me" and "I Hate Boys" were released as singles in the following month of June. A tour was planned for the album but was postponed and later cancelled due to prior commitments. Aguilera landed her first starring role as a waitress turned burlesque performer in the Steven Antin film Burlesque, released in theaters in November 2010. She received her star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame the same week in which the film premiered. While the film received generally mixed reviews from critics, Aguilera's portrayal of the main character garnered positive reviews, and the film grossed US$90 million in the box office. The film also received a nomination for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy at the 68th Golden Globe Awards. In addition to starring in the film, Aguilera recorded eight tracks for the film's ten-track accompanying soundtrack, while Cher performed the remaining two. The soundtrack reached number 18 on the Billboard 200 and was certified gold by the RIAA. Her song "Bound to You" received nominations for the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song at the 68th Golden Globe Awards while the album itself was nominated for the Best Compilation Soundtrack for Visual Media at the 54th Annual Grammy Awards. Aguilera performed "Express" on the finale of the seventh series of The X Factor UK which received criticism for its raunchy content. In early 2011, Aguilera omitted a few lines while performing "The Star-Spangled Banner" at Super Bowl XLV, which led to extensive media coverage. She apologized for the incident saying, "I got so caught up in the moment of the song that I lost my place [...] I can only hope that everyone could feel my love for this country and that the true spirit of its anthem still came through". That same month, Aguilera performed a tribute to Aretha Franklin at the 53rd Annual Grammy Awards. After the performance, Aguilera's heels got caught on her train and she nearly fell. In April 2011, Aguilera became a coach on reality competition show The Voice, which aired on NBC. Aguilera later returned to its second, third, fifth, eighth, and tenth season. For the show's first season, Aguilera's duet of her song "Beautiful" with her finalist, Beverly McClellan, debuted at number 74 on the US Billboard Hot 100 with first-week sales of 42,000 downloads on iTunes. A year later, for the second season, Aguilera's duet of "The Prayer" with her contestant, Chris Mann, also reached 85 on the chart. In late 2011, she featured on the song "Moves like Jagger" by Maroon 5. They first performed the song during their time on The Voice and also performed it at the 2011 American Music Awards. The song received positive reviews and topped the Hot 100 for four non-consecutive weeks making Aguilera the fourth female artist to top the chart over three decades (1990s, 2000s, and 2010s). The song was also nominated for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance at the 54th Annual Grammy Awards. In July 2021, the song was certified diamond by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). During the third season of The Voice in September 2012, Aguilera debuted "Your Body" as the lead single from her then-upcoming seventh studio album. The song received critical acclaim and reached reached number one on the US Dance Club Song chart and 34 on the Billboard Hot 100. The album, titled Lotus, followed in November 2012, in which Aguilera described the record as a "rebirth" of herself after the personal struggles she overcame. Contemporary reviewers found the album generic and conventional, as opposed to Aguilera's previous experimental ventures. Despite this, Lotus peaked at number 7 on the Billboard 200 and has sold 303,000 copies in the US as of 2019. "Just a Fool" with Blake Shelton was released as the album's second single and received positive reviews. The two performed the song live on The Voice and on The Ellen DeGeneres Show. On January 9, 2013, Aguilera performed "Blank Page" at the 39th People's Choice Awards. A month later, on February 22, 2013, Aguilera featured on rapper Pitbull's "Feel This Moment", which became the first of various international top-ten singles she would achieve that year, peaking at number eight on the Billboard Hot 100 becoming Aguilera's tenth top-ten hit, and was later certified platinum by the RIAA. The song garnered positive reviews and was performed at the 2012 American Music Awards, 2013 Kids' Choice Awards, The Voice and 2013 Billboard Music Awards. In May 2013, Aguilera appeared on Alejandro Fernández's cover of Miguel Gallardo's 1976 "Hoy Tengo Ganas de Ti" which received critical acclaim and earned them a diamond certification in Mexico. On November 4, 2013, Aguilera featured on a duet version of "Say Something" with A Great Big World. The song became an instant success receiving universal acclaim from critics who praised Aguilera's stripped back vocals. The song became Aguilera's second top-tenth hit on the Billboard Hot 100 peaking at number 4 and also became the second time she achieved multiple top-ten songs in a calendar year since 2000. They performed the song live on the fifth season of The Voice and 2013 American Music Awards. The song earned them various awards and nominations including a six-time platinum certification from the RIAA and won Best Pop Duo/Group Performance at the 57th Annual Grammy Awards. In October of that year, Aguilera also lent her vocals to the soundtrack for The Hunger Games: Catching Fire with the song "We Remain". She performed the song live with her contestant Jacquie Lee on The Voice. On January 1, 2014, Aguilera featured on the remix for "Do What U Want" by Lady Gaga to replace the original version with R. Kelly after his sexual abuse allegations. In May of that year, she performed a medley of hits at the New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival. In November, Aguilera performed at the Breakthrough Prize Award ceremony. In February 2015, Aguilera opened the 2015 NBA All-Star Game alongside The Rockettes and Nas with a New York-themed medley. In April, Aguilera starred in the third season of the musical drama series Nashville, which aired on ABC. She also contributed to the series' soundtrack with "The Real Thing" and "Shotgun" — with the latter reaching number twenty-eight on Hot Country Songs chart. She also performed at the 50th Academy of Country Music Awards alongside the Rascal Flatts. In May 2016, Aguilera exited The Voice following its tenth season, which she won with her contestant Alisan Porter. On the season finale, she performed "I Have Nothing" and "Dangerous Woman"; the latter with Ariana Grande. A month later, Aguilera released the song "Change", in which she dedicated to the victims of the 2016 Orlando nightclub shooting. The ballad received positive reviews and debuted at number five on Billboard's Bubbling Under Hot 100 chart. In August 2016, Aguilera recorded a disco song titled "Telepathy" featuring Nile Rodgers for the soundtrack of a Netflix original series, The Get Down (2016). Her vocals were praised by critics and the song reached number one on the Dance Club Songs chart. In July 2017, Aguilera voiced a video-game dancer in The Emoji Movie (2017). She also lent her vocals to the Served Like a Girl documentary film for a song titled "America". In November, Aguilera performed a tribute to Whitney Houston at the 2017 American Music Awards. In March 2018, Aguilera announced the completion of her then-upcoming eighth studio album alongside a Paper Magazine cover which received media coverage. In April, Aguilera starred in the romantic science fiction Zoe, which premiered at the Tribeca Film festival and was released in July of that year. Aguilera released her eighth studio album Liberation on June 15, 2018, to favorable reviews. The album had been in the works since the summer of 2015 and incorporated R&B and hip-hop elements. Liberation debuted at number six on the Billboard 200 chart, becoming Aguilera's seventh US top-ten album. The album was promoted with multiple singles, including the preceding lead single, "Accelerate" featuring Ty Dolla Sign and 2 Chainz, which became Aguilera's tenth number one song on the US Billboard Dance Songs Chart. Two other singles from the album, "Fall in Line" (with Demi Lovato) and "Like I Do" were nominated at the 61st Annual Grammy Awards for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance and Best Rap/Sung Performance respectively. To further promote Liberation, Aguilera embarked on her first tour in 10 years, The Liberation Tour, which ran from September to November 2018. The tour was set in the US and received positive reviews from critics who praised Aguilera's vocals and stage presence. Billboard named the tour one of the best 2018 live shows, and it was ranked at 132 on Pollstar's 2018 Year-End Top 200 North American Tours chart with a total gross of $8.7 million with an attendance of 77,854. This tour was followed by The X Tour, which served as the international counterpart to its predecessor, running in Europe and Mexico from July to December 2019. In between the tour, Aguilera headlined her first concert residency, Christina Aguilera: The Xperience, a 25-date show at the Zappos Theater at Planet Hollywood Las Vegas, beginning in May 2019 and concluding in March 2020. In October 2019, Aguilera released the song "Haunted Heart" from the soundtrack of the computer-animated Addams Family film, and her second collaboration with A Great Big World, "Fall on Me", followed a month later. The former received critical acclaim from critics, was nominated for Best Original Song in an Animated Film at the Hollywood Music in Media Awards and topped the US Kid Digital Song Sales chart. In early 2020, Aguilera recorded two songs for Disney's live action remake of Mulan (2020): "Loyal Brave True" – released in March 2020 as a promotional single to positive reviews, eventually being shortlisted as one of the fifteen potential nominees for the Academy Award for Best Original Song – and a re-recording of "Reflection", released in August. That year, she appeared on the ABC television special, The Disney Family Singalong and its follow-up, where she performed "Can You Feel the Love Tonight" and "Remember Me" respectively. In November of that year, Aguilera signed a new management deal with Roc Nation. In July 2021, Aguilera performed two sold-out shows at the Hollywood Bowl with Gustavo Dudamel and the Los Angeles Philharmonic. She also recorded "The Addams Family Theme", which was featured on The Addams Family 2 soundtrack. In October, she performed "Reflection", "When You Wish Upon a Star" and "Loyal Brave True" in ABC's Walt Disney World's 50th Anniversary special. On December 7, 2021, Aguilera was honoured with the People's Music Icon honorific award at the 47th People's Choice Awards. Aguilera released her ninth studio album, titled Aguilera, originally as a double album on May 31, 2022. The album paid tribute to different genres of Latin music, and consisted of three separately released parts: La Fuerza, La Tormenta, and La Luz. The full album was released in its complete form on September 30, 2022. The album was preceded with the singles "Pa Mis Muchachas", "Somos Nada", "Santo" and followed with "Suéltame" and "No Es Que Te Extrañe". Aguilera received widespread critical acclaim from music critics upon release, and was placed on several year-end lists by publications such as Billboard and the Houston Chronicle. The album was promoted through the EU / UK Summer Series promotional tour, which consisted of five festival shows throughout Europe and three arena concerts in the United Kingdom. The promotional tour received critical praise. Aguilera and its songs received seven nominations at the 23rd Annual Latin Grammy Awards with the album winning for Best Traditional Pop Vocal Album. The album also received another two nominations for Best Latin Pop Album and Best Immersive Audio Album at the 65th Annual Grammy Awards. "No Es Que Te Extrañe" was also nominated for Record of the Year at the 24th Annual Latin Grammy Awards. On June 11, 2022, Aguilera headlined the Los Angeles Pride festival with guests Mýa, Kim Petras and Paris Hilton. The use of a strap-on dildo during the set was the subject of polarized reception. In October 2022, Stripped was reissued for its 20-year anniversary, featuring "I Will Be" (the b-side to "Dirrty") and Benny Benassi's remix of "Beautiful". A new music video for "Beautiful" was also released. On November 10, 2022, Time Studios announced a partnership with Roc Nation to produce an upcoming documentary about Aguilera. On September 22, 2023, Aguilera released "Learning to Fly" as a part of the soundtrack for PAW Patrol: The Mighty Movie. The same month she performed at the EuroPride concert in Malta. At the end of the month, it was reported that Aguilera would executive produce a stage adaptation of Burlesque. In December, she began her second residency, Christina Aguilera at Voltaire, at The Venetian Las Vegas. Aguilera has named Etta James as a "role model", and said "At Last" made a major impression on her. She later stated, "I'll still be as raunchy as I wanna be, and I'll have [Etta]'s memory to back me up. She's what I want to be someday". As a young girl, The Sound of Music (1959) and its lead actress, Julie Andrews, became her early references to sing and perform, in addition to broadening her interest on Broadway. Aguilera's other major influences include Whitney Houston, Mariah Carey, Billie Holiday, and Ella Fitzgerald. She has also cited rock bands as an influence, specifically the Red Hot Chili Peppers, Nirvana, and Radiohead. Aguilera was also influenced by Latin music. She later recalled singing her first songs in Spanish during childhood, saying: "I grew up hearing [Spanish] being spoken in my household [and] hearing a lot of Julio Iglesias on the record player". Some of her other inspirations in Latin music include Chavela Vargas, Vicente Fernández, and younger artists such Rosalía. As a performer, Aguilera credits Madonna and Janet Jackson as major inspirations for being "positive female artists [who] aren't afraid to take chances, be daring, experimental and sexy". Cher also encouraged her to being a performer and "a woman who has the guts to do [everything]". Aguilera's childhood visits to records stores moulded her taste and led to an appreciation for blues and soul music, which she called "music that really had heart". Her music has also paid homage to many artists from this genre, including Aretha Franklin, Marvin Gaye, Nina Simone, and Otis Redding. Her album Back to Basics (2006) features inspirations of musicians from the early 20th century. As she later commented: "I was just so drawn to that [kind of music] ... [It] has so much pain, so much beauty of raw emotion and passion". Her other influences in the genre was added for Liberation (2018), including Michael Jackson in "Maria" and Janis Joplin in "Sick of Sittin'". Outside of the music industry, Aguilera was inspired by actresses from the Old Hollywood. She later stated, "I'm fascinated with the golden age of film. I wanted to capture the authenticity of the glam era", after which she cited examples such as Marlene Dietrich, Marilyn Monroe, Greta Garbo, Veronica Lake, and the pin-up models. Her "Tilt Ya Head Back" music video also recreated Monroe's signature look, while the video for "Your Body" includes a directly reference to Lucille Ball. The video for "Ain't No Other Man" presented Aguilera under the alter ego Baby Jane, which was inspired by Bette Davis's character in psychological horror film What Ever Happened to Baby Jane? (1962). Her other inspirations mostly came from contemporary art, including works by Andy Warhol, Roy Lichtenstein and Banksy. Critics have described Aguilera as a soprano, possessing a four-octave vocal range. She is also able to perform the whistle register. Maura Johnston, a journalist with Slate, called Aguilera's voice "an instrument that despite its ability to leap octaves has a low-end grounding similar to that possessed by opera singers". The Boston Globe columnist Joan Anderman highlighted her vocal versatility: "[She] is a real singer ... blessed with the sort of breathtaking elasticity, golden tones, and sheer power that separate the divas from the dabblers". In addition to sustain high notes, Aguilera is recognized for making use of the melismatic technique. Jon Pareles from The New York Times emphasized that "she can aim a note as directly as a missile or turn its trajectory into an aerobatic spiral of leaping, quivering, and scalloping melismas". Ron Fair—A&R executive from RCA Records—was impressed by her "perfect intonation", and concluded: "She's got the pipes to be the next Barbra Streisand or Céline Dion". Aguilera's singing technique also yielded comparisons to other singers. Journalist David Browne suggested that, alongside Mariah Carey and Whitney Houston, she "forms the team of the main proponents" of the melismatic technique. Richard Harrington from The Washington Post also noticed similarities with both artists: "She has a genuinely powerful voice that's evoked comparisons [to them], though it for the most part avoids those singers' ornamental mannerisms". The New Yorker columnist Sasha Frere-Jones also credited the technique by making her become "a serious singer without needing to reincarnate the Sarah Vaughan". Songwriter Steve Kipner praises Aguilera's vocal dexterity, including her ability to "internalize[d] all the riffs from Chaka Khan". Los Angeles Times music critic Ann Powers wrote that she possesses a "voice purely powerful as that of Etta James [...] and she's moving toward the expressiveness of Gladys Knight, if not Aretha Franklin". Powers also associated her vocal ability with Donna Summer when she performs records influenced by rhythm and blues. Aguilera, however, has also been criticized for the excessive use of melisma, as well for oversinging during her concerts shows. The Huffington Post columnist John Eskow called her as "the main proponent of oversouling". Eskow recognizes Aguilera's voice as a "great instrument", although she "[doesn't] seem to know when to stop" with the use of "gratuitous and confected melisma". Lucy Davies, music critic from BBC Music, raved about her "stunning voice", but offered that "she could be more varied, simply by cutting out some of the 'ye-e-eeeh, woah' in her songs". Writing for Entertainment Weekly, Chris Willman credits Aguilera's tendency to oversinging as an influence of Mariah Carey, noting "her slightly nasal tone that really only becomes obvious when she's overselling a song". Alexa Tietjen from VH1 acknowledged that Aguilera "does tend to take it to the extreme at times [...] but her vocal prowess is what's gotten her so far. Love them or hate them, the riffs are a part of who she is as performer". "Genie in a Bottle" (1999) "Genie in a Bottle", an uptempo teen pop song, whose genre also featured on Aguilera's early records. "Like I Do" (2018) A midtempo alternative R&B song, "Like I Do" showcases Aguilera's post-2000 works influenced by R&B and hip-hop. Problems playing these files? See media help. Aguilera's discography is generally categorized as pop, contemporary R&B, soul, and hip-hop. According to critics, she has also experimented with other musical genres in her works. In a 2008 interview, she explained that she is "always inspired by new things" in music and enjoys "experimenting with [her] voice". Alexis Petridis from The Guardian considered the "boldness in [continually] reinventing" her music as "one of her most impressive facets" as an artist. Initially established as a bubblegum pop singer, she mixed teen pop and dance-pop on her first records, Christina Aguilera (1999) and Mi Reflejo (2000), with the latter also taking inspiration from numerous genres in Latin music. Moving away from the teen niche, Aguilera's post-2000 material mainly incorporated R&B and hip-hop. Listed as an executive producer on Stripped (2002), she mixed both genres with Latin pop, rock, neo-soul, gospel, among others, while Back to Basics (2006) was described as a "throwback with elements of old-school genres combined with a modern-day twist [and] hard-hitting beats". She continued merging R&B with other musical styles on Burlesque (2010), as well on Liberation (2018), which also features hip-hop, soul and blues elements. The show tune "Lady Marmalade" is noted as Aguilera's first musical transformation. Referred to as "too urban" by RCA Records executives, the song transitioned her music "from teen pop to a more mature sound". Despite the renewal in her repertoire, Aguilera continued producing power ballads—which became a signature in her discography—in between her uptempo material. Kelefa Sanneh, music critic from The New York Times, observed the continuous modification in her music, in addition to highlighting her "decision to snub some of the big-name producers on whom pop stars often rely". Her notable sonically drastic ventures include the subversive futurepop on Bionic (2010), electropop club on Lotus (2012), and Mexican ranchera numbers on Aguilera (2022). The themes in her music portrays women as full human beings with subjectivity and renders women agency in owning their thoughts, speaking their mind, and practicing self-empowerment. This empowering cultural narrative acknowledges and empowers women to embrace their subjectivity, realize their value, and own their power in controlling their life. —Chin Wai Wong from Hollins University on Aguilera's music themes. Aguilera's music has been the subject of analysis. Critics have acknowledged domestic violence experienced during childhood as one of the main topics in her music. Mary Anne Donovan, author of Christina Aguilera: A Biography (2010), noted that she "channeled her fear and sadness away from the abuse in her family to instead create the music that became her art and her livelihood". It also influenced Aguilera's transition to adulthood and impacted many of her songs, whose lyrics reference female empowerment. In a 2006 interview, she commented: "I feel a responsibility to share some of these things that aren’t kind of the brighter sides of my life. People [who] can relate might not feel as alone in the circumstance". Aguilera has also often defended the sex-positive movement and denounced social double standards in her music. Reviewing Stripped (2002), Sophie Wilkinson from Vice opined that its music "explores nuanced articulations of sexual desires and fears while highlighting the social double standards", in addition to giving "any woman the confidence to take charge of her sexuality and ownership of her body". Jennifer K. Armstrong, author of Sexy Feminism: A Girl's Guide to Love, Success, and Style (2013), opined that her music has "reject[ed] the double standards set forth by sexism and patriarchy". Chin Wai Wong from Hollins University also observed topics such as romance, introspection of vulnerability, gratitude for support, and sexual liberation in Aguilera's music, representing "multi-dimensional aspects of life [and] different social responsibilities a woman experiences". While critics noted the feminist message in her works, Aguilera was acknowledged for her "refusal to sanitize her own sexuality to meet either the norms of mainstream gender politics or mainline Feminism's resistance". The Guardian journalist Hermione Hoby opined that she "incites a sisterly spirit of collaboration [and] is not shy of the odd feministic declaration herself". Other themes addressed in her lyrics include self-respect, body image, and LGBT rights, in addition to "fighting for creative freedom and gender equality". Publications have called Aguilera a pop icon, a triple threat entertainer and has often been labeled a diva for her stardom and persona. Bustle writer James Tison noted comparisons to Mariah Carey adding that "[Aguilera] has mastered being a diva in the best way possible". Her vocal abilities often also distinguished her from her peers. Her fan-base is named the "Fighters" drawing inspiration from her 2003 single "Fighter". She is one of the most popular musicians on Twitter with approximately 17 million followers, and was one of the most searched artists in the world in 2002, 2004, and 2010 through Google. She was also one of the most popular searches in 2003 by Yahoo! Search. Aguilera is also recognized as a gay icon; in 2019, she was awarded by the Human Rights Campaign for using her "platform to share a message of hope and inspiration to those who have been marginalized [...] bringing greater visibility to the LGBTQ community". Her 2002 song "Beautiful" has been called an anthem for the LGBT community, with UK LGBT rights charity Stonewall naming it the most empowering song of the decade for lesbian, gay and bisexual people and for having "inspired millions of young people around the world". In 2023, Aguilera was honored for her LGBTQ allyship and for advocating for the queer community at the Stonewall National Monument. Aguilera's style and fashion has attracted significant media attention throughout her career, and she has been named a fashion icon. Jon Caramanica, journalist from The New York Times, concluded that "Aguilera will be remembered for her glamour and her scandalous take on femme-pop", while Janelle Okwodu from Vogue noted that she "has never been afraid to take a fashion risk [and] has filled her videos with jaw-dropping styles and risqué runway looks". Following her appearance at New York Fashion Week in 2018, Dazed named her one of the most stylish people of the year. Aguilera's influence on fashion has been noted by several publications. Samantha Sutton of InStyle noted Aguilera's influence on the rising fashion trends of 2021. Writing for Vogue in 2022, Christian Allaire said that Aguilera was "ahead of her time" when it came to her 2002 image. Since the beginning of her career, Aguilera has attracted criticism for her revealing clothes, and has been called a sex symbol. In an interview with MTV News, Debbie Gibson accused her of "influencing girls out there wearing less and less", considering that "she lives and breathes the sexual image". In response to negative comments, Aguilera stated: "Just because I have a certain image, everyone wants me to be this role model. But nobody is perfect, and nobody can live up to that". VH1, included in the list of the sexiest entertainment artists in 2002 and 2013; in publications from FHM and Complex, she received similar honors in 2004 and 2012, respectively. In 2003, she was chosen as the sexiest woman of the year by Maxim, stamping the cover of the best-selling issue of the magazine's history, and she was named one of the most beautiful people in the world in 2003 and 2007 by People. Aguilera has been called a "Queen of Reinvention" as she is noted for having reinvented her public image numerous times throughout her career. Stereogum writer Tom Breihan noted that she originally "thought of herself primarily as a [...] young Mariah Carey-type", but was instead marketed as a bubblegum pop teen idol due to the genre's popularity in the late 1990s, following the success of Britney Spears's debut album. David Browne of Entertainment Weekly felt that Aguilera was "a good girl pretending to be bad" when compared to Spears' image. In contrast, Christopher J. Farley of Time considered her a more impressive artist than Spears. Aguilera's vocals set her apart from her bubblegum pop peers. Aguilera departed from the teen idol image with the release of Stripped in 2002, by dyeing her hair black, getting body piercings, and posing nude for several publications. This was attributed to her provocative and extravagant alter ego named Xtina. Serving as the host of the 2003 MTV Europe Music Awards, Aguilera opened the show dressed as a nun, accompanied by a choir singing the lead single from Stripped, "Dirrty", before showing off a more revealing outfit. While analyzing her new visual, Vice and Rolling Stone magazines wrote that her new clothes echoed as if she were participating in the Girls Gone Wild franchise. In a review of her persona, author Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic opined that Aguilera reached "maturity with transparent sexuality and pounding sounds of nightclubs". Writing for The Daily Telegraph, Adam White was more positive about her image and recognized that her "embracing of an overtly sexual image in the wake of adolescent stardom was a tried and tested route to adult success". For the release of Back to Basics in 2006, Aguilera adopted a new persona named Baby Jane, named after Bette Davis's character in What Ever Happened to Baby Jane? (1962). The image drew inspiration from actresses of the Golden Age of Hollywood, such as Marilyn Monroe, to go with the album's 1920s–1950s musical direction. In 2008, she adopted a futuristic image, which drew comparisons to the image of then-newcomer, Lady Gaga. In 2012, she drew criticism over her weight gain from several publications; the following year, she received favorable media attention after a significant weight loss. In March 2018, Aguilera appeared on the cover of the spring 2018 issue of Paper, titled "Transformation". Photographed by Zoey Grossman, the images featured Aguilera with minimal makeup and no photographic manipulation, debuting her freckles. Her appearance in the pictures received significant media attention and widespread praise. This led to other celebrities who had posed similarly receiving attention. Starting in 2021, Aguilera began showing off a red-haired look for the promotion of her ninth studio album, Aguilera (2022). Various music journalists and authors have noted Aguilera's legacy in the entertainment industry and deemed her as one of the greatest artists in pop music. In 2004, she was listed as one of the most influential people in the music market according to The Independent, and was ranked as the eight greatest woman in the phonographic industry by VH1. Early in her career, Aguilera was labeled as a teen idol, and has been named as one of the artists who revived teen pop in the late 1990s; Time magazine stated that she was a "pioneer [in] a different type of teen stardom", crediting her vocal ability as responsible for the phenomenon. Since then, she has been named as one of the greatest singers in contemporary pop music; by MTV, she was ranked as one of the best voices in music since the 1980s, while Rolling Stone and Consequence of Sound included her in their lists of greatest singers of all time. In 2013, Latina honored her as the best vocalist of Latin origin in history. With the recognition of her vocal ability and influence in the music industry, she has been referred in media with the titles of "Princess of Pop" and "Voice of a Generation". Upon launching her music career in the late 1990s, Aguilera was named as one of the artists who shaped the "Latin explosion", having contributed to the Latin pop boom in American music in early of the century. Considered one of the greatest artists of the 2000s, she has been classified between the main references of the Millennials; writing for Vice magazine, Wanna Thompson analyzed her impact in the turn of the century, stating that alongside Britney Spears, "Aguilera dominated mainstream pop-related discussions. [Her] perfectly packaged music and looks appealed to tweens and teens who wanted to be like the pretty, chart-topping pop stars plastered everywhere". The commercial success of her first projects as a bubblegum pop singer caused an effect that influenced record labels to invest in new artists who attracted the same youthful appeal, catapulting names like Jessica Simpson and Mandy Moore. Critics also highlighted the impact of her work in popular culture; while Stripped (2002) was called "the blueprint for divas making the transition from teen idol to adult pop star", Aguilera is credited for "paving the way for a generation of pop singers". Jeff Benjamin from Billboard stated that the album explored a "process of self-identification and declaration still influencing today's mainstream scene", in addition to "how of today's biggest pop stars have followed a similar path, exploring and incorporating these strategies into their careers". In 2007, her self-titled debut album was added to the definitive list from Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, being recognized as one of the "history's most influential and popular albums". Since then, Aguilera and her work have influenced various recording artists including Ariana Grande, Ava Max, Becky G, Britney Spears, Camila Cabello, Charli XCX, Demi Lovato, Doja Cat, Dua Lipa, Grimes, Halsey, Hayley Williams, Iggy Azalea, Karol G, Kelly Clarkson, K. Michelle, Lady Gaga, Lauren Jauregui, Meghan Trainor, Nicki Nicole, Olivia Rodrigo, Rina Sawayama, Rosalía, Sabrina Carpenter, Sam Smith, Selena Gomez, Tate McRae, Tinashe, and Troye Sivan, and athletes such as figure skater Johnny Weir, ice dancers Zachary Donohue and Madison Hubbell, and swimmer Dana Vollmer. Aguilera has also been praised for emphasizing the importance of feminism in pop music; several journalists agree that her use of sexual imagery has helped catalyze public discourse on the topic. Lamar Dawson, columnist from The Huffington Post, praised her feminist efforts in the music industry and recognized that "while Christina isn't the first pop star to place feminist rhetoric into pop culture, she led the charge at the beginning of the 21st century of influencing the next generation of impressionable teens who were too young for Janet [Jackson] and Madonna's curriculum". Gerrick D. Kennedy from Los Angeles Times shared the same point of view and stated that "for a generation who hit puberty during the great 2000 pop explosion, Aguilera was an essential voice with music that tackled self-empowerment, feminism, sex and domestic violence — subject matter her contemporaries were shying away from". Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett, co-founder of The Vagenda, opined that the provocative dance routines in Aguilera's music videos were "empowering", as she has been referred to as the forerunner of the slutdrop dance style. Aguilera's videography impact was also analysed by music critics. While "Dirrty" (2002) has been described as "one of the most controversial videos in pop music history", and one of the greatest music videos of all time, Issy Beech from i-D recognized that the audiovisual work "paved a path for videos like "Anaconda" and "Wrecking Ball" [...] paved the way for open sexuality from women in pop". In the video for "Beautiful" (2002), the highlight scene of a gay kiss has been considered one of the most important moments for LGBT culture, in addition to start Aguilera's image as a gay icon. Both works was elected as one of the greatest music videos of the 21st century by editors from Billboard, while she was named one of the greatest women of the video era according to VH1. In 2012, her videographic collection and some looks used throughout her career were part of an exhibition by the National Museum of Women in the Arts aimed at illustrating "the essential roles women have played in moving rock and roll and American culture forward". Aguilera has accumulated numerous awards and honorary accolades throughout her career. At the age of 19, she won the Grammy Award for Best New Artist, becoming one of the youngest artists to earn such an honor. Aguilera received other four trophies from twenty nominations by The Recording Academy. She is also a recipient of two Latin Grammy Awards, three Billboard Latin Music Awards—including the Spirit of Hope Award—, two MTV Video Music Awards (VMAs), two People's Choice Awards—including the inaugural Music Icon Award—, three World Music Awards, and one Guinness World Record. Among other of her honors, Aguilera received a star on Hollywood Walk of Fame in "recognition of her achievements in the recording industry" and was immortalized as a Disney Legend due to "her remarkable contributions to the Walt Disney Company". Referred to as one of the most prominent Latin artists in the entertainment industry, she was also elected as one of the 100 most influential people in the world by Time in 2013. With estimated sales around 100 million records, Aguilera is recognized as one of the world's best-selling music artists. In the United States, she has sold 41.9 million albums and singles until 2014, according to Nielsen SoundScan. As of 2022, the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) certified over 54.2 million records, of which 17.5 million units came from her albums. While Christina Aguilera (1999) is certified eight times platinum, it was listed as one of the best-selling in the country. In 2013, Aguilera's sales reached 9.4 million records in the United Kingdom, according to the Official Charts Company. Stripped (2002) was also recognized as one of the few to surpass 2 million copies sold, becoming one of the best-selling albums of the 21st century in the country. Her collaboration with Maroon 5, "Moves Like Jagger", also was ranked among the best-selling singles in Australia, Canada, South Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States, as well one of the best-selling digital singles with over 14.4 million units. Elected as top female artist in 2000 and 2003, Aguilera was classified as the twentieth most prosperous artists of the 2000s, according Billboard. She was also listed as one of the most successful singers of the decade on Billboard 200, Hot 100, and Mainstream Top 40 charts—whose she also was ranked among the greatest of all time. With a total of 10 Dance Club Songs chart-toppers, Aguilera became the thirty-fifth most successful artist in the chart history. In 2009, she was recognized as the second best-selling solo artist on Billboard, and she was also the fourth female artist to top the Hot 100 chart over three consecutive decades. Mi Reflejo (2000) also remains as one of the longest albums to chart at number one on Top Latin Albums. Aguilera had earned over US$113.8 million from tickets sales of her concert tours throughout her career. In 2020, she was classified among the top female artists of the 21st century in the concert industry, having sold more than 1.8 million tickets for her performances, according Pollstar. Her largest audience concert was held during Mawazine Festival, in Morocco, attracting 250,000 people which eventually became the record in the event's history. As a businesswoman, Aguilera has been selling her own products and investing in multiple companies. In 2008, she became co-owner of LAX nightclub at the Luxor Las Vegas alongside DJ AM. In 2015, she founded the MX Productions & Investments in partnership with fiancée Matthew Rutler, for which they was included in the investors' group of Pinterest, DraftKings, Lyft and MasterClass enterprises. Aguilera also joined the ownership group of Angel City FC, a National Women's Soccer League (NWSL) expansion team, and sexual wellness brand Playground. In March 2015, Aguilera and Rutler signed a deal with Lions Gate Entertainment to developed both scripted and unscripted projects which eventually was acquired by ABC Family and Spike TV networks. In 2022, she was named chief culture officer of alcoholic beverage company Fun Wine. In 2007, Aguilera signed a long-term deal with Procter & Gamble (P&G) and created the Christina Aguilera Fragrances, which has been sold in North America, Latin America, Asia and Europe. In addition to scents, the brand manufactures body lotions, body sprays, and deodorants whose products was ranked among the United Kingdom best-sellers in 2007, 2009 and 2010. In January 2016, the line was reported to sold over $80 million. Her fragrances also received numerous accolades, including at the Duftstars Awards and FiFi Awards. During São Paulo Fashion Week in 2011, Aguilera debuted her first clothes line which was mostly sold in Brazilian department stores C&A. In partnership with American Greetings, she featured in customized birthday video cards which was sold online in 2021 and eventually won a Clio Awards. During her career, Aguilera has been involved in marketing initiatives and endorsed numerous brands including Sears, Levi's, Skechers, Mercedes-Benz, Virgin Mobile, Orange UK, Sony Ericsson, Oreo, SweeTarts, Just Eat, Lieferando, Menulog, and Merz Aesthetics. In 2001, she starred in a series of television advertising to Coca-Cola, which was aired in Latin America and the United States. Media outlets reported the deal signed by Aguilera to worth up £50 million. Aguilera also shot a global scale advertising campaign alongside South Korean singer Rain to promote Pepsi during the 2006 FIFA World Cup. Other Aguilera's endorses included a clothing line by Versace in 2003, and a collection of sterling silver pieces designed by Stephen Webster in 2008. On June 28, 2004, she received £200,000 to open the summer sale at the London's department store Harrods. In 2008, Aguilera also was paid $1.5 million to submit pictures of her first child to People, becoming the ninth most expensive celebrity baby photograph ever taken. Referred to as a humanitarian, Aguilera has done philanthropic works during her career. In 2003, she visited the Women's Center & Shelter of Greater Pittsburgh and provided a donation over $200,000 in support for victims of domestic violence. In addition to starred in television advertsings on the Lifetime network calling for the end of violence against women in 2007, she partnered with Verizon in a campaign to awareness about violence domestic in 2015. She later destined proceeds from the Christina Aguilera: The Xperience (2019–2020) residency to The Shade Tree, a women and children's center in Las Vegas, Nevada. In October 2019, Aguilera efforts against domestic violence earned her the Bonnie Polley Community Hero Award. In 2009, Aguilera became the global spokesperson for the World Food Program, a branch of the United Nations (UN). She visited countries with high rates of malnutrions, including Ecuador, Guatemala, Haiti and Rwanda. As of 2013, it was reported she helped raise over $148 million to the organization and other hunger relief agencies in 45 countries. Aguilera's efforts eventually earned her the Muhammad Ali Humanitarian Awards and George McGovern Leadership Awards—which she received in the White House from the former Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton. Her other philanthropy initiatives included donations of her wedding gifts to charities in support of families affected by Hurricane Katrina in 2005 and concerts to urges donations to the American Red Cross due Hurricane Sandy in 2012. In 2010, Aguilera auctioned tickets to her concerts through Christie's, earmarking the proceeds to non-profit environmental organizations, including Conservation International and the Natural Resources Defense Council. In response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake, she auctioned off a Chrysler 300 and destined proceeds to support disaster victims and their families. Additionally, Aguilera appeared on the Hope for Haiti Now telethon, whose donations directly benefited Oxfam America, Partners In Health, International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement, and UNICEF. She also was praised by People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) for signed an open letter destined to Government of South Korea appealing to the ban of consumption of dogs and cats, and for using fake fox fur in concerts costumes. As a LGBT rights activist, Aguilera was lauded for calling out myths around HIV/AIDS, in addition to raising awareness about the virus and raising funds for the Mac AIDS Fund and the Elton John AIDS Foundation. In 2008, she advocated for same-sex marriage and spoke out against Proposition 8. During an interview with MTV News, she stated "Why would you put so much money behind something [aimed at] stopping people from loving each other? I just don't understand it". In June 2016, Aguilera release single "Change", which was aimed to raise proceeds to the victim's families and survivors of the Orlando nightclub shooting. During The X Tour (2019), Aguilera visited Russia and "blessed" a gay marriage proposal in the backstage, contrary to the country's laws against "gay propaganda". Aguilera met dancer Jorge Santos backstage, while filming one of her music videos in 2000 and dated him until September 2001. She began dating music executive Jordan Bratman in late 2002. Their engagement was announced in February 2005. On November 19, 2005, they married in a private ceremony on an estate in Napa County, California, during a traditional Jewish ceremony. Aguilera wore a flamenco-style wedding dress by Christian Lacroix and they exchanged wedding bands designed by jeweller Stephen Webster. She gave birth to their son, Max, on January 12, 2008. In September 2010, the couple had separated. She filed for divorce on October 14, 2010. In November 2010, Aguilera began dating production assistant Matthew Rutler, whom she met while filming the musical Burlesque. Aguilera was arrested for public intoxication in March 2011, while Rutler was booked for driving under the influence. However, the charges were dropped against Rutler the following month. In 2014, they became engaged on Valentine's Day. Later that year, Aguilera gave birth to their daughter, Summer Rain, on August 16. Aguilera was raised Catholic, although she was learning about Judaism in the mid 2000s. In 2022, she opened up about depression and anxiety, stating "I experienced a lot of trauma in my childhood [...] I've definitely had struggles in the past with depression and anxiety. It's a constant battle to overcome a mind that is anxious, a mind that is always second-guessing". Aguilera has also been sharing about insecurity and struggling with body image early in her career. In 2007, Aguilera purchased a Mediterranean-style mansion in Beverly Hills for $11.5 million, which she sold for $13.5 million in March 2013. Shortly afterwards, she acquired a house in the Mulholland Estates' private enclave, at the Santa Monica Mountains, for $10 million and currently resides with her family. In 2000, Aguilera was among the biggest moneymakers in the music business with over £65 million earned with albums sales, merchandising and licensing deals according VH1. In January 2008, she was ranked 19th on Forbes' list of Top-Earning Women in Music of 2007 with earnings of $20 million. The previous year, she was also included on their list of richest women in entertainment industry, with an estimated net worth of $60 million. In August 2022, Aguilera's net worth was reported to be $160 million. Studio albums Christina Aguilera (1999) Mi Reflejo (2000) My Kind of Christmas (2000) Stripped (2002) Back to Basics (2006) Bionic (2010) Lotus (2012) Liberation (2018) Aguilera (2022) Burlesque (2010) The Emoji Movie (2017) Zoe (2018) Burlesque (2024); producer, co-composer and lyricist Portals:  Biography  Pop music  United States Honorific nicknames in popular music List of best-selling music artists List of artists who reached number one in the United States List of artists who reached number one on the UK Singles Chart List of highest paid American television stars "Christina Aguilera Breaks Down Her Most Iconic Music Video Looks". W. May 16, 2018. Event occurs at 0:01. Archived from the original on December 11, 2021 – via YouTube. Evans, Cleveland (December 18, 2022). "Cleveland Evans: Christina 'anointed' in 'beauty' for centuries". Omaha World-Herald. Archived from the original on December 19, 2022. Retrieved January 19, 2023. Wang, Julia (April 2007). "Christina Aguilera: Biography". People. Archived from the original on March 31, 2014. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Dominguez 2003, p. 2–3. Isaac, Paulina Jayne (June 27, 2020). "Christina Aguilera Says Music Execs Thought Her Name Was "Too Ethnic"". Cosmopolitan. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Sanneh, Kelefa (September 8, 2002). "The New Season/Music: Idol Returns, Her Image Remade". The New York Times. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Dominguez 2003, p. 2. Harrington, Richard (February 13, 2000). "Christina Aguilera's Fast Track". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Dominguez 2003, p. 4. Donovan 2010, p. 8. Tomasic, Megan (February 24, 2020). "'What a Ride': Wexford's Christina Aguilera Won Grammy for Best New Artist 20 Years Ago". Pittsburgh Tribune-Review. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Dominguez 2003, p. 8. Vineyard, Jennifer (November 4, 2006). "Christina Aguilera's Old Soul". MTV News. Archived from the original on August 5, 2014. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Day, Elizabeth (November 23, 2008). "Elizabeth Day Talks to Child Star, Singing Sensation and New Mother Christina Aguilera". The Guardian. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Scott-Gregory, Sophronia (September 27, 1999). "Uncorking the Genie". People. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Donovan 2010, p. 9. Chen, Joyce (February 10, 2012). "Christina Aguilera Wants to Reconcile with Estranged Father". New York Daily News. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Scaggs, Austin (July 24, 2006). "Christina Aguilera: Dirty Girl Cleans Up". Rolling Stone. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Dominguez 2003, p. 14–16. Donovan 2010, p. 13. Ali, Lorraine (July 30, 2006). "Christina Aguilera Comes of Age". Newsweek. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Hirschberg, Lynn (July 1, 2011). "From the Vault: The Fall & Rise of Christina Aguilera". W. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Donovan 2010, p. 7. Grupp, John (May 6, 2009). "Anthem Singer Fires Up Mellon Crowd". Pittsburgh Tribune-Review. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Dominguez 2003, p. 17. Dominguez 2003, p. 21. Goldstein, Rob (May 15, 1999). "Dreaming of Genie". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on April 1, 2007. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Gómez, Shirley (November 23, 2021). "Proof That Christina Aguilera Has Always Been a Proud Latina". ¡Hola!. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Dominguez 2003, p. 31–32. Govan 2013, p. 24. Govan 2013, p. 24–25. Dominguez 2003, p. 43–44. Dominguez 2003, p. 45. Jefferey, Don (January 22, 2000). "Best-Selling Records of 1999". Billboard. Nielsen Business Media. p. 63. Retrieved August 29, 2013. "Portrait of an Artist: Christina Aguilera". Billboard. January 29, 2000. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Dominguez 2003, p. 70–72. Daigle, Katy (October 28, 1999). "Gibson Recalls Her Pioneering Young Old Days". Hartford Courant. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Hogsett, Nicole (May 6, 2009). "The Top Ten Songs by Christina Aguilera". Yahoo! Voices. Archived from the original on September 29, 2013. Retrieved April 30, 2023. "42nd Annual Grammy Awards: List of Nominations". CNN. Retrieved August 31, 2021. Partridge, Kennth (August 22, 2014). "Christina Aguilera's Self-Titled Debut at 15: Classic Track-by-Track Album Review". Billboard. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Cobo, Leila (August 12, 2000). "Aguilera Makes Spanish Debut on BMG U.S. Latin". Billboard. Retrieved April 30, 2023. "Gold & Platinum: Christina Aguilera Search". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved April 30, 2023. McLean, Craig (May 7, 2010). "Christina Aguilera's 'Eye on the Prize'". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Corner, Lewis (June 22, 2016). "Christina Aguilera's 'Genie In A Bottle' is 17 Years Old, So Here Are 17 Cool Facts About Pop's Biggest Voice". Digital Spy. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Kheraj, Alim (October 8, 2016). "The Surprising Stories Behind 6 of Christina Aguilera's Biggest Hits". Digital Spy. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Farley, Christopher J. (February 27, 2000). "Christina Aguilera". Time. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Govan 2013, p. 43. Dominguez 2003, p. 88. Malone, Chris (August 24, 2019). "Christina Aguilera's Debut Album Turns 20: All the Tracks Ranked". Billboard. Retrieved October 15, 2023. "Christina Aguilera: Awards". AllMusic. Archived from the original on July 28, 2013. Retrieved August 18, 2013. Basham, David (April 27, 2000). "Christina Aguilera Announces Tour, Youth Programs". MTV News. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Dominguez 2003, p. 169. "The Year in Music 2000". Billboard. Vol. 112, no. 53. Prometheus Global Media. December 30, 2000. p. YE-72,74. Retrieved April 28, 2013. Teri van Horn (August 15, 2000). "Christina Aguilera Delves Into Latin Roots On Spanish LP". MTV News. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Cobo, Leila (August 12, 2000). "Aguilera Makes Spanish Debut On BMG U.S. Latin". Billboard. Vol. 112, no. 33. Prometheus Global Media. p. 85. Retrieved April 28, 2013. "Grammys 2001". MTV. Viacom Media Networks. Archived from the original on May 15, 2013. Retrieved April 30, 2013. Cobo, Leila (April 28, 2001). "Billboard Awards Recognize the Best in Latin Music". Billboard. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Govan 2013, p. 75. Saraceno, Christina (October 30, 2001). "Christina Wins Latin Grammy". Rolling Stone. Retrieved April 30, 2023. "They're Dreaming of a Sluggish Christmas". Los Angeles Times. October 30, 2000. "Snow Way!". NME. IPC Media. November 3, 2000. Retrieved November 27, 2013. "Here's a Reminder That Christina Aguilera Has a Christmas Album (and It's Amazing)". Billboard. Retrieved August 8, 2021. "Best Christmas Albums – Christina Aguilera, 'My Kind of Christmas'". Pop Crush. December 11, 2012. Retrieved August 8, 2021. Dominguez 2003, p. 181. "Year in Music: 2000". Billboard. December 30, 2000. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Manning, Kara (October 17, 2000). "Aguilera Sues Former Manager". MTV News. Retrieved April 30, 2023. "Christina Aguilera: Hot 100 Chart History". Billboard. Retrieved April 30, 2023. "Christina Aguilera Chart History (Hot 100)". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved October 12, 2021. "VH1 - 100 Greatest Love Songs". University of British Columbia. Archived from the original on October 14, 2021. Retrieved October 14, 2021. "Christina Aguilera". Grammy Awards. Archived from the original on October 14, 2021. Retrieved October 14, 2021. Newman, Melinda (March 10, 2001). "Four Artists Redo 'Lady Marmalade'; Kid Rock in Studio; Metallica Bass-less" (PDF). Billboard. Vol. 113, no. 10. p. 14. Retrieved October 11, 2020. Fernandez, Suzette (December 24, 2016). "Ricky Martin's Billboard Hot 100 Hits". Billboard. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Jacobs, Matthew (April 7, 2021). "Lady Marmalade Song: 'Moulin Rouge' Movie Track Explained". Rolling Stone. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Mitchell, John (June 27, 2021). "Remaking 'Lady Marmalade' 10 Years Later". MTV News. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Dominguez 2003, p. 203–206. MCGrath, Stephanie (July 3, 2001). "Disputed Aguilera Album to Be Released". Jam!. Archived from the original on July 11, 2014. Retrieved April 30, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Stitzel, Kim (February 12, 2002). "Christina Aguilera: Not Your Puppet". MTV News. Archived from the original on March 5, 2009. Retrieved October 15, 2023. ABC Staff (January 6, 2006). "How Christina Aguilera Got 'Dirty'". ABC News. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Tryangiel, Josh (August 27, 2006). "Welcome to My Bubble". Time. Archived from the original on October 12, 2007. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Dark, Jane (November 11, 2002). "Siren Wailing". The Village Voice. Archived from the original on December 9, 2004. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Browne, David (November 1, 2002). "Stripped". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Edwards, Tanya L. (October 23, 2002). "How Dirty Is 'Dirrty'? X-posing The Kinks In Xtina's Video". MTV News. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Allaire, Christian (October 19, 2022). "Christina Aguilera's 'Dirrty' Era Couldn't Be More on Trend". Vogue. Retrieved April 30, 2022. D'Angelo, Joe (October 18, 2002). "'Dirrty' Christina Aguilera Video Thai-ed To Sex Industry". MTV News. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Romero, Frances (June 6, 2011). "Top 10 Controversial Music Videos". Time. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Griffiths, George (November 17, 2022). "Flashback 2002: Xtina Was Down to Get Dirrty at Number 1". The Official Charts Company. Retrieved April 30, 2023. "Best 2002 Songs: Top 100 Staff Picks". Billboard. March 22, 2022. Archived from the original on March 23, 2022. Retrieved March 23, 2022.{{cite magazine}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Legacy Staff (October 14, 2023). "Christina Aguilera's 'Stripped' 20th Anniversary Celebrated with Deluxe Digital Edition". Legacy Recordings. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Vineyard, Jennifer (October 30, 2002). "Christina Stands Up For The Ladies, Discusses Father's Abuse". MTV News. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Aniftos, Rania (October 26, 2022). "Christina Aguilera Recreates 'Stripped' Look on TikTok". Billboard. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Copsey, Rob (April 14, 2021). "Christina Aguilera Working on New English and Spanish Language Albums". The Official Charts Company. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Jones, Alan (January 30, 2010). "The Noughties' Official UK Albums Chart Top 100". Music Week. London, England: United Business Media: 19. Touré (June 29, 2006). "Scott Storch's Outrageous Fortune". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 19, 2008. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Grimes, Gary (October 24, 2022). "Christina Aguilera's Stripped: An Oral History". W. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Billboard Staff (June 7, 2022). "Best LGBTQ Anthems of All Time". Billboard. Retrieved April 30, 2023. "Beautiful – Christina Aguilera". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved April 26, 2013. Grein, Paul (May 2, 2012). "Week Ending April 29, 2012. Songs: Gotye Makes Digital History". Yahoo! Music. Yahoo!. Archived from the original on October 19, 2012. Retrieved April 26, 2013. Gonzalez, Alex (November 16, 2022). "How Christina Aguilera's "Beautiful" Made An Important Statement About Acceptance — For Society and Herself". Grammy Awards. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Billboard Staff (February 7, 2003). "Justin, Christina Team for Summer Tour". Billboard. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Knopper, Steve (November 16, 2006). "Justin Timberlake, Christina Aguilera Plan 2007 Arena Tours". Rolling Stone. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Allen, Bob (December 27, 2003). "Top 25 Tours". Billboard. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Billboard Staff (November 14, 2003). "Billboard Bits: Aguilera, Goldiggez, Bradley". Billboard. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Vineyard, Jennifer (April 29, 2004). "Christina Calls Off Tour With Chingy Due To Vocal Strain". MTV News. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Tilden, Imogen (August 29, 2003). "Madonna Sexes Up MTV Awards". The Guardian. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Mason, Courtney (August 28, 2022). "The 9 Most Iconic MTV VMAs Performances". L'Officiel. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Knolle, Sharon (August 28, 2022). "11 Most Iconic VMAs Performances". TheWrap. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Vera, Jocelyn (August 24, 2008). "The Top 10 Opening Moments in VMA History: From Madonna To The Present". Retrieved December 21, 2021. Collis, Jonah; Weiner (February 15, 2004). "The 25 Sexiest Music Moments in TV History!". Blender. ISSN 1534-0554. EC Staff (November 7, 2003). "Nun So Bold as Daring Aguilera". Chronicle Live. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Cramb, Auslan (November 7, 2003). "X-Rated Christina Aguilera Puts on a Dirrty Show for MTV". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved April 30, 2023. "Year in Music: 2003". Billboard. December 27, 2003. Retrieved April 30, 2023. "What Is Music Licensing?". Bopper Music. July 30, 2020. Archived from the original on September 29, 2020. Retrieved September 29, 2020. Vineyard, Jennifer (September 24, 2004). "Christina Aguilera Is Poisonous In Video With Missy Elliott". MTV News. Retrieved October 6, 2023. Chaffee, Keith (December 18, 2020). "Music Memories: Christina Aguilera". Los Angeles Public Library. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Sources for Queen of Reinvention: Powell, Emily (May 4, 2018). "'Queen of reinvention' Christina Aguilera drops new single Accelerate as she makes musical comeback". The Standard. Retrieved March 16, 2024. Finn, Natalie (May 4, 2018). "Inside the Reinvention of Christina Aguilera". E! News. Retrieved March 16, 2024. Cills, Hazel (June 4, 2013). "Christina Aguilera: The Style Evolution of a Diva". Vice. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Varinata, Michelle (June 26, 2018). "Christina Aguilera's Incredible Style Metamorphosis From 1993 To 2018". Harper's Bazaar. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Catagnano, Domenico (March 4, 2006). "Sanremo, il trionfo di Povia". TGCOM (in Italian). Mediaset. Retrieved July 27, 2013. "The Complete List of Grammy Nominations". The New York Times. December 8, 2005. p. 1. Retrieved February 2, 2011. Righi, Len (August 19, 2006). "Christina Aguilera: Back to Basics (RCA)". The Morning Call. Archived from the original on February 24, 2015. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Trust, Gary (September 1, 2014). "Ask Billboard: Taylor Swift Out-'Shake's Mariah Carey". Billboard. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Barner, Katherine (August 9, 2016). "Christina Aguilera's 'Back to Basics' Turns 10: Backtracking". Idolator. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Moss, Corey (June 5, 2006). "Christina Makes Her Comeback Twice As Nice By Expanding 'Basics' Into Double LP". MTV News. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Hé, Kristen S. (May 4, 2018). "20 Years of Xtina: How She Found, Lost and Liberated Her Voice Again". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Billboard Staff (August 23, 2006). "Aguilera Takes No. 1 Amid All-New Top Five". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2023. PRNewswire Staff (September 11, 2006). "ChrChristina Aguilera's New Album 'Back To Basics' is an Instant Hit Worldwide". PRNewswire. Retrieved May 1, 2023. "49th Annual Grammy Grammy Nominees". CBS News. December 7, 2006. Retrieved March 16, 2011. J. Freedom du Lac (August 16, 2006). "A Diva's Near Myth Christina Aguilera's 'Back to Basics' Misstates Her Case for Greatness". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Rosen, Jody (August 13, 2006). "Music Review: Back to Basics". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 29, 2008. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Stephen Thomas Erlewine (August 15, 2006). "Back to Basics: AllMusic Review". AllMusic. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Sim, Bernardo (May 7, 2021). "The Voice: How Many Albums Christina Aguilera Has Sold In Her Career". Screen Rant. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Davis 2013, p. 496. Sanneh, Kelefa (March 24, 2007). "No More Teen-Pop Fluff: Aguilera Tries Being a Serious Singer". The New York Times. Retrieved May 1, 2023. "Tony Bennett & Christina Aguilera Duet on 'Steppin' Out With My Baby': Listen". Billboard. October 16, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2023. "50th annual Grammy Awards nominations". Variety. Reed Business Information. December 6, 2007. Retrieved February 2, 2011. "Watch Tony Bennett Duet "Steppin' Out with My Baby" with Christina Aguilera". NBC. July 26, 2023. Retrieved October 4, 2023. Billboard Staff (February 4, 2006). "Reviews Spotlight: Albums". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Copsey, Rob (June 6, 2019). "Christina Aguilera's Top 20 Biggest Singles". The Official Charts Company. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Swan, Melanie (October 22, 2008). "Aguilera Set for Middle East Debut". The National. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Norman, Michael (April 10, 2007). "Back to Basics With the Lavish Christina Aguilera". Cleveland.com. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Walters, Barry (April 5, 2007). "Live Review: Christina Aguilera's "Back to Basics" Tour". Rolling Stone. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Waddell, Ray (December 13, 2007). "The Police Score Top-Grossing Tour Of '07". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2023. WP Staff (January 26, 2008). "Highlights". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Khullar, Samaa (February 6, 2023). "The 10 Most Memorable Grammy Performances of All Time". L'Officiel USA. Retrieved September 27, 2023. Vespoli, Lauren (February 26, 2021). "The 10 Best Grammy Performances of All Time". AARP. Retrieved October 2, 2023. My Night at the Grammys (television special). CBS. November 30, 2007. "Academy Announces Nov. TV Special". Grammy.com. The Recording Academy. Archived from the original on February 1, 2024. Retrieved February 1, 2024. "My Night at the Grammys". IGN. Archived from the original on February 1, 2024. Retrieved February 1, 2024. "My Night at the Grammys". The Futon Critic. Futon Media. Archived from the original on February 1, 2024. Retrieved February 1, 2024. Gordon, Sam (May 5, 2020). "Singer Christina Aguilera performs at half time during the 2007 NBA All-Star basketball game". Las Vegas Review Journal. Retrieved September 27, 2023. Gritten, David (April 11, 2008). "Film Reviews: Shine a Light and 21". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Zwickel, Jonathan. "Aguilera in '08: Electro-Pop, Warhol and Milk". MSN. Archived from the original on December 4, 2008. Retrieved August 10, 2011. Cohen, Jonathan (October 9, 2008). "T.I Breaks Own Record With Hot 100 Burst". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Trust, Gary (September 1, 2014). "Ask Billboard : Taylor Swift Out-'Shake's Mariah Carey". Billboard. Retrieved September 2, 2014. Anitai, Tamar (September 25, 2008). "Christina Aguilera's New 'Keeps Gettin' Better' Look: Better Than Before, Or Not So Much?". MTV. Retrieved September 27, 2023. "Christina Aguilera: Billboard 200 Chart History". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Concepcion, Mariel (October 31, 2008). "Hits Set Tees Up Next Christina Aguilera Album". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Conception, Mariel (October 31, 2008). "Hits Set Tees Up Next Christina Aguilera Album". Billboard. Retrieved May 24, 2011. People Staff (February 6, 2008). "Christina Aguilera's First Appearance Since Baby". People. Retrieved May 1, 2023. "Artists of the Decade (2000s)". Billboard. December 11, 2009. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Rollo, Sarah (October 2, 2008). "Astley Up for Best Act Ever Gong". Digital Spy. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Wood, Gaby (January 7, 2010). "Queen Aguilera Interview". Marie Claire. "Christina Aguilera's 'Bionic' slated for June release". The Independent. March 26, 2010. Retrieved August 11, 2014. Lansky, Sam (June 7, 2012). "The Legacy of 'Bionic': Why Christina Aguilera's Misunderstood Album Was Actually Ahead of Its Time". MTV News. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Ditzian, Eric (May 7, 2010). "Christina Aguilera Tells Oprah She Feels 'Superhuman' As A Mother". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 11, 2010. Retrieved May 7, 2010. Billboard Staff (June 16, 2010). "Glee, Twilight: Eclipse, and Aguilera Arrive... but Drake Awaits". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Sexton, Paul (June 17, 2010). "Christina Aguilera Debuts Atop Euro Chart". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Wood, Gaby (February 1, 2010). "Christina Aguilera Interview - Q&A". Marie Claire. Archived from the original on January 14, 2010. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Empire, Kitty (June 6, 2010). "Christina Aguilera: Bionic Review". The Observer. The Guardian. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Copsey, Robert (November 21, 2012). "What Happened to Christina Aguilera?". Digital Spy. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Sisario, Ben (May 24, 2010). "Christina Aguilera Postpones Tour". The New York Times. Retrieved June 20, 2010. Patterson, John (December 11, 2010). "Cher could teach Christina Aguilera a thing or two in Burlesque". The Guardian. Retrieved August 29, 2013. Wloszczyna, Susan (November 23, 2010). "Director Antin had stars in his eyes when he cast 'Burlesque'". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 15, 2014. Retrieved July 8, 2014. "Christina Aguilera Gets Star on Hollywood Walk of Fame". Billboard. November 15, 2010. Retrieved September 27, 2023. "Burlesque (2010)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved August 25, 2013. "'Burlesque' Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved May 2, 2014. LaSalle, Mike (November 24, 2010). "'Burlesque' review: Aguilera takes off". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved January 12, 2012. Rodriguez, Rene (November 24, 2010). "'Burlesque' (PG-13)". Miami Herald. McClatchy. Retrieved April 15, 2023. Basile, Annette (January 10, 2011). "Burlesque (Film)". FilmInk. FKP. Archived from the original on March 2, 2011. Retrieved April 15, 2023. "2011 Golden Globes nominees & winners". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 15, 2014. Retrieved July 8, 2014. Christina Aguilera, Cher (2010). Burlesque: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack (inlay cover). Screen Gems, Inc. p. iTunes Digital Booklet. "Grammy Awards". RockOnTheNet. Gregory, Jason (December 16, 2010). "Rihanna, Christina Aguilera X Factor Performances Branded 'Porn'". Gigwise. Retrieved January 12, 2012. Kaulfman, Gil (July 2, 2011). "Christina Aguilera Apologizes For Super Bowl National Anthem Flub". MTV News. Retrieved February 23, 2015. RS Staff (February 7, 2011). "Christina Aguilera Explains National Anthem Flub". Rolling Stone. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Semigran, Aly (February 13, 2011). "Christina Aguilera, Jennifer Hudson Belt Out Aretha Franklin Grammy Tribute". MTV. Retrieved September 25, 2023. Hirschberg, Lynn (July 1, 2011). "From the Vaults: The Fall & Rise of Christina Aguilera". W Magazine. Retrieved September 25, 2023. Atkinson, Katie (October 14, 2014). "Christina Aguilera, Gwen Stefani or Shakira". Billboard. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Gallo, Phil (March 2, 2011). "Christina Aguilera to Be Judge on NBC's 'The Voice'". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Jean-Philippe, McKenzie (March 24, 2022). "The Voice Coaches Through the Years: A Timeline". National Broadcasting Company. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Caulfield, Keith (July 6, 2011). "Beyonce Notches 4th Billboard 200 No. 1 with '4'". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on May 28, 2013. Retrieved April 26, 2013. Trust, Gary (July 7, 2011). "Who Won the Billboard Chart Battle: 'Idol' or 'The Voice'?". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Archived from the original on August 31, 2014. Retrieved April 26, 2013. "The Prayer (The Voice Performance)". iTunes Store (US). Apple Inc. Retrieved August 22, 2013. "'Moves Like Jagger': The Making Of Maroon 5's Megahit". NPR. Archived from the original on September 29, 2021. Retrieved September 29, 2021. "Daughtry, Enrique Iglesias, Gym Class Heroes, Lil Jon, Jennifer Lopez, OneRepublic, The Band Perry and will.i.am to Perform at "The 2011 American Music Awards"". PR Newswire. November 15, 2011. Retrieved November 28, 2017. Dinh, James (June 22, 2011). "Adam Levine And Christina Aguilera Show Off On 'Moves Like Jagger' Collabo". MTV Newsroom. MTV Networks. Archived from the original on October 31, 2013. Retrieved July 12, 2011. Frankenberg, Eric (July 12, 2019). "Christina Aguilera Launches Vegas Residency 'The Xperience' with $4 Million Earned". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Ochoa, John (January 3, 2020). "Mariah Carey Confirmed As The First Artist To Top The Billboard Hot 100 Chart Across Four Decades". Grammy. Retrieved September 25, 2023. "2011 – 54th Annual GRAMMY Awards Nominees And Winners". The Recording Academy. November 30, 2011. Trust, Gary (September 19, 2012). "Maroon 5 Reaches No. 1 on Hot 100 with 'One More Night'". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Trust, Gary (August 31, 2011). "Maroon 5 and Christina Aguilera's 'Moves Like Jagger' Struts To No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Trust, Gary (September 26, 2012). "Maroon 5 Still Tops Hot 100, PSY One Step From No. 1". Billboard. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Trust, Gary (November 28, 2012). "Chart Highlights: Ke$ha Climbs To No. 1 on Pop Songs". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Retrieved September 7, 2013. Lipshutz, Jason (November 21, 2012). "Christina Aguilera's Top 10 Biggest Career Moments". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 13, 2014. Retrieved January 21, 2022. "Review: Lotus". Q (318). London: 101. January 2013. Caramanica, Jon; Pareles, Jon; Ratliff, Ben (November 13, 2012). "Albums by Christina Aguilera, Soundgarden and Brian Eno". The New York Times. p. 34. Retrieved November 17, 2012. Trust, Gary (August 24, 2019). "Ask Billboard: A Supersized Mailbag in Honor of Lil Nas X & Billy Ray Cyrus' Record Run Atop the Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Benjamin, Jeff (November 20, 2012). "Christina Aguilera, Blake Shelton Unveil 'Just a Fool' on 'The Voice'". Billboard. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Lansky, Sam (December 7, 2012). "Christina Aguilera Performs "Just A Fool" On Ellen, Talks Hillary Clinton Chemistry: Watch". Idolator. Buzz Media. Retrieved December 22, 2012. Sciarretto, Amy (January 9, 2013). "Christina Gives Candlelit Performance of 'Blank Page' at 2013 People's Choice Awards". PopCrush. Retrieved January 10, 2013. Trust, Gary (March 27, 2013). "Macklemore & Ryan Lewis Return To Top Of Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved March 27, 2013. Patrick, Andy (May 20, 2013). "Billboard Music Awards 2013: Recognizing the Good, the Bad and The Biebs". TVLine. Retrieved September 21, 2022. Lipshutz, Jason (March 15, 2013). "Pitbull, Christina Aguilera 'Feel This Moment' Around The World in New Video". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Retrieved March 15, 2013. "Certificaciones Amprofon" (in Spanish). Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas. Archived from the original on October 22, 2014. Retrieved February 6, 2018. Florino, Rick (November 7, 2013). "A Great Big World "Say Something" Featuring Christina Aguilera Song Review – 5 out of 5 stars". Artist Direct. Retrieved November 10, 2013. Lansky, Sam (November 4, 2013). "Christina Aguilera Lends Her Vocals to a Great Big World's "Say Something": Listen". Idolator. Retrieved November 10, 2013. Trust, Gary (December 4, 2013). "Miley Cyrus' 'Wrecking Ball' Swings Back To No. 1 On Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved December 4, 2013. "Taylor Swift & Justin Timberlake Win Big at American Music Awards". Billboard. November 24, 2013. Retrieved November 28, 2013. "A Great Big World's "Say Something" With Christina Aguilera Ascends To No. 1 on iTunes Pop Songs Chart". Yahoo!. Retrieved November 10, 2013. "57th Annual Grammy Awards". National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. November 28, 2017. Retrieved February 6, 2018. Rivera, Zayda (December 18, 2013). "Shakira, Usher returning to 'The Voice' for Season 6". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on September 6, 2014. "Christina Aguilera Welcomes Gwen Stefani to The Voice, Confirms Singer's Role as Season 7 Coach". Us Weekly. April 29, 2014. Retrieved February 23, 2015. Lynch, Joe (October 14, 2014). "Goodbye, Gwen: Christina Aguilera Returning to 'The Voice'". Billboard. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Lopez, Michael (September 27, 2013). "Christina Aguilera Adds 'We Remain' To 'Catching Fire' Soundtrack (LISTEN)". The Huffington Post. Retrieved September 30, 2013. Young, Alex (November 19, 2013). "Album Review: Various Artists – The Hunger Games: Catching Fire Soundtrack". Consequence of Sound. Retrieved April 21, 2014. Savage, Mark (January 10, 2019). "Lady Gaga breaks her silence on R Kelly". BBC. Archived from the original on April 18, 2020. Locker, Melissa (December 31, 2013). "Lady Gaga Replaces R. Kelly with Christina Aguilera On New Version Of "Do What U Want"". Time. Archived from the original on January 2, 2014. Retrieved January 1, 2014. Spera, Keith (May 3, 2014). "Christina Aguilera played the pop diva, for better and worse, at the New Orleans Jazz Fest". NOLA. Retrieved September 25, 2023. "2015 Breakthrough Prize Ceremony". Breakthrough Prize. Retrieved September 25, 2023. "Christina Aguilera to open NBA All-Star game". AZ Central. January 27, 2015. Retrieved September 25, 2023. "Christina Aguilera Combines with Nas, Rockettes for NBA All-Star Intro". Billboard. February 15, 2015. Retrieved September 25, 2023. Berman, Eliza (April 9, 2015). "Watch Christina Aguilera Vamp It Up on a Sneak Peak From Nashville". Time. Retrieved May 1, 2015. Berman, Eliza (April 9, 2015). "Christina Aguilera Teaser for 'Nashville': Voice Coach to Play Role". Time. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Trust, Gary (April 30, 2015). "Christina Aguilera Makes First Appearance on Hot Country Songs Chart". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Bell, Rebekah (April 19, 2015). "Rascal Flatts and Christina Aguilera Team Up at 2015 ACM Awards". Taste of Country. Retrieved September 25, 2023. Park, Andrea (May 25, 2016). "Alisan Porter makes Christina Aguilera first winning female 'Voice' coach". CBS News. Retrieved May 28, 2016. Lockett, Dee (May 25, 2016). "Ariana Grande and Christina Aguilera Had a Diva-Off on The Voice (Sans Whitney's Hologram)". Vulture. Retrieved September 25, 2023. Reed, Ryan (June 24, 2016). "Watch Christina Aguilera Belt Orlando Tribute 'Change' on 'Kimmel'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Carley, Brennan (June 16, 2016). "Christina Aguilera Drops Emotionally Resonant New Single, 'Change'". Spin. Next Management Partners. Retrieved August 14, 2021. Nolfl, Joey (August 11, 2016). "Christina Aguilera's Telepathy: Xtina returns to the dance floor". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved February 6, 2018. Weatherby, Taylor (October 31, 2016). "Christina Aguilera Thanks Fans for No. 1 Dance Club Songs Hit With Disco-Themed 'Telepathy' Video". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 3, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2016. Harris, Hunter (July 28, 2017). "The Emoji Movie Didn't Deserve Christina Aguilera". Vulture. New York. Retrieved May 1, 2023. French, Megan; Blynn, Jamie (May 15, 2017). "Meet Christina Aguilera's 'Emoji Movie' Character Akiko Glitter: First Pic!". Us Weekly. Retrieved May 15, 2017. McNary, Dave (May 1, 2017). "Christina Aguilera, Theo James, Rashida Jones Join Sci-Fi Romance 'Zoe'". Variety. Retrieved May 2, 2017. Kreps, Daniel (September 11, 2017). "New Pink, Gwen Stefani, Christina Aguilera Songs to Appear on Compilation". Rolling Stone. Retrieved September 26, 2023. Swertlow, Meg (November 20, 2017). "Christina Aguilera's Whitney Houston Tribute Brings the Crowd to Its Feet at the 2017 AMAs". E! News. Retrieved September 26, 2023. "Christina Aguilera Got A Make-Under — & You Won't Recognize Her". Refeinery29. March 27, 2018. Retrieved September 25, 2023. Raup, Jordan (March 7, 2018). "Tribeca 2018 Lineup Includes 'Disobedience,' 'The Miseducation of Cameron Post,' 'The Seagull,' and More". The Film Stage. Retrieved May 9, 2018. News Desk, TV (June 21, 2018). "Amazon Prime Video to Exclusively Launch ZOE Starring Ewan McGregor and Lea Seydoux on July 20". Broadway World. Retrieved June 21, 2018. "Reviews for Liberation by Christina Aguilera". Metacritic. Retrieved October 31, 2018. Spanos, Brittany (June 14, 2018). "Review: Christina Aguilera Flexes Her Diva Power on the Excellent 'Liberation'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 16, 2018. Retrieved June 19, 2018. Pareles, Jon (June 13, 2018). "Christina Aguilera Exults in Her Voice on 'Liberation'". The New York Times. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Lipshut, Jason (January 30, 2015). "Christina Aguilera Talks Next Album, Working with Pharrell Williams on New Music". Billboard. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Lodi, Marie (March 26, 2018). "Christina Aguilera Is Back With a New Transformation". Paper. Retrieved May 6, 2018. Jones, Allie (May 3, 2018). "Christina Aguilera on 'Longing for Freedom' & Her Hip-Hop-Inspired Return to Music". Billboard. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Caulfield, Keith (June 24, 2018). "5 Seconds of Summer Earn Third No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart With 'Youngblood'". Billboard. Retrieved January 21, 2022. "Christina Aguilera's 'Twice' Is Here: Listen". Billboard. May 11, 2018. Retrieved May 12, 2018. Kreps, Daniel (May 16, 2018). "Hear Christina Aguilera's Empowering New Song 'Fall in Line' With Demi Lovato". Rolling Stone. Retrieved January 21, 2018. White, Jack (May 16, 2018). "Christina Aguilera and Demi Lovato release their much-anticipated collaboration Fall In Line". Official Charts Company. Retrieved May 19, 2018. "Christina Aguilera Releases Bouncy New Single 'Like I Do' Featuring Goldlink: Listen". Billboard. June 7, 2018. Retrieved January 6, 2019. "Christina Aguilera Is Back With a New Rap-Forward Single". Time. May 3, 2018. Retrieved May 5, 2018. Radke, Brock (October 19, 2018). "Christina Aguilera's creativity has been liberated". Las Vegas Magazine. Archived from the original on July 22, 2020. Retrieved July 22, 2020. "61st Annual GRAMMY Awards". National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. December 6, 2018. Retrieved December 14, 2018. Gil, Kaufman (May 9, 2018). "Christina Aguilera Announces Liberation Tour, First Outing Since 2008". Billboard. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Villa, Lucas (November 2, 2018). "Christina Aguilera's Liberation Tour marks beautiful comeback in Las Vegas". AXS. Anschutz Entertainment Group. Archived from the original on July 11, 2019. Retrieved July 11, 2019. "Pollstar Year End: Top 200 North American Tours" (PDF). Pollstar. December 17, 2018. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 11, 2019. Retrieved October 28, 2017. AguileraFeaturedNews·December 25, Jordan Miller·Christina; Read, 2018·1 Min (December 25, 2018). "Here's How Many Millions Christina Aguilera's Liberation Tour Grossed". BreatheHeavy.com. Archived from the original on September 18, 2020. Retrieved March 11, 2020.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "The Best Live Shows Of 2018". Billboard. Eldridge Industries. December 14, 2018. Retrieved July 16, 2019. Nied, Mike (March 4, 2019). "She's Coming, Europe! Christina Aguilera Announces 'The X Tour'". Idolator. Retrieved June 29, 2019. Entertainment, Caesars. "International Superstar Christina Aguilera Announces Final Show Dates For "Christina Aguilera: The Xperience" At Planet Hollywood Resort & Casino". www.prnewswire.com (Press release). Retrieved September 10, 2022. "Christina Aguilera: The Xperience, will open at Zappos Theater at Planet Hollywood Resort & Casino on Friday, May 31, 2019". www.caesars.com. Retrieved August 30, 2022. Radke, Brock (May 31, 2019). "Best Bets: Shin Lim, Christina Aguilera, Anita Baker and more for your Las Vegas weekend - Las Vegas Sun Newspaper". lasvegassun.com. Retrieved August 30, 2022. "Christina Aguilera set for Las Vegas residency at Planet Hollywood". Las Vegas Review-Journal. January 29, 2019. Retrieved August 30, 2022. "Christina Aguilera reveals details of Las Vegas residency". news.yahoo.com. Retrieved August 30, 2022. Sheckells, Melinda (January 29, 2019). "Christina Aguilera Brings 'The Xperience' to Las Vegas". Billboard. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Moreland, Quinn (September 13, 2019). "Snoop Dogg and Migos Share New Song for The Addams Family: Listen". Pitchfork. Retrieved September 14, 2019. "Christina Aguilera regresa a la música con 'Haunted Heart' para la película de 'La Familia Addams'" (in Spanish). Europa FM. Atresmedia. September 29, 2019. Archived from the original on October 1, 2019. Retrieved March 19, 2021. "'Haunted Heart' – Confira a canção de Christina Aguilera para a animação 'A Família Adams'". Stereo Pop (in Portuguese). September 27, 2019. Archived from the original on October 14, 2019. Retrieved March 19, 2021. Longmire, Becca (November 22, 2019). "Christina Aguilera And A Great Big World Release New Track 'Fall On Me'". Entertainment Tonight Canada. Archived from the original on September 9, 2020. Retrieved September 9, 2020. Harris, LaTesha (November 5, 2019). "'Joker', 'Lion King' Lead Hollywood Music in Media Awards Nominees". Variety. Retrieved October 9, 2023. "Christina Aguilera Returns to Her Disney Roots with New Song". Rolling Stone. March 7, 2020. "93rd Oscars Shortlists". The Academy Awards. February 5, 2021. Archived from the original on February 10, 2021. Retrieved February 10, 2021. Grow, Kory (March 15, 2021). "Oscars 2021: Hear the Nominees for Best Original Song". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 16, 2021. "Christina Aguilera Returns to Her 'Reflection' For Disney's 'Mulan' With Two New Stunning Videos". Billboard. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Merrett, Robyn (May 6, 2020). "Katy Perry, John Legend, Christina Aguilera, DWTS Pros and More Join Disney Family Singalong 2". People. Retrieved September 28, 2023. Aniftos, Rania (November 10, 2020). "Christina Aguilera Signs With Roc Nation Management". Billboard. Retrieved January 13, 2023. Aswad, Jem (November 10, 2020). "Christina Aguilera Joins Roc Nation Management". Variety. Retrieved January 13, 2023. Aniftos, Rania (July 17, 2021). "Christina Aguilera Reimagines Her Biggest Hits With the LA Philharmonic at the Hollywood Bowl". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 17, 2021. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Cashmere, Paul (July 18, 2021). "Christina Aguilera Performs With Orchestra At Hollywood Bowl". Noise11.com. The Noise Network. Archived from the original on July 18, 2021. Retrieved July 18, 2021. "Christina Aguilera Blazes Sold-Out Hollywood Bowl Shows / Dazzles With 'Dirrty,' 'Fighter,' & More". That Grape Juice. Townsquare Music. July 18, 2021. Archived from the original on July 18, 2021. Retrieved July 18, 2021. "Megan Thee Stallion and Snoop Dogg join 'The Addams Family 2' soundtrack". NME. September 28, 2021. Retrieved October 13, 2021. "Christina Aguilera Has a 'Full Circle Moment' as She Performs at Disney World 50th Anniversary". People. Retrieved October 13, 2021. "Christina Aguilera's 'Reflection' Shows Clearly at Disney World's 50th Anniversary". ITM. October 8, 2021. Retrieved October 13, 2021. "Christina Aguilera, Mickey Guyton Belt for Tina Turner at Rock Hall Tribute". Rolling Stone. October 31, 2021. Retrieved November 2, 2021. "Christina Aguilera Reflects on Her Incredible 2021: 'This Has Been a Year FULL of Celebration!'". People. December 7, 2021. Retrieved December 7, 2021. "Expo 2020 Dubai closing ceremony as it happened: The 'World's Greatest Show' makes grand exit". Gulf News. March 31, 2022. Retrieved April 2, 2022. Major, Michael (May 31, 2022). "Christina Aguilera Releases New Album 'Aguilera'". Broadwayworld. Retrieved May 31, 2022. "CHRISTINA AGUILERA RELEASES NEW ALBUM 'AGUILERA'". TotalNtertainment. May 31, 2022. Retrieved June 1, 2022. Mier, Tomás (July 13, 2021). "Christina Aguilera Says She's 'Re-Inspired by Music All Over Again'". People. Archived from the original on November 16, 2022. Retrieved November 21, 2022. "Christina Aguilera Unveils Release Date & Tracklist for Her Upcoming Spanish-Language EP 'La Fuerza'". Billboard. Retrieved January 20, 2021. "Christina Aguilera Announces New Spanish EP La Tormenta and New Single 'Sueltame'". People. Retrieved May 25, 2022. ""La Luz": Christina Aguilera confirma terceiro EP em espanhol". PopLine. June 2022. Retrieved June 2, 2022. "Christina Aguilera May Be Singing About Her Estranged Father In Her New Spanish Song". UPROXX. September 28, 2022. Retrieved September 30, 2022. Hernandez, Nina (December 9, 2022). "Bad Bunny, Beyoncé and the best albums of 2022". Houston Chronicle. Hearst Communications. Archived from the original on December 29, 2022. Retrieved December 29, 2022. "Best Latin Albums of 2022". Billboard. December 19, 2022. Archived from the original on December 23, 2022. Retrieved December 23, 2022. "See you soon!". Twitter. Twitter, Inc. July 19, 2022. Archived from the original on July 21, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2022. "Christina Aguilera wows fans as she gives five star performance at Monte Carlo Summer Festival". The Mirror. August 2, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2022. "Christina Aguilera review — powerhouse entertainer thrills the O2 Arena". Financial Times. August 8, 2022. Archived from the original on December 10, 2022. Retrieved August 8, 2022. "Christina Aguilera hits out at 'Don't Say Gay' during Brighton Pride performance". PinkNews. August 7, 2022. Retrieved August 7, 2022. Simpson, Dave (August 3, 2022). "Christina Aguilera review – copper-bottomed crowdpleasers by the seaside". The Guardian. Retrieved August 13, 2022. Darcy, Jay (August 12, 2022). "Live Review: Christina Aguilera at M&S Bank Arena". The Mancunion. Retrieved August 13, 2022. "Christina Aguilera promises new English-language album". Music-News.com. August 4, 2022. Retrieved December 16, 2022. Rice, Elle May (August 4, 2022). "Christina Aguilera fans belt out Lady Marmalade at Liverpool gig". Liverpool Echo. Retrieved December 16, 2022. Shillcock, Francesca (August 4, 2022). "Leslie Grace breaks silence after Batgirl is shelved - details". HELLO!. Retrieved December 16, 2022. "Rosalía wins album of the year, and makes history, at 2022 Latin Grammy Awards". Los Angeles Times. November 18, 2022. Retrieved November 18, 2022. "Christina Aguilera Teams Up With Christian Nodal for a Powerful Duet at the Latin Grammys". Rolling Stone. November 18, 2022. Retrieved November 18, 2022. "Grammy nominations 2023: See the list of nominees". CNN. November 15, 2022. Retrieved November 16, 2022. Ratner-Arias, Sigal (September 19, 2023). "Edgar Barrera Tops 2023 Latin Grammys Nominees: Complete List". Billboard. Retrieved September 19, 2023. "Christina Aguilera Wears Hulk Outfit With Strap-on Dildo During L.A. Pride Event". E! News. June 14, 2022. Retrieved June 14, 2022. "Christina Aguilera dons sex toy for x-rated performance at LA Pride concert". PerthNow. June 13, 2022. Retrieved June 14, 2022. "Christina Aguilera Whipped Out a Glittery Green Strap-On For Her LA Pride Performance". OUT. June 13, 2022. Retrieved June 14, 2022. "Christina Aguilera Earns Her Crown at 2022 Billboard Latin Music Awards With Ranchera Anthem 'La Reina'". Billboard. Retrieved September 30, 2022. "20 years on, Christina Aguilera reflects on 'Stripped': "I was able to be the artist I wanted to be"". WJJY 106.7. October 21, 2022. Retrieved October 21, 2022. "Christina Aguilera Announces New 'Beautiful' Music Video: 'Put Your Mind, Body & Soul First'". Billboard. Retrieved October 15, 2022. "11/11/22: Chris Rock signs on for a Netflix first". Cynopsis Media. November 11, 2022. Retrieved January 13, 2023. "TIME Studios and Roc Nation Partner to Produce Feature Documentary About Award-Winning Global Superstar Christina Aguilera". Time. November 10, 2022. Retrieved January 13, 2023. Jones, Monique (September 6, 2023). "Bryson Tiller To Drop 'Down Like That' For 'PAW Patrol: The Mighty Movie,' Starring Taraji P. Henson, Marsai Martin And More". Shadow and Act. Retrieved September 18, 2023. Magri, Giulia (September 17, 2023). "Christina Aguilera dazzles in Europride concert with energetic performance". Times of Malta. Allied Newspapers Limited. Archived from the original on September 25, 2023. Retrieved September 25, 2023. "EuroPride Valletta 2023 'a success', organisers say". The Malta Independent. September 17, 2023. Archived from the original on September 25, 2023. Retrieved September 25, 2023. McArdle, Tommy (September 29, 2023). "Burlesque Stage Adaptation in Works with Christina Aguilera and Todrick Hall Onboard". People. Retrieved October 5, 2023. Daw, Stephen (October 10, 2023). "Christina Aguilera Announces New Series of Las Vegas Shows With 'A Truly Modern Twist'". Billboard. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "Christina Aguilera". Christina Aguilera. December 30, 2023. Retrieved January 31, 2024. Williams, Kyann-Sian (October 11, 2023). "Christina Aguilera announces 'A Truly Modern Twist' Las Vegas gigs". NME. Retrieved February 2, 2024. Hampp, Andrew (September 21, 2012). "Christina Aguilera: Billboard Cover Story". Billboard. Retrieved February 1, 2023. As a vocalist it brought me back to, "Yeah, that's what I used to do to my Whitney Houston record and my Mariah Carey record and my Etta James record." It brings you back to a place where it becomes your personal responsibility to infuse the next generation with more information about learning every intricate note. That's why a song called "Sing for Me" is special song. It's one of those singer's songs where if you're not a vocalist you can't mess with that song. R. Mead 2012, p. 29. Vineyard, Jennifer (June 28, 2006). "Christina Aguilera Can Die Happy Now - She's Bonded with 'Bad Girl' Idol Etta James". MTV News. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Rosen, Craig (September 29, 2000). "Christina Aguilera Climbs Every Mountain for 'My Kind of Christmas'". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on May 24, 2011. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Valdes-Rodriguez, Alisa (July 26, 1999). "Genie 'Behind' Bottle". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Greenberger 2008, p. 27. Dominguez 2003, p. 40. Murphy, Sarah (May 3, 2018). "Christina Aguilera's New Album 'Liberation' Was Apparently Inspired by Nirvana, Radiohead". Exclaim!. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Dominguez 2003, p. 3. Gómez, Shirley (May 9, 2022). "Christina Aguilera Premieres the Video of 'La Reina'". ¡Hola!. Retrieved April 30, 2023. "Christina Aguilera Inspirada por Rosalía" (in Spanish). La Vanguardia. September 23, 2020. Retrieved April 30, 2023. McGrath, Stephanie (May 17, 2020). "The Christina Aguilera Interview". Jam!. Archived from the original on July 11, 2012. Retrieved April 30, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Smith, Krista (November 24, 2010). "Forever Cher". Vanity Fair. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Newman, Melinda (July 29, 2006). "Old School". Billboard. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Cox, Jamieson (June 14, 2018). "Christina Aguilera Hits Reset on Her New Album 'Liberation'". Time. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Moss, Corey (June 29, 2006). "Christina Channels Marilyn Monroe For Intimate Album Cover". MTV News. Retrieved April 30, 2023. "Christina Turns Hollywood Pin-Up in Latest Shoot". Hello. Retrieved February 1, 2023. "Nelly Pursuing Aguilera on Video Set". San Francisco Chronicle. October 28, 2004. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Montgomery, James (September 28, 2012). "Christina Aguilera's 'Your Body' Video: A Pop-Culture Cheat Sheet". MTV News. Retrieved February 1, 2023. Vineyard, Jennifer (June 19, 2006). "'Ain't No Other Man' Video Has Christina Singing The Blues". MTV News. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Vena, Jocelyn (November 10, 2008). "Christina Aguilera Looks Back - And Forward - with New LP, Next LP". MTV News. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Beard, Matthew (April 6, 2006). "Aguilera Invests £25,000 in Banksy". The Independent. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Maddy Shaw Roberts (March 14, 2019). "Let's Take a Moment to Appreciate How Incredible Christina Aguilera's Voice Is". Classic FM. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Browne, David (December 26, 2010). "Trilling Songbirds Clip Their Wings". The New York Times. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Beale, Lauren (August 26, 2011). "Christina Aguilera Sells Sunset Strip-Area Home". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Gayles, Contessa (May 24, 2011). "10 Things You Didn't Know About 'The Voice' Coach and 'Dirrty' Pop Star Christina Aguilera". AOL. Archived from the original on June 1, 2011. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Slezak, Michael (August 16, 2006). "The Essential Christina Aguilera". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Johnston, Maura (November 15, 2012). "Christina Aguilera's Lotus, Reviewed". Slate. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Anderman, Joan (September 10, 1999). "Aguilera Shows Potential to Be More Than Just Marketing". The Boston Globe. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Harrington, Richard (September 8, 1999). "Christina Aguilera: No Mickey Mouse Pop Sensation". The Washington Post. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Frere-Jones, Sasha (August 28, 2006). "Sex Symbols". The New Yorker. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Powers, Ann (August 15, 2006). "Old-School? Her?". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved April 30, 2021. Jones, Preston (March 26, 2007). "Wo-o-o, whoa: Stop Oversinging!". The Seattle Times. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Eskow, John (February 8, 2011). "Christina Aguilera and the Hideous Cult of Oversouling". The Huffington Post. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Davies, Lucy (August 14, 2006). "Review of Christina Aguilera - Back to Basics Album". BBC Music. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Willman, Chris (December 11, 2000). "Christina Aguilera's Oversinging Is Dangerous to Her Career". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Tietjen, Alexa (December 18, 2014). "15 Reasons Why Christina Aguilera Is A Bad B*tch". VH1. Archived from the original on August 2, 2022. Retrieved April 30, 2023. M. Musa (June 12, 2018). "Christina Aguilera and GoldLink's 'Like I Do' Is The Collab We Didn't Know We Needed". The Source. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Hill, Kimberly (October 5, 2023). "If You've Got Soul: Christina Aguilera's 2006 Masterwork 'Back to Basics'". PopMatters. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Kennedy, Gerrick D. (July 2, 2018). "Q&A: After a Six-Year Hiatus, Christina Aguilera Finds Her 'Liberation'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Petridis, Alexis (June 14, 2018). "Christina Aguilera: Liberation Review – #MeToo Makeover Hits High and Low Notes". The Guardian. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Christopher John Farley (September 14, 2000). "Music: Christina Aguilera's Inner Visions". Time. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Benjamin, Jeff (October 29, 2017). "How Christina Aguilera's 'Stripped' Album Is Influencing the Pop Scene 15 Years Later". Billboard. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Handerson, Eric (November 21, 2010). "Burlesque: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Review". Slant Magazine. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Kaplan, Ilana (June 13, 2018). "Christina Aguilera 'Liberation' Review: New Album Is Everything Diehard Fans Could Want, But There Are Misses Among the Hits". The Independent. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Hughes, Hilary (April 6, 2021). "Magic in the Chaos: How Christina Aguilera, Mya, Baz Luhrmann & More Revived 'Lady Marmalade'". Billboard. Retrieved October 15, 2023. MTV News Staff (March 30, 2022). "'Christina Aguilera' Set The Stage For A Pop Icon With Range". MTV News. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Sanneh, Kelefa (August 17, 2006). "Honey They've Shrunk the Pop Stars (but Christina Aguilera Fights On)". The New York Times. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Lansky, Sam (June 7, 2012). "The Legacy of 'Bionic': Why Christina Aguilera's Misunderstood Album Was Actually Ahead of Its Time". MTV Buzzworthy. Archived from the original on June 11, 2012. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Godfrey, Sarah (November 12, 2012). "Album Review: 'Lotus', by Christina Aguilera". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Ratner-Arias, Sigal (December 19, 2022). "Best Latin Albums of 2022". Billboard. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Wai Wong, Chin (2022). Women in American Pop Music: Christina Aguilera's Impact on Cultural Narratives (Thesis). Hollins University. Retrieved October 15, 2023. McIntyre, Hugh (January 6, 2016). "Christina Aguilera Talks Domestic Violence: 'You Are Not Alone'". Forbes. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Harmata, Claudia (October 9, 2019). "Christina Aguilera Gets Emotional Receiving Award from Domestic Violence Shelter: 'I Am a Survivor'". People. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Donovan 2010, p. 124. Dominguez 2003, p. 7. Govan 2013, p. 17. Billboard Staff (August 13, 2006). "'Basic' Instinct". Billboard. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Wilkinson, Sophie (October 26, 2017). "15 Years Since 'Stripped' We're Still Nowhere Near Gender Equality". Vice. Retrieved October 15, 2023. K. Armstrong 2013, p. 116. Solomon, Eric (July 30, 2018). "Is There Life Beyond the Pop Lifecycle for Christina Aguilera?". PopMatters. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Hoby, Hermione (June 13, 2010). "Christina Aguilera: 'I'm a Very Sexual Person by Nature'". The Guardian. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Garland, Emma (October 22, 2019). "Christina Aguilera's 'Stripped' Was a Watershed Moment in 21st Century Pop". Crack Magazine. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Speakman, Kimberlee (November 10, 2022). "Christina Aguilera Gives 'Intimate' Look Into Her Life in New TIME Studios Documentary". People. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Roth, Madeline (September 1, 2015). "11 Things Christina Aguilera Needs to Teach Us in Her New Online Singing Class". MTV. Retrieved January 3, 2022. Thompson, Jake (December 5, 2021). "Christina Aguilera's Best Red Carpet Looks Ever Are Truly Iconic". E! News. Retrieved January 3, 2022. Tison, James (May 19, 2015). "Christina Aguilera's 7 Best Diva Moments". Bustle. Retrieved July 28, 2021. Levine, Nick (August 2, 2019). "We're Long Overdue for a Christina Aguilera Comeback". Vice. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Dawson, Lamar (December 14, 2017). "Christina Aguilera: 5 Times She Showed Up for the LGBTQ Community". Billboard. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "The 100 Most Popular Musicians on Twitter". The Guardian. April 19, 2013. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Elassar, Alaa (August 25, 2019). "Christina Aguilera Celebrates the 20th Anniversary of Her Debut Album". CNN. Retrieved July 5, 2021. "Google Trends 2004". Retrieved July 5, 2021. "Google Trends 2002". Retrieved July 5, 2021. Heron, Liz (May 6, 2010). "50 Most Popular Women on the Web, Per Google Search Results". ABC News. Retrieved July 5, 2021. "Top Yahoo! Searches 2003". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on January 13, 2004. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Pinfold, Michael (2006). "Christina Aguilera". In Gerstner, David A. (ed.). Routledge International Encyclopedia of Queer Culture (1 ed.). Routledge. p. 16. ISBN 9780415306515. Retrieved June 15, 2022. Zhong, Fan (May 16, 2018). "Christina Aguilera Is Back at Last, and She Has Got Something to Say". W. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Beresford, Trilby (March 7, 2019). "Christina Aguilera to Receive Equality Award for LGBTQ Advocacy". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 5, 2021. "Christina Aguilera voted most inspirational pop act for gay people". Stonewall. Archived from the original on April 10, 2011. Retrieved April 26, 2013. "Stonewall National Monument Visitor Center honors Christina Aguilera for allyship I Nightline". YouTube. June 29, 2023. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved July 1, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "Historic site honors LGBTQ+ ally and superstar Christina Aguilera". Good Morning America. YouTube. June 29, 2023. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved July 1, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Toscano, Sarah (October 14, 2019). "10 of Christina Aguilera's Most Iconic Outfits". Elite Daily. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Odell, Amy (September 24, 2020). "50 Christina Aguilera Fashion Moments You Forgot You Were Obsessed With". Cosmopolitan. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Wallace, Megan (August 21, 2022). "Xtina's throwback video proves she's the ultimate "teenage dirtbag"". Cosmopolitan. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Dodd, Georgia (April 26, 2023). "Christina Aguilera Shows Off Her Famous Curves In A Skintight, See-Through Catsuit With Zebra Stripes". SheFinds. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Caramanica, Jon (September 17, 2012). "How Christina Aguilera Changed Judging of Reality TV Music". The New York Times. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Okwodu, Janelle (September 18, 2018). "How Christina Aguilera Brought Down the House at London Fashion Week". Vogue. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Emma Elizabeth Davidson (December 11, 2018). "The 20 Most Stylish People of 2018". Dazed. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Larratt, Megan (December 18, 2020). "See Christina Aguilera's Most Iconic Looks On and Off Stage". E! Online. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Petak, Tessa (September 21, 2022). "Julia Fox Channeled Christina Aguilera in Low-Rise Leather Pants". Yahoo Life. Retrieved April 30, 2023. "Christina Aguilera's Fashion Evolution". Billboard. May 2, 2018. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Sciarretto, Amy (July 25, 2015). "10 Times Ariana Grande Channeled Christina Aguilera, Proving That Xtina Really Is The Best Style Icon". Bustle. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Sutton, Samantha (July 13, 2021). "Everyone Is Dressing Like 2002 Christina Aguilera Now". InStyle. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Allaire, Christian (October 19, 2022). "Christina Aguilera's 'Dirrty' Era Couldn't Be More On Trend". Vogue. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Masley, Ed (August 27, 2000). "Concert Review: Aguilera Wows 'Em With Awe-Inspiring Vocals". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Archived from the original on August 12, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Wiederhorn, Jon (August 23, 2001). "Deborah Gibson: Britney Twinkles, Christina Rankles". MTV News. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Strauss, Neil (July 6, 2000). "Christina Aguilera: The Hit Girl". Rolling Stone. Retrieved July 5, 2021. "100 Sexiest Artists". VH1. Archived from the original on August 31, 2006. Retrieved July 5, 2021. "VH1's 100 Sexiest Artists". VH1. Archived from the original on May 22, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Clun, Rachel (March 26, 2004). "Who's the Sexiest Aussie?". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Nostro, Lauren (December 10, 2012). "The 100 Hottest Female Singers of All Time". Complex. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Palicki, Adrianne (April 24, 2007). "Girls of Maxim". Maxim. Archived from the original on March 1, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Tauber, Michelle (May 12, 2003). "50 Most Beautiful People". People. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Johnson, Caitlin (April 25, 2007). "People Magazine Names 100 Most Beautiful". CBS News. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Guerra, Joey (February 20, 2007). "Christina Aguilera Claims Her Pop Throne". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on February 10, 2015. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Trebay, Guy (March 20, 2013). "Justin Timberlake Is All Dressed Up". The New York Times. Retrieved July 5, 2021. "The Number Ones: Christina Aguilera's "What A Girl Wants"". Stereogum. July 29, 2022. Retrieved August 17, 2022. Eng, Monica (January 16, 2000). "Pop Idol's Store Visit Cut Short By Chaos". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Matsumoto, Jon (December 16, 2002). "Christina Aguilera: A Gifted Artist with an Independent Vision". Broadcast Music, Inc. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Ogunnaike, Lola (July 28, 2006). "Aguilera Aims for Edgy, but Richer, Sound". The New York Times. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Browne, David (May 19, 2000). "Oops!... I Did It Again". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Rahman, Abdul (October 21, 2023). "Christina Aguilera vs. Britney Spears: Unveiling the Rivalry and Resilience of Two Pop Icons". Medium. Retrieved March 28, 2024. "Aguilera Sheds Teen Pop Image, Alongside Clothes". The Sydney Morning Herald. October 30, 2002. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Wilkinson, Sophie (October 26, 2017). "15 Years After Christina Aguilera's 'Stripped', We're Still Nowhere Near Gender Equality". Vice. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Dunn, Jancee (November 5, 2002). "Stripped: Album Review". Rolling Stone. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Stephen Thomas Erlewine (November 18, 2003). "In the Zone". AllMusic. Retrieved July 5, 2021. White, Adam (November 9, 2019). "Get a Little Naughty: How Christina Aguilera Turned Pop Dirrty". The Telegraph. The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Vineyard, Jennifer (June 19, 2006). "'Ain't No Other Man' Video Has Christina Singing the Blues". MTV News. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Cills, Hazel (June 4, 2013). "Christina Aguilera: The Style Evolution of a Diva". Vice. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Greenblatt, Leah (May 18, 2010). "Christina Aguilera's Lady Gaga Talk: For Real or for Show?". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Vena, Jocelyn (April 21, 2010). "Christina Aguilera On Lady Gaga Comparisons: 'My Work Speaks for Itself'". MTV News. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Palomares, Sugey (October 29, 2012). "Adam Levine Defends Christina Aguilera Over Weight Gain Criticism". Latina. Archived from the original on November 1, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Monde, Chiderah (November 25, 2013). "American Music Awards 2013: Christina Aguilera Stuns On Red Carpet a Year After Receiving Criticism for Last Year's Look". New York Daily News. Retrieved July 5, 2021. "Christina Aguilera Dishes on Weight Loss". Fox News. February 17, 2017. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Lodi, Marie (March 26, 2018). "Christina Aguilera Is Back With a New Transformation". Paper. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Hou, Kathleen (March 26, 2018). "Christina Aguilera Wears No Makeup on Her New Cover". The Cut. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Gardner, Abby (March 27, 2018). "I Can't Stop Staring at Christina Aguilera's Freckles". Glamour. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Hautman, Nicholas (March 26, 2018). "Christina Aguilera Is Nearly Unrecognizable on 'Paper' Cover". Us Weekly. Retrieved April 30, 2023. "Christina Aguilera is the Cover Star of Paper Magazine Spring 2018 Issue". DSCENE. March 27, 2018. Retrieved April 30, 2023. "Christina Aguilera Did a Makeup-Free Photo Shoot and She Looks Stunning". Cosmopolitan. March 26, 2018. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Melas, Chloe (March 26, 2018). "Christina Aguilera goes makeup free for Paper". CNN. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Opelka, Brenna (March 27, 2018). "Christina Aguilera took off all her makeup for her new magazine cover — and the transformation will blow your mind". Insider. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Baille, Katie (March 27, 2018). "Christina Aguilera Ditches Makeup, And So Have All of These Celebs". Metro. Retrieved July 5, 2021. "Makeup-Free Magazine Covers Starring Beyoncé, Adele & More". Billboard. March 27, 2018. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Baille, Katie (October 22, 2021). "You need to see Christina Aguilera's new fiery red hair. Right now". Cosmopolitan. Retrieved April 23, 2023. White, Adam (November 9, 2019). "Get a Little Naughty: How Christina Aguilera Turned Pop Dirrty". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Hicks, Gregory (January 25, 2012). "Step into the Salon: Christina Aguilera's Controversial Pop Legend Status". The Michigan Daily. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Quinn, Dave (September 13, 2018). "Christina Aguilera Open to Duet with Britney Spears". People. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Byrne, Ciar (June 29, 2004). "The Music Industry's 100 Most Influential People". The Independent. Retrieved July 26, 2021. "The 100 Greatest Women In Music". VH1. Archived from the original on April 18, 2015. Retrieved July 26, 2021. "The 50 Greatest Teen Idols". VH1. Archived from the original on February 9, 2012. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Huey, Steve (January 2008). "Christina Aguilera: Full Biography". MTV. Archived from the original on January 10, 2008. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Serpick, Evan (February 2010). "Christina Aguilera: Bio". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 8, 2012. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Joshua David Stein (May 16, 2010). "Christina Aguilera Reclaims the Fame". Out. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Sundstrom, Mark (August 17, 2016). "10 Best Christina Aguilera Performances from the 'Back to Basics' Era". Fuse TV. Archived from the original on August 22, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2021. "22 Greatest Voices in Music". MTV. Archived from the original on January 22, 2003. Retrieved July 26, 2021. RS Staff (December 3, 2010). "100 Greatest Singers of All Time". Rolling Stone. Retrieved April 30, 2023. "The 100 Greatest Singers of All Time". Consequence of Sound. October 11, 2016. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Palomares, Sugey (February 8, 2013). "The 50 Best Latin Singers and Pop Stars of All Time". Latina. Archived from the original on July 2, 2017. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Ogunnaike, Lola (July 30, 2006). "Christina Aguilera, That Dirrty Girl, Cleans Up Real Nice". The New York Times. Retrieved June 24, 2021. Kennedy, Gerrick D. (August 23, 2013). "MTV Video Music Awards: 30 Moments That Make It a Can't-Miss Event". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Grein, Paul (December 1, 2021). "Christina Aguilera to Get Music Icon at 2021 People's Choice Awards". Billboard. Retrieved January 3, 2022. Maerz, Melissa (August 3, 2020). "The Voice Season Premiere Recap: Week One of Auditions". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved January 3, 2022. Clayton-Lea, Tony (November 3, 2019). "Christina Aguilera at 3Arena, Dublin: Everything You Need to Know". The Irish Times. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Gurza, Agustin (August 15, 2004). "1999 Was the Year of the Latin Explosion". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Mota, Jennifer (May 14, 2019). "Remember the U.S. Latin Music Wave at the Turn of the Millennium?". People en Español. Archived from the original on August 12, 2022. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Villa, Lucas (June 26, 2020). "Thalia, Paulina Rubio, Christina Aguilera Open Up About Landmark 2000 Albums: Exclusive". Billboard. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Helligar, Jeremy (June 15, 2018). "Can Christina Aguilera Reclaim Her (Rightful) Place as Top Pop Star?". Variety. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Caulfield, Keith (August 8, 2017). "The Turn-of-the-Century Pop Resurgence: Are Late-'90s/Early-'00s Samples About to be Everywhere?". Billboard. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Thompson, Wanna (November 16, 2018). "Gwen Stefani Should Have Been Canceled a Long Time Ago". Vice. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Cohen, Rich (May 4, 2009). "The Jessica Simpson Question". Vanity Fair. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Cohen, Jess (July 25, 2018). "Mandy Moore Reflects on Early Days in Pop Music". E! News. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Nied, Mike (October 24, 2017). "Reflecting On the Impact of Christina Aguilera". Idolator. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Fu, Eddie (June 15, 2018). "How Christina Aguilera's Evolution Paved the Way for a Generation of Pop Singers". Genius. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Moore, Andrew (May 2007). "Definitive 200". Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on May 10, 2007. Retrieved July 26, 2021. @arianagrande (January 19, 2011). "My biggest musical influences are Imogen Heap, Christina Aguilera, MJ and Rihanna" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Mapstone, Lucy (January 11, 2019). "Ava Max: My Parents Left Albania in 1990 and Lived in a Church in Paris for a Whole Year". Belfasttelegraph. Belfast Telegraph. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Seemayer, Zach (November 18, 2021). "2021 Latin GRAMMYs: Becky G Says Performing with Christina Aguilera Is a 'Full Circle Moment'". WUSA. Retrieved November 26, 2021. Spears, Britney (September 13, 2022). "By no means was I being critical of Christina's beautiful body (...)" (As quoted: "I flew to see her show once [...]. I was inspired by her show and she is a beautiful woman of power ... Thank you @xtina for inspiring me !!!"). Archived from the original on September 14, 2022. Retrieved September 14, 2022 – via Instagram. Moreno, Adriano (May 30, 2017). "Camila Cabello Se Inspira en Edurne y Christina Aguilera Para Su Debut en Solitario" (in Spanish). LOS40. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Spurgeon, Ashley (November 4, 2013). "British Pop Starlet Charli XCX, the Particularly Grown-Up 21-Year-Old". Nashville Scene. Retrieved November 26, 2021. Haas, Mariah (September 29, 2017). "Demi Lovato Reveals Christina Aguilera Album Inspiration". People. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Malachi, JaJuann (May 27, 2021). "Five Times Doja Cat Proved She's An R&B Stunner Who's Here To Stay". BET. Archived from the original on July 5, 2021. Retrieved April 29, 2021. Carley, Brennan (January 24, 2018). "Dua Lipa Is Changing the Rules of Pop Music". GQ. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Stoeffel, Kat (March 14, 2012). "Snip, Snip, Bangs, Bangs! From Rooney to Runway, Cropped Tops Come to the Fore(head)". The New York Observer. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Rearick, Lauren (January 10, 2020). "Halsey References Lady Gaga, Christina Aguilera and More Pop Stars in Her 'You Should Be Sad' Video". Teen Vogue. Retrieved July 26, 2021. @yelyahwilliams (December 18, 2013). "Xtina, such a dream meeting you! Remember learning how to sing high notes to your first record :) thx for always inspiring. Happy finale!" (Tweet). Archived from the original on December 24, 2013 – via Twitter. "Billboard Women in Music Honoree Iggy Azalea: 'If I Lose Every Award to Sam Smith, I'm Okay With It'". Billboard. Retrieved June 21, 2022. "Reggaeton Queen Karol G Is The One To Watch". V. September 15, 2020. Retrieved July 26, 2021. "K. Michelle: "K. Michelle Is Ready to 'Snatch Wigs' with New Abum [sic]"". Rap-Up. Retrieved August 24, 2014. Rivera, Zayda (December 18, 2013). "Christina Aguilera, Lady Gaga Put Feud Rumors to Rest with Duet on 'The Voice'". New York Daily News. Retrieved July 26, 2021. "Lauren Jauregui Shares the Playlist of Her Life". Teen Vogue. October 26, 2018. Retrieved December 14, 2018. "Fifth Harmony Biography, Discography, Chart History". Top40-Charts.com. Ryan, Patrick (May 12, 2016). "Review: Meghan Trainor Exudes Confidence on 'Thank You'". USA Today. Retrieved February 20, 2021. "Nicki Nicole Gets Candid on Her New Album". Wonderland. October 27, 2021. Retrieved October 28, 2021. Amsdem, David (May 14, 2021). "Olivia Rodrigo Talks Driver's License, Deja Vu and New Album, Sour". W. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Venetia La Manna (March 2, 2021). "Rina Sawayama on Mental Health, Music Awards Eligibility & Sustainability". iHeartRadio. Retrieved July 26, 2021. P. Cantó (March 12, 2019). "Música: Rosalía Elige a Las 28 Mujeres que Le Inspiran: de Aretha Franklin a Azúcar Moreno" (in Spanish). El Confidencial. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Downing, Megan (June 15, 2017). "Get to Know: Sabrina Carpenter". MTV UK. Retrieved July 28, 2021. Adams, Cameron (April 15, 2015). "Sam Smith on Lady Gaga, Tom Petty, Boy George... and His Next Album". News.com.au. News Corp Australia. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Wass, Mike (September 2, 2015). "Selena Gomez's New Album Was Inspired By Christina Aguilera's 'Stripped'". Idolator. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Nelson, Jeff (December 7, 2023). "Tate McRae Reveals Britney Spears Inspired New 'Exes' Video — and the Song Was Written in 30 Minutes! (Exclusive)". People. Retrieved March 16, 2024. "Tinashe: "I Think More Women Should Collaborate And Support Each Other"". MTV UK. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Daw, Stephen (April 2, 2018). "Christina Aguilera & Troye Sivan Meet and Snuggle Up For An Instagram Photo". Billboard. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Spelling, Ian (February 9, 2018). "Former Figure Skater Johnny Weir Talks Olympics & His Love of Fashion". Herald News. Retrieved July 31, 2021. Prahl, Amanda (January 17, 2021). "Watch the Sexy, Burlesque-Inspired Skate That Propelled These Ice Dancers to a National Title". PopSugar UK. Group Nine Media. Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Abel, Alex (February 18, 2013). "Dana Vollmer Success Tips (Interview)". Seventeen. Retrieved July 31, 2021. Ganatra, Shilpa (September 21, 2019). "Christina Aguilera: 'I Came Out with Dirrty and That Was My F**k It Moment'". The Irish Times. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett (October 7, 2013). "Miley Cyrus: Does the Music Business Exploit Women?". The Guardian. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Dawson, Lamar (October 22, 2017). "Christina Aguilera's 'Stripped' Is 15 and Still Amazing". The Huffington Post. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Wilkinson, Sophie (December 1, 2012). "Slutdropping: The Dancefloor Move That's Bringing Women Together". The Guardian. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Morris, Lucy (April 28, 2017). "11 Moments from Christina Aguilera's Dirrty Video That Showed the MTV Age Was a Lawless Paradise". Grazia. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Gracie, Bianca (July 27, 2018). "Director David LaChapelle & Choreographer Jeri Slaughter on the Making of Christina Aguilera's 'Dirrty' Music Video". Billboard. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Cinquemani, Sal (June 30, 2003). "The 100 Greatest Music Video of All Time". Slant Magazine. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Beech, Issy (December 1, 2016). "How Xtina's 'Dirrty' Changed Sex in Pop". i-D. Vice Media. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Bloodworth, Adam (October 4, 2019). "RuPaul's Drag Race UK: Is Wrong to Embrace the Outdated Stereotype of Queer Bitchiness". The Independent. Retrieved July 26, 2021. "57 marcos LGBTQI+ na cultura pop do Brasil e do mundo" (in Portuguese). O Globo. June 28, 2019. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Megarry, Daniel (March 11, 2019). "Christina Aguilera Named Ally for Equality by Human Rights Campaign". Gay Times. Retrieved July 26, 2021. "The 100 Greatest Music Videos of the 21st Century: Critics' Picks". Billboard. July 24, 2018. Retrieved January 21, 2022. "50 Greatest Women of the Video Era". VH1. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Mannarino, Amy (August 6, 2012). "Women Who Rock: Vision, Passion, Power". National Museum of Women in the Arts. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Olson, Elizabeth (October 26, 2012). "'Women Who Rock' Exhibit Traces Female Music Artists in America". The New York Times. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Diana Pearl (February 2, 2023). "Youngest Grammy Nominees Ever". People. Retrieved November 1, 2023. "Christina Aguilera: GRAMMY Award Profile". Grammy Awards. Retrieved May 1, 2023. "Christina Aguilera Profile: Awards and Credits". E! Online. Archived from the original on February 1, 2008. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Brunker, Alicia (November 18, 2022). "Christina Aguilera Revived the Y2K Trend She Made Famous at the 2022 Latin Grammy Awards". InStyle. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Grein, Paul (December 1, 2021). "Christina Aguilera to Get Music Icon at 2021 People's Choice Awards". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Folkard 2005, p. 360. Dinh, James (November 15, 2010). "Christina Aguilera Honored On Hollywood Walk of Fame". MTV News. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Huff, Lauren (August 23, 2019). "Robert Downey Jr, Christina Aguilera, More Honored as Disney Legends". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Hola! Staff (October 4, 2022). "Christina Aguilera Named Top 100 Latina Powerhouse 2022". ¡Hola!. Retrieved May 1, 2023. "Hispanos Influyentes en Estados Unidos" (in Spanish). Univision. September 6, 2013. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Céline Dion (April 18, 2013). "Christina Aguilera: TIME 100". Time. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Lavin, Will (March 9, 2020). "Eminem vs. Everyone: A Comprehensive List of Slim Shady's Lyrical Feuds". NME. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Trust, Gary (September 1, 2014). "Ask Billboard: Taylo Swift Out-'Shake's Mariah Carey". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2023. "Top Tallies: Top Artists (Albums)". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved May 1, 2023. "Top Albums". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Myers, Justin (October 7, 2013). "Disney's Official Top 10 Biggest Selling Pop Princesses Revealed". The Official Charts Company. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Moss, Liv (March 19, 2015). "Biggest Selling Albums of the Millennium So Far Revealed". The Official Charts Company. Retrieved May 1, 2023. "ARIA Charts - Accreditations - 2014 Singles". Australian Recording Industry Association. Archived from the original on August 10, 2020. Retrieved May 1, 2023. "GAON's 관찰노트" (in Korean). Gaon Chart. October 9, 2020. Archived from the original on October 22, 2020. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Myers, Justin (February 14, 2020). "The Best-Selling Singles of All Time on the Official UK Chart". The Official Charts Company. Retrieved May 1, 2023. "Top Tallies: Diamond Awards - Singles". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Goldstein, Jessica (April 3, 2014). "Pharrell and The Voice: Which Musicians Have Benefited the Most From Being TV Judges?". Vulture. New York Magazine. Retrieved July 27, 2021. 2000: "Year in Music: 2000". Billboard. December 30, 2000. Retrieved May 1, 2023. 2003: "Year in Music: 2003". Billboard. December 27, 2003. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Decade: "Artists of the Decade (2000s)". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Billboard 200: "Billboard 200 Artists". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 6, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Hot 100: "Billboard Hot 100 Artists". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 8, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Top 40: "Billboard Pop Songs Artists". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 6, 2010. Retrieved May 1, 2023. All-Time Top 40: "Greatest of All Time Pop Songs Artists Chart". Billboard. October 18, 2017. Retrieved May 1, 2023. "Greatest of All Time Top Dance Club Artists". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 4, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2023. "Singles Sales Artists". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 3, 2011. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Bustios, Pamela (February 1, 2022). "Christina Aguilera Returns to Billboard Latin Albums Charts". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Allen, Bob (March 27, 2020). "Ladies Might: Box Office Triumph By Top Female Earners". Pollstar. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Bouazza, Aïda (May 30, 2016). "Mawazine: Une Clôture En Apothéose" (in French). L'Économiste. Archived from the original on May 31, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Arseniuk, Melissa (April 6, 2008). "DJ AM Moving to Rain". Las Vegas Sun. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Spangler, Todd (July 21, 2016). "MasterClass Names Matthew Rutler Head of Talent, Biz Dev". Variety. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Murray, Caitlin (February 16, 2022). "Angel City FC Adds Gabrielle Union, Daughter, Christina Aguilera to Star-Studded Ownership Group". ESPN. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Chan, Tim (March 28, 2023). "Dreamy In a Bottle: Christina Aguilera Announced As Co-Founder of Lube and Intimacy Products Brand". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Nededog, Jethro (March 4, 2015). "Christina Aguilera, Matthew Rutler Ink First Look Deal with LionsGate TV". TheWrap. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Goldberg, Lesley (March 15, 2016). "Spike TV Orders Music Game Show 'Tracks' From Christina Aguilera". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Muhammad, Latifah (June 9, 2022). "Christina Aguilera x Fun Wine Pop-Up Shop: Inside the L.A. Pride Event". Billboard. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Weil, Jennifer (January 11, 2007). "Procter & Gamble to Team Up with Christina Aguilera in Fragrance Deal". Women's Wear Daily. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Epiro, Stephanie (May 23, 2008). "P&G Hopes Aguilera Will 'Inspire' Its Fragrance Fortunes". Women's Wear Daily. Retrieved October 9, 2023. United Kingdom best-selling fragrances: 2007: RCA Staff (December 19, 2007). "Christina Aguilera Tops Fragrance Charts". RCA/Jive Label Group. Archived from the original on January 9, 2008. Retrieved October 9, 2023. 2008: Vogue Staff (January 15, 2010). "All Star Perfume". Vogue. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved October 9, 2023. 2009: Winterman, Denise (July 1, 2010). "Eau de Bruce - What Does Die Hard Smell Like?". BBC News. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Collins, Allison (May 12, 2016). "Elizabeth Arden to Buy Christina Aguilera Fragrance Business". Women's Wear Daily. Retrieved October 9, 2023. "Fragrance Foundation Deutschland: Duftstars Sieger 2008-2018". The Fragrance Foundation. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved October 9, 2023. "Marc Jacobs, Tom Ford and Christina Aguilera Win Top Fragrance Awards". New York. April 24, 2008. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Guerra, Flavia (February 1, 2011). "Christina Aguilera: 'A mulher brasileira é perfeita para minhas roupas'" (in Portuguese). O Estado de S. Paulo. Retrieved October 9, 2023. "Christina Aguilera Brings the Hype to Any Occasion with Music-Forward Customizable Greeting Cards". Clio Awards. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Aguilera's endorsed brands: Sears and Levi's: Basham, David (April 27, 2000). "Christina Aguilera Announces Tour, Youth Programs". MTV News. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Skechers: Susman, Gary (August 27, 2003). "Toeing the Line". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 3, 2015. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Mercedes-Benz: "Christina Aguilera Says an Exclusive 'Hello' to the New A-Class". Mercedes-Benz. Archived from the original on July 1, 2018. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Virgin Mobile: Gibson, Owen (April 19, 2004). "Aguilera to Star in 'Raunchy' Virgin Ads". The Guardian. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Orange and Sony Ericson: Brandle, Lars (March 18, 2006). "Orange Deal Juicy for Aguilera". Billboard. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Oreo: Lacsamana, Pauline (February 8, 2017). "Oreo Launches Dunk Challenge with Christina Aguilera and Shaquille O'Neal". Yahoo!. Retrieved October 9, 2023. SweeTarts: Mier, Tomás (July 13, 2021). "Christina Aguilera Says She's 'Re-Inspired by Music All Over Again'". People. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Merz Aesthetics: Talarico, Brittany (March 2, 2023). "Christina Aguilera Says 'Aging Is a Personal Conversation' as She Unveils First Injectables Partnership". People. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Just Eat: DeBianchi, Antonia (October 12, 2023). "Christina Aguilera and Latoo Collaborate on Food Music Video Ad". People. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Day, Julia (March 28, 2001). "Aguilera and Britney Go Head-To-Head in Cola Wars". The Guardian. Retrieved October 9, 2023. "Christina Aguilera to Perform in June". The Korea Times. April 24, 2007. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Susman, Gary (March 5, 2003). "Versace Signs Christina Aguilera". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Conti, Samantha (February 19, 2008). "Christina Aguilera Inspires Stephen Webster Silver Line". Women's Wear Daily. Retrieved October 9, 2023. "Aguilera Causes a Stir at Harrods' Sale". Irish Examiner. June 28, 2004. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Rose, Lucey (April 10, 2008). "The Most Expensive Celebrity Baby Photos". Forbes. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Calvario, Liz (September 30, 2022). "Christina Aguilera Honored at the Billboard Latin Music Awards". Today. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Carpenter, Mackenzie (December 22, 2003). "Aguilera's Visit, Story Lift Spirits at Women's Shelter". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Archived from the original on November 28, 2021. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Moss, Corey (April 4, 2007). "For the Record: Quick News On Kelly Clarkson, 'Idol', Daniel Radcliffe, Christina Aguilera & More". MTV News. Retrieved May 1, 2023. WTSP Staff (November 17, 2015). "Christina Aguilera Talks Domestic Violence Prevention and Awareness". WTSP. Retrieved May 1, 2023. "Christina Aguilera's Las Vegas Residency to Raise Money for Domestic Violence Victims". ABC News. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Smith, Lindsay (October 9, 2019). "Christina Aguilera Cries During Moving Award Speech on Domestic Violence". iHeartRadio. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Bruno, Anthony (July 25, 2009). "Aguilera Onborad with Hunger Relief". Billboard. Retrieved January 25, 2023. Trust, Gary (September 30, 2015). "Christina Aguilera Returns to Her Roots on Ecuador Hunger Relief Trip". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2023. "Christina Aguilera - A Voice for the Hungry". World Food Program. Archived from the original on December 7, 2013. Retrieved May 1, 2023. ESPN Staff (October 4, 2013). "Muhammad Ali Recognizes Former President, Grammy Winners for Humanitarian Contributions". ESPN. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Palomares, Sugey (October 4, 2012). "Hillary Clinton Honors Christina Aguilera for World Hunger Mission". Latina. Archived from the original on October 9, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Kilkelly, Daniel (October 22, 2005). "Christina Aguilera Bans Wedding Presents". Digital Spy. Retrieved May 1, 2023. "'Hurricane Sandy: Coming Together' Concert: Christina Aguilera, Bruce Springsteen to Perform". Billboard. November 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Holzman, Coppy (February 3, 2010). "Christie's Announces the 2010 Inaugural Green Auction". Christie's. Archived from the original on February 10, 2010. Retrieved May 1, 2023. "Chrysler irá leiloar unidades do sedã 300C para ajudar vítimas do Haiti" (in Portuguese). Globo.com. Retrieved January 25, 2023. Duke, Alan (January 24, 2010). "'Hope for Haiti' Raises $58 Million and Counting". CNN. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Karger, Dave (January 22, 2010). "'Hope for Haiti Now': The Telehon's 10 Best Performances". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved May 1, 2023. "Bocelli Not Blind to Tortured Dogs". The Guardian. April 10, 2002. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Matthews, Dan (December 12, 2006). "Christina Aguilera's Costume Change". People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Romeyn, Kathryn (October 27, 2015). "Ariana Grande Is MAC's New Viva Glam Spokeswoman". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Moss, Corey (June 10, 2005). "For the Record: Quick News on Paris Hilton, Christina Aguilera, Michael Jackson, Josh Homme, a Perfect Circle & More". MTV News. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Dawson, Lamar (December 14, 2017). "Christina Aguilera: 5 Times She Showed Up for the LGBTQ Community". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Goodman, Jessica (June 17, 2016). "Christina Aguilera Releases New Song 'Change' to Benefit Orlando Victims". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Dias, Surenã (July 23, 2019). "Christina Aguilera contraria governo da Rússia e abençoa casal gay" (in Portuguese). Universo Online. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Vena, Jocelyn (October 13, 2010). "Christina Aguilera's Love Life Reflected In Her Career". MTV News. Retrieved April 30, 2023. "Christina Aguilera Engaged". The Sydney Morning Herald. February 14, 2005. Retrieved April 30, 2023. InStyle Staff (March 26, 2015). "Christina Aguilera & Jordan Bratman". InStyle. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Fusaro, Kim (June 21, 2011). "Kim Kardashian's Wedding Dress: Guess Which Famous Wedding Gowns Kim's Inpired By". Glamour. Retrieved April 30, 2023. People Staff (November 18, 2005). "Christina Aguilera Marries". People. Archived from the original on November 4, 2016. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Julie Dam, Gerri Miller (January 13, 2008). "Christina Aguilera & Jordan Bratman Have a Boy". People. Retrieved April 30, 2023. "Christina Aguilera Files for Divorce, Days After Separation Announcement". CBS News. October 14, 2010. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Hammel, Sara (November 29, 2010). "Christina Aguilera Meets New Guy's Mom". People. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Goodwyn, Tom (March 1, 2011). "Christina Aguilera Arrested for Public Drunkenness". NME. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Lipshutz, Jason (April 18, 2011). "Christina Aguilera's Boyfriend Not Charged with DIU". Billboard. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Freydkin, Donna (February 14, 2014). "Christina Aguilera Is Engaged". USA Today. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Gibson, Megan (August 18, 2014). "Christina Aguilera Gives Birth to Baby Girl and Shares Name". Time. Retrieved April 30, 2023. "Baby Aguilera Circumcised". Irish Examiner. January 22, 2008. Archived from the original on July 9, 2023. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Heitman, Bethany (April 13, 2021). "Christina Aguilera: Work, Parenthood, Body Positivity in 2021". Health. Archived from the original on June 13, 2022. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Pasquini, Maria (April 13, 2021). "Christina Aguilera Says She 'Hated Being Super Skinny': 'I Remember Feeling So Insecure'". People. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Batur, Jeanette (March 4, 2013). "Christina Aguilera Sells Beverly Hills Home". E! Online. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Chan, Jennifer (April 15, 2013). "Christina Aguilera Buys $10 Million Home". E! Online. Retrieved April 30, 2023. "Teen Pop Makes the Biggest Bucks". Dotmusic. Archived from the original on March 3, 2001. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Pomerantz, Dorothy (January 29, 2008). "The Top-Earning Women in Music". Forbes. Retrieved April 30, 2023. "The 20 Richest Women in Entertainment". Forbes. Retrieved April 30, 2023. Diem Nguyen Le (August 17, 2022). "10 Richest Disney Channel Stars". South China Morning Post. Retrieved April 30, 2022. Dominguez, Pier (2003). Christina Aguilera: A Star is Made: The Unauthorized Biography. Amber Communications Group, Inc. ISBN 978-0-970-222-459. Donovan, Mary Anne (2010). Christina Aguilera: A Biography. ABC-Clio. ISBN 978-0-313-38319-9. Govan, Chlóe (2013). Christina Aguilera: Unbreakable. Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-0-857-129-949. Greenberger, Robert (2008). Contemporary Musicians and Their Music: Christina Aguilera. Rosen Publishing. ISBN 978-1-435-848-641. R. Mead, Margaret (2012). Christina Aguilera. Chelsea House. ISBN 978-1-438-14118-3. Worth, Richard (2015). Christina Aguilera: Pop Singer. Enslow Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7660-7180-3. Davis, Clive (2013). The Soundtrack of My Life. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-476-71479-0. Kimpel, Dan (2006). How They Made It: True Stories of How Music's Biggest Stars Went from Start to Stardom. Hal Leonard LLC. ISBN 978-0-634-076-428. Railton, Diane; Watson, Paul (2011). Music Video and the Politics of Representation. Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 978-0-748-633-234. Valdivia, Angharad N. (2010). Latino/as in the Media. Polity. ISBN 978-0-745-640-075. Folkard, Claire (2005). Guinness World Records 2005. Jim Pattison Group. ISBN 1-892051-22-2. K. Armstrong, Jennifer (2013). Sexy Feminism: A Girl's Guide to Love, Success, and Style. Mariner Books. ISBN 978-0-547-73830-7. Scott, Kieran (2001). I Was a Mousketeer!. Disney Press. ISBN 978-0-7868-4470-8. Christina Aguilera at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website Christina Aguilera at AllMusic Christina Aguilera discography at Discogs Christina Aguilera at IMDb