Leccinum aurantiacum is a species of fungus in the genus Leccinum found in forests of Eurasia and North America. It has a large, characteristically red-capped fruiting body. In North America, it is sometimes referred to by the common name red-capped scaber stalk. Some uncertainties exist regarding the taxonomic classification of this species in Europe and North America. It is considered edible, but must be cooked thoroughly. The cap is orange-red and measures 5–15 centimetres (2–6 inches) across. Its flesh is white, bruising at first burgundy, then grayish or purple-black. The underside of the cap has very small, whitish pores that bruise olive-brown. The stem measures 8–16 cm (3–6+1⁄2 in) tall and 2–3 cm (3⁄4–1+1⁄4 in) thick and can bruise blue-green. It is whitish, with short, rigid projections or scabers that turn to brown to black with age. L. aurantiacum can be found fruiting during summer and autumn in forests throughout Europe and North America. The association between fungus and host tree is mycorrhizal. In Europe, it has traditionally been associated with poplar trees. L. aurantiacum is found among oak and various other deciduous trees, including beech, birch, chestnut, willow, and trees of the genus Tilia. L. aurantiacum is not known to associate with conifers in Europe. North American populations have been recorded in coniferous and deciduous forests, though whether collections from coniferous forests are not L. vulpinum, instead, remains uncertain. In addition, L. aurantiacum may be absent altogether from North America, with collections from deciduous forests being attributed to other North American species L. insigne, and L. brunneum. This is a favorite species for eating and can be prepared as other edible boletes. Its flesh turns very dark on cooking. Like most members of the Boletaceae, these mushrooms are targeted by maggots. Due to a number of poisonings and the difficulty identifying species, Leccinum species are considered by some as possibly not safe to eat. This species also needs to be cooked well (not parboiled) or else it may cause vomiting or other negative effects. Some report gastrointestinal upset after eating this species. At least one death has been reported that was linked to consuming this species In Europe, several orange-red capped species exist, which differ mainly in habitat. L. albostipitatum grows with aspen and has white scales on the stipe. In coniferous forests, L. vulpinum occurs around pine and spruce trees. Not all authors recognise these as distinct species. In North America, L. insigne grows in aspen or birch stands, while L. atrostipitatum grows in birch stands. Both are edible. Another similar species is L. versipelle. List of Leccinum species List of North American boletes National Audubon Society Field Guide to North American Mushrooms, Knopf, 1981. Phillips, Roger (2010). Mushrooms and Other Fungi of North America. Buffalo, NY: Firefly Books. p. 279. ISBN 978-1-55407-651-2. "The genus Leccinum in Western and Central Europe". Noordeloos M. Retrieved July 8, 2010. "Leccinum: Uncertain taxa". Kuo M. Retrieved July 8, 2010. Miller Jr., Orson K.; Miller, Hope H. (2006). North American Mushrooms: A Field Guide to Edible and Inedible Fungi. Guilford, CN: FalconGuide. p. 373. ISBN 978-0-7627-3109-1. https://namyco.org/docs/NAMA_Toxicology_Committee_Report_2009.pdf Wikimedia Commons has media related to Leccinum aurantiacum. Leccinum aurantiacum at MushroomExpert.com Leccinum aurantiacum at MykoWeb Leccinum aurantiacum Leccinum Species May No Longer Be Considered Safe