Doctor Who is a British science fiction television series broadcast by the BBC since 1963. The series, created by Sydney Newman, C. E. Webber and Donald Wilson, depicts the adventures of an extraterrestrial being called the Doctor, part of a humanoid species called Time Lords. The Doctor travels in the universe and in time using a time travelling spaceship called the TARDIS, which externally appears as a British police box. While travelling, the Doctor works to save lives and liberate oppressed peoples by combating foes. The Doctor often travels with companions. Beginning with William Hartnell, fourteen actors have headlined the series as the Doctor; as of 2023, Ncuti Gatwa leads the series as the Fifteenth Doctor. The transition from one actor to another is written into the plot of the series with the concept of regeneration into a new incarnation, a plot device in which, when a Time Lord is fatally injured, their cells regenerate and they are reincarnated. Each actor's portrayal is distinct, but all represent stages in the life of the same character and, together, they form a single lifetime with a single narrative. The time-travelling nature of the plot means that different incarnations of the Doctor occasionally meet. In 2017, Jodie Whittaker, as the Thirteenth Doctor, became the first woman to be cast in the lead role. The series is a significant part of popular culture in Britain and elsewhere; it has gained a cult following. It has influenced generations of British television professionals, many of whom grew up watching the series. Fans of the series are sometimes referred to as Whovians. The series has been listed in Guinness World Records as the longest-running science-fiction television series in the world, as well as the "most successful" science-fiction series of all time, based on its overall broadcast ratings, DVD and book sales. The series originally ran from 1963 to 1989. There was an unsuccessful attempt to revive regular production in 1996 with a backdoor pilot in the form of a television film titled Doctor Who. The series was relaunched in 2005 and was produced in-house by BBC Wales in Cardiff. Since 2023, the show has been co-produced by Bad Wolf and BBC Studios Productions in Cardiff. Doctor Who has also spawned numerous spin-offs, including comic books, films, novels and audio dramas, and the television series Torchwood (2006–2011), The Sarah Jane Adventures (2007–2011), K9 (2009–2010) and Class (2016). It has been the subject of many parodies and references in popular culture. Doctor Who follows the adventures of the title character, a rogue Time Lord with somewhat unknown origins who goes by the name "the Doctor". The Doctor fled Gallifrey, the planet of the Time Lords, in a stolen TARDIS ("Time and Relative Dimension(s) in Space"), a time machine that travels by materialising into, and dematerialising out of, the time vortex. The TARDIS has a vast interior but appears smaller on the outside, and is equipped with a "chameleon circuit" intended to make the machine take on the appearance of local objects as a disguise. Due to a malfunction, the Doctor's TARDIS remains fixed as a blue British police box. Across time and space, the Doctor's many incarnations often find events that pique their curiosity, and try to prevent evil forces from harming innocent people or changing history, using only ingenuity and minimal resources, such as the versatile sonic screwdriver. The Doctor rarely travels alone and is often joined by one or more companions on these adventures; these companions are usually humans, owing to the Doctor's fascination with planet Earth, which also leads to frequent collaborations with the international military task force UNIT when Earth is threatened. The Doctor is centuries old and, as a Time Lord, has the ability to regenerate when there is mortal damage to their body. The Doctor's various incarnations have gained numerous recurring enemies during their travels, including the Daleks, their creator Davros, the Cybermen, and the renegade Time Lord the Master. Doctor Who was originally intended to appeal to a family audience as an educational programme using time travel as a means to explore scientific ideas and famous moments in history. On 31 July 1963, Whitaker commissioned Terry Nation to write a story under the title The Mutants. As originally written, the Daleks and Thals were the victims of an alien neutron bomb attack but Nation later dropped the aliens and made the Daleks the aggressors. When the script was presented to Newman and Wilson, it was immediately rejected as the programme was not permitted to contain any "bug-eyed monsters". According to Lambert, "We didn't have a lot of choice—we only had the Dalek serial to go ... We had a bit of a crisis of confidence because Donald [Wilson] was so adamant that we shouldn't make it. Had we had anything else ready we would have made that." Nation's script became the second Doctor Who serial – The Daleks (also known as The Mutants). The serial introduced the eponymous aliens that would become the series' most popular monsters, dubbed "Dalekmania", and was responsible for the BBC's first merchandising boom. The programme first appeared on the BBC Television Service at 17:16:20 GMT on 23 November 1963; this was eighty seconds later than the scheduled programme time, because of announcements concerning the previous day's assassination of John F. Kennedy. It was to be a regular weekly programme, each episode 25 minutes of transmission length. Discussions and plans for the programme had been in progress for a year. The head of drama Sydney Newman was mainly responsible for developing the programme, with the first format document for the series being written by Newman along with the head of the script department (later head of serials) Donald Wilson and staff writer C. E. Webber; in a 1971 interview Wilson claimed to have named the series, and when this claim was put to Newman he did not dispute it. Writer Anthony Coburn, story editor David Whitaker and initial producer Verity Lambert also heavily contributed to the development of the series. We had to rely on the story because there was little we could do with the effects. Star Wars in a way was the turning point. Once Star Wars had happened, Doctor Who effectively was out of date from that moment on really, judged by that level of technological expertise.  —Philip Hinchcliffe, producer of Doctor Who from 1974 to 1977, on why the "classic series" eventually fell behind other science fiction in production values and reputation, leading to its cancellation The BBC drama department's serials division produced the programme for 26 seasons, broadcast on BBC One. Due to his increasingly poor health, William Hartnell, first actor to play the Doctor, was succeeded by Patrick Troughton in 1966. In 1970, Jon Pertwee replaced Troughton and the series began production in colour. In 1974, Tom Baker was cast as the Doctor. His eccentric personality became hugely popular, with viewing figures for the series returning to a level not seen since the height of "Dalekmania" a decade earlier. After seven years in the role, Baker was replaced by Peter Davison in 1981, and Colin Baker replaced Davison in 1984. In 1985, the channel's controller Michael Grade attempted to cancel the series, but it returned after an 18-month hiatus. He also had Colin Baker removed from the starring role in 1986. The role was recast with Sylvester McCoy, but falling viewing numbers, a decline in the public perception of the series and a less-prominent transmission slot saw production ended in 1989 by Peter Cregeen, the BBC's new head of series. Although it was effectively cancelled, the BBC repeatedly affirmed over several years that the series would return. While in-house production concluded, the BBC explored an independent production company to relaunch the series. Philip Segal, a British expatriate who worked for Columbia Pictures' television arm in the United States, had approached the BBC as early as July 1989, while the 26th season was still in production. Segal's negotiations eventually led to a Doctor Who television film as a pilot for an American series, broadcast on the Fox Network in 1996, as an international co-production between Fox, Universal Pictures, the BBC and BBC Worldwide. Starring Paul McGann as the Doctor, the film was successful in the UK (with 9.1 million viewers), but was less so in the United States and did not lead to a series. Licensed media such as novels and audio plays provided new stories, but as a television programme, Doctor Who remained dormant. In September 2003, BBC Television announced the in-house production of a new series, after several years of attempts by BBC Worldwide to find backing for a feature film version. The 2005 revival of Doctor Who is a direct plot continuation of the original 1963–1989 series and the 1996 television film. The executive producers of the new incarnation of the series were Queer as Folk writer Russell T Davies and BBC Cymru Wales head of drama Julie Gardner. From 2005, the series switched from a multi-camera to a single-camera setup. Starring Christopher Eccleston as the Doctor, Doctor Who returned with the episode "Rose" on BBC One on 26 March 2005, after a 16-year hiatus of in-house production. Eccleston left after one series and was replaced by David Tennant. Davies left the production team in 2009. Steven Moffat, a writer under Davies, was announced as his successor, along with Matt Smith as the new Doctor. Smith decided to leave the role of the Doctor in 2013, the 50th anniversary year. He was replaced by Peter Capaldi. In January 2016, Moffat announced that he would step down after the 2017 finale, to be replaced by Chris Chibnall in 2018. Jodie Whittaker, the first female Doctor, appeared in three series, the last of which was shortened due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Both Whittaker and Chibnall announced that they would depart the series after a series of specials in 2022. Davies returned as showrunner from the 60th anniversary specials, twelve years after he had left the series previously. Bad Wolf co-produces the series in partnership with BBC Studios Productions. Bad Wolf's involvement sees Gardner return to the series alongside Davies and Jane Tranter, who recommissioned the series in 2005. The programme has been sold to many other countries worldwide . It has been claimed that the transmission of the first episode was delayed by ten minutes due to extended news coverage of the assassination of US President John F. Kennedy the previous day; in fact, it went out after a delay of eighty seconds. The BBC believed that coverage of the assassination, as well as a series of power blackouts across the country, had caused many viewers to miss this introduction to a new series, and it was broadcast again on 30 November 1963, just before episode two. The programme soon became a national institution in the United Kingdom, with a large following among the general viewing audience. The show received controversy over the suitability of the series for children. Morality campaigner Mary Whitehouse repeatedly complained to the BBC over what she saw as the programme's violent, frightening and gory content. According to Radio Times, the series "never had a more implacable foe than Mary Whitehouse". A BBC audience research survey conducted in 1972 found that, by their own definition of violence ("any act[s] which may cause physical and/or psychological injury, hurt or death to persons, animals or property, whether intentional or accidental"), Doctor Who was the most violent of the drama programmes the corporation produced at the time. The same report found that 3% of the surveyed audience believed the series was "very unsuitable" for family viewing. Responding to the findings of the survey in The Times newspaper, journalist Philip Howard maintained that, "to compare the violence of Dr Who, sired by a horse-laugh out of a nightmare, with the more realistic violence of other television series, where actors who look like human beings bleed paint that looks like blood, is like comparing Monopoly with the property market in London: both are fantasies, but one is meant to be taken seriously." During Jon Pertwee's second season as the Doctor, in the serial Terror of the Autons (1971), images of murderous plastic dolls, daffodils killing unsuspecting victims, and blank-featured policemen marked the apex of the series' ability to frighten children. Other notable moments in that decade include a disembodied brain falling to the floor in The Brain of Morbius and the Doctor apparently being drowned by a villain in The Deadly Assassin (both 1976). Mary Whitehouse's complaint about the latter incident prompted a change in BBC policy towards the series, with much tighter controls imposed on the production team, and the series' next producer, Graham Williams, was under a directive to take out "anything graphic in the depiction of violence". John Nathan-Turner produced the series during the 1980s and said in the documentary More Than Thirty Years in the TARDIS that he looked forward to Whitehouse's comments because the ratings of the series would increase soon after she had made them. Nathan-Turner also got into trouble with BBC executives over the violence he allowed to be depicted for season 22 of the series in 1985, which was publicly criticised by controller Michael Grade and given as one of his reasons for suspending the series for 18 months. The phrase "Hiding behind (or 'watching from behind') the sofa" entered British pop culture, signifying the stereotypical but apocryphal early-series behaviour of children who wanted to avoid seeing frightening parts of a television programme while remaining in the room to watch the remainder of it. The phrase retains this association with Doctor Who, to the point that in 1991 the Museum of the Moving Image in London named its exhibition celebrating the programme Behind the Sofa. The electronic theme music too was perceived as eerie, novel, and frightening at the time. A 2012 article placed this childhood juxtaposition of fear and thrill "at the center of many people's relationship with the series", and a 2011 online vote at Digital Spy deemed the series the "scariest TV show of all time". The image of the TARDIS has become firmly linked to the series in the public's consciousness; BBC scriptwriter Anthony Coburn, who lived in the resort of Herne Bay, Kent, was one of the people who conceived the idea of a police box as a time machine. In 1996, the BBC applied for a trademark to use the TARDIS' blue police box design in merchandising associated with Doctor Who. In 1998, the Metropolitan Police Authority filed an objection to the trademark claim; but in 2002, the Patent Office ruled in favour of the BBC. The 21st-century revival of the programme became the centrepiece of BBC One's Saturday schedule and "defined the channel". Many renowned actors have made guest-starring appearances in various stories including Kylie Minogue, Sir Ian McKellen, and Andrew Garfield among others. According to an article in the Daily Telegraph in 2009, the revival of Doctor Who had consistently received high ratings, both in number of viewers and as measured by the Appreciation Index. In 2007, Caitlin Moran, television reviewer for The Times, wrote that Doctor Who is "quintessential to being British". According to Steven Moffat, the American film director Steven Spielberg has commented that "the world would be a poorer place without Doctor Who". On 4 August 2013, a live programme titled Doctor Who Live: The Next Doctor was broadcast on BBC One, during which the actor who was going to play the Twelfth Doctor was revealed. The live show was watched by an average of 6.27 million in the UK, and was also simulcast in the United States, Canada and Australia. Doctor Who originally ran for 26 seasons on BBC One, from 23 November 1963 until 6 December 1989. During the original run, each weekly episode formed part of a story (or "serial")—usually of four to six parts in earlier years and three to four in later years. Some notable exceptions were: The Daleks' Master Plan, which aired twelve episodes (plus an earlier one-episode teaser, "Mission to the Unknown", featuring none of the regular cast); almost an entire season of seven-episode serials (season 7); the ten-episode serial The War Games; and The Trial of a Time Lord, which ran for fourteen episodes (albeit divided into three production codes and four narrative segments) during season 23. Occasionally, serials were loosely connected by a story line, such as season 8 focusing on the Doctor battling a rogue Time Lord called the Master, season 16's quest for the Key to Time, season 18's journey through E-Space and the theme of entropy, and season 20's Black Guardian trilogy. The programme was intended to be educational and for family viewing on the early Saturday evening schedule. It initially alternated stories set in the past, which taught younger audience members about history, and with those in the future or outer space, focusing on science. This was also reflected in the Doctor's original companions, one of whom was a science teacher and another a history teacher. However, science fiction stories came to dominate the programme, and the history-oriented episodes, which were not popular with the production team, were dropped after The Highlanders (1967). While the show continued to use historical settings, they were generally used as a backdrop for science fiction tales, with one exception: Black Orchid (1982), set in 1920s England. The early stories were serialised in nature, with the narrative of one story flowing into the next and each episode having its own title, although produced as distinct stories with their own production codes. Following The Gunfighters (1966), however, each serial was given its own title, and the individual parts were assigned episode numbers. Of the programme's many writers, Robert Holmes was the most prolific, while Douglas Adams became the best known outside Doctor Who itself, due to the popularity of his Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy works. The serial format changed for the 2005 revival, with what was now called a series usually consisting of thirteen 45-minute, self-contained episodes (60 minutes with adverts, on overseas commercial channels) and an extended 60-minute episode broadcast on Christmas Day. This system was shortened to twelve episodes and one Christmas special following the revival's eighth series, and ten episodes from the eleventh series. Each series includes standalone and multiple episodic stories, often linked with a loose story arc resolved in the series finale. As in the early "classic" era, each episode has its own title, whether stand-alone or part of a larger story. Occasionally, regular-series episodes will exceed the 45-minute run time; notably, the episodes "Journey's End" from 2008 and "The Eleventh Hour" from 2010 were longer than an hour.[citation needed] 875 Doctor Who instalments have been televised since 1963, ranging between 25-minute episodes (the most common format for the classic era), 45/50-minute episodes (for Resurrection of the Daleks in the 1984 series, a single season in 1985, and the most common format for the revival era since 2005), two feature-length productions (1983's The Five Doctors and the 1996 television film), twelve Christmas specials (most of approximately 60 minutes' duration, one of 72 minutes), and four additional specials ranging from 60 to 75 minutes in 2009, 2010, and 2013. Four mini-episodes, running about eight minutes each, were also produced for the 1993, 2005, and 2007 Children in Need charity appeals, while another mini-episode was produced in 2008 for a Doctor Who–themed edition of The Proms. The 1993 two-part story, entitled Dimensions in Time, was made in collaboration with the cast of the BBC soap-opera EastEnders and was filmed partly on the EastEnders set. A two-part mini-episode was also produced for the 2011 edition of Comic Relief.[citation needed] Starting with the 2009 special "Planet of the Dead", the series was filmed in 1080i for HDTV and broadcast simultaneously on BBC One and BBC HD. To celebrate the 50th anniversary of the show, a special 3D episode, "The Day of the Doctor", was broadcast in 2013. In March 2013, it was announced that Tennant and Piper would be returning and that the episode would have a limited cinematic release worldwide. In June 2017, it was announced that due to the terms of a deal between BBC Worldwide and SMG Pictures in China, the company has first right of refusal on the purchase for the Chinese market of future series of the programme until and including Series 15. Between 1967 and 1978, large amounts of older material stored in the BBC's various video tape and film libraries was either destroyed or wiped. This included many early episodes of Doctor Who, those stories featuring the first two Doctors: William Hartnell and Patrick Troughton. In all, 97 of 253 episodes produced during the programme's first six years are not held in the BBC's archives (most notably seasons 3, 4, and 5, from which 79 episodes are missing). In 1972, almost all episodes then made were known to exist at the BBC, while by 1978 the practice of wiping tapes and destroying "spare" film copies had been brought to a stop. No 1960s episodes exist on their original videotapes (all surviving prints being film transfers), though some were transferred to film for editing before transmission and exist in their broadcast form. Some episodes have been returned to the BBC from the archives of other countries that bought prints for broadcast or by private individuals who acquired them by various means. Early colour videotape recordings made off-air by fans have also been retrieved, as well as excerpts filmed from the television screen onto 8 mm cine film and clips that were shown on other programmes. Audio versions of all lost episodes exist from home viewers who made tape recordings of the show. Short clips from every story with the exception of Marco Polo (1964), "Mission to the Unknown" (1965) and The Massacre (1966) also exist. In addition to these, there are off-screen photographs made by photographer John Cura, who was hired by various production personnel to document many of their programmes during the 1950s and 1960s, including Doctor Who.[citation needed] These have been used in fan reconstructions of the serials. The BBC has tolerated these amateur reconstructions, provided they are not sold for profit and are distributed as low-quality copies. One of the most sought-after lost episodes is part four of the last William Hartnell serial, The Tenth Planet (1966), which ends with the First Doctor transforming into the Second. The only portion of this in existence, barring a few poor-quality silent 8 mm clips, is the few seconds of the regeneration scene, as it was shown on the children's magazine show Blue Peter. With the approval of the BBC, efforts are now underway to restore as many of the episodes as possible from the extant material.[citation needed] "Official" reconstructions have also been released by the BBC on VHS, on MP3 CD-ROM, and as special features on DVD. The BBC, in conjunction with animation studio Cosgrove Hall, reconstructed the missing episodes 1 and 4 of The Invasion (1968), using remastered audio tracks and the comprehensive stage notes for the original filming, for the serial's DVD release in November 2006.[citation needed] The missing episodes of The Reign of Terror were animated by animation company Theta-Sigma, in collaboration with Big Finish, and became available for purchase in May 2013 through Amazon.com. Subsequent animations made in 2013 include The Tenth Planet, The Ice Warriors (1967) and The Moonbase (1967). In April 2006, Blue Peter launched a challenge to find missing Doctor Who episodes with the promise of a full-scale Dalek model as a reward. In December 2011, it was announced that part 3 of Galaxy 4 (1965) and part 2 of The Underwater Menace (1967) had been returned to the BBC by a fan who had purchased them in the mid-1980s without realising that the BBC did not hold copies of them. On 10 October 2013, the BBC announced that films of eleven episodes, including nine missing episodes, had been found in a Nigerian television relay station in Jos. Six of the eleven films discovered were the six-part serial The Enemy of the World (1968), from which all but the third episode had been missing. The remaining films were from another six-part serial, The Web of Fear (1968), and included the previously missing episodes 2, 4, 5 and 6. Episode 3 of The Web of Fear is still missing. The Doctor was initially shrouded in mystery. In the programme's early days, the character was an eccentric alien traveller of great intelligence who battled injustice while exploring time and space in an unreliable time machine, the "TARDIS" (an acronym for Time and Relative Dimension in Space), which notably appears much larger on the inside than on the outside (a quality referred to as "dimensionally transcendental"). The initially irascible and slightly sinister Doctor quickly mellowed into a more compassionate figure[citation needed] and was eventually revealed to be a Time Lord, whose race are from the planet Gallifrey, which the Doctor fled by stealing the TARDIS. Producers introduced the concept of regeneration to permit the recasting of the main character. This was prompted by the poor health of the original star, William Hartnell. The term "regeneration" was not conceived until the Doctor's third on-screen regeneration; Hartnell's Doctor merely described undergoing a "renewal", and the Second Doctor underwent a "change of appearance". The device has allowed for the recasting of the actor various times in the show's history, as well as the depiction of alternative Doctors either from the Doctor's relative past or future. The serials The Deadly Assassin (1976) and Mawdryn Undead (1983) established that a Time Lord can only regenerate 12 times, for a total of 13 incarnations. This line became stuck in the public consciousness despite not often being repeated and was recognised by producers of the show as a plot obstacle for when the show finally had to regenerate the Doctor a thirteenth time. The episode "The Time of the Doctor" (2013) depicted the Doctor acquiring a new cycle of regenerations, starting from the Twelfth Doctor, due to the Eleventh Doctor being the product of the Doctor's twelfth regeneration from his original set. Although the idea of casting a woman as the Doctor had been suggested by the show's writers several times, including by Newman in 1986 and Davies in 2008, until 2017, all official depictions were played by men. Jodie Whittaker took over the role as the Thirteenth Doctor at the end of the 2017 Christmas special and is the first woman to be cast as the character. The show introduced the Time Lords' ability to change sex on regeneration in earlier episodes, first in dialogue, then with Michelle Gomez's version of The Master and T'Nia Miller's version of The General. Upon Jodie Whittaker's final appearance as the character in "The Power of the Doctor" on 23 October 2022, she regenerated into a form portrayed by David Tennant, who was confirmed to be the Fourteenth Doctor and the first actor to play two incarnations. In the same year, Ncuti Gatwa was revealed to be portraying the Fifteenth Doctor, making him the first black actor to headline the series. In addition to those actors who have headlined the series, others have portrayed versions of the Doctor in guest roles. Notably, in 2013, John Hurt guest-starred as a hitherto unknown incarnation of the Doctor known as the War Doctor in the run-up to the show's 50th-anniversary special "The Day of the Doctor". He is shown in mini-episode "The Night of the Doctor" retroactively inserted into the show's fictional chronology between McGann's and Eccleston's Doctors, although his introduction was written so as not to disturb the established numerical naming of the Doctors. The show later introduced another such unknown past Doctor with Jo Martin's recurring portrayal of the Fugitive Doctor, beginning with "Fugitive of the Judoon" (2020). An example from the classic series comes from The Trial of a Time Lord (1986), in which Michael Jayston's character the Valeyard is described as an amalgamation of the darker sides of the Doctor's nature, somewhere between the twelfth and final incarnation. On rare occasions, other actors have stood in for the lead. In The Five Doctors, Richard Hurndall played the First Doctor due to William Hartnell's death in 1975; 34 years later David Bradley similarly replaced Hartnell in "Twice Upon a Time". In Time and the Rani, Sylvester McCoy briefly played the Sixth Doctor during the regeneration sequence, carrying on as the Seventh. In other media, the Doctor has been played by various other actors, including Peter Cushing in two films. The casting of a new Doctor has often inspired debate and speculation. Common topics of focus include the Doctor's sex (prior to the casting of Whittaker, all official incarnations were male), race (all Doctors were white prior to the casting of Jo Martin in "Fugitive of the Judoon") and age (the youngest actor to be cast is Smith at 26, and the oldest are Capaldi and Hartnell, both 55). There have been instances of actors returning later to reprise their specific Doctor's role. In 1973's The Three Doctors, William Hartnell and Patrick Troughton returned alongside Jon Pertwee. For 1983's The Five Doctors, Troughton and Pertwee returned to star with Peter Davison, and Tom Baker appeared in previously unseen footage from the uncompleted Shada serial. For this episode, Richard Hurndall replaced William Hartnell. Patrick Troughton again returned in 1985's The Two Doctors with Colin Baker. In 2007, Peter Davison returned in the Children in Need short "Time Crash" alongside David Tennant. In "The Name of the Doctor" (2013), the Eleventh Doctor meets a previously unseen incarnation of himself, subsequently revealed to be the War Doctor. In the following episode, "The Day of the Doctor", David Tennant's Tenth Doctor appeared alongside Matt Smith as the Eleventh Doctor and John Hurt as the War Doctor, as well as brief footage of all the previous actors. In 2017, the First Doctor (this time portrayed by David Bradley) returned alongside Peter Capaldi in "The Doctor Falls" and "Twice Upon a Time". In 2020's "Fugitive of the Judoon", Jodie Whittaker as the Thirteenth Doctor meets Jo Martin's incarnation of the Doctor, subsequently known as the Fugitive Doctor; they later interact in "The Timeless Children" later that year and "Once, Upon Time" in 2021. In her final episode, "The Power of the Doctor" (2022), Whittaker interacts with the Guardians of the Edge, manifestations of the Doctor's First (Bradley), Fifth (Davison), Sixth (Colin Baker), Seventh (McCoy), and Eighth (McGann) incarnations. Additionally, multiple incarnations of the Doctor have met in various audio dramas and novels based on the television show. The companion figure – generally a human – has been a constant feature in Doctor Who since the programme's inception in 1963. One of the roles of the companion is to be a reminder for the Doctor's "moral duty". The Doctor's first companions seen on-screen were his granddaughter Susan Foreman (Carole Ann Ford) and her teachers Barbara Wright (Jacqueline Hill) and Ian Chesterton (William Russell). These characters were intended to act as audience surrogates, through which the audience would discover information about the Doctor, who was to act as a mysterious father figure. The only story from the original series in which the Doctor travels alone is "The Deadly Assassin" (1976). Notable companions from the earlier series include Romana (Mary Tamm and Lalla Ward), a Time Lady; Sarah Jane Smith (Elisabeth Sladen); and Jo Grant (Katy Manning). Dramatically, these characters provide a figure with whom the audience can identify and serve to further the story by requesting exposition from the Doctor and manufacturing peril for the Doctor to resolve. The Doctor regularly gains new companions and loses old ones; sometimes they return home or find new causes—or loves—on worlds they have visited. Some have died during the course of the series. Companions are usually humans or humanoid aliens.[citation needed] Since the 2005 revival, the Doctor generally travels with a primary female companion, who occupies a larger narrative role. Steven Moffat described the companion as the main character of the show, as the story begins anew with each companion and she undergoes more change than the Doctor. The primary companions of the Ninth and Tenth Doctors were Rose Tyler (Billie Piper), Martha Jones (Freema Agyeman), and Donna Noble (Catherine Tate), with Mickey Smith (Noel Clarke) and Jack Harkness (John Barrowman) recurring as secondary companion figures. The Eleventh Doctor became the first to travel with a married couple, Amy Pond (Karen Gillan) and Rory Williams (Arthur Darvill), whilst out-of-sync meetings with River Song (Alex Kingston) and Clara Oswald (Jenna Coleman) provided ongoing story arcs that continued with the Twelfth Doctor. The tenth series included the alien Nardole (Matt Lucas) and introduced Pearl Mackie as Bill Potts, the Doctor's first openly gay companion. Pearl Mackie said that the increased representation of LGBTQ people is important on a mainstream show. The Thirteenth Doctor has primarily travelled with Ryan Sinclair (Tosin Cole), Graham O'Brien (Bradley Walsh), Yasmin Khan (Mandip Gill), and Dan Lewis (John Bishop). Some companions have gone on to reappear, either in the main series or in spin-offs. Sarah Jane Smith became the central character in The Sarah Jane Adventures (2007–2011) following a return to Doctor Who in 2006. Guest stars in the series include former companions Jo Grant, K9, and Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart (Nicholas Courtney). The character of Jack Harkness also served to launch a spin-off, Torchwood (2006–2011), in which Martha Jones also appeared. When Sydney Newman commissioned the series, he specifically did not want to perpetuate the cliché of the "bug-eyed monster" of science fiction. However, monsters were popular with audiences and so became a staple of Doctor Who almost from the beginning. Daleks, Cybermen, and the Master are some of the most iconic foes the Doctor has battled in the series.[citation needed] With the show's 2005 revival, executive producer Russell T Davies stated his intention to reintroduce the classic monsters of Doctor Who. The Autons with the Nestene Consciousness, first seen in 1970's Spearhead from Space, and Daleks, first seen in 1963's The Daleks, returned in series 1. Davies's successor, Steven Moffat, continued the trend by reviving the Silurians, also first seen in 1970, in series 5 and Zygons, first seen in 1975, in the 50th-anniversary special. Since its 2005 return, the series has also introduced new recurring aliens: Slitheen (Raxacoricofallapatorians), Ood, Judoon, Weeping Angels and the Silence. The Dalek race, which first appeared in the show's second serial in 1963, are Doctor Who's oldest villains. The Daleks are Kaleds from the planet Skaro, mutated by the scientist Davros and housed in mechanical armour shells for mobility. The actual creatures resemble octopuses with large, pronounced brains. Their armour shells have a single eye-stalk, a sink-plunger-like device that serves the purpose of a hand, and a directed-energy weapon. Their main weakness is their eyestalk; attacks upon them using various weapons can blind a Dalek, making it go mad. Their chief role in the series plot, as they frequently remark in their instantly recognisable metallic voices, is to "exterminate" all non-Dalek beings. They even attack the Time Lords in the Time War, as shown during the 50th Anniversary of the show. They continue to be a recurring 'monster' within the Doctor Who franchise, their most recent appearance being the 2022 episode "The Power of the Doctor". Davros has also been a recurring figure since his debut in Genesis of the Daleks, although played by several different actors.[citation needed] The Daleks were created by the writer Terry Nation (who intended them to be an allegory of the Nazis) and BBC designer Raymond Cusick. The Daleks' début in the programme's second serial, The Daleks (1963–1964), made both the Daleks and Doctor Who very popular. A Dalek appeared on a postage stamp celebrating British popular culture in 1999, photographed by Lord Snowdon. In "Victory of the Daleks" a new set of Daleks were introduced that come in a range of colours; the colour denoting its role within the species. Cybermen were originally a wholly organic species of humanoids originating on Earth's twin planet Mondas that began to implant more and more artificial parts into their bodies. This led to the race becoming coldly logical and calculating cyborgs, with emotions usually only shown when naked aggression was called for. With the demise of Mondas, they acquired Telos as their new home planet. They continue to be a recurring 'monster' within the Doctor Who franchise.[citation needed] The Cybermen have evolved dramatically over the course of the show. They were reintroduced in the 2006 series with a radically changed appearance and history. These Cybus Cybermen were created in a parallel universe by the mad inventor John Lumic; he was attempting to preserve the humans by transplanting their brains into powerful metal bodies, sending them orders using a mobile phone network and inhibiting their emotions with an electronic chip. The Master is the Doctor's archenemy, a renegade Time Lord who desires to rule the universe. Conceived as "Professor Moriarty to the Doctor's Sherlock Holmes", the character first appeared in 1971. As with the Doctor, the role has been portrayed by several actors, since the Master is a Time Lord as well and able to regenerate; the first of these actors was Roger Delgado, who continued in the role until his death in 1973. The Master was briefly played by Peter Pratt and Geoffrey Beevers until Anthony Ainley took over and continued to play the character until Doctor Who's hiatus in 1989. The Master returned in the 1996 television movie of Doctor Who, and was played by American actor Eric Roberts.[citation needed] Following the series revival in 2005, Derek Jacobi provided the character's reintroduction in the 2007 episode "Utopia". During that story, the role was then assumed by John Simm, who returned to the role multiple times throughout the Tenth Doctor's tenure. As of the 2014 episode "Dark Water", it was revealed that the Master had become a female incarnation or "Time Lady", going by the name of "Missy" (short for Mistress, the feminine equivalent of "Master"). This incarnation is played by Michelle Gomez. Simm returned to his role as the Master alongside Gomez in the tenth series. The Master returned for the 2020 twelfth series with Sacha Dhawan in the role. This incarnation dubbed himself the "Spy Master" referencing a role he had taken with MI6. Doctor Who theme excerpt An excerpt from the original (1963) classic theme music to Doctor Who Problems playing this file? See media help. The Doctor Who theme music was one of the first electronic music signature tunes for television, and after more than a half century remains one of the most easily recognised. The original theme was composed by Ron Grainer and realised by Delia Derbyshire of the BBC Radiophonic Workshop, with assistance from Dick Mills, and was released as a single on Decca F 11837 in 1964. The Derbyshire arrangement served, with minor edits, as the theme tune up to the end of season 17 (1979–1980). It is regarded as a significant and innovative piece of electronic music recorded well before the availability of commercial synthesisers or multitrack mixers. Each note was individually created by cutting, splicing, speeding up and slowing down segments of analogue tape containing recordings of a single plucked string, white noise, and the simple harmonic waveforms of test-tone oscillators, intended for calibrating equipment and rooms, not creating music. New techniques were invented to allow mixing of the music, as this was before the era of multitrack tape machines. On hearing the finished result, Grainer asked, "Jeez, Delia, did I write that?" She answered, "Most of it." Although Grainer was willing to give Derbyshire the co-composer credit, it was against BBC policy at the time. Derbyshire would not receive an on-screen credit until the 50th-anniversary story "The Day of the Doctor" in 2013. A different arrangement was recorded by Peter Howell for season 18 (1980), which was in turn replaced by Dominic Glynn's arrangement for the season-long serial The Trial of a Time Lord in season 23 (1986). Keff McCulloch provided the new arrangement for the Seventh Doctor's era, which lasted from season 24 (1987) until the series' suspension in 1989. American composer John Debney created a new arrangement of Ron Grainer's original theme for Doctor Who in 1996. For the return of the series in 2005, Murray Gold provided a new arrangement, which featured samples from the 1963 original with further elements added in the 2005 Christmas episode "The Christmas Invasion". A new arrangement of the theme, once again by Gold, was introduced in the 2007 Christmas special episode, "Voyage of the Damned". Gold returned as composer for the 2010 series, and was responsible for a new version of the theme which was reported to have had a hostile reception from some viewers. In 2011, the theme tune charted at number 228 of radio station Classic FM's Hall of Fame, a survey of classical music tastes. A revised version of Gold's 2010 arrangement had its debut over the opening titles of the 2012 Christmas special "The Snowmen", and a further revision of the arrangement was made for the 50th-anniversary special "The Day of the Doctor" in November 2013. Versions of the "Doctor Who Theme" have also been released as pop music. In the early 1970s, Jon Pertwee, who had played the Third Doctor, recorded a version of the Doctor Who theme with spoken lyrics, titled, "Who Is the Doctor". In 1978, a disco version of the theme in the UK, Denmark and Australia by the group Mankind, which reached number 24 in the UK charts. In 1988, the band The Justified Ancients of Mu Mu (later known as The KLF) released the single "Doctorin' the Tardis" under the name The Timelords, which reached No. 1 in the UK and No. 2 in Australia; this version incorporated several other songs, including "Rock and Roll Part 2" by Gary Glitter (who recorded vocals for some of the CD-single remix versions of "Doctorin' the Tardis"). Others who have covered or reinterpreted the theme include Orbital, Pink Floyd, the Australian string ensemble Fourplay, New Zealand punk band Blam Blam Blam, The Pogues, Thin Lizzy, Dub Syndicate, and the comedians Bill Bailey and Mitch Benn. Both the theme and obsessive fans were satirised on The Chaser's War on Everything. The theme tune has also appeared on many compilation CDs, and has made its way into mobile-phone ringtones. Fans have also produced and distributed their own remixes of the theme. In January 2011, the Mankind version was released as a digital download on the album Gallifrey And Beyond.[citation needed] On 26 June 2018, producer Chris Chibnall announced that the musical score for series 11 would be provided by Royal Birmingham Conservatoire alumnus Segun Akinola. Most of the innovative incidental music for Doctor Who has been specially commissioned from freelance composers, although in the early years some episodes also used stock music, as well as occasional excerpts from original recordings or cover versions of songs by popular music acts such as The Beatles and The Beach Boys. Since its 2005 return, the series has featured occasional use of excerpts of pop music from the 1970s to the 2000s.[citation needed] The incidental music for the first Doctor Who adventure, An Unearthly Child, was written by Norman Kay. Many of the stories of the William Hartnell period were scored by electronic music pioneer Tristram Cary, whose Doctor Who credits include The Daleks, Marco Polo, The Daleks' Master Plan, The Gunfighters and The Mutants. Other composers in this early period included Richard Rodney Bennett, Carey Blyton and Geoffrey Burgon.[citation needed] The most frequent musical contributor during the first 15 years was Dudley Simpson, who is also well known for his theme and incidental music for Blake's 7, and for his haunting theme music and score for the original 1970s version of The Tomorrow People. Simpson's first Doctor Who score was Planet of Giants (1964) and he went on to write music for many adventures of the 1960s and 1970s, including most of the stories of the Jon Pertwee/Tom Baker periods, ending with The Horns of Nimon (1979). He also made a cameo appearance in The Talons of Weng-Chiang (as a Music hall conductor). In 1980 starting with the serial The Leisure Hive the task of creating incidental music was assigned to the Radiophonic Workshop. Paddy Kingsland and Peter Howell contributed many scores in this period and other contributors included Roger Limb, Malcolm Clarke and Jonathan Gibbs. The Radiophonic Workshop was dropped after 1986's The Trial of a Time Lord series, and Keff McCulloch took over as the series' main composer until the end of its run, with Dominic Glynn and Mark Ayres also contributing scores.[citation needed] From the 2005 revival to the 2017 Christmas episode "Twice Upon a Time", all incidental music for the series was composed by Murray Gold and Ben Foster and has been performed by the BBC National Orchestra of Wales from the 2005 Christmas episode "The Christmas Invasion" onwards. A concert featuring the orchestra performing music from the first two series took place on 19 November 2006 to raise money for Children in Need. David Tennant hosted the event, introducing the different sections of the concert. Murray Gold and Russell T Davies answered questions during the interval, and Daleks and Cybermen appeared whilst music from their stories was played. The concert aired on BBCi on Christmas Day 2006. A Doctor Who Prom was celebrated on 27 July 2008 in the Royal Albert Hall as part of the annual BBC Proms. The BBC Philharmonic and the London Philharmonic Choir performed Murray Gold's compositions for the series, conducted by Ben Foster, as well as a selection of classics based on the theme of space and time. The event was presented by Freema Agyeman and guest-presented by various other stars of the show with numerous monsters participating in the proceedings. It also featured the specially filmed mini-episode "Music of the Spheres", written by Russell T Davies and starring David Tennant. Six soundtracks have been released since 2005. The first featured tracks from the first two series, the second and third featured music from the third and fourth series respectively. The fourth was released on 4 October 2010 as a two-disc special edition and contained music from the 2008–2010 specials (The Next Doctor to "End of Time Part 2"). The soundtrack for Series 5 was released on 8 November 2010. In February 2011, a soundtrack was released for the 2010 Christmas special "A Christmas Carol", and in December 2011, the soundtrack for Series 6 was released, both by Silva Screen Records. In 2013, a 50th-anniversary boxed set of audio CDs was released featuring music and sound effects from Doctor Who's 50-year history. The celebration continued in 2016 with the release of Doctor Who: The 50th Anniversary Collection Four LP Box Set by New York City-based Spacelab9. The company pressed 1,000 copies of the set on "Metallic Silver" vinyl, dubbed the "Cyberman Edition". Premiering the day after the assassination of John F. Kennedy, the first episode of Doctor Who was repeated with the second episode the following week. Doctor Who has always appeared initially on the BBC's mainstream BBC One channel, where it is regarded as a family show, drawing audiences of many millions of viewers; The programme's popularity has waxed and waned over the decades, with three notable periods of high ratings. The first of these was the "Dalekmania" period (c. 1964–1965), when the popularity of the Daleks regularly brought Doctor Who ratings of between 9 and 14 million, even for stories which did not feature them. The second was the mid to late 1970s, when Tom Baker occasionally drew audiences of over 12 million. During the ITV network strike of 1979, viewership peaked at 16 million. Figures remained respectable into the 1980s, but fell noticeably after the programme's 23rd series was postponed in 1985 and the show was off the air for 18 months. Its late 1980s performance of three to five million viewers was seen as poor at the time and was, according to the BBC Board of Control, a leading cause of the programme's 1989 suspension. Some fans considered this disingenuous, since the programme was scheduled against the ITV soap opera Coronation Street, the most popular show at the time. During Tennant's run (the third notable period of high ratings), the show had consistently high viewership, with the Christmas specials regularly attracting over 10 million. The BBC One broadcast of "Rose", the first episode of the 2005 revival, drew an average audience of 10.81 million, third highest for BBC One that week and seventh across all channels. The current revival also garners the highest audience Appreciation Index of any drama on television. Doctor Who has been broadcast internationally outside of the United Kingdom since 1964, a year after the show first aired. As of 1 January 2013[update], the modern series has been broadcast in more than 50 countries. The 50th anniversary was broadcast In 94 countries and screened to more than half a million people in cinemas across Australia, Latin America, North America and Europe. The scope of the broadcast was a world record, according to Guinness World Records. Doctor Who is one of the five top-grossing titles for BBC Worldwide, the BBC's commercial arm. BBC Worldwide CEO John Smith has said that Doctor Who is one of a small number of "Superbrands" which Worldwide will promote heavily. Only four episodes have premiere showings on channels other than BBC One. The 1983 20th-anniversary special The Five Doctors had its début on 23 November (the actual date of the anniversary) on a number of PBS stations two days before its BBC One broadcast. The 1988 story Silver Nemesis was broadcast with all three episodes airing back to back on TVNZ in New Zealand in November, after the first episode had been shown in the UK but before the final two instalments had aired there.[citation needed] Starting with the 60th-anniversary specials in 2023, Doctor Who will be released on Disney+ outside of the United Kingdom and Ireland. New Zealand was the first country outside the United Kingdom to screen Doctor Who, beginning in September 1964, and continued to screen the series for many years, including the new revived series that aired on Prime Television from 2005 to 2017. In 2018, the series is aired on Fridays on TVNZ 2, and on TVNZ On Demand on the same episode as the UK. The series moved to TVNZ 1 in 2021.[citation needed] In Australia, the show has had a strong fan base since its inception, having been exclusively first run by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) since January 1965. The ABC has periodically repeated episodes; of note were the daily screenings of all available classic episodes starting in 2003 for the show's 40th anniversary and the weekly screenings of all available revived episodes in 2013 for the show's 50th anniversary. The ABC broadcast the modern series' first run on ABC1 and ABC Me, with repeats on ABC2 and streaming available on ABC iview. The series also has a fan base in the United States, where it was shown in syndication from the 1970s to the 1990s, particularly on PBS stations. TVOntario picked up the show in 1976 beginning with The Three Doctors and aired each series (several years late) through to series 24 in 1991. From 1979 to 1981, TVO airings were bookended by science-fiction writer Judith Merril who introduced the episode and then, after the episode concluded, tried to place it in an educational context in keeping with TVO's status as an educational channel. Its airing of The Talons of Weng-Chiang was cancelled as a result of accusations that the story was racist; the story was later broadcast in the 1990s on cable station YTV. CBC began showing the series again in 2005. The series moved to the Canadian cable channel Space in 2009. Series three began broadcasting on CBC on 18 June 2007 followed by the second Christmas special, "The Runaway Bride", at midnight, and the Sci Fi Channel began on 6 July 2007, starting with the second Christmas special at 8:00 pm E/P followed by the first episode. Series four aired in the United States on the Sci Fi Channel (now known as Syfy), beginning in April 2008. It aired on CBC beginning 19 September 2008, although the CBC did not air the "Voyage of the Damned" special. The Canadian cable network Space (now known as CTV Sci-Fi Channel) broadcast "The Next Doctor" (in March 2009) and all subsequent series and specials. The series was aired in Brazil at the TV networks Syfy and, more frequently, at the public broadcaster TV Cultura. Expect international distribution rights holders, it had already been made available on local streaming platforms Looke and Globoplay. Starting from 2024, the previous 13 series will be available at the upcoming streaming service +SBT. Series 1 through 3 of Doctor Who were broadcast on various NHK channels from 2006 to 2008 with Japanese subtitles. Beginning on 2 August 2009, upon the launch of Disney XD in Japan, the series has been broadcast with Japanese dubbing. A wide selection of serials is available from BBC Video on DVD, on sale in the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada and the United States. Every fully extant serial has been released on VHS, and BBC Worldwide continues to regularly release serials on DVD. The 2005 series is also available in its entirety on UMD for the PlayStation Portable. Eight original series serials have been released on Laserdisc and many have also been released on Betamax tape and Video 2000. One episode of Doctor Who (The Infinite Quest) was released on VCD. Initially, only the series from 2005 onwards were also available on Blu-ray, along with the 1996 TV film Doctor Who, released in September 2016. However in March 2021, it was announced that the classic run would be released on Blu-ray starting with seasons 12 and 19. Over 600 episodes of the classic series (the first 8 Doctors, from 1963 to 1996) are available to stream on BritBox (launched in 2017) and Pluto TV. From 2020, the revival series is available for streaming on HBO Max, as well as spin-offs Sarah Jane Adventures and Torchwood. Ahead of the 60th anniversary of the series, BBC cleared the rights to allow almost every single non-missing episode of Doctor Who onto iPlayer. Additionally various spin-offs were also added to iPlayer including Torchwood, The Sarah Jane Adventures, Class, and Doctor Who Confidential. There are two Dr. Who feature films: Dr. Who and the Daleks, released in 1965 and Daleks' Invasion Earth 2150 A.D. in 1966. Both are retellings of existing television stories (specifically, the first two Dalek serials, The Daleks and The Dalek Invasion of Earth respectively) with a larger budget and alterations to the series concept.[citation needed] In these films, Peter Cushing plays a human scientist named "Dr. Who" who travels with his granddaughter, niece, and other companions in a time machine he has invented. The Cushing version of the character reappears in both comic strips and a short story, the latter attempting to reconcile the film continuity with that of the series. In addition, several planned films were proposed, including a sequel, The Chase, loosely based on the original series story, for the Cushing Doctor, plus many attempted television movie and big-screen productions to revive the original Doctor Who after the original series was cancelled.[citation needed] Paul McGann starred in the only television film as the eighth incarnation of the Doctor. After the film, he continued the role in audio dramas and was confirmed as the eighth incarnation through flashback footage and a mini episode in the 2005 revival, effectively linking the two series and the television movie.[citation needed] In 2011, David Yates announced that he had started work with the BBC on a Doctor Who film, a project that would take three or more years to complete. Yates indicated that the film would take a different approach from Doctor Who, although then showrunner Steven Moffat stated later that any such film would not be a reboot of the series and that a film should be made by the BBC team and star the current TV Doctor. Doctor Who has appeared on stage numerous times. In the early 1970s, Trevor Martin played the role in Doctor Who and the Daleks in the Seven Keys to Doomsday. In the late 1980s, Jon Pertwee and Colin Baker both played the Doctor at different times during the run of a play titled Doctor Who – The Ultimate Adventure. For two performances, while Pertwee was ill, David Banks (better known for playing Cybermen) played the Doctor. Other original plays have been staged as amateur productions, with other actors playing the Doctor, while Terry Nation wrote The Curse of the Daleks, a stage play mounted in the late 1960s, but without the Doctor.[citation needed] A pilot episode ("A Girl's Best Friend") for a potential spin-off series, K-9 and Company, aired in 1981, with Elisabeth Sladen reprising her role as companion Sarah Jane Smith and John Leeson as the voice of K9, but was not picked up as a regular series. Concept art for an animated Doctor Who series was produced by animation company Nelvana in the 1980s, but the series was not produced. Following the success of the 2005 series produced by Russell T Davies, the BBC commissioned Davies to produce a 13-part spin-off series titled Torchwood (an anagram of "Doctor Who"), set in modern-day Cardiff and investigating alien activities and crime. The series debuted on BBC Three on 22 October 2006. John Barrowman reprised his role of Jack Harkness from the 2005 series of Doctor Who. Two other actresses who appeared in Doctor Who also star in the series: Eve Myles as Gwen Cooper, who played the similarly named servant girl Gwyneth in the 2005 Doctor Who episode "The Unquiet Dead", and Naoko Mori, who reprised her role as Toshiko Sato, first seen in "Aliens of London". A second series of Torchwood aired in 2008; for three episodes, the cast was joined by Freema Agyeman reprising her Doctor Who role of Martha Jones. A third series was broadcast from 6 to 10 July 2009, and consisted of a single five-part story called Children of Earth which was set largely in London. A fourth series, Torchwood: Miracle Day jointly produced by BBC Wales, BBC Worldwide and the American entertainment company Starz debuted in 2011. The series was predominantly set in the United States, though Wales remained part of the show's setting.[citation needed] The Sarah Jane Adventures, starring Elisabeth Sladen who reprised her role as investigative journalist Sarah Jane Smith, was developed by CBBC; a special aired on New Year's Day 2007, and a full series began on 24 September 2007. A second series followed in 2008, featuring the return of Brigadier Lethbridge-Stewart. A third in 2009 featured a crossover appearance from the main show by David Tennant as the Tenth Doctor. In 2010, a fourth season featured Matt Smith as the Eleventh Doctor alongside former companion actress Katy Manning reprising her role as Jo Grant. A final, three-story fifth series was transmitted in autumn 2011 – uncompleted due to Sladen's death in early 2011. An animated serial, The Infinite Quest, aired alongside the 2007 series of Doctor Who as part of the children's television series Totally Doctor Who. The serial featured the voices of series regulars David Tennant and Freema Agyeman but is not considered part of the 2007 series. A second animated serial, Dreamland, aired in six parts on the BBC Red Button service, and the official Doctor Who website in 2009. Class, featuring students of Coal Hill School, was first aired on-line on BBC Three from 22 October 2016, as a series of eight 45 minute episodes, written by Patrick Ness. Peter Capaldi as the Twelfth Doctor appears in the show's first episode. The series was picked up by BBC America on 8 January 2016 and by BBC One a day later. On 7 September 2017, BBC Three controller Damian Kavanagh confirmed that the series had officially been cancelled. On 27 January 2023, Russell T Davies confirmed via GQ that future Doctor Who spin-offs were in the works. It is currently unknown what form these spin-offs will take, aside from one centering around UNIT and starring Jemma Redgrave as Kate Stewart. Numerous other spin-off series have been created not by the BBC but by the respective owners of the characters and concepts. Such spin-offs include the novel and audio drama series Faction Paradox, Iris Wildthyme and Bernice Summerfield; as well as the made-for-video series P.R.O.B.E.; the Australian-produced television series K-9, which aired a 26-episode first season on Disney XD; and the audio spin-off Counter-Measures. When the revived series of Doctor Who was brought back, an aftershow series was created by the BBC, titled Doctor Who Confidential. There have been three aftershow series created, with the latest one titled Doctor Who: The Fan Show, which began airing from the tenth series. Each series follows behind-the-scenes footage on the making of Doctor Who through clips and interviews with the cast, production crew and other people, including those who have participated in the television series in some manner. Each episode deals with a different topic, and in most cases refers to the Doctor Who episode that preceded it.[citation needed] In 1983, coinciding with the series' 20th anniversary, The Five Doctors was shown as part of the annual BBC Children in Need Appeal, however it was not a charity-based production, simply scheduled within the line-up of Friday 25 November 1983. This was the programme's first co-production with Australian broadcaster ABC. At 90 minutes long it was the longest single episode of Doctor Who produced to date. It featured three of the first five Doctors, a new actor to replace the deceased William Hartnell, and unused footage to represent Tom Baker. In 1993, for the franchise's 30th anniversary, another charity special, Dimensions in Time, was produced for Children in Need, featuring all the surviving actors who played the Doctor and a number of previous companions. It also featured a crossover with the soap opera EastEnders, the action taking place in the latter's Albert Square location and around Greenwich. The special was one of several special 3D programmes the BBC produced at the time, using a 3D system that made use of the Pulfrich effect, requiring glasses with one darkened lens; the picture would look normal to those viewers who watched without the glasses.[citation needed] In 1999, another special, Doctor Who and the Curse of Fatal Death, was made for Comic Relief and later released on VHS. An affectionate parody of the television series, it was split into four segments, mimicking the traditional serial format, complete with cliffhangers, and running down the same corridor several times when being chased (the version released on video was split into only two episodes).[citation needed] In the story, the Doctor (Rowan Atkinson) encounters both the Master (Jonathan Pryce) and the Daleks. During the special, the Doctor is forced to regenerate several times, with his subsequent incarnations played by, in order, Richard E. Grant, Jim Broadbent, Hugh Grant, and Joanna Lumley. The script was written by Steven Moffat, later to be head writer and executive producer of the revived series. Since the return of Doctor Who in 2005, the franchise has produced two original "mini-episodes" to support Children in Need. The first, which aired in November 2005, was an untitled seven-minute scene introducing David Tennant as the Tenth Doctor. It was followed in November 2007 by "Time Crash", a 7-minute scene that featured the Tenth Doctor meeting the Fifth Doctor, Peter Davison. A set of two mini-episodes, titled "Space" and "Time" respectively, were produced to support Comic Relief. They were aired during the Comic Relief 2011 event. During Children in Need 2011, an exclusively filmed segment showed the Doctor addressing the viewer, attempting to persuade them to purchase items of his clothing, which were going up for auction for Children in Need. Children in Need 2012 featured the mini-episode "The Great Detective". In 2014, the Twelfth Doctor Peter Capaldi designed a Doctor Who-themed Paddington Bear statue, which was located at the Royal Observatory in Greenwich (one of 50 placed around London), which was auctioned to raise funds for the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC). Doctor Who has been satirised and spoofed on many occasions by comedians including Spike Milligan (a Dalek invades his bathroom—Milligan, naked, hurls a soap sponge at it) and Lenny Henry. Jon Culshaw frequently impersonates the Fourth Doctor in the BBC Dead Ringers series. Doctor Who fandom has also been lampooned on programs such as Saturday Night Live, The Chaser's War on Everything, Mystery Science Theater 3000, Family Guy, American Dad!, Futurama, South Park, Community as Inspector Spacetime, The Simpsons and The Big Bang Theory.[citation needed] As part of the 50th-anniversary programmes, former Fifth Doctor Peter Davison directed, wrote, and co-starred in the parody The Five(ish) Doctors Reboot, which also starred two other former Doctors, Colin Baker and Sylvester McCoy, and had cameo appearances from cast and crew involved in the programme, including showrunner Steven Moffat and Doctors Paul McGann, David Tennant, and Matt Smith. The Doctor in his fourth incarnation has been represented on several episodes of The Simpsons and Matt Groening's other animated series Futurama. A fan of Doctor Who since childhood, Groening favours Tom Baker's fourth Doctor, with Simpsons writer Ron Hauge stating, "There are several Doctor Who actors but Tom Baker is the one we always go with." There have also been many references to Doctor Who in popular culture and other science fiction, including Star Trek: The Next Generation ("The Neutral Zone") and Leverage. In the Channel 4 series Queer as Folk (created by later Doctor Who executive producer Russell T. Davies), the character of Vince was portrayed as an avid Doctor Who fan, with references appearing many times throughout in the form of clips from the programme. In a similar manner, the character of Oliver on Coupling (created and written by Steven Moffat) is portrayed as a Doctor Who collector and enthusiast. References to Doctor Who have also appeared in the young adult fantasy novels Brisingr and High Wizardry, the video game Rock Band, the Adult Swim comedy show Robot Chicken, the Family Guy episodes "Blue Harvest" and "420", and the game RuneScape. It has also been referenced in Destroy All Humans! 2, by civilians in the game's variation of England, and multiple times throughout the Ace Attorney series. Doctor Who has been a reference in several political cartoons, from a 1964 cartoon in the Daily Mail depicting Charles de Gaulle as a Dalek to a 2008 edition of This Modern World by Tom Tomorrow in which the Tenth Doctor informs an incredulous character from 2003 that the Democratic Party will nominate an African-American as its presidential candidate. The word "TARDIS" is an entry in the Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, and the iOS dictionary.[citation needed] There have been various Doctor Who–related exhibitions in the United Kingdom, including the now-closed exhibitions at:[citation needed] Land's End (Cornwall) Blackpool Llangollen Kelvingrove Museum, Glasgow Coventry Transport Museum, Coventry Centre for Life, Newcastle upon Tyne Melbourne, Australia Kensington Olympia Two, London Longleat, which ran for 30 years. Cardiff (the city where the series is filmed). Since its beginnings, Doctor Who has generated hundreds of products related to the show, from toys and games to collectible picture cards and postage stamps. These include board games, card games, gamebooks, computer games, roleplaying games, action figures and a pinball game. Many games have been released that feature the Daleks, including Dalek computer games.[citation needed] The earliest Doctor Who–related audio release was a 21-minute narrated abridgement of the First Doctor television story The Chase released in 1966. Ten years later, the first original Doctor Who audio was released on LP record; Doctor Who and the Pescatons featuring the Fourth Doctor. The first commercially available audiobook was an abridged reading of the Fourth Doctor story State of Decay in 1981. In 1988, during a hiatus in the television show, Slipback, the first radio drama, was transmitted. Since 1999, Big Finish Productions has released several different series of Doctor Who audios on CD. The earliest of these featured the Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Doctors, with Paul McGann's Eighth Doctor joining the line in 2001. Tom Baker's Fourth Doctor began appearing for Big Finish in 2012. Along with the main range, adventures of the First, Second and Third Doctors have been produced in both limited cast and full cast formats, as well as audiobooks. The 2013 series Destiny of the Doctor, produced as part of the series' 50th-anniversary celebrations, marked the first time Big Finish created stories (in this case audiobooks) featuring the Doctors from the revived show.[citation needed] Along with this, in May 2016, the Tenth Doctor, David Tennant, appeared alongside Catherine Tate in a collection of three audio adventures. In August 2020, Big Finish announced a new series of audios beginning release in May 2021, featuring Christopher Eccleston reprising his role as the Ninth Doctor. The main range, Doctor Who: The Monthly Adventures, holds the Guinness World Record for the longest-running science fiction audio play series. In 2020 Big Finish revealed that The Monthly Adventures would come to an end in favor of individual box sets. In 2022, BBC Sounds began airing Doctor Who: Redacted, a 10-episode podcast written by Juno Dawson and starring Charlie Craggs and Jodie Whittaker. The podcast focuses on a trio of friends who host a paranormal conspiracy podcast, "The Blue Box Files", and end up getting involved in much more than they expected. Doctor Who books have been published from the mid-sixties through to the present day. From 1965 to 1991 the books published were primarily novelised adaptations of broadcast episodes; beginning in 1991 an extensive line of original fiction was launched, the Virgin New Adventures and Virgin Missing Adventures. Since the relaunch of the programme in 2005, a new range of novels has been published by BBC Books. Numerous non-fiction books about the series, including guidebooks and critical studies, have also been published,[citation needed] and a dedicated Doctor Who Magazine (DWM) with newsstand circulation has been published regularly since 1979: DWM is recognised by Guinness World Records as the longest running TV tie-in magazine, celebrating 40 years of continuous publication on 11 October 2019. This is published by Panini, as is the Doctor Who Adventures magazine for younger fans. Numerous Doctor Who video games have been created from the mid-80s through to the present day. A Doctor Who game was planned for the Sega Mega Drive but never released. One of the recent ones is a match-3 game released in November 2013 for iOS, Android, Amazon App Store and Facebook called Doctor Who: Legacy. It has been constantly updated since its release and features all the Doctors as playable characters as well as over 100 companions. Another video game instalment is Lego Dimensions – in which Doctor Who is one of the many "Level Packs" in the game. The pack contains the Twelfth Doctor (who can reincarnate into the others), K9, the TARDIS and a Victorian London adventure level area. The game and pack released in November 2015. Doctor Who: Battle of Time was a digital collectible card game developed by Bandai Namco Entertainment and released for iOS and Android. It was soft-launched on 30 May 2018 in Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Thailand, but was shutdown on 26 November of that same year. Doctor Who Infinity was released on Steam on 7 August 2018. It was nominated for "Best Start-up" at The Independent Game Developers' Association Awards 2018. Since the creation of the Doctor Who character by BBC Television in the early 1960s, a myriad of stories have been published about Doctor Who, in different media: apart from the actual television episodes that continue to be produced by the BBC, there have also been novels, comics, short stories, audio books, radio plays, interactive video games, game books, webcasts, DVD extras, and stage performances. The BBC takes no position on the canonicity of any of such stories, and producers of the show have expressed distaste for the idea of canonicity. The show has received recognition as one of Britain's finest television programmes, winning the 2006 British Academy Television Award for Best Drama Series and five consecutive (2005–2010) awards at the National Television Awards during Russell T Davies' tenure as executive producer. In 2011, Matt Smith became the first Doctor to be nominated for a BAFTA Television Award for Best Actor, and in 2016, Michelle Gomez became the first female to receive a BAFTA nomination for the series, getting a Best Supporting Actress nomination for her work as Missy. In 2013, the Peabody Awards honoured Doctor Who with an Institutional Peabody "for evolving with technology and the times like nothing else in the known television universe." The programme is listed in Guinness World Records as the longest-running science-fiction television show in the world, as the "most successful" science-fiction series of all time—based on its overall broadcast ratings, DVD and book sales, and iTunes traffic—and for the largest ever simulcast of a TV drama with its 50th-anniversary special. In 1975, Season 11 of the series won a Writers' Guild of Great Britain award for Best Writing in a Children's Serial. In 1996, BBC television held the "Auntie Awards" as the culmination of their "TV60" series, celebrating 60 years of BBC television broadcasting, where Doctor Who was voted as the "Best Popular Drama" the corporation had ever produced, ahead of such ratings heavyweights as EastEnders and Casualty. In 2000, Doctor Who was ranked third in a list of the 100 Greatest British Television Programmes of the 20th century, produced by the British Film Institute and voted on by industry professionals. In 2005, the series came first in a survey by SFX magazine of "The Greatest UK Science Fiction and Fantasy Television Series Ever". In Channel 4's 2001 list of the 100 Greatest Kids' TV shows, Doctor Who was placed at number nine. In 2004 and 2007, Doctor Who was ranked number 18 and number 22 on TV Guide's Top Cult Shows Ever. In 2013, TV Guide ranked it as the sixth-best sci-fi show. The revived series has received recognition from critics and the public, across various awards ceremonies. It won five BAFTA TV Awards, including Best Drama Series, the highest-profile and most prestigious British television award for which the series has ever been nominated. It was very popular at the BAFTA Cymru Awards, with 25 wins overall including Best Drama Series (twice), Best Screenplay/Screenwriter (thrice) and Best Actor. It was also nominated for 7 Saturn Awards, winning the only Best International Series in the ceremony's history. In 2009, Doctor Who was voted the 3rd greatest show of the 2000s by Channel 4, behind Top Gear and The Apprentice. The episode "Vincent and the Doctor" was shortlisted for a Mind Award at the 2010 Mind Mental Health Media Awards for its "touching" portrayal of Vincent van Gogh. It has won the Short Form of the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation, the oldest science fiction/fantasy award for films and series, six times since 2006. The winning episodes were "The Empty Child"/"The Doctor Dances" (2006), "The Girl in the Fireplace" (2007), "Blink" (2008), "The Waters of Mars" (2010), "The Pandorica Opens"/"The Big Bang" (2011), and "The Doctor's Wife" (2012). The 2016 Christmas special "The Return of Doctor Mysterio" was also a finalist for the 2017 Hugo Awards. Doctor Who star Matt Smith won Best Actor in the 2012 National Television awards alongside Karen Gillan, who won Best Actress. As a British series, the majority of its nominations and awards have been for national competitions such as the BAFTAs, but it has occasionally received nominations in mainstream American awards, most notably a nomination for "Favorite Sci-Fi Show" in the 2008 People's Choice Awards, and the series has been nominated multiple times in the Spike Scream Awards, with Smith winning Best Science Fiction Actor in 2011. The Canadian Constellation Awards have also recognised the series. In 2019, Doctor Who was inducted into the Science Fiction Hall of Fame based in Seattle, Washington. Time travel in fiction List of Welsh television series Known as BBC TV until 1964 The 1996 television movie premiered on the Canadian network CITV-DT on 12 May 1996. It aired in the United Kingdom on BBC One on 27 May 1996. From 2024, new episodes are set to be released online on BBC iPlayer ahead of their television broadcast on BBC One. Excluding the United Kingdom and Ireland Newman is often given sole creator credit for the series. Some reference works such as The Complete Encyclopedia of Television Programs 1947–1979 by Vincent Terrace erroneously credit Terry Nation with creating Doctor Who, because of the way his name is credited in the two Peter Cushing films. The tapes were on a 405-line broadcast standard and not transferred to the 625-line television system entering use. When it became an entry in the Oxford English Dictionary, the word "TARDIS" often came to be used to describe anything that appeared larger on the inside than its exterior implied. Earlier incarnations of the Doctor have occasionally appeared with the then current incarnation in later plots. Often mistitled "I am the Doctor". Originally released as a 7" vinyl single, plain sleeve, December 1972 on label Purple PUR III With the exception of An Unearthly Child "ICONS. A Portrait of England". Archived from the original on 3 November 2007. Retrieved 10 November 2007. "Do You Remember the First Time?". Doctor Who Confidential. 9 June 2007. BBC. BBC Three. Archived from the original on 5 December 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2019. Director and presenter: David Tennant "Dr Who 'longest-running sci-fi'". BBC News. 28 September 2006. Archived from the original on 25 May 2012. Retrieved 30 September 2006. Miller, Liz Shannon (26 July 2009). "'Doctor Who' honored by Guinness". Variety. Archived from the original on 1 August 2009. Retrieved 8 February 2022. "Doctor Who: Why The Tardis Looks Like A Police Box". Screen Rant. Retrieved 16 April 2023. Bacon, Thomas (25 November 2023). "Doctor Who's UNIT: Origins & History With The Doctor Explained". ScreenRant. Retrieved 5 January 2024. Elvy, Craig (28 August 2019). "Why Each Doctor Regenerated In Doctor Who". ScreenRant. Retrieved 5 January 2024. Ashford, Sage; Lowthian, Declan (23 September 2018). "The 25 Deadliest Doctor Who Villains in the Franchise, Ranked". CBR. Retrieved 4 January 2024. Howe, Stammers, Walker (1992), p. 3. Steve Tribe; James Goss (2011). Dr Who: The Dalek Handbook. BBC Books. Random House. ISBN 978-1-84990-232-8. p. 9. Howe, Stammers, Walker (1994), p. 54 "An Unearthly Child". BBC. 16 August 2012. Archived from the original on 26 June 2019. Retrieved 20 December 2019.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Burk, Graeme (2017). Head of Drama: The Memoir of Sydney Newman. Toronto: ECW Press. pp. 450–1. ISBN 978-1-77041-304-7. Howe, Stammers, Walker (1994), pp. 157–230 ("Production Diary") "Who Created Who?". Retrieved 14 October 2023. Voice-over commentary on the BBC DVD "The Robots of Death" (1977, 2000) Lyons, Kevin (31 January 2014). "Tom Baker: the definitive Doctor Who?". BFI. Retrieved 12 June 2020. Jeffery, Morgan (23 November 2015). "In Defence of... Doctor Who in the 1980s". Digital Spy. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Ley, Shaun (29 May 2013). "Was Doctor Who rubbish in the 1980s?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 9 May 2020. McEwan, Cameron K. (3 December 2018). "Doctor Who star Peter Davison thinks he 'dodged a bullet' by quitting when he did". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 9 May 2020. Graeme Burk, Robert Smith (2013). Who's 50: The 50 Doctor Who Stories to Watch Before You Die. ECW Press. ISBN 9781770411661. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 9 May 2020. Doctor Who Magazine Eighth Doctor Special, Panini Comics 2003 Gibson, Owen (26 September 2003). "Doctor Who returns to BBC1 screens". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 30 September 2013. Retrieved 20 January 2012. "Doctor Who returns to BBC ONE". www.bbc.co.uk. Archived from the original on 25 December 2006. Retrieved 23 July 2020. "BBC – Doctor Who – Graeme Harper Interview". BBC. Archived from the original on 2 January 2019. Retrieved 2 January 2019. "Doctor Who is Saturday night hit". BBC. Archived from the original on 19 December 2019. Retrieved 24 October 2013. Davies, Russell T; Cook, Benjamin (2010). Doctor Who: The Writer's Tale: The Final Chapter. London: BBC Books. p. 216. ISBN 978-1-84607-861-3. Brook, Stephen; Robbins, Peter (23 December 2009). "Doctor Who's departing Davies reveals debt to Pop Idol". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 20 December 2023. "Profile: Russell T Davies". 13 June 2008. Archived from the original on 3 August 2018. Retrieved 3 August 2018. Masters, Tim (1 June 2013). "Matt Smith to leave Doctor Who at the end of year". BBC News. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 11 August 2020. "Doctor Who: Peter Capaldi revealed as 12th Doctor". BBC News. 4 August 2013. Archived from the original on 27 April 2014. Retrieved 11 August 2020. Dowell, Ben. "Steven Moffat quits Doctor Who to be replaced by Chris Chibnall in 2018". RadioTimes. Archived from the original on 14 July 2018. Retrieved 22 January 2016. "Doctor Who boss confirms series 13 will be shorter as filming begins". Digital Spy. 11 November 2020. Retrieved 4 January 2024. Kanter, Jake (29 July 2021). "'Doctor Who': BBC Confirms Jodie Whittaker & Chris Chibnall Are Leaving The Iconic Sci-Fi Series". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved 4 January 2024. Whittock, Jesse (24 September 2021). "Russell T Davies returns to Doctor Who". Broadcast. Retrieved 25 September 2021. Duffy, Nick (25 October 2022). "Doctor Who: BBC partnering with Disney to 'transform show into global franchise' with 'shared creative vision'". i. Retrieved 31 December 2023. Howe, David J.; Walker, Stephen James (2004). The Television Companion: The Unofficial and Unauthorised Guide to Doctor Who (2nd ed.). Canterbury: Telos Publishing. ISBN 1-903889-51-0. Kenneth Muir, John (15 September 2015). A Critical History of Doctor Who on Television. McFarland. ISBN 9781476604541. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 11 February 2020. "Doctor Who's First Episode: An Unearthly Child". televisionheaven.co.uk. Archived from the original on 15 October 2012. Retrieved 6 September 2013. Leith, Sam (4 July 2008). "Worshipping Doctor Who from behind the sofa". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 6 July 2008. Retrieved 7 July 2008. Clark, Anthony. "Doctor Who (1963–89, 2005–)". Screenonline. Archived from the original on 7 February 2007. Retrieved 21 March 2007. The science fiction adventure series Doctor Who (BBC, 1963–89) has created a phenomenon unlike any other British TV programme. Tulloch, John. "Doctor Who". Museum of Broadcast Communications. Archived from the original on 11 February 2007. Retrieved 21 March 2007. The official fans have never amounted to more than a fraction of the audience. Doctor Who achieved the status of an institution as well as a cult. "Doctor Who's most controversial episodes". Radio Times. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 13 August 2020. Howard, Philip (29 January 1972). "Violence is not really Dr Who's cup of tea". The Times. p. 2. "The Times Diary—Points of view". The Times. 27 January 1972. p. 16. "BBC – Doctor Who Classic Episode Guide – Terror of the Autons". BBC. Archived from the original on 18 April 2013. Retrieved 25 October 2013. "Doctor Who Classic Episode Guide – The Brain of Morbius". BBC. Archived from the original on 19 January 2013. Retrieved 25 October 2013. "BBC – Doctor Who Classic Episode Guide – The Deadly Assassin". BBC. Archived from the original on 30 March 2014. Retrieved 25 October 2013. "Season 14". BBC Online. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 13 August 2020. David J. Howe; Mark Stammers; Stephen Walker (1994). Doctor Who: The Seventies. Dr Who. p. 120. ISBN 978-1852274443. Banks, David (1990). Doctor Who: Cybermen. WH Allen & Co. p. 126. ISBN 0352327383. Leith, Sam (4 July 2008). "Worshipping Doctor Who from behind the sofa". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 20 December 2008. Retrieved 5 July 2008. The cliché about Doctor Who—that it had us "hiding behind the sofa"—is more telling in its tone than its questionable factuality. It connotes nostalgia, and a pleasurable mixture of fright and fascination—but above all it connotes domesticity. It united fear and soft furnishings in the British mind. Charlie Jane Anders (25 December 2012). "If you weren't scared of Doctor Who as a child, you missed out on a crucial experience". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on 17 February 2014. Retrieved 8 February 2022. Wightman, Catriona (31 October 2011). "'Doctor Who' named scariest TV show of all time: Your Top 10 revealed". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on 28 October 2014. Retrieved 8 February 2022., Digital Spy, Catriona Wightman & Morgan Jeffery, 31 October 2011. "Doctor Who fan in tardis replica plan for Herne Bay". BBC News. 16 May 2011. Archived from the original on 24 February 2014. Retrieved 31 July 2013. "Case details for Trade Mark UK00002104259". UK Patent Office. Archived from the original on 18 January 2016. Retrieved 27 October 2013. "Trade mark decision". UK Patent Office website. 17 September 2006. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007. Retrieved 17 January 2007. Knight, Mike. "In the matter of application No. 2104259 by The British Broadcasting Corporation to register a series of three marks in Classes 9, 16, 25 and 41 And in the Matter of – Opposition thereto under No. 48452 by The Metropolitan Police Authority" (PDF). UK Patent Office. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 September 2007. Retrieved 17 January 2007. "BBC wins police Tardis case". BBC News. 23 October 2002. Archived from the original on 13 February 2007. Retrieved 17 January 2007. Robinson, James (18 March 2007). "Television's Lord of prime time awaits his next regeneration". The Observer. London. Archived from the original on 20 March 2007. Retrieved 19 March 2007. "Kylie lands Doctor Who role". The Guardian. Press Association. 3 July 2007. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 27 September 2023. Fitzpatrick, Fitzpatrick (10 December 2012). "'Doctor Who' Series 7 Casts…Sir Ian McKellen?!". ScreenCrush. Retrieved 27 September 2023. Thapa, Shaurya (15 January 2023). "Andrew Garfield's Role In Doctor Who, Explained". ScreenRant. Retrieved 27 September 2023. Nguyen, Jessie (28 September 2022). "'Doctor Who': 16 Iconic Celebrities You May Forget Starred on the Show". Collider. Retrieved 27 September 2023. Pettie, Andrew (4 January 2009). "Casting Matt Smith shows that Doctor Who is a savvy multi-million pound brand". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 22 January 2009. Retrieved 4 January 2009. Moran, Caitlin (30 June 2007). "Doctor Who is simply masterful". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 13 October 2008. Retrieved 1 July 2007. [Doctor Who] is as thrilling and as loved as Jolene, or bread and cheese, or honeysuckle, or Friday. It's quintessential to being British. Dowell, Ben (23 August 2008). "Edinburgh TV Festival 2008: don't rule out Doctor Who feature film, says Steven Moffat". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 27 August 2008. Retrieved 23 August 2008. "Doctor Who: Fans await announcement". BBC. 4 August 2013. Archived from the original on 5 August 2013. Retrieved 4 August 2013. "New Doctor Who star to be unveiled". BBC. 2 August 2013. Archived from the original on 2 August 2013. Retrieved 3 August 2013. Glanfield, Tim (5 August 2013). "Doctor Who: Almost 7m watch Peter Capaldi revealed as 12th Doctor". Radio Times. Archived from the original on 7 August 2013. Retrieved 5 August 2013. "From spin doctor to Doctor Who... star's childhood dream comes true". The Herald. Glasgow. 5 August 2013. Archived from the original on 7 September 2013. Retrieved 8 February 2022. Blair, Andrew (27 November 2022). "Doctor Who's Best Episodes: The 1970s Era". Den of Geek. Retrieved 24 January 2024. The Daleks' Master Plan. Writers Terry Nation and Dennis Spooner, Director Douglas Camfield, Producer John Wiles. Doctor Who. BBC. BBC One, London. 13 November 1965 – 29 January 1966. Writer Terry Nation, Director Derek Martinus, Producer Verity Lambert (9 October 1965). "Mission to the Unknown". Doctor Who. London. BBC. BBC One. The War Games. Writers Malcolm Hulke and Terrance Dicks, Director David Maloney, Producer Derrick Sherwin. Doctor Who. BBC. BBC One, London. 19 April 1969 – 21 June 1969. The Trial of a Time Lord. Writers Robert Holmes, Philip Martin and Pip and Jane Baker, Directors Nicholas Mallett, Ron Jones and Chris Clough, Producer John Nathan-Turner. Doctor Who. BBC. BBC One, London. 6 September 1986 – 6 December 1986. "BBC – Doctor Who Classic Episode Guide – Season 8". BBC. Archived from the original on 1 April 2014. Retrieved 25 October 2013. "The Master – BBC". BBC. Archived from the original on 14 November 2013. Retrieved 25 October 2013. "BBC – Doctor Who Classic Episode Guide – Season 16". BBC. Archived from the original on 21 November 2013. Retrieved 25 October 2013. "BBC – Doctor Who Classic Episode Guide – Logopolis". BBC. Archived from the original on 12 February 2013. Retrieved 25 October 2013. "BBC – Season 20 – Episode guide". BBC. Archived from the original on 9 April 2013. Retrieved 25 October 2013. "10 things you didn't know about Doctor Who". Watch. Archived from the original on 16 January 2011. Retrieved 20 January 2012. Blair, Andrew (14 August 2023). "Doctor Who's Best Historical Episodes: Aztecs, Greeks, Daleks & Demons". Den of Geek. Retrieved 27 February 2024. Chrysostomou, George (20 February 2020). "Doctor Who: 5 Times The Show Was Historically Accurate (& 5 Times It Wasn't)". ScreenRant. Retrieved 27 February 2024. Black Orchid. Writer Terence Dudley, Director Ron Jones, Producer John Nathan-Turner. Doctor Who. BBC. BBC One, London. 1 March 1982 – 2 March 1982. "Doctor Who Episode List". BBC. Archived from the original on 17 October 2012. Retrieved 26 October 2013. "Master of the universe". The Telegraph. 11 March 2007. Retrieved 27 February 2024. "BBC Online – Cult – Hitchhiker's – Douglas Adams – Biography". BBC. Archived from the original on 12 April 2014. Retrieved 26 October 2013. "Shada, Douglas Adams's 'lost' Doctor Who story, to be novelised". The Guardian. 24 March 2011. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 26 October 2013. "Doctor Who to be filmed in HD". Doctor Who Online. 4 February 2009. Archived from the original on 6 January 2009. Retrieved 5 February 2009. "BBC announces Doctor Who 3D Special". BBC News. 11 February 2013. Archived from the original on 12 February 2013. Retrieved 12 February 2013. "Doctor Who: David Tennant returns for anniversary show". BBC News. 30 March 2013. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2013. McMillan, Graeme (12 February 2013). "'Doctor Who' goes 3D for its half-century edition". Digital Trends. Archived from the original on 16 February 2013. Retrieved 2 April 2013. "The BBC is already preparing for at least FIVE more series of Doctor Who". RadioTimes. Archived from the original on 8 June 2017. Retrieved 19 June 2017. "BBC – Doctor Who Gets Brand Boost in China – Media Centre". bbc.co.uk. BBC. Archived from the original on 21 June 2019. Retrieved 19 June 2017. "Doctor Who has 97 'missing episodes'. Where are they hiding?". The Independent. 23 November 2023. Retrieved 5 January 2024. Thorpe, Vanessa (11 November 2023). "Lost Doctor Who episodes found – but owner is reluctant to hand them to BBC". The Observer. ISSN 0029-7712. Retrieved 5 January 2024. Molesworth, Richard. "BBC Archive Holdings". Doctor Who Restoration Team. Archived from the original on 28 December 2012. Retrieved 30 April 2007. A full set was held at least until early 1972, as 16 mm black and white film negatives (apart—of course—from 'Masterplan' 7) Molesworth, Richard. "BBC Archive Holdings". Doctor Who Restoration Team. Archived from the original on 28 December 2012. Retrieved 30 April 2007. the videotapes began to be wiped, or re-used, until the formation of the BBC's Film and Videotape Library in 1978 put a stop to this particular practice. "'Doctor Who': Restoring and Reconstructing Missing Episodes". BBC. Archived from the original on 1 December 2012. Retrieved 20 January 2012. Lewinski, John Scott (29 September 2008). "Fans Reconstruct Doctor Who's Trashed Past". Wired. Archived from the original on 11 January 2012. Retrieved 8 February 2022. Martin, Lara (20 February 2009). "Zimbabwe 'hoarding lost 'Who' episodes'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on 29 June 2012. Retrieved 20 January 2012. Foster, Chuck (21 June 2011). "The Reign of Terror—animation update". Doctor Who News Page. Archived from the original on 5 May 2012. Retrieved 6 October 2011. "Blue Peter—Missing Doctor Who tapes". BBC. April 2006. Archived from the original on 24 April 2006. Retrieved 24 April 2006. Mulkern, Patrick (11 December 2011). "Doctor Who: two long-lost episodes uncovered". Radio Times. Archived from the original on 7 January 2012. Retrieved 11 December 2011. Allen, Christopher (10 October 2013). "Two "Missing" Doctor Who Adventures Found". BBC Worldwide. Archived from the original on 11 October 2013. Retrieved 11 October 2013. Doctor Who Online (11 October 2013). "Nine Missing Doctor Who Episodes Recovered!". Doctor Who Online. Archived from the original on 11 October 2013. Retrieved 11 October 2013. Masters, Tim (11 October 2013). "Doctor Who: Yeti classic among episodes found in Nigeria". BBC News. Archived from the original on 25 October 2013. Retrieved 25 October 2013. "Full record for Tardis-like adj". Science Fiction Citations. Archived from the original on 23 May 2008. Retrieved 7 September 2007. "Doctor Who Season 12 changed a lot of canon. Here's what matters most". SYFY Official Site. 2 March 2020. Retrieved 24 January 2024. "The reasons why each Doctor Who actor quit". Digital Spy. 3 May 2021. Retrieved 24 January 2024. Meszaros, E. L. (21 January 2021). "Doctor Who: Why First Doctor William Hartnell Left the Series". CBR. Retrieved 24 January 2024. "The Doctor Who Transcripts – The Power of the Daleks". chakoteya.net. Archived from the original on 1 December 2016. Retrieved 27 January 2017. "The Doctor Who Transcripts – The War Games". chakoteya.net. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 27 January 2017. Moffat, Steven. The Day of The Doctor. BBC. "Interview – Russell T. Davies talks about That Sarah Jane Adventures line". sfx.co.uk. Archived from the original on 31 December 2010. Retrieved 5 August 2013. Bryce, Evangeline (9 December 2022). "Doctor Who: 10 Things You Didn't Know About Regeneration". Game Rant. Retrieved 24 January 2024. Scott, Darren (26 November 2013). "Steven Moffat on 'Doctor numbers' and the regeneration limit". Archived from the original on 28 November 2013. Retrieved 26 November 2013. Norman, Dalton (19 March 2023). "Doctor Who: How Many Times Can A Time Lord Regenerate?". ScreenRant. Retrieved 24 January 2024. Horn, Marc (10 October 2010). "How Doctor Who nearly became the Time Lady". Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 19 July 2017. Retrieved 17 July 2017. Nichols, Sam (18 December 2008). "Could Catherine Zeta-Jones be the next Doctor Who". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 June 2017. Retrieved 17 July 2017. Turner, Camilla (16 July 2017). "Doctor Who: Jodie Whittaker is to replace Peter Capaldi in the Time Lord regeneration game". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 18 July 2018. Retrieved 16 July 2017. Oxman, Demaris (16 April 2022). "Doctor Who: Why Missy Is The Best Incarnation Of The Master". Game Rant. Retrieved 30 January 2024. Gladman, Andrew (14 June 2023). "Doctor Who: Did Sacha Dhawan's Master Actually Come Before Missy?". CBR. Retrieved 30 January 2024. "Bly Manor star T'Nia Miller says Doctor Who was a "hard job"". Digital Spy. 17 October 2020. Retrieved 24 January 2024. Martin Belam (8 May 2022). "Doctor Who: Ncuti Gatwa to replace Jodie Whittaker, BBC announces". The Guardian. Retrieved 25 October 2022. Hegarty, Tasha (23 October 2022). "Doctor Who trailer confirms when 60th anniversary specials and Ncuti Gatwa's first episode will air". Digital Spy. Retrieved 10 November 2022. Hogan, Michael (18 May 2013). "Doctor Who: The Name of the Doctor, BBC One, review". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 22 May 2013. Retrieved 22 May 2013. Rigby, Sam (24 November 2013). "'Doctor Who': Steven Moffat on regeneration limit". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on 27 November 2013. Retrieved 25 November 2013. Blumberg, Arnold T. (28 January 2020). "Doctor Who: Jo Martin's Character and That Surprise Cameo Explained". IGN. Retrieved 24 January 2024. Robert Holmes (writer), Chris Clough (director), John Nathan-Turner (producer) (29 November 1986). "Part Thirteen" "(The Ultimate Foe episode 1)". Season 23. The Trial of a Time Lord. Doctor Who. BBC. BBC1. "'Doctor Who': Every former Doctor return appearance, ranked". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 30 January 2024. Britt, Ryan (21 December 2017). "David Bradley Says the 1st 'Doctor Who' Makes Mistakes". Inverse. Retrieved 31 January 2024. Peters, Megan. "Doctor Who Star Reveals Scene They Regret Not Filming". ComicBook.com. Retrieved 31 January 2024. Britt, Ryan (23 November 2023). "58 Years Ago, A Legendary Actor Turned a Sci-Fi Phenomenon Into a Canon-Breaking Curiosity". Inverse. Retrieved 31 January 2024. Kissell, Ted B. (5 August 2013). "The Depressing, Disappointing Maleness of Doctor Who's New Time Lord". The Atlantic. Retrieved 31 January 2024. "Neil Gaiman hopes a non-white person will take Doctor Who role someday", Archived 11 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine Sunday World, 8 August 2013. Jackson, Matthew (9 December 2013). "Peter Capaldi explains why no one can be too old to play The Doctor". Blastr. Syfy. Archived from the original on 4 May 2016. Retrieved 16 July 2015. Barrett, Sarah (11 May 2023). "The Ultimate 'Doctor Who' Crash Course for First-Time Viewers". The Mary Sue. Retrieved 24 January 2024. "The Day of the Doctor". Doctor Who. Cardiff. 23 November 2013. 60 minutes in. BBC. BBC One. Gladman, Andrew (26 October 2022). "Doctor Who: David Tennant Is Not the Centenary's Biggest Surprise - These Doctors Are". CBR. Retrieved 31 January 2024. "Two, three, four Doctors are better than one! - News - Big Finish". Big Finish. 25 September 2017. Retrieved 31 January 2024. "Doctor Who (before the Tardis)". BBC News. 19 November 2008. Archived from the original on 11 January 2009. Retrieved 22 May 2012. Jones, Paul (19 April 2012). "Steven Moffat: the companion is the main character in Doctor Who, not the Doctor". Radio Times. BBC Magazines. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 28 November 2013. Berkshire, Geoff (27 March 2013). "'Doctor Who' returns: Steven Moffat talks new companion Clara and Jenna-Louise Coleman". Zap2it. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 28 November 2013. Orthia, Lindy A. (2010). ""Sociopathetic Abscess" or "Yawning Chasm"? The Absent Postcolonial Transition in Doctor Who". Journal of Commonwealth Literature. 45 (2): 207–225. doi:10.1177/0021989410366891. hdl:10440/1261. S2CID 142983255. Archived from the original on 19 December 2019. Retrieved 28 November 2013. Box, Christy (2 December 2020). "Doctor Who: Why Captain Jack Harkness Never Met Eleven Or Twelve". ScreenRant. Retrieved 26 January 2024. "River Song's ridiculously complex timeline explained". Digital Spy. 5 November 2018. Retrieved 26 January 2024. Elvy, Craig (12 July 2020). "Doctor Who: How Clara Became Immortal (& Still Died)". ScreenRant. Retrieved 26 January 2024. Collis, Clark (14 June 2016). "'Bridesmaids' actor joins 'Doctor Who' cast". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 26 January 2024. "Doctor Who: Pearl Mackie named as new companion". BBC. 23 April 2016. Archived from the original on 24 April 2016. Retrieved 24 April 2016. Hawkes, Rebecca (31 March 2017). "Bill Potts". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 1 January 2018. Retrieved 5 April 2018. "Doctor Who: Bradley Walsh among three new cast members". BBC. 23 October 2017. Archived from the original on 23 October 2017. Retrieved 20 March 2022. "Comedian John Bishop joins Doctor Who cast". BBC. 1 January 2021. Archived from the original on 1 November 2021. Retrieved 20 March 2022. "Doctor Who companions in order: From Susan Foreman to Ruby Sunday". Radio Times. Retrieved 26 January 2024. "BBC - Doctor Who - Martha Jones - Character Guide". www.bbc.co.uk. Retrieved 25 January 2024. "Doctor Who (before the Tardis)". BBC Magazine. 19 November 2008. Archived from the original on 3 January 2009. Retrieved 3 January 2009. "Doctor Who series two secrets revealed". BBC. 19 June 2005. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013. Retrieved 29 August 2013. Monster Files: Cybermats. iTunes Store. 2011. Burton, Jak (16 October 2021). "10 Best Doctor Who Monsters". ScreenRant. Retrieved 30 January 2024. "The Dead Planet". IMDb. Archived from the original on 10 February 2011. Retrieved 30 June 2011. "Nation, Terry". Archived from the original on 10 December 2006. Retrieved 19 May 2008. "Doctor Who Dalek designer Ray Cusick dies after illness". BBC. 24 February 2013. Archived from the original on 4 January 2014. Retrieved 27 October 2013. "The New Daleks". BBC. 29 April 2010. Archived from the original on 17 June 2018. Retrieved 12 February 2018. Mulkern, Patrick. "Rise of the Cybermen The Age of Steel ★★★". Radio Times. Retrieved 26 February 2024. Doctor Who Magazine Special Edition No. 2, 5 September 2002, [subtitled The Complete Third Doctor], p. 14. "John Simm Returns for the Finale!". Archived from the original on 18 April 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2019. "John Simm to return as the Master in Doctor Who". BBC. 6 April 2017. Archived from the original on 6 April 2017. Retrieved 6 April 2017. Siede, Caroline (1 January 2020). "Doctor Who's New Year's special kicks off the new season with a bang". The A.V. Club. Retrieved 8 February 2022. Jeffery, Morgan. "Doctor Who: How did Missy become Sacha Dhawan's Master?". Radio Times. Retrieved 6 February 2024. Hebblethwaite, Phil (29 June 2016). "Surprising Facts about BBC Theme Tunes You've Heard Hundreds of Times". Bbc.co.uk. Archived from the original on 25 July 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2018. Pidd, Helen (20 November 2017). "Doctor Who theme's co-creator honoured with posthumous PhD". The Guardian. Guardian News and Media Limited. Archived from the original on 28 December 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2017. Allen, Ben. "Doctor Who theme co-composer honoured with posthumous PhD". Radio Times. Immediate Media Company Ltd. Archived from the original on 1 January 2018. Retrieved 31 December 2017. "Hear the Christmas Song". BBC. 10 January 2006. Archived from the original on 14 January 2006. Retrieved 22 April 2023. "The New Theme". BBC. 3 January 2006. Archived from the original on 17 January 2006. Retrieved 22 April 2022. Berriman, Ian (13 December 2007). "Phil Collinson on Doctor Who". SFX. Retrieved 16 April 2023. Blake, Heidi (18 April 2010). "Doctor Who: 'nasty' new theme tune angers fans". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 30 May 2010. Retrieved 20 May 2010. "The Name of the Doctor". Radio Times. Archived from the original on 1 July 2018. Retrieved 1 July 2018. Peel, Ian (7 July 2008). "Doctor Who: a musical force?". The Guardian. London: Guardian News and Media Ltd. Archived from the original on 8 July 2008. Retrieved 7 July 2008. Jeffery, Morgan (26 June 2018). "Doctor Who series 11 composer has been revealed". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on 27 June 2018. Retrieved 26 June 2018. "Dudley Simpson: Composer and conductor who used synthesizers to create eerie music for Doctor Who serials". The Daily Telegraph. London, UK. 19 December 2017. p. 33. O'Connor, Rory (20 February 2018). "Doctor Who: Bradley Walsh WON'T work with two big stars after they confirm their exits". Express. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 20 February 2018. "BBC Prom 27 July 2008". BBC. 27 July 2008. Archived from the original on 18 July 2008. Retrieved 29 September 2008. "Who soundtrack soon". BBC. 17 July 2006. Archived from the original on 13 August 2006. Retrieved 4 August 2006. "Silva Screen announces Doctor Who CD release date". Silva Screen. Silva Screen Records. 1 November 2006. Archived from the original on 12 December 2006. Retrieved 4 December 2006. "Doctor Who – Series 4 – Murray Gold". Silva Screen Music. Archived from the original on 2 September 2013. Retrieved 6 September 2013. "Doctor Who: Series 4-The Specials – Murray Gold". Silva Screen Music. Archived from the original on 19 January 2014. Retrieved 6 September 2013. "Doctor Who Series 5 Original TV Soundtrack (Music CD)". BBC. Archived from the original on 27 September 2013. Retrieved 6 September 2013. "Doctor Who: A Christmas Carol (Soundtrack)". BBC. Archived from the original on 20 September 2013. Retrieved 6 September 2013. "Doctor Who: Series 6 (Soundtrack)". BBC. Archived from the original on 27 September 2013. Retrieved 6 September 2013. Coopee, Todd (2 March 2016). "Doctor Who: The 50th Anniversary Collection 4 LP Box Set". Toy Tales. Archived from the original on 7 March 2016. Retrieved 3 March 2016. Lawson, Mark (30 September 2022). "JFK derails Doctor Who, plus the drama that was too terrifying to show: 100 years of the BBC, part five". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Farnell, Chris (9 June 2023). "Debunking Doctor Who Urban Legends: Daleks, JFK, and River Song's Dirty Joke". Den of Geek. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Kuiper, El (20 November 2023). "'Doctor Who' Is Bigger Than Ever—Find Out Where It's Streaming". The Mary Sue. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Gearan, Hannah (14 November 2023). ""Quite Violent": 1 David Tennant Doctor Who Special Is "Not For Children," Showrunner Warns". ScreenRant. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Hilton, Matt (16 July 2008). "Doctor Who—Top Chart Placing – 1963–2008". Doctor Who News Page. Outpost Gallifrey. Archived from the original on 19 July 2008. Retrieved 16 July 2008.;Hilton, Matt (11 January 2008). "Doctor Who Top Ratings: 1963–2007". Doctor Who News Page. Outpost Gallifrey. Archived from the original on 15 March 2008. Retrieved 17 July 2008. "Ratings Guide". Doctor Who Guide. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 26 March 2020. Elvy, Craig (20 November 2019). "Why Doctor Who Was Cancelled In The 1980s". ScreenRant. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Ley, Shaun (29 May 2013). "Was Doctor Who rubbish in the 1980s?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 10 April 2019. Retrieved 22 May 2019. Douglas, Torin (8 December 2010). "Why Corrie is an enduring TV hit". BBC News. Archived from the original on 10 April 2019. Retrieved 22 May 2019. "Weekly Viewing Summary: Terrestrial Top 30 – Week ending 6 July 2008". Broadcasters' Audience Research Board. 16 July 2008. Archived from the original on 13 July 2008. Retrieved 16 July 2008. Hilton, Matt (16 July 2008). "Journey's End: Officially Number One". Doctor Who News Page. Outpost Gallifrey. Archived from the original on 19 July 2008. Retrieved 16 July 2008. Wright, Mark (1 November 2007). "These sci-fi people vote". The Stage. Archived from the original on 9 April 2008. Retrieved 9 April 2009. Fear, Chelsea (20 November 2013). "50 Years of Doctor Who: Listening to Audiences Around the World". Brandwatch. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 26 March 2020. Booth, Robert (24 November 2013). "Doctor Who one of biggest shows in the world, says BBC following 'simulcast'". The Guardian. Retrieved 26 March 2020. Sweney, Mark (8 July 2008). "Profits grow at BBC Worldwide". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 30 September 2013. Retrieved 8 July 2008. O'Connor, Gavin (13 July 2008). "Daleks speak to all nations". Wales on Sunday. Archived from the original on 15 July 2008. Retrieved 13 July 2008. Hayes, Dade (25 October 2022). "'Doctor Who' Moves To Disney+ Outside UK And Ireland Via BBC-Disney Branded Television Partnership". Deadline. Archived from the original on 25 October 2022. Retrieved 26 October 2022. "New Zealand". broadwcast. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 26 March 2020. "Doctor Who". TVNZ. Television New Zealand. Archived from the original on 30 September 2018. Retrieved 24 November 2018. "Doctor Who: Everything you need to know about the new season without any spoilers". ABC. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 12 April 2020. "Why Do Americans Like Doctor Who? | Forbes and Fifth | University of Pittsburgh". forbes5.pitt.edu. Archived from the original on 31 May 2019. Retrieved 31 May 2019. "Doctor Who: The Next Doctor". SPACE. CTVGlobemedia. Archived from the original on 31 March 2009. Retrieved 5 March 2009. "Canada: Runaway Bride and Series Three on CBC". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 31 May 2007. Retrieved 9 June 2007. "Sci Fi on Air Schedule". Scifi.com. Archived from the original on 11 June 2007. "'Doctor Who' series 4, 'Sarah Jane' Travel to Sci Fi". Zap2it. Archived from the original on 7 February 2008. Retrieved 4 February 2008. "Series Four Starts 19 September on CBC". dwin.org. Doctor Who Information Network. Archived from the original on 19 July 2011. Retrieved 22 May 2008. "SBT anuncia novo streaming para 2024 e tem Doctor Who como principal atração". Aratu On. TV Aratu. 1 December 2023. Retrieved 4 December 2023. "Doctor Who NHK". Archived from the original on 14 September 2008. Retrieved 22 January 2020. "ディズニーXD 8月「アーロン・ストーン」「ドクター・フー」他". Archived from the original on 19 August 2019. Retrieved 22 January 2020. "BBC classic series laserdiscs @ The TARDIS Library (Doctor Who books, DVDs, videos & audios)". Timelash. Archived from the original on 11 October 2011. Retrieved 30 July 2011. "The Doctor Who TV Movie Lands on blurray!". doctorwho.tv. Archived from the original on 18 September 2016. Retrieved 17 September 2016. "Doctor Who classic seasons get new Blu-ray release after original run sells out". Radio Times. Retrieved 7 December 2023. "Over 600 Doctor Who Episodes". BritBox. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 13 April 2020. MacDonald, Lindsay (1 August 2019). "Calling All Whovians: Doctor Who Is Streaming Exclusively on HBO Max Next Year". TV Guide. Red Ventures. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 22 March 2020. "BBC confirms Doctor Who's first story won't be in iPlayer back catalogue". Radio Times. 17 October 2023. Retrieved 7 December 2023. Milici, Lauren (10 October 2023). "Doctor Who celebrates 60 year anniversary by releasing 800 episodes online". Total Film. Retrieved 11 October 2023. "Matt Smith is the eleventh, and youngest, actor to play Doctor Who". News. London: Telegraph Media Group. 5 January 2009. Archived from the original on 3 October 2013. Retrieved 15 June 2011. Dawtrey, Adam (14 November 2011). "Yates to direct bigscreen 'Doctor Who'". Variety. Archived from the original on 15 November 2011. Retrieved 8 February 2022. Sperling, Daniel (2 December 2011). "'Doctor Who' Movie Will Not Be A Reboot Says Moffat". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on 19 January 2012. Retrieved 8 February 2022. "Doctor Who movie will star Matt Smith if it gets made, says Steven Moffat". Metro. Archived from the original on 4 December 2011. Retrieved 2 December 2011. Bailey, Shaun (Producer); Kalangis, Johnny (Director) (2004). The Planet of the Doctor, Part 6: Doctor Who & Culture II (Documentary). Toronto: CBC Television. Archived from the original (QuickTime or Windows Media) on 2 July 2009. Retrieved 9 April 2009. "Planet of the Doctor". CBC Television. Archived from the original on 30 April 2008. Retrieved 9 April 2009. Walker, Stephen James (2007). Inside the Hub. Tolworth, Surrey: Telos Publishing. p. 101. ISBN 978-1-84583-013-7. "Doctor Who spin-off made in Wales". BBC News. 17 October 2005. Archived from the original on 23 April 2006. Retrieved 24 April 2006. "Team Torchwood". BBC. 24 February 2006. Archived from the original on 8 February 2007. Retrieved 24 April 2006. "Russell T Davies creates new series for CBBC, starring Doctor Who's Sarah Jane Smith" (Press release). BBC. 14 September 2006. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 14 September 2006. Martin, Daniel (1 December 2008). "Why is the Brigadier joining Sarah Jane?". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 1 April 2024. Wilkes, Niel (28 September 2008). "Preview: Sontaran return in 'Sarah Jane'". Digital Spy. Retrieved 1 April 2024. Holmwood, Leigh (26 May 2009). "Doctor Who's David Tennant to appear in Sarah Jane Adventures". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 1 April 2024. McEwan, Cameron K. (14 October 2009). "The Sarah Jane Adventures: Prisoner Of The Judoon Part One review". Den of Geek. Retrieved 1 April 2024. Martin, Dan (27 October 2010). "Doctor Who: Matt Smith in The Sarah Jane Adventures". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 1 April 2024. Ling, Thomas (19 April 2020). "Doctor Who's Russell T Davies announces Sarah Jane Adventures goodbye story". Radio Times. Retrieved 1 April 2024. "Who's a Toon?". BBC Doctor Who website. 26 January 2007. Archived from the original on 2 February 2007. Retrieved 26 January 2007. "Wire star set for Dr Who cartoon". BBC News. 9 October 2009. Archived from the original on 12 October 2009. Retrieved 6 January 2010. The Doctor Who Team (October 2015). "BBC Latest News – Doctor Who – Doctor Who Spin Off: Class". Doctor Who. Archived from the original on 27 October 2019. Retrieved 20 December 2019. Dowell, Ben (29 February 2016). "Doctor Who spin off Class begins filming in April 2016 and may feature Peter Capaldi". RadioTimes. Archived from the original on 1 March 2016. Retrieved 29 February 2016. Metro.co.uk, Olivia Waring for (24 September 2016). "Peter Capaldi Will appear in Buffy-style Doctor Who spin-off Class". Metro. Archived from the original on 6 November 2016. Retrieved 16 January 2017. Friedlander, Whitney (8 January 2016). "BBC America Sets 'Doctor Who' Spinoff 'Class' for 2016". Variety. Archived from the original on 17 August 2016. Retrieved 13 January 2016. Jeffrey, Morgan (7 September 2017). "BBC Three boss confirms Doctor Who spin-off Class is done: "It just didn't really land for us"". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on 7 September 2017. Retrieved 8 February 2022. "Russell T Davies confirms Doctor Who spin-offs: "Time for the next stage"". Radio Times. Retrieved 28 February 2023. "Doctor Who boss Russell T Davies confirms return of spin-off shows". Digital Spy. 28 January 2023. Retrieved 28 February 2023. "Russell T. Davies wants Edgar Wright to direct Doctor Who". British GQ. 27 January 2023. Retrieved 28 February 2023. Goldbart, Max (15 March 2023). "'Doctor Who' Spin-Off Details Emerge As Russell T. Davies Says Episode Of New Series Is "One Of The Greatest Things I've Ever Made In My Life"". Deadline. Retrieved 16 March 2023. One of those spin-offs will be based on military research organization UNIT and will star Redgrave as Kate Stewart, BBC sources confirmed. Bundel, Ani (15 March 2023). "The Whoniverse Expands as Russell T. Davies Confirms 'UNIT' Spinoff". Telly Visions. Retrieved 17 March 2023. "Doctor Who dog K9 gets spin-off". BBC News. 25 April 2006. Archived from the original on 13 June 2006. Retrieved 26 July 2006. "New Doctor Who Spin off ... Counter-Measures". Big Finish Productions. 20 October 2011. Archived from the original on 22 October 2011. Retrieved 26 October 2013. The Five Doctors (Cover). BBC. 1985. BBC 2020 2. "The Five Doctors Serial 6K". drwhoguide.com. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 24 October 2013. Whitbrook, James (22 March 2022). "We've Already Had Enough of Hugh Grant as Doctor Who's Doctor". Gizmodo. Retrieved 11 February 2024. "Doctor Who guru Davies steps down". BBC News. 20 May 2008. Archived from the original on 15 February 2009. Retrieved 20 May 2008. "Who Needs Another Doctor?". BBC News. 21 November 2007. Archived from the original on 25 October 2007. Retrieved 21 April 2023. "Doctor Who For Comic Relief – Exclusive". SFX. 2 March 2011. Archived from the original on 5 March 2011. Retrieved 6 March 2011. "Doctor Who Mini Episode" (Video). BBC. 20 November 2012. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 18 December 2012. "Why Paddington Bear Statues Have Taken Over London". Condé Nast. Retrieved 25 November 2023. "50 Paddington Bear sculptures unveiled in London – gallery". The Guardian. 3 November 2014. Retrieved 25 November 2023. Mark Perry, Kevin Connelly and Phil Cornwell (2005). Dead Ringers meets Doctor Who – Comedy Greats – BBC. BBC. Event occurs at 0:00–1:30. Archived from the original on 23 December 2015. Retrieved 12 November 2015. "The Five(ish) Doctors Reboot", BBC. Retrieved 23 November 2013 Sideshow Bob's Last Gleaming. 20th Century Fox Television. 26 November 1995. Event occurs at 11:29. Möbius Dick. 20th Century Fox Television. 4 August 2011. Event occurs at 20:20. All the Presidents' Heads. 20th Century Fox Television. 28 July 2011. Event occurs at 5:50. Hauge, Ron (2008). "Commentary for "Treehouse of Horror X"". The Simpsons: The Complete Eleventh Season [DVD]. 20th Century Fox. "Random Doctor Who References in American TV Shows". Arcadia Pod. An American View of British Science Fiction. 23 April 2012. Archived from the original on 17 August 2013. Retrieved 27 August 2013. Paolini, Christopher (20 September 2008). "Shadows of the Past". Brisingr (Hardcover) (1st ed.). New York: Alfred A. Knopf. pp. 204, 761. ISBN 978-0-375-82672-6. 'Bending over, Eragon read, Adrift upon the sea of time, the lonely god wanders from shore to distant shore, upholding the laws of the stars above.' and in acknowledgments 'Also, for those who understood the reference to a 'lonely god' when Eragon and Arya sitting around the campfire, my only excuse is that the Doctor can travel everywhere, even alternate realities. Hey, I'm a fan too!' "Man in the Bar, the". The Errantry Concordance. Diane Duane. 25 March 2005. Archived from the original on 16 May 2006. Retrieved 5 July 2007. "Doctor who Love in Rock Band". flickr. zerolives. 20 November 2007. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. Retrieved 24 December 2007. "Destroy All Humans! 2". vgfacts.com. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 21 March 2016. "Apollo Justice: Ace Attorney". vgfacts.com. Archived from the original on 11 March 2016. Retrieved 21 March 2016. Illingsworth, Leslie Gilbert (25 November 1964). "The Degaullek (France's leader, General De Gaulle, is caricatured as a Dalek)" (Reprint at the British Cartoon Archive). Daily Mail. London. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011. Retrieved 15 March 2014. "This Modern World". The Week that Was. Tom Tomorrow. 10 June 2008. Archived from the original on 15 March 2014. Retrieved 15 March 2014. "The essence of the Oxford English Dictionary". 5 September 2002. Archived from the original on 10 May 2008. Retrieved 15 May 2009. "Dr Who Exhibition, Longleat". The Doctor Who Exhibitions Archive. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 15 January 2016. "Doctor Who". Archived from the original on 26 June 2014. Retrieved 13 December 2018. "Doctor Who – Doctor Who & The Pescatons/Doctor Who Sound Affects [sic]". Record Store Day. Archived from the original on 7 August 2018. Retrieved 6 March 2021. "Genesis of the Daleks & Slipback". Timelash – The TARDIS Library. Retrieved 6 March 2021. "Doctor Who: The Tenth Doctor Adventures - Coming May 16th 2016! - News - Big Finish". www.bigfinish.com. Retrieved 24 January 2024. "Christopher Eccleston returns to Doctor Who – News – Big Finish". Big Finish Productions. Retrieved 6 March 2021. "Longest running science fiction audio play series". Guinness World Records. 20 April 2021. Retrieved 17 May 2021. "Doctor Who Relaunch Plans Revealed by Big Finish". TV Shows. Retrieved 30 January 2024. Hogan, Micahel (29 April 2022). "'Very gay, very trans': the incredible Doctor Who spin-off that's breathing new life into the franchise". The Guardian. Retrieved 20 May 2022. Fullerton, Huw (8 April 2022). "Jodie Whittaker to star in new Doctor Who audio drama spin-off". RadioTimes. Retrieved 20 May 2022. "Doctor Who 50th anniversary: The Time Lord's world records". Guinness World Records. 22 November 2013. Retrieved 16 April 2023. "Doctor Who Adventures: New magazine for younger viewers launches". BBC News. 20 March 2006. Retrieved 16 April 2023. "News: Diddly-Dum, De Diddly-Dum..." Mean Machines Sega. No. 21. EMAP. August 1994. pp. 10–11. 'Doctor Who: Legacy' Keeps Getting Updated as 10th Anniversary of 'Dr. Who' Show Approaches Archived 19 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 26 February 2015. "All the Doctor Whos are in Lego Dimensions". Eurogamer.net. 9 July 2015. Retrieved 27 September 2023. TGT (10 August 2018). "Bandai Namco soft launches Doctor Who: Battle of Time". thegallifreytimes.com. Archived from the original on 23 August 2021. Retrieved 22 August 2021. Harris, Iain (8 November 2018). "Bandai Namco shuts down soft-launched title Doctor Who: Battle of Time". Pocket Gamer. Archived from the original on 23 August 2021. Retrieved 22 August 2021. "Doctor Who Infinity on Steam". STEAM Store. Archived from the original on 22 September 2018. Retrieved 25 April 2019. Stephenson, Suzi (19 September 2018). "TIGA Announces Games Industry Awards 2018 Finalists". TIGA. Independent Games Developers Association. Archived from the original on 25 April 2019. Retrieved 25 April 2019. "2018 Winners". TIGA. Independent Games Developers Association. Archived from the original on 25 April 2019. Retrieved 25 April 2019. Davies, Russell T. (March 2014). "Doctor Who Magazine". No. 356. "Doctor Who scoops two TV awards". News. BBC. 21 January 2010. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 1 April 2010. Sperling, Daniel (26 January 2011). "National Television Awards 2011 – Winners". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on 1 December 2012. Retrieved 8 February 2022. "Ratings-winners dominate the Bafta shortlist". The Independent. 26 April 2011. Retrieved 5 January 2024. "2016 Television Supporting Actress | BAFTA Awards". awards.bafta.org. Retrieved 5 January 2024. 72nd Annual Peabody Awards Archived 13 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine, May 2013. "Dr Who 'longest-running sci-fi'". BBC News. 28 September 2006. Archived from the original on 25 May 2012. Retrieved 30 September 2006. "Guinness World Record for The Day of the Doctor". BBC. 24 November 2013. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 24 November 2013. Culf, Andrew (4 November 1996). "Viewers spurn TV's golden age in poll of small screen classics as the BBC fetes its 60th birthday". The Guardian. p. 4. "Fawlty Towers tops TV hits". BBC News. 5 September 2000. Archived from the original on 21 June 2006. Retrieved 18 March 2007. "100 Greatest ... (The 100 Greatest Kids TV Shows)". ITN Source. Archived from the original on 21 February 2015. Retrieved 13 June 2014. "25 Top Cult Shows Ever!". TV Guide. 30 May 2004. "TV Guide Names the Top Cult Shows Ever". TV Guide. Red Ventures. 29 June 2007. Archived from the original on 7 May 2019. Retrieved 21 June 2019. "TV Guide Magazine". 16–22 September 2013. "Doctor leads Bafta Cymru winners". BBC News. 22 April 2006. Archived from the original on 5 January 2007. Retrieved 24 April 2006. "Bafta glory for Channel 4's Boy A". BBC News. 12 May 2008. Archived from the original on 17 May 2008. Retrieved 13 May 2008. "Winners announced". Mind. Archived from the original on 23 November 2010. Retrieved 4 May 2011. Dr Who – "Vincent and the Doctor" (BBC One/BBC Wales). Richard Curtis writes this touching episode of Dr Who about the mental health experiences of the great artist Vincent van Gogh. "Hugo and Campbell Awards Winners". Locus Online. 26 August 2006. Archived from the original on 3 September 2006. Retrieved 27 August 2006. "2007 Hugo Awards". World Science Fiction Society. 1 September 2007. Archived from the original on 8 July 2013. Retrieved 1 September 2007. "2008 Hugo Awards Announced". World Science Fiction Society. 9 August 2008. Archived from the original on 22 July 2012. Retrieved 15 August 2007. "2011 Hugo and Campbell Awards Nominees". Locus Magazine. 24 April 2011. Archived from the original on 10 September 2012. Retrieved 24 April 2011. "BBC Latest News – Doctor Who". BBC. 5 April 2017. Archived from the original on 8 April 2017. Retrieved 14 April 2017. "National TV Awards 2012: The winners". BBC News. 25 January 2012. Retrieved 4 January 2024. "Science Fiction Hall of Fame". Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. Retrieved 21 April 2023. Howe, David J.; Walker, Stephen James; Stammers, Mark (1992). Doctor Who: The Sixties (paperback ed.). London: Virgin Books. ISBN 0-86369-707-0. Howe, David J.; Walker, Stephen James; Stammers, Mark (1994). The Handbook: The First Doctor—The William Hartnell Years 1963–1966. London: Virgin Books. ISBN 0-426-20430-1. Howe, David J.; Walker, Stephen James; Stammers, Mark (1998). Doctor Who: The Television Companion (1st ed.). London: BBC Books. ISBN 978-0-563-40588-7. Howe, David J.; Walker, Stephen James (2003). The Television Companion: The Unofficial and Unauthorised Guide to DOCTOR WHO (2nd ed.). Canterbury: Telos Publishing. ISBN 1-903889-51-0. Richards, Justin (2003). Doctor Who—The Legend (1st ed.). London: BBC Books. ISBN 0-563-48602-3. Matt Hills. Triumph of a Time Lord: Regenerating "Doctor Who" in the Twenty-First Century (I. B. Tauris, 2010). 261 pages. Discusses the revival of the BBC's Doctor Who in 2005 after it had been off the air as a regular series for more than 15 years; topics include the role of "fandom" in the sci-fi programme's return, and notions of "cult" and "mainstream" in television. Bradshaw, Simon; Keen, Anthony; Sleight, Graham, eds. (2011). The Unsilent Library: Essays on the Russell T. Davies Era of the New Doctor Who. Science Fiction Foundation. ISBN 978-0903007085. Chapman, James (2013). Inside the TARDIS: The Worlds of Doctor Who. London: I.B.Tauris. ISBN 978-1780761404. Charles, Alec. "War Without End?: Utopia, the Family, and the Post-9/11 World in Russell T. Davies's Doctor Who". Science Fiction Studies (2008): 450–465. Charles, Alec. 2011. "The crack of doom: The uncanny echoes of Steven Moffat's Doctor Who". Science Fiction Film and Television; Vol. 4, Issue 1, Spring 2011. Liverpool University Press. This analysis is framed specifically by the Freudian notion of the uncanny, and suggests that Moffat's work on Doctor Who confronts unconscious perceptions, repressed fears and death itself through storytelling techniques which attempt to connect directly with the audience by deconstructing the distance between material reality and the fantasy space of the series. Fisher, R. Michael, and Barbara Bickel. "The Mystery of Dr. Who? On A Road Less Traveled in Art Education". Journal of Social Theory in Art Education 26.1 (2006): 28–57. Fiske, John. "Popularity and ideology: A structuralist reading of Dr. Who". Interpreting television: Current research perspectives (1984): 165–198. McCormack, Una (2011). "He's Not the Messiah: Undermining Political and Religious Authority in New Doctor Who". In Bradshaw, S., Anthony Keen and Graham Sleight (eds.), The Unsilent Library: Essays on the Russell T. Davies Era of the New Doctor Who. The Science Fiction Foundation. Orthia, Lindy A. "Antirationalist critique or fifth column of scientism? Challenges from Doctor Who to the mad scientist trope". Public Understanding of Science 20.4 (2011): 525–542. Perryman, Neil. "Doctor Who and the Convergence of Media: A Case Study in Transmedia Storytelling". Convergence 14.1 (2008): 21–39. Wikiquote has quotations related to Doctor Who. Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Doctor Who (category) Doctor Who at BBC Online Official website on BBC Official website on Disney+ Doctor Who at BBC Worldwide Archived websites: 1963–1996, 2005–2007, 2008 Production website Archived 14 September 2022 at the Wayback Machine Doctor Who on Tardis Wiki, the Doctor Who Wiki Doctor Who Reference Guide – synopses of all media based on the series (1963–2012) Doctor Who at IMDb: 1963, 1996, 2005 Doctor Who at AllMovie Doctor Who collected news and commentary at The Guardian Portals:  Doctor Who  BBC  Science fiction  Television  United Kingdom