Corallorhiza trifida, commonly known as early coralroot, northern coralroot, or yellow coralroot, is a coralroot orchid native to North America and Eurasia, with a circumboreal distribution. The species has been reported from the United States, Canada, Russia, China, Japan, Korea, India, Nepal, Kashmir, Pakistan, and almost every country in Europe. Corallorhiza trifida is yellowish green in color, leafless, and partially myco-heterotrophic, deriving some, but not all of its nutrients from association with fungi of genus Tomentella. It also contains chlorophyll, with which it supplies some of its own carbon nutrition via autotrophy. Closeup of a flower Infructescence "Corallorhiza trifida". World Checklist of Selected Plant Families (WCSP). Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. Kew World Checklist of Selected Plant Families Gleason, H. A. & A.J. Cronquist. 1991. Manual of the Vascular Plants of Northeastern United States and Adjacent Canada (ed. 2) i–910. New York Botanical Garden, Bronx. Magrath, Lawrence K.; Freudenstein, John V. (2002). "Corallorhiza trifida". In Flora of North America Editorial Committee (ed.). Flora of North America North of Mexico (FNA). Vol. 26. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press – via eFloras.org, Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis, MO & Harvard University Herbaria, Cambridge, MA. Chen, Xinqi; Gale, Stephan W.; Cribb, Phillip J. "Corallorhiza trifida". Flora of China. Vol. 25 – via eFloras.org, Missouri Botanical Garden, St. Louis, MO & Harvard University Herbaria, Cambridge, MA. Böcher, T. W. 1978. Greenlands Flora 326 pp. Porsild, A. E. & W. Cody. 1980. Checklist of the Vascular Plants of the Northwest Territories Canada i–viii, 1–607. National Museum of Natural Sciences, Ottawa. Tolmatchev, A. I. 1963. Arkticheskaia Flora SSSR 4: 1–96. Flora Italiana, Corallorhiza trifida Chatel. Zimmer, K., et al. (2008). The ectomycorrhizal specialist orchid Corallorhiza trifida is a partial myco-heterotroph. New Phytologist 178:2 395-400. Media related to Corallorhiza trifida at Wikimedia Commons Data related to Corallorhiza trifida at Wikispecies Jepson Manual Treatment - Corallorhiza trifida v t e