Alchemilla is a genus of herbaceous perennial plants in the family Rosaceae, with the common name lady's mantle applied generically as well as specifically to Alchemilla mollis when referred to as a garden plant. The plant used as a herbal tea or for medicinal usage such as gynaecological disorders is Alchemilla xanthochlora or in Middle Europe the so-called common lady's mantle Alchemilla vulgaris. There are about 700 species, the majority native to cool temperate and subarctic regions of Europe and Asia, with a few species native to the mountains of Africa and the Americas. Most species of Alchemilla are clump-forming or mounded perennials with basal leaves arising from woody rhizomes. Some species have leaves with lobes that radiate from a common point and others have divided leaves—both are typically fan-shaped with small teeth at the tips. The long-stalked, gray-green to green leaves are often covered with soft hairs, and show a high degree of water-resistance (see Lotus effect). Green to bright chartreuse flowers are small, have no petals and appear in clusters above the foliage in late spring and summer. Alchemilla abyssinica Fresen. Alchemilla alpina L. — alpine lady's mantle Alchemilla argyrophylla Oliv. Alchemilla barbatiflora Juzepczuk Alchemilla bursensis Pawł. Alchemilla conjuncta Bab. Alchemilla diademata Rothm. — diadem lady's mantle Alchemilla ellenbeckii Engl. Alchemilla erythropoda — dwarf lady's mantle Alchemilla filicaulis Buser — thinstem lady's mantle Alchemilla flabellata Buser — fan lady's mantle Alchemilla glabra Neygenf. — smooth lady's mantle Alchemilla glaucescens Wallr. — waxy lady's mantle Alchemilla glomerulans Buser — clustered lady's mantle Alchemilla gracilis Engl. Alchemilla hungarica Soó Alchemilla japonica Nakai & H. Hara Alchemilla jaroschenkoi Grossh. — holotrichous lady's mantle Alchemilla johnstonii Oliv. Alchemilla lapeyrousii Buser — Lapeyrous' lady's mantle Alchemilla mollis (Buser) Rothm. Alchemilla monticola Opiz — hairy lady's mantle Alchemilla orbiculata Ruiz & Pav. Alchemilla sericata Rchb. Alchemilla splendens Christ ex Favrat Alchemilla stricta Rothm. Alchemilla subcrenata Buser — broadtooth lady's mantle Alchemilla stuhlmanii Alchemilla subcrenata Alchemilla subnivalis Baker f. Alchemilla triphylla Rothm. Alchemilla venosa Buser — boreal lady's mantle Alchemilla vestita Alchemilla vulgaris L. Alchemilla wichurae (Buser) Stefanss. — grassland lady's mantle Alchemilla xanthochlora Rothm. "Alchemilla L." Plants of the World Online. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. Retrieved 14 January 2022. "Alchemilla L." Atlas of Living Australia. Archived from the original on 2018-08-31. Retrieved 2018-02-11.