Philip David Charles Collins LVO (born 30 January 1951) is an English singer, drummer, songwriter, record producer and actor. He was the drummer and later became the lead singer of the rock band Genesis and had a successful solo career, achieving three UK number one singles and seven US number one singles as a solo artist. In total, his work with Genesis, other artists, and solo resulted in more US top-40 singles than any other artist throughout the 1980s. His most successful singles from the period include "In the Air Tonight", "Against All Odds (Take a Look at Me Now)", "One More Night", "Sussudio", "Another Day in Paradise" and "I Wish It Would Rain Down". Born and raised in west London, Collins began playing drums at age five. During the same period he attended drama school which secured him various roles as a child actor. His first major role was the Artful Dodger in the West End production of the musical Oliver!. As an accomplished professional actor by his early teens, he pivoted to pursue a music career, becoming the drummer for Genesis in 1970, at age 19. He took over the role of lead singer in 1975 following the departure of Peter Gabriel. During the second half of the 1970s, in-between Genesis albums and tours, Collins was also the drummer of jazz rock band Brand X. Collins began a successful solo career in the 1980s, initially inspired by his marital breakdown and love of soul music, releasing the albums Face Value (1981), Hello, I Must Be Going (1982), No Jacket Required (1985) and ...But Seriously (1989). Collins became, in the words of AllMusic, "one of the most successful pop and adult contemporary singers of the '80s and beyond". He also became known for a distinctive gated reverb drum sound on many of his recordings. He played drums on the 1984 charity single "Do They Know It's Christmas?", and in July 1985, he was the only artist to perform at both Live Aid concerts. He also resumed his acting career, appearing in Miami Vice and subsequently starring in the film Buster (1988). Collins left Genesis in 1996 to focus on solo work; this included writing songs for Disney's animated film Tarzan (1999). He wrote and performed the songs, "Two Worlds", "Son of Man", "Strangers Like Me" and "You'll Be in My Heart", the latter of which earned him the Academy Award for Best Original Song. He rejoined Genesis for their Turn It On Again Tour in 2007. Following a five-year retirement to focus on his family life, Collins released his memoir in 2016 and completed his Not Dead Yet Tour in 2019. He then rejoined Genesis in 2020 for a second reunion tour, ending in March 2022. Collins's discography includes eight studio albums that have sold 33.5 million certified units in the US and an estimated 150 million records sold worldwide, making him one of the world's best-selling artists. He is one of only three recording artists, along with Paul McCartney and Michael Jackson, who have sold over 100 million records both as solo artists and separately as principal members of a band. He has won eight Grammy Awards, six Brit Awards (winning Best British Male Artist three times), two Golden Globe Awards, one Academy Award, and a Disney Legend Award. He was awarded six Ivor Novello Awards from the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors, including the International Achievement Award. He received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1999, and was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 2003 and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of Genesis in 2010. He has also been recognised by music publications with induction into the Modern Drummer Hall of Fame in 2012, and the Classic Drummer Hall of Fame in 2013. Philip David Charles Collins was born on 30 January 1951 at Putney Hospital in Wandsworth, south-west London. His father, Greville Philip Austin Collins (1907–1972), was an insurance agent for London Assurance and his mother, Winifred June Collins (née Strange, 1913–2011), worked in a toy shop and later as a booking agent at the Barbara Speake Stage School, an independent performing arts school in East Acton. Collins is the youngest of three children: his sister Carole competed as a professional ice skater and followed her mother's footsteps as a theatrical agent, and his brother Clive was a noted cartoonist. The family moved twice by the time Collins had reached two; they settled at 453 Hanworth Road in Hounslow, Middlesex. Collins was given a toy drum kit for Christmas when he was five, and later his two uncles made him a makeshift set with triangles and tambourines that fitted into a suitcase. As Collins grew older, these were followed by more complete sets bought by his parents. He practised by playing along to music on the television and radio. During a family holiday at Butlin's, a seven-year-old Collins entered a talent contest singing "The Ballad of Davy Crockett", but stopped the orchestra halfway through to tell them they were in the wrong key. The Beatles were a major early influence on Collins, including their drummer Ringo Starr. He followed the lesser-known London band the Action, whose drummer he would copy and whose work introduced him to the soul music of Motown and Stax Records. Collins was also influenced by jazz and big band drummer Buddy Rich, whose opinion on the importance of the hi-hat prompted him to stop using two bass drums and start using the hi-hat. Around twelve, Collins received basic piano and music tuition from his father's aunt. He studied drum rudiments under Lloyd Ryan and later under Frank King, and considered this training "more helpful than anything else because they're used all the time. In any kind of funk or jazz drumming, the rudiments are always there." Collins never learned to read or write musical notation and devised his own system, which he regretted in later life. "I've always felt that if I could hum it, I could play it. For me, that was good enough, but that attitude is bad." Collins attended Nelson Primary School until he was eleven. He was accepted into Chiswick County Grammar School, where he took to football and formed the Real Thing, a school band that had Andrea Bertorelli, his future wife, and friend Lavinia Lang, as backup singers. Both women would have an impact on Collins' personal life in later years. Collins' next group was the Freehold, with whom he wrote his first song, "Lying, Crying, Dying", and played in a group named the Charge. He was childhood friends with Jack Wild, who would become famous for playing Dodger in the film Oliver! (1968); the pair attended the same stage school after Collins's mother June spotted Wild as the two played football in the park. Collins quit school at fourteen to become a full-time pupil at Barbara Speake. He had an uncredited part as an extra in the Beatles' film A Hard Day's Night (1964), where he is amongst the screaming teenagers during the television concert sequence. Later in 1964, Collins was cast as the Artful Dodger in two West End runs of the musical Oliver! He was paid £15 a week, and called the role "the best part for a kid in all London". His days as the Dodger were numbered when his voice broke during a performance and had to speak his lines for the rest of the show. Collins starred in Calamity the Cow (1967), a film produced by the Children's Film Foundation. After a falling out with the director, Collins decided to quit acting to pursue music. He was to appear in Chitty Chitty Bang Bang (1968) as one of the children who storm the castle, but his scene was cut. Collins auditioned for the role of Romeo in Romeo and Juliet (1968), but the role went to Leonard Whiting. He also travelled the UK teaching people the "crunch" dance made popular by a Smith's crisps advertising campaign. Collins's enthusiasm for music grew during his acting years. He frequented the Marquee Club on Wardour Street so often that eventually the managers asked him to set out the chairs, sweep the floors, and assist in the cloakroom. It was here where Collins saw The Action and newcomers Yes perform, which greatly influenced him. When auditions for Vinegar Joe and Manfred Mann Chapter Three were unsuccessful, Collins secured a position in the Cliff Charles Blues Band and toured the country. This was followed by a stint in The Gladiators, a backing band for a black vocal quartet, which also featured Collins's schoolmate Ronnie Caryl on guitar. Around this time, Collins learned that Yes were looking for a new drummer and spoke to frontman Jon Anderson, who invited him to an audition the following week. Collins failed to turn up, and later wondered what his life would have been like had he gone ahead with it. In 1969, Collins and Caryl joined John Walker's backing band for a European tour, which also consisted of guitarist Gordon Smith and keyboardist Brian Chatton. The tour finished, and the quartet formed a rock band, Hickory, which recorded one single ("Green Light"/"The Key"). Still in 1969, they were later renamed Flaming Youth. They signed to Fontana Records and recorded Ark 2 (1969), a concept album written and produced by Ken Howard and Alan Blaikley that tells the story of man's evacuation from a burning Earth and its voyage into space. Each member sings a lead vocal. In May 1970, after Flaming Youth split, Collins played congas on George Harrison's song "Art of Dying", but his contribution was omitted. Years later, Collins asked Harrison about the omission. Harrison sent Collins a recording allegedly containing Collins's performance; Collins was embarrassed to hear that the performance was poor. When Collins apologised, Harrison confessed that the recording was a prank, which Collins accepted in good humour. In July 1970, the rock band Genesis had signed with Charisma Records and recorded their second album Trespass (1970), but suffered a setback following the departures of drummer John Mayhew and guitarist Anthony Phillips. They decided to continue, and placed an advert in the Melody Maker for a drummer "sensitive to acoustic music" and a 12-string acoustic guitarist. Collins recognised Charisma owner Tony Stratton Smith's name on it, and he and Caryl went for the auditions. The group, who had been a full-time working band for less than a year, consisted of school friends from Charterhouse School, a private boarding school: singer Peter Gabriel, keyboardist Tony Banks, and bassist/guitarist Mike Rutherford. Collins and Caryl arrived early, so Collins took a swim in the pool at Gabriel's parents' house and memorised the pieces the drummers before him were playing. He recalled: "They put on 'Trespass', and my initial impression was of a very soft and round music, not edgy, with vocal harmonies, and I came away thinking Crosby, Stills and Nash." On 8 August 1970, Collins became their fourth drummer. Genesis then took a two-week holiday, during which Collins earned money as an exterior decorator. Rutherford thought Caryl was not a good fit; in 1971, the band enlisted Steve Hackett. From 1970 to 1975, Collins played drums, percussion, and largely sang backing vocals on Genesis albums and concerts. His first album as a member, Nursery Cryme, features the acoustic song "For Absent Friends" that has Collins singing lead vocal. He sang "More Fool Me" on their 1973 album Selling England by the Pound. In 1974, during the recording of The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway, Collins played drums on Brian Eno's second album Taking Tiger Mountain (By Strategy) after Eno had contributed electronic effects to two songs on the album. In August 1975, Gabriel's departure from the band was publicly announced. Genesis advertised for a replacement in Melody Maker and received around 400 replies. After a lengthy auditioning process, during which he sang backup vocals for applicants, Collins became the band's lead vocalist during the recording of their album A Trick of the Tail. The album was a commercial and critical success, reaching number 3 in the UK charts and 31 in the US. Rolling Stone wrote that Genesis "has managed to turn the possible catastrophe of Gabriel's departure into their first broad-based American success." For the tour, Collins accepted former Yes and King Crimson drummer Bill Bruford to play drums while Collins sang. Wind & Wuthering was the last Genesis album recorded with Hackett before he left the group. In 1976, Collins brought in American drummer Chester Thompson, formerly of Frank Zappa and Weather Report who became a mainstay of Genesis' and Collins' backing bands until 2010. When Collins, Banks, and Rutherford decided to continue Genesis as a trio in 1977, they recorded ...And Then There Were Three.... This marked a shift from their progressive rock roots to a more radio-friendly, pop rock sound, and included the band's first UK Top 10 and US Top 40 single, "Follow You Follow Me". The level of commercial success that Genesis had reached by this time allowed Collins and his wife to move into Old Croft, a home in Shalford, Surrey, in the spring of 1978. Collins pursued various guest spots and solo projects from his time as Genesis's drummer. In 1973, he and Hackett were among the musicians who performed on the solo debut of ex-Yes guitarist Peter Banks. In 1975, Collins sang and played drums, vibraphone, and percussion on Hackett's first solo album, Voyage of the Acolyte; performed on Eno's albums Another Green World, Before and After Science, and Music for Films; and replaced drummer Phil Spinelli of the jazz fusion group Brand X before recording their first two albums, Unorthodox Behaviour and Moroccan Roll. Collins played percussion on Johnny the Fox by Thin Lizzy, and sang on Anthony Phillips' debut solo album, The Geese & the Ghost. After Genesis finished touring in December 1978, the group went on hiatus after Collins went to Vancouver, Canada to try to save his failing marriage. The attempt failed, leaving his wife to return to England with their children while living apart. Collins returned to Old Croft, their home in Shalford, Surrey, and their divorce was finalised in 1981. Banks and Rutherford were recording their first solo albums during this time, so Collins rejoined Brand X for their album Product and its accompanying tour, played on John Martyn's album Grace and Danger, and started writing demos of his own at home. This was followed by Genesis resuming activity and recording and touring through 1980 with their album Duke (1980). The three members contributed two tracks each; Collins put forward "Please Don't Ask" and "Misunderstanding". In February 1981, Collins released his debut solo album Face Value. He signed with Virgin Records and WEA for American distribution in order to distance himself from the Charisma label, and oversaw every step of its production; he wrote the liner notes himself and by hand. His divorce was the focus of its lyrical themes and song titles: "I had a wife, two children, two dogs, and the next day I didn't have anything. So a lot of these songs were written because I was going through these emotional changes." Collins produced the album in collaboration with Hugh Padgham, with whom he had worked on Peter Gabriel's self-titled 1980 album. Face Value reached number one on the UK Albums Chart. It was also an international success, reaching number one in six other countries and number seven in the US where it went on to sell 5 million copies. "In the Air Tonight", the album's lead single, became a hit and reached number two in the UK charts. The song is known for the gated reverb effect used on Collins's drums, a technique developed by Padgham when he worked as an engineer on Gabriel's song "Intruder", on which Collins played drums. Following an invitation by record producer Martin Lewis, Collins performed live as a solo artist at an Amnesty International benefit show The Secret Policeman's Other Ball at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane in London in September 1981, performing "In the Air Tonight" and "The Roof Is Leaking". Collins also worked again with John Martyn in this year, producing his album Glorious Fool. In September 1981, Genesis released Abacab. This was followed by its 1981 supporting tour and a two-month tour in 1982 promoting the Genesis live album Three Sides Live. In early 1982, Collins produced and played on Something's Going On, the third solo album by Anni-Frid Lyngstad of ABBA, and performed most of the drum parts on Pictures at Eleven, the first solo album by Led Zeppelin singer Robert Plant. In October 1982, Collins took part in the one-off Genesis reunion concert Six of the Best held at the Milton Keynes Bowl in Buckinghamshire, which marked the return of Gabriel on lead vocals and Hackett on guitar. Collins's second solo album, Hello, I Must Be Going!, was released in November 1982. His marital problems continued to provide inspiration for his songs, including "I Don't Care Anymore" and "Do You Know, Do You Care". The album reached number 2 in the UK and number 8 in the US, where it sold 3 million copies. Its second single, a cover of "You Can't Hurry Love" by the Supremes, became Collins's first UK number one single and went to number 10 in the US. Collins supported the album with the Hello, I Must Be Going! tour of Europe and North America from November 1982 to February 1983. Following the tour, Collins played drums on Plant's second solo album, The Principle of Moments, and produced and played on two tracks for Adam Ant's album Strip, "Puss 'n Boots" and the title track. In May 1983, Collins, Banks and Rutherford recorded a self-titled Genesis album; its tour ended with five shows in Birmingham, England in February 1984. The latter shows were filmed and released as Genesis Live – The Mama Tour. "Against All Odds" "Against All Odds" from the soundtrack of the same name (1984), is a power ballad which became his first Billboard Hot 100 #1 single. It again featured his signature gated reverb drum sound. Problems playing this file? See media help. Collins wrote and performed on "Against All Odds", the main theme for the romantic film of the same name, which demonstrated a more pop-orientated and commercially accessible sound than his previous work. Released in February 1984, it was the first single of his solo career to reach number one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart; it peaked at number two in the UK. Collins won a Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Performance, Male. The song also earned him an Academy Award nomination for Best Original Song, and he arranged his 1985 tour to accommodate the possibility of performing it at the awards ceremony. However, a note to Atlantic Records from show producer Larry Gelbart explaining a lack of invitation stated: "Thank you for your note regarding Phil Cooper [sic]. I'm afraid the spots have already been filled", and Collins watched actress and dancer Ann Reinking perform it. The Los Angeles Times said: "Reinking did an incredible job of totally destroying a beautiful song." Collins would introduce it at subsequent concerts by saying: "I'm sorry Miss Ann Reinking couldn't be here tonight; I guess I just have to sing my own song." In 1984, Collins contributed to the production on Chinese Wall by Earth, Wind & Fire vocalist Philip Bailey, which included a duet from the two, "Easy Lover". The song was number one in the UK for four weeks, and peaked at number 2 in the US. He also produced and played drums on several tracks on Behind the Sun by Eric Clapton. In November, Collins was part of the charity supergroup Band Aid in aid of Ethiopian famine relief and played drums on its single, "Do They Know It's Christmas?". Collins's third album, No Jacket Required, was recorded in 1984 and marked a turning point in his output. He departed from lyrics about his personal life and wrote more upbeat and dance-orientated songs with strong hooks and melodies, such as "Sussudio", "One More Night", and "Take Me Home". The album also featured guest backing vocals from Sting, Peter Gabriel, and Helen Terry. No Jacket Required was released in February 1985 and became a huge worldwide success, reaching number one in several countries. "Sussudio" and "One More Night" topped the US singles chart, and "Don't Lose My Number" and "Take Me Home" made the US top ten. The album remains the most successful of his career, selling over 12 million copies in the US where it was certified diamond, and 1.9 million in the UK where it was the second-best-selling album of 1985. Referring to the album's success, David Fricke of Rolling Stone wrote: "After years on the art-rock fringe, Collins has established himself firmly in the middle of the road. Perhaps he should consider testing himself and his new fans' expectations next time around." "Sussudio" attracted negative attention for sounding too similar to Prince's "1999", a charge that Collins did not deny, and its hook line has been named as the most widely disliked element of his career. No Jacket Required earned Collins the first two of his six Brit Awards, winning Best British Male and Best British Album. Collins had three US number one songs in 1985, the most by any artist that year. No Jacket Required won three Grammy Awards including Album of the Year. The No Jacket Required World Tour saw Collins perform 85 shows between February and July 1985. On 13 July, Collins took part in the Live Aid concerts, a continuation of the fundraising effort started by Band Aid. Collins was the only performer to appear at the London concert at Wembley Stadium and the US concert at JFK Stadium in Philadelphia on the same day. After performing what Ultimate Classic Rock called "an especially crowd-pleasing selection of songs" in London, including "Against All Odds", "In the Air Tonight", and playing alongside Sting, Collins flew to Philadelphia on a Concorde to perform his solo material, play drums for Clapton, and drum with Plant and Jimmy Page for a Led Zeppelin reunion. The latter performance was poorly received and later disowned by the band. Page later said that Collins had not learned his parts for the set. Collins responded that the band "weren't very good", that a "dribbling" Page had made him feel uncomfortable, and he only continued with the set rather than leave the stage in order to avoid negative attention. In November 1985, the song "Separate Lives", a duet featuring Collins and Marilyn Martin for the musical drama film White Nights, was released and became a US number one hit. By the end of 1985, the music press noted that Collins's astronomical success as a solo artist had made him more popular than Genesis. Before the release of No Jacket Required, Collins insisted that he would not leave the band and that he felt "happier with what we're doing now, because I feel it's closer to me." In October 1985, he reunited with Banks and Rutherford to record Genesis's thirteenth album, Invisible Touch. Released in 1986, it became the group's biggest selling album with 6 million copies sold in the US, and 1.2 million sold in the UK. Its title track was released as a single and reached No. 1 in the US, the only Genesis song to do so. The group received a Grammy Award (their only one) and a nomination for the MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year in 1987 for "Land of Confusion", which features puppet caricatures from the British satirical program Spitting Image. Several music critics drew comparisons between the album and Collins's solo work, but Rolling Stone's J. D. Considine praised the album's commercial appeal, stating, "every tune is carefully pruned so that each flourish delivers not an instrumental epiphany but a solid hook". March 1986 saw the release of "No One Is to Blame", a hit single by Howard Jones which included Collins on drums, backing vocals, and co-production alongside Padgham. Collins provided backing vocals, produced and played drums on most of Eric Clapton's 1986 album August. He also toured parts of Europe with Clapton in support of the album as the drummer, of which two concert videos were released; Live at Montreux 1986 (Eric Clapton film) and Eric Clapton and Friends Live 1986. In each of those videos, Collins is featured as the drummer and also performs "In the Air Tonight" with Clapton, bassist Nathan East and keyboardist Greg Phillinganes backing him. After touring with Genesis in 1987, Collins was aware that his music had gained too much exposure and took a year off from writing and recording. He took on his first acting role since the late 1960s, starring as Buster Edwards opposite Julie Walters (who played his wife, June) in the romantic comedy drama-crime film Buster which centred around the Great Train Robbery from 1963 in Ledburn, Buckinghamshire. Reviews for the film were mixed and controversy ensued over its subject matter; Prince Charles and Princess Diana declined an invitation to the première after it was accused of glorifying crime. Collins contributed four songs to the film's soundtrack; his ballad rendition of "A Groovy Kind of Love", originally by the Mindbenders, became his only single to reach No. 1 in the UK and the US. The film also spawned the US #1 single "Two Hearts", which he co-wrote with Lamont Dozier and won the pair a Golden Globe for Best Original Song and an Oscar nomination in the same category. Film critic Roger Ebert said Collins "played [the role of Buster] with surprising effectiveness". In 1988, Collins was the subject of an episode of the British TV series This Is Your Life. In 1989, Collins was among the musicians who donated their own clothes to Madame Tussaud's Rock Circus, an exhibition held at the London Pavilion celebrating the history of rock and pop music featuring its major figures recreated in wax. "Another Day in Paradise" A sample of "Another Day in Paradise" from ...But Seriously (1989). Collins wrote the song to bring attention to the problem of homelessness. It became his final Billboard Hot 100 #1 single. Problems playing this file? See media help. In August 1989, Collins appeared as a special guest for the Who on their 1989 tour for two shows, performing "Fiddle About" as Uncle Ernie and "Tommy's Holiday Camp" from their rock opera Tommy (1969). From April to October 1989, Collins recorded his fourth album ...But Seriously in England and Los Angeles, which saw him address social and political themes in his lyrics. The album was released in November 1989 to worldwide commercial success, spending fifteen weeks at No. 1 in the UK charts and in the US for three. It became the UK's best-selling album of 1990 and is among the best-selling albums in UK chart history. It is one of the best-selling albums in Germany. Its lead single "Another Day in Paradise" is an anti-homelessness song and features David Crosby singing backing vocals. Upon its release in October 1989, it went to No. 1 in the US to become the final number one single there of the 1980s. Despite its success, the song was also heavily criticised and became linked to allegations of hypocrisy made against Collins. Responding to criticism of the song, Collins stated: "When I drive down the street, I see the same things everyone else sees. It's a misconception that if you have a lot of money you're somehow out of touch with reality." In 1991, "Another Day in Paradise" won the Grammy Award for Record of the Year. Other songs from ...But Seriously also reached the top-five in the US: "Something Happened on the Way to Heaven", "Do You Remember?", and "I Wish It Would Rain Down" featuring Eric Clapton on guitar. ...But Seriously was supported with the Seriously, Live! World Tour which ran between February and October 1990 and covered 121 dates. The tour spawned the live album Serious Hits... Live!, which sold 1.2 million copies in the UK and over 4 million in the US. In February 1990, Collins performed "Another Day in Paradise" at the 1990 Brit Awards which won British Single of the Year, and in September he performed "Sussudio" at the 1990 MTV Video Music Awards in Los Angeles. He also played drums on the 1989 Tears for Fears single, "Woman in Chains". In 1991, Collins reconvened with Banks and Rutherford to write and record a new Genesis album, We Can't Dance. It became the band's fifth consecutive No. 1 album in the UK and reached No. 4 in the US, where it sold over 4 million copies. It features the singles "Jesus He Knows Me", "I Can't Dance", "No Son of Mine", and "Hold on My Heart". Collins performed on their 1992 tour. At the 1993 American Music Awards, Genesis won the award for Favorite Pop/Rock Band, Duo, or Group. Collins co-wrote, sang and played on the 1993 single "Hero" by David Crosby. Collins worked on his fifth studio album, Both Sides, in 1992 and 1993. It marked a departure from his more polished and up-tempo songs on recent albums to material more experimental in nature, with Collins performing all the instruments and producing the record himself, because the songs written "were becoming so personal, so private, I didn't want anyone else's input". The decline of his second marriage was a focal point of the album. Released in November 1993, Both Sides reached No. 1 in eight countries, including the UK, and No. 13 in the US. It marked a drop in sales in the latter when compared to his previous records, only reaching a single platinum certification by the end of the year. Its two biggest singles were "Both Sides of the Story" and "Everyday". The Both Sides of the World Tour saw Collins perform 165 shows across four legs between April 1994 and May 1995. Collins turned down the chance to contribute to Tower of Song, an album of covers of Leonard Cohen songs, due to his touring commitments. On 29 March 1996, Collins's decision to leave Genesis to concentrate on his solo career was publicly announced. In the months surrounding his departure from Genesis, Collins formed the Phil Collins Big Band, seating himself on the drums. He had wanted to undertake the project for some time and felt inspired from the Burning for Buddy project that drummer Neil Peart had put together. Having moved to Switzerland, an invitation to perform at the Montreux Jazz Festival led to the band to come together, which featured Quincy Jones as conductor and Tony Bennett on vocals. The group toured summer jazz festivals in July 1996 with a set of jazz renditions of Genesis and Collins' solo material. Their first date was at the Royal Albert Hall for a Prince's Trust concert with Queen Elizabeth II and Nelson Mandela in attendance. To learn his parts, Collins devised his own notation on sheets. The band then went on hiatus until a US and European tour in the summer of 1998, which spawned the live album A Hot Night in Paris. In October 1996, Collins released his sixth solo album, Dance into the Light. It reached No. 4 in the UK and No. 23 in the US. The album was received negatively by the music press and sold less than his previous albums. Entertainment Weekly reviewed by saying that "even Phil Collins must know that we all grew weary of Phil Collins". Singles from the album included "Dance into the Light", which reached No. 9 in the UK, and the Beatles-inspired "It's in Your Eyes". The album was certified Gold in the US. Collins toured the album throughout 1997 with his Trip into the Light World Tour, covering 82 dates. He performed "In the Air Tonight" and "Take Me Home" at the Music for Montserrat benefit concert in London alongside Paul McCartney, Elton John, Eric Clapton, Mark Knopfler, and Sting. In October 1998, Collins released his first compilation album ...Hits which contains a new track, a cover of "True Colors" by Cyndi Lauper that was produced by Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds. The album was a commercial success worldwide, reaching No. 1 in the UK charts and selling 3.4 million copies in the US by 2012. In the mid-1990s Collins was recruited to write and perform songs for Disney's adventure film Tarzan (1999), integrated with a score by Mark Mancina. Collins also sang his songs in French, Italian, German, and Spanish for the dubbed versions of the film's soundtrack. His song "You'll Be in My Heart" was released in June 1999 and spent 19 weeks at No. 1 on the Billboard Adult Contemporary chart, the longest time ever up to that point. In 2000, the song won Collins an Academy Award and a Golden Globe Award, both for Best Original Song. He performed "Two Worlds" at that year's ceremony and the Disney-themed Super Bowl halftime show. In June 1999, Collins was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. In 2000, he became partially deaf in one ear due to a viral infection. In June 2002, Collins accepted an invitation to drum for the house band at the Party at the Palace concert held on the grounds of Buckingham Palace, an event which celebrated Queen Elizabeth II's Golden Jubilee. In 2002, he received the Disney Legend award. On 11 November 2002, Collins released his seventh solo album, Testify. Metacritic's roundup of album reviews found this record to be the worst-reviewed album at the time of its release, though it has since been surpassed by three more recent releases. The album's single "Can't Stop Loving You" (a Leo Sayer cover) was a number-one Adult Contemporary hit. Testify sold 140,000 copies in the US by year's end. Disney hired Collins to compose and perform on the soundtrack to its 2003 animated feature Brother Bear, which included the song "Look Through My Eyes". In the same year he was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame. In 2004, Collins released two compilation albums, The Platinum Collection and Love Songs. From June 2004 to November 2005, Collins performed his First Final Farewell Tour, a reference to the multiple farewell tours of other popular artists. In 2006, he worked with Disney on a musical production of Tarzan. Collins reunited with Banks and Rutherford and announced Turn It On Again: The Tour on 7 November 2006, nearly 40 years after the band first formed. The tour took place during summer 2007, and played in twelve countries across Europe, followed by a second leg in North America. During the tour Genesis performed at the Live Earth concert at Wembley Stadium, London. In 2007 they were honoured at the second annual VH1 Rock Honors, performing "Turn It On Again", "No Son of Mine" and "Los Endos" at the ceremony in Las Vegas. On 22 May 2008, Collins received his sixth Ivor Novello Award from the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors when he was presented the International Achievement Award at a ceremony held at the Grosvenor House Hotel, London. In October 2009, it was reported that Collins was to record a Motown covers album. He told a German newspaper, "I want the songs to sound exactly like the originals", and that the album would feature up to 30 songs. In January 2010, Chester Thompson said that the album had been completed and would be released some time soon. He also revealed that Collins managed to play the drums on the album despite a spinal operation. The resulting album, Going Back, was released on 13 September 2010. It reached number one on the UK Albums Chart. In summer 2010, Collins played six concerts with the music from Going Back. These included a special programme, Phil Collins: One Night Only, aired on ITV1 on 18 September 2010. Collins also promoted Going Back with his first and only appearance on the BBC's music series Later... with Jools Holland, broadcast on 17 September 2010. In March 2010, Collins was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of Genesis at a ceremony in New York City. As of January 2011, Collins has spent 1,730 weeks in the German music charts—766 weeks of them with Genesis albums and singles and 964 weeks with solo releases. On 4 March 2011, citing health problems and other concerns, Collins announced that he was taking time off from his career, prompting widespread reports of his retirement. On 7 March his UK representative told the press, "He is not, has no intention of, retiring." Later that day, Collins posted a message to his fans on his own website, confirming his intention to retire to focus on his family life. In July 2012, Collins's greatest hits collection ...Hits re-entered the US charts, reaching No. 6 on the Billboard 200. In November 2013, Collins told German media that he was considering a return to music and speculated that this could mean further live shows with Genesis, stating: "Everything is possible. We could tour in Australia and South America. We haven't been there yet." Speaking to reporters in Miami, Florida in December 2013 at an event promoting his charity work, Collins indicated that he was writing music once again and might tour again. On 24 January 2014, Collins announced in an interview with Inside South Florida that he was writing new compositions with fellow English singer Adele. Collins said he had no idea who Adele was when he learned she wanted to collaborate with him. He said "I wasn't actually too aware [of her]. I live in a cave." Collins agreed to join her in the studio after hearing her voice. He said, "[She] achieved an incredible amount. I really love her voice. I love some of this stuff she's done, too." In September 2014, Collins revealed that the collaboration had ended and he said it had been "a bit of a non-starter". In May 2014, Collins gave a live performance of "In the Air Tonight" and "Land of Confusion" with young student musicians at the Miami Country Day School in Miami, Florida. Collins was asked to perform there by his sons, who are students at the school. In August 2014, Collins was reported to have accepted an invitation to perform in December at a benefit concert in Miami in aid of his Little Dreams Foundation charity. He ultimately missed the concert due to illness. In May 2015, Collins signed a deal with Warner Music Group to have his solo albums remastered and reissued with previously unreleased material. In October of that year, he announced that he was no longer retired and had started plans to tour and make a new album. By mid-2016, all eight of his albums were reissued with the artwork updated to display Collins as his older self, the exception being Going Back, which had a new cover. In 2019, the additional digital only releases Other Sides and Remixed Sides followed. In October 2016, Collins's autobiography Not Dead Yet was published. At a press conference held at the Royal Albert Hall in the same month, Collins announced his Not Dead Yet Tour which initially took form as a short European trek from June 2017. The tour included five nights at the Royal Albert Hall which sold out in fifteen seconds, prompting the announcement of Collins's headline spot at the 2017 BST Hyde Park festival which became his largest solo concert. His band included his son Nicolas on the drums. A review in The Telegraph stated: "Unlike the body, the voice is largely unravaged by time. It's still soulful, sometimes silky, occasionally bruised." In 2017, the tour was extended worldwide and ran until October 2019 for a total of 97 shows. In March 2020, Collins, Banks, and Rutherford announced they had reformed Genesis once more to undertake The Last Domino? Tour. This time the band were joined by Collins's son Nic on the drums, leaving his father to handle lead vocals. After the tour was rescheduled twice due to the COVID-19 pandemic, it began in September 2021 and finished in London on 26 March 2022. At the last show, at the O2 Arena in London, Collins said on stage: "It's the last show for Genesis". In his book on the "legends" who defined progressive rock drumming, American drummer Rich Lackowski wrote: "Phil Collins's grooves in early Genesis recordings paved the way for many talented drummers to come. His ability to make the drums bark with musicality and to communicate so convincingly in odd time signatures left many a drummer tossing on the headphones and playing along to Phil's lead." In 2014, readers of Rhythm voted Collins the fourth most influential progressive rock drummer for his work on the 1974 Genesis album The Lamb Lies Down on Broadway. In 2015, MusicRadar named Collins one of the six pioneers of progressive rock drumming. In 2005, Planet Rock listeners voted Collins the fifth greatest rock drummer in history. Collins was ranked tenth in "The Greatest Drummers of All Time" list by Gigwise and number nine in a list of "The 20 greatest drummers of the last 25 years" by MusicRadar in 2010. In 1987, Collins looked back at his fast playing in Brand X and early Genesis: "I actually can't play like that anymore". Foo Fighters drummer Taylor Hawkins cited Collins as one of his drumming heroes. He said, "Collins is an incredible drummer. Anyone who wants to be good on the drums should check him out – the man is a master." In the April 2001 issue of Modern Drummer, Dream Theater drummer Mike Portnoy named Collins in an interview when asked about drummers he was influenced by and had respect for. In another conversation in 2014, Portnoy lauded his "amazing progressive drumming" back in the early and mid-1970s. Rush drummer Neil Peart praised his "beautiful drumming" and "lovely sound" on the 1973 Genesis album Selling England by the Pound, which he called "an enduring masterpiece of drumming". Marco Minnemann, drummer for artists including Joe Satriani and Steven Wilson, described Collins as "brilliant" for the way "he composes his parts, and the sounds he gets". He said, "Phil is almost like John Bonham to me. I hear his personality, his perspective." He singled out the drumming on "In the Air Tonight" as an example of "ten notes that everybody knows" and concluded "Phil is [an] insanely talented drummer." Other drummers who have cited him as an influence or expressed admiration for his drumming work are Brann Dailor of Mastodon, Nick D'Virgilio of Spock's Beard and Big Big Train, Jimmy Keegan of Spock's Beard, Matt Mingus of Dance Gavin Dance, John Merryman of Cephalic Carnage, Craig Blundell of Steven Wilson and Frost*, and Charlie Benante of Anthrax. According to Jason Bonham, his father "respected Phil Collins' drumming very much" and one of his favourite songs was Genesis' "Turn It On Again", which he used to love playing with him. Modern Drummer readers voted for Collins every year between 1987 and 1991 as Pop/Mainstream Rock drummer of the year. In 2000, he was voted as Big Band drummer of the year. In 2012, he was inducted into the Hall of Fame. Collins is a left-handed drummer, and uses Gretsch drums, Noble & Cooley solid snare drums, Remo heads, Sabian cymbals and he uses his signature Promark sticks. Past kits he used were made by Pearl and Premier. Other instruments associated with Collins's sound (particularly in his post-1978 Genesis and solo career) include the Roland TR-808, Roland TR-909, the Simmons SDS-V electronic drum set, and the LinnDrum drum machines. Collins also used a Roland CR-78, Sequential Circuits Prophet-5 synthesizer, the Fender Rhodes and Yamaha CP-70 electric pianos, and a vocoder for his voice. Other Korg instruments include the Wavestation, the Karma and the Trinity. Collins had cameo appearances in Steven Spielberg's Hook (1991) and the AIDS docudrama And the Band Played On (1993). He starred in Frauds, which competed for the Palme d'Or at the 1993 Cannes Film Festival. He supplied voices to two animated features: Amblin's Balto (1995) and Disney's The Jungle Book 2 (2003). A long-discussed but never completed project was a film titled The Three Bears; originally meant to star Collins, Danny DeVito, and Bob Hoskins. He often mentioned the film, though an appropriate script never materialised. Collins's music is featured in the satirical black comedy film American Psycho, with psychotic lead character Patrick Bateman (played by Christian Bale) portrayed as an obsessive fan who reads deep meaning into his work, especially with Genesis, while describing his solo music as "...more commercial and therefore more satisfying, in a narrower way." Bateman delivers a monologue praising Collins and Genesis during a sequence in which he engages the services of two prostitutes while playing "In Too Deep" and "Sussudio". Collins told The New Musical Express: "I don't think him being a psychopath and liking my music is linked – my music was just omnipresent in that era." During the 1980s, Collins was among the celebrities caricatured on the satirical television puppet show Spitting Image—the show's creators were then commissioned by Genesis to create puppets of the entire band to appear in their 1986 music video "Land of Confusion". Collins twice hosted the Billboard Music Awards on television, which were produced and directed by his longtime music video and TV special collaborators, Paul Flattery and Jim Yukich of FYI (Flattery Yukich Inc). He also appeared in an episode of the series Miami Vice, entitled "Phil the Shill", in which he plays a cheating con-man. In the 1980s he appeared in several comedy sketches with The Two Ronnies on BBC One. In 2001, Collins was one of several celebrities who were tricked into appearing in a controversial British comedy series, Brass Eye, shown on public service broadcaster Channel 4. In the episode, Collins endorsed a hoax anti-paedophile campaign wearing a T-shirt with the words "Nonce Sense" and warned children against speaking to suspicious people. Collins was reported by the BBC to have consulted lawyers regarding the programme, which was originally pulled from broadcast but eventually rescheduled. Collins said he had taken part in the programme "in good faith for the public benefit", believing it to be "a public service programme that would be going around schools and colleges in a bid to stem child abduction and abuse". Collins also accused the makers of the programme of "some serious taste problems" and warned it would prevent celebrities from supporting "public spirited causes" in the future. In 2006, Collins played a fictional version of himself in the PSP and PS2 video game Grand Theft Auto: Vice City Stories. Set in 1984, he appears in three missions in which the main character, Victor, must save him from Mafia-hired hitmen, who are trying to kill Collins because his manager refused to pay his $3 million debt to them. The final mission occurs during his concert, where the player must defend the scaffolding against saboteurs while Collins is performing "In the Air Tonight". After this, the player is given the opportunity to watch this performance of "In the Air Tonight" for the cost of 6,000 in-game dollars. "In the Air Tonight" is part of the official Vice City Stories soundtrack, and can be also heard on the in-game radio station Emotion 98.3. The song has also been featured in films such as Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film For Theaters (2007) and The Hangover (2009). "In the Air Tonight" featured in the 2007 Gorilla commercial for Cadbury's Dairy Milk chocolate. Many believed that Collins himself was the drummer. When asked about Gorilla, Collins jokingly commented that "Not only is he a better drummer than me, he also has more hair. Can he sing too?" The advertisement—which won Gold at the British Television Advertising Awards in 2008—helped the song re-enter the New Zealand RIANZ Singles Chart at No. 3 in July 2008, the following week reaching No. 1, beating its original 1981 No. 6 peak. "In the Air Tonight" was also sampled in the song "I Can Feel It" on Sean Kingston's self-titled debut album. Collins was portrayed in the cartoon South Park in the episode "Timmy 2000" holding his Oscar throughout, referring to his 1999 win for "You'll Be in My Heart", which defeated "Blame Canada" from South Park: Bigger, Longer & Uncut. The show's creators admitted resenting losing to Collins, as they felt their other competitors were more worthy. The episode "Cartman's Silly Hate Crime 2000" involves a sled race down the landmark known as Phil Collins Hill, which has an impression of Collins' face in the side. The Phil Collins character returns once more and gets killed off in the episode 200. Collins appears briefly in the Finnish animated sitcom Pasila in the episode "Phil Collins Hangover". The music of this episode is a pastiche of Collins's "Another Day in Paradise". Collins was mentioned in the Psych episode "Disco Didn't Die. It Was Murdered!" as resembling Shawn Spencer's father, Henry, portrayed by actor Corbin Bernsen. According to a 2000 BBC biography of Collins, "critics sneer at him" and "bad publicity also caused problems", which "damaged his public profile". Rock historian Martin C. Strong wrote that Collins "truly polarised opinion from the start, his ubiquitous smugness and increasingly sterile pop making him a favourite target for critics". According to Guardian writer Paul Lester, Collins would "regularly" call music journalists to take issue with negative reviews. Over time, he came to be personally disliked; in 2009, journalist Mark Lawson told how Collins's media profile had shifted from "pop's Mr. Nice guy, patron saint of ordinary blokes", to someone accused of "blandness, tax exile and ending a marriage by sending a fax". Collins has rejected accusations of tax avoidance, and despite confirming that some of the divorce-related correspondence between him and second wife, Jill Tavelman, was by fax (a message from Collins regarding access to their daughter was reproduced for the front cover of The Sun in 1993), he states that he did not terminate the marriage in that fashion. Nevertheless, the British media has often repeated the fax claim. Collins has been the victim of scathing remarks in regard to his alleged right-wing political leanings. Caroline Sullivan, a music critic of The Guardian, referred to his cumulative negative publicity in her 2007 article "I wish I'd never heard of Phil Collins", writing that it was difficult for her to hear his work "without being riven by distaste for the man himself". Several critics have commented on Collins's omnipresence, especially in the 1980s and early 1990s. Journalist Frank DiGiacomo wrote a 1999 piece for New York Observer titled The Collins Menace; he said, "Even when I sought to escape the sounds [of Collins] in my head by turning on the TV, there would be Mr. Collins ... mugging for the cameras—intent on showing the world just how hard he would work to sell millions of records to millions of stupid people." In his 2010 article "Love Don't Come Easy: Artists we Love to Hate", The Irish Times critic Kevin Courtney expressed similar sentiments. Naming Collins as one of the ten most disliked pop stars in the world, he wrote: "[Collins] performed at Live Aid, playing first at Wembley, then flying over to Philadelphia via Concorde, just to make sure no one in the U.S. got off lightly. By the early 1990s, Phil phatigue [sic] had really set in." Tim Chester of the New Musical Express alluded to the backlash against Collins in an article titled, "Is It Time We All Stopped Hating Phil Collins?" Chester said of the unrelenting derision he has suffered, "a lot of it he brings on himself." He also said that Collins was "responsible for some of the cheesiest music ever committed to acetate". Erik Hedegaard of Rolling Stone mentioned that Phil Collins hate sites had "flourished" online, and acknowledged that he had been called "the sellout who took Peter Gabriel's Genesis, that paragon of prog-rock, and turned it into a lame-o pop act and went on to make all those supercheesy hits that really did define the 1980s". According to author Dylan Jones in his 2013 publication on 1980s popular music, many of Collins's peers "despised" him. Some fellow artists have made negative comments about Collins publicly. In 1990, former Pink Floyd frontman Roger Waters criticised Collins's "ubiquitous nature", including his involvement in the Who's 1989 reunion tour. David Bowie dismissed some of his own 1980s output as his "Phil Collins years/albums". In addition to the song's negative press from music journalists, singer-songwriter and political activist Billy Bragg criticised Collins for writing "Another Day in Paradise", stating: "Phil Collins might write a song about the homeless, but if he doesn't have the action to go with it he's just exploiting that for a subject." Oasis songwriter Noel Gallagher criticised Collins on multiple occasions, including the comment: "Just because you sell lots of records, it doesn't mean to say you're any good. Look at Phil Collins." Collins said he has "at times, been very down" about Noel Gallagher's comments. Gallagher's brother, Oasis singer Liam, also recalled the "boring" Collins's chart dominance in the 1980s and stated that, by the 1990s, it was "time for some real lads to get up there and take charge". Appearing on the BBC television series Room 101 in 2005, in which guests discuss their most hated things and people, Collins nominated the Gallaghers to be sent into the eponymous room. He described them as "horrible" and stated: "They're rude and not as talented as they think they are. I won't mince words here, but they've had a go at me personally." Collins acknowledged in 2010 that he had been "omnipresent". He said of his character: "The persona on stage came out of insecurity ... it seems embarrassing now. I recently started transferring all my VHS tapes onto DVD to create an archive, and everything I was watching, I thought, 'God, I'm annoying.' I appeared to be very cocky, and really I wasn't." Collins concedes his status as a figure of contempt for many people and has said that he believes this is a consequence of his music being overplayed. In 2011 he said: "The fact that people got so sick of me wasn't really my fault. ... It's hardly surprising that people grew to hate me. I'm sorry that it was all so successful. I honestly didn't mean it to happen like that!" He described criticism of his physical appearance over the years as "a cheap shot", but has acknowledged the "very vocal element" of Genesis fans who believe that the group sold out under his tenure as lead singer. Collins denied that his retirement in 2011 was due to negative attention and said that his statements had been taken out of context. He said: "I have ended up sounding like a tormented weirdo who thinks he was at the Alamo in another life, who feels very sorry for himself, and is retiring hurt because of the bad press over the years. None of this is true." Paul Lester of The Guardian wrote in 2013 that Collins is one of several pop acts that "used to be a joke" but are "now being hailed as gods". Collins has become an important figure in US urban music, influencing artists such as Kanye West, Alicia Keys and Beyoncé. His songs have been sampled by various hip-hop and contemporary R&B acts, and performers including Lil' Kim, Kelis, and Wu-Tang Clan co-founder Ol' Dirty Bastard covered his work on the 2001 tribute album Urban Renewal. In 2004, DCFC and Postal Service musician Ben Gibbard described Collins as a "great vocalist". Collins has been championed by his contemporary, the heavy metal singer Ozzy Osbourne, David Crosby called him "a dear friend" who has helped him "enormously", Queen guitarist Brian May called him "a great guy and an amazing drummer", and Robert Plant paid tribute to him as "the most spirited and positive and really encouraging force" when commencing his own solo career after the break-up of Led Zeppelin. Collins has been championed by modern artists in diverse genres, including indie rock groups the 1975, Generationals, Neon Indian, Yeasayer, St. Lucia and Sleigh Bells, electronica artist Lorde, and soul singer Diane Birch, who said in 2014, "Collins walks a really fine line between being really cheesy and being really sophisticated. He can seem appalling, but at the same time, he has awesome production values and there's a particular richness to the sound. It's very proficient in the instrumentation and savvy about melodies." Genesis bandmate Mike Rutherford has praised Collins's personality, saying that "he always had a bloke-next-door, happy-go-lucky demeanour about him: let's have a drink in the pub, crack a joke, smoke a cigarette or a joint". In 2014, ex-Genesis frontman Peter Gabriel, whom they both cross-collaborated with on some of their solo albums in the 1980s, referred to Collins as the "workaholics' workaholic". He has been characterised by favourable critics as a "rock god", and an artist who has remained "down to earth". In The New Rolling Stone Album Guide, published in 2004, J. D. Considine wrote: "For a time, Phil Collins was nearly inescapable on the radio, and enormously popular with the listening public — something that made him an obvious target for critics. Despite his lumpen-pop appeal, however, Collins is an incisive songwriter and resourceful musician." Tim Chester of the New Musical Express described Collins as "the go-to guy for ironic appreciation and guilty pleasures" and stated he was responsible for "some moments of true genius (often accompanied, it must be said, by some real stinkers)". Creation Records founder Alan McGee wrote in 2009 that there was a "non-ironic revival of Phil Collins" happening. According to McGee: "The kids don't care about 'indie cred' anymore. To them, a great pop song is just that: a great pop song. In this time of revivals, nothing is a sacred cow anymore, and that can only be a good thing for music." Commenting on Collins's popularity with hip-hop acts, he argued: "It's not surprising. Collins is a world-class drummer whose songs immediately lend themselves to being sampled." In 2010, Gary Mills of The Quietus made an impassioned defence of Collins: "There can't be many figures in the world of pop who have inspired quite the same kind of hatred-bordering-on-civil-unrest as Collins, and there can't be too many who have shifted anything like the 150 million plus units that he's got through as a solo artist either ... The disgrace of a career bogged entirely in the determined dross of No Jacket Required however is simply not justified, regardless of how Collins gained either his fortune, or his public image." David Sheppard wrote for the BBC in 2010: "Granted, Collins has sometimes been guilty of painting the bull's-eye on his own forehead (that self-aggrandising Live Aid Concorde business, the cringe-worthy lyrics to 'Another Day in Paradise', Buster, etc.), but nonetheless, the sometime Genesis frontman's canon is so substantial and his hits so profuse that it feels myopic to dismiss him merely as a haughty purveyor of tortured, romantic ballads for the middle income world." Rolling Stone journalist Erik Hedegaard expressed disapproval of the widespread criticism which Collins has received, suggesting that he has been "unfairly and inexplicably vilified". Martin C. Strong stated in 2011 that "the enigmatic and amiable Phil Collins has had his fair share of mockers and critics over the years, although one thing is sure, and that is his dexterity and undeniable talent". In a piece the following year, titled "10 Much-Mocked Artists It's Time We Forgave", New Musical Express critic Anna Conrad said Collins had been portrayed as a "villain", and wrote: "Was the bile really justified? ... come on, admit it. You've air drummed to 'In the Air Tonight', and loved it." The Guardian journalist Dave Simpson wrote a complimentary article in 2013; while acknowledging "few pop figures have become as successful and yet reviled as Phil Collins", he argued "it's about time we recognised Collins's vast influence as one of the godfathers of popular culture". Collins has divorced three times. From 1975 to 1980, he was married to Canadian-born Andrea Bertorelli. They met as 11-year-old students in a London drama class and reconnected in 1974 when Genesis performed in Vancouver. They married in England in 1975 when both were 24, after which Collins legally adopted Bertorelli's daughter Joely (b. 1972), who became an actress and film producer. They also had a son, Simon Collins (b. 1976), who is the former vocalist and drummer of the progressive rock band Sound of Contact. In 2016, Bertorelli took legal action against Collins pertaining to his account of their relationship in his autobiography. In 1984, Collins married American Jill Tavelman. They have one daughter, Lily Collins (b. 1989), who became an actress. While married to Tavelman, Collins twice had an affair with Lavinia Lang, a former drama school classmate, while touring with Genesis in 1992. The two were previously engaged, but the relationship ended before they married. In 1994, Collins openly stated that he had fallen out of love with Tavelman and had filed for divorce, which was finalised in 1996. As part of the settlement, Collins paid £17 million to Tavelman. In 1999, Collins married Orianne Cevey, a Swiss national who worked as his translator at the start of his 1994 tour when she was 22. They have two sons, Nicholas and Matthew. The latter is an aspiring footballer for the youth squad of WSG Tirol, having previously played in the youth systems of Bundesliga club Hannover 96 and Astoria Walldorf. They lived in the former house of Jackie Stewart in Begnins, Switzerland. In 2006 they divorced. Collins paid £25 million to Cevey, which became the largest settlement in a British celebrity divorce. Collins continued to live in Féchy, Switzerland, while he also maintained homes in New York City and Dersingham, Norfolk. From 2007 to 2016, Collins was in a relationship with American news anchor Dana Tyler. In 2008, Cevey and her two sons moved to Miami, Florida. Collins recalled: "I went through a few bits of darkness; drinking too much. I killed my hours watching TV and drinking, and it almost killed me." He said in 2015 that he had been teetotal for three years. In January 2016, after moving to Miami Beach, Florida in the previous year to be closer to his two youngest sons, Collins reunited with Cevey and they lived together in Miami. In October 2020, Collins filed an eviction notice against Cevey after she secretly married another man in August. Collins sold his Miami home in 2021 for $39 million. Collins' brother Clive was a cartoonist. Phil appeared at his brother's investiture ceremony at Buckingham Palace in 2012 when he was awarded an MBE for services to art, with Phil stating, "I shared a bedroom with him when we were boys and he was always drawing. He used to do Christmas cards and birthday cards for the family." In 2012, Collins was estimated to be the second-wealthiest drummer in the world, surpassed only by Ringo Starr. Collins was estimated to have a fortune of £120 million in the Sunday Times Rich List of 2018, making him one of the 25 wealthiest people in the British music industry. On 29 March 2000, Collins launched a case against two former musicians from his band to recoup £500,000 in royalties that were overpaid. Louis Satterfield and Rahmlee Davis claimed their contract entitled them to 0.5 per cent of the royalties from Serious Hits... Live!, a live album recorded during Collins's Seriously, Live! World Tour in 1990. They claimed they were an integral part of the whole album, but Collins responded that the two should only receive royalties from the five tracks in which they were involved. On 19 April 2000, the High Court in London ruled that the two musicians would receive no more royalty money from Phil Collins. The amount that Collins was seeking was halved, and Satterfield and Davis (who originally brought the suit forward in California) would not have to repay any of it. The judge agreed with Collins's argument that Satterfield and Davis should have been paid for only the five tracks on which they performed, including the hit "Sussudio". In 1999, Collins developed sudden hearing loss in his left ear following a recording session in Los Angeles. He consulted three doctors, who told him that there was nothing they could do and that the chance of a full recovery was slim. Two years later, he had recovered most of his hearing. Collins later found that it was caused by a viral infection, and that it was resolved after treatment. In April 2009, Collins had surgery on his upper neck, to correct a problem that began while drumming on the 2007 Genesis tour. Following the operation, he lost feeling in his fingers and could only grip drumsticks if they were taped to his hands. In 2010, Collins alluded to feelings of depression and low self-worth in recent years and said he had contemplated suicide, but he resisted for the sake of his children. In 2014, Collins said that he was still unable to play the drums and that it was not arthritis, but an undiagnosed nerve problem. In 2015, he underwent a spine operation. In 2016, he said he was still unable to drum with his left hand. His doctor advised him that if he wanted to play the drums again, he would need to take it "step by step" and "practice". In his 2016 autobiography, Collins acknowledged that he had struggled with alcoholism following his retirement and third divorce. At that point he also stated that he had been sober for three years. In January 2017, Collins said he was a type 2 diabetic and had received treatment with a hyperbaric chamber after developing a diabetic abscess on his foot that became infected. In June 2017, Collins cancelled two shows after he slipped in his hotel room during the night and hit his head on a chair as he fell, resulting in stitches for a severe gash close to his eye. The fall was caused by his foot drop, resulting from his back operation. In 2017, Collins began to use a cane to assist with walking, and to sit in a chair while performing on stage. Collins has received several honorary degrees in recognition of his work in music and his personal interests. In 1987, he received an honorary doctorate of fine arts at Fairleigh Dickinson University. In 1991, he received an honorary doctorate of music at the Berklee College of Music. On 12 May 2012, he received an honorary doctorate of history at the McMurry University in Abilene, Texas, for his research and collection of Texas Revolution artefacts and documents (see other interests section). Collins has often been mentioned erroneously in the British media as being a supporter of the Conservative Party and a critic of the Labour Party. This derives from the famous article in The Sun, printed on the day of the 1992 UK general election, titled "If Kinnock wins today will the last person to leave Britain please turn out the lights", which stated that Collins was among several celebrities who were planning to leave Britain in the event of a Labour victory. Collins is often reported in the British press to have left the UK and moved to Switzerland in protest at the Labour Party's victory in the 1997 general election. Shortly before the 2005 election (when Collins was living in Switzerland), Labour supporter Noel Gallagher was quoted: "Vote Labour. If you don't and the Tories get in, Phil Collins is threatening to come back and live here. And let's face it, none of us want that." Collins has since stated that although he did once say many years earlier that he might leave Britain if most of his income was taken in tax, which was Labour Party policy at that time for top earners, he has never been a Conservative Party supporter and he left Britain for Switzerland in 1994 purely because he started a relationship with a woman who lived there. He said of Gallagher: "I don't care if he likes my music or not. I do care if he starts telling people I'm a wanker because of my politics. It's an opinion based on an old, misunderstood quote." Despite his statement that he did not leave Britain for tax purposes, Collins was one of several wealthy figures living in tax havens who were singled out for criticism in a 2008 report by the charity Christian Aid. The Independent included Collins as one of their "ten celebrity tax exiles", erroneously repeating that he had left the country when Labour won the 1997 general election and that he threatened to return if the Conservatives won in 2005. Referring to the 1997 general election in his article "Famous men and their misunderstood politics" for MSN, Hugh Wilson stated: "Labour won it in a landslide, which just goes to show the influence pop stars really wield". He also wrote that Collins's reported comments and subsequent move to Switzerland led to "accusations of hypocrisy" since he had "bemoaned the plight of the homeless in the song 'Another Day in Paradise'", making him "an easy target when future elections came round". The Paul Heaton and Jacqui Abbott song "When I Get Back to Blighty", from their 2014 album What Have We Become?, made reference to Collins as "a prisoner to his tax returns". Questioned about his politics by Mark Lawson in an interview for the BBC, broadcast in 2009, Collins said: "My father was Conservative but it wasn't quite the same, I don't think, when he was alive. Politics never loomed large in our family anyway. I think the politics of the country were very different then." In a 2016 interview in The Guardian, Collins stated that talking about politics to The Sun was one of his biggest regrets. When asked whether he had ever voted Conservative, he said: "I didn't vote, actually. And that's not something I'm proud of. I was just so busy that I rarely was here." Collins is a member of the Canadian charity Artists Against Racism and has worked with them on campaigns including radio PSAs. In October 2020, Collins issued a cease and desist order to Donald Trump and his campaign for playing "In the Air Tonight" at a rally. Collins has a long-standing interest in the Alamo. He has collected hundreds of artefacts related to the famous 1836 battle in San Antonio, Texas, narrated a light and sound show about the Alamo, and has spoken at related events. His passion for the Battle of the Alamo has also led him to write the book The Alamo and Beyond: A Collector's Journey, published in 2012. A short film was released in 2013 called Phil Collins and the Wild Frontier which captures Collins on a book tour in June 2012. On 26 June 2014, a press conference was held from the Alamo, where Collins spoke, announcing that he was donating his entire collection to the Alamo via the State of Texas. On 11 March 2015, in honour of his donation, Collins was named an honorary Texan by the state legislature. Like Rod Stewart, Eric Clapton, and Neil Young, Collins is a model railway enthusiast. He also has an interest in King & Country toy soldiers. He is an honorary president of Richmond Yacht Club, of which his parents used to be members. Collins has performed at the Secret Policeman's Ball, a benefit show co-founded by Monty Python member John Cleese on behalf of Amnesty International. He made his first appearance at the 1981 show held in London's Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, and he subsequently became an activist. Collins was appointed a Lieutenant of the Royal Victorian Order (LVO) in the 1994 Birthday Honours, in recognition of his work on behalf of The Prince's Trust, a leading UK youth charity founded by King Charles III (then-Prince of Wales) which provides training, personal development, business start up support, mentoring, and advice. Since appearing at the first Prince's Trust's rock concert in 1982 which included a performance as part of singer Kate Bush's backing band, Collins has played at the event numerous times since, most recently at the Royal Albert Hall in 2010. On 9 April 1989, Collins topped the bill at a benefit concert for the veteran English comic actor Terry-Thomas. Held at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, the event raised over £75,000 for Terry-Thomas and Parkinson's UK. Collins has stated he is a supporter of animal rights and People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA). In 2005 he donated autographed drumsticks in support of PETA's campaign against Kentucky Fried Chicken. In February 2000, Collins and Cevey launched the Little Dreams Foundation, a non-profit organisation that aims to "...realise the dreams of children in the fields of sports and art" by providing future prodigies aged 4 to 16 years with financial, material, and mentoring support with the help of experts in various fields. Collins took the action after receiving letters from children asking him how they could break into the music industry. Mentors to the students who have benefited from his foundation include Tina Turner and Natalie Cole. In 2013 he visited Miami Beach, Florida, to promote the expansion of his foundation. Collins supports the South African charity Topsy Foundation, which provides relief services to some of South Africa's most under-resourced rural communities through a multi-faceted approach to the consequences of HIV/AIDS and extreme poverty. He donates all the royalties earned from his music sales in South Africa to the organisation. Studio albums Face Value (1981) Hello, I Must Be Going! (1982) No Jacket Required (1985) ...But Seriously (1989) Both Sides (1993) Dance into the Light (1996) Testify (2002) Going Back (2010) The Hello, I Must Be Going Tour (1982–1983) The No Jacket Required World Tour (1985) Seriously, Live! World Tour (1990) Both Sides of the World Tour (1994–1995) Trip into the Light World Tour (1997) The First Final Farewell Tour (2004–2005) Not Dead Yet Tour (2017–2019) The Alamo and Beyond: A Collector's Journey (2012) Not Dead Yet: The Autobiography (2016) Ruhlmann, William. "Phil Collins Biography". AllMusic. Retrieved 16 April 2014. Payne, Ed (29 October 2015). "Phil Collins' fans rejoice: Artist announces end of retirement". CNN. Wardrop, Murray (8 May 2009). "Ozzy Osbourne: 'I love Phil Collins'". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 23 December 2015. Eder, Bruce. "Genesis Biography". AllMusic. Retrieved 16 April 2014. Huey, Steve. "Brand X Biography". AllMusic. Retrieved 16 April 2014. Galbraith, Alex (19 October 2016). "Phil Collins has serious disdain for Paul McCartney". Consequence. Retrieved 20 November 2018. Anderson, John (7 January 1990). "Pop Notes". Newsday. New York. "Phil Collins Biography". Allmusic. Retrieved 16 April 2014. Howell, Steve (March 2005). "Q. How do I set up a gated reverb?". Sound On Sound. Retrieved 31 January 2016. Walker, Brian (10 March 2011). "Phil Collins leaves music industry to be full-time dad". CNN. Retrieved 14 October 2013. "Book excerpt: Phil Collins' "Not Dead Yet"". CBS News. 22 October 2016. Retrieved 25 August 2017. Payne, Ed (29 October 2015). "Phil Collins' fans rejoice: Artist announces end of retirement". CNN. Retrieved 25 August 2017. "Phil Collins 'no longer retired'". BBC. 2 January 2018. "Modern Drummer's Readers Poll Archive, 1979–2014". Modern Drummer. Retrieved 8 August 2015. "Phil Collins Hall of Fame Induction". Classic Drummer. Retrieved 18 January 2017. Collins 2016. Coleman 1997, p. 27. Coleman 1997, p. 31. Sheff, David (October 1986). "Phil Collins Interviews – Playboy, October 1986". Archived from the original on 1 September 2002. Retrieved 23 January 2022. Hinton, Victoria (1994). "A case of mothers' pride". The Daily Express. Archived from the original on 20 December 2005. Retrieved 25 November 2019. Coleman 1997, p. 28. Coleman 1997, p. 29. Coleman 1997, pp. 29–30. Classic Albums: Face Value DVD, Eagle Home Entertainment, 2001. Sutherland, Gill (10 January 2009). "Think your child has a future in showbiz? Read on ..." The Guardian. Retrieved 29 June 2014. Hodgkinson, Will (14 November 2002). "Home entertainment: Phil Collins". The Guardian. Retrieved 30 September 2013. Battistoni, Marielle. "Ringo Starr guards Beatles' legacy with new album 'Liverpool 8'". The Dartmouth. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 9 August 2014. "Phil Collins Interviews – Hitmen, 1986 – Part Two". Hitmen. Archived from the original on 1 August 2008. Retrieved 22 September 2014. Kelman, John (14 July 2004). "A Salute To Buddy Rich". All About Jazz. Retrieved 28 July 2015. Alexander, Susan (March 1979). "Phil Collins: On the Move". Modern Drummer. pp. 10–12, 54. Retrieved 20 January 2022. Coleman 1997, p. 30. Coleman 1997, pp. 29, 47. Collins 2016, p. 55. Gallo 1978, p. 120. "Jack Wild obituary". The Independent. Retrieved 9 November 2023. "Making Beatlemania: A Hard Day's Night at 50". Vanity Fair. Retrieved 15 March 2024. McLean, Craig (4 September 2010). "Rock's outsider: Phil Collins interview". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 25 November 2019. Collins, Phil (2016). Not Dead Yet. Century Books. p. 34. ISBN 978-1780895123. Brown, Len (17 November 1988). "Well Chuffed". New Musical Express. Retrieved 14 April 2020 – via Rock's Backpages. "Film details". Chittybangbang.com. Retrieved 22 September 2014. Coleman 1997, p. 51. Coleman 1997, pp. 43–44, 46. "Phil Collins Interviews – Q – December 1993". Q. December 1993. Archived from the original on 20 October 2002. Retrieved 17 July 2019 – via PhilCollins.co.uk. Coleman 1997, p. 53. Coleman 1997, p. 59. [1] Archived 13 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine Coleman 1997, p. 55. Taysom, Joe (10 February 2021). "The hilarious prank George Harrison pulled on Phil Collins". Far Out. Retrieved 22 April 2021. Coleman 1997, p. 61. "Genesis" Biography, Billboard. Retrieved 16 January 2006. Coleman 1997, p. 63. Genesis 2007, p. 94. Collins 2016, p. 84. Thompson 2004, p. 129. Thompson 2004, p. 117. "Bio: Phil Collins". MTV Artists. Retrieved 30 September 2013. "Phil Collins | full Official Chart History". Official Charts Company. Retrieved 23 February 2017. Nicholson, Kris (20 May 1976). "Genesis – Album Reviews – A Trick of the Tail". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 12 March 2007. Retrieved 10 February 2006. Roberts, David (2006). British Hit Singles & Albums. London: Guinness World Records Ltd. Whitburn 2000, pp. 143–144. Coleman 1997, p. 4. Coleman 1997, p. 84. Collins 2016, p. 114. Ken Brooks, "Phil Lynott & Thin Lizzy: Rockin' Vagabond", Agenda, 2000, pp. 64–68 "The Geese and the Ghost". Allmusic. Retrieved 22 December 2017 Fielder, Hugh (27 October 1979). "The return of... Getting it together in the Country". Sounds. Retrieved 11 October 2014. Starr, Red. "Genesis: Duke". Smash Hits (17–30 April 1980): 30. Sendra, Tim. "AllMusic Review by Tim Sendra". AllMusic. Retrieved 14 March 2016. Thompson 2004, p. 181. West, David (5 February 2014). "Classic Drum Sounds: 'In The Air Tonight'". MusicRadar. Retrieved 14 March 2016. "American album certifications – Phil Collins". RIAA. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 17 December 2014. McCall, Douglas (2013). Monty Python: A Chronology, 1969–2012, 2d ed. p. 82. McFarland Michaels, Sean (27 April 2011). "John Martyn's final recordings to be released". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 21 December 2016. "Anni-Frid Lyngstad". Billboard. Retrieved 27 March 2015. Christ, Shawn (6 January 2015). "Robert Plant Praises Phil Collins For Encouraging His Solo Career After Led Zeppelin's Split". Music Times. Retrieved 27 March 2015. Strange, Paul (9 October 1982). "The lamp wakes up". Melody Maker. Retrieved 23 September 2015. Ruhlmann, William. "Strip – Adam Ant | Songs, Reviews, Credits". AllMusic. Retrieved 29 October 2015. Bowler & Dray 1992, pp. 191, 251. Bronson 1998, p. 586. "Down The Academy". Los Angeles Times. Los Angeles. 31 March 1985. Retrieved 13 August 2015. Wolmuth, Roger (8 July 1985). "Short, Pudgy and Bald, All Phil Collins Produces Is Hits". People. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 13 August 2015. Ruhlmann, William. "Chinese Wall – Philip Bailey | Songs, Reviews, Credits". AllMusic. Retrieved 29 October 2015. mtv (12 July 2010). "Looking Back At Live Aid, 25 Years Later". MTV. Retrieved 23 February 2017. "RIAA: Gold and Platinum". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved 18 November 2023. Fricke, David (9 May 1985). "No Jacket Required Album Review". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 30 September 2013. Bronson 1998, p. 611. Courtney, Kevin (22 October 2010). "Love Don't Come Easy: Artists We Love to Hate". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on 24 October 2010. Retrieved 24 October 2010. "Brit Awards: Phil Collins". Brit Awards. Archived from the original on 9 November 2014. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "Past Winners: Phil Collins". The GRAMMYs. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "How Phil Collins Became Live Aid's Transcontinental MVP". Ultimate Classic Rock. Retrieved 8 June 2020. "Zeppelin defend Live Aid opt out". BBC News. 4 August 2004. Retrieved 23 July 2014. "Page: 'Collins Was A Disastrous Drummer'". Contactmusic.com. 4 December 2007. Retrieved 23 July 2014. Sellers, John (19 August 2010). "Tough Questions for Phil Collins". Spin. Retrieved 23 July 2014. Hoerburger, Rob (23 May 1985). "Phil Collins Beats the Odds". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 18 November 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2015. "MTV Video Music Awards". MTV. 1987. Retrieved 30 September 2013. "Rolling Stone : Genesis: Invisible Touch : Music Reviews". Archive.is. Archived from the original on 12 March 2007. Retrieved 21 January 2019. Dean 2003, pp. 180, 453. Ruhlmann, AWilliam. "August – Eric Clapton | Songs, Reviews, Credits". AllMusic. Retrieved 29 October 2015. (9 September 1988). "Prince Charles cancels royal film date". Manila Standard (Manila). Ebert, Roger (25 November 1988). "Buster Movie Review". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved 30 September 2013. Röttgers 2015, pp. 82–83. "Waxing Enthusiastic Over Tussaud's Rock 'n' Roll Circus : Nostalgia: Opened less than a year ago in London, the rock museum features robotic figures of rock stars sculpted in wax. Each exhibit is accompanied by music and comment". Los Angeles Times. 4 August 1990. Retrieved 13 July 2023. Silverman, David (24 August 1989). "'Tommy' Comes Home". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved 23 July 2014. Copsey, Rob (4 July 2016). "The UK's 60 official biggest selling albums of all time revealed". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on 9 July 2016. Retrieved 11 May 2018. "Highest Gold Platinum certifications as of 2008" (PDF). International Federation of the Phonographic Industry. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 January 2011. Retrieved 3 July 2020. Larkin 2007, p. 263. Wilson, Hugh (3 April 2013). "Famous men and their misunderstood politics". MSN. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 9 February 2014. Holden, Stephen (6 December 1989). "The Pop Life". The New York Times. Retrieved 21 August 2014. "1990 Brit Awards". Brit Awards. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "Phil Collins". Rockonthenet.com. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "MTV Video Music Awards". MTV. 1990. Retrieved 30 September 2013. Ellen, Mark (30 October 2015). "Does Everybody Still Hate Phil Collins?*". Classic Rock. Retrieved 18 October 2018. "20th American Music Awards". Rockonthenet.com. Retrieved 22 September 2014. Ruhlmann, William. Phil Collins at AllMusic Coleman 1997, p. 181. de Lisle, Tim (17 September 2004). "Who held a gun to Leonard Cohen's head?". The Guardian. Retrieved 7 April 2016. Coleman 1997, p. 216. Kronberger, Heinz (September 1997). "All the World's a Stage". Rhythm. Retrieved 21 April 2020. Browne, David (1 November 1996). "Dance into the Light Review". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 3 October 2013. Retrieved 30 September 2013. "Billboard 6 September 1997". p.59. Billboard. Retrieved 20 June 2022 "Phil Collins – True Colors (CD)". Discogs. 1998. Retrieved 23 February 2017. Billboard magazine, Phil Collins Chart History. Retrieved 13 January 2006. "Phil Collins". Hwof.com. Archived from the original on 7 July 2019. Retrieved 22 September 2014. Lynskey, Dorian. "Phil Collins returns: 'I got letters from nurses saying, "That's it, I'm not buying your records"' | Life and style". The Guardian. Retrieved 23 February 2017. "Partying at the palace". BBC News. 4 June 2002. Retrieved 17 December 2014. "Disney Legends". Disney D23. Retrieved 24 February 2013. "Best Music and Albums". Metacritic. Retrieved 23 February 2017. Thompson 2004, p. 260. Moore, Roger (1 November 2003). "A Genesis For Phil Collins". Orlando Sentinel. Retrieved 6 July 2015. "Songwriters Hall of Fame announces 2003 inductees: Phil Collins, Queen, Van Morrison and Little Richard". Songwriters Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on 8 March 2013. Retrieved 24 February 2013. Touchette, Deborah. "Famous Baby Boomers with Significant Hearing Loss and/or Tinnitus". Today's Senior Magazine. Retrieved 30 September 2013. Ruhlmann, William (27 June 2006). "Tarzan: The Broadway Musical [Original Broadway Cast Recording] – Original Broadway Cast | Songs, Reviews, Credits". AllMusic. Retrieved 29 October 2015. "Genesis to participate in Live Earth". MSN. Archived from the original on 19 August 2009. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "Genesis in Las Vegas last night (VH-1 Rock Honors)". Genesis-news.com. Archived from the original on 4 September 2012. Retrieved 29 October 2015. "The 53rd Ivor Novello Awards" Archived 3 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine. The Ivors. Retrieved 31 December 2017 "Phil Collins To Record Motown Covers Album". Undercover.com.au. 24 October 2009. Archived from the original on 21 November 2009. Retrieved 26 March 2010. Broadcast Yourself. YouTube. 17 November 2009. Retrieved 26 March 2010. "Phil Collins tops album chart after 12 years". BBC News. 27 September 2010. "Later with Jools Holland". BBC. 17 September 2010. Retrieved 29 July 2015. "Genesis inducted into hall of fame". Belfast Telegraph. 16 March 2010. Retrieved 23 February 2013. "Phil Collins: 1.730 Wochen in den Charts". Media-control.de. 24 January 2011. Retrieved 9 July 2011. Wardrop, Murray (3 March 2011). "Phil Collins calls time on music career". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 4 March 2011. Bartolomeo, Joey (7 March 2011). "Phil Collins Is Not Retiring". People. Retrieved 23 February 2017. "Phil Collins confirms retirement". BBC News. 9 March 2011. Retrieved 9 March 2011. "A Message From Phil". Archived from the original on 13 November 2013. Retrieved 21 January 2019. "Adele Claims 74th Week in Billboard 200 Top Ten As Nas Takes #1 Spot". Capital. 25 July 2012. Retrieved 22 September 2014. Michaels, Sean (28 November 2013). "Phil Collins considering a return to music?". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 4 December 2013. "Phil Collins Mulling a Musical Comeback". Rolling Stone. 3 December 2013. Retrieved 22 September 2014. Greene, Andy (24 January 2014). "Phil Collins: 'I've Just Started to Work With Adele'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 27 January 2014. Retrieved 25 January 2014. "Adele working with Phil Collins". UTV. 24 January 2014. Archived from the original on 2 February 2014. Retrieved 25 January 2014. Augustin, Camille (24 January 2014). "Adele To Hit The Studio With Phil Collins?". Vibe. Retrieved 25 January 2014. Rutherford, Kevin (24 January 2014). "Adele, Phil Collins Working on New Music Together". Billboard. Retrieved 25 January 2014. "Adele chose motherhood over Phil Collins collaboration". 3 News. 30 September 2014. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 1 October 2014. Reed, Ryan (23 May 2014). "Watch Phil Collins Sing 'In the Air Tonight' for First Time in Years". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 24 May 2014. "Phil Collins performs at school concert". BBC News. 30 May 2014. Retrieved 30 May 2014. "Phil Collins to perform benefit concert". Ultimate Classic Rock. 7 August 2014. Retrieved 9 August 2014. Blistein, Jon (12 May 2015). "Phil Collins Readies Deluxe Reissues of Solo Catalog". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 13 May 2015. "Phil Collins 'no longer retired'". 28 October 2015. Retrieved 28 October 2015. Greene, Andy (28 October 2015). "Phil Collins Plotting Comeback: 'I Am No Longer Retired'". Retrieved 28 October 2015. "Phil Collins Reshot All His Original Album Covers for the 2016 Reissues". PetaPixel. 8 April 2016. Retrieved 14 May 2018. "Phil Collins goes digital with demos, B-sides and remixes". ABC News. Archived from the original on 24 May 2019. Retrieved 21 May 2019. Kreps, Daniel (12 October 2015). "Phil Collins' 'Warts and All' Autobiography Arriving in 2016". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 28 October 2015. "Phil Collins marks comeback with European tour". BBC News. Retrieved 17 October 2016. "Phil Collins to play his biggest-ever solo show in Hyde Park". The Guardian. 3 November 2016. Hall, James (23 November 2017). "Against all odds, Phil Collins carries the crowd – review". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. "Phil Collins announces Mexico, South America tour dates for 2018". Consequence. 27 November 2017. Retrieved 16 May 2018. "Phil Collins announces first North American tour in 12 years". Consequence. 7 May 2018. Retrieved 16 May 2018. ConcertFix. "Phil Collins Tour Dates & Concert Tickets 2019". ConcertFix. Retrieved 26 March 2019. Greene, Andy (4 March 2020). "Genesis to Launch 'The Last Domino?' Reunion Tour in April 2021". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 4 March 2020. Sicily, Angeline (27 March 2022). "Phil Collins Retiring? Drummer Worries Fans During Last Performance With Genesis". Music Times. Retrieved 28 March 2022. Lackowski 2009, p. 11. Mackinnon, Eric (3 October 2014). "Peart named most influential prog drummer". Louder. Retrieved 21 August 2015. "6 pioneers of prog rock drumming". MusicRadar. 2 June 2015. Archived from the original on 13 February 2017. Retrieved 22 August 2015. "Zeppelin voted 'ideal supergroup'". BBC News. 10 July 2005. Retrieved 27 August 2015. "The Greatest Drummers of All Time!". Gigwise. 29 May 2008. Retrieved 4 June 2014. "The 20 greatest drummers of the last 25 years". MusicRadar. 10 August 2010. Retrieved 4 June 2014. Tolleson, Robin (Summer 1987). "Phil Collins & Chester Thompson: The Drums of Genesis". Drums and Drumming. p. 42. Retrieved 11 June 2018. Barnes, Chris (31 August 2010). "Drum Icon Interviews: Taylor Hawkins". MusicRadar. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 21 August 2015. Dome, Malcolm (7 April 2014). "Taylor Hawkins: My Prog Heroes". TeamRock. Archived from the original on 21 November 2016. Retrieved 21 August 2015. "Mike Portnoy.com The Official Website". Mike Portnoy. Archived from the original on 17 July 2009. Retrieved 21 August 2015. "Mike Portnoy Interviewed On Drum Talk TV (Video)". Blabbermouth.net. 7 February 2014. Retrieved 16 November 2015. Bosso, Joe (31 May 2013). "Marco Minnemann picks 13 essential drum albums". MusicRadar. Archived from the original on 13 February 2017. Retrieved 12 November 2015. Kearns, Kevin (12 May 2004). "Brann Dailor of Mastodon". Modern Drummer. Archived from the original on 6 March 2017. Retrieved 24 March 2017. Giammetti, Mario (September 2011). "Nick D'Virgilio exclusive interview From Dusk # 68 – September 2011". www.dusk.it. Archived from the original on 7 November 2014. Retrieved 31 March 2017. Haid, Mike (14 October 2014). "The Essence of Progressive Drumming". Modern Drummer. Retrieved 24 March 2017. Cular, Jackie (12 October 2016). "Dance Gavin Dance (Video)" (video) (Interview). chorus.fm (published 18 October 2016). Event occurs at 4:47. Retrieved 12 May 2017. "John Merryman". Sick Drummer Magazine. 9 September 2007. Archived from the original on 9 July 2017. Retrieved 12 July 2017. Barnes, Chris (10 August 2017). "Steven Wilson's Craig Blundell: 10 drumming albums that changed my life". MusicRadar. Retrieved 15 August 2017. Lafon, Mitch (9 March 2022). "Nic Collins talks Drums, Genesis tour and his band Better Strangers/Interview 2022". Youtube.com. Retrieved 28 August 2022. Fish, Scott (18 April 2018). "Jason Bonham: The Last Time I Remember My Father Showing Me Anything". ScottKFish.com. Retrieved 18 April 2018. "Vintage drum gear: Phil Collins' Pearl DLX kit". Music radar. 22 December 2017. Leight, Elias (6 December 2016). "8 ways the 808 drum machine changed pop music". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 7 December 2016. Retrieved 16 January 2016. Flans, Robyn (1 May 2005). "Classic Tracks: Phil Collins's "In the Air Tonight"". Mix. Archived from the original on 3 March 2011. "Hear what Phil Collins has to say about his collection of Korg keyboards". Archived 11 January 2014 at the Wayback Machine "Festival de Cannes: Frauds". festival-cannes.com. Retrieved 18 August 2009. Baker, Glenn A. (1993). "Phil Collins Interview". Penthouse. Archived from the original on 20 December 2005. Retrieved 30 September 2013. "Phil Collins shares thoughts on his music's role in 'American Psycho' ". NME. Retrieved 6 October 2019 Röttgers 2015, p. 74. "The Two Ronnies: series 12 episode 3". BBC. 22 December 2017. "Star consults lawyers over TV spoof". BBC News. 18 July 2001. Retrieved 13 August 2015. Downey, Ryan J. (6 December 2009). "Todd Phillips Discusses His Musical Decisions For 'The Hangover'". MTV. Tabloid Hell: Phil Collins, NME, 19 September 2007. Retrieved 5 August 2019. "Drumming gorilla beats ad rivals". The Guardian. 13 March 2008. Retrieved 29 March 2022. Jeffries, David (31 July 2007). "Sean Kingston – Sean Kingston | Songs, Reviews, Credits". AllMusic. Retrieved 23 February 2017. "South Park | South Park – Watch Full Episodes, Clips & More | South Park Studios" – via southpark.cc.com. "Phil Collins -darra on vakava asia – auttaako siihen Phil Collins? Pian kysymystä pääsee testaamaan käytännössä". Rumba.fi. Retrieved 24 February 2019 "Psych: Disco Didn't Die. It Was Murdered!". Aoltv.com. 16 August 2008. Archived from the original on 13 November 2013. Retrieved 13 June 2013. "Taking Collins seriously". BBC News. 19 April 2000. Retrieved 20 June 2013. Strong, Martin C. (December 2011). "Phil Collins". Great Rock Bible. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. Lester, Paul (23 October 2013). "The musical evolution of cool: from heinous to hip". The Guardian. Retrieved 25 August 2014. Lawson, Mark (4 January 2009). "Phil Collins". Mark Lawson Talks To. Season 4. Episode 1. BBC Four. BBC. Collins has had to endure two very different profiles in the media. Originally pop's Mr. Nice Guy, patron saint of ordinary blokes, he has more recently been accused of blandness, tax exile and ending a marriage by sending a fax. "I'm Not So Ambitious As I Was". Replay.waybackmachine.org. Archived from the original on 22 April 2009. Retrieved 22 September 2014. Sullivan, Caroline (19 September 2007). "I wish I'd never heard of Phil Collins". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 5 March 2013. Petridis, Alexis (20 September 2002). "Peter Gabriel: Up". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 23 June 2013. Khan, Urmee (17 August 2008). "Phil Collins pays £25 million in divorce settlement". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 20 August 2008. DiGiacomo, Frank (21 June 1999). "The Collins Menace". New York Observer. Retrieved 2 August 2014. Brackett 2004, p. 182. Modell, Josh (18 June 2013). "My dad toured with Phil Collins". The A.V. Club. Retrieved 11 August 2014. Seriously, try to go a few days without accidentally hearing a snippet [of Collins] somewhere. Chester, Tim (10 March 2011). "Is It Time We All Stopped Hating Phil Collins?". NME. Retrieved 19 October 2013. Hedegaard, Erik (4 March 2011). "Phil Collins' Last Stand: Why the Troubled Pop Star Wants to Call It Quits (page 1)". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 8 October 2015. Retrieved 7 November 2013. Jones 2013, p. 188. "Waters hard to please". Spartanburg Herald-Journal. 1 August 1990. Retrieved 23 July 2014. Walton, James (13 April 2013). "Why David Bowie is still underrated". The Spectator. Retrieved 7 August 2014. Quantick, David. "David Bowie Black Tie White Noise Review". BBC. Retrieved 7 August 2014. Brunner, Rob (30 June 2000). "Bragg-ing Rites". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 9 February 2014. Hedegaard, Erik (4 March 2011). "Phil Collins' Last Stand: Why the Troubled Pop Star Wants to Call It Quits (page 2)". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 8 March 2011. Retrieved 13 November 2013. Bainbridge, Luke (13 October 2007). "The 10: right-wing rockers". The Observer. London. Retrieved 16 July 2014. Savage, Mark (24 November 2013). "1,000 Number ones: A chart history". BBC News. Retrieved 16 April 2014. "Phil Collins: I quit music but no one will miss me". The Telegraph. 4 March 2011. Retrieved 22 September 2014. "Britpop: The Great Rock'n'Roll Swindle". Mojo (113). April 2003. Williams, Lowri (7 September 2005). "Phil Collins Hits Back at Noel Gallagher". Gigwise. Retrieved 23 July 2014. Parvizi, Lauren (9 August 2010). "Phil Collins: 'I was cocky and annoying; I'm sorry'". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved 11 August 2014. "Phil Collins apologises for his success after quitting music". NME. 5 March 2011. Retrieved 19 October 2013. "The Things They Say". Contactmusic.com. 13 September 2007. Retrieved 2 November 2013. McCormick, Neil. "He could barely walk but Phil Collins still knocked it out of Hyde Park – review". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 19 November 2018. Simpson, Dave (2 December 2013). "Is Phil Collins the godfather of popular culture?". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 4 December 2013. Lapatine, Scott (20 November 2008). "Premature Evaluation: Kanye West – 808s & Heartbreak". Stereogum. Retrieved 22 February 2015. Farber, Jim (16 February 2014). "Phil Collins goes from reviled to revered". New York Daily News. Retrieved 11 August 2014. "Postal Service Hearts Pop Music". Stereogum. 7 September 2004. Retrieved 2 April 2015. Wardrop, Murray (8 May 2009). "Ozzy Osbourne: "I love Phil Collins"". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 22 February 2015. Lester, Paul (26 February 2014). "David Crosby: 'The FBI scare me more than Hell's Angels'". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 27 July 2015. Fitzpatrick, Rob. "'I'm The Antichrist of Music' Immensely popular for decades, yet a permanent resident on music's outermost fringes of fashionability, Phil Collins would like to apologise. Are you ready to forgive?". FHM. April 2011. Gross, Josh (12 June 2013). "Heza for Generationals". Boise Weekly. Archived from the original on 19 August 2014. Retrieved 16 August 2014. Hampp, Andrew (17 October 2013). "Gimme Five: St. Lucia's Biggest Musical Influences". Billboard. Retrieved 25 February 2016. Moore, Alex (24 September 2010). "Phil Collins: Indie Rock's New Muse". Death and Taxes. Retrieved 2 April 2015. Walsh, John (20 June 2014). "Phil Collins: The King Lear of pop music". The Independent. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 16 August 2014. Today, USA; Jazz.com; UltimateClassicRock.com; at, among others Contact Something Else! (14 March 2014). "Peter Gabriel on the Depression that Gripped Genesis' Phil Collins: 'It's Been a Very Difficult Time'". Something Else!. Retrieved 5 June 2020. "Lily Collins: 'Julia Roberts tore my hair out'". The Telegraph. 22 February 2012. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 16 August 2014. McGee, Alan (13 January 2009). "The non-ironic revival of Phil Collins". The Guardian. Retrieved 27 July 2015. Mills, Gary (26 May 2010). "No Flak Jacket Required: In Defence Of Phil Collins". The Quietus. Retrieved 23 July 2014. Sheppard, David. "Phil Collins Going Back Review". BBC. Retrieved 19 July 2015. Conrad, Anna (10 May 2012). "10 Much-Mocked Artists It's Time We Forgave". NME. Retrieved 18 August 2014. "An interview with film producer Joely Collins on Becoming Redwood". UrbanMoms. 25 April 2013. Retrieved 3 August 2015. "Phil Collins sued by ex-wife over claims made in autobiography". Sky News. 3 December 2016. Retrieved 5 December 2016. "Dropping the Ax Via Fax". People. 8 August 1994. Retrieved 14 June 2019. Cottrill, Jeffrey (23 July 2014). "Phil Collins reportedly pays ex-wife $50 million in divorce settlement". Divorce Magazine. Retrieved 17 June 2019. "A brief bio of Orianne Collins". Orianne Collins Jewellery. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 4 August 2015. Richard, Katja (20 February 2016). "Orianne Collins: "Phil und ich wollen nochmals heiraten!" / Orianne Collins: "Phil and I want to get married again!"". Blick. Archived from the original on 21 February 2016. Retrieved 23 February 2016. Webber, Stephanie (20 February 2016). "Phil Collins to Remarry His Third Ex-Wife, Orianne Cevey, After $46 Million Divorce". Us Weekly. Retrieved 23 February 2016. Krebs, Florian (6 October 2023). "Von Hannover nach Innsbruck. So geht's dem Collins-Sohn". Bild (in German). Retrieved 21 December 2023. Michaels, Sean (19 August 2008). "Phil Collins sets divorce pay-out record". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 5 December 2016. "Phil Collins Plotting Comeback: 'I Am No Longer Retired'". Rolling Stone. 28 October 2015. Retrieved 29 October 2015. "Against all odds, Phil Collins is back with his ex-wife after £25m divorce settlement". The Daily Telegraph. 29 January 2016. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 30 January 2016. "Phil Collins' ex-wife Orianne Cevey 'still refusing to leave Miami house'". Metro. 21 October 2020. Retrieved 2 November 2020. San Juan, Rebecca (28 January 2021). "Phil Collins' Miami Beach house sold to billionaire businessman and wife for $39.25M". Miami Herald. Retrieved 5 February 2021. "Phil Collins flies in for bro's MBE". Independent. 23 May 2018. Breihan, Tom (28 August 2012). "The 30 Richest Drummers in the World". Stereogum. Retrieved 30 May 2014. Hanley, James (10 May 2018). "Paul McCartney tops 2018 Sunday Times list of richest musicians". musicweek.com. Retrieved 18 February 2019. Watson-Smyth, Kate (30 March 2000). "Phil Collins sues backing band to reclaim 'overpaid' royalties'". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2010. Watson-Smyth, Kate (20 April 2000). "Phil Collins wins claim he overpaid musicians". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 22 May 2010. Morden, Darryl (19 September 2002). "Phil Collins comes clean on hearing-loss scare". Launch. Archived from the original on 30 June 2015. Retrieved 9 March 2020.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Statement from Phil Collins". Genesis-music.com. 10 September 2009. Archived from the original on 26 October 2009. Retrieved 1 January 2010. Michaels, Sean (11 November 2010). "Phil Collins says he considered suicide". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 6 June 2013. Front Row (2014) BBC Radio 4, 3 October 2014. "Neck surgery puts Phil Collins on the drumming disabled list". Cleveland.com. 19 October 2009. Retrieved 9 March 2020. "Phil Collins Plotting Comeback: 'I Am No Longer Retired'". Rolling Stone. 28 October 2015. "Phil Collins Comes Out Of Retirement, Wants To Play Australian Stadiums – Music Feeds". 29 October 2015. Savage, Mark (22 November 2016). "Phil Collins: Back from the brink after alcohol battle". BBC. Retrieved 21 June 2018. Cumming, Ed (25 January 2017). "Phil Collins: the cool 'elder statesman' of pop?". The Independent. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 9 March 2020. France, Lisa (8 June 2017). "Phil Collins hospitalized after fall". Retrieved 8 June 2017. Boucher, Phil; Mizoguchi, Karen (11 May 2018). "Phil Collins Is a 'Little Slower but Mentally Very on It' Nearly a Year After Nasty Fall: Source". People. Retrieved 21 June 2018. Hyden, Steven (20 June 2018). "Take a Look at Him Now: The Many Lives of Phil Collins". The Ringer. Retrieved 21 June 2018. "University will give Phil Collins an honorary doctorate degree". Lakeland Ledger. Retrieved 12 May 2012. "Music History for 4 May". OnThisDay.com. Retrieved 12 May 2012. "McMurry doctorate a 'tremendous honor,' Phil Collins says". ARNews Weekend. Archived from the original on 16 May 2012. Retrieved 12 May 2012. Long, Pat (8 March 2012). "Why are there so few right-wing rock stars?". New Statesman. Retrieved 4 April 2013. "Music's millionaires club honoured". BBC News. 14 July 2000. Retrieved 20 June 2013. Bland, Archie (1 February 2012). "Archie Bland: Forget music – financial wars are the route to power". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 5 October 2013. "Hit & Run: Jarvis' bum note". The Independent. London. 29 April 2009. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 23 June 2014. "Should I stay or should I go?". The Economist. 21 April 2015. Retrieved 4 July 2016. Matthews, Jenny (21 April 2005). "Who's backing whom at the election?". BBC News. Retrieved 20 June 2013. Paphides, Pete (25 April 2008). "Phil Collins casually serves notice of his retirement". The Times. London. Retrieved 22 May 2010. Horin, Adele (26 July 2008). "Tax tourists and the crown prince of thieves". The Sydney Morning Herald. Sydney. Retrieved 19 March 2015. Leach, Jimmy (5 October 2009). "Ten celebrity tax exiles". The Independent. London. Retrieved 17 October 2013. Meller, David (16 May 2014). "Paul Heaton and Jacqui Abbott – What Have We Become". musicOMH. Retrieved 18 June 2014. Lynskey, Dorian (11 February 2016). "Phil Collins returns: 'I got letters from nurses saying, "That's it, I'm not buying your records"'". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 24 February 2016. "Radio". Artists Against Racism. Archived from the original on 7 October 2020. Retrieved 21 January 2019. "Phil Collins issues Donald Trump with cease and desist order after 'In The Air Tonight' is played at a rally". NME. 15 October 2020. "Phil Collins serves Trump with a cease and desist order after 'In the Air Tonight' plays at rally". The Independent. 16 October 2020. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Michels, Patrick (11 May 2010). "Remembering the Alamo with Phil Collins". Dallas Observer. Archived from the original on 29 April 2015. Retrieved 29 June 2011. "The Alamo and Beyond: A Collector's Journey With special guest and author, Phil Collins". Dallas Historical Society. Archived from the original on 10 May 2012. Retrieved 12 May 2012. "PHIL COLLINS AND THE WILD FRONTIER by Ben Powell". Kickstarter. Retrieved 23 February 2017. "Phil Collins Press Conference". The Official Alamo Website. 21 July 2014. Archived from the original on 28 September 2014. Retrieved 22 September 2014. Cobler, Nicole (11 March 2015). "Phil Collins made an 'honorary Texan' by the state legislature". mysanantonio.com. Retrieved 13 March 2015. Reynolds, Nigel (24 October 2007). "Rod Stewart is a model railway enthusiast". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 26 July 2014. "Toy Soldiers for Big Boys". www.koreatimes.co.kr. Retrieved 19 February 2021. Holman, Celia (25 February 2016). "Twickenham's rock and roll legacy". Essential Surrey. Retrieved 30 November 2022. "Remember the Secret Policeman's Ball?". BBC. Retrieved 21 August 2019. "No. 53696". The London Gazette (Supplement). 11 June 1994. p. 4. "Prince's Trust Rock Gala". Kate Bush Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on 19 May 2021. Retrieved 19 May 2021. "TRH attend The Prince's Trust Rock Gala 2010". PrinceofWales.gov.uk. 4 March 2018.[permanent dead link] McCann 2009, p. 188. "Phil Collins". Kentucky Fried Cruelty. Retrieved 26 March 2010. "Little Dreams Foundation". Ldf.cc. Archived from the original on 5 April 2012. Retrieved 29 October 2015. "Phil Collins says he is writing songs again". Newsday. 4 December 2013. Retrieved 6 December 2013. "Musician Phil Collins Donates Nearly $54,000 in South African Royalties to AIDS Foundation". The Body. 29 October 2003. Archived from the original on 21 May 2013. Retrieved 20 June 2013. "Phil Collins gives money away". Budapest Report. Archived from the original on 14 January 2011. "Genesis Biography". Billboard. Retrieved 16 January 2006. "Phil Collins Chart History". Billboard. Retrieved 13 January 2006. Banks, Tony; Collins, Phil; Gabriel, Peter; Hackett, Steve; Rutherford, Mike (2007). Dodd, Philipp (ed.). Genesis: Chapter and Verse. Weidenfeld & Nicolson. ISBN 978-0-297-84434-1. Bowler, Dave; Dray, Bryan (1992). Genesis: A Biography. Sidgwick & Jackson. ISBN 978-0-283-06132-5. Brackett, Nathan (2004). The New Rolling Stone Album Guide. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-743-20169-8. Bronson, Fred (1998). The Billboard Book of Number One Hits. Billboard Books. ISBN 978-0-823-07641-3. Coleman, Ray (1997). Phil Collins: The Definitive Biography. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-81784-2. Collins, Phil (2016). Not Dead Yet: The Memoir. Crown Advocate. ISBN 978-1-101-90747-4. Dean, Maury (2003). Rock N' Roll Gold Rush: A Singles Un-cyclopedia. Algora Publishing. ISBN 978-0-875-86207-1. Gallo, Armando (1978). Genesis: The Evolution of a Rock Band. Sidgwick and Jackson Limited. ISBN 0-283-98440-6. Jones, Dylan (2013). The Eighties: One Day, One Decade. Random House. ISBN 978-1-409-05225-8. Lackowski, Rich (2009). On the Beaten Path – Progressive Rock: The Drummer's Guide to the Genre and the Legends Who Defined It. Alfred Publishing. ISBN 978-0-739-05671-4. Larkin, Colin (2007). The Encyclopedia of Popular Music (5th ed.). Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-0-857-12595-8. McCann, Graham (2009). Bounder! The Biography of Terry-Thomas. Aurum Press. ISBN 978-1-845-13441-9. Röttgers, Philipp (2015). Two Eras of Genesis? – The Development of a Rock Band. Tectum Wissenschaftsverlag. ISBN 978-3-828-86270-8. Thompson, Dave (2004). Turn It On Again: Peter Gabriel, Phil Collins and Genesis'. BackBeat Books. ISBN 978-0-879-30810-0. Whitburn, John (2000). The "Billboard" Book of Top 40 Hits: Complete Chart Information About the Artists and Their Songs, 1955 to 2000 (7 ed.). Billboard Books. ISBN 978-0-823-07690-1. Phil Collins at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Phil Collins at Curlie Phil Collins at IMDb Phil Collins discography at Discogs