Look up Drake or drake in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Drake may refer to: A male duck Drake (surname), a list of people and fictional characters with the family name Drake (given name), a list of people and fictional characters with the given name Drake (musician) (born 1986), Canadian rapper, singer, and actor Aubrey Drake Graham Drake, Arizona, an unincorporated community Drake, Colorado, an unincorporated community Drake, Illinois, an unincorporated community Drake, Kentucky, an unincorporated community Drake, Missouri, an unincorporated community Drake, North Dakota, a town Drake, North Carolina, a place in Nash County near Dr. Franklin Hart Farm Drake, South Carolina, an unincorporated community Drake Park, Bend, Oregon Drake Peak, Oregon Drake Passage, between Cape Horn and Antarctica Drake Head, Oates Land, a headland Drake Icefall, Ellsworth Land Drake County, New South Wales, Australia Drake, New South Wales, a parish and rural community Drake, Saskatchewan, Canada, a village Drake (ward), a ward in the city of Plymouth, United Kingdom HMS Drake, several British Royal Navy ships Drake-class cruiser, a Royal Navy class of armoured cruisers in service up to 1920 Pasha Bulker, later renamed Drake, a bulk carrier launched in 2006 Drake (ship), various ships Drake University, Des Moines, Iowa, United States Drake Bulldogs, the school's athletic program Drake Stadium (1904), an outdoor multiuse sports field at Drake University from 1904 to 1925 Drake Stadium (Drake University), a sports facility on the campus Drake Fieldhouse, an athletic facility Drake Stadium (UCLA), University of California, Los Angeles Drake Field (stadium), Auburn University Drake Performance and Event Center, Ohio State University J. F. Drake Middle School, Auburn, Alabama O. B. Drake Middle School, Arvada, Colorado Drake Planetarium and Science Center, Cincinnati, Ohio Battle of Goodenough Island or Operation Drake, a World War II battle Drake Supermarkets, an Australian chain Drake Hotel (disambiguation) Drake baronets, three titles in the Baronetage of England and one in the Baronetage of Great Britain Drake Street, Hong Kong Drake (mythology), a term related to and often synonymous with dragon Drake Field, a public-use airport south of Fayetteville, Arkansas Drake, two variants of the Goodyear Duck 1940s American light amphibious aircraft Drake Memorial Hospital, Cincinnati, Ohio, notable as a locale for crimes by serial killer Donald Harvey The Drake, the fictional hotel that is the subject of the American TV series 666 Park Avenue R. L. Drake Company, electronics manufacturer Drake equation Drake Fountain, Chicago, Illinois Drake House (disambiguation) Drake Well, an oil well in Pennsylvania which sparked the first oil boom in the United States Drake's (disambiguation), a list of Drake's and Drakes This disambiguation page lists articles associated with the title Drake. If an internal link led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article.