Catherine Bush CBE (born 30 July 1958) is an English singer, songwriter, record producer and dancer. In 1978, at the age of 19, she topped the UK Singles Chart for four weeks with her debut single "Wuthering Heights", becoming the first female artist to achieve a UK number one with a self-written song. Bush has since released 25 UK Top 40 singles, including the Top 10 hits "The Man with the Child in His Eyes", "Babooshka", "Running Up That Hill", "Don't Give Up" (a duet with Peter Gabriel), and "King of the Mountain". All nine of her studio albums reached the UK Top 10, with all but one reaching the top five, including the UK number one albums Never for Ever (1980), Hounds of Love (1985) and the greatest hits compilation The Whole Story (1986). She was the first British solo female artist to top the UK album charts and the first female artist to enter the album chart at number one. Bush began writing songs at 11. She was signed to EMI Records after Pink Floyd guitarist David Gilmour helped produce a demo tape. Her debut album, The Kick Inside, was released in 1978. Bush slowly gained artistic independence in album production and has produced all her studio albums by herself since The Dreaming (1982). She took a hiatus between her seventh and eighth albums, The Red Shoes (1993) and Aerial (2005). In 2011, Bush released the albums Director's Cut and 50 Words for Snow. Bush drew attention again in 2014 with her concert residency Before the Dawn, her first shows since 1979's The Tour of Life. In 2022, "Running Up That Hill" received renewed attention after it appeared in the Netflix series Stranger Things, becoming Bush's second UK number one and reaching the top of several other charts. It also reached number 3 on the US Billboard Hot 100, and its parent album, Hounds of Love, became Bush's first album to reach the top of a Billboard albums chart. Bush's eclectic musical style, unconventional lyrics, performances and literary themes have influenced a diverse range of artists. She has received 14 Brit Awards nominations, winning for Best British Female Artist in 1987, and has been nominated for three Grammy Awards. In 2002, Bush was recognised with an Ivor Novello Award for Outstanding Contribution to British Music. She was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2013 New Year Honours for services to music. She also became a Fellow of The Ivors Academy in the UK in 2020. That year, Rolling Stone ranked Hounds of Love at number 68 on their list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. In 2021, "Running Up That Hill" was also listed at number 60 in Rolling Stone's 500 Greatest Songs of All Time. In 2023, she was ranked at number 60 on Rolling Stone's list of the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time. Bush was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2023. Bush was born on 30 July 1958 at the maternity hospital in Bexleyheath, Kent, to an English doctor, general practitioner Robert Bush (1920–2008), and Hannah Patricia (née Daly) (1918–1992), an Irish staff nurse, daughter of a farmer in County Waterford. She grew up with her elder brothers, John and Paddy, in a 350-year-old former farmhouse at East Wickham near Welling, which neighbours Bexleyheath. Bush came from an artistic background: her mother was an amateur traditional Irish dancer, her father was an amateur pianist, Paddy worked as a musical instrument maker, and John was a poet and photographer. Both brothers were involved in the local folk music scene. She was raised as a Roman Catholic. Bush trained at Goldsmiths College karate club where her brother John was a karate instructor. There she became known as "Ee-ee" because of her squeaky kiai. Her family's musical influence inspired Bush to teach herself the piano at the age of 11. She also played the organ in a barn behind her parents' house and studied the violin. She soon began composing songs, eventually adding her own lyrics. Bush attended St Joseph's Convent Grammar School, a Catholic girls' school in nearby Abbey Wood. During this time, her family produced a demo tape with over 50 of her compositions, which was turned down by record labels. Pink Floyd guitarist David Gilmour received the demo from Ricky Hopper, a mutual friend of Gilmour and the Bush family. Impressed, Gilmour helped the 16-year-old Bush record a more professional demo tape. Bush recorded three tracks, paid for by Gilmour. The tape was produced by Gilmour's friend Andrew Powell; Powell later produced Bush's first two albums, and sound engineer Geoff Emerick, who had worked with the Beatles. The tape was sent to EMI executive Terry Slater who signed Bush. "Every female you see at a piano is either Lynsey de Paul or Carole King. And most male music–not all of it but the good stuff–really lays it on you. It really puts you against the wall and that's what I like to do. I'd like my music to intrude. Not many females succeed with that." Bush, speaking to Melody Maker magazine in 1977. The British record industry was reaching a point of stagnation. Progressive rock was very popular and visually oriented rock performers were growing in popularity, thus record labels looking for the next big thing were considering experimental acts. Bush was put on retainer for two years by Bob Mercer, managing director of EMI's group-repertoire division. Mercer believed that Bush's material was good enough to release. However, he also felt that should the album fail it would be demoralising and if it were successful Bush was too young to handle this. In a 1987 interview, Gilmour disputed this version of events, blaming EMI for initially using the "wrong" producers. EMI gave Bush a large advance, which she used to enroll in interpretive dance classes taught by Lindsay Kemp, a former teacher of David Bowie, and mime training with Adam Darius. For the first two years of her contract, Bush spent more time on schoolwork than recording. She left school after doing her mock A-Levels and having gained ten GCE O-Level qualifications. Bush wrote and made demos of almost 200 songs, some of which circulated as bootlegs. From March to August 1977, she fronted the KT Bush Band at public houses in London. The band included Del Palmer (bass), Brian Bath (guitar), and Vic King (drums). She began recording her first album in August 1977. For her debut album, The Kick Inside (1978), Bush was persuaded to use established session musicians instead of the KT Bush Band. She retained some of these even after she had brought her bandmates back on board. Her brother Paddy played the harmonica and mandolin. Stuart Elliott played some of the drums and became her main drummer on subsequent albums. The Kick Inside was released when Bush was 19, with some songs written when she was as young as 13. EMI originally wanted the more rock-oriented track "James and the Cold Gun" to be her debut single, but Bush, who already had a reputation for asserting herself in decisions about her work, insisted that it should be "Wuthering Heights". Two music videos with similar choreography were created by Bush to accompany the song. The studio version sees her perform in a dark room with mist while wearing a white dress, suggesting her character is a ghost (as is the case with Cathy in the novel that inspired the song). The outside version sees Bush dancing in a grassy area in Salisbury Plain (inspired by the novel's moors) while wearing a red dress. Perhaps its keen ear for adolescent angst is part of what makes "Wuthering Heights" so special. She appeared on Top of the Pops with it five times in 1978, cementing her public image as an ethereal spirit, embodying the essence of Cathy through a combination of wide eyes, floaty fabrics and wild choreography, still fondly mimicked and parodied today. "Wuthering Heights" turned Bush into a pop star, the rules of which she continues to bend to her own will: her individuality was set in stone from the very beginning. —Rebecca Nicholson in The Guardian. In the United Kingdom alone, The Kick Inside sold over a million copies. "Wuthering Heights" topped the UK and Australian charts and became an international hit. Bush became the first British woman to reach number one on the UK charts with a self-written song. "The Man with the Child in His Eyes" made it onto the US Billboard Hot 100 where it reached number 85 in early 1979, and went on to win her an Ivor Novello Award in 1979 for Outstanding British Lyric. According to Guinness World Records, Bush was the first female artist in pop history to have written every track on a million-selling debut album. Bob Mercer blamed Bush's lesser success in the United States on American radio formats, saying there were no outlets for Bush's visual presentation. EMI capitalised on Bush's appearance by promoting the album with a poster of her in a tight pink top which emphasised her breasts. In an interview with NME in 1982, Bush criticised the choice: "People weren't even generally aware that I wrote my own songs or played the piano. The media just promoted me as a female body. It's like I've had to prove that I'm an artist in a female body." In late 1978, EMI persuaded Bush to quickly record a follow-up album, Lionheart, to take advantage of the success of The Kick Inside. The album was produced by Andrew Powell, assisted by Bush. Although it gained a high number of sales and spawned the hit single "Wow", it did not reach the success of The Kick Inside, reaching number six in the UK album charts. She went on to express dissatisfaction with Lionheart, feeling that it had needed more time. Bush set up her own publishing company, Kate Bush Music, and her own management company, Novercia, to maintain control of her work. Members of her family, along with Bush herself, composed the board of directors. Following the release of Lionheart, she was required by EMI to undertake heavy promotional work and an exhausting tour. The Tour of Life began in April 1979 and lasted six weeks. It was described by The Guardian as "an extraordinary, hydra-headed beast, combining music, dance, poetry, mime, burlesque, magic and theatre". The show was co-devised and performed on stage with magician Simon Drake. Bush was involved in every aspect of the production, choreography, set design, costume design and hiring. The shows were noted for her dancing, complex lighting and her 17 costume changes per show. Because of her need to dance as she sang, sound engineers used a wire coat hanger and a radio microphone to fashion a headset microphone; it was the first use by a rock performer since the Spotnicks used a rudimentary version in the early 1960s. Released in September 1980, Never for Ever was Bush's second foray into production, co-producing with Jon Kelly. Her first experience as a producer was on her Live on Stage EP, released after her tour the previous year. The first two albums had resulted in a definitive sound evident in every track, with orchestral arrangements supporting the live band sound. The range of styles on Never for Ever is much more diverse, veering from the straightforward rocker "Violin" to the wistful waltz of hit single "Army Dreamers". "Artists shouldn't be made famous. They have this huge aura of almost god-like quality about them, just because their craft makes a lot of money. And at the same time it is a forced importance... It is man-made so the press can feed off it." —Kate Bush in a 1980 interview Never for Ever was her first album to feature synthesisers and drum machines, in particular the Fairlight CMI. She was introduced to the technology while providing backing vocals on Peter Gabriel's eponymous third album in early 1980. It was her first record to reach the top position in the UK album charts, also making her the first female British artist to achieve that status, and the first female artist ever to enter the album chart at the top. The top-selling single from the album was "Babooshka", which reached No. 5 in the UK Singles Chart. In November 1980, she released the standalone Christmas single "December Will Be Magic Again", which reached No. 29 in the UK charts. September 1982 saw the release of The Dreaming, the first album Bush produced by herself. With her new-found freedom, she experimented with production techniques, creating an album that features a diverse blend of musical styles and is known for its near-exhaustive use of the Fairlight CMI. The Dreaming received a mixed reception in the UK, and critics were baffled by the dense soundscapes Bush had created to become "less accessible". In a 1993 interview with Q magazine, Bush stated: "That was my 'She's gone mad' album." However, the album became her first to enter the US Billboard 200 chart, albeit only reaching No. 157. The album entered the UK album chart at No. 3, but is to date her lowest-selling album, garnering "only" a silver disc. "Sat in Your Lap" was the first single from the album to be released. It preceded the album by over a year and peaked at No. 11 in the UK. The title track, featuring Rolf Harris and Percy Edwards, stalled at No. 48, while the third single, "There Goes a Tenner", stalled at No. 93, despite promotion from EMI and Bush. The track "Suspended in Gaffa" was released as a single in Europe, but not in the UK. Continuing in her storytelling tradition, Bush looked far outside her own personal experience for sources of inspiration. She drew on old crime films for "There Goes a Tenner", a documentary about the Vietnam War for "Pull Out the Pin", and the plight of Indigenous Australians for "The Dreaming". "Houdini" is about the magician's death, and "Get Out of My House" was inspired by Stephen King's novel The Shining. Hounds of Love was released in 1985. Because of the high cost of hiring studio space for her previous album, she built a private studio near her home, where she could work at her own pace. Hounds of Love topped the charts in the UK, knocking Madonna's Like a Virgin from the number-one position. The album takes advantage of the vinyl and cassette formats with two very different sides. The first side, Hounds of Love, contains five "accessible" pop songs, including the four singles "Running Up That Hill", "Cloudbusting", "Hounds of Love", and "The Big Sky". "Running Up That Hill" reached No. 3 in the UK charts and re-introduced Bush to American listeners, climbing to No. 30 on the Billboard Hot 100 in November 1985. Bush has stated that she initially wanted to name the song "A Deal With God", but the record company was reluctant because some people might think it was "a sensitive title", but that "... for me, this is still called A Deal With God". The second side of the album, The Ninth Wave, takes its name from Tennyson's poem, "Idylls of the King", about the legendary King Arthur's reign, and is seven interconnecting songs joined in one continuous piece of music. The album earned Bush nominations for Best Female Solo Artist, Best Album, Best Single, and Best Producer at the 1986 Brit Awards. In the same year, Bush and Peter Gabriel had a UK Top 10 hit with the duet "Don't Give Up" (Dolly Parton, Gabriel's original choice to sing the female vocal, turned his offer down), and EMI released her "greatest hits" album, The Whole Story. Bush provided a new lead vocal and refreshed backing track on "Wuthering Heights", and recorded a new single, "Experiment IV", for inclusion on the compilation. Dawn French and Hugh Laurie were among those featured in the video for Experiment IV. At the 1987 Brit Awards, Bush won the award for Best British Female Solo Artist. Released in 1989, The Sensual World was described by Bush herself as "her most honest, personal album". One of the tracks, "Heads We're Dancing", inspired by her own black humour, is about a woman who dances all night with a charming stranger only to discover in the morning that he is Adolf Hitler. The title track drew its inspiration from James Joyce's novel Ulysses. The Sensual World went on to become her biggest-selling album in the US, receiving an RIAA Gold certification four years after its release for 500,000 copies sold. In the United Kingdom album charts, it reached the number-two position. Another single from the album, "This Woman's Work", was featured in the John Hughes film She's Having a Baby, and a slightly remixed version appeared on Bush's album The Sensual World. The song reached number-eight in 2005 on the UK download chart after featuring in a British television advertisement for the charity NSPCC. "I don't think of myself as a musician. As a writer, I suppose. I only ever play the piano to accompany myself singing. I could never sit and read a piece of music. At best, I'm an accompanist. I suppose the worst thing is frustration at your own ability. Not being able to do what you want to do." —Kate Bush, Q, 1993 In 1990, the boxed set This Woman's Work was released; it included all of her albums with their original cover art, as well as two discs featuring the majority of her singles' B-sides recorded from 1978 to 1990. In 1991, Bush released a cover of Elton John's "Rocket Man", which reached number 12 in the UK singles chart, and reached number two in Australia. In 2007, it was voted the greatest cover ever by readers of The Observer newspaper. Another John cover, "Candle in the Wind", was the B-side. In the same year, she starred in the black comedy film Les Dogs, produced by The Comic Strip for BBC television. Bush plays the bride Angela at a wedding set in a post-apocalyptic Britain. Bush's seventh studio album, The Red Shoes, was released in November 1993. The album gave Bush her highest chart position in the US, reaching number 28, although the only song from the album to make the US singles chart was "Rubberband Girl", which peaked at number 88 in January 1994. In the UK, the album reached number-two, and the singles "Rubberband Girl", "The Red Shoes", "Moments of Pleasure", and "And So Is Love" (featuring Eric Clapton on guitar) all reached the top 30. Bush directed and starred in the short film The Line, the Cross and the Curve, which featured music from her album The Red Shoes, itself inspired by the 1948 film of that name. It was released on VHS in the UK in 1994 and also received a small number of cinema screenings around the world. The initial plan had been to tour with The Red Shoes release, but did not reach fruition. Thus, Bush deliberately produced her tracks live, with less studio production that had typified her last three albums and which would have been too difficult to re-create on stage. The result polarised her fan base, who had enjoyed the intricacy of her earlier compositions, with other fans claiming they had found new complexities in the lyrics and the emotions they expressed. During this period of time, Bush suffered a series of bereavements, including the loss of guitarist Alan Murphy, who had started working with her on The Tour of Life in 1979, and her mother Hannah, to whom she was exceptionally close. The people she lost were honoured in the ballad "Moments of Pleasure." However, Bush's mother was still alive when "Moments of Pleasure" was written and recorded. Bush describes playing the song to her mother, who thought the line where she is quoted by Bush as saying, "Every old sock meets an old shoe", was hilarious and "couldn't stop laughing." After the release of The Red Shoes, Kate Bush dropped out of the public eye. She had originally intended to take one year off, but despite working on material, twelve years passed before her next album release. Her name occasionally cropped up in the media with rumours of a new album release. The press often viewed her as an eccentric recluse, sometimes drawing a comparison with Miss Havisham from Charles Dickens's Great Expectations. In 1998, Bush gave birth to Albert, known as "Bertie", fathered by guitarist Dan McIntosh, whom she met in 1992. In 2001, Bush was awarded a Q Award as Classic Songwriter. In 2002, she was awarded an Ivor Novello Award for Outstanding Contribution to Music, and performed "Comfortably Numb" at David Gilmour's concert at the Royal Festival Hall in London. Kate Bush's eighth studio album, Aerial, was released on double CD and vinyl in November 2005. The album single "King of the Mountain", had received its premiere on BBC Radio 2 on 1 September 2005. The single entered the UK Downloads Chart at number six, and would become Bush's third-highest-charting single ever in the UK, peaking at number four on the full chart. Aerial entered the UK albums chart at number three, and the US chart at number 48. Aerial, like Hounds of Love (1985), is divided into two sections, each with its own theme and mood. The first disc, subtitled A Sea of Honey, features a set of unrelated themed songs, including "King of the Mountain"; "Bertie", a Renaissance-style ode to her son; and "Joanni", based on the story of Joan of Arc. In the song "π{\displaystyle \pi }", Bush sings 117 digits of the number pi. The second disc, subtitled A Sky of Honey, features one continuous piece of music describing the experience of 24 hours passing by. Aerial earned Bush two nominations at the 2006 Brit Awards, for Best British Female Solo Artist and Best British Album. In 2007, Bush was asked to write a song for The Golden Compass soundtrack which made reference to the lead character, Lyra Belacqua. The song, "Lyra", was used in the closing credits of the film, reached number 187 in the UK Singles Chart and was nominated for the International Press Academy's Satellite Award for original song in a motion picture. According to Del Palmer, Bush was asked to compose the song on short notice and the project was completed in 10 days. In May 2011, Bush released the remix album Director's Cut, comprising 11 reworked tracks from The Sensual World and The Red Shoes, recorded using analogue rather than digital equipment. All the tracks have new lead vocals, drums, and instrumentation. Some were transposed to a lower key to accommodate her lowering voice. Three of the songs, including "This Woman's Work", have been completely rerecorded, with lyrics often changed in places. Bush described the album as a new project rather than a collection of remixes. It was the first album on her new label, Fish People, a division of EMI Records. In addition to Director's Cut in its single CD form, the album was released with a box-set that contains the albums The Sensual World and the analogue re-mastered The Red Shoes. It debuted at number two on the United Kingdom chart. Bush's ninth studio album, 50 Words for Snow, was released on 21 November 2011. It features the high-profile cameo appearance of Elton John on the duet "Snowed in at Wheeler Street". The album contains seven new songs "set against a backdrop of falling snow", with a total running time of 65 minutes. The album's songs are built around Bush's quietly jazzy piano and Steve Gadd's drums, and use both sung and spoken word vocals in what Classic Rock critic Stephen Dalton calls "a ... supple and experimental affair, with a contemporary chamber pop sound grounded in crisp piano, minimal percussion and light-touch electronics ... billowing jazz-rock soundscapes, interwoven with fragmentary narratives delivered in a range of voices from shrill to Laurie Anderson-style cooing". Bassist Danny Thompson appears on the album, while the sixth track on the album, "50 Words for Snow", features the voice of Stephen Fry reciting a list of surreal words to describe snow. 50 Words for Snow received general acclaim from music critics. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album received an average score of 88, based on 26 reviews, which indicates "universal acclaim". At the 2012 Brit Awards she was nominated in the Best Female Artist category, and the album won the 2012 Best Album at the South Bank Arts Awards, and was also nominated for Best Album at the Ivor Novello Awards. Bush turned down an invitation to perform at the 2012 Summer Olympics closing ceremony in London. Instead, a new vocal remix of her 1985 single "Running Up That Hill" was played. In 2013, Bush became the only female artist to have top five albums in the UK charts in five successive decades. In March 2014, Bush announced her first live concerts in decades: Before the Dawn, a 22-night residency in London running from 26 August to 1 October 2014 at the Hammersmith Apollo. Tickets sold out in 15 minutes. The concerts received universal acclaim. An album of recordings from the concerts, Before the Dawn, was released on 25 November 2016. Bolstered by publicity around Before the Dawn, Bush became the first female performer to have eight albums in the UK Top 40 Albums Chart simultaneously, putting her at number three for simultaneous UK Top 40 albums. The only artists ahead of Bush were Elvis Presley, who had 12 entries in the top 40 after his death in 1977 and the Beatles who had 11 in 2009. She had 11 albums in the top 50. It was an extraordinary experience putting the show together. It was a huge amount of work, a lot of fun and an enormous privilege to work with such an incredibly talented team. This is the audio document. I hope that this can stand alone as a piece of music in its own right and that it can be enjoyed by people who knew nothing about the shows as well as those who were there. I never expected the overwhelming response of the audiences, every night filling the show with life and excitement. They are there in every beat of the recorded music. Even when you can't hear them, you can feel them. On 6 December 2018, Bush published her first book, How to Be Invisible, a compilation of lyrics. In November 2018, Bush released two box sets of remasters of her studio albums. Vocals from Rolf Harris, who was convicted of multiple sexual assault charges in 2014, were replaced by versions by Bush's son Bertie. A compilation of rare tracks, cover versions and remixes from the boxsets, The Other Sides, was released on 8 March 2019. It includes the previously unreleased track "Humming," recorded in 1975. In September 2019, Bush released "Ne t'enfuis pas" / "Un baiser d'enfant" on vinyl, in France, as a limited-edition promotional single. In September 2020, Bush became a Fellow of The Ivors Academy, the UK's independent professional association for songwriters, composers and music authors. Following Bush's award, another Fellow, Annie Lennox, commented, "She is visionary and iconic and has made her own magical stamp upon the zeitgeist of the British cultural landscape." Bush's 1985 single "Running Up That Hill" gained newfound popularity in May 2022 after it was incorporated into the plot of the fourth season of the Netflix series Stranger Things. It became the most streamed song on Spotify in the United States, the United Kingdom, Ireland, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and globally. Winona Ryder, who plays the character Joyce Byers on Stranger Things, said she had pushed for the song to be on the show: "I've been obsessed with her since I was a little girl. I've also for the last seven years been dropping hints on set wearing my Kate Bush T-shirts." According to The Guardian, "Running Up That Hill" has become particularly popular with members of Generation Z, who were not born when the song was first released, and it has appeared in numerous videos on the social media platform TikTok. Bush released a statement praising Stranger Things and saying the resurgence was "really exciting". On 10 June 2022, "Running Up That Hill" reached number two on the UK Singles Chart, surpassing its peak of number three from 1985. It was the most popular track of the week in the UK, ahead of "As It Was" by Harry Styles, but a pre-existing chart rule penalised older songs that are streamed. The Chart Supervisory Committee responded by giving the record an exemption from the "accelerated chart ratio" rule due to its ongoing sales resurgence. On 17 June, the song reached number one in the UK, making it Bush's second UK number one. It broke three UK chart records in the process. With 44 years since her last number one, "Wuthering Heights" in 1978, Bush surpassed Tom Jones's 42-year gap between number ones and replaced Cher as the oldest female solo chart-topping artist at 63 years and 11 months. Bush also achieved the record for a single with the longest period taken to reach number one, beating the previous record, held by "Last Christmas" by Wham!, by a year. On the US Billboard Hot 100 issue dated 11 June 2022, "Running Up That Hill" re-entered the chart at number eight, surpassing its original peak of number 30 in November 1985 to become Bush's first US top-ten hit. A week later, it climbed to number four in the US, before reaching number three on 25 July. The parent album, Hounds of Love, also reached a new peak in the US, charting at number 12. The song topped the Australian ARIA Charts to become her second number one single in the country. In France, "Running Up That Hill" beat its original chart peak of 24, placing at number three. Hounds of Love also rose in popularity on various album charts, with it reaching number 1 on Billboard's Top Alternative Albums chart, making it Bush's first US chart-topping album in her career. On 10 June, The Whole Story rose from number 76 to number 19 on the UK Albums Chart, peaking a week later at number 17. A limited edition CD single was released in September 2022, in this format for the first time ever, through Rhino. The 2022 film A Man Called Otto featured the song "This Woman's Work" from Bush's album, The Sensual World. In May 2023, it was also featured in the Netflix film The Mother, spiking a sales resurgence for the song. On 1 January 2023, Bush was included at number 60 in the list of 200 Best Singers of All Time by Rolling Stone. On 22 February 2023, Bush announced that her label, Fish People, had moved to the new distribution partner, the State51 Conspiracy. The new company took over distribution of her post-1980 releases (starting from The Dreaming) worldwide, and the entire catalogue in the US only. This move has also generated renewed "indie" reissues of her albums. Bush was nominated for the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2018, 2021 and 2022, and was inducted in 2023. In February 2024, it was announced that Bush was an ambassador for that year's Record Store Day on 20 April 2024. Her cancelled 1993-single "Eat the Music" will be released as a 10" vinyl single. In a statement, Bush said, Isn't it great to see how the resurgence in vinyl has taken the music industry by surprise? It had decided to leave vinyl far behind, but it would seem that not everyone agrees! I love that [...] In the same way that some people like to read a book on Kindle but also want to have a book as a physical object, a lot of people like vinyl and streaming. Both have different appeals. An album on vinyl is a beautiful thing, given a strong identity by its large-scale artwork. There's a much more personal connection with the artist and their work. The added bonus of vinyl is that it encourages people to listen to albums. An art form that I've always thought can be treasured in a unique way. This year, I hope you have a fantastic time at this very important event, and that you get to celebrate music that's been specially released for you." Bush's musical aesthetic is eclectic, and is known to employ varied influences and meld disparate styles, often within a single song or over the course of an album. Her music has primarily been described as art pop, art rock, baroque pop, post-progressive, progressive pop, pop rock, avant-pop and experimental pop. Even in her earliest works, with piano the primary instrument, she wove together diverse influences, drawing on classical music, glam rock, and a wide range of ethnic and folk sources. This has continued throughout her career. By the time of Never for Ever, Bush had begun to make prominent use of the Fairlight CMI synthesiser, which allowed her to sample and manipulate sounds, expanding her sonic palette. She has been compared with other "'arty' 1970s and '80s British pop rock artists" such as Roxy Music and Peter Gabriel. Critic Simon Reynolds of The Guardian called Bush "the queen of art-pop". Bush has a soprano vocal range. Her vocals contain elements of British, Anglo-Irish and most prominently (southern) English accents and, in its use of musical instruments from various periods and cultures, her music has differed from American pop norms. Reviewers have used the term "surreal" to describe her music. Her songs explore melodramatic emotional and musical surrealism that defies easy categorisation. It has been observed that even her more joyous pieces are often tinged with traces of melancholy and vice versa. Elements of Bush's lyrics employ historical or literary references, as embodied in her first single "Wuthering Heights", which is based on Emily Brontë's novel of the same name. She has described herself as a storyteller who embodies the character singing the song and has dismissed efforts by others to conceive of her work as autobiographical. Bush's lyrics have been known to touch on obscure or esoteric subject matter, and New Musical Express noted that Bush was not afraid to tackle sensitive and taboo subjects in her work. "The Kick Inside" is based on a traditional English folk song (The Ballad of Lucy Wan) about an incestuous pregnancy and a resulting suicide. "Kashka from Baghdad" is a song about a gay couple; She has referenced G. I. Gurdjieff in the song "Them Heavy People", while "Cloudbusting" was inspired by Peter Reich's autobiography, A Book of Dreams, about his relationship with his father, Wilhelm Reich. "Breathing" explores the results of nuclear fallout from the perspective of a fœtus. Other non-musical sources of inspiration for Bush include horror films, which have influenced the gothic nature of her songs, such as "Hounds of Love", which samples the 1957 horror movie Night of the Demon. "The Infant Kiss" is a song about a haunted, unstable woman's infatuation with a young boy in her care (inspired by Jack Clayton's film The Innocents (1961), which had been based on Henry James's novella The Turn of the Screw). The title of the song "Hammer Horror" is from Hammer Film Productions' horror movies, and the song's story was inspired by the film Man of a Thousand Faces (1957). Her songs have occasionally combined comedy and horror to form dark humour, such as murder by poisoning in "Coffee Homeground", an alcoholic mother in "Ran Tan Waltz" and the upbeat "The Wedding List", a song inspired by François Truffaut's 1967 film of Cornell Woolrich's The Bride Wore Black about the murder of a groom and the bride's subsequent revenge against the killer. Bush has also cited comedy as a significant influence. She has cited Woody Allen, Monty Python, Fawlty Towers, and The Young Ones as particular favourites. Bush is regarded as the first artist to have had a headset with a wireless microphone built for use in music. For her Tour of Life in 1979 she had a compact microphone combined with a self-made construction of wire clothes hangers, so that she did not have to use a hand microphone and had her hands free and could dance her rehearsed choreography of expressionist dance on the concert stage and sing with a microphone at the same time. Later, her idea was adopted by other artists such as Janet Jackson, Madonna and Peter Gabriel. According to Alexis Petridis of The Guardian, Bush's "shadow looms so large that whenever a female singer-songwriter emerges who is even remotely out of the ordinary, it's only a matter of time before someone, fairly or otherwise, mentions Bush". Musicians who have acknowledged Bush's influence include Bjork, Alanis Morissette, Nigel Godrich, Florence Welch, Fever Ray, Regina Spektor, Imogen Heap, Sharon Van Etten, Ellie Goulding, Kyros, Aisles, Neil Hannon of the Divine Comedy, Grimes, Solange Knowles, Julia Holter, Angel Olsen, Halsey, and Robyn. Since she made the bold decision after only six weeks on the road in 1979 that she wouldn't play live again, yet continued to be a powerhouse of inventive avant pop for the next 15 years – and a sporadic, off-the-grid presence ever since – Bush has set the blueprint for the autonomous artist creating masterworks entirely at their own pace and on their own terms. Kate Bush is the definitive example of a musician allowing work to flow through her life, not cram life into the spaces between her work. —Mark Beaumont writing for NME on Bush being an "enigma worthy of the name", July 2018 In 2015, Adele stated that the release of her third studio album 25 was inspired by Bush's 2014 comeback to the stage. Nerina Pallot was inspired to become a songwriter after seeing Bush play "This Woman's Work" on Wogan. Bush was described by The Guardian as an "early role model" for Dido. The Australian singer-songwriter Sia described Bush as one of the "weird" artists she "grew up with", along with Adam Ant, Boy George and Cyndi Lauper. k.d. lang named Bush as one of the artists she was listening to when she was starting to write songs. Jack Antonoff has described Bush as an artist he listens to when he writes songs. Andy Bell described Bush as "a major influence on a lot of Erasure's album tracks". When Little Boots was asked about female producers or songwriters that have inspired her, she highlighted Bush for "how involved she got with the studio side as well as the performance". Kate Nash described Bush as "really amazing and really inspirational". Bat for Lashes also called her "a real inspiration". Tegan and Sara called Bush a "huge influence" on them when they were growing up in the 1980s, and Sky Ferreira named her when asked about her "primary influences" from that decade. Rosalía named Bush as one of the female artists who made success possible for artists like her. Beverley Craven acknowledged that when she was beginning to write songs, she was "trying to sound like Kate Bush". Tim Bowness of No-Man named Bush as one of his early influences. Elton John cited Bush's duet with Peter Gabriel, "Don't Give Up", for helping him to become sober, particularly Bush's lyric, "Rest your head. You worry too much. It's going to be all right. When times get rough you can fall back on us. Don't give up." He stated, "she [Bush] played a big part in my rebirth." After doing a duet with Bush in 2013, John praised her talents as a musician, stating "I'm so proud to be on a Kate Bush record; she's always marched to the beat of her own drum. She was groundbreaking – a bit like a female equivalent of Freddie Mercury. She does come out socially sometimes and she came to my civil partnership occasion with her husband. There were so many stars in the room, but all the musicians there were only interested in saying, 'You've got to introduce me to Kate Bush.' I remember Boy George saying, 'Oh my God, is that Kate Bush?' I said, 'Yeah!'." Bush was one of the singers whom Prince thanked in the liner notes of 1991's Diamonds and Pearls. Kirk Hammett of Metallica listed Bush as one of the influences on Master of Puppets. The Weeknd named "Running Up That Hill" as one of the songs that inspired his debut studio album Kiss Land. According to an unauthorised biography, Courtney Love of Hole listened to Bush among other artists as a teenager. Tricky of Massive Attack wrote an article about The Kick Inside, saying: "Her music has always sounded like dreamland to me.... I don't believe in God, but if I did, her music would be my bible". Suede front-man Brett Anderson stated about Hounds of Love: "I love the way it's a record of two halves, and the second half is a concept record about fear of drowning. It's an amazing record to listen to really late at night, unsettling and really jarring". John Lydon, better known as Johnny Rotten of the Sex Pistols, declared her work to be "beauty beyond belief". Rotten once wrote a song for her, titled "Bird in Hand" (about exploitation of parrots) that Bush rejected. In December 1989, Robert Smith of the Cure chose "The Sensual World" as his favourite single of the year, The Sensual World as his favourite album of the year, and included "all of Kate Bush" in his list of "the best things about the eighties". In 1999, VH1 named Bush the 46th-greatest woman in rock and roll. In November 2023, Bush was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame by Big Boi of OutKast, a long-time fan of her music. In his induction speech, Big Boi said, "What I love about Kate's music is that I never know what sound I’m gonna hear next. She ignores anything that seems like a formula and instead just does whatever she wants to do, like me. She challenges me as a listener and expands my ears and my mind. No matter how many times I look to albums like The Dreaming or 50 Words for Snow, they sound fresh and surprise me every time. They fill with my head with ideas and expand my ambitions for what music can achieve." Marianne Faithfull mentioned Bush's four-octave range should be regarded as a "national treasure". "My favourite instrument in the whole world is the human female voice, and Kate Bush is one of the reasons why. It is, by far, a Stradivarius," Faithfull says. "Which is why she rarely deals with the press or isn't in a rush to record. She's one of the few who can be above all that." Enya praised Bush in a similar manner: "When you think of Kate Bush, you think of the music, not the headlines."Kele Okereke of Bloc Party said about "Hounds of Love": "The first time I heard it I was sitting in a reclining sofa. As the beat started I was transported somewhere else. Her voice, the imagery, the huge drum sound: it seemed to capture everything for me. As a songwriter you're constantly chasing that feeling". Rufus Wainwright named Bush one of his top ten gay icons. Outside music, Bush has been an inspiration to several fashion designers, including Hussein Chalayan. In 2020, Harry Potter author J. K. Rowling chose Bush's 1985 song "Cloudbusting" as the first of ten songs on Ken Bruce's BBC Radio 2 show Tracks Of My Years as it reminded her of her student years. In 1998 an asteroid was named after Bush. In 2019, Pone, ex Fonky Family member, released Kate and me, an entire album created from samples of Kate Bush's work. According to The Guardian, it's the "first album in history to be entirely produced through an eye-tracking device". Pone declares that Bush is the greatest artist of the past 40 years. A few months later, after hearing about the album and listening to it, the English star wrote a message to the French producer, expressing her emotion, admiration and approval. With this encouragement, Pone reiterates the experience in June 2021 by publishing Listen And Donate. An EP composed of four tracks including two originals by Pone, still based on samples of Kate Bush's work, and two remixes produced by SCH and Para One. JR signs the visual part of the project. The goal is to raise funds for the Trakadom association, created by Pone and two doctors in collaboration with the intensive care unit of the hospital of Nîmes. In 2020, Grazia magazine conducted an interview with UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson. When asked about the five most influential women in his life, Johnson placed Kate Bush at the fifth spot after deliberating between nominating Queen Elizabeth II, Margaret Thatcher, and Bush. In addition to her music, her dancing has been critically acclaimed and proven influential, as well as enduring in the popular consciousness. Critics have noted her "pioneering synthesis of music and movement" and called her work "modern dance at its most powerful". Prix Benois de la Danse winner Sidi Larbi Cherkaoui credits her dancing as a formative influence. For the recurring The Most Wuthering Heights Day Ever event, thousands of people gather worldwide to recreate her dance routine from the "Wuthering Heights" music video—the outside version where Bush is seen dancing "out in the wily, windy moors", adorned with flowers and a flowy red dress. Bush's only tour, the Tour of Life, ran for six weeks in April and May 1979, covering Britain and mainland Europe. The BBC suggested that she may have quit touring due to a fear of flying, or because of the death of a lighting engineer, Bill Duffield, who was killed in an accident after a warmup concert. Mercer, who signed Bush to EMI, said touring was "just too hard ... I think [Bush] liked it but the equation didn't work ... I could see at the end of the show that she was completely wiped out." Bush described the tour as "enormously enjoyable" but "absolutely exhausting". During the same period as the Tour of Life, Bush performed on television programs including Top of the Pops in the UK, Bio's Bahnhof in Germany, and Saturday Night Live in the United States (performing "The Man with the Child in His Eyes" with Paul Shaffer on piano, and later in the programme, "Them Heavy People"), which remains her only live performance in the country. On 28 December 1979, BBC TV aired the Kate Bush Christmas Special. Bush participated in the first benefit concert in aid of The Prince's Trust in July 1982, at which she sang "The Wedding List" with a backing band composed of Pete Townshend, Phil Collins, Midge Ure, Mick Karn, Gary Brooker, Dave Formula and Peter Hope Evans. The performance was later released on VHS video, Laserdisc and CED disc. She performed live for British charity event Comic Relief in 1986, singing "Do Bears... ?", a humorous duet with Rowan Atkinson, and a rendition of "Breathing". In March 1987, Bush sang "Running Up That Hill" at The Secret Policeman's Third Ball accompanied by David Gilmour. She appeared with Gilmour again in 2002, singing the Pink Floyd song "Comfortably Numb" at the Royal Festival Hall in London. Bush returned to headline performance with a 22-night residency, Before the Dawn, which ran from 26 August to 1 October 2014 at the London Hammersmith Apollo. The set list encompassed most of Hounds of Love featuring the entire Ninth Wave suite, most of Aerial, two songs from The Red Shoes, and one song from 50 Words for Snow. Bush provided vocals on two of Peter Gabriel's albums, including the hits "Games Without Frontiers" and "Don't Give Up", as well as "No Self-Control". Gabriel appeared on Bush's 1979 television special, where they sang a duet of Roy Harper's "Another Day". She has sung on two Roy Harper tracks, "You", on his 1979 album, "The Unknown Soldier"; and "Once", the title track of his 1990 album. She has also sung on the title song of the 1986 Big Country album The Seer; the Midge Ure song "Sister and Brother" from his 1988 album Answers to Nothing; Go West's 1987 single "The King Is Dead"; and two songs with Prince – "Why Should I Love You?", from her 1993 album The Red Shoes, and "My Computer" from Prince's 1996 album Emancipation. In 1987, she sang a verse on the Beatles cover charity single "Let It Be" by Ferry Aid. In 1990 Bush produced a song for another artist, Alan Stivell's "Kimiad" for his album Again; this is the only time she has done this to date. Stivell had appeared on The Sensual World. In 1991, Bush was invited to perform a cover of Elton John's 1972 song "Rocket Man" for the tribute album Two Rooms: Celebrating the Songs of Elton John & Bernie Taupin. In 2007 Bush's cover won The Observer readers' award for Greatest Cover of all time. In 2011, Elton John collaborated with Bush once again in "Snowed in at Wheeler Street" for her most recent album 50 Words for Snow. In 1994, Bush covered George Gershwin's "The Man I Love" for the tribute album The Glory of Gershwin. In 1996, Bush contributed a version of "Mná na hÉireann" (Irish for "Women of Ireland") for the Anglo-Irish folk-rock compilation project Common Ground: The Voices of Modern Irish Music. Bush had to sing the song in Irish, which she learned to do phonetically. Artists who have contributed to Bush's own albums include Elton John, Eric Clapton, Jeff Beck, David Gilmour, Nigel Kennedy, Gary Brooker, Danny Thompson, and Prince. Bush provided backing vocals for a song that was recorded during the 1990s titled Wouldn't Change a Thing by Lionel Azulay, the drummer with the original band that was later to become the KT Bush Band. The song, which was engineered and produced by Del Palmer, was released on Azulay's album Out of the Ashes. Bush declined a request by Erasure to produce one of their albums because, according to Vince Clarke, "she didn't feel that that was her area". Bush is married to guitarist Danny McIntosh. They have a son, Albert McIntosh, known as Bertie, born in 1998. From the late 1970s to the early 1990s, Bush was in a relationship with the bassist and sound engineer Del Palmer. Bush is a former resident of Eltham, southeast London. In the 1990s she moved to a canalside residence in Sulhamstead, Berkshire, and bought a second home in Devon in 2004. Bush is a vegetarian. Raised a Roman Catholic, she said in 1999: I would never say I was a strict follower of Roman Catholic belief, but a lot of images are in there; they have to be; they're so strong. Such powerful, beautiful, passionate images! There's a lot of suffering in Roman Catholicism. I think I'm looking for not necessarily religion, but ways of helping myself to become more understanding, more complete, a happier person ... But I really don't think I've found a niche. The length of time between albums has led to rumours concerning Bush's health or appearance. In 2011, she told BBC Radio 4 that the amount of time between albums was stressful: "It's very frustrating the albums take as long as they do ... I wish there weren't such big gaps between them". In the same interview, she denied that she was a perfectionist, saying: "I think it's important that things are flawed ... That's what makes a piece of art interesting sometimes – the bit that's wrong or the mistake you've made that's led onto an idea you wouldn't have had otherwise." She reiterated her prioritisation of her family life. Bush's son Bertie featured in the 2014 concert Before the Dawn. Her nephew Raven Bush was a violinist in the English indie band Syd Arthur. Some of Bush's songs contain references to political and social themes, such as "Breathing" which addresses the fear of nuclear warfare and "Army Dreamers" which examines the grief felt by mothers who lose children serving in the military during war. In a 1985 interview with The NewMusic, Bush stated "I've never felt I've written from a political point of view, it's always been an emotional point of view that just happens to perhaps be a political situation." During the 1979 United Kingdom general election campaign, Bush, who at the time was on a live concert tour of the UK, posed for a photograph alongside the Labour Prime Minister James Callaghan. When asked about her political beliefs in a 1985 interview with Hot Press, Bush replied that she preferred not to discuss how she voted and added "I don't feel I am a political thinker at all. I don't really understand politics." In The Comic Strip Presents... episode GLC: The Carnage Continues..., she produced and sang on the theme song "Ken". The song was a satirical take on how Hollywood glamourises and fictionalises political figures, in this particular case Ken Livingstone, the former leader of the Greater London Council, and the lyrics parodied the theme from Shaft. In 2016, the Canadian news magazine Maclean's published an interview in which Bush was asked about people being afraid of women holding political power. Bush pointed out that the UK, unlike the US, did have a female premier, Theresa May, who a few months earlier had become the Conservative Prime Minister. The interview quoted Bush as saying: "I actually really like her and think she's wonderful. I think it's the best thing that's happened to us in a long time ... It is great to have a woman in charge of the country. She's very sensible and I think that's a good thing at this point in time." In 2019, Bush published a statement on her website saying that she was not a Conservative Party supporter, that she felt May was an improvement over the previous Prime Minister, and that she had intended only to defend women in power. In April 2021, Bush was one of 156 signatories of an open letter to Prime Minister Boris Johnson calling for a change in the wording of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 to make royalty payments for streaming closer to the amounts paid for radio broadcast. In December 2022, in her annual Christmas message, Bush voiced her support for the people of Ukraine following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, and expressed solidarity with nurses undertaking strike action, stating that NHS nurses should be "appreciated and cherished". Studio albums The Kick Inside (1978) Lionheart (1978) Never for Ever (1980) The Dreaming (1982) Hounds of Love (1985) The Sensual World (1989) The Red Shoes (1993) Aerial (2005) Director's Cut (2011) 50 Words for Snow (2011) Thomson, Graeme (13 May 2010). "Kate Bush's only tour: pop concert or disappearing act?". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 26 July 2019. Retrieved 12 December 2016. "Kate Bush – Never For Ever". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on 3 April 2015. Retrieved 13 September 2019. "Kate Bush – Brits Profile". Brit Awards. Archived from the original on 9 October 2014. "The BRITs 1987". Brit Awards. Archived from the original on 17 March 2014. Retrieved 11 April 2015. "BBC News – New Year Honours 2013: At a glance". BBC. 29 December 2012. Archived from the original on 30 July 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. "No. 60367". The London Gazette (Supplement). 29 December 2012. p. 7. "Kate Bush becomes a Fellow of The Ivors Academy". Ivors. Retrieved 22 July 2022. "#68 Kate Bush, 'Hounds of Love' (1985) — Rolling Stone 500 Greatest Albums Of All Time". Rs500albums.com. Retrieved 17 July 2022. "Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five, 'The Message'". Rolling Stone Australia. 16 September 2021. Retrieved 17 July 2022. "The 200 Greatest Singers of All Time". rollingstone.com. January 2023. Retrieved 1 January 2023. "Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 2023 Inductees". The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Retrieved 3 May 2023. Graeme Thomson (2012). Under the Ivy. Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-1-78038-146-6. Archived from the original on 6 February 2022. Retrieved 2 September 2017. Kate Bush and Hounds of Love, Ron Moy, Ashgate, 2007, p. 58 Sweeting, Adam (2 October 2005). "Kate Bush: Return of the recluse". The Independent. Archived from the original on 21 September 2017. Retrieved 2 September 2017. Jovanovic, Rob (2015). Kate Bush: The biography. Google Books: Little, Brown Book Group. p. Ch 2. ISBN 9780349411255. "Kate Bush". Salon. Archived from the original on 8 August 2007. "East Wickham Farm". Kate Bush Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on 19 November 2021. Retrieved 19 November 2021. David Young (2 December 1978), "Haunting Kate Bush", NZ Listener "Kate Bush @ Paradise Place – Q interview". Q. 2 September 1999. Archived from the original on 9 December 2012. Retrieved 30 June 2012. Hazard, Dave (2007). Born Fighter. London: John Blake Publishing. p. 114. ISBN 978-1-84454-480-6. "Kate Bush Biography". AllMusic. Gaar, Gillian (1993). She's a Rebel. Da Capo Press. ISBN 9781878067081. Cowley, Jason (7 February 2005). "The Wow Factor". New Statesman. Archived from the original on 14 December 2014. Retrieved 11 December 2014. Rolling Stone magazine, 8 February 1990, pp 21–2: "The Sensual Woman" by Sheila Rogers. "The Rightful Heir?". Q. No. 48. September 1990. Kruse, Holly (November 2000). "Kate Bush: Enigmatic chanteuse as pop pioneer". Soundscapes.info, Online Journal on Media Culture. 3. ISSN 1567-7745. Archived from the original on 1 January 2009. Retrieved 31 July 2008, originally published in Tracking: Popular Music Studies. 1 (1). Spring 1988 "Kate Bush". EMI. Archived from the original on 26 February 2012. Brown, Mick (21 September 1979). "Show fuses music, theater". Wilmington Morning Star. Archived from the original on 2 December 2021. Retrieved 5 October 2020. ravenhearst09 (7 April 2017). "David Gilmour talks about discovering Kate Bush". Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 16 October 2019 – via YouTube. "Today's Style And Looks". Face & Figure. 1979. Darius, A. (1984) The Adam Darius Method, page 236–240. Latonia. ISBN 0-9502707-2-5 Mime Centre Archived 3 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine Williamson, Nigel (2 October 2005). "The Mighty Bush". Scotland on Sunday. "Kate Bush in MP3". Q. September 2001. "Kate Bush Biography". LyricSystem.com. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007. Lyrics booklets from Kate Bush's albums. EMI. Rogers, Jude (12 February 2018). "Kate Bush's Wuthering Heights – from Emily Brontë to Alan Partridge". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 30 June 2022. Retrieved 14 November 2019. Kate Bush - Wuthering Heights - Official Music Video - Version 2, archived from the original on 7 February 2017, retrieved 15 February 2020 Nicholson, Rebecca (19 May 2020). "The 100 greatest UK No 1s: No 14, Kate Bush – Wuthering Heights". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 30 June 2022. Retrieved 14 June 2022. "First artist to write every song on a million-selling album (female)". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on 8 September 2017. Retrieved 8 January 2019. "Kate Bush in the UK singles charts". The Official Charts. Archived from the original on 1 January 2011. Barkham, Patrick (30 September 2005). "Guardian profile: Kate Bush". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 13 October 2007. Retrieved 10 September 2007. "Awards Database". The Envelope. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 5 January 2022. The Whole Story album lyrics booklet. EMI. 1986. "Stand By Your Mantra". Classic Rock. 2004. "Simon Drake – The Illusionist". magicweek.co.uk. 2000. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 15 March 2011. Eder, Bruce. "Kate Bush biography". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 21 March 2016. Retrieved 17 May 2016. Badhorn, Philippe (February 2006). "Interview in Rolling Stone (France)". Rolling Stone. "Kate Bush Music Wuthering Heights Hounds of Love". Refinery29.com. 20 October 2013. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 28 March 2014. "Kate Bush". UnderGroundOnline. Archived from the original on 16 June 2011. "Official Singles Chart Top 100". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on 3 December 2021. Retrieved 14 June 2022. "Something from Kate, at last". The Age. Australia. 8 October 2005. Archived from the original on 6 November 2012. Retrieved 21 November 2010. Smash Hits magazine, reviews of The Dreaming (September 1982) "Kate Bush The Dreaming Chart History". Billboard. Archived from the original on 17 November 2021. Retrieved 18 March 2018. "the dreaming | full Official Chart History | Official Charts Company". OfficialCharts.com. Archived from the original on 4 March 2018. Retrieved 4 March 2018. "British album certifications – Kate Bush – The Dreaming". British Phonographic Industry (Enter The Dreaming in the search field and then press Enter.). Archived from the original on 17 January 2010. Retrieved 3 March 2018. "Kate Bush". TheOfficialCharts.com. Archived from the original on 1 January 2011. "the dreaming | full Official Chart History | Official Charts Company". OfficialCharts.com. Archived from the original on 18 March 2018. Retrieved 18 March 2018. UK singles chart peak for "There Goes a Tenner": "UK Mix forums > Chart Histories page 78". ukmix.org. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 27 August 2015. Simper, Paul (16 October 1982). "Dreamtime Is Over". Melody Maker. Ellen, Barbara (2 October 2005). "Comeback Kate". The Observer. London. Archived from the original on 13 October 2007. Retrieved 4 April 2007. Fitzgerald Morris, Peter (1997). Hounds of Love lyrics booklet. EMI. "The Story of... 'Running Up that Hill' by Kate Bush after Stranger Things resurgence". Smooth Radio. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 26 June 2022. "Kate Bush radio interview". Rock Over London with Paul Cooke. 1985. "Peter Gabriel: 'Kate Bush replaced Dolly Parton on "Don't Give Up"' NME 19 September 2011". NME. 19 September 2011. Archived from the original on 30 May 2016. Retrieved 21 April 2020. Hewitt, Ben (19 January 2019). "Kate Bush: The Sensual World". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on 1 March 2021. Retrieved 19 July 2019. "Kate Bush's dream world". The Daily Telegraph. 26 November 1989. Archived from the original on 21 November 2021. Retrieved 5 October 2020. "Kate Bush Biography". Starpulse.com. Archived from the original on 26 September 2007. Holmes, Linda (6 August 2009). "Five Great John Hughes Moments National Public Radio (United States) 6 August 2009". NPR. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 2 April 2018. "Eighties Kate Bush track goes Top 10 on download chart". Music Week. 24 November 2005. Archived from the original on 17 January 2012. Retrieved 21 November 2010. "Booze, fags, blokes and me". Q. December 1993. "UK Top 40 Hit Database". EveryHit.com. Archived from the original on 25 October 2015. Retrieved 15 May 2008. "The top 50 greatest covers as voted by you". The Observer. Archived from the original on 11 November 2007. Retrieved 26 October 2007. Strong, Martin (1994). The Great Rock Discography. Canongate Books. p. 218. ISBN 1-84195-615-5. "Kate Bush". Q. 1990. "Back On Stage After 12 Years". Softpedia.com. Archived from the original on 10 September 2014. Aizlewood, John (December 2001). "The Big Sleep". Q. Mojo Magazine, page 81, October 2005 edition "Well red". Future Music. November 1993. Gettelman, Parry (1993). "The Red Shoes review". The Orlando Sentinel. "The Red Shoes review". Request. November 1993. "Interview with Ken Bruce on Radio 2, 9 May 2011". BBC Radio 2. 9 May 2011. Archived from the original on 27 July 2013. Retrieved 25 May 2011. Barkham, Patrick (28 September 2005). "Guardian profile: Kate Bush". The Guardian. "Kate Bush and the war of Wuthering Heights". London Evening Standard. 5 May 2007. Archived from the original on 9 May 2007. "Kate Bush earns two Q Award nods". BBC News. 9 September 2014. Archived from the original on 30 April 2018. Retrieved 11 March 2018. Greene, Andy (21 March 2013). "Flashback: David Gilmour & Kate Bush Duet". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 16 October 2018. Retrieved 16 October 2018. McKenna, Stephen (2 September 2005). "Kate Bush back on form with first single in 12 years". icScotland.com. Archived from the original on 18 April 2012. "Official UK Download Chart Book (File corrupt 081209)" (PDF). DigitalStar.org.uk. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 January 2007. "Operatic act beat Bush to the top". BBC News. 13 November 2005. Archived from the original on 14 January 2006. Retrieved 21 November 2010. "50 Cent Gets A Billboard Beating From Zellweger's Ex". MTV. 16 November 2005. Archived from the original on 3 April 2010. Retrieved 21 November 2010. Thompson, Ben (5 November 2006). "Ben Thompson reviews an album of two halves". The Sunday Telegraph. Jurek, Thom. "Aerial". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 8 November 2018. Retrieved 5 November 2018. "Chart Log UK: Darren B – David Byrne". Zobbel.de. Archived from the original on 10 February 2012. Retrieved 28 May 2012. Silberman, Stacey (30 November 2007). "Tis the Awards Season: Lots of Green & "Golden" Loving Stars". Hollywood Today. Archived from the original on 12 March 2008. Palmer, Del. "Lyra". DelPalmer.com. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 15 May 2008. "BBC iPlayer – Front Row: Kate Bush in a rare interview; and John Cleese reviewed". BBC Radio 4. 4 May 2011. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. Retrieved 11 February 2018. "Pitbull Tops U.K. Singles Chart; Kate Bush Album Debuts At No. 2". Billboard. 23 May 2011. Archived from the original on 19 August 2020. Retrieved 21 April 2020. Empire, Kitty (20 November 2011). "50 Words for Snow". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 September 2018. Retrieved 2 September 2018. Perpetua, Matthew (12 September 2011). "Kate Bush: First New Album in Six Years". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 13 March 2018. Retrieved 2 September 2017. "News". Kate Bush. Archived from the original on 8 March 2016. Retrieved 12 September 2011. "Kate Bush: 50 Words For Snow". Classic Rock. 10 November 2011. Archived from the original on 27 February 2018. Retrieved 26 February 2018. "Kate Bush: 50 Words for Snow". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 March 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2022. "50 Words for Snow Reviews, Ratings, Credits, and More at Metacritic". Metacritic. Archived from the original on 22 December 2018. Retrieved 21 April 2020. "Brit Awards nominations: Kate Bush vs Adele for best female". The Daily Telegraph. 12 January 2012. Archived from the original on 13 April 2018. Retrieved 2 April 2018. Dex, Robert (1 May 2012). "Kate Bush scoops South Bank award". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 21 September 2017. Retrieved 2 September 2017. "BBC News – All-female shortlist is a first for Ivor Novello awards". BBC News. 17 April 2012. Archived from the original on 28 November 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2018. Sabbagh, Dan (13 August 2012). "David Bowie Among UK Stars Who Turned Down Olympic Closing Show". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 September 2016. Retrieved 29 September 2016. "Kate Bush CBE will put medal 'on top of Christmas tree'". The Daily Telegraph. 10 April 2013. Archived from the original on 13 April 2018. Retrieved 2 April 2018. "Kate Bush Announces First Live Shows Since 1979". The Guardian. 21 March 2014. Archived from the original on 21 March 2014. Retrieved 29 September 2016. Masters, Tim (27 August 2014). "Kate Bush: Before the Dawn – A First Look". BBC News. Archived from the original on 27 August 2014. Retrieved 29 September 2014. Saunders, Tristram Fane (29 September 2016). "Kate Bush to Release Before the Dawn Triple-Album in November". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 29 September 2016. Retrieved 29 September 2016. "Kate Bush sets new album chart record". BBC News. 31 August 2014. Archived from the original on 4 June 2020. Retrieved 7 January 2020. Myers, Justin (29 January 2016). "David Bowie matches Elvis Presley's Official Albums Chart record". Officialcharts.com. Archived from the original on 22 October 2016. Retrieved 2 December 2016. Brandle, Lars (1 September 2014). "Kate Bush Sets U.K. Chart Record". Billboard. Archived from the original on 29 September 2016. Retrieved 29 September 2014. Grow, Kory (4 September 2014). "Kate Bush Lands Astounding Eight Albums on British Chart". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 5 September 2014. Retrieved 29 September 2016. Earls. John (29 September 2016). "Kate Bush to release new live album". NME. Archived from the original on 30 September 2016. Retrieved 30 September 2016. Fane Saunders, Tristram (29 September 2016). "Kate Bush to release Before the Dawn triple-album in November". The Telegraph. The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 29 September 2016. Retrieved 30 September 2016. Snapes, Laura (10 September 2018). "Kate Bush to publish book of lyrics, introduced by David Mitchell". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 10 September 2018. Retrieved 10 September 2018. Bush, Kate (6 December 2018). How To Be Invisible. London: Faber & Faber. ISBN 978-0-571-35094-0. OCLC 1065348019. Archived from the original on 27 October 2020. Retrieved 13 November 2020. "Kate Bush replaces Rolf Harris on LP remaster". Data Thistle. 15 November 2018. Archived from the original on 20 November 2018. Retrieved 20 November 2018. Reitman, Shelby (22 February 2019). "Kate Bush to Release Four-Disc 'The Other Sides' Collection". Billboard. Archived from the original on 8 July 2020. Retrieved 8 July 2020. "Kate releasing French exclusive 12" of Ne T'Enfuis Pas / Un Baiser D'Enfant in September!". 20 July 2019. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 13 November 2020. "Ne t'enfuis pas Exclusivité Fnac Edition Limitée". FNAC. 3 September 2019. Archived from the original on 17 November 2020. Retrieved 13 November 2020. Cordero, Rosy (29 May 2022). "'Stranger Things' Pushes Kate Bush's 1985 Single 'Running Up That Hill' To No. 1 On iTunes". Deadline. Archived from the original on 30 June 2022. Retrieved 30 May 2022. Unterberger, Andrew (1 June 2022). "Could 'Stranger Things' Result in Kate Bush's Highest Hot 100 Peak Yet?". Billboard. Archived from the original on 3 June 2022. Retrieved 3 June 2022. "Kate Bush running up that chart thanks to Stranger Things". BBC. 1 June 2022. Archived from the original on 3 June 2022. Retrieved 3 June 2022. "What Is Kate Bush's Song 'Running Up That Hill' Doing In 'Stranger Things'? What Is Kate Bush's Song 'Running Up That Hill' Doing In 'Stranger Things'? Everything About The Old '80s Tune". Women's Health. 31 May 2022. Archived from the original on 11 June 2022. Retrieved 22 June 2022. Cain, Sian (6 June 2022). "Kate Bush thanks Stranger Things fans as 'Running Up That Hill' climbs charts". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 June 2022. Retrieved 7 June 2022. "Kate Bush's Running Up That Hill claims new Official Singles Chart peak as Harry Styles reigns with As It Was". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on 10 June 2022. Retrieved 13 June 2022. "Kate Bush Had The Biggest Record In The UK Last Week, But She's Not No.1 On The Official Chart. This Is A Watershed Moment For A Music Industry Struggling To Understand The Meaning Of 'New'". Music Business Worldwide. Archived from the original on 14 June 2022. Retrieved 14 June 2022. "Kate Bush heading to number one after chart rule reset". BBC. Archived from the original on 14 June 2022. Retrieved 14 June 2022. "How Kate Bush's Running up That Hill became a No.1 contender: Inside the biggest chart story of 2022". Archived from the original on 17 June 2022. Retrieved 16 June 2022. Savage, Mark (17 June 2022). "Kate Bush is number one, thanks to Stranger Things". BBC. Archived from the original on 17 June 2022. Retrieved 17 June 2022. Khomami, Nadia (17 June 2022). "Kate Bush reaches UK No 1 with Running Up That Hill after 37 years". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 17 June 2022. Retrieved 17 June 2022. "Kate Bush's Running Up That Hill is Official Charts Number 1 Single: Singer becomes 3 x Official Charts Record Breaker with Stranger Things success". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on 17 June 2022. Retrieved 17 June 2022. Trust, Gary (6 June 2022). "Harry Styles Holds Atop Billboard Hot 100 With 'As It Was', Kate Bush's 'Running Up That Hill' Hits Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on 7 June 2022. Retrieved 7 June 2022. "Harry Styles' "As It Was" Tops Billboard Hot 100 for Sixth Week". Billboard. Archived from the original on 13 June 2022. Retrieved 13 June 2022. Trust, Gary (25 July 2022). "Lizzo's 'About Damn Time' Hits No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved 25 July 2022. @billboardcharts (6 June 2022). "@KateBushMusic's 1985 album 'Hounds of Love' re-enters this week's #Billboard200 chart at No. 28, a new peak..." (Tweet). Retrieved 7 June 2022 – via Twitter. "Kate Bush takes out #1 on the Singles Chart". Australian Recording Industry Association. 10 June 2022. Archived from the original on 10 June 2022. Retrieved 10 June 2022. "Top Singles (Week 24, 2022)" (in French). Syndicat National de l'Édition Phonographique. Archived from the original on 20 June 2022. Retrieved 6 June 2022. Rutherford, Kevin (7 June 2022). "Kate Bush Earns First Billboard No. 1 Album Thanks to 'Stranger Things' Boost". Billboard. Archived from the original on 7 June 2022. Retrieved 7 June 2022. Smith, Carl (10 June 2022). "Post Malone's Twelve Carat Toothache boasts highest new entry as Harry Styles reclaims Number 1 album with Harry's House". Official Charts. Archived from the original on 10 June 2022. Retrieved 10 June 2022. "Official Albums Chart Top 100 - 24 June 2022 - 30 June 2022". Official Charts. 24 June 2022. Retrieved 30 June 2022. Campbell, Erica (1 September 2022). "Kate Bush's 'Running Up That Hill' to be released as CD single". NME. Retrieved 2 October 2022. A Man Called Otto (2022) - Soundtracks - IMDb, retrieved 8 September 2023 "Is Kate Bush Having Another Netflix Moment?". Billboard. 18 May 2023. Retrieved 19 May 2023. "The 200 Greatest Singers of All Time". Rolling Stone. January 2023. Sinclair, Paul (23 February 2023). "Kate Bush's Hounds Of Love to be reissued later this year". SuperDeluxeEdition. Retrieved 5 May 2023. Rigotti, Alex (1 November 2023). "Kate Bush announces new physical reissues of her album back catalogue". NME. Retrieved 30 November 2023. "Kate Bush". Future Rock Legends. Retrieved 5 May 2023. O'Connor, Roisin (28 February 2024). "Kate Bush announced as Record Store Day UK". The Independent. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Monroe, Jezz (28 February 2024). "Kate Bush Made Ambassador for Record Store Day UK 2024". Pitchfork. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Savage, Mark (28 February 2024). "Kate Bush says she's 'privileged' to become Record Store Day ambassador". BBC. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Simon Reynolds (21 August 2014). "Kate Bush, the queen of art-pop who defied her critics". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 9 July 2017. Retrieved 12 December 2016. Fitzmaurice, Larry (4 April 2011). "Kate Bush Reveals LP Details, New Song". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on 5 May 2016. Retrieved 28 August 2016. Cunningham, John M. (22 September 2014). "Kate Bush". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 5 September 2015. Retrieved 17 May 2016. Sarnoff, Maria Montgomery (March 1990). "Perfect Vision". Option. Retrieved 7 May 2016. Merlini, Mattia (October 2022). "A Mellotron-Shaped Grave: Deconstructing the Death of Progressive Rock". OpenEdition (10). doi:10.4000/transposition.7101. hdl:2434/948377. S2CID 250229571. Retrieved 9 August 2023. Indeed, such an analysis can explain why new post-progressive artists (e.g. Kate Bush, Peter Gabriel, Robert Fripp) Bennett, Andy (2020). British Progressive Pop 1970-1980. Bloomsbury. ISBN 9781501336645. Hutchinson, Kate (13 May 2020). "Kate Bush: where to start in her back catalogue". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 March 2022. Retrieved 18 June 2022. Ray, Michael (2012). Disco, Punk, New Wave, Heavy Metal, and More: Music in the 1970s and 1980s. Rosen Education Service. p. 107. ISBN 978-1-61530-908-5. Archived from the original on 29 August 2021. Retrieved 5 October 2020. 'Arty' 1970s and '80s British pop rock artists such as Roxy Music, Peter Gabriel, and Kate Bush... Sarnoff, Maria Montgomery (March 1990). "Perfect Vision". Option. Corcoran, Nina (21 March 2014). "Kate Bush to Tour for the First Time in 35 Years". Under the Gun Review. Archived from the original on 17 September 2016. Retrieved 30 March 2015. Curtis-Horsfall, Thomas (3 July 2022). "How did Kate Bush capture the imagination of a new generation?". Smooth Radio. Retrieved 27 July 2022. Theatrical, experimental, ethereal, the music of Kate Bush never really sat well within the confines of pop music "KATE BUSH - Pop Music Experimental Object". uDiscover Music. 30 November 2018. Retrieved 27 July 2022. Kate Bush, who turned 60 in July, is one of the most innovative, experimental and influential artists in pop history Gardner, Elysa (17 November 2005). "Kate Bush picks it up in 'Aerial'". USA Today. Archived from the original on 14 October 2015. Moy, Ron (2006). "Kate Bush and mythologies of Englishness". Popular Musicology Online. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 8 April 2007. Hudson, Sue (December 1985). "The Unique Poetry Of Kate Bush". Hi-Fi & Record Review. Archived from the original on 13 August 2014. Retrieved 1 October 2014. Hudson, Sue. "The Back Page". Hi-Fi and Record Review. Davis, Erik (1993). "Red Shoes review". Spin. "Kate Bush admits frustration over time between albums". BBC News. 4 May 2011. Archived from the original on 15 October 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. "BBC Radio 2 – Mark Radcliffe's Music Club, 17/05/2011". BBC Radio 2. 17 May 2011. Archived from the original on 27 July 2013. Retrieved 17 May 2011. Solanas, Jane (1983). "The Barmy Dreamer". NME. Colin Irwin (November 1989). "Iron Maiden". Q. "Kate Bush interview". Smash Hits. 1980. Sutcliffe, Phil (June 1991). "Hounds of Love Sleeve Notes". Q. "Kate Bush interview". Q. 1990. "Top 100 Greatest Gayest albums 81–90". Out. 19 March 2012. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 12 May 2015. "Gaffaweb - Kate Bush - THE GARDEN - Kate's KBC article - Issue 3 (November 1979) - Various & Interview". gaffa.org. Retrieved 31 October 2022. Irwin, Colin (10 October 1980). "Paranoia and Passion of the Kate Inside". Melody Maker. Brown, Len (7 October 1989). "In the Realm of the Senses". NME. "Kate Bush once named her favourite TV shows of all time". Far Out magazine. Archived from the original on 1 March 2022. Retrieved 12 June 2022. "Little Miss Can't Be Wrong". Q. December 1993. Pollard, Alexandra (8 September 2016). "Your ultimate guide to the incredible Kate Bush". Dazed. dazeddigital.com. Archived from the original on 11 February 2022. Retrieved 11 February 2022. Mehr, Bob. "Review: Janet Jackson offers spectacle and intimacy at FedExForum concert". The Commercial Appeal. Archived from the original on 22 January 2021. Retrieved 29 July 2021. Laborey, Claire (2019). "Kate Bush – Stimmgewaltig und exzentrisch" [Kate Bush – Vocally powerful and eccentric] (in German). Arte France. Archived from the original on 21 September 2019. Retrieved 21 September 2019. Alexis Petridis (7 June 2022). "'Ooh, yeah, you're amazing!' The wonder of Kate Bush – and 10 tracks to delight new listeners". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 February 2023. Nevins, Jake (11 July 2023). "ANOHNI and Björk Talk Soul Music, Lou Reed, and Climate Collapse". Interview Magazine. Retrieved 23 March 2024. "Alanis Morissette says Kate Bush inspired her to sing". yahoo! news. 26 August 2020. Retrieved 20 March 2024. "BBC Radio 6 Music - Guy Garvey's Finest Hour, Hounds of Love at 35 - A Kate Bush Special". Archived from the original on 8 June 2022. Retrieved 8 June 2022. Ablaze!, Karren (31 March 2010). "This woman's work: How Kate Bush inspires female artists". The Guardian. a wave of solo female artists followed – from Florence Welch to Fever Ray – all happy to namecheck Bush as an influence Aidin Vaziri (25 October 2009). "A guide to Regina Spektor's album 'Far'". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on 18 July 2018. Retrieved 3 November 2017. "Why we love Kate Bush, by the musicians she's influenced". Evening Standard. 19 August 2014. Aroesti, Rachel (1 July 2022). "'An old strain of English magic had returned': stars on why they fell in love with Kate Bush". The Guardian. London. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 24 July 2022. Kathy Iandoli (12 September 2014). "Exclusive: Ellie Goulding Talks Subliminal Songs – 'People Shouldn't Believe What They've Been Hearing'". Vibe. Archived from the original on 22 June 2017. Retrieved 24 January 2017. I want to write about being really inspired by Kate Bush more recently "Interview: Kyros talk latest single". OriginalRock.net. 17 October 2016. Archived from the original on 14 December 2016. Retrieved 16 February 2017. "GERMAN VERGARA from AISLES (Chile)". Justincaseradio.com. Archived from the original on 16 February 2017. Retrieved 16 February 2017. Twomey, Seán (30 July 2019). "Neil Hannon talks to HMV podcast about his inspiration Kate Bush". KateBushNews.com. Archived from the original on 10 November 2020. Retrieved 10 November 2020. "Grimes At Lollapalooza 2016". Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 16 October 2019 – via YouTube. Ogunnaike, Nikki (25 April 2017). "Solange Wants To Redefine "Classic"". Elle. Archived from the original on 2 August 2020. Retrieved 30 April 2020. Puttick, Kate (8 March 2024). "Julia Holter on the Yamaha CS-60, Kate Bush and the parallels between composition and production: "So much of production is thinking about organising sounds in a similar way to on a sheet of music"". MusicRadar. Retrieved 20 March 2024. Kate Bush's productions in particular influenced me "Angel Olsen on Her Dazzling New LP, Becoming a Crazy Cat Lady". Rolling Stone. 22 October 2019. Retrieved 23 March 2024. Mylrea, Hannah (1 September 2022). "Halsey: "No amount of experience makes you invincible to trends"". NME. Retrieved 23 March 2024. Greenblatt, Leah (22 May 2018). "Robyn talks new album, old influences in New York lecture series — then crashes a dance party in Brooklyn". EW.com. Archived from the original on 18 June 2022. Retrieved 18 June 2022. a move heavily influenced, she admitted, by Kate Bush's "Cloudbusting" Beaumont, Mark (30 July 2018). "Celebrating Kate Bush at 60". NME. Archived from the original on 12 June 2022. Retrieved 12 June 2022. "Adele: Kate Bush inspired my comeback". The Guardian. 2 December 2015. Archived from the original on 1 August 2016. Retrieved 12 January 2020. Sawer, Patrick (4 April 2010). "Nerina Pallot: Cowell, Minogue and me". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 20 January 2017. Hodginson, Will (3 October 2003). "Classic examples (Dido Interview)". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 9 February 2017. Retrieved 20 January 2017. Mossman, Kate (31 January 2016). "Sia: 'Everyone in entertainment is insecure. We've been dancing our entire lives for your approval'". The Observer. I grew up with these weirdos: Kate Bush, Adam Ant, Boy George, Cyndi Lauper. I want to help show that little people can express themselves in a non-sexual way, but still be extremely expressive Sturges, Fiona (17 June 2011). "KD Lang: 'In the end, I knew it would all come back to the music. And it did'". The Independent. Archived from the original on 22 September 2016. Retrieved 2 January 2017. "Taylor Swift producer Jack Antonoff: 'I'm drawn to female artists who are brutally honest' | Pop and rock | The Guardian". amp.theguardian.com. Retrieved 23 March 2024. "Blondie, Kate Bush and Siouxsie & The Banshees: Andy Bell's favourite albums". Daily Express. 18 July 2014. Archived from the original on 15 January 2017. Retrieved 20 January 2017. "Interview: Little Boots". M. 26 June 2014. Archived from the original on 19 August 2014. Retrieved 14 August 2014. David Apple; Dedee W. "Kate Nash Interview". House of Tracks TV. Archived from the original on 19 August 2014. Michelson, Noah (6 September 2009). "Bat for Lashes Redux". Out. Archived from the original on 19 August 2014. Retrieved 14 August 2014. Erin Lyndal Martin (18 February 2013). "Shock To Your System: Tegan Of Tegan & Sara Interviewed". The Quietus. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 16 March 2016. Stern, Claire (8 September 2014). "Sky Ferreira on Channeling Madonna and Why Blondes Have More Fun". InStyle. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 31 August 2015. "Rosalía Shouts-Out Lauryn Hill, Kate Bush And More Women During Latin GRAMMY Speech". The Grammys. 15 November 2018. Archived from the original on 3 April 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2019. Lewis, Katy (23 March 2007). "Beverley's back!". BBC. Archived from the original on 10 November 2010. Retrieved 3 October 2019. Dostert, Mike (3 July 2014). "Tim Bowness". Terrorverlag.com. Archived from the original on 5 February 2017. Retrieved 4 February 2017. "Elton John Reveals Kate Bush Song 'Saved His Life'". Smooth Radio. Archived from the original on 18 June 2022. Retrieved 14 June 2022. Harper, Leah (31 August 2013). "Elton John: Soundtrack of my life". TheGuardian.com. Diamonds and Pearls by Prince – liner notes – section Thanks. Paisley Park, Warner Bros. 1991. "10 things you didn't know about Metallica's Master of Puppets". Revolver Mag. March 2018. "Memento Mori Ep. 9 Tracklist". Genius. Brite, Poppy Z. (1997). Courtney Love: The Real Story. Simon & Schuster. p. 45. ISBN 0-684-84800-7. "Last Night a Record Changed my Life". Mojo. July 2003. Turner, Luke (5 October 2011). "There's A Song Playing: Brett Anderson's Favourite 13 Albums". The Quietus. Archived from the original on 16 August 2014. Retrieved 16 August 2014. "Queens of British pop (including an interview with Lily Allen about Kate Bush)", BBC Television, 1 April 2009 Lewis, John (December 2007). "An Audience With John Lydon". Uncut. "Robert Smith [interview]". Melody Maker. 23 December 1989. p. 23. "VH1: 100 Greatest Women of Rock & Roll". 1999. Retrieved 23 October 2017 – via RockOnTheNet.com. Minsker, Evan (4 November 2023). "Read Big Boi's Speech Inducting Kate Bush Into Rock & Roll Hall of Fame 2023". Pitchfork. Retrieved 4 November 2023. "The incomparable Kate Bush". Archived from the original on 23 February 2013. Retrieved 9 June 2022. Few pop stars are as cerebral about making music as Kate Bush Peretti, Jacques (12 October 2008). "Enya talks about her new album And Winter Came". www.telegraph.co.uk. Retrieved 10 May 2023. Pires, Candice (14 August 2012). "Six Songs of Me: Kele Okereke". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 12 December 2016. Wainwright, Rufus (12 November 2006). "Gay icons". The Observer. London. Archived from the original on 24 February 2007. Retrieved 18 November 2006. Chalayan, Hussein (12 February 2005). "Hussein Chalayan on Kate Bush". The Independent. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. Retrieved 2 September 2017. "J. K. Rowling chooses the Tracks of My Years". BBC. Archived from the original on 23 June 2022. Retrieved 23 June 2022. "27052 Katebush (1998 SN13)". ssd.jpl.nasa.gov. 21 January 2014. Archived from the original on 11 May 2020. Retrieved 8 April 2020. "(27052) Katebush = 1998 SN13 = 2000 CJ103". minorplanetcenter.net. Archived from the original on 2 October 2016. Retrieved 8 April 2020. Brémond, Anaïs (14 February 2020). "Pone: the paralysed producer making music with his eyes". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 February 2020. Retrieved 15 February 2020. "Kate and Me". kateandme.73bpm.com/. Archived from the original on 21 December 2019. Retrieved 15 February 2020. "Pone". katebushencyclopedia.com. 17 July 2020. Archived from the original on 2 June 2021. Retrieved 29 May 2021. "LISTEN AND DONATE : Atteint de la maladie de Charcot, Pone lance un projet musical et caritatif dont le visuel est signé JR". clique.tv. 18 May 2021. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 19 June 2021. Clarker, Phoebe. "From Malala To Kate Bush: The Five Women Who Have Shaped Boris Johnson's Life". Grazia. Archived from the original on 14 March 2020. Retrieved 23 March 2020. Hess, Liam (5 January 2018). "When Kate Bush Turned Her Hand to Filmmaking". AnOther. Archived from the original on 24 September 2020. Retrieved 15 December 2020. Myers, Owen. "Kate Bush Speaks". The FADER. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 15 December 2020. Dickson, Andrew (8 April 2014). "Sidi Larbi Cherkaoui, dancer: why I love Kate Bush". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 11 November 2020. Retrieved 4 May 2021. Precel, Nicole (9 July 2016). "Thousands to embody Kate Bush in Most Wuthering Heights Day Ever". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 9 February 2019. Retrieved 15 December 2020. "Kate Bush fans mark 'Most Wuthering Heights Day Ever' – in pictures". The Guardian. 14 July 2018. Archived from the original on 13 June 2021. Retrieved 21 April 2021. "Watch as hundreds of Kate Bush fans re-create her 'Wuthering Heights' video across the world". NME. 15 July 2018. Archived from the original on 15 May 2021. Retrieved 21 April 2021. "Why did Kate Bush never tour after 1979?". BBC News. 21 March 2014. Archived from the original on 2 April 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. Gambaccini, Paul (24 November 1993). "Kate Bush Smiles in Her New Red Shoes". New York Press. "Kate: Kate Bush Christmas Special 1979". IMDb. Archived from the original on 10 February 2017. Retrieved 19 March 2020. "Prince's Trust Rock Gala". Kate Bush Encyclopedia. 18 August 2017. Archived from the original on 19 May 2021. Retrieved 19 May 2021. Lynskey, Dorian (25 August 2014). "The 10 best Kate Bush moments". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 22 May 2018. Retrieved 21 May 2018. Greene, Andy (10 November 2015). "Flashback: Kate Bush and David Gilmour Play Together in 1987". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 16 October 2018. Retrieved 16 October 2018. "Kate Bush announces first live shows since 1979". The Guardian. 21 March 2014. Archived from the original on 21 March 2014. Retrieved 12 December 2016. Alex Young. "Kate Bush's first concert in 35 years: setlist + photos". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on 21 March 2016. Retrieved 26 August 2014. Tim Masters (26 August 2014). "Kate Bush comeback greeted with huge cheers". BBC News. Archived from the original on 26 August 2014. Retrieved 26 August 2014. "Kate Bush replaced Dolly Parton on 'Don't Give Up', Peter Gabriel says". Digital Spy. 19 September 2011. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 28 September 2013. Mabbett, Andy (30 January 2005). "Roy Harper, Rock Cafe 2000, Stourbridge". Birmingham Alive!. Archived from the original on 13 February 2008. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Emancipation – Prince". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 13 June 2022. Retrieved 13 June 2022. "Recording of 'Let it Be'". Smash Hits. Archived from the original on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 12 June 2022. "The top 50 greatest covers as voted by you". The Observer. Archived from the original on 11 August 2013. Stephen Thomas Erlewine. "The Glory of Gershwin - Various Artists | Songs, Reviews, Credits". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 8 November 2021. Retrieved 13 June 2022. "Mna Na h-Éireann". Hot Press. 29 May 1996. "Kate Bush: her 31 UK singles from worst to best". The Daily Telegraph. 29 November 2016. Archived from the original on 21 August 2021. Retrieved 20 June 2022. Twomey, Seán (26 August 2008). "Lost Kate Vocal Performance surfaces on iTunes!". KateBushNews.com. Archived from the original on 26 March 2016. Retrieved 24 July 2014. "Erasure & Kate Bush: The Lost Collaboration". The Quietus. 4 March 2009. Archived from the original on 16 July 2012. Retrieved 6 March 2009. Sweeney, Eamon (24 March 2014). "Why Kate Bush is so proud of her Irish roots". independent. Archived from the original on 18 December 2020. Retrieved 19 December 2020. Singh, Anita (27 August 2014). "Kate Bush: how Bertie inspired my comeback". Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 6 July 2016. Sweeting, Adam (2 October 2005). "Kate Bush: The Return of the Recluse". The Independent. Archived from the original on 13 October 2005. "Famous People of Eltham". Elthamse9.co.uk. Archived from the original on 23 April 2016. Retrieved 5 July 2016. "Kate Bush talks Vegetarianism". Delia Smith's Cookery Course. BBC. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021 – via YouTube. Russell, John. "Kate Bush's Thoughts on Vegetarianism". John Russell's Home Page. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 5 July 2016. Ziegler, Mollie (8 November 2005). "The Return of a Sultry Songstress". The New York Sun. Lester, Paul (15 February 2010). "New band of the day – No 726: Syd Arthur". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 August 2019. Retrieved 16 October 2019. "Kate Bush – Breathing (lyrics)". Genius Lyrics. Archived from the original on 15 April 2019. Released 14 April 1980 "Cloudbusting -- Kate Bush In Her Own Words: Politics". children.ofthenight.org. Archived from the original on 26 April 2005. "Crisis? What Crisis? The Callaghan Government and the British 'Winter of Discontent'". Reviews in history. January 2015. Archived from the original on 8 May 2021. Retrieved 22 January 2021. "Kate Bush Once Wrote A Song About Ken Livingstone". 28 March 2014. Archived from the original on 19 September 2015. Retrieved 1 May 2016. Rampen, Julia (29 November 2016). "Kate Bush thinks Theresa May is 'wonderful' - and it's not the first time she's turned political". New Statesman. Archived from the original on 22 April 2021. Retrieved 22 April 2021. Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (8 January 2019). "Kate Bush clarifies political stance: 'I am not a Tory supporter'". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 8 January 2019. "Kate Bush Says She Does Not Support Tories, Clarifying 2016 Theresa May Quote". Pitchfork. 8 January 2019. Archived from the original on 30 August 2021. Retrieved 30 August 2021. Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (20 April 2021). "Paul McCartney and Kate Bush lead call for change to music streaming payments". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 May 2021. Bush, Kate (22 December 2022). "Merry Christmas". Retrieved 22 December 2022. Bush, John Carder (2014). Cathy. Sphere, London. ISBN 978-0-7515-5989-7. Bush, John Carder (2015). Kate. Sphere, London. ISBN 978-0-7515-5990-3. Bush, Kate (2018). How To Be Invisible. Faber & Faber, London. ISBN 978-0-571-35094-0. Cann, Kevin; Mayes, Sean (1988). Kate Bush: A Visual Documentary. Omnibus Press. ISBN 0-7119-1039-1. Doherty, Mike (22 December 2005). "This Bush's Mission Finally Gets Accomplished". National Post. Archived from the original on 26 September 2007. Doyle, Tom (28 October 2005). "'I'm Not Some Weirdo Recluse'". Music. The Guardian. Archived from the original on 1 October 2014. Godwin, Robert (2006). The Illustrated Collector's Guide to Kate Bush (2nd ed.). Collector's Guide Publishing. ISBN 978-1-894959-45-2. Godwin, Robert (2014). 100 things you thought you knew about Kate Bush but were afraid to ask. Archived from the original on 1 June 2022. Retrieved 13 June 2022. Jovanovic, Rob (2006). Kate Bush – The Biography. Portrait. ISBN 978-0749951146. Muskens, Helena; Racké, Quirine (2007). Come Back Kate. Snow White Films. Osborn, Michael (30 July 2008). "Behind the enigma of Kate Bush". Entertainment. BBC News. Archived from the original on 12 July 2012. Thomson, Graeme (2012). Kate Bush: Under the Ivy. Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-1-84772-930-9. Vermorel, Fred; Vermorel, Judy (1980). Kate Bush: Princess of Suburbia. Target Books. ISBN 978-0-7119-0152-0. Vermorel, Fred (1983). The Secret History of Kate Bush and the Strange Art of Pop. Omnibus Press. ISBN 0-7119-0152-X. Withers, Deborah (2010). Adventures in Kate Bush and Theory. Hammeron Press. ISBN 978-0-9564507-0-8. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Kate Bush. Wikiquote has quotations related to Kate Bush. Official website Kate Bush at AllMusic Kate Bush at IMDb Kate Bush interview, Ireland, 1978