Janet Damita Jo Jackson (born May 16, 1966) is an American singer, songwriter, actress, and dancer. She is noted for her innovative, socially conscious and sexually provocative records, as well as elaborate stage shows. Her sound and choreography became a catalyst in the growth of MTV, enabling her to rise to prominence while breaking gender and racial barriers in the process. Lyrical content which focused on social issues and lived experiences set her reputation as a role model for youth. The tenth and youngest child of the Jackson family, she made her debut at the MGM Grand. She starred in the variety television series The Jacksons in 1976 and went on to appear in other television shows throughout the 1970s and early 1980s, including Good Times, Diff'rent Strokes, and Fame. After signing a recording contract with A&M Records in 1982, she became a pop icon following the release of her third and fourth studio albums Control (1986) and Rhythm Nation 1814 (1989). Her collaborations with record producers Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis incorporated elements of rhythm and blues, funk, disco, rap, and industrial beats, which led to crossover success in popular music. In 1991, Jackson signed the first of two record-breaking multimillion-dollar contracts with Virgin Records, establishing her as one of the highest-paid artists in the industry. Prior to her first studio project with Virgin, she appeared in her first of several lead film roles in Poetic Justice (1993). Her two studio albums which followed, Janet (1993) and The Velvet Rope (1997), saw her develop a public image as a sex symbol. These records, along with their promotional music videos and live performances in concert tours, branded Jackson as one of the world's most erotic performers, garnering both criticism and praise. By the end of the 1990s, she was named by Billboard magazine as the second most successful recording artist of the decade in the United States after Mariah Carey. The release of her seventh studio album All for You in 2001 coincided with a celebration of her impact on the recording industry as the subject of the inaugural MTV Icon special. The backlash from the 2004 Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show controversy resulted in an industry blacklisting under the direction of Les Moonves, then-CEO of CBS Corporation. Jackson subsequently experienced reduced radio airplay, televised promotion and sales figures from that point forward. After parting ways with Virgin Records, she released her tenth studio album Discipline (2008), her first and only album with Island Records. In 2015, she partnered with BMG Rights Management to launch her own record label, Rhythm Nation, and released her eleventh studio album, Unbreakable, the same year. Since then she has continued to release music as an independent artist. Jackson has sold over 100 million records, making her one of the world's best-selling music artists. She has amassed an extensive catalog, with singles such as "Nasty", "Rhythm Nation", "That's the Way Love Goes", "Together Again", and "All for You"; she holds the record for the most consecutive top-ten entries on the US Billboard Hot 100 singles chart by a female artist with 18. She is also the only artist in the history of the chart to have seven commercial singles from one album (Rhythm Nation 1814) peak within the top five positions. In 2008, Billboard placed her number seven on its list of the Hot 100 All-Time Top Artists, and in 2010 ranked her fifth among the "Top 50 R&B/Hip-Hop Artists of the Past 25 Years". In December 2016, the magazine named her the second most successful dance club artist after Madonna. Her accolades include five Grammy Awards, eleven Billboard Music Awards, eleven American Music Awards, an Academy Award nomination, a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, and eight Guinness World Records entries. In 2019, she was inducted to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Janet Damita Jo Jackson was born on May 16, 1966, in Gary, Indiana. She was the youngest of ten children in the Jackson family, a working-class African-American family living in a two-bedroom house on Jackson Street. Her mother, Katherine Esther Jackson (née Scruse), played clarinet and piano, had aspired to be a country-and-western performer, and worked part-time at Sears. Her father, Joseph Walter "Joe" Jackson, a former boxer, was a crane operator at U.S. Steel and played guitar with a local rhythm and blues band, the Falcons, to supplement the family's income. Janet's great-great-grandfather, July "Jack" Gale, was a US Army scout. Family lore held that he was also a Native American medicine man. Janet grew up with two sisters (Rebbie and La Toya) and six brothers (Jackie, Tito, Jermaine, Marlon, Randy and Michael). Another brother, Marlon's twin Brandon, died shortly after birth. The Jacksons were devout Jehovah's Witnesses, although Janet would later refrain from organized religion. At a young age, Jackson's brothers began performing as the Jackson 5 in the Chicago-Gary area. In March 1969, they signed a record deal with Motown, and soon had their first number-one hit. The family then moved to the Encino neighborhood of Los Angeles. Jackson had initially desired to become a horse racing jockey or entertainment lawyer, with plans to support herself through acting. Despite this, she was anticipated to pursue a career in entertainment and considered the idea after recording herself in the studio. At age seven, Jackson and her sisters performed at the MGM Casino on the Las Vegas Strip. A biography revealed her father, Joseph, was emotionally withdrawn and told her to address him solely by his first name as a child. She began acting in the variety show The Jacksons in 1976. In 1977, She was selected to have a starring role as Penny Gordon Woods in the sitcom Good Times. She later starred in A New Kind of Family and later got a recurring role on Diff'rent Strokes, portraying Charlene Duprey from seasons three to six. Jackson also played the role of Cleo Hewitt during the fourth season of Fame, but expressed indifference towards the series, largely due to the emotional stress of her secret marriage to R&B singer James DeBarge. Jackson later elaborated on her time on the show in an interview with Anderson Cooper, revealing that the cast would occasionally play pranks on her, but she spoke fondly of them. When Jackson was fifteen, her father and manager Joseph Jackson arranged a contract for her with A&M Records. Her debut album, Janet Jackson, was released in 1982. It was produced by Angela Winbush, René Moore, Bobby Watson of Rufus and Leon Sylvers III, and overseen by her father Joseph. It peaked at No. 63 on the Billboard 200, and No. 6 on the publication's R&B albums chart, receiving little promotion. The album appeared on the Billboard Top Black Albums of 1983, while Jackson herself was the highest-ranking female vocalist on the Billboard Year-End Black Album Artists. Jackson's second album, Dream Street, was released two years later. Dream Street reached No. 147 on the Billboard 200, and No. 19 on the R&B albums chart. The lead single "Don't Stand Another Chance" peaked at No. 9 on Billboard's R&B singles chart. Both albums consisted primarily of bubblegum pop music. After her second album, Jackson terminated business affairs with her family, commenting "I just wanted to get out of the house, get out from under my father, which was one of the most difficult things that I had to do." Attempting a third album, Jackson teamed with producers Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis. They set out to achieve crossover pop appeal, while also creating a strong foundation within the urban market. Within six weeks, Jackson and the duo crafted her third studio album, Control, released in February 1986. The album shot to No. 1 on the Billboard 200, and was certified fivefold Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), selling over ten million copies worldwide. Control was declared "remarkably nervy and mature" for a teenage act, also considered "an alternative to the sentimental balladry" which permeated radio, likening Jackson to Donna Summer's position of "unwilling to accept novelty status and taking her own steps to rise above it." The album spawned five top five singles, "What Have You Done for Me Lately", "Nasty", "When I Think of You", "Control", and "Let's Wait Awhile", and a top 15 hit with "The Pleasure Principle". "When I Think of You" became her first No. 1 hit on the Hot 100. Control received six Billboard Awards, including "Top Pop Singles Artist", and three Grammy nominations, such as Album of the Year. It also won four American Music Awards from twelve nominations, an unbroken record. At this point, Jackson was successfully "shaking off the experience of being a shadow Jackson child", becoming "an artist in her own right". The album's lyrical content included several themes of empowerment, inspired by an incident of sexual harassment, with Jackson recalling "the danger hit home when a couple of guys started stalking me on the street and instead of running to Jimmy or Terry for protection, I took a stand. I backed them down. That's how songs like 'Nasty' and 'What Have You Done for Me Lately' were born, out of a sense of self-defense." Its innovative fusion of dance-pop and industrial music with hip-hop and R&B undertones influenced the development of the new jack swing genre by bridging the gap between the latter two styles. The accompanying music videos shot for the album's singles became popular on MTV, and obtained a then-unknown Paula Abdul a recording contract for her choreography work with Jackson. Billboard stated "[Jackson's] accessible sound and spectacularly choreographed videos were irresistible to MTV, and helped the channel evolve from rock programming to a broader, beat-driven musical mix." In retrospect of her influence on the channel, Kyle Anderson of Entertainment Weekly commented: "The videos from Control were all over MTV, and Janet established herself as an instantly dominant pop figure talked about in the same sentences as Madonna and her older brother Michael." MTV's Meaghan Garvey asserted "it's hard to overstate the significance of Control, whether in terms of the pop landscape, the evolution of the music video as a vessel for promotion and expression, or Top 40 feminist anthems." She also argued "it's important to note that Control’s self-actualization anthems were expressions of black female pride. Control spawned a whopping six videos—great ones, at that—which played an immeasurable role in the shift toward visible black pop." Jackson released her fourth album, Rhythm Nation 1814, in September 1989. Although her record label desired a direct sequel to Control, Jackson chose to include a socially conscious theme among various musical styles. She stated, "I know an album or a song can't change the world. I just want my music and my dance to catch the audience's attention, and to hold it long enough for them to listen to the lyrics." The album's central theme of unity was developed in response to various crimes and tragedies reported in the media. Peaking at No. 1 on the Billboard 200, the album was certified sixfold Platinum by the RIAA and sold over 12 million copies worldwide. Rolling Stone observed Jackson's artistic growth shifted from "personal freedom to more universal concerns—injustice, illiteracy, crime, drugs—without missing a beat." The album was also considered "the exclamation point on her career", consisting of a "diverse collection of songs flowing with the natural talent Jackson possesses", which effectively "expanded Janet's range in every conceivable direction", being "more credibly feminine, more crucially masculine, more viably adult, more believably childlike." With singles "Miss You Much", "Rhythm Nation", "Escapade", "Alright", "Come Back to Me", "Black Cat" and "Love Will Never Do (Without You)", it became the first album in history to produce number one hits in three separate calendar years, as well as the only album to achieve seven top five singles on the Hot 100. Famous for its choreography and warehouse setting, the "Rhythm Nation" music video is considered one of the most iconic and popular in history, with Jackson's military ensemble also making her a fashion icon. The video for "Love Will Never Do (Without You)" is notable for being the first instance of Jackson's transition into sexual imagery and midriff-baring style, becoming her trademark. Rhythm Nation 1814 became the highest selling album of 1990, winning a record fifteen Billboard Awards. The long-form "Rhythm Nation" music video won a Grammy Award. Jackson's Rhythm Nation World Tour 1990 became the most successful debut tour in history and set a record for the fastest sell-out of Japan's Tokyo Dome. She established the "Rhythm Nation Scholarship", donating funds from the tour to various educational programs. As Jackson began her tour, she was acknowledged for the cultural impact of her music. Joel Selvin of the San Francisco Chronicle wrote "the 23-year-old has been making smash hit records for four years, becoming a fixture on MTV and a major role model to teenage girls across the country", and William Allen, then-executive vice president of the United Negro College Fund, told the Los Angeles Times, "Jackson is a role model for all young people to emulate and the message she has gotten to the young people of this country through the lyrics of 'Rhythm Nation 1814' is having positive effects." She also received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in recognition of her impact on the recording industry and philanthropic endeavors. The massive success experienced by Jackson placed her in league with her brother Michael, Madonna, and Tina Turner for her achievements and influence. Ebony magazine remarked: "No individual or group has impacted the world of entertainment as have Michael and Janet Jackson," arguing that despite many imitators, few could surpass Jackson's "stunning style and dexterity". With her recording contract under A&M Records fulfilled in 1991, she signed a multimillion-dollar deal with Virgin Records—estimated between thirty-two to fifty million dollars—making her the highest paid recording artist at the time. The recording contract also established her reputation as the "Queen of Pop". In 1992, Jackson provided guest vocals on Luther Vandross's "The Best Things in Life Are Free", becoming a top ten Billboard hit and reaching the top ten internationally. Jackson's fifth studio album Janet, was released in May 1993. The record opened at number one on the Billboard 200, making Jackson the first female artist in the Nielsen SoundScan era to do so. Certified sixfold Platinum by the RIAA, it sold over 14 million copies worldwide. Janet spawned five singles and four promotional singles, receiving various certifications worldwide. The lead single "That's the Way Love Goes" won the Grammy Award for Best R&B Song and topped the Billboard Hot 100 for eight consecutive weeks.: 118  "Again" reached number one for two weeks, while "If" and "Any Time, Any Place" peaked in the top four. "Because of Love" and "You Want This" charted within the top ten. The album experimented with a diverse number of genres, including contemporary R&B, deep house, swing jazz, hip hop, rock, and pop, with Billboard describing each as being "delivered with consummate skill and passion". Jackson took a larger role in songwriting and production than she did on her previous albums, explaining she found it necessary "to write all the lyrics and half of the melodies" while also speaking candidly about incorporating her sexuality into the album's content. Rolling Stone wrote "[a]s princess of America's black royal family, everything Janet Jackson does is important. Whether proclaiming herself in charge of her life, as she did on Control (1986), or commander in chief of a rhythm army dancing to fight society's problems (Rhythm Nation 1814, from 1989), she's influential. And when she announces her sexual maturity, as she does on her new album, Janet., it's a cultural moment." In July 1993, Jackson made her film debut in Poetic Justice. While the film received mixed reviews, her performance was described as "beguiling" and "believably eccentric". Jackson's ballad "Again", which was written for the film, received Golden Globe and Academy Award nominations for "Best Original Song". In September 1993, Jackson appeared topless on the cover of Rolling Stone, with her breasts covered anonymously by her then-husband, René Elizondo, Jr. The photograph is the original version of the cropped image used on the Janet album cover, shot by Patrick Demarchelier. The Vancouver Sun reported, "Jackson, 27, remains clearly established as both role model and sex symbol; the Rolling Stone photo of Jackson ... became one of the most recognizable, and most lampooned, magazine covers." The Janet World Tour launched in support of the studio album garnered criticism for Jackson's lack of vocal proficiency and spontaneity, but earned critical acclaim for her showmanship. It was described as erasing the line between "stadium-size pop music concerts and full-scale theatrical extravaganzas". During this time, Janet was set to sign a multimillion-dollar deal with Coca-Cola when her brother Michael was immersed in a child sex abuse scandal, of which he denied any wrongdoing. She provided moral support, defending her brother, and denied abuse allegations regarding her parents made by her sister La Toya. She collaborated with Michael on "Scream", the lead single from his album HIStory, released 1995. The song was written by both siblings as a response to media scrutiny. It debuted at number five on the Hot 100 singles chart, becoming the first song ever to debut within the top five. Its music video, directed by Mark Romanek, was listed in Guinness World Records as the "Most Expensive Music Video Ever Made", costing $7 million. The clip won the 1996 Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video. Jackson's first compilation album, Design of a Decade: 1986–1996, was released in 1995. It peaked at number three on the Billboard 200. The lead single, "Runaway", became the first song by a female artist to debut within the top ten of the Hot 100, reaching number three. Design of a Decade 1986–1996 was certified double Platinum by the RIAA. Jackson's influence in pop music continued to garner acclaim, as The Boston Globe remarked "If you're talking about the female power elite in pop, you can't get much higher than Janet Jackson, Bonnie Raitt, Madonna and Yoko Ono. Their collective influence ... is beyond measure. And who could dispute that Janet Jackson now has more credibility than brother Michael?" Jackson renewed her contract with Virgin Records for a reported $80 million the following year. The contract established her as the then highest-paid recording artist in history, surpassing the recording industry's then-unparalleled $60 million contracts earned by Michael Jackson and Madonna. Jackson began suffering from severe depression and anxiety, leading her to chronicle the experience in her sixth album, The Velvet Rope, released October 1997. Jackson returned with a dramatic change in image, boasting vibrant red hair, nasal piercings, and tattoos. The album is primarily centered on the idea that everyone has an intrinsic need to belong. Aside from encompassing lyrics relating to social issues such as same-sex relationships, homophobia and domestic violence, it also contains themes of sadomasochism and is considered far more sexually explicit in nature than her previous release, Janet. The record was hailed as "her most daring, elaborate and accomplished album" by The New York Times, while Billboard called it "the best American album of the year and the most empowering of her last five." The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and was certified triple Platinum by the RIAA. It has sold over eight million copies worldwide. The lead single "Got 'til It's Gone" was released in August 1997, featuring guest vocals from folk singer Joni Mitchell and rapper Q-Tip. The song's music video, depicting a pre-Apartheid celebration, won the Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video. "Together Again" became Jackson's eighth number-one hit on the Billboard Hot 100, placing her on par with Elton John, Diana Ross, and the Rolling Stones.: 28, 120  It spent a record forty-six weeks on the Hot 100 and nineteen weeks on the United Kingdom's singles chart. It sold six million copies worldwide, becoming one of the best-selling singles of all time. "I Get Lonely" peaked at number three on the Hot 100, and received a Grammy nomination for Best Female R&B Vocal Performance. It was Jackson's eighteenth consecutive top ten hit, making her the only female artist to garner that achievement; and surpassed only by Elvis Presley and the Beatles. Several other singles were released, including "Go Deep" and the ballad "Every Time", which was controversial for the nudity displayed in its music video. The album fully established Jackson as a gay icon for its themes regarding homosexuality and protesting homophobia. "Together Again", a "post-Aids pop song", and "Free Xone", considered "a paean to homosexuality" and an "anti-homophobia track", were praised for their lyrical context, in addition to Jackson's lesbian reinterpretation of Rod Stewart's "Tonight's the Night". The Velvet Rope received an award for "Outstanding Music Album" at the 9th Annual GLAAD Media Awards and was honored by the National Black Lesbian and Gay Leadership Forum. A portion of the proceeds from "Together Again" were donated to the American Foundation for AIDS Research. Jackson embarked on The Velvet Rope Tour, traveling to Europe, North America, Asia, Africa, New Zealand, and Australia. The tour received praise for its theatrics, choreography, and Jackson's vocal performance. It was likened to "the ambition and glamour of a Broadway musical", and exclaimed as "only fitting that the concert program credits her as the show's 'creator and director'". The tour's HBO special, The Velvet Rope: Live in Madison Square Garden, garnered more than fifteen million viewers. It surpassed the ratings of all four major networks among viewers subscribed to the channel. The concert won an Emmy Award from four nominations. Jackson donated a portion of the tour's sales to America's Promise, an organization founded by Colin Powell to assist disenfranchised youth. As the tour concluded, Jackson lent guest vocals to several collaborations, including Shaggy's "Luv Me, Luv Me", used for the film How Stella Got Her Groove Back, as well as "Girlfriend/Boyfriend" with Teddy Riley's group Blackstreet, and "What's It Gonna Be?!" with Busta Rhymes. The latter two music videos are both among the most expensive music videos ever produced, with "What's It Gonna Be?!" becoming a number-one hit on the Billboard Hip-Hop Singles and Hot Rap Tracks charts, reaching the top three of the Hot 100. Jackson also contributed the ballad "God's Stepchild" to the Down in the Delta soundtrack. Jackson recorded a duet with Elton John titled "I Know the Truth", included on the soundtrack to Elton John and Tim Rice's Aida. At the 1999 World Music Awards, Jackson received the Legend Award for "outstanding contribution to the pop industry". Billboard ranked Jackson as the second most successful artist of the decade, behind Mariah Carey. In July 2000, Jackson appeared in her second film, Nutty Professor II: The Klumps, as the role of Professor Denise Gaines, opposite Eddie Murphy. Director Peter Segal stated "Janet Jackson was a natural fit, and an obvious choice." The film became her second to open at number one, grossing an estimated $170 million worldwide. Jackson's single "Doesn't Really Matter", used for the film's soundtrack, became her ninth number-one single on the Hot 100. Preceding the release of her seventh album, MTV honored Jackson with the network's inaugural "MTV Icon" ceremony, honoring her "significant contributions to music, music video and pop culture while tremendously impacting the MTV Generation." The event paid tribute to Jackson's career and influence, including commentary from Britney Spears, Jennifer Lopez, Aaliyah, and Jessica Simpson, and performances by 'N Sync, Pink, Destiny's Child, Usher, Buckcherry, Mýa, Macy Gray, and Outkast. The American Music Awards also honored Jackson with the Award of Merit for "her finely crafted, critically acclaimed and socially conscious, multi-platinum albums". Jackson's seventh album, All for You, was released in April 2001. It opened at number one on the Billboard 200 with 605,000 copies sold, the highest first-week sales of her career, and among the highest first-week sales by a female artist in history. The album was a return to an upbeat dance style, receiving generally positive reception. Jackson received praise for indulging in "textures as dizzying as a new infatuation", in contrast to other artists attempting to "match the angularity of hip-hop" and following trends. All for You was certified double Platinum by the RIAA. The album's lead single, "All for You", debuted on the Hot 100 at number fourteen, setting a record for the highest debut by a single that was not commercially available. Jackson was titled "Queen of Radio" by MTV as the single made airplay history, being "added to every pop, rhythmic and urban radio station" within its first week. The song broke the overall airplay debut record with a first week audience of seventy million, debuting at number nine on the Radio Songs chart. It topped the Hot 100 for seven weeks, also reaching the top ten in eleven countries. The song received a Grammy Award for Best Dance Recording. "Someone to Call My Lover" peaked at number three on the Hot 100. Built around a sample of the iconic 1972 hit "You're So Vain" by Carly Simon, "Son of a Gun (I Betcha Think This Song Is About You)" featured Simon herself, along with Missy Elliott on remixes of the single. In July 2001, Jackson embarked on the All for You Tour, which was also broadcast on a concert special for HBO watched by twelve million viewers. The tour traveled throughout the United States and Japan, although European and Asian dates were required to be canceled following the September 11 terrorist attacks. The Los Angeles Times complimented Jackson's showmanship. Richard Harrington of The Washington Post said Jackson's performance surpassed her contemporaries, but Bob Massy of Spin thought her dancers "threw crisper moves" and her supporting singers were mixed nearly as high, though declared "Janet cast herself as the real entertainment." Jackson donated a portion of the tour's proceeds to the Boys & Girls Clubs of America. The following year, Jackson began receiving media attention for her rumored relationships with Justin Timberlake, actor Matthew McConaughey, and record producer Jermaine Dupri. Upon the release of Timberlake's debut solo album Justified, Jackson provided vocals on "(And She Said) Take Me Now" per Timberlake's request, with the song initially planned as a single. Jackson collaborated with reggae artist Beenie Man for the song "Feel It Boy", produced by the Neptunes. Jackson was chosen by the National Football League and MTV to perform at the Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show in February 2004. She performed a medley of "All for You", "Rhythm Nation", and an excerpt of "The Knowledge" before performing "Rock Your Body" alongside surprise guest Justin Timberlake. As Timberlake sang the lyric "I'm gonna have you naked by the end of this song", he tore open her costume, exposing her right breast to 140 million viewers. The incident was referred to as "nipple gate" by the media. Jackson issued an apology after the performance, saying that the incident was accidental and unintended, explaining that Timberlake was only meant to pull away a bustier and leave the red-lace bra intact. She commented, "I am really sorry if I offended anyone. That was truly not my intention ... MTV, CBS, the NFL had no knowledge of this whatsoever, and unfortunately, the whole thing went wrong in the end." Timberlake also issued an apology, calling the accident a "wardrobe malfunction". CBS, the NFL, and MTV denied any knowledge of the incident and all responsibility for it. The Federal Communications Commission heavily fined all companies involved and continued an investigation for eight years, ultimately losing its appeal for a $550,000 fine against CBS. Following the incident, CBS permitted Timberlake to appear at the 46th Grammy Awards ceremony but did not allow Jackson to attend, forcing her to withdraw after being scheduled as a presenter. The controversy halted plans for Jackson to star in the biographical film of singer and activist Lena Horne, which was to be produced by ABC. Horne was reportedly displeased by the incident, but Jackson's representatives stated that she withdrew from the project willingly. A Mickey Mouse statue wearing Jackson's iconic "Rhythm Nation" outfit was mantled at Walt Disney World theme park the previous year to honor her legacy, but it was removed following her controversial performance. Jackson's eighth studio album Damita Jo was released in March 2004, titled after her middle name. It debuted at number two on the Billboard 200. The album received mixed to positive reviews, praising the sonic innovation of selected songs and Jackson's vocal harmonies, while others criticized its frequent themes of carnality. However, several critics' reviews focused on the Super Bowl incident, rather than critiquing the album itself. It was certified Platinum by the RIAA within a month, and sold over three million copies worldwide. The album's performance was affected by blacklisting from radio and music channels, in part at the behest of CBS CEO Les Moonves. Conglomerates involved in the boycott included Viacom and CBS, subsidiaries MTV, Clear Channel Communications, and Infinity Broadcasting, the latter two among the largest radio broadcasters. The blacklist was placed into effect preceding the release of Damita Jo and continued throughout the course of Jackson's following two albums. Entertainment conglomerate Viacom owns MTV, VH1, and many radio formats, and a senior executive commented that they were "absolutely bailing on the record. The pressure is so great, they can't align with anything related to Janet. The high-ups are still pissed at her, and this is a punitive measure." Prior to the incident, Damita Jo was expected to outsell prior release All for You. Its three singles received positive reviews but failed to achieve high chart positions, although each was predicted to perform extremely well under different circumstances. Billboard reported that Damita Jo "was largely overshadowed by the Super Bowl fiasco.... The three singles it spawned were blacklisted by pop radio—they were also the album's biggest highlights". For the album's promotion, Jackson appeared as a host on Saturday Night Live performing two songs, and she was also a guest star on the sitcom Will & Grace portraying herself. Jackson received several career accolades upon the album's release, including the "Legend Award" at the Radio Music Awards, "Inspiration Award" from the Japan Video Music Awards, "Lifetime Achievement Award" at the Soul Train Music Awards, and a Teen Choice Awards nomination for "Favorite Female". In November 2004, she was honored as a role model by 100 Black Men of America, Inc. and presented with the organization's Artistic Achievement Award saluting "a career that has gone from success to greater success". The organization responded to criticism for honoring Jackson in light of the Super Bowl incident by saying that "an individual's worth can't be judged by a single moment in that person's life." In June 2005, she was honored with a Humanitarian Award by the Human Rights Campaign and AIDS Project Los Angeles as recognition for her involvement in raising money for AIDS charities. The Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show is considered to be one of the most controversial televised events in history, and Jackson was later listed in Guinness World Records as the "Most Searched in Internet History" and the "Most Searched for News Item". The incident became the most recorded and replayed moment in TiVo history, enticing an estimated 35,000 new subscribers. Jawed Karim has stated that the incident inspired the creation of YouTube, as he noted that it was difficult for him to find videos of the incident online. Jackson began recording her ninth studio album, 20 Y.O., in 2005. She recorded with producers Dupri, Jam and Lewis for several months during the following year. The album's title was a reference to the two decades since the release of her breakthrough album Control, representing the album's "celebration of the joyful liberation and history-making musical style". To promote the album, Jackson appeared in various magazines, and performed on the Today Show and at the Billboard Awards. Jackson's Us Weekly cover, revealing her slim figure after heavy media focus was placed on her fluctuations in weight, became the magazine's best-selling issue in history. 20 Y.O. was released in September 2006 and debuted at number two on the Billboard 200. The album received mixed reviews, with multiple critics chastising the production and involvement of Jermaine Dupri. Rolling Stone disagreed with the album's reference to Control, saying "If we were her, we wouldn't make the comparison." Jackson's airplay and music channel blacklist remained persistent, massively affecting her chart performance and exposure. However, lead single "Call on Me", which featured rapper Nelly, peaked at number twenty-five on the Hot 100, number one on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, and number six in the United Kingdom. The video for the album's second single, "So Excited", was directed by Joseph Kahn and portrayed Jackson's clothes disappearing through a complex dance routine. 20 Y.O. was certified Platinum by the RIAA and sold 1.5 million worldwide, also receiving a Grammy nomination for Best Contemporary R&B Album. After the album's release, Dupri was condemned for his production and misguidance of the album, and subsequently was removed from his position at Virgin Records. Slant Magazine stated, "After promising a return to Janet's dance-pop origins, [Dupri] opted to aim for urban audiences, a colossal mistake that cost Dupri his job and, probably, Janet her deal with Virgin." Jackson was ranked the seventh richest woman in the entertainment industry by Forbes, having amassed a fortune of over $150 million. In 2007, she starred opposite Tyler Perry as a psychotherapist in the film Why Did I Get Married?. It became her third consecutive film to open at number one at the box office, grossing $60 million. Jackson's performance was praised for its "soft authority", though also described as "charming, yet bland". Jackson signed with Island Records after her contract with Virgin was fulfilled. She interrupted plans for touring and began recording with various producers, including Rodney "Darkchild" Jerkins, Tricky Stewart, and Stargate. Her tenth studio album, Discipline, was released in February 2008, opening at number one. Despite radio blacklisting, the album's first single "Feedback" peaked at number nineteen on the Hot 100 and nine on Pop Songs, her highest-charting single since "Someone to Call My Lover". Also in February 2008, Jackson won an Image Award for "Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture" for the role. Jackson was also approached to record the lead single for the film Rush Hour 3. Jackson was awarded the Vanguard Award at the 19th annual GLAAD Media Awards, honoring her contributions in promoting equal rights among the gay community. The organization's president commented, "Ms. Jackson has a tremendous following inside the LGBT community and out, and having her stand with us against the defamation that LGBT people still face in our country is extremely significant." Jackson's fifth concert tour, the Rock Witchu Tour, began in September 2008. Jackson parted with Island Records through mutual agreement. Billboard disclosed Jackson was dissatisfied with L.A. Reid's handling of the album and its promotion, saying "the label agreed to dissolve their relationship with the artist at her request." Producer Rodney Jerkins expressed "I felt like it wasn't pushed correctly.... She just didn't get her just due as an artist of that magnitude." In June 2009, Jackson's brother Michael died at age fifty. She spoke publicly concerning his death at the 2009 BET Awards, stating "I'd just like to say, to you, Michael is an icon, to us, Michael is family. And he will forever live in all of our hearts. On behalf of my family and myself, thank you for all of your love, thank you for all of your support. We miss him so much." In an interview, she revealed she had first learned of his death while filming Why Did I Get Married Too?. Amidst mourning with her family, she focused on work to deal with the grief, avoiding any news coverage of her sibling's death. She commented, "it's still important to face reality, and not that I'm running, but sometimes you just need to get away for a second." During this time, she ended her seven-year relationship with Jermaine Dupri. Several months later, Jackson performed a tribute to Michael at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards, performing their duet "Scream". MTV stated "there was no one better than Janet to anchor it and send a really powerful message." The performance was lauded by critics, with Entertainment Weekly affirming the rendition "as energetic as it was heartfelt". Jackson's second hits compilation, Number Ones (retitled The Best for international releases), was released in November 2009. For promotion, she performed a medley of hits at the American Music Awards, Capital FM's Jingle Bell Ball at London's O2 arena, and The X-Factor. The album's promotional single "Make Me", produced with Rodney "Darkchild" Jerkins, debuted in September. It became Jackson's nineteenth number one on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart, making her the first artist to have number-one singles in four separate decades. Later that month, Jackson chaired the inaugural benefit of amfAR, The Foundation for AIDS Research, held in Milan in conjunction with fashion week. The foundation's CEO stated "We are profoundly grateful to Janet Jackson for joining amfAR as a chair of its first event in Milan... She brings incomparable grace and a history of dedication to the fight against AIDS." The event raised $1.1 million for the nonprofit organization. In April 2010, Jackson reprised her role in the sequel to Why Did I Get Married? titled Why Did I Get Married Too?. The film opened at number two, grossing sixty million. Jackson's performance was hailed as "invigorating and oddly funny", and praised for her "willingness to be seen at her most disheveled". Her performance earned her an Image Award for "Outstanding Actress in a Motion Picture". Jackson recorded the film's theme, "Nothing", released as a promotional single. The song was performed on the ninth season finale of American Idol along with "Again" and "Nasty". In July, Jackson modeled for the Blackglama clothing line featuring mink fur, then helped design a signature line of clothing and accessories for Blackglama, to be sold at Saks Fifth Avenue and Bloomingdales. Universal Music released the hits compilation Icon: Number Ones as the debut of the Icon compilation series. In November 2010, Jackson starred as Joanna in the drama For Colored Girls, the film adaptation of Ntozake Shange's 1975 play For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide When the Rainbow Is Enuf. The Wall Street Journal stated Jackson "recites verses written by Ntozake Shange, the author of the play that inspired the film ... But instead of offering up a mannered coffeehouse reading of the lines, Jackson makes the words sound like ordinary—though very eloquent—speech." Jackson's portrayal in the film was likened to Meryl Streep as Miranda Priestly in The Devil Wears Prada. Her performance earned Black Reel Awards nominations in the categories of Outstanding Supporting Actress and Outstanding Ensemble. Jackson announced plans to embark on her largest world tour in support of her second hits collection, Number Ones. The tour, entitled Number Ones, Up Close and Personal, held concerts in thirty-five global cities, selected by fans who submitted suggestions on her official website. During the tour, Jackson performed thirty-five number one hits and dedicated a song to each city. Mattel released a limited-edition Barbie of Jackson titled "Divinely Janet", auctioned for over $15,000, with proceeds donated to Project Angel Food. Jackson released the self-help book True You: A Journey to Finding and Loving Yourself in February 2011, co-written with David Ritz. It chronicled her struggle with weight and confidence, also publishing letters from fans. It topped The New York Times' Best Seller list the following month. Additionally, she signed a film production contract with Lions Gate Entertainment to "select, develop and produce a feature film for the independent studio." Jackson became the first female pop singer to perform at the I. M. Pei glass pyramid at the Louvre Museum, raising contributions for the restoration of iconic artwork. Jackson was selected to endorse fashion line Blackglama for a second year, being the first celebrity in the line's history chosen to do so. She partnered with the label to release a fifteen-piece collection of luxury products. In 2012, Jackson endorsed Nutrisystem, sponsoring their weight-loss program after struggling with weight fluctuations in the past. With the program, she donated ten million dollars in meals to the hungry. She was honored by amfAR for her contributions to AIDS research when chairing the Cinema Against AIDS gala during the Cannes Film Festival. She also participated in a public service announcement for UNICEF to help starving children. On May 16, 2015, Jackson announced plans to release a new album and to embark on a world concert tour. She outlined her intention to release her new album in the fall of 2015 under her own record label, Rhythm Nation, distributed by BMG Rights Management. The launch of Rhythm Nation established Jackson as one of the few African-American female musicians to own a record label. On June 15, 2015, Jackson announced the first set of dates for the North American leg of her Unbreakable World Tour. On June 22, the lead single "No Sleeep" was released from the album. Jackson's solo version of the single debuted on the Hot 100 at number 67, marking her 40th entry on the chart. The song went to number 1 on the Billboard + Twitter Trending 140 immediately following the release. The album version featuring J. Cole enabled it to re-enter the Hot 100 with a new peak position at number 63, while also topping the Adult R&B Songs chart. BET presented Jackson with their inaugural Ultimate Icon: Music Dance Visual award at the BET Awards 2015, which also featured a dance tribute to her performed by Ciara, Jason Derulo and Tinashe. It was announced she would launch a luxury jewelry line called the "Janet Jackson Unbreakable Diamonds collection," a joint venture between herself and Paul Raps New York. On August 20, she released a preview of a new song "The Great Forever", while also confirming the title of her eleventh studio album as Unbreakable. Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis stated that Jackson's concept for the album was developed simultaneously with the accompanying tour's production and that its composition will differ from the majority of her catalog. They also stated that the album's theme reflects "being able to be vulnerable and to be able to withstand what comes to you," drawing on Jackson's experiences over the past several years. The album's title track "Unbreakable" was released on September 3, 2015, debuting on Apple Music's Beats 1 radio station, hosted by Ebro Darden. The album was also made available for pre-order on iTunes the same day. "Burnitup!" featuring Missy Elliott debuted on BBC Radio 1 on September 24, 2015. Unbreakable was released on October 2, 2015. It received largely positive reviews, including those by The Wall Street Journal, The New York Times, USA Today, Los Angeles Times, and The Guardian. The following week, Jackson received her first nomination to be inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Her album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, becoming her seventh album to top the chart in the United States. On April 6, 2016, Jackson announced that she was "planning her family" with husband Wissam Al Mana, resulting in her postponing her tour. On May 1, 2017, Jackson announced she would resume her Unbreakable World Tour, now known as the State of the World Tour. The revamped tour launched on September 7, 2017. Refocusing the tour's theme to reflect socially conscious messages from Jackson's entire music catalog, many songs selected for the concert set list along with corresponding imagery depicted on stage address racism, white supremacy, fascism, xenophobia and police brutality. The tour opened to positive critical reception, with several commentators praising Jackson's post-pregnancy physical fitness, showmanship and socially conscious messages. Her emotional rendition of "What About", a song about domestic violence originally recorded for The Velvet Rope, drew media attention highlighting her recent separation from her husband; Jackson's brother Randy alleges she suffered verbal abuse by Al Mana which contributed to the breakdown of their marriage. Proceeds from the concert of September 9, 2017, at the Toyota Center in Houston, Texas were donated to relief efforts supporting evacuees of Hurricane Harvey. Jackson met with Houston mayor Sylvester Turner and evacuees at the George R. Brown Convention Center prior to the performance. In May 2018, it was announced that Jackson would receive the Billboard Icon Award at the 2018 Billboard Music Awards. In an interview for Billboard magazine, Jackson revealed that she was then working on new music. On August 16, 2018, it was announced that Jackson and Rhythm Nation had entered into a partnership with Cinq Music Group. The next day, Jackson released the single "Made for Now", a collaboration with Daddy Yankee. In October 2018, she received her third nomination for induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. On December 13, 2018, Jackson was announced as one of the seven inductees of the 2019 class of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. On February 26, 2019, Jackson announced a four-month Las Vegas residency entitled Metamorphosis. The initial schedule comprised fourteen shows at the Park Theater at Park MGM resort; three additional shows were announced in May. In September and November 2019 Jackson performed a series of concerts in support of the 30th anniversary of the Rhythm Nation album in Welch Treasure Island Resort & Casino, San Francisco and Hawaii. In 2019, Jackson played a variety of festivals in the US and abroad, including The Glastonbury Festival. A two-part documentary titled Janet Jackson for Lifetime and A&E premiered on January 28 and 29, 2022, respectively. Jackson previewed a clip of a new song, "Luv I Luv", during the end credits of the last episode of her documentary. Jackson was set to embark on the Black Diamond World Tour in 2020. Later that year, the tour was postponed indefinitely due to the COVID-19 pandemic. She also announced her upcoming twelfth studio album Black Diamond, which was scheduled for a 2020 release. On March 3, 2022, Jackson was announced as a headliner of the 2022 Essence Music Festival in New Orleans. On December 12, 2022, Jackson announced she was going on tour again starting April 14, 2023, with her Together Again Tour and teased new music. On March 8, 2023, Lifetime and A&E announced that it had greenlighted a follow-up documentary series, Janet Jackson: Family First. The series will follow Jackson as she prepares for her Together Again Tour as well as her and brother Randy's attempts to reunite the family band. Jackson possesses a mezzo-soprano vocal range. Over the course of her career, she has received frequent criticism for the limitations of her vocal capabilities, especially in comparison to contemporary artists such as Whitney Houston and Mariah Carey. In comparing her vocal technique to Houston and Aretha Franklin, vocal coach Roger Love states that "[w]hen Janet sings, she allows a tremendous amount of air to come through. She's obviously aiming for a sexy, sultry effect, and on one level that works nicely. But actually, it's fairly limited." He adds that while her voice is suitable for studio recording, it doesn't translate well to the stage because despite having "great songs, incredible dancing, and her star-like presence, the live show is still magnificent. But the voice is not the star." Biographer David Ritz commented, "on Janet's albums—and in her videos and live performances, which revealed a crisp, athletic dance technique [...] singing wasn't the point," saying emphasis was placed on "her slamming beats, infectious hooks, and impeccable production values." Eric Henderson of Slant magazine claimed critics opposing her small voice "somehow missed the explosive 'gimme a beat' vocal pyrotechnics she unleashes all over 'Nasty' ... Or that they completely dismissed how perfect her tremulous hesitance fits into the abstinence anthem 'Let's Wait Awhile'." Classical composer Louis Andriessen has praised Jackson for her "rubato, sense of rhythm, sensitivity, and the childlike quality of her strangely erotic voice." Several critics also consider her voice to often be enveloped within her music's production. Wendy Robinson of PopMatters said "the power of Janet Jackson's voice does not lie in her pipes. She doesn't blow, she whispers ... Jackson's confectionary vocals are masterfully complemented by gentle harmonies and balanced out by pulsing rhythms, so she's never unpleasant to listen to." Matthew Perpetua of Fluxblog suggested Jackson's vocal techniques as a study for indie rock music, considering it to possess "a somewhat subliminal effect on the listener, guiding and emphasizing dynamic shifts without distracting attention from its primal hooks." Perpetua added: "Her voice effortlessly transitions from a rhythmic toughness to soulful emoting to a flirty softness without overselling any aspect of her performance ... a continuum of emotions and attitudes that add up to the impression that we're listening to the expression of a fully-formed human being with contradictions and complexities." Jackson's music has encompassed a broad range of genres. Her records from the 1980s have been described as being influenced by Prince, as her producers are ex-members of the Time. Sal Cinquemani wrote that in addition to defining Top 40 radio, she "gave Prince's Minneapolis sound a distinctly feminine—and, with songs like 'What Have You Done for Me Lately?,' 'Nasty,' 'Control,' and 'Let's Wait Awhile,' a distinctly feminist—spin." On Control, Richard J. Ripani documented that she, Jam, and Lewis had "crafted a new sound that fuses the rhythmic elements of funk and disco, along with heavy doses of synthesizers, percussion, sound effects, and a rap music sensibility." Author Rickey Vincent stated that she has often been credited for redefining the standard of popular music with the industrial music beats of the album. She is considered a trendsetter in pop balladry, with Richard Rischar stating "the black pop ballad of the mid-1980s had been dominated by the vocal and production style that was smooth and polished, led by singers Whitney Houston, Janet Jackson, and James Ingram." Jackson continued her musical development by blending pop and urban music with elements of hip-hop in the nineties. This included a softer representation, articulated by lush, soulful ballads and up-tempo dance beats. She is described by music critic Greg Kot as "an artist who has reshaped the sound and image of rhythm and blues" within the first decade of her career. Critic Karla Peterson remarked that "she is a sharp dancer, an appealing performer, and as 'That's the Way Love Goes' proves—an ace pop-song writer." Selected material from the following decade has been viewed less favorably, as Sal Cinquemani comments "except for maybe R.E.M., no other former superstar act has been as prolific with such diminishing commercial and creative returns." Jackson has changed her lyrical focus over the years, becoming the subject of analysis in musicology, African American studies, and gender studies. David Ritz compared Jackson's musical style to Marvin Gaye's, stating, "like Marvin, autobiography seemed the sole source of her music. Her art, also like Marvin's, floated over a reservoir of secret pain." Much of her success has been attributed to "a series of powerful, metallic grooves; her chirpy, multi-tracked vocals; and a lyrical philosophy built on pride and self-knowledge." Ritz also stated, "The mystery is the low flame that burns around the perimeters of Janet Jackson's soul. The flame feeds off the most highly combustible elements: survival and ambition, caution and creativity, supreme confidence and dark fear." During the 1980s, her lyrics embodied self-actualization, feminist principles, and politically driven ideology. Gillian G. Gaar described Control as "an autobiographical tale about her life with her parents, her first marriage, and breaking free." Jessie Carney Smith wrote "with that album, she asserted her independence, individuality, and personal power. She challenged audiences to see her as a transformed person, from an ingénue to a grow-up, multi-talented celebrity." Referring to Rhythm Nation 1814 as an embodiment of hope, Timothy E. Scheurer wrote "It may remind some of Sly Stone prior to There's a Riot Going On and other African-American artists of the 1970s in its tacit assumption that the world imagined by Dr. King is still possible, that the American Dream is a dream for all people." On Janet, Jackson began focusing on sexual themes. Shayne Lee wrote that her music over the following decade "brand[ed] her as one of the most sexually stimulating vocalists of the 1990s." Lilly J. Goren observed, "Jackson's evolution from politically aware musician to sexy diva marked the direction that society and the music industry were encouraging the dance-rock divas to pursue." The Washington Post declared Jackson's public image over the course of her career had shifted "from innocence to experience, inspiring such carnal albums as 1993's 'Janet' and 1997's 'The Velvet Rope', the latter of which explored the bonds—figuratively and literally—of love and lust." The song "Free Xone" from The Velvet Rope, which portrays same-sex relationships in a positive light, is described by sociologist Shayne Lee as "a rare incident in which a popular black vocalist explores romantic or sensual energy outside the contours of heteronormativity, making it a significant song in black sexual politics." During the promotion for Janet, she stated "I love feeling deeply sexual—and don't mind letting the world know. For me, sex has become a celebration, a joyful part of the creative process." Upon the release of Damita Jo, Jackson stated "Beginning with the earlier albums, exploring—and liberating—my sexuality has been an ongoing discovery and theme," adding "As an artist, that's not only my passion, it's my obligation." Stephen Thomas Erlewine has found Jackson's consistent inclusion of sex in her music lacking ingenuity, especially in comparisons to other artists such as Prince, stating "while sex indisputably fuels much great pop music, it isn't an inherently fascinating topic for pop music—as with anything, it all depends on the artist." Jackson drew inspiration for her music videos and performances from musicals she watched in her youth, and was heavily influenced by the choreography of Fred Astaire and Michael Kidd, among others. Throughout her career, she has worked with and brought numerous professional choreographers to prominence, such as Tina Landon, Paula Abdul, and Michael Kidd. Veronica Chambers declared, "Her impact on pop music is undeniable and far-reaching," adding, "A quick glance at the Billboard chart reveals any number of artists cast in the Janet Jackson mold." Chambers observed numerous videos which "features not only Ms. Jackson's dancers, but choreography and sets remarkably like those she has used." Janine Coveney of Billboard observed that "Jackson's musical declaration of independence [Control] launched a string of hits, an indelible production sound, and an enduring image cemented by groundbreaking video choreography and imagery that pop vocalists still emulate." Ben Hogwood of MusicOMH applauded the "huge influence she has become on younger pretenders to her throne," most notably Britney Spears, Jennifer Lopez and Christina Aguilera. Qadree EI-Amin remarked that many pop artists "pattern their performances after Janet's proven dance-diva persona." Beretta E. Smith-Shomade wrote that "Jackson's impact on the music video sphere came largely through music sales successes, which afforded her more visual liberties and control. This assuming of control directly impacted the look and content of her music videos, giving Jackson an agency not assumed by many other artists—male or female, Black or White." Parallel Lines: Media Representations of Dance (1993) documents that her videos have often been reminiscent of live concerts or elaborate musical theater. However, in her 30-minute Rhythm Nation 1814 film, Jackson utilizes street dancing techniques in contrast to traditional choreography. The group dynamic visually embodies gender-neutral equality, with Jackson "performing asexually and anonymously in front of, but as one of the members of the group." Her music videos have also contributed to a higher degree of sexual freedom among young women, with Jackson "heavily implying male-on-female oral sex in music videos by pushing down on a man's head until he's in exactly the right position." However, accusations of cosmetic surgery, skin lightening, and increasingly hypersexual imagery have led to her being viewed as conforming to a white, male-dominated view of sexuality, rather than liberating herself or others. Jackson received the MTV Video Vanguard Award for her contributions to the art form, and she became the first recipient of the MTV Icon tribute, celebrating her impact on the music industry as a whole. In 2003, Slant Magazine named "Rhythm Nation" and "Got 'til It's Gone" among the 100 Greatest Music Videos of all time, ranked at number 87 and number 10, respectively. In 2011, "Rhythm Nation" was voted the tenth best music video of the 1980s by Billboard. Independent Journalist Nicholas Barber stated "Janet's concerts are the pop equivalent of a summer blockbuster movie, with all the explosions, special effects, ersatz sentimentality, gratuitous cleavage, and emphasis on spectacle over coherence that the term implies."Jet magazine reported "Janet's innovative stage performances during her world tours have won her a reputation as a world-class performer." Chris Willman of the Los Angeles Times stated the "enthralling" choreography of Jackson's Rhythm Nation 1814 Tour "represents the pinnacle of what can be done in the popping 'n' locking style—a rapid-fire mixture of rigidly jerky and gracefully fluid movements." When Jackson was asked "do you understand it when people talk about [The Velvet Rope Tour] in terms of Broadway?", she responded, "I'm crazy about Broadway ... That's what I grew up on." Her "Number Ones: Up Close and Personal" tour deviated from the full-scale theatrics found in her previous concert arena settings in favor of smaller venues. Critics noted being scaled down did not affect the impact of her showmanship, and in some cases, enhanced it. Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune wrote, "In past tours, Jackson's thin voice was often swallowed up by the sheer size of her production ... In the more scaled-down setting, Jackson brought a warmth and a passion that wasn't always evident in stadiums ... the best Janet Jackson performance I've covered in 20-plus years." Thor Christensen of The Dallas Morning News reported Jackson often lip syncs in concert; he wrote: "Janet Jackson—one of pop's most notorious onstage lip-syncers—conceded ... she uses 'some' taped vocals to augment her live vocals. But she refused to say what percentage of her concert 'voice' is taped and how much is live." Michael MacCambridge of the Austin American-Statesman, who reviewed Jackson's Rhythm Nation World Tour, described lip-syncing as a "moot point", stating "Jackson was frequently singing along with her own pre-recorded vocals, to achieve a sound closer to radio versions of singles." MacCambridge also observed "it seemed unlikely that anyone—even a prized member of the First Family of Soul Music—could dance like she did for 90 minutes and still provide the sort of powerful vocals that the '90s super concerts are expected to achieve." Similarly, Chris Willman commented, "even a classically trained vocalist would be hard-pressed to maintain any sort of level of volume—or, more appropriately, 'Control'—while bounding up and down stairs and whipping limbs in unnatural directions at impeccable, breakneck speed." Critics observed that in the smaller scale of her "Number Ones: Up Close and Personal" tour, she forwent lip-syncing. Chris Richards of The Washington Post stated "even at its breathiest, that delicate voice hasn't lost the laserlike precision." Jackson describes Lena Horne as a profound inspiration, for entertainers of several generations as well as herself. Upon Horne's death, she stated "[Horne] brought much joy into everyone's lives—even the younger generations, younger than myself. She was such a great talent. She opened up such doors for artists like myself." Similarly, she considers Dorothy Dandridge to be one of her idols. Jackson has declared herself "a very big Joni Mitchell fan", explaining: "As a kid I was drawn to Joni Mitchell records [...] Joni's songs spoke to me in an intimate, personal way." She holds reverence for Tina Turner, stating "Tina has become a heroic figure for many people, especially women, because of her tremendous strength. Personally, Tina doesn't seem to have a beginning or an end in my life. I felt her music was always there, and I feel like it always will be." She has also named other socially conscious acts, such as Tracy Chapman, Sly and the Family Stone, U2, and Bob Dylan as sources of inspiration. In her early career, Jackson credited her brothers Michael and Jermaine Jackson as musical influences. The youngest sister of the "precious Jackson clan", Janet Jackson has striven to distance her professional career from that of her older brother Michael and the rest of the Jackson family. Steve Dollar of Newsday wrote that "[s]he projects that home girl-next-door quality that belies her place as the youngest sibling in a family whose inner and outer lives have been as poked at, gossiped about, docudramatized and hard-copied as the Kennedys." Phillip McCarthy of The Sydney Morning Herald noted that throughout her recording career, one of her common conditions for interviewers has been that there would be no mention of Michael. Joshua Klein wrote, "[f]or the first half of her recording career, Janet Jackson sounded like an artist with something to prove. Emerging in 1982 just as big brother Michael was casting his longest shadow, Jackson filled her albums not so much with songs as with declarations, from 'The Pleasure Principle' to the radical-sounding 'Rhythm Nation' to the telling statement of purpose, 'Control'." Steve Huey of Allmusic asserted that despite being born into a family of entertainers, Janet Jackson has managed to emerge a "superstar" in her own right, rivaling not only several female recording artists including Madonna and Whitney Houston, but also her brother, while "successfully [shifting] her image from a strong, independent young woman to a sexy, mature adult". By forging her own unique identity through her artistry and her business ventures, she has been esteemed as the "Queen of Pop". Klein argued that "stardom was not too hard to predict, but few could have foreseen that Janet—Miss Jackson, if you're nasty—would one day replace Michael as true heir to the Jackson family legacy.". Jackson has also been recognized for playing a pivotal role in crossing racial boundaries in the recording industry, where black artists were once considered to be substandard. Author Maureen Mahon states: "In the 1980s, Whitney Houston, Michael Jackson, Janet Jackson, and Prince were among the African American artists who crossed over ... When black artists cross over into pop success they cease to be black in the industry sense of the word. They get promoted from racialized black music to universal pop music in an economically driven process of racial transcendence." The Routledge International Encyclopedia of Women: Global Women's Issues and Knowledge documented that Jackson, along with other prominent African-American women, had achieved financial breakthroughs in mainstream popular music, receiving "superstar status" in the process. She, alongside her contemporaries "offered viable creative, intellectual, and business paths for establishing and maintaining agency, lyrical potency, marketing and ownership". Her business savvy has been compared to that of Madonna, gaining a level of autonomy which enables "creative latitude and access to financial resources and mass-market distribution". A model of reinvention, author Jessie Carney Smith wrote that "Janet has continued to test the limits of her transformative power", receiving accolades in music, film and concert tours throughout the course of her career. Musicologist Richard J. Ripani identified Jackson as a leader in the development of contemporary R&B, as her music created a unique blend of genre and sound effects which ushered in the use of rap vocals into mainstream R&B. He also argues her signature song "Nasty" influenced the new jack swing genre developed by Teddy Riley. Leon McDermott of the Sunday Herald wrote: "Her million-selling albums in the 1980s helped invent contemporary R&B through Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis's muscular, lean production; the sinuous grooves threaded through 1986's Control and 1989's Rhythm Nation 1814 are the foundation upon which today's hotshot producers and singers rely." On March 24, 2021, the Library of Congress announced that Janet Jackson's Rhythm Nation 1814 had been added to the National Recording Registry's class of 2020, stating that the album still "resonates today". Simon Reynolds described Jackson's collaborations with her record producers as a reinvention of the dance-pop genre, introducing a new sonic palate. Den Berry, Virgin Records CEO and Chairman stated: "Janet is the very embodiment of a global superstar. Her artistic brilliance and personal appeal transcend geographic, cultural and generational boundaries." In July 1999, she placed at number 77 on VH1's "100 Greatest Women of Rock and Roll". She also placed at number 134 on their list of the "200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons of All Time", number seven on the "100 Greatest Women In Music", and at number two on the "50 Greatest Women of the Video Era", behind Madonna. In March 2008, Business Wire reported "Janet Jackson is one of the top ten selling artists in the history of contemporary music; ranked by Billboard magazine as the ninth most successful act in rock and roll history, and the second most successful female artist in pop music history." She is the only female artist in the history of the Hot 100 to have 18 consecutive top ten hit singles, from "Miss You Much" (1989) to "I Get Lonely" (1998). The magazine ranked her at number seven on their Hot 100 50th Anniversary "All-Time Top Artists", making her the third most successful female artist in the history of the chart, following Madonna and Mariah Carey. In November 2010, Billboard released its "Top 50 R&B / Hip-Hop Artists of the Past 25 Years" list and ranked her at number five. She ranks as the top artist on the chart with 15 number ones in the past twenty-five years, garnering 27 top ten hits between 1985 and 2001, and 33 consecutive top 40 hits from 1985 through 2004. Recipient of eleven Billboard Music Awards, she is one an elite group of musical acts, such as Madonna, Aerosmith, Garth Brooks and Eric Clapton, whom Billboard credits for "redefining the landscape of popular music". In November 2014, Jackson was voted 'Queen of Pop' by a poll conducted online by VH1.com. In October 2015, she received her first nomination for induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and four years later was inducted to the Hall. Jackson's music and choreography have inspired numerous performers. Virgin Records executive Lee Trink expressed: "Janet is an icon and historic figure in our culture. She's one of those gifted artists that people look up to, that people emulate, that people want to believe in ... there's not that many superstars that stand the test of time." Sarah Rodman of the Boston Herald remarked: "For every hand-fluttering, overwrought, melisma addict out there aping Mariah's dog calls, there's an equal number trying to match Jackson's bubbling grooves and fancy footwork, including Britney Spears, Aaliyah and Destiny's Child." Music critic Gene Stout commented she "has so broadly influenced a younger generation of performers, from Jennifer Lopez ... to Britney Spears, who has copied so many of Jackson's dance moves." NSYNC and Usher have credited her for teaching them how to develop stage show into theatrical performance. Elysa Gardner of USA Today wrote: "Jackson claims not to be bothered by the brigade of barely post-adolescent baby divas who have been inspired by—and, in some cases, have flagrantly aped—the sharp, animated choreography and girlish but decidedly post-feminist feistiness that have long been hallmarks of her performance style." Adrienne Trier-Bieniek stated, "scholars trace the origins of pleasure as a Black feminist commitment within popular culture to Janet Jackson" who inspired the feminist perspective found in many pop stars' careers. Those who are considered to have followed in her footsteps have been referred to as "Janet-come-lately's". Sociologist Shayne Lee commented that "[a]s Janet enters the twilight of her reign as erotic Queen of Pop, Beyoncé emerges as her likely successor." Joan Morgan of Essence magazine remarked: "Jackson's Control, Rhythm Nation 1814 and janet. established the singer-dancer imprimatur standard in pop culture we now take for granted. So when you're thinking of asking Miss Jackson, 'What have you done for me lately?' remember that Britney, Ciara and Beyoncé live in the house that Janet built." On season 30 of Dancing with the Stars in 2021, the 8th week's theme, "Janet Jackson Night", was dedicated as a tribute to Jackson. At age 18, Janet Jackson eloped with singer James DeBarge in September 1984. The marriage was annulled in November 1985. In 1986, Jackson began dating dancer/songwriter/director René Elizondo Jr. In March 1991, Jackson married Elizondo Jr. and the union was kept a secret until the divorce was public. Elizondo filed a lawsuit against her, estimated to have been between $10–25 million a settlement was reached and the divorce was finalized in October 2003. From 2002 to 2009, Jackson dated music producer/rapper/songwriter Jermaine Dupri. Jackson was introduced to Qatari businessman Wissam Al Mana in October 2006, and began dating him in 2010. The couple became engaged and married privately in 2012. In January 2017, Jackson gave birth to a son. In April 2017, it was reported that the couple had separated and were pursuing a divorce, and was announced by Jackson the following month. Studio albums Janet Jackson (1982) Dream Street (1984) Control (1986) Janet Jackson's Rhythm Nation 1814 (1989) Janet (1993) The Velvet Rope (1997) All for You (2001) Damita Jo (2004) 20 Y.O. (2006) Discipline (2008) Unbreakable (2015) Good Times (1977–1979) Diff'rent Strokes (1980–1984) Fame (1984–1985) Poetic Justice (1993) Nutty Professor II: The Klumps (2000) Why Did I Get Married? (2007) Why Did I Get Married Too? (2010) For Colored Girls (2010) Janet Jackson (2022) Concert tours Rhythm Nation World Tour 1990 (1990) Janet. World Tour (1993–1995) The Velvet Rope Tour (1998–1999) All for You Tour (2001–2002) Rock Witchu Tour (2008) Number Ones, Up Close and Personal World Tour (2011) Unbreakable World Tour (2015–2016) State of the World Tour (2017–2019) Janet Jackson: A Special 30th Anniversary Celebration of Rhythm Nation (2019) Together Again Tour (2023–2024) Concert residencies Janet Jackson: Metamorphosis (2019) True You (2011) Honorific nicknames in popular music List of artists who reached number one in the United States List of best-selling music artists List of best-selling music artists in the United States List of dancers "Jermaine Dupri Reveals His Relationship Status With Janet Jackson". Bet.com. Retrieved December 4, 2019. Biakolo, Kovie (April 24, 2021). "Janet Jackson's All for You Was a Reawakening". Vulture. Archived from the original on May 4, 2021. Retrieved May 4, 2021. Vibe Staff (April 29, 2020). "Janet Jackson Biopic Reportedly In Development". Vibe. Archived from the original on May 6, 2020. Retrieved January 10, 2020. Kohli, Diti (February 12, 2020). "Janet Jackson brings Black Diamond tour to TD Garden this summer". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on February 14, 2020. Retrieved January 10, 2020. Levine, Nick (June 24, 2019). "Culture – Why Janet Jackson is pop's most underrated legend". BBC Culture. Archived from the original on June 28, 2019. Retrieved February 29, 2020. "Greatest of All Time Top Dance Club Artists". Billboard. December 2016. Archived from the original on July 7, 2017. Retrieved September 20, 2017. Ben Sisario (December 13, 2018). "Janet Jackson and Radiohead Lead Rock & Roll Hall of Fame Class of 2019". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 13, 2018. Retrieved December 13, 2018. Cornwell 2002, pp. 2, 10, 24 Jackson 2009, p. 26. Young 2009, pp. 17, 19. Sweeting, Adam (June 27, 2018). "Joe Jackson obituary". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 8, 2022. Retrieved April 14, 2019. Young 2009, pp. 18–19. Knopper 2016, p. 6. Note: No tribal affiliation named in source. Morris, Chris (June 27, 2018). "Joe Jackson, Jackson Family Patriarch, Dies at 89". Variety. Archived from the original on November 8, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2019. Norment, Lynn (November 2001). "Janet: On her sexuality, spirituality, failed marriages, and lessons learned". Jet. Vol. 57, no. 1. p. 104. ISSN 0012-9011. "History 60-68 | The Jacksons | The Official Website". Archived from the original on September 20, 2019. Retrieved October 7, 2022. Fox, Norman. "Indian Summer". TV.com. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on November 8, 2012. Retrieved September 3, 2010. Saunders, Michael (October 3, 1996). "The 3 Divas Janet Jackson turns her focus inward". The Boston Globe. p. D13. "Pro Equipment & Services". Billboard. Vol. 94, no. 19. May 15, 1982. p. 47. "Janet Jackson". AllMusic. Archived from the original on February 17, 2011. Retrieved July 21, 2010. "Janet Jackson – Chart History: Billboard 200". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved October 29, 2012. "Janet Jackson – Chart History: R&B/Hip-Hop Albums". Billboard. Retrieved October 29, 2012. "A Billboard Spotlight: Billboard Talent Almanac — 1984 Year-End Charts" (PDF). Billboard. No. Special Double. Billboard Publication. December 24, 1983. pp. TA–14, TA–15, TA–20, TA–23. Retrieved October 29, 2012. "Janet Jackson – Chart History: R&B/Hip-Hop Songs". Billboard. Retrieved April 8, 2012. "Dream Street – Janet Jackson". AllMusic. Archived from the original on March 1, 2023. Retrieved July 21, 2010. Gaar 2002, pp. 323–325 "Janet Jackson Thanks Fans After 1986 Album Control Tops Charts Again: 'Really Appreciate You'". PEOPLE.com. Archived from the original on April 18, 2021. Retrieved May 4, 2021. Cohen, Jonathan (December 15, 1999). "Billboard Feature: Janet Jackson: Still In Control". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 10, 2011. Retrieved September 6, 2010. "American album certifications – Janet Jackson". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved August 21, 2009. Norment, Lynn (April 2008). "Don't Call It A Come Back – 'I'm Not Ready to Retire!'". Ebony. Vol. 63. pp. 74–. ISSN 0012-9011. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved December 2, 2018. Johnson, Connie (February 23, 1986). "Jackson Jive". Los Angeles Times. p. 78. ISSN 0458-3035. "Singer Janet Jackson". Newsweek. Vol. 108, no. 3. July 21, 1986. p. 61. ISSN 0028-9604. Hoerburger, Rob (April 24, 1986). "Janet Jackson: Control: Music Reviews: Rolling Stone". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 30, 2008. Retrieved September 6, 2010. "In Praise of Small Numbers". Billboard. Vol. 98, no. 52. December 27, 1986. pp. 10, Y–17, Y–19, Y–20, Y–21, Y–22, Y–23, Y–24, Y–26. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved April 18, 2014. "Veterans top Grammy nominations". The Herald. The McClatchy Company. January 8, 1987. Smith, Kathleen (January 26, 1987). "American Music Awards tonight to honor Presley posthumously". St. Petersburg Times. p. 7.D. "Travis tops music award winners". Houston Chronicle. January 26, 1988. p. 1. ISSN 1074-7109. Hamlin, Jesse (February 25, 1987). "Graced With a Grammy / Paul Simon wins award for top album". San Francisco Chronicle. p. 48. Hilburn, Robert (January 11, 1987). "British Critics Turn All Ears To America". Los Angeles Times. p. 65. ISSN 0458-3035. Ritz, David (September 16, 1993). "Sexual healing". Rolling Stone. No. 665. p. 38. ISSN 0035-791X. Ripani 2006, pp. 130–153 "Janet Jackson's 'Rhythm Nation 1814': Still dancing and dreaming 25 years later". Entertainment Weekly. Anderson, Kyle. September 19, 2014. Archived from the original on September 21, 2014. Retrieved September 19, 2014. Meaghan Garvey (February 4, 2016). "On 30 Years of Janet Jackson's Control". MTV. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved November 5, 2017. Cocks, Jay (May 28, 1990). "Dancing on the charts". Time. Vol. 135, no. 22. p. 87. ISSN 0040-781X. Graham, Jefferson (December 15, 1989). "Janet in command; Jackson rules her own 'Nation'; Highlights of a rhythmic life". USA Today. p. 01.D. Morse, Steve (November 20, 1989). "Changing Her Tune Janet Jackson's New Conscience". The Boston Globe. p. 30. Aletti, Vince (October 19, 1998). "Rhythm Nation 1814: Janet Jackson: Review: Rolling Stone". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 30, 2008. Retrieved September 6, 2010. Henderson, Eric (September 7, 2009). "Janet Jackson: Janet Jackson's Rhythm Nation 1814: Music Review". Slant Magazine. Archived from the original on September 13, 2009. Retrieved November 11, 2009. "Cover Story: 'Design of a Decade' Features Ten Years of Hits". Jet. Johnson Publication. November 6, 1995. pp. 54–58. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved June 9, 2011. Trust, Gary. "The Weeknd & Ariana Grande's 'Save Your Tears' Soars to No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Billboard Media, LLC. Archived from the original on May 9, 2021. Retrieved May 4, 2021. "The Biggest Brother-Sister Stars in Show Business History", Ebony, vol. 46, no. 10, p. 40, ISSN 0012-9011 Eng, Joyce (May 21, 2012). "Adele, LMFAO Top Billboard Music Awards – Today's News: Our Take". TV Guide. Archived from the original on January 27, 2013. Retrieved December 13, 2012. Macdonald, Patrick (December 28, 1990). "Ringing In 1991: Northwest Top 10 Video Count-Down". The Seattle Times. p. 8. Anderson, Susan (November 28, 1990). "Chronicle". The New York Times. p. 7. ISBN 0-8118-6207-0. ISSN 0362-4331. "Artist: Janet Jackson". The Recording Academy. Archived from the original on May 26, 2020. Retrieved March 18, 2015. Jaynes 2005, p. 565 "Janet Jackson Ends 'Rhythm Nation' Tour, Donates over $1/2 Million to Fund Education Projects". Jet. Vol. 79, no. 13. January 14, 1991. p. 56. ISSN 0021-5996. "Janet Combines Talent and Appeal for UNCF". Los Angeles Sentinel. March 3, 1994. p. B–3. ISSN 0890-4340. Selvin, Joel (April 30, 1990). "Just Wholesome Glitz From Janet". San Francisco Chronicle. p. F1. "Names In The News Janet Jackson Benefit Concert". Los Angeles Times. February 5, 1990. p. 9. ISSN 0458-3035. "Janet Jackson Gets Star On Hollywood Walk Of Fame". Jet. Vol. 78, no. 4. May 7, 1990. pp. 60–61. ISSN 0021-5996. Kramarae & Spender 2000, p. 1408 "The Biggest Brother-Sister Stars in Show Business History". Ebony. Vol. 46, no. 10. 1991. p. 40. ISSN 0012-9011. Goldberg, M. (May 2, 1991). "The Jacksons score big". Rolling Stone. p. 32. ISSN 0035-791X. She confirmed her status as today's Queen of Pop when, not long ago, she signed a $35–$40 million recording contract with Virgin Records. James Robert Parish (1995), Today's black Hollywood, Pinnacle Books, p. 158, ISBN 978-0-8217-0104-1 "Janet Jackson: Biography: Rolling Stone". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 20, 2010. Retrieved April 9, 2008. Mayfield, Geoff (August 5, 1995). "Between The Bullets". Billboard. Vol. 107, no. 31. p. 106. ISSN 0006-2510. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved July 28, 2010. Loughlin, Sean (November 6, 2017). "Boardwalk hall looks to get 'nasty' with janet jackson". The Press of Atlantic City. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved November 10, 2017. Halstead & Cadman 2003 "Janet Jackson – Chart History: Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved October 29, 2012. Verna, Paul; Morris, Edward (May 23, 1993). "Pop/Spotlight". Billboard. p. 91. "Janet Jackson: Janet: Music Reviews". Rolling Stone. Vol. 659. June 24, 1993. Archived from the original on May 2, 2008. Retrieved September 9, 2010. "Poetic Justice". Rolling Stone. Vol. 663 (published August 19, 1993). December 8, 2000. Archived from the original on April 9, 2010. Retrieved June 13, 2008. Howe, Desson (July 23, 1993). "Poetic Justice". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011. Retrieved June 13, 2008. Biddle, Frederic M. (March 22, 1994). "Fashion and fame team on Oscar night". The Boston Globe. p. 61. "HFPA – Awards Search: Janet Jackson". Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Archived from the original on July 13, 2010. Retrieved September 18, 2010. Halstead & Cadman 2003, p. 85 "Janet Jackson". Rolling Stone. September 30, 2004. Archived from the original on December 23, 2007. Retrieved July 23, 2008. Murray, Sonia (February 3, 1994). "Janet: The Queen of Pop: Michael could lose his crown to his hot little sister". The Vancouver Sun. p. C1. ISSN 0832-1299. Graham, Renee (June 20, 1994). "Janet Jackson: looks good, sounds bad". The Boston Globe. p. 34. Snyder, Michael (February 18, 1994). "Janet Jackson Makes All The Right Moves / Singer brings extravaganza to San Jose". San Francisco Chronicle. p. C1. Jon Pareles (December 20, 1993). "Wrapped in Song and Spectacle, Janet Jackson Plays the Garden". The New York Times. p. C.11. ISSN 0362-4331. Corliss, Richard; Sachs, Andrea (September 6, 1993). "Society: Who's Bad? An age of innocence may be at an end as Michael Jackson, the Peter Pan of pop, confronts accusations that he sexually abused one of his young friends". Time. p. 54. Hilburn, Robert (June 27, 1994). "I Think I've Finally Grown Up". Newsday. p. 10. Boepple, Leanne (November 1, 1995). "Scream: space odyssey Jackson-style.(video production; Michael and Janet Jackson video)". Theatre Crafts International. Vol. 29. p. 52. ISSN 1063-9497. George, Nelson (2004). Michael Jackson: The Ultimate Collection (booklet). Sony BMG. "Record Application Search". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved May 22, 2014. Directed by Mark Romanek (USA), the video for Michael and Janet Jackson's hit single Scream (1995) cost $7 million (£4.4 million) to make. Enter Expensive Music Video in the search field and then press Enter Walcott, Wes (April 5, 2016). "15 Of The Most Expensive Music Videos Ever Made". Goliath. Archived from the original on February 16, 2022. Retrieved April 5, 2016. Strauss, Neil (November 20, 1995). "The Pop Life". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 22, 2017. Retrieved May 22, 2014. Fred, Bronson (September 16, 1995). "Janet Jackson Has Done It Again". Billboard. Vol. 107, no. 37. p. 96. ISSN 0006-2510. Retrieved April 17, 2010. Morse, Steve (November 3, 1995). "Pure pop for power women Janet Jackson, Bonnie Raitt, Yoko Ono and Madonna flex their musical muscle". The Boston Globe. p. 51. ISSN 0743-1791. "Janet Jackson Hits Big; $80 Million Record Deal". Newsday. January 13, 1996. p. A02. Davidson, Casey (January 26, 1996). "News & Notes". Entertainment Weekly. p. 15. They don't call it jackpot for nothing. After much speculation, Janet Jackson, 29, clinched a reported four-album, $80 million deal with Virgin Records, making her the music industry's highest-paid performer (over brother Michael and Madonna, who each got $60 million deals in the early '90s) Farley, Christopher John; Thigpen, David E.; Ressner, Jeffrey (January 29, 1996). "Business: Are they worth all that cash? Janet Jackson's record-breaking $80 million contract could set off a new wave of pop-music megadeals". Time. p. 54. "R.E.M. Signs $80M Deal". Newsday. August 26, 1996. Rock band R.E.M. later signed an $80 million recording contract with Warner Bros. Records in August 1996; sources compared the group's record deal with Jackson's contract, but quoted her earning $70 million "Janet Discusses Depression With 'Newsweek'". MTV. November 11, 1997. Archived from the original on July 25, 2014. Retrieved April 20, 2014. "Cover Story: Janet Jackson Returns With Hit Album, New Look". Jet. November 1997. pp. 60–63. ISSN 0021-5996. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved April 20, 2014. Pareles, Jon (October 7, 1997). "Critic's Choice/Pop CD's; Love Can Get Complicated (Ouch!)". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 19, 2013. Retrieved January 16, 2014. Flick, Larry (December 3, 1998). "The Year in Music". Billboard. Vol. 109, no. 52. p. 16. ISSN 0006-2510. Turner-Williams, Jaelani (October 3, 2022). "'The Velvet Rope' Turns 25: Janet Jackson's Most Personal Album Reshaped R&B Forever". BET. Archived from the original on October 4, 2022. Retrieved June 9, 2023. Anderson, Kyle (August 7, 2013). "Mark Romanek: Inside Stories on 8 Classic Videos — Janet Jackson, 'Got 'Til It's Gone' (1997)". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 27, 2017. Retrieved May 13, 2016. "FYI > Together Again". UNAIDS Outlook Report. Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS. July 2010. p. 30. ISBN 9789291738595. Archived from the original on March 1, 2023. Retrieved August 19, 2019. "Causing a Commotion". Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on June 13, 2011. Retrieved January 13, 2012. "Naked Music Videos (Pg. 2)". Vibe. March 25, 2010. Archived from the original on March 5, 2014. Retrieved February 19, 2014. McCormick, Neil (October 18, 1997). "The Arts: Give her enough rope ... Reviews Rock CDs". The Daily Telegraph. p. 11. "Janet Jackson: The Velvet Rope: Music Reviews : Rolling Stone". Rolling Stone. No. 776/777. December 18, 1997. Archived from the original on May 3, 2008. Retrieved September 9, 2010. McCarthy, Marc (April 1, 2008). "Janet Jackson to be Honored at 19th Annual GLAAD Media Awards in Los Angeles" (Press release). GLAAD. Archived from the original on June 8, 2008. Retrieved June 10, 2008. Hilburn, Robert (September 20, 1998). "Janet Jackson Learns The Ropes\ Singer Learns To Like Herself On The Way To Creating The Lavishly Staged Velvet Rope Tour". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. p. G3. ISSN 1068-624X. "HBO's Exclusive Live Concert Event Janet: The Velvet Rope" (Press release). October 14, 1998. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved March 9, 2008. "Don Cheadle, Janet Jackson, Chris Rock, Cicely Tyson Among Primetime Emmy Nominees". Jet. Vol. 96, no. 11. Johnson Publishing Company. August 16, 1999. pp. 57–58. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved June 29, 2010. Kim McAvoy. "HBO makes the most of music". Broadcasting & Cable. Vol. 128, no. 36. p. 30. "Shaggy – Chart History: Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved October 29, 2012. "Blackstreet – Chart History: Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved October 29, 2012. "Busta Rhymes – Chart History: Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved October 29, 2012. "Global Pulse: Smith, Hill Top World Awards". Billboard. May 6, 1999. Archived from the original on November 29, 2010. Retrieved September 16, 2008. Mayfield, Geoff (December 25, 1999). "Totally '90s: Diary of a decade". Billboard. Vol. 111, no. 112. ISSN 0006-2510. Singleton, Keenan (2000). "The Klumps has its moments but collapses under own weight". The Daily Cougar. Archived from the original on February 27, 2014. Retrieved February 19, 2014. LaSalle, Mick (July 31, 2000), "'Professor' Moves Out Smartly / Hollywood's summer better than expected", San Francisco Chronicle, p. D1 "Box Office; Home Edition", Los Angeles Times, p. F–28, August 3, 2000 Jeckell, Barry (January 10, 2001), "MTV To Honor Janet Jackson", Billboard, archived from the original on June 3, 2013, retrieved March 16, 2008 "Billboard Bits: AMAs, They Might Be Giants, Ricky Scaggs", Billboard, January 4, 2001, archived from the original on June 6, 2013, retrieved May 3, 2008 Martens, Todd (May 3, 2001), "Janet Reigns Supreme On Billboard Charts", Billboard, archived from the original on June 6, 2013, retrieved April 17, 2008 Pareles, Jon (May 4, 2001), "Album of the Week", The New York Times, archived from the original on July 27, 2018, retrieved July 20, 2008 vanHorn, Teri (March 9, 2001), Janet Jackson Single Breaks Radio, Chart Records, MTV, archived from the original on July 24, 2009, retrieved May 23, 2008 Trust, Gary (February 16, 2011). "Lady Gaga Claims 1,000th Hot 100 No. 1 with 'Born This Way'". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 25, 2013. Retrieved February 16, 2011. Martens, Todd (May 17, 2001), "Seven And Counting For Janet At No. 1", Billboard, archived from the original on June 6, 2013, retrieved April 17, 2008 Caulfield, Keith (December 24, 2006), "Ask Billboard", Billboard, archived from the original on June 6, 2013, retrieved April 17, 2008 "Music DVD Review: Janet Jackson – Live in Hawaii (Re-Release)". Blog Critics. March 31, 2008. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved January 29, 2014. Esparza, Rafael; Massey, David; Scalese, Rudy (October 6, 2001), "Let Jackson's Energetic Beat Go On", Los Angeles Times, p. F–4, archived from the original on September 16, 2018, retrieved February 20, 2020 Harrington, Richard (August 18, 2001). "Janet Jackson, Diva Dynamo". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 14, 2014. Retrieved September 28, 2010. Massy, Bob (November 2001). "Janet Jackson, August 17, 2001, MCI Center, Washington, D.C." Spin. Vol. 17, no. 11. p. 54. ISSN 0886-3032. Janet Jackson Announces 'All for You Tour 2001'; Alliance to Support Boys & Girls Clubs of America; Ticket Proceeds To Be Donated As Part Of Nationwide Campaign, Business Wire, May 30, 2001 "Miss Jackson Gettin' It On With Grammy Co-Presenter". Popdirt. March 21, 2002. Archived from the original on February 20, 2014. Retrieved January 4, 2014. "Justin Timberlake Lets Music Ease Toll On His Heart". Orlando Sentinel. Abott, Jim. July 13, 2002. Archived from the original on December 24, 2013. Retrieved January 4, 2014. Norment, Lynn (February 2008), "Janet & Jermaine", Ebony, vol. 63, no. 4, p. 82, ISSN 0012-9011 Sheffield, Rob (February 11, 2020). "How Nipplegate Created YouTube". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 15, 2021. Retrieved April 3, 2021. Apologetic Jackson says 'costume reveal' went awry, CNN, February 3, 2004, archived from the original on February 18, 2010, retrieved May 20, 2006 Jackson's apology can't stem mass anger, ESPN, February 4, 2004, archived from the original on June 10, 2008, retrieved March 9, 2008 CBS's sister network, which produced the halftime show Davidson, Paul (July 22, 2008), "FCC loses appeal of 'wardrobe malfunction' fine", USA Today, p. 2b, ISSN 0734-7456 "Jackson banned from Grammys for Super Bowl stunt". The Telegraph. May 4, 2004. Archived from the original on March 23, 2013. Retrieved June 18, 2013. Horne: Janet Jackson, don't play me, CNN, February 4, 2004, archived from the original on February 20, 2005, retrieved April 3, 2008 {{citation}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) "Bust Stop". Entertainment Weekly. Susman, Gary. March 3, 2004. Archived from the original on September 16, 2018. Retrieved January 4, 2014. "No. 1 Usher Holds Janet To No. 2 Debut", Billboard, archived from the original on September 13, 2010, retrieved October 21, 2009 "Burned: Usher's Confessions of Sexual Prowess Hovers Near The Charts' Tops, but the Naughty Janet Jackson Offers More Sexual Intimacy on Damita Jo – Baltimore City Paper". City Paper. Wood, Mikael. June 9, 2004. Archived from the original on December 10, 2013. Retrieved January 4, 2014. "Fear of a Black Titty – Page 1 – Music – Los Angeles". LA Weekly. Hardy, Ernest. May 6, 2004. Archived from the original on May 4, 2016. Retrieved April 11, 2014. "Janet Jackson Biography". People. Archived from the original on March 7, 2011. Retrieved August 16, 2010. "Les Moonves Was Obsessed With Ruining Janet Jackson's Career, Sources Say". HuffPost UK. September 7, 2018. Archived from the original on December 15, 2018. Retrieved December 15, 2018. "Nipple Ripples: 10 Years of Fallout From Janet Jackson's Halftime Show". Rolling Stone. Kreps, Daniel. January 30, 2014. Archived from the original on January 31, 2014. Retrieved January 30, 2014. Blackballed – Panache Report, Panach Report, 2004, archived from the original on September 16, 2013, retrieved June 18, 2013 Tannenbaum, Robert (2004). America's Most Wanted. Blender Magazine. p. 128. "Awaiting 'Damita Jo': SouthCoastToday.com". South Coast Today. March 29, 2004. Archived from the original on October 16, 2013. Retrieved October 15, 2013. "A "Sexploration": Janet Jackson's "Damita Jo" album gets lost in the lust". March 29, 2004. Archived from the original on January 22, 2014. Retrieved February 7, 2014. Hope, Clover (February 4, 2008), "Together Again: Janet Jackson", Billboard, archived from the original on June 6, 2013, retrieved March 23, 2008 Hay, Carla (August 28, 2004), "The Billboard Backbeat", Billboard, vol. 116, no. 35, pp. 60–61 "New York Chapter Of 100 Black Men Honors Janet Jackson, Hank Aaron, Johnnetta Cole, Willie Gary", Jet, vol. 106, no. 23, p. 28, December 6, 2004, ISSN 0021-5996 Browne, J. Zamgba (November 18, 2004), "Janet Jackson stirs up controversy at annual gala of 100 Black Men", New York Amsterdam News, vol. 95, no. 47, p. 8, ISSN 0028-7121 Berry, Steve (November 11, 2004), "Janet Jackson stirs up controversy at annual gala of 100 Black Men", The Columbus Dispatch, vol. 95, no. 47, p. 12.D, ISSN 1074-097X Janet Jackson Receives HRC Award – Towleroad, Towleroad.com, June 20, 2005, archived from the original on April 5, 2015, retrieved September 9, 2010 Star-studded 2007 edition of Guinness World Records released, CBC News, September 29, 2006, archived from the original on November 8, 2012, retrieved March 19, 2012 "Numbers", Time, vol. 163, no. 7, p. 19, February 16, 2004, ISSN 0040-781X Burke, Monte (March 1, 2004), "The Ripple Effect", Time, vol. 173, no. 4, p. 46, ISSN 0015-6914, archived from the original on September 9, 2017, retrieved September 1, 2017 Hopkins, Jim (October 11, 2006). "Surprise! There's a third YouTube co-founder". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 5, 2017. Retrieved March 26, 2017. Coveney, Janine (September 5, 2006), "Janet's Juggernaut", Billboard, archived from the original on September 29, 2014, retrieved September 13, 2010 The best-selling issue in Us Weekly history was the Janet Jackson mag, which sold a record 1.4 million the week of May 26. Kelly, Keith (June 23, 2006), "MLad Mag's Coverup – Fhm Wraps Racy Glossy After Hudson News Complaint", New York Post, p. 36 Serpick, Evan (October 3, 2006), Janet Jackson: 20 Y.O. : Music Reviews : Rolling Stone, archived from the original on May 3, 2008, retrieved July 19, 2010 Janet Blacklist?, TMZ, July 28, 2006, archived from the original on November 14, 2014, retrieved June 18, 2013 "Ask Billboard". Billboard. January 6, 2007. Archived from the original on June 6, 2013. Retrieved July 14, 2010. Turner, Mariel (July 19, 2018). "Janet Jackson's life in photos". MSN. Archived from the original on January 17, 2019. Retrieved January 17, 2019. The 2006 project was certified Platinum, with 1.5 million copies sold, but never really found its footing. Mitchell, Gail; Garrity, Brian (November 4, 2006), "Dupri Exit Fuels Rumors", Billboard, vol. 118, no. 44, p. 10, ISSN 0006-2510 "Post-Katrina Music...and an American Idol Dropout". Slant Magazine. Cinquemani, Sal. September 11, 2006. Archived from the original on November 14, 2014. Retrieved December 4, 2014. Goldman, Lea; Kiri Blakeley (January 18, 2007), "The 20 Richest Women In Entertainment", Forbes, archived from the original on November 24, 2017, retrieved September 3, 2008 Ryan, Joal (October 15, 2007), "Just Call It Tyler Perry's Box Office", E! News, retrieved September 17, 2010 Scheib, Ronnie (October 2007), "Tyler Perry's Why Did I Get Married?", Variety, vol. 408, no. 10, p. 32, ISSN 0042-2738 Morris, Wesley (October 13, 2007). "'Married' is involving, if not blissful". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on December 23, 2008. Retrieved July 29, 2008. "Janet Jackson Sets Sights On Fall Tour, Book", Billboard, July 3, 2008, archived from the original on September 13, 2014, retrieved February 7, 2014 "Janet – Chart history". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 30, 2015. Retrieved March 24, 2013. Christian, Margena A (March 3, 2008), "NAACP Honors Showbiz Veterans, Newcomers At Image Awards", Jet, vol. 113, no. 8, p. 52 "Jermaine Dupri Says Janet Will Switch Labels, Be On 'Rush Hour 3' LP". MTV News. May 9, 2007. Archived from the original on March 2, 2014. Retrieved February 14, 2014. Harrington, Jim (September 14, 2008), "Review: The hits kept coming at Janet Jackson's Oakland show", Oakland Tribune, ISSN 1068-5936 Concepcion, Mariel (September 22, 2008), "Janet Jackson Parts Ways With Island Def Jam", Billboard, archived from the original on June 6, 2013, retrieved September 22, 2008 "Week Ending April 11, 2010: Bieber Bounces Back". Yahoo!. April 14, 2010. Archived from the original on April 17, 2010. Retrieved May 16, 2010. "Janet Jackson splits with record label", NME, September 20, 2008, archived from the original on September 1, 2009, retrieved October 8, 2009 Carter, Kelley (June 28, 2009), "An emotional Janet Jackson thanks fans at BET Awards", USA Today, archived from the original on July 1, 2009, retrieved June 28, 2009 Brown, Laura (October 2009), "Janet Jackson Takes Control", Harper's Bazaar, p. 244, ISSN 0017-7873 Kaufman, Gil (September 13, 2009), VMAs Kick Off with Madonna and Janet's Tribute to Michael Jackson, MTV News, archived from the original on September 22, 2009, retrieved September 14, 2009 Kinon, Cristina (September 11, 2009), "Janet Jackson to do dance tribute for Michael to kick off VMAs", Daily News, New York, archived from the original on September 15, 2009, retrieved September 19, 2009 Slezak, Michael (September 13, 2009), "Janet Jackson single-handedly saves MTV VMA tribute to Michael Jackson", Entertainment Weekly, archived from the original on September 25, 2009, retrieved September 16, 2009 Kaufman, Gil (November 22, 2009), Janet Jackson Kicks Off American Music Awards With Energetic Medley/Singer performed her new single, 'Make Me.', MTV, archived from the original on November 26, 2009, retrieved November 22, 2009 Janet Jackson – Capital FM, 95.8 Capital FM, October 20, 2009, archived from the original on April 2, 2015, retrieved October 20, 2009 Kaufman, Gil (September 14, 2009), Janet Jackson Releases New Single Following VMA Performance, MTV, archived from the original on September 22, 2009, retrieved September 14, 2009 "Chart Highlights: Adult Contemporary, Pop, Jazz & More". Billboard. December 21, 2009. Archived from the original on September 13, 2010. Retrieved December 21, 2009. Janet Jackson to Chair amfAR's Inaugural Milan Fashion Week Event, amfAR, August 24, 2009, archived from the original on March 6, 2010, retrieved September 28, 2009 Flint, Joe (April 5, 2010), "Tyler Perry's impressive weekend", Los Angeles Times, archived from the original on March 5, 2024, retrieved April 6, 2010 Hale, Mike (April 7, 2010), "Tyler Perry's Why Did I Get Married Too? (2010): At Couples' Reunion, Laughs, Then Grief", The New York Times, archived from the original on April 6, 2010, retrieved April 7, 2010 Cooper, Jackie (April 5, 2010), ""Tyler Perry's Why Did I Get Married Too?": Why Did He Make a Two?", The Huffington Post, archived from the original on April 9, 2010, retrieved April 6, 2010 "The 42nd NAACP Image Awards – Motion Picture" Archived January 12, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, NAACP Image Awards, January 12, 2011. Retrieved January 12, 2011. Rodriguez, Jayson (February 18, 2010),"Jermaine Dupri Says New Janet Jackson Song Is 'A Good Record'" Archived February 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, MTV. Retrieved April 7, 2010. Downey, Ryan J. (May 27, 2010). "'American Idol' Finale Ratings the Lowest Since Season One". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 31, 2010. Retrieved May 27, 2010. Ella Ngo (July 29, 2010), Poll: Are You Fur or Against Janet Jackson's New Ad, E!, archived from the original on August 1, 2010, retrieved July 29, 2010 Donnelly, Erin (November 21, 2011). "Janet Jackson's Blackglama Collection". Fashion Etc. Archived from the original on May 8, 2014. Retrieved May 7, 2014. Christopher John Farley (November 2, 2010), "Janet Jackson Tackles Poetry in 'For Colored Girls'", The Wall Street Journal, archived from the original on November 5, 2010, retrieved November 2, 2010 Manohla Dargis (November 4, 2010), "A Powerful Chorus Harmonizing 'Dark Phrases of Womanhood'", The New York Times, archived from the original on November 6, 2010, retrieved November 4, 2010 Randy Myers (November 4, 2010), "Review: Cast elevates 'For Colored Girls' from soap opera territory", San Jose Mercury News, archived from the original on February 6, 2012, retrieved November 4, 2010 2011 Black Reel Awards Nominations, Black Reel Awards, December 15, 2010, archived from the original on December 21, 2010, retrieved December 17, 2010 "Janet Jackson Announces 2011 Plans, Asks Fans for Questions", The Boombox, AOL, November 19, 2010, archived from the original on November 21, 2010, retrieved November 19, 2010 Amber Katz (December 10, 2010), This Janet Jackson Barbie Doll Is All We Want For Christmas!, MTV, archived from the original on December 17, 2010, retrieved April 8, 2011 Schuessler, Jennifer (February 28, 2011), "Best Sellers – The New York Times", The New York Times, archived from the original on February 28, 2011, retrieved February 28, 2011 Pamela McClintock (March 15, 2011), "Janet Jackson Signs Film Production Deal with Lionsgate (Exclusive)", The Hollywood Reporter, archived from the original on March 18, 2011, retrieved March 17, 2011 "Janet Jackson to Perform at Paris' Louvre Museum", The Hollywood Reporter, April 6, 2011, archived from the original on April 13, 2011, retrieved April 8, 2011 Sonya E (April 8, 2011), "Janet Jackson To Make History In Paris", Sister 2 Sister, archived from the original on April 11, 2011, retrieved April 9, 2011 "Janet Jackson Featured In New Blackglama Ad Campaign" Archived December 12, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, RTTNews, August 25, 2011. Retrieved August 26, 2011. Coleen Nika (November 23, 2011), "News Roundup: Lady Gaga's Barney's Workshop, Rihanna's Collection, Janet Jackson's New Line And More", Rolling Stone, archived from the original on November 26, 2011, retrieved November 29, 2011 Elizabeth Olson (December 14, 2011), "Weight Loss, With Divas and Public Service", The New York Times, archived from the original on January 5, 2012, retrieved January 3, 2012 Michelle Salemi (May 23, 2013), "Janet Jackson's AmfAR Advocacy Goes Beyond Galas", Variety, archived from the original on August 21, 2023, retrieved November 12, 2013 Janet Jackson Teams Up with UNICEF to Fight Hunger, ETonline, February 25, 2013, archived from the original on December 11, 2013, retrieved December 11, 2013 Billboard Staff (May 16, 2015). "Janet Jackson Announces New Album, Tour". Billboard. United States. Archived from the original on May 16, 2015. Retrieved May 16, 2015. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) McLaughlin, Eliott C.; Sutton, Joe (May 17, 2015). "'From my lips,' Janet Jackson announces new album, world tour". United States: CNN. Turner Broadcasting System (Time Warner). Archived from the original on May 20, 2015. Retrieved May 17, 2015. Andrew Hampp (June 3, 2015). "Janet Jackson to Release New Album This Fall Via Rhythm Nation/BMG". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 4, 2015. Retrieved June 3, 2015. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) Music, Guardian (June 3, 2015), "Janet Jackson back with new album – and record-breaking new deal with BMG", The Guardian, archived from the original on June 5, 2015, retrieved June 5, 2015 Hampp, Andrew (June 15, 2015). "Janet Jackson Announces Unbreakable World Tour". Billboard. United States. Archived from the original on June 17, 2015. Retrieved June 15, 2015. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) Erika Ramirez (June 22, 2015). "Janet Jackson Releases New Song, 'No Sleep': Listen". Billboard. Retrieved June 22, 2015. Gary Trust (July 1, 2015). "Wiz Khalifa No. 1 on Hot 100 'Again,' Selena Gomez Debuts at No. 9". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 7, 2021. Retrieved July 1, 2015. "Janet Jackson Leads Trending 140, Pentatonix's Michael Jackson Medley Hits Top Five". Billboard. June 22, 2015. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved September 24, 2015. Gary Trust (August 6, 2015). "Hot 100 Chart Moves: Charlie Puth & Meghan Trainor's 'Marvin Gaye' Hits Top 40". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 9, 2015. Retrieved August 10, 2015. Amaya Mendizabal (September 29, 2015). "Janet Jackson's 'No Sleeep' Becomes Her Longest-Running No. 1 on Adult R&B Songs". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 3, 2015. Retrieved September 30, 2015. Gerrick D. Kennedy (June 23, 2015), "BET to honor Janet Jackson with new 'Icon' award", Los Angeles Times, archived from the original on June 25, 2015, retrieved June 26, 2015 Antoinette Bueno (June 30, 2015). "EXCLUSIVE: Janet Jackson Announces a Surprising New Venture". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015. Retrieved July 1, 2015. Jeremy Gordon (August 20, 2015). "Janet Jackson Titles New Album, Previews "The Great Forever"". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on August 22, 2015. Retrieved August 20, 2015. Joe Lynch (August 20, 2015). "Janet Jackson Teases Upbeat New Song 'The Great Forever,' Confirms Album Title". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 22, 2015. Retrieved August 20, 2015. Kyle Anderson (August 28, 2015). "6 things we now know about Janet Jackson's new album, thanks to Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 30, 2015. Retrieved August 28, 2015. Will Robinson (September 3, 2015). "Janet Jackson shares powerful new single, 'Unbreakable'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 4, 2015. Retrieved September 4, 2015. Jacobs, Matthew (September 25, 2015). "Janet Jackson And Missy Elliott 'BURNITUP!' With Their New Song". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on September 27, 2015. Retrieved September 26, 2015. Jim Fusilli (September 29, 2015). "'Unbreakable' by Janet Jackson Review". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on September 30, 2015. Retrieved September 29, 2015. Jon Pareles (September 30, 2015). "Review: Janet Jackson's 'Unbreakable' Focuses on Love Outside the Bedroom". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 4, 2015. Retrieved September 30, 2015. Elysa Gardner (October 1, 2015). "Album of the week: Janet Jackson turns reflective on 'Unbreakable'". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 4, 2015. Retrieved October 1, 2015. Mikael Wood (October 1, 2015). "Review Janet Jackson's new 'Unbreakable' includes a tender tribute to Michael". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 3, 2015. Retrieved October 1, 2015. Alex Macpherson (October 1, 2015). "Janet Jackson: Unbreakable review – sunny serenity on reflective 11th album". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 3, 2015. Retrieved October 1, 2015. Lisa Respers France (October 8, 2015). "Janet Jackson, N.W.A., Los Lobos among Rock and Roll Hall of Fame nominees". CNN. Archived from the original on October 11, 2015. Retrieved October 8, 2015. Keith Caulfield (October 11, 2015). "Janet Jackson Earns Historic Seventh No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 20, 2016. Retrieved October 11, 2015. "Janet Jackson Delays Tour; Planning Family, Ordered to Rest". ABC News. April 6, 2016. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. Retrieved April 6, 2016. Vulpo, Mike (May 1, 2017). "Watch Janet Jackson Confirm Separation From Wissam Al Mana". E! Online. United States: NBCUniversal. Archived from the original on May 2, 2017. Retrieved May 1, 2017. Yoo, Noah; Sodomsky, Sam (May 1, 2017). "Janet Jackson Sets Date for Rescheduled Tour | Pitchfork". Pitchfork. United States: Condé Nast. Archived from the original on May 2, 2017. Retrieved May 1, 2017. Danielle Kwateng-Clark (September 8, 2017). "Janet Jackson 'Snatched Wigs' At First State Of The World Tour". Essence. Archived from the original on September 11, 2017. Retrieved September 11, 2017. Desire Thompson (September 8, 2017). "Janet Jackson Returns With Political Message On "State Of The World" Tour". Vibe. Archived from the original on September 11, 2017. Retrieved September 11, 2017. Wilson, Jeff. "Randy Jackson, Michael's Brother, Gets Jail for Wife Beating". apnewsarchive.com. Archived from the original on June 15, 2018. Retrieved November 27, 2017. Gil Kaufman (September 11, 2017). "Janet Jackson Gets Emotional While Performing Song About Abuse For the First Time in 18 Years". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 11, 2017. Retrieved September 11, 2017. Janine Rubenstien (September 12, 2017). "Janet Jackson Was 'Verbally Abused' by Ex, Randy Claims". People. Archived from the original on September 13, 2017. Retrieved September 12, 2017. Joi-Marie McKenzie (September 10, 2017). "Janet Jackson breaks down in tears at Houston tour stop". ABC News. Archived from the original on September 24, 2022. Retrieved September 11, 2017. Abby Jones (May 7, 2018). "Janet Jackson to Receive Icon Award at 2018 Billboard Music Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 22, 2020. Retrieved May 17, 2018. David Ritz (May 17, 2018). "Janet Jackson Goes Deep on Her Early Challenges, Upcoming Music & the Joy of Motherhood". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 17, 2018. Retrieved May 17, 2018. Cobo, Leila (August 16, 2018). "Janet Jackson & Her Rhythm Nation Records Partner With Cinq Music For New Indie Release: Exclusive". Billboard. United States. Archived from the original on August 16, 2018. Retrieved August 16, 2018. Cobo, Leila (July 29, 2018). "Janet Jackson and Daddy Yankee Will Release a Single and Video Together". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 15, 2018. Retrieved July 31, 2018. Andrew Unterberger (October 9, 2018). "The 2019 Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Nominees: Who Will Actually Get In?". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 9, 2018. Retrieved October 9, 2018. Ben Sisario (December 13, 2018). "Janet Jackson and Radiohead Lead Rock & Roll Hall of Fame Class of 2019". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 13, 2018. Retrieved December 13, 2018. "Janet Jackson Launching Las Vegas Residency in May". Variety. February 26, 2019. Archived from the original on February 27, 2019. Retrieved February 26, 2019. "Janet Jackson Adds Three Dates to 'Metamorphosis' Las Vegas Residency". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 13, 2019. Retrieved May 14, 2019. "Janet Jackson Upcoming Shows". Live Nation. Archived from the original on May 27, 2019. Retrieved August 21, 2019. Emily Zemler (March 15, 2019). "The Cure, The Killers, Janet Jackson Added to Glastonbury Lineup". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019. Retrieved March 16, 2019. "Janet Jackson Sunday 30 June". Montreux Jazz Festival Switzerland. Archived from the original on April 23, 2019. Retrieved June 6, 2019. "RNB Fridays Reveals Massive Line-up For 2019 festival". News.com.au. August 8, 2019. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019. "Janet Jackson, 50 Cent, Black Eyed Peas Announced As Headline Acts for Friday Jams Live 2019". Stuff. August 8, 2019. Archived from the original on February 12, 2020. Retrieved August 9, 2019. "Janet Jackson Two-part Documentary Set to Air on A&E and Lifetime". CNN. March 4, 2021. Archived from the original on March 25, 2021. Retrieved March 25, 2021. Iasimone, Ashley (January 2, 2022). "Janet Jackson Documentary Sets Release Date, Drops New Trailer: Watch". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 3, 2022. Retrieved January 2, 2022. Iasimone, Ashley (January 29, 2022). "Janet Jackson Debuts New Song 'Luv I Luv' on 'Janet' Documentary". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 30, 2022. Retrieved January 30, 2022. "Janet Jackson Announces New Black Diamond Album and World Tour". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 10, 2020. Retrieved February 10, 2020. Mervis, Scott (May 21, 2020). "Janet Jackson show at PPG Paints Arena is postponed". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Archived from the original on January 22, 2022. Retrieved January 22, 2022. Mitchell, Gail (March 3, 2022). "Essence Festival of Culture Makes In-Person Return With Janet Jackson, Nick Minaj, Summer Walker & More". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 3, 2022. "Janet Jackson Announces 'Together Again' 2023 Tour Dates". Variety. December 12, 2022. Archived from the original on September 5, 2023. Retrieved December 12, 2022. Bell, BreAnna (March 8, 2023). "Lifetime, A+E Networks Greenlights 'Janet Jackson: Family First,' Announces Simulcast Premiere Date for 'TLC Forever' Documentary". Variety. Archived from the original on March 8, 2023. Retrieved March 9, 2023. Jones, Tashara (May 20, 2015). "Why pop divas should fear Janet Jackson's comeback". New York Post. Archived from the original on March 11, 2018. Retrieved March 10, 2018. Stephen Holden (April 7, 1991), "Big Stars, Big Bucks and the Big Gamble", The New York Times, p. A.24, ISSN 0362-4331 Roger Love; Donna Frazier (2009), Set Your Voice Free: How To Get The Singing Or Speaking Voice You Want, Little, Brown and Company, ISBN 978-0-316-09294-4 Henderson, Eric (2003), "Slant Magazine Music Review: Janet Jackson: Control", Slant, archived from the original on December 19, 2003, retrieved June 30, 2008 Andriessen, Louis; Maja Trochimczyk (2002), The music of Louis Andriessen, Routledge, p. 61, ISBN 978-0-8153-3789-8 Robinson, Wendy (February 9, 2014), "Janet Jackson: Rhythm Nation Compilation", PopMatters, archived from the original on September 2, 2017, retrieved February 9, 2014 "FLUXBLOG: New, Unusual, Trendy, and Zany", Fluxblog, Perpetua, Matthew, July 2, 2008, archived from the original on October 12, 2008, retrieved February 20, 2014 Pareles, Jon (April 25, 1986), "Pop and Jazz Guide", The New York Times, pp. C.23, ISSN 0362-4331 Cinquemani, Sal (November 19, 2009), "Janet Jackson: Number Ones", Slant Magazine, archived from the original on November 16, 2009, retrieved November 19, 2009 Vincent, Rickey; George Clinton (1996), Funk: The Music, The People, and The Rhythm of The One, Macmillan, pp. 272, 284, ISBN 978-0-312-13499-0 Richard Rischar (2004), "A Vision of Love: An Etiquette of Vocal Ornamentation in African-American Popular Ballads of the Early 1990s", American Music, 22 (3): 407–443, doi:10.2307/3592985, JSTOR 3592985 Miller, Michael (2008), The Complete Idiot's Guide to Music History, Penguin Group, p. 205, ISBN 978-1-59257-751-4 Greg Kot (February 28, 1994), "Fighting Another Grammy Whammy 'Janet' Producers Defend Jackson's Role", Chicago Tribune, p. 5, ISSN 1085-6706 Karla Peterson (February 26, 1994), "Pop goes Janet in concert full of programmed flash", U-T San Diego, p. E.6 Smith 1996, p. 324 Reynolds, Simon; Joy Press (1996), The Sex Revolts: Gender, Rebellion, and Rock 'n' Roll, Harvard University Press, p. 297, ISBN 978-0-674-80273-5 Ritz, David (October 1, 1998), "Sex, sadness & the triumph of Janet Jackson", Rolling Stone, archived from the original on August 24, 2007, retrieved April 23, 2008 MacCambridge, Michael (October 19, 1989), "Worth a note", Austin American-Statesman, p. G.2 Goren, Lilly (2009), You've Come A Long Way, Baby: Women, Politics, and Popular Culture, University Press of Kentucky, p. 61, ISBN 978-0-8131-2544-2 Jessie Carney Smith (2010), Encyclopedia of African American Popular Culture, ABC-CLIO, pp. 738, 739, ISBN 978-0-313-35797-8 Timothy E. Scheurer (2007), Born in the USA: The Myth of America in Popular Music from Colonial Times to the Present, University Press of Mississippi, p. 224, ISBN 978-1-934110-56-0 Shayne Lee (2010), Erotic Revolutionaries: Black Women, Sexuality, and Popular Culture, Government Institutes, pp. 12–16, ISBN 978-0-7618-5228-5 Klein, Joshua (April 25, 2001), "Janet Jackson's Lighthearted Lament About Lost Love", The Washington Post, p. C01 Ritz, David (2004). The Naked Truth. Upscale. p. 64. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas (2004), Damita Jo, AllMusic, archived from the original on March 5, 2024, retrieved February 8, 2009 Mitoma, Judy; Judith Mitoma; Elizabeth Zimmer; Dale Ann Stieber; Nelli Heinonen; Norah Zuniga Shaw (2002), Envisioning dance on film and video, Routledge, p. 16, ISBN 978-0-415-94171-6 Cutcher, Jenai (2003), Feel the Beat: Dancing in Music Videos, The Rosen Publishing Group, pp. 14–16, ISBN 978-0-8239-4558-0 Chambers, Veronica (September 7, 1997). "She's Not Anybody's Baby Sister Anymore". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 11, 2014. Retrieved March 7, 2014. "Janet Jackson – From Janet. To Damita Jo: The Videos – music DVD reviews". MusicOMH. Hogwood, Ben. 2004. Archived from the original on May 13, 2013. Retrieved December 25, 2013. Norment, Lynn (November 1, 2000), "Janet: At the crossroads", Ebony, vol. 56, no. 1, p. 180, ISSN 0012-9011 Beretta E. Smith-Shomade (2002), Shaded Lives: African-American Women and Television, Rutgers University Press, p. 86 Stephanie Jordan; Dave Allen (1993), Parallel Lines: Media Representations of Dance, Indiana University Press, p. 68 Helmi Järviluoma; Pirkko Moisala; Anni Vilkko (2003), Gender and Qualitative Methods, SAGE Publications, p. 92, ISBN 978-0-7619-6585-5 Jean M. Twenge (2007), Generation Me: Why Today's Young Americans are More Confident, Assertive, Entitled—and More Miserable Than Ever Before, Simon & Schuster, p. 167 Sal Cinquemani and Ed Gonzalez (June 30, 2003), "100 Greatest Music Videos", Slant Magazine, archived from the original on January 10, 2012, retrieved March 9, 2012 Letkemann, Jessica (August 1, 2011). "The 10 Best '80s Music Videos: Poll Results". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 1, 2013. Retrieved August 1, 2011. Barber, Nicholas (June 7, 1998), "Rock music: Janet Jackson gets lost in her own limelight", The Independent, p. 6 "Janet Jackson receives American Music Awards' Top Honor Highlighting Stellar Career", Jet, vol. 99, no. 7, p. 56, January 29, 2001, ISSN 0021-5996 Willman, Chris (April 23, 1990), "Pop Music Review Janet Jackson's Dance of Community", Los Angeles Times, p. 1, ISSN 0458-3035 Glenn Gamboa (March 18, 2011), "The magnificent 7 Our critic's take on Janet Jackson's top hits before her musical comeback", Newsday, p. B.15 Christensen, Thor (September 15, 2001), "Loose Lips: Pop Singers' Lip-Syncing In Concert Is An Open Secret", Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, p. B.8, ISSN 1068-624X MacCambridge, Michael (July 6, 1990), "A lesson in 'Control' – Janet Jackson delivers precise, sparkling show", Austin American-Statesman, p. B.8 Ratliff, Ben (March 20, 2011), "First-Person Reflections on a Pop Career", The New York Times, retrieved April 1, 2011 Chris Richards (March 23, 2011), "Janet Jackson lets fans see her sweat with energized Constitution Hall show", The Washington Post, retrieved April 1, 2011 "Sultry songstress Lena Horne dies", The Washington Times, May 10, 2010, retrieved July 12, 2010 Liz Smith (June 4, 1993), "Janet Jackson as Dandridge?", Los Angeles Times, p. 2, ISSN 0458-3035 Penn, Roberta (September 5, 1997), "Janet Jackson digs deep and gets personal in latest album", The Fresno Bee, p. E.4, ISSN 0889-6070 "Janet Jackson Returns with Hit Album and New Look", Jet, vol. 92, no. 26, p. 60, November 17, 1997 "The Immortals – The Greatest Artists of All Time: 61) Tina Turner", Rolling Stone, April 22, 2005, archived from the original on May 3, 2009, retrieved April 26, 2009 Kevin Phinney (September 21, 1989), "Jackson takes control on latest album // Songstress instrumental in signing producers, writing lyrics for 'Rhythm Nation'", Austin American-Statesman, p. F.2 Strong, Martin (2004), The Great Rock Discography: Complete Discographies Listing Every Track, Canongate U.S., p. 749, ISBN 978-1-84195-615-2 Steve Dollar (July 23, 2000), "A Little Help From Her Friends", Newsday, p. D.07 McCarthy, Phillip (February 25, 2008), "The Sun Herald — Don't mention Michael", The Sydney Morning Herald, retrieved October 22, 2010 Huey, Steve (2008), Janet Jackson > Biography, AllMusic, retrieved June 7, 2008 Janet Jackson is a big deal these days, the Queen of Pop, though we can still call her by her first name. So little is she trading off the fame of her brother, so completely has she become her own thing, she has all but abandoned the family name. Tour posters, tickets and recent album — all say, quite simply "Janet", and leave it at that. Smith, Giles (April 21, 1996), "Slow riffs, fast riffs, midriffs", The Independent, p. 26, ISSN 0951-9467 Over the next few years, a significant proportion of music industry revenues were generated by a handful of superstar artists; in addition to her brother Michael, there were Lionel Richie, Madonna, Prince, Bruce Springsteen, Whitney Houston, Tina Turner, Wham!, Phil Collins, Steve Winwood, Huey Lewis and the News, the Pointer Sisters, Janet Jackson, Anita Baker, and a handful of others. A surprising number of the new superstars were black. This was perhaps the first hint that the greater cosmopolitanism of a world market might produce some changes in the complexion of popular music. Garofalo, Reebee (1999), "From Music Publishing to MP3: Music and Industry in the Twentieth Century", American Music, 17 (3): 318–354, doi:10.2307/3052666, JSTOR 3052666 Mahon, Maureen (2004), Right to Rock: The Black Rock Coalition and the Cultural Politics of Race, Duke University Press, p. 163, ISBN 978-0-8223-3317-3 Smith-Shomade, Beretta E. (2002), Shaded lives: African-American women and television, Rutgers University Press, p. 181, ISBN 978-0-8135-3105-2 Millner, Denene (January 12, 1996), "Dueling Divas Top Five Singers Slug It Out To See Who's The Real Queen Of Pop", Daily News, New York, retrieved October 15, 2009 DeCurtis, Anthony (1992), Present tense: rock & roll and culture, Duke University Press, p. 257, ISBN 978-0-8223-1265-9 McDermott, Leon (March 28, 2004), "Going bust?; Damita Jo ought to have been Janet Jackson's big comeback album, says Leon McDermott, but after that incident at the Super Bowl will America forgive her?", Sunday Herald, p. 3 "Janet Jackson's Classic 'Rhythm Nation 1814' Added To National Recording Registry". The Huffington Post. March 25, 2021. Retrieved March 25, 2021. Simon Reynolds (2011), Bring the Noise: 20 Years of Writing About Hip Rock and Hip Hop, Soft Skull Press, p. 226, ISBN 978-1-59376-401-2 "Janet Jackson Renews Contract With Virgin Records For Blockbuster Deal", Jet, vol. 89, no. 13, p. 35, ISSN 0021-5996 J.D. Considine (July 25, 1999), "Ranking the Women of 'Rock'", The Baltimore Sun, p. 2.F 200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons of All Time, VH1, archived from the original on September 9, 2015, retrieved February 28, 2011 VH1's 100 Greatest Women In Music, VH1, February 13, 2012, archived from the original on February 14, 2012, retrieved February 22, 2012 50 Greatest Women of the Video Era, VH1, archived from the original on June 29, 2011, retrieved February 28, 2011 UOMO Producer Helps Propel Janet Jackson to #1 in the US, Business Wire, March 10, 2008 Melinda Newman (December 8, 2001). "Achievement Award is 'All' for Jackson". Billboard. Vol. 113, no. 49. p. 28. ISSN 0006-2510. "Billboard Hot 100 Chart 50th Anniversary", Billboard, archived from the original on September 13, 2008, retrieved October 1, 2009 Trust, Gary; Caulfield, Keith; Ramirez, Rauly (November 18, 2010), "The Top 50 R&B / Hip-Hop Artists of the Past 25 Years — Billboard Underground", Billboard, retrieved November 18, 2010 "Winners Database: Janet Jackson". Billboard Music Awards. Retrieved October 16, 2016. Nick Goumond (April 14, 2011), Rihanna, Eminem, Lady Gaga score double digit Billboard Music Awards noms, goldderby.com, retrieved April 16, 2011 "VH1's Pop Queen Faceoff: The Winner Revealed!". VH1 News. Archived from the original on November 8, 2014. Retrieved September 8, 2015. Rodman, Sarah (August 24, 2001), "Music; Has Janet Jackson earned her diva wings?; Two FleetCenter shows are just one criterion", Boston Herald, p. S03 Stout, Gene (July 16, 2001), "Janet Jackson's Steamy Album Leaves Room For Romance", Seattle Post-Intelligencer, p. 8, ISSN 0745-970X Valdéz, Mimi (August 2001), "Show and prove", Vibe, vol. 9, no. 8, p. 116, ISSN 1070-4701 Chris Nickson (2005), Usher:The Godson of Soul, Simon and Schuster, p. 39, ISBN 978-1-4169-0922-4 Elysa Gardner (July 28, 2000), "Luscious Jackson", USA Today, p. 1.E, ISSN 0734-7456 Adrienne Trier-Bieniek (2016), The Beyonce Effect: Essays on Sexuality, Race and Feminism, McFarland, p. 181, ISBN 978-0-7864-9974-8 While her vocal skills are at least as decent as Britney Spears and the other Janet-come-latelys, it's Jackson's skills as an entertainer—and commanding stage presence—that makes her so deserving of the spotlight. Gemma Tarlach (October 17, 2001), "Janet Jackson takes her place as Queen of Pop", Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, p. 12.B Most disappointing was crunk princess Ciara. The Janet-come-lately and her octet of dance-floor acrobats moved with ferocious elegance to tracks like 'Goodies,' but the singer had glaring microphone problems when she spoke—tediously, about the 'importance' of her upcoming sophomore album. Sarah Rodman (October 31, 2006), "MonsterJam Lacks Star Power", The Boston Globe, p. E.7, ISSN 0743-1791 Joan Morgan (August 2010), "Before Sunset", Essence, p. 106 "Dancing With the Stars is Joining Rhythm Nation: Next Theme Night is Janet Jackson". www.eonline.com. November 1, 2021. "Her Impetuous Marriage Kaput, Janet Jackson, Michael's Sis, Is Now a Miss with a Nasty Hit". July 7, 1986. Retrieved March 31, 2018. "Revisit Janet Jackson's November 1997 Cover Story: 'JANET'S BACK!'". Vibe. October 7, 2022. Retrieved October 8, 2022. Mancini, Rob (June 1, 2000). "UPDATE: Janet Jackson Faces Divorce, Drug Lawsuit". MTV News. Retrieved October 26, 2022. Gordinier, Jeff (May 7, 2001), "Will the real Janet Jackson please stand up?", Entertainment Weekly, p. 36, retrieved April 26, 2021 "Janet Jackson and Rene Elizondo divorce finalized". The Smoking Gun. October 21, 2003. Archived from the original on February 17, 2009. Retrieved May 21, 2006. McElroy, Quindelda (April 21, 2007), "Ex-hubbies can cash in", The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, p. E.2 "Janet Jackson confirms marriage to billionaire Wissam Al Mana". Newsday. February 2013. Retrieved January 4, 2024. "Janet Jackson reveals secret wedding to Wissam Al Mana". Hello!. February 26, 2013. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "'They Come from Very Different Worlds:' Janet Jackson and Husband Separated Shortly After Son's Birth, Says Source". April 10, 2017. Retrieved August 25, 2023. "Janet Jackson Confirms Split Rumours, As She Announces New Tour". May 2, 2017. Andriessen, Louis; Maja Trochimczyk (2002). The Music of Louis Andriessen. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-8153-3789-8. Brackett, Nathan; Hoard, Christian David (2004). The New Rolling Stone Album Guide. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-0169-8. Beretta E., Smith-Shomade (2002). Shaded Lives: African-American Women and Television. Rutgers University Press. ISBN 978-0-8135-3105-2. Bronson, Fred (2003). The Billboard Book of Number One Hits. Billboard Books. ISBN 978-0-8230-7677-2. Jackson, Michael (2009) [First published 1988]. Moonwalk. Random House. ISBN 978-0-307-71698-9. Cornwell, Jane (2002). Janet Jackson. Carlton Books. ISBN 978-1-84222-464-9. Cullen, Jim (2001). Popular Culture in American History. Blackwell Publishing. ISBN 978-0-631-21958-3. Cutcher, Jenai (2003). Feel the Beat: Dancing in Music Videos. The Rosen Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-8239-4558-0. Knopper, Steve (2016). MJ: The Genius of Michael Jackson. Scribner. ISBN 978-1-4767-3037-0. Dean, Maury (2003). Rock-N-Roll Gold Rush. Algora Publishing. ISBN 978-0-87586-207-1. DeCurtis, Anthony (1992). Present Tense: Rock & Roll and Culture. Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-8223-1265-9. Dominguez, Pier (2003). Christina Aguilera: A Star is Made: The Unauthorized Biography. Amber Books Publishing. ISBN 978-0-9702224-5-9. Gaar, Gillian G (2002). She's a Rebel: The History of Women In Rock & Roll. Seal Press. ISBN 978-1-58005-078-4. Garofalo, Reebee (1999). "From Music Publishing to MP3: Music and Industry in the Twentieth Century". American Music. 17 (3): 318–354. doi:10.2307/3052666. JSTOR 3052666. Gates, Henry Louis; Appiah, Anthony (1999). Africana: The Encyclopedia of the African and African American. Basic Civitas Books. ISBN 978-0-465-00071-5. Goren, Lilly (2009). You've Come A Long Way, Baby: Women, Politics, and Popular Culture. University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0-8131-2544-2. Halstead, Craig; Cadman, Chris (2003). Jacksons Number Ones. Authors On Line. ISBN 978-0-7552-0098-6. Hyatt, Wesley (1999). The Billboard Book of Number One Adult Contemporary Hits. Billboard Books. ISBN 978-0-8230-7693-2. Parish, James Robert (1995). Today's Black Hollywood. Pinnacle Books. ISBN 978-0-8217-0104-1. Jaynes, Gerald David (2005). Encyclopedia of African American Society. SAGE Publications. ISBN 978-0-7619-2764-8. Järviluoma, Helmi; Moisala, Pirkko; Vilkko, Anni (2003). Gender and Qualitative Methods. SAGE Publications. ISBN 978-0-7619-6585-5. Kramarae, Cheris; Spender, Dale (2000). Routledge International Encyclopedia of Women: Global Women's Issues and Knowledge. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-92091-9. Lee, Shayne (2010). Erotic Revolutionaries: Black Women, Sexuality, and Popular Culture. Government Institutes. ISBN 978-0-7618-5228-5. Love, Roger; Frazier, Donna (2009). Set Your Voice Free: How To Get The Singing Or Speaking Voice You Want. Little, Brown and Company. ISBN 978-0-316-09294-4. Mahon, Maureen (2004). Right to Rock: The Black Rock Coalition and the Cultural Politics of Race. Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-8223-3317-3. Miller, Michael (2008). The Complete Idiot's Guide to Music History. Penguin Group. ISBN 978-1-59257-751-4. Mitoma, Judy; Mitoma, Judith; Zimmer, Elizabeth; Stieber, Dale Ann; Heinonen, Nelli; Shaw, Norah Zuniga (2002). Envisioning dance on film and video. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-94171-6. Nickson, Chris (2005). Usher: The Godson of Soul. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4169-0922-4. Reynolds, Simon; Press, Joy (1996). The Sex Revolts: Gender, Rebellion, and Rock 'n' Roll. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-80273-5. Reynolds, Simon (2011). Bring the Noise: 20 Years of Writing About Hip Rock and Hip Hop. Soft Skull Press. ISBN 978-1-59376-401-2. Rischar, Richard (2004). "A Vision of Love: An Etiquette of Vocal Ornamentation in African-American Popular Ballads of the Early 1990s". American Music. 22 (3): 407–443. doi:10.2307/3592985. JSTOR 3592985. Ripani, Richard J (2006). The New Blue Music: Changes in Rhythm & Blues, 1950–1999. University Press of Mississippi. ISBN 978-1-57806-862-3. Scheurer, Timothy E. (2007). Born in the USA: The Myth of America in Popular Music from Colonial Times to the Present. University Press of Mississippi. ISBN 978-1-934110-56-0. Smith, Jessie Carney (2010). Encyclopedia of African American Popular Culture. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-313-35797-8. Smith, Jessie Carney (1996). Notable Black American Women, Volume 2. Gale. ISBN 978-0-8103-9177-2. Starr, Larry; Waterman, Christopher Alan (2006). American Popular Music: The Rock Years. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-530052-9. Stephanie, Jordan; Allen, Dave (1993). Parallel Lines: Media Representations of Dance. Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-86196-371-3. Strong, Martin Charles (2004). The Great Rock Discography: Complete Discographies Listing Every Track Recorded by More Than 1200 Artists. Canongate U.S. ISBN 978-1-84195-615-2. Sutherland, William (2005). Aaliyah Remembered. Trafford Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4120-5062-3. Tannenbaum, Rob; Marks, Craig (2011). I Want My MTV: The Uncensored Story of the Music Video Revolution. Dutton Penguin. ISBN 978-1-101-52641-5. Trier-Bieniek, Adrienne (2016). The Beyonce Effect: Essays on Sexuality, Race and Feminism. McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-9974-8. Twenge, Jean M. (2007). Generation Me: Why Today's Young Americans are More Confident, Assertive, Entitled—and More Miserable Than Ever Before. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4767-5556-4. Vincent, Rickey; Clinton, George (1996). Funk: The Music, The People, and The Rhythm of The One. Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-312-13499-0. Young, Julie (Fall 2009). "A Hoosier Thriller: Gary, Indiana's Michael Jackson". Traces of Indiana and Midwestern History. 21 (4). Indianapolis: Indiana Historical Society. Archived from the original on April 15, 2014. Retrieved April 14, 2014. Warner, Jay (2006). On this Day in Black Music History. Hal Leonard. ISBN 978-0-634-09926-7. Janet Jackson at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website Janet Jackson at AllMusic Janet Jackson at IMDb Portals:  Biography  Pop music  R&B and Soul Music  Indiana  United States