Giurtelecu Șimleului (in Hungarian Somlyógyőrtelek or simply Győrtelek) is a Romanian village in the commune of Măeriște, in Transylvania, in Sălaj County. It is also known by the name of Giurtelec or Giurtelecu in Romanian. Giurtelecu Șimleului is located in the northwest part of Salaj County, in the basin of the Crasna river, at the foot of Coasta lui Damian. The Crasna river crosses the village of Giurtelecu Șimleului and Vârșolț dam serves to prevent flooding. Giurtelecu Șimleului has a continental climate, characterized by a hot and dry period in the summer and cold winters. The mean temperature in January is -3 °C, and 21.1 °C in July. The mean annual precipitation is around 627 mm. The West-Atlantic affects the weather during the winter and fall. During the winter, temperatures are often below 0 °C (32 °F), even if they do not fall below -10 °C (14 °F). On average, snow covers the ground for 65 days each winter. In the summer, the mean temperature is around 18 °C (64 °F) (the mean for July and August), despite the fact that temperatures frequently reach 35 °C (95 °F) to 40 °C (104 °F) during midsummer. Although the average precipitation and humidity throughout the summer is low, violent storms are not rare. In spring and fall, temperatures vary between 13 °C (55 °F) to 18 °C (64 °F), and precipitation throughout this period tends to be more than in the summer, with more more frequent and heavy periods of rain. Giurtelecu Șimleului is located 25 km from under construction Transylvanian highway. The diversity of the area which surrounds Giurtelecu Șimleului, the view of Coasta lui Damian towards its depression in particular. Giurtelecu Șimleului's potential for tourism is due to its natural features. In the 2002 census, there were 1,149 people living in Giurtelecu Șimleului. There was an increasing proportion of aged people in the community, with emigration to the European Union being important Traditionally, the community has had multiple religions, the inhabitants are Greek Catholics, Orthodox Christians, Catholics and Protestants. The Giurtelecu Șimleului economy is essentially agricultural (cereals, potatoes). In recent years, some livestock farming has developed. The fluvial terraces in the Crasna river are occupied by many crops and foothills with vineyards. The first written documents concerning Giurtelecu Șimleului are from 1259. Economically and politically, the village was influenced by the Báthory family, which was very powerful in the 18th century, this family's house was influential in central Europe located in Șimleu Silvaniei, 7 km from Giurtelecu Șimleului. Giurtelecu Șimleului's name still demonstrates this influence. Strategically well-placed and fortified, Damian Coasta has attracted different human settlements searching for security for thousands of years. Giurtelecu Șimleului has been inhabited since the Iron age. Traditionally, the community was multi-ethnic. According to the 1715 census, 36 inhabitants were Romanians, 27 Hungarians and 9 Germans and according to the 1920 census, there were 45 Romanians, 36 Hungarians and 9 Slovaks. The 1890 census shows that 996 inhabitants spoke Romanian, 54 Hungarian and 9 another language. According to the same census, there were 992 Greek Catholics, 43 Jews, 23 evangelic Protestants and one Catholic. During the German occupation, Jews were expelled (in May 1944) and killed in the Nazi extermination camps. Located in the northeast of Giurtelecu Șimleului, the Jewish cemetery is in ruins. Petri Mór, Szilágy vármegye monographiája (Budapest, 1901-1904) http://www.mek.oszk.hu/04700/04750/html/293.html Romania portal