Selena Quintanilla-Pérez (Latin American Spanish pronunciation: [seˈlena kintaˈniʝa ˈpeɾes]; née Quintanilla; April 16, 1971 – March 31, 1995), known mononymously as Selena, was an American singer. Referred to as the "Queen of Tejano Music", her contributions to music and fashion made her one of the most celebrated Mexican-American entertainers of the late 20th century. In 2020, Billboard magazine put her in third place on their list of "Greatest Latino Artists of All Time", based on both Latin albums and Latin songs chart. Media outlets called her the "Tejano Madonna" for her clothing choices. She also ranks among the most influential Latin artists of all time and is credited for catapulting the Tejano genre into the mainstream market. The youngest child of the Quintanilla family, she debuted on the music scene as a member of the band Selena y Los Dinos, which also included her elder siblings A.B. Quintanilla and Suzette Quintanilla. In the 1980s, she was often criticized and was refused bookings at venues across Texas for performing Tejano music—a male-dominated music genre. However, her popularity grew after she won the Tejano Music Award for Female Vocalist of the Year in 1987, which she won nine consecutive times. She signed with EMI Latin in 1989 and released her self-titled debut album the same year, while her brother became her principal music producer and songwriter. Selena released Entre a Mi Mundo (1992), which peaked at number one on the US Billboard Regional Mexican Albums chart for eight consecutive months. The album's commercial success led music critics to call it the "breakthrough" recording of her musical career. One of its singles, "Como la Flor", became one of her most popular signature songs. Live! (1993) won Best Mexican/American Album at the 1994 Grammy Awards, becoming the first recording by a female Tejano artist to do so. In 1994, she released Amor Prohibido, which became one of the best-selling Latin albums in the United States. It was critically acclaimed as being responsible for Tejano music's first marketable era as it became one of the most popular Latin music subgenres at the time. Selena was shot and killed on March 31, 1995, by Yolanda Saldívar, her friend and the former manager of her Selena Etc. boutiques. Saldívar was cornered by police when she attempted to flee and threatened to kill herself but was convinced to give herself up. She was convicted of murder and sentenced to life in prison with possible parole after 30 years. Two weeks later, George W. Bush, then-governor of Texas, declared April 16 as Selena Day in Texas. Her posthumous crossover album, Dreaming of You (1995), debuted atop the Billboard 200, making Selena the first Latin artist to accomplish this feat. In 1997, Warner Bros. released Selena, a film about her life and career, which starred a then-unknown Jennifer Lopez as Selena, catapulting Lopez into fame. In 2020, Netflix released Selena: The Series starring Christian Serratos. Selena has sold around 18 million records worldwide, making her one of the best-selling female artists in Latin music. Selena Quintanilla was born on April 16, 1971, in Lake Jackson, Texas. She was the youngest child of Marcella Ofelia Quintanilla (née Samora), who had Cherokee ancestry, and Abraham Quintanilla Jr., a Mexican American former musician. The obstetrician-gynecologist at her birth was future House of Representatives member Ron Paul. Selena was raised as a Jehovah's Witness. Quintanilla Jr. noticed her musical abilities when she was six years old. He told People magazine, "Her timing, her pitch were perfect, I could see it from day one". In 1980, Quintanilla Jr. opened his first Tex-Mex restaurant in Lake Jackson, Papa Gayo's, where Selena and her siblings Abraham III (on bass guitar) and Suzette Quintanilla (on drums) would often perform. The following year, the restaurant was forced to close after a recession caused by the 1980s oil glut. The family declared bankruptcy and were evicted from their home. They settled in Corpus Christi, Texas; Quintanilla Jr. became manager of the newly formed band Selena y Los Dinos and began promoting it. They needed the money and played on street corners, weddings, quinceañeras, and fairs. As her popularity as a singer grew, the demands of Selena's performance and travel schedule began to interfere with her education. Her father took her out of school when she was in the eighth grade. Her teacher Marilyn Greer disapproved of Selena's musical career. She threatened to report Quintanilla Jr. to the Texas Board of Education, believing the conditions to which Selena was exposed were inappropriate for a girl her age. Quintanilla Jr. told Greer to "mind her business". Other teachers expressed their concerns when they noticed how tired Selena appeared when she arrived at school. At seventeen, Selena earned a high school diploma from the American School of Correspondence in Chicago and was also accepted at Louisiana State University. She enrolled at Pacific Western University, taking up business administration as her major subject. Quintanilla Jr. refurbished an old bus; he named it "Big Bertha" and the family used it as their tour bus. In the first years of touring, the family sang for food and barely had enough money to pay for gasoline. In 1984, Selena recorded her first LP record, Selena y Los Dinos, for Freddie Records. Despite wanting to record English-language songs, Selena recorded Tejano music compositions; a male-dominated, Spanish-language genre with German influences of polka, jazz, and country music, popularized by Mexicans living in the United States. Quintanilla Jr. believed that Selena should record musical compositions related to her heritage. During the recording sessions for the album, Selena had to learn Spanish phonetically with guidance from her father. In 1985, to promote the album, Selena appeared on the Johnny Canales Show, a popular Spanish-language radio program, on which she continued to appear for several years. Selena was discovered by musician Rudy Trevino, founder of the Tejano Music Awards, where she won the Female Vocalist of the Year award in 1987 and for nine consecutive years after. The band was often turned down by Texas music venues because of the members' ages and because Selena was their lead singer. Her father was often told by promoters that Selena would never be successful because she was a woman in a genre historically dominated by men. By 1988, Selena had released five more LP records; Alpha (1986), Muñequito de Trapo (1987), And the Winner Is... (1987), Preciosa (1988), and Dulce Amor (1988). José Behar of newly formed label EMI Latin Records, together with the new head of Sony Music Latin, watched Selena perform at the 1989 Tejano Music Awards. Behar was searching for new Latin acts and wanted to sign Selena to EMI's label Capitol Records, while Sony Music Latin offered Quintanilla Jr. twice Capitol's signing fee. Behar thought he had discovered the "next Gloria Estefan" but his superior called Behar illogical because he had been in South Texas less than a week. Quintanilla Jr. chose EMI Latin's offer because of the potential for a crossover album and wanted his children to be the first musicians to sign to the label. Before Selena began recording for her debut album, Behar and Stephen Finfer requested a crossover album for her. She recorded three English-language compositions for the heads of EMI's pop division. Behar and Finfer's request for a crossover album was denied and Selena was told she needed a bigger fan base to sell such an album. Behar thought EMI Records and the public did not believe that a Mexican American woman could have "crossover potential" after Charles Koppelman denied the project. Selena released her self-titled debut album on October 17, 1989. The singer recorded most of the songs at AMEN Studios in San Antonio, Texas; "Sukiyaki" and "My Love" were recorded at Sunrise Studios in Houston. Selena wrote "My Love" and wanted the song to be included on the album. Her brother A.B., became Selena's principal record producer and songwriter for most of her musical career, though did not write the tracks "Sukiyaki", "Contigo Quiero Estar", and "No Te Vayas". "Sukiyaki" was originally recorded in Japanese in the 1960s by Kyu Sakamoto; Selena used a translation into Spanish of an English version of the song by Janice Marie Johnson. Selena peaked at number seven on the US Billboard Regional Mexican Albums chart, becoming Selena's first recording to debut on a national music chart. The album performed better than other recordings from other contemporaneous female Tejano singers. In the same year, Coca-Cola wanted Selena to become one of their spokespeople in Texas. The jingle used in her first two commercials for the company was composed by A.B. and Chris Pérez—the latter of whom had joined Selena y Los Dinos several months earlier as the band's new guitarist. Pérez began having romantic feelings for Selena, despite having a girlfriend in San Antonio. After a trip down to Mexico with the band, Pérez thought it would be best for them both to distance themselves, but he found that impossible and chose to try to build a relationship with her. They expressed their feelings for each other at a Pizza Hut restaurant and shortly afterward became a couple. Pérez and Selena hid their relationship, fearing Quintanilla Jr. would try to break it up. Selena released her second studio album, Ven Conmigo, in September 1990. Three tracks from Ven Conmigo were released as singles; "Ya Ves", "La Tracalera", and "Baila Esta Cumbia". The latter, a Tejano cumbia song, became one of Selena's most successful single. Its popularity grew in Mexico, where a compilation album bearing the single's name was released there, which was certified platinum by the Asociación Mexicana de Productores de Fonogramas y Videogramas (AMPROFON), denoting sales of 150,000 units. A registered nurse and fan named Yolanda Saldívar asked Quintanilla Jr. to start a fan club in San Antonio. Saldívar had the idea after she had attended one of Selena's concerts. Quintanilla Jr. approved Saldívar's request; he believed the fan club would bring more exposure for the band. Saldívar soon became a close friend to Selena and the family; she was trusted and became the acting president of the fan club in 1991. That same year, Salvadoran singer Álvaro Torres composed a duet he wanted to record with Selena. The song, "Buenos Amigos", was produced by Enrique Elizondo and was released on Torres' tenth studio album Nada Se Compara Contigo (1991). "Buenos Amigos" peaked at number one on the US Billboard Top Latin Songs chart, giving Selena her first number-one single. The song's music video earned Selena and Torres two nominations at the 1992 Billboard Music Awards. The track was also nominated for Duo of the Year at the 1992 Tejano Music Awards. Biographer Deborah Parédez wrote that the track enabled Selena to tour the west and east coasts of the United States. According to John Lannert of Billboard magazine, "Buenos Amigos" was helped by increased airplay on regional Mexican and Tejano radio stations, which had previously dismissed Selena's recordings. Selena's sister Suzette claimed to caught Selena and Pérez flirting with each other and immediately informed their father. Quintanilla Jr. took Pérez off the bus and told him his relationship with Selena was over. Selena and Pérez continued their relationship despite Quintanilla Jr's disapproval; Selena's mother Marcella approved of their relationship. Quintanilla Jr. saw Selena and Pérez romantically together on the bus after he informed them of his disapproval; he pulled over and an argument between him and Selena ensued. He called Pérez a "cancer in my family" and threatened to disband the group if they continued their relationship. Selena and Pérez relented; Quintanilla Jr. fired Pérez from the band and prevented Selena from leaving with him. After his dismissal, Pérez and Selena secretly continued their relationship. On the morning of April 2, 1992, Selena and Pérez decided to elope, believing Quintanilla Jr. would never approve of their relationship. Selena thought her father would have to accept them if they were married and would not have to hide their feelings for each other. Within hours of their marriage, the media announced the couple's elopement. Selena's family tried to find her; Quintanilla Jr. did not take the news well and alienated himself for some time. Selena and Pérez moved into an apartment in Corpus Christi. In interviews, Quintanilla Jr. expressed how he feared Pérez could be a machista (Spanish for a male chauvinist), who would force Selena to end her career and music goals, a move that prevented Quintanilla Jr. to accept Pérez as being suitable for Selena at the time. Quintanilla Jr. later approached Pérez, apologized, accepted the marriage, and took Pérez back into the band. A month after her elopement, Selena released her third studio album, Entre a Mi Mundo, in May 1992. The album was critically acclaimed as her "breakthrough album". The recording peaked at number one on the US Billboard Regional Mexican Albums chart for eight consecutive months; it was certified 10× platinum by the RIAA for sales of 600,000 album-equivalent units, while in Mexico, the album sold 385,000 units. Entre a Mi Mundo became the first Tejano album by a female artist to sell over 300,000 copies. Selena was booked for a high-profile border press tour in Monterrey, Mexico, with music media figures in a meet-and-greet conference. At the time, Tejanos were looked down on as "hayseed pochos" among Mexican citizens. The singer's Spanish was far from fluent; EMI Latin executives were "terrified" about the singer's limited Spanish during the press conference for the album in Mexico. According to Patoski, Selena "played her cards right" during the conference and won over the Mexican media after newspapers hailed her as "an artist of the people". The newspapers found her to be a refreshing change from Mexican telenovela actors "who were fair-skinned, blond-haired, and green-eyed." After her publicity press, Selena was booked to play at several concerts throughout Mexico, including a performance at Festival Acapulco in May 1993, which garnered her critical acclaim. Her performance in Nuevo Leon on September 17, 1993, was attended by 70,000 people, garnering her the title of the biggest Tejano act in Mexico. The album produced four singles; "Como la Flor", "¿Qué Creías?", "La Carcacha", and "Amame". "Como la Flor" became Selena's signature recording; it was critically acclaimed by music critics as a career launcher for Selena. "Como la Flor" helped Selena to dominate the Latin music charts and become immensely popular in Mexico—where Mexican-Americans were generally not liked among citizens—which was well received by critics. The track was nominated for Song of the Year at the 1993 Tejano Music Awards. The single peaked at number six on the US Billboard Top Latin Songs chart. In 1994, Entre a Mi Mundo ranked as the second best-selling regional Mexican album of all-time. Selena released Live! a year after Entre a Mi Mundo; it was recorded during a free concert at the Memorial Coliseum in Corpus Christi, on February 7, 1993. The album included previously released tracks that were sung live and three studio recordings; "No Debes Jugar", "La Llamada", and "Tú Robaste Mi Corazón"—a duet with Tejano musician Emilio Navaira. The tracks "No Debes Jugar" and "La Llamada" peaked within the top five on the US Billboard Top Latin Songs chart. Live! won the Grammy Award for Best Mexican/American Album at the 36th Grammy Awards. In May 1994, Live! was named Album of the Year by the Billboard Latin Music Awards. At the 1994 Tejano Music Awards, Live! won Album of the Year, while at the 1994 Lo Nuestro Awards, it was nominated for Regional Mexican Album of the Year. Live! was certified gold by the RIAA for shipments of 500,000 copies, while in Mexico it sold 250,000 units. Selena briefly appeared opposite Erik Estrada in a Mexican telenovela titled Dos Mujeres, Un Camino. In 1995 she entered negotiations to star in another telenovela produced by Emilio Larrosa. She appeared in two episodes, which garnered record ratings for the series. Aside from music, in 1994 Selena began designing and manufacturing a line of clothing; she opened two boutiques called Selena Etc., one in Corpus Christi and the other in San Antonio. Both were equipped with in-house beauty salons. By the end of 1994, Selena Etc. had held two fashion shows to showcase their clothing line. Selena (alongside her band, Selena y Los Dinos) held a concert after Selena Etc.'s second fashion show on December 3, 1994, at the Hemisfair Arena in San Antonio. She was in negotiations to open more stores in Monterrey, Mexico, and Puerto Rico. Saldívar managed both boutiques after the Quintanilla family were impressed with the way she managed the fan club. Hispanic Business magazine reported that the singer earned over five million dollars from these boutiques. She was ranked among the twentieth-wealthiest Hispanic musicians who grossed the highest income in 1993 and 1994. Selena released her fourth studio album, Amor Prohibido, in March 1994. The recording debuted at number three on the US Billboard Top Latin Albums chart and number one on the US Billboard Regional Mexican Albums charts. After peaking at number one on the Top Latin Albums, the album remained in the top five for the rest of the year and into early 1995. Amor Prohibido became the second Tejano album to reach year-end sales of 500,000 copies, which had previously only been accomplished by La Mafia. It became one of the best-selling Latin albums in the United States. Amor Prohibido spawned four number-one singles; the title track, "Bidi Bidi Bom Bom", "No Me Queda Más", and "Fotos y Recuerdos". Amor Prohibido was among the best selling U.S. albums of 1995, and has been certified 36× platinum by the RIAA for sales of 2.16 million album-equivalent units in the United States. The album was named on Tom Moon's list of the 1,000 Recordings to Hear Before You Die: A Listener's Life List (2008). Amor Prohibido popularized Tejano music among a younger and wider audience than at any other time in the genre's history. The two singles, "Amor Prohibido" and "No Me Queda Más", were the most successful US Latin singles of 1994 and 1995, respectively. The album's commercial success led to a Grammy nomination for Best Mexican/American Album at the 37th Grammy Awards in 1995. It won Record of the Year at the 1995 Tejano Music Awards and Regional/Mexican Album of the Year at the 1995 Lo Nuestro Awards. Selena was named "one of Latin music's most successful touring acts" during her Amor Prohibido tour. After Amor Prohibido's release, Selena was considered "bigger than Tejano itself", and broke barriers in the Latin music world. She was called the "Queen of Tejano Music" by many media outlets. Billboard magazine ranked Amor Prohibido among the most essential Latin recordings of the past 50 years and included it on its list of the top 100 albums of all-time. In 2017, NPR ranked Amor Prohibido at number 19 on their list of the 150 greatest albums made by women. Sales of the album and its titular single represented Tejano music's first commercial success in Puerto Rico. Selena recorded a duet titled "Donde Quiera Que Estés" with the Barrio Boyzz, which was released on their album of the same name in 1994. The song reached number one on the Top Latin Songs chart, which enabled Selena to tour in New York City, Argentina, Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic, and Central America, where she was not well known. In late 1994, EMI chairman Charles Koppelman decided Selena had achieved her goals in the Spanish-speaking market. He wanted to promote her as an English-language solo pop artist. Selena continued touring while EMI began preparing the crossover album, engaging Grammy Award-winning composers. By the time Selena performed to a record-breaking, sold-out concert at the Houston Astrodome in February 1995, work had already begun on her crossover album. In 1995, she made a cameo appearance in Don Juan DeMarco, which starred Marlon Brando, Johnny Depp, and Faye Dunaway. The Quintanilla family appointed Yolanda Saldívar as manager of Selena's boutiques in early 1994. Eight months later, Selena signed Saldívar as her registered agent in San Antonio, Texas. After the agreement, Saldívar moved from San Antonio to Corpus Christi to be closer to Selena. In December 1994, the boutiques began to suffer after the number of staff for both stores had decreased. According to staff members, Saldívar often dismissed employees she disliked. Employees at the stores regularly complained about Saldívar's behavior to Selena, who dismissed the claims, believing Saldívar would not negatively impose erratic decisions on Selena's fashion venture. According to Quintanilla Jr., the staff later turned their attention to him and began informing him about Saldívar's behavior. Quintanilla Jr. took the claims seriously; he told Selena to "be careful" and said Saldívar might not be a good influence. Selena dismissed her father's inquiries because he had often distrusted people in the past. By January 1995, Selena's fashion designer Martin Gomez, her cousin Debra Ramirez, and clients had expressed their concerns over Saldívar's behavior and management skills. During an interview with Saldívar in 1995, reporters from The Dallas Morning News said her devotion to Selena bordered on obsession. According to Quintanilla Jr., in January 1995, he began receiving telephone calls from fans who said they had paid for membership in the Selena fan club and had received nothing in return for it, and he began an investigation. Quintanilla Jr. discovered that Saldívar had embezzled more than $30,000 via forged checks from both the fan club and the boutiques. Quintanilla Jr. held a meeting with Selena and Suzette on the night of March 9 at Q-Productions to confront Saldívar. Quintanilla Jr. presented Saldívar with the inconsistencies about the disappeared funds. Quintanilla Jr. told her that if she did not provide evidence that disproved his accusations, he would involve the local police. Quintanilla Jr. banned Saldívar from having any contact with Selena. However, Selena did not want to dissolve their friendship; she thought Saldívar was essential to the success of the clothing line in Mexico. Selena also wanted to keep her close because she had bank records, statements, and financial records necessary for tax preparation. In the days before Selena's death, Saldívar delayed handing over the bank statements and financial records by saying she had been physically and sexually assaulted in Mexico. Saldívar, along with Selena, appeared at a medical clinic on March 31, 1995, ostensibly to have Saldívar examined for an assault which she claimed happened to her in Monterrey. During that visit, Saldívar was given a brief physical examination by the clinic's doctor, but this did not include a gynecological exam specifically done in cases of sexual assault. It was suggested by nurse Carla Anthony that Saldívar needed to have the rape exam in San Antonio for three reasons: Saldívar was a resident of San Antonio, the clinic they were currently at was in Corpus Christi, and the assault occurred in Mexico. Afterward, Selena again met with Saldívar in her motel room at the Days Inn in Corpus Christi. At the motel, Selena demanded the financial papers. At 11:48 a.m. (CST), Saldívar got a gun from her purse and pointed it at Selena. As Selena attempted to flee, Saldívar shot her once on the right lower shoulder, severing the subclavian artery and causing a severe loss of blood. Critically wounded, Selena ran towards the lobby, leaving a 392-foot (119 m)-long trail of blood. She collapsed on the floor as the clerk called the emergency services, with Saldívar still chasing after her and calling her a "bitch". Before collapsing, Selena named Saldívar as her assailant and gave the number of the room where she had been shot. Meanwhile, Saldívar attempted to leave in her pickup truck. She was spotted by a responding police cruiser. She surrendered after a nearly nine-and-a-half-hour standoff with police and the FBI. By that time hundreds of fans had gathered at the scene. Many wept as police took Saldívar away. Selena was taken to the Corpus Christi Memorial Hospital at 12:00 p.m. (CST). Her pupils were fixed and dilated, there was no evidence of neurological function, she had no vital signs, and was declared clinically brain dead. Dr. Louis Elkins, cardiac surgeon, arrived at Memorial Hospital and said he saw doctors making "heroic efforts" to revive Selena. They were able to establish an "erratic heartbeat" long enough to transfer her to the trauma room, and began blood transfusions in an attempt to re-establish blood circulation after opening Selena's chest and finding massive internal bleeding. By the time Elkins arrived, an emergency doctor began "massaging her heart" after it had stopped beating. Elkins reported how all efforts were futile and said had he been the receiving doctor, he would not have made any treatments on Selena. He felt "obligated to continue" after the emergency room doctor made the decision to reanimate the singer. After 50 minutes of surgery, she was pronounced dead from blood loss and cardiac arrest at 1:05 p.m. (CST). An autopsy was performed on the same day due to the overwhelming media response. It revealed that the bullet had entered Selena's upper right back, near her shoulder blade, passed through her chest cavity, severed the right subclavian artery, and exited her right upper chest. Her official cause of death was described as "exsanguinating internal and external hemorrhage due to perforating gunshot wound" resulting in "massive bleeding". The internal examination revealed that she had not ingested any type of drug, nor was she pregnant, which was a rumor that began spreading after her death. On April 1, Bayfront Plaza in Corpus Christi held a vigil which drew 3,000 fans. During the event, it was announced that a public viewing of the casket would be held at the Bayfront Auditorium the following day. Fans lined up for almost a 1 mile (1.6 km). An hour before the doors opened, rumors that the casket was empty began circulating, which prompted the Quintanilla family to have an open-casket viewing. About 30,000 to 40,000 fans passed by Selena's casket. More than 78,000 signed a book of condolence. Flowers for the casket viewing were imported from The Netherlands. At the request of Selena's family, video and flash photography was banned. On April 3, 1995, six hundred guests—mostly family members—attended Selena's burial at Seaside Memorial Park in Corpus Christi, Texas, which was broadcast live by a Corpus Christi and San Antonio radio station without the consent of her family. A Jehovah's Witness minister from Lake Jackson preached in English, quoting Paul the Apostle's words in 1 Corinthians 15. Hundreds of people began circling the area in their vehicles. Among the celebrities who attended Selena's funeral were Roberto Pulido, Bobby Pulido, David Lee Garza, Navaira, Laura Canales, Elsa Garcia, La Mafia, Ram Herrera, Imagen Latina, and Pete Astudillo. A special mass held the same day at Los Angeles Sports Arena drew a crowd of 4,000. Selena's murder had a widespread impact. Reactions to her death were compared to those following the deaths of musicians John Lennon and Elvis Presley and that of U.S. president John F. Kennedy. Major television networks interrupted their regular programming to break the news—Tom Brokaw referred to Selena as "The Mexican Madonna". Her death was front-page news in The New York Times for two days. Many vigils and memorials were held in her honor, and radio stations in Texas played her music non-stop. Her funeral drew 60,000 mourners, many of whom traveled from outside the United States. The news struck the Hispanic community extremely hard. Many fans traveled thousands of miles to see Selena's house and boutiques, and the crime scene. By mid-afternoon, police were asked to form a detour because a line of cars began backing up traffic from the Quintanillas' houses. Among the celebrities who contacted the Quintanilla family to express their condolences were Gloria Estefan, Celia Cruz, Julio Iglesias, and Madonna. Other celebrities—including Stefani Montiel, Jaime DeAnda (of Los Chamacos), and Shelly Lares—appeared on radio stations to express their thoughts about Selena's death. An issue of People magazine was released several days after her murder. Its publishers believed interest would soon wane. They released a commemorative issue within a week when it became clear it was growing. The issue sold nearly a million copies, selling the entire first and second print runs within two weeks. It became a collector's item, a first in the history of People. Betty Cortina, an editor of People, told Biography they never had an issue that was completely sold out; "it was unheard of". In the following months, the company released People en Español aimed at the Hispanic market, due to the success of the Selena issue. This was followed by Newsweek en Espanol and Latina magazine. A few days later, Howard Stern mocked Selena's murder and burial, poked fun at her mourners, and criticized her music. Stern said, "This music does absolutely nothing for me. Alvin and the Chipmunks have more soul ... Spanish people have the worst taste in music. They have no depth." Stern's comments outraged and infuriated the Hispanic community in Texas. Stern's sound effects man added gunshots to her music played in the background on his show. A South Texas judge issued a disorderly conduct arrest warrant in his name. "I did it for all the Tejano fans," Justice of the Peace Eloy Cano said. Free-speech advocates said the warrant was unconstitutional. "It fails the First Amendment test," said Jay Jacobson, executive director for the Texas chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union. "It's a speech that is protected being a music critic, no matter how harsh, is not grounds for criminal charges." Stern made an on-air statement, in Spanish, saying his comments were not made to cause "more anguish to her family, friends and those who loved her". The League of United Latin American Citizens boycotted Stern's show, finding his apology unacceptable. Texas retailers removed any products that were related to Stern, while Sears and McDonald's sent a letter stating their disapproval of Stern's comments to the media because some fans believed the companies sponsored Stern's show. Within a week, on NBC's The Tonight Show with Jay Leno, Stern and Robin Quivers (his co-host) were asked whether Stern's remarks about Selena were acceptable. Quivers decided not to talk about the situation to avoid arguing with Stern. When Linda Ronstadt—a pop singer of Mexican-American heritage—appeared on the show, she and Quivers argued when Ronstadt defended Selena. On April 12, 1995, two weeks after Selena's death, George W. Bush, governor of Texas at the time, declared her birthday, April 16, Selena Day in the state. He said Selena represented "the essence of south Texas culture." Some European Americans in Texas wrote to the editor of the Brazosport Facts during April and May, asking what the big deal was; some were offended that Selena Day fell on Easter. Others said, "Easter is more important than Selena Day", and that they believed people should let Selena rest in peace and continue with their lives. Mexican Americans in Texas wrote vociferously to the newspaper. Some said others were too critical of Selena Day, and should not have responded so rudely. In October 1995, a Houston jury convicted Saldívar of first-degree murder and she was sentenced to life in prison with the possibility of parole after 30 years in 2025. Life with the possibility of parole was the maximum prison term allowed in Texas that could be imposed at the time. In 2002, under a judge's order, the gun used to kill Selena was destroyed and the pieces were thrown into Corpus Christi Bay. Fans and historians disapproved of the decision to destroy the gun, saying the event was historical and the gun should have been in a museum. Selena possessed a soprano vocal range. During her lifetime, she expressed her love and admiration for Gloria Estefan, who she credited with opening the door for female artists of hispanic descent. Selena's other major influences include Michael Jackson, Janet Jackson, Mariah Carey and Whitney Houston, as well as rock bands such as AC/DC and Kiss. In an April 1995 interview with Billboard magazine, Behar said he saw Selena as a "cross between Janet Jackson and Whitney Houston in style, feel, and vocal range". Although Selena did not write most of her songs, she incorporated R&B, Latin pop, technopop, country and western, and disco into her Tejano music repertoire. Mario Tarradell of The Dallas Morning News said that during her music career, Selena "merges Tejano's infectious cumbia rhythm with street-savvy R&B, old-school soul, dancehall reggae, sizzling salsa, and trippy, loopy funk". Selena's recordings expressed "love and pain, as well as strength and passion", according to Charles Tatum. She also recorded independently driven, female-empowerment-themed compositions; "Si La Quieres", "¿Qué Creías?", "Ya Ves" and "Ya No", which centered around inappropriate relationships and recovery from domestic violence. Peter Watrous of The New York Times said Selena's voice "sometimes quivered", and that she "roughed it up a bit". He continued, "[a]t its best, it had a coolness, a type of unadorned passion". Ilan Stavans called her music "cursi-melodramatic, cheesy, overemotional, not too far from Juan Gabriel and a relative of Iglesias". Richard Corliss of Time magazine said her songs "are perky, cheerful rather than soulful", and that earlier recordings, "with their tinny, Tijuana Brass charts, and keyboards that evoke calliopes are ideal for the fairground or merry-go-round". Corliss calls Selena's singing an "expert mimicry of everything from Édith Piaf's melodramatic contralto to the coloratura riffs of Mariah Carey. But the sounds are still lightly Hispanic." "Dreaming of You" (1995) "Dreaming of You", an English-language recording, became one of four English cuts Selena recorded for her crossover from Spanish into English pop music. Problems playing this file? See media help. Newsweek magazine called Selena's English-language recordings "a blend of urban pop and Latin warmth". According to Texas Monthly, Selena's brother modernized her music into a more "funk and hip hop" sound. Selena's use of emotive range during her musical career has been praised by critics as being her trademark. A.B. wrote increasingly cumbia-influenced songs for Ven Conmigo (1990); Ramiro Burr of Billboard said Selena and her band had "evolved a rhythmic style that demonstrated its increasing prowess for catchy cumbias such as 'Baila Esta Cumbia' and the title track". Italian essayist Gaetano Prampolini wrote that "Selena's voice projected a sonorous warmth and joyfulness" during his review of Selena's cumbia recordings. In his review of the remix album Enamorada de Ti (2012), Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic wrote that Selena's songs were "rooted in the '90s and sound that way". Quintanilla Jr. sought to maintain Selena's image clean and family-oriented. In 1989, she was offered sponsorship from beer companies but her father turned them down. Selena was often refused gigs at Tejano venues because she was a female singer in a male-dominated music scene. Manuel Peña wrote that after 1989, Selena's popularity increased and she became a sex icon following the release of her debut album. Charles Tatum said Selena drew most attention from her "beauty, sexuality, and youthful impact on the Tejano music scene". Selena said she never wanted to record explicit songs because of her upbringing and because her fan base consisted largely of young children, who regarded her as a role model. She further commented on the question of her sexual appeal to men during her crossover attempt, asserting that she will "stay the same" and that her English-language recordings will refrain from foul language and sexual themes. In 1997, María Celeste Arrarás wrote in her book about Selena's death that the singer was a "sweet and charismatic girl". According to Arrarás, Selena "trusted everyone"; she often went shopping alone, despite her father's concerns over her safety. Betty Cortina of People magazine said Selena's provocative choice of clothing was an acceptable emulation of Janet Jackson and Madonna, and that she wore "sexy outfits that [accentuated] a body of a Latina woman". Cortina also stated that Selena had a "flamboyant style, an unbelievable body, curves and booty". Arrarás wrote that Selena "began wearing clothes designed to emphasize her curvaceous figure" and that she "never came across as cheap—simply sexy". She also said Selena's makeup regimen was not being "painted up or vulgar". Arrarás also noted Selena's "fun-loving stage manner" and said she was "playful onstage and off". Matt S. Meier wrote in his book The Mexican American Experience: An Encyclopedia (2010) that Selena exhibited "contagious energy" during her concerts and said she displayed "warmth, passion, and sexuality" while exuding a "down-to-earth persona of the wholesome young girl next door". Selena wore outfits that accented her physical attributes and was not afraid to wear outfits she liked, despite criticism from parents who thought Selena's choice of outfits were inappropriate for young girls, who began emulating Selena. Her views on public image in the fashion industry were bothersome; she said she was opposed to the image that all woman should be "rail-thin" and the notion that they must wear certain outfits and be "super-young to be beautiful". In the early 1990s, Selena began wearing decorative bustiers, spandex or tight pants, and attractive, unbuttoned jackets during her concerts. She was inspired by Paula Abdul, Janet Jackson, and Madonna. During a 1992 interview, Selena said her choice of clothing does not reflect her personality. NBC News called Selena's outfit "provocative". Because of her choices of outfits and dance moves, she was named by her fans as the "Mexican Madonna". According to Suzette, Selena often designed and sewed her outfits backstage with her designers, moments before she was due on stage. Quintanilla Jr. disapproved of Selena's outfits, but he later accepted it when Selena discussed it being a fashion trend. Selena became an inactive member of the Jehovah's Witnesses due to her exotic clothing. During the photo shoot for Entre a Mi Mundo (1992), a photographer remarked on the ways Selena's choice of clothing affected Quintanilla Jr. tremendously; he often left sessions when Selena appeared in revealing outfits. Selena was credited as the first woman to change public perceptions of feminine beauty in the Tejano market; a feminist, she blazed a trail for other female artists during her career. Following Selena's death, some celebrities questioned her status as a role model among Hispanic women. In her 1999 documentary about the singer, filmmaker Lourdes Portillo expressed concerns whether Selena was a great role model for young women. Portillo believed Selena was sending the wrong message to young girls by dancing in clothing that suggested hypersexualization. American author Sandra Cisneros agreed with Portillo's assessment that Selena was "not a good role model to Latina women". Media outlets also shared Portillo's views; they said the "fairy tale story" of Selena was one that her family would want to preserve, questioning Quintanilla Jr.'s role for pushing an image that Selena had "never made mistakes" into the media, calling it "lies" and "not the real story". During her childhood, Selena helped organizations such as Toys for Tots. She was active in the U.S. Latino community, visiting local schools to talk to students about the importance of education. At Fulmore Junior High School in Austin, she educated two hundred high school students about positive attitudes and setting life-goals in their adult lives. Selena urged children to stay in school, and that alcohol and drugs will lead them nowhere in life. She spent her free time helping her community. Selena performed in Washington, D.C. to celebrate the forming of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus. Following the aftermath of Hurricane Andrew, Selena helped victims in Florida by performing at a Houston benefit concert. In August 1994, Selena hosted a charity baseball game to raise money for unspecified charities. She also donated her time to civic organizations such as D.A.R.E. and planned a fundraising concert to help AIDS patients. Selena participated with the Texas Prevention Partnership which was sponsored by the Texas Commission on Alcohol and Drug Abuse (Dep Corporation), which released an educational video that was sent to students for free. Her pro-education videos included "My Music" and "Selena Agrees". She was in the works for a Dallas-Fort Worth, Texas Boys & Girls Clubs of America benefit concert. In January 1995, Selena headlined the Teach the Children festival in San Antonio. The concert funded a non-profit program to provide school supplies to needy children. Selena was a spokesperson for women in abusive relationships. She also helped out at homeless shelters. According to the A&E television series Biography, Selena's fans were often minorities; she encouraged them to make the most of their lives. Selena has been credited for helping redefine Latin music and its subgenres of Tejano, cumbia, and Latin pop. Selena broke barriers in the Latin music world. She is considered "one of the most significant Mexican-American singers of the end of the twentieth century". People magazine named Selena one of the most intriguing people of the 20th century. US Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison named Selena one of "the spirited women who shaped [the United States]." Selena became one of the "most celebrated cultural products" of the United States-Mexico borderlands. Selena was called the "Queen of Tejano Music", and was described as "the most important and popular Tejano star of all time". Her death was "the most devastating loss" in Tejano music history, according to Zach Quaintance of The Monitor. At the time of her death, Selena became one of the most widely known Mexican-American vocal artists and the most popular Latin artist in the United States. She had a "cult-like" following among Hispanics. Selena has been named one of the most influential Latin artists of all-time and has been credited for elevating a music genre into the mainstream market. Latin Post called the singer "one of the most iconic artists in Latin American music history", while The New York Times called her "arguably the most important Latina musician in the country, on her way to becoming one of the most important, period." Selena became a household name in the United States and Mexico following her death and became part of the American pop culture. She became more popular in death than when she was alive. After her death, her popularity among the Hispanic population was compared to those of Marilyn Monroe and Madonna in Anglo-American culture. According to author Carlota Caulfield, Selena was "one of the most popular Latina singers of the 1990s". Selena's popularity was drawn in by the LGBT community and minority groups in the United States. The popularity of Tejano music waned after her death and has not recovered. John Lannert of Billboard said in an interview with Biography in 2007 that when Selena died the "Tejano market died with her". Dreaming of You, the crossover album Selena had been working on at the time of her death, was released in July 1995. It sold 175,000 copies on the day of its release in the U.S.—a then-record for a female vocalist—and sold 331,000 copies its first week. Selena became the third female artist to sell over 300,000 units in one week, after Janet Jackson and Mariah Carey. It debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart, becoming the first album by a Hispanic artist to do so. Dreaming of You helped Selena to become the first solo artist to debut a posthumous album at number one. Dreaming of You joined five of Selena's studio albums on the Billboard 200 chart simultaneously, making Selena the first female artist in Billboard history to do so. The album was certified 59× platinum (Latin field), for sales of 3.54 million album-equivalent units in the U.S. alone. As of 2017[update] it has sold over 2.942 million copies in the U.S. making it the best-selling Latin album of all-time in the country according to Nielsen SoundScan. As of 2015[update], the recording has sold five million copies worldwide. In 2008, Joey Guerra of the Houston Chronicle said its lead single, "I Could Fall in Love", had "made the Tejano goddess a posthumous crossover star". Her death was believed to have sparked an interest in Latin music by people who were unaware of its existence. It was also believed her death "open[ed] the doors" to other Latin musicians such as Jennifer Lopez, Ricky Martin, and Shakira. In 1995, the United States Social Security Administration ranked the name Selena one of the 100 most popular names for newborn girls, and namesake Selena Gomez acknowledged Quintanilla's influence. In December 1999, Selena was named the "top Latin artist of the '90s" and "Best selling Latin artist of the decade" by Billboard for her fourteen top-ten singles in the Top Latin Songs chart, including seven number-one hits. She was the best-selling Latin female singer of the 1990s in the U.S. and Mexico. Selena was named "Best Female Vocalist of the '80s" and "Best Female Vocalist of the '90s" at the 2010 Tejano Music Awards. In 2023, Rolling Stone ranked Selena at number 89 on its list of the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time. In the months following her death, several honors and tributes were erected. Several proposals were made, such as renaming streets, public parks, food products, and auditoriums. Two months later, a tribute was held at the 1995 Lo Nuestro Awards. The Spirit of Hope Award was created in Selena's honor in 1996; it was awarded to Latin artists who participated in humanitarian and civic causes. On March 16, 2011, the United States Postal Service released a "Latin Legends" memorial stamp to honor Selena, Carlos Gardel, Tito Puente, Celia Cruz, and Carmen Miranda. In February 2014, the Albany, New York Times Union named her one of "100 Coolest Americans in History". In 1998 Selena was commemorated with a museum. In 1995, Selena was inducted into the Billboard Latin Music Hall of Fame, the Hard Rock Cafe's Hall of Fame, and the South Texas Music Hall of Fame. In 2001 she was inducted into the Tejano Music Hall of Fame. In 2017, she received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. The unveiling ceremony of her star was attended by around 4,500 fans, which was the largest-ever crowd for an unveiling ceremony at the Hollywood Walk of Fame. She was named one of the 20 most influential Texans of all time by author Laurie Jasinski. She was ranked fifth of the "100 most influential Latin musicians of the 20th century" according to the Orange County Register. The singer has been given many epithets by media outlets, including the "Queen of Cumbia" or "Queen of Kumbia", the "Chicana Elvis", the "Queen of Hybrid Pop Culture", the "Hispanic Marilyn Monroe", the "Tupac Shakur of Latin Music", the "Corpus Christi Queen", and the "People's Princess". Media have compared Selena's fashion sense to that of Madonna more times than any other celebrity. In 1995, Mexican actress Salma Hayek was chosen to portray Selena in a biopic produced by the Quintanilla family and Warner Bros. However, Hayek turned down the role as she felt it was "too early" to base a film on Selena, and that it would be emotional since Selena's death was still being covered on American television. Over 21,000 people auditioned for the title role, becoming the second largest audition since the search for Scarlett O'Hara in Gone with the Wind (1939). Puerto Rican-American actress Jennifer Lopez replaced Hayek, which initially drew criticism because of Lopez's Puerto Rican ancestry, but after seeing her performance, fans changed their views. Gregory Nava directed the film, which was released on March 21, 1997. Selena opened in 1,850 theaters worldwide and grossed $11,615,722, making it the second-highest-grossing film debut that week. With a production budget of $20 million, the film grossed $35 million in the U.S. The film was a commercial and critical success and is often cited by critics as Lopez's breakthrough role. Lopez rose into pop culture, for which the film's success was credited. In 1999, a Broadway-bound musical titled Selena was scheduled to premiere in San Antonio in March 2000 to commemorate the fifth anniversary of her murder. Broadway producers Tom Quinn, Jerry Frankel, Peter Fitzgerald, and Michael Vega staged the musical, and Edward Gallardo wrote the show's book and lyrics. Fernando Rivas composed the show's songs. In 2000, Selena Forever was first produced; the show embarked on a 30-city U.S. tour with a budget of over US$2 million. After a national casting call, producers chose Veronica Vasquez to portray Selena; Vasquez alternated in the role with Rebecca Valdez. The musical previewed on March 21, and opened on March 23 at the San Antonio Municipal Auditorium. Selena's family and her former band, Los Dinos, held a tribute concert on April 7, 2005, a week after the 10th anniversary of her murder. The concert, titled Selena ¡VIVE!, was broadcast live on Univision and achieved a 35.9 household rating. It was the highest-rated and most-viewed Spanish-language television special in the history of American television. The special was also the number-one program in any language among adults ages 18 to 34 in Los Angeles, Chicago, and San Francisco; it tied for first in New York, beating that night's episode of Fox's reality show American Idol. Among Hispanic viewers, Selena ¡VIVE! outperformed Super Bowl XLV and the telenovela Soy tu dueña during the "most-watched NFL season ever among Hispanics". In January 2015, it was announced that a two-day annual event called Fiesta de la Flor would be held in Corpus Christi for Selena by the Corpus Christi Visitors Bureau. Musical acts for the first annual event included Kumbia All Starz, Chris Pérez, Los Lobos, Jay Perez, Little Joe y la Familia, Los Palominos, Stefani Montiel of Las 3 Divas, Girl in a Coma's Nina Diaz, Las Fenix, and The Voice contestant Clarissa Serna. The event raised $13 million with an attendance of 52,000 people, 72% of whom lived outside of Corpus Christi. The event sparked interest from people in 35 states and five different countries including Mexico, Brazil, and Ecuador. On August 30, 2016, a wax statue of Selena was unveiled at Madame Tussauds Hollywood. In October 2016, MAC Cosmetics released a limited edition Selena makeup line after On Air with Ryan Seacrest senior producer Patty Rodriguez started a petition for the company to do so and it garnering over 37,000 signatures. It became the best-selling celebrity line in cosmetic history. She was inducted into the Texas Women's Hall of Fame at Texas Woman's University in October 2016. An exhibit at the National Museum of American History in Washington, D.C. that ran in 2017, focused on Selena's influence in marketing. "Due to her massive appeal to both general and Latino markets, advertisers began targeting specific demographics for the first time." Google honored Selena on October 17, 2017, with a musical doodle of her life. On December 11, 2018, it was announced that a biographical television series based on Selena's life titled Selena: The Series would be released on Netflix in December 2020. Actress Christian Serratos plays the leading role as Selena, which was shown in a teaser trailer in late 2019. The two-part series is being done with the participation of the Quintanilla family. Selena: The Series is an American biographical drama streaming television series created by Moisés Zamora and starring Christian Serratos. The first part of the series was released on Netflix on December 4, 2020. The second and final part premiered on May 4, 2021. Forever 21 announced the launch of a clothing line celebrating her legacy named "Selena: The White Rose Collection", was released in 2019. In a 10-part podcast miniseries, Anything for Selena, broadcast in 2021 by WBUR-FM and Futuro Media, Latina journalist Maria Garcia "goes on an intimate, revelatory quest to understand how Selena has become a potent symbol for tensions around race, class and body politics in the United States". In the same year, Selena was posthumously presented with the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award which her family received on the artist's behalf. Mirador de la Flor (English: Lookout of the Flower) is Selena's own life-size bronze statue monument in Corpus Christi, Texas, sculpted by H. W. "Buddy" Tatum and unveiled in 1997. About 30,000 people from around the world visit this monument every year. While the monument has remained a popular tourist attraction, the construction of the statue met some resistance from the local community. Dusty Durrill, a local philanthropist, financed the construction of the monument with support from local community leaders. Selena y Los Dinos albums Selena y Los Dinos (1984) Alpha (1986) Muñequito de Trapo (1986) And the Winner Is... (1987) Preciosa (1988) Dulce Amor (1988) Solo studio albums Selena (1989) Ven Conmigo (1990) Entre a Mi Mundo (1992) Amor Prohibido (1994) Dreaming of You (1995) True crime documentaries Honorific nicknames in popular music List of best-selling Latin music artists List of Hispanic and Latino Americans List of people on the postage stamps of the United States Music of Texas Women in Latin music Media outlets that called Selena the "Mexican American equivalent" of Madonna include The Victoria Advocate, The New York Times, MTV.com, and Rhapsody. According to Pérez in that book, Suzette freaked out when she got on Big Bertha, the band's tour bus, seeing him and Selena together, but they actually never flirted with each other when they were on the bus alone before Suzette's bare arrival. According to a book written by Stacy Lee, she reported sales of 300,000 units, while María Celeste Arrarás wrote in her book that the album sold 385,000 units in Mexico. "Fotos y Recuerdos" peaked at number one posthumously in April 1995. "Amor Prohibido", "Bidi Bidi Bom Bom", and "No Me Queda Mas" peaked at number one before Selena's death. Outlets describing Selena as "Queen of Tejano Music" include: Entertainment Weekly, Billboard magazine, Los Angeles Magazine, Vibe magazine, The Huffington Post, and The New York Times. Testimony given by nurse Carla Anthony at the Saldívar trial indicated that Saldívar and Selena's visit to her clinic occurred March 24, not March 31. The predominance of other sources indicate that Nurse Anthony is mistaken. Queen of Cumbia is also spelled as Queen of Kumbia. Cumbia is the correct spelling of the music genre while Kumbia is the stylization used and popularized by her brother A.B. Quintanilla III, the King of Cumbia or King of Kumbia, and this spelling stylization has also been applied for Selena Quintanilla. "Selena Seaside Memorial Park obituary". Retrieved March 18, 2022. "Selena autopsy report, first page". Retrieved March 18, 2022. Ramirez, Sonia (October 26, 2020). "Selena comes in at No. 3 on Billboard's". Chron. Retrieved October 14, 2021. Martin, Dale (July 16, 1999). "Selena Album Goes Mainstream". The Victoria Advocate. Retrieved April 7, 2015. Howe Verhovek, Sam (April 1, 1995). "Grammy Winning Singer Selena Killed in Shooting at Texas Motel". The New York Times. p. 1. "Selena Murder Trial Begins Monday". MTV News. Retrieved March 26, 2015. Palomares, Sugey. "Hispanic Icons: Selena". Rhapsody.com. Retrieved April 15, 2015. Flores, Daniel (March 28, 2015). "Selena's Legacy: Queen of Tejano still reigns". Valley Star News. Archived from the original on April 29, 2015. Retrieved April 29, 2015. "The 30 Most Influential Latin Artists of All-Time". Billboard.com. Retrieved April 29, 2015. Navarro, Heather (March 31, 2020). "Selena Remembered 25 Years After Death". NBC Los Angeles. Retrieved October 14, 2021. Patoski 1996, p. 30. Patoski 1996, p. 20. "Selena, the Queen of Tejano Music". Legacy.com. Retrieved October 11, 2011. Guerra, Joey. "The doctor who delivered a baby Selena was presidential hopeful Ron Paul | Datebook". Preview.houstonchronicle.com. Retrieved April 1, 2022. Bernstein, Ellen (April 16, 1997). "Birthday hoopla is prohibited". Corpus Christi Caller-Times. Corpus Christi, Texas. Archived from the original on April 3, 2009. Retrieved August 27, 2010. Hewitt, Bill (April 17, 1995). "Before Her Time". People. Vol. 43, no. 15. Retrieved January 29, 2015. "Viva Selena!". Los Angeles Daily News. August 24, 1994. Retrieved October 10, 2011. "Latin singer Selena killed in Texas motel". Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. April 1, 1995. Retrieved October 10, 2011.[permanent dead link] Patoski 1996, p. 53. Mitchell, Rick (May 21, 1995). "Selena, the making of the queen of Tejano". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on July 9, 2007. Retrieved February 1, 2008. Arrarás 1997, p. 58. Patoski 1996, p. 59. Patoski 1996, p. 111. Orozco, Cynthia (August 31, 2010). "Selena Biography". Texas State Historical Association. Archived from the original on September 8, 2015. Retrieved September 27, 2015. Arrarás 1997, p. 56. Schone, Mark (October 31, 2004). "Sweet Music". Bloomberg Businessweek. Retrieved January 29, 2015. Miguel 2002, p. 118. Sobek 2012, p. 631. Miguel 2002, p. 3. "The Chicano Wave". Latin Music USA. Episode 3. 30 minutes in. PBS. Retrieved April 19, 2015. Selena wanted to sing American pop music, but her father had learned some hard lessons playing music in Texas with a band he'd had years before called Los Dinos. Arrarás 1997, p. 256. Morales, Tatiana (October 16, 2002). "Fans, Family Remember Selena". CBS News. Retrieved January 29, 2015. Arrarás 1997, pp. 56–57. Patoski 1996, p. 112. Patoski 1996, p. 63. Cecilia Miniucchi (director), Edward James Olmos (narrator), Jeffrey Coulter (producer) (1997). Selena Remembered (VHS/DVD) (in English and Spanish). EMI Latin, Q-Productions. Event occurs at 60 minutes. Queen of Tejano Music, Selena special (Part of the 10th anniversary of the Selena DVD movie). Corpus Christi: Q-Productions. 2007. 18 minutes in. Gershman, Rick (March 18, 1997). "Selena's legacy". St. Petersburg Times. Archived from the original on January 31, 2013. Retrieved October 11, 2011. Lopetegui, Enrique (April 8, 1995). "A Crossover Dream Halted Prematurely, Tragically Some Ambitious Plans Were Under Way to Bring Selena to Mainstream U.S. Audience". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 7, 2012. Retrieved July 21, 2011. Minnick, Doug (September 24, 2010). "Jose Behar, interview". Taxi A&R. Archived from the original on January 30, 2015. Retrieved September 24, 2010. Morales 2003, p. 266. Selena at AllMusic "Selena (artist): Chart history: Regional Mexican Albums: Selena". Billboard. Retrieved May 16, 2012. Peña 1999, p. 205. Pérez 2012, p. 9. Pérez 2012, p. 12. Pérez 2012, p. 28. Novas 1995, p. 50. Pérez 2012, p. 49. Pérez 2012, p. 52. Jones 2000, p. 23. "Selena > Discography". Billboard. Vol. 107, no. 23. June 10, 1995. Retrieved October 10, 2014. Castrellón 2007, p. NA. "El motivo era celebrar que Selena había ganado su primer Disco de Oro al rabasar las 150 mil copias vendidas de su disco Baila Esta Cumbia, el primero que salio en Mexico. [The occasion was to celebrate that Selena had won her first gold record of 150 thousand copies sold of her album Baila Esta Cumbia, who first came to Mexico.]" "Disco de Oro y Platino a Viene de la Uno". El Siglo de Torreón (in Spanish). December 13, 1993. Retrieved October 10, 2014. Patoski 1996, p. 134. Reports, Wire (April 1, 1995). "Gunshot Silences Singing Sensation Selena At Age 23". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on January 31, 2013. Retrieved October 10, 2011. Soto, Manuel (December 30, 2004). "Alvaro Torres: el antigalán de la canción". Hoy (in Spanish). Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved May 7, 2012. "Peniston Leads Music Video Nominees". Billboard. Vol. 104, no. 42. October 17, 1992. Retrieved May 5, 2013. "Past Tejano Music Awards Winners". TejanoMusicAwards.com. Texas Talent Association. Retrieved May 5, 2013. Parédez 2009, p. 259. Lannert, John (June 10, 1995). "Beloved Selena Enters Latin Music Hall of Fame". Billboard. Vol. 107, no. 23. Retrieved May 2, 2013. Pérez 2012, p. 72. Pérez 2012, p. 73. Pérez 2012, p. 75. Aguila, Justino (March 22, 2012). "Selena's Widower Shows a Different Side of Singer in New Book (Q&A)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 9, 2013. Novas 1995, p. 53. Gostin, Nicki (March 30, 2012). "Chris Perez on his book 'To Selena, With Love'". CNN. Retrieved June 9, 2013. Pérez 2012, p. 79. Pérez 2012, p. 93. Pérez 2012, p. 99. Jones 2000, p. 26. Behar, Deider (March 21, 2017). "Exclusive: 'Selena' Turns 20! Her Family Reflects on the Movie and Her Legacy: 'In My Mind, She's Still Alive'". E!. Retrieved September 13, 2017. Pérez 2012, p. 105. Tarradell, Mario (July 16, 1995). "Dreaming of Selena A new album celebrates what she was but only hints at what she could have become". The Dallas Morning News. Retrieved November 18, 2011. "Record company planning Selena retrospective". Fort Worth Star-Telegram. April 12, 1995. Retrieved November 18, 2011. Burr, Ramiro (July 18, 1995). "Selena crosses over to pop – Posthumous release a reminder of talent cut short". San Antonio-Express News. Retrieved November 18, 2011. Burr, Ramiro (May 20, 1993). "Awards recognize Latin musicians". Austin American Statesmen. Retrieved November 18, 2011. "American certifications – Selena". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved September 5, 2015. Arrarás 1997, p. 104. Stacy 2002, p. 746. Patoski 1996, p. 102. Deggans, Eric (July 21, 1995). "Latin Diva's Legacy Lives Through Music". Asbury Park Press. p. 43. Retrieved June 2, 2017. Patoski 1996, p. 103. Patoski 1996, p. 113. Clark 2013, p. 120. Tarradell, Mario (March 16, 1997). "Selena's Power: Culture Fusion". The Dallas Morning News. Retrieved November 18, 2011. Malone 2003, p. 158. "Music Scene". The Philadelphia Inquirer. May 23, 1993. Retrieved November 18, 2011. "Billboard Charts > Selena > Top Latin Songs". Billboard. Retrieved January 30, 2015. Lannert, Bronson & Mayfield 1995, p. 72, 80, 82. Patoski 1996, p. 135. "Allmusic > Selena Awards". AllMusic. Retrieved June 21, 2012. Lannert, John (May 21, 1994). "Latin Music Conference". Billboard. Vol. 106, no. 21. p. 112. Retrieved November 6, 2011. "Tejano Music Awards Past Award Winners". TejanoMusicAwards.com. Archived from the original on August 15, 2010. Retrieved August 23, 2010. González, Fernando (May 16, 1994). "Lo Nuestro, Billboard Honor Latin Singers". The Miami Herald. Lannert, John (September 2, 1995). "The Selena Phenomenon". Billboard. Vol. 107, no. 35. p. 120. Retrieved November 6, 2011. Patoski 1996, p. 120. Jasinski 2012. Patoski 1996, p. 146. "Selena – Life Events". Corpus Christi Caller Times. March 27, 2005. Archived from the original on May 13, 2006. Retrieved June 7, 2006. Arrarás 1997, p. 51. "Top Latin Albums > Week of April 9, 1994". Billboard. Retrieved January 29, 2012. "Regional Mexican Albums > Week of April 9, 1994". Billboard. Retrieved January 29, 2012. Lannert, John (April 22, 1995). "Selena's Albums Soar". Billboard. Vol. 107, no. 16. Retrieved March 9, 2015. Patoski 1996, p. 152. Tarradell, Mario (April 1, 1995). "Singer soared beyond traditional limits on Tejano music". The Dallas Morning News. Retrieved November 4, 2011. Parédez 2009, p. 47. Arrarás 1997, p. 34. Lannert, John (June 10, 1995). "Beloved Selena Enters The Latin Music Hall of Fame". Billboard. Vol. 107, no. 23. p. 112. Retrieved December 26, 2011. "Selena's Chart Performance". Billboard. Retrieved November 23, 2011. Burr, Ramiro (April 14, 1995). "Five Selena albums reach Billboard 200". San Antonio Express-News. Retrieved August 14, 2011. Moon 2008, p. 990. Miguel 2002, p. 110. "Born on the Border". Newsweek. October 22, 1995. Retrieved February 28, 2015. "Topping The Charts Year By Year". Billboard. Vol. 110, no. 48. November 28, 1998. p. LMQ3. Retrieved March 3, 2010. Rivas, Jorge (March 31, 2011). "Remembering Selena's Trailblazing Music". Colorlines. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved April 14, 2011. Valdes, Alisa (April 7, 1995). "Loving Selena, fans loved themselves". Boston Globe. Archived from the original on January 4, 2013. Retrieved August 14, 2011. Harrington, Richard (July 26, 1995). "Slain Tejano Singer's Album Tops Pop Chart". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 28, 2015. Schone, Mark (April 20, 1995). "A Postmortem Star In death, Selena is a crossover success". Newsday. Archived from the original on January 31, 2013. Retrieved November 4, 2011. Cortina, Betty (March 26, 1999). "A Sad Note". Entertainment Weekly. No. 478. Archived from the original on June 23, 2011. Retrieved September 11, 2012. Lannert, John (April 6, 1996). "Tejano Music Awards: Bigger, But Not Necessarily Better". Billboard. Vol. 108, no. 14. Retrieved September 11, 2012. Katz, Jesse (December 2002). "The Curse of Zapata". Los Angeles Magazine. Vol. 47, no. 12. Retrieved September 11, 2012. "The Year In Review". Vibe. Vol. 6, no. 7. September 1998. Retrieved September 11, 2012.[permanent dead link] Hernandez, Lee (April 15, 2012). "Selena Quintanilla: Remembering The Queen Of Tejano Music On Her Birthday". The Huffington Post. Retrieved January 30, 2015. Verhovek, Sam (April 1995). "Grammy-Winning Singer Selena Killed in Shooting at Texas Motel". The New York Times. Retrieved January 30, 2015. "The 50 Greatest Latin Albums of the Past 50 Years". Billboard. September 17, 2015. Archived from the original on June 4, 2016. Retrieved August 19, 2016. Roiz & 2015 (b). Diaz-Hurtado, Jessica (July 24, 2017). "The 150 Greatest Albums Made By Women". NPR. Retrieved July 24, 2017. "Chart history > Selena > Donde Quiera Que Estes". AllMusic. Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved July 13, 2011. Patoski 1996, p. 123. Jones 2013, p. 14. Patoski 1996, p. 115. "Selena: Singer was on the verge of mainstream stardom". The Atlanta Journal. April 5, 1995. Retrieved October 11, 2011. Patoski 1996, p. 182. Patoski 1996, p. 170. Patoski 1996, p. 171. Patoski 1996, p. 183. Liebrum, Jennifer; Jamieson, Wendell (October 27, 1995). "Selena's Killer Gets 30 Years". NY Daily News. Archived from the original on May 19, 2017. Retrieved July 12, 2017. "October 12, 1995 testimony of Carla Anthony". Houston Chronicle. October 12, 1995. Archived from the original on April 6, 2007. Retrieved September 27, 2015. Hewitt, Bill (April 17, 1995). "Before Her Time – Death, Murder, Selena". People. Retrieved June 8, 2010. "Selena". Famous Crime Scene. Season 1. Episode 105. March 12, 2010. 30 minutes in. VH1. "October 12, 1995, the testimony of Norma Martinez". Houston Chronicle. October 12, 1995. Archived from the original on July 15, 2007. Retrieved September 27, 2015. "Friday, October 13, testimony of Shawna Vela". Houston Chronicle. October 13, 1995. Archived from the original on July 10, 2007. Retrieved September 27, 2015. Arrarás 1997, p. 154. "Surgeon Recalls Futile Emergency Treatment of Selena". The Journal News. October 20, 1995. p. 7. Retrieved June 5, 2022. Mitchel, Rick (March 25, 2005). "In life, she was the queen of Tejano music. In death, the 23-year-old singer became a legend". Houston Chronicle. Retrieved March 8, 2015. "Doctor: Selena Arrived Brain Dead". Daily News. October 20, 1995. p. 7. Retrieved March 18, 2018. "'Futile' Efforts to Save Selena". Philadelphia Daily News. October 20, 1995. p. 19. Retrieved March 18, 2018. Villafranca, Armando (April 1, 1995). "Singer Selena shot to death". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on June 21, 2007. Retrieved September 27, 2015. County of Nueces, office of the Medical Examiner (April 20, 1995). "Selena autopsy report" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on May 30, 2022. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Cynthia López y Andrés Rivera (March 27, 2018). "Foto a foto: esto fue lo que le pasó a Selena el día que Yolanda la mató". Univisión (in Spanish). Retrieved March 18, 2022. Nied, Jennifer (April 16, 2021). "There Were Rumors Selena Quintanilla Was Pregnant When She Was Shot". yahoo!life. Retrieved March 18, 2022. Patoski 1996, p. 108. "Tejano fans mourning for Selena—Yolanda Saldívar, who held a Corpus Christi police SWAT team at bay for nearly 10 hours after the shooting, has been charged with murder". Fort Worth Star-Telegram. April 2, 1995. Retrieved September 15, 2011. Patoski 1996, p. 211. Milloy, Ross E. (April 3, 1995). "For Slain Singer's Father, Memories and Questions". The New York Times. Retrieved September 20, 2011. "Thousands Mourn Selena's Death". Charlotte Observer. April 3, 1995. Retrieved September 15, 2011. "More than 30,000 view Selena's casket". Fort Worth Star-Telegram. April 3, 1995. Retrieved September 20, 2011. Arrarás 1997, p. 28. Brown, Eric (April 3, 1995). "Saying goodbye: Thousands bid Selena farewell". Corpus Christi Caller Times. Retrieved September 19, 2015. "Grave of Selena". TexasTripper.com. Retrieved November 5, 2017. Patoski 1996, p. 215. Cabrera, Rene (April 3, 1995). "Selena tragedy jars Tejano industry". Corpus Christi Caller-Times. Retrieved September 19, 2015. Williams, Frank B; Lopetegui, Enrique (April 3, 1995). "Mourning Selena : Nearly 4,000 Gather at L.A. Sports Arena Memorial for Slain Singer". Latin Times. Retrieved March 21, 2015. Jasinski 2012, p. 254. Rodriguez, Gregory (April 7, 1997). "'Selena': A Symbol of Today's Cultural Ties". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved September 27, 2015. Patoski 1996, p. 174. "Selena's death leaves Tejano music world shocked, mournful". Corpus Christi Caller Times. April 1, 1995. Retrieved September 19, 2015. Patoski 1996, p. 199. Katz, Jesse (April 2, 1995). "For Barrio, Selena's Death Strikes a Poignant Chord Tragedy: Fans descend on superstar's home in Texas community. Idolized singer didn't forget her roots". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 1, 2013. Retrieved September 15, 2011. Patoski 1996, p. 200. Patoski 1996, p. 165. Patoski 1996, p. 201. Lannert, John (1995). "Latin pride". Billboard. Vol. 107, no. 23. p. 112. Retrieved September 27, 2015. "Biography TV Series, Selena episode". Biography. November 26, 2010. 60 minutes in. The Biography Channel. Muniz, Janet. "Bidi Bidi Bom Bom: The Audiotopias of Selena Across the Americas". Claremont.edu. Retrieved February 28, 2015. Arrarás 1997, pp. 24–27. "The Howard Stern Show". April 3, 1995. "Warrant Is Issued For Howard Stern". The New York Times. Associated Press. April 13, 1995. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved December 10, 2023. "A real shocker from Stern: Apology for Selena comments". Daily News. New York. April 7, 1995. Retrieved November 23, 2013. Marikar, Sheila (May 14, 2012). "Howard Stern's Five Most Outrageous Offenses". Good Morning America. ABC. Retrieved November 23, 2013. "Hispanics call Stern's apology for Selena remarks unacceptable". Fort Worth Star-Telegram. April 7, 1995. Retrieved September 20, 2011. Arrarás 1997, pp. 26–27. Patoski 1996, p. 227. Reports, Wire (April 14, 1995). "Sunday's Selena Day". San Antonio Express-News. Retrieved October 6, 2011. "Texas Declares 'Selena Day'". Houston Chronicle. April 17, 1995. Retrieved February 28, 2015. Patoski 1996, p. 225. Patoski 1996, p. 226. Patoski 1996, p. 230. "Selena's killer receives life sentence". CNN. October 26, 1995. Retrieved August 17, 2015. "Southwest: Texas: Gun That Killed Singer Is To Be Destroyed". The New York Times. June 8, 2002. Retrieved September 27, 2015. Compiled, Items (June 11, 2002). "Gun used in slaying of Selena destroyed". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on October 4, 2013. Retrieved October 26, 2011. Mendoza, Madalyn (February 27, 2015). "28 reasons Selena makes our hearts go 'bidi bidi bom bom'". San Antonio Express-News. Retrieved March 26, 2015. Mesa, Cristal (April 22, 2020). "20 Forgotten Photos Showing Selena With Today's Biggest Celebrities". we are Mitú. Retrieved February 8, 2024. Selena Names her Biggest Influences (Mariah, MJ, Janet, Whitney), retrieved February 8, 2024 Burr, Ramiro (April 15, 1995). "EMI Set Honors Selena's Memory". Billboard. Vol. 107, no. 15. Retrieved February 2, 2015. Ilan 2014, p. 668. Stacy 2002, p. 745. Moreno 2010, p. 282. Gutiérrez 2003, p. 122. Tatum 2013, p. 1032. Patoski 1996, p. 121. Watrous, Peter (July 30, 1995). "Recordings View;; Inklings of What Might Have Been". The New York Times. Retrieved March 26, 2015. Stavans, Ilan (November 20, 1995). "Dreaming of You". New Republic. Vol. 213, no. 21. pp. 24–25. Retrieved March 26, 2015 – via EBSCO. Corliss, Richard (June 24, 2001). "Viva Selena". Time. Retrieved March 26, 2015. "Selena's Posthumous Triumph". Newsweek. July 31, 1995. Retrieved February 28, 2015. "Topics > Selena". Texas Monthly. Retrieved February 28, 2015. "none". Latin Style. No. 45. 2002. The song "My Love," was written by Selena and samples from contemporary pop influences. Other songs like "Sukiyaki" (a cover of Kyu Sakamoto's 1963 hit), "Amame, Quiéreme" (her first duet with Pete Astudillo), and the cumbia "Besitos", played a pivotal role on how Selena mixed rhythm and sound, which became her trademark. Parédez 2009, p. 160. Burr 1999, p. [page needed]. "selena baila esta cumbia." Prampolini 2013, p. 188. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Enamorada de Ti (Album review)". AllMusic. Retrieved September 3, 2014. Peña 1999, p. 206. Pilchak 2005, p. 39. Parédez 2009, p. 141. Arrarás 1997, p. 23. Arrarás 1997, p. 38. Foley 1997, p. 16. Arrarás 1997, p. 59. Arrarás 1997, p. 60. Meier 2003, p. 372. Foley 1997, p. 24. Tiscareño-Sato 2011. Reyes, Paul (March 31, 2014). "Still Missing Selena: Here Are 6 Reasons Why". NBC News. Retrieved February 28, 2015. Espinosa 2009, p. 359. Jones 2013, p. 88. Patoski 1996, p. 167. Patoski 1996, p. 117. Jasinski 2012, p. 457. "Corpus: A Home Movie For Selena". PBS. January 14, 1999. Archived from the original on March 28, 2015. Retrieved March 9, 2015. Fregoso 2010, p. 20. Rebolledo 2005, p. 126. Persall, Steve (March 21, 1997). "Selena becomes more saint than singer". St. Petersburg Times. Archived from the original on May 17, 2014. Retrieved December 28, 2011. McLane, Daisann (March 18, 1997). "Santa Selena Does The Movie's "Official" Version of The Slain Tejano Singer's Life Show's The True Picture?". Sun Sentinel. Archived from the original on June 30, 2013. Retrieved December 28, 2011. Jones 2013, p. 11. Patoski 1996, p. 150. Arrarás 1997, p. 61. Jones 2013, p. 9. Sickels 2013, p. 482. Parédez 2009, p. 12. Habell-Pallán 2002, p. 121. Vargas 2012, p. 188. Segura 2007, p. 477. Habell-Pallán 2002, p. 122. Quaintance, Zack (March 31, 2010). "Remembering Selena". The Monitor. Retrieved March 26, 2015. Vargas 2012, p. 183. Dunkel & Smolowe 1998, p. 151. Bailey 2004, p. 185. Espinosa 2009, p. 376. Candelaria 2004, p. 755. Garcia 2002, p. 220. True, Philip (April 17, 1995). "Selena's fans may turn her into folk hero". San Antonio Express-News. Retrieved October 10, 2011. Espinosa 2009, p. 377. Akoukou Thompson, Nicole (January 3, 2014). "Selena, Shakira, Santana & More: The 100 Year History of Latin Music in the United States". Latin Post. Retrieved March 26, 2015. Pareles, Jon; Caramanica, Jon; Ratliff, Ben; Chinen, Nate; Holden, Stephen (November 26, 2010). "Wow! Every Song What's-His-Name Ever Recorded: Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. ProQuest 812033801. Mitchell & Reid-Walsh 2007, p. 387. Espinosa 2009, p. 364. Espinosa 2009, p. 372. Caulfield 2007, p. 223. Vargas 2012, p. 185. Vargas, Deborah R. (2007). "Selena: Sounding a Transnational Latina/o Queer Imaginary". English Language Notes. 45 (2): 65–76. doi:10.1215/00138282-45.2.65. ISSN 0013-8282. McDonald 2010, p. 364. Platenburg, Gheni (October 17, 2011). "Popularity of Tejano music wanes; conjunto, other Regional Mexican music takes over". The Monitor. Retrieved January 31, 2015. "No. 1 start for Selena's 'Dreaming'". USA Today. July 27, 1995. Retrieved July 22, 2011.[permanent dead link] "Selena's Popularity Grows". The Hour. March 24, 2004. Retrieved April 28, 2013. Burr, Ramiro (July 25, 1995). "Selling like a dream — Selena CD outpaces previous top sellers". San Antonio Express-News. Retrieved January 19, 2013. With first-week sales of "Dreaming of You" at about 400,000-plus, Selena has become the fastest-selling female artist in music history. Final full-week sales figures will not be available until later this week, but on Monday EMI Latin officials estimated Selena's sales at more than 400,000, which puts the late singer ahead of other previous top sellers including: Janet Jackson, "Janet," 350,000; Mariah Carey[...] Bruno, Anthony (February 28, 2011). "AllMusic.com Folding Into AllRovi.com for One-Stop Entertainment Shop". Billboard. Retrieved June 15, 2013. Marrero, Letisha (November 2003). "Ritmo Roundup". Vibe. Vol. 13, no. 13. p. 172. Retrieved December 7, 2011. Burr, Ramiro (March 26, 2005). "Upcoming Selena Tribute". Billboard. Vol. 117, no. 13. p. 56. Retrieved December 7, 2011. Lannert, John (August 5, 1995). "Latin Notas". Billboard. Vol. 107, no. 31. Retrieved December 2, 2011. Lannert, John (June 10, 1995). "A Retrospective". Billboard. Vol. 107, no. 23. p. 112. Retrieved December 7, 2011. "Awards Show". Billboard. Vol. 108, no. 18. Nielsen Business Media Inc. May 4, 1996. p. 122. Retrieved December 7, 2011. Estevez, Marjua (October 17, 2017). "The Top 25 Biggest Selling Latin Albums of the Last 25 Years: Selena, Shakira & More". Billboard. Prometheus Global Media. Retrieved October 18, 2017. Guerra, Joey (January 28, 2015). "Selena to be honored at Fiesta de la Flor in Corpus Christi". Houston Chronicle. Jack Sweeney. Retrieved March 9, 2015. Guerra, Joey (October 30, 2008). "Gloria Estefan in a league of her own 'Person of the Year' a longtime inspiration". Houston Chronicle. Retrieved June 26, 2012. Jones 2000, p. 81. Lannert, John (July 29, 1995). "Latin Music Has New Challenges At Anglo Market". Billboard. Vol. 107, no. 30. Retrieved March 26, 2015. Jones 2000, p. 82. Guerra, Joey (July 24, 2012). "A tribute to Selena among this year's QFest offerings". Houston Chronicle. Retrieved March 26, 2015. Renter, Melissa (March 25, 2010). "The legacy of Selena". San Antonio Express-News. Retrieved January 31, 2015. Mayfield, Geoff (December 25, 1999). "Totally '90s: Diary of a Decade". Billboard. Vol. 111, no. 52. p. YE–16–18. ISSN 0006-2510. Retrieved March 30, 2010. "The American Dream". The Dominion Post. January 29, 2001. Retrieved March 26, 2015. "The 200 Greatest Singers of All Time". Rolling Stone. January 1, 2023. Retrieved June 21, 2023. Arrarás 1997, p. 33. Patoski 1996, p. 318. Chito de la Torre (May 12, 1995). "En Vivo: Premio Lo Nuestro". La Prensa de San Antonio (in Spanish). Duran Duran Industries. Archived from the original on July 5, 2015. Retrieved April 13, 2015. "Billboard's Magazine 1996 Latin Music Awards Scheduled For May 1 At The Historical Gusman Center for Performing Arts". Billboard. Vol. 108, no. 9. Nielsen Business Media Inc. March 2, 1996. Retrieved September 11, 2012. "The Songwriters Speak". Billboard. Vol. 118, no. 17. Nielsen Business Media Inc. April 29, 2006. Retrieved September 11, 2012. Sara Inés Calderón (January 18, 2011). "Selena, Celia Cruz, Tito Puente In U.S. Postal Stamp Form". NewsTaco. Retrieved March 7, 2011. "The 100 coolest Americans in history". Times Union. February 20, 2014. Retrieved February 22, 2014. Lannert, John (June 10, 1995). "Beloved Selena Enters The Latin Music Hall of Fame". Billboard. Vol. 107, no. 23. p. 58. Retrieved April 11, 2014. Marti, Diana (November 4, 2017). "Selena Quintanilla Officially Receives Star on Hollywood Walk of Fame". E! Online. Retrieved November 4, 2017. "Selena Quintanilla's Walk of Fame Star Ceremony Attracts Record Crowd in Hollywood". Associated Press. November 4, 2017. Retrieved November 5, 2017 – via Billboard. Wener, Ben; Chang, Daniel; Eddy, Steve; Darling, Cary (December 30, 1999). "Choosing the 100 most influential Latin musicians of the 20th century". Orange County Register. Retrieved March 26, 2015. Guerra, Joey (April 15, 2014). "Happy birthday, Selena: 'Our cumbia queen'". Houston Chronicle. Retrieved April 7, 2015. Martinez, Ileana (April 1, 2022). "Popup market celebrates 'La Reina de la Cumbia'". Sunnyside Sun. Archived from the original on March 4, 2024. More than 35 women-owned businesses will be in attendance at the "Anything for Selenas" popup market celebrating Selena Quintanilla, "La Reina de la Cumbia" ("The Queen of Cumbia"). Gómez, Shirley (June 28, 2017). "'Sabor Latino' Experience: Madame Tussauds Will Exhibit Latin Music Icons". The Latin Times. Archived from the original on July 11, 2017. Selena Quintanilla's figure will be on permanent display in the Times Square attraction and is a re-sculpt of the star's original Madame Tussauds figure unveiled last August in Hollywood. The Queen of Kumbia (La Reina de la Kumbia) catapulted to global adoration in the 1980s and 90s and is the only Latin female artist to have five albums simultaneously on Billboard 200. Lopez, Antonio (April 6, 1997). "Selena, Selena: We Hardly Knew You". Santa Fe New Mexican. Retrieved March 26, 2015. Ryan, Patrick (June 25, 2014). "Michael Jackson joins a Posthumous Hot 100". USA Today. Retrieved March 26, 2015. Salians, Rebecca (December 9, 2014). "Fake story reporting Selena's killer leaving prison early nearly 'breaks the Internet' in S. Texas". San Antonio Express-News. Retrieved March 26, 2015. Ybarra, Rose (April 1, 2005). "Family perseveres after Selenas death". The Brownsville Herald. Archived from the original on April 4, 2015. Retrieved March 26, 2015. Jones 2000, p. 87. Parédez 2009, p. 116. "Selena to Big Screen". Entertainment Weekly. No. 291. September 8, 1995. Archived from the original on December 4, 2008. Retrieved December 28, 2011. Pearlman, Cindy (March 16, 1997). "Selena: the story behind the legend". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved December 28, 2011. Longsdorf, Amy (March 21, 1997). "Director Aims For Truth About Selena's Life". The Morning Call. Archived from the original on June 30, 2013. Retrieved December 28, 2011. Arrarás 1997, p. 31. Puente, Teresa (March 30, 1997). "The Unforeseen Legacy Of Selena Quintanilla Perez". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved March 26, 2015. Tracy 2008, p. 53. "Selena – Box Office Data, News, Cast Information". The Numbers. Retrieved January 22, 2012. "Selena". Rotten Tomatoes. March 21, 1997. Retrieved November 29, 2011. "Breakout Roles: Jennifer Lopez". Latina. December 19, 2011. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved January 9, 2012. Vargas 2012, p. 53. Sanchez, Clemente (April 22, 2011). "Quién es Quién en el Teatro en México: Angie Vega". Broadway World.com. Retrieved May 31, 2011. "Selena musical to be staged here in April". Corpus Christi Caller Times. February 3, 2000. Archived from the original on May 17, 2008. Retrieved October 25, 2011. "Crowds enjoy preview of 'Selena Forever'". Corpus Christi Caller Times. March 22, 2000. Archived from the original on May 15, 2008. Retrieved October 25, 2011. Cobo, Leila (April 23, 2005). "Selena's Appeal Still Strong". Billboard. Retrieved October 18, 2011. Seidman, Robert (February 8, 2011). "Super Bowl XLV Most-Watched Show in U.S. TV History Among Hispanic Viewers; Tops World Cup Final". TVbythenumbers. Zap2it. Archived from the original on February 10, 2011. Retrieved May 26, 2012. Gorman, Bill (February 16, 2011). "NFL 2010 Hispanic TV Recap, Most-Watched NFL Season Ever Among Hispanics". TVbythenumbers. Zap2it. Archived from the original on February 17, 2011. Retrieved May 26, 2012. Nunez, Alana (January 28, 2015). "Selena Is Getting Her Own Festival to Honor the 20th Anniversary of Her Death". Cosmopolitan. Retrieved March 10, 2015. Flores, Adofo (January 28, 2015). "Mexican-American Icon Selena Will Be Honored In Texas Festival 20 Years After Her Death". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Guerra, Joey (January 28, 2015). "Tejano star Selena to be honored at Fiesta de la Flor". Houston Chronicle. Retrieved October 25, 2017. "The Economic Impact of the Fiesta de la Flor Festival". KIII TV. April 27, 2015. Archived from the original on April 28, 2015. Retrieved April 29, 2015. "Selena Quintanilla Madame Tussauds Hollywood". Madame Tussauds Hollywood. Retrieved October 25, 2017. Marissa, Rodriguez (September 17, 2016). "MAC honors late singer Selena with new line". USA Today. Retrieved October 6, 2016. Acciardo, Kelli. "20 Best-selling MAC Celeb Collaborations of All-time". Bustle. Retrieved September 13, 2017. "Selena Quintanilla Inducted Into the Texas Women's Hall of Fame". Billboard. October 24, 2016. Retrieved September 13, 2017. Barrientos, Brenda. "A New Exhibit Shows How Selena Quintanilla Changed the World of Marketing". People. Karsen, Shira (October 17, 2017). "The Story Behind Today's Selena Quintanilla Google Doodle: Exclusive". Billboard. Retrieved October 17, 2017. "Everything We Know About Netflix's 'Selena: The Series' (So Far)". Billboard. Retrieved December 11, 2020. Guglielmi, Jodi (December 11, 2018). "Bidi Bidi Bom Bom! Netflix Announces Series About Murdered Tejano Music Icon Selena Quintanilla". People. Retrieved December 11, 2018. Roiz, Jessica (April 1, 2020). "Everything We Know About Netflix's 'Selena: The Series' (So Far)". Billboard. Retrieved June 12, 2020. Evans, Greg (October 6, 2020). "Netflix's 'Selena: The Series' Gets December Premiere Date, Trailer". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 6, 2020. Retrieved October 6, 2020. Evans, Greg (October 26, 2020). "'Selena: The Series' Trailer: Netflix Drama Charts Singer's Youthful Hopes". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 26, 2020. Retrieved October 26, 2020. Petski, Denise (April 5, 2021). "'Selena The Series' Part 2: Netflix Sets New Premiere Date, Unveils Teaser". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 5, 2021. Retrieved April 5, 2021. Roiz, Jessica (March 21, 2019). "Forever 21 Launches 'White Rose Collection' Honoring Selena's Legacy". Billboard. Retrieved October 29, 2023. "Anything For Selena". Latino USA. Retrieved February 3, 2021. Oliva, John (March 15, 2021). "Selena's family received her Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award ahead of 63rd annual ceremony". USA Today. Retrieved April 14, 2021. "Selena Memorial-Mirador De La Flor". TripAdvisor. Retrieved March 21, 2022. "Selena vive en sus canciones". Sintesis (in Spanish). March 30, 2010. Archived from the original on July 22, 2011. Retrieved March 21, 2022. Fernandez, Icess (April 1, 2005). "Dedicated fans tour Selena-related sites Many spend 10th anniversary of her death at mirador". Corpus Christi Caller-Times. Retrieved March 31, 2010. Parédez 2009, pp. 70–80. Arrarás, María Celeste (1997). Selena's Secret: The Revealing Story Behind Her Tragic Death. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0684831930. Bailey, Kay (2004). American heroines female role models in america. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0061875359. Burr, Ramiro (1999). The Billboard guide to Tejano and regional Mexican music (1st ed.). Billboard Books. ISBN 978-0823076918. Retrieved October 10, 2014. Candelaria, Cordelia (2004). Encyclopedia of Latino Popular Culture, Volume 1. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0313332104. Castrellón, Cristina (August 31, 2007). Selena: su vida después de su muerte (in Spanish). Penguin Random House Grupo Editorial México. ISBN 9786071110367. Retrieved October 10, 2014. Caulfield, Carlota (2007). A Companion to US Latino Literatures. Boydell & Brewer Ltd. ISBN 978-1855661394. Clark, Walter Aaron (2013). From Tejano to Tango: Essays on Latin American Popular Music. Routledge. ISBN 978-1136536878. Dunkel, Tom; Smolowe, Jill (1998). The most intriguing people of the century. New York, NY: People Books. ISBN 978-1883013141. Espinosa, Gastón (2009). Mexican American Religions: Spirituality, Activism, and Culture. Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0822388951. Foley, Neil (1997). Reflexiones 1997: New Directions in Mexican American Studies. University of Texas Press. ISBN 978-0292725065. Fregoso, Rosa Linda (2010). Lourdes Portillo: The Devil Never Sleeps and Other Films. University of Texas Press. ISBN 978-0292757929. Garcia, Alma M. (2002). The Mexican Americans. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0313314995. Gutiérrez, José Angel (2003). Chicano Manual on How to Handle Gringos. Arte Publico Press. ISBN 978-1611920932. Habell-Pallán, Michelle (2002). Latino/a Popular Culture. NYU Press. ISBN 978-0814737255. Ilan, Stavans (2014). Latin Music: Musicians, Genres, and Themes. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0313343964. Jasinski, Laurie E. (2012). Handbook of Texas Music. Texas A&M University Press. ISBN 978-0876112977. Jones, Steve (2000). Afterlife as Afterimage: Understanding Posthumous Fame. Peter Lang. ISBN 978-0820463650. Jones, Veda Boyd (2013). Selena (They Died Too Young). Infobase Learning. ISBN 978-1438146379. Lannert, John; Bronson, Fred; Mayfield, Geoff (April 15, 1995). "Selena's Tragedy Echoed in Charts". Billboard. Vol. 107, no. 15. pp. 72, 80, 82. Retrieved August 19, 2016. Malone, Bill C. (2003). Southern Music/American Music. University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0813126357. McDonald, Les (2010). The Day the Music Died. Xlibris Corporation. ISBN 978-1469113562.[unreliable source?] Meier, Matt S. (2003). The Mexican American Experience: An Encyclopedia. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0313316432. Miguel, Guadalupe San (2002). Tejano Proud: Tex-Mex Music in the Twentieth Century. Texas A&M University Press. ISBN 978-1585441884. - Read online, registration required Mitchell, Claudia; Reid-Walsh, Jacqueline, eds. (2007). Girl Culture: An Encyclopedia. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 387. ISBN 978-0-313-08444-7. Retrieved November 27, 2011. Moon, Tom (2008). 1,000 Recordings to Hear Before You Die: A Listener's Life List. Workman Publishing. ISBN 978-0761139638. Morales, Ed (2003). The Latin Beat: The Rhythms And Roots Of Latin Music From Bossa Nova To Salsa And Beyond. Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0786730209. Moreno, Michael P. (2010). Term Paper Resource Guide to Latino History. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0313379321. Novas, Himilce (1995). Remembering Selena. Turtleback Books. ISBN 978-0613926379. Parédez, Deborah (2009). Selenidad: Selena, Latinos, and the Performance of Memory. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0822344896. Ebook: ISBN 978-0822390893. Patoski, Joe Nick (1996). Selena: Como La Flor. Boston: Little Brown and Company. ISBN 978-0-316-69378-3. Peña, Manuel (1999). Música Tejana: The Cultural Economy of Artistic Transformation. Texas A&M University Press. ISBN 978-0890968888. Pérez, Chris (2012). To Selena, with Love. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-1101580264. Pilchak, Angela M. (2005). Contemporary Musicians: Profiles of the People in Music. Cengage Gale. ISBN 978-0787680695. Prampolini, Gaetano (2013). The Shade of the Saguaro / La sombra del saguaro. Essays on the Literary Cultures of the American Southwest. Firenze University Press. ISBN 978-8866553939. Rebolledo, Tey Diana (2005). The Chronicles of Panchita Villa and Other Guerrilleras: Essays on Chicana/Latina Literature and Criticism. University of Texas Press. ISBN 978-0292709638. Roiz, Jessica Lucia (June 8, 2015). "Selena Quintanilla On NBC Universo: When, Where To Watch Back-To-Back 'Queen Of Tejano' Special". Latin Times. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved August 19, 2016. Segura, Denise A. (2007). Remembering Selena. Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0822341185. Sickels, Robert C. (2013). 100 Entertainers Who Changed America: An Encyclopedia of Pop Culture Luminaries. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1598848311. Sobek, Maria (2012). Celebrating Latino Folklore: An Encyclopedia of Cultural Traditions, Volume 1. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0313343391. Stacy, Lee (2002). Mexico and the United States. Marshall Cavendish. ISBN 978-0761474029. Tatum, Charles (2013). Encyclopedia of Latino Culture: From Calaveras to Quinceaneras. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1440800993. Tiscareño-Sato, Graciela (2011). Latinnovating: Green American Jobs and the Latinos Creating Them. Gracefully Global Group. ISBN 978-0983476009. Tracy, Kathleen (2008). Jennifer Lopez: A Biography. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0313355158. Vargas, Deborah (2012). Dissonant Divas in Chicana Music: The Limits of la Onda. University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0816673162. Wikiquote has quotations related to Selena. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Selena. Official website SelenaVEVO on YouTube Selena on Grammy Awards Selena at IMDb Archival footage related to Selena from the Texas Archive of the Moving Image Portals:  Biography  Texas  Latin music  Hispanic and Latino Americans