Kharkiv (Ukrainian: Харків, IPA: [ˈxɑrkiu̯] ), also known as Kharkov (Russian: Харькoв, IPA: [ˈxarʲkəf] ), is the second-largest city in Ukraine. Located in the northeast of the country, it is the largest city of the historic region of Sloboda Ukraine. Kharkiv is the administrative centre of Kharkiv Oblast and of the surrounding Kharkiv Raion. It has a population of 1,421,125 (2022 estimate). Kharkiv was founded in 1654 as a fortress, and grew to become a major centre of industry, trade, and Ukrainian culture in Sloboda Ukraine in the composition Russian Empire. At the beginning of the 20th century, the city had a predominantly Ukrainian and Russian population, but as industrial expansion drew in further labor from the distressed countryside, and as the Soviet Union moderated previous restrictions on Ukrainian cultural expression, Ukrainians became the largest ethnic group in the city by the eve of World War II. From December 1919 to January 1934, Kharkiv was the capital of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic. Kharkiv is a major cultural, scientific, educational, transport and industrial centre of Ukraine, with numerous museums, theatres and libraries, including the Annunciation and Dormition cathedrals, the Derzhprom building in Freedom Square, and the National University of Kharkiv. Industry plays a significant role in Kharkiv's economy, specialised primarily in machinery and electronics. There are hundreds of industrial facilities throughout the city, including the Morozov Design Bureau, the Malyshev Factory, Khartron, Turboatom, and Antonov. In March and April 2014, security forces and counter-demonstrators defeated efforts by Russian-backed separatists to seize control of the city and regional administration. Kharkiv was a major target for Russian forces in the eastern Ukraine campaign during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine before they were pushed back to the Russia-Ukraine border. The city remains under intermittent Russian fire. Historical affiliations De-jure: RT/RI 1654–1789 De-facto: Kharkiv Regiment 1654–1789 Russian Empire 1789–1917 Beginning of 1917-1921 Revolution Russian Provisional Government Mar–Nov 1917 UPR Nov-Dec 1917 UPRS Dec 1917 – Apr 1918 Ukrainian People's Republic/Ukrainian State Apr 1918 – Jan 1919 PWPGU/ UkSSR 1919 Jan–Jun ARSR 1919 Jun–Dec UkSSR Dec 1919 – Dec 1922 End of 1917-1921 Revolution USSR 1922–1941 Third Reich 1941–1943 USSR Feb–Mar 1943 Third Reich Mar–Sep 1943 USSR 1943–1991 Ukraine 1991–present The earliest historical references to the region are to Scythian and Sarmatian settlement in the 2nd century BCE. Between the 2nd to the 6th centuries CE there is evidence of Chernyakhov culture, a multiethnic mix of the Geto-Dacian, Sarmatian, and Gothic populations. In the 8th to 10th centuries the Khazar fortress of Verkhneye Saltovo stood about 25 miles (40 km) east of the modern city, near Staryi Saltiv. During the 12th century, the area was part of the territory of the Cumans, and then from the mid 13th century of the Mongol/Tartar Golden Horde. By the early 17th century, the area was a contested frontier region with renegade populations that had begun to organise in Cossack formations and communities defined by a common determination to resist both Tatar slavery, and Polish-Lithuanian and Russian serfdom. Mid-century, the Khmelnytsky Uprising against the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth saw the brief establishment of an independent Cossack Hetmanate. In 1654, in the midst of this period of turmoil for Right-bank Ukraine, groups of people came onto the banks of Lopan and Kharkiv rivers where they resurrected and fortified an abandoned settlement. There is a folk etymology that connects the name of both the settlement and the river to a legendary Cossack founder named Kharko (a diminutive form of the name Chariton, Ukrainian: Харитон, romanized: Kharyton, or Zechariah, Ukrainian: Захарій, romanized: Zakharii). But the river's name is attested earlier than the foundation of the fortress. The settlement reluctantly accepted the protection and authority of a Russian voivode from Chuhuiv 40 kilometres (25 mi) to the east. The first appointed voivode from Moscow was Voyin Selifontov in 1656, who began to build a local ostrog (fort). In 1658, a new voivode, Ivan Ofrosimov, commanded the locals to kiss the cross in a demonstration of loyalty to Tsar Alexis. Led by their otaman Ivan Kryvoshlyk, they refused. However, with the election of a new otaman, Tymish Lavrynov, relations appear to have been repaired, the Tsar in Moscow granting the community's request (signed by the deans of the new Assumption Cathedral and parish churches of Annunciation and Trinity) to establish a local market. At that time the population of Kharkiv was just over 1000, half of whom were local Cossacks. Selifontov had brought with him a Moscow garrison of only 70 soldiers. Defence rested with a local Sloboda Cossack regiment under the jurisdiction of the Razryad Prikaz, a military agency commanded from Belgorod. The original walls of Kharkiv enclosed today's streets: vulytsia Kvitky-Osnovianenko, Constitution Square, Rose Luxemburg Square, Proletarian Square, and Cathedral Descent. There were 10 towers of which the tallest, Vestovska, was some 16 metres (52 ft) high. In 1689 the fortress was expanded to include the Intercession Cathedral and Monastery, which became a seat of a local church hierarch, the Protopope. Administrative reforms led to Kharkiv being governed from 1708 from Kyiv, and from 1727 from Belgorod. In 1765 Kharkiv was established as the seat of a separate Sloboda Ukraine Governorate. Kharkiv University was established in 1805 in the Palace of Governorate-General. Alexander Mikolajewicz Mickiewicz, brother of the Polish national poet Adam Mickiewicz, was a professor of law in the university, while another celebrity, Goethe, searched for instructors for the school. One of its later graduates was In Ivan Franko, to whom it awarded a doctorate in Russian linguistics in 1906. The streets were first cobbled in the city centre in 1830. In 1844 the 90 metres (300 ft) tall Alexander Bell Tower, commemorating the victory over Napoleon I in 1812, was built next to the first Assumption Cathedral (later to be transformed by the Soviet authorities into a radio tower). A system of running water was established in 1870. In the course of the 19th century, although predominantly Russian speaking, Kharkiv became a centre of Ukrainian culture. The first Ukrainian newspaper was published in the city in 1812. Soon after the Crimean War, in 1860–61, a hromada was established in the city, one of a network of secret societies that laid the groundwork for the appearance of a Ukrainian national movement. Its most prominent member was the philosopher, linguist and pan-slavist activist Oleksandr Potebnia. Members of a student hromada in the city included the future national leaders Borys Martos and Dmytro Antonovych, and reputedly were the first to employ the slogan "Glory to Ukraine!" and its response "Glory on all of earth!". In 1900, the student hromada founded the Revolutionary Ukrainian Party (RUP), which sought to unite all Ukrainian national elements, including the growing number of socialists. Following the revolutionary events 1905 in which Kharkiv distinguished itself by avoiding a reactionary pogrom against its Jewish population, the RUP in Kharkiv, Poltava, Kyiv, Nizhyn, Lubny, and Yekaterinodar repudiated the more extreme elements of Ukrainian nationalism. Adopting the Erfurt Program of German Social Democracy, they restyled themselves the Ukrainian Social Democratic Labour Party (USDLP). This was to remain independent of, and opposed by, the Bolshevik faction of the Russian SDLP. After the February Revolution of 1917, the USDLP was the main party in the first Ukrainian government, the General Secretariat of Ukraine. The Tsentralna Rada (central council) of Ukrainian parties in Kyiv authorised the Secretariat to negoitate national autonomy with the Russian Provisional Government. In the succeeding months, as wartime conditions deteriorated, the USDLP lost support in Kharkiv and elsewhere to the Ukrainian Socialist Revolutionary Party (SR) which organised both in peasant communities and in disaffected military units. In the Russian Constituent Assembly election held in November 1917, the Bolsheviks who had seized power in Petrograd and Moscow received just 10.5 percent of the vote in the Governorate, compared to 73 percent for a bloc of Russian and Ukrainian Socialist Revolutionaries. Commanding worker, rather than peasant, votes, within the city itself the Bolsheviks won a plurality. When in Petrograd Lenin's Council of People's Commissars disbanded the Constituent Assembly after its first sitting, the Tsentralna Rada in Kyiv proclaimed the independence of the Ukrainian People's Republic (UPR). Bolsheviks withdrew from Tsentralna Rada and formed their own Rada (national council) in Kharkiv. By February 1918 their forces had captured much of Ukraine. They made Kharkiv the capital of the Donetsk-Krivoy Rog Soviet Republic. Six weeks later, under the treaty terms agreed with the Central Powers at Brest-Litovsk, they abandoned the city and ceded the territory to the German-occupied Ukrainian State. After the German withdrawal, the Red Army returned but, in June 1919, withdrew again before the advancing forces of Anton Denikin's White movement Volunteer. By December 1919 Soviet authority was restored. The Bolsheviks established Kharkiv as the capital of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic and, in 1922, this was formally incorporated as a constituent republic of the Soviet Union. A number of prestige construction projects in new officially-approved Constructivist style were completed, among them Derzhprom (Palace of Industry) then the tallest building in the Soviet Union (and the second tallest in Europe), the Red Army Building, the Ukrainian Polytechnic Institute of Distance Learning (UZPI), the City Council building, with its massive asymmetric tower, and the central department store that was opened on the 15th Anniversary of the October Revolution. As new buildings were going up, many of city's historic architectural monuments were being torn down. These included most of the baroque churches: Saint Nicholas's Cathedral of the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox church, the Church of the Myrrhophores, Saint Demetrius's Church, and the Cossack fortified Church of the Nativity. Under Stalin's First Five Year Plan, the city underwent intensified industrialisation, led by a number of national projects. Chief among these were the Kharkiv Tractor Factory (HTZ), described by Stalin as "a steel bastion of the collectivisation of agriculture in the Ukraine", and the Malyshev Factory, an enlargement of the old Kharkiv Locomotive Factory, which at its height employed 60,000 workers in the production of heavy equipment. By 1937 the output of Kharkiv's industries was reported as being 35 times greater than in 1913. Since turn of the century, the influx of new workers from the countryside changed the ethnic composition of Kharkiv. According to census returns, by 1939 the Russian share of the population had fallen from almost two thirds to one third, while the Ukrainian share rose from a quarter to almost half. The Jewish population rose from under 6 percent of the total, to over 15 percent (sustaining a Hebrew secondary school, a popular Jewish university and extensive publication in Yiddish and Hebrew). In the 1920s, the Ukrainian SSR promoted the use of the Ukrainian language, mandating it for all schools. In practice the share of secondary schools teaching in the Ukrainian language remained lower than the ethnic Ukrainian share of the Kharkiv Oblast's population. The Ukrainization policy was reversed, with the prosecution in Kharkiv in 1930 of the Union for the Freedom of Ukraine. Hundreds of Ukrainian intellectuals were arrested and deported. In 1932 and 1933, the combination of grain seizures and the forced collectivisation of peasant holdings created famine conditions, the Holodomor, driving people off the land and into Kharkiv, and other cities, in search of food. Eye-witness accounts by westerners—among them those of American Communist Fred Beal employed in the Kharkiv Tractor Factory —were cited in the international press but, until the era of Glasnost were consistently denounced in the Soviet Union as fabrications. In 1934 hundreds of Ukrainian writers, intellectuals and cultural workers were arrested and executed in the attempt to eradicate all vestiges of Ukrainian nationalism. The purges continued into 1938. Blind Ukrainian street musicians Kobzars were also rounded up in Kharkiv and murdered by the NKVD. Confident in his control over Ukraine, in January 1934 Stalin had the capital of the Ukrainian SSR moved from Kharkiv to Kyiv. During April and May 1940 about 3,900 Polish prisoners of Starobilsk camp were executed in the Kharkiv NKVD building, later secretly buried on the grounds of an NKVD pansionat in Piatykhatky forest (part of the Katyn massacre) on the outskirts of Kharkiv. The site also contains the numerous bodies of Ukrainian cultural workers who were arrested and shot in the 1937–38 Stalinist purges. During World War II, Kharkiv was the focus of major battles. The city was captured by Nazi Germany on 24 October 1941. A disastrous Red Army offensive failed to recover the city in May 1942. It was retaken (Operation Star) on 16 February 1943, but lost again to the Germans on 15 March 1943. 23 August 1943 saw a final liberation. On the eve of the occupation, Kharkiv's prewar population of 700,000 had been doubled by the influx of refugees. What remained of the pre-war Jewish population of 130,000, were slated by the Germans for "special treatment": between December 1941 and January 1942, they massacred and buried an estimated 15,000 Jews in a ravine outside of town named Drobytsky Yar. Over their 22 months occupation they executed a further 30,000 residents, among them suspected Soviet partisans and, after a brief period of toleration, Ukrainian nationalists. 80,000 people died of hunger, cold and disease. 60,000 were forcibly transported to Germany as slave workers (Ostarbeiter). Among these was Boris Romanchenko. The 96-year old survivor of forced labor at the Buchenwald, Peenemünde, Dora and Bergen Belsen concentration camps was killed when Russian fire hit his apartment bloc on 18 March 2022. By the time of Kharkiv's liberation in August 1943, the surviving population had been reduced to under 200,000. Seventy percent of the city had been destroyed. According to a New York Time's piece, "The city was more battered than perhaps any other in the Soviet Union save Stalingrad." Before the occupation, Kharkiv's tank industries had been evacuated to the Urals with all their equipment, and became the heart of Red Army's tank programs (particularly, producing the T-34 tank earlier designed in Kharkiv). These enterprises returned to Kharkiv after the war, and became central elements of the post-war Soviet military industrial complex. Houses and factories were rebuilt, and much of the city's center was reconstructed in the style of Stalinist Classicism. Kharkiv's Jewish community revived after World War II: by 1959 there were 84,000 Jews living in the city. However, Soviet anti-Zionism restricted expressions of Jewish religion and culture, and was sustained until the final Gorbachev years (the confiscated Kharkiv Choral Synagogue reopened as a synagogue in 1990). In the Brezhnev-era, Kharkiv was promoted as a "model Soviet city". Propaganda made much of its “youthfulness”, a designation broadly used to suggest the relative absence in the city of "material and spiritual relics" from the pre-revolutionary era, and its commitment to the new frontiers of Soviet industry and science. The city's machine-and-weapons building prowess was attributed to a forward-looking collaboration between its large-scale industrial enterprises and new research institutes and laboratories. The last Communist Party chief of Ukraine, Vladimir Ivashko, appointed in 1989, trained as a mining engineer and served as a party functionary in Kharkiv. He led the Communists to victory in Kharkiv and across the country in the parliamentary election held in the Ukrainian SSR in March 1990. The election was relatively free, but occurred well before organised political parties had time to form, and did not arrest the decline in the CPSU's legitimacy. This was accelerated by the intra-party coup attempt against President Mikhail Gorbachev and his reforms on August 18, 1991, during which Ivashko temporarily replaced Gorbachev as CPSU General Secretary. The National University of Kharkiv was at the forefront of democratic agitation. In October 1991, a call from Kyiv for an all-Ukrainian university strike to protest Gorbachev's new Union Treaty and to call for new multi-party elections was met with a rally at the entrance to the university attended not only by students and university teachers, but also by a range of public and cultural figures. The protests—the so-called Revolution on Granite—ended on October 17 with a resolution of the Verkhovna Rada of the Ukrainian SSR promising further democratic reform. In the event, the only demand fulfilled was the removal of the Communist Prime Minister. In the 1 December 1991 Referendum on the Act of Declaration of Independence, on a turnout of 76 percent 86 percent of the Kharkiv Oblast approved separate Ukrainian statehood. During the 1990s post-Soviet aliyah, many Jews from Kharkiv emigrated to Israel or to Western countries. The city's Jewish population, 62,800 in 1970, dropped to 50,000 by the end of the century. The collapse of the Soviet Union disrupted, but did not sever, the ties that bound Kharkiv heavy's industries to the integrated Soviet market and supply chains, and did not diminish dependency on Russian oil, minerals, and gas. In Kharkiv and elsewhere in eastern Ukraine, the limited prospects for securing new economic partners in the West, and concern for the rights of Russian-speakers in the new national state, combined to promote the interests of political parties and candidates emphasising understanding and cooperation with the Russian Federation. In the new century, these were represented by the Party of Regions and by the presidential ambitions of Victor Yanukovych, which in Kharkiv triumphed in the city council elections of 2006, in the parliamentary elections of 2007 and in the presidential elections of 2010. Although never attaining the level of protest witnessed in Kyiv and in communities further west, following the disputed 2012 Parliamentary elections public opposition to President Yanukovych and his party surfaced in Kharkiv amid accusations of systematic corruption and of sabotaging prospects for new ties to the European Union. The Euromaidan protests in the winter of 2013–2014 against then president Viktor Yanukovych consisted of daily gatherings of about 200 protestors near the statue of Taras Shevchenko and were predominantly peaceful. Disappointed at the turnout, an activist at Kharkiv University suggested that his fellow students "proved to be as much of an inert, grey and cowed mass as Kharkiv’s ‘biudzhetniki’ " (those whose income derives from the state budget, mostly public servants). But Pro-Yanukovych demonstrations, held near the statue of Lenin in Freedom (previously Dzerzhinsky) Square, were similarly small. In the wake Yanukovych's ouster in February, there were attempts in Kharkiv to follow the example of separatists in neighbouring Donbas. On 2 March 2014, a Russian "tourist" from Moscow replaced the Ukrainian flag with a Russian flag on the Kharkiv Regional State Administration Building. On 6 April 2014 pro-Russian protestors occupied the building and unilaterally declared independence from Ukraine as the "Kharkiv People's Republic". Doubts arose about their local origin as they had initially targeted the city's Opera and Ballet Theatre before recognising their mistake. Kharkiv's mayor, Hennadiy "Gepa" Kernes, elected in 2010 as the nominee of the Party of Regions, was placed under house arrest. Claiming to have been "prisoner of Yanukovych's system", he now declared his loyalty to acting President Oleksandr Turchynov. In a televised address on April 7, Turchynov had announced that "a second wave of the Russian Federation's special operation against Ukraine [has] started" with the "goal of destabilising the situation in the country, toppling Ukrainian authorities, disrupting the elections, and tearing our country apart". Kernes persuaded the police to storm the regional administration building and push out the separatists. He was allowed to return to his mayoral duties. Police action against the separatists was reinforced by a special forces unit from Vinnytsia directed by Ukrainian Interior Minister Arsen Avakov and Stepan Poltorak the acting commander of the Ukrainian Internal Forces. On 13 April, some pro-Russian protesters again made it inside the Kharkiv regional state administration building, but were quickly evicted. Violent clashes resulted in the severe beating of at least 50 pro-Ukrainian protesters in attacks by pro-Russian protesters. On 28 April, Kernes was shot by a sniper, a victim, commentators suggested, of his former pro-Russian allies. Relatively peaceful demonstrations continued to be held, with "pro-Russian" rallies gradually diminishing and "pro-Ukrainian unity" demonstrations growing in numbers. On 28 September, activists dismantled Ukraine's largest monument to Lenin at a pro-Ukrainian rally in the central square. Polls conducted from September to December 2014 found little support in Kharkiv for joining Russia. From early November until mid-December, Kharkiv was struck by seven non-lethal bomb blasts. Targets of these attacks included a rock pub known for raising money for Ukrainian forces, a hospital for Ukrainian forces, a military recruiting centre, and a National Guard base. According to SBU investigator Vasyliy Vovk, Russian covert forces were behind the attacks, and had intended to destabilise the otherwise calm city of Kharkiv. On 8 January 2015 five men wearing balaclavas broke into an office of Station Kharkiv, a volunteer group aiding refugees from Donbas. On 22 February an improvised explosive device killed four people and wounded nine during a march commemorating the Euromaidan victims. The authorities launched an 'anti-terrorist operation'. Further bombings targeted army fuel tanks, an unoccupied passenger train and a Ukrainian flag in the city centre. On 23 September 2015, 200 people in balaclavas and camouflage picketed the house of former governor Mykhailo Dobkin, and then went to Kharkiv town hall, where they tried to force their way through the police cordon. At least one tear gas grenade was used. The rioters asked the mayor, Hennadiy Kernes, a supporter of the president, to come out. Following recovery from his wounds, Kernes had been re-elected mayor, and was so again in 2020. He died of COVID-19 related complication in December 2020. He was succeeded by Ihor Terekhov of the "Kernes Bloc — Successful Kharkiv". After the Euromaidan events and Russian actions in the Crimea and Donbas ruptured relations with Moscow, the Kharkiv region experienced a sharp fall in output and employment. Once a hub of cross border trade, Kharkiv was turned into a border fortress. A reorientation to new international markets, increased defense contracts (after Kyiv, the region contains the second-largest number of military-related enterprises) and export growth in the economy's services sector helped fuel a recovery, but people's incomes did not return to pre-2014 levels. By 2018 Kharkiv officially has the lowest unemployment rate in Ukraine, 6 percent. But in part this reflected labor shortages caused by the steady outflow of young and skilled workers to Poland and other European countries. Until 18 July 2020, Kharkiv was incorporated as a city of oblast significance and served as the administrative center of Kharkiv Raion though it did not belong to the raion. In July 2020, as part of the administrative reform of Ukraine, which reduced the number of raions of Kharkiv Oblast to seven, the city of Kharkiv was merged into Kharkiv Raion. During the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Kharkiv was the site of heavy fighting between the Ukrainian and Russian forces. On 27 February, the governor of Kharkiv Oblast Oleh Synyehubov claimed that Russian troops were repelled from Kharkiv. According to a 28 February 2022, report from Agroportal 24h, the Kharkiv Tractor Plant (KhTZ), in the south east of the city, was destroyed and “engulfed in fire” by “massive shelling” from Russian forces. Video purported to record explosions and fire at the plant on 25 and 27 February 2022. UNESCO has confirmed that in the first three weeks of bombardment the city experienced the loss or damage of at least 27 major historical buildings. On 4 March 2022, Human Rights Watch reported that on the fourth day of the invasion of Ukraine by the Russian Federation, 28 February 2022, Federation forces used cluster munitions in the KhTZ , the Moskovskyi and Shevchenkivskyi districts of the city. The rights group—which noted the "inherently indiscriminate nature of cluster munitions and their foreseeable effects on civilians"—based its assessment on interviews and an analysis of 40 videos and photographs. In March 2022, during the Battle of Kharkiv, the city was designated as a Hero City of Ukraine. In May 2022, Ukrainian forces began a counter-offensive to drive Russian forces away from the city and towards the international border. By 12 May, the United Kingdom Ministry of Defence reported that Russia had withdrawn units from the Kharkiv area. Russian artillery and rockets remain within range of the city, and it continues to suffer shelling and missile strikes. Kharkiv is located at the banks of the Kharkiv, Lopan, and Udy rivers, where they flow into the Siverskyi Donets watershed in the north-eastern region of Ukraine. Historically, Kharkiv lies in the Sloboda Ukraine region (Slobozhanshchyna also known as Slobidshchyna) in Ukraine, in which it is considered to be the main city. The approximate dimensions of city of Kharkiv are: from the North to the South — 24.3 km; from the West to the East — 25.2 km. Based on Kharkiv's topography, the city can be conditionally divided into four lower districts and four higher districts. The highest point above sea level, in Piatykhatky, is 202m, and the lowest is Novoselivka in Kharkiv is 94m.[citation needed] Kharkiv lies in the large valley of rivers of Kharkiv, Lopan, Udy, and Nemyshlia. This valley lies from the North West to the South East between the Mid Russian highland and Donets lowland. All the rivers interconnect in Kharkiv and flow into the river of Northern Donets. A special system of concrete and metal dams was designed and built by engineers to regulate the water level in the rivers in Kharkiv.[citation needed] Kharkiv has a large number of green city parks with a long history of more than 100 years with very old oak trees and many flowers.[citation needed] Central Park is Kharkiv's largest public garden. The park has nine areas: children, extreme sports, family entertainment, a medieval area, entertainment center, French park, cable car, sports grounds, retro park. This park was previously named after Maxim Gorky until June 2023 when it was renamed Central Park for Culture and Recreation. Kharkiv's climate is humid continental (Köppen climate classification Dfa/Dfb) with long, cold, snowy winters and warm to hot summers. The average rainfall totals 519 mm (20 in) per year, with the most in June and July. The mayor of Kharkiv and the city council govern all the business and administrative affairs in the City of Kharkiv. The mayor of Kharkiv has the executive powers; the city council has the administrative powers as far as the government issues are concerned. The mayor of Kharkiv is elected by direct public election in Kharkiv every four years. The city council is composed of elected representatives, who approve or reject the initiatives on the budget allocation, tasks priorities and other issues in Kharkiv. The representatives to the city council are elected every four years. The mayor and city council hold their regular meetings in the City Hall in Kharkiv. While Kharkiv is the administrative centre of the Kharkiv Oblast (province), the city affairs are managed by the Kharkiv Municipality. Kharkiv is a city of oblast subordinance. The territory of Kharkiv is divided into 9 administrative raions (districts), until February 2016 they were named for people, places, events, and organizations associated with early years of the Soviet Union but many were renamed in February 2016 to comply with decommunization laws. Also, owing to this law, over 200 streets have been renamed in Kharkiv since 20 November 2015. The raions are named: Kholodnohirskyi (Ukrainian: Холодногірський район, Cold Mountain; namesake: the historic name of the neighbourhood) (formerly Leninskyi; namesake: Vladimir Lenin) Shevchenkivskyi (Ukrainian: Шевченківський район); namesake: Taras Shevchenko (formerly Dzerzhynskyi; namesake Felix Dzerzhinsky) Kyivskyi (Ukrainian: Київський район); namesake: Kyiv (formerly Kahanovychskyi; namesake: Lazar Kaganovich) Saltivskyi (Ukrainian: Салтівський район); namesake: Saltivka residential area (formerly Moskovskyi; namesake: Moscow) Nemyshlianskyi (Ukrainian: Немишлянський район) (formerly Frunzenskyi: namesake: Mikhail Frunze); Industrialnyi (Ukrainian: Індустріальний район) (formerly Ordzhonikidzevskyi; namesake: Sergo Ordzhonikidze) Slobidskyi (Ukrainian: Слобідський район) (formerly Kominternіvskyi); namesake: Sloboda Ukraine Osnovianskyi (Ukrainian: Основ'янський район) (formerly Chervonozavodskyi); namesake: Osnova, a city neighborhood Novobavarskyi (Ukrainian: Новобаварський район) (formerly Zhovtnevyi); namesake: Nova Bavaria, a city neighborhood According to the 1989 Soviet Union Census, the population of the city was 1,593,970. In 1991, it decreased to 1,510,200, including 1,494,200 permanent residents. The population in 2023 was 1,430,885. Kharkiv is the second-largest city in Ukraine after the capital, Kyiv. The first independent all-Ukrainian population census was conducted in December 2001, and the next all-Ukrainian population census is decreed to be conducted after the end of the ongoing Russo-Ukrainian war. As of 2001, the population of Kharkiv Oblast is as follows: 78.5% living in urban areas, and 21.5% living in rural areas. 1660 year – approximated estimation 1788 year – without the account of children 1920 year – times of the Russian Civil War 1941 year – estimation on 1 May, right before German-Soviet War 1941 year – next estimation in September varies between 1,400,000 and 1,450,000 1941 year – another estimation in December during the occupation without the account of children 1943 year – 23 August, liberation of the city; estimation varied 170,000 and 220,000 1976 year – estimation on 1 June 1982 year – estimation in March Distribution of the population of the city of Kharkiv by native language according to the 2001 census: According to a survey conducted by the International Republican Institute in April-May 2023, 16 % of the city's population spoke Ukrainian at home, and 78 % spoke Russian. Kharkiv is an important religious centre in Eastern Ukraine. There are many old and new religious buildings, associated with various denominations in Kharkiv. Assumption Orthodox Cathedral was built in Kharkiv in the 1680s and rebuilt in the 1820s and 1830s. Holy Trinity Orthodox Church was built in Kharkiv in 1758–1764 and rebuilt in 1857–1861. Annunciation Orthodox Cathedral, one of the tallest Orthodox churches in the world, was completed in Kharkiv on 2 October 1888. Recently built churches include St. Valentine's Orthodox Church and St. Tamara's Orthodox Church. Kharkiv's Jewish population is estimated to be around 8,000 people. It is served by the old Kharkiv Choral Synagogue, which was fully renovated in Kharkiv in 1991–2016. There are two mosques including the Kharkiv Cathedral Mosque and one Islamic center in Kharkiv.[citation needed] The 2016–2020 economic development strategy: "Kharkiv Success Strategy", is created in Kharkiv. Kharkiv has a diversified service economy, with employment spread across a wide range of professional services, including financial services, manufacturing, tourism, and high technology. The International Economic Forum: Innovations. Investments. Kharkiv Innitiatives! is being conducted in Kharkiv every year. In 2015, the International Economic Forum: Innovations. Investments. Kharkiv Innitiatives! was attended by the diplomatic corps representatives from 17 world countries, working in Ukraine together with top-management of trans-national corporations and investment funds; plus Ukrainian People's Deputies; plus Ukrainian Central government officials, who determine the national economic development strategy; plus local government managers, who perform practical steps in implementing that strategy; plus managers of technical assistance to Ukraine; plus business and NGO's representatives; plus media people. The key topics of the plenary sessions and panel discussions of the International Economic Forum: Innovations. Investments. Kharkiv Innitiatives! are the implementation of Strategy for Sustainable Development "Ukraine – 2020", the results achieved and plan of further actions to reform the local government and territorial organization of power in Ukraine, export promotion and attraction of investments in Ukraine, new opportunities for public-private partnerships, practical steps to create "electronic government", issues of energy conservation and development of oil and gas industry in the Kharkiv Region, creating an effective system of production and processing of agricultural products, investment projects that will receive funding from the State Fund for Regional Development, development of international integration, preparation for privatization of state enterprises. The international industrial exhibitions are usually conducted at the Radmir Expohall exhibition center in Kharkiv. During the Soviet era, Kharkiv was the capital of industrial production in Ukraine and a large centre of industry and commerce in the USSR. After the collapse of the Soviet Union the largely defence-systems-oriented industrial production of the city decreased significantly. In the early 2000s, the industry started to recover and adapt to market economy needs. The enterprises form machine-building, electro-technology, instrument-making, and energy conglomerates. State-owned industrial giants, such as Turboatom and Elektrovazhmash occupy 17% of the heavy power equipment construction (e.g., turbines) market worldwide. Multipurpose aircraft are produced by the Antonov aircraft manufacturing plant. The Malyshev factory produces not only armoured fighting vehicles, but also harvesters. Khartron is the leading designer of space and commercial control systems in Ukraine and the former CIS. As of April 2018, there were 25,000 specialists in IT industry of the Kharkiv region, 76% of them were related to computer programming. Thus, Kharkiv accounts for 14% of all IT specialists in Ukraine and makes the second largest IT location in the country, right after the capital Kyiv. Also, the number of active IT companies in the region to be 445, five of them employing more than 601 people. Besides, there are 22 large companies with the workers' number ranging from 201 to 600. More than half of IT-companies located in the Kharkiv region fall into "extra small" category with less than 20 persons engaged. The list is compiled with 43 medium (81-200 employers) and 105 small companies (21-80).[citation needed] Due to the comparably narrow market for IT services in Ukraine, the majority of Kharkiv companies are export-oriented with more than 95% of total sales generated overseas in 2017. Overall, the estimated revenue of Kharkiv IT companies will more than double from $800 million in 2018 to $1.85 billion by 2025. The major markets are North America (65%) and Europe (25%). Kharkiv is also the headquarters of one of the largest Ukrainian banks, UkrSibbank, which has been part of the BNP Paribas group since December 2005. There are many large modern shopping malls in Kharkiv. There is a large number of markets: Barabashovo market [uk], the largest market in Ukraine and one of the largest markets in Europe Tsentralnyi market [uk] (Blahovishchenskyi market) Kinnyi (Horse) market Sumskyi market Raiskyi book market The Vasyl N. Karazin Kharkiv National University is the most prestigious reputable classic university, which was founded due to the efforts by Vasily Karazin in Kharkiv in 1804–1805. On 29 January [O.S. 17 January] 1805, the Decree on the Opening of the Imperial University in Kharkiv came into force. The Roentgen Institute opened in 1931. It was a specialist cancer treatment facility with 87 research workers, 20 professors, and specialist medical staff. The facilities included chemical, physiology, and bacteriology experimental treatment laboratories. It produced x-ray apparatus for the whole country. The city has 13 national universities and numerous professional, technical and private higher education institutions, offering its students a wide range of disciplines. These universities include Kharkiv National University (12,000 students), National Technical University "KhPI" (20,000 students), Kharkiv National University of Radioelectronics (12,000 students), Yaroslav Mudryi National Law University, Kharkiv National Aerospace University "KhAI", Kharkiv National University of Economics, Kharkiv National University of Pharmacy, and Kharkiv National Medical University. More than 17,000 faculty and research staff are employed in the institutions of higher education in Kharkiv. The city has a high concentration of research institutions, which are independent or loosely connected with the universities. Among them are three national science centres: Kharkiv Institute of Physics and Technology, Institute of Meteorology, Institute for Experimental and Clinical Veterinary Medicine and 20 national research institutions of the National Academy of Science of Ukraine, such as the B Verkin Institute for Low Temperature Physics and Engineering, Institute for Problems of Cryobiology and Cryomedicine, State Scientific Institution "Institute for Single Crystals", Usikov Institute of Radiophysics and Electronics (IRE), Institute of Radio Astronomy (IRA), and others. A total number of 26,000 scientists are working in research and development. A number of world-renowned scientific schools appeared in Kharkiv, such as the theoretical physics school and the mathematical school. There is the Kharkiv Scientists House in the city, which was built by A. N. Beketov, architect in Kharkiv in 1900. All the scientists like to meet and discuss various scientific topics at the Kharkiv Scientists House in Kharkiv. In addition to the libraries affiliated with the various universities and research institutions, the Kharkiv State Scientific V. Korolenko-library is a major research library. Kharkiv has 212 (secondary education) schools, including 10 lyceums and 20 gymnasiums.[citation needed] There is the educational "Landau Center", which is named after L.D. Landau, Nobel laureate in Kharkiv. Kharkiv is one of the main cultural centres in Ukraine. It is home to 20 museums, over 10 theatres[citation needed] and a number of art galleries. Large music and cinema festivals are hosted in Kharkiv almost every year. The Kharkiv National Academic Opera and Ballet Theatre named after N. V. Lysenko is the biggest theatre in Kharkiv. In 2017 the Kharkiv Ukrainian Drama Theatre named after T. G. Shevchenko was especially popular among theater audiences more prone to speak Ukrainian in daily life. The Kharkiv Academic Drama Theatre was recently renovated, and it is quite popular among locals. Until October 2023 this theater was named after Russian poet Alexander Pushkin; the derussification of Ukraine campaign of that area led to its renaming that also meant the removal of (the word) "Russian" from the name. The Kharkiv Theatre of the Young Spectator (now the Theatre for Children and Youth) is one of the oldest theatres for children. The Kharkiv Puppet Theatre (The Kharkiv State Academic Puppet Theatre named after VA Afanasyev) is the first puppet theatre in the territory of Kharkiv. It was created in 1935. The Kharkiv Academic Theatre of Musical Comedy is a theatre founded on 1 November 1929 in Kharkiv. In the 1930s Kharkiv was referred to as a Literary Klondike.[citation needed] It was the centre for the work of literary figures such as: Les Kurbas, Mykola Kulish, Mykola Khvylovy, Mykola Zerov, Valerian Pidmohylny, Pavlo Filipovych, Marko Voronny, Oleksa Slisarenko. Over 100 of these writers were repressed during the Stalinist purges of the 1930s. This tragic event in Ukrainian history is called the "Executed Renaissance" (Rozstrilene vidrodzhennia). Today, a literary museum located on Frunze Street marks their work and achievements. Today, Kharkiv is often referred to as the "capital city" of Ukrainian science fiction and fantasy. It is home to a number of popular writers, such as H. L. Oldie, Alexander Zorich, Andrey Dashkov, Yuri Nikitin and Andrey Valentinov; most of them write in Russian and are popular in both Russia and Ukraine. The annual science fiction convention "Star Bridge" (Звёздный мост) has been held in Kharkiv since 1999. There is the Kharkiv Philharmonic Society in the city. The leading group active in the Philharmonic is the Academic Symphony Orchestra. It has 100 musicians of a high professional level, many of whom are prize-winners in international and national competitions. There is the Organ Music Hall in the city. The Organ Music Hall is situated at the Assumption Cathedral presently. The Rieger–Kloss organ was installed in the building of the Organ Music Hall back in 1986. The new Organ Music Hall will be opened at the extensively renovated building of Kharkiv Philharmonic Society in Kharkiv in November 2016. The Kharkiv Conservatory is in the city. The Kharkiv National University of Arts named after I.P. Kotlyarevsky is situated in the city. Kharkiv sponsors the prestigious Hnat Khotkevych International Music Competition of Performers of Ukrainian Folk Instruments, which takes place every three years. Since 1997 four tri-annual competitions have taken place. The 2010 competition was cancelled by the Ukrainian Ministry of Culture two days before its opening. The music festival: "Kharkiv - City of Kind Hopes" is conducted in Kharkiv. From Kharkiv comes also black metal band Drudkh. From 1907 to 2008, at least 86 feature films were shot in the city's territory and its region. The most famous is Fragment of an Empire (1929). Arriving in Leningrad, the main character, in addition to the usual pre-revolutionary buildings, sees the Derzhprom - a symbol of a new era. The Kharkiv Lilacs international film festival is very popular among movie stars, makers and producers in Ukraine, Eastern Europe, Western Europe and North America. The annual festival is usually conducted in May. There is a special alley with metal hand prints by popular movies actors at Shevchenko park in Kharkiv. Kharkiv has been a home for many famous painters, including Ilya Repin, Zinaida Serebryakova, Henryk Siemiradzki, and Vasyl Yermilov. There are many modern arts galleries in the city: the Yermilov Centre, Lilacs Gallery, the Kharkiv Art Museum, the Kharkiv Municipal Gallery, the AC Gallery, Palladium Gallery, the Semiradsky Gallery, AVEK Gallery, and Arts of Slobozhanshyna Gallery among others. There are around 147 museums in the Kharkiv's region. Museums in the city include: The M. F. Sumtsov Kharkiv Historical Museum The Kharkiv Art Museum The Natural History Museum at V. N. Karazin Kharkiv National University was founded in Kharkiv on 2 April 1807. The museum is visited by 40000 visitors every year. The V. N. Karazin Kharkiv National University History Museum was established in Kharkiv in 1972. The V. N. Karazin Kharkiv National University Archeology Museum was founded in Kharkiv on 20 March 1998. The National Technical University "Kharkiv Polytechnical Institute" Museum was created in Kharkiv on 29 December 1972. The National Aerospace University "Kharkiv Aviation Institute" Museum was founded on 29 May 1992. The "National University of Pharmacy" Museum was founded in Kharkiv on 15 September 2010. The Kharkiv Maritime Museum - a museum dedicated to the history of shipbuilding and navigation. The Kharkiv Puppet Museum is the oldest museum of dolls in Ukraine.[citation needed] Memorial museum-apartment of the family Grizodubov.[citation needed] Club-Museum of Claudia Shulzhenko. The Museum of "First Aid".[citation needed] The Museum of Urban Transport.[citation needed] The Museum of Sexual Cultures. The city is famous for its churches as well as Art Nouveau and constructivist architecture: Dormition Cathedral, built in 17th century in Baroque style and rebuilt in 18th and 19th centuries Pokrovskyi Monastery, built in 18th century in Baroque style Annunciation Cathedral, built in 1887-1901 in Neo-Byzantine style Kharkiv Ukrainian Drama Theatre, built in 1841 Kharkiv Puppet Theatre, former Volga-Kama Commercial Bank, built in 1907 in Art Nouveau style Kharkiv State Academy of Design and Arts, built in 1912 in Art Nouveau style Choral Synagogue, built in 1909-1913 Central Market Hall, built 1912-1914 Derzhprom building, built in 1925-1928 in constructivist style Freedom Square Railway Pochtamt (post office), built 1927-29 in constructivist style Palace of Culture of Railway Workers, built 1928-31 in constructivist style Kharkiv railway station, rebuilt in socialist-realist style in 1952 Kharkiv Opera, built in 1970-1990 in brutalist style Other attractions include: Taras Shevchenko Monument, Mirror Stream, Historical Museum, T. Shevchenko Gardens, Zoo, Children's narrow-gauge railroad, World War I Tank Mk V, Memorial Complex, and many more. After the 2014 Russian annexation of Crimea the monument to Petro Konashevych-Sahaidachny in Sevastopol was removed and handed over to Kharkiv. Dormition Cathedral Pokrovskyi Monastery Annunciation Cathedral Kharkiv Ukrainian Drama Theatre Kharkiv Puppet Theatre (former Volga-Kama Bank) Kharkiv State Academy of Design and Arts Kharkiv Central Market Hall Kharkiv Choral Synagogue Railway Pochtamt (post office) Palace of Culture of Railway Workers Kharkiv railway station Kharkiv contains numerous parks and gardens such as the Central Park, Shevchenko park, Hydro park, Strelka park, Sarzhyn Yar and Feldman ecopark. The Central Park is a common place for recreation activities among visitors and local people.[citation needed] The Shevchenko park is situated in close proximity to the V.N. Karazin National University. It is also a common place for recreation activities among the students, professors, locals and foreigners. The Ecopark is situated at circle highway around Kharkiv. It attracts kids, parents, students, professors, locals and foreigners to undertake recreation activities. Sarzhyn Yar is a natural ravine three minutes walk from "Botanichniy Sad" station. It is an old girder that now - is a modern park zone more than 12 km length. There is also a mineral water source with cupel and a sporting court. The majority spoken language in Kharkiv (especially until 2022) was Russian, mainly due to the many influxes of Russian settlers and colonizers during the times of the Soviet Union, but also due to many years of russification. Even after Ukraine regained its independence, Russian was still used predominantly by ethnic Russians and Ukrainians alike, although after the 2022 invasion of Ukraine by Russia many of the city’s residents are gradually transitioning to Ukrainian. There are a large number of broadcast and internet TV channels, AM/FM/PM/internet radio-stations, and paper/internet newspapers in Kharkiv. Some are listed below. Slobidskyi Krai Vremya Vecherniy Kharkov Segodnya Vesti Kharkovskie Izvestiya Guberniya "7 kanal" channel "А/ТВК" channel "Simon" channel "ATN Kharkiv" channel "UA: Kharkiv" channel Promin Ukrainske Radio Radio Kharkiv Kharkiv Oblastne Radio Russkoe Radio Ukraina Shanson Retro FM The Kharkiv Times Kharkiv Observer The city of Kharkiv is one of the largest transportation centres in Ukraine, which is connected to numerous other cities of the world by air, rail and road traffic. There are about 250 thousand cars in the city. Kharkiv is one out of four Ukrainian cities with a subway system. Being an important transportation centre of Ukraine, many different means of transportation are available in Kharkiv. Kharkiv's Metro is the city's rapid transit system operating since 1975. It includes three different lines with 30 stations in total. The Kharkiv buses carry about 12 million passengers annually.[citation needed] Trolleybuses, trams (which celebrated its 100-year anniversary of service in 2006), and marshrutkas (private minibuses) are also important means of transportation in the city. The first railway connection of Kharkiv was opened in 1869. The first train to arrive in Kharkiv came from the north on 22 May 1869, and on 6 June 1869, traffic was opened on the Kursk–Kharkiv–Azov line. Kharkiv's passenger railway station was reconstructed and expanded in 1901, to be later destroyed in the Second World War. A new Kharkiv railway station was built in 1952. Kharkiv is connected with all main cities in Ukraine and abroad by regular railway services. Regional trains known as elektrychkas connect Kharkiv with nearby towns and villages. Kharkiv is served by Kharkiv International Airport. Charter flights are also available. The former largest carrier of the Kharkiv Airport — Aeromost-Kharkiv — is not serving any regular destinations as of 2007[update]. The Kharkiv North Airport is a factory airfield and was a major production facility for Antonov aircraft company. The Kharkiv International Marathon is considered as a prime international sportive event, attracting many thousands of professional sportsmen, young people, students, professors, locals and tourists to travel to Kharkiv and to participate in the international event. The most popular sport is football. The city has several football clubs playing in the Ukrainian national competitions. The most successful is FC Dynamo Kharkiv that won eight national titles back in the 1920s–1930s. FC Metalist Kharkiv, which plays at the Metalist Stadium FC Metalist 1925 Kharkiv, which plays at the Metalist Stadium FC Helios Kharkiv, a defunct club, which played at the Helios Arena FC Kharkiv, a defunct club, which played at the Dynamo Stadium FC Arsenal Kharkiv, which played at the Arsenal-Spartak Stadium (participates in regional competitions) FC Shakhtar Donetsk also play at the Metalist Stadium since 2017, due to the war in Donbas There is also a female football club WFC Zhytlobud-1 Kharkiv, which represented Ukraine in the European competitions and constantly is the main contender for the national title. Metalist Stadium hosted three group matches at UEFA Euro 2012. Kharkiv also had some ice hockey clubs, MHC Dynamo Kharkiv, Vityaz Kharkiv, Yunost Kharkiv, HC Kharkiv, who competed in the Ukrainian Hockey Championship. Avangard Budy is a bandy club from Kharkiv, which won the Ukrainian championship in 2013. There are a men's volleyball teams, Lokomotyv Kharkiv and Yurydychna Akademiya Kharkiv, which performed in Ukraine and in European competitions. RC Olymp is the city's rugby union club. They provide many players for the national team. Tennis is also a popular sport in Kharkiv. There are many professional tennis courts in the city. Elina Svitolina is a tennis player from Kharkiv. There is a golf club in Kharkiv. Horseriding as a sport is also popular among locals. There are large stables and horse riding facilities at Feldman Ecopark in Kharkiv. There is a growing interest in cycling among locals. There is a large bicycles producer, Kharkiv Bicycle Plant within the city. Presently, the modern bicycle highway is under construction at the "Leso park" (Лісопарк) district in Kharkiv. Anastasia Afanasieva (born 1982) – psychiatrist, poet, writer, translator Serhii Babkin (born 1978) – singer and actor Snizhana Babkina (born 1985) – actress and music manager Nikolai P. Barabashov (1894–1971) – astronomer, co-author of the first pictures of the far side of the Moon Pavel Batitsky (1910–1984) – Soviet military leader Vladimir Bobri (1898–1986) – illustrator, author, composer, educator and guitar historian Inna Bohoslovska (born 1960) – lawyer, politician and leader of the Ukrainian public organization Viche Sergei Bortkiewicz (1877–1952) – Russian Romantic composer and pianist Maria Burmaka (born 1970) – Ukrainian singer, musician and songwriter Leonid Bykov (1928–1979) – Soviet actor, film director, and script writer Cassandre (1901–1968) – Ukrainian-French painter, commercial poster artist, and typeface designer Juliya Chernetsky (born 1982) – TV host, actress, model, and music promoter in the US. (Mistress Juliya) Andrey Denisov (born 1952) - Russian diplomat in China Vladimir Drinfeld (born 1954) – mathematician, awarded Fields Medal in 1990 Isaak Dunayevsky (1900–1955) – Soviet composer and conductor Konstanty Gorski (1859–1924) – Polish composer, violist, organist and music teacher Valentina Grizodubova (1909–1993) – one of the first female pilots in the Soviet Union Lyudmila Gurchenko (1935–2011) – Soviet and Russian actress, singer and entertainer Mikhail Gurevich (1892–1976) – Soviet aircraft designer, a partner (with Artem Mikoyan) of the MiG military aviation bureau Diana Harkusha (born 1994) – Miss Ukraine Universe 2014 and Miss Universe 2014's 2nd Runner-up Leonid Haydamaka (1898–1991) – bandurist and conductor Vasily Karazin (1773–1842) – founder of National University of Kharkiv, which bears his name Hnat Khotkevych (1877–1938) – writer, ethnographer, composer, bandurist Mikhail Koshkin (1898–1940)– chief designer of Soviet tank T-34 Olga Krasko (born 1981) – Russian actress Mykola Kulish (1892–1937) – Ukrainian prose writer, playwright and pedagogue Les Kurbas (1887–1937) - movie and theatre director and dramatist Simon Kuznets (1901–1985) – Russian-American economist Evgeny Lifshitz (1915–1985) – Soviet physicist Eduard Limonov (1943–2020) – writer, poet and controversial politician Gleb Lozino-Lozinskiy (1909–2001) – lead developer of Soviet Shuttle Buran program Aleksandr Lyapunov (1857–1918) – Russian mathematician and physicist, invented motion stability theory Boris Mikhailov (born 1938) – photographer and artist Mykola Mikhnovsky (1873–1924) – Ukrainian political leader and activist T-DJ Milana (born 1989) – DJ, composer, dancer and model, lives in Kharkiv Yuri Nikitin (born 1939) – Russian science fiction and fantasy writer. H. L. Oldie (Dmitry Gromov and Oleg Ladyzhensky) (both born 1963)– writers Justine Pasek (born 1979) – Miss Universe 2002 Valerian Pidmohylny (1901–1937) – poet, novelist and literary critic Olga Rapay-Markish (1929–2012) – ceramicist Elisabetta di Sasso Ruffo (1886–1940) – Russian princess Serafina Schachova – nephrologist Eugen Schauman (1875–1904) – Finnish nationalist, killed Russian general NA Bobrikov Alexander Shchetynsky (born 1960) – composer of solo, orchestral and choral pieces. George Shevelov (1908–2002) – linguist, essayist, literary historian and literary critic Elena Sheynina (born 1965) – children's author Lev Shubnikov (1901–1937) – Soviet experimental physicist, worked in the Netherlands and USSR Klavdiya Shulzhenko (1906–1984) – Soviet and Russian popular female singer and actress. Henryk Siemiradzki (1843-1902) – studied at the Kharkiv University Alexander Siloti (1863–1945) – Russian pianist, conductor and composer Hryhorii Skovoroda (1722–1794) – poet, philosopher and composer Karina Smirnoff (born 1978) – world champion dancer, starring on Dancing with the Stars Jura Soyfer (1912–1939) – Austrian political journalist and cabaret writer Otto Struve (1897–1963) – Russian-American astronomer Sergei Sviatchenko (born 1952) Danish-Ukrainian artist, photographer and architect. Mark Taimanov (1926–2016) – concert pianist and chess player Nikolai Tikhonov (1905–1997) - a Soviet Russian-Ukrainian statesman during the Cold War. Yevgeniy Timoshenko (born 1988) – poker player in the US Andriy Tsaplienko (born 1968) - journalist, presenter, filmmaker and writer. Anna Tsybuleva (born 1990) – classical pianist, winner of the Leeds International Piano Competition Anna Ushenina (born 1985) – women's world chess champion Vladimir Vasyutin (1952–2002) – Soviet cosmonaut of Ukrainian descent Vitali Vitaliev (born 1954) – journalist and author Alexander Voevodin (born 1949) – biomedical scientist and educator Yevgania Yosifovna Yakhina (1918 – 1983) – composer Vasyl Yermylov (1894–1968) - Ukrainian and Soviet painter, avant-garde artist and designer. Serhiy Zhadan (born 1974) - Ukrainian poet, novelist, essayist and translator. Valentine Yanovna Zhubinskaya (1926–2013) Ukrainian composer, concertmistress and pianist Irina Zhurina (born 1946) Russian operatic coloratura soprano. Alexander Zorich (Dmitry Gordevsky and Yana Botsman) (both born 1973) – writers Oksana Cherkashyna (born 1988) – actress Leonid Buryak (born 1953) – football coach and former footballer Valentina Chepiga (born 1962) – female bodybuilder and 2000 Ms. Olympia champion Olga Danilov (born 1973) – Israeli Olympic speed skater Alexander Davidovich (born 1967) – Israeli Olympic wrestler Mikhail Gurevich – (born 1959) a Belgian chess player. Oleksandr Gvozdyk (born 1987) – boxer Pavlo Ishchenko (born 1992) – Olympic Ukrainian-Israeli boxer Oleksandr Kachorenko (born 1980) – professional footballer Maksym Kalynychenko (born 1979) – footballer Igor Olshanetskyi (born 1986) – Israeli Olympic weightlifter Gennady Orlov (born 1945) - Russian sports journalist and former footballer Ivan Pravilov (1963–2012) - ice hockey coach, sexually abused a teenage student, committed suicide by hanging in prison Irina Press (1939–2004) – athlete who won two Olympic gold medals Tamara Press (1937–2021) – Soviet shot putter and discus thrower Oleh Ptachyk (born 1981) – retired footballer Igor Rybak (1934–2005) – Olympic champion lightweight weightlifter Elina Svitolina (born 1994) – tennis player Kateryna Tabashnyk (born 1994) - high jumper Ievgeniia Tetelbaum (born 1991) – Israeli Olympic synchronized swimmer Artem Tsoglin (born 1997) – Israeli pair skater Yury Vengerovsky (1938–1998) – Olympic gold medal-winning volleyball player Igor Vovchanchyn (born 1973) – mixed martial artist Oleksandr Zhdanov (born 1984) – Ukrainian-Israeli footballer Élie Metchnikoff (1845–1916) – Russian/French zoologist; researched immunology; jointly awarded the 1908 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Simon Kuznets (1901–1985) – American economist and statistician; received the 1971 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences Lev Landau (1908–1968) – Soviet physicist, made fundamental contributions to theoretical physics; Nobel Prize in Physics 1962 Vladimir Drinfeld (born 1954) – mathematician now in the United States; awarded the Fields Medal in 1990 Kharkiv is twinned with: Albuquerque, USA (2023) Bologna, Italy (1966) Brno, Czech Republic (2005) Cetinje, Montenegro (2011) Cincinnati, United States (1989) Daejeon, South Korea (2013) Daugavpils, Latvia (2006) Debrecen, Hungary (2016) Gaziantep, Turkey (2011) Geroskipou, Cyprus (2018) Jinan, China (2004) Kaunas, Lithuania (2001) Kutaisi, Georgia (2005) Lille, France (1978) Maribor, Slovenia (2012) Nuremberg, Germany (1990) Polis, Cyprus (2018) Poznań, Poland (1998) Rishon LeZion, Israel (2008) Tbilisi, Georgia (2012) Tianjin, China (1993) Tirana, Albania (2017) Trnava, Slovakia (2013) Turku, Finland (2022) Varna, Bulgaria (1995) Ukraine portal Grigoriev Institute for Medical Radiology Kharkiv fortress [uk; ru] What Makes Kharkiv Ukrainian Archived 8 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine, The Ukrainian Week (23 November 2014) У Харкові “декомунізували” ще 48 вулиць і 5 районів [Another 48 streets and 5 districts "decommunized" in Kharkiv]. Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 1 July 2023. Retrieved 1 July 2023. Переименование районов [Three districts renamed in Kharkiv]. Status Quo (in Russian). 30 June 2023. Archived from the original on 1 July 2023. Retrieved 1 July 2023. (in Ukrainian) It was decided not to rename the Zhovtnevyi and the Frunzenskyi districts in Kharkiv Archived 4 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine, Korrespondent.net (3 February 2015) "Терехов офіційно став мером Харкова" [Terekhov officially became the mayor of Kharkiv]. Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 25 January 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2023. "Блок Кернеса висунув Терехова кандидатом у мери" [Kernes' bloc nominated Terekhov as a candidate for mayor]. Ukrainska Pravda (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 11 November 2021. Retrieved 1 July 2023. The number of the available population of Ukraine as of January 1, 2022 (PDF), archived (PDF) from the original on 10 August 2022, retrieved 26 March 2023 Ukraine's second Winter Olympics: one medal, some good performances Archived 3 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine, The Ukrainian Weekly (1 March 1998) Kharkiv "never had eastern-western conflicts" Archived 20 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine, Euronews (23 October 2014) Чисельність наявного населення України на 1 січня 2022 [Number of Present Population of Ukraine, as of January 1, 2022] (PDF) (in Ukrainian and English). Kyiv: State Statistics Service of Ukraine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 July 2022. Eiddon, Iorwerth; Edwards, Stephen; Heather, Peter (1998). "Goths & Huns". The Late Empire. The Cambridge Ancient History. Vol. 13. Cambridge University Press. p. 488. ISBN 0-521-30200-5. Kevin Alan Brook, The Jews of Khazaria (2006), p. 34 Archived 5 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine. Roman Solchanyk (January 2001). Ukraine and Russia: The Post-Soviet Transition. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 6. ISBN 978-0-7425-1018-0. Archived from the original on 2 October 2023. Retrieved 31 March 2015. Живий Харків. Нічна екскурсія містом-господарем [Living Kharkiv. Nightly excursion through the host-city]. Ukrainska Pravda. Archived from the original on 7 May 2021. Retrieved 1 July 2023. Ivan Katchanovski et al. (eds.), Historical Dictionary of Ukraine (2013), p. 253 Archived 5 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine "Сторінка:Котляревський. Енеида на малороссійскій языкъ перелицїованная. 1798.pdf/175 — Вікіджерела". uk.wikisource.org. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. Slavs in Canada, vol. 2, Inter-university Committee on Canadian Slavs (1968), p. 255. Указ об учреждении губерний и о росписании к ним городов, 1708 г., декабря 18 [Decree on the establishment of Provinces and cities assigned to them, December 18, 1708]. constitution.garant.ru (in Russian). Archived from the original on 28 July 2017. Retrieved 31 March 2015. История административно-территориального деления воронежского края. 2. Воронежская губерния [History of the Administrative-Territorial Division of the Voronezh Region. 2. Voronezh Province.] (in Russian). Archive service of Voronezh Oblast. Archived from the original on 25 May 2013. Retrieved 10 June 2012. У Харкові відкрили меморіальну дошку Івану Франку [A memorial plaque to Ivan Franko was unveiled in Kharkiv] (in Ukrainian). Istpravda.com.ua. 23 August 2011. Archived from the original on 10 November 2012. Retrieved 21 July 2012. Харків і харків'яни XIX-го сторіччя [Kharkiv and Kharkiv denizens in 19th century photos] (in Ukrainian). Istpravda.com.ua. 24 January 2011. Archived from the original on 22 June 2012. Retrieved 21 July 2012. "Hromadas". Encyclopedia of Ukraine. Archived from the original on 27 December 2015. Retrieved 14 January 2016. ""Glory to Ukraine!": Who and when was the slogan created?". www.istpravda.com.ua. Archived from the original on 25 February 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Revolutionary Ukrainian party". www.encyclopediaofukraine.com. Archived from the original on 15 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. HAMM, MICHAEL F. (2013), Heywood, Anthony J; Smele, Jonathan D (eds.), "Jews and revolution in Kharkiv: how one Ukrainian city escaped a pogrom in 1905", The Russian Revolution of 1905, doi:10.4324/9780203002087, ISBN 9780203002087, archived from the original on 14 August 2022, retrieved 14 August 2022 "УКРАЇНСЬКА СОЦІАЛ-ДЕМОКРАТИЧНА РОБІТНИЧА ПАРТІЯ, Ukrainian Soviet Encyclopedia". leksika.com.ua. Archived from the original on 25 January 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Senkus, Roman; Zhukovsky, Arkadii (1993). "Ukrainian Social Democratic Workers' party". www.encyclopediaofukraine.com. Archived from the original on 22 September 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Oliver Henry Radkey (1989). Russia goes to the polls: the election to the all-Russian Constituent Assembly, 1917. Cornell University Press. pp. 115, 117. ISBN 978-0-8014-2360-4. Archived from the original on 2 October 2023. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Historical Dictionary of Ukraine (Historical Dictionaries of Europe) Archived 5 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine by Ivan Katchanovski, Scarecrow Press (Publication date: 11 July 2013), ISBN 0810878453 (page 713) Literary Politics in Soviet Ukraine, 1917–1934 Archived 5 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine. Durham and London: Duke University Press. ISBN 0-8223-1099-6 (page 7) World War I: A Student Encyclopedia Archived 11 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine. ABC-CLIO. p. 1195. ISBN 978-1-85109-879-8 Ukraine: The Phony War? Archived 13 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine, The New York Review of Books (27 April 2014) Borderlands into Bordered Lands: Geopolitics of Identity in Post-Soviet Ukraine (Soviet and Post-Soviet Politics and Society, Vol. 98) (Volume 98) Archived 5 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine, Ibidem Verlag, 2010, ISBN 383820042X (page 24) The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression Archived 11 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine, Harvard University Press, 858 pages, ISBN 0-674-07608-7, page 97 The A to Z of the Russo-Japanese War Archived 5 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine. Scarecrow Press Inc. ISBN 978-0-8108-6841-0 (page 101) "Донбас і Україна (з історії революційної боротьби 1917–18 рр.) (Donbas and Ukraine. (From articles and declarations of Mykola Skrypnyk))". Istpravda.com.ua. Archived from the original on 27 August 2012. Retrieved 21 July 2012. HEWRYK, TITUS D. (1992). "Planning of the Capital in Kharkiv". Harvard Ukrainian Studies. 16 (3/4): 325–359. ISSN 0363-5570. JSTOR 41036482. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Derzhprom statistics". Kharkov.ua. Archived from the original on 29 November 2009. Retrieved 21 July 2012. "Kharkiv". www.encyclopediaofukraine.com. Archived from the original on 22 September 2015. Retrieved 12 August 2022. Stalin, Joseph (1931). "To the Workers and the Administrative and Technical personnel of Kharkov Tractor Works Project". Stalin Collected Works. 13. Archived from the original on 10 July 2022. Retrieved 12 August 2022. Tank factory workers decry war that pits Ukrainian against Ukrainian Archived 26 June 2022 at the Wayback Machine, Al Jazeera America (27 February 2015) Первая всеобщая перепись населения Российской Империи 1897 г. Распределение населения по родному языку и уездам 50 губерний Европейской России Archived 25 February 2022 at the Wayback Machine Демоскоп Історія міста Харкова ХХ століття, Харків 2004, р. 456 "Kharkov, Ukraine Virtual Jewish History Tour". www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Archived from the original on 5 April 2023. Retrieved 15 August 2022. Games from the Past: The continuity and change of the identity dynamic in Donbas from a historical perspective Archived 27 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine, Södertörn University (19 May 2014) Language Policy in the Soviet Union Archived 22 September 2023 at the Wayback Machine by Lenore Grenoble, Springer Science+Business Media, 2003, ISBN 978-1-4020-1298-3 (page 84) Leonavičius, Vylius; Ozolinčiūtė, Eglė (1 December 2019). "The Transformation of the Soviet Agriculture". Sociologija: Mintis Ir Veiksmas. 44 (1): 93–131. doi:10.15388/SocMintVei.2019.1.10. S2CID 213399789. Ellman, Michael (June 2007). "Stalin and the Soviet Famine of 1932–33 Revisited". Europe-Asia Studies. 59 (4). Routledge: 663–693. doi:10.1080/09668130701291899. S2CID 53655536. Beal, Fred Erwin (1937). Proletarian journey: New England, Gastonia, Moscow. New York: Hillman-Curl. pp. 283–284, 289–291. Archived from the original on 10 August 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Levy, Clifford J. (16 March 2009). "A New View of a Famine That Killed Millions". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 4 August 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Robert Conquest (2000). Reflections on a Ravaged Century (1st ed.). New York City, London: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 96. ISBN 0-393-04818-7. OL 24766940M. Wikidata Q108386870. Boriak, Hennadii (Fall 2001). "The publication of sources on the history of the 1932-1933 famine-genocide: history, current state, and prospects". Harvard Ukrainian Studies 25 (3-4): 167–186. Ukrainian minstrels: and the blind shall sing Archived 5 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine by Natalie Kononenko, M.E. Sharp, ISBN 0-7656-0144-3/ISBN 978-0-7656-0144-5, page 116 Liber, George (1992). Soviet Nationality Policy, Urban Growth, and Identity Change in the Ukrainian SSR, 1923–1934. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0521522434. Archived from the original on 2 October 2023. Retrieved 2 September 2017. Fischer, Benjamin B., "The Katyn Controversy: Stalin's Killing Field", Studies in Intelligence, Winter 1999–2000, last accessed on 10 December 2005 "Records Relating to the Katyn Forest Massacre at the National Archives". National Archives. 15 August 2016. Archived from the original on 8 April 2017. Retrieved 12 August 2022. "Харків часів "дорослого дитинства" Людмили Гурченко (Kharkiv at times of "matured childhood" of Lyudmila Gurchenko)". Istpravda.com.ua. Archived from the original on 22 June 2012. Retrieved 21 July 2012. "Kharkiv through the eyes of Lyudmila Gurchenko". Andersval.nl. 31 March 2011. Archived from the original on 6 September 2012. Retrieved 15 July 2012. The Red Army committed 765,300 men to this offensive, suffering 277,190 casualties (170,958 killed/missing/PoW, 106,232 wounded) and losing 652 tanks, and 4,924 guns and mortars. Glantz, David M. (1998). Kharkov 1942, anatomy of a military disaster through Soviet eyes. Ian Allan Publishing. p. 218. ISBN 0-7110-2562-2. per Robert M. Citino, author of "Death of the Wehrmacht", and other sources, the Red Army came to within a few miles of Kharkiv on 14 May 1942 by Soviet forces under Marshal Timoshenko before being driven back by German forces under Field Marshal Fedor von Bock, p. 100 Ukrainian Institute of National Remembrance (2015). Ukraine in World War II. Ukraine: Ukrainian Institute of National Remembrance. p. 26. Archived from the original on 31 July 2023. Retrieved 31 July 2023. "Харьков в годы Великой Отечественной войны | Вечерний Харьков". Evening Kharkiv. Archived from the original on 12 August 2022. Retrieved 12 August 2022. Karpyuk, Gennady (23–29 December 2006), Трагедія, про яку дехто не дуже хотів знати [A tragedy that not everyone wanted to know about], Дзеркало Тижня, vol. 49, archived from the original on 9 December 2008, retrieved 16 December 2011 Subtelny, Orest (2009). Ukraine: A History (4th ed.). University of Toronto Press. p. 338. ISBN 978-1442609914. Archived from the original on 11 April 2023. Retrieved 13 March 2023. Kelly, Lidia (22 March 2022). "WWII Holocaust survivor killed in Ukraine's Kharkiv". Reuters. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "96-year-old Holocaust survivor said killed in Russian shelling of his Kharkiv home". Times of Israel. 21 March 2022. Archived from the original on 13 August 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Verini, James (19 May 2022). "Surviving the Siege of Kharkiv". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 5 July 2023. Retrieved 14 August 2023. Studenna-Skrukwa, Marta (2020). "Model Soviet City of the Brezhnev Era: The Image of Kharkiv in Selected Propaganda Texts". Historia i Polityka. 32 (39): 67. doi:10.12775/HiP.2020.015. ISSN 1899-5160. S2CID 229566527. Archived from the original on 12 August 2022. Retrieved 12 August 2022. Remnick, David (29 September 1989). "SHCHERBITSKY DISMISSED AS COMMUNIST PARTY BOSS IN UKRAINE". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on 28 August 2017. Retrieved 14 August 2022. КАЛІНІЧЕНКО В.В., РИБАЛКА І.К. ІСТОРІЯ УКРАЇНИ. ЧАСТИНА ІІІ: 1917-2003 рр. (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 12 May 2008. McFaul, Michael (1993). Post-communist politics : democratic prospects in Russia and Eastern Europe. Internet Archive. Washington, D.C. : Center for Strategic and International Studies. pp. 17–19. ISBN 978-0-89206-208-9. Perrie, Maureen; Lieven, D. C. B.; Suny, Ronald Grigor (2 November 2006). "The Gorbachev Era". The Cambridge History of Russia: Volume 3, The Twentieth Century. Cambridge University Press. pp. 344–349. ISBN 978-0-521-81144-6. "Революція на граніті: Як харківські студенти змінили історію держави 30 років тому – новини Харкова". www.depo.ua (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. The lesson of the Revolution on Granite Archived 15 April 2021 at the Wayback Machine, Den (4 October 2016) Zhyshko, Serhii (2016). "The lesson of the Revolution on Granite". «Антидот» і «детокс» від «Дня». Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Ukrainian Independence Referendum". Seventeen Moments in Soviet History. 28 September 2015. Archived from the original on 14 April 2022. Retrieved 12 August 2022. "Virtual Jewish World: Kharkov, Ukraine". Jewish Virtual Library. Archived from the original on 5 April 2023. Retrieved 15 March 2022. "Khar'kiv". YIVO. Archived from the original on 12 May 2023. Retrieved 15 March 2022. Sutela, Pekka. "The Underachiever: Ukraine's Economy Since 1991". Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "The Party of Regions monopolises power in Ukraine". OSW Centre for Eastern Studies. 29 September 2010. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Platonova, Daria (2021). The Donbas Conflict in Ukraine: Elites, Protest, and Partition. Routledge. p. 27. ISBN 978-1-000-45326-3. Archived from the original on 2 October 2023. Retrieved 22 August 2022. Ukraine opposition protests election results Archived 20 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Kyiv Post (1 November 2012) Ukraine Authorities Clear Kharkiv Building, Arrest Scores Of 'Separatists' Archived 11 November 2021 at the Wayback Machine, Radio Free Europe (8 April 2014) How Eastern Ukraine Is Adapting and Surviving: The Case of Kharkiv Archived 8 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine, Carnegie Europe (12 September 2018) "Kharkiv Talks in a Viennese Kitchen – On Revolution, War and Literature in Ukraine". IWM WEBSITE. Archived from the original on 15 August 2022. Retrieved 15 August 2022. "Ukraine crisis: Timeline". BBC News. 13 November 2014. Archived from the original on 3 June 2014. Retrieved 22 March 2015. Roth, Andrew (4 March 2014). "From Russia, 'Tourists' Stir the Protests". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 4 March 2014. Retrieved 27 February 2017. "Russian site recruits 'volunteers' for Ukraine". BBC News. 4 March 2014. Archived from the original on 22 July 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018. "Pro-Russia activists declare establishment of 'Kharkiv people's republic'". Focus Information Agency. 7 April 2014. Archived from the original on 9 April 2014. Retrieved 13 April 2014. Times, The Moscow (8 April 2014). "Protesters Storm Kharkiv Theater Thinking It Was City Hall". The Moscow Times. Archived from the original on 15 August 2022. Retrieved 15 August 2022. "Kharkiv's Kernes justifies his 180-degree political turn by saying he was 'prisoner' of Yanukovych system" Archived 6 December 2021 at the Wayback Machine, MY-MEDIA, 6 March 2014; accessed 28 August 2014. "Authorities Clear Occupied Kharkiv Building". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 8 April 2014. Archived from the original on 11 November 2021. Retrieved 15 August 2022. Loiko, Sergei (28 April 2014). "Ukraine mayor in critical condition after he was shot in the back". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 15 August 2022. Retrieved 15 August 2022. "Kharkiv settles down, while pro-Russian separatists still hold buildings in Luhansk, Donetsk". Kyiv Post. 8 April 2014. Archived from the original on 13 January 2016. Retrieved 13 April 2014. "Kharkiv city government building infiltrated by pro-Russian protesters". Kyiv Post. 13 April 2014. Archived from the original on 13 January 2016. Retrieved 13 April 2014. "После нападения антимайдановцев на митинг Евромайдана в Харькове пострадало 50 человек : Новости УНИАН". Unian.net. 14 April 2014. Archived from the original on 19 May 2014. Retrieved 28 April 2014. "Ukraine crisis: US and EU to intensify Russia sanctions". BBC. 28 April 2014. Archived from the original on 1 March 2022. Retrieved 28 April 2014.Ukraine mayor in critical condition after he was shot in the back Archived 5 May 2014 at the Wayback Machine, Los Angeles Times (28 April 2014) "Latest from the Special Monitoring Mission in Ukraine based on information received until 23 June 2014" (Press release). Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. 24 June 2014. Archived from the original on 22 November 2015. Retrieved 22 August 2014. "Latest from the Special Monitoring Mission (SMM) in Ukraine based on information received until 18:00 hrs, 23 July" (Press release). Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. 24 July 2014. Archived from the original on 11 November 2021. Retrieved 25 July 2014. (in Ukrainian) Two liberty square rally Archived 20 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine, Status quo (17 August 2014) Ukrainian Crowds Topple Lenin Statue (Again) Archived 20 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 29 September 2014. Navalny, Alexei (23 September 2014). Соцопрос ФБК по Харьковской и Одесской областям. Европа, Россия, Новороссия [Survey of Kharkiv and Odesa Oblasts] (in Russian). navalny.com. Archived from the original on 23 September 2014. Лише 3% українців хочуть приєднання їх області до Росії [Only 3% of Ukrainians want their region to become part of Russia]. Dzerkalo Tyzhnia (in Ukrainian). 3 January 2015. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 23 January 2015. Seven recent blasts in Ukraine city stir fear of new Russian menace Archived 20 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine, Los Angeles Times (11 December 2014) Mysterious spate of bombings hit Ukraine military hub Archived 15 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine, Agence France-Presse (10 December 2014) SBU: Russian special services target Kharkiv, Odesa, situation difficult to control Archived 14 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine, Ukrainian Independent Information Agency (10 December 2014) Міліція з ясовує, хто напав на волонтерську "Станцію Харків" [Police finds out who attacked the volunteer-run "Station Kharkiv"] (in Ukrainian). ukrinform.ua. 9 January 2015. Archived from the original on 7 October 2015. Retrieved 22 March 2015."Станция Харьков" — первый пункт помощи переселенцам из зоны АТО ["Station Kharkiv" - the first point of assistance for displaced persons from the Donbas zone] (in Russian). 24tv.ua. 25 October 2014. Archived from the original on 14 January 2016. Retrieved 22 March 2015. UNIAN Archived 24 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine Anti-terrorist operation launched in Kharkiv due to fatal blast on Sunday – Turchynov, 22 February 2015. En.Censor.Net Archived 25 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Anti-terrorist operation started in Kharkiv: four participants on the explosion detained, 22 February 2015. Novorossia.Today Archived 25 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Turchinov announced start of the ATO in Kharkov. The highest level of terrorist threat had been introduced in the city, 23 February 2015. Bomb Attacks Increase In Ukraine's Second-Largest City, Kharkiv Archived 19 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine, NPR (6 April 2015) Kharkiv explosion targeting Ukrainian flag classified as 'terrorist act' Archived 14 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Ukraine Today (7 April 2015) Explosion In Ukraine's Kharkiv Targets National Flag Memorial Archived 7 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (7 April 2015) Unian Archived 25 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Over 200 men in balaclavas brawl at Kharkiv town hall, clash with police, 23 September 2015, 14:10. Появилось видео столкновений у горсовета Харькова [Video of riot at Kharkiv City Council]. korrespondent.net (in Russian). Archived from the original on 1 July 2023. Retrieved 1 July 2023. Kharkiv mayor Kernes dies Archived 11 November 2021 at the Wayback Machine, Ukrinform (17 December 2020) Помер Геннадій Кернес: мер Харкова, який виграв вибори з реанімації Archived 17 December 2020 at the Wayback Machine, BBC Ukrainian (17 December 2020) (in Ukrainian) (in Ukrainian) Keys to cities. What is the secret of longevity of mayors Archived 11 November 2021 at the Wayback Machine, The Ukrainian Week (10 August 2020) Jarábik, Natalia Shapovalova, Balázs. "How Eastern Ukraine Is Adapting and Surviving: The Case of Kharkiv". Carnegie Europe. Archived from the original on 8 March 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Про утворення та ліквідацію районів. Постанова Верховної Ради України № 807-ІХ". Голос України (in Ukrainian). 18 July 2020. Retrieved 3 October 2020. "Нові райони: карти + склад" (in Ukrainian). Міністерство розвитку громад та територій України. Schwirtz, Michael (25 February 2022). "Scenes from Kharkiv: Battle wreckage, the boom of artillery, and people sheltering in the subway". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 25 February 2022. Retrieved 26 February 2022. Harding, Luke (27 February 2022). "Kharkiv governor claims Russian troops repelled from city". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 February 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. "Ukrainian Tractor Factory Destroyed in Bombing". www.agequipmentintelligence.com. Archived from the original on 16 March 2022. Retrieved 14 March 2022. "Реальная Война Новости Украина". Telegram. Archived from the original on 14 March 2022. Retrieved 14 March 2022. video of the fire reportedly at the Kharkiv Tractor Plant, archived from the original on 14 March 2022, retrieved 14 March 2022 "Kharkiv catalogues war's toll on its architectural gems". the Guardian. 5 May 2022. Archived from the original on 24 July 2022. Retrieved 15 August 2022. "Ukraine: Cluster Munitions Launched Into Kharkiv Neighborhoods". Human Rights Watch. 4 March 2022. Archived from the original on 13 March 2022. Retrieved 13 March 2022. Богданьок, Олена (6 March 2022). "Харків, Чернігів, Маріуполь, Херсон, Гостомель і Волноваха тепер міста-герої". Суспільне | Новини (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 13 March 2022. Retrieved 13 March 2022. Norman, Greg (12 May 2022). "Russia withdrawing troops after 'heavy losses', proving 'inability to capture key Ukrainian cities,' UK says". Fox News. Archived from the original on 15 May 2022. Retrieved 14 May 2022. "Enemy shell falls near apartment building in Kharkiv region". www.ukrinform.net. 14 August 2022. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Russians fire missiles at Kharkiv Region's Zmiiv community, three civilians injured". www.ukrinform.net. 14 August 2022. Archived from the original on 14 August 2022. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Ukraine war: Russia hits back after Kyiv attack on border city". BBC News. 31 December 2023. Retrieved 31 December 2023. "Russia launches largest air attack on Ukraine since start of full-scale war". The Kyiv Independent. 29 December 2023. Retrieved 30 December 2023. "In Kharkiv, the Central Park named after Gorky and several streets". Ukrinform (in Ukrainian). 13 June 2023. Retrieved 26 January 2024. "Weather and Climate - The Climate of Kharkiv" (in Russian). Weather and Climate (Погода и климат). Archived from the original on 13 December 2019. Retrieved 8 November 2021. "World Meteorological Organization Climate Normals for 1981–2010". World Meteorological Organization. Archived from the original on 17 July 2021. Retrieved 18 July 2021. "Kharkiv Climate Normals 1991–2020". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved 1 November 2023. (in Russian) List of 170 renamed streets Archived 24 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine, SQ (20 November 2015) (in Ukrainian) Kharkiv city council renamed 173 streets, 4 parks and a metro station Archived 27 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine, RBC Ukraine (20 November 2015) (in Russian) 50 streets renamed in Kharkiv: list Archived 4 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine, SQ (3 February 2015) (in Ukrainian) In Kharkiv, five metro stations and fifty streets have been communicated Archived 30 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine, Korrespondent.net, (18 May 2016) (in Russian) Districts Of Kharkiv. History with geography Archived 18 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine, SQ (23 February 2015) Л.И. Мачулин. Mysteries of the underground Kharkiv. — Х.: 2005. ISBN 966-8768-00-0 (in Russian) Kharkiv: Architecture, monuments, renovations: Travel guide. Ed. Aleksandr Jurevitsj Leybfreyd [ru], В. Реусов, А. Тиц. — Х.: Прапор, 1987(in Russian) N. T. Dyachenko (1977). Улицы и площади Харькова [Streets and squares of Kharkiv]. dalizovut.narod.ru (in Russian). Archived from the original on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 31 March 2015. А.В. Скоробогатов. Kharkiv in times of German occupation (1941–1943). – X.: Прапор, 2006. ISBN 966-7880-79-6(in Ukrainian) Oleksandr Leibfreid, Yu. Poliakova. Kharkiv. From fortress to capital. – Х.: Фолио, 2004(in Russian) State archives of Kharkiv Oblast. Ф. Р-2982, оп. 2, file 16, pp 53–54 Colonel Н. И. Рудницкий. Военкоматы Харькова в предвоенные и военные годы.(in Russian) In reference to the German census of December 1941; without children and teenagers no older 16 years of age; numerous city-dwellers evaded the registration(in Russian) Nikita Khrushchev. Report to ЦК ВКП(б) of 30 August 1943. History: without «white spots». Kharkiv izvestia, No. 100–101, 23 August 2008, page 6(in Russian) Ukrainian Census (2001) "Major Cities in Ukraine by Population (2014)". World Population Review. Archived from the original on 3 April 2014. Retrieved 14 April 2014. "Kharkiv today". Our Kharkiv (in Russian). Archived from the original on 22 August 2006. Retrieved 4 May 2007. "Population of Kharkiv, Ukraine (UA) 2023". World Meters. Archived from the original on 12 October 2023. Retrieved 11 October 2023. "Results / General results of the census / Number of cities". 2001 Ukrainian Census. Archived from the original on 9 January 2006. Retrieved 28 August 2006. "Всеукраїнський перепис населення 2001 | English version | Results | General results of the census | Urban and rural population". 2001.ukrcensus.gov.ua. Archived from the original on 22 April 2017. Retrieved 11 January 2017. "Общая информация о Харькове на vharkov". vharkov.ru. Archived from the original on 29 August 2014. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Всеукраїнський перепис населення 2001 – Результати – Основні підсумки – Загальна кількість населення – Харківська область". 2001.ukrcensus.gov.ua. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Рідні мови в об'єднаних територіальних громадах України" (in Ukrainian). "Municipal Survey 2023" (PDF). ratinggroup.ua. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 July 2023. Retrieved 9 August 2023. "Харьковская епархия Украинской Православной Церкви". Kharkiv Diocese. Archived from the original on 25 June 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Харьковская епархия Украинской Православной Церкви". Kharkiv Diocese. Archived from the original on 24 June 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Харьковская епархия Украинской Православной Церкви". Kharkiv Diocese. Archived from the original on 12 June 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Харьковская епархия Украинской Православной Церкви". Kharkiv Diocese. Archived from the original on 24 June 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Освящен храм благоверной царицы Тамары города Харькова – Харьковская епархия". Kharkiv Diocese. Archived from the original on 24 June 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Kharkov Jewish Community". jewishkharkov.org. Archived from the original on 3 June 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Розробка стратегії розвитку міста Харкова на 2016-2020 роки "Харків – стратегія успіху"". strategy.kharkov.ua. Archived from the original on 18 June 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. Круглий стіл «Розробка Стратегії розвитку міста Харкова до 2020 року: наука і освіта». old.karazin.ua. Archived from the original on 1 July 2023. Retrieved 1 July 2023. LLC, Hulu. В університеті Каразіна обговорять перспективи розвитку освіти. www.city.kharkiv.ua (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 1 July 2023. Retrieved 1 July 2023. "www.led.org.ua/en/". led.org.ua. Archived from the original on 9 August 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "VII International economic forum "INNOVATIONS. INVESTMENTS. KHARKIV INITIATIVES!" - Announcements - Embassy of Ukraine in the United States of America". usa.mfa.gov.ua. Archived from the original on 13 August 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Урядовий портал :: International Economic Forum "Innovations. Investments. Kharkiv Initiatives" due on September 5". Archived from the original on 16 August 2016. Retrieved 27 June 2016. "statements/amb-kharkiv-econ-forum-09042015". ukraine.usembassy.gov. Archived from the original on 7 January 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Kharkiv – U.S. Embassy Kyiv Blog". usembassykyiv.wordpress.com. Archived from the original on 21 January 2012. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Radmir Expohall | Radmir Expohall". radmir-expohall.com.ua. Archived from the original on 19 July 2008. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "spetm.com.ua". spetm.com.ua. Archived from the original on 28 September 2008. Retrieved 20 April 2012. "Hartron: Forms of cooperation". hartron.com.ua. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 22 March 2015. "Kharkiv". Kharkiv. Archived from the original on 7 June 2019. Retrieved 13 June 2019. "Kharkiv". Kharkiv. Archived from the original on 9 June 2019. Retrieved 13 June 2019. Торговый центр "Сумской рынок" по адресу Харьков, Шевченковский район, Культуры, 8. kharkov.info. Archived from the original on 26 June 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "V. N. Karazin Kharkiv National University". karazin.ua. Archived from the original on 6 June 2023. Retrieved 1 July 2023. "Харківський національний університет імені В.Н. Каразіна". vnz.univ.kiev.ua. Archived from the original on 27 August 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. Khwaja, Barbara (26 May 2017). "Health Reform in Revolutionary Russia". Socialist Health Association. Archived from the original on 30 August 2017. Retrieved 26 May 2017. "house". khdu.org. Archived from the original on 27 July 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "ПРО "ЛАНДАУЦЕНТР" |". landaucentre.org. Archived from the original on 18 July 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. Головна - ХАТОБ, ХНАТОБ. hatob.com.ua. Archived from the original on 16 July 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Home". hatob.com.ua. Archived from the original on 19 May 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Харківський Державний Академічний Драматичний Театр ім. Т.Г.Шевченка". theatre-shevchenko.com.ua. Archived from the original on 15 June 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "rusdrama.kh.ua/". rusdrama.kh.ua. Archived from the original on 27 June 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Kharkiv got rid of the Pushkin Theater". Status Quo (in Ukrainian). 23 October 2023. Retrieved 26 January 2024. "Харьковский театр для детей и юношества" [Theatre for Children and Youth]. Archived from the original on 21 November 2015. Retrieved 6 August 2018. "Kharkiv city guide". uefa.com. 25 January 2010. Archived from the original on 2 October 2023. Retrieved 22 March 2015. "Ukraine Travel Guide: Kharkiv, Ukraine". ukrainetravel.co. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 22 March 2015. "Kharkiv International Festival of Science Fiction "Star Bridge - 2011"". V. N. Karazin Kharkiv National University. September 2011. Archived from the original on 1 July 2023. Retrieved 1 July 2023. "Органный зал, Харьков – концерты, камерная и органная музыка | Харьковская филармония". filarmonia.kh.ua. 28 October 2015. Archived from the original on 6 July 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Kharkiv I.P. Kotlyarevsky National University of Arts". num.kharkiv.ua. Archived from the original on 1 July 2023. Retrieved 1 July 2023. "Минкультуры запретил Харькову проводить конкурс им. Гната Хоткевича - Комментарии". Proua.com. 16 April 2010. Archived from the original on 28 December 2013. Retrieved 15 July 2012. "Фестиваль "Харків - місто добрих надій". Информация для участников | Харьковская филармония". filarmonia.kh.ua. 28 October 2015. Archived from the original on 27 May 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Харьковская сирень - Главная". sirenfest.net.ua. Archived from the original on 27 September 2014. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "times.kh.ua/news/fresh/kharkovskaya_siren_2016_novye_ladoni_znamenitykh_akterov_na_allee_zvezd_foto/158954/". times.kh.ua. Archived from the original on 24 October 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. Возвращение «Харьковской сирени»: новые ладони знаменитых актеров на Аллее звезд (ФОТО) [Return of "Kharkiv Lilac": new palms of famous actors on the Avenue of Stars (PHOTO)]. Дозор.UA. Archived from the original on 29 June 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. "Музеї Харківщини". museums.kh.ua. Archived from the original on 8 September 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Information in English - Харківський історичний музей імені М.Ф.Сумцова". museum.kh.ua. Archived from the original on 1 August 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Kharkiv Art Museum". artmuseum.kh.ua. Archived from the original on 11 March 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2023. "Museum of Nature | Karazin University". karazin.ua. Archived from the original on 24 March 2022. Retrieved 18 June 2017. Державний Музей природи Харківського національного університету імені В.Н. Каразіна. zvo.knu.ua. Archived from the original on 1 July 2023. Retrieved 1 July 2023. Музей історії Харківського національного університету - Головна [History Museum of Kharkiv National University - Main]. History Museum of Kharkiv National University. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "University History Museum". karazin.ua. Archived from the original on 29 June 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. Музей історії Харківського національного університету імені В.Н. Каразіна. zvo.knu.ua. Archived from the original on 29 June 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. "www.maesu.org/". maesu.org. Archived from the original on 21 June 2012. Retrieved 18 June 2017. Музей археології та етнографії Слобідської України [Museum of Archeology and Ethnography of Slobid Ukraine]. zvo.knu.ua. Archived from the original on 1 July 2023. Retrieved 1 July 2023. "www.kpi.kharkov.ua/ru/home/muzeum/". kpi.kharkov.ua. Archived from the original on 16 April 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Музей НТУ "ХПI"". web.kpi.kharkov.ua. Archived from the original on 21 June 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Архів подій | Музей НТУ "ХПI"". web.kpi.kharkov.ua. Archived from the original on 26 April 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Фотогалерея | Музей НТУ "ХПI"". web.kpi.kharkov.ua. Archived from the original on 29 May 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. Музей історії Національного технічного університету «Харківський політехнічний інститут» [Museum of History of the National Technical University "Kharkiv Polytechnic Institute"]. zvo.knu.ua. Archived from the original on 1 July 2023. Retrieved 1 July 2023. Музей Національного аерокосмічного університету «ХАІ» [Museum of the National Aerospace University "KHAI"]. zvo.knu.ua. Archived from the original on 1 July 2023. Retrieved 1 July 2023. "Музей истории Национального фармацевтического университета - Національний фармацевтичний університет (НФаУ)". nuph.edu.ua. Archived from the original on 28 April 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Экспозиционные залы музея - Національний фармацевтичний університет (НФаУ)". nuph.edu.ua. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. Музей історії фармації України [Museum of the History of Pharmacy of Ukraine]. zvo.knu.ua. Archived from the original on 1 July 2023. Retrieved 1 July 2023. "The Kharkiv Maritime Museum". Archived from the original on 18 June 2012. Retrieved 13 November 2017. "The KI City Museum. Shulzhenko". Archived from the original on 4 October 2013. Retrieved 1 December 2017. moygorod.ua. "Музей секса и сексуальных культур мира". Музей секса и сексуальных культур мира (in Russian). Archived from the original on 9 April 2022. Retrieved 9 March 2022. В Харькове появится памятник Сагайдачному [A monument to Sahaidachny in Kharkiv]. Status Quo (in Russian). 24 June 2023. Archived from the original on 2 June 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. FlexKit. "The Spring". www.kharkovinfo.com. Archived from the original on 10 May 2020. Retrieved 2 May 2020. "Губерния - деловой представительский журнал". guberniya.net. Archived from the original on 22 June 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. Andrew Rybka (31 May 2008). "Харьков транспортный. Новости. Останови автомобиль. Сколько стоит минута простоя в ежедневных пробках. Харьковские изобретатели бьются над проблемой разгрузки города". Gortransport.kharkov.ua. Archived from the original on 24 April 2015. Retrieved 12 March 2013. "Metro maps in Ukraine". Archived from the original on 26 June 2022. Retrieved 5 May 2022. "Metro. Basic facts". City transportation Kharkiv (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 8 June 2015. Retrieved 1 March 2011. Poroshenko opens new subway station in Kharkiv Archived 22 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Interfax-Ukraine (19 August 2016) "Railway Stations :: Euro-2012 :: Офіційний веб-сайт Укрзалізниці". uz.gov.ua. Archived from the original on 6 March 2022. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Main | 5th Kharkiv International Marathon". kharkivmarathon.com. Archived from the original on 22 November 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Kharkiv International Marathon 2017 - Race Details - Marathon Runners Diary". marathonrunnersdiary.com. Archived from the original on 28 June 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Ukraine Sport Events - Спортивные мероприятия Украины". sportevent.com.ua. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Kharkiv International Marathon 2016 « СОВЕТ МОЛОДЫХ УЧЁНЫХ". blogs.kpi.kharkov.ua. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "гольф-курорт Superior Golf & Spa Resort в Харькове". superiorresort.com. Archived from the original on 17 June 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "zabytki.in.ua/ru/430/kharkovskii-ippodrom". zabytki.in.ua. Archived from the original on 12 March 2012. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Харьковский ипподром". ippodrom.pp.ua. Archived from the original on 9 July 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Конный спорт". ippodrom.pp.ua. Archived from the original on 16 June 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Харьковский Конный Завод - продажа лошадей в Украине". konezavod.com. Archived from the original on 20 June 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "feldman-ecopark.com/en.html#". feldman-ecopark.com. Archived from the original on 25 December 2016. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "В Харькове установили велосипедный рекорд. Любители двухколесного транспорта выстроились в огромную фигуру велосипеда | Харьков | Вести". vesti-ukr.com. 24 May 2015. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Веложизнь в Харькове - Харьков на Незабаром". kharkov.nezabarom.ua. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. "Харьковский Велосипедный Завод им.Петровского - велосипеды, тележки, санки, товары для отдыха". usi.ua. Archived from the original on 20 June 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2017. Міста-партнери [Partner cities]. www.city.kharkiv.ua. Archived from the original on 13 May 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. "Albuquerque welcomes new Ukrainian 'sister' city". KRQE News 13 (www.krqe.com). 29 June 2023. Archived from the original on 10 July 2023. Retrieved 10 July 2023. Kharkiv at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage "Kharkov (town)" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 15 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 772. "Kharkov (government)" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 15 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 772. Citynet UA – Official website of Kharkiv City Information Centre (in Ukrainian) Misto Kharkiv – Official website of Kharkiv City Council (in Ukrainian and Russian) Study in Kharkiv Archived 29 June 2023 at the Wayback Machine – Official website of Study in Ukraine (in English, French, and Ukrainian) Listen to this article (2 minutes) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 7 January 2016 (2016-01-07), and does not reflect subsequent edits. (Audio help · More spoken articles)