This is a list of cities and towns in Belarus. Neither the Belarusian nor Russian languages have equivalent words to "city" and "town" in English. The word horad (Belarusian: горад) or gorod (Russian: город) is used for both. Belarusian legislation uses a three-level hierarchy of town classifications. According to the Law under May 5, 1998, the categories of the most developed urban localities in Belarus are as follows: capital — Minsk; city of regional subordinance (Belarusian: горад абласнога падпарадкавання; Russian: город областного подчинения) — urban locality with a population of not less than 50,000 people; it has its own body of self-government, known as Council of Deputies (Belarusian: Савет дэпутатаў; Russian: совет депутатов) and an executive committee (Belarusian: выканаўчы камітэт; Russian: исполнительный комитет), which stand on the level with these of a raion (Belarusian: раён). city of district subordinance (Belarusian: горад раённага падпарадкавання; Russian: город районного подчинения) — urban locality with a population of more than 6,000 people; it may have its own body of self-government (Belarusian: Савет дэпутатаў; Russian: совет депутатов) and an executive committee (Belarusian: выканаўчы камітэт; Russian: исполнительный комитет), which belong to the same level as these of rural councils and of s.c. haradski pasiolak (Belarusian: гарадскі пасёлак; Russian: городской посёлок) (a type of a smaller urban locality). This division was inherited by the contemporary Republic of Belarus from the Byelorussian SSR and introduced in 1938. As of 2020, 115 settlements had the status of a city/town. Among them: 10 cities of regional subordinance; 104 towns of district subordinance; Minsk — the capital of the country. Map legend: Capital city Cities and towns of regional subordination Cities and towns of district subordination Minsk Grodno Brest Mogilev Gomel Vitebsk Zhodzina Barysaw Salihorsk Maladzyechna Slutsk Vileyka Dzyarzhynsk Maryina Horka Stowbtsy Smalyavichy Zaslawye Nyasvizh Fanipal Byerazino Lyuban Staryya Darohi Kletsk Lahoysk Valozhyn Chervyen Kopyl Uzda Krupki Myadzyel Orsha Novopolotsk Polotsk Pastavy Hlybokaye Lyepyel Novolukoml Haradok Baran Talachyn Braslaw Chashniki Miory Dubrowna Syanno Vyerkhnyadzvinsk Dokshytsy Dzisna Babruisk Horki Asipovichy Krychaw Bykhaw Klimavichy Shklow Kastsyukovichy Mstsislaw Byalynichy Chavusy Kirawsk Cherykaw Slawharad Kruhlaye Klichaw Mazyr Zhlobin Svyetlahorsk Rechytsa Kalinkavichy Rahachow Dobrush Zhytkavichy Khoiniki Pyetrykaw Yelsk Buda-Kashalyova Narowlya Vyetka Chachersk Vasilyevichy Turov Baranavichy Pinsk Kobryn Byaroza Luninyets Ivatsevichy Pruzhany Ivanava Drahichyn Hantsavichy Zhabinka Mikashevichy Byelaazyorsk Stolin Malaryta Lyakhavichy Kamyenyets Davyd-Haradok Vysokaye Kosava Lida Slonim Vawkavysk Smarhon Navahrudak Masty Shchuchyn Ashmyany Skidzyelʹ Byarozawka Iwye Dzyatlava Svislach Astravyets Sharkawshchyna Minsk, City Hall Gomel, Rumyantsev-Paskevich Residence Mogilev, City Hall Vitebsk, City Hall Grodno, Cathedral of St. Francis Xavier Brest, Church of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross Babruysk, Church of the Immaculate Conception of Saint Virgin Mary Baranavichy, Lenin Square Barysaw, Church of the Resurrection of Christ Pinsk, Jesuit collegium Orsha, former Jesuit Cloister Mazyr, Cathedral of Archangel Michael Salihorsk, Administration Building Instruction on transliteration of Belarusian geographical names with letters of Latin script Names of Belarusian places in other languages List of renamed cities in Belarus "Закон Республики Беларусь от 5 мая 1998 года № 154-З "Об административно-территориальном делении и порядке решения вопросов административно-территориального устройства Республики Беларусь"". Национальный правовой Интернет-портал Республики Беларусь. Retrieved 2010-06-03. Указ Президиума Верховного Совета БССР от 27 сентября 1938 года «О классификации населённых пунктов Белорусской ССР» (Собрание законов Белорусской ССР и указов Президиума Верховного Совета Белорусской ССР, 1938—1955 гг. — Мн.: издание Президиума Верховного Совета Белорусской ССР, 1956. — С.71—74) Административно-территориальное деление Республики Беларусь на 1 января 2010 года // Статистический ежегодник Республики Беларусь 2010 / Зинковский В.И. и др.. — Мн.: Национальный статистический комитет Республики Беларусь, 2009. — С. 26. "Численность населения на 1 января 2012 года и среднегодовая численность населения за 2011 год по Республике Беларусь в разрезе областей, районов, городов, поселков городского типа". Национальный статистический комитет Республики Беларусь. Archived from the original on 13 August 2020. "Перепись населения 2009. Население Республики Беларусь: его численность и состав". Национальный статистический комитет Республики Беларусь. Minsk, being the capital of BSSR, became a city of republican subordinance on May, 14 1946. It means that it has become a separate administrative unit on the level with a region (voblasć). It has been included into the table for convenience. Браслав // Большой энциклопедический словарь / Гл. ред. В.П.Шишков. — Москва: НИ «Большая Российская энциклопедия», 1998. — 640 с. — ISBN 978-5-85270-262-3 Toponym.by — toponyms map of Belarus. Search by pattern and the visualization on the map. Current Status of United Nations Romanization Systems for Geographical Names of Belarus Belarus Maps at World-Gazetteer at archive.today (archived 2012-12-09)