The 1997 Men's Ice Hockey World Championships was the 61st such event sanctioned by the International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF). Teams representing 36 countries participated in several levels of competition, while three other teams competed in an exhibition tournament to gain experience before joining on an official basis in the 1998 competition. The competition also served as qualifications for group placements in the 1998 competition. The top Championship Group tournament took place in Finland from 26 April to 14 May 1997, with matches played in Helsinki, Tampere and Turku. Twelve teams took part, with the first round being split into two teams of six, and the six best teams going to a further group stage. Canada beat Sweden in the final game, best of three, where they won 2–1 in games, and became world champions for the 21st time. Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Teams that had played each other in the first round carried those results forward. First and second place played off for gold, third and fourth for bronze. Source:[citation needed] Teams that had played each other in the first round carried those results forward. Last place was not relegated to Group B, instead they had to play against three qualifiers from Group B for the last two openings in the 1998 Group A tournament. This was Germany's lowest finish since 1965. Source:[citation needed] Norway was sent to 1998 Group A Qualifier. Played 12–21 April in Katowice (Spodek) and Sosnowiec (Stadion Zimowy). With the announcement that Group A would be expanding from twelve to sixteen nations, Group B would also undergo significant changes. The winner and next year's host (Switzerland) were promoted. In addition, the remaining three best teams would win the opportunity to play in a qualifying tournament against the last place team from Group A, where the top two would be included in the Group A tournament. Source:[citation needed] Belarus, as winner, was promoted to Group A. Switzerland, as host, was also promoted to Group A. Kazakhstan, Austria, and Poland were all promoted to the Qualifying tournament for Group A, along with Norway. No one was relegated. Played 22–28 March in Tallinn and Kohtla-Järve. Along with the expansion of Group A, a provision was made to allow the best "Far East" team to qualify directly. Beginning in 1999 there would be a tournament to decide who that would be. But for now, the top placing "Far East" hockey nation was able to proceed directly from Group C to Group A. For this year, as well, promotion to Group B was available to the top three European teams, and there was no relegation. Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Japan was promoted to Group A as the "Far East Qualifier", Ukraine, Slovenia, and Estonia were all promoted to Group B. Source:[citation needed] Played 7–14 April in Canillo. With Group A expansion, four nations were promoted to Group C. Source:[citation needed] Croatia and South Korea were promoted to Group C. Source:[citation needed] Spain and Yugoslavia were promoted to Group C. Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Three men's teams that were going to be included in Group D in 1998 played a tournament in Ankara Turkey from 19 to 24 February 1997. Source:[citation needed] Best players selected by the directorate: Best Goaltender: Tommy Salo Best Defenceman: Rob Blake Best Forward: Michael Nylander Media All-Star Team: Goaltender: Tommy Salo Defence: Rob Blake, Teppo Numminen Forwards: Michael Nylander, Martin Procházka, Vladimír Vůjtek The final standings of the tournament according to IIHF: List shows the top skaters sorted by points, then goals. Source: [1] Only the top five goaltenders, based on save percentage, who have played 40% of their team's minutes are included in this list. Source: [2] 1997 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships 1997 IIHF Women's World Championship Summary at Passionhockey.com "Historia hokeja w Polsce". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 3 January 2014. Complete results Duplacey, James (1998). Total Hockey: The official encyclopedia of the National Hockey League. Total Sports. pp. 498–528. ISBN 0-8362-7114-9. Podnieks, Andrew (2010). IIHF Media Guide & Record Book 2011. Moydart Press. pp. 160–1.