Katheryn Elizabeth Hudson (born October 25, 1984), known professionally as Katy Perry, is an American singer, songwriter, and television personality. She is known for her influence on modern pop music and her camp style, being dubbed the "Queen of Camp" by Vogue and Rolling Stone. At 16, Perry released a gospel record titled Katy Hudson (2001) under Red Hill Records, which was commercially unsuccessful. She moved to Los Angeles at 17 to venture into secular music, and later adopted the stage name "Katy Perry" from her mother's maiden name. She recorded an album while signed to Columbia Records, but was dropped before signing to Capitol Records. Perry rose to fame with One of the Boys (2008), a pop rock record containing her debut single "I Kissed a Girl" and follow-up single "Hot n Cold", which reached number one and three on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 respectively. The disco-influenced pop album Teenage Dream (2010) spawned five U.S. number one singles—"California Gurls", "Teenage Dream", "Firework", "E.T.", and "Last Friday Night (T.G.I.F.)"— the only album by a female singer to do so. A reissue of the album titled Teenage Dream: The Complete Confection (2012) subsequently produced the U.S. number one single "Part of Me". Her empowerment-themed album Prism (2013) had two U.S. number one singles, "Roar" and "Dark Horse". Both their respective music videos made Perry the first artist to have multiple videos reach one billion views on Vevo and YouTube. The electropop album Witness (2017) featured themes of feminism and a political subtext, while Smile (2020) was influenced by motherhood and her mental health journey. Afterwards, she embarked on her Las Vegas concert residency titled Play (2021–2023), receiving critical acclaim and commercial success. Perry is one of the best-selling music artists of all time, having sold over 143 million records worldwide. She has the most U.S. diamond certified singles for any female artist (4). All of her studio albums released under Capitol have individually surpassed one billion streams on Spotify. She has nine U.S. number one singles, three U.S. number one albums and has received various accolades, including a Billboard Spotlight Award (currently the only female artist to have one), four Guinness World Records, five Billboard Music Awards, five American Music Awards, a Brit Award, and a Juno Award. Perry has been included in the annual Forbes lists of highest-earning women in music from 2011 to 2019. Outside of music, she released an autobiographical documentary titled Katy Perry: Part of Me in 2012, voiced Smurfette in The Smurfs film series, and launched her own shoe line Katy Perry Collections in 2017. Perry began serving as a judge on American Idol during its sixteenth season in 2018. She is also the second most-followed woman and the sixth most-followed person on Twitter, with over 106.7 million followers. Katheryn Elizabeth Hudson was born on October 25, 1984, in Santa Barbara, California, to Pentecostal pastors Mary Christine (née Perry) and Maurice Keith Hudson. Both of her parents turned to religion after a "wild youth". Perry has English, German, Irish, and Portuguese ancestry. Through her mother, she is a niece of film director Frank Perry. She has a younger brother named David, who is also a singer, and an older sister, Angela. From ages three to 11, Perry frequently moved across the country as her very strict parents set up churches before settling again in Santa Barbara. Growing up, she attended religious schools and camps, including Paradise Valley Christian School in Arizona and Santa Barbara Christian School in California during her elementary years. The family struggled financially, sometimes using food stamps and eating food from the food bank which also fed the congregation at her parents' church. Growing up, Perry and her siblings were not allowed to eat the cereal Lucky Charms as the word "luck" reminded their mother of Lucifer, and were also required to call deviled eggs "angeled eggs". Perry primarily listened to gospel music, as secular music was generally discouraged in the family's home. She discovered popular music through CDs she sneaked from her friends. Perry later recalled a story about how a friend of hers played "You Oughta Know" by Alanis Morissette, which impacted her songwriting and singing. While not strictly identifying as religious, she has stated, "I pray all the time – for self-control, for humility." Wanting to be like her sister Angela, Perry began singing by practicing with her sister's cassette tapes. She performed the tracks in front of her parents, who let her take vocal lessons like Angela was doing at the time. She began training at age nine and was incorporated into her parents' ministry, singing in church from ages nine to 17. At 13, Perry was given her first guitar for her birthday, and publicly performed songs she wrote. She tried to "be a bit like the typical Californian girl" while growing up, and started rollerskating, skateboarding, and surfing as a teenager. Her brother David described her as a "tomboy" during her adolescence, which Perry talks about on her song "One of the Boys". She took dancing lessons and learned how to swing, Lindy Hop, and jitterbug. Perry completed her General Educational Development (GED) requirements early at age 15, during her first year of high school, and left Dos Pueblos High School to pursue a music career. Perry briefly had vocal lessons with a woman named Agatha Danoff in facilities rented from the Music Academy of the West. Her singing caught the attention of rock artists Steve Thomas and Jennifer Knapp from Nashville, Tennessee, who brought her there to improve her writing skills. In Nashville, she started recording demos and learned how to write songs and play guitar. Perry signed with Red Hill Records and recorded her debut album, a contemporary Christian record titled Katy Hudson, which was released on March 6, 2001. She also went on tour that year as part of Phil Joel's Strangely Normal Tour and embarked on other performances of her own in the United States. Katy Hudson received mixed reviews from critics and was commercially unsuccessful, selling an estimated 200 copies before the label ceased operations in December. Transitioning from gospel music to secular music, Perry started working with producer Glen Ballard, and moved to Los Angeles at age 17. She opted to work with Ballard due to his past work with Alanis Morissette, one of her major inspirations. In 2003, she briefly performed as Katheryn Perry, to avoid confusion with actress Kate Hudson, and later adopted the stage name "Katy Perry", using her mother's maiden name. In 2010, she recalled that "Thinking of You" was one of the first songs she wrote after moving to Los Angeles. Perry would also perform at the Hotel Café, performing new music while she was between record labels. In 2004, she signed to Ballard's label, Java Records, which was then affiliated with The Island Def Jam Music Group. Perry began work on a solo record due for release in March 2005, but the record was shelved after Java was dropped. Ballard then introduced her to Tim Devine, an A&R executive at Columbia Records, and she was signed as a solo artist. By November 2006, Perry had finished writing and recording material for her Columbia debut titled Fingerprints (with some of the material from this time appearing on One of the Boys) which was planned for release in 2007. Some of the material from Fingerprints that did not make it on One of the Boys was given to other artists, such as "I Do Not Hook Up" and "Long Shot" to Kelly Clarkson and "Rock God" to Selena Gomez & the Scene. Perry worked with songwriters including Desmond Child, Greg Wells, Butch Walker, Scott Cutler, Anne Preven, the Matrix, Kara DioGuardi, Max Martin, and Dr. Luke. In addition, after Devine suggested that songwriting team the Matrix become a "real group", she recorded an album, The Matrix, with them. The Matrix was planned for release in 2004 but was cancelled due to creative differences. It was released in 2009 after the release of One of the Boys. Perry was dropped from Columbia in 2006 as Fingerprints neared completion. After the label dropped her, she worked at an independent A&R company, Taxi Music. Perry had minor success prior to her breakthrough. One of the songs she had recorded for her album with Ballard, "Simple", was featured on the soundtrack to the 2005 film The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants. Perry provided backing vocals on Mick Jagger's song "Old Habits Die Hard", which was included on the soundtrack to the 2004 film Alfie. In September 2004, Blender named her "The Next Big Thing". She recorded background vocals on P.O.D.'s single "Goodbye for Now", was featured at the end of its music video in 2006, and performed it with them on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno. That year, Perry also appeared in the music video for "Learn to Fly" by Carbon Leaf, and played the love interest of her then-boyfriend, Gym Class Heroes lead singer Travie McCoy, in the band's music video for "Cupid's Chokehold". After Columbia dropped Perry, Angelica Cob-Baehler, then a publicity executive at the label, brought Perry's demos to Virgin Records chairman Jason Flom. Flom was convinced that she could be a breakthrough star and she was signed to Capitol Records in April 2007. The label arranged for her to work with Dr. Luke to add an "undeniable smash" to her existing material. Perry and Dr. Luke co-wrote the songs "I Kissed a Girl" and "Hot n Cold" for her second album One of the Boys. A campaign was started with the November 2007 release of the video to "Ur So Gay", a song aimed at introducing her to the music market. A digital EP of the same name was also released that month. Madonna helped publicize the song by praising it on the JohnJay & Rich radio show in April 2008, stating "Ur So Gay" was her "favorite song" at the time. In March 2008, Perry made a cameo appearance as a club singer in the Wildfire episode "Life's Too Short" and appeared as herself during a photo shoot that June on The Young and the Restless for the show's magazine Restless Style. Perry released her first single with Capitol, "I Kissed a Girl", on April 28, 2008, as the lead single from One of the Boys. The first station to pick up the song was WRVW in Nashville, who were inundated with enthusiastic calls the first three days they played it. The track reached number one on the US Billboard Hot 100. "I Kissed a Girl" created controversy among both religious and LGBT groups. The former criticized its homosexual theme, while the latter accused her of using bi-curiosity to sell records. In response to speculation that her parents opposed her music and career, Perry told MTV that they had no problems with her success. One of the Boys, released on June 17, 2008, garnered mixed critical reviews and reached number nine on the US Billboard 200. The album went on to sell 7 million copies worldwide. "Hot n Cold" was released the following September and became the album's second successful single, reaching number three on the Billboard Hot 100 while topping charts in Germany, Canada, the Netherlands and Austria. Later singles "Thinking of You" and "Waking Up in Vegas" were released in 2009 and reached the top 30 of the Hot 100. The Matrix's self-titled debut album, which Perry had recorded with the band in 2004, was released onto iTunes on January 27, 2009, as a result of her solo success. After finishing the 2008 Warped Tour, Perry hosted the 2008 MTV Europe Music Awards in November 2008, where she won the award for Best New Act. At the 2009 Brit Awards, she also won the award for International Female Solo Artist. Perry embarked on her first headlining world tour, the Hello Katy Tour, from January to November 2009 to support One of the Boys. On August 4, 2009, she performed as opening act for one date of No Doubt's 2009 Summer Tour. Perry also hosted the 2009 MTV Europe Music Awards in November 2009, becoming the first person to host two consecutive ceremonies of the European awards. On July 22, 2009, Perry recorded a live album titled MTV Unplugged, which featured acoustic performances of five tracks from One of the Boys as well as one new song, "Brick by Brick", and a cover of Fountains of Wayne's "Hackensack". It was released on November 17, 2009. Perry also appeared on two singles with other artists; she was featured on a remix of Colorado-based band 3OH!3's song "Starstrukk" in September 2009, and on a duet with Timbaland entitled "If We Ever Meet Again", from his album Shock Value II, three months later. The Guinness World Records recognized her in its 2010 edition as the "Best Start on the U.S. Digital Chart by a Female Artist", for digital single sales of over two million copies. After Perry and Travie McCoy split up in December 2008, they briefly reconciled before she ended their relationship in 2009. Perry met her future husband Russell Brand in the summer of 2009 while filming a cameo appearance for his film Get Him to the Greek. Her scene, in which the two kiss, does not appear in the film. She began dating Brand after meeting him again that September at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards. The couple became engaged on December 31, 2009, while vacationing in Rajasthan, India. After serving as a guest judge on American Idol, Perry released "California Gurls" featuring Snoop Dogg on May 7, 2010. The song was the lead single from her third studio album, Teenage Dream, and reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100 in June. She also served as a guest judge on British The X Factor later that month before releasing the album's second single, "Teenage Dream", in July. "Teenage Dream" reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100 in September. Released on August 24, 2010, Teenage Dream debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, and received mixed reviews from music critics. It has since sold 6 million copies worldwide. Teenage Dream would go on to win the 2011 Juno Award for International Album of the Year. In October, "Firework" was released as the album's third single. It became the album's third consecutive number one on the Billboard Hot 100 on December 8, 2010. "E.T." featuring Kanye West was released as the fourth single from Teenage Dream on February 16, 2011. It topped the Billboard Hot 100 for five non-consecutive weeks, making Teenage Dream the ninth album in history to produce four number one singles on the chart. "Last Friday Night (T.G.I.F.)" followed as the fifth single in June, and Perry became the first female artist to achieve five number-one Billboard Hot 100 songs from one album when the single topped that chart on August 17, and the second artist after Michael Jackson with his album Bad. For this record, she received an honorary American Music Award in November 2011 and a 2013 Guinness World Record. On September 7, she set a new record by becoming the first artist to spend 69 consecutive weeks in the top ten of the Hot 100. After "The One That Got Away" was released as the album's sixth single in October, Teenage Dream became the third album to spawn six top-five songs on the Billboard Hot 100 after Rhythm Nation 1814 by Janet Jackson and Faith by George Michael. The song peaked at number three in the US and number two in Canada. On January 5, 2012, Perry was named the sixth best-selling digital artist in the United States, with sales of 37.6 million units according to Nielsen SoundScan. That month, she became the first artist to have four songs sell over 5 million digital units when "E.T." reached that mark along with "Firework", "California Gurls", and "Hot N Cold". On February 13, Capitol released the lead single from Teenage Dream: The Complete Confection, "Part of Me", which debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 and became Perry's seventh single overall to top the chart. Teenage Dream: The Complete Confection was released on March 23, and serves as a reissue of Teenage Dream. "Wide Awake" was released on May 22 as the re-release's second single, peaking at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 and number one in Canada and New Zealand. Perry embarked on her second tour, the California Dreams Tour, in support of Teenage Dream from February 2011 to January 2012. The tour grossed $59.5 million globally and won her the award for Best Live Act at the 2011 MTV Europe Music Awards. On September 23, 2011, she performed on the opening day of the 2011 Rock in Rio festival along with Elton John and Rihanna. In September 2010, Perry was scheduled to appear on the 41st-season premiere of Sesame Street. After her scene was uploaded to YouTube, viewers criticized Perry's exposed cleavage. Four days before the scheduled airing, Sesame Workshop announced that the segment would not air on television, but would still be available to watch online. Perry subsequently mocked the controversy on Saturday Night Live, where she was a musical guest and wore an Elmo-themed shirt showing large amounts of cleavage during one skit. In December 2010, Perry played Moe Szyslak's girlfriend in the live-action segment from a Christmas episode of The Simpsons titled "The Fight Before Christmas". In February 2011, she made a guest appearance on the How I Met Your Mother episode "Oh Honey", playing a woman known as Honey. The role won her the People's Choice Award for Favorite TV Guest Star in January 2012. She made her film debut in the 3D family motion picture The Smurfs as Smurfette on July 29, 2011. The film was a financial success worldwide, while critics gave mostly negative reviews. She hosted Saturday Night Live on December 10, 2011, with Robyn as the episode's musical guest. Perry's work on the episode received generally positive reviews from critics, who praised her performance in the episode's digital short featuring her and Andy Samberg. In March 2012, she guest starred as a prison security guard named Rikki on the Raising Hope episode "Single White Female Role Model". On July 5, 2012, Perry's autobiographical documentary Katy Perry: Part of Me was released to theaters through Paramount Pictures. The film received positive reviews and grossed $32.7 million worldwide at the box office. Perry began to venture into business when she endorsed her first fragrance, Purr, in November 2010. Her second fragrance, Meow!, was released in December 2011. Both perfumes were released through Nordstrom department stores. Electronic Arts recruited her to promote their new expansion pack for The Sims 3: Showtime, before releasing a separate stuff pack featuring Perry-inspired furniture, outfits, and hairstyles, titled The Sims 3: Katy Perry's Sweet Treats, in June 2012. The following month, she became the spokesperson and ambassador for Popchips and made an investment in the company. Billboard dubbed her as their "Woman of the Year" for 2012. She married Russell Brand on October 23, 2010, in a traditional Hindu ceremony near the Ranthambhore tiger sanctuary in Rajasthan, India. On December 30, 2011, Brand announced that they were divorcing after 14 months of marriage. Perry later stated that conflicting career schedules and his desire to have children before she was ready led to the end of their marriage and that he never spoke to her again after sending a text message that he was divorcing her, while Brand asserted that he divorced her due to her commercial success and reluctance to engage in activism. She was initially distraught over their divorce and said that she contemplated suicide. After the marriage ended in 2012, Perry began a relationship with singer John Mayer that August. In November 2012, Perry began work on her fourth album, Prism. She told Billboard, "I know exactly the record I want to make next. I know the artwork, the coloring and the tone" and "I even know what type of tour I'm doing next. I'll be very pleased if the vision I have in my head becomes a reality." After initially telling L'Uomo Vogue in June 2012 that she planned to have "darker elements" in Prism following the end of her marriage, the singer revealed to MTV during the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards that she changed the album's direction after periods of self-reflection. Perry commented "I felt very prismatic", which inspired the album's name. "Roar" was released as the lead single from Prism on August 10, 2013. It was promoted at the MTV Video Music Awards and reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100. "Unconditionally" followed as the second single from Prism on October 16, 2013, and peaked at number 14 in the United States. Prism was released on October 18, 2013, and has sold 4 million copies as of August 2015. It received favorable reviews from critics and debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 chart. Four days later, Perry performed the songs from the album at the iHeartRadio Theater in Los Angeles. "Dark Horse" with Juicy J was released as the album's third single in December, and became her ninth U.S. number-one single the following month. In 2014, "Birthday" and "This Is How We Do" respectively followed as the album's fourth and fifth singles, and reached the top 25 on the Hot 100. Prior to ending her relationship with Mayer in February 2014, she recorded and co-wrote a duet with him titled "Who You Love" for his album Paradise Valley. The song was released on August 12, 2013. Perry's third headlining tour, the Prismatic World Tour, began in May 2014 and concluded in October 2015. It sold almost 2 million tickets and grossed $204.3 million worldwide and won Perry the award for "Top Package" at the 2014 Billboard Touring Awards. She also performed at the 2015 Rock in Rio festival on September 27, 2015. On November 23, 2014, the NFL announced that Perry would perform at the Super Bowl XLIX halftime show on February 1, 2015. Lenny Kravitz and Missy Elliott served as special guests for the show. Her performance was critically acclaimed, and the Guinness World Records announced two days after the singer's halftime show that it garnered 118.5 million viewers in the United States, becoming the most watched and highest rated show in Super Bowl history. The viewership was higher than the game itself, which was viewed by an audience of 114.4 million. The International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI) ranked her fifth on the list of Top Global Recording Artists of 2013. On June 26, 2014, she was declared the Top Certified Digital Artist Ever by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for certified sales of 72 million digital singles in the United States. In May 2014, a portrait of Perry by painter Mark Ryden was featured in his exhibition "The Gay 90s", and shown at the Kohn Gallery in Los Angeles. Along with several other artists, she also recorded a cover version of the song "Daisy Bell (Bicycle Built for Two)" on a limited-edition concept album titled The Gay Nineties Old Tyme Music: Daisy Bell to accompany the exhibition. That month, a portrait of Perry by artist Will Cotton was included in the United States National Portrait Gallery. On November 23, 2015, Perry starred in H&M's holiday advertising campaign, for which she wrote and recorded a song titled "Every Day Is a Holiday". On June 17, 2014, Perry announced that she had founded her own record label under Capitol Records, titled Metamorphosis Music. Ferras was the first artist to get signed to her label, and Perry served as an executive producer on his self-titled EP. She also recorded a duet with him on the EP, titled "Legends Never Die". The label was later renamed Unsub Records. Outside of her music career, Perry reprised her role as Smurfette in The Smurfs 2, which was released in theaters on July 31, 2013. Like its predecessor, The Smurfs 2 was a financial success but was panned by critics. In March 2014, she made a guest appearance playing herself in the episode "Blisteritos Presents Dad Academy Graduation Congraduritos Red Carpet Viewing Party" of the Kroll Show. Killer Queen was released as her third fragrance in August 2013 through Coty In January 2014, she became a guest curator of Madonna's Art for Freedom initiative. In March 2015, she appeared in Brand: A Second Coming, a documentary following her ex-husband Russell Brand's transition from comedy work to activism, and released a concert film titled Katy Perry: The Prismatic World Tour through Epix, which took place during her tour of the same name. Perry also made a cameo appearance in the music video for Madonna's song "Bitch I'm Madonna" in June 2015. The following month, she released another fragrance with Coty, entitled Mad Potion. In September 2015, she appeared in the documentaries Katy Perry: Making of the Pepsi Super Bowl Halftime Show, which followed Perry's preparation for her Super Bowl performance, and Jeremy Scott: The People's Designer, which followed the life and career of designer Jeremy Scott. Perry released a mobile app titled Katy Perry Pop in December 2015 through Glu Mobile where her character helps players become famous musicians. She described it as "the most fun, colorful world that helps guide your musical dreams". Perry started writing songs for her new album in June 2016, and recorded an anthem for NBC Sports's coverage of the 2016 Summer Olympics titled "Rise", which was released the following month. Perry chose to release it as a standalone track rather than save it for her album "because now more than ever, there is a need for our world to unite". NBC also felt its message spoke "directly to the spirit of the Olympics and its athletes" for its inspirational themes. The song reached number one in Australia and number eleven in the United States. In August 2016, Perry stated that she aspired to create material "that connects and relates and inspires" and told Ryan Seacrest that she was "not rushing" her fifth album, adding "I'm just having a lot of fun, but experimenting and trying different producers, and different collaborators, and different styles". On February 10, 2017, Perry released the album's lead single "Chained to the Rhythm" featuring Skip Marley. It reached number one in Hungary and number four in the United States. The track was also streamed over three million times on Spotify within 24 hours, breaking the music streaming service's record at the time for the highest first-day streaming for a single track by a female artist. The album's second single, "Bon Appétit" with Migos, was released that April. Its third single, "Swish Swish", featured Nicki Minaj and followed the next month. They respectively peaked at numbers 59 and 46 in the United States, and made the top 15 in Canada. The album, titled Witness, was released on June 9, 2017, to mixed reviews, and debuted at number one in the United States. To accompany the album's release, Perry broadcast herself on YouTube for four days with a live-stream titled Katy Perry Live: Witness World Wide, concluding with a live concert on June 12. The live-stream generated over 49 million views from 190 countries. She also embarked on Witness: The Tour, which began in September 2017 and ended in August 2018. On June 15, 2017, Calvin Harris released a song titled "Feels" from his album Funk Wav Bounces Vol. 1, which featured Perry, Big Sean, and Pharrell Williams. The song went on to reach number one in the United Kingdom. Perry subsequently recorded a cover of the Dear Evan Hansen song "Waving Through a Window" for the deluxe edition of the cast recording, which was released on November 2, 2018. The show's creators Benj Pasek and Justin Paul had requested Perry to cover the song to promote the musical's national tour and bring awareness to mental health. Later that month, Perry released "Cozy Little Christmas". She also recorded the song "Immortal Flame" for the game Final Fantasy Brave Exvius, and had a playable character modeled after her. Outside of recording music, Perry appeared as herself in the film Zoolander 2, which was released in February 2016. In February 2017, the singer launched a shoe line titled "Katy Perry Collections". Her shoes are available on her website, Katy Perry Collections, and at retailers such as Dillard's and Walmart. The following August, she hosted the 2017 MTV Video Music Awards. Perry was signed for a $25-million salary to serve as a judge on ABC's revival of American Idol, which premiered in March 2018. Perry began a relationship with Orlando Bloom in early 2016, and the couple got engaged on February 14, 2019. At the 61st Annual Grammy Awards, Perry performed "Here You Come Again", alongside Dolly Parton and Kacey Musgraves, as part of a tribute to Parton. Four days later, she released a song called "365", with DJ Zedd. In April, Perry was included on a remix of Daddy Yankee's song "Con Calma", featuring Snow. She followed this with the singles "Never Really Over" on May 31, "Small Talk" on August 9, and "Harleys in Hawaii" on October 16. "Never Really Over" in particular received critical acclaim. In June 2019, Perry appeared in the music video of Taylor Swift's "You Need to Calm Down". In July, a jury in California returned a verdict following a week-long trial that Perry's song "Dark Horse" had copied Flame's 2008 song "Joyful Noise" after he filed a copyright lawsuit alleging that it used his track's beat without permission; the verdict was later overturned. After the initial verdict, the jury ordered her to pay him $550,000. The next month, Josh Kloss, Perry's co-star in the "Teenage Dream" music video, accused her of sexual misconduct. In an Instagram post, Kloss alleged that, during a party at a skating rink, Perry pulled on his sweatpants and underwear, exposing his penis to her male friends. He also said her management prevented him from speaking about his time with the singer. However, Johnny Wujek, the creative director of said party defended Perry, saying that she "would never do something like that" and accused Kloss of having an "ongoing obsession" with her. After initially refraining from responding to this, believing it would have detracted from the Me Too movement, Perry has also denied Kloss's claims. Following the release of her single "Never Worn White" in March 2020, Perry revealed in the accompanying music video that she was expecting her first child with Bloom. "Daisies", the lead single from her sixth album, was released on May 15, 2020. Its second single "Smile" followed two months later. The album, also titled Smile, was released on August 28, 2020. Two days before its distribution, she gave birth to a daughter named Daisy Dove Bloom. The album received mixed reviews, and debuted at number five in the United States. Perry further promoted the album with four compilation EPs: Camp Katy, Empowered, Scorpio SZN, and Cosmic Energy. These EPs were followed by the single "Not the End of the World" in December 2020, which had a music video in which Zooey Deschanel impersonates Perry. Additionally she collaborated with various artists to create two remixes of Smile album tracks. Tiësto remix of "Resilient" featuring Aitana was released in November 2020, while Bruno Martini remix of "Cry About It Later" featuring Luísa Sonza was released in April 2021. On January 20, 2021, Perry performed "Firework" at the Celebrating America concert during the inauguration of Joe Biden. Four months later, she released a new single, "Electric", a collaboration with Pokémon as part of its 25th anniversary. Perry began hosting a concert residency named Play at Resorts World Las Vegas on December 29, 2021. The show's inception happened during the COVID-19 lockdowns with Perry being inspired by Honey, I Shrunk the Kids, Pee-wee's Playhouse, and Pee-wee's Big Adventure. She described it as "larger than life" and "the kookiest, most camp show I've ever put together." The show has received critical acclaim with Melinda Sheckells of Billboard saying that Play's "sold-out opening night is part fantasy, part hallucination and thoroughly camp. In addition to a sold out opening night, the Santa Barbara Independent reported that Perry's contract deal for the residency is worth $168 million dollars. It concluded on November 4, 2023. In September 2021, Variety paid tribute to and honored Perry on their "Power of Women" issue, where she discussed her career, motherhood, and philanthropy. As a nominee, she attended the Variety 2021 "Power of Women" dinner. On her 37th birthday the next month, Perry guest hosted The Ellen DeGeneres Show and starred in a holiday advertisement for Gap Inc. which featured her singing "All You Need Is Love" by the Beatles. A full version of her cover was released on streaming platforms the same day. Two months later, Perry followed this with "When I'm Gone", a collaboration with Swedish DJ Alesso that made her the third person to reach number one on Croatia's ARC 100 list across three different decades following Lady Gaga and Coldplay. In January 2022, she and Morgan McLachlan established De Soi, a company which produces and sells non-alcoholic apéritifs. Both wanted a beverage that "would mellow the mind, minus the buzz" when creating it. Along with Thomas Rhett, Perry recorded a country pop duet titled "Where We Started" for his album of the same name that was released three months later. That May, it was announced Perry would create music for the soundtrack to Jeremy Zag's animated musical film Melody and voice its title character. She also became the new face for Just Eat's, SkipTheDishes', Lieferando's, and Menulog's advertisements and created a new remix of their jingle. On June 8, 2022, Perry was awarded with the Key to Las Vegas, the same day it was marked as Katy Perry day. Perry collaborated with the tech company Apple Inc. starring in advertisements for their GarageBand music software where users could have "Remix Sessions" featuring her song, "Harleys in Hawaii". On the collab, she stated in August 2022: "'Harleys in Hawaii' has lived so many different lives" as well as that there was "so much opportunity to remix this song, and I can't wait to hear all the GarageBand evolutions with this Apple collab." Perry performed at the Coronation Concert of Charles III the following May at Windsor Castle. In September 2023, she sold her music rights to Litmus Music for an estimated $225 million. During an appearance on Jimmy Kimmel Live! the following February, Perry announced her exit from American Idol following the conclusion of the twenty-second season, wanting to "to go out and feel that pulse to my own beat" and release new music after being "in the studio for a while". Perry cites her sister Angela as the woman who has had the most influence on her. During the early stages of her career, Perry's musical style gravitated towards gospel and she aspired to be as successful as Amy Grant. At age 15, she heard "Killer Queen" by Queen, which inspired her to pursue a music career. She cites the band's frontman, Freddie Mercury, as her biggest influence and expressed how the "combination of his sarcastic approach to writing lyrics and his 'I don't give a fuck' attitude" inspired her music. She paid homage to the band by naming her third fragrance Killer Queen. Perry described the Beach Boys and their album Pet Sounds as having a considerable influence on her music: "Pet Sounds is one of my favorite records and it influenced pretty much all of my songwriting. All of the melody choices that I make are because of Pet Sounds." The singer also holds the Beatles' album The Beatles in high esteem, and described these two albums as "the only things I listened to for probably two years straight." She cites Alanis Morissette and her 1995 album Jagged Little Pill as a significant musical inspiration, stating in 2012: "Jagged Little Pill was the most perfect female record ever made. There's a song for anyone on that record; I relate to all those songs. They're still so timeless." Additionally, Perry borrows influence from Flaming Red by Patty Griffin and 10 Cent Wings by Jonatha Brooke. Perry's autobiographical documentary Katy Perry: Part of Me was largely influenced by Madonna: Truth or Dare. She admires Madonna's ability to reinvent herself, saying "I want to evolve like Madonna". Perry names Björk as an influence, particularly admiring her "willingness to always be taking chances". Other artists who Perry has cited as influences include Stevie Nicks, ABBA, the Cardigans, Whitney Houston, Cyndi Lauper, Ace of Base, 3OH!3, CeCe Peniston, C+C Music Factory, Black Box, Crystal Waters, Mariah Carey, Heart, Joni Mitchell, Paul Simon, Imogen Heap, Rufus Wainwright, Pink, and Gwen Stefani. "Firework" was inspired by a passage in the book On the Road by Jack Kerouac in which the author compares people who are full of life to fireworks that shoot across the sky and make people watch in awe. Her second concert tour, the California Dreams Tour, was reminiscent of Alice's Adventures in Wonderland and The Wonderful Wizard of Oz. She also credits the 1996 film The Craft for inspiring her song "Dark Horse", and Eckhart Tolle's book The Power of Now for influencing Prism. "When I am in between records, sometimes I doubt myself. I'll be like 'Did I just get lucky, or did I mass-manipulate the world into thinking that seven songs were worth a number-one position?' And then I go back into the studio and I start writing, and the true essential oil of who I am comes bubbling back up and reminds me that it's always been inside of me, that nobody can take this away no matter what comment anyone makes." —Perry on her confidence as a songwriter Although Perry's music incorporates elements of pop, rock, and disco, Katy Hudson contains gospel. Her subsequent releases, One of the Boys and Teenage Dream, involve themes of sex and love. One of the Boys is a pop rock record, while Teenage Dream features disco influences. Perry's fourth album, Prism, is significantly influenced by dance and pop music. Lyrically, the album addresses relationships, self-reflection, and everyday life. Her fifth studio effort Witness is an electropop album that she described as a "360-degree liberation" record, with themes including political liberation, sexual liberation, and liberation from negativity. Many of her songs, particularly on Teenage Dream, reflect on love between teenagers; W magazine described the album's sexual innuendos as "irresistible hook-laden melodies". Self-empowerment is a common theme in Perry's music. Perry has described herself as a "singer-songwriter masquerading as a pop star" and maintains that honest songwriting is very important to her. She told Marie Claire: "I feel like my secret magic trick that separates me from a lot of my peers is the bravery to be vulnerable and truthful and honest. I think you become more relatable when you're vulnerable." Actress and comedian Kristen Wiig commented that "as easy, breezy, and infectious as Perry's songs can be, beneath the surface lurks a sea of mixed emotions, jumbled motives, and contradictory impulses complicated enough to fill a Carole King record." According to Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune, "being taken seriously may be Perry's greatest challenge yet." In 2013, The New York Times labeled her "the most potent pop star of the day – her hits are relatable with just a hint of experimentation". Randall Roberts of the Los Angeles Times criticized her use of idioms and metaphors in her lyrics and for frequent "clichés". Throughout her career, Perry has also co-written songs recorded by other artists, including Lesley Roy, Kelly Clarkson, Jessie James Decker, Selena Gomez & the Scene, Britney Spears, Iggy Azalea, Rita Ora, Nicki Minaj, and Ariana Grande. Perry possesses a contralto vocal range. Her singing has received both praise and criticism. Betty Clarke of The Guardian commented that her "powerful voice is hard-edged" while Rob Sheffield from Rolling Stone described Perry's vocals on Teenage Dream as "processed staccato blips". Darren Harvey of musicOMH compared Perry's vocals on One of the Boys to Alanis Morissette's, both possessing a "perky voice shifting octaves mid-syllable". Alex Miller from NME felt that "Perry's problem is often her voice" on One of the Boys, stating that "somewhere along the line someone convinced her she was like, well, a ballsy rock chick". Conversely, Bernadette McNulty from The Daily Telegraph praised her "rock chick voice" in a review of a concert promoting Prism. On social media, Perry surpassed Justin Bieber as the most followed person on Twitter in November 2013. She won the 2015 Guinness World Record for most Twitter followers, and became the first person to gain 100 million followers on the site in June 2017. Keith Caulfield of Billboard stated that Perry is "the rare celebrity who seems to have enormous popularity but genuine ground-level interaction with her adoring KatyCats." With over 106 million Twitter followers, she is the second-most followed woman on the site, and the sixth most followed musician across social media with a combined total of over 385 million followers across Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter. In June 2017, Time magazine listed Perry among its "25 Most Influential People on the Internet" of the year, writing that her live-stream for Witness was "blazing a trail" for being "the closest any major entertainer has come to giving fans the kind of 'real' intimacy that social media purports to provide". Perry has been described as a sex symbol; GQ labeled her a "full-on male fantasy", while Elle wrote her body looked "as though sketched by a teenage boy". Vice called her a "'serious' popstar/woman/sex symbol". She was placed at number one on the Maxim Hot 100 in 2010 as the "most beautiful woman in the world", with editor Joe Levy describing her as a "triple – no quadruple – kind of hot". Men's Health readers voted her the "sexiest woman of 2013". In November 2010, Perry told Harper's Bazaar that she was proud of and satisfied with her figure. Perry's fashion often incorporates humor, bright colors, and food-related themes such as her characteristic spinning peppermint swirl dress. Vogue described her as "never exactly one to shy away from the outrageous or the extreme in any realm", and called her the "Queen of Camp", while Glamour named her the "queen of quirk". In February 2009, Perry told Seventeen that her fashion style was "a bit of a concoction of different things" and stated she enjoyed humor in her clothing. She has also described herself as having "multipersonality disorder" for fashion. Perry lists Gwen Stefani, Shirley Manson, Chloë Sevigny, Daphne Guinness, Natalie Portman, and the fictional character Lolita as her style icons. In 2022, Elle dubbed her as "the kitsch-loving pop star renowned for her uniquely experimental style", while Vogue described her style as "synonymous with outrageous, eye-catching ensembles that lean towards the theatrical". During the 2017 launch of her shoe collection, Katy Perry Collections, she said about shoes: "When I first got to L.A., I cultivated my style on a budget, always shopping at thrift stores or vintage stores. … Once, I found these flats that looked like Dalmatian dogs. They had ears that moved and a tongue that stuck out. They were such a conversation piece. That's what is so great about fashion. … It's a form of communication. You don't have to start a smoking habit to start talking to someone. You can just wear cool shoes. It's an icebreaker." Several media outlets such as Billboard and Glamour have referred to her as the "Queen of Pop", while others like Vogue, Rolling Stone, and InStyle have dubbed Perry the "Queen of Camp". Andrew Unterberger of Billboard described Teenage Dream "one of the defining LPs from a new golden age in mega-pop" while Christopher Rosa of Glamour named her as an influence to the pop sound and style of the 2010s, adding that her singles are "some of the most recognizable, iconic, and impactful hits in pop history." Perry was named "one of the last decade's most reliable and successful hitmakers" by the Official Charts Company in 2022. Additionally, Perry was included in Glamour's "104 Women Who Defined the Decade in Pop Culture" list of the 2010s. It stated Perry "did more than just break chart records. She was one of the driving forces behind the sound of pop radio in the 2010s" for her tracks that were "glossy, booming, sugary-sweet, and undeniably catchy." Variety included Perry in their Variety 500 list of the most influential business leaders, calling her a "global phenomenon" and a "dedicated artist and tireless self-promoter who has leveraged chart-topping hits, sold-out stadium shows, and staggering endorsement deals to become one of the richest and most influential pop stars alive." A 2017 journal published by Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts studying structural patterns in the melodies of earworm songs compiled lists of catchiest tracks from 3,000 participants, in which Perry's "California Gurls" ranked number six. She has been called a "gay icon" by Taylor Henderson of Out, noting how "I Kissed a Girl" helped fans explore their sexuality and how Perry openly embraced the LGBTQ+ community. Perry's music has been described by Out as having a "lasting legacy", with American singers Fletcher sampling "I Kissed a Girl" and Olivia Rodrigo referencing Teenage Dream on "Brutal". Additionally, other artists such as Halsey and Ariana Grande have praised Perry's work, with Halsey calling Teenage Dream the "perfect pop album" and Grande saying "The One That Got Away" is "one of the biggest and most perfectly written pop songs ever from one of the best pop albums of all time." Perry and her work have influenced artists such as Lil Nas X, Halsey, BTS, Adele, Lorde, Sia, Bonnie McKee, Rina Sawayama, Doja Cat, Ellie Goulding, Tegan and Sara, Jessie J, Marina Diamandis, John Mayer, Jason Derulo, Lil B, Little Mix, Natalia Kills, Maren Morris, Hayley Kiyoko, Troye Sivan, Kim Petras, Yungblud, Mary Lambert, Issues, Rebecca Black, the Lonely Island, Tramp Stamps, Baba Sehgal, Grace VanderWaal, Dagny, and Coldplay. Perry has supported various charitable organizations and causes throughout her career. She has contributed to organizations aimed at improving the lives and welfare of children in particular. In April 2013, she joined UNICEF to assist children in Madagascar with education and nutrition. On December 3, 2013, she was officially named a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador, "with a special focus on engaging young people in the agency's work to improve the lives of the world's most vulnerable children and adolescents." She arranged for a portion of the money generated from tickets to her Prismatic World Tour to go to UNICEF. In September 2010, she helped build and design the Boys Hope/Girls Hope foundation shelter for youth in Baltimore, Maryland along with Raven-Symoné, Shaquille O'Neal, and the cast of Extreme Makeover: Home Edition. In 2010, Perry and Nicki Minaj performed a cover of "Girls Just Want to Have Fun" for service members during the 2010 VH1 Divas Salute the Troops concert. She has also supported children's education and well-being. All profits from sales of the album The Gay Nineties Old Tyme Music: Daisy Bell, which includes her rendition of "Daisy Bell (Bicycle Built for Two)", were donated to the charity Little Kids Rock, which supports musical education in underprivileged elementary schools. In June 2014, she teamed up with Staples Inc. for a project entitled "Make Roar Happen" which donated $1 million to DonorsChoose, an organization that supports teachers and funds classroom resources in public schools. In May 2016, she worked with UNICEF to improve child care quality in Vietnam, hoping to "break the cycle of poverty and drastically improve children's health, education and well-being". The following month, UNICEF announced that Perry would receive the Audrey Hepburn Humanitarian Award "for her work as a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador in support of the world's most vulnerable children" at their annual Snowflake Ball in November. All Spotify streams of her 2021 cover of "All You Need Is Love" will generate $1 in donations for the charity Baby2Baby. Perry has supported organizations aimed at aiding people suffering with diseases including cancer and HIV/AIDS. During the 2008 Warped Tour, she had a cast made of her breasts to raise money for the Keep A Breast Foundation. She hosted and performed at the We Can Survive concert along with Bonnie McKee, Kacey Musgraves, Sara Bareilles, Ellie Goulding, and duo Tegan and Sara at the Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles, California, on October 23, 2013. The concert's profits were donated to Young Survival Coalition, an organization aiding breast cancer in young women. In June 2009, she designed an item of clothing for H&M's "Fashion Against AIDS" campaign, which raises money for HIV/AIDS awareness projects. On February 26, 2017, she served as a co-chair alongside various celebrities such as Beyoncé, Lea Michele, Jim Carrey, Jared Leto, and Kevin Spacey for the 25th Annual Elton John AIDS Foundation Academy Award Party, a fundraiser for HIV/AIDS healthcare. The proceeds from Perry's single "Part of Me" were donated to the charity MusiCares, which helps musicians in times of need. During her California Dreams Tour, she raised over $175,000 for the Tickets-For-Charity fundraiser. The money was divided between three charities: the Children's Health Fund (CHF), Generosity Water, and The Humane Society of the United States. On her 27th birthday, Perry set up a donations page for the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Auckland, and set up a similar page benefiting the David Lynch Foundation for her 28th birthday. On March 29, 2014, she helped raise $2.4 million for the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles along with other celebrities such as Ryan Seacrest, Pharrell Williams, Tim Allen, Lisa Edelstein, and Riley Keough. Perry performed at the One Love Manchester benefit concert for the victims of the 2017 Manchester Arena bombing, among various performers including its organizer Ariana Grande, which was broadcast live on June 4, 2017, on radio and television stations around the world. In March 2018, Perry announced Witness: Coming Home, a benefit concert that was held in her hometown of Santa Barbara on May 19, 2018. The concert benefited those recovering from the aftermath of the 2017 California wildfires and 2018 Southern California mudflows. Perry partnered with the Santa Barbara Foundation, the 93108 Fund and The 805 UndocuFund, organizations which help in assisting members of the community in the Santa Barbara area through grants and various philanthropic efforts. Perry has publicly advocated for LGBT rights and admitted that she wrote "I Kissed a Girl" about her own bisexual experiences with other women. In 2017, she received a Nation Equality Award from Human Rights Campaign for "using her powerful voice and international platform to speak out for LGBTQ equality". During her acceptance speech, she discussed having bisexual experiences, her fluid sexuality, and thanked the LGBTQ+ community. In an Out interview in 2021, she was heralded as a "gay icon" with "I Kissed a Girl" being called a "bonafide queer anthem". Perry continued to thank the LGBTQ+ community in the same interview, saying: "I came from a very sheltered upbringing where it wasn't okay to be friends with anyone from that community. And now that is my community." She also mentioned "I wouldn't have survived without the community and it's amazing how full circle it's come and how much growth has happened since I started." Tomás Mier of Rolling Stone remarked Perry "championed queer folks, especially drag queens, throughout her career." She dedicated the music video to her song "Firework" to the It Gets Better Project. In June 2012, Perry expressed her hopes for LGBT equality, commenting "hopefully, we will look back at this moment and think like we do now concerning [other] civil rights issues. We'll just shake our heads in disbelief, saying, 'Thank God we've evolved.' That would be my prayer for the future." In December 2012, Perry was awarded the Trevor Hero Award by The Trevor Project for her work and activism on behalf of LGBT youth. Perry identifies as a feminist, and appeared in April 2013 in a video clip for the "Chime for Change" campaign that aimed to spread female empowerment. She has also said that America's lack of free health care drove her "absolutely crazy". Following the shooting at the Pulse nightclub in Orlando in June 2016, Perry and nearly 200 other artists and executives in music signed an open letter organized by Billboard addressed to United States Congress demanding increased gun control in the United States. Through Twitter and by performing at rallies, Perry supported President Barack Obama in his run for re-election and praised his support for same-sex marriage and LGBT equality. She performed at three rallies for Obama, in Los Angeles, Las Vegas, and Wisconsin, singing a rendition of "Let's Stay Together" as well as a number of her songs. During her Las Vegas performance she wore a dress made to replicate a voting ballot, with Obama's box filled in. On Twitter, she encouraged her followers to vote for Obama. In August 2013, Perry voiced criticism of Tony Abbott, then-leader of conservative Liberal Party of Australia and candidate for Prime Minister of Australia, due to his opposition to gay marriage and told Abbott, "I love you as a human being but I can't give you my vote."; the statement came after Abbott expressed pride at learning of Perry's then-upcoming performance in Australia. In April 2014, she publicly supported Marianne Williamson in her campaign for California's 33rd congressional district by attending a political press event. She endorsed Kamala Harris in the United States Senate election in California, and organized a fundraiser for Harris at her home in Los Angeles in November 2016. Perry also publicly endorsed former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton for president in 2016. She performed alongside Elton John at a fundraising concert for Clinton in New York City in March 2016. Perry also spoke and performed at the 2016 Democratic National Convention in support of Clinton. Four years later, she supported Joe Biden and Kamala Harris during the 2020 United States presidential election, praising the latter as a leader who had "experience we desperately need right now" and believed that the former "choosing her as his running mate is already a testament to his decision making". In 2022, Perry posted a picture of herself voting for Rick Caruso in the 2022 Los Angeles mayoral election. Throughout her career, Perry has won five American Music Awards, fourteen People's Choice Awards, four Guinness World Records, a Brit Award, and a Juno Award. In September 2012, Billboard dubbed her the "Woman of the Year". From May 2010 to September 2011, the singer spent a record-breaking 69 consecutive weeks in the top ten of the Billboard Hot 100. Teenage Dream became the first album by a female artist to produce five number-one Billboard Hot 100 singles, and the second album overall after Michael Jackson's Bad. In the United States, she has accumulated nine number-one singles on the Billboard Hot 100, her most recent being "Dark Horse", and holds the record for having 18 consecutive number-one songs on the Billboard Dance Club Songs chart. Billboard also named her the 15th most successful dance club artist of all time. The magazine additionally ranked her fourth on its "Greatest of All Time Pop Songs Artists" list, included Teenage Dream and Prism among its "Greatest of All Time Billboard 200 Albums by Women" list, and ranked "Dark Horse" at number 100 on its "Greatest of All Time Hot 100 Songs" as well as one of its "Greatest of All Time Hot 100 Songs by Women" along with "E.T.", "Firework", and "California Gurls". In June 2015, her music video for "Dark Horse" became the first video by a female artist to reach 1 billion views on Vevo. The following month, her music video for "Roar" reached 1 billion views on Vevo, making her the first artist to have multiple videos with 1 billion views. With 143 million records sold globally, Perry is one of the best-selling music artists of all time. She was declared the Top Global Female Recording Artist of 2013 by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI). According to RIAA, Perry is the ninth top digital singles artist in the United States, with 112 million certified song units in the country including on-demand streams and also has 17.5 million certified album units, totaling 129.5 million certified units in the United States. She also became the first artist to have three songs receive Diamond certifications from the RIAA in 2017 with "Dark Horse", "Firework", and "Roar". All three of them and "E.T.", "California Gurls", and "Hot n Cold" have each sold over 5 million digital copies. Six years later, the RIAA certified "California Gurls" as her fourth diamond-certified single in the U.S., breaking her tie with Lady Gaga as the female artist with the most diamond singles there. In 2011, Forbes ranked her third on their "Top-Earning Women In Music" list with earnings of $44 million and fifth on their 2012 list with $45 million. She subsequently ranked seventh on the 2013 Forbes list for "Top-Earning Women In Music" with $39 million earned, and fifth on their 2014 list with $40 million. With earnings of $135 million, Forbes also ranked Perry number one on their 2015 "Top-Earning Women In Music" list as well as the "World's Highest-Paid Musicians" and declared her the highest earning female celebrity in 2015, placing her at number 3 on the Forbes Celebrity 100 list. In 2016, the magazine estimated her net worth was $125 million, and ranked her number six on their list of "Highest-Paid Women in Music" with earnings of $41 million. The following year, she was ranked number nine on the list with $33 million. In 2018, she topped its "Highest-Paid Women in Music" listing and ranked at number four on the "Highest-Paid Female Celebrities" list, with earnings of $83 million. Perry subsequently was placed at number four on the 2019 "Highest-Paid Women in Music" listings, with $57.5 million. Later that year, with earnings of $530 million throughout the 2010s, the magazine also ranked her as the ninth-highest-earning musician of the decade. During September 2023, Forbes surmised Perry had a net worth of $340 million, making her "one of the richest self-made women in America." Katy Hudson (2001) One of the Boys (2008) Teenage Dream (2010) Prism (2013) Witness (2017) Smile (2020) The Smurfs (2011) Katy Perry: Part of Me (2012) The Smurfs 2 (2013) Brand: A Second Coming (2015) Katy Perry: The Prismatic World Tour (2015) Katy Perry: Making of the Pepsi Super Bowl Halftime Show (2015) Jeremy Scott: The People's Designer (2015) Zoolander 2 (2016) Headlining tours Hello Katy Tour (2009) California Dreams Tour (2011–2012) Prismatic World Tour (2014–2015) Witness: The Tour (2017–2018) Co-headlining tours Strangely Normal Tour (with Phil Joel) (2001) Residency Play (2021–2023) Biography portal Pop music portal United States portal List of best-selling music artists List of most-followed Twitter accounts List of Billboard Social 50 number-one artists List of highest-certified music artists in the United States Forbes list of highest-earning musicians White, Jack (September 21, 2021). "Katy Perry's 2019 single Harleys in Hawaii enjoys huge uplift thanks to TikTok". Official Charts Company. Retrieved September 26, 2021. Harleys in Hawaii's upturn has seen its parent album Smile surpass one billion streams on the platform, joining Katy's four other albums One Of The Boys, Teenage Dream, Prism and Witness. Perry 2012, 05:23. Friedlander 2012, p. 15 Graff, Gary (February 21, 2009). "Interview: Katy Perry – Hot N Bold". The Scotsman. Archived from the original on March 7, 2009. Retrieved February 28, 2009. Cowlin 2014, pp. 11, 51 Robinson, Lisa (May 3, 2011). "Katy Perry's Grand Tour". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on October 25, 2014. Retrieved January 23, 2014. Martins, Chris (September 4, 2012). "Katy Perry's Lil Bro Hudson Would Like to Be a Pop Star Too". Spin. Archived from the original on May 2, 2014. Retrieved April 30, 2014. Friedlander 2012, p. 7 Masley, Ed (January 9, 2015). "Katy Perry talks Super Bowl, Scottsdale childhood". The Arizona Republic. Retrieved January 9, 2015. Wallace, Amy (January 19, 2014). "Katy Perry's GQ Cover Story". GQ. Archived from the original on February 7, 2014. Retrieved February 6, 2014. Grigoriadis, Vanessa (August 19, 2010). "Sex, God & Katy Perry". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 8, 2014. Retrieved May 20, 2014. Hudson 2012, p. 27 Montgomery, James (June 24, 2008). "Katy Perry Dishes on Her 'Long And Winding Road' From Singing Gospel To Kissing Girls". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 2, 2014. Retrieved February 15, 2009. "Katy Perry Discusses Evangelical Childhood, Term 'Deviled Eggs' Banned from House". Billboard. May 4, 2011. Archived from the original on March 22, 2014. Retrieved February 6, 2014. Perry 2012, 22:22. Hoffman, Claire (December 9, 2013). "Katy Conquers All". Marie Claire. Archived from the original on December 12, 2013. Retrieved December 10, 2013. Friedlander 2012, pp. 8, 18 Hudson 2012, p. 41 Friedlander 2012, p. 18 Hudson 2012, p. 25 Summers 2012, p. 37 Spencer, Amy (January 6, 2010). "Katy Perry (she kisses boys, too!)". Glamour. Archived from the original on August 11, 2014. Retrieved August 9, 2014. Hudson, Kathryn (August 29, 2013). "Katy Perry: Elle Canada Interview". Elle. Archived from the original on February 23, 2014. Retrieved February 6, 2014. Hudson 2012, p. 37 Heldman, Breanne L. (August 8, 2014). "Katy Perry: I Could Really Use a Better Education". Yahoo! Entertainment. Retrieved February 18, 2024. Montgomery 2011, pp. 11–12 Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Katy Hudson – Katy Hudson". AllMusic. Archived from the original on December 26, 2013. Retrieved December 27, 2013. Monroe, Blaire (September 17, 2015). "Remember When Katy Perry Was a Christian Music Artist?". Complex. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved February 19, 2016. "Katy's tour info". katyhudson.com. Archived from the original on August 16, 2001. Summers 2012, pp. 10–11 Price, Deborah Evans (December 1, 2001). "Doors close in Pamplin's beleaguered music division". Billboard. Retrieved August 6, 2014. Perry 2012, 21:11. Hirschberg, Lynn (October 22, 2013). "Katy Perry". W. Archived from the original on October 25, 2013. Retrieved November 1, 2013. Perry 2012, 38:33. CBS (October 3, 2010). "Katy Perry Sings Her First Song". Archived from the original on November 14, 2021. Retrieved October 1, 2021 – via YouTube. Fields, Taylor (May 27, 2020). "Katy Perry Returns to Hotel Café Where She Got Her Start for Special Performance". iHeartRadio. Retrieved March 29, 2022. Fifteen years ago, this was kind of like my hideout/living room. This is actually Hotel Café in Hollywood. It's where I went to try out my new songs, and when I wanted to know if anyone actually liked them, besides my cat — may she rest in peace. So, it's kind of like my living room. It's my growing up space. Conniff, Tamara (December 25, 2004). "I've Stopped Asking for Permission. I'd Rather Ask for Forgiveness". Billboard. Retrieved April 25, 2015. "Katy Perry - Nintendo Wii Launch (Nov 2006)". April 17, 2012. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved November 17, 2021 – via YouTube. Corner, Lewis (December 4, 2016). "8 Songs You Didn't Know Were Written By Katy Perry". Elle. Retrieved November 5, 2021. Spanos, Brittany (September 6, 2016). "9 Great Songs You Didn't Know Katy Perry Wrote". Rolling Stone. Retrieved February 15, 2022. Blumenrath, Jan (October 18, 2010). "Interview with Chris Anokute". HitQuarters. Archived from the original on April 17, 2015. Retrieved April 25, 2015. "Katy Perry Cover Story". Billboard. July 3, 2010. Retrieved April 25, 2015. Hochman, Steve (February 15, 2004). "Making a production of it". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 10, 2015. Retrieved April 25, 2015. Summers 2012, pp. 11–12 Summers 2012, p. 11 "Mick Jagger says he never hit on 18-year-old Katy Perry". USA Today. October 31, 2013. Archived from the original on November 1, 2013. Retrieved October 31, 2013. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Katy Perry". AllMusic. Archived from the original on November 4, 2015. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Exposito, Suzy (October 15, 2015). "Flashback: Katy Perry Sings With Christian Nu-Metal Band P.O.D." Rolling Stone. Retrieved February 25, 2022. Music video guest appearances: Summers 2012, p. 12 Rosen, Craig (October 18, 2013). "Katy Perry's Best Moments Undercover". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 22, 2014. Friedlander 2012, p. 46 "Correction to the interview with Chris Anokute". HitQuarters. January 21, 2011. Archived from the original on July 13, 2014. Retrieved April 29, 2014. Mervis, Scott (July 21, 2014). "Katy Perry's star keeps rising". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Archived from the original on July 23, 2014. Retrieved July 31, 2014. Friedlander 2012, pp. 58, 61 Perry, Katy (November 20, 2007). "Ur So Gay". Amazon. Retrieved August 25, 2018. Summers 2012, pp. 38–39 Friedlander 2012, p. 61 Summers 2012, p. 61 Summers 2012, p. 99 "I Kissed a Girl". Rolling Stone. July 30, 2014. Archived from the original on November 8, 2014. Retrieved October 24, 2014. "Interview With Chris Anokute". HitQuarters. October 18, 2010. Archived from the original on July 13, 2014. Retrieved April 29, 2014. Cohen, Jonathan (August 14, 2008). "Rihanna Topples Katy Perry on Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 31, 2013. Retrieved March 15, 2014. Vena, Jocelyn (August 20, 2008). "Katy Perry Responds To Rumors of Parents' Criticism: 'They Love And Support Me'". MTV News. Archived from the original on December 13, 2013. Retrieved April 29, 2014. "One of the Boys by Katy Perry". Metacritic. Archived from the original on November 14, 2012. Retrieved March 6, 2009. "Katy Perry – Chart history: Billboard 200". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 13, 2014. Retrieved March 2, 2009. Kaufman, Gil (August 26, 2010). "Katy Perry, Fantasia look to unseat Eminem on charts". MTV News. Archived from the original on March 30, 2016. Retrieved February 28, 2016. "Hot n Cold". Rolling Stone. July 30, 2014. Archived from the original on November 8, 2014. Retrieved October 24, 2014. "Katy Perry – Chart history: The Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 29, 2014. Retrieved June 26, 2014. "Hot n Cold (Single)". Musicline. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved June 26, 2014. "Katy Perry – Chart history: Billboard Canadian Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 29, 2014. Retrieved June 26, 2014. "Nederlandse Top 40 – week 01, 2009". Dutch Top 40. Archived from the original on July 28, 2014. Retrieved July 27, 2014. "Katy Perry — Hot N Cold". Ö3 Austria Top 40. Archived from the original on August 30, 2013. Retrieved July 27, 2014. "Thinking of You". Rolling Stone. July 30, 2014. Archived from the original on July 7, 2015. Retrieved April 5, 2017. "Waking Up in Vegas". Rolling Stone. July 30, 2014. Archived from the original on October 22, 2014. Retrieved October 21, 2014. Kaufman, Gil (January 27, 2009). "The Matrix Drop Long-Lost Album Featuring Katy Perry". MTV News. Archived from the original on October 27, 2015. Retrieved April 29, 2014. "Katy Perry on Warped 2008: Mosh Pits, Injuries and Andrew WK". Rolling Stone. August 25, 2008. Archived from the original on May 1, 2014. Retrieved April 3, 2014. Kaufman, Gil (November 7, 2008). "Americans Katy Perry, Britney Spears, Kanye West, 30 Seconds To Mars Dominate 2008 MTV EMAs". MTV News. Archived from the original on December 13, 2013. Retrieved September 13, 2015. "Brit Awards 2009: Full list of winners". The Daily Telegraph. February 18, 2009. Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved November 3, 2015. Hudson 2012, p. 83 Ching, Albert (August 5, 2009). "Last Night: No Doubt, Katy Perry, the Sounds at Verizon Wireless Amphitheater". OC Weekly. Archived from the original on May 21, 2014. Retrieved May 20, 2014. "MTV EMAs Host Katy Perry Brings 'Cabaret' To Berlin". MTV. October 1, 2009. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved September 13, 2015. MTV Unplugged (Compact Disc). Capitol Records. 2009. Montgomery, James (October 12, 2009). "Katy Perry's MTV Unplugged Album Will Feature Two New Songs". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 2, 2014. Retrieved April 28, 2014. "Starstrukk (feat. Katy Perry)". iTunes Store. September 14, 2009. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved July 23, 2014. "If We Ever Meet Again (feat. Katy Perry)". iTunes. December 1, 2019. Archived from the original on December 8, 2009. Retrieved March 22, 2020. "Video: Timbaland f/ Katy Perry – 'If We Ever Meet Again'". Rap-Up. January 18, 2010. Archived from the original on January 22, 2010. Retrieved August 2, 2010. Glenday 2010, p. 405 "Katy Perry And Travis Split". MTV News. January 5, 2009. Archived from the original on February 3, 2014. Retrieved April 29, 2014. "Travie Travis Mccoy Still Hurt About Katy Perry Split Email". Contactmusic.com. October 16, 2012. Retrieved January 11, 2022. Dennis, Alicia (April 27, 2009). "Katy Perry and Travis McCoy: Back Together". Zimbio. Retrieved January 11, 2022. Vena, Jocelyn (June 4, 2010). "Katy Perry Explains Why She Was Cut From 'Get Him to the Greek'". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 2, 2014. Retrieved February 18, 2012. Ziegbe, Mawuse (September 4, 2010). "Katy Perry, Russell Brand's Love Story Began at the VMAs". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 2, 2014. Retrieved November 9, 2010. Heldman, Breanne L. (January 6, 2010). "Katy Perry and Russell Brand Engaged in India". E!. Archived from the original on August 28, 2012. Retrieved January 6, 2010. Barrett, Annie (January 27, 2010). "'American Idol': The Kara vs. Katy Lifetime movie". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved April 29, 2014. Montgomery, James (May 7, 2010). "Katy Perry Debuts New Single 'California Gurls'". MTV News. Archived from the original on September 12, 2014. Retrieved September 21, 2014. Details on "California Gurls": Rosa, Christopher (August 24, 2015). "Katy Perry's "Teenage Dream" Is Best Pop Album Of The Decade". VH1. Retrieved December 6, 2017. Ryan, Chris (July 21, 2010). "Star Spotting: Katy Perry Reveals 'Teenage Dream' Album Artwork". MTV News. Retrieved December 6, 2017. Trust, Gary (June 9, 2010). "Katy Perry Speeds To No. 1 on Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved June 9, 2010. "Katy Perry Hits Dublin For X Factor Auditions". MTV News. June 28, 2010. Archived from the original on October 17, 2013. Retrieved June 28, 2010. Greenblatt, Leah (July 22, 2010). "Katy Perry's new single 'Teenage Dream' hits the web". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 9, 2014. Retrieved September 21, 2014. Pietroluongo, Silvio (September 8, 2010). "Katy Perry's 'Teenage Dream' Dethrones Eminem on Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved July 31, 2014. Vena, Jocelyn (May 11, 2010). "Katy Perry To Release Teenage Dream On August 24". MTV News. Archived from the original on September 11, 2014. Retrieved September 10, 2014. Caulfield, Keith (October 23, 2013). "Katy Perry's 'Prism' Set for No. 1 Debut on Billboard 200 Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 20, 2014. Retrieved March 15, 2014. "Teenage Dream by Katy Perry". Metacritic. Archived from the original on November 2, 2013. Retrieved March 15, 2014. Michaels, Sean (July 30, 2013). "Katy Perry announces new album, Prism, on side of golden lorry". The Guardian. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved June 20, 2016. "2011 JUNO Gala Dinner & Award Winners". Juno Awards. March 26, 2011. Archived from the original on January 27, 2016. Retrieved June 18, 2015. Semigran, Aly (February 8, 2011). "Glee Sets 'Firework' Apart From 'Silly Love Songs'". MTV News. Archived from the original on December 5, 2014. Retrieved September 21, 2014. Pietroluongo, Silvio (December 8, 2010). "Katy Perry's 'Firework' Shines Over Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 12, 2013. Retrieved December 8, 2010. Wete, Brad (February 16, 2011). "Kanye West abducts Katy Perry on singer's new single, 'E.T'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 14, 2014. Retrieved September 21, 2014. Trust, Gary (March 30, 2011). "Katy Perry's 'E.T.' Rockets To No. 1 on Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved March 30, 2011. "FMQB: Radio Industry News, Music Industry Updates, Nielsen Ratings, Music News and more!". FMQB. June 6, 2011. Archived from the original on July 5, 2011. Retrieved September 21, 2014. Trust, Gary (August 17, 2011). "Katy Perry Makes Hot 100 History: Ties Michael Jackson's Record". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 30, 2013. Retrieved August 17, 2011. Nordyke, Kimberly (November 20, 2011). "AMAs 2011: Katy Perry Surprised With Special Achievement Award". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 17, 2016. Retrieved November 15, 2015. Glenday 2013, p. 423 Trust, Gary (September 7, 2011). "Adele's 'Someone Like You' Soars To No. 1 on Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 29, 2011. Retrieved September 7, 2011. "Available for Airplay (10/11)". FMQB. Archived from the original on October 17, 2011. Retrieved September 22, 2014. Trust, Gary (December 14, 2011). "Katy Perry's 'Teenage Dream' Yields Sixth Hot 100 Top Five Hit". Billboard. Retrieved November 3, 2012. Lipshutz, Jason (August 9, 2013). "Katy Perry's 10 Biggest Billboard Hits". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 11, 2014. Retrieved October 21, 2014. Loynes, Anna (January 5, 2012). "The Nielsen Company & Billboard's 2011 Music Industry Report". Business Wire. Archived from the original on January 8, 2012. Retrieved January 5, 2012. Grein, Paul (January 19, 2012). "Week Ending Jan. 15, 2012. Songs: The Song That Won't Drop". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on August 12, 2014. Retrieved April 29, 2014. Trust, Gary (February 22, 2012). "Katy Perry's 'Part of Me' Debuts Atop Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved November 12, 2017. "Teenage Dream: The Complete Confection". iTunes Store. March 23, 2012. Archived from the original on July 17, 2014. Retrieved July 31, 2014. Maerz, Melissa (March 23, 2012). "Teenage Dream: The Complete Confection review - Katy Perry Review". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved October 26, 2013. "Top 40/M Future Releases". All Access. Archived from the original on May 7, 2012. Retrieved September 22, 2014. "Katy Perry — Wide Awake". Top 40 Singles. Retrieved July 31, 2014. Lipshutz, Jason (November 18, 2013). "Katy Perry Announces First 'PRISMATIC' World Tour Dates". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 20, 2014. Retrieved April 29, 2014. "Top 25 Worldwide Tours (01/01/2011 – 12/31/2011)" (PDF). Pollstar. December 28, 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 7, 2012. Retrieved December 28, 2011. Vena, Jocelyn (November 7, 2011). "Justin Bieber Parties With Selena Gomez, LMFAO After MTV EMA". MTV News. Archived from the original on January 25, 2016. Retrieved September 13, 2015. "Rock in Rio 2011: A hora e a vez do pop" [Rock in Rio 2011: the time and turn of pop]. Jornal da Cidade de Bauru (in Portuguese). September 22, 2011. Archived from the original on October 11, 2011. Retrieved November 5, 2011. Getler, Michael (September 24, 2010). "Was This Show a Must or a Bust(ier)?". PBS. Archived from the original on May 2, 2015. Retrieved November 27, 2014. "Katy Perry mocks Sesame Street ban". Capital FM. Archived from the original on April 13, 2014. Retrieved January 14, 2014. Kaufman, Gil (September 27, 2010). "Katy Perry to appear on 'The Simpsons' in December". MTV News. Archived from the original on November 7, 2012. Retrieved August 19, 2011. Snierson, Dan (September 25, 2010). "Katy Perry to guest star on 'The Simpsons'! Here's your exclusive first look". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 5, 2014. Retrieved November 27, 2014. Tucker, Ken (February 7, 2011). "How I Met Your Mother: 'Oh Honey'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 15, 2011. Retrieved August 27, 2011. "Katy Perry Wins Five People's Choice Awards Including Fave Guest Star for 'How I Met Your Mother'". The Hollywood Reporter. January 11, 2012. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved February 25, 2014. "The Smurfs (2011)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on November 4, 2011. Retrieved November 6, 2011. "The Smurfs". Rotten Tomatoes. July 29, 2011. Archived from the original on January 11, 2014. Retrieved January 16, 2014. Rutherford, Keith (December 11, 2011). "Katy Perry Hosts 'SNL': The Hits & Misses, Including a Florence Welch Spoof". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 21, 2013. Retrieved August 8, 2013. Moraski, Lauren (February 22, 2012). "Katy Perry to portray a prison attendant on 'Raising Hope'". CBS News. Archived from the original on August 13, 2014. Retrieved February 25, 2014. Gleiberman, Owen (August 14, 2012). "Katy Perry: Part Of Me". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 26, 2015. Retrieved September 13, 2015. Zemler, Emily (March 27, 2015). "Katy Perry Premieres Concert TV Special, Explains Why Pop Stars Should Always Play Their Hits". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 11, 2015. Retrieved July 19, 2015. "Katy Perry: Part of Me (2012)". Rotten Tomatoes. July 5, 2012. Archived from the original on August 13, 2012. Retrieved August 4, 2012. "Katy Perry: Part of Me". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on August 14, 2012. Retrieved August 16, 2012. Howard, Hilary (November 17, 2010). "Beauty Spots". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved August 22, 2014. Moraski, Lauren (February 1, 2012). "Katy Perry to perform at Grammy Awards". CBS News. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 22, 2014. Sweeney, Mark (January 17, 2012). "Katy Perry becomes a Sim". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved January 22, 2012. "The Sims 3 Katy Perry's Sweet Treats". Electronic Arts. Archived from the original on January 6, 2015. Retrieved April 3, 2014. Donnelly, Matt (July 25, 2012). "First Look: Katy Perry joins Popchips as its face, an investor". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 28, 2012. Retrieved July 25, 2012. "Katy Perry: Billboard's Woman of the Year". Billboard. September 25, 2012. Archived from the original on March 24, 2014. Retrieved April 29, 2014. Ganguly, Prithwish (October 26, 2010). "Katy affirms Brand loyalty". The Times of India. Archived from the original on October 28, 2010. Retrieved November 9, 2010. Freydkin, Donna (December 30, 2011). "Russell Brand, Katy Perry call it quits". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved August 7, 2014. Perry 2012, 01:11:49. Saad, Nardine (June 18, 2013). "Katy Perry's First Vogue Cover". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 29, 2014. Retrieved July 23, 2014. Mary Ward (March 16, 2015). "Documentary reveals Russell Brand and Katy Perry split caused by singer's rising fame". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on March 17, 2015. Retrieved March 16, 2015. Diehl, Matt (September 27, 2013). "Katy Perry's 'PRISM': The Billboard Cover Story". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 27, 2013. Retrieved September 27, 2013. Heller, Jill (September 30, 2013). "Katy Perry Contemplated Suicide After Divorcing Russell Brand, Says Split Was A 'Dark Time'". International Business Times. Archived from the original on August 12, 2014. Retrieved August 7, 2014. "Katy Perry says Russell Brand texted his desire to divorce". United Press International. June 18, 2013. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 21, 2014. "John Mayer Dedicates Song to Katy Perry During Tour Opener". Billboard. July 8, 2013. Archived from the original on July 12, 2013. Retrieved July 11, 2013. "Prism by Katy Perry". Metacritic. Archived from the original on December 9, 2013. Retrieved November 15, 2013. "Katy Perry Won't Rush New Album: "I Know Exactly The Record I Want To Make Next"". Capital FM. December 1, 2012. Archived from the original on April 22, 2014. Retrieved May 19, 2014. Garibaldi, Christina (August 27, 2013). "Katy Perry 'Lets the Light In' On Prism". MTV News. Archived from the original on August 28, 2013. Retrieved August 28, 2013. "Katy Perry inspired by Madonna". MTV News. June 29, 2012. Archived from the original on October 20, 2013. Retrieved April 29, 2014. Caulfield, Keith (August 10, 2013). "Katy Perry's 'Roar' Arrives Early: Listen". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 20, 2014. Retrieved May 19, 2014. Wickman, Kase (August 26, 2013). "Katy Perry Makes Brooklyn 'Roar' With Epic VMA Finale". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 20, 2014. Retrieved May 19, 2014. Trust, Gary (September 4, 2013). "Katy Perry Dethrones Robin Thicke Atop Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 6, 2013. Retrieved September 4, 2013. Benjamin, Jeff (October 16, 2013). "Katy Perry Wails on New Single "Unconditionally"". Fuse. Archived from the original on October 17, 2013. Retrieved October 16, 2013. Trust, Gary (February 17, 2014). "Ask Billboard: Katy Perry Regains No. 1 Momentum". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 11, 2014. Retrieved September 27, 2014. Bell, Amanda (August 14, 2015). "Katy Perry Just Gave The Middle Finger Send-Off To Her Prism Era". MTV News. Archived from the original on September 17, 2015. Retrieved September 13, 2015. Caulfield, Keith. "Katy Perry's 'PRISM' Shines at No. 1 on Billboard 200". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 1, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2013. Gundersen, Edna (October 22, 2013). "Live stream: Katy Perry's 'Prism' album release party". USA Today. Archived from the original on March 30, 2014. Retrieved May 22, 2014. "Dark Horse (feat. Juicy J)". Rolling Stone. July 30, 2014. Archived from the original on October 22, 2014. Retrieved October 21, 2014. Trust, Gary (January 29, 2014). "Katy Perry's 'Dark Horse' Gallops to No. 1 on Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2014. Retrieved January 29, 2014. Wass, Mike (June 7, 2017). "Should Have Been Bigger: Katy Perry's "Birthday"". Idolator. Retrieved October 27, 2017. Strecker, Erin (July 24, 2014). "Katy Perry Releases Lyric Video For New Single 'This Is How We Do'". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 27, 2014. Retrieved July 24, 2014. Lipshutz, Jason (February 26, 2014). "Katy Perry & John Mayer Break Up: Report". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 2, 2014. Retrieved February 27, 2014. Malkin, Marc (March 31, 2014). "Katy Perry After John Mayer: New Hair, New Tour, New Very Expensive Hobby". E!. Archived from the original on March 31, 2014. Retrieved March 31, 2014. "Who You Love" with John Mayer: Danton, Eric R. (August 13, 2013). "Listen to John Mayer's 'Paradise Valley' Now". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 16, 2013. Retrieved August 13, 2013. Gicas, Peter (February 26, 2014). "Katy Perry and John Mayer: Inside Their Relationship's Ups and Downs". E!. Archived from the original on September 12, 2014. Retrieved August 25, 2014. "Lovers Mayer and Perry release duet artwork". Yahoo! News. December 3, 2013. Archived from the original on June 10, 2015. Retrieved June 9, 2015. The tour earned $153.3 million on 1,407,972 tickets in 2014 and $51 million on 576,531 tickets in 2015. "2014 Pollstar Year End Top 100 Worldwide Tours" (PDF). Pollstar. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 31, 2015. Retrieved February 10, 2016. "2015 Pollstar Year End Top 100 Worldwide Tours" (PDF). Pollstar. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 8, 2017. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Hampp, Andrew (November 20, 2014). "One Direction, Lionel Richie & Katy Perry Win at Billboard Touring Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 15, 2015. Retrieved June 12, 2015. Leopold, Todd (September 30, 2015). "Katy Perry kissed by a girl – too much". CNN. Archived from the original on October 27, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015. "Katy Perry confirmed to perform at Super Bowl halftime show". CBS News. November 23, 2014. Archived from the original on November 24, 2014. Retrieved November 24, 2014. Lipshutz, Jason (February 1, 2015). "Katy Perry Shines During Super Bowl XLIX Halftime Show". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 3, 2015. Retrieved February 1, 2015. Dresdale, Andrea (February 7, 2016). "Super Bowl 2016: A History of Halftime Performances". ABC News. Retrieved February 7, 2017. Angert, Alex (February 3, 2015). "Super Bowl XLIX: How Brady, Belichick and Katy Perry's shark ensured the records tumbled". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved November 14, 2015. Brandle, Lars (January 30, 2014). "One Direction Named Most Popular Recording Artist for 2013". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 9, 2014. Retrieved February 5, 2014. "RIAA Crowns Katy Perry Top Certified Digital Artist Ever". Recording Industry Association of America. June 26, 2014. Archived from the original on July 13, 2016. Retrieved June 26, 2014. "Katy Perry Becomes the RIAA's All-Time Top Digital Artist". Billboard. June 26, 2014. Archived from the original on June 28, 2014. Retrieved June 26, 2014. Williams, Maxwell (May 2, 2014). "Katy Perry Featured on Pop Artist Mark Ryden's $100 'Gay Nineties' Album". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 6, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2014. "Katy Perry Added to US National Portrait Gallery". Billboard. May 21, 2014. Archived from the original on May 25, 2014. Retrieved May 29, 2014. Mallenbaum, Carly (November 23, 2015). "Katy Perry debuts new 'Holiday' song in H&M commercial". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 24, 2015. Retrieved November 23, 2015. "World Premiere: H&M Holiday Featuring Katy Perry" (Press release). H&M. November 9, 2015. Archived from the original on November 27, 2016. Retrieved November 23, 2015. Lindner, Emilee (June 17, 2014). "Katy Perry Starts Her Own Record Label and Reveals First Signee". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 19, 2014. Retrieved June 17, 2014. Kaufman, Gil (July 14, 2017). "Katy Perry Really Wants You to Get 'Together' with Her Latest Signing, CYN". Billboard. Retrieved July 14, 2017. "Katy Perry taped background vocals for 'Ooh La La'". United Press International. July 29, 2013. Archived from the original on August 8, 2013. Retrieved August 8, 2013. "The Smurfs 2 (2013)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 18, 2014. Retrieved April 29, 2014. "The Smurfs 2". Rotten Tomatoes. July 31, 2013. Archived from the original on January 6, 2014. Retrieved January 16, 2014. "Katy Perry Makes Hilarious Cameo on Kroll Show". Maxim. March 26, 2014. Archived from the original on August 12, 2014. Retrieved July 25, 2014. Reed, Ryan (July 15, 2013). "Katy Perry Names New Perfume After Queen". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 11, 2014. Retrieved September 10, 2014. "Katy Perry to Guest Curate Madonna's Art for Freedom Project". Billboard. January 7, 2014. Archived from the original on April 22, 2014. Retrieved May 26, 2014. Linder, Emilee (June 17, 2015). "Madonna's New Video: Here's Every Blink-And-You-Miss-It Celeb Cameo". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 17, 2015. Retrieved June 17, 2015. Kinosian, Janet (August 12, 2015). "Katy Perry hopes her Mad Potion fragrance will help you time-travel". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 20, 2016. Retrieved February 19, 2016. Hipes, Patrick (September 11, 2015). "'Katy Perry: Making Of The Pepsi Super Bowl Halftime Show' Trailer: What 118.5 Million Viewers Didn't See". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 12, 2015. Retrieved September 12, 2015. Scheck, Frank (September 17, 2015). "'Jeremy Scott: The People's Designer': Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 21, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015. Bryant, Jacob (December 15, 2015). "Glu Mobile's 'Katy Perry Pop' Hopes to Rival Success of 'Kim Kardashian: Hollywood'". Variety. Archived from the original on December 25, 2015. Retrieved January 4, 2016. Bell, Amanda (October 14, 2015). "'Katy Perry Pop': First Look At Her App". MTV News. Archived from the original on October 15, 2015. Retrieved October 14, 2015. "Grammys 2017: Katy Perry On The Meaning Behind 'Chained To The Rhythm'". Access Hollywood. February 12, 2017. Archived from the original on May 21, 2017. Retrieved May 5, 2017. "NBC Olympics Features New Katy Perry Anthem "Rise"". NBC Sports. July 14, 2016. Archived from the original on July 18, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Ryan, Gavin (July 25, 2016). "Australian Singles: Katy Perry 'Rise' Has A Go At No 1". Noise11.com. Archived from the original on July 25, 2016. Retrieved July 25, 2016. Carroll, Sarah (August 18, 2016). "Katy Perry Is 'Taking Chances' & 'Not Rushing' Her New Music". 97.1 AMP Radio. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved August 19, 2016. "Katy Perry Reveals She's 'Experimenting' With New Album, Talks Forthcoming Shoe Collection". On Air with Ryan Seacrest. August 18, 2016. Archived from the original on September 20, 2016. Retrieved August 19, 2016. Perry, Katy. "Chained to the Rhythm (feat. Skip Marley) – Single". iTunes Store. Archived from the original on February 14, 2017. Retrieved February 14, 2017. Aiello, McKenna; Vulpo, Mike (March 5, 2017). "Katy Perry Opens 2017 iHeartRadio Music Awards With a Bunch of Kids and a Dancing Hamster". E!. Archived from the original on March 6, 2017. Retrieved March 6, 2017. "Rádiós Top 40 slágerlista" [Radio Top 40 hit list] (in Hungarian). Magyar Hanglemezkiadók Szövetsége. April 7, 2017. Archived from the original on April 26, 2017. Retrieved April 27, 2017. Romano, Nick (February 11, 2017). "Katy Perry's 'Chained to the Rhythm' Breaks Spotify Streaming Record". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved February 16, 2017. Tom, Lauren (April 26, 2017). "Katy Perry Unveils 'Bon Appetit' Single Art, Release Date & Migos Feature". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 27, 2017. Retrieved April 27, 2017. Moore, Sam (May 19, 2017). "Listen to Katy Perry's new song 'Swish Swish', featuring Nicki Minaj". NME. Archived from the original on May 19, 2017. Retrieved September 1, 2017. "Witness by Katy Perry". Metacritic. Retrieved June 9, 2017. Caulfield, Keith (June 18, 2017). "Katy Perry Scores Third No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart With 'Witness'". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 19, 2017. Retrieved June 18, 2017. Stutz, Colin (June 9, 2017). "Katy Perry YouTube Live Stream Wraps Monday With Live Concert; James Corden, Sia & More Guests to Pop In". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 10, 2017. Retrieved June 10, 2017. Bell, Sadie (June 15, 2017). "Katy Perry's Witness World Wide Generated Over 49 Million Views". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 15, 2017. Retrieved June 16, 2017. Roth, Madeline (August 17, 2017). "Katy Perry Has Good News And Bad News About Her Witness Tour". MTV News. Retrieved August 18, 2017. Findlay, Mitch (June 14, 2017). "Calvin Harris Announces Single With Big Sean, Pharrell, & Katy Perry". HotNewHipHop. Archived from the original on June 22, 2017. Retrieved June 14, 2017. White, Jack (August 11, 2017). "Calvin Harris dethrones Despacito to claim his eighth Number 1 single". Official Charts Company. Retrieved August 11, 2017. Nolfi, Joey (November 2, 2018). "Katy Perry releases soaring cover of Dear Evan Hansen's Waving Through a Window". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Kaufman, Gil (November 1, 2018). "Katy Perry Re-Recorded 'Dear Evan Hansen' Song 'Waving Through a Window' to Help Launch Show's National Tour: Listen". Billboard. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Blistein, Jon (November 15, 2018). "Katy Perry Unwraps New Holiday Song 'Cozy Little Christmas'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 15, 2018. Fogel, Stefanie (December 11, 2018). "Katy Perry Joins 'Final Fantasy Brave Exvius' as Playable Character". Variety. Retrieved December 12, 2018. Doty, Meriah (February 12, 2016). "From Amanpour to Zane: All the Celebrity Cameos in 'Zoolander 2' (Spoilers!)". Yahoo! Movies. Archived from the original on February 23, 2016. Retrieved February 13, 2016. Ryan, Patrick (February 10, 2016). "Ben Stiller, Owen Wilson put 'Zoolander' back in fashion". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 13, 2016. Retrieved February 13, 2016. Mackenzie, Macaela (February 13, 2017). "Katy Perry Just Named a Shoe After Hillary Clinton". Allure. Retrieved November 19, 2017. Grinberg, Emanuella (February 12, 2019). "Katy Perry faces criticism over shoes that evoke blackface". CNN. Retrieved February 13, 2019. Roth, Madeline (July 27, 2017). "Katy Perry Is Ready To Be Your 'Moonwoman' As Host Of The 2017 VMAs". MTV News. Retrieved July 27, 2017. O'Connell, Michael (August 3, 2017). "'American Idol' Producer Talks Revival Salaries, New ABC Home". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved August 23, 2017. Gelman, Vlada (September 29, 2017). "American Idol Taps Lionel Richie as Third Judge for ABC Revival". Yahoo! Music. Retrieved October 25, 2017. Enos, Morgan (April 30, 2018). "A Timeline of Katy Perry and Orlando Bloom's Relationship". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 6, 2018. Retrieved October 6, 2018. O'Kane, Caitlin (February 15, 2019). "Katy Perry and Orlando Bloom get engaged on Valentine's Day". CBS News. Retrieved February 15, 2019. Watts, Cindy (February 10, 2019). "Dolly Parton honored at Grammys with star-studded tribute from Katy Perry, Miley Cyrus and more". USA Today. Retrieved February 11, 2019. Bloom, Madison (February 14, 2019). "Zedd and Katy Perry Share New Song and Video '365': Listen". Pitchfork. Retrieved February 14, 2019. Fernandez, Suzette (April 19, 2019). "Katy Perry Joins Daddy Yankee's 'Con Calma': Listen". Billboard. Retrieved April 19, 2019. Knapp, Toby (May 31, 2019). "KATY PERRY: Never Really Over... Anthem for US because WE'VE BEEN THERE!". iHeartRadio. Retrieved May 31, 2019. Smith, Lindsey (August 6, 2019). "Katy Perry Announces New Single 'Small Talk' Out This Friday". iHeartRadio. Retrieved August 7, 2019. Rowley, Glenn (October 16, 2019). "Katy Perry Goes On a Tropical Joyride in 'Harleys in Hawaii' Video: Watch". Billboard. Retrieved October 17, 2019. Choppin, Damien; Bourdon, Megan; Moynihan, Qayyah (November 20, 2019). "These are the 10 highest-paid female singers of 2019". Business Insider. Retrieved March 13, 2022. Never Really Over earned the singer considerable critical acclaim, positioning her in the top 15 of the Billboard 100." Zemler, Emily (June 17, 2019). "Watch Taylor Swift Reunite With Katy Perry in 'You Need to Calm Down' Video". Rolling Stone. Retrieved June 18, 2019. Eggertsen, Chris (July 29, 2019). "Katy Perry Loses 'Dark Horse' Copyright Trial". Billboard. Retrieved July 31, 2019. Maddaus, Gene (March 17, 2020). "Katy Perry Wins Reversal of 'Dark Horse' Copyright Verdict". Variety. Retrieved March 17, 2020. "Katy Perry among those ordered to pay a total of $2.78M in song copying lawsuit". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. August 1, 2019. Retrieved August 2, 2019. Robin, Marci (August 14, 2019). "Katy Perry Is Being Accused of Sexual Misconduct by "Teenage Dream" Video Model Josh Kloss". allure. Retrieved August 16, 2019. Robin, Marci (August 14, 2019). "Fans Are Defending Katy Perry After a Model Accused Her of Sexual Misconduct". Allure. Retrieved November 23, 2021. Snapes, Laura (August 14, 2020). "Katy Perry: 'I've done a lot of falling flat on my face'". The Guardian. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Barr, Sabrina (March 5, 2020). "Katy Perry pregnant: Singer confirms she is expecting a baby with Orlando Bloom". The Independent. Retrieved May 7, 2020. Sanchez, Omar (May 15, 2020). "Katy Perry releases new single 'Daisies' and announces album release date". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Gomez, Dessi (July 10, 2020). "Katy Perry's new single encourages listeners to 'Smile'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 10, 2020. Retrieved July 10, 2020. Martoccio, Angie (May 14, 2020). "Katy Perry Announces New Album Release Date". Rolling Stone. Retrieved May 15, 2020. Lee, Janet W. (July 27, 2020). "Katy Perry Delivers Final Performance Before Giving Birth (Watch)". Variety. Retrieved July 27, 2020. "Katy Perry and Orlando Bloom announce birth of first child Daisy Dove Bloom". BBC. August 27, 2020. Retrieved August 27, 2020. "Smile by Katy Perry". Metacritic. Retrieved September 10, 2020. Billboard staff (September 9, 2020). "Five Burning Questions: Katy Perry's 'Smile' Debuts at No. 5 on Billboard 200 Albums Chart". Billboard. Retrieved September 10, 2020. "Camp Katy". Apple Music. October 16, 2020. Retrieved January 30, 2021. "Empowered". Apple Music. November 3, 2020. Retrieved January 30, 2021. "Scorpio SZN". Apple Music. October 26, 2020. Retrieved January 30, 2021. "Cosmic Energy". Apple Music. December 18, 2020. Retrieved January 30, 2021. Rowley, Glenn (December 21, 2020). "Watch Aliens Abduct Zooey Deschanel Instead Of Katy Perry In 'Not The End Of The World' Video". Billboard. Retrieved January 3, 2021. Curto, Justin (December 21, 2020). "Zooey Deschanel Plays Katy Perry in Music Video, Culminating a 13-Year-Old Joke". Vulture. Retrieved December 22, 2020. Kaufman, Gil (December 18, 2020). "Katy Perry Drops Surprise 'Cosmic Energy' EP". Billboard. Retrieved January 7, 2021. Tintel, Guilherme. "Serviu, você sabe que serviu! "Cry About It Later" vira trance com Katy Perry, Luísa Sonza e Bruno Martini" [It served, you know it served! "Cry About It Later" turns trance with Katy Perry, Luísa Sonza and Bruno Martini] (in Brazilian Portuguese). Portalitpop.com. Retrieved May 14, 2021. Brodsky, Rachel (January 21, 2021). "'Katy Perry came and delivered': Singer closes inauguration concert with explosive fireworks display". The Independent. Retrieved February 27, 2020. Mamo, Heran (May 11, 2021). "Katy Perry Announces 'Electric' Song Collab With Pokémon". Billboard. Retrieved May 11, 2021. Spanos, Brittany (May 12, 2021). "Celine Dion, Katy Perry, Carrie Underwood, Luke Bryan Plot Las Vegas Residencies". Rolling Stone. Retrieved May 12, 2021. Henderson, Taylor (December 16, 2021). "Katy Perry Knows She Helped Fans Explore Their Sexuality". Out. Retrieved December 17, 2021. Katsilometes, John (January 27, 2022). "Katy Perry adds more shows to 'Play' at Resorts World". Las Vegas Review-Journal. Retrieved February 2, 2022. Sheckells, Melinda (December 30, 2021). "Katy Perry Brings Dancing Mushrooms, A Giant Toilet & More to Wild Las Vegas Residency". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 31, 2021. Retrieved December 31, 2021. Donelan, Charles (February 1, 2022). "Pano: Santa Barbara's Katy Perry Brings Down the House in Las Vegas". Santa Barbara Independent. Retrieved October 3, 2022. In the spring of 2021, Perry signed a deal worth $168 million to appear at the new Resorts World Theater, a splashy, 5,000-seat venue located in the Conrad Las Vegas. She opened her run on December 30, 2021, as reported by the Montecito Journal's intrepid star spotter Richard Mineards, along with the usual array of celebrity media outlets. Katsilometes, John (April 10, 2023). "Katy Perry announces final 'Play' dates". Las Vegas Review-Journal. Archived from the original on April 10, 2023. Retrieved April 10, 2023. Halperin, Shirley (September 29, 2021). "Between Pop-Stardom and Parenthood, Katy Perry Still Finds Time to Empower Others". Variety. Retrieved September 30, 2021. Woerner, Meredith (September 30, 2021). "Inside Variety's Power of Women Dinner | Photos". Variety. Retrieved October 1, 2021. Avila, Daniela (October 25, 2021). "Watch Luke Bryan Channel His Inner Elvis Presley During Appearance on The Ellen DeGeneres Show". Yahoo! News. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Kaufman, Gil (October 25, 2021). "Katy Perry Strums, Sings Beatles' 'All You Need is Love' in Holiday Gap Ad". Billboard. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Katy Perry je treći izvođač koji je u tri različita desetljeća došao na prvo mjesto Airplay Radio Charta" [Katy Perry is the third artist to come to the top of the Airplay Radio Charter in three different decades] (in Croatian). Hrvatska radiotelevizija. March 31, 2022. Odell, Kat (January 6, 2022). "Katy Perry Gets Into the Wellness Game With De Soi, a Line of Non-Alcoholic Aperitifs". Vogue. Retrieved July 3, 2022. Rice, Nicholas (January 10, 2022). "Katy Perry Says New Non-Alcoholic Drink Line Is 'About Balance': 'Can't Drink Like I Was in My 20s'". People. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Ocean, Justin (June 10, 2022). "Six Canned Drinks For Summer Parties That Refresh Without Guilt". Bloomberg Businessweek. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Vaughn, Grace Lenehan (April 4, 2022). "Thomas Rhett talks creating 'Where We Started' and beating writer's block". Sounds Like Nashville. Retrieved April 15, 2022. Fleming, Mike Jr. (May 10, 2022). "Hot Cannes Package: Katy Perry Stars In Jeremy Zag-directed Animated Musical 'Melody'; Cross Creek & Zag Studios Producing". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Kiefer, Brittaney (May 17, 2022). "Katy Perry's Playful Remix Helps Just Eat Take Its Food Delivery Global". Adweek. Retrieved May 17, 2022. Regan, Ashley (May 18, 2022). "Superstar Katy Perry teams up with Menulog in new music video". AdNews. Retrieved May 18, 2022. Crann, Justin (June 9, 2022). "SkipTheDishes' new campaign pops with Katy Perry". Strategy. Retrieved May 7, 2023. Behn, Hanna (May 20, 2022). "Kampagne für Lieferando: Katy Perry singt Witze übers Essen" [Campaign for Lieferando: Katy Perry sings jokes about food] (in German). Onlinehändler News. Retrieved May 7, 2023. "Katy Perry awarded "Key to Las Vegas"". KLAS-TV. June 8, 2022. Retrieved June 9, 2022. "GarageBand drops new in-app Remix Sessions featuring Katy Perry and SEVENTEEN". Apple Newsroom. August 17, 2022. Retrieved October 3, 2022. Sinha, Charu (May 7, 2023). "Katy Perry 'Roar's at the British Public During Coronation Concert". Vulture. Retrieved May 9, 2023. Mouriquand, David. "The Coronation Concert in pictures: Katy Perry, Lionel Richie and Take That honour the new king". Euronews. Retrieved May 12, 2023. Aswad, Jem (September 18, 2023). "Katy Perry Sells Catalog Rights to Litmus Music for $225 Million". Variety. Retrieved October 13, 2023. Morrow, Brendan (February 13, 2024). "Katy Perry says she's leaving American Idol amid 'very exciting year'". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 13, 2024. Retrieved February 13, 2023. Katy Perry is leaving American Idol after seven seasons. She surprised fans on Monday's Jimmy Kimmel Live! by casually revealing her exit. "Katy Perry on the 180 That Saved Her Career". NPR. October 26, 2013. Archived from the original on February 18, 2014. Retrieved February 3, 2014. Schneider, Marc (May 12, 2012). "Katy Perry Wants a 'Fucking Vacation' After Next Single". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 13, 2014. Retrieved February 3, 2014. "Freddie Mercury inspired Katy Perry to 'Kiss a Girl'". NME. September 26, 2008. Archived from the original on January 6, 2014. Retrieved February 3, 2014. "Katy Perry, The Things They Say". Contactmusic.com. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved February 3, 2014. Wiig, Kristen (March 2, 2012). "Katy Perry". Interview. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved February 3, 2014. Mitchell, Gail (November 30, 2012). "Katy Perry Q&A: Billboard's Woman of the Year 2012". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved November 30, 2012. Dinh, James (April 6, 2012). "Katy Perry's 'Part of Me' Film Inspired By Madonna". MTV News. Archived from the original on November 9, 2013. Retrieved April 29, 2014. "Why Unplugged?". MTV. November 16, 2009. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved January 4, 2014. Newman, Melinda (April 22, 2010). "Katy Perry dishes details on new dance-fueled album". HitFix. Archived from the original on April 9, 2016. Retrieved March 30, 2016. "Katy Perry: Influences". Apple Music. Archived from the original on April 5, 2022. Retrieved April 5, 2022. Ryan, Chris (March 30, 2010). "What Will Katy Perry's New Album Sound Like? Check Out 5 Video Clues". MTV News. Archived from the original on April 10, 2016. Retrieved March 26, 2016. Vena, Jocelyn (September 22, 2009). "Katy Perry wants to make new music her fans can 'roller-stake' to". MTV News. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved March 25, 2016. Michaels, Sean. "Katy Perry wants to go folk acoustic – in style of Joni Mitchell". The Guardian. Archived from the original on February 23, 2014. Retrieved February 3, 2014. Garland, Emma (January 10, 2017). "A Deep Dive into Katy Perry's 2007 Myspace Page". Noisey. Vice Media. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved January 20, 2017. "Katy Perry praises "really great" Pink". Digital Spy. August 15, 2009. Archived from the original on November 4, 2013. Retrieved December 5, 2013. Friedlander 2012, p. 123 "Katy Perry's 'California Dreams' Tour: What the Critics Are Saying". The Hollywood Reporter. June 19, 2011. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved August 6, 2014. Rutherford, Kevin (October 22, 2013). "Katy Perry Reveals 'Prism' Influences, Adds Stripped-Down Performances at Album Release Event". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 27, 2013. Retrieved December 9, 2013. Woods, Vicki (June 2013). "Katy Perry's First Vogue Cover". Vogue. Archived from the original on July 26, 2013. Retrieved July 26, 2013. Musical genres of Katy Hudson and One of the Boys: Friedlander 2012, p. 20 Merritt, Stephanie (September 14, 2008). "Pop review: Katy Perry, One of the Boys". The Guardian. Archived from the original on August 10, 2014. Retrieved August 6, 2014. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "One of the Boys – Katy Perry". AllMusic. Archived from the original on July 27, 2014. Retrieved July 25, 2014. Sheffield, Rob (August 23, 2010). "Teenage Dream". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 25, 2014. Retrieved February 5, 2014. Trust, Gary (September 9, 2013). "Katy Perry's Future 'Prism' Hits: Industry Picks". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 11, 2013. Retrieved September 19, 2013. Heller, Corinne (May 20, 2017). "Katy Perry Reveals Meaning Behind "Swish Swish" Amid Rumors Song Is About Taylor Swift". E!. Retrieved July 25, 2017. Smith, Da'Shan (June 13, 2017). "Katy Perry's 'Witness' Fails as 'Purposeful Pop,' But Succeeds as Future Pop". Billboard. Retrieved June 16, 2017. Reed, James (October 20, 2013). "Perry shows many colors on 'Prism'". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on January 25, 2014. Retrieved February 7, 2014. Wallace, Amy (January 19, 2014). "Katy Perry's GQ Profile Outtakes: Going Back to School, Dating Musicians, and Plastic Surgery". GQ. Archived from the original on February 24, 2014. Retrieved February 1, 2014. Kot, Greg (October 20, 2013). "Katy Perry album review; Prism reviewed". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on January 25, 2014. Retrieved February 5, 2014. Pareles, Jon; Ratliff, Ben; Carmanica, Jon; Chinen, Nate (September 6, 2013). "Fall Pop Music Preview: An Abundance of Rhythms and Styles". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 11, 2014. Retrieved August 7, 2014. Roberts, Randall (October 22, 2013). "Review: Hits pack Katy Perry's 'Prism'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 25, 2014. Retrieved February 4, 2014. Castellanos, Melissa (September 26, 2008). "Second Cup Cafe: Lesley Roy". CBS News. Archived from the original on September 8, 2014. Retrieved May 24, 2014. All I Ever Wanted (Media notes). RCA Records/19 Recordings. 2009. Jessie James (Media notes). Mercury Records/The Island Def Jam Music Group. 2009. Vena, Jocelyn. "Selena Gomez 'Had To Fight' To Get Katy Perry Song 'Rock God'". MTV News. Archived from the original on February 3, 2014. Retrieved September 22, 2010. When the Sun Goes Down (Media notes). Hollywood Records. 2011. Garibaldi, Christina (December 4, 2013). "Britney Spears Explains How 'Amazing' Katy Perry Ended Up On Britney Jean". MTV News. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 25, 2014. The New Classic (Media notes). The Island Def Jam Music Group. 2014. The Pinkprint (Media notes). Universal Music Group. 2014. Grewal, Samar (October 9, 2008). "Review: Katy Perry – One of the Boys". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 17, 2014. Retrieved March 16, 2014. Mirkin, Steven (February 1, 2009). "Review: 'Katy Perry'". Variety. Archived from the original on March 17, 2014. Retrieved March 16, 2014. Clarke, Betty (October 1, 2013). "Katy Perry – review". The Guardian. Archived from the original on February 23, 2014. Retrieved February 5, 2014. Harvey, Darren (September 15, 2008). "Katy Perry – One of the Boys". musicOMH. Archived from the original on January 4, 2014. Retrieved February 5, 2014. Miller, Alex. "NME Album Reviews – Katy Perry". NME. Archived from the original on January 16, 2014. Retrieved February 5, 2014. McNulty, Bernadette (October 1, 2013). "Katy Perry, iTunes Festival, Roundhouse, review". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on March 22, 2014. Retrieved February 5, 2014. Hollister, Sean (November 3, 2013). "Katy Perry passes Justin Bieber as most popular person on Twitter". The Verge. Archived from the original on November 4, 2013. Retrieved November 4, 2013. Grow, Kory (September 4, 2014). "Wherever They May Roam: Metallica Set Guinness World Record for Touring". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 5, 2014. Retrieved September 4, 2014. Cirisano, Tatiana (June 16, 2017). "Katy Perry Becomes First to Hit 100 Million Twitter Followers". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 16, 2017. Retrieved June 16, 2017. Gundersen, Edna (October 21, 2013). "Katy Perry tells how to 'tame the social media dragon'". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 5, 2014. Retrieved February 7, 2014. "Music Fuels the Internet". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved January 1, 2024. "The 25 Most Influential People on the Internet". Time. June 26, 2017. Retrieved June 27, 2017. George, Kat (May 24, 2014). "Does Madonna Need Katy Perry More Than Katy Perry Needs Madonna?". Vice. Archived from the original on May 27, 2014. Retrieved May 29, 2014. "Katy Perry tops Maxim's Hot 100 list". CNN. May 10, 2010. Archived from the original on October 22, 2014. Retrieved October 21, 2014. "The Hottest Women of 2013". Men's Health. January 2013. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved April 29, 2014. Apodaca, Rose. "Katy Perry's Interview – Quotes from Katy Perry". Harper's Bazaar. Archived from the original on January 10, 2014. Retrieved February 6, 2014. Larson, John (September 14, 2010). "Katy Perry // "Teenage Dream"". Tacoma Weekly. Archived from the original on November 9, 2013. Retrieved June 19, 2013. Menyes, Carolyn (July 12, 2012). "Katy Perry Asked to Ditch Hazardous Peppermint Bra". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 29, 2013. Retrieved June 19, 2013. "Fashion Fireworks: Katy Perry's Best Performance Looks". Vogue. Archived from the original on December 21, 2013. Retrieved February 6, 2014. Allaire, Christian (January 2, 2022). "Katy Perry Is Still the Queen of Camp". Vogue. Retrieved January 3, 2022. Lyons Powell, Hannah. "Katy Perry's Changing Style and Fashion". Glamour. Archived from the original on February 19, 2014. Retrieved February 6, 2014. "Find Out What Influences Katy Perry's Cute Style!". Seventeen. February 5, 2009. Archived from the original on September 8, 2009. Retrieved April 29, 2014. Young, Katy (October 1, 2013). "Katy Perry reveals her perfume preferences". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved October 1, 2013. Murray, Daisy (January 10, 2021). "Katy Perry's Style File: Every Single One Of The Singer's Camp Outfits". Elle. Archived from the original on January 14, 2022. Retrieved January 14, 2022. Kessler, Alex (February 23, 2022). "Introducing Katy Perry's Edgy New Style Direction". Vogue. Retrieved February 25, 2022. Kanter, Sharon (February 16, 2017). "Shop It Now! Katy Perry Launches a Shoe Line, Names Styles After Her Famous Pals (Hillary Clinton's Is 'a Pep in Her Step!')". People. Retrieved January 14, 2022. Herrera, Monica (July 23, 2010). "Katy Perry: The Billboard Cover Story". Billboard. Retrieved November 22, 2021. Kramer, Jillian (September 12, 2014). "Katy Perry Says Men She's Dated Were Intimidated by Her Success. Can You Relate?". Glamour. Retrieved November 21, 2021. Mier, Tomás (October 6, 2022). "Katy Perry Talks 'Kampy' Residency, New Music, and How She Knew Dua Lipa Was the 'It Girl'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 7, 2022. Katy Perry, the "Kween of Kamp," knows a thing or two about entertaining. Odell, Kat (January 6, 2022). "Katy Perry Gets Into the Wellness Game With De Soi, a Line of Non-Alcoholic Aperitifs". Vogue. As Perry embarks on a residency in Las Vegas, the singer admits that her rigorous work schedule serves as a daily reminder of the importance of self-care. But the queen of camp will always advocate for a bit of indulgence in the mix. Newman, Scarlett (May 6, 2019). "Katy Perry Lit Up the Met Gala Dressed as a Chandelier". Teen Vogue. Katy Perry is a queen of camp, and this year she did not disappoint. Baudler, Averi (May 9, 2022). "Katy Perry's Lace-Up Corset Minidress Is Giving Madonna". InStyle. It's no secret that Katy Perry has a unique sense of style. As the unofficial queen of camp, it's practically in the job description. Huber, Hannah; Silverstein, Noah (October 15, 2019). "Katy Perry's 34 Most Memorable Looks of All Time". Glamour. Retrieved October 21, 2023. The queen of camp lit up the 2019 Met Gala red carpet in a wearable chandelier. Unterberger, Andrew (August 26, 2021). "How Katy Perry and Her 'Dream' Team Tied Michael Jackson's Single-Album Hot 100 Record in 2011". Billboard. Retrieved August 27, 2021. Rosa, Christopher (October 21, 2020). "Katy Perry's 10 Best (and Worst) Songs". Glamour. Retrieved August 19, 2021. Griffiths, George (January 11, 2022). "Watch Katy Perry and Alesso's high-energy video for new track When I'm Gone". Official Charts Company. Retrieved January 11, 2022. "104 Women Who Defined the Decade in Pop Culture". Glamour. December 20, 2019. Retrieved November 21, 2021. Ramsay, Derek (October 5, 2017). "Katy Perry". Variety. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved December 1, 2021. Jakubowski et al. 2017, pp. 122–135. Lorge, Melinda (November 29, 2021). "'The Voice': Lana Scott Puts a Country Spin on a Katy Perry Pop Hit". Taste of Country. Retrieved November 30, 2021. Lowe, Zane (August 30, 2021). "Halsey - Apple Music "If I Can't Have Love, I Want Power" Interview". Archived from the original on November 18, 2021. Retrieved August 31, 2021 – via YouTube. Gold, Allie (September 15, 2021). "Lil Nas X Talks 'Montero' Album, Shawn Mendes & His Biggest Musical Impacts". Elvis Duran and the Morning Show. Retrieved November 21, 2021. Kaufmann, Gil (September 17, 2020). "Jessica Agombar, Co-Writer of BTS' 'Dynamite,' Says Goal for the Song Was 'A Positive, Huge Ball of Energy'". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 22, 2020. Retrieved September 22, 2020. Bustos, Kristina (February 28, 2016). "How did Katy Perry inspire Adele's Brit Awards performance". Digital Spy. Retrieved March 6, 2022. Weiner, Jonah (April 12, 2017). "The Return of Lorde". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved November 21, 2021. Knopper, Steve (April 18, 2014). "Sia Furler, the Socially Phobic Pop Star". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 7, 2020. Retrieved March 9, 2022. Higgins, Bill (September 7, 2017). "Bonnie McKee on Writing Hits for Pop's Leading Ladies: 'Britney Spears Is Just All Sex, All Day' (Q&A)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 8, 2018. Retrieved April 13, 2018. Kuga, Mitchell (June 2, 2021). "How Rina Sawayama Turned Pop Inside Out — And Built One of Its Fastest Growing Fanbases". Billboard. Retrieved January 31, 2022. I always get asked: 'Who are you listening to at the moment?' I'm like, 'Kelly Clarkson? I don't know if you've heard of her? Um, Katy Perry's first album? "Charli XCX's Best Song Ever". BBC Radio 1. January 31, 2022. Event occurs at 20:00. Retrieved February 1, 2022. "Doja Cat Teases New Album, Talks Hentai, Clears Up Cardi B & JD Comments + More!". August 22, 2019. Retrieved November 21, 2021 – via YouTube. Still, Jennifer (May 13, 2011). "Ellie Goulding: "I'm influenced by everyone"". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on April 4, 2016. Retrieved March 26, 2016. Daniels, Colin (January 15, 2013). "Tegan and Sara unveil new song 'I Was a Fool' - listen". Digital Spy. Retrieved March 21, 2016. "Jessie J inspired by Katy Perry". Hindustan Times. June 6, 2012. Retrieved March 6, 2022. "Katy Perry taught Marina Diamandis". The Times of India. November 28, 2011. Retrieved March 9, 2022. McDermott, Maeve (March 23, 2017). "John Mayer admits Katy Perry inspired his new song". USA Today. Retrieved March 6, 2022. "Jason Derulo Explains How Katy Perry's Underwear Inspired His Latest Hit, "Trumpets"". ABC News Radio. November 3, 2014. Archived from the original on March 7, 2022. Retrieved March 6, 2022. "Lil B's "Katy Perry" Inspires the Pop Star to Ask Him to Prom". Fuse. April 2014. Retrieved March 6, 2022. Kheraj, Alim (March 9, 2016). "The surprising stories behind six of Little Mix's biggest hits". Digital Spy. Retrieved March 6, 2022. Oltuski, Romy (February 28, 2014). "A Moment With Natalia Kills". Harper's Bazaar. Retrieved March 6, 2022. "Maren Morris Breaks Down Our Favorite Tracks from Her New Album, 'GIRL'". TooFab. March 8, 2019. Retrieved March 3, 2022. Love Michael, Michael (June 12, 2018). "Hayley Kiyoko Knows What She Needs". Paper. Retrieved August 17, 2018. Robinson, Peter (March 1, 2018). "Troye Sivan interview: "I feel more fully-realised as a person"". Popjustice. Retrieved March 3, 2022. "Get to Know: Kim Petras". MTV. August 22, 2019. Archived from the original on February 27, 2022. Retrieved February 2, 2022. Moore, Sam (December 17, 2020). "Yungblud: "Katy Perry's 'California Gurls' and 'I Kissed A Girl' felt so punk rock to me"". NME. Retrieved March 3, 2022. Menze, Jill (October 27, 2014). "From Katy Perry to Arcade Fire, Mary Lambert Reveals the Artists Who Inspired Her Debut Album". Billboard. Retrieved March 6, 2022. Yossman, Karen (April 29, 2014). "Meet Issues, the Metalcore Band Inspired by Katy Perry". MTV. Archived from the original on September 25, 2015. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Margaret, Mary (August 12, 2011). "Rebecca Black: I Don't Want to Just Be Known as the 'Friday' Girl". Parade. Retrieved March 6, 2022. Spanos, Britney (June 10, 2016). "Which Superstars Inspired 'Popstar'?". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 6, 2022. Al-Sharif, Rabab (April 19, 2021). "Who Are Tramp Stamps + Why Does Everyone Already Hate Them?". Loudwire. Retrieved March 7, 2022. "Baba Sehgal's special song for Katy Perry". The Times of India. November 14, 2019. Retrieved March 6, 2022. Spanos, Brittany (June 9, 2016). "'America's Got Talent' Star Grace VanderWaal Talks Songwriting, Katy Perry". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 11, 2022. Rowley, Glenn (June 7, 2019). "Dagny Talks Providing Inspiration for Katy Perry's 'Never Really Over' and Being 'Part of Something Bigger Than Me'". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 16, 2022. Retrieved March 16, 2022. Blistein, Jon (November 18, 2014). "Chris Martin: Nirvana, Katy Perry, EDM Inspired 'Sky Full of Stars'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 6, 2017. Retrieved July 6, 2015. "Katy Perry teams up with UNICEF and visits children in Madagascar". UNICEF. Archived from the original on April 9, 2013. Retrieved April 7, 2013. "Katy Perry is UNICEF's newest Goodwill Ambassador". UNICEF. December 3, 2013. Archived from the original on August 10, 2014. Retrieved April 28, 2014. Ryan, Reed (January 15, 2014). "Katy Perry Cues Up 'Prismatic' World Tour". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 31, 2014. Retrieved April 28, 2014. "Boys Hope/Girls Hope". American Broadcasting Company. Archived from the original on October 18, 2014. Retrieved April 28, 2014. Coplan, Chris (December 6, 2010). "Nicki Minaj and Katy Perry Cover "Girls Just Wanna Have Fun" For The Troops". Consequence of Sound. Retrieved November 18, 2020. Trakin, Roy (June 12, 2014). "Katy Perry and Staples 'Make Roar Happen' to Help Support Teachers". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 22, 2014. Retrieved June 18, 2014. "UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador Katy Perry meets children facing immense challenges in Viet Nam". UNICEF. June 1, 2016. Archived from the original on June 2, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2016. "2016 UNICEF Snowflake Ball to Honor UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador Katy Perry and Philanthropist Moll Anderson". UNICEF. June 23, 2016. Archived from the original on August 17, 2016. Retrieved June 23, 2016. "The Keep A Breast Foundation". Keep A Breast Foundation. Archived from the original on March 30, 2014. Retrieved May 20, 2014. Aguila, Justino (October 24, 2013). "Katy Perry Hosts Famous Friends, Previews Next Tour at Hollywood Bowl: Live Review". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 24, 2014. Retrieved April 28, 2014. Vena, Jocelyn. "Katy Perry, Tokio Hotel Join H&M for Fashion Against AIDS". MTV News. Archived from the original on May 8, 2009. Retrieved March 14, 2014. "EJAF's 25th Annual Academy Awards Viewing Party: Sunday, February 26, 2017". Elton John AIDS Foundation. Archived from the original on November 29, 2018. Retrieved January 18, 2017. Myers, Alexandra (February 16, 2012). "Katy Perry donates proceeds from new single to charity". Yahoo! News. Archived from the original on July 15, 2014. Retrieved May 25, 2014. "Katy Perry Celebrates Over $175K Raised for Charity on Her California Dreams Tour through Tickets-for-Charity" (PDF). Children's Health Fund. December 8, 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 23, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2014. "Katy Perry Asks For Charity Donations To Mark Birthday". Contactmusic.com. Channel 4. October 26, 2011. Archived from the original on October 28, 2011. Retrieved November 11, 2011. Davidson, Danica. "Sweet Treat: Katy Perry asks for Charitable Donations for her 28th Birthday". MTV. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved June 27, 2014. Daunt, Tina (March 31, 2014). "Katy Perry, Pharrell Williams Help Raise $2.4 Million for MOCA". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 3, 2014. Retrieved April 10, 2014. "One Love Manchester: What you need to know". BBC News. June 4, 2017. Archived from the original on June 4, 2017. Retrieved June 4, 2017. Shackleford, Tom (March 13, 2018). "Katy Perry announces Witness: Coming Home benefit show at the Santa Barbara Bowl". AXS. Retrieved March 19, 2018. Gardner, Chris (March 9, 2017). "Katy Perry, America Ferrera and Senator Tim Kaine Set to Appear at HRC Gala". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 11, 2017. Retrieved March 11, 2017. "Katy Perry Opens Up About Accepting Her Sexuality For The First Time". Grazia. March 20, 2017. Retrieved August 17, 2021. Mapes, Jillian (October 28, 2010). "Katy Perry Dedicates Leaked 'Firework' Video to LGBT Campaign". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 19, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2014. Hauser, Brooke (June 28, 2012). "Katy Perry Celebrates Her Independence". Parade. Archived from the original on February 21, 2014. Retrieved February 6, 2014. "Katy Perry Accepts Hero Award From Trevor Project". Contactmusic.com. December 3, 2012. Archived from the original on July 12, 2014. Retrieved April 28, 2014. Stampler, Laura (March 18, 2014). "Katy Perry: Maybe I am a Feminist After All". Time. Archived from the original on June 15, 2014. Retrieved June 16, 2014. Levinson, Lauren (April 16, 2013). "Watch: Beyoncé, Blake Lively, Katy Perry, and More Unite in Chime for Change Video". Elle. Archived from the original on June 30, 2014. Retrieved April 28, 2014. "Katy Perry Talks Body Image, Fame, and Politics in Rolling Stone Cover Story". Rolling Stone. June 22, 2011. Archived from the original on March 7, 2014. Retrieved February 16, 2014. "An Open Letter to Congress from the Music Industry". Billboard. June 23, 2016. Archived from the original on June 24, 2016. Retrieved June 23, 2016. Porter, Amber (October 8, 2012). "Katy Perry Nails it for Obama". ABC News. Archived from the original on October 12, 2012. Retrieved November 4, 2012. Strecker, Erin (November 1, 2012). "Katy Perry performing another free concert at Obama rally". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012. Retrieved November 4, 2012. Strecker, Erin. "Katy Perry performs at third President Obama rally in Wisconsin". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 5, 2014. Retrieved February 9, 2014. Nessif, Bruna (November 5, 2012). "K2012 Election: Katy Perry, George Lopez, Rashida Jones, and More Take to Twitter to Get Out the Vote". E!. Archived from the original on April 25, 2014. Retrieved February 16, 2014. "Katy Perry confronts Tony Abbott on gay marriage". The Daily Telegraph. August 15, 2013. Archived from the original on March 22, 2014. Retrieved February 6, 2014. Schwiegershausen, Erica (April 9, 2014). "Katy Perry Exposed a Springy Strip of Upper Belly". New York. Archived from the original on April 11, 2014. Retrieved April 9, 2014. "Katy Perry's Fundraiser For Kamala Harris". W. November 6, 2016. Archived from the original on November 11, 2016. Retrieved November 10, 2016. "Katy Perry Offers to Write Hillary Clinton Campaign Theme Song". The Hollywood Reporter. June 22, 2014. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved August 21, 2015. Todd, Bridget (June 13, 2015). "Celebs show they are ready for Hillary by embracing her logo". MSNBC. Archived from the original on August 16, 2015. Retrieved August 21, 2015. Claiborne, Matthew (March 3, 2016). "Katy Perry, Elton John Perform at Hillary Clinton Fundraiser In New York". ABC News. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved June 3, 2016. Grant, Sarah (July 28, 2016). "Watch Katy Perry 'Rise' and 'Roar' for Hillary Clinton at DNC". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 30, 2016. Retrieved July 29, 2016. Carras, Christi (November 3, 2020). "Yep, that was Katy Perry parading around L.A. dressed as an 'I Voted' sticker". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved November 14, 2020. Sharp, Rachel (November 8, 2022). "Why Katy Perry, Chris Pratt and Netflix are causing controversy on Election Day". The Independent. Retrieved November 13, 2022. American Music Awards for Katy Perry: Dinh, James (November 20, 2011). "Katy Perry Strips Down 'One That Got Away' At AMAs". MTV News. Archived from the original on April 27, 2014. Retrieved April 26, 2014. "AMAs 2012: Full Winners List". Billboard. November 18, 2012. Archived from the original on June 21, 2014. Retrieved April 26, 2014. Fekadu, Mesfin (November 23, 2014). "One Direction, Katy Perry win big at American Music Awards". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved November 23, 2014. People's Choice Awards for Katy Perry: "People's Choice Awards 2009 Nominees". CBS. Archived from the original on October 27, 2009. Retrieved April 27, 2014. "People's Choice Awards 2011 Nominees". CBS. Archived from the original on November 29, 2012. Retrieved April 27, 2014. "People's Choice Awards 2012 Nominees". CBS. Archived from the original on January 9, 2012. Retrieved April 27, 2014. "People's Choice Awards 2013 Nominees". CBS. Archived from the original on January 28, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2014. "People's Choice Awards 2014 Nominees". CBS. Archived from the original on January 12, 2014. Retrieved April 27, 2014. Trust, Gary (May 12, 2011). "Katy Perry Celebrates Year in Hot 100's Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 12, 2011. Retrieved May 13, 2011. Murray, Gordon (July 13, 2017). "Another One in the Basket: Katy Perry Nets 18th Club No. 1 With 'Swish Swish'". Billboard. Retrieved September 27, 2017. "Greatest of All Time Top Dance Club Artists". Billboard. Retrieved September 27, 2017. "Greatest of All Time Pop Songs Artists". Billboard. Retrieved January 3, 2018. "Greatest of All Time Billboard 200 Albums by Women". Billboard. Retrieved January 3, 2018. "Greatest of All Time Hot 100 Songs". Billboard. Retrieved January 3, 2018. "Greatest of All Time Hot 100 Songs by Women". Billboard. Retrieved January 3, 2018. Strecker, Erin (June 10, 2015). "Katy Perry's 'Dark Horse' Passes 1 Billion Vevo Views". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 12, 2015. Retrieved June 10, 2015. Kaufman, Gil (June 9, 2015). "Katy Perry Just Beat Taylor Swift To A Huge Milestone". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 10, 2015. Retrieved June 9, 2015. "Katy Perry's 'Roar' Video Surpasses 1 Billion Vevo Views". iHeartRadio. July 10, 2015. Archived from the original on September 23, 2015. Retrieved August 6, 2015. Hall, James (February 5, 2024). "The End of the Old Boys Club? How Women Took Over Pop Music". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on February 6, 2024. Retrieved February 6, 2024. "Top Artists (Digital Singles)". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved July 11, 2023. "Katy Perry Album Certifications". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved July 11, 2023. "Katy Perry Makes Gold & Platinum History". Recording Industry Association of America. June 21, 2017. Retrieved June 22, 2017. Grein, Paul (May 21, 2014). "MJ Makes Hot 100 History". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on May 22, 2014. Retrieved May 21, 2014. Kennedy, John R. (June 20, 2023). "Katy Perry Breaks Tie With Lady Gaga For Most Diamond Singles". iHeartRadio. Retrieved June 21, 2023. Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (December 14, 2011). "The Top-Earning Women In Music 2011". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 27, 2015. Retrieved December 14, 2011. Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (December 12, 2012). "The Top-Earning Women In Music 2012". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 12, 2012. Retrieved December 12, 2012. Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (December 11, 2013). "The Top-Earning Women In Music 2013". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 15, 2013. Retrieved December 11, 2013. Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (November 4, 2014). "The Top-Earning Women In Music 2014". Forbes. Archived from the original on November 27, 2014. Retrieved November 27, 2014. 2015 Forbes rankings: Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (June 29, 2015). "How Katy Perry Became America's Top Pop Export". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 30, 2015. Retrieved June 30, 2015. Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (November 4, 2015). "The World's Highest-Paid Women In Music 2015". Forbes. Archived from the original on November 4, 2015. Retrieved November 5, 2015. Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (December 8, 2015). "The World's Highest-Paid Musicians Of 2015". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 25, 2015. Retrieved December 24, 2015. Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (June 2, 2016). "Katy Perry's Net Worth: $125 Million In 2016". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 2, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2016. Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (November 2, 2016). "The World's Highest-Paid Women In Music 2016". Forbes. Archived from the original on November 4, 2016. Retrieved November 4, 2016. Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (November 20, 2017). "The World's Highest-Paid Women In Music 2017". Forbes. Retrieved November 22, 2017. Cuccinello, Hayley C. (July 16, 2018). "Highest-Paid Women In Entertainment". Forbes. Retrieved July 16, 2018. Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (November 19, 2018). "The World's Highest-Paid Women In Music 2018". Forbes. Retrieved November 19, 2018. Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (August 26, 2019). "The World's Highest-Paid Women In Music 2019: Taylor Swift Doubles Up No. 2 Beyoncé". Forbes. Retrieved January 31, 2020. Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (December 23, 2019). "From Taylor Swift To Dr. Dre: The 10 Top-Earning Musicians Of The Decade". Forbes. Retrieved January 31, 2020. Dellatto, Marisa (September 19, 2023). "Katy Perry Is Now Worth $340 Million—And One Of The Richest Self-Made Women In America". Forbes. Retrieved September 20, 2023. Cowlin, Chris (2014). The Pop Diva Quiz Book. Apex Publishing Limited. ASIN B00JJ2P9CE. Cutforth, Dan; Lipsitz, Jane (directors); Perry, Katy (autobiographer) (July 5, 2012). Katy Perry: Part of Me (Motion picture). United States; Imagine Entertainment, Perry Productions et al.: Paramount Pictures. Friedlander, Noam (2012). Katy Perry. Sterling Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4549-0364-2. Glenday, Craig (2010). Guinness World Records 2010. Random House. ISBN 978-1-904994-50-3. Glenday, Craig (2013). Guinness World Records 2013. Random House. ISBN 978-1-904994-87-9. Hudson, Alice (2012). Katy Perry: Rebel Dreamer. Flame Tree Publishing. ISBN 978-0-85775-280-2. Jakubowski, Kelly; Finkel, Sebastian; Stewart, Lauren; Müllensiefen, Daniel (May 2017). "Dissecting an earworm: Melodic features and song popularity predict involuntary musical imagery" (PDF). Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and the Arts. 11 (2): 122–135. doi:10.1037/aca0000090. Montgomery, Alice (2011). Katy Perry – The Unofficial Biography. Penguin. ISBN 9780718158248. Summers, Kimberly Dillon (2012). Katy Perry: A Biography. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-4408-0100-6. Wikiquote has quotations related to Katy Perry. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Katy Perry. Katy Perry – official site Katy Perry at IMDb Katy Perry at Rotten Tomatoes