The City of Brussels (French: Ville de Bruxelles [vil də bʁysɛl] or alternatively Bruxelles-Ville [bʁysɛl vil]; Dutch: Stad Brussel [stɑd ˈbrʏsəl] or Brussel-Stad [ˌbrʏsəl ˈstɑt]) is the largest municipality and historical centre of the Brussels-Capital Region, as well as the capital of the Flemish Region (from which it is separate) and Belgium. The City of Brussels is also the administrative centre of the European Union, as it hosts a number of principal EU institutions in its European Quarter. Besides the central historic town located within the Pentagon, the City of Brussels covers some of the city's immediate outskirts within the greater Brussels-Capital Region, namely the former municipalities of Haren, Laeken, and Neder-Over-Heembeek to the north, as well as the Avenue Louise/Louizalaan and the Bois de la Cambre/Ter Kamerenbos park to the south-east, where it borders municipalities in Flanders. As of 1 January 2023[update], the City of Brussels had a population of 194,291 inhabitants. The total area is 33.09 km2 (12.78 sq mi) which gives a population density of 5,704/km2 (14,770/sq mi). As of 2007, there were 75,998 registered non-Belgians in the City. In common with all of Brussels' municipalities, it is legally bilingual (French–Dutch). Historically, the City of Brussels was simply defined, being the area within the second walls of Brussels, the modern-day Small Ring (Brussels' inner ring road). As the city grew, the surrounding villages grew as well, eventually growing into a contiguous city, though the local governments retained control of their respective areas. The construction of the Avenue Louise/Louizalaan was commissioned in 1847 as a monumental avenue bordered by chestnut trees that would allow easy access to the popular recreational area of the Bois de la Cambre/Ter Kamerenbos. However, fierce resistance to the project was put up by the town of Ixelles (which was then still separate from Brussels) through whose land the avenue was supposed to run. After years of fruitless negotiations, Brussels finally annexed the narrow band of land needed for the avenue plus the Bois de la Cambre itself in 1864. That decision accounts for the unusual south-eastern protrusion of the City of Brussels and for Ixelles being split in two separate parts. Part of the Université libre de Bruxelles (ULB)'s Solbosch campus is also part of the City of Brussels, partially accounting for the bulge in the south-eastern end. Unlike most of the municipalities in Belgium, the ones located in the Brussels-Capital Region were not merged with others during mergers occurring in 1964, 1970, and 1975. However, a few neighbouring municipalities have been merged into the City of Brussels, including Haren, Laeken and Neder-Over-Heembeek in 1921. These comprise the northern bulge in the municipality. To the south-east is also a strip of land along the Avenue Louise that was annexed from Ixelles. The origins of Brussels can be traced back to the heart of Saint-Géry/Sint-Goriks Island, formed by the river Senne, on which a first keep was built around 979. Nowadays, the neighbourhood around the Halles Saint-Géry/Sint-Gorikshallen, a former covered market, is one of the capital's trendiest districts. In this Central Quarter (French: Quartier du Centre, Dutch: Centrumwijk), there are some vestiges of the 13th-century first walls of Brussels, which encompassed the area between the first port on the Senne, the old Romanesque church (later replaced by the Brabantine Gothic Cathedral of St. Michael and St. Gudula), and the former ducal palace of Coudenberg in today's Royal Quarter. At the centre of this triangle are the Grand-Place/Grote Markt (Brussels' main square); the Îlot Sacré district, which takes its name from its resistance to demolition projects, itself crossed by the Royal Saint-Hubert Galleries; the Saint-Jacques/Sint-Jacobs district, which welcomed pilgrims on their way to Santiago de Compostela; as well as the former Brussels Stock Exchange building, erected on the site of a former Franciscan convent whose remains have been unearthed. Manneken Pis Brussels' Town Hall Cathedral of St. Michael and St. Gudula Brussels Stock Exchange Royal Saint-Hubert Galleries The Royal Quarter (French: Quartier Royal, Dutch: Koninklijke Wijk or Koningswijk) is so named because it houses, on the one hand, the Place Royale/Koningsplein ("Royal Square" or "King's Square"), built under Charles-Alexander of Lorraine on the Coudenberg hill, on the site of the former Palace of the Dukes of Brabant, of which certain levels of foundation still exist, and on the other hand, the Royal Palace of Brussels, which faces Brussels Park, on the other side of which is the Belgian House of Parliament (Palace of the Nation). Below the Royal District is the Central Station and the Mont des Arts/Kunstberg, home to the Royal Library of Belgium (KBR), the Royal Belgian Film Archive (Cinematek), the Brussels Centre for Fine Arts, the Museum of Cinema, the Musical Instruments Museum (MIM), the BELvue Museum, and the Royal Museums of Fine Arts of Belgium. Royal Palace Place du Musée/Museumplein Brussels Park Royal Museums of Fine Arts Academy Palace From the Place Royale/Koningsplein, the Rue de la Régence/Regentschapsstraat crosses the Sablon/Zavel Quarter (French: Quartier des Sablons, Dutch: Zavelwijk), made of the larger Grand Sablon/Grote Zavel ("Large Sablon") square in the north-west and the smaller Petit Sablon/Kleine Zavel ("Small Sablon") square and garden in the south-east, divided by the Church of Our Blessed Lady of the Sablon. It is a swanky district, where an antiques market is held, and in which antique and art dealers, as well as other luxury shops, have their businesses. Not far from there stood the Art Nouveau Maison du Peuple/Volkshuis by the famous architect Victor Horta, until its demolition in 1965. The Sablon is also home to the Egmont Palace and the Royal Conservatory of Brussels. Church of Our Blessed Lady of the Sablon Fountain of Minerva Egmont Palace Fountain of the Counts of Egmont and Horn Royal Conservatory In the shadow of the gigantic Palace of Justice lies the Marolles/Marollen Quarter (French: Quartier des Marolles, Dutch: Marollenwijk, not to be confused with the Marolle that purists delimit to only seven streets). From the Place de la Chapelle/Kapellemarkt to the Place du Jeu de Balle/Vossenplein, where a daily flea market known as the Old Market has been held since 1873, along the Rue Haute/Hogestraat and the Rue Blaes/Blaestraat, second-hand and popular shops have for some years given way to antique dealers, marking a profound transformation of the district. The Cité Hellemans, a remarkable example of an early 20th-century collective housing complex, was built to replace the neighbourhood's many squalid cul-de-sacs. The Rue Haute, one of the city's longest and oldest streets, follows the course of an old Gallo-Roman road, and runs along Saint Peter's Hospital, built in 1935 on the site of a leprosium, to end at the Halle Gate, the only remaining gate in a series that allowed passage inside the second walls of Brussels. Place du Jeu de Balle/Vossenplein, end of a market Cité Hellemans, Rue Blaes/Blaesstraat Brigittines Chapel Palace of Justice Halle Gate It was in the heart of the Midi–Lemonnier Quarter (French: Quartier Midi–Lemonnier, Dutch: Lemmonier–Zuidwijk), where the Place Rouppe/Rouppeplein is today, that Brussels' first South Station, the terminus of the South Line, was built in 1839. It was known as Bogards' railway station for the eponymous convent whose site it was built on, and to which the Rue des Bogards/Bogaardenstraat is now the only reference. The former presence of a station at this location also explains the unusual width of the current Avenue de Stalingrad/Stalingradlaan, which goes from the square to the Small Ring, cleared of its train tracks since the inauguration of Brussels-South Station, built outside the Pentagon in 1869. Because of this, the neighbourhood is sometimes called the Stalingrad Quarter (French: Quartier Stalingrad, Dutch: Stalingradwijk). At the same time, following the covering of the Senne, the district saw the construction of Haussmann-esque grand central boulevards, including the Boulevard Maurice Lemonnier/Maurice Lemonnierlaan, bordered by the Place Fontainas/Fontainasplein and the Place Anneessens/Anneessensplein (former location of the Old Market), as well as by the Midi Palace. Each Sunday morning, the Midi district hosts the second largest market in Europe. Place Rouppe/Rouppeplein and Avenue de Stalingrad/Stalingradlaan Place Anneessens/Anneessensplein (François Anneessens) and Haute École Francisco Ferrer Midi Palace on the Boulevard Maurice Lemonnier/Maurice Lemonnierlaan Place Fontainas/Fontainasplein The damp and marshy land around the present-day Rue de la Senne/Zennestraat and Rue des Fabriques/Fabriekstraat was occupied by craftsmen since the Middle Ages. An arm of the river crossed the defences of the second walls at the level of the Ninove Gate via the Petite Écluse/Kleine Sluis ("Small Lock"), which served as a maritime gate, an end of which remaining there until the 1960s. Later, small industries and many artisan breweries (now disappeared) established themselves in the area, as evidenced by the names of the Rue du Houblon/Hopstraat ("Hops Street") and the Rue du Vieux Marché aux Grains/Oude Graanmarktstraat ("Old Grain Market Street"). The Shot Tower (Tour à Plomb), which was used to manufacture lead shot for hunting, and the Rue de la Poudrière/Kruitmolenstraat ("Gunpowder Street"), also testify to the neighbourhood's former activities. Long neglected following the relocation of businesses outside the city centre, the Senne/Zenne Quarter (French: Quartier de la Senne, Dutch: Zennewijk) has in recent years been the object of renewed interest and is undergoing gentrification due to the many disused industrial premises being converted into lofts. The area around the Rue Antoine Dansaert/Antoine Dansaertstraat has become a trendy district and is attracting a younger, more well-off, and mostly Dutch-speaking population. This new situation, which has resulted in rising rents, is not without problems for the neighbourhood's less fortunate inhabitants. Rue Antoine Dansaert/Antoine Dansaertstraat Place du Jardin aux Fleurs/Bloemenhofplein Industrial building transformed into housing (loft) Shot Tower (Tour à Plomb) The Quays Quarter (French: Quartier des Quais, Dutch: Kaaienwijk) is that of the old Port of Brussels, which for a long time played the role of "belly" of the city. Boats coming from the river Scheldt penetrated through the former Shore Gate (French: Porte du Rivage, Dutch: Oeverpoort), on the site of the present-day Place de l'Yser/Ijzerplein, to join one of the canals, whose docks were each reserved for one type of goods. Filled in the late 19th century with the opening of Brussels' new port, these basins were replaced by wide boulevards, whose names on both sides still recall their former function: the Quai aux Briques/Baksteenkaai ("Brick Wharf"), the Quai au Bois à Brûler/Brandhoutkaai ("Firewood Wharf"), the Quai aux Pierres de Taille/Arduinkaai ("Quarry Stone Wharf"), the Quai au Foin/Hooikaai ("Hay Wharf"), etc., or references to the neighbourhood's commercial activities: the Rue du Magasin/Pakhuisstraat ("Warehouse Street"), the Rue des Commerçants/Koopliedenstraat ("Traders Street"), the Rue du Marché aux Porcs/Varkensmarktstraat ("Pig Market Street") and the Quai du Commerce/Handelskaai ("Trade Wharf"). Along the quaysides, numerous bourgeois houses, once belonging to wealthy merchants, have preserved the entrances to the warehouses. On the Boulevard d'Ypres/Ieperlaan, one can still cross food wholesalers, now supplied by trucks that have replaced the boats. The district also includes the Great Beguinage of Brussels, with the Church of St. John the Baptist and the remarkable Grand Hospice Pachéco. Church of St. John the Baptist Anspach Fountain Royal Flemish Theatre St. Catherine's Church La Bellone Few of the buildings in the Marais–Jacqmain Quarter (French: Quartier Marais–Jacqmain, Dutch: Jacqmain–Broekwijk) have escaped 20th-century demolition, from the Boulevard Pachéco/Pachecolaan to the Rue Neuve/Nieuwstraat. They have given way to the State Administrative Centre, press printers, banking facilities, and commercial galleries. The current trend is to restore the neighbourhood's social mix by redeveloping former office buildings into housing. Despite the district's long-time grim aspect, the centuries-old Meyboom tradition has been maintained, and the former Art Nouveau Magasins Waucquez by Victor Horta have been preserved to house, since 1993, the Belgian Comic Strip Center. Another preserved islet is the 18th-century neoclassical Place des Martyrs/Martelaarsplein, which has gradually been renovated. The victims of the Belgian Revolution of 1830 are buried there in an open crypt with a memorial. Nearby is the Rue Neuve, one of Belgium's main shopping streets, with more than 1 km (0.62 mi) of stores on both its sides; the Boulevard Adolphe Max/Adolphe Maxlaan, a traditional 19th-century artery; and the Boulevard Émile Jacqmain/Émile Jacqmainlaan (where the Théâtre National Wallonie-Bruxelles has been installed since 2004), close to the Place de Brouckère/De Brouckèreplein. The latter, a very busy square, is dominated at its southern end by two block-style towers, but for the rest, it has totally (Hotel Métropole and its neighbour the Hotel Atlanta) or partially (UGC cinema) retained its old facades. Place de Brouckère/De Brouckèreplein Royal Theatre of La Monnaie Place des Martyrs/Martelaarsplein Church of Our Lady of Finistère The Freedom Quarter (French: Quartier des Libertés, Dutch: Vrijheidswijk) is situated between the Belgian Parliament and the Rue Royale/Koningsstraat, not far from the crossroads with the Small Ring. Its focal point is the Congress Column (erected in memory of the National Congress of 1830–31, the founder of democratic liberties in Belgium), under which also lies the tomb of the Unknown Soldier with an eternal flame. Not far from there is the Hotel Astoria, dating from 1911, which is currently being renovated and enlarged, to be reopened in the coming years. In the 19th century, the district was known as Notre-Dame-aux-Neiges/Onze-Lieve-Vrouw-ter-Sneeuw and was predominantly inhabited by working-class people. The authorities' desire to clean up the squalid parts of the city led to the expulsion of the population and the neighbourhood's complete destruction. A new bourgeois district was developed during the last quarter of the century. The choice was made to commemorate Belgian independence: the Place de la Liberté/Vrijheidsplein ("Liberty Square"), the Place des Barricades/Barricadenplein ("Barricades' Square"), the Rue de la Révolution/Revolutiestraat ("Revolution Street"), the Rue du Congrès/Congresstraat ("Congress Street"), etc. The four streets leading off the Place de la Liberté bear the names of the four constitutional liberties, symbolised by four allegorical bronze female sculptures surrounding the Congress Column: Freedom of the Press, Worship, Association and Education. This eclectic urban complex is one of the best preserved in the Pentagon. Congress Column (Leopold I, 1859) Place de la Liberté/Vrijheidsplein (Charles Rogier) Place Surlet de Chokier/Surlet de Chokierplein (The Brabançonne) Place des Barricades/Barricadenplein (Andreas Vesalius) The European Quarter (French: Quartier Européen, Dutch: Europese Wijk) is located to the east of the Pentagon, around the Place du Luxembourg/Luxemburgplein and the Robert Schuman Roundabout, and includes the smaller Leopold Quarter (French: Quartier Léopold, Dutch: Leopoldswijk). The European Parliament was built near the Place du Luxembourg, on the site of the former Leopold Quarter railway station, and of which only the central building overlooking the square remains, having been replaced by the underground Brussels-Luxembourg railway station. The European Commission, housed in the Berlaymont building, is located on the Schuman Roundabout, not far from the Cinquantenaire Park. Across the street stands the Justus Lipsius building and the Europa building (part of the Residence Palace), serving as the seat of the European Council and the Council of the EU. In Leopold Park, the House of European History (HEH) initiates visitors to the social history of the European continent. There is a visitor centre in the main European Parliament building, known as the Parliamentarium, and another smaller one in the Justus Lipsius building for the European Council. It is accessible on certain days, by appointment. Many of the attractions in the European Quarter are free to visit. Place du Luxembourg/Luxemburgplein Berlaymont building (European Commission) Europa building (European Council) Espace Léopold buildings (European Parliament) Parc du Cinquantenaire/Jubelpark The Squares Quarter (French: Quartier des Squares, Dutch: Squareswijk) is the northern spur of the European Quarter, located between Saint-Josse-ten-Noode and the Leopold Quarter. The district is bounded by the Chaussée de Louvain/Leuvense Steenweg to the north, the Rue du Noyer/Notelaarsstraat and the Avenue de Cortenbergh/Kortenberglaan to the east, the Rue Joseph II/Jozef II-straat and the Rue Stevin/Stevinstraat to the south, as well as the Small Ring to the west. The toponym refers to the many squares in the area, in particular the Square Ambiorix/Ambiorixsquare, the Square Marguerite/Margaretasquare, the Square Marie-Louise/Maria-Louizasquare and the Avenue Palmerston/Palmerstonlaan. The area between the Small Ring and the Square Marie-Louise is sometimes considered to be part of the Leopold Quarter. Saint-Cyr House Square Marie-Louise/Maria-Louizasquare Hôtel van Eetvelde Avenue Palmerston/Palmerstonlaan Laeken is a former municipality in the north of the Brussels-Capital Region, annexed by the City of Brussels in 1921. It is home to, among others, the Royal Domain of Laeken, the Palace of Laeken, the Royal Greenhouses of Laeken, the Church of Our Lady of Laeken (whose crypt contains the tombs of the Belgian royal family) and Laeken Cemetery, known for its wealth of monuments and sculptures. On the territory of Laeken also lies the Heysel/Heizel Plateau, the site of the World's Fairs of 1935 and 1958, and which includes the King Baudouin Stadium, Bruparck (with the Atomium, Mini-Europe miniature park and Kinepolis cinema), the Centenary Palace, home to the Brussels Exhibition Centre (Brussels Expo), and the Port of Brussels, next to which the Monument to Work by Constantin Meunier was erected. On its southern part, it holds the former Tour & Taxis former industrial site, which was annexed by the City of Brussels in 1897, twenty-four years before the rest of the municipality. Map of Laeken Palace of Laeken Church of Our Lady of Laeken Atomium Brussels Expo Mini-Europe Sometimes also known as the Pagoda district, the Japanese Tower district or De Wand district, Mutsaard (also spelled Mutsaert), is an old hamlet and a historic district located between Laeken and Neder-over-Heembeek and centred around the Place du Mutsaert/Mutsaertplaats or Mutsaardplein. The district was part of the former municipality of Laeken (postcode: 1020), but also a piece of Neder-over-Heembeek, annexed by Laeken in 1897. It is separated from the rest of Laeken by the Royal Domain and is the site of the Museums of the Far East. The district also extends a little into the neighbouring Flemish municipalities of Vilvoorde and Grimbergen. Map of Mutsaard Japanese Tower Chinese Pavilion Neder-Over-Heembeek is a former municipality incorporated into the City of Brussels in 1921, at the same time as Laeken and Haren. It has the distinction of having the oldest place name in the Brussels-Capital Region, as it was mentioned in an ordinance as early as the 7th century.[citation needed] This is where the Queen Astrid Military Hospital, which is the National Burns and Poisons Centre, as well as recruitment services of the Belgian Armed Forces are located. Map of Neder-Over-Heembeek Old Romanesque tower in Lower Heembeek Church of St. Nicholas in Upper Heembeek Like Laeken and Neder-Over-Heembeek, the former municipality of Haren was annexed by the municipality (City) of Brussels in 1921, which allowed the extension of Schaerbeek railway station north of its territory. But it was above all the presence, south-west of the town, of an airfield, created by the Germans during the First World War, and where the former Belgian national airline Sabena was born, that precipitated the annexation of Haren. For almost fifty years, Haren has been home to NATO's headquarters. It is also the location of many other administrations and companies, such as the headquarters of Eurocontrol. Church of St. Elizabeth Headquarters of NATO Headquarters of Eurocontrol The City of Brussels has a large immigrant population, with both the EU and non-European migrant communities outnumbering the native Belgians. Akin to neighbouring Ixelles, Etterbeek and Schaerbeek, the City of Brussels also has a large Muslim population, mainly of North African origin. As of 2023[update], taking into account the nationality of birth of the parents, 55.84% of the City of Brussels's population is from non-European countries (predominantly Morocco), 27.21% is from another European country (mainly France, Romania, Italy, Spain, and Poland), while the native Belgian population is 16.94%. Among all major migrant groups from outside the EU, a majority of the permanent residents have acquired Belgian nationality. Migrant communities in the City of Brussels with over 1,000 people as of 1 January 2020: As in every other Belgian municipality, the City of Brussels is headed by a mayor, who should not be confused with the Minister-President of the Brussels-Capital Region or the Governor of Brussels-Capital. The current city council was elected in the October 2018 elections. The current mayor of the City of Brussels is Philippe Close, a member of PS, who is in coalition on the municipal council with Ecolo - Groen, DéFI and Forward. Brussels is ranked sixth in the index of cities which are becoming greener fastest as for the year 2022, even though in the past it had a reputation of a "traffic-choked city of high rises and concrete". The authorities released a plan composed of seven steps on how to make the city even more sustainable. Those include introducing "a use-based, circular and low-carbon economy" and making the city "proactive". The city should become a "10-minute city" meaning "making the facilities essential to urban life accessible to every inhabitant in less than 10 minutes". Green spaces should be expanded. The plan includes participation of the population in decision-making and high life level for all. There are many museums in and around Brussels' city centre. On the first Sunday of every month, free entry is granted to many of Brussels' museums. The Underwear Museum opened in 2009, and was initially in the City of Brussels. In 2016 it moved to Lessines, Hainaut, Wallonia. Below is a non-exhaustive list of museums in the City of Brussels: Royal Museums of Art and History : Art & History Museum Horta-Lambeaux Pavilion Halle Gate Museums of the Far East Musical Instruments Museum Royal Museums of Fine Arts of Belgium : Oldmasters Museum Magritte Museum Fin-de-Siècle Museum Wiertz Museum Meunier Museum Royal Museum of Modern Art Royal Museum of the Armed Forces and Military History Brussels is well known for its food. Brussels sprouts were named after the city. Like most of Belgium, moules-frites, waffles (gaufres), chocolate, French fries, and beer are common there. It is home to one 2-starred and four 1-starred Michelin restaurants. Among the recipients of the honorary citizenship of the City of Brussels are: Belgium portal Transport in Brussels Timeline of Brussels Bourgeois of Brussels Seven Noble Houses of Brussels Guilds of Brussels Brussels is not formally declared capital of the EU, though its position is spelled out in the Treaty of Amsterdam. "Bevolking per gemeente op 1 januari 2022". Statbel. The Belgian Constitution (PDF). Brussels, Belgium: Belgian House of Representatives. May 2014. p. 63. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 August 2015. Retrieved 10 September 2015. Demey 2007. "Protocol (No 6) on the location of the seats of the institutions and of certain bodies, offices, agencies and departments of the European Union, Consolidated version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, OJ C 83, 30.3.2010, p. 265–265". EUR-Lex. 30 March 2010. Archived from the original on 20 May 2013. Retrieved 3 August 2010. "Immigration Office | IBZ". Picavet, Georges (29 April 2003). "Municipalities (1795-now)". Georges Picavet. Retrieved 5 April 2009. "Brussels Capital-Region". Georges Picavet. 4 June 2005. Retrieved 5 April 2009. "Halles Saint-Géry – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Cathédrale Saints-Michel-et-Gudule – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Grand-Place – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Galeries Royales Saint-Hubert – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. Eggericx 1997, p. 26–28. "La Bourse – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Place Royale – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Palais Royal – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Parc de Bruxelles – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Parc de Bruxelles – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Palais de la Nation – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Mont des Arts – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Bibliothèque Royale Albert I – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Palais des Beaux-Arts – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Old England – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Musées Royaux des Beaux-Arts de Belgique – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Rue de la Régence – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Place du Grand Sablon – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Place du Petit Sablon – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Eglise Notre-Dame des Victoires au Sablon – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Palais d'Egmont / Palais d'Arenberg et le parc – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Conservatoire Royal de Musique et ancienne résidence du directeur – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Palais de Justice – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Place de la Chapelle – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Place du Jeu de Balle – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Rue Haute – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Rue Blaes – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Cité Hellemans – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Hôpital Universitaire St-Pierre – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Porte de Hal – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Place Rouppe – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Rue des Bogards – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Avenue de Stalingrad – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Boulevard Maurice Lemonnier – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Place Fontainas – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Place Anneessens – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Palais du Midi – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Rue de la Senne – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Rue des Fabriques – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Rue du Houblon – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Rue du Vieux Marché aux Grains – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Fonderie de la tour de plomb – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Rue de la Poudrière – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Rue Antoine Dansaert – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Place de l'Yser – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Quai aux Briques – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Quai au Bois à Brûler – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Quai aux Pierres de Taille – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Quai au Foin – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Rue du Magasin – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Rue des Commerçants – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Rue du Marché aux Porcs – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Quai du Commerce – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Boulevard d'Ypres – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Eglise Saint-Jean-Baptiste au Béguinage – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "anc. Grand Hospice / Institut Pacheco – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Boulevard Pachéco – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Rue Neuve – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Anciens magasins Waucquez / Centre Belge de la bande dessinnée – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Place des Martyrs: ensemble architectural – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Boulevard Adolphe Max – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Boulevard Emile Jacqmain – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Place De Brouckère – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Hôtel Métropole – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Hôtel Atlanta – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Colonne du Congrès – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Hôtel Astoria – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Place de la Liberté – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Place des Barricades – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Rue de la Révolution – Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Inventaire du patrimoine architectural". monument.heritage.brussels (in French). Retrieved 26 October 2023. "Origin | Statbel". statbel.fgov.be. Retrieved 4 July 2023. "2.738.486 inwoners van vreemde afkomst in België op 01/01/2012" [2,738,486 inhabitants of foreign origin in Belgium on 01/01/2012]. Npdata.be (in Dutch). Archived from the original on 22 October 2019. Retrieved 12 March 2013. "Nationalités | IBSA". ibsa.brussels. Retrieved 10 July 2023. Statistics foreign population in Belgium by municipality (in French and Dutch only) "Origin | Statbel". statbel.fgov.be. Retrieved 4 July 2023. "Résultats officiels des élections communales 2018" (in French). Retrieved 17 July 2021. "PS, Ecolo-Groen et sp.a ouvrent la majorité à Défi à la Ville de Bruxelles" (in French). 20 October 2018. Retrieved 17 July 2021. Ann Hughes, Rebecca (22 December 2023). "10-minute city: How Brussels plans to become a pedestrian-friendly green hub". Euronews. Retrieved 7 January 2024. "Panty Poetry: Celebrity Underwear Museum Opens in Brussels". Spiegel Online. Der Spiegel. 23 July 2009. Retrieved 27 August 2018. "Le "musée du slip", dernière expérience surréaliste à Bruxelles". La Dépêche. 28 June 2009. Retrieved 27 August 2018. (36 rue des Renards, 1000 Bruxelles). Boyle, Robyn (25 September 2016). "Underwear Museum moves from Brussels to Lessines". The Bulletin. Retrieved 27 August 2018. "Real Food Encyclopedia | Brussels Sprouts". FoodPrint. Retrieved 9 February 2021. 2venturists (10 June 2018). "What to Eat in Brussels Belgium". Venturists. Retrieved 8 February 2021.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Brussels 2 Stars MICHELIN MICHELIN Restaurants – the MICHELIN Guide Belgium". MICHELIN Guide. Retrieved 8 February 2021. "Ereburgers". opendata.brussel.be (in Dutch). Retrieved 14 May 2022. "City of Brussels". Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 20 September 2018. "World Jewish Congress". Netherlandish sculpture 1450-1550 by Paul Williamson 2002 ISBN 0-8109-6602-6 page 42 Guillaume Des Marez, "L'origine des armoiries de Bruxelles. Première phase: De gueules plain", in: Études inédites, Brussels, 1936, p. 111-113. Louis Robyns de Schneidauer, La couronne comtale de la ville de Bruxelles, in Le Parchemin, Gendbrugge-lez-Gand, 1939 (March–April). (en)Brussels[archive], on the Heraldry of the World website. Netherlandish sculpture 1450-1550 by Paul Williamson 2002 ISBN 0-8109-6602-6 page 42 Demey, Thierry (2007). Brussels, capital of Europe. S. Strange (trans.). Brussels: Badeaux. ISBN 978-2-9600414-6-0. Eggericx, Laure (1997). Les Boulevards du Centre. Bruxelles, ville d'Art et d'Histoire (in French). Vol. 20. Brussels: Centre d'information, de Documentation et d'Etude du Patrimoine. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Brussels (municipality). Official website (in French, Dutch, and English) Official tourism website (in French, Dutch, English, German, Spanish, Italian, and Portuguese) Webcam Grand-Place Brussels Interactive map