Two thirds of the Greek people live in urban areas. Greece's largest metropolitan centers and most influential urban areas are those of Athens and Thessaloniki, with metropolitan populations of approximately four million and one million inhabitants respectively. The third-largest-city is Patras, with a metropolitan area of approximately 305,000 inhabitants, then comes Heraklion with a metropolitan population of 211,370 that's almost the same as the municipal population of Patras. The table below lists the largest cities in Greece, by population size, using the official census results of 1991, 2001, 2011 and 2021. The lowest level of census-designated places in Greece are called oikismoi (settlements) and are the smallest continuous built-up areas with a toponym designated for the census. Although some urban CDPs form individual cities and towns (labeled in bold) the majority of them do not. They are either what make up the central districts, or suburbs (italicized), contained within the wider urban and metropolitan areas of Athens and Thessaloniki. The list below presents every settlement (CDP) that is urban, with a population of more than 10,000 de jure (permanent) residents, using data collected from the 2021 census. Explanation of the superscript numbers: 1 a suburb of the Athens urban area, in Athens' agglomeration/conurbation 2 a suburb of the Thessaloniki urban area, in Thessaloniki's agglomeration/conurbation 3 a suburb that belongs to Piraeus regional unit (Greater Piraeus). 4 a suburb of Athens' metropolitan area 5 a suburb of Thessaloniki's metropolitan area 6 a municipal unit of the Volos urban area, in Volos' agglomeration/conurbation 7 a municipal unit of the Heraklion urban area, in Heraklion's agglomeration/conurbation. 8 the core municipal community of Patras municipality which has a population of 215,922 inhabitants 9 a municipal unit of the Ioannina urban area, in Ioannina's agglomeration/conurbation 10 a municipal unit of the Chalcis urban area, in Chalkis' agglomeration/conurbation * The settlement (CDP) of Athens is the central district of the Athens-Piraeus urban area. * The settlement (CDP) of Thessaloniki is the central district of the Thessaloniki urban area. Alphabetical list of municipalities and communities in Greece List of ancient Greek cities List of cities List of cities in Europe 1991 Official Census. "Population de fait de la Grece au recensement du 17 Mars 1991 par departements, eparchies, communes-demes, communes et localites" (PDF). Statistics.gr.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) 2001 Official Census. "De facto population of Greece population and housing census of March 18th, 2001. By departments, municipalities, communes, municipal/communal departments and localities" (PDF). Statistics.gr.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) 2011 Official Census. "Announcement on the Publication of Revised 2011 Census Tables". Statistics.gr.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) 2021 Official Census. "Permanent population results by municipal community, 21.04.2023". National Statistical Service of Greece.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Map at archive.today (archived 2012-12-09) Greek city guides