Gujarat (/ˌɡʊdʒəˈrɑːt/ GUUJ-ə-RAHT, Gujarati: [ˈɡudʒəɾat̪] ) is a state along the western coast of India. Its coastline of about 1,600 km (990 mi) is the longest in the country, most of which lies on the Kathiawar peninsula. Gujarat is the fifth-largest Indian state by area, covering some 196,024 km2 (75,685 sq mi); and the ninth-most populous state, with a population of 60.4 million in 2011. It is bordered by Rajasthan to the northeast, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu to the south, Maharashtra to the southeast, Madhya Pradesh to the east, and the Arabian Sea and the Pakistani province of Sindh to the west. Gujarat's capital city is Gandhinagar, while its largest city is Ahmedabad. The Gujaratis are indigenous to the state and their language, Gujarati, is the state's official language. The state encompasses 23 sites of the ancient Indus Valley civilisation (more than any other state). The most important sites are Lothal (the world's first dry dock), Dholavira (the fifth largest site), and Gola Dhoro (where 5 uncommon seals were found). Lothal is believed to have been one of the world's first seaports. Gujarat's coastal cities, chiefly Bharuch and Khambhat, served as ports and trading centres in the Maurya and Gupta empires and during the succession of royal Saka dynasties in the Western Satraps era. Along with Bihar, Mizoram and Nagaland, Gujarat is one of four Indian states to prohibit the sale of alcohol. The Gir Forest National Park in Gujarat is home to the only wild population of the Asiatic lion in the world. The economy of Gujarat is the fourth-largest in India, with a gross state domestic product (GSDP) of ₹16.55 trillion (equivalent to ₹19 trillion or US$230 billion in 2023) and has the country's 10th-highest GSDP per capita of ₹215,000 (US$2,700). Gujarat has the highest exports of all states, accounting for around one-third of national exports. It ranks 21st among Indian states and union territories in human development index. Gujarat is regarded as one of the most industrialised states and has a low unemployment rate, but the state ranks poorly on some social indicators and is at times affected by religious violence. Gujarat is derived from the Gurjara-Pratihara dynasty, who ruled Gujarat in the 8th and 9th centuries CE. Parts of modern Rajasthan and Gujarat have been known as Gurjarat or Gurjarabhumi for centuries before the Mughal period. Gujarat was one of the main central areas of the Indus Valley civilisation, which is centred primarily in modern Pakistan. It contains ancient metropolitan cities from the Indus Valley such as Lothal, Dholavira and Gola Dhoro. The ancient city of Lothal was where India's first port was established. The ancient city of Dholavira is one of the largest and most prominent archaeological sites in India, belonging to the Indus Valley civilisation. The most recent discovery was Gola Dhoro. Altogether, about fifty Indus Valley settlement ruins have been discovered in Gujarat. Indus Valley civilisation The ancient history of Gujarat was enriched by the commercial activities of its inhabitants. There is clear historical evidence of trade and commerce ties with Egypt, Bahrain and Sumer in the Persian Gulf during the time period of 1000 to 750 BCE. There was a succession of various Indian empires such as the Mauryan dynasty, Western Satraps, Satavahana dynasty, Gupta Empire, Chalukya dynasty, Rashtrakuta Empire, Pala Empire and Gurjara-Pratihara Empire, as well as the Maitrakas and then the Chaulukyas. The early history of Gujarat includes the imperial grandeur of Chandragupta Maurya who conquered a number of earlier states in what is now Gujarat. Pushyagupta, a Vaishya, was appointed the governor of Saurashtra by the Mauryan regime. He ruled Girinagar (modern-day Junagadh) (322 BCE to 294 BCE) and built a dam on the Sudarshan lake. Emperor Ashoka the Great, the grandson of Chandragupta Maurya, not only ordered his edicts engraved in the rock at Junagadh, but also asked Governor Tusherpha to cut canals from the lake where an earlier Indian governor had built a dam. Between the decline of Mauryan power and Saurashtra coming under the sway of the Samprati Mauryas of Ujjain, there was an Indo-Greek defeat in Gujarat of Demetrius. In 16th century manuscripts, there is an apocryphal story of a merchant of King Gondophares landing in Gujarat with Apostle Thomas. The incident of the cup-bearer torn apart by a lion might indicate that the port city described is in Gujarat. For nearly 300 years from the start of the 1st century CE, Saka rulers played a prominent part in Gujarat's history. The weather-beaten rock at Junagadh gives a glimpse of the ruler Rudradaman I (100 CE) of the Saka satraps known as Western Satraps, or Kshatraps. Mahakshatrap Rudradaman I founded the Kardamaka dynasty which ruled from Anupa on the banks of the Narmada up to the Aparanta region bordering Punjab. In Gujarat, several battles were fought between the Indian dynasties such as the Satavahana dynasty and the Western Satraps. The greatest and the mightiest ruler of the Satavahana dynasty was Gautamiputra Satakarni who defeated the Western Satraps and conquered some parts of Gujarat in the 2nd century CE. The Kshatrapa dynasty was replaced by the Gupta Empire with the conquest of Gujarat by Chandragupta Vikramaditya. Vikramaditya's successor Skandagupta left an inscription (450 CE) on a rock at Junagadh which gives details of the governor's repairs to the embankment surrounding Sudarshan lake after it was damaged by floods. The Anarta and Saurashtra regions were both parts of the Gupta empire. Towards the middle of the 5th century, the Gupta empire went into decline. Senapati Bhatarka, the general of the Guptas, took advantage of the situation and in 470 set up what came to be known as the Maitraka state. He shifted his capital from Giringer to Valabhi, near Bhavnagar, on Saurashtra's east coast. The Maitrakas of Vallabhi became very powerful with their rule prevailing over large parts of Gujarat and adjoining Malwa. A university was set up by the Maitrakas, which came to be known far and wide for its scholastic pursuits and was compared with the noted Nalanda University. It was during the rule of Dhruvasena Maitrak that Chinese philosopher-traveler Xuanzang/ I Tsing visited in 640 along the Silk Road. Gujarat was known to the ancient Greeks and was familiar with other Western centers of civilisation through the end of the European Middle Ages. The oldest written record of Gujarat's 2,000-year maritime history is documented in a Greek book titled The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea: Travel and Trade in the Indian Ocean by a Merchant of the First Century. In the early 8th century, the Arabs of the Umayyad Caliphate established an empire in the name of the rising religion of Islam, which stretched from Spain in the west to Afghanistan and modern-day Pakistan in the east. Al-Junaid, the successor of Qasim, finally subdued the Hindu resistance within Sindh and established a secure base. The Arab rulers tried to expand their empire southeast, which culminated in the Caliphate campaigns in India fought in 730; they were defeated and expelled west of the Indus river, probably by a coalition of the Indian rulers Nagabhata I of the Gurjara-Pratihara dynasty, Vikramaditya II of the Chalukya dynasty and Bappa Rawal of the Guhila dynasty. After this victory, the Arab invaders were driven out of Gujarat. General Pulakeshin, a Chalukya prince of Lata, received the title Avanijanashraya (refuge of the people of the earth) and honorific of "Repeller of the unrepellable" by the Chalukya emperor Vikramaditya II for his victory at the battle at Navsari, where the Arab troops suffered a crushing defeat. In the late 8th century, the Kannauj Triangle period started. The three major Indian dynasties – the northwestern Indian Gurjara-Pratihara dynasty, the southern Indian Rashtrakuta dynasty and the eastern Indian Pala Empire – dominated India from the 8th to 10th centuries. During this period the northern part of Gujarat was ruled by the northern Indian Gurjara-Pratihara dynasty and the southern part of Gujarat was ruled by the southern Indian Rashtrakuta dynasty. However, the earliest epigraphical records of the Gurjars of Broach attest that the royal bloodline of the Gurjara-Pratihara dynasty of Dadda I, II and III (650–750) ruled south Gujarat. Southern Gujarat was ruled by the Indian Rashtrakuta dynasty until it was captured by the Indian ruler Tailapa II of the Western Chalukya Empire. Zoroastrians from Greater Iran migrated to the western borders of India (Gujarat and Sindh) during the 8th or 10th century, to avoid persecution by Muslim invaders who were in the process of conquering Iran. The descendants of those Zoroastrian refugees came to be known as the Parsi. Subsequently, Lāṭa in southern Gujarat was ruled by the Rashtrakuta dynasty until it was captured by the Western Chalukya ruler Tailapa II. The Chaulukya dynasty ruled Gujarat from c. 960 to 1243. Gujarat was a major center of Indian Ocean trade, and their capital at Anhilwara (Patan) was one of the largest cities in India, with a population estimated at 100,000 in the year 1000. After 1243, the Solankis lost control of Gujarat to their feudatories, of whom the Vaghela chiefs of Dholka came to dominate Gujarat. In 1292 the Vaghelas became tributaries of the Yadava dynasty of Devagiri in the Deccan. Karandev of the Vaghela dynasty was the last Hindu ruler of Gujarat. He was defeated and overthrown by the superior forces of Alauddin Khalji from Delhi in 1297. With his defeat, Gujarat became part of the Delhi Sultanate, and the Rajput hold over Gujarat would never be restored. Fragments of printed cotton from Gujarat have been discovered in Egypt, providing evidence for medieval trade in the western Indian Ocean. These fragments represent the Indian cotton traded in Egypt during the Fatimid, Ayyubid and Mamluk periods, from the tenth to sixteenth centuries. Similar cotton was also traded as far east as Indonesia. After the Ghoris had assumed a position of Muslim supremacy over North India, Qutbuddin Aibak attempted to conquer Gujarat and annex it to his empire in 1197, but failed in his ambitions. An independent Muslim community continued to flourish in Gujarat for the next hundred years, championed by Arab merchants settling along the western coast. From 1297 to 1300, Alauddin Khalji, the Turko-Afghan Sultan of Delhi, destroyed the Hindu metropolis of Anhilwara and incorporated Gujarat into the Delhi Sultanate. After Timur sacked Delhi at the end of the 14th century, weakening the Sultanate, Gujarat's Muslim Khatri governor Zafar Khan Muzaffar (Muzaffar Shah I) asserted his independence, and his son, Sultan Ahmed Shah (ruled 1411–1442), established Ahmedabad as the capital. Khambhat eclipsed Bharuch as Gujarat's most important trade port. Gujarat's relations with Egypt, which was then the premier Arab power in the Middle East, remained friendly over the next century and the Egyptian scholar, Badruddin-ad-Damamimi, spent several years in Gujarat in the shade of the Sultan before proceeding to the Bahmani Sultanate on the Deccan Plateau. Shah e Alam, a famous Sufi saint of the Chishti order who was the descendant of Makhdoom Jahaniyan Jahangasht from Bukhara, soon arrived in a group that included Arab theologian Ibn Suwaid, several Sayyid Sufi members of the Aydarus family of Tarim in Yemen, Iberian court interpreter Ali al-Andalusi from Granada, and the Arab jurist Bahraq from Hadramaut who was appointed a tutor of the prince. Among the illustrious names who arrived during the reign of Mahmud Begada was the philosopher Haibatullah Shah Mir from Shiraz, and the scholar intellectual Abu Fazl Ghazaruni from Persia who tutored and adopted Abu'l-Fazl ibn Mubarak, author of the Akbarnama. Later, a close alliance between the Ottoman Turks and Gujarati sultans to effectively safeguard Jeddah and the Red Sea trade from Portuguese imperialism, encouraged the existence of powerful Rumi elites within the kingdom who took the post of viziers in Gujarat keen to maintain ties with the Ottoman state. Humayun also briefly occupied the province in 1536, but fled due to the threat Bahadur Shah, the Gujarat king, imposed. The Sultanate of Gujarat remained independent until 1572, when the Mughal emperor Akbar conquered it and annexed it to the Mughal Empire. The Surat port (the only Indian port facing west) then became the principal port of India during Mughal rule, gaining widespread international repute. The city of Surat, famous for its exports of silk and diamonds, had reached a par with contemporary Venice and Beijing, great mercantile cities of Europe and Asia, and earned the distinguished title, Bab al-Makkah (Gate of Mecca). Drawn by the religious renaissance taking place under Akbar, Mohammed Ghaus moved to Gujarat and established spiritual centers for the Shattari Sufi order from Iran, founding the Ek Toda Mosque and producing such devotees as Wajihuddin Alvi of Ahmedabad whose many successors moved to Bijapur during the height of the Adil Shahi dynasty. At the same time, Zoroastrian high priest Azar Kayvan who was a native of Fars, immigrated to Gujarat founding the Zoroastrian school of illuminationists which attracted key Shi'ite Muslim admirers of the Safavid philosophical revival from Isfahan. Early 14th-century Maghrebi adventurer, Ibn Batuta, who famously visited India with his entourage, recalls in his memoirs about Cambay, one of the great emporia of the Indian Ocean that indeed: Cambay is one of the most beautiful cities as regards the artistic architecture of its houses and the construction of its mosques. The reason is that the majority of its inhabitants are foreign merchants, who continually build their beautiful houses and wonderful mosques – an achievement in which they endeavor to surpass each other. Many of these "foreign merchants" were transient visitors, men of South Arabian and Persian Gulf ports, who migrated in and out of Cambay with the rhythm of the monsoons. But others were men with Arab or Persian patronyms whose families had settled in the town generations, even centuries earlier, intermarrying with Gujarati women, and assimilating everyday customs of the Hindu hinterland. The Age of Discovery heralded the dawn of pioneer Portuguese and Spanish long-distance travel in search of alternative trade routes to "the East Indies", moved by the trade of gold, silver and spices. In 1497, Portuguese explorer Vasco da Gama is said to have discovered the Europe-to-India sea route which changed the course of history, thanks to Kutchi sailor Kanji Malam, who showed him the route from the East African coasts of Mozambique sailing onwards to Calicut off the Malabar coast in India. Later, the Gujarat Sultanate allied with the Ottomans and Egyptian Mamluks naval fleets led by governor-generals Malik Ayyaz and Amir Husain Al-Kurdi, vanquished the Portuguese in the 1508 Battle of Chaul resulting in the first Portuguese defeat at sea in the Indian Ocean. To 16th-century European observers, Gujarat was a fabulously wealthy country. The customs revenue of Gujarat alone in the early 1570s was nearly three times the total revenue of the whole Portuguese empire in Asia in 1586–87, when it was at its height. Indeed, when the British arrived on the coast of Gujarat, houses in Surat already had windows of Venetian glass imported from Constantinople through the Ottoman empire. In 1514, the Portuguese explorer Duarte Barbosa described the cosmopolitan atmosphere of Rander known otherwise as City of Mosques in Surat province, which gained the fame and reputation of illustrious Islamic scholars, Sufi-saints, merchants and intellectuals from all over the world: Ranel (Rander) is a good town of the Moors, built of very pretty houses and squares. It is a rich and agreeable place ... the Moors of the town trade with Malacca, Bengal, Tawasery (Tannasserim), Pegu, Martaban, and Sumatra in all sort of spices, drugs, silks, musk, benzoin and porcelain. They possess very large and fine ships and those who wish Chinese articles will find them there very completely. The Moors of this place are white and well dressed and very rich they have pretty wives, and in the furniture of these houses have china vases of many kinds, kept in glass cupboards well arranged. Their women are not secluded like other Moors, but go about the city in the day time, attending to their business with their faces uncovered as in other parts. The conquest of the Kingdom of Gujarat marked a significant event of Akbar's reign. Being the major trade gateway and departure harbour of pilgrim ships to Mecca, it gave the Mughal Empire free access to the Arabian sea and control over the rich commerce that passed through its ports. The territory and income of the empire were vastly increased. For the best part of two centuries, the independent Khatri Sultanate of Gujarat was the cynosure of its neighbours on account of its wealth and prosperity, which had long made the Gujarati merchant a familiar figure in the ports of the Indian Ocean. Gujaratis, including Hindus and Muslims as well as the enterprising Parsi class of Zoroastrians, had been specialising in the organisation of overseas trade for many centuries, and had moved into various branches of commerce such as commodity trade, brokerage, money-changing, money-lending and banking. By the 17th century, Chavuse and Baghdadi Jews had assimilated into the social world of the Surat province, later on their descendants would give rise to the Sassoons of Bombay and the Ezras of Calcutta, and other influential Indian-Jewish figures who went on to play a philanthropical role in the commercial development of 19th-century British Crown Colony of Shanghai. Spearheaded by Khoja, Bohra, Bhatiya shahbandars and Moorish nakhudas who dominated sea navigation and shipping, Gujarat's transactions with the outside world had created the legacy of an international transoceanic empire which had a vast commercial network of permanent agents stationed at all the great port cities across the Indian Ocean. These networks extended to the Philippines in the east, East Africa in the west, and via maritime and the inland caravan route to Russia in the north. Tomé Pires, a Portuguese official at Malacca, wrote of conditions during the reigns of Mahmud I and Mozaffar II: "Cambay stretches out two arms; with her right arm she reaches toward Aden and with the other towards Malacca" He also described Gujarat's active trade with Goa, the Deccan Plateau and the Malabar. His contemporary, Duarte Barbosa, describing Gujarat's maritime trade, recorded the import of horses from the Middle East and elephants from Malabar, and lists exports which included muslins, chintzes and silks, carnelian, ginger and other spices, aromatics, opium, indigo and other substances for dyeing, cereals and legumes. Persia was the destination for many of these commodities, and they were partly paid for in horses and pearls taken from Hormuz. The latter item, in particular, led Sultan Sikandar Lodi of Delhi, according to Ali-Muhammad Khan, author of the Mirat-i-Ahmadi, to complain that the support of the throne of Delhi is wheat and barley but the foundation of the realm of Gujarat is coral and pearls Hence, the sultans of Gujarat possessed ample means to sustain lavish patronage of religion and the arts, to build madrasas and ḵānaqāhs, and to provide douceurs for the literati, mainly poets and historians, whose presence and praise enhanced the fame of the dynasty. Even at the time of Tomé Pires' travel to the East Indies in the early 16th century, Gujarati merchants had earned an international reputation for their commercial acumen and this encouraged the visit of merchants from Cairo, Armenia, Abyssinia, Khorasan, Shiraz, Turkestan and Guilans from Aden and Hormuz. Pires noted in his Suma Orientale: These [people] are [like] Italians in their knowledge of and dealings in merchandise ... they are men who understand merchandise; they are so properly steeped in the sound and harmony of it, that the Gujaratees say that any offence connected with merchandise is pardonable. There are Gujaratees settled everywhere. They work some for some and others for others. They are diligent, quick men in trade. They do their accounts with fingers like ours and with our very writings. Gujarat was one of the twelve original subahs (imperial top-level provinces) established by Mughal Emperor (Badshah) Akbar, with seat at Ahmedabad, bordering on Thatta (Sindh), Ajmer, Malwa and later Ahmadnagar subahs. Aurangzeb, the sixth Mughal Emperor, was born in Dahod, Gujarat. He was the third son and sixth child of Shah Jahan and Mumtaz Mahal. At the time of his birth, his father, Shah Jahan, was then the Subahdar (governor) of Gujarat, and his grandfather, Jehangir, was the Mughal Emperor. Before he became emperor, Aurangzeb was made Subahdar of Gujarat subah as part of his training and was stationed at Ahmedabad.[citation needed] Aurangzeb had great love for his place of birth. In 1704, he wrote a letter to his eldest son, Muhammad Azam Shah, asking him to be kind and considerate to the people of Dahod as it was his birthplace. Muhammad Azam was then the Subedar (governor) of Gujarat. In his letter, Aurangzeb wrote: My son of exalted rank, the town of Dahod, one of the dependencies of Gujarat, is the birthplace of this sinner. Please consider a regard for the inhabitants of that town as incumbent on you. When the cracks had started to develop in the edifice of the Mughal Empire in the mid-17th century, the Marathas were consolidating their power in the west, Chatrapati Shivaji, the great Maratha ruler, attacked Surat in southern Gujarat twice first in 1664 and again in 1672. These attacks marked the entry of the Marathas into Gujarat. However, before the Maratha had made inroads into Gujarat, the Europeans had made their presence felt, led by the Portuguese, and followed by the Dutch and the English. The Peshwas had established sovereignty over parts of Gujarat and collected taxes and tributes through their representatives. Damaji Rao Gaekwad and Kadam Bande divided the Peshwa territory between them, with Damaji establishing the sway of Gaekwad over Gujarat and making Baroda (present day Vadodara in southern Gujarat) his capital. The ensuing internecine war among the Marathas was fully exploited by the British, who interfered in the affairs of both Gaekwads and the Peshwas. In Saurashtra, as elsewhere, the Marathas were met with resistance. The decline of the Mughal Empire helped form larger peripheral states in Saurashtra, including Junagadh, Jamnagar, Bhavnagar and a few others, which largely resisted the Maratha incursions. In the 1600s, the Dutch, French, English and Portuguese all established bases along the western coast of the region. Portugal was the first European power to arrive in Gujarat, and after the Battle of Diu, acquired several enclaves along the Gujarati coast, including Daman and Diu as well as Dadra and Nagar Haveli. These enclaves were administered by Portuguese India under a single union territory for over 450 years, only to be later incorporated into the Republic of India on 19 December 1961 by military conquest. The British East India Company established a factory in Surat in 1614 following the commercial treaty made with Mughal Emperor Nuruddin Salim Jahangir, which formed their first base in India, but it was eclipsed by Bombay after the English received it from Portugal in 1668 as part of the marriage treaty of Charles II of England and Catherine of Braganza, daughter of King John IV of Portugal. The state was an early point of contact with the west, and the first British commercial outpost in India was in Gujarat. 17th-century French explorer François Pyrard de Laval, who is remembered for his 10-year sojourn in South Asia, bears witness in his account that the Gujaratis were always prepared to learn workmanship from the Portuguese, and in turn imparted skills to the Portuguese: I have never seen men of wit so fine and polished as are these Indians: they have nothing barbarous or savage about them, as we are apt to suppose. They are unwilling indeed to adopt the manners and customs of the Portuguese; yet do they regularly learn their manufactures and workmanship, being all very curious and desirous of learning. In fact, the Portuguese take and learn more from them than they from the Portuguese. Later in the 17th century, Gujarat came under control of the Hindu Maratha Empire that arose, defeating the Muslim Mughals who had dominated the politics of India. Most notably, from 1705 to 1716, Senapati Khanderao Dabhade led the Maratha Empire forces in Baroda. Pilaji Gaekwad, first ruler of Gaekwad dynasty, established the control over Baroda and other parts of Gujarat. The British East India Company wrested control of much of Gujarat from the Marathas during the Second Anglo-Maratha War in 1802–1803. Many local rulers, notably the Maratha Gaekwad Maharajas of Baroda (Vadodara), made a separate peace with the British and acknowledged British sovereignty in return for retaining local self-rule. An epidemic outbreak in 1812 killed half the population of Gujarat. Gujarat was placed under the political authority of the Bombay Presidency, with the exception of Baroda State, which had a direct relationship with the Governor-General of India. From 1818 to 1947, most of present-day Gujarat, including Kathiawar, Kutch and northern and eastern Gujarat were divided into hundreds of princely states, but several districts in central and southern Gujarat, namely Ahmedabad, Broach (Bharuch), Kaira (Kheda), Panchmahal and Surat, were governed directly by British officials. In 1819, Sahajanand Swami established the World's First Swaminarayan Mandir in Kalupur, Ahmedabad. Princely states of Gujarat in 1924 Bombay Presidency in 1909, northern portion Mahatma Gandhi picking salt at Dandi beach, South Gujarat, ending the Salt satyagraha on 5 April 1930 Foundational Swaminarayan Mandir, est. 1819 Initially there was confusion over whether Junagadh would join India or Pakistan. This was resolved in 1947 with a plebiscite for full union with India following the next year. After Indian independence and the partition of India in 1947, the new Indian government grouped the former princely states of Gujarat into three larger units; Saurashtra, which included the former princely states on the Kathiawad peninsula, Kutch, and Bombay state, which included the former British districts of Bombay Presidency together with most of Baroda State and the other former princely states of eastern Gujarat. Bombay state was enlarged to include Kutch, Saurashtra (Kathiawar) and parts of Hyderabad state and Madhya Pradesh in central India. The new state had a mostly Gujarati-speaking north and a Marathi-speaking south. Agitation by Gujarati nationalists, the Mahagujarat Movement, and Marathi nationalists, the Samyukta Maharashtra, for their own states led to the split of Bombay state on linguistic lines; on 1 May 1960, it became the new states of Gujarat and Maharashtra. In 1969 riots, at least 660 died and properties worth millions were destroyed. The first capital of Gujarat was Ahmedabad. The capital of Gujarat was moved to Gandhinagar in 1970. Nav Nirman Andolan was a socio-political movement of 1974. It was a students' and middle class people's movement against economic crisis and corruption in public life. This was the first and last successful agitation after the Independence of India that ousted an elected government. Gujarat has emerged as an important industrial hub in India. In Western India Surat was among the strongest industrial clusters in the 1970s. Between 1971 and 1981 diamond cutting was established as industry in Surat. At the same time the production of artificial silk and a substantial petrochemical industry became a fixture in Surat. The Morvi dam failure, in 1979, resulted in the death of thousands of people and large economic loss. In the 1980s, a reservation policy was introduced in the country, which led to anti-reservation protests in 1981 and 1985. The protests witnessed violent clashes between people belonging to various castes. The 2001 Gujarat earthquake was located about 9 km south-southwest of the village of Chobari in the Bhachau taluka of Kutch District. This magnitude 7.7 shock killed around 20,000 people (including at least 18 in South-eastern Pakistan), injured another 167,000 and destroyed nearly 400,000 homes. In February 2002, the Godhra train burning led to statewide riots, resulting in the deaths of 1044 people – 790 Muslims and 254 Hindus, and hundreds missing still unaccounted for. Akshardham Temple was attacked by two terrorists in September 2002, killing 32 people and injuring more than 80 others. National Security Guards intervened to end the siege killing both terrorists. On 26 July 2008 a series of seventeen bomb blasts rocked Ahmedabad, killing and injuring several people. Gujarat borders the Tharparkar, Badin and Thatta districts of Pakistan's Sindh province to the northwest, is bounded by the Arabian Sea to the southwest, the state of Rajasthan to the northeast, Madhya Pradesh to the east, and by Maharashtra, the Union Territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu to the south. Historically, the north was known as Anarta, the Kathiawar peninsula, "Saurastra", and the south as "Lata". Gujarat was also known as Pratichya and Varuna. The Arabian Sea makes up the state's western coast. The capital, Gandhinagar is a planned city. Gujarat has an area of 75,686 sq mi (196,030 km2) with the longest coastline (24% of Indian sea coast) 1,600 km (990 mi), dotted with 41 ports: one major, 11 intermediate and 29 minor. The Narmada is the largest river in Gujarat followed by the Tapi. The Sabarmati has the longest course through the state. The Sardar Sarovar Project is built on Narmada, one of the major rivers of peninsular India where it is one of only three major rivers that run from east to west – the others being the Tapi and the Mahi. It is about 1,312 km (815 mi) long. Several riverfront embankments have been built on the Sabarmati River. The eastern borders have fringes of low mountains of India, the Aravalli, Sahyadri (Western Ghats), Vindhya and Saputara. Apart from this the Gir hills, Barda, Jessore and Chotila together make up a large minority of Gujarat. Girnar is the tallest peak and Saputara is the only hill-station (hilltop resort) in the state. Rann (રણ) is Gujarati for desert. The Rann of Kutch is a seasonally marshy saline clay desert in the Thar Desert biogeographic region between the Pakistani province of Sindh and the rest of the state of Gujarat; it commences 8 km (5.0 mi) from the village of Kharaghoda, Surendranagar District. Mount Karo, Kutch Cracked earth in the Rann of Kutch The colourful Rann Utsav Festival is held annually in the Rann of Kutch. People enjoying Raan Utsav at Dhordo, Kutch Camel ride in Rann of Kutch Greater Flamingo at Rann of Kutch In the early 1980s, palaeontologists found dinosaur egg hatcheries and fossils of at least 13 species in Balasinor. The most important find was that of a carnivorous abelisaurid dinosaur named Rajasurus narmadensis which lived in the Late Cretaceous period. A notable discovery in the village of Dholi Dungri was that of Sanajeh indicus, a primitive madtsoiid snake that likely preyed on sauropod dinosaur hatchlings and embryos. According to the India State of Forest Report 2011, Gujarat has 9.7% of its total geographical area under forest cover. Among the districts, The Dangs has the largest area under forest cover. Gujarat has four national parks and 21 sanctuaries. It is the only home of Asiatic lions and, outside Africa, is the only present natural habitat of lions. Gir Forest National Park in the southwest part of the state covers part of the lions' habitat. Apart from lions, Indian leopards are also found in the state. They are spread across the large plains of Saurashtra and the mountains of South Gujarat. Other National Parks include Vansda National Park, Blackbuck National Park, Velavadar and Narara Marine National Park, Gulf of Kutchh, Jamnagar. Wildlife sanctuaries include Wild Ass Wildlife Sanctuary, Nal Sarovar Bird Sanctuary, Porbandar Bird Sanctuary, Kutch Desert Wildlife Sanctuary, Kutch Bustard Sanctuary, Narayan Sarovar Sanctuary, Jessore Sloth Bear Sanctuary, Anjal, Balaram-Ambaji, Barda, Jambughoda, Khavda, Paniya, Purna, Rampura, Ratan Mahal, and Surpaneshwar. In February 2019, a Bengal tiger claimed to be from Ratapani in Madhya Pradesh was spotted in the area of Lunavada in Mahisagar district, in the eastern part of the state, before being found dead later that month, likely from starvation. An Asiatic lion family, which occurs in and around Gir National Park Greater flamingo, Jamnagar Striped hyena at the Gir Forest National Park The population of Gujarat was 60,439,692 (31,491,260 males and 28,948,432 females) according to the 2011 census data. The population density is 308 persons per square kilometre (800 persons/sq mi), lower than other Indian states. As per the census of 2011, the state has a sex ratio of 918 females for every 1000 males, one of the lowest (ranked 24) among the 29 states in India. While Gujarati speakers constitute a majority of Gujarat's population, the metropolitan areas of Ahmedabad, Vadodara and Surat are cosmopolitan, with numerous other ethnic and language groups. Marwaris compose large minorities of economic migrants; smaller communities of people from the other states of India have also migrated to Gujarat for employment. Luso-Indians, Anglo-Indians, Jews and Parsis also live in the areas. Sindhi presence is traditionally important here following the Partition of India in 1947. The Koli forms the largest caste-cluster, comprising 24% of the total population of the state. According to 2011 census, the religious makeup in Gujarat was 88.57% Hindu, 9.67% Muslim, 0.96% Jain, 0.52% Christian, 0.10% Sikh, 0.05% Buddhist and 0.03% others. Around 0.1% did not state any religion. Hinduism is the majority religion, and is over 93% in rural areas. Muslims are the biggest minority in the state accounting for 9.7% of the population. Gujarat has the third-largest population of Jains in India, following Maharashtra and Rajasthan, almost all of whom live in urban areas like Vadodara, Ahmedabad and Surat. Hathisingh Jain Temple, Ahmedabad Palitana temples Modhera Sun Temple built by Bhimdev Gurudwara Govinddham, Ahmedabad Magen Abraham Jewish Synagogue Jama Masjid (Friday Mosque, 15th century), Ahmedabad Gujarati is the official language of the state. It is spoken natively by 86% of the state's population, or 52 million people (as of 2011). Hindi is the second-largest language, spoken by over 6% of the population. Marathi is also spoken in urban areas. People from the Kutch region of Gujarat also speak in the Kutchi mother tongue, and to a great extent understand Sindhi as well. Memoni is the mother tongue of Kathiawar and Sindhi Memons, most whom are Muslims. Almost 88% of the Gujarati Muslims speak Gujarati as their mother tongue, whilst the other 12% speak Urdu. A sizeable proportion of Gujarati Muslims are bilingual in the two languages; Islamic academic institutions (Darul Uloom) place a high prestige on learning Urdu and Arabic, with students' memorising the Quran and ahadith, and emphasising the oral and literary importance of mastering these languages as a compulsory rite of religion. In rural areas among the tribals, various Bhil dialects are spoken by around 1.37% of the population. In the northeast, Bhili is spoken, in the central part is spoken Bhili, Bhilali and Vasava, while in the southeast is spoken Dangi, Varli Chodri and Dhodia which are related to Marathi. Apart from this, English, Bengali, Kannada, Malayalam, Marwari, Odia, Punjabi, Tamil, Telugu and others are spoken by a considerable number of economic migrants from other states of India seeking employment. The languages taught in schools under the three-language formula are: First language: Gujarati/Hindi/English Second language: Gujarati/English Third language: Hindi "Structurally Gujarat is divided into districts (Zila), Prant (subdivisions), Taluka (blocks) & villages. The state is divided into 33 districts, 122 prants, 248 talukas. There are 08 municipal corporations, 156 municipalities and 14,273 Panchayats, for administrative purposes.' Gujarat has 33 districts and 250 talukas. Surat Bharuch Dang Navsari Tapi Valsad Narmada Ahmedabad Vadodara Anand Chhota Udaipur Dahod Kheda Mahisagar Panchmahal Gandhinagar Aravalli Banaskantha Mehsana Patan Sabarkantha Rajkot Jamnagar Amreli Bhavnagar Botad Devbhoomi Dwarka Gir Somnath Junagadh Morbi Porbandar Surendranagar Kachchh Gujarat is governed by a Legislative Assembly of 182 members. Members of the Legislative Assembly are elected on the basis of adult suffrage from one of 182 constituencies, of which 13 are reserved for scheduled castes and 27 for scheduled tribes. The term of office for a member of the Legislative Assembly is five years. The Legislative Assembly elects a speaker who presides over the meetings of the legislature. A governor is appointed by the President of India, and is to address the state legislature after every general election and the commencement of each year's first session of the Legislative Assembly. The leader of the majority party or coalition in the legislature (Chief Minister) or his or her designee acts as the Leader of the Legislative Assembly. The administration of the state is led by the Chief Minister. After the independence of India in 1947, the Indian National Congress (INC) ruled the Bombay State (which included present-day Gujarat and Maharashtra). Congress continued to govern Gujarat after the state's creation in 1960. During and after India's State of Emergency of 1975–1977, public support for the INC eroded, but it continued to hold government until 1995 with the brief rule of nine months by Janata Morcha. In the 1995 Assembly elections, the Congress lost to the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) led by Keshubhai Patel who became the Chief Minister. His government lasted only two years. The fall of that government was provoked by a split in the BJP led by Shankersinh Vaghela. BJP again won election in 1998 with clear majority. In 2001, following the loss of two assembly seats in by-elections, Keshubhai Patel resigned and yielded power to Narendra Modi. BJP retained a majority in the 2002 election, and Narendra Modi remained as Chief Minister. On 1 June 2007, Narendra Modi became the longest serving Chief Minister of Gujarat. BJP retained the power in subsequent elections in 2007 and 2012 and Narendra Modi continued as the chief minister. After Narendra Modi became the prime minister of India in 2014, Anandiben Patel became the first female chief minister of the state. Vijay Rupani took over as chief minister and Nitin Patel as deputy chief minister on 7 August 2016 after Anandiben Patel resigned earlier on 3 August. Bhupendrabhai Patel became chief minister in September 2021 after the resignation of Vijay Rupani. The incumbent chief secretary of Gujarat is Raj Kumar and director general of police (DGP) is Vikas Sahay. During the British Raj, Gujarati businesses played a major role in enriching the economies of Karachi and Mumbai. Major agricultural produce of the state includes cotton, groundnuts (peanuts), dates, sugar cane, milk and milk products. Industrial products include cement and petrol. Gujarat is ranked number one in the pharmaceutical industry in India, with a 33% share in drug manufacturing and 28% share in drug exports. The state has 130 USFDA certified drug manufacturing facilities. Ahmedabad and Vadodara are considered as pharmaceutical hubs, as there are many big and small pharmaceutical companies established in these cities. Gujarat has the longest coastline in India (1600 km), and its ports (both private and public sector) handle around 40% of India's ocean cargo, with Mundra Port located in Gulf of Kutch being the largest port of India by cargo handled (144 million tons) due to its favourable location on the westernmost part of India and closeness to global shipping lanes. Gujarat also contributes around 20% share in India's industrial production and merchandise exports. According to a 2009 report on economic freedom by the Cato Institute, Gujarat is the most free state in India (the second one being Tamil Nadu). Reliance Industries operates the oil refinery at Jamnagar, which is the world's largest grass-roots refinery at a single location. The world's largest shipbreaking yard is in Gujarat near Bhavnagar at Alang. India's only Liquid Chemical Port Terminal at Dahej, developed by Gujarat Chemical Port Terminal Co Ltd. Gujarat has two of the three liquefied natural gas (LNG) terminals in the country (Dahej and Hazira). Two more LNG terminals are proposed, at Pipavav and Mundra. Gujarat has 85% village connectivity with all‐weather roads. Nearly 100% of Gujarat's 18,000 villages have been connected to the electrical grid for 24-hour power to households and eight hours of power to farms, through the Jyotigram Yojana. As of 2015[update], Gujarat ranks first nationwide in gas-based thermal electricity generation with a national market share of over 8%, and second nationwide in nuclear electricity generation with national market share of over 1%. The state registered 12.8% agricultural growth in the last five years against the national average of 2%. Gujarat records highest decadal agricultural growth rate of 10.97%. Over 20% of the S&P CNX 500 conglomerates have corporate offices in Gujarat. As per RBI report[which?], in year 2006–07, 26% of total bank finance in India was in Gujarat.[citation needed] According to a 2012 survey report of the Chandigarh Labour Bureau, Gujarat had the lowest unemployment rate of 1% against the national average of 3.8%. Legatum Institute's Global Prosperity Index 2012 recognised Gujarat as one of the two highest-scoring among all states of India on matters of social capital. The state ranks 15th alongside Germany in a list of 142 nations worldwide: higher than several developed nations. The tallest tower in Gujarat, GIFT One was inaugurated on 10 January 2013. One other tower called GIFT Two has been finished and more towers are planned. Gujarat's major cities include Ahmedabad, Surat, Vadodara, Rajkot, Jamnagar and Bhavnagar. In 2010, Forbes' list of the world's fastest growing cities included Ahmedabad at number 3 after Chengdu and Chongqing from China. The state is rich in calcite, gypsum, manganese, lignite, bauxite, limestone, agate, feldspar, and quartz sand, and successful mining of these minerals is done in their specified areas. Jamnagar is the hub for manufacturing brass parts. Gujarat produces about 98% of India's required amount of soda ash, and gives the country about 78% of the national requirement of salt. It is one of India's most prosperous states, having a per-capita GDP significantly above India's average. Kalol, Khambhat, and Ankleshwar are today known for their oil and natural gas production. Dhuvaran has a thermal power station, which uses coal, oil, and gas. Also, on the Gulf of Khambhat, 50 km (31 mi) southeast of Bhavnagar, is the Alang Ship Recycling Yard (the world's largest). MG Motor India manufactures its cars at Halol near Vadodara, Tata Motors manufactures the Tata Nano from Sanand near Ahmedabad, and AMW trucks are made near Bhuj. Surat, a city by the Gulf of Khambhat, is a hub of the global diamond trade. In 2003, 92% of the world's diamonds were cut and polished in Surat. The diamond industry employs 500,000 people in Gujarat. At an investor's summit entitled "Vibrant Gujarat Global Investor Summit", arranged between 11 and 13 January 2015, at Mahatma Mandir, Gandhinagar, the state government signed 21000 Memoranda of Understanding for Special Economic Zones worth a total of ₹ 2.5 million crores (short scale). However, most of the investment was from domestic industry. In the fourth Vibrant Gujarat Global Investors' Summit held at Science City, Ahmedabad, in January 2009, there were 600 foreign delegates. In all, 8668 MOUs worth ₹ 12500 billion were signed, estimated to create 2.5 million new job opportunities in the state. In 2011, Vibrant Gujarat Global Investors' Summit MOUs worth ₹ 21 trillion (US$ 463 billion) were signed. Gujarat is a state with surplus electricity. The Kakrapar Atomic Power Station is a nuclear power station run by NPCIL that lies in the proximity of the city of Surat. According to the official sources, against demand of 40,793 million units during the nine months since April 2010, Gujarat produced 43,848 million units. Gujarat sold surplus power to 12 states: Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana, Karnataka, Chhattisgarh, Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh, and West Bengal. Shown here is the Tata Nano, the world's least expensive car. Sanand, Gujarat, is home to Tata Nano. Surat is one of the fastest growing cities in the world. Alang shipbreaking As of April 2022, the peak power requirement of state is 20,277 MW. Total installed power generation capacity is 44,127.43 MW. Of this 25,688.66 MW belongs to thermal power generation capacity while 17,879.77 MW belongs to renewable energy generation capacity. The rest 559 MW is nuclear power generation capacity. The renewable energy installed capacity includes 9,209 MW wind power and 7,180 MW solar power, as of March 2022. The total geographical area of Gujarat is 19,602,400 hectares, of which crops take up 10,630,700 hectares.[verification needed] The three main sources of growth in Gujarat's agriculture are from cotton production, the rapid growth of high-value foods such as livestock, fruits and vegetables, and from wheat production, which saw an annual average growth rate of 28% between 2000 and 2008 (According to the International Food Policy Research Institute). Other major produce includes bajra, groundnut, cotton, rice, maize, wheat, mustard, sesame, pigeon pea, green gram, sugarcane, mango, banana, sapota, lime, guava, tomato, potato, onion, cumin, garlic, isabgul and fennel. Whilst, in recent times, Gujarat has seen a high average annual growth of 9% in the agricultural sector, the rest of India has an annual growth rate of around 3%. This success was lauded by former President of India, APJ Abdul Kalam. The strengths of Gujarat's agricultural success have been attributed to diversified crops and cropping patters; climatic diversity (8 climatic zones for agriculture); the existence of 4 agricultural universities in the state, which promote research in agricultural efficiency and sustainability; co-operatives; adoption of hi-tech agriculture such as tissue culture, green houses and shed-net houses; agriculture export zones; strong marketing infrastructure, which includes cold storage, processing units, logistic hubs and consultancy facilities. Gujarat is the main producer of tobacco, cotton, and groundnuts in India. Other major food crops produced are rice, wheat, jowar, bajra, maize, tur, and gram. The state has an agricultural economy; the total crop area amounts to more than one-half of the total land area. Animal husbandry and dairying have played vital roles in the rural economy of Gujarat. Dairy farming, primarily concerned with milk production, functions on a co-operative basis and has more than a million members. Gujarat is the largest producer of milk in India. The Amul milk co-operative federation is well known all over India, and it is Asia's biggest dairy. Among the livestock raised are, buffaloes and other cattle, sheep, and goats. As per the results of livestock census 1997, there were 20.97 million head of livestock in Gujarat State. In the estimates of the survey of major livestock products, during the year 2002–03, Gujarat produced 6.09 million tonnes of milk, 385 million eggs and 2.71 million kg of wool. Gujarat also contributes inputs to the textiles, oil, and soap industries. The adoption of cooperatives in Gujarat is widely attributed to much of the success in the agricultural sector, particularly sugar and dairy cooperatives. Cooperative farming has been a component of India's strategy for agricultural development since 1951. Whilst the success of these was mixed throughout the country, their positive impact on the states of Maharashtra and Gujarat have been the most significant. In 1995 alone, the two states had more registered co-operatives than any other region in the country. Out of these, the agricultural cooperatives have received much attention. Many have focused on subsidies and credit to farmers and rather than collective gathering, they have focused on facilitating collective processing and marketing of produce. However, whilst they have led to increased productivity, their effect on equity in the region has been questioned, because membership in agricultural co-operatives has tended to favour landowners whilst limiting the entry of landless agricultural labourers. An example of co-operative success in Gujarat can be illustrated through dairy co-operatives, with the particular example of Amul (Anand Milk Union Limited). Amul was formed as a dairy cooperative in 1946, in the city of Anand, Gujarat. The cooperative, Gujarat Co-operative Milk Marketing Federation Ltd. (GCMMF), is jointly owned by around 2.6 million milk producers in Gujarat. Amul has been seen as one of the best examples of cooperative achievement and success in a developing economy and the Amul pattern of growth has been taken as a model for rural development, particularly in the agricultural sector of developing economies. The company stirred the White Revolution of India (also known as Operation Flood), the world's biggest dairy development program, and made the milk-deficient nation of India the largest milk producer in the world, in 2010. The "Amul Model" aims to stop the exploitation by middlemen and encourage freedom of movement since the farmers are in control of procurement, processing and packaging of the milk and milk products. The company is worth 2.5 billion US dollars (as of 2012[update]). 70% of Gujarat's area is classified as semi-arid to arid climatically, thus the demand on water from various economic activities puts a strain on the supply. Of the total gross irrigated area, 16–17% is irrigated by government-owned canals and 83–84% by privately owned tube wells and other wells extracting groundwater, which is the predominant source of irrigation and water supply to the agricultural areas. As a result, Gujarat has faced problems with groundwater depletion, especially after demand for water increased in the 1960s. As access to electricity in rural areas increased, submersible electric pumps became more popular in the 1980s and 1990s. However, the Gujarat Electricity Board switched to flat tariff rates linked to the horsepower of pumps, which increased tubewell irrigation again and decreased the use of electric pumps. By the 1990s, groundwater abstraction rates exceeded groundwater recharge rate in many districts, whilst only 37.5% of all districts has "safe" recharge rates. Groundwater maintenance and preventing unnecessary loss of the available water supplies is now an issue faced by the state. The Sardar Sarovar Project, a debated dam project in the Narmada valley consisting of a network of canals, has significantly increased irrigation in the region. However, its impact on communities who were displaced is still a contested issue. In 2012 Gujarat began an experiment to reduce water loss due to evaporation in canals and to increase sustainability in the area, by constructing solar panels over the canals. In a one megawatt (MW) solar power project set up at Chandrasan, Gujarat uses solar panels fixed over a 750-metre stretch of an irrigation canal. Unlike many solar power projects, this one does not take up large amounts of land since the panels are constructed over the canals, and not on additional land. This results in lower upfront costs since land does not need to be acquired, cleared or modified to set up the panels. The Chandrasan project is projected to save 9 million litres of water per year. The Government of Gujarat, to improve soil management and introduce farmers to new technology, started on a project which involved giving every farmer a Soil Health Card. This acts like a ration card, providing permanent identification for the status of cultivated land, as well as farmers' names, account numbers, survey numbers, soil fertility status and general fertiliser dose. Samples of land from each village are taken and analysed by the Gujarat Narmada Valley Fertiliser Corporation, State Fertiliser Corporation and Indian Farmers Fertilisers Co-operative. 1,200,000 soil test data from the villages was collected as of 2008, from farmer's field villages have gone into a database. Assistance and advice for this project was given by local agricultural universities and crop and soil-specific data was added to the database. This allows the soil test data to be interpreted and recommendations or adjustments made in terms of fertiliser requirements, which are also added to the database. Gujarat is home for the Gujarati people. Gujarat was also the home of Mahatma Gandhi, a worldwide figure known for his non-violent struggle against British rule, and Vallabhbhai Patel, a founding father of the Republic of India. The history of Gujarati literature may be traced back to 1000 CE. Well-known laureates of Gujarati literature include Hemchandracharya, Narsinh Mehta, Mirabai, Akho, Premanand Bhatt, Shamal Bhatt, Dayaram, Dalpatram, Narmad, Govardhanram Tripathi, Mahatma Gandhi, K. M. Munshi, Umashankar Joshi, Suresh Joshi, Swaminarayan, Pannalal Patel and Rajendra Shah. Kavi Kant, Zaverchand Meghani and Kalapi are famous Gujarati poets. Gujarat Vidhya Sabha, Gujarat Sahitya Sabha, and Gujarati Sahitya Parishad are Ahmedabad based literary institutions promoting the spread of Gujarati literature. Saraswatichandra is a landmark novel by Govardhanram Tripathi. Writers like Aanand Shankar Dhruv, Ashvini Bhatt, Balwantray Thakore, Bhaven Kachhi, Bhagwatikumar Sharma, Chandrakant Bakshi, Gunvant Shah, Harindra Dave, Harkisan Mehta, Jay Vasavada, Jyotindra Dave, Kanti Bhatt, Kavi Nanalal, Khabardar, Sundaram, Makarand Dave, Ramesh Parekh, Suresh Dalal, Tarak Mehta, Vinod Bhatt, Dhruv Bhatt and Varsha Adalja have influenced Gujarati thinkers. A notable contribution to Gujarati literature came from the Swaminarayan paramhanso, like Brahmanand Swami, Premanand, with prose like Vachanamrut and poetry in the form of bhajans. Shrimad Rajchandra Vachnamrut and Shri Atma Siddhi Shastra, written in 19th century by Jain philosopher and poet Shrimad Rajchandra (Mahatma Gandhi's guru) are very well known. Gujarati theatre owes a lot to Bhavai. Bhavai is a folk musical performance of stage plays. Ketan Mehta and Sanjay Leela Bhansali explored artistic use of bhavai in films such as Bhavni Bhavai, Oh Darling! Yeh Hai India and Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam. Dayro (gathering) involves singing and conversation reflecting on human nature. Mumbai theatre veteran, Alyque Padamsee, best known in the English-speaking world for playing Muhammad Ali Jinnah in Sir Richard Attenborough's Gandhi, was from a traditional Gujarati-Kutchi family from Kathiawar. Gujarati food is primarily vegetarian. The typical Gujarati thali consists of rotli or bhakhari or thepala or rotlo, dal or kadhi, khichdi, Bhat and shak. Athanu (Indian pickle) and chhundo are used as condiments. The four major regions of Gujarat all bring their own styles to Gujarati food. Many Gujarati dishes are distinctively sweet, salty, and spicy at the same time. In the Saurashtra region, chhash (buttermilk) is believed to be a must-have in their daily food. The Gujarati film industry dates back to 1932, when the first Gujarati film, Narsinh Mehta, was released. After flourishing through the 1960s to 1980s, the industry saw a decline. The industry is revived in recent times. The film industry has produced more than one thousand films since its inception. The Government of Gujarat announced a 100% entertainment tax exemption for Gujarati films in 2005 and a policy of incentives in 2016. Gujarati folk music, known as Sugam Sangeet, is a hereditary profession of the Barot community. Gadhvi and Charan communities have contributed heavily in modern times. The omnipresent instruments in Gujarati folk music include wind instruments, such as turi, bungal, and pava, string instruments, such as the ravan hattho, ektaro, and jantar and percussion instruments, such as the manjira and zanz pot drum. Garba during Navaratri in Ahmedabad Navratri Garba at Ambaji temple Tourists playing Dandiya Raas International Kite Festival, Ahmedabad The folk traditions of Gujarat include bhavai and raas-garba. Bhavai is a folk theatre; it is partly entertainment and partly ritual, and is dedicated to Amba. The raas-garba is a folk dance done as a celebration of Navratri by Gujarati people. The folk costume of this dance is chaniya choli for women and kedia for men. Different styles and steps of garba include dodhiyu, simple five, simple seven, popatiyu, trikoniya (hand movement which forms an imagery triangle), lehree, tran taali, butterfly, hudo, two claps and many more. Sheri garba is one of the oldest form of garba where all the women wear red patola sari and sing along while dancing. It is a very graceful form of garba. Makar Sankranti is a festival where people of Gujarat fly kites. In Gujarat, from December through to Makar Sankranti, people start enjoying kite flying. Undhiyu, a special dish made of various vegetables, is a must-have of Gujarati people on Makar Sankranti. Surat is especially well known for the strong string which is made by applying glass powder on the row thread to provide it a cutting edge. Apart from Navratri and Uttarayana, Diwali, Holi, Janmashtami, Mahavir Janma Kalyanak, Eid, Tazia, Paryushan and others are also celebrated. Due to close proximity to the Arabian Sea, Gujarat has developed a mercantile ethos which maintained a cultural tradition of seafaring, long-distance trade, and overseas contacts with the outside world since ancient times, and the diffusion of culture through Gujarati diaspora was a logical outcome of such a tradition. During the pre-modern period, various European sources have observed that these merchants formed diaspora communities outside of Gujarat, and in many parts of the world, such as the Persian Gulf, Middle East, Horn of Africa, Hong Kong, Indonesia, and Philippines. long before the internal rise of the Maratha dynasty, and the British Raj colonial occupation. Early 1st-century Western historians such as Strabo and Dio Cassius are testament to Gujarati people's role in the spread of Buddhism in the Mediterranean, when it was recorded that the sramana monk Zarmanochegas (Ζαρμανοχηγὰς) of Barygaza met Nicholas of Damascus in Antioch while Augustus ruled the Roman Empire, and shortly thereafter proceeded to Athens where died by setting himself on fire to demonstrate his faith. A tomb to the sramana, was still visible in the time of Plutarch, which bore the mention "ΖΑΡΜΑΝΟΧΗΓΑΣ ΙΝΔΟΣ ΑΠΟ ΒΑΡΓΟΣΗΣ" ("The sramana master from Barygaza in India"). The progenitor of the Sinhala language is believed to have been Prince Vijaya, son of King Simhabahu, who ruled Simhapura (modern-day Sihor near Bhavnagar). Prince Vijaya was banished by his father for his lawlessness and set forth with a band of adventurers. This tradition was followed by other Gujaratis. For example, in the Ajanta frescoes, a Gujarati prince is shown entering Sri Lanka. Many Indians migrated to Indonesia and the Philippines, most of them Gujaratis. King Aji Saka, who is said to have come to Java in Indonesia in year 1 of the Saka calendar, is believed by some to have been a king of Gujarat. The first Indian settlements in the Philippines and Java Island of Indonesia are believed to have been established with the coming of Prince Dhruvavijaya of Gujarat, with 5000 traders. Some stories propose a Brahmin named Tritresta was the first to bring Gujarati migrants with him to Java, so some scholars equate him with Aji Saka. A Gujarati ship has been depicted in a sculpture at Borabudur, Java. Gujarat's natural environment includes the Great Rann of Kutch and the hills of Saputara, and it is the sole home of pure Asiatic lions in the world. During the historic reigns of the sultans, Hindu craftsmanship blended with Islamic architecture, giving rise to the Indo-Saracenic style. Many structures in the state are built in this fashion. It is also the birthplace of Mahatma Gandhi and Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, great iconic figures of India's Independence movement. Amitabh Bachchan is currently the brand ambassador of Gujarat Tourism. Gujarat has a variety of museums on different genres that are run by the state's Department of Museums located at the principal state museum, Baroda Museum & Picture Gallery in Vadodara, which is also the location of the Maharaja Fateh Singh Museum. The Kirti Mandir, Porbandar, Sabarmati Ashram, and Kaba Gandhi No Delo are museums related to Mahatma Gandhi, the former being the place of his birth and the latter two where he lived in his lifetime. Kaba Gandhi No Delo in Rajkot exhibits part of a rare collection of photographs relating to the life of Mahatma Gandhi. Sabarmati Ashram is the place where Gandhi initiated the Dandi March. On 12 March 1930 he vowed that he would not return to the Ashram until India won independence. The Maharaja Fateh Singh Museum is housed within Lakshmi Vilas Palace, the residence of the erstwhile Maharajas, located in Vadodara. The Calico Museum of Textiles is managed by the Sarabhai Foundation and is one of the most popular tourist spots in Ahmedabad.[citation needed] The Lakhota Museum at Jamnagar is a palace transformed into museum, which was residence of the Jadeja Rajputs. The collection of the museum includes artefacts spanning from 9th to 18th centuries, pottery from medieval villages nearby and the skeleton of a whale. Other well-known museums in the state include the Kutch Museum in Bhuj, which is the oldest museum in Gujarat founded in 1877, the Watson Museum of human history and culture in Rajkot, Gujarat Science City and Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Memorial in Ahmedabad. In October 2018, the world's tallest statue commemorating the independence leader Sardar Patel was unveiled. At 182 metres tall the Statue of Unity is the newest tourist attraction with over 30,000 visitors every day. Religious sites play a major part in the tourism of Gujarat. Somnath is the first of the twelve Jyotirlingas, and is mentioned in the Rigveda. The Dwarakadheesh Temple, Radha Damodar Temple, Junagadh and Dakor are holy pilgrimage sites with temples dedicated to Lord Krishna. The Sun Temple, Modhera is a ticketed monument, handled by the Archaeological Survey of India. Other religious sites in state include Ambaji, Dakor, Shamlaji, Chotila, Becharaji, Mahudi, Shankheshwar etc. The Palitana temples of Jainism on Mount Shatrunjaya, Palitana are considered the holiest of all pilgrimage places by the Svetambara and Digambara Jain community. Palitana is the world's only mountain with more than 900 temples. The Sidi Saiyyed Mosque and Jama Masjid are holy mosques for Gujarati Muslims. A five-day festival is held during Maha Shivaratri at the fort of Girnar, Junagadh, known as the Bhavanth Mahadev Fair (Gujarati: ભવનાથ નો મેળો). The Kutch Festival or Rann Festival (Gujarati: કચ્છ or રણ ઉત્સવ) is a festival celebrated at Kutch during Mahashivratri. The Modhra Dance Festival is a festival for classical dance, arranged by the Government of Gujarat's Cultural Department, to promote tourism in state and to keep traditions and culture alive. The Ambaji Fair is held in the Hindu month of Bhadrapad (around August–September) at Ambaji, during a time which is particularly suitable for farmers, when the busy monsoon season is about to end. The Bhadrapad fair is held at Ambaji which is in the Danta Taluka of Banaskantha district, near the Gujarat-Rajasthan border. The walk from the bus station to the temple is less than one kilometre, under a roofed walkway. Direct buses are available from many places, including Mount Abu (45 km away), Palanpur (65 km away), Ahmedabad and Idar. The Bhadrapad fair is held in the centre of the Ambaji village just outside the temple premises. The village is visited by the largest number of sanghas (pilgrim groups) during the fair. Many of them go there on foot, which is particularly enriching as it happens immediately after the monsoon, when the landscape is rich with greenery, streams are full of sparkling water and the air is fresh. About 1.5 million devotees are known to attend this fair each year from all over the world. Not only Hindus, but some devout Jains and Parsis also attend the functions, whilst some Muslims attend the fair for trade. The Tarnetar Fair is held during the first week of Bhadrapad, (September–October according to Gregorian calendar), and mostly serves as a place to find a suitable bride for tribal people from Gujarat. The region is believed to be the place where Arjuna took up the difficult task of piercing the eye of a fish, rotating at the end of a pole, by looking at its reflection in the pond water, to marry Draupadi. Other fairs in Gujarat include Dang Durbar, Shamlaji Fair, Chitra Vichitra Fair, Dhrang Fair and Vautha Fair. The Government of Gujarat has banned alcohol since 1960. Gujarat government collected the Best State Award for 'Citizen Security' by IBN7 Diamond States on 24 December 2012. Statue of Mahatma Gandhi in Sabarmati Ashram, Ahmedabad Somnath Temple, Veraval Dwarkadhish Temple, Dwarka Radha Damodar Temple, Junagadh Kirti Toran, Vadnagar Akshardham Gandhinagar Jama Mosque, Champaner Lakhota Museum in Jamnagar Sun Temple, Modhera Laxmi Vilas Palace, Vadodara Vijay Vilas Palace, Mandvi, Kutch Mahabat Maqbara, Junagadh Vasai Jain Temple, Kutch Wankaner palace, Wankaner Mandvi Beach, Kutch There are three international airports (Ahmedabad and Surat, Vadodara), nine domestic airports (Bhavnagar, Bhuj, Jamnagar, Kandla, Porbandar, Rajkot, Amreli, Keshod), two private airports (Mundra, Mithapur) and three military bases (Bhuj, Jamnagar, Naliya) in Gujarat. Two more airports (Ankleshwar, Rajkot) are under construction. There are three disused airports situated at Deesa, Mandvi and Mehsana; the last serving as a flying school. Gujarat State Aviation Infrastructure Company Limited (GUJSAIL) has been established by the Government of Gujarat to foster development of aviation infrastructure in the state. These airports are operated and owned by either the Airports Authority of India, Indian Air Force, Government of Gujarat or private companies. Gujarat comes under the Western Railway Zone of the Indian Railways. Ahmedabad Railway Station is the most important, centrally located and biggest railway station in Gujarat which connects to all important cities of Gujarat and India.Surat railway station and Vadodara Railway Station is also the busiest railway station in Gujarat and the ninth busiest railway station in India. Other important railway stations are Palanpur Junction, Bhavnagar Terminus, Rajkot Railway Station, Sabarmati Junction, Nadiad Junction, Valsad Railway Station, Bharuch Junction, Gandhidham Junction, Anand Junction, Godhra Railway Station, etc. Indian Railways is planning a dedicated rail freight route Delhi–Mumbai passing through the state. The 39.259 km (24.394 mi) long tracks of the first phase of MEGA, a metro rail system for Ahmedabad and Gandhinagar is under construction. It is expected to complete by 2024. The construction started on 14 March 2015. Gujarat State has the longest sea coast of 1214 km in India. Kandla Port is one of the largest ports serving Western India. Other important ports in Gujarat are the Port of Navlakhi, Port of Magdalla, Port Pipavav, Bedi Port, Port of Porbandar, Port of Veraval and the privately owned Mundra Port. The state also has Ro-Ro ferry service. Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation (GSRTC) is the primary body responsible for providing the bus services within the state of Gujarat and also with the neighbouring states. It is a public transport corporation providing bus services and public transit within Gujarat and to the other states in India. Apart from this, there are a number of services provided by GSRTC. Mofussil Services – connects major cities, smaller towns and villages within Gujarat. Intercity Bus Services – connects major cities – Ahmedabad, Surat, Veraval, Vapi, Vadodara (Baroda), Rajkot, Bharuch etc. Interstate Bus Services – connects various cities of Gujarat with the neighbouring states of Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Rajasthan. City Services – GSRTC provides city bus services at Surat, Vadodara, Vapi, Gandhinagar and Ahmedabad, within the state of Gujarat. Parcel Services – service used for transporting goods. Apart from this, the GSRTC provides special bus services for festivals, industrial zones, schools, colleges and pilgrim places also buses are given on contract basis to the public for certain special occasions. There are also city buses in cities like Ahmedabad (AMTS and Ahmedabad BRTS), Surat (Surat BRTS), Bhavnagar (BMC CITY BUS) ) Vadodara (Vinayak Logistics), Gandhinagar (VTCOS), Rajkot (RMTS and Rajkot BRTS), Anand (VTCOS) Bharuch (Gurukrupa) etc. Auto rickshaws are common mode of transport in Gujarat. The Government of Gujarat is promoting bicycles to reduce pollution by the way of initiative taken by free cycle rides for commuters.. The Gujarat Secondary and Higher Secondary Education Board (GSHSEB) are in charge of the schools run by the Government of Gujarat. However, most of the private schools in Gujarat are affiliated to the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE) and Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations (CISCE) board. Gujarat has 13 state universities and four agricultural universities. Institutes for Engineering and Research in the area include IIT Gandhinagar, Indian Institute of Information Technology Vadodara (IIITV), Institute of Infrastructure Technology Research and Management (IITRAM), Dhirubhai Ambani Institute of Information and Communication Technology (DA-IICT) also in Gandhinagar, Sardar Vallabhbhai National Institute of Technology (SVNIT) and P P Savani University in Surat, Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University (PDPU) in Gandhinagar, Nirma University in Ahmedabad, M.S. University in Vadodara, Marwadi Education Foundation's Group of Institutions (MEFGI) in Rajkot and Birla Vishwakarma Mahavidyalaya (BVM) in Vallabh Vidyanagar (a suburb in Anand district). Mudra Institute of Communications Ahmedabad (MICA) is an institute for mass communication. In addition, Institute of Rural Management Anand (IRMA) is one of the leading sectoral institution in rural management. IRMA is a unique institution in the sense that it provides professional education to train managers for rural management. It is the only one of its kind in all Asia. The National Institute of Design and development (NID) in Ahmedabad and Gandhinagar is internationally acclaimed as one of the foremost multi-disciplinary institutions in the field of design education and research. Centre for Environmental Planning & Technology University, popularly known as (CEPT) is one of the best planning and architectural school not in India, but across the world; providing various technical and professional courses. In the emerging area of legal education, a premier institution Gujarat National Law University was founded in the capital city Gandhinagar which started imparting education in 2004 and is ranked in top institutions in the country. Lalbhai Dalpatbhai College of Engineering (LDCE) is also one of the top engineering college of the state. The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, Vadodara, is a premier university of Gujarat. It is one of the oldest universities of Gujarat and provides education in Faculty of Fine Arts, Engineering, Arts, Journalism, Education, Law, Social Work, Medicine, Science and Performing Arts. Originally known as the Baroda College of Science (established 1881), it became a university in 1949 after the independence of the country and later renamed after its benefactor Maharaja Sayajirao Gaekwad III, the former ruler of Baroda State. Gujarat University, Kadi Sarva Vishwavidyalaya, Sardar Patel University, Ahmedabad University, Saurashtra University, Veer Narmad South Gujarat University, Dharmsinh Desai University and Hemchandracharya North Gujarat University are also among reputed universities, affiliating many reputed colleges. Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad The Gujarat National Law University, Gandhinagar Campus at Dhirubhai Ambani Institute of Information and Communication Technology, Gandhinagar The clock tower in Gujarat University, Ahmedabad Kala Bhavan, Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda The Space Applications Centre (SAC) is an institution for space research and satellite communication in Ahmedabad, India, under the aegis of the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO). Vikram Sarabhai, a renowned scientist, industrialist, and visionary Gujarati, played an important role in it. He also founded Physical Research Laboratory, a research institute encompasses Astrophysics, Solar System, and cosmic radiation. He also envisioned Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad, one of the internationally reputed management research institute that is located in Gujarat's commercial capital Ahmedabad and is the top ranked management institutes in the country. Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute has been established under Council of Scientific and Industrial Research Government of India at Bhavnagar. It was inaugurated by Late Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime Minister of India on 10 April 1954, with a view to carry out research on marine salt, and salt from inland lakes and sub-soil brine. It is working on reverse osmosis, electro membrane process, salt and marine chemicals, analytical science, marine biotechnology, and other related fields. The Gujarat National Law University situated at Gandhinagar is the 5th Best Law School currently in India. Gujarat Science City, is a government initiative to draw more students towards education in science, which hosts India's first IMAX 3D theatre, an energy park, a hall of science, an amphitheatre, and dancing musical fountains among others. Institute of Management under Nirma University is constantly ranked among the top MBA colleges in India. International Institute of Management and Technical Studies affiliated with Gujarat Knowledge Society, European Association for Distance Learning, Association of Indian Management Schools and Ahmedabad Textile Industry's Research Association has performed globally for its higher education certification courses for working professionals. IIMT STUDIES also launched GET SET GO programme in 2013 in affiliation with Gujarat Technological University and Gujarat Knowledge Society, Department of Technical Education- Government of Gujarat. B.K. School of Business Management is ranked sixth in financial management. K. S. School of Business Management is also an MBA college in Gujarat University providing a five-year integrated MBA course. Shanti Business School in Ahmedabad is a business school offering a post-graduate diploma in management through a corporate citizenship initiative. The Institute of Seismological Research (ISR) was established by the Science and Technology Department, Government of Gujarat, in 2003 and is registered as a society. ISR campus is at Raisan, Gandhinagar, on the banks of Sabarmati river. Aims and objectives include assigning optimum seismic factors for buildings in different regions and long-term assessment of potential. The ISR is the only institute in India fully dedicated to seismological research and is planned to be developed into a premier international institute in few years time. Notable people of Gujarat Gautam Adani, founder and chairman of Adani Group; from Ahmedabad, Gujarat Lal Krishna Advani, ex-president of BJP and Deputy Prime Minister of India (1999–2004) Dhirubhai Ambani, founder of Reliance Industries; from Chorvad, Gujarat Jasprit Bumrah, Indian bowler who plays for Indian National Cricket team (all formats), from Ahmedabad. Morarji Desai, 4th Prime Minister of India (1977–1979); from Valsad Urvashi Dholakia, Television & Bollywood actress Balkrishna Vithaldas Doshi, Architect, Pritzker Architecture Prize laureate Dadudan Gadhvi (Kavi DadBapu), poet, singer and lyricist of Gujarati Cinema, Padmashri title given in 2021 Mahatma Gandhi, spearheaded the Indian independence movement against British colonial rule; Gujarati Ravindra Jadeja, Indian all-rounder & part of the Indian U-19 cricket team, from Navagam Ghed Sanjeev Kumar a Versatility Bollywood actor, Born in Surat Shri Gopinathji Maharaj, family founder Narendra Modi, 14th and current Prime Minister of India; from Vadnagar, Gujarat Asha Parekh influential actress in Hindi cinema, she was born in Ahmedabad Urjit Patel, former Governor of Reserve Bank of India; from Kheda district, Gujarat Vallabhbhai Patel, Independent India's first Deputy Prime Minister and Home Minister; from Karamsad Falguni Pathak, a female singer and performing artist born & brought up in Vadodara, who currently resides in Mumbai Azim Premji, software magnate and chairman of Wipro Limited; ethnically Gujarati Cheteshwar Pujara, Indian batter who plays fior Indian National Cricket Test team, from Rajkot. Shrimad Rajchandra, poet, philosopher and reformer best known as the spiritual guru of Mahatma Gandhi Paresh Rawal, Indian film actor and politician of Gujarati origin born in Mumbai Vikram Sarabhai, "father of the Indian space programme"; from Ahmedabad Dayananda Saraswati is an Indian philosopher, social leader and founder of the Arya Samaj, Born in Tankara Amit Shah, 31st and Current Home Minister of India, former Minister of State, Government of Gujarat; born in Mumbai Jamsetji Tata, pioneer industrialist, founder of the Tata Group; from a Parsi family of Navsari Shyamji Krishna Varma, an Indian revolutionary fighter, an Indian patriot, lawyer and journalist From Kutch  New Jersey, United States (September 2019)  Delaware, United States (September 2019)  California, United States  Hyōgo Prefecture, Japan (November 2019) Guangdong, China (2014)  Astrakhan Oblast, Russia India portal Cuttanee Navnirman Andolan Outline of Gujarat Dharasana Satyagraha "Newest version of Jay Jay Garvi Gujarat song launched(Video)". Desh Gujarat. 7 May 2011. Archived from the original on 13 November 2016. Retrieved 12 November 2016. "DGFASLI REPORT". Archived from the original on 20 August 2017. Retrieved 24 March 2023. "50th Report of the Commissioner for Linguistic Minorities in India" (PDF). 16 July 2014. p. 118. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 July 2016. Retrieved 6 November 2016. "The Gujarat Official Languages Act, 1960" (PDF). indiacode.nic.in. 1961. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 December 2022. Retrieved 21 December 2022. Benedikter, Thomas (2009). Language Policy and Linguistic Minorities in India: An Appraisal of the Linguistic Rights of Minorities in India. LIT Verlag Münster. p. 89. ISBN 978-3-643-10231-7. Archived from the original on 25 April 2016. Retrieved 13 June 2018. "Socio-Economic Review 2021–2022" (PDF). Government of Gujarat. p. 30. Retrieved 11 February 2022.[permanent dead link] "Human Development Indices (5.0)". Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 17 February 2022. "Household Social Consumption on Education in India" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 November 2020. Retrieved 17 February 2022. "Census 2011 (Final Data) – Demographic details, Literate Population (Total, Rural & Urban)" (PDF). planningcommission.gov.in. Planning Commission, Government of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 January 2018. Retrieved 3 October 2018. "Gujarat forgets state bird, tree and flower". The Times of India. 14 January 2016. Archived from the original on 27 December 2016. Retrieved 14 July 2017. Nair, Avinash (21 November 2023). "'Ghol' declared state fish of Gujarat at Global Fisheries Conference, Ahmedabad". The Indian Express. Archived from the original on 21 November 2023. Retrieved 21 November 2023. "Which is State Fruit of Gujarat India – Mango (Keri)". Nri Gujarati News. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 14 July 2017. "Gujarat Population 2018". worldpopulationreview.com. Archived from the original on 25 January 2018. Retrieved 24 January 2018. Kulke, Professor of Asian History Hermann; Kulke, Hermann; Rothermund, Dietmar (2004). A History of India. Psychology Press. pp. 26–27. ISBN 978-0-415-32920-0. Archived from the original on 23 September 2021. Retrieved 2 August 2021. Baṭṭūṭa, Ibn; Husain, Mahdi (1976). The Rehla of Ibn Battuta (India, Maldive Islands and Ceylon). Baroda: Oriental Institute. p. 172. David Smith (2003). Hinduism and modernity. Oxford: Blackwell. p. 62. ISBN 978-0-631-20862-4. Surat was then the place of embarkation of pilgrims to Mecca; known as Bab al-Makkah or the Gate of Mecca, it was almost a sacred place for the Muslims of India. More to the point it was the main city for foreign imports, where many merchants had their bases, and all the European trading companies were established. Its population was more than 100, 000. The journal of Asian studies, Volume 35, Issues 1–2. 1975. Archived from the original on 4 March 2019. Retrieved 22 December 2016. For a pious emperor, Surat had more than economic and political importance; it was the port from which the hajj (pilgrimage) ships left Mughal India for the Red Sea. The port was variously known as Bab-al-Makkah, the Bab-ul-Hajj, the Dar-al-Hajj, and the Bandar-i-Mubarak. "States with total and phase-wise prohibition of alcohol in India". The Indian Express. 6 April 2016. Archived from the original on 5 June 2021. Retrieved 2 August 2021. Mukherjee, Aeshita; Borad, C.K. (1 October 2004). "Integrated approach towards conservation of Gir National Park: the last refuge of Asiatic Lions, India". Biodiversity & Conservation. 13 (11): 2165–2182. Bibcode:2004BiCon..13.2165M. doi:10.1023/B:BIOC.0000040009.75090.8c. ISSN 1572-9710. S2CID 35893400. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 2 August 2021. "NIRYAT". niryat.gov.in. Archived from the original on 18 January 2024. Retrieved 7 February 2024. "Sub-national HDI – Area Database". Global Data Lab. Institute for Management Research, Radboud University. Archived from the original on 23 September 2018. Retrieved 25 September 2018. "Periodic Labour Force Survey (2017-18)" (PDF). Ministry of Labour and Employment. p. 212. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 July 2019. Retrieved 3 May 2019. M Saraswathy (5 February 2020). "Electronic appliance makers eye Gujarat as new manufacturing hub". CNBC TV18. Archived from the original on 5 February 2020. Retrieved 4 March 2017. Pradeep Udhas. "Accelerating growth in Gujarat" (PDF). KPMG. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 September 2020. Retrieved 4 July 2020. Tomar, Anita; Oza, Heena (September 2015). "Green supply chain management practices implementation and effect on organizational performance of ISO14001 certified manufacturing companies of India". Abhinav International Monthly Refereed Journal of Research in Management & Technology. 4 (9). Abhinav Publication: 21. ISSN 2320-0073. Retrieved 5 July 2020. Parwez, S. (2016). A Comparative Study of Gujarat and Kerala Developmental Experiences. International Journal of Rural Management, 12(2), 104–124. doi:10.1177/0973005216660908 Christophe Jaffrelot (2015) What 'Gujarat Model'?—Growth without Development—and with Socio-Political Polarisation, South Asia: Journal of South Asian Studies, 38:4, 820-838, doi:10.1080/00856401.2015.1087456 KALAIYARASAN, A. "A Comparison of Developmental Outcomes in Gujarat and Tamil Nadu." Economic and Political Weekly, vol. 49, no. 15, 2014, pp. 55–63. JSTOR, JSTOR 24479122. Accessed 29 December 2022. Simpson, E. (2006). The State of Gujarat and the Men without Souls. Critique of Anthropology, 26(3), 331–348. doi:10.1177/0308275X06066581 SUD, N. (2008). Secularism and the Gujarat State: 1960–2005. Modern Asian Studies, 42(6), 1251-1281. doi:10.1017/S0026749X07002934 Subramaniam, M. (2014), "Resisting gendered religious nationalism: The case of religious-based violence in Gujarat, India", Gendered Perspectives on Conflict and Violence: Part B (Advances in Gender Research, Vol. 18B), Emerald Group Publishing Limited, Bingley, pp. 73-98. doi:10.1108/S1529-21262014000018B007 Ahmad, Riaz. "Gujarat Violence: Meaning and Implications." Economic and Political Weekly, vol. 37, no. 20, 2002, pp. 1870–73. JSTOR, JSTOR 4412121. Accessed 29 December 2022. Gujarat, Part 1. Popular Prakashan. 2003. ISBN 978-81-7991-104-4. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 8 August 2020. The Gurjars of Chitrakuta and Gurjars of lta were mentioned in Rashtrakuta inscriptions Gujarat Government. "Gujarat state official site". Archived from the original on 3 February 2010. Retrieved 21 January 2010. The State took its name from the Gurjara, the land of the Gujjar, who ruled the area during the 700s and 800s. Ramesh Chandra Majumdar; Bhāratīya Itihāsa Samiti (1954). The History and Culture of the Indian People:The classical age. G. Allen & Unwin. p. 64. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 8 August 2020. "Gujarat". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 19 October 2016. Retrieved 27 October 2016. Gujarat draws its name from the Gurjara, who ruled the area during the 8th and 9th centuries CE. Ramesh Chandra Majumdar; Achut Dattatrya Pusalker; A. K. Majumdar; Dilip Kumar Ghose; Vishvanath Govind Dighe; Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan (1977). The History and Culture of the Indian People: The classical age. Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan. p. 153. "Devdutt Pattanaik explores Gujarat through the ages and finds, in its archaeology, its myths and legends, its cultures and histories, a microcosm of the multilayered country he loves". 18 October 2017. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. "Where does history begin?". 18 October 2017. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. "History of Gujarat". Mapsofindia.com. Archived from the original on 26 May 2010. Retrieved 16 July 2010. Shuichi Takezawa (August 2002). "Stepwells – Cosmology of Subterranean Architecture as seen in Adalaj" (PDF). Journal of Architecture and Building Science. 117 (1492): 24. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 July 2011. Retrieved 18 November 2009. S. R. Rao (1985). Lothal. Archaeological Survey of India. p. 11. The Acts of Judas Thomas, M.R. James, Tr. by M.R. James, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1924. Medlycott, A. E. India and the Apostle Thomas Archived 24 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine Trade And Trade Routes In Ancient India, von Moti Chandra, page: 99 "CNG: eAuction 343. INDIA, Post-Gupta (Gujura Confederacy). Gujuras of Sindh. Circa AD 570-712. AR Drachm (25 mm, 3.84 g, 9h)". cngcoins.com. Archived from the original on 11 August 2017. Retrieved 15 July 2017. Mote, Sally Hovey Wriggins; with a foreword by Frederick W. (1996). Xuanzang : a Buddhist pilgrim on the Silk Road. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press. ISBN 978-0-8133-2801-0. Archived from the original on 4 March 2019. Retrieved 22 December 2016.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Vashi, Ashish (21 October 2010), "Saga of Barygaza", The Times of India, archived from the original on 21 January 2012, retrieved 19 August 2014, The book describes an episode of a foreigner bringing costly gifts for kings, saying, "And for the King there are very costly vessels of silver, singing boys, beautiful maidens for the harem, fine wines, thin clothing of the finest weaves, and the choicest ointments. William H. Schoff (1912), The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea: Travel and Trade in the Indian Ocean by a Merchant of the First Century (digitalized), New York, archived from the original on 24 February 2011, retrieved 1 October 2013, As a sign of these places to those approaching from the sea there are serpents, very large and black; for at the other places on this coast and around Barygaza, they are smaller, and in color bright green, running into gold ... Now the whole country of India has very many rivers, and very great ebb and flow of the tides; increasing at the new moon, and at the full moon for three days, and falling off during the intervening days of the moon. But about Barygaza it is much greater, so that the bottom is suddenly seen, and now parts of the dry land are sea, and now it is dry where ships were sailing just before; and the rivers, under the inrush of the flood tide, when the whole force of the sea is directed against them, are driven upwards more strongly against their natural current, for many stadia.{{citation}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Blankinship, Khalid Yahya (1994). The end of the jihād state : the reign of Hishām ibn ʻAbd al-Malik and the collapse of the Umayyads. Albany: State University of New York Press. p. 189. ISBN 978-0-7914-1828-4. Archived from the original on 4 March 2019. Retrieved 19 October 2015. The Syrian troops became increasingly reluctant to serve on the ill-omened Indian front, which seemed, after so many failures, to be well on its way to becoming the worst front. Ancient India by Ramesh Chandra Majumdar p. 366 Manjulal Ranchholdlal Majmudar (1960). Historical and cultural chronology of Gujarat, Volume 1. Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda. p. 147. History, Religion and Culture of India, by S. Gajrani p.32 Hodivala 1920, p. 88 Boyce 2001, p. 148 Khanbaghi 2006, p. 17 Jackson 1906, p. 27 Bleeker & Widengren 1971, p. 212 André Wink (1991). Al- Hind: The slave kings and the Islamic conquest. 2. BRILL. p. 283. ISBN 978-90-04-09509-0. Archived from the original on 4 March 2019. Retrieved 17 May 2018. Rose, Horace Arthur; Ibbetson (1990). Glossary of the Tribes and Castes of the Punjab and North West Frontier Province. Asian Educational Services. p. 300. ISBN 978-81-206-0505-3. Barnes, Ruth (2017). "Indian Cotton for Cairo: The Royal Ontario Museum's Gujarati Textiles and the Early Western Indian Ocean Trade". Textile History. 48 (1): 15–30. doi:10.1080/00404969.2017.1294814. ISSN 0040-4969. S2CID 194752057. Schimmel, Annemarie (1980). Handbuch der Orientalistik. Leiden: Brill. p. 65. ISBN 978-90-04-06117-0. Wink, André (1990). Indo-Islamic society: 14th - 15th centuries. BRILL. p. 143. ISBN 978-90-04-13561-1. Archived from the original on 18 November 2021. Retrieved 18 November 2021. Zafar Khan Muzaffar, the first independent ruler of Gujarat was not a foreign muslim but a Khatri convert, of a low subdivision called Tank, originally from Southern Punjab. Muhammed Ibrahim Dar (1952). Literary and Cultural Activities in Gujarat Under the Khaljis and Sultanate. Bazm-i-Ishaʻat, Ismail Yusuf College. p. 51. Archived from the original on 4 March 2019. Retrieved 22 December 2016. J. Spencer Trimingham, John O. Voll, The Sufi Orders in Islam, pg 73 Subrahmanyam, Sanjay; Alam, Muzaffar (2012). Writing the Mughal world : studies on culture and politics. New York: Columbia University Press. p. 41. ISBN 978-0-231-15811-4. Richard Maxwell Eaton (8 March 2015). The Sufis of Bijapur, 1300–1700: Social Roles of Sufis in Medieval India. Princeton University Press, 2015. p. 127. ISBN 978-1-4008-6815-5. Achyut Yagnik (2 February 2011). Ahmedabad: From Royal city to Megacity. Penguin UK, 2011. ISBN 9788184754735. Retrieved 18 February 2015. Mansooruddin Quraishi (1972). Muslim education and learning in Gujarat, 1297–1758. Faculty of Education and Psychology, Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda. p. 47. Archived from the original on 4 March 2019. Retrieved 22 December 2016. Alvi Azra (1985). Socio Religious Outlook of Abul Fazl. Lahore Pakistan: Vanguard Books. p. 6. ISBN 978-0-210-40543-7. Giancarlo Casale (2010). The Ottoman Age of Exploration. Oxford University Press. p. 104. ISBN 978-0-19-979879-7. Ali Anooshahr (2008). The Ghazi Sultans and the Frontiers of Islam: A Comparative Study of the Late Medieval and Early Modern Periods. Routledge. p. 43. ISBN 978-1-134-04134-3. Nevertheless, there were indeed people in India, specifically in Gujarat, who by about 1486 knew the Ottomans as the primary Ghazi sultans of western domains of the abode of Islam, and had tried to elevate their own standing by posing as comrade ghazis fighting irreligion in the east. Kurup, K.K.N., ed. (1997). India's naval traditions : the role of Kunhali Marakkars. New Delhi: Northern Book Centre. p. 7. ISBN 978-81-7211-083-3. Gujarati merchants had very long-standing relations with the Persian Gulf and Red Sea regions. Aden, Ormuz, and Mecca were frequently visited by them. They took gold, quicksilver, vermilion, copper, rose-water, camlets, scarlet-in-grain, coloured woollen cloth, glass beads and weapons which were brought by merchants from Cairo to Aden. The above mentioned items were collected by merchants from Italy, Greece, and Damascus. Horses from various parts of Arabia and Persia, especially from Ormuz, were brought by the Gujarati merchants to India. Arthur Percival Newton (1936). The Cambridge History of the British Empire. CUP Archive. p. 23. Retrieved 24 February 2015. The annual pilgrimages of Indian Muslim to Mecca, whose route lay through Gujarat (which was called the Gate of Mecca) had been for some years interrupted by the domination of the Arabian Sea by the Portuguese and also by the disorder prevailing in Gujarat. Ho, Engseng (2006). The graves of Tarim genealogy and mobility across the Indian Ocean. Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 122. ISBN 978-0-520-93869-4. From the other direction, the enhanced security of the Hejaz provided not only profits for Gujarati merchants but succor for Gujarat's Muslim sultans. In times of insecurity, Gujarati sultans would send their families and treasures to the Hejaz for safekeeping ... the sultanate indeed fell, in 1573, and the triumphant emperor Akbar, retained his services giving him charge of pious endowments in Gujarat dedicated to Mecca and Medina. A.V. Williams. Chapter 9 – The Ebb of the Tide – Humayun – 1530–1556 A.D. p. 228. Archived from the original on 3 October 2013. Retrieved 30 September 2013. Sen, Sailendra (2013). A Textbook of Medieval Indian History. Primus Books. pp. 115–116. ISBN 978-93-80607-34-4. Poros, Maritsa V. (2011). Modern migrations : Gujarati Indian networks in New York and London. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-7222-8. Indeed, Fernand Braudel likened Surat to some of the great mercantile cities of Europe and Asia, such as Venice and Beijing ... Godinho estimated that Surat's population was more than 100, 000, with people from all over the world residing in the city or frequenting it for business. He even claimed that it surpasses our "Evora in grandeur" Richard Maxwell Eaton (2015). The Sufis of Bijapur, 1300–1700: Social Roles of Sufis in Medieval India. Princeton University Press. p. 60. ISBN 9781400868155. Dunn, Ross E. (1986). The adventures of Ibn Battuta, a Muslim traveler of the fourteenth century. Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 218. ISBN 978-0-520-05771-5. Archived from the original on 4 March 2019. Retrieved 19 October 2015. "Gujarati showed Vasco 'da' way". The Times of India. 3 October 2010. Archived from the original on 1 October 2013. Retrieved 1 October 2013. Historians have differed over the identity of the sailor, calling him a Christian, a Muslim and a Gujarati. According to another account, he was the famous Arab navigator Ibn Majid. Some historians suggest Majid could not have been near the vicinity at the time. German author Justus says it was Malam who accompanied Vasco ... Italian researcher Sinthia Salvadori too has concluded that it was Malam who showed Gama the way to India. Salvadori has made this observation in her 'We Came In Dhows', an account written after interacting with people in Gujarat. N. Subrahmanian; Tamil̲an̲pan̲; S. Jeyapragasam (1976). Homage to a Historian: A Festschrift. Dr. N. Subrahmanian 60th Birthday Celebration Committee. p. 62. Archived from the original on 4 March 2019. Retrieved 19 October 2015. Darwis Khudori (2007). Rethinking solidarity in global society : the challenge of globalisation for social and solidarity movements: 50 years after Bandung Asian-African Conference 1955. Petaling Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia: Strategic Information and Research Development Centre. p. 35. ISBN 978-983-3782-13-0. Archived from the original on 4 March 2019. Retrieved 1 October 2013. Peter Padfield (1979). Tide of Empires: 1481–1654. Routledge & Kegan Paul. p. 62. ISBN 978-0-7100-0150-4. Archived from the original on 2 January 2016. Retrieved 19 October 2015. Pearson, M. N. (1976). Merchants and rulers in Gujarat: the response to the Portuguese in the sixteenth century (illustrated ed.). Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 109. ISBN 978-0-520-02809-8. Archived from the original on 12 July 2020. Retrieved 19 October 2015. Goody, Jack (1996). The East in the West (1998 Repr. ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 113. ISBN 978-0-521-55673-6. Archived from the original on 4 March 2019. Retrieved 19 October 2015. Gazetteer of the Bombay Presidency: Gujarát Surat and Broach Volume 2, Part 1 of Gazetteer of the Bombay Presidency, Bombay (India : State) (Digitized). Printed at the Government Central Press. 30 April 2007. p. 299. Archived from the original on 4 March 2019. Retrieved 19 October 2015. Tsukasa Mizushima; George Bryan Souza; Dennis O. Flynn (2014). Hinterlands and Commodities: Place, Space, Time and the Political Economic Development of Asia over the Long Eighteenth Century European Expansion and Indigenous Response. BRILL. p. 88. ISBN 9789004283909. Archived from the original on 12 July 2020. Retrieved 22 December 2016. Mehta, Makrand (11 January 1991). Indian Merchants and Entrepreneurs in Historical Perspective. Academic Foundation. p. 1. ISBN 978-81-7188-017-1. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 8 August 2020. Haider, Irfan Habib with contributions from Najaf; Khan, Iqtidar Alam; Moosvi, Shireen; Prasad, Pushpa (2011). Economic history of medieval India, 1200–1500. New Delhi: Pearson Education. p. 171. ISBN 978-81-317-2791-1. Archived from the original on 4 March 2019. Retrieved 22 December 2016. Lentin, Sifra Samuel (2002). "The Jewish presence in Bombay". In Weil, Shelve (ed.). India's Jewish heritage: ritual, art, & life-cycle. Mumbai. pp. 22–35.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Rajesh Rai; Peter Reeves, eds. (2008). The South Asian Diaspora: Transnational Networks and Changing Identities. Routledge. p. 1. ISBN 978-1-134-10595-3. Archived from the original on 4 March 2019. Retrieved 19 October 2015. Pires, I, p. 41 Barbosa, I, pp. 108–58 Barbosa, I, p. 82 apud Bayley, p. 20 GUJARAT – Encyclopædia Iranica Archived 17 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Iranicaonline.org. Retrieved 28 July 2013. Freeman-Grenville, G.S.P.; Munro-Hay, Stuart Christopher (2002). Historical atlas of Islam (Rev. and expanded ed.). New York [u.a.]: Continuum. p. 250. ISBN 978-0-8264-1417-5. Archived from the original on 4 March 2019. Retrieved 22 December 2016. Rajesh Rai; Peter Reeves, eds. (2008). The South Asian Diaspora: Transnational Networks and Changing Identities. Routledge. p. 31. ISBN 978-1-134-10595-3. Archived from the original on 4 March 2019. Retrieved 19 October 2015. Jacobsen, Knut A. (29 November 2020). Routledge Handbook of South Asian Religions. Routledge. p. 190. ISBN 978-0-429-62206-9. Vashi, Ashish (1 May 2012). "Aurangzeb loved Dahod till the end". Daily News and Analysis. Archived from the original on 27 September 2013. Retrieved 4 October 2013. Eminent historian Manekshah Commissariat has quoted from this letter in his book 'A History of Gujarat: Mughal period, from 1573 to 1758'. Patel, Aakar (6 April 2012). "Blame the British Raj on bankers – Livemint". livemint.com. Livemint. Archived from the original on 7 August 2017. Retrieved 7 August 2017. MULTIPLE AUTHORITIES – DISPUTED SOVEREIGNTY (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 August 2017. Retrieved 7 August 2017. Behera, Deepak Kumar; Pfeffer, Georg (2002). The concept of tribal society. Concept Publishing Company. p. 198. ISBN 9788170229834. WINGS Birding Tours to India: the West – Gujarat and the Rann of Kutch – Itinerary Archived 30 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Wingsbirds.com (14 December 2011). Retrieved 28 July 2013. Rai, Rajesh; Reeves, Peter (2009). The South Asian diaspora transnational networks and changing identities. London: Routledge. p. 31. ISBN 978-0-203-89235-0. Archived from the original on 4 March 2019. Retrieved 19 October 2015. Petersen, Eskild; Chen, Lin Hwei; Schlagenhauf-Lawlor, Patricia (14 February 2017). Infectious Diseases: A Geographic Guide. John Wiley & Sons. p. 8. ISBN 9781119085737. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 2 September 2017. "Five states that refused to join India after Independence". August 2017. Archived from the original on 13 January 2022. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Peer, Yasmeen (2007). Communal Violence in Gujarat: Rethinking the Role of Communalism and Institutionalised Injustices in India. pp. 103–104. ISBN 9780549517535. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 6 February 2013. Gayer, Lauren; Jaffrelot, Christophe (30 May 2012). Muslims in Indian Cities: Trajectories of Marginalisation. Columbia University Press. pp. 53–60. ISBN 9780231703086. Shah, Ghanshyam (20 December 2007). "Pulse of the people". India Today. Archived from the original on 17 September 2012. Retrieved 22 November 2012. Krishna, Ananth V. (2011). India Since Independence: Making Sense Of Indian Politics. Pearson Education India. p. 117. ISBN 978-81-317-3465-0. Retrieved 19 October 2015. Dhar, P. N. (2000). "Excerpted from 'Indira Gandhi, the "emergency", and Indian democracy' published in Business Standard". Business Standard India. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-564899-7. Archived from the original on 9 August 2022. Retrieved 23 November 2012. Alf Gunvald Nilsen (2010). Dispossession and Resistance in India: The River and the Rage. Taylor & Francis. p. 24. ISBN 9781136994326. "Book on 1979 Morbi dam disaster rubbishes 'Act of God' theory". The Indian Express. 25 July 2012. Archived from the original on 17 June 2013. Retrieved 18 February 2013. Yagnik, Achyut (May 2002). "The pathology of Gujarat". New Delhi: Seminar Publications. Archived from the original on 22 March 2006. Retrieved 10 May 2006. "Historic Earthquakes". Earthquake.usgs.gov. Archived from the original on 1 November 2014. Retrieved 20 December 2014. BBC News. 11 May 2005 Archived 26 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine, These figures were reported to the Rajya Sabha by the Union Minister of State for Home Affairs Sriprakash Jaiswal in May 2005 Dasgupta, Manas (1 June 2010). "Death sentence for Akshardham temple attack convicts upheld". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 16 May 2013. "17 bomb blasts rock Ahmedabad, 15 dead". CNN-IBN. 26 July 2008. Archived from the original on 28 June 2008. Retrieved 26 July 2008. P. Page xvii Historical and Cultural Chronology of Gujarat edited by Manjulal Ranchholdlal Majmudar P. 391 The Hindu World: An Encyclopedic Survey of Hinduism by Benjamin Walker "The wonders of India's Jurassic Park". BBC. 11 May 2010. Archived from the original on 10 May 2012. Retrieved 2 January 2024. Dixit, Neha; Mehta, Vishal (21 January 2016). "Meet India's Dinosaur Princess". Smithsonian Magazine. Archived from the original on 2 January 2024. Retrieved 2 January 2024. Wilson, Jeffrey A.; Mohabey, Dhananjay M.; Peters, Shanan E.; Head, Jason J. (2 March 2010). "Predation upon Hatchling Dinosaurs by a New Snake from the Late Cretaceous of India". PLOS Biology. 8 (3): e1000322. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000322. ISSN 1544-9173. PMC 2830453. PMID 20209142. "Forest and tree resources in states and union territories" (PDF) (Press release). Forest survey of India (Ministry of Environment and Forests). Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 May 2012. Retrieved 28 February 2014. Singh, H. S.; Gibson, L. (2011). "A conservation success story in the otherwise dire megafauna extinction crisis: The Asiatic lion (Panthera leo persica) of Gir forest" (PDF). Biological Conservation. 144 (5): 1753–1757. Bibcode:2011BCons.144.1753S. doi:10.1016/j.biocon.2011.02.009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 August 2017. Retrieved 18 July 2017. "Like humans, animals too have a right to migrate". The Hindustan Times. 18 February 2019. Archived from the original on 27 February 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. Ghai, Rajat (12 February 2019). "Camera trap proves Gujarat now has tiger". Down To Earth. Archived from the original on 12 February 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. Kaushik, Himashu (9 March 2019). "Tiger that trekked from MP to Gujarat died of starvation: Post-mortem report". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 28 February 2020. Retrieved 17 March 2019. "Census of India Website : Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner, India". censusindia.gov.in. Archived from the original on 8 August 2019. Retrieved 10 December 2019. "Gujarat Profile" (PDF). censusindia.gov.in. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 September 2020. Retrieved 16 March 2020. Taraporevala, Sooni. "Parsis – the Zoroastrians of India". the-south-asian.com. Archived from the original on 25 July 2017. Retrieved 7 August 2017. "Welcome to Indian Institute of Sindhology". Sindhology.org. Archived from the original on 18 December 2014. Retrieved 20 December 2014. Kumar, Rajneesh (13 December 2017). "गुजरात: बनिये का दिमाग़ और मियांभाई की बहादुरी". BBC News हिंदी (in Hindi). Archived from the original on 19 November 2020. Retrieved 19 January 2021. Shah, Ghanshyam (2004). Caste and Democratic Politics in India. Permanent Black. ISBN 978-81-7824-095-4. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 13 February 2021. "Population by religion community – 2011". Census of India, 2011. The Registrar General & Census Commissioner, India. Archived from the original on 25 August 2015. "Table C-01 Population by Religion: Gujarat". censusindia.gov.in. Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India. 2011. Archived from the original on 10 November 2022. Retrieved 30 January 2023. "Table C-16 Population by Mother Tongue: Gujarat". censusindia.gov.in. Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India. Archived from the original on 18 July 2023. Retrieved 30 January 2023. "C-16 Population By Mother Tongue - Gujarat". censusindia.gov.in. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2022. "52nd Report of the Commissioner for Linguistic Minorities in India" (PDF). nclm.nic.in. Ministry of Minority Affairs. 29 March 2016. p. 96. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 15 February 2018. "Administrative divisions of Gujarat". "Village Map - Revenue Department". 25 March 2016. Archived from the original on 25 March 2016. Retrieved 9 April 2016 – via Internet Archive. "State Govt Announces 23 New Talukas". 10 September 2013. Archived from the original on 6 February 2016. Retrieved 5 January 2016 – via HighBeam Research. "Raman Singh breaks Modi's record to be longest serving BJP CM". 25 July 2016. Archived from the original on 14 May 2017. Retrieved 29 April 2017. "Yahoo". Retrieved 7 February 2016.[permanent dead link] "Narendra Modi to complete 12 years as Gujarat's chief minister tomorrow". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 10 January 2017. Retrieved 29 April 2017. "About the Chief Secretary". Gad.gujarat.gov.in. Archived from the original on 21 April 2023. Retrieved 21 April 2023. "Vikas Sahay appointed as Gujarat DGP". Times of India. 2 March 2023. Khaled Ahmed (23 February 2012). "Gujarat's gifts to India and Pakistan". Archived from the original on 12 February 2014. Retrieved 16 February 2014. "Reliance commissions worlds biggest refinery". The Indian Express. 26 December 2008. Archived from the original on 16 May 2013. Retrieved 20 December 2014. "Despite Covid-19, fresh investments flowing into Gujarat's Pharma Sector". timesofindia.indiatimes.com. 14 March 2021. Archived from the original on 3 May 2021. Retrieved 3 May 2021. "Executive Summary" (PDF). Cato.org. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 September 2013. Retrieved 20 December 2014. Uday Mahurkar (11 September 2006). "Gujarat – Physical fitness". India Today. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 20 December 2014. "Claim Check: Narendra Modi on Gujarat's Jyotigram Yojana". livemint.com. 16 October 2013. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 22 January 2017. "Executive summary of month of November 2015" (PDF). cea.nic.in. Central Electricity Authority, Ministry of Power, Government of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 22 January 2017. "Gujarat Brand". Business Standard. Press Trust of India. 18 November 2010. Archived from the original on 12 October 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2014. "List of S&P CNX 500 conglomerates". NSE India. Archived from the original on 4 May 2022. Retrieved 4 May 2022. "Survey says Gujarat has lowest unemployment; Narendra Modi is 'delighted'". 11 July 2012. Archived from the original on 13 July 2012. Retrieved 11 July 2012. "The 2012 Legatum Prosperity Index" (PDF). Legatum Institute. p. 20. Archived from the original on 24 June 2017. Retrieved 29 April 2019. "DNA India: Latest News Headlines, Breaking News & Live Updates on Politics, Business, Sports, Bollywood at Daily News & Analysis". Archived from the original on 20 December 2014. Retrieved 13 February 2013. "India's tallest proposed building Diamond Tower showcased (video)". Deshgujarat.com. 22 January 2009. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 30 September 2014. Kotkin, Joel. "In pictures- The Next Decade's fastest growing cities". Forbes. Archived from the original on 14 October 2010. Retrieved 10 July 2010. "In Pictures: The Next Decade's Fastest-Growing Cities". Forbes. Archived from the original on 14 October 2010. Retrieved 25 April 2012. Adiga, Aravind (12 April 2004). "Uncommon Brilliance". Time. Archived from the original on 29 July 2010. Retrieved 4 May 2010. Lum, Kathryn (16 October 2014). "The rise and rise of Belgium's Indian diamond dynasties". The Conversation. Archived from the original on 18 May 2018. Retrieved 17 May 2018. "'Vibrant Gujarat' signs 21000 MoUs worth Rs 25 lakh cr". The Economic Times Line. Archived from the original on 15 January 2015. Retrieved 20 December 2014. "Vibrant Gujarat sees one foreign investor, the Business Standard". Archived from the original on 8 January 2009. Retrieved 30 September 2014. "Gujarat aims at 15% industrial growth: Rediff.com Business". Rediff.com. 10 March 2008. Archived from the original on 22 June 2011. Retrieved 16 July 2010. "How Gujarat became a power surplus State". Business Line. 11 July 2014. Retrieved 16 February 2016. "Gujarat sold surplus power to 12 states". The Times of India. 8 March 2011. Archived from the original on 8 July 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2014. Robyn Meredith (16 April 2007). "The Next People's Car". Forbes. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 17 January 2011. Nair, Avinash (10 April 2022). "At 20,277 MW, Gujarat records highest power demand in a day". The Indian Express. Archived from the original on 30 May 2022. Retrieved 30 May 2022. "All India Installed Capacity (in MW) of Power Stations" (PDF). Central Electricity Authority. 30 April 2022. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 May 2022. Retrieved 30 May 2022. Balachandar, G. (19 April 2022). "Renewable capacity addition: Rajasthan and Gujarat pip Tamil Nadu and Karnataka". The Hindu Businessline. Archived from the original on 30 May 2022. Retrieved 30 May 2022.(subscription required) "Agriculture and Co-operation Department, Government of Gujarat: Information, Statistics". Agriculture and Co-operation Department, Government of Gujarat. Archived from the original on 8 February 2013. Retrieved 24 February 2013. "Gujarat State Portal". Government of Gujarat. Archived from the original on 2 January 2013. Retrieved 20 February 2013. "Gujarat's agriculture turnaround an eye opener for the entire nation: Dr. Kalam". IBTL for CNBC. 2012. Archived from the original on 14 February 2013. Retrieved 20 February 2013. Pattanayak, Debi (1990). Multilingualism in India. USA: Multilingual Matters Ltd. ISBN 978-1-85359-072-6. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 8 August 2020. Modi, Narendra. "Agricultural Exhibition and Conference". Agritech Asia. Archived from the original on 29 June 2013. Retrieved 20 February 2013. "About Gujarat State Agriculture Marketing Board". Agri.gujarat.gov.in. Archived from the original on 4 February 2011. Retrieved 16 July 2010. "Amul to become world's largest liquid milk brand-Food-Cons. Products-News By Industry-News". The Economic Times. 14 September 2006. Archived from the original on 18 May 2014. Retrieved 16 July 2010. Ebrahim, Alnoor (2000). "Agricultural cooperatives in Gujarat, India: Agents of equity or differentiation?". Development in Practice. 10 (2): 178–188. doi:10.1080/09614520050010214. S2CID 154497407. Bellur, Venkatakrishna; Saraswathi P. Singh; Radharao Chaganti; Rajeswararao Chaganti (1990). "The white revolution—How Amul brought milk to India". Long Range Planning. 23 (6): 71–79. doi:10.1016/0024-6301(90)90104-C. "India largest milk producing nation in 2010–11: NDDB". Hindustan Times. 20 December 2011. Archived from the original on 26 April 2013. Retrieved 23 February 2013. "The Amul Model". Amul. Archived from the original on 6 March 2013. Retrieved 23 February 2013. "News Release: Taste of India Continues to Commemorate its Producers" (PDF). GCMMF. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 February 2013. Retrieved 23 February 2013. Suran, B (10 June 2012). "Is Agriculture in Gujarat on a Different Growth Trajectory?". Social Science Research Network. National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD). SSRN 2080876. Gulati, Ashok (2009). Agriculture performance in Gujarat since 2000 (PDF). International Water Management Institute & International Food Policy Research Institute. p. 10. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2016. Sharma, D.C. (June 2012). "India Launches Solar Power Project". Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment. 10 (5): 230. doi:10.1890/i1540-9295-10-5-228. Attri, S.D. (2011). Challenges and Opportunities in Agrometeorology. Heidelberg: Springer. p. 265. ISBN 978-3-642-19360-6. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 8 August 2020. "Gujarati Writers in India, Gujarati Novelists of India, Gujarati Poets". Culturopedia.com. Archived from the original on 2 May 2014. Retrieved 20 December 2014. Williams, Raymond (2001). Introduction to Swaminarayan Hinduism. Cambridge University Press. pp. 187–190. ISBN 978-0-521-65422-7. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 8 August 2020. Shrimad Rajchandra. Shrimad Rajchandra Vachanamrut. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 14 February 2018 – via Internet Archive. "Atma Siddhi". Shree Raj Saubhag. Archived from the original on 14 February 2018. Retrieved 14 February 2018. Padamsee, Alyque; Prabhu, Arun (11 January 2007). A Double Life: My Exciting Years in Theatre and Advertising. Penguin. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-14-024071-9. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 8 August 2020. "Narsinh Mehta". 26 March 2009. Archived from the original on 12 May 2012. Retrieved 12 February 2012. "NEWS: Limping at 75". Screen. 4 May 2007.[permanent dead link] "'Dhollywood' at 75 finds few takers in urban Gujarat". The Financial Express. 22 April 2007. Archived from the original on 2 June 2020. Retrieved 1 October 2016. "Golly! Gujarati films cross 1k mark". The Times of India. 29 July 2011. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 15 July 2015. Roy, Mithun (3 May 2005). "Crisis-hit Gujarati film industry gets 100% tax rebate". Business Standard India. Archived from the original on 14 July 2015. Retrieved 13 July 2015. DeshGujarat (2 February 2016). "Gujarat govt announces new policy for incentives to Gujarati films". DeshGujarat. Archived from the original on 4 February 2016. Retrieved 4 February 2016. "Dance & Music". NRI Division Government of Gujarat. Archived from the original on 13 February 2012. Retrieved 14 February 2012. "Navratri". Government of Gujarat. Archived from the original on 25 July 2012. Retrieved 12 February 2012. "Kite Festival". Government of Gujarat. Archived from the original on 3 January 2012. Retrieved 12 February 2012. Rai, Rajesh; Reeves, Peter (2008). Rajesh Rai, Peter Reeves (ed.). The South Asian Diaspora: Transnational networks and changing identities. Routledge. p. 41. ISBN 978-0-203-89235-0. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 8 August 2020. The Gujarati merchant diaspora can still be found in the littoral cities of West Asia and Africa on the one hand and in Southeast Asia on the other. "Even British were envious of Gujaratis". The Times of India. 11 December 2012. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013. Retrieved 25 September 2013. "Most people perceive that British dominated everything in the 19th century when the Indian sub-continent was under their control. But Gujarati merchants, especially those from Kutch, dominated the economy all along the East African coast. So while British were ruling, Gujaratis were making all the money," said Pearson." As financers, they (Gujarati merchants) had agents to collect tax, they had money to provide loans, they dominated the merchandise business and they were also into slavery business at Nairobi, Mombasa, Zanzibar on the East African coast and to some extent their influence was also on the South African region," he said. "In fact, the dominance of Gujarati merchants on economy was to such an extent that at one point of time the British even complained about it. They, however, couldn't make any difference as most of them were either administrators or soldiers," said Pearson "Strabo, Geography, NOTICE". Perseus.tufts.edu. Archived from the original on 4 October 2008. Retrieved 20 December 2014. "Cassius Dio – Book 54". Penelope.uchicago.edu. Archived from the original on 25 September 2022. Retrieved 20 December 2014. Plutarch. 'Life of Alexander' in The Lives of the Noble Grecians and Romans. (trans John Dryden and revised Arthur Hugh Clough) The Modern Library (Random House Inc). New York. p.850 Elledge CD. Life After Death in Early Judaism. Mohr Siebeck Tilbringen 2006 ISBN 3-16-148875-X pp. 122–125 P. 25 Historical and cultural chronology of Gujarat, Volume 1 by Manjulal Ranchholdlal Majmudar P. 4 Shyamji Krishna Varma, the unknown patriot by Ganeshi Lal Verma, India. Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. Publications Division P. 67 An era of peace By Krishna Chandra Sagar P. 158 Foreign Influence on Ancient India By Krishna Chandra Sagar "Amitabh Bachchan offers to become brand ambassador of Gujarat". The Times of India. 7 January 2010. Archived from the original on 19 April 2013. Retrieved 14 February 2012. "TAAI award for Gujarat Tourism". @businessline. Archived from the original on 26 October 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2019. "Contact us". Government of Gujarat. Archived from the original on 3 November 2011. Retrieved 14 February 2012. Gandhi, Mohandas. "Gandhi Ashram Official Website". Archived from the original on 5 December 2011. "Watson Museum". Lonely Planet. Archived from the original on 20 February 2012. Retrieved 14 February 2012. "Statue of Unity – Project Features, Progress & Major Facts". statueofunity.in. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 26 March 2019. "Statue of Unity now getting 30k daily visitors: Guj officials". The Economic Times. 3 December 2018. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 26 March 2019. "Sun Temple, Modhera". Archaeological Survey of India. Archived from the original on 16 April 2012. Retrieved 14 February 2012. ""Murtipujakas, Jainism", Encyclopedia of World Religions (PHILTAR), University of Cambria". Philtar.ucsm.ac.uk. Archived from the original on 13 October 2007. Retrieved 30 September 2014. "World's only mountain that has more than 900 temples". 3 April 2013. Archived from the original on 21 November 2013. Retrieved 6 February 2018. "Modhra Dance Festival". Government of Gujarat. Archived from the original on 2 March 2012. Retrieved 14 February 2012. "Tarnetar Fair". Government of Gujarat. Archived from the original on 18 October 2011. Retrieved 14 February 2012. "Narendra Modi justifies gutkha ban in Gujarat". The Economic Times. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 30 September 2014. "STATE PROFILE". Gujaratindia.com. Archived from the original on 6 February 2015. Retrieved 20 December 2014. "Gujarat | Gujarat State Aviation Infrastructure Company Limited". gujsail.gujarat.gov.in. Archived from the original on 21 May 2019. Retrieved 21 May 2019. "Airports | Gujarat State Aviation Infrastructure Company Limited". gujsail.gujarat.gov.in. Retrieved 21 May 2019.[permanent dead link] "Gujarat Civil Aviation Policy 2010" (PDF). Government of Gujarat. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 August 2013. Retrieved 19 April 2012. DeshGujarat (14 March 2015). "First 6 km works of Ahmedabad Metro to complete by September 2016:CM". DeshGujarat. Archived from the original on 4 April 2015. Retrieved 12 April 2015. "Gujarat plans 12 giant industrial hubs". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011. Retrieved 25 October 2010. "What is Gujarat's Ro-Ro ferry service?", The Indian Express, 22 October 2017, archived from the original on 22 October 2017, retrieved 22 October 2017 "GSRTC Services". Archived from the original on 3 May 2018. "India's top 50 business schools". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 1 February 2012. Retrieved 23 February 2012. "Top B-schools in India". CNBC-TV18. Archived from the original on 18 February 2012. Retrieved 23 February 2012. "Gujarat Science City". Scity.org. 26 June 2010. Archived from the original on 26 July 2010. Retrieved 16 July 2010. "GUJARAT TECHNOLOGICAL UNIVERSITY" (PDF). Gtu.ac.in. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 August 2014. Retrieved 20 December 2014. "Gujarat Knowledge Society". Gksgujarat.org. Archived from the original on 17 December 2014. Retrieved 20 December 2014. "IIMT -International Institute of Management and Technical Studies-Distance Education Distance Learning Institute". Iimtstudies.edu.in. Archived from the original on 18 December 2014. Retrieved 20 December 2014. "Association of Indian Management Schools (AIMS)". Aims.org.in. Archived from the original on 24 December 2014. Retrieved 20 December 2014. "India". Eadl.org. Archived from the original on 2 January 2016. Retrieved 20 December 2014. "Dhirubhai Ambani – The founder of Reliance". Britannica. 8 January 2020. Archived from the original on 7 August 2020. Retrieved 20 May 2020. "Modern Gujarat". Mapsofindia.com. Archived from the original on 5 April 2018. Retrieved 4 April 2018. "narendra modi". narendramodi.in. 21 May 2020. Archived from the original on 2 October 2019. Retrieved 21 May 2020. Patel, Aakar (16 May 2016). "The Muslim businessmen of India". DNA. Archived from the original on 3 February 2013. Retrieved 4 April 2018. Jathar, Dnyanesh (16 July 2016). "Indian who inspired Gandhi". The Week. Archived from the original on 17 February 2018. Retrieved 4 April 2018. "Vikram Sarabhai, the father of the Indian Space Program passed away 45 years ago". First Post. 30 December 2013. Archived from the original on 5 April 2018. Retrieved 4 April 2018. Balan, Premal (10 July 2014). "Amit Shah: An organisation man at helm". Business Standard India. Archived from the original on 15 January 2021. Retrieved 15 February 2021. "Tata Steel". Tatasteel100.com. Archived from the original on 8 December 2014. Retrieved 20 December 2014. "Gujarat, New Jersey ink sister state MoU". Business Standard India. Press Trust of India. 21 September 2019. Archived from the original on 13 April 2020. Retrieved 12 April 2020. "Gujarat Govt, Delaware State of America sign MoU for sister state". newsonair.com. Archived from the original on 12 July 2020. Retrieved 12 April 2020. "Senate Concurrent Resolution No. 4 | Senate Office of International Relations". soir.senate.ca.gov. Archived from the original on 13 April 2020. Retrieved 13 April 2020. "Japan Information & Study Centre". Japan Information and Study Centre. Archived from the original on 13 April 2020. Retrieved 13 April 2020. Experts, Disha (25 September 2019). Quarterly Current Affairs Vol. 3 - July to September 2019 for Competitive Exams. Disha Publications. ISBN 978-93-89418-63-7. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 25 October 2020. Panda, Jagannath P. (4 October 2016). India-China Relations: Politics of Resources, Identity and Authority in a Multipolar World Order. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-317-56381-5. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 25 October 2020. IANS (7 June 2019). "Gujarat, Guangdong look to strengthen trade relations". Business Standard India. Archived from the original on 13 April 2020. Retrieved 12 April 2020. Upadhyay, Dadan; RIR, specially for (9 December 2015). "Modi to reconnect in Russia with Astrakhan". rbth.com. Archived from the original on 12 April 2020. Retrieved 12 April 2020. Upadhyay, Dadan (16 January 2017). "Russia, India turn to Gujarat to help increase trade turnover". rbth.com. Archived from the original on 13 April 2020. Retrieved 12 April 2020. Bleeker, Claas Jouco; Widengren, Geo (1971). Historia Religionum: Religions of the present. Vol. II. Brill. ISBN 9789004025981. Boyce, Mary (2001). Zoroastrians: Their Religious Beliefs and Practices (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul. ISBN 9780415239028. Hodivala, Shahpurshah Hormasji (1920). Studies in Parsi History. Bombay: Captain Print Works. Jackson, Abraham Valentine Williams (1906). Persia Past and Present: A Book of Travel and Research, with More Than Two Hundred Illustrations and a Map. The Macmillan Company. Khanbaghi, Aptin (2006). The Fire, the Star and the Cross: Minority Religions in Medieval and Early Modern Iran (reprint ed.). I. B. Tauris. ISBN 9781845110567. Yazdani, Kaveh (2017). India, Modernity and the Great Divergence: Mysore and Gujarat (17th to 19th C.). Leiden: Brill. xxxi + 669 pp. Online review. Gujarat at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Government Official website Gujarat Web Directory Official tourism site 1 Official tourism site 2[permanent dead link] General information Gujarat web resources provided by GovPubs at the University of Colorado Boulder Libraries Gujarat at the Encyclopædia Britannica Gujarat at Curlie Geographic data related to Gujarat at OpenStreetMap